F296 11795875 49310
Cryptomenysis Patefacta: Or the ART OF SECRET INFORMATION Disclosed without a KEY. Containing, Plain and Demonstrative Rules, for Decyphering all Manner of SECRET WRITING. With Exact Methods, for Resol∣ving Secret Intimations by SIGNS or GE∣STURES, or in SPEECH. As also an In∣quiry into the Secret ways of CONVEYING Written Messages: And the several MYSTE∣RIOUS PROPOSALS for Secret Informa¦tion, mentioned by Trithemius, &c. By J. F. Et varias usus meditando extunderet Artes. Virg. G. 1. LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, at the black Swan and Bible, without Temple-Bar, 1685.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE CHARLES Earl of MIDDLETON, Lord Claremont and Fettercairn, &c. Secretary of State for the King∣dom of England, and one of His Majesties most Honorable Privy Council of both Kingdoms. My Lord, HAving Writ a few Sheets, to lay open the Incertainty of Cypher; and Decy∣phering, being an Art consecrate to the Occasions of Princes, I do Hum∣bly prefix your Lordships name to
them: The thing is designed for His Maje∣sties Service, and that gives His Secre∣tary a good Title to it: But my Lord I had other Motives for this my Pre∣sumption, besides your Eminent Stati∣on; I mean, the more Eminent Adhe∣rence of your Noble Family, to the In∣terests of the Crown; at a time when he was accounted the only Traytor, that dared not commit Treason. His late Majesty of ever Blessed Me∣mory, and Judgment, next to infal∣lible, had so much Confidence in the Conduct of your late Father; That he gave him the command of that Army in the Hills, which then only appeared for his Majesties
Interest, and might have been the means to restore Him, had not Providence suited a Bloodless Restauration to a Gentle Reign, tho Rebel's Blood stains not. And when His Majesty, was Miraculously settled upon the Throne of his Ancestors; He first chose the Earl of Middleton, out of all His Loyal Subjects in his Anci∣ent Kingdom, immediately to Repre∣sent Him, as His Commissioner; the next Representation of Majesty it self a Subject is capable of: And His Lordship died bearing part of that Sacred Image, as Governor of Tangier. This leads me to your Lordship, and I have the Authority of Custom, to go on, for De∣dications are generally Panegyricks, and Authors either find, or make their Patrons singular; But I
forbear, be∣cause, tho' I should say nothing, but Truths, within the small reach of my own Knowledg; as I might exceed, the Belief of Strangers, so I must come short, of the Expectation of all, who know your Lordship: And as the Subject treated of, (for the most part) lies out of the common Road, so the manner of this Address to your Lord∣ship is Suitable; having here so far shun'd the Imputation of Flattery, that I designedly shade evident Truths, while others Blazon Palpable Forma∣lities. And now my Lord, though I De∣dicate the following Observations to your Lordship, I hope none can fansie that the Defects, under
what Desig∣nation soever may reflect upon you, I know it is a Critical Age, and Cri∣ticks have much of the Venom and Na∣ture of Wasps, often observed, to make Sores where there are none to fix upon. But their Ignorance, as well as Malice is sufficiently ridiculous, that do not lay the Faults of this, whether Real, or Imaginary, entirely at my own Dore; and there is Ground enough to throw them on: Let all, be imputed to want of years, or Judgment; and let this hum∣ble Address, be call'd want of Discretion; Nay there are plenty of WANTS: But I HAVE an intire Inclination, to serve my King and Country; and if this small Tract, at this time, do in any Mea∣sure
Evidence it, I HAVE my aim, and let it remain upon record to my per∣petual Infamy, if I do not chearful∣ly, and upon all occasions venture the last drop of my Blood in His Majesties Service; and according to the Circum∣stances, Act of Suffer for one infinitly BETTER than the GOOD OLD CAUSE. And next to the Royal Interest, I declare, That my great Ambition in particular, is to be, My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, John Falconer.
TO THE READER. YOƲ will find amongst the follow∣ing Observations, that by means of Secret Intelligence, not only Ar∣mies, but Kingdoms and Crowns have been lost. Which Things had never otherways, perhaps been attempted, at least not effected. And particularly, That in the be∣ginning of the late Troubles, of ever Cursed Memory, the Canting (I would say Cove∣nanting) People of both Kingdoms, studyed a part of this BLACK Art, See Bakers Chron. of the Kings of Engl. p. 492. as their first de∣gree in the MYSTERY of Rebellion, which ended not before the Faith's Defender was removed to make way for Religion, and the Laws of God and his Vicegerent were over∣turned to secure property: In short untill there was nothing Consequential visible in some Mens actions, but only in that of Pro∣viding Asses for the Pulpit, and sending Hor∣ses to Church. And certainly he wants the Head or Brains of a Plotter,
(tho he may have the Heart of a Traitor) that does not in the first place (be∣fore hereduce his Intentions against an esta∣blish'd Authority into Acts) consider, That it is absolutely necessary, to fix some Method of Private Communication, betwixt those that are to be the Instruments, in carrying on the Work. Now taking this for granted, be∣cause undenyable, he must have a stock of Confidence to the non ultra, who will deny a Probability, That their Letters may be inter∣cepted: And if Intercepted I dare trust the following Sheets to evince, That the most sure Cypher practicable in a Current converse may make a Discovery. The Rules delivered for Decyphering, are not taken upon Trust, nor were to be had at the second Hand; but are the genuin re∣sult of Experience, and every new Experi∣ment, gave occasion of fresh Observations. I hope it will be no unprofitable Digression, to give an Account of the occasion of my In∣quiries this way, which fell out thus. A few years ago, having had some discourse with a Gentleman, concerning the Possibility of Resolving any Writing in Secret Chara∣cter, and the means to perform it; I was ta∣ken with the Novelty of the Thing, and after some few serious thoughts, ventured
upon the Tryal, which succeeding at first, I still went further: And you have here the account of my Discoveries in this progress. The Learned Lord Verulam, in his Ad∣vancement of Learning, reports the Art of Decyphering as WANTING, and there∣fore I thought it worth the while to search af∣ter it. The Advantages, that may probably arise from the knowledge of it, I leave to be Collect∣ed from the danger of Secret Practices, espe∣cially in this Juncture. And as the late Earl of Argile's later Designs, against the Go∣vernment (discovered in several of his Letters last year) determined me to undertake this troublesome Task, so the open Rebellion now on foot added new Motives for its speedy Publication, according to that of the Poet. Et quoniam variant Morbi, variabimus Artes: Mille malispecies, millesalutis erunt. I have no mind to enlarge; but there is one conveniency attending this Art, that I cannot pass over (because attributed to Cryptography) and it is, the Assistance it will give to the knowledge of the Tongues. Trithemius affirms, in recommendation of his Polygra∣phy, (and transposes this one
into no less than three or four Advantages.) Polygrap. p. 38, 39. de Caus. & Utilit, Operis. That by it a Man, that understands none but his Mother Tongue, may understand the sense of an E∣pistle in Latin, &c. But this I have consider∣ed, and the Fallacy attending it Chap. V. But if you once understand the Rules for Decyphering, in one Language, you may really, and without any Reservation, in a few hours, understand as much of any Language, as is needful to reduce it out of Cypher, as is observed in another place. Now this must produce a desire of understanding the meaning of what is so Decyphered, and De∣sire (joyned even with a Superficial know∣ledge) a Facility of attaining it. Note, in Page 21, a wrong Alphabet was by mistake insert, the true one is this, A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t v w x y z P q r s t v w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o Towards the end of the Introduction, for Lucis Ossores, read Lucis Osores. p. 11. l. 28. f. Propositions, r. Praepositions. p. 94. l. 4. f. In the order, strings passing r. In the order of the strings passing, &c.
INTRODUCTION. BEfore I enter upon any particular En∣quiry into this occult Art, I conceive it proper enough to make some In∣troductory general Remarks upon the whole Design. And here I cannot but observe a very Mysterious Change between the Measures taken by some Politicians of this, as also many past Ages, and those universally received of Old. Primitive Simplicity was Blessed with one Language, adapted for the Advancement of Knowledge and Commerce, until our Forefathers undertook that ungodly Expedition Heaven-ward, when they were divided into seventy and two Parties, Vid. inter alios Cluv. Epit. p. 5. A. M. 1758. and every one Gen. c. 11. CUR∣SED Master of a Language for his own use. But of a long time the Policy-menders, or ra∣ther Plot-makers, have taken quite another By∣ass: For instead of some generous Attempt to repair the old Breach of a Catholick Converse, they debauch their Inventions, to frame and manage new ways of Correspondence, that no Mortal, but a few joyned in the Confederacy should comprehend.
But this Project (such as it is) has been very far from obtaining an universal Assent in any Age; tho' the Tongue was confounded, the Curse extended not to the Brain: Reason re∣mained entire, which by help of that great School-master, Experience, taught them an use∣ful piece of Philosophy, That the World is but a large Society of Men, link'd together by a Chain of Wants almost of infinite Variety: Or as Dubar∣tas elegantly expresseth it, — All Lands as God destributes To the World's Treasure pay their several Tributes. Now in a Defection of 71 parts in 72, Know∣ledge and Commerce were mightily interrupted, and the publick must be presumed very sensible of the Loss; and Endeavours have been on all sides to remove this Obstacle, by which all Par∣ties became Losers. A Reunion of Speech (considering the different Regions Mankind was divided into) was not to be hoped for; and besides, as it might have proved a work endless, so it had been needless; for Words (however model'd) require presence of Time and Place, and cannot be conjured out of their little Sphere, being no less unfit to enter the Ear, or (of themselves) inform the Understanding, at a very few hours distance, than to satisfie a craving Stomach. Indeed Men are sometimes said to eat their Words; but they grow but badly on the Dyet. These Inconveniencies gave Occasion to the Invention of Writing: An Art, by which we may not only transmit our Thoughts
to an absent Friend, in respect of place, but to Posterity, in re∣spect of Time; and that at the Distance of thousands of Years: An Art by which me may yet hear Moses, and the Prophets, Witness his excel∣lent Com∣mentaries. Julius Cae∣sar, and the Conquerors, &c. without the Mi∣racle of being raised from the Dead; Polyd. Verg. de Invent. re∣tum l. 1. c. 6. Solo lite∣rarum usu, Memoria fulcitur Aeternitas, ab om∣nique oblivionis injuria res memoriae dignae vindi∣cantur. And as Rhodiginus hath it, Quid hoc mag∣nificentius quid aeque mirandum, in quod ne mortis quidem avida rapacitas jus ullum habet. Who was the Author of this Invention, I shall not take upon me to determine; but such an Improvement of Converse was thought to have something more than human in it; and Polyd. Verg. ibid. Mercury (who is by some thought to be the First, by others the Fifth that taught the Use of Letters to the Aegyptians) was thereupon Dei∣fied, Note, it's most con∣sonant to sound Hi∣story, That the Aegyp∣tians had this bene∣fit from the neigh∣bourhood of the Is∣raelites. the usual Complement that the Men of those Ages put upon their Benefactors. But so it is, after the manner of Men, that what they make, they love to use as their Creatures: And thus they put new Gods in Commission at plea∣sure. But to let that pass, whatever of supposed Divinity might be attributed to this Invention, when (like the supposed Mercury. Inventor) it had got Wings, and visited some parts of the World. It was not long before some Men began to tamper with it; and to Writing add Secret ways of Correspondence: The particulars of which are the Subject of this Treatise.
Letters in their Infancy were in themselves so Secret, that he that should have taken them to task, to understand an Intrigue committed to their Trust, might have worn his Eyes out of his Head, or sunk them so low in it, as would give Ground to suspect them on their March to enlighten the Brain, and the Writing as ob∣stinate as ever. And I am apt to believe some Men could be satisfied this Art had still con∣tinued in that State; at least confined to the use of themselves and their Confederates, whose Necks are no longer safe, than their Designs secret. As for those things treated of by the Au∣thors that have writ upon Steganography, &c. which lead a man to the Knowledge of the Tongues, or are subservient to other useful Sci∣ences: No man in his right Wits will discom∣mend them, while such innocent Designs are made the ne ultra. Neither would I be mis-understood, so as to condemn even the Use of Cypher in general: For the Mysteries of State cannot perhaps be too well secured from prying Eyes; but tho' Princes, and those in Authority, may have pe∣culiar Signs for secret Information, I hope there's no Consequence for a general Practice that way. The Lord Bacon mention'd it as an Aggravati∣on of the Earl of Somerset's Crime, in his Charge, when Attorney General against that Peer, concerning the poysoning of Sir Thomas Over∣bury, where, speaking of the Earl's former In∣timacy
with Sir Thomas; Nay, (says he) they were grown to such an Inwardness, See the L. Bacon's genuine Remains. Charge a∣gainst Rob. Earl of Somerset. as they made play of all the World besides themselves: So as they had Cyphers and Jargons for the King and Queen, and all the great Men; things seldom used, but either by Princes, and their Embassadors and Mi∣nisters, or by such as work or practise against, or, at least, upon Princes. You have here this Learned Author's Sentiment of Secret Writing, inter pri∣vatos; tho' in his Advancement of Learning, he afterwards published the most ingenious Me∣thod (in my poor Judgment) that is extant: But of this afterwards. I have seen very few Authors upon that Sub∣ject, but have acknowledg'd it a Detriment to the Publick, to publish their Inventions of this kind. And Trithemius in his Apology for Print∣ing his six Books of Polygraphy (fore-seeing the Inconveniencies) gives this Caution: Te, Lector, Polygraph. p. 83. quicunque es, rogo memineris, quanta per hanc sci∣entiam mala in Republica fieri per malos & lubri∣cos possent, si ad multorum Notitiam deveni∣ret, &c. But it was an Oversight to imagine, that his Book in a general Progress, Ad Reges, Prin∣cipes, Nobiles & Ignobiles, Sacerdotes & Laicos, Vid. p. 44. Trit. Polyg. Doctos simul & Indoctos; published in Latin, the most Universal Language, might not meet with some ill designing Men: And his Confi∣dence in this, (as perhaps in other things) was but too great, to fansie, that his bare Desire could be more prevalent upon such, than the Laws of God, or Man. I wish we were all so much Stoicks, as to consider, that, We come into the World as
into a Comedy, where we are not to chuse the person we must represent, but perform well the part given us, &c. And a little after, that Author adds to this purpose, If of a Porter, like a Porter; for there is Honor in well performing any in their Kind, and Disgrace in doing any ill. Trithemius tells us (and indeed most of those that follow his Cryptical Foot-steps, want not this Pretext) That it was at the Desire, and on∣ly for the use of a † Prince, Duke of Bavaria. that he began his Mysterious (I had almost said his Miraculous) Ste∣ganography, Polyg. praef. ad Maxi∣mil, Impe∣ratorem. which was to fill the World with Wonder, if ever it should be published; to which indeed he subjoyns an Absit. Polyg. p. 100. In manibus jam habeo grande opus, quod si unquam fuerit publicatum, quod absit, totus Mundus mi∣rabitur, &c. And I am sure we may without any Violence upon the Sence of this Author, make his Kindness to that Prince the Result of Conviction, Polyg. p. 22. since he acknowledges, Operae pretium fuerit principes omnes singulari praeditos esse sapientia, &c. And it were uncharitable to suspect him of Flattery in an unanswerable Truth, even tho' his Designs and Doings (I mean in what he himself hath published to the World) do not seem to quadrate. I confess, the Practice of Secret Information, inter privatos, may, without any far Fetch, be derived from the same Original with good Laws, Ex malis moribus ori∣untur bonae Leges. I mean from Corruption of Manners; and sometimes both may have an Eye at Or∣der; but their several Aims and Effects are generally in as direct an Opposition as Light and Darkness.
What the Intent and Effects of good Laws are, is well enough known: And on the other Hand, I hope it is, or shall be undeniable, that such Secret means, without a Commission, do of∣ten tend to the Breach of some positive Com∣mand. These black Intrigues have often car∣ried on darker Designs; things buried, that they may live: And I may, without any Solecism in Sence, affirm, That the Lovers of Light, or written characters. Philophoti, as well as Light∣haters, or occult cha∣racters, not at first discern∣able to the Eye. Misophoti, mentioned by Trithemius, are Lucis Ossores: But more of this in its pro∣per place. Tradition gives us the Story of a Basilisk mention∣ed by Pli∣ny, l. 8. c. 21. Creature that lurks in secret, and kills a Man if it gets the first View of him. Now though I can∣not swear to the Existence of such a Monster among the Brutes, yet there have been brutal Contrivances that may give it the Authority of a Parable, and the Author an Apology for this endeavour to crush it in the Egg. It is true, the unridling of such Mysteries, is more immediately the Province of those who sit at the Helm of Affairs, Military and Ci∣vil: Yet if a private Sentinel, by decyphering an intercepted Epistle, should save an Army, &c. 'tis no Crime, I hope, that he be more clear sighted than his Superiours. And besides, the Knowledge o Uncyphering should not be con∣fined to a Corner: For great Undertakings (according to the Exactness of Policy) require sudden Action: And if a Cypher were to be carried some hundreds of Miles for its Resoluti∣on, the Design might in the mean time discover it self, by an effectual Execution: Nay, many
times it may so fall out, that the Secret Writing cannot be safely sent far from the place where it may be intercepted, as in open Hostility, or so. These, and the like, are amongst the Motives that first enclined me to send abroad the fol∣lowing Observations concerning the unridling of such secret Signs, or Notes of Intimation, that are practicable in a constant Correspon∣dence: But that which entirely determined me, was the Time and Pains spent in Decypher∣ing the late Earl of Argyle's Letters, as you may see in that Authentick Account of the Discove∣ries made in Scotland, of the late Conspiracies a∣gainst His Majesty and the Government, publish∣ed by His Majesty's Command. And now to come to the Particulars contain∣ed in this small Tract: First, I shall treat of the most material ways of Secrecy in Writing that have been invented (termed by those who have dealt that way, Cryptographia, Steganographia, &c.) and lay downe plain Rules for Decyphering them with∣out any Key. 2. Of Saemaeology, or the several Methods of Secret Information, by Signs and Gestures. 3. Of Cryptology, or that Secrecy consisting in Speech. 4. Of Secret MEANS of CONVEYING Written Messages, that have been practised to frustrate a Search; which Method may be called Cryptogrammatophoria, since there's no Statute a∣gainst coyning of Words: And sure I have Precedents on my side. And,
5. I shall enquire into the several astonish∣ing Proposals for Secret Information, mentioned in that Epistle of Trithemius, directed to Arnol∣dus Bostius, concerning his eight Books of Ste∣ganography. In this Distribution, I have not so much con∣sidered which are first in Order of Nature, or in Order of Time, as what is first in Order for the Reader's Ease: Whether Speech, or that dumb kind of Eloquence by Signs, be first Or∣dine Naturae, is under Debate; and let it re∣main so: But without Controversie, for a me∣thodical comprehending the whole Rules of Dis∣covery, 'tis most proper to begin with Crypto∣graphy; being the Resolution of the rest of the Chapters, in a manner, depend upon this:
Cryptomenysis Patefacta: OR, THE Art of Secret Information disclosed with∣out a Key. CHAP. I. Of Secret Writing, and the Resolution thereof. IN Secret Writing there are reckoned these Requisites: Requisites in Crypto∣graphy, &c. 1. That it be void of Suspicion, if possible. 2. That it be difficult to be unfolded, if doubted. 3. That it be fitted for Dispatch (i.e.) easie to be writ, and Decyphered by the Key. From whence I shall here only observe,Note. That every thing is to be Examined, that comes from a suspected Hand. The particular ways of Tryal will appear as we proceed. This Art is by some Authors call'd Cryto∣graphia, , to hide, or keep secret, Etymolog. of Cryptog.
&c. and  to write, carve or grave. By others Steganographia, , to conceal, and . Trithemius entitles the six Books he him∣self published upon this Subject, Libri Polygra∣phiae, from , because of the numerous, or rather innumerable Differences it is capable of. And yet all will fall under the following Secti∣ons, which I have digested after this Method. 1. I shall examine that way of Secret Wri∣ting, by Altering the Powers of the Letters; as also by invented Notes, and Characters. 2. By changing the Places of the Letters, where the Powers are the same. 3. By using more Letters or Characters than are requisite to frame Words. 4. I shall enquire into that Secresie which arises by writing with fewer Letters than the words require. 5. I shall consider the Secresie in Writing, that proceeds from a Deceit in the Paper, or some other Material instead thereof: And, 6. That Fallacy where the Secret Intentions are concealed by a Deceit arising from the Ink, or some other Liquor used for it.
SECT. 1. Of Secret Writing, by changing the Powers of Letters, &c. ¶ 1. Contains several Ancient and Modern Inventions of this kind. THis way of Secret Writing, by changing the Powers of Letters, of purpose to con∣found the true Intent of a written Message was very early in the World; Sec. and Swift Mes. p. 69, 70. and the Author of the Secret and Swift Messenger tells us much of the ancient Jewish Learning is wrapt up in it. Suetonius relates, See also Aul. Gell. noct. Atti. l. 17. c. 9. That Julius Caesar writ his Epistles of Moment, per quartam elementorum literam, (as that Author hath it) in this Order, D e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c. A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z. D being put for A, and E for B, &c. E, g. Xlh Hqhpb mw mq kvhdx gmwrvghv. idoo ysrq xlhp zmxl doo hashgmxmrq. The Enemy is in great Disorder, fall upon them with all Expedition. Augustus Caesar, in communicating his secret Intentions, secundum elementum proprii loco sub∣stituit, (i.e.) He put B for A; for B, he put C, &c. and for A, he used XX. thus; X X a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y. A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z.
This Transposition will appear fully as much a Stranger to the true meaning in an Epistle as any; notwithstanding of the near Neigh∣bourhood of the Letters that are express'd, and understood. It is ordinary in Secret Writing of this nature, to make use of some word, wherein one Letter is only once express'd, to frame their Alphabet by, writing first the Word it self, and after it the Letters wanting to compleat the Alphabet; and that either by two Lines at length, or by the Alphabet divided. E. g. Let Liberty be for the Key. In two full Lines. L i b e r t y a c d f g h k m n o p q s u w x z. a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z. By the Alphabet divided. L i b e r t y a c d f g h k m n o p q s v w x z. So that in Writing, L is used for H, and again H for L; they use I for K, and K for I, &c. I have seen Transpositions of the Letters so ordered in framing an Alphabet, that the seeming barbarous words in the writing could be well enough pronounced in Speech, and would at first view appear to be some strange kind of Language. But why should I enlarge upon Particulars? Trithemius his fifth Book contains nothing but Tables for Transpositions: and tho he had em∣ployed the whole time of his Life that way, he had left a vast variety untouched; for let the Alphabet stand in its natural Order,
viz. a b c d e f g h, &c. for an Index to shew the Powers of the several possible Combinations of the twenty four Letters, to be placed opposite to it in Rows, and allowing five of these Rows to stand in an Inch measure: One end of this Tabula transpositionis expansa, (when writ in a Scroul,) if reached to the Man in the Moon: Nay, to go farther, if Mercury, who once taught the use of Writing, had it, the other might re∣main with us: And besides, the Transpositions, which must lie by the way thither, abundance of different Alphabets left for the Use of this lower World upon Occasion. To be serious, (according to the following Rules for combining any Number of Letters) you will find twenty four Letters have 62044|8401733239439360000 several Positions. And Schottus demonstrates, Steganog. Clas. 5. c. 5. (tho the Calculation in his Book be not exact) that a thousand Milli∣on of Men in as many years could not write down all those different Transpositions of the Alphabet, granting every one should compleat forty Pages a day, and every Page contain forty several Positions: For if one Writer in one day write forty Pages, every one contain∣ing forty Combinations, 40 multiplied by 40, gives 1600, the Number he compleats in one day, which multiplied by 366, the Number (and more) of Days in a Year; a Writer in one Year shall compass 585600 distinct Rows. Therefore in a thousand million of years he could write 585600000000000, which being again multiplied
by 1000000000, the number of Writers supposed, the Product will be 585600000000000000000000, which wants of the number of Combinations no less than 34848401733239439360000. But those are not all; for the Alphabet put for the Index is capable of 6204484017332394|39359999 Variations to each of the former Po∣sitions. And besides, many have used invented Cha∣racters, Arithmetical Figures, &c. to express their Secret Intentions by. Thus Pharamund, King of the Franks, invading the Gauls about the Year 424. Trith. Po∣lyg. lib. 6. devised a new Alphabet for his own use: Clodius his Son and Successor follow∣ed his Father's Example in contriving new Characters, for communicating his Intentions the more secretly: as also did Charles the Great and others. And some will have it, that Ezra invented the Hebrew Character upon some such Motives. Trithemius has been at the pains of collecting a great many invented Alphabets, which you may see in his sixth Book de Poly∣graph. Gasp. Schottus, Part 4. lib. 1. Synt. 6. Prop. 4. & 5. in his Magia Universalis, pro∣poses an Invention he had found amongst the secret Manuscripts of Kircherus, how to write with Points or Arithmetical Figures. It is to this purpose; They divide the Letters of the Alphabet into a certain number of Parts; and to every Partition they subjoyn
some different sign or point, v. g. 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 a b c d e f g h i l m n o p q r s t u x z , ; : . ? Afterwards when they come to write, they first mark down the number of the Letters, as they stand in their respective Columns, that serve to express their hidden meaning, and joyn to it the sign of that Column e: g: 4, 1; 3? 1? 3? 1: 4, 1; 2? Deus videt. But he thinks it better, to mark the several Divisions of the Alphabet with Figures thus: 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z 1 2 3 4 5 6 By help of this Alphabet, if the following Words were put in Cypher, Princeps insidiatur vitae tuae; fuge. they will stand in this order; 43, 51, 31, 41, 13, 21, 43, 52, 31, 41, 52, 31, 14, 31, 11, 53, 54, 51, 54, 31, 53, 11, 21, 53, 54, 11, 21, 22, 54, 23, 21. Here either the number of the Letters in their several Clas∣ses, or the number under them, may be put first. Nay, to come nearer, you may find three or four new Alphabets out of the Mint, in the Discoveries made in Scotland: but since the same Rules of decyphering will serve for all, I proceed.
SOLUTION. First; Distinguish the Vowels from Consonants. To proceed regularly herein, you must endeavour to distinguish betwixt the Vowels and Consonants. And first, the Vowels generally discover themselves by their frequency; for, because they are but few in number, and no word made up without some of them, they must frequently be used in any Writing: how∣ever, it may by accident fall out, that some of the Consonants shall be oftner found in an Epi∣stle. 2. Where you find any Character or Letter standing by it self, it must be a Vowel; this holds in all Languages. 3. If you find any Character doubled in the beginning of a word, in any Language it is a Vowel, as Aaron, Eel, Jilt, Oogala, Vulture, &c. except in some Eng∣lish proper Names, as Llandaff, Lloyd. 4. In Monosyllables of two Letters, one being a Vowel, you may distinguish it from the Con∣sonant joyn'd with it by its frequency, &c. 5. In a word of three Letters, beginning and ending with the same Character, some Vowel is pro∣bably included; as, did, &c. except er'e, &c. but e is easily known, being of greater use than any Letter, in the beginning, middle, and end of Words; as see, ever, serve, deference, be∣seech, need, &c. This will not hold in Latin; and as for the frequency of the
Vowels in that Language, they are computed to serve thus in any Writing: e and i of most use; next to these a and u; and o not so often as any of them; but upon the whole, the difference is but small. 6. When you find a Character doubled in the middle of a word of four Letters, 'tis probably the Vowel e or o, as feel, good, &c. and consequently the first and last Letters Conso∣nants. 7. In Polysyllables, where a Chara∣cter is double in the middle of a Word, it is for the most part a Consonant; and if so, the precedent Letter is always a Vowel, and very often the following. 8. i in English never ter∣minates a Word, nor a or u, except in sea, you, &c. tho they be of much use in the begin∣ning and middle of Words, as in advantage, assassinate, diminish, and the like. 9. These Vow∣els, a, i, u, are seldom doubled; and in this and the former, they are distinguishable from the Consonants most frequently used, such as, d, h, n, r, s, t. Most of those Remarks are cal∣culated for the English Tongue. Secondly, Distinguish Vowels amongst themselves. To distinguish one Vowel from another, after you have made the most probable Suppositions in separating them from the Consonants, 1. com∣pare their frequency, and e, as we observed before, is generally of most use in the English Tongue, next o, then a and i; but u and y are not so frequently used as some of the Conso∣nants. 2. It is remarkable, that amongst the Vowels, e and o are often doubled, the
rest seldom or never. 3. e is very often a terminal Letter, and y terminates Words, but they are distinguishable, because there is no proportion as to their frequency: o is not often in the end of Words, except in Monosyllables. 4. e is the only Vowel that can be doubled in the end of an English Word, except o in too, &c. In Latin no Consonant can be doubled in the end of a Word, and only the Vowel i. 5. You may consider which of the Vowels, in any Lan∣guage, can stand alone, as a, i, and sometimes o in English, a, e, o, in Latin, or i Impera∣tive of eo. 3. Distinguish the Consonants amongst themselves. To distinguish one Consonant from another, you must 1. (as before) observe their frequency. Those of most use in English are d, h, n, r, s, t, and next to those may be reckoned c, f, g, l, m, w; in a third rank may be placed b, k, p; and lastly, q, x, z. In Latin, the most frequent Consonants are l, r, s, t, next to these c, f, m, n, then d, g, h, p, q; and lastly, b, x, z. 2. You may consider what Consonants can be doubled in the middle or end of Words. 3. What are terminal Letters, &c. and 4. The number and nature of the Consonants or Vowels that can fall together, or do usually follow one ano∣ther. Note, that if the same Character be used for j when a Consonant, and when it is a Vow∣el, it may a little perplex some of
the Rules for decyphering: but this Confusion cannot hap∣pen so often, as to excuse the prolixity of any other Caveat than barely to have me∣tioned it. Additional Observations. The great difficulty being once to come to the Knowledge of three or four Letters, (those leading a man to the Knowledge of the rest) endeavour to find out Words usual in Writing, that have something peculiar to them in the order of Letters; such as, 1. A word of three Letters, beginning and ending with the same, may be supposed, did. 2. A word consisting of four Characters, with the same Letter in the beginning and end, is probably, that, or hath. 3. A word consisting of five Letters, when the second and last are the same, is commonly which, though it may be otherways, as in known, serve, &c. And you may judge of the truth of such Suppositions by the frequency of the Letters in the Word supposed. Next, you may compare Words one with another, as on, and no, each being the other reversed; so of and for, the last being the first reversed, with the addition of a Letter; for and from will discover each other, &c. You may likewise observe some of the usu∣al Propositions and Terminations of Words, such as com, con, ing, ed, &c. or in Latin, prae, per, us, um, &c. Note that t and h are often joyned in the beginning and end of English,
Words, and sometimes in the middle, &c. I have not medled here with any Language but English; because of the design'd Brevity of this small Tract: However, by a little practice of decyphering in one Language, you may de∣cypher an Epistle in any, even tho the plain Speech it self be a Mystery to you, if you first observe, the frequency of the Letters, the ter∣minal Letters, what Letters can be doubled, in the beginning, end, or middle of Words; and such general Rules. And as to English, I have hereunto subjoyn∣ed one Example. 39. 38, 31, 21, 35. 35, 14, 20, 18, 21, 19, 20, 35, 34. 20, 38, 39, 19. 32, 35, 31, 18, 35, 18. 22, 39, 20, 38. 13, 31, 14, 24. 20, 38, 39, 14, 37, 19. 31, 19, 20, 15, 20, 38, 35. 13, 31, 14, 31, 37, 39, 14, 37. 15, 36. 20, 38, 35. 31, 36, 36, 31, 39, 18. 18, 35, 17, 21, 39, 19, 39, 20, 35. 36, 15, 18. 24, 15, 21. 20, 15. 11, 14, 15, 22. 18, 35, 13, 35, 13, 32, 35, 18. 20, 38, 31, 20. 15, 14. 14, 15. 31, 33, 33, 15, 21, 14, 20. 24, 15, 21. 36, 31, 39, 12. 20, 15. 13, 35, 35, 20. 13, 35. 31, 20. 14, 39, 14, 35. 20, 15. 13, 15, 18, 18. 15, 22, 19. 14, 39, 37, 38, 20. 36, 15, 18. 22, 35. 13, 21, 19, 20, 14, 15, 20. 14, 15, 22, 34, 35, 12, 31, 24. 20, 38, 35. 19, 21, 18, 16, 18, 39, 25, 35. 15, 36. 20, 38, 35. 33, 31, 19, 20, 12, 35. 22, 38, 35, 14. 20, 38, 39, 14, 37, 19. 31, 18, 35. 39, 21, 19, 20. 18, 39, 16, 35. 36, 15, 18. 35, 23, 35, 33, 21, 20, 39, 15, 14. By practising the foregoing Rules, you will find that this method of Secret Writing in plain Cypher, may with as much ease, if not with as much speed, he deciphered as written.
The Secret Sense of the Example given is this: I have entrusted this Bearer with many things as to the managing of the Affair requisite for you to know: Remember that on no account you fail to meet me at nine to morrows night; for we must not now delay the surprize of the Castle, when things are just ripe for Execution. Note. When you are to decypher any Wri∣ting, begin with the single Characters, if any be; next go to the Monosyllables, or remarkable Words; take them out of the Epistle, and mark them down in a Paper apart. We shall next consider some ways that may be taken to frustrate the foregoing Rules of Discovery: and several have been insisted on to this purpose, that fall under this Section in the following Paragraphs. ¶ 2. An Improvement of the former methods of Se∣cret Writing, by leaving out Characters of least use, and putting others in their stead that shall signifie the Vowels. This we have from the Author of the Secret and Swift Messenger: for (says he) by this means the Number of the invented Alphabet will be com∣pleat, and the Vowels, by reason of their double Character, less distinguishable.
SOLUTION. As for this difficulty, I must confess I cannot well comprehend it; for if the number of the Alphabet be perfect, how can one Character express two Letters? and again, if one Chara∣cter hath a double power, viz. of a Vowel and Consonant, it would appear to me rather more than less distinguishable, by reason of its great∣er frequency: and having found one of the pow∣ers of a double Character, you may discover when it is used in another power, and then proceed as before; and withal, the common Particles, such as, the, that, of, and, &c. will be written throughout all the Epistle, without any variation, in their respective Characters. But further, if only the Letters of less use be left out, it will not make any great Alteration in an Epistle; and if you discover but one word in the whole, the Sense will bring you through such little Intricacies, especially upon this Ad∣vertisement, that an Epistle may be so contrived. If Letters of greater use should be laid aside by compact, and others also of great use put in their stead to express a double power, I believe the Confederate might have an equal disadvan∣tage by his means with the Discoverer, E. G. If the same Character should signifie o and n, they cannot distinguish on from no, &c. but by the Sense of the Epistle, or some private mark: and why may not the Decypherer be as good as the Confident at the Art of Discerning?
And besides the notice given, that an Epi∣stle may be so contrived, I shall add further, That any Writing contrived in this manner, may be easily discovered to be so, because the usual num∣ber of Characters must be wanting, and be∣cause of a more than usual frequency of some particular Characters; and you see that there is no insuperable difficulty to decypher it when discovered to be so. ¶ 3. Of writing without any distinction between Words. The way of concealing the sense of an Epi∣stle by writing continually without any distin∣ction between the words, is mentioned by our last cited Author; and of late very much pra∣ctised, particularly by the late Earl of Argyle. See the Account of the Discoveries made in Scot∣land, &c. SOLUTION. By this Intricacy, I acknowledge those helps we mentioned from single Characters, Temina∣tions, or the like, are deluded; but you may however distinguish, between the Vowels and Con∣sonants, the Vowels one from another, as also the Consonants amongst themselves: nay, you may make Suppositions for Words, &c. and having found two or three Letters, or one Word, the difficulty is over. I have often tryed it, and never found any new difficulty to arise from
this Defeating way that requires other Rules, than what you have already for Decyphering. ¶ 4. Of making false Distinctions in Secret Writing. This way is likewise mentioned in the Secret and Swift Messenger, ibib. e. g. if these words, There is no Safety but by Flight, were divided thus, The, reisn, osa, fetyb, utb, y, fli, ght. and after∣wards put in Character. SOLUTION. When you have any suspicion of a Fraud of this nature, you may proceed as if there were no Stop used. ¶ 5. Of inserting Nulls or Non-significants. This Obscurity in Cypher is commonly pro∣posed in Treatises for Secret Writing; and amongst other Authors upon that Subject, by the Lord Advance∣ment of Learning. l. 6. c. 1. Bacon. You will find it put in See Dis∣cov. in Scotland. Pra∣ctice too. SOLUTION. As to this, it is necessary, 1. That you take the number of the different Characters in the Epistle: and if that exceed the Number of the Alpha∣bet, 'tis probable Mutes are intermix'd with the significant Letters.
I have said probable, because there may be Characters insert to express Relatives, Sylla∣bles, &c. of which hereafter. 2. Observe the frequency of the several Chara∣cters. And by this means you may distinguish those Nulls from significant Letters; for 'tis ob∣vious, that if many insignificant Characters be used, they shall not be frequent; at least most of them shall be but rarely insert, which will do no great feats: If only a few in number, and consequently their places the more frequent, they are yet by Supposition distinguishable from the Vowels and Consonants of most use in Writing; especially if you consider the Order and Coherence amongst the several Characters. This admits of no particular Rules; nor will the Judicious need any. 3. After you have found out the real Alpha∣bet, or all the Mutes, there is no new difficulty. ¶ 6. Of Secret Writing by the Key Character. There is an Invention of Secrecy much in∣sisted on (though none of the swiftest) by the Author of the Secret and Swift Messenger, and others, beyond any yet mentioned, for Intri∣cacy, wherein each particular Line, Word, or Letter, is written by a new Alphabet: but the cited Author himself acknowledges it too tedi∣ous for a current Correspondence; which can∣not be entertained this way, but at a vast ex∣pence of Time and Trouble, to put it in, or take it out of Cypher
even by the Key; and se∣cret Information, in several Exigencies must be speedy or unprofitable: so that in effect it is unpracticable for the end it is design'd for. However, lest it should obtain too much cre∣dit if supposed undecypherable, its Difficulties shall be considered. But first, the way of writing by it is this: The Confederates condescend upon some Word or Sentence that shall lock and unlock their Missives; or the Key may be sent in the Letter, in some Word or Sentence privately marked, or by compact agreed on, such as the first or last Line, &c. to serve for the Key. Sup∣pose then it should be Policy's Preheminence, there must be several Alphabets framed for each of its Letters in manner following.
1 A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z 2 P q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o 3 O p q r s t v w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n 4 L m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k 5 I k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h 6 C d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b 7 Y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x 8 S t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r 9 P q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o 10 R s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q 11 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d 12 H i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g 13 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d 14 M n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l 15 I k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h 16 N o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m 17 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d 18 N o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m 19 C d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b 20 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d If they agree, that the Lines only shall be writ by a new Alphabet, the first line shall be made according to the first Alphabet A. P. the second line according to the second Alphabet, viz. A. O. the third Alphabet is A. L. &c. the first Line being an Index successively to all the rest. And when they have gone through the Table, they may begin a-new, or go back∣wards again, &c. If Words are only writ by one Alphabet, then every new word is writ by a new Alpha∣bet: and so of Letters. I have hereunto sub∣joyned an Example for each: viz.
1 Example in the Lines. Y pb vdgrts id ztte ixt Hadasytgh idcb wofr rihm obr rihm rxsh dfaawi fd zc espi gtww cpfzwe ez cqn Nwuxg bynnmrtg. qibc. I am forced to keep the Soldiers upon hard duty and hard diet: Supply us, or they will revolt to the Enemy speedily. Hast. SOLUTION. 1. When there is only one Alphabet used for a Line, the Writing might be discovered as in plain Cypher, if you make a new Operation for each line. But there may be other ways to decyper any such Writing: for, 2. If you find out but one Letter in a Line, (and that may certainly be done by a few Sup∣positions) it will of it self give an Alphabet for that whole Line, as you may perceive by the Counter-Table, which follows: for, the Confe∣derates Table being framed, so as the first line may be an Index to all the rest of the Lines which are ordered by some Word or Sen∣tence that is the Key, every Letter of such a Word or Sentence must be once supposed to stand for A. Now in the Counter Table you see all the Letters in the Alphabet to be once supposed A: Therefore you need only to search
for I in the upper line of it, and try in what line Y is opposite to it; and those two Lines give you an Alphabet. Or set down the Letter found under the Letter that expresseth its true power, and compleating the last line, you have the Alphabet. E. g. If you supposed Y in the Ex∣ample given to express the power of I, first write down the twenty four Letters in their usu∣al order, and under I place Y; then going on in order, your Alphabet is this for the first line. A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z L m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k
The Counter-Table. 1 A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z 2 B c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a 3 C d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b 4 D e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c 5 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d 6 F g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e 7 G h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f 8 H i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g 9 I k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h 10 K l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i 11 L m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k 12 M n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l 13 N o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m 14 O p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n 15 P q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o 16 Q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p 17 R s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q 18 S t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r 19 T u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s 20 V w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t 21 W x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u 22 X y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w 23 Y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x 24 Z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y This Table needs not much Explanation, being but a Collection of such Alphabets as you may frame by your self upon every new supposition. Having found one Alphabet for the first line, you have likewise by this means the first Letter of the Key. e. g. In the fifteenth line of the Ta∣ble, Y standing against I, and P beginning that line (as you may perceive) P must
be the first Letter of the Key; and if you peruse the fol∣lowing Collection of what Letters can be joyn∣ed in the beginning of Words, you will find a, e, h, i, l, or o, &c. must follow P: so that at worst to get another Alphabet for the next Line, it will cost but so much Pains as to make Tryal of all those Letters by Supposition; as first, what Letter in the first Line is against i, in the fifth Line beginning with E, (for A can∣not regularly follow P in this particular me∣thod, else the Letters in the second Line of the Writing, should have their usual Significa∣tion without any Transposition;) and finding that E cannot be the second Letter of the Key, because the Cypher from that Supposition is in as great confusion as ever, next try what Let∣ter is opposite to i in the line H. Still supposing a new, untill you find the second Line to pro∣duce Sense. And so of all the rest. Or you may take the same Measures from the Letters or Syllables found, in the Writing it self. Or you may proceed to find the Alphabet of the second, third, or any other Line, as you did for the first; viz. searching after the Power of some Letter in the second Line, by the ordinary Rules; and according to the greatst Probability, in that search; from the frequency of the Letter, or other help, to make Tryal by your Counter-Table.
2 Example in Words. Y oa qzcnpo cx mggr rfc Lgdwbxkl kedc zriv hzyc hvl mewh puqf bdyytg hf sw gvrl ylnn wizspy id hws pypxi bynnmrtg. kcvw. SOLUTION. When the Alphabet is changed at every word, you may either make Suppositions from Words, or from Letters that fall in the end or beginning of the several Words in the Writing, until you have made some progress in the Let∣ters of the Key; and then proceed as before. You may likewise find out by Supposition, the number of Letters in the Key, &c. which will much facilitate the work. Thus: 1. Having found an Alphabet for the first, second, or indeed any word near the begin∣ning of the Epistle, go through all the imme∣diate following Words, until you find another that is decyphered by the same Alphabet. 2. From the last found Word count the like number, and you have a new word decypher∣able by the found-Alphabet: and thus you may go on until you have once gone through the whole Writing, marking the whole Series with some peculiar mark: And then, 3. Begin the Epistle again at some Word immediately
before or after that which was first found, and count forwards as before, un∣til you come to the end of the Epistle. 4. Afterwards observe the same method, until you have distinguished the whole Wri∣ting, giving each respective Series of Words some particular mark of Distinction. And in end having found out but one Letter in such a Series of Words it gives an Alphabet to decy∣pher all that Series by, as was observed in Lines, &c. e.g. Y therefore, the first Word in the Example, expressing the Power of I; you shall find the twentieth Word id decypherable by its Alphabet, viz. A. P. and consequently hws, the one and twentieth Word in the Wri∣ting, but twentieth after oa the second Word, to have one Alphabet with it; and in the same order pypxi to have one Alphabet with qzcnpo; and bynnmrtg and cx to be denoted by the same Alphabet, &c. Now if the Writing were long (as it must be to contain Proposals, Emergencies, and other Circumstances) the use of the foregoing Ob∣servation will be worth the consideration. But there is an Exception to these Rules; for Note. you will see in the Example, that the first Word Y and the seventh Word Lydwbxkl are are writ by the same Alphabet, but not the seventh from that, viz. puqf, nor the seventh from oa, viz. kedc, &c. and the reason, is, be∣cause the Letter P is twice repeated in the Words of the Key. So that when you find this happen in decyphering, leave such
Words, and go to the next, until you find the true number of Letters that make up the Key by the for∣mer Rule; and then this difficulty becomes a help in the Operation, &c. Example in the Letters. Y ox oqpvtv yw oqnc yvg Xdzorgpl kgsn mmaq hhwc pbo qcpw saib xgycpl xx df eqgw oycp, zigxyy gq. yxs pwgkq hgimhvtl: mnvy. SOLUTION. To decypher this last kind of Secret Wri∣ting, you must begin with Suppositions; and 1. Extracting out of it the Monosyllables, &c. you may suppose all the Words in it of three Letters successively to stand for the, or and, &c. and you may prove your several Suppositions thus: viz. 1. Mark down the Powers suppo∣sed. 2. Observe in what Lines of your Coun∣ter-Table the Letters express'd in the Cypher are opposed to them in a perpendicular Line. 3. Observe the first Letters of those Lines, and you will soon find whether they can be joyned to make up a part of the Key: e. g. Let yvg in the first Line of the Example be supposed, the, y, is opposite to t in line fifth, beginning with E; h to v line thirteen, beginning N; and e to g line third, beginning C. So that having found enc in the beginning of these several lines, it is probably some part of the Key.
2. You may proceed in the same manner to other Monosyllables, &c. in any part of the Epistle; or you may consider what Letters can follow enc, and thus e being most probable, look in that Line of your Table beginning with E, for x the following Letter in the Cypher, and its opposite Letter in the upper Line, which is S; and afterwards you may go on with probable Suppositions, either from the Letters found in the Key or in the Wri∣ting. Perhaps these Methods will not so readily give you the entire Key, yet they are good helps. You may otherways begin your Suppositi∣ons with the first Letters in the Writing; and for that end, I have hereunto added, in an alphabetical Order, the Letters that can be joyned together to begin Words. And from all together, you may in a short time find out the number of Letters in the Key; and here that is of as much use as in the other ways of writing by the Key Character, since thereby you have the several Returns of each Alphabet. Now follows the Table.
A Beginning a Word is regularly followed by most of the Letters. B Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, c, i, l, o, r, u, y. C Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, h, i, l, o, r, u. D Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, i, o, r, u. E Beginning a Word is regularly followed by most of the Letters. F Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, i, l, o, r, u, and sometimes y. G Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, h, i, l, n, o, r, u, y. H Beginning a Word is regularly followed by Vowels only. I Beginning a Word is regularly followed by most of the Letters. K Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, i, n. L Beginning a Word is regularly followed by Vowels only. M Beginning a Word is regularly followed by Vowels only. N Beginning a Word is regularly followed by Vowels only. O Beginning a Word is regularly followed by most of the Letters. P Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, h, i, l, o, r, s, sometimes t, u, y. Q Beginning a Word is regularly followed by only by u, and QU by a, e, i, o, R Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, sometimes h, i, o, u, y. S Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, c, e, h, i, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, t, u, w, y. T Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, h, i, o, r, u, w, y. U Beginning a Word is regularly followed by sometimes d, and g, l, m, n, p, some∣times r, s, t, x. V Beginning a Word is regularly followed by Vowels only. W Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, h, i, o, r, y. X Beginning a Word is regularly followed by sometimes a, or e. Y Beginning a Word is regularly followed by e, sometimes i, o. Z Beginning a Word is regularly followed by e, sometimes o. Here I have only insert the Letters of the Alphabet on the left hand, and such Letters, as can immediately follow any of them, be∣ginning a Word opposite to it.
It had been the least part of the Trouble of this Undertaking, to have contrived Tables for Monosyllables, Terminations, &c. and that in most Languages; but I rather feared a Cen∣sure, than hoped for Thanks from the Ingeni∣ous, to crowd Tables into this small Tract: and if it be reputed a Defect, it is such an one that a very ordinary Capacity may supply by help of Dictionaries only. But to return to the method of Secret In∣formation in hand, it is easily discernable from any other. e.g. When the Alphabet is changed for every Word or Letter, the Frequency of the Letters will not agree with that in an Epistle writ in plain Cy∣pher, where one Character always expresseth the same power: For, as to this last, you shall but rarely find two or three Characters of the same frequency; but by a continual altering of the Alphabet you shall have a great many, e. g. In the last Example you have no less than seven different Letters twice repeated, viz. a, b, d, k, s, t, z, three Letters thrice repeated, two Let∣ters four times repeated, three Letters five times repeated, three Letters seven times re∣peated, and two Letters nine times repeated. Again, in one line of an Epistle where the Alphabets are continually altered, you shall have more differing Characters than in two where one Alphabet is only used in the whole Writing. e. g. In the Example you have the compleat number of the Alphabet, whereas in the Writing
(viz. I am forced to keep the Soldiers upon hard Duty and hard Diet: Supply us, or they will revolt to the Enemy speedily. Hast.) there are wanting, b, g, q, x, z. We have already observed, that this method of Cryptography requires too much time to be put in practice: but besides, it is not only unpracticable upon that score, for by the least mistake in Writing, it is so confounded, that the Confederate with his Key shall never set it in order again; and withal, 'tis liable to sus∣pition: so that it has none of those things re∣quired in Secret Writing, except that there is difficulty in decyphering it; and that not in∣superable, as is made apparent. ¶ 7. Of communicating any Secret Intention with the ordinary Letters, by help of a few Figures. The following way of Secret Writing is pro∣posed by Schottus, Schott. Mag. Ʋni∣vers. part 4. pag. 65, 66, &c. who tells us, that he had it of Count Gronsfeld: It would seem to frustrate the Rules for decyphering already mentioned, and therefore have I insert it. The Method is this: 1. The Confederates dispose the Letters of the Alphabet in a Line or Circle, over which they place any number of Figures, v. g. 436. in this manner. 436 a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z.
2. They write their Secret Intentions on a Paper apart, and over the tops of the Letters they place the number of Figures agreed on. Let the Words be these. The Governor of the City is beyond Corruption, so that we may conclude there is nothing of Bribery will serve the turn. Which Words, according to the Example, will stand thus: 436 436443643 64 364 3643 64 364364 The Governor of the City is beyond 3643643643 64 3643 64 364 36436436 Corruption, so that we may conclude 43643 64 3643643 64 36436436 4364 there is nothing of Briberie will 36436 436 4364 serve the turn. 3. Observe what Figure stands over the first Letter of the Writing, (viz. T) which is 4. and counting forward as many Letters, write down the fourth, viz. x; again see what Fi∣gure is over the second Letter (v. g. h.) which Figure is 3; then counting three Letters from h, the third is k, next write down the sixth Let∣ter from e, which is also k; and so they pro∣ceed, always observing the Letters in the Writing to be secretly communicate, and the Figures above it, until they come to the end of the Epistle. The Example being finished will stand thus: xkk kqahtsrt ti wnh eoxa ow dkbqsg etvtaswo∣rp yr wndw bh ofb etqeqyfk xkkvg ow ptxkoqi ti dxmdkvlk zlqo vkvxk xkk xxxq.
SOLUTION. To decypher this kind of Secret Writing, you may, 1. Transcribe the Cypher out of the Epistle, keeping the lines and letters at such a distance one from another, that each letter may admit of a Figure distinctly above it. 2. Endeavour to find the number of Figures in the Key which must be enquired into by several Suppositions. 3. The number of Figures being supposed, E. g. 3. take any three Figures, v. g. 123. and place them above the tops of the Letters in Cypher in this order. 123 12312312 31 231 2312 31 231231 xkk kqahtsrt ti wnh eoxa ow dkbqsg 2312312312 31 2312 31 231 23123123 etvtasworp yr wndwbh ofb etqeqyfk 12312 31 2312312 31 23123123 1231 xkkvg ow ptxkoqi ti dxmdkvlk zlqo 23123 123 1231 vkvxk xkk xxxq. 4. Observe where the same Character and the same Figure happen to fall together, and you will find that thus it always expresseth the same Power as in the Example; K with 3 pla∣ced above it has the Power of E through the whole Writing; X with 1 upon the top of it signifies H, &c. But, 5. The same Letter when its Figure is alter∣ed cannot
express the same Power, e.g. Q with 1. expresseth N; but Q with 2 signifies O, and Q with 3 L, &c. 6. One and the same Letter will be exprest by different Characters, e.g. Q with 2, R with 1, and T with 3, express severally O in the Writing. 7. Two Letters of the same power cannot be joyned together in the same Character; and consequently, where you find any Cha∣racter double in a Writing of this nature, it expresseth different Powers. 8. Having made these or the like general Remarks, you may proceed to discover parti∣cular Syllables or Words as in the preceding Paragraphs; and having one, you will find with it the true numbers that are contained in the Key, at least some of them, which will disco∣ver the rest. It is almost superfluous to add, That in your several Operations you must count the Letters backwards, since I have told you, that regular∣ly the Cypher is writ forwards: but because the Cypher may be otherways contrived, you may try both ways, &c. ¶ 8. Of Secret Writing by Points, Lines, &c. The Secrecy in an Epistle may consist in Points, Lines, &c. which are distinguishable one from another by their place, not their fi∣gure; all of the same Situation (whatever the nature of the Figure be) expressing the same Character. v. g. Suppose the
Paper to be writ upon, be secretly divided into twenty four equal parts, according to the breadth of a plate upon which the Letters are described; and then by Application of this to the Epistle, 'tis easie to conceive the way of writing it. This is published in the Secret and Swift Messenger, p. 92. SOLUTION. This contains no great nor new Intricacy; for you may extract the Points, &c. that fall in the first perpendicular Line in any Character, and the Points that are in the next perpendicu∣lar line by a differing Character, and those Points in the third line by a third Character; and so for all the rest, until you come to an end or rather the side of the Epistle, towards the right hand; and then 'tis resolvable by the common Rules. Having now removed the most material Difficulties under this Section, I proceed to
SECT. 2. Of Secret Writing, by altering the Places of the Letters, where the Powers remain the same. BIshop Wilkins observes, Sec. and Swift Mes. p. 88. That the Difference of Characters in the World, is part of the General Curse upon their once one Tongue; and from the Parity of Reason we may infer, that the different methods of writing those Chara∣cters is so too. The Oriental Languages, Hebrew, Chaldaick, Samaritan, Syriack, Arabick, Persian, Coptick, &c. are writ from the right-hand to the left, only the Ethiopick and Armenian proceed from the left to the right-hand. As also do all the Occidental Languages, Greek, Latin, French, Spanish, Italian, German, English, Sclavonick, &c. At first the Greeks writ from the left to the right-hand, and again from the right to the left, forward and backward: Hence Literas exarare signifies to Write, a Metaphor taken from Plowing of Ground. Thus the sense of an Epistle in a known Language might be perplexed, if the writing should be contrived after the method of writing some Foreign Tongue. And we have this Example from the Secret and Swift Messenger.
T i l w e l d f r e h t l s s o o t e i e s e u h h u u s l p h n t a o t o h p e t c s l t t h a p s o r g l e h t n u t d e n n l e i d s i e a o o b s w s y l c s m t a i e p d e n e a b e e g e e Here the Rows are put instead of the Lines: And if you begin at the first Letter towards the left-hand, and read down that Row of Letters, then read the next upward, and the following down again, and so to the end, you will find these Words: The Pestilence doth still encrease amongst us; we shall not be able to hold out the Siege without fresh and speedy Supply. This is said to be the ordinary way of wri∣ting amongst the Inhabitants of the Island T∣probane, China, and Japan. This manner of Secret Writing is but slen∣derly touched by any Author I have seen on that Subject: and had it not gotten greater Perfection by private Practice than open In∣structions, I had saved the Reader and my sel the Trouble of exposing it to the Publick.
¶ 1. Of the Combination of three or more Letters. The first remarkable Improvement I find of this kind of Cryptography by altering the places of Letters, is by the regular Combination of three, four, or more Letters: I had it of a Gentleman, who (I am fully satisfied) would put it to no bad use; but since it may fall into bad hands, I have his leave to provide against its harm. And that we may proceed regularly therein, it is necessary, first to enquire, How many se∣veral ways any given number of Letters may be combined? (i. e.) How many different Positions they can regularly admit of. And for that end I have hereunto subjoyned the following Table.
Table of Combinations Letters   Several ways 1 May be combined 1 2 2 3 6 4 24 5 120 6 720 7 5040 8 40320 9 362880 10 3628800 11 39916800 12 479001600 &c.   Construction of the Table. 1. At the left-hand of your Table stands a Rank of Figures expressing the number of Let∣ters to be combined, encreasing in an Arithme∣tical proportion from Unity, or 1. and by the common excess of 1, or Unity. 2. To the right hand of these stands the number of Combinations, or several ways they can be combined. 3. As for 1, being it has but one Position, I set 1 opposite to it in the Rank of Combina∣tions.
4. I multiply 1, in the Column of Combi∣nations, by two, in the Column of Letters, and set the Product, viz. 2, opposite to it, which shews how often two Letters or Things can be combined, viz. two times. 5. I multiply 2 in the Row of Combinati∣ons, by 3 in the Column of Letters; and over against it I set 6 the Product, which shews that three Letters have six regular Positions or Combinations. 6. I multiply 6, the last number of Combi∣nations, by four, the number of Letters, marking down 24 the Product, as the Table. And thus I proceed, multiplying each last pro∣duct by the next superior number of Letters, and writing the several Products against their re∣spective Multipliers; and these Products shew how many Positions their opposite number of Letters have, as 5 have 120 several Positions, 6 admits of 720, &c. Demonstration. 1. It is manifest, that one Letter or Thing has but one Position, and two Letters have twice the Position of 1, viz. once before and after it. e. g. A B, B A. 2. From the Combination of two Letters we find that of 3, for the new Letter added is three times applicable to the former Positions, viz. in the beginning, middle, and end, e. g. the Letter C being joyned with A B, the first combination may be C A B, and
the second CBA. Again put C in the middle, and it yields other two differences, viz. ACB, BCA. And when C is put in the last place, you have a fifth and sixth Difference, viz. ABC, BAC. 3. From the Combination of three Letters arises that of four Letters; viz. ABCD: for D can be four several times applied to each of the former six Differences; e. g. in the first, second, third, and fourth or last place. 4. From the twenty four Combinations ari∣sing from four Letters, you have that of 5; e. g. if the Letter E be added, it is five times applicable to each of the former twenty four regular Positions: and so for any other Num∣ber in infinitum. I have said Regular Positions, because any number of letters or things may be irregularly varied in their Positions very much above this Order; as for Example, A B is capable of these irregular Variations, AA, AB, BA, BB; and at this rate, three Letters have no less than 27 Positions in all, viz. six regular (as before) and twenty one irregular Positions. But of this when we come to treat of Secret Writing by more Characters than are usually required to the framing of Words. ¶ 2. A new Method how to Write Secretly by the Art of Combinations. 1. To write Secretly by the method propo∣sed, a certain number of Letters are combined to lock and unlock the Epistle. The
differen∣ces of writing down the Positions, as, which shall be first, which second, which third, &c. in order, may be varied to a vast number; e. g. three Letters ABC, having six regular ways of Combination; these six Positions are capable of 720 several Orders, for the Rows may be combined amongst themselves, the same way as Letters. Therefore, 2. The Order of the Rows is agreed upon at parting. 3. The number of Letters combined, which is the Key, may be express'd in the Epistle by some Mathematical Figure, as ▵ for three Letters, □ for 4, &c. or by some other pri∣vate Mark. 4. They frame a Rectangular Table of as many Columns as there are Letters combined. 5. The Letters so combined, are placed in their natural order upon the top of the Ta∣ble. 6. Having determined of how many lines the Table shall consist, the order of the Com∣binations agreed upon is set down in a Row, in the first Column towards the left hand; as you may see in the following Table. 7. The Table being thus prepared for Wri∣ting, they observe the order of the Combina∣tions, and write according to its Direction. 8. When they have placed one Letter in every Column of all the lines, they begin a new, and so go on until the Writing be fi∣nished.
9. And lastly, they take the letters out of the Table according to their Partitions, as so many barbarous Words, upon a Paper apart, and send it to the Confident. Example. Let the Key for the number of Letters com∣bined, be a Triangle; and the Subject of the Writing, We are big with Expectation to know the Success you have had, whether the Arms you have under∣taken for will be ready upon Occasion. Let your next be writ by the square Key. From of the Table for Writing. Order of Positions A B C 1 CBA a t s a s k d e t e c e h m a a l i y w e h e r t e n r e 2 CAB e t c w o n u y y b i c h u f p o t r a u d y e y t b 3 ACB j o e e h o o u h w t s v w o n s g n s t a r n r e 4 BCA h n u t n l a t a i o y e e i c e q t k o r u l c x u 5 BAC x w a e e e i e e e o h h d b s b r p t v a r r o w k A further Explication of this Table. CBA, being the first Position, (W) the first letter in the Writing is placed under C in the last Column, and E, being the second letter, is put under B in the next Column, and A the third letter, under A.
CAB, being the second Position, the fourth Letter in the Writing, r, falls in the second line under C, the fifth Letter, e, under A, and the sixth, b, under B in its Column, all in the same line. ACB. being the third Position, the se∣venth letter in the Epistle, i, is put under A in the third line, the eighth letter g, under C, and the ninth letter w, in the Column B. And so they go through the writing, always beginning again, when they are at the end of the Table; so long as there is any thing to write. The writing taken out of the Table will stand thus: The terminal Letters may be so marked to prevent Confusion. I have insisted the more upon this Method, because the manner of Combining, and the way of Writing by such Combining, and the way of Writing by such Combinations being once perfectly understood, the Rules for De∣cyphering may be the more succinct, and the more easily comprehended.
SOLUTION. 1. If the Figure of the Key be prefix'd to the Epistle, expressing the number of Letters combined, take as many Letters out of the first places of seeming Words in the Epistle, as shall be equal to that number so exprest; and you may soon find out their true Order without the trouble of a new Combination, tho the trou∣ble of combining be not so very great, as the discovery of a treasonable Design may be of Importance to the Publick. Thus in the Example given, you have ▵ (which being supposed to shew that three let∣ters are combined) extract the three first let∣ters from the three first seeming words of the Epistle, viz. a e. w, here at first View you may perceive the Order. Then taking out the next three Letters, e. b r, you have a for the first letter of the word from the first line, and e for the last letter; and then you are only to consider whether b or r is the middle Let∣ter, which is easily determined; so b (being lest out there) must be the first Letter of the next word: Thus you may proceed; for it's need∣less to enlarge in a Case so plain. 2. If there be no Key given, take the num∣ber of Partitions of seeming words in the Epi∣stle, and find out their several Divisors, which may be performed by the following Rules.
How to find out the equal Divisors of any Number. 1. Divide the Number given by some Prime Number (i. e.) such a Number that cannot be divided, but by it self, or Unity; and the Quo∣tient by some or other prime Number, and the last Quotient again by a prime Number; and so go on until the last Quotient of all be one; and thus you shall find a certain Number of prime Divisors. 2. Make a rectangular Table that shall consist of as many Columns as you have prime Divisors, which you must place one after another at the Tops of the Columns; and by help of them you will find all the rest of the Divisors, viz. By multiplying the first prime Divisor towards the left hand of the Table by the second, and wri∣ting the Product under the second. Next, By the third prime Divisor, multiplying all the Figures in the Table towards the left Hand, setting the seve∣ral Products in the third Column: And so forth, throughout all the prime Divisors; but with this Caution, That one Product be not written twice. And in end, the several Numbers in your Table will be all the Aliquot Parts, or just Divisors of the given Number.
Example to find out all the Divisors in 450. 450 225 75 25 5 1 2 3 3 5 5   The first Line contains the first Dividend, and the respective Quotients; the lowest line is the several prime Divisors. Now 450, the Number given, being divi∣ded by 2, a prime Divisor, the Quotient is 225, which being divided by 3, you have 75 for a new Quotient; and that again divided by 3, you have 25 for another Quotient. This last divided by 5, gives 5, which being a prime Number, you have 1, or Unity in the last Quotient of all: So that your prime Divisors are, 2, 3, 3, 5 5, all which set down in the Tops of the Columns, and multiplying them according to the Rule given, the Operation will stand thus. 2 3 3 5 5   6 9 10 25     18 15 50       30 75       45 150       90 225         450
All the Divisors of 450, are 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 15, 18, 25, 30, 45, 50, 75, 90, 150, 225; and one of them (supposing the Epistle to have consisted of 450 seeming words) should have been the number of Letters combined for the Key: For the number of seeming words in such an Epistle, is equal to the Rect∣angle made of the Figure of the Key, or num∣ber of lines; and consequently the Figure of the Key, or number of Letters combined, is some aliquot part, or equal Divisor of the num∣ber of seeming words. But to save all trouble in search of the Key, you may take out a certain number of letters out of the first places of the seeming words: Write them down in a line; next, take just as many Letters out of the second places of the same Partitions, and then the Letters out of the third, fourth, fifth places, &c. placing them directly one under another in order; or rather for Dispatch, take out the seeming words, and write them down in Rows, beginning at the first, and then proceed to the second, third, fourth, fifth, &c. until you have gone through them; and if the Number be too great, take as many as you think fit at a time, placing all the Dots you find above the Heads of the let∣ters at their sides.
E. g.   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1. A e. w e. b r i w g. h. i t x e p 2. t c e t i a o t n. n o. k w. o t 3. s e. h c c u e s. s u. y o a h v 4. a h e. w h d. e h t t e r. e. h a 5. s. m r o u. y h v a n e. u e d r 6. k a t n. f e o w r. l. i l e. b r 7. d a e u p y. o o n. a c c i s o 8. e l n. y o t. u n r. t. e x e. b w 9. t. i r y. t b h s e. a q u e. r k 10. — y. e — — — — — — — — — — — — I have marked the Lines and Rows with Figures for their more easie distinction. Having brought the Writing into this Or∣der; 1. Search in the several Lines for some of the Particles of that Language you shall sup∣pose the Epistle to have been writ in: If in English, make Suppositions, E. g. for such little words, as, the, that, for, of, to, and, &c. and the like, without some of which no man can well express Business of any moment. 2. Having supposed in any of the Lines for some one of those mentioned, or the like Par∣ticles, you may prove the Truth of your Sup∣position, by taking out the opposite Letters of all the other Lines: And if they do not make up Words, or Syllables, or produce such Let∣ters as can probably follow one another in that Order, your first Supposition is false, and you must suppose anew.
3. Having by fresh Suppositions found some usual Word: And the letters of the other lines (in the same Order) agreeing, the Words or Syllables arising from them, will direct you to some new Row that goes before or after in the true Order: And thus you may proceed till you have found out the whole Writing, which by this time will be no great difficul∣ty. Example. In the sixth line you have f once, o once, and r twice; so that probably amongst these Letters you may find the Word for; and up∣on Tryal, the Supposition is proved by the o∣ther lines, e. g. Line 6. by lines 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. Rows 5 7 9 6. f o r. 1. b i g. 2. i o n. 3. c e s 4. h e t 5. u. h a 7. p o n. 8. o u r. 9. t h e. Here in the fifth line, you find u a termina∣ting Letter, which must then have before it the Vowel o, as in you, or e, as in Lieu: And in this line you have
o, once, and e, twice; so that in three Suppositions at most, you shall have the preceeding Row in its natural order, thus supposing it, o, in the fourth Row that joyns the Vowel u, the Writing will stand thus;   4. 5. 7. 9. 1 e. b i g. 2 t i o n. 3 c c e s 4 w h e t 5 o u. h a 6 n. f o r 7 u p o n. 8 y o u r. 9 y t h e. Now having ou, it is most probable that y is wanting to joyn with it; which standing in the sixth Row of the Line, write down that Row in order thus;   6. 4. 5. 7. 9. 1 r e. b i g 2 a t i o n. 3 u c c e s 4 d. w h e t 5 y o u. h a 6 e n. f o r 7 y. u p o n 8 t. y o u r 9 b y. t h e.
And so you may go on until you get through the whole Writing; which will in end stand thus; W e. a r e. b i g. w i t h. e x p e c t a t i o n. t o k n o w. t h e. s u c c e s s. y o u. h a v e. h a d. W h e t h e r. t h e. A r m s. y o u. h a v e. u n d e r t a k e n. f o r. w i l l. b e. r e a d y. u p o n. o c c a s i o n. L e t. y o u r. n e x t. b e. W r i t. b y. t h e. s q u a r e. K e y.                           There are sometimes other helps obvious to discover the sence of an Epistle obscured by this Invention, e: g: you see only two Let∣ters falling in the last Line of the Example, whereby I not only conclude that the Epistle ends with them, but may also infer from the Supposition of a Regular procedure in Writing it, that the Letter began at some of the seem∣ing Words, that composed those two Rows, viz. Ecehmaaliy, or wehertenre: The reason is evident, &c. This Method of Secret writing is at first sight distinguishable from any other, Note. only by observing the equality in the Division of its Letters. There are great variety of Inventions of this kind more easie to the confederates. Whereby they only write their secret intentions
in a Pa∣rallelogram or other Mathematical figure, and confound the sense, by the Method of ex∣tracting it, I shall inquire into a few. ¶ 3. Of Secret writing by help of a Parallelogram, where the Letters are extracted out of that figure Diagonally. To perform this a Man needs only form a Parallelogram or Table, and without any Combination or other obscurity in the writing, insert his secret intentions therein; e: g: let the sense of the Epistle be, I suppose that things are so forward by your dili∣gence that we may adventure at all, once next week. Meet me towards ten to morrow's night at the old place. It is first insert in the Table thus. I. s u p p o s e. t h a t. t h i n g s. a r e. s o. f o r w a r d. b y. y o u r. d i l i g e n c e. t h a t. w e. m a y. a d v e n t u r e. a t. a l l. o n c e. n e x t. w e e k. m e e t. m e. t o w a r d s. t e n. t o. m o r r o w s. n i g h t. a t. t h e. o l d. p l a c e. b x y f q. Here the last five Letters b, x, y, f, q, are of no use to fill up the voyd Places in the Ta∣ble.
The first Method I have observed in pra∣ctice, of obscuring the meaning of such an E∣pistle, is by Copying it out of the Table Dia∣gonally, upon a Paper apart (i. e.) by supposed Lines extending from the second Letter in the first Row towards the left Hand, to the second of those in the uppermost Line, and from the third Letter in that Row to the third in the up∣per Line; next from the Letters of the last Line, to those in the upper Line that remain, and then to the last Row towards the right Hand, &c. Diagonal is a Mathematical term, from , and  an Angle or Corner. Example. They first write down I. beginning at the upper Corner of the Parallelogram, next they take the other two Letters that are next in or∣der to it, viz. g s, then they extract the next three in order, viz. y s u. And so they go on untill they come to the last Corner, viz. q. The whole Writing being extracted in this manner, will stand thus. I. g s y s. u t. o a p t. w u r p m a e. r. e. ot e l m d s s t o. e l. a i o. e. h m t. o y. l f t e.o m n a i o h o r e. c d g r a l r t e. v e w t. d.o o n e n a t p w w e n c r h l s. a x t e. d. i a nr t. u t b n c i d w r h y. e. g s. e e. a b h t e ax t. e k. y a n f t. q.
Rosolution. For Resolution of this and the like manner of Secret Writing, the only difficulty is, to find out the number of the Lines and the number of Rows. And here you may observe that the number of Letters in the Epistle is e∣qual to the Rectangle made of the Number of Lines and Rows, so that if you take the Di∣visors or Aliquot parts of the number of Let∣ters, you may find out the number of Lines and Rows by a few suppositions and conse∣quently the involved meaning. Nay you may soon discover any Writing of this Nature, by reducing the Letters of the E∣pistle into Diagonal Lines, as if you had found out its true Figure. e: g. First you may mark down I. the first Letter in the Writing by it self, I. I. s g I. s u g s. y as in the Margine. Next write the two following Letters, g s by it thus, then to these joyn the three following Letters y s. u thus, afterwards the following four Letters t o a p thus, and so of the follow∣ing five Letters, I. s u p g s. a y o t. &c. You will perceive when Words or Syllables appear, and withall if you observe the Cohaesion of Words or Letters, between the end of the first Line, and the be∣ginning of the second, you will find out where these two Lines joyn in the sense, and conse∣quently where the first line ends, thus you shall have the number of Rows, by which if you divide the whole Letters, the Quotient gives you the number of Lines, &c.
This way of Decyphering may seem to be deluded two ways. 1. By beginning (when they Copy the E∣pistle out of the Table) at some of the other Angles. 2. By inserting Nulls before the Epistle. As to the first, if they begin at the lower Angle towards the left Hand, the Words will discover themselves as before. Only the order of the Lines will be reversed in the Operation, viz. The first Line, last in the true order, &c. 2. If they begin at the upper Angle of the Pa∣rallelogram towards the right Hand, the Lines will be in their true order, but the Writing must be read backwards. 3. If at the lower Angle towards the right Hand, the order of Lines will be revers'd and the Writing must al∣so be read backwards. This holds by the ordi∣nary Operation, but you may frame your Fi∣gure for Discovery, according to these three Suppositions, viz. Beginning it at any Cor∣ner, &c. Yet I judge the ordinary Operation will give the speediest Resolution. Note, That by the last Supposition, viz. By beginning at the lower Corner towards the right Hand. You are not to expect Words or Sylla∣bles in the beginning of the first Line, by your Operation, being it is last in the true order, and Mutes, perhaps, may be insert to fill up the void places in the Figure, so that you may observe the other Lines. As to the second by inserting Nulls before the E∣pistle, they may in process of time be discover∣ed thus;
When upon Tryal, you find the Writing in the Epistle will make nothing of sense, lay aside the first Letter, and make a new Suppo∣sition with those remaining, if nothing yet ap∣pear, lay aside two Letters and proceed as be∣fore, then leave out three, four, &c. until you perceive Words, &c. But to leave this. ¶ 4. Of Argile's Method for confounding the sense of an Epistle by altering the places of the Words. As by changing the places of Letters, so by altering the Natural Order of the Words, the sence of an Epistle may be obscured. Yet since both are Decypherable by the very same Rules, we shall not make any destinction; but take either as they come to Hand. And there∣fore have I subjoyned this Method of the late Earl of Argile's to the preceeding Paragraph, which is in effect but a new alteration in Co∣pying out the Writing from the Table, in which it was at first contrived. Perhaps he had in his Eye, that way of Writing we have ob∣served before, to proceed from the top to the bottom, and then upwards again, &c. Where∣in the Rows are instead of Lines, and said to be usual in China, Taprobane and Japan. Of this recent instance we have the follow∣ing account in the Discoveries made in Scotland. P. 18. The words in the long Letter were so Ordered that 254 words in course were interposed betwixt the first and second word in sense, and as many be∣tween
the third and fourth, and so forth to the last word of the Letter. Then beginning with the second word, there were 252 words between that and the next in sense, and so forth till they came to the pe∣nult word; Again beginning with the third word of the Letter, bewixt which and the next in sense intervened only 250 words, and so forward to the end. In the short Letter 62 words were interposed betwixt the first and second, and so to proceed as in the other, &c. The reason of this inequality was his manner of transcribing his Missives, from that Parallelogram, he contrived them in at first; for having distributed them into a cer∣tain number of Columns and Lines (which numbers were subjoyned to the end of the writing for a Key: E: g: there rest just 32 l. 8 s. (i. e.) 32 Lines 8 Columns, Steganog. p. 100. The Total sum is 128 Gild. 8 st. &c. A piece of Policy taught by Schottus in his Schola Steganographica.) He be∣gins at the Head of the first Column, and proceeds to the Foot of it, Account of Disco∣veries in Scot. ibid. thn beginning at the bottom of the 2d Column he rises to the Head thereof, there∣after begins at the top of the third Column, &c.
We need not go far for an Example. I know not the grounds our Friends have gone upon which hath occasioned them to offer so little Money as I hear neither know I what assistance they do intend to give and till I know both I will neither refuse my Service nor do so much as object against any thing is resolved till I first hear what Mr Red or any other you send shall say only in the mean time I resolve to let you know as much of the grounds I go on as is possible at this distance and in this way I did truly in my proposition mention the very least sum I thought could do our business effectually not half of what I would have thought requisite in an other juncture, &c. The Words are Argile's, and after his way of obscuring them, they will stand thus. I gone so I and refuse object first you time much is way the our would have business very I possible of I send hear against my till what little upon know not which Money assistance I service any what shall resolve the at did least effectually thought requisite not sum truly this grounds to say Mr thing nor know they as
hath the grounds occasioned I do both do is Red only let I distance in I half in an of thought my and go you in or resolved so I intend hear them our Friends to neither to will much till any the know on in proposition could what other juncture I do mention this as as mean other I as neither give know offer have. SOLUTION. Here the great difficulty is the same, as in that of the preceeding Method concerning the number of Lines and Columns, for these two Numbers being given, as in Argile's Letters; or found out by the Rules already delivered. There remains nothing, but to reduce the writ∣ing in the Epistle to such a form as you suppose it to have been writ in at first. Now as to the Example, we shall grant that no intelligible Key is given; however the number of Words being 128, and supposing it to be equal to the rectangle made of the num∣ber of Lines and Columns, you may take it's several equal Divisors or Aliquot parts, which are 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, which you may set down reversed one to another thus; 2 64 4 32 8 16 16 8 32 4 64 2
Some of these number is that of Lines, and the number opposite to it (being its equal Divi∣sor, or Dividend, as it falls greater or lesser) is the number of Columns, and if you make Tryal by all, you cannot miss of your aim. But supposing Nulls were by compact joyn∣ed in with such an Epistle. Its equal parts or Divisors are by that means altogether obscured. To removed this difficulty, (besides what hath been said concerning the former Method) I shall further add, that you may proceed by Suppositions at random, as to the number of Lines or Columns beginning very low as at two or three for Security, or going first through what is most probable for Expedition. When you have the true number of Lines, if their order be perplexed (which may happen by Nulls) 'tis true the meaning will be as intricate as ever, yet if you make a different position for each supposed Line, abating always one Letter in every new Position, you shall in some of those have the sense of the Epistle unmasqued, what∣ever the number or places of these Mutes shall be, the Demonstration is obvious. Take this Example. The whole design is laid open take your measures as the knowledge of this shall direct you fare you well Suppose there were Nulls insert in the Ta∣ble, where you
see the Words marked by a dif∣ferent Character thus; The whole you design is laid open take his your measures as the knowledge kindred of this shall direct you my fare you well Nay to render the Writing more intricate after it is extracted, let new Mutes be added. e. g. Affection Love Passion Mystical Honor the open the direct you knowledge take whole you his kindred my fare of your design is measures this you well shall as lady Father Sister Pounds &c. Now this Epistle once supposed to consist of 4 Lines the first Position, with all the Words will be false. e. g. Affection the direct kindred my this as layd Love open you his fare measures shall Father Passion the knowledge you of is well Sister Mystical Honor take whole your design you Pounds But at the second Position abating one word you shall have those added Nulls all by them∣selves in this order, viz. Love direct you my fare you well   Passion the knowledge kindred of this shall Pounds Mystical open take his your measures as Sister Honor the whole you design is layd Father Here the order of the Lines is inverted, which is occasioned
because the Nulls or non∣significant Words in the beginning make an odd Row, so that the second Row being first in sense, you proceed from the bottom up∣wards, whereas had it likeways been first in the Writing you should have begun at the top, &c. ¶ 4. The former Method of Secret Writing ren∣dered more intricate. This way of Secret Information may be yet further obscured by confounding the order of Columns according to compact, when they ex∣tract the writing out of the Table. Example in Letters. The Example in ¶ 3. is sufficient to illustrate any new difficulty arising from this.   5 11 3 16 1 8 6 12 2 13 4 15 7 10 14 9 1 I. s u p p o s e. t h a t. t h i n 2 g s. a r e. s o. f o r w a r d. b y. 3 y o u r. d i l i g e n c e. t h a 4 t. w e. m a y. a d v e n t u r e. a. 5 t. a l l. o n c e. n e x t. w e e k. 6 m e e t. m e. t o w a r d s. t e n. 7 t o. m o r r o w s. n i g h t. a t. 8 t h e. o l d. p l a c e. b x y f q. You see the order is this, 5, 11, 3, 16, 1, 8, 6, 12, 2, 13, 4, 15, 7, 10, 14, 9. When they Copy it out of the Table, they begin at the top
of the Row at number 1, and so proceed successively to Numbers, 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. The Row of Letters, which is first in order, is 5th by compact, those that stand in the second Row, are 11th in the Order of extracting the Writing, &c. thus; p e. d a o m r l t o g v n w s. a u a u e. l e m e. a w n n x r i e. I. g y t. t. m t t s o. l a c t o p t r e. u w s. h x o s i y. n e. r d. n y. a a k. n. t. q h d. t r e t t. y s s. o w a e o. h e. f i d e. o w l h r e c e a n c i b h e. e e a f t. a c t t. d g b p r r. m l. t. o o. SOLUTION. What is already proposed for finding out the number of Lines and Rows, and for Separating the Mutes from significant Letters, will reach this Method; & what is said in the Solution of ¶ 2. for reducing the Rows into their Natural Order, will hold good her likewise. e. g. When after (perhaps) several false Supposi∣tions as to the number of Lines, you have at last supposed the Table of the Epistle to consist of 8 Lines, tho there were 100 Nulls in the Writ∣ing, in one of eight Positions you shall have them a part, as in the former instance and the Writing in the following order.
p t u a I. s t o n h s e. h i t. p e. o a w g o. r s y. d. s. f r b a r d g u n y l e. i. a t o i e h c r. a v e. n t. a u y. a r w d e e. t m. o n l x t. c w n k. e a e. e e t. l. m w e r m t s. e. n. t e o a e d t. r s. m i t o h r t. t. o. w n a g o l a e. e. t p x d. q y h l c f b o. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Now in the first Line you find t thrice, b twice, a once, and e once, and probably a∣mongst these Letters you may have the Word the or that, upon Tryal you will find t in the second Row, h in the 13th, a in the 4th, and t in the 15th Row to favour your Supposition, by the agreement of the other Lines. And having come this length you may proceed backwards or forwards, as the imper∣fect words shall best direct you. e. g. 2. 13. 4. 15. t h a t. o r w a g e n c v e n t n e x t. w a r d s. n i g a c e. b.
Note. In this Method if you have once the true number of Lines, notwithstanding nonsig∣nificants be added you will in the Operation perceive Words and Syllables appear in one half of the Lines at least, even though their order be perplext. There are other Observations, which for brevity I leave to the Ingenious Readers per∣usal of the Example given in its several posi∣tions. Upon the whole 'tis observable. 1. That this kind of Cryptography by changing the places of the Letters or Words (however contrived) will still be lyable to suspicion. 2. You may certainly distinguish it from any other kind of Secret Writing, by the fre∣quency of the Letters, e. g. If the Vowels be often used, &c. Or in short, if the Letters have their usual frequency as in plain Writing. 3. You may probably judge of the Language it is writ in, either from the frequency of the Let∣ters, or by some of the Letters themselves: e. g. w is only used in English, Dutch, or some branch of the Teutonick, k is never used in Latin, &c. nor q frequently in English: And if the Ter∣minal Letters be given, you may with much certainty find out the Language. In these last remarks there must be an ex∣ception for proper Names, and I hope 'tis e∣nough to have mentioned it. My method leads me next to treat
SECT. 3. Of secret Writing, by using more Letters or Characters than are requisite to frame Words. HAving gone through the most material kinds of Secret Writing, by Equal Letters or Characters in the two preceeding Sections, I come now to enquire into that arising from More Letters than are required to make up Words: And here I shall pass by what may not be worth the Enquiry, such as that com∣mon Distich. Mitto tibi caput Veneris, ventremque DiAnae, Latronisque caput, posteriora CanE. (i. e.) VALE. And that wherein the first, middle, and last Letters or Syllables are only significant: e. g. Fildy Fagodur windeeld arare discogverantibrand, which is put to express these words, Fly, for we are discovered. This is from the Secret and swift Messenger; but every Body may see it Nonsence and un∣practicable; and sure it is enough in all Con∣science to have mentioned it. A Writing may be so contrived, Secr. and swift Mes. p. 77. out of Bed. l. de Sybil. as that one letter in a line shall only be significant, as in that remarkable Acrostick made by one of the
Sybils, where the first letters of each Verse be∣ing put together made up these words, . Plautus contriv'd the names of his Comedies in the first Letters of their Arguments. Schola Ste∣ganog. clas. 7. Erot. 5. Schottus relates a way of Secret Writing out of Trithemius, whereby the first, second, third or last letters of the words may serve to express the secret Intentions; but I leave these, and many more to this purpose under a general Caveat. ¶ 1. Of secret Writing by Dots, &c. in an ordinary Epistle. The first remarkable, Sc. Steg. Class. 5. c. 1, 2, 3. &c. and a very ordinary Contrivance in Secret Writing, by more letters than usually go to the framing of words, is that insisted on by Schottus, viz. 1. The Confidents at parting frame an Al∣phabet of Figures to write by, v. g. A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t v w x y z 4 22 10 9 1 11 13 18 3 19 12 8 20 2 21 23 7 6 5 15 14 16 17 24 2. Having writ down their secret Intenti∣ons on a Paper apart, they contrive an Epistle of some ordinary Business in any Language. 3. They search for the Numbers of the Al∣phabet that express the letters of the secret Wri∣ting; and counting the letters in the common Mssive from the Beginning, they subjoyn
some private. Mark under every Character where the respective Numbers end. E. g. Let the secret Intimation be this; 3 6 18 4 12 12 6 1 1 16 2 15 5 18 3 6 20 3 I s h a l l s e e y o u t h i s n i 13 18 5 4 5 16 2 15 7 12 2 9 13 3 20 13 6   g h t a t y o u r L o d g i n g s   And the Epistle to run thus: Having understood that I could not be safe any longer where you are, I have chosen rather a vo∣luntary Banishment to wander with my Liberty abroad, than to lie under the daily Hazard of losing it at home: 'Tis in my opinion the least of the two Evils. 'Tis true, I am innocent; but Innocence is not always a Bucklr; so that I hope you will not condemn, even tho' you cannot approve my choice, at least, till you have the particulars of my Case; which expect per next. You see the Figure for the first letter, to be put in Cypher, is 3; therefore a secret Mark or Point must be placed directly under (or a∣bove) the third letter of the Epistle, viz. v. and number 6, expressing the second letter in secret Writing, a Dot must stand under the 6th. letter from v. viz. under n, and 18 letters from n, will stand another Dot, &c.
Example. The Points may be so ordered, See the last Secti∣on of this Chapter. as that they shall not be visible, till held by the Fire, or dipt in Water, &c. SOLUTION. For Decyphering this you have no more a∣o, but to take the number of Letters, from
the beginning of the Epistle to the first point, from that to the second, and so from point to point until you come to the last; Writing down the several Numbers, distinctly one af∣ter another, and then you have it in a plain Cypher resolvable by the former Rules. Nich. Machiavel tells us, 7 Book of the Art of War. that in his own time a certain Person designing to signify some Se∣cret intention to his Friends, interlined private marks in Letters of Excommunication that were to be Publickly affixt, by which the Se∣cret was afterwards communicate to the Con∣federates, and this has in all probability been performed by the former or the like Method of Secret Information. ¶ 2. Contains several ways of Inserting Nulls to Prevent or Divert Suspicion. I have already considered the obscurity ari∣sing from the Insertion of Nulls at random, as to several of the ways of Secret Writing men∣tioned: But here I shall enquire into them, as insert by compact to prevent or divert suspicion, and indeed their great design, who use them in the following methods, is generally one of the two. When they would quite Remove suspicion the Epistle is so contrived, as that to outward appearance, it may appear to have nothing in it but some Trivial Business, as news, &c. or a Private Concern, as borrowing of Money, pay∣ing of Bills, &c.
But if the Person will render the Paper sus∣pected, they may endeavour to divert that sus∣picion, by Inserting a false design to cloak a true one. The nature of this Secrecy will more fully appear in the following Examples. Example 1. Suppose two or more Confederates had a∣greed to confine their Secret Intentions to one side of the Paper in the Writing, according to some Private Compact. Thus if upon discove∣ry of Plot a speedy flight were designed, and to be communicated by this contrivance, it might be writ at first in manner following.
The design is not Secret there is now no safety but by flight do not fail to meet me half an hour hence let the next meeting be just without the Gate if my Senses are sound we may conclude to have infallible Evidence the snare is prepared effectually to entrap you and Your, &c. POST-SCRIPT. Prethee expose not thy self to imminent danger. Now to obscure the sense and prevent suspi∣cion the void parts of the Lines may be supply∣ed with something foreign to the design; and afterwards the Epistle pointed according to the seeming sense, v.g.
The design is not in danger, to all it is as yet Secret; There is now nothing in view to threaten our safety, but by flight we should ruin all our designs. Do not fail to meet me by six in the old manner in half an hour hence, I intend to be at the Consult, let the next meeting be where they will, I'll have notice just without the Gate, was the Governour this Morning (if my Senses are sound) secure as we could wish him, we may conclude to have hit right on the means, and more infallible Evidence is not on this side Conjuration, the Snare is prepared they are misted, and see not that 'tis effectually to entrap them and on their Ruine to raise you and Your, &c. POST-SCRIPT. Prethee throw off those vain fears, expose not thy self to scorn, when there's not any imminent danger. Here to divert the suspicion what is design∣ed for the Confederates particular knowledge is divided from the rest of the Epistle, by a supposed perpendicular Line, but however it be divided, the sense cannot well escape a dis∣cerning Eye; and to propose a SOLUTION would be superfluous.
Example 2. The former Method for Secret Correspon∣dence may be further obscured, by cutting out equal Holes in two or more Sheets or half Sheets of Paper, and each of the Confederates at parting keep one, when there is any Secret concern in agitation, they lay the cut Paper over that they are to write upon, and express their mind through the Holes, which done, the void places are filled up (as before) with any thing to prevent or divert suspicion; and when it comes to the Confederates Hands. He be∣comes acquainted with the hidden meaning by applying the cut Paper he kept, to the Writing in the Epistle. SOLUTION. This method can hardly have any positive Rules for Decyphering, nor will the Judicious World need any, were not such ways of Se∣cret Writing fair to pass unsuspected, I am con∣fident they should be abandoned as useless. First, to solve this new Difficulty lay aside the seeming sense of the Epistle, and afterwards a Man's Reason will furnish him with more light into the Business than a whole Volumn of Instructions. The project is fairly laid down, and 'tis but going through the whole Epistle to find it out, nay you will find many occurring
circumstances to help you in the search e. g. suspicious words, which may be first extracted, and afterwards you may make Tryal what will best join with them. At worst you may begin with the first two, three, or more words in the Epistle, and perusing the whole add what will make up sense, from thence to the next words and combine as before, &c. 'Tis true this way of Resolving is not so in∣fallible as others, because you may find sense and perhaps a design contrary to the true intent of the Epistle, yet for security you may ex∣tract all out of it that will stick together, and and thus suppose you could not certainly know which of them may be the real meaning, yet all may be secured against, and tho such a dis∣covery could not in Law amount to a proof against the Criminal. It may however serve to provide against the attempt. 'Tis observeable that this Method of Cryto∣graphy may occasion a mistake amongst the Confederates themselves, without a great exact∣ness in Acting their several parts in Writing and Reading, especially if the Holes be so contri∣ved as that they can only contain Words, Syl∣lables or so, for we must suppose the Receiver of the Epistle to give an implicite Faith to what is delivered him in this manner, and one false step on either side, may give STAY in∣stead of RUN, &c. quite confounding the measures laid down. And if the Holes be large enough to contain Sentences it facilitates the Discoverer's work.
Example 3. To prevent but especially to Divert Suspicion (by Non-significants) there is an improvement of the last Methods of Secret Writing too Pu∣lick, tho not by way of the Press (for any thing I know) viz. By contriving a Writing accord∣ing to any of the last Examples, in Secret Cha∣racters, containing a Plot, or perhaps some lit∣tle Sham, a Love Entrigue, or an Ingenious Cloak of no Ingenuous dealing, as a pretence of broken credit amongst Merchants, and the like, and lockt up by Cypher and a Seal: This Epistle when Decyphered, (which is no more than perhaps the Confederates had agreed on) would give great probability that you had seen clearly into the Mystery, (finding a Plot or other tender concern put in Cypher,) when in truth, you have made no further Progress than they designed for you (in case of surprize) and as to any real intention you are still in the dark. This Obscurity when it is once suspected falls under the Observations upon the last two Examples. Example 4. From the Lord Verulam we have one Secret way of Converse to Divert suspicion by insert∣ing of Nulls, Advanc. of Learn. p. 265. in these
Words. As for the shifting off Examination, there is ready prepared a new and profitable Invention to this purpose; which, seeing it is easily procured, to what end should we report it as Deficient? The Invention is this: That you have two sorts of Alphabets, one of True Letters, the other of Non-significants; and that you likewise fold up two Letters; one, which may carry the Se∣cret; another, such as is probable the Writer might send, yet without Peril. Now, if the Messenger be strictly examined concerning the Cypher, let him present the Alphabet of Non-significants for true Letters; but the Alphabet of true Letters for Non-significants: By this Art the Examiner falling up∣on the Exterior Letter, and finding it probable, shall suspect nothing of the Interior Letters. SOLUTION. The Difficulties here are not very great: 'Tis true, if this Contrivance had never been published, it might have had the desired Ef∣fect; I mean, to divert Suspicion: But being made publick by an Author, so universally re∣ceived, I cannot see, but that the Examiner (even finding the exterior Letter probable) should take a View likewise of the interior, tho its Alphabet might be delivered him for Non signi∣ficants. But supposing no Alphabet in the Case, the Writing is decypherable without it. v. g. 1. You may discover from the number of Characters in the Writing, whether two Al∣phabets be used.
2. After you have found out, that two Alpha∣bets or more are used, you may from the fre∣quency of each particular Character, &c. ob∣serve the differing letters that express the same Power. 3. And having by several Operations distin∣guished the Alphabets one from another, any thing of new Difficulty vanisheth. ¶ 3. Of expressing all the Letters of the Al∣phabet, by any two, or three, or five of them, &c. Examples 1. Of five Letters resolved into two places. AA, ab, ac, ad, ae, ba bb, bc, bd, be, ca,     A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L,     cb, cc, cd, ce, da, db, dc, dd, de, ea, eb, ec, ed. M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, W, X, Y, Z.                           According to which, Bd aacb abacdddbaaecad.     I am betray'd.
Example 2. Of three Letters transposed through three places. Aaa, aab, aac, aba, abb, abc, baa, bab, bbb, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, bba, bac, bca, aca, acc, acb, bbc, bcb, bcc, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, cca, cab, cba, ccc, cbb, ccb.       T, V, W, X, Y, Z.       Babaaabcccaaabbaca. Hasten. Example 3. Of a Bi-literary Alphabet. Aaaaa, aaaab, aaaba, aaabb, aabaa, aabab, A, B, C, D, E, F, aabba, aabbb, abaaa, abaab, ababa, ababb, G, H, I, K, L, M, abbaa, abbab, abbba, abbbb, baaaa, baaab, N, O, P, Q, R, S, baaba, baabb, babaa, babab, babba, babbb. T, V, W, X, Y, Z. Aababbaabbaabbaaabaa. FUGE. From these Examples you may perceive how a man may express his mind (at any such distance wherein the Eye and Ear may imme∣diately
officiate) by any thing that is capable of a double or triple difference: But of this in the following Chapter. All these Alphabets are composed by an ir∣regular Position of the Letters, which differs very much from a regular Combination of let∣ters, as is observed: For, 1. By an Irregular Position, all the Letters to be used are not insert in all the Places; and thus you see aaa, bbb, baa, &c. in the Alpha∣bet of three Letters. 2. The Number of Letters, and Number of Places need not be the same: And thus in the first Example you have 5 letters resolved into 2 places; and in the last Example two letters transposed through five Places, &c. Note, by Places is understood the Number of Letters in the several Ranks, as in the Ex∣amples. But in a Regular Transposition or Combi∣nation, e contra, All the Letters to be combi∣ned must be insert in every Position; and con∣sequently the Number of letters, and Places equal: As you may perceive from the Expla∣nation of the Table of Combinations, in the pre∣ceeding Section. Having mentioned these things, I shall for the Satisfaction of those that are curious, leave some Remarks, to find out how many times this Irregular Method varies the Positions of a∣ny. Number of Letters in their several Pla∣ces: And, 1. As to the Number of Places and Letters, take the Number of Letters given; multiply
that Number by it self, and the Square, or Product arising from the Multiplication, gives their Variations in two Places: E. g. In the first Example there are five Letters in two Places: Now 5 the Number of Letters, mul∣tiplied by it self, gives 25, the Number of dif∣ferent Positions, 5 letters resolved into two Pla∣ces can have. 2. When the same Number of Letters is dis∣posed, three in a Rank, or in three Places, multiply the Square by the Root, or Number of Letters, and the Product will give you the different Positions of the letters in three Places: E. g. multiply 25, the last Product by 5 the Root, the Result, or Cube, 125 shows, that 5 letters in three Places may be so many times varied in the several Positions. 3. If you would know how many Irregular Positions 5 letters in 4 Places can have, take the fourth Power from the Root or Number of letters, (i. e.) Multiply the last Product by the Number of letters, v. g. 5, and the new Pro∣duct gives you the Resolution. And thus you may proceed to 5 Places, by finding out the Fifth Power; and so go on as far as you please. Again, if you would find out how many Positions two letters have in any Number of Places desired: First. Multiply 2 by it self (as before) which shews, that 2 Letters in 2 Pla∣ces, have 4 Positions. 2dly. Multiplpy 4, the Product, by 2, the Root, and you have 8, the Number of Different Positions that 2 letters
have in 3 Places: 2 Letters in 4 Places have 16 Irregular Positions, and in 5 Places they have 32: And so for any Number in Infini∣tum. I need not say much for SOLVING any Difficulty in the former Examples: For this way of Secret Writing (alone) will signifie ve∣ry little, unless to spend Time and Paper to the Writer: For if you put a Mark of Distincti∣on between every two, three, or five, &c. of the Characters (as they make up a significant Letter) they are liable to Discovery the same way with an ordinary Cypher. And it is easily discernable when two, three, or five Characters express one Letter, either from the Number of Characters in a Word, or in the whole Writing. 1. From the Number in a Word: For when two Letters go to the Composition of the Alphabet, there must be five Places; and the Words will consist of 5, 10, 15, 20, or 25 let∣ters, &c. If three letters in three Places, you will find 3, 6, 9, 15, or 18 Characters, &c. in each word, if five Letters in two places, the words shall have 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, or 12 Chara∣cters, &c. a piece. 2. From the Number of the letters in the whole, as if two be only used in one Rank, you shall have five differing Characters in the whole at least: E. g. a, b, c, d, e. If three in a Rank, then you may have 3 Characters: e. g. a, b, c, and if 5 in a Rank, you shall possibly have but 2 Characters in the Writing, &c.
There might be other Observations made, as from the number of like Characters falling together, &c. were it not superfluous. ¶ 4. Of Secret Writing by a Bi formed Alphabet. This way of Secret Writing is mentioned by the Lord Verulam, Adv. of Learn. p. 267. joyntly with that in the pre∣ceeding Paragraph, only as preparatory to the Secret Contrivance immediatly following, but is insisted on by it self in Bishop Wilkins his Secret and swift Messenger, and therefore have I insert it seperately here. For Example. First Alphabet. A a, B b, C c, D d, E e, F f, G g, H h, I i, K k, L l, M m, N n, O o, P p, Q q, R r, S s, T t, V v, W w, X x, Y y, Z z. Second Alphabet. A a, B b, C c, D d, E e, F f, G g, H h, I i, K k, L l, M m, N n, O o, P p, Q q, R r, S s, T t, V v, W w, X x, Y y, Z z. In Writing by this Invention of Secrecy, the Body of the Epistle is to consist chiefly of the second Alphabet. And as Occasion offers, the Secret intentions may be exprest by the Let∣ters of the first Alphabet; this I find illustrat∣ed by the following Example, viz. From those that are besieged.
We prosper still in our affairs and shall without having any further help endure the siege. Here the Letters of the first Alphabet con∣tain these words; We perish with hunger help us. I do not mention this for any thing of in∣tricacy, but only for Information that such Methods may be taken. ¶ 5. Of the Lord Bacon's Invention of Writing OMNIA PER OMNIA. 1. For performing this, they must have at Hand a Bi-literary Alphabet as in ¶ 3. And a Bi-formed Alphabet as in ¶ 4. 2. They write down their Secret Intentions or the Writing to be infolded on a Paper a∣part. 3. They make a Supposition, that all the Letters in the first Alphabet ¶ 4. do express A, and those in the second Alphabet B. And thus they may write what they please, for the Writing infolding, so it bear a quintuple propor∣tion to the Writing infolded at least. Or in that Learned Lord's own Words: To the interior Letter which is Bi-literate you shall fit a Bi formed Exterior Letter, Adv. of Learning l. 6. c. 1. which shall answer the other, Letter for Letter, and afterwards set it down. Let the exterior example be, Manere te volo donec venero. And the interior be, FUGE.
Example. F U G E                   Aabab. baabb. aabba. aabaa.                   Manere te volo donec venero.                   I have hereunto subjoyned an Example for further Illustration out of the Secret and Swift Messenger. Exterior Epistle. All things do happen according to our desires the particulars you shall understand when we meet at the appointed time and place of which you must not fail by any means the success of our affairs does much depend upon the meeting that we have agreed upon. Interior Letter. Fly for we are discover'd, I am forced to write this.
The Example illustrated. Aabab, ababa, babba, aabab, abbab, baaaa, F L Y. F O R. babaa, aabaa, aaaaa, baaaa, aabaa, aaabb, W E. A R E. D abaaa, baaab, aaaba, abbab, baabb, aabaa, I S C O V E baaaa, aaabb, abaaa, aaaaa, ababb, aabab, R' D. I. A M. F abbab, baaaa, aaaba, aabaa, aaabb, baaba, O R C E D. T abbab, babaa, baaaa, abaaa, baaba, aabaa, O. W R I T E. baaba, aabbb, abaaa, baaab.     T H I S.     This Method wants nothing of Ingenuity in the Contrivance, and containeth the Highest degree of Cypher, which is to signify omnia per omnia, without any other Restriction, than that the outward Writing must bear a quintu∣ple proportion to the Inward. Nay, there may be a Tri-formed Alphabet, contrived and Re∣gulated by the Tri literary Alphabet in ¶ 3. Example 2. And then the Epistle infolding will bear but a triple proportion to the Writing in∣folded: Either of which ways is preferable, to that tedious way of Secret Writing without sus∣picion, insisted on by Trithemius, in his first four Books of Polygraphy, and all the emprove∣ments it hath met with as shall be made mani∣fest.
Note, that by the invention of Secret Writ∣ing with Dots mentioned ¶ 1. a Man may write omnia per omnia, or express any intention by any Writing; but the proportion, between the Exterior and Interior Letter will be much greater than in this Noble Lord's contrivance. But to leave this Competition, I proceed. SOLUTION. We shall not need to enlarge much upon the Resolution of this kind of Secret Writing, for if you once find out whether two or three Al∣phabets be used, (and the different kinds of Let∣ters in the Epistle will inform you of that,) you may suppose one Alphabet A, a second to stand for B, and if there be a third, let it be supposed C. Afterwards extract the Writing out of the Epistle, as if these Letters A, B, or C, were only insert, and then it falls under the former considerations. It is nothing to the purpose, whether your Supposition and the Writers be the same, or not; for if you suppose always A for his B, the Operation will be alike easy. And here I shall leave this kind of Cryptogra∣phy by more Letters, &c.
SECT. 4. Of Secret Writing, by fewer Letters than are usual in the framing of Words. THe Art of Abbreviations in Writing, is mentioned by Trithemius and most Au∣thors who have treated of Cryptography, but pursued by very few or none. There hath been great variety of these Con∣tractions invented, and their first, and, for any thing I hear, their constant use amongst the Romans was for Expedition, Pier. Hier. lib. 17. c. 23. such as A the mark of Absolution, Pier. ibid. C of Condemnation, , Pier. Hierogl. ibid. & lib. 42. c. 53. Vid. Schot. Techn. Cur. lib. 7. c. 3. N. L. Non Liquet, and N. D. Ne∣ci Datum. And thus did the Judges write their several opinions upon a little Stone or Tessera, in Cases Capital. Hence it is that A was called Salutis Litera, and C Litera Tristis. But there were other Abbreviations amongst the Notaries, which more properly may be said to have been used for Expedition, v.g. A. T. M. D. O. Aio te mihi dare opportere, B. A. bona actio, B. E. bonorum emptor, B. F. bona fides. B. J. bonum ju∣dicium. Ca. M. V. causa memorati viri. C. C. causa cognita, &c. This way of Writing was retained in the Civil Law, until the number of Abbreviations was augmented to a Confusion, and L. I. Cod. Tic. 17. leg. 12. Justinian discharged the use of them in Statutes, &c.
To this we may subjoin those later inven∣tions, for Expedition by Tachygraphy or Short-Hand-Writing. In the first, certain Characters exprest whole Words; and to reduce this to a ready practice for Secret Information, the Confederates must allow a great deal of Time and Pains, for Con∣triving it, and Instructing their Confidents in it. Trithemius, speaking of Cicero's notes, gives his Judgment of the invention (after he had pro∣posed it as a mean for Secret Converse) in these words—Horum Rex tutissimè uti semper potest Ob∣sequio, quamvis non sine magno labore, manifesta∣que Bacuceorum suspicione. And the second is in effect but an improve∣ment of the first, rendering it a little more practicable; for in Tachygraphy Notes are used to express Syllables, and sometimes Words. And herein if you understand but one kind of Short-Hand-Writing, you may Decypher any; for you may judge of Syllables, when exprest by single Characters, by their frequency, &c. as of Letters. But, besides, you have the advan∣tage of distinguishing the Vowels, See Ma∣sons or any other up∣on Short-Hand. which are not exprest, but understood by the Places of the Notes, that (together with their own pro∣per powers) express those of the several Vowels. It is Observable that this kind of Writing has not so much as the name of Secret, for it is term∣ed, Tachygraphy, or Brachygraphy, not Crypto∣graphy, &c. agreeable (as is already Observ∣ed) to the design of its Invention.
I know it is very Ordinary in Secret Writ∣ing, to have an Alphabet of Words signified by single Notes; Discov. in Scotl. p. 11, 12, &c. and in the Lady Argile's Let∣ter, Decyphered by Mr. Gray, 43 or Dexprest the Relatives He, His, Their, Him &c. But the meaning of a few such Characters may be re∣solved by the sense of the rest of the Epistle. And now having taken a few Observations here of the Method of Writing by fewer Let∣ters than custom requires for framing Words, as it may respect Secret Information, I leave it to be improved by others to more regular Intents; and certainly the knowledge of Ancient Ab∣breviations alone, wants not its advantages for understanding the Religious worship, as well as Civil Laws, of the Ancient Romans, for gene∣rally their Consecration of Places or Things was exprest by the first Letters of the Words under∣stood; such as Mer. S. Mercurio Sacrum, M. J. Maximo Jovi. D. Im. S. Diis Immortalibus Sa∣crum, D. O. Diis Omnibus, D. P. Diis Penati∣bus, J. O. M. D. Jovi Optimo Maximo Dedica∣tum, &c.
SECT. 5. Of Secret Writing, by a Deceit in the Pa∣per, or some Material used instead of it. ¶ 1. Of the Lacedaemonian Scytale. THat Secrecy arising from the Paper in a written Message, most early, and, per∣haps, most universally received, was the La∣cedaemonian Scytale, contrived by Archimedes, who lived about the Year of the World 3735, we have this Relation of the Experiment from Bishop Wilkins, Secr. and Swift Mes. p. 38. There were provided two round Staves of an equal Length and Size, the Magi∣strates always retaining one of them at home, and the other being carried abroad by the General, at his going forth to War: When there was any se∣cret Business to be writ by it, their manner, was to wrap a narrow Thong of Parchment about one of the Staves by a Serpentine Revolution, so that the Edges might meet close together: Upon both which Edges they inscribed their Epistles; where∣as the Parchment being taken of, there appeared nothing but pieces of Letters on the Sides of it, which could not be joyned together in the right Sence without the true Scytale. Vel Lacedaemoniam Scytalen imitare libelli, Ason. ad Paulin. Segmina Pergamei, tereti circundata ligno,
Perpetuo inscribens versu, deinde solutus, Non respondentes sparso dabit ordine formas. Resolution. As for this piece of ancient Ingenuity, I find it freely Sec. and Swift Mes. ibid. confess'd, That a little Examination might have discover'd it (as Scalig. L. de subt. ex∣cre. 327. Scaliger in a few words clearly demonstrates:) For do but put the Edges of the Paper or Parchment (so writ upon) together, by a Serpentine Revolution, so as both pieces of the first divided letter may be joyned, and it gives the Compass of the Scytale to frame one by: And it were no great Task to frame Staves of all Sizes, and have them in readiness: Nay, such a Staff may be augmented in Bulk by Wax-Paper, &c. As it may be diminished by taking these off again: But indeed you may find out the Sence with∣out any such Trouble: For after the first let∣ter is joyned, you may successively add piece to piece in Order, as they naturally follow, even in your Hand. And here you may observe, That so much of the Paper as gives the Measure of the Scy∣tale, will be void of any parts of letters, because it must go once round the Staff before the Edges can meet. If such an Epistle were writ in Cypher, there's no great Difficulty in joyning the Edg∣es rightly; and if copied from them on a Pa∣per apart, it is liable to the ordinary Rules of decyphering Characters.
¶ 2. Improvement of the Lacedaemonian Scytale. This may be performed by a Thread first dipt in Alum Water, Bapt. Port. Mag. nat. l de Ziph. c. 5. then rowl'd about a small Rod or Staff, in a Serpentine Revolution, and writ up∣on. SOLUTION. And the Sence may also be discovered as before: For the Distance between the first and second Mark, which the Thread receives from the Ink, gives the Measure of the Scytale. Here 'tis the same thing what end of the Thread you begin at: For if you begin with the last Leater, turn only the Rod, putting that end downwards which was uppermost, and you have it in Order. ¶ 3. Of expressing any secret Intention by a String and Tablet. There is a way of expressing any private Imitation, Sec. and swift Mes. p. 44. by drawing a String through the Holes of a little Tablet, or Board: These Holes must be of the same Number with the Letters, unto which, by Compact, they should be applied: The Order of the Strings passing through, may serve to express any Letter, &c.
SOLUTION. As for the Resolution, it differs nothing from that of Secret Characters: For, if from the Differences in the Order Strings passing thro' the Holes, you copy it out in supposed Letters or Figures, on a Paper apart, you have it writ∣ten in an ordinary Cypher; of which already. ¶ 4. Of expressing any Intention by certain Knots tied upon a String. There is another way to this purpose of Secret Information, Secr. and Swift Mes. ibid. by divers Knots tied upon a Thread, according to certain Distances, by which a man may distinctly express any Meaning. The manner of per∣forming it is this: Let there be a square piece of Plate, with the 24 Letters described on the Top of it, at equal Distances, on both the opposite Sides; and let there be little Teeth, on which the Thread may be fast∣ened for its several Returns; and the Knots to be made at the Letters; required, &c. Instead of Knots, Scho. Mag. Cryptog. p. 19. if the Thread be first dipt in Alum water, they can make little Marks with Ink. SOLUTION. To discover any meaning so involved, the Difficulty is to find out the true Breadth of the Plate, or Table: And to effect this,
Take the Exact length of the Thread, which you may reduce to Inches; or, if needful, even to Degrees upon the Line of Chords. This done, find out all its equal Divisors, or Aliquot parts by the Rules formerly deliver∣ed. Now one of these Divisors gives the breadth of the Tablet, and which of them it is you may find out by two or three Suppositions at most. But there may be other ways for discovering the breadth of the Plate, viz. Take all the se∣veral Distances between the Knots or other marks of Distinction; or between some few of them if the thread be long: Compare the Diffe∣rences, and you shall soon find out the com∣mon Distance between the Letters of their Al∣phabet, and consequently its breadth. You may easily perceive when your Suppo∣sitions are false, for then there will but few Knots fall in a Perpendicular Line upon the Tablet, whereas when ever you suppose true the Knots expressing the same power will be all in a direct Line, opposite to one another, and then you may Copy it out thus, Begin at the Left-hand, mark all the Letters you find in the first perpendicular Line A, and those in the second Line B, &c. And at worst you have it in an Ordinary Cypher. Here you may observe that when you have the true breadth of the Tablet, it will be no Difficulty, tho there be some part of the Thread Mute, or useless in Reading, and only sent to amuse the Discoverer.
This may likeways be Decyphered without the breadth of the Tablet, thus: 1. Take all the several Distances between the Knots, and set down two different Cha∣racters to express every Variation. 2. Copy out upon Paper the whole Thread, according to the Figures you took to express it. Example. Suppose your first distance should be 16 de∣grees, and your mark for it a b, the second 14 deg. and your mark for it a c, the third distance 4 deg. and its mark a d, the fourth distance 16 deg. marked as before a b, &c. The Writing will stand thus a b, a c, a d, a b, &c. Again suppose the first two Knots to express t h, the fourth distance is likeways t h: And wherever these two Letters fall together you shall have the same distance. And so from the frequen∣cy, &c. you may find the hidden meaning. ¶ 5. How to write Secretly upon the Edges of a new Bound Book. Baptista Porta tells us, Mag. Nat. l. de Ziph. cap. 5. how we may write our Secret Intentions without suspicion, upon the Edges of a new Bound Book, by drawing back the Leaves, until by degrees the Edges of the Paper fall awry, then write your mind upon it, and nothing shall appear but such
small blots, as are usually thrown upon a new Book for Ornament, or fall accidently by mi∣stake, until the leaves of the Book be put in the same Figure again. SOLUTION. This needs no more for its discovery, but only to be suspected. ¶ 6. Of Writing upon the Edges of Cards, &c. Baptista Porta relates, Port. ibid. the former way of Secret Information may be performed with playing Cards, or upon cut Paper, &c. As for this way by Writing upon the Edges of Cards, &c. placed in an oblique; or, per∣haps, a straight Figure. It appears to have some∣thing more of Intricacy in it, than that last mentioned, Schot. Ste∣ganog. Clas. 12. c. 5. because the order of placing the Cards, may be confounded when employed upon a Message, for what Card shall be first, second, &c. is by compact agreed upon, how∣ever this can only prolong, not frustrate a dis∣covery, for you may take any Card that comes first to Hand, and search into the rest of the Pack, &c. until you get another that will exact∣ly joyn with its broken pieces of Letters, and afterwards you may with great ease find the Cards that must go before and after those that are truly coupled, and this I hope needs no further illustration.
SECT. 6. Of Secrecy in Writing that ariseth from the Ink or other Liquor. THere are likewise several ways of Secrecy arising from the Ink, or the Liquor used instead thereof. I shall only name them, since that carries along with it the means of Disco∣very. Thus when I tell you from experience, or a second Hand assurance, That if a Man write with Salt Ammoniack, dissolved in Water, or with the juice of Limons, &c. The Letters will only be visible when held by the Fire, there needs no other Rule for Discovery; but indeed the heat of the Fire only detects, Port. Mag. Nat. l. de Ziph. c. 2. that which in a little time had disclosed it self, for such is the nature of those acid and corroding moistures, that they cannot be long good Se∣cretaries. Letters written with dissolved Alum, Port. ibid. &c. are not discernable until the Paper be dipt in Water. Letters witten with Urine, Goats fat, Scht. Steg. p. 304. &c. do not appear until dust be scattered upon them. And 'tis thought that Attalus used this piece of Policy, to encourage his Soldiers, before he engaged in Battle with the Gauls, his Enemies, Superior in number. The Story goes thus;
At∣talus having appointed a day for Sacrifice, as he pull'd out the Intrails of the Beast, described these words upon them, Regis Victoria, which he had before writ backwards in his Hand with some Gummy Juice, and as the Intrails were turn'd up and down by the Priest to find out their signification, they gathered so much dust that they appeared legible, which Omen so en∣couraged his Soldiers that he got the Victory indeed. To this purpose likewise is that of Ovid. Tuta quoque est, fallitque oculos è lacte recenti Littera: Carbonis polline tange, Leges. Fallit & humiduli quae fiet acumine Lini, Et ferret occultas pura Tabella notas. There is a Secret way of Writing with the Yolk of a raw Egg, Scht. Steg. p. 303. dissolved in Fountain Wa∣ter. The Letters whereof being fully dry, the Confederates black the whole Paper with Ink, which being likewise dryed, the Ink falls from the Letters first described when scraped gently with a Knife. Schottus tells us, p. 301. how we may write Secretly with two several Inks, the method is this, mix a little Common Ink with so much Water, that little or nothing of Blackness appear in it; with this write your Secret intentions upon clean Paper: When it is thoroughly dryed, write an Ordinary Epistle with another Ink, (made of Gun-powder, beat and mixt with
Rain water) upon the very Letters you de∣scribed before. The last Ink will wash off with a Sponge dipt in Water boyled with Galls, which will also blacken the first. Baptista Porta, Mag. Nat. lib. de Ziph. c. 1. has another way to this pur∣pose, whereby he affirms, the true Writing will not appear until wet with the juice of Un∣ripe White Grapes. Letters that are Writ with dissolved Traga∣canth and White Lead, Schot. Ste. 304. will not be visible un∣til the Writing be held between the Sun, a Star, or a Candle, &c. and the Eye. Schottus affirms, Schot. Mag. Uni∣ver. part. 4. l. 1. p. 13. that a Writing may be so contrived, that the Letters shall not be Legible until the Paper be burnt black: And the writ∣ten parts of it do still remain White. Which is performed by mixing Vinegar made of Wine, and the white of an Egg, with Quicksilver or white Lead: and Writing therewith, or with Gum or any kind of Salt, &c. Or with such Liquors, as render the Letters described in∣combustible. There are some contrivances whereby the Letters appear not but in the dark, but such are not yet practicable in communicating Secret designs, for it being a Material Flame in the Nocteluca, that gives light on such parts of the Paper as it adheres to, in a short time it con∣sumes it self. It is only visible in the Dark, be∣cause its Light is drowned by any that's grea∣ter. I leave this beaten Road, with a Caution, that most Methods in this kind of Cryptogra∣phy, may be interlined with some Ordinary
business in an Epistle, or writ on the backside, or other part of a Letter; for of themselves they have two grand inconveniencies. 1. To be very lyable to suspicion; for who can imagine that a piece of clean Paper, or where thee is nothing but one blot, when intercepted should have no occult meaning? And 2. They are ve∣ry easily discovered when doubted. And this is all I shall add, upon Cryptogra∣phia or the Art of Secret Writing. CHAP. II. Of Secret Information by Signs and Gestures and its Resolution. TO come now to the second Part of Secret Information mentioned, viz. By Signs and Gestures; it is called * Saemaeologia, from  a Sign, Etimolo∣gy. and  to read or comprehend. This way of Converse is compleat in its kind without the help either of Words or Letters, as was observed in the preceeding Chapter; and to borrow the words of an Eminent Author. L. Bacon Advanc. of Learn. p. 258. For this is certain, whatsoever may be distinguisht into differences, sufficient for number, to express the variety of notions (so those differences be perceptible to sense) may be the Convey of the Cogitations from Man to Man. And a little after, he adds:
NOTES therefore of things which without the Mediation of Words (or Letters) signify THINGS, p. 259. are of two Sorts; whereof the first is significant ex CONGRUO, and the other ad PLACITUM. And according to this Partition I shall here treat of them. SECT. 1. Of Information by Signs and Gestures Emble∣matical. Gestures and Signs, are said to signify ex Con∣gruo, when there is some natural Analogy or resemblance between the action exprest and thing signified. Of which we shall adduce some Examples. ¶ 1. Of Transitory Signs of Information. The Noble Author last mentioned speaking of such Transitory Signs tells us. Ibid. As for Gestures they are, as it were, Transitory Hieroglyphicks. For as Words pronounced vanish, Writings re∣main; so Hieroglyphicks exprest by Gestures are Transient; but painted, permanent. As when Periander being consulted with, how to preserve a Tyranny, bid the Messenger stand still, and he walking in a Garden, topt all the highest Flowers, for which he cites Herodotus. Bishop Wilkins calls it a Parabolical way of dis∣coursing by Gestures, Sec. and Sw. Mess. p. 111. and relates a Story to the same purpose, if not the same. Thrasybulus,
be∣ing consulted (says he) how to maintain a new U∣surped Tyranny, brought the Messenger into the Fields, and in his sight cut of the higher Ears of Corn overtopping the rest, bidding him tell his Ma∣ster what he had seen him do. Others will have this to have been done by Tarquinius Superbus, Vide inter alios Front. de Stratag. l. 1. c. 4. seventh and last King of the Romans, when consulted by his Son Sextus. And all do agree that the thing signified, was the cutting off and keeping low of the Nobility. ¶ 2. Of Permanent Signs such as Hiero∣glyphicks, &c. Hieroglyphicks, (i. e.) (Holy Sculptures, from Sacred and  to Carve) are Natural or Historical. The use of them (especially of the first) was very early in the World, and they would appear to have been a first born Writing, elder than the Elements of Letters. They were both significant from Congruity, and therefore I have mentioned them here; being in effect but a kind of Emblems. Hieroglyphicks were had in great Venera∣tion amongst the Aegyptians, and were En∣graven upon their Pyramids and Pillars: Their way was to express any Writing by the Pi∣ctures of such Creatures or Things, as did bear in them something of Similitude to the thing signified. Many Treatises have been writ upon this Subject, and kindly received by the Learned World, and I hope it will not be repute, as
beside the purpose, that I have subjoyned a short account of some that are remarkable in this ancient way of expressing things. A small Collection of ancient Hieroglyphicks. The representation of a LYON, (according to the differing Postures, as Passant, Couchant, &c. Or the Pictures of other Creatures placed with him) exprest severally, Magnanimity, Strength, Punishment, Power, filial Obedience, Clemency, Religious fear, &c. The Lyon's Clemency is commonly noted, Plin. lib. 8. c. 36. Pliny tells us, Leoni tantum ex feris Clementia in supplices, prostratis parcit. Hence that of Ovid. Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni. When the Lyon is made the Hieroglyphick of fear, they present a Cock by him, whose crow∣ing is said to be so formidable, Plin. ibid. that it puts him to flight. By the several Postures of an ELEPHANT, they used to express a King, Piety, Temperance, &c. A King, because he never bows the Knee, &c. By the RHINOCEROS or UNICORN, a severe Revenger, but not easily provoked, &c. By the BULL, Continence, plenty, &c. By the HORSE, War, Empire, Lechery, &c. By the DOG, a Priest, and sometimes a Flatterer, &c.
By the STAG or HART; Fear, Lasciviae Poenitentia, a Preparation of Arms without the Heart, &c. By the ANT, Foresight, indefatigable labour. By the HEDGE-HOG, a Man armed against dangers, the danger of delays, &c. By the HOG, Sensuality, a Sophist, a profane Fellow, Luxury, a Chaos, &c. By the GOAT, a Promptitude of Hearing, a Whore, Lust, &c. This Beast was likewise the Hieroglyphick, and Sign of Pan, by whom the whole Universe was understood. It is amongst the reasons given, that a Goat should signify Pan, and Pan the World; Huic (i. e.) Panw▪ l. 10. c. . illa in Nymphas procacitas attributa, & nunquam satiata Libido: Mundus siquidem assidue rerum species progenerat, & humore plurimum utitur, màteria quippe Generationi in primis & apta & commoda, &c. By the SHEEP, Innocence, or sometimes Foolishness, according to the Proverb . Like a Sheep. Yet of old this Creature was in great esteem, and tho Hercules carryed no spoil but Sheep from his African Victory, he is said to have brought back Golden Apples. So that this was more properly the Hierogly∣phick of Riches, fertility, &c. By the RAM, War, the envy betwixt Rivals, fierceness, &c. By the WOLF, the Egyptians represented, a Man that was fearful at little, for 'tis reported of this voracious Creature, that it flies the noise of a few Stones, when it dares encounter a Man armed cap à pe,
this Pierius confirms from his Fathers experience. The Wolf was likewise the Hieroglyphick of Apollo, Mars, Improbitatis Meretriciae, &c. hence Lupa is some∣times taken for a Strumpet, Cic. in Mi∣lon. as in that of Cicero, Clodius semper secum Scorta, semper Lupas ducebat. A Man holding a Wolf by the Ears, is the em∣bleme of one involved in difficulties. By the TYGER devouring a Horse, Revenge, the Tyger is also the Hieroglyphick of Parental af∣fection, &c. When they were to express one very Igno∣rant, they represented him by the Picture of a Man with ASS's Ears, which commonly is termed Aselliceps homo; and this the Poets feign to be the punishment of Midas for his bad judg∣ment. Old Israel in his 17 years aboad in Ae∣gypt, Gen. 49. having seen into the Learning of the Ae∣gyptians, couched many of his predictions con∣cerning the future state of his Sons posterity, under Hieroglyphicks, and particularly concern∣ing Issachar, he says, Issachar is a strong Ass, &c. Herein he made use of an Hieroglyphick Tran∣sient. Cic. in Pisonem. Cicero says concerning one very dull, Quid nunc te, Asine, literas doceam, non opus est verbis, sed fustibus, &c. By the MULE, the Aegyptians exprest Bar∣renness, others have signified a Bastard, &c. by it. By the HARE, Vigilance, because she is said to sleep with her Eyes open; she is also the Hieroglyphick of Fear, &c. I do not find the FOX recorded amongst the Aegyptian
Hieroglyphicks, but amongst the Geeks and Latines his Picture exprest, craft and deceipt, &c. By the VIPER, Conjugal or filial ingrati∣tude. By the EAGLE, Royal Majesty, &c. By the PHOENIX, the Restauration of any thing that had been laid aside, &c. By the HAWK, God, the Sun, &c. By the RAVEN, one that disinherits his Chil∣dren. By the BEE, a King, Obedience to Authori∣ty, &c. By the DOLPHIN, speed, dispatch, &c. By a young STORK nourishing its Dame, Fi∣lial Gratitude. By the HEAD, the Aegyptians and others exprest Empire, &c. By the BACK, flight. By the SHOULDERS, strength, &c. By the EYES, God, Justice, a Guardian, &c. By the TONGUE, Mercury, Discipline, &c. By the HEART, Counsel, Life, &c. By the HANDS, Authority, &c. By a CIRCLE, they represented Aeterni∣ty, &c. By a QUADRANGLE, the Solar year, &c. By a CAP, Liberty. By a SHOOE, the progress of things. By a RING, Trust, Confidence, &c. By the ADAMANT, Fortitude, &c. By an EMERALD, Virginity.
By the SUN, God, &c. By an ANCHOR, Deliberation, &c. By a HOOK, Deceipt. By the HARP, Concord. By a DOLPHIN Painted upon an AN∣CHOR, Festina lente, Deliberation in Counsel, and dispatch in Business. Plutarch, Lib. de Isia & Isid. relates there was a Temple in Ae∣gypt, dedicate to Minerva, that had these Pi∣ctures Painted in the Front of it, viz. An In∣fant, an Old Man, a Hawk, a Fish, and a Sea-Horse, which is thus interpreted, YOUNG, and OLD, GOD, (signified by the Hawk) HATES, (by the Fish, their Ordinary way of expressing Hatred,) IMPUDENCE (under∣stood by the Sea-Horse.) Young and Old know that God hates Impudence. Idanthura, Sch. Mag. Crypt. c. 2. out of Clem. A∣lexander. King of the Scythians, in War with Darius, sent him a Mouse, a Frog, a Bird, a Dart, and a Plough; threatning, thereby that unless the Persians could hide themselves in the Earth, or Water as Mice and Frogs, or fly as Birds, they should not escape the Scythian Ar∣rows, or Slavery, &c. The Sign of Secrecy amongst the Romans, was by lifting up the Picture of a Minataur, in∣timating thereby, that the thing communicate, was to be kept as Secret as the feigned Habita∣tion of that Monster. But there are Historical Emblemes or Hie∣roglyphicks, which likewise signify ex Congruo, viz. Such as relate to some common
History or Fable: As by the Picture of Prometheus gnaw'd by a Vulture, is understood the Reward of too much Curiosity, &c. For SOLUTION of all such Riddles, lit∣tle can be said: There is a good Judgment, a knowledge of History, and a Natural Faculty (which cannot admit of Rules of Art) required in him, that would thus Secretly express his mind, or comprehend this way of Information so exprest. I have mentioned it here partly, be∣cause much of the Ancient Learning, especi∣ally of the Aegyptians was veiled under such mysteries, and that is no frivolous subject for the speculation of a modern Philosopher: And withal the knowledge of Hieroglyphicks and Emblems, as it may be useful to compleat a Decypherer, so it is no great burthen, but an Ornament to any Gentleman. SECT. 2. Of Signs and Gestures significant ad placitum, or by Compact. This way of Secret Information by Signs or Gestures, ad libitum, is capable of as great Variety, as the fancies of Men shall impose sig∣nifications upon all such Signs and Actions, as are capable of sufficient Differences. I shall on∣ly take notice of what is most remarkable, but I hope clear All.
¶ 1. Of Characters Real, that have nothing of Emblem in them. I have already observed, that the old Hiero∣glyphicks, always had something of Similitude to the thing signified, and were really a kind of Emblemes. But now it is certainly known, that in China there are certain real, (and not nominal Characters) that express things and Notions, ab∣stracting from any Naturnl Analagy, between the thing exprest and signify'd. And tho the se∣veral Countries, in those large Territories, be altogether ignorant one of anothers Language, yet they entertain an intelligible way of con∣verse by Writing; and there wants not those who have attempted to introduce this Method of an Universal Correspondence nearer home, particularly Bishop Wilkins, Schottus, &c. I should be very unjust if I did not approve of the design, but I cannot conceive how this can be well accommodated to our new Magia Cryptographica; for it is evident, that there must needs be a vast number of these dead and dumb Signs invented, at least so many as there are ra∣dical words. And this new collection of Signs significant ad Libitum, requires too much time and trouble, to adapt it to SECRET Informa∣tion. And seeing it is not consonant to the Re∣quisites and Design of Private Intelligence, I shall even leave it to be improved to better purposes.
¶ 2. Of Arthrology. Arthrologia, or the Art of Discoursing by the joynts or remarkable parts of a Mans Body, (from  and ) is observed by most Authors that treat upon Secret Converse, and particularly by Schottus, Steg. Class. 12. c. 10. § 1, 2. who inserts an Arthro∣logical Alphabet, in Latin and High Dutch, I have hereunto subjoyned one in English, viz. A The Ear. B The Chin. C The Hair. D The Teeth. E The right Eye. F The Fore Head. G The Throat. H The Shoulder. I The Fore-Finger. K The Middle-Finger. L The Lip. M The left Hand. N The Nose. O The Knee. P The Breast. Q Any two Fingers stretched. R Three Fingers stretched. S Four Fingers stretched. T The Tongue. V The right Eye-Brow. W The left Eye-Brow. X The left Eye. Y For Y, the mark of I. Z For Z, the mark of C.
The Practice of this would appear to be as old as Ovid, who was not wanting in such Ob∣servations. Verba superciliis sine voce loquentia dicam. Verba leges digitis, Ovid de Art. Ama. verbaque vultus habet: And again: Saepetacens vocem, verbaque vultus habet. I have known Children at School use it, and I am sure they must be still Children, or else something indued with a less degree of Know∣ledge, that practise it in Company; and out of Company it is good for little, because so small an Object as a particular Joint, &c. is not perceptible at any considerable distance. SOLUTION. But however if you would Solve this, go a∣side, and mark every particular Action by a Distinct Character, and it is lyable (when so noted down) to the common Rules of Decy∣phering. ¶ 3. Of Dactylogy. Dactylogia (, or from , and .) Is an Art of discoursing by the Fingers, and noted for its Antiquity; the
Ancients used to express any number under 100 by the Fingers of the left Hand, and those numbers above 100, and under 9000, Hierog. l. 37. c. 1. by the Fingers of the right Hand. Sat. 10. de Pylio. Pierius gives us an account of their particular ways of Reckoning from 1, or Unity to 9000. And hence Juve∣nal. Rex Pylius, magno si quicquam credis Homero, Exemplum vitae fuit à cornice secundae, Foelix nimirum, qui tot per saecula vitam Distulit, atque suos jam dextra computat annos. Now these Postures may serve to express Let∣ters and Words, as well as Figures or Num∣bers. And Schottus is not wanting in an Alpha∣bet this way too, e.g. A Exprest by The little Finger of the left Hand. B Exprest by The little and Ring-Finger. C Exprest by The little, Ring, and middle Finger. D Exprest by The little, Ring, middle, and fore-Finger. E Exprest by All the five Fingers. F Exprest by All the Fingers of the left Hand, and little Finger of the right. G Exprest by All the Fingers of the left Hand, and the little and Ring-Finger of the right. H Exprest by All the Fingers of the left, and the little, Ring and middle Finger of the right Hand. I Exprest by All the Fingers of the left Hand,
and of the right except the Thumb. L Exprest by All the Fingers of both Hands. M Exprest by The Thumb of the left, and little Finger of the right Hand. N Exprest by The Thumb, the little and Ring Finger of the left Hand. O Exprest by The Thumb and three last Fingers of the left Hand. P Exprest by The right Thumb. Q Exprest by The right and left Thumbs. R Exprest by The left Thumb, and the Thumb and fore-Finger of the right Hand. S Exprest by The left Thumb, and two first Fin∣gers of the right Hand. T Exprest by The left Thumb, and three first Fingers of the right Hand. V Exprest by The left Thumb, and all the Fin∣gers of the right Hand. The Letters wanting may be supplyed as before. This falls under the former Observation for SOLUTION. ¶ 4. Of several ways of Secret Information by the species of Sight or Sound. Amongst the Secret Signs for Information ad Placitum, that by Smoak in the day time, and Fire in the night, is very remarkable, and so Ancient, that a great many Authors affirm, that this was
the Sign to unlock the Wooden Horse at the Siege of Troy; especially Diodo∣rus Siculus, I cannot now call to mind the par∣ticular Citations. The Turks of Chios in the Island of Lesbos in Asia Minor, give notice from their small Watch Towers along the Coast, of such Vessels as they see approaching. &c. There are latter Inventions of Secrecy by Torches, &c. much insisted on, viz. The Letters of the Alphabet may be con∣trived in two Tables, each of the Confede∣rates to have one. e. g.   1 2 3 4 5 1 A F M R Y 2 B G N S Z. 3 C H O T   4 D I P U   5 E L Q X   When they communicate their Intentions by this Table, there must be ten Torches, five on the right Hand, and five on the left. The sign of Advertisement being given and returned, they first lift up as many Torches, as is the number of Colums, wherein the Letter to be exprest, stands; then so many to the left as is the number of the Line. v.g. Suppose the Con∣federates would express the Word VENIE∣MUS: First the Informer holds up 4 Torches the right Hand, to signify,
that the Letter to be exprest, viz. (U) is in the 4th Column, then other 4 Torches to the left Hand, to show that it is in the 4th Line: Next he lifts up one to the right Hand, and 5 to the left, intimat∣ing the Letter exprest is in the 1st Column, and 5th in order, Weck. de Secret. l. 14. cap. 1. viz. E and so of the rest as Wec∣kerus hath it. Now this difficulty is easily SOLVED, for if at the first up-lifting of the Torches, you mark down 4, the number of Torches, and at the next motion 4, at the third 1, and at the fourth 5, &c. You shall have it in Cypher at last, thus: 4415322415314442. Which may be RESOLVED by the Rules given in the first Chapter. Here you see that two motions go always to the composition of one Letter, thus, 44, 15, 32, 24, 15, 31, 44, 42, V E N I E M U S. Be sure to observe every different Sign by a particular mark, for if you lose one motion, you may render your labour useless, but if you take all, you shall not only have the Secret, in Character; but you will find out by the marks of Advertisement when any word ends. Schottus proposes a way how this may be performed with one Torch only. v. g. One elevation to express A, 2, to signify B, 3, C, 4, D, &c.
But this contains no new Difficulty in its SOLUTION, and therefore I pass it over. There may be other Signs for Secret Infor∣mation, viz. at Sea by Flags of different Co∣lours, as White, Red, Blew, &c. By a Trumpet, a Drum, a Bell, &c. in refe∣rence to the Ear. As also by Musical Notes, &c. The order of managing either may be un∣derstood by the Tri-literary or Bi-literary Al∣phabets. Chap. 1. Sect. 3. Other Observations than what you have al∣ready for DECYPHERING are needless; on∣ly in marking the particular differences as to the species of Sound and sometimes of Sight, you may write down the first Letter of the thing used for Information, as B. for Bell, T. for Trumpet, C. for Cannon, R. for Red, W. for White, &c. CHAP. III. Of CRYPTOLOGY, or that SECRECY consisting in SPEECH. I Have already observed, that the Method of Treating of things here, is only in or∣der for the Readers ease; for if I had pursued this Design from the order of Nature, or Time, there must have
been several returns; but as things now stand, there is a clear Progress (I hope) without any thing of impediment in the way; and the further you go, you have the clearer prospect of what is be∣fore you. This Art is termed Cryptologia, Etymolo∣gy. from , and , Secretly to communicate our Thoughts by SPEECH. The way of Communicat∣ing our Thoughts, is reckoned threefold; or, there are three means of Converse, viz. By SPEAKING, by WRITING, or by SIGNS and GESTURES. Words are, or ought to be the Picture of Conceptions, as Letters are the Images of Words, the Tongue speaks to the Ear, but the Gesture to the Eye, &c. As King JAMES elegantly exprest it. To each of those three ways of discourse, human Policy hath added, a deceipt, viz. CRYPTOLOGY, CRYPTOGRAPHY, and SAEMAEOLOGY by Compact, the two last are already considered. And to return to the first, the common use of Language is twofold. 1. That others may discover their Intenti∣ons to us. And 2. That we may unfold ours to them, so that the Tongue was design'd for an Inter∣preter of the mind, but that it is often very unfaithful to its trust, is not to be doubted much less deny'd. It is storied concerning the French, that they neither Write as they Speak, nor Speak as they Think. And 'tis pity that they are not singular especially in the last part. But this
Moral Defect of Veracity lies at present out of my Road, for a Man may truly (tho Crypti∣cally) express bad Conceptions, and 'tis the Discovery of that Art is now my Province; yet it borders so near upon the former, (while both have one general aim to DECEIVE) that I could not altogether pass it. Cryptology or the Secrecy in Speaking may con∣sist, 1. In the Matter: 2. In the Words. SECT. 1. Of Secrecy in Speech in respect of the matter. CRyptology is said to consist in the MAT∣TER, when the thing we would utter is concealed under the expression of some other matter, that is not of obvious conceipt, so Bishop Wilkins hath it. Now as to this particular kind of Secrecy, by which one thing is said and another understood, the Words in themselves, have some Relation to the thing signified by them, either Natural or by Compact. ¶ 1. Of Cryptology, wherein there is some Ana∣logy between the thing said, and the mat∣ter signified. This differs little or nothing from Permanent, or Transient Hieroglyphicks, except only that by the last, the Secret Intention is communicate by some Actions; as in that of
Tarquinius Superbus. For if he had told his Son, those Higher Ears of Corn, (or as Frontinus relates it Poppy) that overtopped the rest must be Cropt, the Words were capable of the same Interpretation, as when he actually cut them off himself, &c. To this Head are reducible, Vid. Sec. and Swift Mes. p. 19. Metaphors, Al∣legories, Parables, Fables, and all that Aenigma∣tical Learning the Aegyptians, and others were so much addicted to, Macrob. in Som. Scip. l. 1. c. 2. Quia sciunt inimicam esse Naturae apertam, nudamque expositionem sui, quae sicut vulgaribus Hominum sensibus, intellectum sui vario rerum tegmine, operimentoque subtraxit, ita à Prudentibus Arcana sua voluit per fabulosa tractari. It is requisite in this Art to make choice of such a Subject, as may bear in it some proper Resemblance to the business in Hand, and to make the several parts of the Similitude fitly answer the several Passages of greatest mo∣ment. And this requiring a Natural Faculty, it is clear, that such ways of Secret Information cannot be accommodated to all Persons, and consequently not to all Exigences. Besides that it cannot be safely adventured on, before a Man of sense, who may trace the meaning through the several parts of the Similitude, &c. But Allegories, &c. have in other things a more genuine use, being observed to excite the Fancy upon an Argument, and often to bring the Adversary over unawares to an acknow∣ledgment, while plain Arguments and Moral precepts are more flat in their Operation. I re∣member Knolls, in his History of the Turks, Re∣lates,
That Bajazet, one of their most fiery Ty∣rants, having resolved to destroy a great ma∣ny of his Chief Officers, about the time when Tamerlane was on his March to invade him; (at least when Tamerlane's Designs were known at the Ottoman Court.) Alis Bassa, the Chief Mi∣nister at the Port, dared not open his Mouth for their Reprieve: And if he had, he had undergone their Sentence. And tho' thus forced to lay aside as weighty Arguments for their Lives as any Circumstances of Reason or State could afford: The Tyrant's unruly Passion was overcome by a kind of Metaphor out of his Jester's Mouth; who appearing before Bajazet with a great Drum, bid him, Cause hang those Villains presently that had offended him: For (says he) you shall have no Use for them: You and I will fright that Numerous Army of Tartars that are approaching: For I can beat a terri∣ble March upon this Drum, and you may come up with a dreadful Countenance, and the day's your own. When Cyrus had put the Medes to Flight, their Mothers and Wives upbraided them in their Flight by a homely Metaphor, related thus by Justin. Justin. l. 1. Matres & Uxores in Praelium contra Cyrum fugintes, occurrunt; sublata veste, obscae∣na corporis ostendunt, rogantes num in uteros Ma∣trum vel Uxorum velint refugere. But this be∣ing Foreign to my Design, I leave it.
¶ 2. Of that Secrecy in SPEECH wherein the Relation between the Words Exprest and under∣stood, is merely by Compact. That there may be Contrivance of Secrecy, wherein the Relation betwixt the thing exprest, and the thing signified, is by Compact agreed upon, is beyond Controversie. Instances of this Nature have been but too frequent. The Powers, or usual Signification of Words, may be altered as well as that of Letters: And by this Fallacy, the Sence of any Writing or Discourse as much confounded; yet you must suppose that this way can only cloak some Per∣sons, or things, not a whole Design, if render∣ed practicable. He that reads Argile's long Letter decyphered (as in the Discoveries in Scotland) may easily perceive in the several Steps, the Lines of an intended Rebellion, tho' without all doubt, he at first, when he framed his Alphabet of Words, provided as much a∣gainst a Discovery of the Sence of his Epistles, as could be, when adapted to a current Cor∣respondence: But Humane Policy cannot fore∣see all future Contingencies: And tho here we chiefly mention this in Reference to Speech, yet you see it hath been committed to Wri∣ting. And having mentioned Argile's Long Letter, I shall insist on some of the PARTICULARS, contained therein. He is more than short∣sighted, nay, more than half blind, that does
not see in it a Design of raising Money; and that this Money is to be employed upon Men and Arms, against the Forces; and consequent∣ly the Established Government of BRAND. What is to be understood by BRAND, viz. Scotland, the occurring Circumstances do sufficiently e∣vince, 1. By the Number of Standing Forces there, viz. 1200 Horse and Dragoons and 2000 Foot. 2. From the Station, these Standing Forces would probably take up, viz. Stirling. 3. From the Aid of the Standing Forces, viz. a Militia of 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, and the Heretors, &c. to the Number of 50000. Thus having by the concurring Circumstan∣ces discovered BRAND, to signifie SCOT∣LAND, That might help to understand some other of his Canting Terms, E. g. And tho we had at first the greatest Success imaginable, yet it is impossible but some (of the Forces) will keep together, and get some Concurrence and Assistance, not only in Brand, but from Birch and Ireland, &c. From this one Expression, it is easily con∣ceiveable, that by BIRCH, is understood ENG∣LAND. Next, As to BROWNE, it must signifie True Dissenting Protestants, from the following words. How can BROWNE employ so much Money, Note, THEIR denotes the plural Number. and so many Horse better for THEIR own Interest, tho the Protestant Interest were not concerned, &c. And these, at present, shall be all the Ani∣madversions
I will make to discover the Falla∣cy of this Method, equally applicable in Speech, or an Epistle. ¶ 3. Of Cryptology, without any Altera∣tion in the Words. This is performed by using Words in Speech, that are insignificant as to the Confederates, yet have a natural Cohesion amongst them∣selves, and guard that which is really secret from Suspicion, the Pane of Secret Speaking; and that either in an Oration, or even in com∣mon Discourse, e. g. Suppose the words immediately following any animate Being mentioned, should be only significant, and the Words that follow such Pronoons, &c. as relate to Animate Beings. Schottus proposes the Method, Steg. p. 320, 321. and does de∣monstrate it by the following Example. Let the Speaker's Secret Intention be to ad∣monish the Confederates to make their Escape, and the Words these; Sumus in periculo; cavete. The Discourse might run thus: In manu DEI sumus ubicunque versamur. Hanc ob Causam NOS in rebus adversis nequaquam pusil∣lanims esse debemus; quoniam DEUS periculo om∣ni eripere potest. Ergo AUDITORES cavete, pecca∣ta, & curam rerum vestrarum permittile DEO, &c. Here the words which express Animate Be∣ings, are DEI, NOS, DEUS, AUDITORES. And the words immediately following, Sumus in priculo; cavete.
I have hereunto subjoyn'd an Example in English. Suppose the words to be communi∣cated, were, Fly, you are discovered. The Discourse may be to this Effect, Let every MAN fly to his Duty. GENTLE∣MEN, you now see what PEOPLE are, and may do in their Madness: But WE discovered long since their Folly, &c. The Words that direct to the Meaning, are, MAN, GENTLEMEN, PEOPLE, WE. And this, I hope, is sufficient for Explana∣tion. 1. I know this Method is sufficiently capa∣ble of Variation; for Terminations of Words (instead of Animate Beings) may be the In∣dex. 2. Words may (by private Agreement) be remarkable from their place, as the first, fifth, tenth, fifteenth, &c. to be only significant. But this (except in a premeditated Discourse, which requires time to frame it) is hardly practi∣cable. 3. The Words that express the private In∣timation, may be distinguisht by some secret Sign, &c. But this, if observed, will give ground for Suspicion; and being once suspected, it is not safe; and needs no other Rule but Atten∣tion for to find out the hidden Meaning. For RESOLVING the other ways mention∣ed in this Paragraph, the most sure way were to take the whole Discourse in Short hand; or if you can remember it verbatim, it will save
so much trouble: And afterwards having writ it out, first, joyn the Words together that go before or after Animate Beings, and Relatives that belong to such: And if that will not resolve the Riddle, joyn other Words that fol∣low the particular Terminations, &c. However, I believe, there might be as ma∣ny found to unriddle all such politick Mysteries without any other Trouble than that of Atten∣tion, as they are that can handsomly frame them upon any occasion. SECT. 2. Of Cryptology, Or that secrecy in Speech which consists in the WORDS. ¶ 1. Of Invented Words. That Secrecy in Speech, by inventing new Words, Secr. and Swift Mes. p. 21. is mentioned in the Secret and Swift Messenger: And to this the Author refers the Canting of Beggars, Charms of Witches and Ma∣gicians, &c. And I must acknowledge my Ig∣norance in both. But if by Inventing of new words he under∣stands a new Language, it would require too much Time and Trouble to invent and learn it (as is observed in another place:) And with∣al, the Confederates should to better purpose practise upon some of the Eastern Languages, &c. already invented to their Hand, and per∣haps
fully as intricate to the Company they intend to impose upon: Nay, why might they not whisper; or speak apart in their Mother Tongue? Either of which are as little off the road of common Civility, as the new Language, and all are alike lyable to Su∣spicion. If by Inventing new words, he means some few that may be serviceable upon Occasion, its difficulties are consider'd in the second Paragraph of the preceding Section, &c. ¶ 2. Of the Alteration of any known Language in Speech. The Author last mentioned, Sec. and swift Mes. p. 23, &c. Proposes four ways for altering the Words of a known Lan∣guage. 1. By Inversion, and that either of Letters as Mitto tibi METULAS, &c. (i. e.) SA∣LUTEM; or of the Syllables, as Tishos estad, veca biti, (i. e.) Hostis adest, cave tibi, &c. 2. By Transmutation of Letters as in CHAP∣TER 1. 3. By contracting some Words in Pronunncia∣tion, according to the Common Abbreviations used in Writing as Aa for Anima, Ho for Ho∣mo, Raalis for Rationalis, Aal for Animal, &c. 4. By Augmenting Words, as in doubling the Vowels, &c. E. G. Ougour Plogot, (i. e.) Our Plot, &c.
Most of which are so Childish that perhaps it is too much to have mentioned them; and I am sure no Body would thank me for my Pains to insist upon them. ¶ 3. Of Secret Conveyance of Words. Schottus, Stegane∣graph. p. 327, 328, &c. mentions several ways of Secret speaking to this purpose, and to be performed without Suspicion, even tho there be several People in Company; in most of which the Re∣quisites are enough of themselves to create a Jealousie. One is, Si eligantur Ambulacra, &c. There must be a long Gallery with Arches, &c. Where if one apply his Mouth, and the other his Ear, to the opposite sides of the Arch, he shall di∣stinctly hear the least whisper, the other utters and thus he would have them behave, for fear of Suspicion. Another Requisite is a long Trunk or Pipe to convey the Words, &c. In short, all he mentions have more of In∣genuity in the Contrivance, than use as to the Communicating any Secret concern in Agita∣tion. There is an Experiment for Secret Convey∣ance of Words, Walch-Fab. 9. insisted on by some, thus, Let there be a Trunk or Pipe contriv'd, and one of the ends of it closed up, so as no Air can have the least entrance or egress: At the other end which is to be the only Orifice; they are to con∣vey in, what Words
or Sentence they intend to communicate: And these being instantly se∣cur'd in the Pipe, from taking harm by Air, they Fansy the Articulate Words by this means are entirely preserv'd in good Order, and may be carry'd hundreds of Miles; until the Con∣federate open the end of the Trunk agreed on, and receive the Message. And this puts me in Mind of that very common and known Fable of a violent Frost in a cold Climate, that ar∣rested Words in the Air, which were never heard of again until a Thaw came, that loos'd them very orderly from their un-natural or ra∣ther supernatural Captivity. Bishop Wilkins himself condemns the folly of proposing, and credulity of believing such Propositions for Secret Information: Being, the Species of sound, are multiplyed in the Air, by a kind of Continuation, and Efflux from the first ORIGINAL, as the Species of Light from a Luminous Body: either of which once separated from their CAUSES do presently vanish, &c. But tho no Engine can be framed to preserve the Voice; yet there are several Improvements in directing it, as by speaking Trumpets. The Emperor Severus fortifi'd the North of England, against the Incursions of the Scots and Picts, with a Wall extending from Carlisle to the Ri∣ver Tine, the Wall had Towers at every miles-end, and betwixt every Tower, there were small Watch Houses at a convenient distance one from another, and between these Watch-Houses a Trunk or Pipe of Brass passed in the
Curtains of the Wall, so that in a short time, all those in the Towers had notice of any ap∣proaching Enemy, as Cambden relates; but this was rather a Contrivance for Swift than Secret Intelligence. I know there have been speaking Statues, and for a good token, Albertus Magnus having spent thirty years in framing one to express Ar∣ticulate sounds, Aquinas designedly broke it, and in a Minute ruined the Labor of so much time. But I cannot see how this can contri∣bute much to the Design of Secret Informati∣on: And sure it is nothing of kin to Walchius's Fable. Weckerus de Secretis, Lib. 14. cap. 1. proposes several ways of Secrecy in Speech, but anticipates any other Man's Observations by condemning the Methods himself, except what we have con∣sidered in other places. Upon the whole; Cryptology where it is lia∣ble to Suspicion (as it can hardly be otherways) is impertinent, and a publick abuse upon those present, if the Confederates be at Liberty: Nay, Schottus himself censures it, Steganog. p. 328. Modus, quo aliqui utuntur, spectantibus alijs, insusurrando submisse in aures, quod audiri ab adstantibus nolunt, rusticus est, & indecorus, ideoque fugiendus: and subjoins the following story, Johannes Basiliades, Mag∣nus Muscoviae Dux, gladium stringi jubebat in e∣jusmodi Collocutores in praesentia sua. And fur∣ther adds, Idem judicium esto, de modo, quo ali∣qui, nutibus, gestibus, &c. sibi quidpiam mutuo indicare nituntur.
And when one or more of the Confidents are confin'd, and under the constant Eye of Kee∣pers (who will not admit of ambiguous or un∣known Language, &c.) it is useless. I proceed next to. CHAP. IV. Of Secret Means for conveying Written Messages. THIS part of Secret Correspon∣dence I call Cryptogrammatopho∣ria from  and . The Practice of it is of an old standing; and I believe it was from the Inconveniencies that Secret Conveyances alone were liable to, the other Methods of Secret Information in the particular ways of Dis∣course mentioned, were first invented. In this Chapter, I shall not tye my self up to any Method, but only give you a mixed account of those Secret ways of Conveying Messages, I have met with in any Author of Note, and recommend Circumspection, as the only means of Discovery; for the Subject will admit of no other SOLUTION.
Harpagus the Mede, Justin. l. 1. &c. when he would exhort Cyrus to a Rebellion against Astyages the King, his Grandfather; conveyed, his Letters to that intent, in the Belly of a Hare, and sent them by a Servant in disguise of a Huntsman, who got an unsuspected passage to Cyrus: And by this Treason was the Empire translated to the Persians, Cluv. Epi∣tom p. 56. till then an obscure People. This fell out about the year of the World 3400. The like Stratagem is related of Demetrius, Son of Antigonus, one of the Successors of Alex∣ander the Great. Epistles have been often delivered to Persons in their Food, thus Polycretes deceived Diogne∣tus the Phaenician General, having given notice of their Confusion upon a Plate of Lead, and sent it in a Tart, and by this Stratagem Diog∣netus's Army was cut to pieces by a despised Enemy. Lib. de Zi∣ph. c. 6. Steg. p. 299. This is related by Baptista Porta, & Schot∣tus, &c. Epistles may be concealed into unbaked Lea∣ven: And afterwards that part which contai∣ned the Message, cut off, and given to a trusty Servant in disguise of a Beggar to be convey∣ed to the Confederate: And to this purpose, Schottus relates, Steg. p. 297. That in the late War betwixt the Swedes and Poles, a Polish Souldier imploy'd on such a Message, having past most of the Swedish Troops, and Garrisons with private Instructions, which he had untertaken to car∣ry for Dantzick, and concealed in a Loaf of Bread, was at last robb'd of his Provision by a hungry Souldier belonging to the Swedes: And
by this means the Secret was accidentally dis∣closed. The same Author has another late passage concerning a Person of Quality, Steg. p. 298. Prisoner in the Netherlands. This Gentleman's Friend enclosed an Epistle into a very fair Pear, which he sent him with other Fruit, not doubting but he would chuse it first, and so receive therein the Message: But the event answered not the Ex∣pectation, for that Pear was left untouch'd, and with the private Epistle, fell into the Keeper's Hands, for whom it was least de∣signed. He likewise proposes two several ways of conveying an Epistle into an Egg. As also, Baptista Porta, Weckerus, &c. have a great many Methods of Imprinting Secret Intentions upon an EGG, without any Suspi∣cion. Such as, 1. How the Impression will not be visible until held between a Light and the Eye. 2. How the Letters shall only appear upon the White of the Egg when boil'd. 3. How Letters describ'd upon the Shell of an Egg, shall not be perceived, but in Wa∣ter. 4. How nothing shall appear until the Egg be held by the Fire. And 5. How the Writing shall continue invisible until Dust be scattered upon the Egg. Porta, Schottus and others likewise tell us, Lib. de Zi∣ph. c. 3. &c. That if we Write with Gum-Arabick, or Tragaanth, dissolv'd in Fountain Water,
upon Crystal or Glass, the Writing will not appear until Dust be thrown upon it also, and Porta adds that this being a Transparent Body, can∣not be lyable to Suspicion, tho they them∣selves render it suspected by publishing it. Epistles have been sometimes concealed in Cloths, which practice is noted by Ovid, de Art. Amandi. Conscia cum possit scriptas portare tabellas, Quas tegat in tepido fascia lata sinis, Cum possit solea chartas celare ligatas, Et vincto blandas sùb pede ferre notas. Schottus cites several Authors who give an account, Steganog. p. 286, 287, &c. of Secret Epistles hid betwixt the Soles of a Man's Shoes, and intercepted, the Writing is generally cut out upon Lead. Epistles have been likewise concealed in a Woman's Hair. Some have Writ their Secret Intentions upon the inside of the Scabbard of a Sword; Machiav. Lib. 7. of the Art of War. as also upon Swords and other Armour. We hear of an Epistle wrapt up in a Wax Candle, and sent to the Confederate with this verbal Message, Secr. and Swift Mes. p. 29. That it would light him to his Business. Baptista Porta, Lib. de Ziph. Chap. 6. pro∣poses a way to conceal an Epistle within an Artificial Stone.
There is likewise a way of Writing upon a Stone, with Goat's Fat, which Letters will not be visible till dipt in Vinegar. Letters may be describ'd upon a Tablet of Wood, a Napkin, or Hankerchief, which will not be legible until Dust be first thrown upon them. Schottus mentions an Ingenious way of con∣cealing an Epistle in a Glass Bottle, or Viol, Steg. p. 289. viz. by taking the Bladder of a Hog or Calf, and having blown it to the utmost extent, when it is throughly dryed, they Write on it their Secret Intentions; afterwards pressing out the Air, they convey it into a Viol or Bot∣tle, leaving the Neck without, by which they extend it a second time, when in the Viol, with Air: And filling it with Oyl, they seal all up, and send it to the Confederate; the Oyl will appear in the Bottle, but not the Wri∣ting. Note, the Viol must be prepared with some Glutinous Moisture before hand, other∣ways the Bladder should not continue extend∣ed to receive the Oyl into it. This Author proposes another way of con∣cealing an Epistle, in the Wax that is used to Seal One, the Method is this; 1. They write an Epistle of any ordinary concern. 2. Having contrived their Secret Intention in as few words as is possible, they write it down upon a small piece of thin Paper. Then 3. having folded it up, they dip it in Oyl, that the Wax may not adhere to it. And lastly conceal it within the Wax of the other Letter.
Note. The Seal must be very large, otherways the Secret Writing cannot be contained within its impression; or in case the Letter were intercepted, the Secrecy might be detected in breaking it open. Demaratus, King of Sparta, being dethroned upon suspicion of Bastardy, banished his Na∣tive Country, and received into the Persian Court, betrayed the Counsels of Xerxes, to his Country-men in this manner, He cut out the Se∣cret Information in a Tablet of Wood, and then co∣vered the Letters with Wax, and sent it by one of his Servants unto the Magistrates of Lacedae∣mon, who knew not at first what to make of it; they could see nothing written, and yet could not imagine, but that it should import some∣thing of moment. But at last the Kings Sister having accidentally discovered the Writing un∣der the Wax, Justin. l. 1 Cluv. p. 64. Flosc. Hist. Arco. 7, &c. and the Writing the Intentions of Xerxes, to make War upon Greece; the Gre∣cians were so well provided for the War, That they gave a defeat to an Army of 3235220 Men, according to the Historian's Computa∣tion. Hamilcar feigning himself to be banished by the Carthaginians, Justn. l. 21. was kindly received by Alex∣ander and Great, and in the same manner gave notice of his Intentions. I meet with several Improvements of this Stratagem. As 1. There may be a Tablet made of Pop∣lar, or some other soft Timber, and the Con∣federates having provided a set of Iron Letters, they
imprint upon it to a considerable depth, what they intend to communicate; then they cut down the Timber until nothing of the for∣mer Impression appear, Bapt. Por∣ta. Li. de Ziph. c. 5. and having smoothed it, they may perhaps paint it over to prevent suspicion, and send it whither they will. The way taken by the Confident (to whom it is di∣rected) to find out the hidden sense; is by steep∣ing it for some time in Water, until those parts of the Tablet that were contracted by the pres∣sure swell above the rest, and discover the for∣mer Impressions. Note. The Timber may be contrived (after the Letters are imprinted) into Timber Vessels, &c. 2. This Author teaches, not only how to write Secretly upon Timber, but also by what means a Man may conceal a Written Epistle within Timber, and instanceth that experi∣ment of Theophrastus, by incision into a growing Tree, first carefully taking off the Bark, then putting the Epistle into the vacuity, and lastly by binding up the Bark again in its old place, until nature sufficiently conceal the Secret. But even against the Possibility of this there are con∣siderable doubts, which I shall not stay to pro∣pose: Yet granting a Possibility, this way is in∣consistent with dispatch, the life of Secret De∣signs. 3. Porta affirms, this might more commo∣diously be performed in dry Timber, e.g. in a Firr Tree, by cutting the Bark, and making a vacuity (as before;) for the Bark may be affixt to its former place by a kind of Glew, which resembles the natural Rozin of that kind of Timber.
4. In Baker's Chronicle, Baker's Chron. of the Kings of Eng∣land, p. 492. Schot. Steganog. Class. 12. c. 2. we have an account of one Frost who carried Letters in a hollow Staff, between the Rebels of both Kingdoms, in the beginning of the late troubles. Schottus gives several Historical Instances to this effect; and particularly relates from his own knowledge, that very lately some Travel∣lers had been apprehended in Moravia, and Treasonable Letters found in their Canes. 5. The Learned Author of the Secret and Swift Messenger, affirms, That some have used to write upon leaves of Trees, and with these to cover Ulcers, &c. Which is likewise observed by Schottus. 6. And this brings to my remembrance a Stratagem, which I had from a very good Hand. A Gentleman being employed to carry Letters of very great moment, with all privacy; he affixt them by a Plaister to some Fleshy part of his Body, which afterwards he caused to be Artifically painted over in the Natural colour of his Skin. Letters have been sometimes inscribed upon the Messengers Flesh, a Device not unknown in Ovid's time. Caverit hoc custos, pro chartâ censciâ tergum Praebeat, inque suo corpore verba ferat. And long before Ovid's time, viz. about the year of the World 3539, Histiaeus, the Tyrant of Miltus, chusing one of his Servants
that was troubled with sore Eyes, pretended that for his recovery, his Hair must be shaved and his Head scarify'd, in performing which, he took occasion to imprint upon his Servant's Head his Secret Intentions, viz. about revolt∣ing from the Persian Government; and keep∣ing him at home until his Hair was grown; he afterwards sent him to Aristagoras the Per∣sian General then in Greece, to whom his de∣sign was to be communicate, under pretence of his Servant's perfect recovery, and (says he) When you come to Aristagoras, tell him, That I desire he may Shave you with his own Hands as I have done, for it is the only means to restore you, &c. The Message went safe, for the Messengers Head faithfully deli∣vered the Secret that never troubled his Brain, but in the end Histiaeus lost his own Head, Aul. Gell. Noct. Att. lib. 17. c. 9. the due reward of his Treachery. This is related by Herodotus, and out of him in Aulus Gellius. See also Flosc. Histor. Areol. 7. &c. As in this, so in most of the other Contri∣vances mentioned, the Messenger may be al∣together Ignorant of the Message he carries; as in a Bottle which he knows to contain no∣thing but Oyl; or Secret Intimations upon, or within a Stone or Timber, &c. But as to this way of Writing upon the Mes∣senger's Skin, Porta promises great Security, Mag. Nat. Lib. 16. Cap. 18. his Words are these: Sed nos possumus Epistolas mit∣tere, & scribere loco etiam, ut non possit ab aliis, nisi iis quibus Literae destinantur, intelligi; & qui eas fert ad quamcumque distantiam; etiamsi in via
comprehensus fuerit, & interrogatus per tormen∣ta, nil possit fateri, quia nil ei penitus constat, & Epistola semper mànebit Occulta. Nec tempus aut itineris labor Charactares abolebit, quia nec à plu∣viis, nec ab ipso sudore aboleri possunt; unde nec refert si Lator per mare & flumina transeat, &c. In short, Porta endeavours to prove by the best Arguments (which must necessarily in this Case proceed from Experience) that Let∣ters may be imprinted upon the Messenger's Back, &c. which shall be indelible by Sweat, Water, See the last Sect, of the first Chap. or any Mosture; until Dust, or o∣ther things applicable to Paper, be made use of. He likewise proposes a way, how the Let∣ters writ upon the Messenger's Skin, may in a few days vanish: And treats of several So∣poriferous Medicaments, to throw him into a deep sleep, or insensibility, during the Opera∣tion. The whole may be lyable to several doubts, but it lies out of my road to examine them. Messengers Conscious of their carrying Se∣cret Messages have Metamorphos'd them∣selves in very differing shapes; upon Occa∣sion. Euoullus the Roman Praetor coming to the Re∣lief of the Cyziceni (besieged by the Famous, Front. de de strateg. l. 3. c. 13. tho Unfortunate, Mithridates, King of Pontus) sent one of his Soldiers to give the Besieged notice of Relief; who, being to pass a River,
did Swim over supported by two Bladders, in disguise of a Sea-Monster, and preserved the Letters he carryed in one of them. The like Contrivance is related to have been practis'd by Hircius, Front. ib. to Decius Brutus (two Roman Consuls) the last being besieged by An∣thony, only the Epistles were inscrib'd on Lead Plates. Bishop Wilkins in his Secret and Swift Mes∣senger, speaks of Inventions, whereby a Man may pass under the Water, if there were a long Trunk or Pipe likewise contriv'd to let down fresh Air to the Messenger: But withal he tells us that to prevent such Conveyances the Enemy used to cross the Rivers with strong Nets, and to fasten Stakes in several parts of the Channel; but 'tis a great question whether this Experiment be practicable. And the same Author in a Treatise he publish'd, a considera∣ble time after his Secret and Swift Messenger, speaking of sub-marine Navigation, and the Requisits for performing it, does not mention any Contrivance for letting in fresh Air: The three things he reckons considerable in the Case are these; Mathemat. Magick. Lib. 2. Chap. 5. 1st. That the Vessel it self should be of a large Capacity, that as the Air in it is corrupted in one part, so it may be purified, and renewed in the other: Or if the mere Refrigeration of the Air would fit it for breathing, this might be some∣what helped with Bellows, &c. 2dly. That the Lamps or Fires in the middle of it, like the refle∣cted Beams in the first Region, rarifying the Air, and the Circumambient Coldness towards the sides of the
Vessel, like the second Region, cooling and condensing it, would make such a vicissitude and change of Air, as might fit it for all its proper u∣ses. 3dly. He cites Mersennus, and tells us, That there was in France one Barrieus, a Diver, who had lately found out another Art whereby a man might easily continue under Water for six hours to∣gether, and whereas ten Cubical feet of Air will not serve another Diver to Breath in for half an Hour, he by the help of a Cavity, not above one or two foot at most, will have Breath enough for six Hours, and a Lanthorn scarce above the usual size to keep a Candle burning as long as a Man pleases. By what Means he arriv'd to this Art I hear not. In the Secret and Swift Messenger, we hear of Messages conveyed by Persons in Coffins as dead, &c. There are many Relations in History, of Brute Creatures, that have carried Intelligence betwixt Confederates: I shall mention a few. Aelianus, l. 6. cap. 7. relates that one Men∣thes a King of Aegypt, kept a Crow he had made so very tractable, that having received from him the particulars of its Commission, it would carry a Message to any part of the World. In Trithemii. Polygraph. pag. 96. It is rela∣ted that Hircius and Decius Brutus (already mentioned) kept a Correspondence by the help of Pigeons.
Saladine, the Sultan of Aegypt, is said to have used this way of giving and receiving intelli∣gence at the siege of Ptolemais, about the year 1194, &c. There are other Modern Relations to this ef∣fect which I pass over. See Front. Lib 3. cap. 11.13. de Stratag. As also Schot. Ste. gan. Clas. 12. c. 2. Dogs have also been used for Messengers upon Urgent Occasions, having Epistles fixt to, or rather inclosed in their Collars, &c. See Justus Lipsius Cent. 1. Epistolarum ad Belgas, 44. and out of him in Schottu's Steganographi∣a, &c. Baptista Porta has a cruel kind of Device se∣cretly to convey Letters, Mag. Na∣tur lib. de Ziph. c. 6. viz. to give a Written Message roll'd up in a piece of Bread to a Hungry Dog, whose Belly the Confe∣derate is to rip up before he receive the Se∣cret. Arrows, Darts, &c. have long since been used for greater Destruction, than the killing of single Enemies; for whole Cities have been attempted by means of one Shot out of a Bow, Cleonymus King of Lacedaemon at the Siege of Troezen, caused shoot Arrows into the Town with notes affixt to them containing these words, Polyae. l. 2. , I come, that I may restore Liberty to this City. And the Citi∣zens were so Credulous, I dare not say Good natur'd, as to believe this common Topique, and opened their Gates to him and his Army.
But instead of tying Epistles to an Arrow, there are later Contrivances, whereby the Let∣ter may be put conveniently enough within one, or in Bullets, &c. Keckerman relates, and let him answer for the truth of it, that Rhegiomontanus, at the coming of the Emperor Maximilian to Nurenburg, made a Wooden Eagle, which flew a quarter of a Mile out of the Town to meet his Impe∣rial Majesty, and returned back again to ac∣company him of its own accord: And if this obtain belief so may that of Horace, Horat. Lib. 1. Od. 28. as to the Artificial Dove, contriv'd by Archytas, Citizen of Tarentum, the Pythagorean Philosopher. Rhegiomontanus is likewise said to have con∣triv'd an Iron Fly of which Dubartas. 6. Day 1. W. Once as this Artist more with Mirth than meat, Feasted some Friends whom he esteemed great, From hs Learn'd Hand, an Iron Fly flew out; And having flown a perfect round about, With wearyed Wings return'd unto her Master, And as Judicious on his Arm he plac'd her. Bishop Wilkins in his World of the Moon, pro∣poses an Experiment of a flying Chariot, and in his Secret and Swift Messenger: Mat. Mag. l. 2. 6. 8. He mentions it as an Excellent Contrivance, Secretly, Safe∣ly and Swiftly to convey any Message: He a∣gain insists upon it in his Mathematical Magick, and is at a great deal of pains to answer the Objections may be urged against it (says he) We see a great difference betwixt the several Quanti∣ties
of such Bodies as are commonly upheld by the Air, not only Gnats and Flies, but also the Eagle and other Fowl of vaster Magnitude. Cardan and Scaliger do unanimously affirm (and this is almost as wonderful as the flying Chariot) That there is a Bird amongst the Indians of so great a Bigness, that his Beak is often used to make a Sheath, or Scabboard for a Sword, &c. And a little af∣ter, adds, The main difficulty and Labor of it will be in the raising of it from the Ground; near un∣to which the Earth's Attractive Vigor is of greatest Efficacy. But for the better effecting of this, is may be helped by the strength of Winds, and by taking its first rise from some Mountain, or other high place: When once it is aloft in the Air the Motion of it will be easie, &c. But yet for all this, I do not hear, that any part of this Mechanical Learning, has been ve∣ry guilty of the Cryptical Conveyances we speak of, however if they should attain to that Perfection (which I do very much question) they may be subservient to bad Designs, and therefore I mention them.
CHAP. V. Of the several Proposals for Secret Infor∣mations, mention'd by Trithemius in his Epistle to Arnoldus Bostius, &c. HAVING gone through the seve∣ral ways for Secret Information in Writing, by Signs and Gestures, and in Speech; and having taken no∣tice of the most remarkable ways for Secret Conveyances, that are recorded in History, I come now to enquire into the wonderful Pro∣posals with which Trithemius has amaz'd the World; not only in that Epistle of his to Arnoldus Bostius: but in his other Wri∣tings. There are some Treatises upon Steganogra∣phy have come out under Trithemius's Name; but whether Genuine, or Supposititious, I shall not determine. From the affected Obscurities, under which Trithemius veiled his Methods for Secret Infor∣mation, he had the ill Fortune to lie under the Suspicion of dealing with bad Messengers: And Frederick the 2d. Prince Palatine, &c. caused Burn the
Original Manuscript even of his six Books of Polygraphy, That in my thoughts contain just as much of Witchcraft, as that O∣pinion held by Vigilius Bishop of Saltzburg (concerning Antipodes) had of Heresie, who was condemn'd for it in the beginning of the 8th. Century. It is questioned by some, whether those Books of Polygraphy Trithemius himself publi∣shed were a part of the Steganography he pro∣posed, and there wants not Reasons for the Af∣firmative. But here I wave this, and all other Debates of this nature. And that we may proceed regularly, take his own Words concerning his Steganography. The Epistle of Johannes Trithemius to Ar∣noldus Bostius. In manibus jam habeo grande opus, quod si un∣quam fuerit publicatum, quod absit, totus Mundus mirabitur, cujus primi libri titulus est Steganogra∣phia. Erunt autem quatuor libri, quilibet ad minus centum capitulis distinguentur. Incepi hoc opus ad in∣stantiam unius magni principis, quem nominare non opus est. Quaeris quid hoc opus docet? Maxima docet, omnibusque nescientibus stupenda & incredi∣bilia, quae à saeculo nunquam sunt audita. Primus enim liber continet plusquam centum mo∣dos occultè scribendi, quicquid velis sine omni sus∣picione, sine literarum transpositione, sine omni ti∣more, ita ut non sit homo in Mundo, qui naturali Industria scire, vel suspicari quidem possit, quid in meis
literis contineatur, praeter eum, qui artem no∣vit ex me, vel ex eo quem ego docuero. Verba sunt plana & familiaria, omni suspicione carentia, sed intentionem meam nemo sine arte percipere poterit in aeternum, quantumcunque sit doctus, & est res ve∣rè stupenda. Secundus liber multa mirabiliora continebit, per ignem videlicet in hac arte possum mentis meae con∣ceptum notum facere artem meam scienti ad quan∣tamcunque distantiam, ad centum milliarìa vel plura securè, sine verbis, sine scriptis, sine signis per quemcunque nuncium, qui si comprehensus in via fuerit, si interrogatus etiam per tormenta durissima, nihil potest fateri de nuncio meo, quia nihil sibi pe∣nitus constat de illo, quicquid occurrat, nuncium meum semper manebit occultum, nec omnes totius Mundi homines si simul essent congregati possent il∣lud vestigare virtute naturali. Quod etiam facere sine nuncio, dum volo, possum, voluntatem quoque meam indicare possum sedenti in carcere artem scienti, etiam longè absens quan∣tumcunque custodiatur, etiam si tribus milliaribus sub terra sederat. Et haec omnia latissimè & univer∣saliter quando & quotiescunque voluero possum, naturaliter sine aliqua superstitione, vel adjutorio spirituum quorumcunque. Mira sunt fateor, sed audi mirabiliora. Tertius liber docet artem, per quam possum ho∣minem idiotam, scientem tantum linguam mater∣nam, qui nunquam novit verbum Latini Sermonis in duabus horis docere, scribere, legere & intelli∣gere Latinum satis ornatè & disertè, quantumcun∣que voluerit, ita ut quicunque viderint ejus literas, laudent verba, intelligant Latinè composita.
Quartus liber continet multa stupenda experimen∣ta, sed purè naturalia. Mentem videlicet meam indicare possum scienti artem meam inter edendum, vel sedendum cum aliis, sine verbis, sine nutibus quam latissime voluero, etiam inter loquendum, prae∣dicandum, ludendum in organo, vel cantandum, sine impedimento actionis alterius cujuscunque, ita ut praedicando bona & sancta indicem, non verbis, non signis, non nutibus, cuicunque scienti latissimè quicquid voluero, etiam clausis oculis, & alia mul∣ta quartus liber continebit arcana, quae non sunt in publicum proferenda. Mirantur haec omnes, qui audiunt, è quibus mul∣ti sunt viri nobiles atque doctissimi, existimantes ista aut esse impossibilia, aut penitus supernatura∣lia. His ego tibique respondeo, quod multis respondi: multa naturaliter esse possibilia, quae nescientibus viris naturae impossibilia, vel etiam supernaturalia videntur. Et ecce coram Deo meo loquor qui omnia novit, quod ea quae praedixi miranda, multò sunt excellentiora, profundiora & majora, quàm ego scri∣bere, aut tu crederepossis, & tamen omnia sunt pure naturalia, sine deceptione aliqua, sine superstitione, sine magica arte, sine invocatione seu ministerio quorumcunque spirituum. Haec ideò dixerim, ut si forte aliquando rumor ad te pervenerit, me aut scire aut posse miranda, non me Magum dico existimares, sed Philosophum. Nam quod Alberto Magno profundissimorerum na∣turalium scrutatori contigit, ut propter miranda quae occulta virtute naturae operatus est, Magus à vulgo sit habitus, mihi sum certus similiter contin∣gere posse.
Si quaeris, unde mihi ista quae nemo alius novit, audi. Non ab homine, neque per hominem ista didi∣ci, sed per revelationem nescio cujus; cum enim praesenti anno, quadam vice cogitarem quid novi possem invenire quod omnes lateret, coepi cogitare si ea possem excogitare quae dixi miranda. Cum post longam phantasiam tanquam de re impossibili peni∣tus desperarem, dormitum eo, me nocte reposui, fa∣tuitatem meam ipse mcum deridens, quòd impossi∣bilia quaerere tentaverim. Eadem nocte mihi asti∣tit quidam dicens, non sunt vana, ô Trithemi, quae cogitasti, quanquam tibi sint impossibilia, quae nec tu, nec alius tecum, poter is invenire; dixique ad eum; Si ergòpossibilia sunt, dic, obsecro, quomodo fiant. Et aperiens os suum, de singulis, per ordinem me do∣cuit, ostendens quomodo fieri, quae multis diebus frustra cogitaveram, de facili possent. Ecce coram Deo quia non mentior, sed veritatem dico, nemi∣nem ista adhuc docui, quamvis multi permittentes magna, saepè rogarint, praeter unum principem cui scribo, quem de possibilitate artis manifesto argu∣mento feci certiorem, nec decet ista alios scire, quam principes; alioquin multa per ea fierent mala, tra∣ditiones, deceptiones, fornicationes & alia quaecun∣que vellent homines mali. Sed benè utentes arte mul∣ta per eam bona Reipublicae facere possent; possum autem ista omnia docere in omni lingua totius mun∣di quam nunquam audivi. Haec tibi, Bosti, propterea significare volui, ne me crederes otiosum. In this Epistle Trithemius speaks of four Books only; erunt autem quatuor Libri, &c. But in his Preface to the Emperor
Maximilian, he mentions eight; and out of this Preface I have hereunto subjoyned his Apologetick account of his, Steganography in his own Words. Ad memorati Principis & Domini Electori Phi∣lippi Comitis Palatini, Pavariaeque Ducis instan∣tiam, ego Johannes Trithemius, nunc Abbas Monasterii S. Jacobi apud Wirebg, tunc verò D. Martini, Praesulis in Spanheim, Moguntiae dioecesis, octo mysteriorum libros in St ganographia scribere coepi. Me autem in tertio jam libro ejusdem operis lucubrationem continuante, res contigit, quam breviter, si potero, sum dicturus. Anno Dominicae nativitatis millesimo quadringentesimo nonagesimo nono, indictione Romanorum secunda: sciscitanti per Epistolam Arnoldo Bostio Carmelitae Ganda∣vensis oppidi, quid novi ederem, quibusve studiis occuparer, altera Palmarum die per mercatores ut amico rescripsi me habere sub incude novum & mi∣randum Steganographiae opus, & quid in singulis contin retur libris, per ordinem reseravi. Verum prius quàm epistola mea pervenisset Gandavum, Bostius in diebus Paschalibus è vita migravit ad Christum. Cujus loci Prior literas accepit, aperuit, legit, pomissorumque novitate (ut reor) attonitus, multis aliis rogantibus legendas & rescribendas communicavit. Hine est factum quod ipsa epistola mea, brevi tempore, per totam penè Germaniam & Galliam divulgata, saepiusque à pluribus re∣scripta, multos etiam doctissimos viros convertit in stuporem & admirationem, usque adeò ut quid cum veritat sntire deberent, de me haesitarent. Ex his fu re nonnulli qui meas in dicta
Epistola Pollicita∣tiones constanter asseverarent frivolas, impossibiles, atque mendaces, & à me inanis gloriae causa impu∣denter excogitatas. Alij verò dicebant▪ Magna & miranda pollice∣tur iste Abbas Trithemius, quae si potest, non aliter quàm Daemonm ministerio potest, cum naturae me∣tas procul videantur excedre. Si verò non potest, quis eum dubitabit esse mendacem, & ab omnibus viris bonis & doctis meritò refutandum: Sed absit procul utrumque à me, quoniam naturalia promisi. Omnium verò incognita mea tmerè judicantium, maximè temerarius, & iniquissimus rerum aestimator tandem prorupit in medium, Carolus Bovillus, na∣tione Picardus, qui cum superioribus partibus Alsa∣tiae peragratis, ad me gratia hospitij venisset in Span∣heim per Treviros rediturus in Galliam, quâ pote∣ram humanitate ipsum tractavi, & omnia hospita∣litatis bnficia, quamdiu mecum fuit, hilari vultu exhibui. Cumque ut fieri solet inter amicos maximè literarum studiosos, omnia mea gratissimo hospiti exhibuissem videnda, cum aliis se obtulit etiam me∣moratum opus Steganographiae, nec dum eo tempo∣re consummatum. Vidit Bovillus, & obiter legit mente aliunde occupatus se adinventum mirari di∣xit, laudavit, nec quo intelligeretur modo, curavit. Unde cum non peteret intelligentiae clavem, nihil eorum, quae continebantur ipsa lucrubatione nostra, meruit audire vel pripere. Reversus pst haec in Galam, malum bonis pro bono reddidit, & Chri∣stianae foedus amicitiae turpiter violavit. Interroga∣tus nim per dominum Germanum de Ganay com∣munem amicum, posta Episcopum Aurelianensem quid apud me reperisset,
vidissetque in Spanheim, falsa pro veris, mendacia pro beneficiis rescripsit, dam∣nans & temerè judicans ea, qùae comprehenderè intellectu minimè valebat. Nam cum doctrinae sibi palmam invidia & mendacio crederet fore confe∣rendam, epistolam ad memoratum virum doctissi∣mum falsitate, mendaciis, injuriis & comtumeliis multis plenam rescripsit, in qua non intellectae Ste∣ganographiae mentionem faciens, me pravis artibus deditum Magum & Necromanticum fals, menda∣citer, & nimis injuriosè temeraria praesumptione proclamat. Cujus mendacissimis injuriis & Blasphe∣miis, Deo miserante, brevi taliter sum respnsurus, quo intelligat omnis posteritas & me innocntem, & Povillum impium, crudelem, & temerarium esse in hac parte mendacem. Constanter affirmo, vraciter dico, & confidenter in animam meam juro, cum Dae∣monibus, pravis ac perniciosis, magicis vel necro∣manticis artibus me nullum unquam habuisse cm∣mercium: sed omnia & singula, quae vel scripsi, vel scripturum me sum pollicitus pura esse, sana, natu∣ralia, & Christianae fidei in nullo penitus adversa. Unde non vereor mea promissa coram viris bonis & doctis, quando & quties opus fuerit, dare exami∣ni quorum determinationi nullatenus intendo relu∣ctari. Quod hanc Eovillanae temeritatis hstoriam huic praefationi meae interposui, causa rationabilis fuit, vt intelligant omns maturo factum consilio, quod hactnus manet in tenebris opus Steganogra∣phiae sepultum, nn quod temeraria Fovilli judicia metuam: sed ne causam pluribus videar dare simili∣bus de me similia suspicandi. Enimverò quantum ad me attinet, malem aemulos meos placare silentio, quàm literis irritare, vel scripturis ad insaniam pro∣vocare.
Satius enim judicavi, omnia mirabiliter inventa perpetuo damnare silentio, quàm Magicae vel Necromanticae perniciosae superstitionis notam, falsa etiam hominum aestimatione incurrere. Lateat ergo Steganographia in tenebris, nec fiat Bovillanae Societati mendaci communis, quae de rebus judicare consuevit incognitis, & depravare famam boni vi∣ri sola libidine pravitatis. Veruntamen cohortanti∣bus amicis, ut cum Bovillo intelligant aemuli nostri, quàm temeratam & ementitam nobis injuriam fe∣cerit (manente suis in terminis Steganographia) sub∣jectum opus, quod Polygraphiam nuncupamus, per sex libros distinctum in lucem edere consentimus. Le∣gant qui volunt, & sine stomacho legant hoc volu∣men amici, cujus cùm latentia mysteria intellexerint omnia, ipsi absque invidia sint judices, naturalia sint an superstitiosa. Scio enim & certus sum omnia esse syncera, pura, naturalia, & ab omni studio su∣perstitionis malae remota. Quoties autem sermo procedit obscurior, ea fit ratione, ne gladio defensionis vesanus abuteretur ad interitum, quem animo & mente sanus ad sui d∣fert munimentum. Nihil tamen propterea in eo con∣tinetur mali, cùm bonis etiam rebus in malum abu∣tantur perversi. Quisquis autem hanc editionem nostram condemnare praesumpserit, ipse sibi conscius est & testis, quod eam nunquam veraciter intel∣lexit. Celantur sub aenigmatibus mysteria ne bacuceis fiant bubonum arcana quomodolibet manifesta. Si quem haec scire delectat, remota procul invidia Lector accedat. Sum enim Christianus, sum Presbyter, sub nor∣ma Divi patris
Benedicti & Monachus, Christum diligo, & quâ possum sinceritate mentis, devotus sem∣per adoro, nulla mihi sunt, nulla fuerunt, & pro∣tectore Deo nulla erunt cum daemonibus commercia, nulla in Magicis, Necromant cis, seu profanis arti∣bus studia, nullae occupationes, nulla documenta. Qui de me aliter sentit, malè sentit, injuriam fa∣cit, & apertum Bovilli mendacium defendit. And now having made Trithemius his own Advocate for the Lawfulness of his Steganogra∣phy, &c. We may the more safely deal with his several Proposals therein contained; and to come to Particulars. 1. INQUIRY. How Trithemius might have performed without any unlawful Compact, what he promises in his first Book? Primus enim Liber continet plus quam centum modos, &c. The first Book (says he) contains more than a hundred ways of Secret Writing, without all Suspicion, without any Transpo∣sition of the Letters, without any fear of dis∣covery, for no Man by human Industry can know, nay or suspect the involved meaning of my Letters, except he who knows the Art from me, or from him to whom I shall teach it, &c.
SOLUTION. Having already taken notice of several ways of Secret Writing, that would never have given ground for Suspicion, if such Methods had not been first made Publick, much of the wonder now ceases. The Lacedaemonian Scytale, Julius and Augustus's Inventions of Secrecy by Trans∣position of Letters: The Invention of new Alpha∣bets, in short none of the old Inventions of Se∣cret Writing had this Requisite, and before Trithemius imployed his time that way, very few or none ever thought of Preventing Suspi∣cion in Secret Writing, or of the posibility of it; and besides, the Art of Decyphering was then al∣together unknown; so that there might be some appearance of reason for his too confident As∣sertion; but That it was no way answerable even then to the stress he laid upon it, will I hope appear. Those particular Methods that in great Pro∣bability he refers to, in the Words cited, have nothing but hard Words to guard them against discovery, the Invention hath little of extraor∣dinary contrivance in it; for it is only by make∣ing the first Letters in the exterior Letter serve to express the inward meaning, as I have ob∣served, pag. 67. cap. 3. Or by intermitting one Word, so that the first Letters, of the first, third, and fifth Words, &c. will be only sig∣nificant.
Schottus has several Examples to this purpose, and that I may not seem, Steg. Class. 7. Ero∣tem. 5. quite to neglect any thing so much insisted on, by so great Authors, I have insert one. v. g. Let the Secret Intimation be, Hac nocte post XII. veniam ad te, circa januam, que ducit ad Ortum, ubi me ecspectabis; age ut omnia sint pa∣rata. Which by the former Artifice may be in∣volv'd in the following Words. Humanae Salutis Amator, qui creavit, omnia nobis indixit Obedientiam Mundatorum, cui om∣nes tenemur obedire & obsequi. Praemium Sanctae Obedientiae erit Sempiterna faelicitas timentibus De∣um. Christi Obedientiam in omnibus imitari Stu∣deamus ut Vitam Aeternam promissam nobis Merea∣mur Ingredi cum Angelis per Misericordiam Dei agamus Paenitentiam dum possumus; tempus vitae est brevissimum; cito Mors imparatos offendet, re∣pente Negligentes consumet, Judici Animas trans∣mittet. In Paenitentiam agenda Fratres non tarde∣tis: Velociter enim ad vos Mors veniet quam nemo vestrûm diu evadere potest. Dies ergo vestros transeuntes conspicite, Paenitentiam inchoate dum tempus habetis. Ad quid diutius Negligitis? O Mors rerum horribilium terribil issima, quam velo∣citer nos miseros consumis! Vester incolatus Brevis∣simus est, Judicio abnoxius, Mors omnes examini submittit. Exaudi nos Christe piissimè Salvator. Nobisque paenitere cupientibus esto propitius. Con∣cede nobis Timorem & Amorem tuum benignissimè
Redemptor, Indulgentiam Peccatorum Supplicanti∣bus tribue. Alme Creator Generis Humani exau∣di nos, veniam nobis tribuens Scoelerum. ô Pater misericordissime, esto nobis Misericors! Infirmita∣tem nostram adjuva clementissime; succurre mise∣ricorditer infirmis Animabus nostris, quoniam tui sumus. Pater indulgentissime Animabus fidelium requiem concede, Angelis conjunge, timentibus te a∣desse digneris. Schottus, takes notice of a great many ways of varying this Secret Contrivance, such as, by Beginning at the 2d. Word of the Exterior Letter, and from thence to the 4th. 6th. &c. or to begin at the 3d. word, and proceed to the 4th. &c. Or by interposing words betwixt some of the Letters in the Secret Writing, and the rest to follow one another immediately, Or otherways by intermitting sometimes two words in the Epistle infolding, and sometimes one, &c. All which are very Laborious to write, and very easily decyphered, if suspected. Now that this Method of Secret Writing, was the Subject of Trithemius's first Book of Steganography, there are good Arguments. For, 1. It is published in a Book entitl'd Clavis Steganographiae that goes under Trithemius his Name. 2. Tho Schottus seems to question whether this was really, Steganog. ibid. any part of Trithemius's Writings; yet he tacitly acknowledges it. (Says he) Qui Clavem edidit, Artificium non intellexit, &c.
He who published the Clavis has not understood the Artifice; for the Old German Words in the Ex∣ample are altered into the Modern Dutch, which change, confounds the Sense, &c. Now certain∣ly if the Publisher had been Author, he must be supposed to have understood his own Example; but it is acknowledged he did not. 2. On the other hand I see no improbability, but that this Clavis Steganographiae Trithemii is Genuine; for since others of his Writings were published long after his Death, which are ac∣knowledged by all to be his own, why might not this Manuscript fall into the Hands of some Person, that particular and private Conside∣rations might induce to send it abroad for Com∣pany? And withal his peculiar Stile in obscu∣ring plain Things, is a convincing Argument of the Truth of it. 3. And withal this way of Secret Writing, can easily admit of a hundred and odd Varia∣tions, and agrees with his Proposition in all Things, except the Intricacy, he attributes to it. But this is not, the only Hyperbole, he makes use of.
INQUIRY II. Into the 2d. Book of his Steganography. Secundus Liber multa Mirabiliora continent, &c. (i. e.) The second Book contains ma∣ny things more strange, viz. By this Art I can communicate my Intentions (by Fire) to any one instructed in it, at any distance, a hundred Miles or more, without Words, without Writing, and without Signs, by any Messenger, who, tho he be apprehended by the way, and examined by the most severe Tortures, he can reveal nothing of my Mes∣sage, because he knows nothing of it. Nay whatever occurs it can never be discovered, and all the Men on Earth if assembled toge∣ther, can ever unmask it without more than natural help. This I can at pleasure perform without a Messenger: I can express my Mind at a great distance to a close Pri∣soner, three Miles under ground: Let him be under the strictest Custody; all this I can do effectually, and at all times, when and how often I will, &c. By what Methods Trithemius could perform all this, hath been enquired into, by Schottus, Kircherus, and many others; and it will be found a very bard task to give any satisfacto∣ry account of the
means; for the whole Pro∣positions can most naturally be RESOLVED into Contradictions: For, 1. There is a way of Converse proposed, ab∣stracting from all means of Discourse: Without WORDS, without WRITING, and without SIGNS. 2. He proposes to inform his Confident with∣out a Sign, and yet by a Sign, viz. Fire; for if Fire or Smoak when used for Secret Informati∣on, be not truly significatory Signs both Rea∣son and Grammar are at a great loss. 3. He pretends, that he could express his Mind to a close Prisoner at a great distance, and three German Miles under ground, when∣ever, and how often he pleased; And this I am perswaded he had omitted, if he had tryed the Experiment, upon one, in a Gulf, but half a German mile, below the surface of the Earth, &c. As for the Conjectures for reconciling the last Propositions to Sense, they want not their own Difficulties: But since we must necessari∣ly grant, that his Words are aenigmatically propos'd, there must be the greater allowance given. His Propositions in the second Book are redu∣cible to three. 1. To Communicate his Secret Intentions by any Messenger to his Confederate at any distance, with∣out any Writing, &c. And that by Fire. 2. To Communicate his Intentions (by Fire) without a Messenger. And
3. To signifie his Mind to a close Prisoner, under ground, &c. By the first, Schottus is of Opinion, that Tri∣themius understood that way of Secret Writing mentioned, Chap. 1. Sect. 6. which will be on∣ly Visible when held by the Fire. He says the Messenger cannot reveal the Message, be∣cause he knows not the Contents of it: And if intercepted, nothing could be understood by it, because the Artifice was at that time known to few or none, except Trithemius: And when it comes to the Confederate's Hands, he may find out the meaning by Fire, without any word or sign, made by the Writer, upon the Paper, by Fire. If you approve of this Resolution; by the words, without Writing or Signs, must be under∣stood, apparent and visible Letters or Signs. And indeed this is the most natural Construction can be put upon them. But there is another, wants not some kind of probability, viz. That these words may signifie, some Secret Conveyance by Writing upon the Messenger's Skin, such as that we ob∣served, Chap. 4. concerning Histiaeus: This conjecture is likewise mention'd by Schottus: For by (FIRE) Trithemius may understand a Virtual Fire, viz. Aqua Fortis, &c. And WRITING and SIGNS may be explai∣ned as before.
As to the second Proposition it may be refer∣red to that Secret way of Information by Tor∣ches, or by Fire and Smoak, &c. mentioned Chap. 2. Sect. 2. The other Conjectures here are Fabulous, particularly that of Cornelius Agrippa, Lib. 1. Philosoph. Occult. Cap. 6. viz. By opposing a Glass with Letters writ upon it to the Full-Moon, which being magnified in the Air, and carried back to the Moon with her reflected Beams, are there perceptible. And as for the third, it may respect the Spe∣cies of Sound, because of the Supposition of be∣ing so strictly shut up, unless he had an Eye at some of those Secret ways of Conveyance mentioned Chap. 4. which last, I rather en∣cline to believe, as being the more easie and safe Contrivance, considering the supposed Circumstances of a close Prisoner; nor does Trithemius propose the Performance of the last by Fire, or without Writing, &c. And this Conjecture will appear the more probable, when we come to consider the bar∣barous and strange Terms, he wrapt up those known Experiments in. I know there are likewise Fables here confi∣dently related, of means for entertaining a Cor∣respondence at any distance, by help of two Nee∣dles of an equal size, touched by the same Loadstone, moving in a circle, whereon the Letters of the Alphabet are described, &c. And that by the mutual Insition of Blood or
Flesh, between two Confederates, &c. But the Performance of either is impossible in Na∣ture; as Kircherus Schottus, and other great Naturalists have clearly demonstrated. INQUIRY III. Concerning the third Book of Stega∣nography. Tertius Liber docet Artem, per quam possum Hominem, &c. The third Book teaches an Art, by which I can instruct a Man Ignorant of Letters, only knowing his Mother-Tongue, tho he never understood one word of Latine, in the space of two Hours, to Write, Read, and Understand Latine, or∣nately and eloquently, &c. This Art agrees exactly with that he after∣wards published in his Polygraphy, only in the last he explains some ambiguous Words in the former, v. g. These Words, to write, Read and understand Latine, ornately and eloquently, &c. Are rendered in the exposition of his first Book of Polygraphy to this purpose, In paucis Diebus non dicam horis informare poteris, &c. In a few days, not to say hours, you may teach one ignorant of the Latin Tongue; to read, write, speak and understand it; indeed not every thing in it, but to such a degree as any exi∣gence in his affairs shall require.
Now a part of the Fallacy in his Epistle to Arnoldus Bostius lurks in that expression, that he could make a Man, read, write and under∣stand Latin, ornately and eloquently, without any exception. Whereas on the contrary, his Scho∣lar shall only Read, or Communicate any Se∣cret Message in his Mother-Tongue, concealed under certain Forms of Prayers or Exhortati∣ons in Latin; of which he neither understands the natural meaning, nor can he change the Forms given him, upon occasion: Now to ex∣plain this ingenious Art a little, 1. There must be a vast number of common Alphabets writ down. 2. And to each of the Letters of every par∣ticular Alphabet, must be joyned Words that are Synonyma, or of the like signification, and these Words serve to express the Letters unto which they are opposite. 3. If all the Words expressing A, in the se∣veral Alphabets, do make up an Oration; and all the Words in each rank be of like signification. And if A in Writing by this Method, begin or∣derly at the first Alphabet, taking one Word thence, and another from the second, and the next from the third, &c. as they shall express the Letters of the Secret Intention: 'Tis easie to conceive, how a Man that is Ignorant of Latin must yet ornately write Latin. But that this may be further Evident, I have hereunto added a few of Trithemius's Alphabets.
ALPHABET. 1. A Deus B Creator C Conditor D Opifex E Dominus F Dominator G Consolator H Arbiter I Judex K Illuminator L Illustrator M Rector N Rex O Imperator P Gubernator Q Factor R Fabricator S Conservator T Redemptor V Auctor W Princeps X Pastor Y Moderator Z Salvator 2. A Clemens B Clementissimus C Pius D Piissimus E Magnus F Excelsus G Maximus H Optimus I Sapientissimus K Invisibilis L Immortalis M Aeternus N Sempiternus O Gloriosus P Fortissimus Q Sanctissimus R Incomprehensibilis S Omnipotens T Pacificus V Misericors W Misericordissimus X Cunctipotens Y Magnificus Z Excellentissimus.
3. A Creans B Regens C Conservans D Moderans E Gubernans F Ordinans G Ornans H Exornans I Constituens K Dirigens L Producens M Decorans N Stabiliens O Illustrans P Intuens Q Movens R Confirmans S Custodiens T Cernens V Discernens W Illuminans X Fabricans Y Salvificans Z Faciens 4. A Coelos B Coelestia C Supercoelestia D Mundum E Mundana F Homines G Humana H Angelos I Angelica K Terram L Terrena M Tempus N Temporalia O Aevum P Aeviterna Q Omnia R Cuncta S Universa T Orbem V Astra W Solem X Stellas Y Vitam Z Viventia
5. A Impendat B Conferat C Donet D Largiatur E Concedet F Condonet G Tribuat H Distribuat I Retribuat K Contribuat L Indulgeat M Exhibeat N Praestet O Offerat P Deferat Q Ostendat R Revelet S Manifestet T Insinuet V Aspiret W Restituat X Reddat Y Administret Z Faveat 6. A Omnibus B Cunctis C Universis D Credentibus E Nobis F Christianis G Fidelibus H Petentibus I Expetentibus K Orantibus L Exorantibus M Postulantibus N Expostulantibus O Quaerentibus P Christicolis Q Inquirentibus R Requirentibus S Exquirentibus T Optantibus V Exoptantibus W Praeoptantibus X Exspectantibus Y Sperantibus Z Desiderantibus
7. A Vitam B Amoenitatem C Jucunditatem D Consolationem E Laetitiam F Gloriam G Foelicitatem H Beatitudinem I Visionem K Jubilationem L Quietem M Requiem N Mansionem O Habitationem P Recreationem Q Fruitionem R Lucem S Exultationem T Claritatem V Pacem W Tranquillitatem X Glorificationem Y contemplationem Z Securitatem 8. A Permansuram B Aeternam C Sempiternam D Coelestem E Supercoelestem [cum Omnibus] F Perpetuam G Beatissimam H Angelicam I Seraphicam K Immortalem L Immarcessibilem M Ineffabilem N incomprehensibilem O Inaestimabilem P Luminosam Q Splendidam [cum Universit] R Lucidissimam S Amaenisimam T Perrennem V Sanctissimam W Interminabilem X Dulcissimam Y Perfectam Z Futuram
9. A Sanctis B Electis C Praedilectis D Sanctissimis E Justis F Justificatis G Praedestinatis H Angelis I Arch-Angelis K Amatoribus [suis in] L Cultoribus M Amicis N Apostolis O Prophetis P Discipulis Q Martyribus R Sanctificatis S Dominationibus T Dilectis V Civibus W Servis X Famulis Y Ministris Z Confessoribus 10. A Coelis B Coelestibus C Supercoelestibus D Aeternum E Perpetuum F Sempiternum. G Saecula Saeculorum H Aevum Sanctum I Saeculum K Regno Coelorum L Altissimis M Excelsis N Paradiso O Olympo P Paradisiacis Q Olympicis R Fulgoribus S Foelicitate T Foecitatibus [Amen.] V Gloria W Honore X Magnificentia Y Luce perpetua Z Patria Coelesti.
The first four Books of Trithemius's Polygra∣phy, contain nothing but a Continuation of such Alphabets, only in the third and fourth, they are conceived in Barbarous Words: I have insert these few only, and given no Example, because the manner of Writing by them is by this time obvious. Note the Words writ in a different Chara∣cter at the side of the rest, signifie nothing to the Confederates; but are added in the out∣ward Writing to make up the seeming Sense, and when there are two of them, one is only used. Remarks upon the foregoing Method of Se∣cret Writing. I have not hitherto insisted upon this Me∣thod of Secret Writing: Nor do I here pre∣tend to SOLVE the Difficulties in Decypher∣ing it: But I have made some occasional Re∣marks as to the practice of it. And 1. According to Trithemius, there must be a new Alphabet for every Letter in the private Epistle. 2. These Alphabets require a more than or∣dinary Ingenuity in their Contrivance. 3. When the Alphabets are exactly fram'd; the least mistake in the Writer, turns the Se∣cret Intimation into a Chaos.
4. But suppose there were nothing amiss in the whole Design, (which is enough in all Con∣science freely to grant) yet there is more Time, and Pains required in Writing and Reading, by this Artifice, than a Man in Business, can dispense with: For (as we have observed) according to, Trithemius, the Key must contain as many Al∣phabets, as the Secret Epistle has Letters in it: Now in Argile's long Letter insert in the Disco∣veries made in Scotland, there are upwards of a thousand Words; and if he had taken Trithe∣mius's way of concealing it, there had been five or six thousand Alphabets used in the Key: And I leave it to ARITHMETICK to RE∣SOLUE. How much Time a particular Search into each of those Alphabets will amount to. And to STOCISM (for none, but of that Sect will try) how much Patience. Athanasius Kircherus in his Steganography Endeavours to improve Trithemius's Method. The alterations I observe are these. 1. Kircherus contrives his Key in form of an Ordinary Epistle: Whereas Trithemius con∣ceives his, in forms of Prayer, which is more Liable to Suspicion, especially in an age, when the greatest Villainies are committed under a Form of Godliness. 2. Kircherus has Alphabets of several Langua∣ges, whereby a man may chuse what speech he pleases for his Exterior Letter, tho he under∣stand not the Genuine meaning of one Word of it. But this was proposed by Trithemius. 3. Kircherus's Key consists not of many Words
so that if the Secret or Interior Epistle be not conceived in a few, it gives Ground of Suspici∣on and of Resolution too. For the Words that express every particular Alphabet (as before) being of like Significa∣tion, (that the outward Writing may have a see∣ming Sense,) at every return you shall have the same sense, tho not in the same words, which gives ground to suspect, and if the Writing be long, and many returns, to Solve it. Again, suppose that several Letters, writ by the same Key were seized, (which is no great improbability) the Sense of all shall be to the same purpose, and that gives cause enough of Jealousie, and facilitates the Discovery. And having considered Trithemius's tedious Method, and Kircherus's way of abbreviating it, both are lyable to so many Inconveniences, that it is evident, many of the Proposals for Secret Information considered in the first Chapter, and particularly that of the Lord Bacon's by Writing omnia per omnia is preferrable to it. INQUIRY IIII. Into the Contents of the 4th. Book of Stega∣nography. Quartus Liber continet multa stupenda Experi∣menta, &c. The fourth Book contains ma∣ny wonderful Experiments, but simply Na∣tural, viz. I can fully communicate my Con∣ceptions to my
confident, when we are eating or sitting with others, without Words, without Gestures: As also in Discourse, in Preaching, Playing upon the Organ, or Singing, and that without any Impediment of either Action, so that in Preaching things good and holy, I can reveal my mind Secret∣ly without Words, Signs or Gestures, &c. These Words to my thinking may be redu∣ced to three Propositions. 1. A Secret way of Converse in Company is proposed (inter edendum vel sedendum) with∣out Words or Gestures, 2. By a premediated Oration, or any Dis∣course, to reveal an Intention; without Words, Signs, or Gestures. And 3. By Musical Notes, to inform a Confede∣rate. And I suppose they are all so jumbled toge∣ther of Design, that these Words, without Words Signs or Gestures, might be attributed by the un∣wary, to every one of the particular Propo∣sals. And certainly by SIGNS, &c. must be understood Signs PERCEPTIBLE, or else his Words fall under the first Contradiction, that was observed in the Preceding Inquiry. And having noted this, I proceed. As to the first, In eating or sitting in Com∣pany, everry Action may be significant by Com∣pact, that is necessary or usual, as calling for Drink, wiping of the Mouth, or Hands, &c. And he does not Exclude Signs in the first Pro∣position.
As to the second Proposition, it is very natu∣rally reducible to that kind of Secrecy in Speech, we have considered Chap. 3. Sect. 1. Para∣graph 3. So that in Preaching Bona & Sancta, one may couch any Intimations, WITHOUT any Sign or Gesture; or Words (i. e.) Words extrinsick to the outward Sense of the Discourse; but this savors too much of Impiety. As to the Third, That the Differences of Sound, and particularly of Musical Notes, ei∣ther in Musick, Instrumental or Vocal, may be applyed to the Letters of the Alphabet, is already observed. And now having Inquired into the Mysteri∣ous Difficulties, that relate to Secret Informa∣tion contain'd in the Epistle to Arnoldus Bosti∣us, I shall examin a few other of the Obscu∣rities mentioned by Trithemius. INQUIRY V. Into the several Mystical Expressions, Trithemius hath left upon Record in his Polygraphy. Trithemius in the Preface of his Polygraphy, Polyg. pag. 17. hath these hard Words. Magnus Romanorum Caesar Augustus, tnebroso cupiens in arduis uti nunciorum ministerio, spiramina vocis conceptae mu∣tavit ex lucidis in Opaca, quorum barbariem vo∣tis renitentem, Metatheseos Orchemate pulchra in∣ventione, ad nutum convenientem effecit, & iste receptivus & quasi perpetuus ordo
thelemati nihil∣ominus & temporis rationi subjectus, quanquam nuncios ab incursione Bacuceorum conservet in via securos: sui tamen regulatas non custodiens metas, intuentes faciet omnes de suspicione rei sollicitos. All the Mystery is no more, than that Au∣gustus by Transposition of the Letters of the Alphabet, Polyg. pag. 45. changed their Powers, as we have it from his own Authority in his Exposition to Maximilian. Again in his Preface, he tells us, Archimides ille Syracusianus Mathematicorum facile Princeps, P. 17, 18. albam suis convenientem institutis Volucrem, nu∣dam per Caput & Pedes, bactro in formam Tetrago∣ni reciso circumferenter affixit, ordinatisque debita proportione Ministris, opus volatili commendavit instrumento, donec in picam Imago Volucris albae mutata comparuit. Quo rite peracto, resolvit af∣fixam sua manu, quam ut avolare permisisset, facta est subito inter familiares penetralium facies disjun∣ctio magna, surrexitque mox tortuosae imaginis mo∣nasticae prius monstrum nimis vagabundum, cujus in aspectu nemo quod erat potuit cogitare. Nec prius conquievit bubonum dissensio, donec Imago Ma∣gistri, picam scite religasset Tetragono consimili. This Wonderful Monster, at last by his own Metamorphosis is turned into that Invention of Secret Writing by the Lacedaemonian Scytale, mentioned page 91. Alii enim Familiares ministerio Artis praepositae, Page 50. Bubones habebant Philophotos alij Misopho∣tos, &c.
By Bubones, he all along expresseth Secret Writing, and what Philophoti and Misophoti do denote, is clear from the words themselves, viz. Philophoti, Apparent Characters from  and ; Misophoti, Occult or Invisible Characters from . The Hieroglyphick he takes to Express Se∣cret Writing, in General, by the Owl, is very Natural: But when he says habebant Bubones Philophotos, the Expression is not so very agree∣able; for Owls have no great kindness for the Light; as also Light and Secret Information were ever at variance. A Little after Speaking of Visible and Invisi∣ble Characters, he says, Trith. ibid. Modivro Characterum Visibilium, pro scriptura occulta nimis sunt multi, ac paene innumerabiles, &c. Invisibilium autem tria sunt genera inter Mortales hodie magis usitata. Primum nuncupatur Dermaticum, quod fit in Dorso Nunciorum, Scriptura quedam Artificialis per Lo∣turam cujusdam humris duntaxat visibilis, quam penetrarenemo sufficit; qui artis nescierit arcanum. Secundum vero Hyphasmaticum dicitur, quo re∣bus certis in Panno scribitur, quod exsiccatum, vi∣deri potest minime; donec Madefactum in aqua fri∣gida cernatur. Tertium genus nominatur Aleoti∣cum, quod est multiplex & varium, tam in for∣ma, quam in Materia, habetque modos occulti scri∣bendi paene Innumerabiles; ejus autem Scriptura fit in Charta, vel sine Charta, cum Nemilua, & Cala cum Raphocam, Lapolce, alijsque rebus diversis. Scribuntur
item Literae, ac varijs modis ab∣sconduntur & Locis, ut sub Race Tabulata, sub Rofirila cubior, in Leopi, in Necoflas, in Ceo∣cali, Locubat, in Ratera, in Lispilia, & aliis similibus paene infinitis, &c. Of all which in Oder. And First, he himself explains the meaning of Dermaticum, to be an Artificial kind of Writ∣ting on the Messengers back, not visible until washed with a Certain Liquor. The word is dirived from , which signifies the skin: By what means this may be performed Bap∣tista Porta, Kircherus, Schottus, and many more give an account; Plin. lib. 26. cap. 8. but for Antiquities sake, I shall only Repeat Pliny's words in his * Natu∣ral History, to the like purpose. Tythimalum, Nostri berbam laclariam vocant, See the preceed∣ing Chap∣ter. alii Laclucam ca∣prinam: Narrantque lacte ejus inscripto Corpore cùm inaruerit, si cinis inspergatur apparere Lite∣ras. Et ita quidem Adulteros alloqui malûere quam codicillis. 2. Trithemius likewise explains Hyphasmaticum to be an Experiment, whereby a man may write upon Cloth, and the Letters to be indis∣cernible, until the Cloth be wet in cold Wa∣ter. Hyphasma is a Greek word, signifying Cloth, or Weaving. 3. The third kind of Writing secretly by Latent Characters mentioned, he calls Aleoti∣cum I know none that have given any Account what it is, but it may be derived from  to avoid.
Trithemius only tells us that it is Ma∣nifold and various, both as to the Form and Matter, and has almost Infinite ways of Secret Writing, and that either with or without Pa∣per, &c. That a man may write secretly without Paper, we have already given several practi∣cable Instances in the 4th Chap. We shall now proceed to those adduced by Trithemius in this place. And, 1. A man says he may write cum Nemilua, Schot. Steg. Class. 7. which in all probability is put instead of these words cum Alumne (i. e.) with Alum, for the one is only a transposition of the Letters of the other; an Obscurity Trithemius did very much af∣fect. 2. By Cala may be understood Lac, Schot. ibid. (i.e.) Milk, and the Redundant Letter perhaps has been added Euphoniae gratia. I have already considered secret Writing with Alum and Milk, Chap. 1. Chap. 6. 3. Cum Raphocam (i. e.) Cum Camphora, Schot. ibid. Cam∣phire, a kind of Gum. 4. Cum Lapolce, is interpreted cum Cepolla, (i. e.) an Onyon. Now after these Instances Trithemius comes next to treat of another part of his Aleotical kind of Secret Information. for (says he) as Epistles may be secretly written, so they may be several ways, and in several places Con∣cealed. 1. Sub Race Tabulata (i. e.) Sub Tabula cerata, Schot. ibid. viz. The Letters inscribed may be covered over with Wax, as in that Instance we Mention∣ed of Demaratus, &c.
2. Sub Rofirila cubior, Schot. ibid. some interpret this sub floribus Rubi; but Schottus is not pleased with that Interpretation, but thinks it may perhaps be read, Sub Rofirila Mubios, sub foliis Arborum, a Concealing of Letters under the Leaves of Trees. 3. In Leapi, (i. e.) in Pileo, or to hide Letters in a Hat, Helmet, or Cap. 4. In Necoflas (i. e.) in Flascone, to conceal Epistles in a Bottle or Viol. 5. In Ceocali (i. e.) in Calceo, only the last Letter is redundant. 6. In Locubat (i. e.) in Baculo, the last Letter being again redundant. 7. In Ratera (i. e.) in Terra, under ground. 8. In Lispilia (i. e.) in Palliis, in Cloths. And now having in the last place Inquired in∣to the Wonderful Proposals for Secret Informa∣tion mentioned by Trithemius first in an Epistle to Arnoldus Bostius; and afterwards in his Poly∣graphy to the Emperor Maximilian, I shall not insist further at this time. FINIS.
