G1549 18419200 107515
THE Slanderer Rebuked: OR, The Vindication of Thomas Grantham against the malicious Slanders of one Mr. Toathby, a Seller of Wool in the City of Norwich. IT is now about fourteen Years, I think, since two of my Neighbours being desired by me to coard or geld a Ram for me, one of them, (Robert Hareby by Name) having Ground joining unto mine, finding a Ram (very much like mine) in his Pasture, caught him, (verily thinking he was mine) and brought him to my Yard, where my other Neighbour (Mr. John Lark by Name) did coard him, as I had formerly desired him, and let him go, not doubting but he was mine, and they both knew my Sheep as well as my self. This Account is testified under the Hands of John Hareby (Bro∣ther to the said Robert Hare∣by) Mr. Roger Lark, (Son to the said Mr. John Lark) Tho. Atkin, and William Brad∣shaw, Anno 1680. who all are yet living (except John Hareby). But we were all mistaken, for this Ram proved a poor Man's, who dwelt near us; and the Ram dying of his Gelding, the Owner complain∣ed, and desired my self and Mr. Lark to consider his Loss, which I willingly did, and gave him half the Value of his Ram, which was six Shillings eight Pence: and here was an end of the Business without Sute or Trouble, though some ill Men ad∣vised the poor Man to sue us, and to put us to Trouble. But as ill Men desire to abuse the Innocent, so this Accident became a Reproach to me; and from gelding a Ram, they turn'd it to stealing a Ram. But my Neighbours knowing my
Innocency, did vindicate my Reputation, so that the Clamor ceased in those parts where I then lived, [which was at Ashby next Spilsby in the County of Lincoln] insomuch that none but vile Persons would so much as mention it. Now since I came to dwell in Norwich, there came a Seller of Wool under the Title of Mr. Toathby, (whom I could not see, though I went to his Inn as soon as I heard of him) and he was pleased to reproach me by this Accident, in the vilest manner that might be, (as the Inn-keeper told me) and his Slander was very pleasing to such as delight in Falshood, insomuch as I found it needful to detect this lying Slander, by the Testimony of such of my Neighbours at Ashby aforesaid, who are yet living, and who very well know the Circumstances of this matter. What I wrote to them, with their Answers, I shall here commit to Posterity, to detect the Wickedness of such as have or hereafter shall attempt to abuse me upon this occasion. To my loving Neighbours in Ashby next Spilsby, Greeting, &c. SIRS; I am now settled (as the place of my Residence) in the City of Norwich; and here came a Person out of Lincolnshire, a Seller of combed Wool, and defamed me as a great Rogue, and a In Lincoln∣shire they call a Ram a Tup. Tup-stealer. Now some of you being yet living to testify how innocent I was in that Accident, which happened by the Over-sight of Robert Hareby and Mr. John Lark (our Neigh∣bours,) in bringing up to my Yard, and coarding a Ram for mine, which, unknown to them and my self, was another Man's, as you very well know. I do therefore earnestly intreat you, to send me your Testimony of the Truth concerning this mat∣ter, and of my Conversation among you, for I am much abused by the false Report of this unworthy Person. You have heard Mr. Lark speak of this matter, and his Son can testify the same. Thus with my kind Love to you all, I remain, Your Loving Neighbour, Tho. Grantham. Norwich May 1. 1691.
The Testimony of my Neighbours in Ashby aforesaid, May 7, 1691. THese are to satisfy whom it may concern, That whereas our Neighbour Thomas Grantham, late of Ashby, in the Coun∣ty of Lincoln, and now Resident in Norwich, hath been defamed by some Person for stealing a Tup: We do here testify that he is innocent as to what he is charged withal in that case, and that the said Thomas Grantham did not intentionally nor actu∣ally do any unlawful Act or Deed; and that in respect of his Behaviour amongst us his Neighbours, he was always ac∣counted a very honest Man, and a good Neighbour. Witness our Hands, George Coddington, John Robison, Thomas Atkin, Anthony Robison. Note that these Gentlemen who have given these Testimonies, are all of the Church of England, ex∣cept one; and they offer the Testimo∣ny of many more if it be desired. May 7, 1691. WE are here informed that Thomas Grantham, late of Ash∣by, and now at Norwich, is taxed in his Life and Con∣versation, and particularly about a Tup. These are to satis∣fy that the said Thomas Grantham always behaved himself well, and led a very good Life and Conversation amongst us, and was always esteemed a very honest Man. Witness Ben. Smith, Edward Reed. To the Right Worshipful the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Norwich; The humble Petition of Thomas Grantham, Inhabitant in the said City. Doth shew; THat whereas many Abuses, Reproaches, and Affronts, have been and are daily offered to my Person, Name and Reputation, insomuch that I cannot pass peaceably in the Streets, nor be peaceable in my Habitation, nor injoy my self quietly
in my Service to Almighty God, according to the Law of the Land, by reason of the Rudeness of many of the Inhabitants of this Place, unknown to me by Name; save that from one Mr. Harman's House in St. Martins, at the Unicorn, a Report is spred abroad, that I did steal a Ram in the Place where I formerly lived: which Forgery I have detected, by the Testi∣mony of divers of my Neighbours, who have sent Certificates of my Innocency under their Hands concerning that matter, (Copies whereof I have herewith sent to your Worships.) And seeing the Rudeness of the People, and their Insolency to be so great in promoting that and other Slanders, that I go in danger of my Life, I thought it my Duty to spread my Complaint before your Worships, and to beseech you to do for me what you lawfully may for my Preservation from Violence. And your humble Petitioner shall pray, &c. Norwich May 28, 1691. This Petition was received by the Mayor of Norwich, who was pleased to say, they were satisfied the Report was false, and that he would do me Justice. And seeing that Satan so violently rages against me, meerly because I endeavour to serve God and this Generation in my Ministry, with all possible Fidelity, I doubt not but after my Decease he will by such base ways do what he can to deface my poor (though sincere) Labours. I do therefore here, in the Fear of God, challenge all the World, whilst I am yet alive, to bring a just Accusation against me, if they can, in respect of my Conversation, from my Youth to this Day: For though I am a Man of Infirmities (as all are) yet by the Grace of God, I have been kept from all these things whereof I have by the Tongue of Infamy been so unworthily accused. Tho. Grantham. FINIS.
