G2218 12850087 94489
AN ACCOUNT OF A Late Voyage TO ATHENS, CONTAINING The Estate both Ancient and Modern of that Famous City, and of the present Empire of the TURKS: The Life of the now Sultan Mahomet the IV. With the Ministry of the Grand Vizier, Coprogli Achmet Pacha. Also the most Remarkable Passages in the Turkish Camp at the Siege of CANDIA. And divers other particularities of the Affairs of the PORT. By Monsieur de la GƲILLATIERE, a French Gentleman. Now Englished. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H. Herringman. at the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. MDCLXXVI.
ATHENS Ancient and Modern: WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF THE EMPIRE OF THE TURKS. BOOK I. SInce it is Your Desire, I shall send you some other time the Relation of My Adventures at Tunis, and the Four Years Slavery which I endured in Barbary;
and I hope you will not repent of your in∣clination to see that part of my History, for my Imployment was under such Masters as have enabled me much for the satisfacti∣on of your Curiosity: But your Request at present, is, News from the Famous City of Athens, and the Coasts of Greece, which I viewed before my Arrival at Athens; It is your pleasure likewise that I send you an Account of my Remarks in the Turks Camp before Candia, where I was present at that time. I shall out-do your Proposals, and give you the particulars of the Life of Sul∣tan Mahomet IV. and of the Ministery of the Grand Visier. It is pleasant to me, and reasonable, not only to satisfie, but exceed the desires of a Brother, who (like you) by a thousand good Offices in my absence, per∣swade me that the bonds of our Friendship are straiter than the bonds of our Birth. The truth is, a Person of your Curiosity could not have Addressed himself more pro∣perly than to me; and, as it seems, you have already had some intimation of my Con∣duct in my Travels: Whilst my Compani∣ons were pursuing their Affairs, and employ∣ed where their Commerce required, I en∣tertained my Curiosity, sometimes with Merchants, to whom I was recommended; sometimes with mine Host, and sometimes
with our Guides, especially if I found them any thing ingenious; in that case I brib'd them to procure me the Conversation of the most Considerable Persons in those Quarters; and where ever I came, my bu∣siness was to inform my self of every thing. About the end of February 1669. I part∣ed from Tunis in a Vessel belonging to Ale∣xandria, call'd the St. John Baptist, which Vessel, though of Legorn, carry'd the Co∣lours of Genoa, and was commanded by the Captain Crivellieri of the Isle of Corsica, which as you know belongs to the Com∣mon-wealth of Genoa: Crivellieri was a Gentleman, with some tincture of Learning, which is rare in his Country: He took pleasure in my Conversation, and during my Voyage, having made some benefit of my Experience in Navigation, he did me a thousand civilities; told me that the Fraight was already paid for his Ship to Constan∣tinople as soon as she had unladen at Genoa; and endeavouring to oblige me to go along with him, as an inducement, he told me his Vessel was to touch at Porto-lione a league and half from Athens, to the sight of which place I was formerly most ardent∣ly inclin'd: But two years Service in the Wars of Hungary, and four years slavery in Barbary had cool'd me, and taken off much
of my rambling Fancy which indeed was the great infirmity of my Mind: I had then thoughts of reposing it for a year or two, and to go try in my own Country whether I could not cure it by the pleasures of a retir'd life, and applying my self afresh to my former studies. However the Cap∣tains proposition startled me, and rais'd no small combate betwixt my Resolution and Inclination. The same day we came to an anchor at Genoa, he was visited by two Ger∣mans, two Italian, and one English Gentle∣man, who came in company from Rome, where they had contracted a friendship, and agreed among themselves to pass together into Turky. They had been tempted to Genoa, upon intelligence, that our Ship was to arrive very suddenly, and to pass from thence to Athens: Those who had adver∣tis'd them of that convenience, had told them withal, what an advantage it would be to them to make their Voyage in a Ves∣sel belonging to that Republick; for since the Year 1665. it had been at Peace with the Port, and obtained a Priviledge of car∣rying out its own Colours; whereas till that time She had managed her Commerce into the Levant, under the Standard of the French. The next day being come on Shore, the
Captain return'd a Visit to the Travellers, and took me along with him. I found pre∣sently that they were Learned and Curious. They had provided themselves of a Qua∣drant well enough made, and a Perspective-Glass that was sold them for one of Eusta∣chius Divinus his making, who was famous in Rome for those kind of things, and Com∣petitor with the admirable Campani. The Captain knew these Gentlemen were for my turn, and smiling upon me, put the Per∣spective-Glass into my hands; I eyed it a little, and looking gravely, to give my self Authority, I blunder'd out two or three Optick terms, that put my Gallants into a surprise, to find a person of their own Learning and Curiosity in the habit of a Slave; but having deliver'd my Opinion of it to the Captain in the Turkish Lan∣guage, the English-man and the two Ger∣mans embraced me; profess'd they had found a Treasure, and would needs oblige me to go along with them into Greece: The truth is, the Languages that I spoke, and the Experience which I had, perswaded them they should be very happy to have me with them, and they express'd their O∣pinion in that point by a thousand Caresses, and a thousand importunities to tempt me. It is no shame to me to confess, that the
Stock of one who had been four years a Slave, was too short to defray the charge of that Voyage; and the sudden departure of the Ship would not suffer me to attend till the Trustees for my Estate could make me any Returns from my little Patrimony in Auvergne: But my Fellow-travellers sup∣ply'd me, and all things went on very well, and very honourably for me: They were content to take my Bill for a summ of mo∣ney which they advanc'd. Could I have dispenc'd with my Natural Pride, I should have accepted of the offer they made of bearing my whole Charge, to the very Taxes which the Turks in roguery do exact from the Christians upon several unreason∣able pretences: However, I would needs have it thought I borrow'd it only, though perhaps they might have given it as well. Our Ship was of Two hundred and fifty Tun, mounted with sixteen pieces of Ca∣non, and set sayle the 20. of March 1669. At first we were carried with a N. W. wind with which that very night we doubled the Cape Corso, Coasting along by the Shore of Corsica, with design to put in at Porto-Vecchio, which lies in the Gulf of Arfiano, due East of the said Island. You see Sir, according to your Advice, I make use of Sea-term, though my Dis∣course
reaches no farther than the Navi∣gation in the Streights: You justifie me by an irrefragable Argument, in telling me that writing principally for my own private ac∣quaintance in Paris, I may well use such terms as are already familiar to them: Be∣sides you are not ignorant, that unless it be those of the Provence, all our Pilots do use the same phrases which I make use of to you. Our little Troop of Travellers retir'd in∣to a Cabin appointed them by the Captain in the Stern of the Ship, to free them from the noise and clutter of the rest: The Ita∣lians were call'd, one of them Bocca-negra, and the other Bianchi; the two Germans, one of them Hermerstat, and the other Ho∣eninghen, and the English mans name was Drelingston. You may imagine, that per∣sons who had voluntarily undertaken a Voyage to Athens, had at the least some smattering of Learning. The Country is so poor there, there is little of profit to tempt a Man thither; nor would it indeed satisfie any Mans pains or expectation but a Scholars. Two of our number were ex∣cellent in Mathematicks and Chymistry, and all of us well versed in History, both Ancient and Modern, which was of great use to us in our Voyage; for having pro∣vided
our selves with certain Greek Au∣thors, we consulted them with as much ex∣actness as possible, to inform our selves of the Situations, and Models of several great Fabricks, which time had so perfectly de∣molish'd, that they were lost beyond the very tradition of the Inhabitants. Our usual pains and impatience in matters of Navigation, we sweetned sometimes by pleasant and agreeable Recreations; and when we were tired with any thing that was intricate and knotty, we diverted our selves upon the Interests of the Princes of Europe; For matters of State are alwayes the last part of the Conversation of Scho∣lars, as well as of the entertainment of the Common People. The wind being contrary, and our Ship (with much Veering sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the other) got up into the mouth of the Gulf Arsiano, our Cap∣tain took his Shallop and went on Shore at Porto-Vecchio: He would not acquaint us upon what score; but I understood since, it was by Express Orders from the States of Genoa to see what they did there in the bu∣siness of the Magnotti or Mainottes (for they are pronounc'd both wayes.) These Magnotti are a People of Greece inhabiting part of that Country which belong'd anci∣ently
to the Lacedemonians; and the only persons of all Greece that have to this pre∣sent preserv'd themselves a Common-wealth in spite of the great Power of the Turks: But of late they are grown apprehensive lest Candia should fall into the Enemies hands, and after the taking of that Town, the Grand Visier should address himself to the subversion of their Government: Inso∣much as the Magnotti have some thoughts of quitting their own Country, and esta∣blishing in the Isle of Corsica; to which pur∣pose they have lately sent underhand to the State of Genoa, to desire that admission near Porto-Vecchio which they were former∣ly offered; so that our Captains business on Shore was only to inform himself how the Commissioners deputed by the Republick proceeded in the distribution of such Lands as were assigned them. Our Captain return'd, we sail'd directly for Malta, and, for the dispatching of cer∣tain Affairs, remain'd at Anchor half a day within sight of the Chief Port in that Island. About Evening a Shallop came on board us with an Italian and a Turk, who de∣sir'd, by the convenience of our Vessel to be set down in some Island of the Archipe∣lago, or some Port of Morea. The Turk seem'd a person of Condition, though just
then coming out of Slavery. The Italian and he had both of them had relation to a Knight of Malta lately dead, who to re∣compence the Services of the Italian had given him the Turk for a Legacy. The Turk pretended to be considerable in his own Country, and gave sufficient testimony that he had been honourably imploy'd in the Wars both of Hungary and Candia: But with all his Merit, and all his boasting, he had not been able to ransom himself, though he had sent many Letters to his Friends; the Italian hereupon (his new Master) was a∣bout selling him to a Captain who was re∣cruiting his Gally; but the Turk unwilling to keep longer at the Oare, if it were pos∣sible to prevent it, had so cox'd the Italian with assurances of honesty, and hopes of a good ransom, that they came lovingly from Malta, with intention to have pass'd toge∣ther in our Vessel into Turky, where the Ransom was to be readily paid, and an in∣violable Friendship to be contracted be∣tween them. We were at that time by ac∣cident upon the Deck, and heard them give an account of their design; most of our Equipage fell a laughing, and derided the simplicity of the Italian, upon whom they look'd as a person little better than a fool. In short, though in those cases little heed is
given to the stories of a Slave, yet they are never sparing of their promises, and to get leave to go and solicite their Ransoms, are never short in magnifying and protesting their own probity and gratitude. A Secre∣tary who was with us, gave us an instance, and told it on purpose that the Italian might hear it: His account was this, That he had at one time seven Slaves of Acrio∣teri in Natolia; that he had been perswa∣ded to trust five of them to return into their own Country, and to go along with them to raise the Ransoms of all, and that he kept the other two as Hostages for per∣formance of Articles. They pretended that at Smirna they should find Friends enough who would treat them handsomly, and sup∣ply them with Camels and Money to com∣pleat their Journey; and yet when they came there, and all the way beyond, they had nothing to trust to, but what they begg'd; and when at length they came to Acrioteri, all their Relations were either gone or dead, or so poor that they were not able to relieve them: In a word, in∣stead of paying him as they had ingaged, it was once in debate to sell their Master, and it was no small happiness for him that they chose rather to give him the slip: He had a thousand fears upon him (till their
Hostages were restored) that they would have secured him: He added also that at his return he used the two Hostages very se∣verely, but to no purpose, it neither brought the other back, nor constrained the two poor Creatures to ransom themselves. This Story quite altered the Italian, and expunged all his former sentiments of Ge∣nerosity and Confidence. The Vessel that brought them from Malta, was still with us, attending an Answer to certain Letters which our Captain had received; so that the Italian prepared to carry his Slave back, resolving to dispose of him to some other person: This he insinuated to the Turk, who to speak truth, at that time testified the greatness of his mind; he seemed not at all surpriz'd, but having asserted his quality with all the modesty in the world, and pro∣tested that he would have sincerely kept his Parole; he exprest himself very ready to re∣turn to Malta, if his Master pleased. This modesty and resignation in him, wrought compassion in me; and by good fortune it came into my mind to speak to my Came∣rades of a thing which I had gathered from his Discourse. This Turk had told me that he was born in a place not far from Athens, in a Country to which all of us had a cu∣riosity to go, and indeed would have pur∣chased
such a Person at a dear rate, if for nothing but his assistance during our resi∣dence there. I acquainted our friends how useful he might be, and advising them not to slip so fair an opportunity; I pre∣vailed with them to buy him: It was only the hazard of so much money as his Ran∣som would cost, which might be possibly repayd, however it would not be absolute∣ly lost, seeing it would give us at least a fair pretence into that Country, and afford us convenience of seeing that securely, which we would otherwise have done, though with more danger. We propound∣ed it to the Turk, not doubting but he would gladly embrace it: He finding him∣self returning to the Galleys, and that we offering so honourably to redeem him, ex∣pressed great sense of our kindness, and esolutions of gratitude. He assisted to make the bargain, and to beat down the price as much as he could. He had been ong enough in Malta to speak Italian ve∣y well: We paid him Four hundred Franks, nd the Italian return'd by himself, and eft his Turk to make his Voyage with us. The first thing that confirmed my good opi∣ion of this Slave, was the civility which e showed immediately to the person who ad told the Story of the five Slaves which
had cheated him; He was sensible enough that it had hindered his return with his old Master, and hazarded the continuation of his slavery; yet he was so far from being pro∣voked, that he came to him, embraced him with both his Arms, and thanked him for being instrumental in delivering him from so rigid a Master, and placing him with such persons of worth: We used him very civilly, and I entered into a more particular friend∣ship with him, by reason of my smattering in the Turkish language, which was the oc∣casion of our frequent discourse. His name was Osman Chelebi, which last word is a Title of honour, and given only to conside∣rable Persons. Being got up to the height of Capo-Pas∣saro, which is South-east of Sicily, we de∣scryed a Vessel that gave us an alarm: We discovered by her Hull she was a Christian Frigot, but she carryed the Colours o Barbary, which sent us immediately to our Arms, and our Port-holes were opened to make room for our Canon: We had no sooner done that, but she put up the English Colours, after them the Portugal, and nex the Colours of Ragusa: We were all this while upon the Decks, no whit delighted with this kind of sport: but the Frigot be∣ing as little desirous to put an end to our
confusion, put out new Colours still, as the Colours of Genoa, Holland, France, and Hambourg, which last are very rare to be seen in the Levant Seas: Not long after we observed the Standard of Savoy, as great a rarity as the other; and after that the Pope's, with the Arms of the Family of the Rospi∣gliosi, out of which his Holiness was de∣scended. Having taken down those Co∣lours, the Frigot continued some time with∣out any, as we supposed, employ'd in looking out the Colours of Algier, and Venice, which were hung up afterwards. Thus have I given you in part an Inventory of the Goods of the Pyrats, who by a new name, from an old word, are at this day called Capers, of which sort of Cattel there is scarce one but is furnished with all sorts of Colours; by which means the poor Mer∣chant is many times deluded, suffering them to come so near, upon an imagination they are Friends, that 'tis then too late to get off, and they are forced to submit. We were not so taken up with these ex∣travagant changes, but we could observe the Enemy preparing all the while to attack us; and indeed we had but few of our crew that were desirous of that. When the Fri∣got came within distance of twice Canon-shot she slackned her Sails, to give us notice
by their Shalop, that we should take down our Standard, and salute them with all the Guns we had in our Vessel, otherwise they would sink us to the bottom: In contempt, they sent this Message to us by the most in∣considerable persons among them; yet one of them, more rational and civil than the rest, took our Captain aside, and told him the Frigot was commanded by a Christian, but a haughty insolent person who affected to make himself terrible, and his name you shall have hereafter. All his crew were drunk, it being their third day of rejoicing for two Prizes which they had taken from the Turks of a considerable value. Whilst we were in this suspence, the Frigot gave us two Guns with Bullet, and had like to have brought our Fore-Mast by the Board. Their Messenger told us we might perceive with what kind of Persons we had to deal; that their fingers itcht to be at us, and that whilst they were under the fury of their debauch, it would not be discretion in us to provoke them. He told us likewise, that before he came away, they had prepared to burn our Sails, and to that end had ram'd into their great Guns Rags of Linen steep'd in Oyl and Strong-waters. Our Captain called a Council, and made it appear how sensible he was of, and how willing to re∣venge
so great an affront, if we thought him in a condition to do it, but he refer'd to our advice, and was not much offended when we gave our judgments, that we were in prudence to quit our selves of those desperado's, though at the expence of a little Formality; and to do it with as little dishonour as might be, we insisted that when we struck and saluted them, the Fri∣got should hang out either the French or English Colours; But the Messenger told us it was not to be expected, his power was limited; and that we must strike either to the Hambourg or Ragusa Colours, (which were the most inconsiderable of them all) and to no other; and observing the Frigot working her side to us, he required us pe∣remptorily to salute the Standard of Ragusa, increasing the injury by taking away the li∣berty of our choice, even of those con∣temptible two; but the inequality of our force made our Captain constrain himself. We sent their Shallop on Board again, and they causing the Banner of Ragusa to be set up; we Lowr'd our Top-sails, saluted them with all our great Guns, and to satiate their ambition, if possible, came under their Lee, which is the basest and most abject Formality upon the Seas. In this manner the madness of the Corsair brought us ac∣quainted
with the greatest part of the Standards belonging to the Mediterranean; but his Ceremony at parting was nothing inferiour, and one must have spent some time in a considerable Fleet to understand what he meant: he hung out the several Flags that are used to distinguish every particular Ship, according to the rank and dignity of the Officer; For having set up the Spanish Standard, he represented an Admiral by clapping his Colours upon the Main-Mast; taking them down there, he personated a Vice-Admiral by setting them up in his Misne, and then the Reer-Admi∣ral by removing it to another: In short, af∣ter this, he made himself another Officer, by hanging out a Flame at his Main-Mast, and at last, the Commander of a Squa∣dron, by his Cornet, and with that he va∣nished. The Italians being naturally jealous, our Captain suspected there was more than ordi∣nary in this insolence; for my part I was not at all troubled to find there were peo∣ple in the world that could mortifie the Va∣nity of Genoa, since they had a new Stan∣dard of their own. They have made no great advantage of it these three years past, since which time they have laid aside the French; nor has this whimsie been capa∣ble
of restoring the authority which they had formerly in those Seas, where doubt∣less they have been more potent than the Venetian. But how remarkable soever these passages are, our Physitian Boccane∣gra (who for his divertisement kept a Jour∣nal of our Navigation, after the manner of a Pilot) took no notice of them in his Book, where our Captain would many times look in curiosity, but could never find any thing, but by what wind we were carryed, and how many fathom water. On Saturday the 6. of April, and 18. of our Voyage, we discovered the Coasts of Greece, and by ten in the morning were got within sight of the old Castle de Maina, which denominates the Canton of Brazzo di Maina. We were obliged to keep at a distance of two miles from the shore, where we came to an Anchor in fifteen fathom water, (for nearer there was no ground for greater Vessels) the Castle lying to the N. W. Here we understood we were not above eighteen Leagues from Misithra, which is the name at present of the famous City of Sparta. In a word, the Greeks, like the Turks, measure their way by the hour; and an hours distance is as much as a Footman can make in an hours time at the ordinary walk of a Horse, which is near as
much as a French League or three Miles in Italy. The Brazzo di Maina is the Southerly part of the famous Country of the Lacede∣monians, inclosed betwixt two rows of Mountains that run into the Sea almost full North and South, and form the Cape of Matapan, called anciently Tenara; so that Westward the Cape makes the Gulf of Co∣ron, formerly called the Gulf of Messena; and Eastward the Gulf of Colochina, cal∣led by the Antients the Laconick Gulf. The Western Coast of Greece, begins at the Port of Calamata, which is the most Northerly of that Country, and runs on to the Cape de Matapan, where the Eastern Coast commences, and runs along bending insensibly towards the North, till at last it ends at Port-Rapani, the farthest Port in the Brazzo di Maina. The Port de Calamata, and the Port de Coron lie seven Leagues asunder, one of them W. N. W. the other E. S. E. But the ordinary way from Calamata to Cape Ma∣tapan is S. S. E. and about Fourteen Leagues. The Eastern Coast runs N. E. about ten Leagues from Cape Matapan to Pagana, from Pagana to Colchina it runs Eastward about four Leagues; from Colchina to the
Point of Porto-Rapani (where the Coast is most bending) it inclines Eastward for about five Leagues together. It may well be said that on the Western Coast the anchoring is not so good as on the Eastern; for on the Western Coast the Ground is false, and consists much in banks of Sand, so that to Cruise upon that Coast at the distance of a League, it is necessary to have a Greek Pilot, or otherwise you must be perpetually Sounding. I could describe all the Soundings, did I not fear to be troublesom, for I have them in my Memoires as they were given me by one of the best Pilots in that Country. Calamata retains much of its old name Calamiae, of which Polybius makes mention. Passing from thence to the Cape, de Matapan, the first Village we came to is called Christo, which name was given it from a miraculous Crucifix, which the Grecians have erected in that place. The Greeks do not use em∣boss'd work, and therefore this Crucifix was only painted upon Wood. Christo of old was called Gerenea, and was the place of the Nativity of Nestor, whose pru∣dence contributed so much to the taking of Troy.
From Christo the Coast leads to Chiores, which is a little Chorion,. as the Vulgar Greek call a Village. The Houses of Chiores stand scatter'd and dispers'd in a Wood full of Fountains, for there are more Springs of Water in the Country of the Magnotti, than in any Country of Europe besides. About half a League from thence lies the small Village Cardamile, which has kept its name from the time of Agamemnon; it is one of the richest little Towns in the Brazzo di Maina, wherefore the Greeks do not call it a Chorion but a Chora,. which is their word for a Town. The Banks about Cardamile are famous in memory of those delicate Nymphs which came out of the Neighbouring Waters to be present at the Nuptials of Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles, when he came into those parts to solemnize his Marriage with Her∣mione. The great Village Istechia is not above three small Leagues from Cardamile upon the Coast, but is not to be confounded with another large Town of the same Name not far from Thebes, and eminent for the great Battel Epaminondas gained there a∣gainst the Lacedemonians. Our French
Geographers will needs have the Castle of Maina to be the old Town of Leuctra, but they are much out in their description of that Country. About Canon shot from Istechia, the lit∣tle Rock of Pecno is to be seen, about a Musket shot distance in the Sea; the Anci∣ents called it formerly Pephnos, and 'twas a wonder to me that they should denomi∣nate an Island from so pitiful a Rock, whose top is no larger than the top of Mont-Mar∣tyr: However, in this Country it was that Castor and Pollux were born. It was told us as a great wonder, That upon the top of that Rock an infinite number of Pismires were to be seen; our Virtuosi falling pre∣sently to their Philosophy, and canvasing the causes of so unusual a thing, the saga∣cious Bocca-negra demanded of a Seaman who had been there, if the top of it was not sandy, and what colour the Sand was of? The Seaman had no sooner told him that it was very sandy, and the Sand extra∣ordinary white, but he cryed out, That we need trouble our selves no farther for a reason, for the whiteness of the Ants: That ancient History was much to blame to have omitted so evident an Argument; and for our further conviction he urged the example of the Bears and Foxes which are
white, in Nova Zembla, and those Northern Countries by perpetual reflection of the Snow; concluding at last, that either quick transpiration of the little particles in the body of the Insect, attract by their activity the colour of the Sand; or else the colour of the Sand does of it self penetrate the sub∣stance of the Insect, by means of the humi∣dity of the place. Pecno is equidistant from the Port of Istechia, and the Port of Prestean, which last is built upon the ruines of the Ancient Thalamae, a Town never very Eminent, but now most miserably poor. The Greeks call it indifferently Prassia or Prestean. Upon the Coast betwixt Prestean and By∣tilo by the Sea side, there is an excellent spring of fresh water, very well known to the Corsaires. It was formerly Consecrated to the Moon; and not far from it was the Temple of Juno, remarkable for the Ora∣cles, which by way of dream, resolv'd all those who consulted it concerning future Events: I know not whether any thing of this Temple be remaining, as they assure us; but this is certain, that in the Brazzo di Maina there are the ruines and reliques of many Noble and Magnificent Buildings to be seen, preserv'd as well by the valour of the Inhabitants, as the barrenness of the
Countrey, which has taken away either the power or inclination of Forreign Nations to invade and destroy them. Nor have the Turks been able hitherto to supplant them. Bytilo is a large Village call'd formerly Oeti∣los: and as out of Oetilos is form'd by cor∣ruption Bytilo; so the Italian Pilots have corrupted the name of Bytilo, and call'd it Vitoulo. The Harbour is large, and we an∣chor'd there at sixteen or eighteen fathom water, which would make it an excellent Port, were the bottom accordingly, but 'tis cover'd with great flints, or little pebbles that hinder the anchoring, and many times cut the Cables. The wind that brings a Ship out of this Harbour must be S. W. and we would think should rather run it upon the Shore. If there be any good Swimmers in the world, or any Thieves more famous than ordinary either at Land or Sea, they are at Bytilo, in which respect the Greeks call that Town the Grand Algier. Next to Bytilo keeping close to the Coast, we came to Corotta, a place little consider∣able, either for Antiquity, or Port, which is capable only of small Vessels. From By∣tilo to Maina is near seven hours passage, and Corotta is exactly in the midst. From Maina to the point of Matapan is only two hours; and at the foot of this Cape, lies a
small Village call'd Caibares, where stood formerly the little City of Cenepolis call'd otherwise Taenarium, from the name of that Promontory; and thus ends the Western Coast of Brazzo-di-Maina. The Castle of Maina, is on the same place where formerly stood the City of Messa  not much known amongst the Ancients but for its Neighbourhood to the ruines o Hyppolae; and a hollow part of the Coas call'd by them Thyrides or the Windows▪ By the view of this Coast we concluded▪ that Maina is the same that Messa was for∣merly, and could easily collect why it wa call'd Thyrides; for observing the Coast from our Ship, we discerned several Grottos cut in it, and dispos'd in such a manner, that they look'd like a continued row of win∣dows, and I will tell you hereafter how they are us'd to that purpose. There are three dangerous Rocks at the mouth of the Haven of Maina; besides that it is otherwise very bad, there being scarce water enough for a Shallop, in respect o the many quick-sands and sand-banks there∣in: The Town is built round about the Port, but open every where towards the Land, as all the Towns of the Magnotti are, and indeed it is generally so all over Greece, where, unless it be Constantinople▪
and the old circumference of Andrinople, there is scarce a City that has a compleat Wall about it: formerly they had all very good Walls. The Famous Sparta was the only Town that refused them, as looking upon the Valour and Bucklers of her Inha∣bitants to be her best Rampart and Forti∣fication. Our Vessel having been at anchor a∣bout two hours, sent her Shallop with a white flag within Canon shot of the Castle, which is the formality used when Pratique or Commerce is desired with a suspected people: The Inhabitants hung out like∣wise a white flag; and a while after two or three of their Barks came on board us: Our Captain had no mind we should know his Negotiations with them, and to take off our curiosity of going a Shore, he en∣deavour'd to terrifie us with stories of the frequent insolence and rudeness of those people toward strangers; but Osman Che∣libi assured us the contrary, though there were several affirm'd that he himself would be in as much danger as any of us: How∣ever our own inclinations, and his confi∣dence prevail'd, and he put himself with us into one of the Boats of the Magnotti: we landed about a hundred paces from some of the aforesaid Grottos, out of which
we quickly perceiv'd five or six lusty Fel∣lows to come forth, arm'd with Musque∣tons and making towards us, which gave us no little alarm; their faces were black as Devils, but their clothes or the same co∣lour with the ground, which they chose on purpose for the more easie circumvention of passengers, that is to say, of one ano∣ther, for there are few Travellers to be seen in those Quarters. These Rascals do lye flat upon their bellies about fifty paces from the Rode, and appearing at that distance like so many little heaps of rubbish, a man suspects nothing, and is strangely surpriz'd to see them leap up suddenly, and come and catch them by the coller. The Magnott who conducted us, had a little barrel of Brandy in his hand that we had given him; he proffer'd it to these honest Fellows to drink, who being much pacified thereby, each of them took two hearty gulps, and invited us very civilly into their Dens: Os∣man Chelibi encouraged us to go along, but we durst not trust him, and for more surety sate our selves down upon the bank. At first I was receiv'd but coldly with my Turkish Language, which at Osman's request I distributed very freely among them: I thought to have insinuated migh∣tily thereby, but they pretended not to un∣derstand
me, that I might conceive a better opinion of their Religion, and be taken with their contempt of the Mahumetans: This policy of theirs made me believe they were some of those who were to pass into Italy; and when I asked them, they con∣fessed as much. By degrees we grew some∣thing better acquainted, and in time came to some kind of confidence: We walked up and down together, and at last they brought us some of their salted Quails, which indeed are admirably good: There s no Countrey in the world that has more plenty of Quails, or better than theirs, and hey are careful to salt them up to serve hem the whole year. A Papas, or Greek Priest gave us Wine of his own growth, not t all inferiour to the Wine of Lepanthe, which at this day is the famousest Vineyard n the West of Greece: by degrees they grew very communicable, and inform'd us eadily of their Customs. It is supposed there may be about thirty housand Souls in the Brazzo-di-Maina; ut as to their Manners, never any people were represented so diversly as they are at his day: Some will have them brutish, erfidious, and naturally addicted to rob∣ery; others consider them as the true Po∣erity and remainder of the Magnanimous
Greeks, who prefer'd their Liberty to thei Lives, and by variety of great actions mad themselves terrible, or at least respected t other Nations; insomuch that their Cham¦pions maintain, that the violences and fe¦rocity of the Magnotti is but the effect o their just indignation to which they a daily provok'd by their barbarous persecu¦tions both from the Turks and the Christia Corsaires. Be it how it will, of all the Peo¦ple in Greece, there were none but the Ep¦rots (call'd the Albanians at this day) an the Magnotti (the lamentable remainder  the Lacedemonians) that were able to be up against the Turks. The Albanians we subdued 1466. in which Year their R¦nowned Prince Scanderbeg dying; at th dispersion of his Subjects and Troops,  good part of them retiring to the Magnot were kindly receiv'd, and had Quarte given them in their Caverns and Mou¦tains. As to their Religion, they preserve th of the Ancient Greeks; they have amo them many Calogers, which are Monks  the Institution of St. Basil, and several th they call Papa's or Priests: But the oth Greeks have so little esteem of their Piet that when they speak of them, they say  derision, If you would be a New Saint, yo
must go and live among the Magnotti. They have a particular Veneration for the Vir∣gin Mary, for St. George, and for St. Deme∣trius, who is the Protector of Greece. Up∣on the top of their Mountains they have a multitude of little Chappels dedicated to the Prophet Elias, whom they account the first person that imbrac'd a Monastick Life. The whole Coast is full of Grottos cut in he Rock, which are used as Cells or Her∣mitages for their Calogers, who are as so many Sentinels to discover the Ships at Sea, and when any appear, they repair imme∣diately to the Town to give Alarm to the Governour, and prepare the people either for their Defence or Prize: This is the use that is made of the Thyrides or Windows that we have mentioned before. The Calogers in the other parts of Greece by the Rules of their Institution, have the priviledge of Commerce, and may trade for Wines, Fruit, Honey, Oyles, and in general, for all the effects of their own industry and labour: But the Calogers of the Brazzo-di-Maina go farther, and have liberty of Piracy, and in excuse of their hostilities, they pretend slily when they go to Sea, that they go only to secure the tenths of the Prize in behalf of the Church; whereas in truth there is nothing excites them so
much as the desire of plunder; and when they meet with any Prize, they need no speak twice to bid them lay them aboard▪ and yet there are among them very Piou Men, and strict in their Lives. The Greek that is vulgarly spoken among the Magnotti, is the most corrupt of al other; for having a constant Trade by rea∣son of the Commodities which they take by Piracy; and Trafficking one day with on Nation, and another day with another they are much accustom'd to the Languag which they call the Franck; an ill favour'd kind of Italian that makes use of the Infi∣nitive of every Verb, to express all the Ten∣ses and Moods of every Conjugation; and yet for all that lame and imperfect way, i understood and spoke in most parts of the Levant. The greatest Trade of the Mag¦notti is slaves: They take all the Prisoner they can catch, both Christians and Turks  the Turks they sell to the Christians, an the Christians to the Turks. They are so far from concealing, or be¦ing asham'd of their Piracies, that they boas of them, and take delight in giving a Re¦lation. I found by their vanity in thos descriptions that they were true Greeks  and had learn'd of their Ancestors the A of flourishing and embellishing their Ex¦ploits:
They carried me to one of their Grand Corsaires, and shew him as a person who had done strange things above the or∣dinary rate. When in the Countrey it was known that he was preparing to go to Sea, the Alarm was generally taken, the Pa∣rents that had handsom Children, and the Husbands that had handsom Wifes lock'd them up carefully for fear this good Gen∣tleman should spirit them, and sell them in∣to other Countries: they are in the same apprehension when any strange Vessel comes in; for if any of the Magnot Corsaires has a quarrel to any of his Neighbours, their Wives or Children pay for it, and are stolen the next opportunity. When I was a slave at Birette, I had for my Comrade a young Greek who had been sold by the Magnotti; he was only Son and Heir to the best Fami∣ly in Modon, which is a considerable Town in Morea. A rich Turk in that City, famous for oppressing the Christians, had an itch∣ing after the young Mans Estate, and not finding a cleaverer way, he contracted with the Magnotti, who took their opportunity, whipp'd him away, and sold him to a Vessel belonging to Bizerti. Not many dayes before we came to an anchor in the Road of Maina, there hap∣pen'd a pleasant accident in the Cabans be∣twixt
Maina and Bytilo: Two of the Mag∣notts, one of them call'd Theodoro, the o∣ther Anapliottis (both great Corsaires, both married, and formerly great friends) fall∣ing out about the division of a Barque which they had taken from the Venetian, and pil∣laged; in revenge, unknown to one ano∣ther, at the same time they enter'd upon a design of stealing one anothers Wives; and it succeeded on both sides: They knew there was in the Road at the same time a Corsaire of Malta: Theodoro got the Wife of Anapliottis, and away he went with her to the Ship, but could by no means come to an agreement with the Corsaire about the Prize; for having viewed and considered her well, the Corsaire refused to give what he demanded, and told him, it was not two hours since he had bought another much handsomer for half the money; and that Theodoro might be satisfied he spake truth, he commanded her to be brought up; She was produc'd, and Theodoro found it was his own Wife, and that Anapliottis had been before-hand with him; He was strangely surprized, yet thought not so much of rescuing his own Wife, as pressing the Maltese to take the other at his own rate; that when the whole story came out, (as one day it was likely it would) it might
be known that both the good Women were sold at the discretion of the Pirate, and that he might not be alone the perpetual subject of mockery and disgrace: But Ana∣pliottis missing his Consort, and understand∣ing her condition, armed out a Shallop (and Theodoro in spight of the quarrel join∣ing with him) they made up to him, and so hectored the poor Pirate, that he was forced to deliver them, or otherwise he must have ruined the rest of his Affairs in that Country. The Husbands, by interpo∣sition of their friends, were so perfectly re∣conciled, that two days after they were Cruising again together in the same Vessel, and looking for Prize: They might have been Divorced from their Wives if they had desired it; for nothing is more common a∣mong the Greeks; but they were both good natured and took them again. Not far from Maina we were carried in∣to a long Cabin, in which there were two large Rooms hung with Cloaths, one side a la Turque, the other a la Françcois; here hung the Turbans, there the Calpas or Greek Bonnets; here the Sabers, there our Couteaux or short Swords; here our Shoes, and there the Turkish Chippins. This Wardrobe was the Spoils and Trophies of many victories at Sea, where sparing no bo∣dy,
they make all Fish that comes into their Net. They offered us very good peny∣worths, and a young Piemontois of our company, called Bertaldi, bought a very fair Vest that had been taken from a Greek Merchant of the Isle of Engia, which is an Island not far from Athens: For my part I had not the courage that Bertaldi had; Cloths that are gained in that unjustifiable manner, are many times owned, and great mischiefs do fall out to the buyers. The Turks are every day sensible of the Cunning and Courage of the Magnotti, see∣ing their Vessels with Officers and Provisi∣ons for their Camp before Candy, many times intercepted by them. The Turks, however provoked, durst never formally invade them, or ingage their Troops in those hideous Mountains: instead of down∣right attacks, they have thought it more prudent to debauch some of the most mu∣tinous of the people, and make a Faction among them. The Grand Visier has reciev∣ed and swallowed a thousand insolencies from them, which they did to revenge the death of ten or twelve of their Corsairs taken in the year 1667. and impaled in Candy by his order. They have come of∣ten in the night and burned his Ships under the very Canon at Canea, and got off with∣out
much difficulty; for their Vessels are nimble sailers, draw but little water, and will run any where, where another will strike. To pacifie them, and furnish him∣self the better, the Grand Visier offered them double the price for all Provisions they will bring in; but his proposition being rejected, he sent a Squadron to infest their Coast under the Command of Ássam Baba the famous Corsair and best Seaman the Turks have; and indeed the very man, who having committed so many insufferable Vi∣olences upon several French Vessels, gave just occasion for the Complaints which our Ambassadors made against him, and was a great cause of the jealousies betwixt the two Crowns. Assam Baba having appeared with his Squadron of four Ships before Mai∣na, hung out his White Flag; promised an amnesty, and proposed to them to send Com∣missioners to Treat with him. They suspect∣ed it was but a design, and those of the Magnotti who were most disposed for Mu∣tiny, replyed only with their Muskets and long Guns, of which they have great store. The Alarm was taken all over the Country, and they sent in great confusion to raise the third man quite thorow that Canton, ap∣pointing several Rendezvouses at Sytrè and Adrabysta, two of their principal Villages:
In the mean time the Inhabitants of Maina carried all the best of their Goods to the top of their Rocks. It was a spectacle of strange confusion to see them haling their Wives and Children along those terrible Precipices; and the Old and the Lame limp∣ing along, with each of them a great bundle at their backs, and driving before them their Flocks of Goats, which is the chief wealth of that Country. But the Women came back, and were present at the defence of their Shore, and by an accident that I cannot omit. It hapned that a young man in the mid∣dle of their March, overtaking one of the Women who had a Child of three days old at her breast, told her that her Husband had sent him after her to enquire where she had laid his Sword and Fuzil in the hurry. Tell him (replied the woman in a passion) that he come and look to my Goats, and my Child, and I will fetch his Arms and use them better than he; and thereupon having put her Child into the arms of an old woman that was next her, she took her course directly to the Shore, and gave an Example to all the rest, who following her unanimously, came and put themselves at the head of their Militia that was already arrived at Adrabysta, and Syrtè;
it fell out to be at the same time as Assam-Baba was sending his Shallops on shore with Armed Men to repel them; but the cries and comminations which these women sent up to Heaven; and the marks of courage and undauntedness which she showed, did exceedingly incourage the Magnotti, and made Assam-Baba unwilling to hazard a descent. The Woman who animated them in that manner was of the House of Giracaris, which was the most ancient and most considerable Family in that Quarter. The next night ten or twelve of the Mag∣notti swam secretly to the Turkish Ships, and cut their Cables in such manner, that being dashed together by the agitation of the Sea, they fell foul upon one another; were driven violently upon the shore, and several of their Men taken Prisoner, where they were plundered in sight of the two other Ships, which, by reason of the shal∣lowness of the Water durst not attempt to relieve them. This way of infesting of Ships is ordinary among the Magnotti, who are excellent Swimmers. The Vessel where Assam-Baba was in person was saved; yet this advantage obtained against a man that was the very Soul of the Turkish Fleet, gave the Magnotti such incouragement that they took the confidence to intrench themselves
regularly at Cerifo, Maina, Collocythia, Cardamile, and Sytrè; for till that time their Mountains were their refuge upon all occasions. The Grand Visier, who did not think this an Enterprize worthy of his Force, betook himself to an Artifice: He had certain of the Magnotti Prisoners, and among the rest one Lybiracis a considera∣ble Person in his own Country. He found out a way to seduce them, and having dis∣charged them, after he had loaden them with money and private instruction, they undertook their design, and by their pra∣ctises, with their acquaintance in the Braz∣zo, brought it about, that the greatest parts of the Inhabitants being frighted or corrupted, consented that the Grand Visier should build a Cittadel at Porto-Caglie, and another at Bytilo, under pretence of securing the liberty of Trade; for at first they were unwilling to alarm them with the name of Dominion. When the two Cittadels were defensible, the persons whom the Turk had debauched, seized of all such as they thought capable of oppos∣ing their Treason, and hung up five or six of the most active among them. In this the Turks gave great evidence of their cun∣ning; nothing appeared to be done by their order; great formality was used in forming
the process against those poor Creatures, who were condemned (forsooth) as distur∣bers of the publick repose; and Executi∣on done in the name, and by the authority of the whole body of the Magnotti. But their Eyes being opened at last, in spight of their subtilty, there grew to be two Fa∣ctions among them, one of the Giracaris, the other of the Lybiracis; and this at pre∣sent is the great object of the Turkish de∣signs, who would fain reduce this people to a condition of destroying themselves, without any Force or Invasion from them. The Posts which the Turks have forti∣fied in the Brazzo, are each of them secured by an Aga, with a certain number of Jani∣zaries under his Command. But this new servitude growing insupportable to the Magnotti, they have had thoughts of tran∣splanting into Italy; and that inclination is increased as oft as they see those Cittadels, which they look upon as the first step to their slavery: However, they are as yet ir∣resolute, and who can admire it in an affair of so tender an importance? 'Tis probable the success at Candia will settle their minds, and what that will be, God only knows; If it be fatal to the Turks, they will not venture to attack them, but seem to disown the Mutineers who will doubtless be sup∣ported
by the Venetian. If the Grand Vi∣sier takes the Town, his Victory there wil draw on the subversion of the Republick o the Magnotts, either by means of the Con∣sternation it will cause among them, or o the Effort the Turks will be constrained to make, that they may leave nothing in all Greece considerable enough to give them apprehension. The Creatures which the Grand Visier imployed among the Mag∣notti, were every day insinuating into the people, and especially the Papas, and Colo∣gers, that the Turks would allow them their Churches and Crosses upon their Steeples, and publick Market places, a priviledge of which the Greeks are generally very fond; and all those who are dependent of the Turk, have often endeavoured to purchase at no inconsiderable rate. They do like∣wise promise the Magnotti exemption from the Tax upon Children, and that they shall pay but one half of the duty exacted in Morea, where every Male pays two Crowns a head. At Constantinople the Males pay three Crowns. On the Terra firma the Wo∣men pay nothing, but in the Isles of the Archipelago Men and Women pay equally two Crowns a piece; and all this without diminution of their other Taxes, of which I shall speak elsewhere; all which were to
be excused to the Magnotti: and to inveigle them yet farther, they assured them that no Turk shall ever be permitted to live in their Country, but such Janizaries as will be necessary for the Garrisoning their Forts. These fair promises are the more plau∣sible, having the reputation of the Grand Visiers word to secure them, who passes a∣mong them as a Man of great Sincerity and Honour; on which score they cease not to cry up his rare Qualities to the skies, who in our dayes has found out a way (as the Turks themseves say) of distinguishing him∣self with advantage from the Greatest and Most Heroick Persons of their Nation: He has as they say, the infallibility of Con∣quering, with a peculiar Gift of keeping his Parole. Nevertheless among the Mag∣notti this reputation has no great influence upon such as have an aversion to the Turks, who to support those that are tottering, do as often inculcate the resolution of the Turks, to allow them but one Church in a Town, which is a menace that makes them commonly tremble. In a word, the most prudent and best dis∣posed of the Magnotti do intend to trans∣plant, rather than be subject to the Tyran∣ny of the Turks; and accordingly they
have sent to the Pope to beg admission in∣to the Patrimony of the Church; and to the Great Duke into Tuscany; but having been denied by both, they Addressed to the Republick of Genoa, which State re∣flecting upon the brutishness of the Inhabi∣tants of Corsica, was the more inclinable to gratifie them, upon consideration that the barbarity of the Magnotti must be very great, if it out-did the rudeness of the Cor∣sicans: This is most certain, if the late Treaty succeeds, never Nations will be bet∣ter matched; their intermarriages must needs produce Children which will be so many Master-pieces of ferocity; for, which of the Corsicans is it, that having the least quarrel with another, begins not his decla∣ration of hostility with a stab? and if he misseth, his Adversary will be sure of him; so natural to them is the spirit of revenge: Some of these Corsicans have been known upon an injury received to lye hid a fort∣night together in the bushes, contenting themselves to brouze all that while upon Raisins, so they did but prosper in their ambush. This then is the present condition of the last Common-wealth among the Greeks, and if you will have the truth, the matter is not great; for were it not in so much
danger of the Turk as it is at this time, it would be always within two fingers breadth of destruction, by animosities among them∣selves, and the small reputation they have among strangers, who having no alliances with them, have no obligation of interest to relieve them, unless upon some pressing necessity, as there lies now upon the Ve∣netians. On the seventh of April our Astronomer Bianchi took the height of the Pole at Mai∣na, and made use of all possible precauti∣on to reduce its Meridian to the Meridian of Ʋranisburgh, establishing their difference of 54 minutes of time; for he Calculated the place of the Sun, by the Radical Tables of Kepler: He found the Pole Elevated 4 degrees and 25 minutes. You know very well, that in the Mediterranean, the Elevation of the Pole is never taken but in curiosity. Those practises are used only in ong Voyages. But in the Levant-Seas, be∣ng almost continually in sight of Land they ectifie their Course by the prospect of the Coasts; and when by foul weather, or the owness of the shore they are not visible, hey take advice of their Pilots, and point heir Chart accordingly; so by their Com∣ass they guess probably of the course of heir Ship, and by their judgement and ex∣perience
they pronounce of the place whe they think they are arriv'd, but many tim they are guilty of very foul mistakes. O Bianchi would needs make experiment like wise about the variation of the Needle, an was amaz'd at the Opinion of several Pilot who maintained, that at the Point of M¦rea the Needle would not vary at all: H tryed the Experiment two or three seven wayes, and found by all of them, that  declin'd two degrees fifteen minutes fro North to N. W. The seventh of April in the Evening w had scarce got on Board, before our Bo was furiously tossed, and for three hou together suffered great agitation by th strong current of waters that is frequent i all the Western Coast of Greece: The w¦ters do run naturally towards the shore, an when their violence is opposed by th winds from the shore, the Ships are alwa tossed as ours was at that time by a stron N. N. W. wind which blows constant from Land: But the Sea was nothing  rough in that Quarter, as I observ'd it tw years since upon the Coast of Natolia:  was then in a Galley of Bizerte passing fro the Isle of Cyprus to Rhodes, where o Slaves had opportunity to exercise the Arms, and show their dexterity at the Oa
against the impetuosity of the current from the Gulf of Satalia, which reaches from Cape Sardeni upon the Terra firma to Cape Saint Epiphano at the Western Point of Cy∣prus. I hope in the continuation of my Voyage, I shall have occasion to observe the Currents which come down the Channel from the Black Sea to the Mer-de-Mar∣mora, and from thence into the Archipe∣lago by the mouth of the Dardenelles; then I shall be able to give you an account of them; but for those upon the Coasts of Maina, and in the Gulf of Satalia I can assure you by my own observation, and the report of the best Pilots in the Countrey, that they have three different sorts of Mo∣tion conformable to the nature of the Tydes in the Ocean, which have their dead wa∣ters, and their quick waters in three seve∣ral fashions, yet all those motions equally proceeding from the impression of the rays of the Moon upon the mass of the waters. These Currents therefore have a peculiar Motion every day, for their force redou∣bles according to the propinquity of the Moon to the Meridian, and relaxes when She is farther off. They have a Motion likewise for every month which increases towards the New or Full Moons, and to∣wards the first and last Quarter; and the
third Motion (which is the most impetuou of all) is a sort of Motion that happen eight times a Year, that is to say, in the New and Full Moons, at the two Aequi∣noxes, and the two Solstices. Not having had a Full Moon of twenty dayes near the Vernal Aequinox, I was curious to enquire of the Seamen at Maina how the force o the Current had been there during that time, and they assured me, that for two dayes together, (viz.) the 19. and 20. o March the waters came down upon the Coast with more than ordinary violence, and they shew me a place in the Banks where the water had got in, and transgrest its old limits above a Musket shot, and this with∣out any wind either to assist or oppose it, for commonly the wind contributes much either one way or other. Our Captains private Affairs being dis∣patch'd, and the Magnotts having nothing farther wherewith to detain us; we weigh∣ed Anchor the seventh of April in the Even∣ing, the Sea being something calmer, and took our leaves of this rude kind of Peo∣ple. Having left the Old Castle de Maina to the Eastward, to gain the Wind and double the Cape of Metapan, we were forced to stand out to Sea, and fetch a greater Com∣pass
with our Ship: As we were steering to the South to avoid the dangerous Rock of Renesta (which lies about a good League from the shore) we heard a great thunder∣ing of Canon that way towards which we were sailing: The Soldier that was Senti∣nell upon the Scuttle could see nothing by reason of the height of the Coasts, but we, having no maw to ingage in other mens quarrels, declin'd them, slackning our sails because we would not straggle too far from the place where we were: But the noise of the Guns ceasing, we sail'd on to the East∣ward, and doubled the Cape that was for∣merly so Famous for the adventure of Ari∣on, to whom we are obliged for our Con∣sorts in Musick, he being the first who taught us to sing in Parts. The story how the Dolphin preserv'd him when he was Ship-wrack'd not far from Tenara, is too well known to be troublesome to you here. The Mountains of this Cape, and gene∣rally all of them that inclose the Brazzo-di-Maina had their tops cover'd over with Snow, but at the foot of them great Herds of Cattle and Goats. The Skie was full of Crows, and they came so near us, that we were sufficiently molested with their noise. It is not imaginable what abundance they
have of Deer, wild Boars and Bears. Not far off, we saw a vast number of Sea-hogs, or (if you will have them under a better title) Dolphins following our Ship, and rang'd, according to their custom, two and two, a Male and a Female, and the Male always behind: They did not swim quiet∣ly as other fishes do, but were still leaping up and falling down again into the waters, which our Seamen interpreted an infallible prognostick of ill weather. I never saw so many Dolphins as in that place, more ca∣mus'd, nor flatter heads, which is the beau∣ty of that sort of fish: It was easie to di∣stinguish which of them were most hand∣som; several of them had long heads which were not so comely, but all of them threw up their noses into the air, and gave us ou choice. Our Seamen would needs have it, that they threw up their heads in that man∣ner, the better to hear the word Simon  which they roar'd out as loud as they could call, supposing they follow'd them there∣by: For my part, I think they did it for more convenient respiration; for the Dol∣phin is a foggy fish, and almost stifled if i lies long under water without air. I wil not meddle with the secret sympathie whic renders this fish naturally kind to Man, and tames it so easily to our hand: Such Pro¦blems
as these, are the rocks of Reason, upon which the curious do too frequently split. Our Virtuosi (being full of their Learned Ideas, and lying as it were at catch for any thing that might give new light to their old Notions) proposed to themselves an Experiment about these Dolphins; they resolved to take two or three of them with their harping-irons; (and if they took one they might take a hundred, their amity one for another, not suffering them to part) the design was to dissect a Female, and examine the form of her belly, her breast, the si∣tuation of her Aspera arteria, and the com∣munication betwixt her lungs and her no∣stril; that if possible we might find out whether in the structure and fabrick of this fish, there might not be some secret analo∣gie with the Inwards of a man, to which (for want of better reason) we might ascribe their kindness, and strange inclina∣tion to our Sex: But we discover'd that the inclination of Man was more powerful to them; for the Italian Marriners would not endure that we should do them any mis∣chief, calling them the Companions of their Voyage, and the faithful Sentinels, who by their leaping and playing upon the Wa∣ters, do give them constant notice of any tempest approaching; and by this means our Experiment was lost.
But the sight of Tenara gave us another contemplation. The passage into Hell (if you will believe the Antients) is there, and Cerberus tyed there by Proserpine to guard it. This is certain, on the middle of the Mountain there is a dismal hole to be seen, that was formerly consecrated to Nep∣tune: the entrance is so horrid, and the depth so immense, that it gave occasion to that opinion that it went down into Hell: That it was by that Hercules descended, Hector'd Pluto in the midst of his Estates, and in defiance of him, brought away his Three-headed Dog. 'Tis the common opi∣nion at this day, quite through the Brazzo di Maina, that by this hole the Devil comes out a hunting every day in the shape of a Hound. In this Mountain Tenara there was found formerly good Crystal of the Rock, seve∣ral sorts of Metals, and some Precious Stones; The Greeks say the Veins are as fruitful as ever, but that the Inhabitants conceal it, for fear it should invite the Turks, and bring them sooner into their Country. At the foot of Cape Matapan towards the N. N. E. the old Castle is to be seen; from this Castle the Coast runs two Leagues N.E. as far as the Port of Colocythia, called an∣ciently
the Port of Achilles: There the an∣choring is good, but not so good as at Porto-Caglie, a Haven about seven Leagues di∣stance from the Cape. To enter into the Harbour at Porto-Caglie we kept to the Southward Coast, where we found sixteen Fathom water: Towards the North, with∣in Pistol-shot of the Shore, great care is to be had of a Rock, which is the more dan∣gerous because it lies almost just level with the water. Our Anchorage here is in danger of nothing but a South-East wind; The Town is large, (and in it one of the best Fountains in the world) it was called in former days Teuthrone, and was once a Co∣lony of Athenians. Here it is that the Sea makes a great Arch in the Shore, to form the Gulf of Colochina, heretofore called the Gulf of Laconia. In this manner our Vessel sailed on to the Southward of Saint Angelo, where we were to double the Point. On the Shore from Porto-Caglie, towards the North, we found the place which was cal∣led in former times the Temple of Jupiter, and two large Rivers, where the Barks did frequently supply themselves with fresh wa∣ter. The River that lies Northward of the other, retains still the quality of its water, which passed among the Ancients for the most pure and delicate, and least sub∣ject
to corruption in all Greece. The Inha∣bitants call it only Potamo, which signifies a River; but Pyrrhus called it Scyras, from the name of the Island Scyros, where he Imbarqued when he came into this Country to his Nuptials with Hermione. Beyond the River, the Coast runs into a Point, upon which stands the Town of Pagana, which name though it be the most commonly given, it is called likewise Pago, Gade Pagou, or to pronounce it more just∣ly, Cape de Pago; the Ancients called it the Promontory of Diana Dictynna, and the Town is built of the ruines of the old City Las; its scituation is easily known by three Mountains, Hama, Ilion, and Cuacadion▪ formerly famous for the Trophies erected there after the Macedonian defeat; as likewise for the Temples which Castor and Pollux built in that place, at their return from the Conquest of the Fleece. About half a League S.W. from Pagana, is the little Island called Spatara, and three Leagues E. N. E. o Spatara lies the City of Colochina, upon the firm land near the mouth of the famous Ri∣ver Eurothas, which passes by Mysithre o Lacedaemon, as you please. On the eighth of April in the morning▪ as we were within sight of Pagana, the win began to rise, and increased so fast, tha
we grew fearful of a Storm. It drove us near enough the Shore to discover the large and long Reeds which grow in the mouth of the Eurotas, and they put us in mind of the Lacedemonians who made Mats of them formerly to lie upon. This River is now called Bazili Potamo, or, the Royal River, and might be made Navigable seven or eight Leagues up, for there is water enough, but then it is so narrow there is not room to turn, and scarce for another Vessel to pass. Our apprehension of ill weather, made us resolve to put in at the little Isle of Spa∣tara, formerly famous by the name of Cra∣naz: But what think you did we find in a little Creek where we put in for shelter be∣cause the anchorage was good? We found two Vessels, who coming the same road with us, and driven with the same wind, had put in there not above two hours be∣fore. You will be surprized when I tell you that one of those Vessels was the Chri∣stian Corsair who had changed his Colours upon us so often, and treated us so inso∣lently. The other was a Turkish Vessel laden with Janizaries for Candia, that the Corsair had taken after very great re∣sistance; and it was the noise of that Com∣bate that we had heard when we were off
of Matapan. Lest the Corsair should be∣gin a new Quarel with us, on point of Ce∣remony, we Saluted him, and Lowr'd our Sails: We had scarce come to an anchor, when by good fortune the Wind veer'd to the South, and a great Rain falling, the Storm ceased. Our Captain sent his Shal∣lop a shore, and in it his Mate, to salute the Pirate; our curiosity would needs make us accompany the Mate, where we found the Pirate very busie; his Vessel shot through and through in several places, took water in such plenty, that all her Pumps (though they wrought continually) were not sufficient to clear her: This was a mani∣fest sign that the Turk had defended herself well; but we perceived also that the Turk had been as ill treated, for her Tackling was in the greatest disorder imaginable; no Sails, no Cables, no Masts, but every thing in most desperate condition, and the relation we had of it was this. The San∣giac or Governour of Modon, had sent a Turkish Vessel with Ammunition and three hundred Janizaries to the Siege of Candy. It was the misfortune of this Ship, to meet our Corsair in the same height of debauche∣ry, and the same impatience of being at mischief as we left him; so that without the least scruple or hesitation the Corsair
fell to work upon the Turk, who defended herself very well; received and returned some hundreds of shot. But the Corsair observing store of Janizaries upon the Deck, changed his design of laying her on Board as he intended, and betook himself to his Granado's and Bosses (which are a sort of Glass-bottles very thin and square, and holding about six pounds of Pouder, o which they give fire in four several pla∣ces, by so many pieces of Match fastned hereunto.) Their execution was so terri∣bly great, that it burned or lamed the great∣est part of the Janizaries; this was evi∣dent by the strange consternation and ter∣rour that it produc'd in those that were left, who not knowing how to secure them∣selves against them, sate down quietly one by another with their arms a-cross, and their heads hanging down, as people that were utterly lost, and had nothing to do but to submit to their destiny. All their refuge was in the word Alla, Alla, which they repeated often to themselves with a low and humble voice; so that their Vessel being surrender'd, they were imme∣diately clap'd into Chains. The Conque∣rour, forced by the violence of the wind, and the necessity of mending, was come to an anchor at Spatara. We arrived just as
her Equipage quitted the Turkish Shi which was ready to sink under them. Ou Companions knew nothing, but by hear say, of the obduracy and natural insolenc of the Corsairs, but they had then time t inform themselves. The Christian Seame in the mean time did but deride and moc at the Janizaries, jeering and imitatio their cries and their postures; sometime hanging down their own heads, and some∣times forcing them to hang down theirs▪ and when it was resolved (their Ship being sinking) to put them on Shore, they shuv'd them into a Boat together in a heap, lam or wounded as they came to hand, with  out any compassion; and certainly they would have done it more gently had they been removing of Billets. The cruelty o this spectacle began to work upon us, and Bianchi could not but beg of the Seame to show more pity to those miserable crea∣tures. But one of their Officers looking sternly upon him (in a word) with the eye of a Corsair, Would to God, said he, you were to pass only three or four months in the clutches of an Algerine, we should the see what your tenderness would be for these dogs: The poor Italian had not a word more to say, but shrunk up his shoulders and went off. Not but many Christian Of∣ficers
may be found who abhor such barba∣ity in their Souls, but in policy they are obliged to dissemble it to incourage their Men, to flesh them upon the Turks, and to earn them to give no better quarter to those Infidels, than they are to expect from them. Whilst we were in this Island, one of our Cabal remembred that here it was where the famous Helen condescended, and gave Paris the first undeniable evidence of her kindness; He assured us likewise, that up∣on the Continent right against the said place of his first fruition, the happy Lover erect∣ed a Temple to Venus, as a testimony of his gratitude and felicity. He gave like∣wise to Venus the attribute of Migonitis, and call'd her Territory Migonion, refer∣ring to the amorous mystery that had been accomplished there. Menelaus the unhappy Husband of that delicate Princess, eighteen years after she was carried away, made a visit to that Temple which was then a Mo∣nument both of his misfortune, and the disloyalty of his Wife. He would not de∣molish it, only upon each side of the Sta∣tue of Venus, he caused to be erected the Images of another Goddess; that is to say, on one side Thetis, on the other side Pra∣xidice, or the Goddess of Correction; to
shew that he desired she would not leave his Wives infidelity unpunish'd: But Hel∣len survived him for all that, and he neve lived to see that injury reveng'd; she out-liv'd him, as is said before: but being a length banish'd by Nicostrates and Mega∣penthe, she repair'd to Rhodes to a near Re∣lation of hers call'd Prolixo, who Com∣manded in that Isle; but instead of being treated as she expected, he caused her to be hanged upon a tree: Thousands have mentioned the story of Helen, who never knew any thing of her end. There was another object which much delighted us likewise, and that was, when directing our eyes on shore towards the place where we conceived the Temple of Venus had been, we were entertained with the sight of Mont Larissus, (at about a quarter of a Leagues distance) which is at this day an excellent Vineyard. We were told, the first ripe Grapes that were found in all Greece, was upon that Coast. We saw also a small Chappel and a little Cell of Calagers, probably in the same place where the Temple of Bacchus was built, that was anciently so famous for the Feasts which the Grecians from all parts of Greece came thither every spring to solemnize in memo∣ry of that great discovery.
The prospect of this beautiful Coast, and he pleasant reflections which it gave us, would have entertained us much longer, ad not our Captain given us notice to re∣urn. He had intelligence that the Chri∣tian Corsaire began to be jealous of us; nd that being conscious he had offended s, and withal sensible, that his own weak∣ess and embarasment might incourage us o revenge it, he might well be tempted s by way of prevention) to endeavour omething (unexpectedly) upon us; where∣ore we took the hint, and went immedi∣tely on board: Besides we were afraid hat the Corsaire returning our Visit, his nvoys should find Osman Chelebi, and seize n him as one of his prisoners that had scaped. Osman was much troubled at the misfor∣ne of the Janizaries, but he said nothing hatever he thought. The weather began  be fair and favourable, so we hoised our ils, and took our leaves of the Pirate, who  we heard since mended her Ship, burn'd e Turk, sold half her prisoners to the agnotti, and carried the rest along into hristendom. Sailing towards the East, we left Colo∣ina to the North of us; the Ancients ll'd it formerly Gytheon, and it was the
Arsenal for all the Lacedemonian Sea. T Inhabitants of this place would never o their Original to any People of the Eart but boasted themselves a Colonie from He¦ven, and that Apollo and Hercules who h great Controversie in this Country, bei at last reconcil'd, they built this Gythe and peopl'd it themselves. The Country  uneven, full of hills and dales, but abou with admirable fountains of fresh water.  would not have it thought impertinent th I make mention so frequently of the Sprin 'tis the best instruction that can be given  such Ships as sail that way. The Turks call Colochina by corrupt Koutguina; from whence to the Cape  St. Angelo that Coast runs E. S. E. Up the Sea side stands Tsyli in the same pla where Trinasus stood of old; and next  that stands Sapico built out of the ruines  Acriae. The next Town to Sapico is Por Rapani or Rapini, where the City of  ronthrae stood formerly, where there  also excellent springs. The Port of Rap is discernible afar off, especially from  S. S. E. by reason of two very round Mo¦tains in the mouth of the Harbour. Ab two Leagues distance towards the S. E.  the Esapo or Esopo, which was the Anci Asopu. The Inhabitants of which place
the time of the Roman Dominion, having Observ'd that many great Towns had Con∣secrated Temples to particular Emperours, erected a new one, and dedicated it to all the Emperours past, present, and to come. Eight Leagues S. E. of Asopus lies the Cape of Sancta Maria; which Cape was by the Ancients call'd Onugnato, or the Jaw-bone of an Ass. South West of the Cape de Sancta Mar∣ia in the Chanel of Cerigo lies the Island of Cervi, call'd formerly Platanistunte: This Island, and the Island of Cerigo lie North East and South West one of another. The Isle of Cervi lies a good League from the Terra firma, and the Isle of Cerigo from the Isle of Cervi four Leagues. The froth of the Canal that formerly parted these two Islands, was the occasion of the birth of Ve∣nus, who was carried in the shell of a Fish to the Isle of Cerigo, call'd formerly Cythe∣ea. The Venetians, the present Masters of this Island, have a good Castle upon the top of a Mountain; the Coasts of it are all very high, particularly those towards the firm Land: The anchoring in some places is but indifferent, but on the East and South side it is very good. To the Eastward of Sancta Maria, not far from the Cape of St. Angelo lies the
Gulf of Lavadia, with a great Town of the same name. Here was the Ancient City o Boeae, built of old by one of the Sons o Hercules. The whole Coast abounds with Myrtles as formerly, when Diana her sel made choice of it. For her Town of Boeae  and the Town of St. Angelo (which give name to the Cape) are not far from it. Thi Cape was call'd Anciently Malea, and is a this day call'd Maleo by several good Pi∣lots: It lies E. N. E. of the Cape de Ma∣tapan, affording a large Spring which run out of a Cave, and great store of people. On Wednesday the 10. of April, the wind blowing cross from the Eastward, we wer obliged to slacken our sails; but coming fair the next day, we doubled the Cape, and steer'd Northward in sight of the Wester Coast of the Country of the Lacedemoni¦ans or Laconia, which in vulgar Greek i at this day call'd Tzaconia, and sometime Saccania. The thirteenth of April, the da before Palm Sunday we met an English Ves∣sel betwixt the Isle of Caravi (eight good Leagues from the Cape de St. Angelo) an the Island of Bella Pola that is ten. Th Island or Rock of Caravi is a black Roc of the figure of a Ship, from whence it re¦ceives the name of Caravi, which in com¦mon Greek is a Ship. The English Vesse
had furl'd the sails of her main Mast, at∣tending another English Ship of her Com∣pany, but not so good a sailer; not long after the wind came about to the East, but blew so gently, that we were becalm'd for some hours: This gave opportunity to the English Gentleman (call'd, as I take it, Dre∣slington) to go on board that Vessel, to see if he could find any of his Friends that could give him any news from Constantino∣ple, from whence that Vessel came; and the wind beginning to blow again, in six hours he returned: The said Gentleman had learn'd there, that every moment news was expected of the surrender of Candia: That for some dayes it had been reported and believed, that the Grand Signior was killed by a fall from his horse, as he was hunting upon the Mountains of Thessaly not far from Larissa; but that the last Post had assured them that the fall was not con∣siderable, and that the Grand Signior was very well. After this he gave us a relation of a great insolence that had been commit∣ted at Pera towards Monsieur Hodges Trea∣surer to the English Company in the Le∣vant: Hodges (being return'd from taking the air with some other persons of Quality of his own Nation, and not giving way to a black Eunuch who belonged to the Se∣raglio,
and was passing on horseback tho∣row the same street) was treated with in∣sufferable ill language, and indeed such as strangers may well expect from the ferocity of the Turks; upon which our English Ca∣merade took occasion to enquire how a man was to comport himself in Constanti∣nople: other advised him above all things to be cautious of entertaining in∣trigues with the Ladies, and remonstrated the danger of them by an account he gave of an amorous adventure, in which the per∣son that related it, had a particular share: It is fresh enough in my memory, and I will give you a recital, but with no farther as∣surance that it is true, than the bare asseve∣ration of the Gentleman who told it: And this I hope will be a testimony of my com∣placency, and how much respect I bear to your desire, that I should communicate eve the slightest adventures in my travels. An old shew Jew, who traffick'd in Jewel in the best houses of Constantinople, drov a Trade likewise with such strangers as ar∣rived at Pera; and her access was the mor easie, because she spake Spanish perfectly well, which, as you know, is at this day  language common to all the Jews in Greece She was a Woman of intrigue, and he brains were not alwayes working upon he
Jewels. Her greatest Commerce was with young Ladies, whose Husbands were ei∣ther slain, or absent at Candia: Among the rest She had a particular intimacy with a very pretty one called Majunama, whose Husband was at that time attending the Grand Visier: About six months before, the good old Jew had fixt her eye on a young Neopolitan Gentleman who was ar∣rived at Constantinople to take a view of that place, and proceed afterwards in his Journey quite thorow the Grand Signiors Country: He was a handsom man, about eight and twenty years old, and appeared to be a person of Quality. The old Jew immediately had her designs upon him, mentioned Majunama to him, and him to Majunama, and order'd things so, that Ma∣junama had as great curiosity to see him. It is most certain these practises are more difficult there than any where; yet it does not follow, that every thing that is difficult is impossible: and the greatest obstacles were removed by a certain dexterity the old Woman had, in disguising young men in the habit of her Slaves, when she had a mind to introduce them among the Ladies. The Neopolitan was timerous and circum∣spect, and would not be brought to such an enterview but with great caution and
forecast. Besides the fear of her Relations, and the unexpected return of her Husband, he consider'd she might grow weary of her Gallant, and by an effect of her penitence or inconstancy, follow the custom of most of the Turkish Dames, who in like cases, do take such course with their Gallants, that they are never more to be heard of; a Sack, and the neighbourhood of the Sea are of great use to them in those occasions. He confessed frankly his apprehensions to the Jew, who laughing at his fears, asked him whether he would be contented if the Ladies Father and Mother were sent to him in hostage; if that would not do, he should have the Governour of the Town, but at length she prevailed over him so far that he ventured. Having been assured, that the Ladies do never rid themselves but when the performance of their Gallants is not answerable to their undertakings, he managed his stock with great prudence and oeconomy, like usurers who will generally promise more for the next day than they will give in the present: But he relapsed, and was always in his fears. After he had been eight days together locked up in his Mistrises Lodgings, lest she should cut his throat, he declared he would be gone, un∣less all the Swords and Daggers, and even
the knives in the house were brought to him at night, and laid under his bolster. Majunama offer'd in rallery, if he suspected her, to lye by him with her hands and legs bound, but all that could not shame him into better security: The good Lady, to incourage him, gave order he should have what Wine he pleased, though at first out of a principle of Religion she scrupled to let any come into her house; but in spite of her scruples, he found out a way to make her drink it her self: He was so fear-full of being poison'd, that he would nei∣ther eat nor drink any thing but what she tasted in his presence: She must take the first sip still, or nothing could satifie him: In the mean time an alarm was spread a∣broad that her Husband was return'd from Candia: The Neopolitan was dismissed, and he went away in such a fright, that he left Constantinople immediately: This report was only an invention to be quit of him, and Majunama being accustomed, and much taken with the Society of strangers, continued that Commerce by the industry of the officious Jew, who not long after brought her a French Gentleman, whose brisk and airy way was quite contrary to the timidity of her Neopolitan The first ime the Monsieur was slipp'd into her
Chamber, they had all the trouble in the world to keep him from striking up with a Flagelot he had brought in his pocket, and from running over some Corants which he by all means would have been teaching his Mistress. More than once he would have been kicking down the stairs a deaf Slave, who had not come in as soon as he was cal∣led. But this Gallant was less pleasing to the Lady than the others; she would have them brave, but not vain and obstreperous: So that Majunama was not much sorry that his Affairs called him away, and that he was obliged suddenly to leave her. He was no sooner gone, but the Jew be∣gan a new intrigue with an English Gen∣tleman, who pretended himself a rela∣tion of the Earl of Winchelsy, Ambassa∣dor from England in that Court: The Gentleman was a resolute person, but no so hair-brain'd and extravagant. Thes two Lovers no sooner saw one another but they liked exceedingly, and having a mu∣tual desire to continue their intimacy, made it their study to understand one another  thereby to increase their kindness and reci∣procal complacence. This Care and cir∣cumspection inspired them with designs no altogether unpleasant. It came into thei minds to make experiment how each o
them would, behave themselves in case it should happen, the Husband arrived and surpriz'd them together. To clear the point, each had his plot. After the English Gentleman had been a week together in her Quarters, as he was going abroad for re∣freshment, word was brought that two English Vessels were expected from Canea, and that undoubtedly if the Husband had any inclination to return, he could have no opportunity like that; That if so, there could be no danger in their meetings, be∣cause care was taken that notice should be given of their arrival, and of the number and quality of the Passengers. This was his contrivance, and by it he designed when he pleased to alarm her with a report that her husband was come, and to see thereby what shift she would make to disintangle her self in case it were true. Among all the Family of Majumana, none was so pri∣vy to her secrets as a certain young Slave called Ketevan, who was a witty lass, and had made all the Servants of her party ve∣ry cunning, to the end that being all Ac∣complices in the intrigue, it might be their common interest to conceal it. Ketevan was fair and young, and being taken with the bonne mine of the English Gentleman; she had a snickering after him, and pleased her∣self
much in promoting his affairs, in hopes some kind opportunity might hap∣pen in which she might be requited. She it was who discovered to him the late in∣trigue with the Neopolitan and French∣man; imagining that that relation might lessen his affection for her Mistress. They had many Consultations to consider of his Escape in case of necessity; and in what part of her Lodgings he might be concealed to avoid the sudden return of her Husband. There was not a corner in the whole house but was examined, and the convenience and inconvenience of it thoroughly debated; at length it came into Ketevan's head, that a Sofa in the Hall might be useful: (The Sofas are holes about a foot high, of a competent breadth, and covered over with Tapestry.) To make Experiment whether that would be commodious or not, Kete∣van crouded herself into it, but found her∣self so close, she was in danger of being stifled. Whereupon she shifted out again as well as she could, with her heels fore∣most: the hole was so strait that she bruised herself with struggling to get out, and was forced to keep her bed. The English Gen∣tleman was troubled, and indeed something too much, for the jealous Majunama did not like it, and their little apprehensions
edoubled their desire of putting one ano∣her to the Test. One day as the Gallant was in Majunama's Lodgings, attending till he returned from Bathing (which accord∣ng to the Custom of the Turkish Ladies, he did use constantly every Friday) he aused an Alarm to be suddenly brought rom the Harbour, that the Husband was rrived in an English Vessel. The report was brought to another young Slave an Ita∣ian; (for Ketevan was at that time in a ever in bed.) The poor Italian believed  real, and in great fright came running with the News to the English Man who dis∣embled it very well. A while after, Ma∣umana (who had a mind likewise to put he same trick upon her Gallant) returned rom the Bath in great terrour and confu∣on. Her head being full of her own pre∣meditated fear, she took no notice of the retended terrour of the English Man, or er Slave; but cryed out as soon as she saw hem, That all was undone, That her Gal∣ant was very unfortunate to have depend∣d for his intelligence upon his friends in he Harbour, for her Husband was cer∣ainly arrived. The Englishman who had repared the same train for her, and was eady to have given fire, was exceedingly stonished, and catcht in the same trap
which he had laid for his Mistress. H found his case desperately terrible; and  the height of his surprise admired (as muc as he had time) the subtilty of Fortun that at her own pleasure could make a tr story of an invention. He could not spea a word himself, but the Italian Slave ha composedness enough to tell her Mistre that it was but too true her Master was  turned, and that the English Gentlema friends had been exact in giving him n∣tice, and thereupon gave her the partic¦lars of what she had heard before: Maj¦nama was in strange consternation, imagi¦ing that by a kind of prodigy, she had to  truth when she never intended it. In t cruel agitation of mind that this doub imposture and fraud had produced in the both, they passed a quarter of an hour  the greatest confusion imaginable; the  were all at their wits end, and not one  the three but wished themselves sick in b as Ketevan was at that time. Majunam tearing her hair off her head, confessed th she had invented the news, and cursed h stars that had turned it into truth. T Gallant hearing that, began to recollec and with incredible joy acknowledged th same stratagem on his side: This discove calmed their spirits immediately, and w
he occasion of a thousand Caresses; they ook a thousand Oaths never more to sur∣prise one another with those sorts of trials, so much had the short moment of their un∣certainty discomposed them. She asked him what he would have done if her Hus∣band had been really at the door: He pulled but his Dagger, and told her that if he could not have stab'd it to the heart of her Husband, he would have done it to his own. She liked not that way, but told him, by so doing, he would not have in the least pro∣vided for her safety, but rather incensed the common Enemy against them both; and thereupon she shew'd him a Cabinet of Jew∣els, and a little box of poison. The Jewels were designed to go along in case their e∣scape was practicable; and the poison to be taken when things were desperate, to put an end to all their troubles at a blow. They re∣peated their protestations never to be so ingenious for the future. But what do you think happened in the very moment? The Husband being in good earnest returned from Candia, was knocking at the door, the Italian Slave who had left them to their endearments, and perceived her Master coming by a window that looked into the street, came running with the news in an incredible fright. They thought at first
that either one or the other had a mind t divert themselves at the old rate, but the cryes and paleness of the Italian dispelled that fancy quickly, and perswaded them i was true. Majunama, who before had dis¦liked the expedient of the Dagger, wa the first that got it in her hand, but the English-man in pure love snatch'd it away again, and secured the box of poison les she should have taken it down. When he had so done, he advanced with undaunted courage, and took his Post at the door with the Dagger in his fist, and his arm u ready to strike it into any man that should enter: The Husband knock'd on, and the Italian pressed her Mistris to go and open it her self, and entertain him for some time below stairs as well as she could, but the poor Lady had not strength enough to convey her: In this inconceivable distraction, in spight of her Feavor, Ketevan crawl'd to them, and proposed to hide the poor Gen∣tleman in her bed, having no time to con∣sider of a better expedient, in he went clothes and all, but his Dagger still fast in his hand. Majunama was pacified for the present; but as she was going down the stairs, she changed her Opinion, and gave way to one of the most unseasonable fan∣cies in the world: Unhappy Woman that
I am, (said she to the Italian) I cannot but be jealous: Never Lover went so nimbly o bed to another Woman: Never did ick person speak so heartily as Ketevan; nd never did Mistris press her Gallant so arnestly to anothers embraces, Ha, Ma∣am, said the Italian, recommend your self o the Prophet, and lay aside these unsea∣onable whimsies: Hereupon Majunama went directly to the door, and let in her Husband, who look'd upon her surprize as he effect of her Conjugal affection; having onducted him up stairs, she was tempted  partly out of jealousie, and partly weak∣ess) to have gone back to her Chamber, nd reposed her self upon Ketevans bed: ut her Italian had provided very wisely gainst that, and lock'd the door, by which eans all was well, and the old Jew found way to convey the English Man that night ut of the House; the young Gentleman eing happily delivered stood not much pon Constancy, changed his haunts, and as never afterwards to be found either by he Jew or Italian. From Pera where he dged before, he removed to the Poland mbassadors house in Constantinople, and  few dayes after, having heard of this essel that we met betwixt the Isles of Bella∣ola and Caravi, he took the opportunity,
and Embarked in it for London. This sto the Gentleman himself told to Master Dr¦slington. Our Vessel continuing its course, th Gulf of Napoli de Romania, the Isle of s¦dra, and the Cape de Schilly continued  the Westward, and the Islands of the A¦chipelago to the East: Of these Islands, a the whole Country of Morea I shall ha more convenient opportunity to discour hereafter. At length, to our great sati¦faction, we found our selves on the 15.  April, at the mouth of the Gulf d' Eng about sixteen Leagues from Athens. W met a Saique (or small Greek Vessel) to t Westward of St. George d' Arbora, whi the Italians called Capello Cardinale, a the Ancients Albona: It is an Island ve low on the Northside, but on the South  has several steep pointed hills, that disti¦guishes it easily from the other Islands: T Saique was fraighted with Oyls, and Ski and bound for Porto-Lione, which (as I sa before) was anciently the so famous Ha¦bour of Athens. Our Captain had hea news that the Cadi and other Turkish O¦ficers, had of late imposed new Duties u¦on all Vessels that came to anchor in th Harbour; and being desirous to infor himself better, he hall'd the Saique; t
Master of the Saique confirm'd what he had eard, and assured us they would make us ay at the rate of Six per Cent. for all our Goods. That our Timins (for so they call ur five Sols pieces) were decried, and that we could utter nothing there now but eales, or pieces of Eight full weight, and hat of them too they had lessened the rice; for having always passed there for hree and thirty Parats, they were reduc'd ow to twenty seven; every Parat is worth hree Aspers, and every Asper six or seven French Deniers. This being a great grie∣ance to the Genois, and contrary to their Capitulation at Constantinople in the year 665. our Captain resolved to stay at St. George d' Arbora (though the anchor∣ng was not very good) and to write to Athens to understand the truth, concluding o go to some other Port, if the Turkish Officers would not admit him upon better conditions: He sent his Pinnace to Porto-Lione, with a Letter to the Genoa Consul, who at that time stood very tottering in his Office, it being not only disposed of, but almost executed by John Giraud a French-man, born at Lions, and formerly Consul For the French Nation in Athens. This Giraud is a nimble man, and under∣stands well enough, but he loves his plea∣sure,
and particularly play; for there a Gamesters at Athens as well as at oth places: When he was turn'd out of th Consulship for the French, he struck in wi some People, and got himself made Co¦sul there for the English and Dutch. He  a person that loves to make a noise and  Parade, and with his bustling got into  young Lady of the house of the Paleolog and married her much to his advantag for there is still a branch of that Illustrio Family in Athens. The present French Consul at Athens,  of Marseille, and his name Christopher Ch¦staigner, a Vigorous man, and one th stands stifly for the Interest of his Cou¦trey. Upon our Captains Resolution of sta¦ing at St. George d' Arbora till his Pinna return'd, Osman Chelebi (who understoo perfectly the humour of the Turks in tho parts) came to him, and advised him  threaten the Athenian Officers with th loss of a Present which he design'd the for his anchoring; and that to let them s how indifferent he was for coming in the he should put off again to Sea, and ma either for the Port de Raphti (which li N. E. of the Cape de Colonnes) or the Islan of Zea, about five Leagues from the sai
Cape: He assured us that those two Ports were the safest in all those Seas, which was very true, besides that in either of them a Vessel may be supplyed with Water, or Bisket, or Wood. Afterwards Osman Che∣lebi grew more open to us, confessed he was married, and that he was not above five or six Leagues from the place where his Wife lived, adding with great circumstances of kindness, that if we would hazard our selves with him, he would shew us a very fine Countrey as (possibly) we had seen; we all lik'd his proposition: The Captain sent his Pinnace to Athens, commanding it to meet him at the Island of Zea whither he was steering his course: We took the opportunity of a little Bark bound for St. George de Arbora: The Captain being informed of the place to which Osman Che∣lebi had tempted us, told us that he would stay five dayes for us at Zea; that if from thence he was invited to Athens, he would give us notice by an Express; but if the avarice of the Turks at Athens obliged him to pass on to Smyrna, he would send our things to Baphti, from whence we might easily convey them to Athens. Upon his incouragement we habited our selves ike Grecians, and away with the Bark that was going to Capo Colonne, which is the
same that the Ancients called the Promon∣tory of Sunion. It was not long before we got sight of the Columns of white Marble that are to be seen upon the point of that Coast, and give it that name. On the West side towards the lower parts of that Coast, Nature has form'd a little Harbour, where both anchoring and shelter is exceeding good: For the hills of the Terra firma do cover it on every side but the South, and on that side it is secur'd by the Island o Garderonis, of old call'd Gadalone. Ne∣vertheless there are sand-banks upon th Western point, and our Master had like to have run us upon them. Here it was tha we Landed, and believed our selves first i Greece, for we reckon'd as nothing our de¦barkment at Maina. 'Tis not to be ima¦gined how all of us were pleased. Dre¦lingston our English Camerade, to signali his curiosity, clamber'd along upon tho hills that conducted to the Columns, a being impatient to be admiring their Work¦manship; we all follow'd, and made it  a good half League before we came a them. The present Greeks, and the Italia Pilots perswade us, that they are the r¦liques of a Magnificent Palace built there b Alexander the Great: But that is a m¦stake, they being the remainder of a Gl¦rious
Temple built by the Athenians, and Dedicated to Pallas. We could observe, that the Palace had been twice as long as broad, and had Pillars round about it, which other Temples had only in their Fronts. Hereafter you may have a sight of a draught that I took upon the place, which will give you the dimensions exactly. Those who are skill'd in Architecture, and would know the true proportions of the Dorick Order, will be able to judge whether this was the work the Most Famous Architect hath so highly commended. Let it not displease, I beseech you, that I make my self the depository of my designs, and chuse to bring along with me when I return into France, all the Monuments, Bas-reliefs, In∣scriptions and Figures that I have met, in Crayons of my own doing; and upon this account it is, that I do not here trouble you with the Description of any one of them. There could not be a pleasanter prospect than we had among the Pillars; the whole Archipelago was on our left hand, and no∣thing could entertain us better than to see, and consider the multitude of Isles where∣with it is furnished; and our Perspective-Glasses were of great use in our view: forward we saw the way which we had
come; on our right hand the Gulf of En∣gia gave us occasion to guess in what part of its shore the City of Athens was situate; and then looking Northward up the Coun∣try, we had a view of a good number of Cabanes, and the entrance of the famous plain of Marathon where the Persians were defeated. It came into Osman's head that he could discern the house where his Wife lived; and that fancy redoubling his impa∣tience, he took us off from our contempla∣tion much sooner than otherwise we should have been. We made directly to the Ca∣banes, designing to lye there that night (for it grew late) and to take Waggon the next Morning to convey us to Osman Chilebi's house. These Cabanes were inhabited by those kind of people which are known to the Turks and Greeks by the name of Arnautes, and to others by the name of Albanians: Part of them came Originally from the Frontiers of Macedon not far from the Towns of Apoli∣mena and Sapoza, and part of them from Epirus towards the Mountains of Chimera. These Arnautes are naturally brave, reso∣lute and indefatigable, great thieves, and the same at Land, that the Magnotts are at Sea. If there be fifty Robbers taken, and impal'd in Turkie, 'tis odds but forty nine
of them are Arnautes. About the declension of the Empire, the Greek Emperours trans∣planted them, as finding them turbulent, and inclining to revolt; it was thought they would have chang'd their humour with their soil, but they were mistaken: the worst of them were removed into Morea, and about Athens: Upon the death of Scanderbeg, part of his Subjects came to them, part of them removed into Poüille, and part into Dalmatia under the Government of the Ve∣netian: Those in Greece are dispersed into an infinite number of little Villages, con∣sisting of twenty or thirty houses apiece. Those who live near the Sea are much given to fishing; those who are farther up upon the Land, have great herds of Cattle that maintain them; but both of them are ex∣cellent at thieving, and whatever they lay their hands on is their own. In Greece they are of the Greek Church; in Italy of the Roman Catholick. They speak three sorts of Languages, the Turks, the Greek, and a kind of Jargon of their own made up of broken Sclavonian. We had received so ismal an impression of the brutality of the Arnautes, that we expected they would have allen upon us, and pillaged us: But they were not so bad as we looked for. The rst house we came to, we found the Ma∣ster
newly dead, and the Neighbours com∣ing out who had been with him when he died. The dress of the Women was very odd, and 'tis possible I may make you laugh one day at the sight of one of their pi∣ctures. After Osman and I had passed our Sala∣malekum, and saluted them, being wrought upon by Osman's good language and Mine, they received us pretty well. One of them carried us to his Cabane, and it happened to be at a time when it was clean and un∣pestered; for the Cattle were by acciden at grass, and there was nothing amiss in th house, but the remainder of their fodde In those Countries, the Master and his Cat∣tle are Inmates, and lye higgledy piggled in the same room. We had a Collation o Milk and Cheese, and certain little Cake made up with Honey and Almonds by on Landlord (who was Baker for the Town) and to be put into his Neighbours Grav according to the custom of that Country, They use them likewise to please the Chil¦dren, who for that reason will be sure t flock to every Funeral, and assist at th singing the Eleyson. The door of the Cab¦bin was thronged with multitudes of peo¦ple, and the Funeral Pomp being a rarity among us, is well worth our particular Re¦lation.
The Body was extended upon a piece of course cloth before the door of his Hutt, with a large Sheephook on one side, and a Carabine on the other, which (being their whole equipage in Peace and in War) are display'd constantly on the sides of the Corps upon those occasions. His Widow was not wanting with her shreeks and expressions of sorrow; but in so dismal a Tone, that they provoked more to ter∣rour than pitty: Her hair hung down loose upon her shoulders, only some few hand∣fulls she had pulled off, more in formality than any thing else: Her yells were second∣ed by the consort of the whole Neighbour∣hood, after which they intermitted for some time, till the eldest began again, and was answered by the rest. The Men in their turns came up to the Corps, and every one in his degree accosted it with some saying or other that testified his regret. I do as∣sure you, without the testimony of mine own senses, I could not have believed a thing so sottishly ridiculous. Why wouldst thou dye? said our Host to him: what was it you wanted? the purses of all Passengers were at your mercy; and if it had been mo∣ney you lookt for, they might have supplyed you. Another Apostrophised thus; You were a terrour to the whole world, and do
you not think that dying so indiscreetly, you have done a pleasure to your enemies in taking from them the only cause of their fear? Your Wife that stands by you, ne∣ver offended you in her life; your Children never disputed your Commands; your Ser∣vants were alwayes obedient, so that no man being more absolute in his Family, what was it that could provoke you to dye? And the rest of their exaggerations being suitable, I was of Opinion, that they had been suggested by Osman Chelebi, on purpose to entertain us: But the truth is, the Arnautes do in this manner boast of their Out-rages, and (which you would hardly believe) design them as documents and stimulations to their Children, who dare not be absent from these excellent Pane∣gyricks. One of the Neighbours had a par∣ticular way by himself, and it was thus; Seeing you are dead, (says he) and that bu∣siness is done, let me recommend it to you to desire Saint Peter to let you into Para∣dise, that you may look down into Hell, and see how the Devils do revenge us of those miscreant Turks who have so barba∣rously treated us. During all these Ha∣rangues, Osman Chelebi was attending at our Landlords house, otherwise the last good Gentleman durst not have used that
expression in his presence. As soon as the body was interr'd, Osman came up to us, and told us, That if we pleased he would go before the next morning, to see what con∣dition his Family was in, and prepare for our reception: We consented, and he de∣parted before day with a Guide, which he sent back for us with horses about Noon: We mounted immediately, and passed on under the Conduct of our Calaous or Guide. Our Virtuosi (who had imployed themselves very studiously in taking an account of the Country) found that those Cabbins which we left, were not far from the place where formerly stood the Town of Cephale, so fa∣mous among the Ancients for the Venerati∣on which its Inhabitants had for Castor and Pollux; which Town was of the Acaman∣tide Tribe; the People of Athens being di∣vided into Ten Tribes, as the Romans were into thirty five, and the Jewes into twelve. We left on our right hand towards the East the Port de Raphti called formerly Pota∣mus, of the Leontide Tribe. Pausanias ob∣served nothing in it remarkable but the Tomb of one of the Sons of Xuthus: But the Inhabitants were of old great Subjects of the Raillery and Comedy of the Athe∣nians by reason of their giddiness and in∣constancy in their Election of Magistrates:
In short, the place to which we were to go, was a little on the other side of th Mountain Anchesmus which was then in ou Eye. This Mountain was covered with Thic¦kets and little Woods, abounding wit great store of Bears and wild Bores, whic made it taken notice of at Constantinople whereas among the Ancients it was memo¦rable only for a Statue of Jupiter that wa set upon the top of it. When the Gran Visier had perswaded the Grand Signior t leave Andrinople and remove into Greec that he might be nearer his Affairs in Candid and by his proximity give more life an vigour to the Siege; he proposed to him fo the places of his Residence, either Larissa o Athens; and to invite him to the election o Athens, they inculcated the great conve¦nience for his Hunting (which is his chief¦est delight) and the vast store of Gam wherewith Anchesmus would furnish him▪ But the Grand Signior had the same accom∣modation at Larissa from the Mountains o Thessaly, and therefore in that respect, th Arguments being equal in both places, h rejected Athens, for fear the Venetians  who were Masters at Sea, should come an block up Porto-Lione, and in bravery b tempted to land in some place under hi
nose to his insufferable dishonour. On the other side of the Mountain An∣chesmus we met Osman Chelebi who was come to receive us attended with a couple of Slaves: we found him very jolly and pleasant, having found his Wife well, and his Affairs in a good condition; as a testi∣mony of it, he paid us down upon the Nail in the very Field where he met us, the mo∣ney which we had laid out for his ransom, gave us a thousand thanks, and told us he had fixed our Caunac (or Quarters) for a fortnight at his own house, and that after∣wards he would assist us in our journey. He carried us directly home to a Country-house, in a place called Emporion, which is the Greek word for a Fair; for by relation, there was formerly a great Fair kept there, which was long since removed to Raphti. The house belonged to Osman's Father in Law, after the rate of propriety in Turkie; for to speak strictly, among the Turks there is no such thing, Houses, and Lands, and immoveable Goods devolve still to the Grand Signior, and the Occupant is only his Steward, and is changed as often as the Grand Signior pleases. Nevertheless, if a man has friends at Court, he may be sure to renew, and Estates do often pass by that means from Father to Son; but if they have
no friends, they must march and give room to another. Osman's Father in Law was a jolly old Gentleman, he had been formerly Bey o Negrepont, but his age having rendered him unserviceable, he was retired to spend the rest of his days with his Wife, and two Maiden-daughters, besides that which Os∣man had married. He had two Sons, bu they were both at the Siege of Candy with the Grand Visier. It is reckoned very dis∣honourable for young men, in those parts, to live quietly at home, though in the nature of Citizens, when the Army is so near; so that we saw scarce one Turk that was not dispenced with by reason of his age, infirmities, or employments. Osman's Father in Law (who was called Mustapha Bey) received us with great kindness in re∣gard of his Son in Law, who had magnified his obligations to us. To do us the more honour Mustapha Bey had sent for three or four of his Neighbour Turks to entertain us, which was a mighty punctilio: for in those parts Turks are so rare, that for one of them you shall see five hundred Greeks, besides the Arnautes: As you come nearer Constantinople their numbers increase, and in Asia you shall meet as many Turks for one Grecian. Mustapha Bey accosted us very
pleasantly in the Language of the Franks; His Complement was this, In your Country we Turks do pass for very barbarous peo∣ple; and truly as it happens I am not at all roubled at your prejudice against us. For were you not already possessed of our ill Manners, you could not so easily pardon he ill entertainment that you are like to ncounter. He left us with his Son in Law nd his four Neighbours, who conducted s into a fair Hall, in the forepart of the ouse; for you must know all their Houses re divided into two apartments; that hich is forward, for the Men; that which  backward for the Women, who without eing seen may pass privately to the Mens partment, and by the help of little Galle∣es and Lettices behold all that is done mong the Men. With inferiour people eir apartments are less, and the women are ore shie and unwilling to be seen to a ranger. Our Fellow-Travellers, in their whole ur, had not seen any gravity comparable  the gravity in our four Turks; no coun∣nance could be more composed, nor no scourse more formal and starch'd. And nly if they find a Christian observes them, e Spaniard himself is nothing so serious; t when they are among themselves they
are like other men, as flippant and men as we for our lives. According to the custom, Perfumes were brought in by cer∣tain of their Slaves, who threw a kind o Napkin over each of our heads, that (for¦sooth) the odour might not so quickly e¦vaporate. They presented us with tw sorts of Liquor, one they called Coffee which is only hot water with the Fruit o a certain Tree (called by them Bun) put i to it, and boiled up till it receives a so taste, and an ugly black tincture, but they re¦kon it an Excellent Cordial; the other w Sherbet, which is a kind of Lemonad Wax being very plentiful about Athen they make little use of any lights but Wi Candles of five or six foot long. We ha but one among us, but it was so large as  lighted the whole room. The Soffa w covered indeed with very good Tapestry  but the Walls were as the Mason had le them; they think themselves extraordin¦ry fine when they have them painted wi Flowers; for the Figures of Men are n consistent with the Religion of a Mahum¦tan. Upon the Soffa, in order to supp were placed two Round Tables, each  them about a foot high, which to Stra¦gers is a great incommodity, for they a forced to sit cross-legg'd, and we began a
of us to be afraid of that posture. To mor∣tifie us the more, whilst we were standing in our dumps, a great Platter of Rice was brought in, and clapp'd upon the Table before any Cloth, Napkins, or Trenchers were laid, (for among them they are alto∣gether superfluous) They have a long List of striped Cotton Cloth that runs round the Table, and serves any that has a mind to it, to wipe his mouth and his hands. For Plates, and Salts, and Forks, they are utter∣ly unknown: They say that whatever is big enough for a Table, is big enough also for a Trencher; and that Saltsellers do always suppose ill Cooks; against Forks their ob∣jection is no less weighty, for, say they, what is it less than to repine at Heaven, and be unsatisfied with what Nature has given us, to make use of other fingers than those with which we were born? The lit∣tle meat in the Platter each of them took up in his hand, and biting off two or three good morsels, they put it in again, and then told us very civilly, that if we pleased, we might do as much; but that great privi∣ledge, considered with all their other cir∣cumstances of neatness, could not prevail with our appetites in the least. We had not been long at it before the Dish was taken off the Table, under pretence of
warming it again, during which time we were desired to take a turn in another Room to which Mustapha Bey, Osman, and the rest of the Turks accompanied us. Ou Conversation was very dry; the Turks stoo still fixed to their places, and would no endure to walk: Having spoke each of them three or four words, they held their peace and continued in most profound silence fo a long time; about a quarter of an hou after, one of them began an Harangue, bu stopped before he had spoken ten words  and was as silent as before; at length the fell to their Beads (for the Turks have thei Chaplets also, and do pronounce Alla a the dropping of each of their Beads) I wis with all my heart you had been a spectato of Drelingston's mortification; he that be¦fore was all life and fire, stood now as h had been nailed to the Wall, cursing in hi thoughts the manners of that Countr which were so cold, and insipid, and so di¦rectly contrary to ours. He told me pri¦vately that he was weary, and that h would get off as well as he could, and en¦tertain himself somewhere else; according¦ly he shrunk from us, and was stealing ou at the door: But the Turks stopt him, an thinking the past raillery sufficient, Musta¦pha Bey put up his Beads, and carried u
back into the Room that we had left, where we found a Table spread, and a supper rea∣dy, as good meat, as well dressed, and in as good order as we could have it in France. The Christian Slaves had shown the utmost of their skill, and had borrow'd of the Greeks what was wanting in their own conveni∣ences. Wine we had good store; the Turks indeed drank none of it that day, but they made it up in their Rossolis, and the whole Company was in a very good humour. The Glass went merrily about, and the word Eskina (which is with them a Good health to you) was often repeated, and answered with Afietler, I thank you, Sir. Mustapha had given private Orders, that his Wifes she Slaves should appear suddenly at a little Window that opened into the Hall. Osman told us in our Ears, that his Wife and her Sisters had a mighty curiosity to see us, and it was possible would be peeping. We cast our eyes very often up to the Window, and could see sometimes the faces of Wo∣men, which immediately slunk away laugh∣ing. Our curiosity to see them kept our Eyes fixt upon the Window, whilst in the mean time they played us several little tricks. The Slaves that were waiting whipt away our Plates full of excellent Ragouts that they had given us, and stole into their stead
the stalks of Coleworts and Turneps, and lit∣tle Kittlings newly born; whilst our eyes be∣ing fixed upon the window, we put them up to our mouths before some of us perceived the change. Not long after, the Women began to sing; their Airs were soft and lan∣guishing, according to their way, but their voices excellent, to which they added the sound of little Brass Drums (and they plaid musically and well.) They danced likewise in Complement to us, but it was behind the Lattice, so that our Eyes had but little pleasure in the entertainment. In a word, never people were more pleasantly treated; for repasts among the Turks being general∣ly poor and niggardly, they lay it on upon these occasions, and are never so frolick▪ nor will they ever refuse to be treated by a Christian. One of the four Turks had brought along with him a Son of his about six or seven years old, and a very pretty Child: His Father took it up in his Arms▪ and hugging it, said to it, My Child, is you desire to be happy whilst you live, re∣member to do two things as often as you can, that is, to pray like a Turk, and feed like a Christian. In this manner we passed away our time with extraordinary mirth, till one of ou Italians remembring it was the Holy Week▪
began to take up, and admonish us to be more serious: I believe also we had for∣got our Journey to Athens, had not on good Friday the 19. of April a Messenger on horseback arrived to us from our Cap∣tain, with news, that he would send his Pin∣nace for us a little above the Port de Raphti, to bring us to him at the Port de Zea; for having adjusted his differences with the Of∣ficers at Athens, he staid only for us, and as soon as we came he would set sail, which put us upon thoughts of our return. We regal'd the Ladies of the house, and in the name of our fraternity presented them with a handsom Clock (that we had brought on purpose, if we liked our entertainment) and some other little things. When we took our leaves, Osman Chelebi assured us, he would make us a visit e're long at A∣thens: He acquainted us that it was his resolution to repair to Candia, and make use of his Friends about the Visier to be restored to his Timariotship, which was given to another during his absence. In the Turkish Army nothing but sickness can excuse any Man from being present at his Command; and most commonly, when un∣able (by reason of sickness) to serve in per∣son, they oblige him to find another; in short, we parted with Osman in hopes of
seeing him suddenly again, taking our way upon the Coast, and leaving Raphti to the North West. Our Boat attended us in a Creek where no Inhabitants were near, it lies S.W. of the Isle of Negrepont, at the end of a Canal or River that bears the Name of the Island, and was famous in Ancient Times under the name of the Euripus. Our Boat passed within less than a League of Raphti, which (as I said before) was called anciently Po∣tamus, and is denominated from the mul∣titude of Fountains thereabouts, which make several little Brooks, and fall all in together at Raphti. The Harbour at Raph∣ti is the safest in all Greece, good anchor∣ing, and seven or eight fathom water; but its excellence consists in the shelter, being covered round by a small Island, which leaves only as much space open as is ne∣cessary for the entrance of a Ship. Upon the point of this Island, there is a large Figure of Marble (of which I shall bring you the design) and another Statue upon a little eminence hard by, but the best an∣choring is under a little low Island that lies within the Port. Having left Raphti to the North, we a∣voided the Sand-banks which are very dan∣gerous, and lye to the N.E. of Macrinosi,
called by the Italians Isola Longa, which is the same with the Greeks. It is in length two Leagues, and runs from the N. E. to the S. W. It was called anciently the Island of Helen, because Helen landed there in her return from Troy. It is inhabited only by Calogers which live there with great au∣sterity. From Macronisi we directed our Course to Zea, which is an Island that lies S. E. and N. W. with the other. We saw our Ship preparing and under sail to pass into the Gulf of Engia; and we were no sooner on board, but she made all the way she could thither: About three hours af∣ter with our Perspective-Glasses we could discover the Coast of Macyna or Munychia that is not above a league from Athens.
ATHENS Ancient and Modern: WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF THE EMPIRE OF THE TURKS. Book II. THe Gulf of Engia is that which an∣ciently was called the Saronick Gulf from the River Saron which dis∣charges it self into it, on the West side to∣wards
Hexamele the present name for the Isthmus of Corinth. This Gulf is denomi∣nated from the Isle of Engia (formerly fa∣mous by the name of Egina) and so power∣full at Sea, that the Inhabitants of that Island were once in a condition to dispute for Soveraignty with Athens it self. The length of the Island is near four and twen∣ty leagues, bounded on the East by Saint George d' Arbora that lies in the mouth of it, and on the West by the ruines of the Ca∣stle of Policastro, which is but two leagues from Corinth. From the Cape de Colomnes to Porto-Lione is twelve leagues, and they lie S. E. and N. W. one of another. This Coast has been so much infested by the Christian Corsairs, especially since the Wars in Candia, that their habitations at present are all removed a full league from the Sea. Our Modern Geographers injure them as much, for 'tis strange that a Gulf so famous in old times among the Ancients, should at present be utterly forgotten, and that our Maps should agree so little about the position of Laurion, Munichia, Sala∣mis and Egina. We have affirmed that Laurion lies three leagues to the Westward of the Cape de Colomnes, and convinced those Maps of errour which have placed it on the side of the Euripus, and this we have
done, not only by the sight of the Moun∣tain of which Thucydides makes mention when he speaks of the other, but also by he nature of the ground where formerly here were Silver Mines; for some of our Virtuosi caused several pieces of that Earth to be brought to them, and found in the darkness of the colour, in the weight and dissolution, all the qualities of Ore, and Earth mingled with Veins of Silver. When our Vessel was North and South of the Mountain of Laurion, we could see the Sands upon the Shore, and the sharp Rooks in the Island of Engia, which render it naccessible on all sides but the North-West where the Town is placed that gives name to the Island; the condition of which City  shall give you more conveniently here∣fter. The length of the Island from East o West is five good leagues; the breadth n the widest place is but three: It lies ex∣ctly in the midst of the Gulf, and the Gulf s twelve leagues over: As soon as we were n the Canal, we had a sight of Phalerum he Old Port of Athens, before Themisto∣les advised to fortifie the other. There s now nothing left about that Harbour but hree or four Cabbins, forsaken by the In∣habitants, and pulled down and ruined by the Corsaires: The anchoring is very good,
and a Ship ride in it at ten or twelve fa¦thom water: Upon the Banks there are se¦veral Excellent Springs to which the Ship that pass by do frequently send for fre water. From this Phalerum to Athens i but a league and a quarter, and in that plac the City is nearest the Sea. Our Captai had much ado to restrain our Gallants, wh would fain have been landing at Phaleru because the Learned Museus who invente the Sphere, and discovered to us the use o it, was buried there about three thousan years since. Drelingston declared that h had come from Orleans to Paris on purpos to see in the Church of St. Nicholas d Champs the Tomb of the Excellent Gassen¦dus, who in his Astronomical Observation  has followed the footsteps of the said M¦seus, and that with the same curiousity h had visited in the Church of Saint Gen¦viesve the Tomb of the incomparable do Cartes, whose new Hypothesis is the won¦der and envy of all Scholars. He affirme it was an honour due to the memory of grea persons, and that the Emperour Charle V. being in the Low Countries, disdain¦ed not to visit the Sepulchre of Buckeldi the famous fisher for Herrings, who firs found out the way of keeping them i pickle, and salting them; and as if his ow
ngle visit had been too little, he took a∣ong with him his Sister Mary Queen of ungaria. About a quarter of league Westward, n the bank of the River is to be seen the lace where formerly was the Fortress of Munychia so often mentioned in History or the beauty of its Harbour, and the Temple of Diana. The most part of our Maps do place Mu∣ychia four leagues from Phalerum, mista∣ing its distance, and Angle of position. t is called at present Macyna, but deserted s the rest of those Towns are. It is situa∣ed so as to hinder the sight of the other Harbour where we designed to have come o an anchor, but the wind rising, we were riven upon the Isle of Salamis called now ndifferently Colouri, and Santa Broussia: The Proverb sayes, It is an ill wind that lows no body profit; and it was verified with us, for our Virtuosi had a great cu∣iosity to be peeping about that Island, be∣ause it was of old under the Dominion of Telamon and Ajax, and was famous for the irth of Euripides, and the defeat of Xerxes is Fleet: But the weather was bad, and continued so all Easter day, so that we could ot get a shore as we desired. Easter day was Celebrated very devout∣ly,
the whole crew were at publick Pray with great decency and attention: O two Germans being Lutherans, did thei Exercises of Piety by themselves: Thei Easter day, and the Greeks falling out tha Year on the same day with ours, with th difference only, that they reckoned it th Eleventh, and we the One and twentieth  April. We came to an anchor betwixt the littl Isle of Psytalle (which indeed is but a Rock  and the Island of Colouri. The Rock  Scyradion lying East of us, towards th Coast of Athens. I shall not trouble  self to tell you the great noise that Psyt and Scyradion made formerly among th Ancients, for I am now in a place so ferti in Miracles, I need no more than ask whe you would have me begin. We could easily perceive the Rock calle Ceras, upon the point where the Canal  Colouri is most narrow, and nearest th Country belonging to the Ancient Eleu and Megara, which Rock is memorable fo being the place where Xerxes upon his Si¦ver Throne beheld the Battel betwixt hi Fleet and the Grecian. To the N. E. of this Rock there is  good Harbour called Porto-Longo, or th Harbour for the Gallies. Here there is con¦tantly
a passage-Boat that goes from Co∣uri to Athens and back again, the di∣tance betwixt them being no more than wo leagues. The next morning being the 22. of April, ur Troop of Travellers put themselves on oard a Shallop to go ashore at Coluri: I ore them Company, and we came into a arrow Creek to the Southward of the Isle: We landed at the farther end of the Creek, where we found about a hundred Caves, nd about twice as many pittifull Cabbins, which is all they have to show for their Capital City, and is the miserable remain∣er of the whole Kingdom of Ajax. The umber of the Inhabitants amounts not to bove four hundred: When ever they de∣cry a Vessel at Sea (though never so small) hey betake themselves immediately to their oles, and if possible, those holes that are rthest off, for fear it should prove a Cor∣aire, by whom they are frequently visited, arried off, and sold in foreign Countries: They no sooner perceived us, but they fled n mighty confusion, and we could easily ear the noise which they made in driving heir Cattel, and forcing them into their Caves. One of our Company over-took n old man whose legs were too feeble to arry him off; we comforted and convinced
him by our Caresses and Behaviour that  were no Corsaires, insomuch that he carri us to the mouth of a Cavern, and havi secured them upon his word, five or six  the Islanders came out to us: We used the kindly, demanding Victualls only for o Money, and something we gave them o and above; upon which a Signal being ¦ven, the Men and Cattel, and all began  appear: We bought very good Partrid at the rate of a Timin a douzen, and as  were told we bought them too dear; th the Timins were currant, but they told  they would not pass at Athens, (where th were cryed down, because the Italian M¦chants had brought thither great quantiti of false, which they had coyned private  upon the Mountains of Genoa) howev they knew how to put them off in the Is of the Archipelago. They brought us  feed in a little Church, but the Vicar w gone to Athens. We scrupled it much, a told them, that to eat there could not co¦sist with our reverence for the place: The were much pleased at our preciseness, b told us, That seeing it was God that ga us to eat, they saw no reason why we shou refuse to make use of it in his house. T Wine they provided was indifferently goo but their water was excellent, and fetch
from a spring not far from the Church: But these poor wretches have cursed that Spring a thousand times, for being the oc∣casion of so many Visits from the Cor∣saires. I do not question but in our walk we met (though we did not know it) with the Closet where Euripides composed some of his Tragedies; for History tells us, that for fear of interruption, he made them in one of the privatest Caverns of the Island, and we saw good store of them. Euripides was born in this Island of a poor Woman, who got her living by selling of Herbs: to expi∣ate the meanness of his Extraction, he came to Athens, where he studied Physick under Anaxagoras, Rhetorick under Prodicus, and Morality under Socrates; so that in that Age Learning was necessary to com∣pleat and adapt any thing for the Stage. We returned to our Ship again about ten of the Clock, where we found the Consul of Genoa and his Dragoman or Interpreter (for every Consul has one allowed him, to facilitate his Negotiations with the Turks) our Captain agreed with them concerning the ordinary Duties that each Vessel pays at Porto-Lione, that is to say, two per Cent. to the Consul; as much to the Dragoman, and three per Cent. to the Vaywode, who is
the Master of the Custom-house at Athen They agreed likewise about the Presents  be made to the Turkish Officers, and part¦cularly to the Cady, who having a powe to lay what Tax he pleases upon Merchan Goods that are brought into that Harbou by Strangers, does many times use hi own Liberty, and act without any regar to justice if he be not presented. Fro Athens the Commodities exported are pri¦cipally Silks, Oyls, Skins, and a kind  Gauls which in times of Peace the Ve¦tians buy in great quantities, and use in d¦ing. If a Ship puts into that Harbour though it neither buys nor sells, nor ex¦ercises any sort of Commerce, yet it pay  Crown for anchoring to the Consul of i own Country; but paying two per Cen the Consul is obliged to look after thei Effects, and to a particular care of the In¦terest of their Nation. He is Judge, an determines in all Controversies about Trad betwixt the Merchants of that Country b whom he is imployed: He is the Chi Person concerned to extend their Jurisdict¦on, and vindicate their Priviledges:  short, his Authority is so considerable, tha it is the occasion of great jealousies, an many times the ruine of the Competiton▪ For those Christian Countries (who hav
no Ambassador nor Resident at Constanti∣nople, and are constrained to put them∣selves under the protection of some setled and established Consul) are in perpetual dif∣ference, and obliged to be continually pre∣senting and greasing the Bassa's and San∣giac's to countermine their Competitors: And it is no small part of the cunning of the Turkish Officers to seem to incline to one Nation, to spur up the rest in their Con∣tributions. By this Artifice they squeez Money out of the Merchants of all Coun∣tries, pretending sometimes to take cog∣nizance of their disputes, and to bring them before their Turkish Tribunals, and the su∣rest way to divert them is to present them liberally. The Armenians do likewise create us much trouble, for having no right of Consulship of their own, the other Con∣suls repine to do their business, which turns often to their ruine. Formerly there was only the Emperours Ambassaddor Resident at Constantinople, and he medled not in matters of Trade; but for these four or five years, since the taking of Newhausel, and the peace that followed thereupon, a Company was erected in Vienna that Tra∣ded by the Danube into Turky, and the Emperours Ambassador there invested with the priviledges of the Consulship; for in
that Court there are no other Consuls, but Ambassadors and Residents. The French Nation being allowed a Church in Athens; for the maintenance o it, every French Vessel is forced to pay five Crowns, besides what the Vaywood exact of us more than of other Nations: But 'tis probable the Reputation of our King, and his Arms, and the prudence of our Ambsas∣sadours will put a stop to their Extortio in a short time: Nevertheless hitherto thi has been no advantage to the Affairs of ou Consul Monsieur Chastagner, though he re∣tains the Title and Priviledges of Consu of Morea, and has under him Vice-Consul at Patras, Napoli, and other places; upo which score he is about resigning to one o his Brothers: All charges born, the Con∣sulship brings him not in clearly above fiv hundred Franks per Annum. He complain¦ed much of Monsieur Giraud, attributin most of our losses in that nature to his pri¦vate intelligence with several Merchants o other Nations, by which they have bee perswaded to commit their Affairs to th Protection of the English Consul, to th no small detriment of our own: And doubtless it will be much worse if Girau be made Consul for Genoa, as I was ad∣vised he would be before I came from
Athens; whereupon I took a resolution, and was much incouraged in it by my friends. The love and interest of my Country work∣ing strongly upon my mind (though with Monsieur Giraud they seemed utterly for∣gotten, otherwise he would never have promoted the Interest of another Country at that time in Hostility with France) I thought it discretion to provide in time a∣gainst the Rencounters I might have with him. I considered that if I passed for a Frenchman in Athens, I should be obliged in duty and inclination to defend the rights, and propagate the Interest of our Consul in all our Conversations; and the little Figure I made in the World, would add but little to the advantage of my Coun∣try by all the clutter I could make: Besides, I had occasion to be beholding to our Cap∣tain, with whom that would have put me at variance; so that I spake to all our Crew to let me pass for a Genoese to avoid those unprofitable Contests, and they did as I de∣sired. In a word, about one a Clock at noon we arrived at Porto-lione, it being not a∣bove three Leagues from thence to Coluri; yet in that little distance we observed there were Currents that ran directly upon the Coast.
The Shore at Porto-lione bends into three several bows, which do make so many Har∣bours, all of them excellent for anchoring shelter, and largeness, and sufficient to justi∣fie the wisdom of Themistocles, who pre∣ferred them to the Haven at Phalerm. Fou hundred Sale of Ships may ride there very safe at nine, ten, twelve, and in some pla∣ces at fifteen fathom water. To the West∣ward they are covered by the Island of Bel∣bina, now called the Island of Blenda, no inhabited at present, and useful only in fur∣nishing wood for the Ships. Of the thre Harbours the middle is properly Porto-li¦one, and runs N. N. E. the entrance is nar¦row, and it is that which makes it so safe▪ Upon the Rocks in the Sea may be seen th piles of stone to which the Chain is fastne▪ for the stopping up of the Harbour. In th bigger Harbour there is a lesser for the Gal¦lies, and that is it which the Italians ca Darse, or Darsine. The Ancients calle one of these three Ports Aphrodiston becaus of the Temple of Venus that was near it▪ another they called Cantharon from Canth¦rus, and the third was called Zea, as bein designed for the unlading of Corn. W were no sooner landed, but the first thin we did was to Curse the Romans and thei barbarous Consul Sylla, who having abo
1754 years since sacked the City of Athens, destroyed Pyraeum into the bargain. It was with great displeasure we surveyed the solitude and desolation of Porto-lione; we were all of us inquisitive after the famous Temples of Jupiter, Minerva, and Venus, and the five Portico's, which being joined together, were called Macra Stoa, in imi∣tation of that which was at Athens: We enquired after the Theatre of Bacchus, of which Thucydides and Xenophon made men∣ion. Of the Tribunal of Phreattys, and he famous Library of Appollicon where his ncomparable Writings were found, which re now lost, and memorable by nothing ut the mention made of them by Diogenes Laertius. We enquired after the magnifi∣ent Arsenal, a Master-piece of that inimita∣le Architect Philo, for the admirable con∣eniences made for the receipt and security f the Gallies: after all which we required ery earnestly one among another, (for esides our selves there was not one person o be seen) where those times were when our or five hundred Ships sailed out of his Port together: when multitudes of eople on one side, and Seamen on the o∣her, were heard reciprocally to shout out ier Agati tuki, Farewell to you: Euploia,  good Voyage to you: and Pronoia Sozouza,
Providence keep you. What are become, said we, of all their famous Admirals, their Commanders of Squadrons, and the two Magistrates which they called Apostles, or Commissioners of the Navy? In a word, where are all those Trierarques or rich Ci∣tizens, who were obliged to build at their own expence a certain number of Ships ac∣cording to their respective Estates? What a most excellent order, and how beneficial to the publick was it, as soon as a Citizen was arrived at an Estate of 18000 Livers to have him denominated a Trierarque, and obliged at his own charge to set out a Ship▪ If his Fortune was double, he furnished out two, but he was not constrained to se out above three though his Estate was ne∣ver so immense. When there were no Citizens enough to be found able to ex¦pend 18000 Livers, several of them wer laid together, and built a Ship among them▪ but then it was laid so impartially that n body could complain. If any though himself aggrieved, he had no more to d but to make it appear that his Neighbou was better able than himself, and he tha was proved so, was sure to be put in hi place. Thus was this noble and ingeni¦ous people as it were distracted betwixt th love of Literature and Navigation, whil
each Parent was enjoined to teach his Chil∣dren both to Read and to Swim. Pyraeum had formerly the glory within the compass of its walls to see some of the first Schools of Philosophy in the world: For in that, as in other Countries, the gross ignorance and brutality of former A∣ges having contracted a strange depravity and corruption in their Manners; in process of time there came forth a small number of virtuous and ingenious persons, who ap∣plied themselves to more regularity in their lives, and to discover what was most rare and obscure in the nature of things, and for their good inclinations, and the happy progress they made, were called Philoso∣phers. I shall tell you once for all, You must not be surprized if you meet in this description some slight and imperfect touch∣es of the Ancient Philosophy, which do sometimes fall in naturally enough, and without any Violence or Constraint; and indeed we had as good never have gone to Athens, if contenting our selves with an Inventory of the old pieces of Marble, we should have neglected that which made them so glorious whilst they were united and standing. Nor can I bring my self to believe that men of any Curiosity or Learn∣ing would ever have forgiven me, should I
have passed by several things, because they were nor visible to my eye. Athens then having produced several Philosophers, it was at Pyraeum that one of them called Antisthenes, undertook to set up a particular Sect: For still as the most Learned among them established any new Hypothesis, those of his party and opini∣on asserted his Principles, and formed themselves into several Sects under different appellations. Antisthenes was the first of the Sect of the Cynicks. The word imports originally a Dog, from which their do∣ctrine is not altogether abhorring, as be∣ing much less gentle and refined than the rest. It admits nothing of Natural Philo∣sophy, Logick, nor Mathematicks; it re∣lies wholly upon Morality, and that the most austere and rigid in the World. To render a man wise, it requires that he be∣gins with an extream contempt of himself, and to enure him to it, the Rules prescrib∣ed have in them more of insolence that instruction: For to decry their Vices, they reproach men with scandal, so that it is from their barking and snarling at every mans miscarriages that they are called Cy∣nicks. The History of Crates and Hypar∣chus justifies that appellation by other rea∣sons that I shall not mention in this place;
and it is possible it was given them like∣wise from the place called Cynosarges, which was a part of the Suburbs in Athens, where they settled themselves after they had quitted Pyraeum. All that is now to be seen of Pyraeum is only a fair Marble Statue of a Lion that gives the present name to that famous Port. It is placed gaping with his face towards the Sea, and as it were ready to leap into all the Ves∣sels that come in there to anchor, Themisto∣cles his Tomb was formerly not far from it. There is a little Caravanserael (but not built as in Turkie) which serves for the odging and entertainment of Passengers, and to lock up their goods; and being therefore so inconsiderable, I will not trou∣ble you with its description. That at Por∣to-lione is but an ill favoured kind of Hall, where, in case of Rain, they lay by what is unladen there, to be carried to Athens, or what is brought from thence to be shipp'd in that Port. All the settled and establish∣ed Caravanseraels in Greece, are these which follow: Two at Thebes, one at Megara, one at Corinth, one at Arcadia, one at Napoli de Romania, one at Tripolissia or Dropo∣lissia, two at Messitra, and one at Lace∣daemon. Upon an eminence on the Shore stands an
old Town, or Phanal, which the Athenian call Pyrgo, and the Italians Torre del foc For the whole Town of Pyraeum two po Greeks are perpetually upon the Watch i that Tower of Pyrgo, whose business it is t give warning of the Corsairs, setting u their Colours by day as soon they deser any Ship at Sea, and in the night hanging ou lights, to give alarm to the Country about besides which there is a fire made constantly every night upon the Platform. All along upon the Shore, at a competent distanc there are several Pyrgo's for the same pur¦pose, and two men always as Sentinels▪ The Tower that makes the first discovery of a Man of War, throws down a light∣ed Fire-brand over the Wall to give notice to the rest; and doing all of them the same the Signal is taken: The whole Country immediately in Arms, and the word passing from one to another to know where the Signal was first given, they repair thither with the greatest part of their strength. If nothing be discovered, the fire is suffered to go out in each Tower, and serves only to admonish the Corsairs that they are up∣on their Guard. But to elude their diligen∣ces, and frustrate their Signals, the Cor∣sairs do frequently furl up their Sails, other∣wise a Vessel of two hundred Tun will be
seen by those Sentinels six or seven leagues. A larger Vessel is seen farther, and if two Ships be at Sea, they can discover one ano∣her three or four leagues, unless they furle up their sails. At Pyraeum there are still to be seen great quantity of square stone of which the Walls were made that joyned it to the City, and upon the Road to Athens there were many more: They are generally Cubique, and those of the Foundation cramped together with iron, which was the Workmanship of the old and eminent Athenian Conon. But that which was most wonderfull in the For∣tifications about Pyraeum, was, the Famous Wooden Tower that Sylla could not burn; the Wood of which it was built having been prepared with a Composition of A∣lume that the Fire could not touch; but though fire could not, it is now quite de∣voured by Time. Having walked for some space, we had Horses brought us from Athens, and mount∣ing, had not rid far, before the Magnificent Temple of Minerva (which stands in the Castle, and appears very statelily over the Walls) presented it self as the first consider∣able object to our view. And here I cannot but acknowledge my own weakness, you may call it folly if you
please: At the first sight of this Famous Town (struck as it were with a sentiment of Veneration for those Miracles of Anti∣quity which were Recorded of it) I start∣ed immediately, and was taken with an universal shivering all over my Body. Nor was I singular in my Commotion, we all of us stared, but could see nothing, our ima∣ginations were too full of the Great Men which that City had produced. We fan∣cied every step we made, that we met ei∣ther Theseus, or Socrates, Alcibiades, or some other of those Reverend Persons: I could not contain my self, but cryed out, Adsunt Athenae, unde Humanitas, Doctrina, Religio, Fruges, Jura, Leges ortae, atque in omnes Terras distributae putantur, de qua∣rum possessione proper pulchritudinem, etiam inter Deos certamen proditum est. Ʋrbi (inquam) quae vetustate eâ est, ut ipsa ex sese suos Cives genuisse dicatur: Au∣thoritate autem tantâ, ut jam fractum prope & dehilitatum Graeciae Nomen, hujus Ʋrbis laude nitatur: You may remember it in Tully. The ruines of the Walls were called formerly the Long Rampires, of which there were two, the Northern by which we passed, and the Southern that ran along by the Sea to Pyraeum; from thence to Mu∣nichia, and from Munichia to Phalerum,
and so to the Walls of the Town; so that the circumference of the Ancient City of Athens was compleatly two hundred Fur∣ongs, which is about seven Leagues. And History mentions, that at convenient di∣stances these Rampires were flanked by lit∣tle Towers that were inhabited. The rode by which we passed along upon the Nor∣thern Rampire, was called formerly These∣us his way; of which Boccaneyra remem∣bered us in the Verses he cited out of Pro∣pertius: Inde ubi Pyraei capient me littora portus, Scandam ego Thescae brachia longa viae. Accordingly there was a Temple consecra∣ed to Theseus, and a little farther two Mo∣numents, one of the Famous Poet Menan∣der, the other of Euripides. About the midway betwixt Athens and Pyraeum there was a great Well set round very handsom∣y with Olive Trees, which rendered it very pleasant: We took this Well for the Foun∣tain, that was formerly by a certain Chap∣pel Consecrated to Socrates; for in those days Temples were Dedicated to Illustri∣ous Men, as well as to the Gods. The descents and incursions of the Chri∣stian Corsaires is the cause that there are no
Country-houses above a League from Por¦to-Lione; but beyond that distance to¦wards Athens, there are many little House set about very beautifully with Vines an Olive Trees; and behind them each has i Garden full of Oranges, Citrons and Pom¦granats; they have plenty of Fountains an Water-works, most of their Gardens bein furnished with Engines to break and d¦sperse the waters as it comes out of th Pipes; and the Engines are generall wrought by a Horse. The Athenians a present call a Country-house Spititon Ch¦rion, and a Garden Perinoles. We could scarce see the Town before w were in it, because it stands upon a littl Eminence behind the Castle, which bein just in our face, hindered the prospect there of. We alighted at a house taken up fo us not far from a Church, which they ca Agios Jannis, or the Church of St. John. And now being arrived at Athens, whic was the main object of our Voyage, yo would have just cause to be offende should I neglect an opportunity that offen it self so freely for your entertainment, an not endeavour to give you the most faith¦full and succinct description both of he passed fortune, and present condition, see¦ing that what has been said hitherto, seem
but preliminary, and as it were to prepare he way for the knowledge of that. I do ot question, but in other Authors you may find a considerable part of what I have resented to you here: It would be strange n speaking of the place where Athens stood formerly, I should write of nothing but what was new of a Town so universally fa∣mous, and reputed the Mother of Arts, and he Theatre of Valour and Policy. The happy times in which this City flou∣ished, were so fertile in wonders, and we ave had so few Ages since that have pro∣uced such Eminent Men, that I do not doubt your excuse, if I give you a parti∣ular specification of those memorable years hat remain still Sacred by so great and so glorious Events: But not to interrupt or ivert my Discourse, you will find in the Margin of these Memoires the number of Years reduced from the Epoche of the Olym∣iads to our own; by which you will dis∣ern the time passed betwixt such an acci∣ent and the time present. Of all the Ancient Cities in Greece, none as preserved its name with better success han this City of Athens. Our Geogra∣phers have thought good to alter it, and all it Setines: The Greek and Turkish In∣habitants, and the Neighbours about, call t Atine.
I will not trouble you with the differe names it bore, before the Goddess Miner (whom the Greeks called Athena) gave  her name in despite of the jealousie and o position of Neptune, who would have giv it his own. It is most certain, the Inhab¦tants of old, called it by way of Excellen Asti, or the City: And the Romans,  the same Spirit of Ostentation designed t same. The year of its Foundation was n¦ver yet known.  In the time of Cecrops (t first of Her seventeen Kings (wh Reign began 3226. years since)  was but a Burrough, though h¦noured with the Residence of its King, a the Title of Metropolis in that Countre so that Athens was built above eight hu¦dred years before the City of Rome. Theseus their Tenth King observing t People to be affected with Countrey liv and by the means, being dispersed up a down at a distance one from the other, a consequently exposed to the irruptious  their Nighbours;  he incorporat the wealthiest of them into a Cit and by that Union gained to hi¦self the Title of Founder of Athens. Th City and Country was a long time G¦verned by Kings, but with a limited A¦thority; nevertheless the people, in lo
with their Liberty, abolished Monarchy, and in the place of their Kings, Created their Archontes, whose Power was almost equivalent with the power of the Doges or Dukes of Venice; thirteen of them were perpetual, and succeeded one another, and seven had their Authority limited to Ten Years: After these, the Sovereign Power was put into the hands of Nine Magistrates, the first with the Title of Archonte, the se∣cond of King: Their Dignity lasted but a Year, yet these latter Archontes were so considerable, that the Athenians reckoned their Years, and distinguished their times from the Order of their Creation. In pro∣cess of time Draco gave them those Famous Laws that were said to have been written in blood, by reason of their excessive rigour: But twenty four years after, they were abolished by Solon, who supplyed them with Laws much more gen∣le and humane. The Laws of Solon Established a Popu∣ar Government, till Pisistrates usurped the Soveraignty of Athens, and having left it o his Two Sons Hipparchus and Hippias, he first was slain by Harmodius and Ari∣stogiton, with the assistance of a fair Athe∣nian called Leena, to whom they had made great Courtship: This Leena being taken
into Custody by the Tyrants Guards, and threatned the torture, unless she discovered her Accomplices, she chose rather to bite out her tongue, than suffer it to betray he Gallants:  And this Heroick action of Lee∣na's hapned the same year that Lu∣cretia was the cause that Tarqui was banished out of Rome. Liberty being restored to the Athenian three years after, by the flight of Hippia, he called in the Persians who lost the Fa∣mous Battel of Marathon:  Ten years af∣ter they returned, with intention to Sac the City of Athens, but in a few months time they were defeated again in a Sea-fight at Salamis. After the Victory at Salamis, the Re¦publick of Athens was in its highest eleva¦tion: Its greatest Captains, its greate Philosophers, and its most Ingenious Ar∣tists were living in that time; and neve was any City so fertile in Illustrious Men Pericles was the person by whose Conduc it arrived at that Grandeur. But the Lacedemonians growing jealou of their greatness, made War upon the A¦thenians, and after several ingagements Ly¦sander the Lacedemonian General, havin rather surprized than vanquished them in  Sea-fight, came afterwards to besiege th
City of Athens, and forcing it to surrender upon very hard Conditions, he e∣stablished in it the thirty Tyrants, o famous in History. After four Years Servitude, Thrasibulus  Citizen of that City, slew the hirty Tyrants, drove out the Lace∣demonian Garrison, and by degrees onquered the Lacedemonians, partly by he Arms of his own Country-men, and artly by exciting the Thebans under the Command of Epaminondas. Not long after, this City was forced to ontend with the whole strength of a puissant League of the Inha∣itants of Byzantium, Rhodes, and other Islands, who were not able to sup∣ort the Tribute which was exacted in the dellespont, which Tribute was the foundati∣n of its ruine.  Afterwards she suffered much y Philip of Macedon, who gained he Battel of Cheronea against the Athenians and Beotians. Neither was Alexander the Great a bet∣er friend to them at first, but he was kind o them afterwards; however Alexander ied, and two years after his death, two f his Successors Antipater and Craterus btained a great Victory over them, and put  Macedonian Garrison into Mynichia;
and to weaken them yet more, An∣tipater transported 22000 Atheni∣ans into Thracia. Cassander, another of Alexander's Suc¦cessors usurped upon them, and invaded that Liberty which had been recovered b Antigonus and Demetrius great Enemies t Cassander;  after which the said Demetri besieged the said City, and took i from Lacharis a Citizen, who ha made himself Absolute, and his Set¦ting up for himself, gave occasion for th discovery of the valour of Olimpiador who by unparallel'd bravery and conduc delivered the said Country from the Ma¦cedonians, defeating and dispersing abov 12000. of them: Upon which the Mag¦nanimity of these Inhabitants resuming i ancient force, they made us Gauls sensibl of the fury of their Arms;  for the Ath¦nian Callipus defended the passage at The¦mopilae against a numerous Arm under the Command of two of on Kings, Brennus and Acichorius, an constrained them to try other ways, whic proved afterwards their ruine. This was the last of the Athenian Tr¦umphs; afterwards the Gauls tired the out, and exhausted their strength, so a from that time they never attempted an¦thing
considerable in their own name, nor signalized themselves but by their Learning and Science: They fell again under the Dominion of the Macedonians, and could never free themselves but by the supplys of Aratus;  and yet it must be confessed, that hey were the chief cause of the uine of the Macedonian Monar∣hy, by exciting the Romans, who Triumphed over Philip and Perseus. At length Aristion a Citizen of Athens, nvolved that Common-wealth in the great∣st Calamity that ever befell it: The Hi∣tory is visible at large in the Life f Sylla, who took the said City nd pillaged it. But Pyraeum was he more unfortunate of the two, for Athens was afterwards repaired, but Pyraeum was acked and never built since. After this Desolation, it had continued  most deplorable solitude, had not the ame of its Philosophers invited thither ost of the Learned Men in the World, nd twenty years after, Pompey the Great called so meerly upon account of the Athe∣ians) discontinuing his pursuit of certain irats which he had undertaken to dis∣erse, came to an anchor in Pyrae∣m, visited the Philosopher at A∣hens, and restored that City to
the exercise of their Old Laws; in acknow∣ledgement of which, the Athenians espou¦sed Pompey's Party; followed him in h Civil Wars, and fought for him in the Bat∣tel of Pharsalia. Their Ingagement with Pompey woul have been fatal to them, had not Caesa been more generous than Sylla: He pa¦doned them after his Victory, using this e¦pression (which is so memorable in History▪ These present Athenians ought indeed to  punished, but for the merit of their Anc¦stors I will pardon them for once: For whic they were not so grateful as they ough joyning, afterwards with the Forces of Br¦tus and Cassius against Augustus and Anth¦ny: Nevertheless, though at th Battel of Philippi Anthony remai¦ed Conquerour, he treated the A¦thenians with much favour, vouchsafing  the very height of his Fortune, not on to afford them his Company for some tim but he caused himself to be Created A¦chonte, and accommodated so exactly wi their Old Customers, that they called hi frequently Philellen or Lover  the Greeks;  and when he w beaten by Augustus at the Batt of Actium, the only request he made  him, was, that he might be permitted
live privately at Athens, but he was not able to obtain it; after which Augustus con∣tinued to them their Ancient Laws, but he took from them certain Islands that Mark Anthony had given them. From that time they continued true to the Romans, only now and then some small Seditions happened of little importance: But of all Men, the Emperour Adrian was the greatest Lover of Athens; that Prince being universally skilled both in their Learning and Arts, (working with his own hands so exactly, that the best Workmen could not equal him) was pleased to be the restorer of their Magnificent Build∣ings: He lived there as a private Citizen, aspired to the Dignity of Archonte, Executed that Office in the ha∣bit of an Athenian, and revived the Laws of Solon: With his Empire he left his In∣clination to Athens to his Successor Anto∣ninus Pius, by whom it was transmitted to Verus, both of which came and lived per∣sonally in Athens, and made themselves popular by their beneficence: But about thirty years after, the Emperour Severus came thither, and retrenched their Privi∣ledges in revenge of some injury which he had received formerly when he was a Stu∣dent there in a private condition.
Three hundred and fifty years after Sylla had demolished them, the Emperour Vale∣rian caused their Walls to be repaired, which hindered not, but a while after un∣der the Reign of Claudian, successor to Galenus, it was sack'd by the Scythians; and about One hundred forty years after that, under the Reign of Honorius, it was taken again by Alaricus at the instigation of Stilicon. And yet these Revolutions rendered it not to abject and contemptible, but that the Illustrious Families that were left, sup∣plied the Eastern Empire with several Em∣peresses, as I shall observe hereafter. And those Emperors contracted no inconside∣rable alliances; for in process of time, when the Empire began to decline, two of its Emperors, Alexis and Andronicus, succes∣sively married Agnes, the Daughter of Lewis le Gross. These two Marriages, and the Misfortunes that attended them, having brought the French into those parts, Bald∣win the Emperour brought his Army be∣fore Athens, but he raised his Siege, and was afterwards taken Prisoner by the Mar∣quess Boniface. The French however had possession, and kept it till the Sicilian Ve∣spers in the year 1282, when the Cataloni∣ans and Aragonois beat them out; but the
Title of Duke of Athens remained to the French a long time. Our curious Dreslington remembred that t the Abbey of St. Denis, two Leagues rom Paris, upon a flat Tomb in the Chap∣el, called Nostre Dame la Blanche, he had ead and transcribed this Epitaph, Cy gist Madame Jeanne d'Eu, jadis Cantesse d' E∣tamps, & Duchesse d'Athens, Fille de tres oble homme Mons. Raoul, Comte d'Eu, & e Guines; laquelle trepassa en la Cité de ienne le 6 de Juillet 1489. Here lies the ody of Madam Joan d'Eu, formerly Coun∣ess of Estamps, and Dutchess of Athens, Daughter of the thrice Noble Monsieur Ra∣ul, Earl of Eu, and Guines; she died in he City of Sienna, the 6. of July 1489. nform your self of some Herald who this Dutchess of Athens was, and how that Title ame into her Family. From the dominion of the Spaniard, Athens passed to a Family (originally of lorence) called Acciaoli, which Family ad the Soveraignty both in Corinth and hebes. Francus or Francis the Eighth, Prince of that House, was at length con∣trained in the year 1455 to yield it up to he Valour and Fortune of Mahomet the econd, the greatest Conquerour of all the Turks. So then it is now two hundred and
thirteen years since it has been in the han of the Mahumetans. It is true in the ye 1464 Capello the Venetian General surpriz it, but not taking the Castle, he could n keep the Town. This then is one of t two hundred Capital Cities which the sa Mahomet took from the Christians;  did it submit till it had seen two Empin and twelve Kingdoms subdued by  Sword. And it was some kind of lus  and reputation to the surrender of Athen  that it was not conquered by an ordina or inconsiderable Prince. It is remarkab in History that when the said Francus w expulsed, the chief Citizens of the To conspired to restore him; which Cons¦racy was the cause that the Turks made the Exemplary, and took from them the Sov¦raignty of Thebes, which they had allow them till that time. Mahomet was na∣rally bloody and vindicative, neverthel he treated Athens with great humanit  professing one day as he was walking abo the Town, That his desire to be master  it sprang not so much from his Natural a¦bition, as from a delight he took in vie¦ing the pleasantness of its scituation, a the magnificence of its buildings; and  his great favours the Athenians are s mindful to this day. The better sort of t
Inhabitants will never discourse with you upon any thing of Religion, but they will be sure to tell you of St. Paul, and St. Denis the Areopagite: They will show you none of their Antiquities, but they will tell you of Themistocles and Adrian; nor can they mention their State-Affairs, but with a re∣verend Commemoration of Sultan Maho∣met the Second. Before we come to their form of Govern∣ment as it is established at present, it will not be improper in two words to give you an account how Christianity was first intro∣duced into that City. Saint Paul the Apostle concerned himself, and took great pains in its conversion; for coming out of Macedonia he came to Athens, and disputing against the Stoicks and Epicureans, he explained to them the new doctrine of the Resurrection, and shew'd that the God which he preached to them was the same Unknown God to whom their Altar was erected. Saint Dionysius, (of the Famous Society of the Areopagites) and Damaris were two of the most conside∣rable who embraced Christianity; the Hi∣story of which is recorded in the 17. Cha∣pter of the Acts of the Apostles, and when a stranger is at any time present at the Ce∣lebration of Mass, they will be sure instead
of the Epistle for the day to read that Chapter, thinking thereby (with a piou kind of Vanity) to enhaunce their reputa∣tion with the Stranger, according to the natural genius and affectation of that peo∣ple. In Civil Affairs, when by the Judges a Oath is to be administred to an Athenian, they open the New Testament at the 17th▪ Chapter of the Acts, and laying the hand of the Deponent upon that Leaf, they fan∣cy it adds much to its Religious Obligation▪ They look upon St. Dionysius as their firs Bishop. In the infancy of Christianity it was fa∣mous by the Martyrdom of several persons, particularly in the year 125 there were ma∣ny Athenians that suffered for the Truth, being animated by the Example of Publi their Bishop. The Emperour Adrian was then at Athens, and entered himself into the Priesthood of Ceres Eleusina; but three years after, Quadratus succeeding Publius, stopped the course of the persecution by an excellent Discourse which he made to the said Emperour at that time returned to Athens, in order to the Consecration of a stately Temple to Jupiter Olympius, and re∣paired by his care. The Eloquence of Ari∣stides the Philosopher (who was a Chri∣stian)
confirmed the Doctrine of Quadra∣tus, and he mollified Adrian very much by a learned Apology he exhibited in defence of Christianity, and dedicated to him. Some of the Calogers pretend to have the said Apology still in a Library in a Monasteryl at Medelli, some six miles from Athens. The Church at Athens produced several considerable men, and was erected into an Arch-Bishoprick depending upon the Pa∣riarch of Constantinople. The Metropolitan of Athens has under him at this day seven Bishopricks, two in the Archipelago, Scyros and Andros; one in the Island of Negro∣ont called Carystehi, and four upon the Continent, Porthima, Diaulis, Heterotopia, nd la Valone. The Archbishoprick is va∣ued at about thirteen or fourteen thousand Crowns a year, out of which a good part s paid constantly to the Sultan. The pre∣ent Archbishop is a witty man, but no great Clerk, nor Friend to the Church of Rome: He is a Caloger, not far from Constantinople, or you must know, none but Calogers are dmitted to the Prelacy in Greece. It is not ong since he was advanced to that Digni∣y; his Predecessor is still living in Athens,  man of an exemplary Life, but dispossessed by the violence of the Port, who choosing or removing the Patriarch of Constantino∣ple
at their pleasure, have a great influence in the Election of Rejection of the Inferi¦our Prelates. For the most part, that Ca∣loger who has most money in his pocket and parts with it most freely, is advance to be Patriarch; and to reimburse himself he is glad to make such his Bishops and Archbishops as give him the largest Contri∣bution; and they in their turns take the same measures with their inferiours, so tha from one to another every Priest, Papas, Bi∣shop, and Archbishop contributes to th making of the Patriarch: And the bette to satiate the avarice of the Turks, ther are commonly resident at Athens fou Grand Penitentiaries deputed by the Arch¦bishop to hear Confessions, and to prescribe certain Mulcts and Taxes to their penitent according to the quality of the crime fro which they are absolved. The former Arch∣bishop is one of these four Penitentiaries and Director of a Monastery of Caloger or Nuns of the Order of Saints Basil, o which there are three Monasteries in A¦thens. There are in Athens a hundred and thre Churches, of which four are Dedicated t the Virgin Mary, and called Panagia, and three more Dedicated to Saint George. Th Chiefest among them are Agios Dimitrios
Agios Jannis, and Agios Chiriachis. But be∣ides these one hundred and three within he Walls, there are double the number within a league about the Town: 'Tis rue, the least Chappel passes with them for  Church, and sometimes one single Papas upplys two or three of them. There is but ne Altar in each of them, and some there re in which Mass is not said above three r four times in a Year. The Rich Men of he Town have each of them Chappels at ome, and the great reason is, to keep their Wives and Daughters from being ga∣ed upon in the streets, by which means it appens, that unless it be on great dayes, he Great Churches are quite unfrequent∣d; and to take off all pretence of Gos∣ping, the Good-wives are not permitted o go to Church out of their own Parish. Their Zeal for Christianity is very extraor∣inary, and though there are few of the thenians, or none that follow the Disci∣line of our Church, yet one full third of he Town, admit the Procession of the Holy Ghost, the Supremacy of the Pope, nd the most essential points in Controver∣e betwixt us and the Eastern Church. Fa∣her Simon de Compeigne a Religious French apuchin, and one of the Missionaries at Athens, is sometimes admitted to hear the
Confessions of the Arch-bishop; the grea¦est part of the Calogers of Medelli, and th most considerable of the Laity in th City; as particularly the Paleologues, t Bininzelles, the Capitanakis, the Calch¦diles, and several others. Before the Old Archbishop was dispo¦sessed by the Turks, he many times signifie to our Capuchins at Athens, the great d¦sire he had to see our differences compose telling them expresly, that if he could see  United with the Eastern Church, he cou chearfully resign to the person who at Rom is made Arch-bishop of Athens, in partil infidelium; and he inquired very earnest after his Name and his Parts. Our Rom Archbishop is called Carlo Vecchi; he h four considerable Dignities in the Court  Rome; He is Secretary of the Congreg¦tion of Bishops, a Member of the Sacr Office, Counsellour to the Penitentiar and Secretary to the Congregation de pr¦paganda fide: He is an Ancient Man,  weak and declining, that the Physicians  way of Regiment have prescribed him thr dishes of Chocolat a day. This Grave Archbishop, preferred to th Title out of the Monastery at Medelli  his Piety as well as learning, is much ple¦sed when our Capuchins which are thei
o tell him that the City of Paris esteems t a singular honour that Saint Dionysius the Areopagite was their first Bishop. The good Old Man in a rapture of Joy, and with great pleasure to himself replyes, You must confess then that but for Athens, France ad possibly never had an Apostle. Some of our Learned Countrey-men, re∣osing too stifly upon the Doctrine of our Times, have maintained, that the Conver∣on of the French was not ascribable to aint Dennis the Areopagite, and that he was not the first Preacher of the Gospel a∣mongst us: However our Chronology may ustifie them; the Universal tradition at Athens is against them, as I found by par∣icular inquiry and disquisition. They are ll full of his Mission into, and his Martyr∣om in France. It is observable, with what heat and eagerness the Common People of Athens will hear and discourse of ; for being naturally proud and passio∣ate, they do exceedingly magnifie and ex∣ggerate the humility of that Saint, in lea∣ing so Noble and Illustrious a Diocess, to stablish himself in France. Not far from he Archbishops Palace there was a little Chappel Dedicated to Saint Dennis, which as been ruined by the fall of a Rock; and he Athenians have frequently solicited our
Missionaries to intercede to the King o France to repair it, and revive the Glory o their Nation among them. As to the number of its Inhabitants, I ad¦mired to have read and heard a thousan times that Athens was a desart: Certainly the Travellers that have reported it, onl passed thorow it, and that perhaps in a rain day, when no body was in the streets,  in the time of a Contagion, which send them packing to their Countrey house The Town consists of at least fifteen or si¦teen thousand Inhabitants, of which ten o twelve hundred are Turks. No Jews coul ever be admitted, though there are many, o them in the Neighbourhood, and partic¦larly at Thebes and Negropont; and to spea truth, in the whole Turkish Empire,  places but Athens and Trebizond have pre¦served the priviledge of excluding the Jew though the Turkish Officers have attempte several times to introduce them; but to op¦pose them, the Christians underhand mad friends to the Mahumetans of the said Citie pretending that the Jews would ingro the whole Trade, and ruine the rest of th Inhabitants: Sometimes they have threat¦ned the Jews which solicited their admit¦tance, and the fear of being cudgelled pre¦vailed with them to desist, for at Athen
they are in a great deal of danger. About 1986. Years since, Cassander the Macedonian having given the Administra∣tion of Affairs of this City to the Philosopher Demetrius of Phalerum, he found the City to consist of twenty one thousand Citizens, ten thousand Strangers setled in the Town, and four hundred thousand Slaves; and this account was testified by Ctesicles: and it is to be observed, that by the word Citizen is intended the Masters of Families, which must needs suppose a great number of Ser∣vants and Dependants. At present, as formerly, the people of both Sexes are well shaped, and of an Ex∣cellent Contexture, which is the reason they ive to be very old: We attributed much of their vigour to their diet, and their use of Honey, which the Athenians use very frequently, being excellently good. Their Physicians account their Honey for the wholsomest of their Food: But the Com∣mon People ascribe much to the Situation of their Mountains which shelter them so commodiously, from the winds; did they understand the virtue of their Simples which are there in great abundance and ex∣cellence, much would be attributed to them. The People have generally very strong and clear voices, and their Memories are admi∣able.
Philip of Macedon described them well▪ when he compared them to the Images o Mercury, which the Ancients put up in the Markets, and other publick places; hi expression was, that they were all mouth  implying, that they were good at nothing  but Oratory and Talk. It is a saying a¦mong those who are acquainted, with them  that as there is not a Countrey in the worl where Honey is more nourishing, nor Hem lock more pernicious; so there is not a Cit where the People that are disposed to goo are better; nor where they apply them¦selves to ill, they are worse: Naturall they are very selfish, and great dissembler Their Women are Virtuous, Pious an Chaste; they never admit of Conversatio with any Man, unless they be well assure of his Virtue. The Common People hav no kindness either for Us or the Italians▪ the frequent injuries which they receiv by the sudden descents of our Corsaires, ha so incensed them against us, that in time o War they hate us worse than the Turks  Our Privatiers appear no sooner at Sea but they are immediately in Arms, and the the Turks themselves do not use a Fra with worse language than they; so tha our infesting them, makes us mortally odi¦ous: Nevertheless this has no influence up∣on
the better sort, who are kind and civil to strangers that live with any kind of so∣briety and reputation: Nothing is more generous than they; they are the first that will salute a stranger, the first that will pro∣pose a friendship with him; and in a word, no Man can be long a stranger in Athens hat has the least spark of Society: Some of our Merchants will tell you other things, ut then they conceal the great Reasons whereby they have provoked the Atheni∣ns. When a man has rendered his friend∣hip suspected at Paris, he shall find how nwilling people are to continue their cor∣espondence. To be short, the Athenians o with admirable reputation maintain the Hospitality that was so honourable in their Ancestors. Their Language at Athens is the most ure and incorrupt of all the Cities in reece; It is no where spoken or under∣tood in its primitive purity but at Athens.  Tis true, when they speak any thing, they o it with a tone as if they sung, which has iven occasion to many people to say that hey spoke very ill; but it is now a Pro∣erb among the Greeks, That he who would peak well must have the elocution of A∣hens, and the accent of Napoli, for Napoli e Romania is the Town in all Greece where
the variation of the voice is most natural and sweet. Most part of the Mahumetans in Athens speak nothing but Greek, fo want of Commerce with the Turks abroad▪ Of the Turkish Language they have seldo more than seven or eight words in part o their Creed, La hillah allah, Muhamet h resoul ullah. When they meet a Turk o another Country, they accost him by hold∣ing up their thumb in the air, and if he an¦swers not in Greek, their Conversation i at an end. Their habit is almost the same▪ and scarce sufficient to distinguish them, fo except their Turban, their habit is perfect∣ly Greek; and for the Turkish Women, they have no difference at all. There are three Mosquo's in Athens, one in the Castle, an that was the Famous Temple of Minerva▪ the other two in the City, and the Chief o them was the magnificent Pantheon built by Adrian. As to the Form of their Government i Athens, there are four Jurisdictions tha manage the whole business of that City, o which three are Executed by Turkish O∣ficers, viz. the Sardar's, Disdar's and C¦di's; the other called the Vecchiados is i the hands of the Christians. The Sarda is Governour of the City, Commands th Janizaries, and the Militia round abou
the Town: The Disdar is Governour of the Castle, and lodges in it, he has Com∣mand over the Janizaries in the City: The Cadi has his Residence in the City likewise, and is Judge both in Civil and Criminal Causes: The Vecchiados are four and twenty Seniors selected out of the best Christian Families to Regulate private Af∣fairs betwixt Christian and Christian: The Vaywode or Farmer under Keslar-Agasi has some little Jurisdiction likewise, which he makes use of when the interest of the Farm requires it. I inquired of the most Venerable of the Vecchiados how it came to pass that their City being as populous as any in Greece, was not the residence of some Sangiac or Bey. They told me, it was an instance of the kindness which Mahomet II. had for A∣thens, because Officers of that Great Qua∣lity having alwayes great Trains and Re∣tinues, must needs be a great charge to the Cities where they reside; upon which con∣sideration Mahomet would not permit that the little Officers, that make up the Family of the Sangiac's, and are indeed so many Leeches, sucking up the blood of the Inha∣bitants, and incessantly stretching the Ju∣risdiction of their Masters, to build up their own Fortunes, should have the pillaging
of Athens, under pretence of advancing the dignity of their Lords. The Jurisdiction of the Vecchiados ex∣tends only to the Civil Affairs of the Chri∣stians, from whose Sentences there lies an appeal to the Cadi; but to prevent those appeals, and conceal their differences from the Cadi, the Vecchiados do oftner act as Mediators than Judges, endeavouring in an amicable way to compose their controver∣sies. The most considerable among the Vecchiados are the two Paleologi, Stama∣tis, and Jannis. The two Beninzellos, Jannis, and Demetrios. Janachis Coro∣lis, Dimitrios Periolis, Leonardus Scliros, Dimitrios Macola, Panajotti Cavalleiris, Janis Verdogonis, Polimenos Zarlis, Sta∣matis Calchondile, and an excellent person called Capitanakis, a rich Merchant that speaks Italian very well, and has a great kindness for the Franks. He lived a long time in Zant, where he contracted a friend∣ship with Taulignan the French Consul: He has a Son a very fine Gentleman. The Vec∣chiados are distinguished from the rest of the Inhabitants by a little Hat which they wear upon their heads: They hold their Offices for life, and when any of them die, his place is supplied by the suffrage of the Survivors, but with the approbation of the
Cadi. They have no precise Court, or fixed place where they assemble; sometimes they meet at the houses of the Paleologi; sometimes with one, sometimes with another, but commonly at the houses of the ancientest and most considerable among them. Their Clerk or Secretary keeps the minutes and Register of all Causes or Contracts passing betwixt the Christians in Athens for Hous∣es, Lands, or immoveable goods, (for by their Articles with Mahomet they were con∣tinued in the possession of their Estates) and their Bargains are all ratified by the Cadi. The Christians are not exempt from the duty upon Slaves, but for a small sum of money they enfranchise themselves, and for reasons which I shall tell you hereafter, even that is not collected with so much se∣verity as in other places, this Tax having been remitted or neglected since 1666. Their Pole-money, or Tax by the Head, which they call Caratge, is at Athens two Crowns per annum, but the Women pay nothing. There is also another Tax called Avalis which the Grand Signior exacts for the security of the Seas, and this is levied upon their Chimnies, but several persons are exempt, and particularly all that are any ways serviceable in the Castle, as those who are employed about repairing the
Walls; conveying or securing the Waters; scouring the Arms; fitting the Carriages for the Cannon, and such things. When this Avalis is collecting, you shall see all the Priviledged Persons with their Patents and Letters of Exemption thronging about the Receiver: But you must know that all thei Exemptions derive not from one Prince; some were granted by Mahomet II. some by Solyman the Great; and others by Am¦rath; however they will be sure to have them ratified, and that ratification is to be done at the Port by the Officers of the Divan. The great favours that they received from Mahomet (a Prince severe enough to all other Christians) made the Athenians uneasie under the domination of the Chri∣stian Princes, and I have been told they re∣tained an aversion to them a long time: But of late they are come to themselves, and as weary of the Barbarity of the Turks, who have for some time used them worse tha the rest of the Cities in Greece; so as now they would willingly hearken to their ol temptation of Liberty, if Christendom could espouse them, or propose any power that was likely to sustain them. The Malteses, and other Christian Privateers never make any descent, or take any Prizes upon their
Coasts, but the Turks charge them with Intelligence and Combination, and attri∣bute the whole mischief thereto. Upon these pretences, they immediately take the most wealthy of the Inhabitants into Cu∣stody, and force them to great Compositi∣ons before they are dismiss'd. There are great Factions among the Vecchiados, and at present even among the three Paleologi (for besides the two that are Vecchiados, there is a third who has devoted himself to an Ecclesiastical life) For some three or four years since, upon a difference about the division of Goods, they conceived so great a displeasure and animosity to one another, that they accused one another of Treason to the Grand Signior, and of hold∣ing Intelligence with the Venetian. But the Family of the Beninzellos being nearly allied to them, has interposed, and with the exhortations and admonitions of Fa∣ther Simon, in some measure lessened their Pique. And at length that Star, which some Ages since was so propitious to this City, shines again upon it with the same rays and emanations of Kindness; it being at this hour the happiest City in Greece, and the best protected. Its dependance is upon Keslar-Agasi, a black Eunuch that has the
superintendency of the Odaliques, or La∣dies of the Seraglio. He it is that has the sole and absolute Command of that secre appartment, an Office which the Grand Signior intrusts to none but the Negro Eu∣nuchs, and of them he chooses the most deformed, to give his Misses the less tem∣ptation. This Eunuchs kindness for Athens, may possibly respite its Calamities for some time, his Office being one of the most con∣siderable in that Empire, conducting much of the Sultan's private Pleasures, and ap∣proaching him in the sweetest moments of his life, and most proper for obtaining a Boon. The present prosperity of Athens, may be ascribed to a young Virgin of this City, born in the Reign of Mahomet III. who di∣ed in the year 1604, and was Great-Grand∣father to Mahomet IV. the present Empe∣rour of the Turks. This young Athenian Virgin was called Basilia; but the excel∣lence of her beauty having brought her into the Seraglio, the Turks gave her a new name, and called her Johahi. She missed narrowly of being made Hunkiar Asaki, or chief Sul∣taness; but she was not altogether so hap∣py as three other Virgins of the same City, which came to be Empresses of the East. Theodusius, the
second Son of Arcadius, married Athenais the Daughter of Leontius the noble Philo∣sopher of Athens, and changed her name from Athenais to Eudoxa, under both which she passed for the most learned, most pru∣dent, and most beautiful Lady of her time.  After her, Leo, Son of Constantine Coprony∣mus married Irene of the same City, but neither so fair nor so well qua∣lified as Athenais.  Not long after Stauracus Son of Nice∣phorus (who governed the Empire but few months) married Theophan, a beautiful young Virgin of Athens likewise. This Ba∣silia was of Christian Parents, and torn from them in her minority by the Turkish Officers that collected the Duties upon Children in those Parts, and had been informed of her excellent beauty. Her Mother, when they were carrying her away, weeping over her most bitterly, and clipping her in her Arms, conjured her to be always mindful of her Religion, and the calamities of her Coun∣try; and the good Creature never forgot what her Mother so earnestly recommended. She was put into the Seraglio about the beginning of the Reign of Achmet, an ef∣feminate and voluptuous Prince, and one, who of all the good qualities convenient
for a Soldier, had none but a faculty in making of Arrows; which rendered him so contemptible to his Janizaries, that in a Tumult, by way of insolence and decisi∣on, they told him he need not trouble himself to make his Arrows extraordinary, seeing he had not courage enough to try them upon the Christians. This being the most sensual Prince, and perhaps person of his time, it was not strange if in his Reig the Seraglio was fuller of Beauties than e∣ver: All the Beglerbegs or General Gover∣nours of Provinces; all the Sangiac's o particular Governours (convinced it would relish him very well, and was the ready way to keep them in their places, if not to advance them) sent to him daily the chois∣est Beauties they could find, adorned with rich Jewels, and furnished with Presents to be distributed among the Officers of the Seraglio and the Eunuchs, to engage them in their Interests, and to the protection o those who had sent them. The Keslar-Agasi was always to have the best share, for it is as he pleases, that these Beauties are admitted or not to the Caresses of the Sul∣tan. She that can make him her friend, ha put her Affairs in a good way, and the Belgerbegs that sent her; for the Keslar-Agasi knows well enough how and whe
to recommend them to his Master. But Basilia or Johahi came to the Seraglio without Jewels or any advantage but her own beauty; Fortune had given her no better Patrons than the inferiour Officers at Athens who had taken her by force from her Parents, upon which score detesting their Persons, and abhorring their Vio∣lence she would not have taken their Pre∣sents, had they been in a condition to have given them. Nevertheless Custom obliged, and she ought to have done it; whereupon at her entrance into the Seraglio one of the black Eunuchs whispered her in the Ear, and told her, You must by no means do as the last did that came in before you; she made no Presents to the Officers, and so fell nto disgrace. She had not gone six steps, before another, an old Kadun or Gover∣ness (each of which has five Damoisels under her Tuition) being taken with the beauty of Johahi accosted her thus: What Basha is it that you desire to befriend? Your Beauty is sufficient to attone for any Crime he shall commit; Your Eyes carrying with them a protection for all his enormities. The custom of Flattery is universal, and he appetite of Lucre is as great, and dispo∣ses of all things as powerfully in the Sera∣glio as any where else. But 'tis very strange
the Eunuchs should be so covetous in these places, having their Fortunes settled for their lives, and no Children when they are dead to inherit the vast Treasures which they amass: This shows clearly that no rea∣son is to be required of that general weak∣ness in mankind, and that our Vices d flow rather from the corruption of our Na∣tures, than the necessities of Life. Johahi returned no answer to these Mer∣cenaries, but in these words, which she re∣peated often in the Seraglio; I should d you no service if I should tell you the City where I was born, seeing it is too poor t afford you any considerable advantage; ma∣naging by little and little with great pru∣dence what her Mother had so seriously re∣commended for the advantage of her Coun∣try. She was put immediately into the Cu∣stody of the Kadun Kiaia, which is the Principal Governess of all the Damoisell and as she was carrying her into the Chuck chuck Oda or Chamber of new Comers, th Sultan was by the way recreating himsel with seven or eight of his Favourites: A the news of her arrival, he put an end to his sports, all the preparation was laid by and a mortal jealousie seized upon the re of the Nymphs, who upon such occasion are, betwixt fear and curiosity, under strang
agitations; and indeed where are the Ri∣vals that would not tremble upon such an Alarm? Those only who are rejected are pleased with such accidents, and do com∣monly pronounce the new Comers the hand∣somest they ever saw in despite to those for whom they had been refused. It was ob∣served, the Sultan expressed no great im∣patience to see her, which gave some satis∣faction to the Favourites: He only demand∣ed whether she was as handsom as was re∣ported, and immediately four of the Oda∣liques proffered their service to go see, and their report was already determined, at least the Sultan believed it so; for being well acquainted with the humours of that Sex, he conceived they would readily speak a∣gainst their minds, and being envious of one anothers greatness, commend that cun∣ningly which perhaps they did not ap∣prove; and condemn that which privately they admired. The Sultan understood well enough the power of their jealousie, and knew how to interpret their character of Johahi. But he had no occasion to make se of his skill; the Messengers never came back, which was of great advantage to the Athenian, for he concluded they were un∣willing to give him a description of the ranscendency of their Rival. Upon this
presumption he ran to her himself; he saw her, surveyed her, and liked her so well, he entertained himself two whole days with her, and for a long time made all his Court∣ship to her. The first thing she did was to enquire in∣to, and consider all the Caballs, and In∣trigues of the young Damoiselles, resolv∣ing to take her measures a quite contrary way. Being one day with the Sultan in a Kiosque or Pavillion that looked upon the Sea, she slily took opportunity to insinu∣ate the ambition and Corruption of his fa¦vourites who sold all the Offices of the Empire by the mediation of his Eunuchs bartering for all publick Employments both of War and of Peace. The Sulta being then in a good humour, had sent fo five or six of his beloved Odaliques to ad to his mirth: When they came near, Joh presented them to the Sultan in a smilin but malitious way, adressing herself to hi in this manner (which sufficiently shows th great veneration the Turks have for thei Emperour) God prolong your blessed day The Holy Prophet preserve you; See, Sir,  troop of fair Ladies, ambitious to approac the King and Soveraign both of the Lan and the Sea: and then (not staying for th Sultan's answer) she presented them to hi
one after another, adding with profound respect, The blessing of God go with you: The peace of the Holy Prophet make your days happy: This, Sire, is the Basha of A∣lepo, presenting one to him who but two days before had obtained that Bashaship for a person who had bribed her suffi∣ciently. This, Sire, is the Bey of Mesitra, and this the Cadi of Trebazond, but he has but two days to be Cadi, for there is another offers a thousand Sequins more. For my part, Sir, (the great Prophet bless your Reign) I aspire to nothing but a place in your favour and affection; and that I would purchase with the best and dearest of my blood: I leave the disposal of the great Offices to my Companions; let them leave me the heart of my Soveraign and we shall be all contented. The Sultan smiled, and being alwayes ready to gratifie his Oda∣liques, he commanded Johahi to ask some∣thing of him, and in merriment reproached her by her Generosity. Johahi (who to compass her designs, had proposed other Methods than what were practised by her Companions) instead of snatching at the opportunity, replyed with great modesty to the Sultan; The favour of our Prophet protect you, the Great God preserve you: Do not divert me, Your Majesty is not sensible
of my avarice, my Petition is for your heart and affection; in gaining that I should be more rich, and in requesting it I have been more selfish than all the rest of your slaves▪ In this manner she dallied a long time, re∣fusing the liberality of the Sultan, insomuch that he was forced to delude her, and caus presents to be delivered underhand to the Eunuchs and Caduns in Johahi's name, a if they had been sent from her: Whe they came to return their thanks, she wa amazed, and for some time believed it be  mockery, and done to reproach her for th omission of a Custom that had been pra¦ctised by every body else: But by degrees she perceived it was the generosity of her Gallant who had prevented her desires: Al this did not transport her, or tempt her be∣yond her former Moderation: But at length he grew angry, and being impatient of ex∣pressing his Love to her by some consider able boon, he told her in some heat, that h could be as proud as She, and that since Jo¦hahi despised his favours, he was resolve to receive no more favours from her. Jo¦hahi saw now was her time, she repaire immediately to the Keslar-Agasi, and desi¦red him to go along with her to the Empe¦rour, and being come into his presence, sh addressed in this manner; Behold, Sir, you
slave, I am now in need of your bounty, the great Prophet sanctifie your days, and showre down perpetual health and happiness upon Your Sacred head: I shall beg nothing of Your Majesty, but for those persons that are nearest Your most sublime Throne: Why should Your Majesties vast Bounty exhaust it self abroad, when in Your own Court You have such excellent objects? My first Peti∣tion is for Your Majesties most sublime and incomparable self, that You would have more care of Your own health, and ease, and sa∣tisfaction. In my own particular, I should be too happy if Your Great Majesty would vouchsafe to Grant my Petition; but most of all, if any pains or diligence of mine could procure, or, but in the least contribute to them. God make you victorious over your Enemies, and may our good Prophet pour down his blessing into your heart. There is not a person in Your Majesties vast Empire to whom I can pay any thing more justly han to this Keslar-Agasi before you: And I know nothing that I can ask for him so properly, as the Government of the City where I was born. Confer, I beseech you, upon a Slave that has been so faithfull to Your Sacred Majesty and Your Interests the Revenue of Athens, and permit him to sub∣titute under him Kiais and such Officers as
may not abuse Your Divine Authority, as o∣ther have done before them, of whose vio∣lences and extortions my miserable Parents have many times given me sad and deplo∣rable Relations. Her request was imme∣diately granted, yet not without regret in the Sultan, to see that she was not to have the profit of it her self, and that she had found out a way to draw a boon from him, without being obliged her self to call him Benefactor. By this means, the City of A∣thens became dependant upon the Keslar-Agasi, and the Revenue ever since accrued to the Successors in that Office. That Ke∣slar-Agasi sent thither a Deputy or Farmer with express Order against Rapine and Ex∣tortion, which Order was not only execu∣ted then, but has been observed ever since. After she had laboured so happily for the benefit of her Countrey, Johahi proved with Child, and the Sultans Love (which formerly was volatile) being fixed in her, transported with hopes of a Son to inheri his Empire, he was so forward as to settl him a Family. He appointed him a Validi-Agasi, or Chief of the old Sultanness black Eunuchs, and an Eschatradeler-Agasi o black Eunuch that has the Tuition of the Sultans Children; but She died in labour and the Child, which was a Son, with her
who had doubtless been concerned in the Empire, being born a full Year before the unfortunate Osman who succeeded Achmet. The Sultan was infinitely grieved for the loss of Johahi, and being jealous that some of his she-favourites had given her a lift, (which is a practise too common among them) he clapped two or three of the most suspected of them into the Old Seraglio, which is never done but when the Sultan dies, to whom they were Favourites. This Grant which was given by Achmet to the Keslar-Agasi, has been ever since continued to that Office; but he who was most Ge∣nerous, and from whom the City of Athens received the most honourable protection, was slain in that great and dangerous Sedi∣tion in Constantinople in March 1655. This is the Story that was told by a black Eunuch, that the Keslar-Agasi sent to A∣thens to take possession of his new De∣measnes: What honours would have been shown? what Statues and Monuments ere∣cted to this Johahi by the City of Athens, had she been born in an Age when that poor Town was more flourishing and grate∣full? At present it is content to receive any benefit, without inquiring from what hand it comes. The good man Capitanakis, and a Caloger called Hyeros Monachos Dama∣shinos
(who gave us this account) seemed to be much concerned that the memory of this Johahi was almost lost in that City, though in other things (perhaps less consi∣derable) not only events, but names, and other circumstances of above 3000. Years standing, are Recorded. The Revenue of this Demeasn is Farmed every year to him who gives most, and yet it seldom amounts to above 7 or 8000 Pi∣asters; and though he who Rents it, is but really a Farmer, yet he takes upon himself the quality of a Vaywode. The best part of the Revenue is the Customs; he receives likewise the tenth of their Avelanade that grows about Athens. This Avelande is a kind of Akorn which they use for Dying, but it is most proper for Tanning of Lea∣ther. When this Vaywode is an austere man, and values himself, as he does who is at present in the place, all people fear him, and even the Cadi himself. To give you an instance. Father Lewis of Paris (a zealous Capuchin now, though formerly a Lieutenant Colonel in the Regiment of Monsieur le Mareshal de la Motte Fauda∣cour) being Catechising one day in Athens, as an incouragement to a Boy in whom he found great hopes both of Memory and Judgment, he gave him an Agnus. As the
Lad was going from him, a Turkish Boy snatched the Agnus away out of the hands of the Christian. Father Lewis being by, and apprehending Profanation, stopped the Turk, would have it again, and laying hold of his Vest, the Boy struggled, and his Vest was torn. Some Mahumetans standing by, and glad of the occasion, cried out a Chri∣stian is beating of a Turk, which with them is no less than Capital. A Tumult was imme∣diately raised, the Cadi sent for, and im∣mediately he gave Sentence against the poor Father, who submitted with all meek∣ness. The Consul privately sent a dozen Loaves of Sugar to the Vaywode, and gave him an account of Proceedings: The Vay∣wood repaired to the place, reprehended the Cadi for his forwardness, and told him he would examine the business himself, and see it decided next morning: Immediately he discharged the Father out of Prison, and delivered him to the custody of the Consul; at night he went himself to the houses of the Informers, and threatning to drub them, he made them recant, by which means he rescued the poor Capuchin in despight of the Cadi. This Father is at present very well, and lives in Napoli di Romania. Tuesday the 23. in the Morning, the first thing we did was to secure our selves of the
protection of the Turkish Officers, to whom we presented several curiosities, and after∣wards made them a Visit ourlves: Bian∣chi would by no means be perswaded along with us for reasons that he kept to himself. For our Interpreter, we made choise of a Janizary, a haughty supercilious fellow, but one who knew every body, was well known himself, and spake Italian very well. In a word, our confidence in him was so great, that we refused Cajetas the English, and Baptista Jannis the French Dragoman, who were each of them pro∣posed to us. The Sardar and the Cadi were not then in Athens; some three or four days before the Sardar was gone to one of his Country Houses not far from Lep∣sina; We therefore addressed our selves to the Disdar in the Castle, but more in curi∣osity than duty. When a Stranger or Greek himself desires to go into the Castle, he must have the consent of the Disdar, who sends his Ring for their safe Conduct; and the Servant by whom his Ring is sent (receiv∣ing a Present, either from Greek or Stran∣ger) showing his Ring, the Guards suffer him to pass, as we found by experience. In the time that Athens flourished, the Castle stood in the middle of the Town, and was called indifferently Glaucopion,
Parthenon, Cecropia, Polis, and Acropolis, at present they call it Castro. It is situate upon a Mountain which the Ancients called Tritonion, because dedicated to the God∣dess Minerva, called formerly Tritonia, or Tritogenia. As we were making our Tower, to get up to the Castle, we saw at the top of the Rock a Caloger or Nun of the Or∣der of St. Basil, who kept the door of a much frequented Church that stands in the hol∣low of the said Rock: The Church is call∣ed Panagia, as being dedicated to the Vir∣gin Mary, we being willing to bestow the first fruits of our curiosity upon it, went in, and found it very handsom, and richly a∣dorned by the care of the Lady Govern∣ness. As soon as we were come forth of the Panagia, I perswaded our Companions to look about them more seriously, for it was thereabouts that the Grotto was, which a∣mong the Ancients was so Famous for the adventures betwixt Apollo and Creusa, Daughter of a King of Athens; which Grot∣to was afterwards by the Athenians turned into a Temple, and dedicated to Apollo and Pan: And thanks to the hardness of the Rock, there is the most entire relique of all the Monuments remaining of the Old Athens; and of this Grotto Euripides makes
mention in two or three of his Tragedies. The hollow Rock that is near it was called Macrae Petrae, and it was admired by some of us (more verst in Warlike Affairs than the rest) that the Christian Corsaires, a∣mong their many Designs and Enterprizes upon the Turks, never thought of making use of that hole as of a Mine half made to their hands for blowing up the Castle, which in their judgment ten or twelve Bar∣rels of Powder would easily and effectually have done: but this was only whispered among our selves, for the Turks are very shy in those points, and we had our Janizaries always at our heels. It is most certain, that about eighteen months since, a Greek of the Island of Can∣dia who had lived long in Athens, came privately to Daniel Justiniani, Commis∣sary and Treasurer-General for the Vene∣tian Fleet, and proposed to him the pilla∣ging of Athens, which being an open Town would have been no hard matter, and for the Castle, he would have taken that by the hole I mentioned before; to effect this, the Candiot desired only eight hundred Men, and three or four Field-Pieces (more for terrour than execution) with ten barrels of Powder for springing the Mine. It is said, that at first Justiniani rejected his pro∣position,
upon the score, that the Plague was in Athens, and he was fearful the Troops which he imployed in that Enter∣prize should bring the Sickness into the Ve∣netian Fleet: But afterwards having con∣sidered it better, he Communicated with Francisco Cornaro, and Zorz Foscarini, two Noble Venetians that served in Candy, and all three of them resolved to have broke it to General Morosini, and the Pro∣veditor Cornaro; but in the very nick, the Venetians, having the better against the Turks in a Sea-fight upon the Coast of Can∣dia, changed their minds and took other measures. For my own part, when I heard of this design, I concluded it rejected upon ac∣count of difficult execution, for the Guards in the Pyrgo or Watch-Tower in Porto-Lione, are too diligent to have been surpri∣zed, or to have failed giving timely Alarm to the Athenians, though dispersed up and down in the Country by reason of the Plague: Besides, the distance betwixt A∣thens and Porto-Lione (where their descent must have been made) would have given the Athenians leasure to have got into a body, and endangered the retreat of the Venetians, though they had come in a body of four thousand men; and as to the blow∣ing
up the Castle by that hole in the Grot∣to, I thought it unpracticable in respect of the height of the Rock, which is of such a nature, that the breach cannot be favour∣able; for let the Rock fall which way it will, it will fall into the Mine, and leave such heaps of rubbish as will require ano∣ther Mine to remove, which is not to be done without more time than is consistent with those sudden attempts; in a word, the Venetians durst not venture upon it. From the Panagia we passed on towards the Castle, and nothing could be more re∣markable than the way by which we went: It was made of the ruines of the old Lyce∣um, the Famous School where Aristotle taught his Philosophy. It is now level, and very pleasant, but nothing to be seen of the old Palaestra where their Champions wre∣stled. Upon this flat it is, that in time of War, their new raised men are exercised, and prepared for the Field. Upon certain dayes in the year, the Athenians dine pub∣lickly upon it, where they have no want of water, being supplyed by the ruines of an old Aquaeduct. We fell into mighty To∣pographical disputes about the place where formerly stood that Famous Fountain call∣ed Panopis, whose waters have been since diverted. That Fountain was called also
Diocharis, as being not far from a Gate of the City of that Name: There are some wooden Pipes to be seen, but nothing so big as has been mentioned by very credi∣ble Authors. The Trees which have been planted are so shady and delightful, that it is become the common walk of the Town, and is therefore called Peripatus, and que∣stionless, it was the convenience of that, which invited Aristotle, gave him oppor∣tunity of teaching his Disciples as he was walking, and the name of Peripateticks to his Followers. To dilate upon their Doctrine would be superfluous, seeing it is at this day the great Theme of our Schools: I shall only say, that their great study is to understand the proprieties of Nature, and the force of se∣cond causes. Their Morality is pleasant, affirming, that to arrive at the Summum Bo∣num, and make our lives happy in this World, our Virtue must be beholding to the advantages and commodities of our Bodies: Corporis commodis compleri vitam beatam putant. As to passions, they are so far from eradicating them, that they be∣lieve them necessary. Theophrastus upon the flight of Aristotle taught in the same School, and had above two thousand Scho∣lars.
In this Lycaeum was also kept the Court of the Polemark, who is the third of the nine Archontes: The first of the Archontes by way of excellence was called Archonte; the second, King of the Sacrifices; the third Polemarque; and the six others pro∣miscuously by the name of The smothetes. This Tribunal in the Lycaeum was princi∣pally for strangers, for in time of War the Polemarque was Captain-General of all the Forces of that Common-wealth; and in time of Peace, he was Judge in all Causes and Controversies betwixt Strangers and the Inhabitants of that Town. Not far from this Tribunal stood a Sta∣tue of Heros Lycus or Lycius the Son of Pandion; which Statue represented a Wolf, and by every Tribunal in the City there was a Statue of the same Figure. About sixty yards from thence, upon a Eminence, as Herodotus observes, are to be seen the ruines of the Areopagus, that Renowned and Majestick Court, whose Members are never mentioned in History, but with great Veneration for their tran∣scendent Integrity and Justice. It was de∣nominated Areopagus from Ares, a Name which the Greeks had given to Mars; and the first Cause that was ever heard in it, was an Impeachment against him, for hav∣ing
slain one of the Sons of Neptune. Per∣haps you may remember how those Pagans are reproached with it by Lactantius; Vos homicidam Martem consecrastis ut Deum, quod tamen non fecissetis, si illum Areopa∣gitae in Crucem sustulissent. But Lactantius prevaricated, and did not say all, for this Homicide was judged by twelve of their Gods before the Court of the Areopagitae was erected. Authors do not agree upon their number; some will have them Thirty one, others Fifty one, and others above Five hundred, which makes it probable that in different times their number was different. All the rest of their Magistrates were annual, only the Areopagitae were for life. They held their Court always in the night, and in the dark, that they might dispatch their business with more intenti∣on and impartiality, when free from all objects that might work upon their affe∣ctions, and dispose them unjustly either to severity or pity. But it was a general practice in all Courts for the Judges to sit in the open air in places uncovered: Their Salaries were all equal, and paid out of the Publick Money, besides a Fee of about Three half pence in every Cause. In Cicero's time the Romans entered them∣selves among these Areopagitae, and referred
several knotty and ambiguous Causes to their decision. On the left hand of the Areopagus we passed by a Hill exactly of the height of the Castle, it is called Trajans Arch, from the ruines of a Triumphal Arch which Trajan caused to be erected upon it: but anciently it was called Museon, from Musaeus who used to recite his Verses there. The Citta∣del which the Macedonians built there to bridle the Town; and the brave exploit of Olympiadorus, who (with twelve more) beat out the Garrison, have made the place very memorable in History. Some of our Fellow Travellers having taken a fancy (from the great noise that at this day the name of Adrian makes in that City) would needs have it that that Arch was dedicated to him, but it is a mistake of you will be∣lieve common report, which calls that Hill at this hour Trajans Arch. There is but one avenue to the Castle and that not imbellished as of old with the famous Ante-Port called Propylaea, whose magnificent structure cost as many Talents as amounts of our money to Two Millions and six hundred Livers, which went very high in an age when the Salary of one of their Soveraign Judges was but 4 d. per diem. This Propylaea is at present nothing
but rubbish, yet even that shows it to have been noble and great. On the side of it there is built a place for a double Court of Guard, but the building is very indiffe∣rent. Formerly the Keys of this Fort were de∣posited in the hands of some considerable man, who notwithstanding (by a certain diffidence in the Government) was to keep them but one day: and the person was chosen by lot. Afterwards it was intrusted with one of the Epistatae or Prytanes, of whom you shall hear more hereafter: Only this by the by: There were three sort of Animals that never were admitted into this Castle; Dogs, because of their nastiness; Goats, lest they should crop the branches of the sacred Olives; and Crows, as being forbiden by Minerva. The reasons you shall have afterwards. Part of the Garrison was in Arms at the Gate, not so much in complement to us as to show the exactness of their Guards, though we had sent them a Present before. The whole Garrison consisted of about 300 men; they would have them thought to be Janizaries, but they were but so many dead pays, and the Soldiers when called to their Arms, were born and bred in that Country, and far short of that Martial Or∣der,
of which more another time. In all the Turkish Territories there are such sort of people which take upon them that name to make them more formidable; and all a∣long upon the Frontiers where the Garri∣sons are inforced with Janizaries, and where there is a necessity of good Soldiers, these are looked upon as the refuse of their Militia, and called by way of contempt Muhanat or Poultrons, as I said before. In the Castle of Athens there are about three hundred of them; they are upon the Guard only in the day time; for as soon as it is night the Children of these Janizaries walking round within the Works, with continual shouts and cryes would perswade us of their vigilance and readiness, and especially upon the arrival of any strangers they are more clamourous than ordinary, to signifie the carefulness of their Parents, and strike us with greater terrour, and ap∣prehension of them, whilst in truth the good men are either asleep in their beds, or a∣broad about their business, being most of them Mechanicks. That part of the Wall which they call Cimonion (which is towards the South) is covered over with a kind of Herb they call Parthenon or Matricaria like our Mother-wort, of which you may see more in Plutarch in his Life of Sylla. There
is nothing so much of it on the other Wall called Pelasgicon: These Walls are old and decayed, but well supported by Buttresses in several places: The Greeks are obliged to keep them in repair, and their Privi∣ledges are preserved to them for their pains. The Artillery belonging to the Castle, consists of twenty Pieces of Canon; their Carriages are alwayes in very good Order, and it is part of the Christians Duty to keep them so: We made our Visit to the Dis∣dar, who received us very civilly: He was a corpulent Man, well enough behaved, and had two Sons, one already in the Army in Candia, and the other preparing to go thi∣ther: The latter was a very handsom Youth, with a great skar upon his lip, that he had got with darting of a Javelin after the man∣ner of the Turks, and being cured by a bal∣som which Father Simon gave him, he re∣tained a great kindness for him, and did him many good Offices to his Father; and his Father was so sensible of what he had done for his Son, that he never since comes that way, but he stops at his door, and sa∣lutes him in Greek with a Callimera Patera, or, Good Morrow Father, which is frequent∣ly followed with a Visit, and great expres∣sions of favour. He treated us with Sher∣bet
and Perfumes, and other kind of Civi∣lities, which we had bespoke by our more solid Presents: His Ceremonies were not long, but they tired our whole Company, which the Disdar perceiving, understand∣ing our Curiosity, and observing our eyes still sixt upon the Temple of Minerva, he commanded it should be opened, and Or∣dered the Kiaia to attend us. This Temple was built by Pericles (in the place where the Old Temple was burnt by the Persians) and all People and Crea∣tures were imployed in the building of it, as you may see in Plutarch in his Life of Cato the Censor. Callicrates and Ictinus were the Chief Architects, and Ictinus (be∣ing of the greater reputation of the two) left us a description of it in a Book which he writ expresly, but it is lost; and indeed the building it self is little better, for be∣fore this time nothing considerable would have been left of it, had not Adrian ap∣plyed his care, and repaired it; to whom we are obliged for whatever is memorable or antique in Athens: I wish Posterity may find the Turks as well inclined to preserve them. After this Temple had for a long time been made use of in the worship of Miner∣va, the Christians turned it into a Church,
And called it Santa Sophia: The Turks have turned it since into a Mosque. I hope one day to show you a draught that I took of it, by which you will at one glance dis∣cover so much beauty and magnificence, as will attone for the resolution I have taken of losing no more time in describing it thus, than barely in letting you know, that the Dorick Order is no where so excellent as there. That it is so Noble and Magni∣ficent without, that the very Sea-men be∣take themselves to their Perspective-Glasses as far as they can see: That the Frontis-piece is most beautifull, and the Portico's (which make the Wings) with the Figures wherewith they are adorned, do add ex∣ceedingly to it. Upon this Frontispiece it was, that with great Joy and Veneration we read that Fa∣mous Inscription mentioned in Scripture, To the unknown God: It is not ingraven upon the door of a little Chappel, as some People would have it, who do not remem∣ber, that in the Mosco's there are neither Chappels nor Altars permitted to remain. Nevertheless you must not conceive that this was one of those Inscriptions which gave occasion to Saint Paul to discover to the Athenians that God of whom till then they had been ignorant. The Christians of
the third Century had set them up in me∣mory of the Ancient Inscriptions which Epimenides caused to be ingraven on the Altars in the time of Solon, as we are told by Diogenes Laertius; and Pausanies gives us an account of the situation of those Altars in Phalerum, and in the Province of Elis. Among the Statues on the out-side of the Temple, the best work is a Marble Statue of a Lion. They have all of them been in great danger of pulling down by the scru∣pulosity of the Mahumetan Religion, which forbids the Image of any Animals, and up∣on that score several of them are maimed; but at length some civiler than others, ex∣plained their Law with more favour to the Statues, and preserved those of them which are left; and yet the kindness of the Officers could not have done it, had not Divine Providence Cooperated; for at our en∣trance into the Mosco, the first thing our Ja∣nizary shew'd us, was, a Picture of the Vir∣gin Mary, one of her Eyes being shot out with a Musket bullet by a Turk: The Sto∣ry (though not at all to their advantage) is commemorated by the Turks as well as by the Christians; the Turks aggravate it, and will tell you that the sacriledge was punished miraculously, the bullet rebound∣ing
upon the Malefactor with such violence that it struck out his brains; but the Chri∣stians (whose testimony is looked upon as more credible) say only that he immediate∣ly lost the use of his right Arm, and con∣tinued lame ever after. The building within is not so rich as with∣out, but it is as regular; It is but of late years that it has been discernable, and that was by removing the trash wherewith it was full by reason of the Mahumetan Offer∣ings: For it seems the place where this Temple stands has had in all Ages a Power to incourage and spur men on to Devoti∣on, there being a certain kind of fatality that determines Men and Cities to peculiar Practices and Customs. The same Star that made Athens superstitious in times of Ido∣latry, that made them so fervently pious in times of Christianity, has made them as zea∣lous under the Discipline of the Turks. 'Tis not above fifteen years since this Temple of Minerva was one of the most Celebrated Mosquos in all Turkie; to which Reputa∣tion it was advanced by the Dervices, which are a sort of Religious Turks; and before the present Grand Visier (Chief Mi∣nister in the Port) provoked by their frauds and collusion in matters of Religion, had banished them out of Europe to Cogna where
they were Originally Instituted, they made no reckoning even of their Dervices till they had been in Pilgrimage at the Mosque in Athens: These sort of Pilgrims had (as they thought) adorned the inside of this Temple with pieces of Taffaty and old Scarffs which they had hung up and displayed in every corner. There was not any of their Devotes (for each Order has its Devotes) but fastned to the Walls some little Banner or other of Red and Yellow Taffaty, and now and then of Yellow and Green, which are the Colours the Spahi or Turkish Ca∣valry carry in their hands upon any solemn Cavalcade. Others of them who had been in Foreign Parts, would hang up some bau∣ble they had brought from thence; and o∣thers that were Artificers, when they had made any thing extraordinary, would give some of them to their Mosque, and hang them up against the Wall: but this clut∣ter of Offerings is almost quite laid aside. Standing so high as it did, it was strange, me thought, to find it so dark; but by the wisdom of that excellent Architect Ictinus it was contrived with very few windows, that it might with more force and solidity resist the assaults of the winds, which for want of free passage do many times make a great noise in the Mosque; and the Lamps,
according to the Custom of the Turks, be∣ing very numerous, and hanging thick with gilt wires, the wind strikes them one against another, and makes a noise very unpleasing to the ear. It is only at Prayer time these Lamps are lighted, and indeed they give but little ad∣vantage to the common light of the Temple; and yet we were no sooner entered, but we were suprized with a more than ordinary lustre, refracted from two bright polished Stones, placed close by one another in the main wall towards the bottom of the Mosque. They seemed to be two large Lamps that cast an extraordinary light, and as we advanced the light seemed to in∣crease. Their Colour was not unlike the Carbuncle, and some body had had the cu∣riosity to examine them; for in one of them there is a little hole, made I suppose to that purpose. The jet Mirror or Looking-Glass in the Abbey of St. Denis is nothing so il∣lustrious. Their Figure is rectangular, or a long square, each of them about three foot long, and a foot and a half broad. We having observed that the Turks which were with us looked upon them with more than usual respect, had not the confidence to touch or examine them any farther lest we should have been guilty of some great profanation.
Besides the Kiaia interposed, and we were obliged to the more formality, the Iman of the Mosque making towards us himself, accompanied by the Talismans and his Kod∣gias, which are one to the other in the same subordination as the Parsons, and Vicars, and Curates among us. It was no little favour which the Disdar had done us in preparing the Iman, and disposing him to be civil to us, who of himself was a severe and rigid man, having been a Kodgias in Asia, where the Mahumetans are so scrupulous, that if a Christian be taken in any of their Mosques, he has no way to get off, but either by apo∣stasie or death. These Officers advancing with great gra∣vity towards us, attributed the cause of that light to a Miracle of their Prophet Maho∣met; for the Religion of the Turks runs much upon Miracles, and we thought nei∣ther safe, nor indeed civil to contest the truth of it. The Stones being transparent, one of these two things must of necessity produce that light; either there must be two Lamps behind it, whose light is seen through, or else the two Lamps before it being placed exactly in the opposite Wall, dart their rays upon those Stones, which rays are reflected again as from a Looking-Glass. We could discern nothing behind
that might be the cause, though on the sides of it, according to the Turkish Mode, there hung great numbers of Austriges Eggs; several little Lamps without lights, and se∣veral little Globes of Crystal. Be it from which it will, it is probably designed to perpetuate the prodigy of that Golden Lamp which was placed there by Calima∣chus, the famous Sculptor, who was the first that invented the way of piercing Stone with an Augar. This Lamp was supplied with Oil but once a year, though it was to keep a constant light night and day before the Statue of Minerva: But the Ancients (though otherwise sufficiently superstitious) made no Miracle of it, supposing the du∣ration of the light proceeded from an occult property in the nature of the Wick, which as they thought was made of a sort of in∣combustible Cotton; nevertheless it burn∣ed not without smoke, for to carry it off, Calimachus had made a most admirable Pipe that conveyed it out at the top of the Tem∣ple. At present it is quite otherwise: But to settle our thoughts: with an eager and decisive tone, the Iman told us, that the first appearance of the Miracle of the two Lamps, was the very day that Sultan Ma∣homet II. turned that Temple into a Mosque. In a word, Mahomet II. is in Athens of so
great reputation, that they think all things extraordinary that are done either by him or for him. Before these two Stones there stands a white Marble Chair formerly imployed by the Arch-Bishop, but now it is the place from whence the Iman dispences his Alchoran; and in each side of the Chair, in the main Wall there are two Cupboards, covered with two Tables of Marble, in which the Christians used to put the Ornaments for their Altar. One of those Cupboards has not been opened since the Christians had possession of that Church; and the other being rashly and audaciously opened not many years since by a Turk, there came forth so mischievous and pestilent an Air, as brought the Plague into the City, and was the occasion of a great Mortality. This is confessed by the Turks themselves, and since that time no body has had the courage to open them. When we came out of the Temple, at a distance of about fifty paces, we saw that famous Well that is recorded as one of the Wonders in Nature; and even at this day the Athenians do esteem it one of the greatest Rarities of their Country. Its wa∣ter is salt, and of the same colour with the Sea; every time the South wind blows, it
is mightily agitated, and makes a great noise in the bottom of the Well. Our Fellow-Travellers being impatiently and incessantly addicted to Natural disqui∣sitions, had not found a fairer subject for their dissertations. Some were of opinion that from the Sea to the Well there was some secret and subterraneous Meatus, into which the wind forcing it self, made an ebullition, or else the Sea was driven there∣by violently up to the Well, and supplied it with Salt waters. Others objected that the Spring must be there, and proceeding upon Hydraulick Principles, concluded that the Water rising naturally no higher than the level of its Fountain, could not be car∣ried from the Sea so high as to the top of the Castle Hill, but would rather have dis∣gorged into the Pits in the lower Town, where yet there is not the least semblance of any such thing. But all agreed that the noise proceeded from the force of the wind dispersing the vapours which the saltness of the Water exhaled, and that it was from the disposition of the Sea-banks, that only a South wind could come at it. In a Country proper for Experiment, we should have weighed it with Rain and Sea-water, examining how they would have in∣corporated, and which of the three had
fallen down to the bottom: We should have tried whether Fresh-water Fish would have lived longer in it than Sea-Fish; and causing both of them with a gentle fire to evaporate, have seen which had left the most Salt. Had it been Winter we should have tried which would have been first frozen. We should have likewise observ∣ed whether the bottom of the Well had been Chalky, Gravelly, Turfy, Rocky, or Sandy; and perhaps have proceeded so far in our Curiosity, as to have taken some Criminal out of Prison, and causing him to drink it, have seen whether it would have put him into a Dysentery according to the propriety of the Sea-water. From the Castle Hill, we could discover all the Isles in the Gulf of Engia, without the help of our Perspectives, of which indeed we durst not make use to look about as we would have done, because we were very near a steep place that is to this day memo∣rable for the precipitation of a King, and might well be a place of punishment to peo∣ple that are over-curious. It was Egeus, Father of Theseus, who threw himself down headlong 2905 years since, having from the same place where we stood, descried a far off at Sea, the black Sails of that Ship which brought back from Creet his Son,
whom he supposed the Minotaure had de∣voured; Plutarch gives you a particular ac∣count. At a small distance upon the plain or flat of the Castle there is a small point of a Rock with nothing about it, which probably was the place where Silenus disposed of him∣self when he came along with Bacchus in∣to this Castle: In the same Court there were formerly a hundred remarkable things to be seen, and as many more in the houses that are now set apart for the entertainment of the Janizaries: Upon the Plain there were several Altars dedicated to Friendship, Mo∣desty, Integrity, Oblivion, Jupiter, Vulcan, Neptune and Minerva; so that you may observe, that in old time their Altars were not alwayes within the Precincts of their Temples: Many were in the Field, and uncovered, which the Romans called Sub Dio. On that side where the Janizaries are lodged, nothing is to be seen but ruines, except the Arsenal built by Lycurgus the Son of Lycophron, which Arsenal appears still very Magnificent and Lofty, especially the great Tower, which is one of the first things that discovers the Castle to the Ships at their entrance into the Gulf of Engia; and I have an Opinion it was upon that
Tower that the Statue of Minerva was pla∣ced, which Statue was of such a vast big∣ness, that from the Promontory of Sunion, the casque and lance of it might easily be descried. Lycurgus built this Arsenal of Marble, and among the rest of the Ammu∣nitions, there is constantly in readiness a provision of fifty thousand Arrows. Quite through the Janizaries Apart∣ment there is nothing to be seen but ruines of houses, that in appearance have former∣ly been very Magnificent; but the Greeks frequenting those places but seldom, we had not the help of Tradition to inform us where stood the Temples of Jupiter Tutela∣ris, Minerva the Protectress, Neptune, A∣glaura, her Sister Pandrosa, and Victoria; as likewise the Temple of Venus, which Phaedra caused to be Erected, to acquit her self of a Vow that she had made for her recovery from loving Hippolytus: These Famous Places, where of old so many Gods had Incense burned to them, are now de∣faced and profaned with the Tobacco of the Turks, at present the greatest smoaken in the world: I ventured among then rub∣bish of one of those ruined houses; In my life time I never saw so many Choughs as I saw there, which Birds are more common in Athens now than formerly, but nothing so considerable.
This great demolition considered, I do not think you can reasonably inquire after the Olive-Tree which sprang up so mira∣culously in the Castle when Minerva and Neptune had their great difference about the possession of that Country. Nor do I believe you will be more eager to inform your self of the Opisthodomos, or place of their publick Treasurie, in which there was always in deposito a thousand Talents of ready Money, kept with so much rigour for the extreamest dangers, that unless the City were in imminent hazard of pillage∣ing, or fire, it was no less than death for any man to propose the medling with it. To be short, nor is there more to be seen of the apartment belonging to the She-Priest of Minerva, to whom it was forbid∣den to eat any coagulated Milk, but what was brought from the Island of Salamis. The House belonging to the two Virgins dedicated to the said Goddess, is under the same desolation; and, which is more re∣gretable, the admirable Statue of Diana done by Praxitiles; the three Statues of Minerva by the inimitable Phidias; the Statues of the Graces by Socrates (which, by the way, would have justified the con∣sistency of Mechanicism and Philosophy) the rich Sculptures, and admirable Master∣pieces
of Daedalus, Leocaris, Cleetas, En∣deus, and Calamis, are all lost and gone, as are the excellent paintings of Poligno∣tus, Micon, Parrhasius and Timenet; Pieces that were anciently the renowned Orna∣ments of the Castle of Athens, and doubt∣less would now be esteemed a rich Treasure, by all the Princes of Europe; But time has devoured them, and they are become only only the vain Images of a Dream, subsisting like in the same and memory of their Au∣thour. As we were going out of the Castle, we understood it was noon, by the preparati∣on the Turks made to go to their Eoüyli, which is a prayer they make precisely at 10 a Clock, at which time an Officer on purpose, called Muczin, gets up on the top of the Mosque, and calls the Mahumetans to pray∣er, which is done by proclaiming in their language that God is great; That there is no other God but he, and that it imports every man in time to look to his Salvation: and this is the whole language of their Clocks (for in Turkie among the Mahumetans there are no other used) and upon this score i is, the Turks in Athens, when they woul deride or upbraid the Greeks by their ver∣bosity or babble, do tell them in mockery, Our Clocks (if you had wit) would teach
you to speak better: And the Renegades think they hit the Nail on the head, when in roguery they boast that their Women wear better Breeches than our Men; their Men are better shod than our Horses, and that their Clocks are better Oratours than our Advocates; and the reason of all is, be∣cause their Women wear a sort of Stuff-Drawers; their Men have a kind of Half∣moon of Iron upon their Shoes; and their Clocks deliver themselves with the afore∣said articulation. As we came from the Castle we left the ruines of the Lycaeum upon our left hand, and being dinner time, we went directly to our lodging, without any farther observa∣tion by the way. We found our Bianchi very busie in the Garden; for having found the Sky clear, and all things convenient for his design, he had taken the opportunity, and was preparing for his Astronomical Observations; We found he had made his Horizontal, and was fixing his Meridian with such ease, that we could not get him to dinner till he had done, telling us he was resolved by the benefit of the first fair night to take the height of the Pole in Athens, by the elevation of some fixed Stars which he had observed. After dinner we went abroad again to
view that part of the Suburbs which lies Eastwardly of the Lycaeum, and Court of the Araeopagitae. We passed by the House of Monsieur Giraud, and afterwards by the House where the Jesuites lived before they were persecuted in Athens. About the Year 1641. Father Blezeau was eminent i that Town for his zeal and abilities in op∣posing their Errors and Schism; and (not to mention any more of those Reverend Fathers called thither by the providence, and for the service of God) the Fathers, Richard and Tessier, of late years have ve∣ry gloriously asserted the Catholick Cause, till certain Athenian Priests jealous of the progress of their doctrine, excited the ras∣cality against them, which being much en∣couraged by the artifice of some Protestant Merchants at that time in Athens, the com∣mon people besieg'd the poor Fathers, forc'd them out of the Town, and plundered their House: but they were better treated at Ne¦gropont, where, Father Richard has already brought over several Families from the Grecian Church, and preaches daily to the Bey's Gally-Slaves which are most of them French. About this time there hapned a remark∣able passage to this poor Father Richard. The Basha Caterzo-Ogli Caraman Beglerbeg▪
was by accident at Thebes, and upon his re∣turn to Candy, where he was Surveyor Ge∣neral of the Works under the Grand Visier, Father Richard went to make him a Visit, and took the opportunity to beg of him a protection against some desperate people that were exasperated against him by the Priests of Negropont; and having obtained it as he desired, the Basha (a gentile well-bred man) among other discourse, asked him if it was true that the Monks in France never drank Wine but in their Mass, and seemed much satisfied with their tempe∣rance: But the good Father, with a pious confidence, becoming the zeal of the Pri∣mitive Church, replied, If we never drank Wine but at Mass, we should never drink any, for what is drank there is transubstan∣tiated, and ceasing to be Wine, becomes the real blood of Christ the Son of God; to which with a most Christian eagerness he added, that all opinion to the contrary was damnable. The throng of Turkish Officers that were about the Basha, would fain have rebuked the confidence of the Father; But the Basha being more moderate than all of them, smiled and corrected them with this gentle answer: Do you not see he is a stran∣ger, and can scarce speak the language of the Country where he is? Let us be gone and
take Candy, and when we come back he will be better able to explain himself: and had it not been for the generosity of the Basha, it was not unlikely but the poor Father might have been added to the number of the Martyrs. Not far from this house of the Jesuites, there is another where the Calogers of Me∣delli are lodged when they come to Athens▪ The Sardar's Palace is at the end of the same Street, and his Seraglio over against his Palace; all the Chelibi's of Athens have every one their Seraglio over against their Lodgings. On the right hand towards Panagia stands the Temple of Jupiter, a magnificent Stru∣cture, but there having been formerly five or six Dedicated to the same God, we could not inform our selves whether this were the Encyclios, the Epopete, or the Phratrios; be it which it will, it is at pre∣sent a Greek Church, and stands at the end of the street. And this let me tell you by the by, at this day the streets of Athens have no name but what they receive from some Church, Mosque, or Palace of some great Man. The Vecchiados Capitanakis (next neighbour to the Capuchins) knew not the name of the street where he lived, but called it my
street: So that we were left to our selves to distinguish the streets of Vesta, the sa∣cred Tripos, or Trivet, Polemion, and cer∣tain others which we found mentioned in History: Of all the old streets, there is none that retains its old name but the Cera∣micus; and even that is not like to keep it long, now frequently called the street of Bazar, which in probability in a short time will obtain against the other, and extin∣guish it. Unless it be this street, there is none of the rest either broad or streight, and the crookedness and oddness of their turnings at this day, answers very much to the description given of it long since by Di∣caearchus the Geographer. Atheniensium urbs amaena & humanitatem prae se ferens; at sicca tota, neque aquis bene instructa, ne∣que rectè item in plateas secta ob vetustatem: Athens is a pleasant City, and pretends much to civility; but it is dry and ill sup∣plyed with waters; nor are the streets so streight as they should be by reason of their antiquity. The Suburbs that lye Eastward of Lycaeum, are full of Gardens, which run along as far as the Ancient Village called Amazonion, from the great Battel fought there betwixt Theseus and the Amazons. The Athenians set up a Pillar in the place, and called it A∣mazonia,
where also those Martial Women Erected a Temple, and called it Amazo∣nian; In the same place where stood the Gate of the Ancient City of Ithonia, which is now in the way to Phalerum. These Gardens lye likewise where for∣merly was that famous place for publick Assemblies, called Pnyx, in which there were frequent and great concourses, in which many a great Orator has recommend∣ed himself to them in an excellent harangue. About the Bench or Tribunal (which stood in the middle of the Court) there was a competent proportion of Ground called Periscaenisma, for that it was roped about to keep the Multitude off from incommo∣ding the Judges: The Lithos was on the side of it, being a high Stone upon which the Publick Cryer stood, when he com∣manded silence: Not far from it there was a Sun-dial, and at one Corner a Temple De∣dicated to the Muses: On the other side stood the House where Cimon dwelt and Elpinice, from whence we passed to ano∣ther Quarter called Chrysa, and famous, as being the place where the Amazons in∣camped. We returned into the City by the Gate which is hard by the Covent of Capuchins, and to speak truth, we might enter as we
pleased, for there was not above a pane or two of Wall standing together by the Gates of the City, and they pitifull things in re∣spect of the Ancient Gates which were very magnificent; one of them, it is true, is to∣lerably well, but of that hereafter: As we entred into the Town, on the right hand there stands a Monastery of Calogers, whose Church is Governed by a particular Calo∣ger; on the other side of the street is a Cloister of Capuchins; the Cloister was shut, and leaving it on our left hand, we passed by the house of Vecchiados Capita∣nakis, where we saw one of his Sons, but not like to be so accomplished as his Fa∣ther. Not far from it we were shown a little building, which the Athenians called To Phanari tou Diogenis, or Diogenes his Lanthorn: It is used at present for the re∣ception of Water from one of their Foun∣tains, the Ancients called it Analogaean, be∣cause it was built like a Pulpit; but there being a Cupola like a Lanthorn on the top, the Common People called it Diogenes his Lanthorn, in allusion to a capricious hu∣mour of his, when to upbraid the effemi∣nacy of those Times, he took a Lanthorn at Mid-day, and pretended he was looking for a Man. Julius Pollux speaking of this Analo∣gaean,
would perswade us it was Erected by Diogenes; but I cannot think he intended the Philosopher, who was not Architect enough to repair his own Tub when bro∣ken by the Tumult; for the Athenians were fain to supply him; so that probably Plu∣tarchs Opinion is the best, that it was set up by Diogenes, a Governour of the Mace∣donian Garrisons in Attica, who drove the Athenians out of Pyreum, Munichia, Sala∣mis, and the Castle of Sunion. From thence we passed by the house of the French Consul, which stands at the cor∣ner of a Market-place, with the Dining-room jetting out into the street, and sup∣ported by Pillars: There is a fair Foun∣tain in the Wall, and under the Fountain a large watering-place. There is a Story told very confidently at the Consuls house, but laught at by most of the Athenians: They perswaded us that every night the Fairies came into the Con∣suls Stables, dressed his Horses, gave them many and terrible blows with their whips, and when they had done, led them out to water to a Fountain that is within his Court. A little above the French Consuls House towards the street called the Bazar, we saw the second great Mosque of that City. It
was anciently the Temple of Venus Ʋra∣nia, built by Egeus, and repaired by Adri∣an. It was famous for the Statue of Venus done by Phidias: Vulcans Temple, called at present the Catholicon, (and now the Archiepiscopal Church in Athens) is not far from it; and it was some pleasure to us to observe that their proximity agreed with what Pausanias said of it. From this Mosque, we went to see the House which is vulgarly called Anemoi; it was formerly the Tower of Andronicus Cyrrhestes: Pausanias makes no mention of it, and Meursius confesses he knows not where it was; but it is hard by a noted place, of which I shall speak largely else∣where. This Tower is built of Marble, in an Octangular Figure, as Vitruvius has de∣scribed, and upon every Angle Cyrrhestes caused the Figure of that wind which blew directly upon it, to be engraven: The work in Bas-relief is incomparable; but the Triton of Brass is down, that stood on the Top of the Tower, and turning freely with the wind, with a stick which it held in his hand, shew'd the place where the wind was: Nevertheless there is something more than either Varro or Vetruvius have told us of; and that is Eight Sun-dials, upon each of the flats of the Octogone one; yet only
seven of them are visible in the street, the eighth being inclosed in a Turks house that is built against one of the Angles. And here I fancy you most eagerly in∣quisitive whether the Athenians do reckon their hours now as they did formerly, and as they reckon them in Italy, that is, by the number of four and twenty, from Sun∣rise one day, till Sun-set the next: To sa∣tisfie your Curiosity, that is not now the Custom. The Common People regulate their intervals by the Cryes which the Muc∣zins make from the top of their Mosques, at Day-break, at Noon, and at six a clock at Night: But the better sort have watches from Venice, or hour-glasses which are very common among them. The House of Vecchiados Panajotti Ca∣valieri is right over against the House of the winds; and the famous place I hinted before is a little higher toward the Vicus Ceramicus, and called Poecile, or Porticus varia. Of all the Porticoes that adorn this great City, this was the most considerable, and to distinguish it from the rest, it was call∣ed by way of Excellence the Portico; An∣ciently it was called Pisianactios. Whilst Athens was in its Glory, the Painters of those Times had represented with great ac∣curacie
upon the Walls of this Portico, the memorable Exploits of all the Great Cap∣tains of this Common-wealth; and which is remembred both by the Greek and Latin Authors, the Famous Artist Polignotus drew one of his Master-pieces there, and gave it freely to the City. But if you will take the Judgement of the great Scholars, they will tell you the thing that made this Por∣tico so Eminent, was the Philosopher Zeno, who built a School there for the Stoicks, a Sect that was Instituted by him, and called at first Zenonians, till this Stoa or Portico was Erected that changed their Appella∣tion: And here it was that sustained by the Testimony of Antiquity, I convinced our Camerades of the errour of Common Tradition, that at this day calls the School of Zeno a certain place without the Town, betwixt the Temple of Theseus and the A∣cademy upon the way to Thebes at the foot of the Mountain of St. George. The Do∣ctrine of the Stoicks tends principally to the subduction of our Passions, by which they affirm it possible to take off the sting and affliction of grief and sorrow, &c. and make them unpainful. But impugning the frailties and softness of our Inclinations, with Maximes too ri∣gid and severe, they are reproached by the
other Sects for Dogmatizing against Truth, and the Experience of Sense: Doctrina non moderata, nec mitis, sed paulo asperior, & durior quàm aut veritas, aut Natura pa∣tiatur: maintaining that a Wise Man is not susceptible of Adversity, and that Calami∣ties are necessary for the exercise and tryal of our Vertue, which without agitation would languish and relax. They place in themselves the Principle of the highest Fe∣licity, affirming, that the Soveraign Good has no need of Forreign Acquisition, if it had, it would be subject to Fortune; so that the greatest disgrace or dishonour that could befall another man, ought not to af∣fect, or make the least impression upon a Stoick, because all that is good or necessa∣ry is within him, as Temperance, Prudence, Justice, &c. They do confess themselves subject to, and sensible of misfortunes; but then they master and subdue them, and though their humanity will not suffer them to be totally exempt, yet they are impreg∣nable to them; adding that their Doctrine, though charged with austerity and rigour, is worthy and suitable to the courage and magnanimity of a Man; whereas the soft and tender maximes of other Sects are only proper for the delicacy of a Woman: In short, they affirm, that the difference be∣twixt
the Stoicks, and the other Sects of Philosophers is as great as the difference betwixt Man and Woman, the one being Created for Command, and the other for Obedience. The Learned dissertations of these Phi∣losophers, though they denominated this Portico, Porticus sapiens, were not suffici∣ent to secure it from the publick diversions, for Apuleus observes, that hither the Athe∣nians did usually come to behold their Vaulters, and persons of Activity; and at this day these sort of Spectacles are exhibi∣ted to the People in their Festivals of the Bayram. This Portico put an end to our walk that way, for you cannot imagine that we would spend much time in contemplating places that were utterly void, though formerly there had been many Curiosities in them, nor trouble our selves with the examinati∣on of every particular relique. It would have been the ready way to have drawn all the rascality after us, who followed us up and down, and perhaps would not have let us escape with a bare derision: To prevent it, rather than to make one tedious walk of it, we chose to come again two or three times, that they might not think us ridicu∣lous and affected.
The next night being fair and serene, we imployed a good part of it in Astronomical Observation. We took the height of three several Stars as they were to pass the Meri∣dian, (viz.) of Azimech, Zubana Gienoubi, and Antares: We rectified their Longi∣tude by the Table of their peculiar Moti∣ons, and found their Declinations by their Spherical Triangles; Zubana Gienoubi be∣ing my Province I will give you my Calcu∣lation: Its Longitude answers to 10 De∣grees and 30 Minutes of Scorpio: Its Lati∣tude is Septentrional, and is but of 26 Mi∣nutes: Its declination Meridional is of 14 Degrees and 37 Minutes, and its Meridi∣onal Elevation 37 Degrees and 42 Minutes, and adding that height to its Declination, there remained 52 Degrees and 19 Minutes for the Elevation of the Equator, whose Complement (that is to say, 37 Degrees and 41 Minutes) is the height of the Pole at Athens. The rest of their Observations accommo∣dated with mine, and we found all the three Stars without the limits of refraction; and the Moon not rising till midnight, her light gave us no impediment. The exact time of my Observation was about 25 Minutes af∣ter Midnight, which agreed not only with our watches, but with the Observations the
rest made the following days about the po∣sition of the Sun, which was in 4 degrees and 16 minutes of Taurus, and its right ascension in 31 degrees and 59 minutes; and my Star being 218 degrees 15 mi∣nutes, determined the moment of my ob∣servation. The 24. of April in the morning we went to hear Mass of Father Simon de Compiegne, at the Covent of Capucins who were then Missionaries at Athens. Father Barnaby, whose Residence is at Napoli de Romania, is President of that fraternity: Father Si∣mon lived in a small house of Marble, though little, yet very good building: nei∣ther Meursius nor any other ancient Authour has taken notice of it, though it be called by the Common people indifferently, To Phanari tou Demosthenis, and To Palati tou Demosthenis, sometimes Demosthenes his Lanthorn, and sometimes his Palace. The Athenians never mention him, but they speak of (what Plutarch reports in his Hi∣story) the thickness of his Tongue that hindered the grace and liberty of his pro∣nunciation; and as they tell us, there it was that he made use of his pebbles to help his imperfection. The workmanship of this Phanari is excellent. This House Father Simon bought of a
Greek for a hundred and fifty Crowns, but a while after the Greek would have put a trick upon him, pretending that he had since been informed he could not by the custom of Athens put a Stranger into the possession of any Antiquity, lest the Stran∣ger should demolish it: The Father replied, as he might very well, That he was no Stranger, and in effect he had been admit∣ted Citizen of Athens, and got Letters of Infranchisment to obviate such kind of Ca∣vils; however the business was brought to a hearing before the Vecchiados, who con∣demned the poor Capuchin, but appealing to the Cadi, it was confirmed to him upon condition he should not impair it, and that he should show it to any man who had the curiosity to see it, which shows the esteem they still have of their antiquities in that Town: and the poor Father was so unwil∣ling to disoblige them, and so careful to gain their good will by any reasonable com∣pliance, that he removed his Altar and Ora∣tory into a low Parlour within the said Pha∣nari. But this ceremony and respect that he shewed to the Athenians did not hinder, but that at first he was treated with the same insolence that had been used to the Jesuites there; for the Capuchin being settled in
his house just about the time that the Grand Visier had banished the Dervices out of all the Turkish Cities in Europe, the Boys in Athens, who had been used to those Der∣vices (supposing the poor Capuchin had been one of them in disguise, that would not submit to the Grand Visiers order) flocked about him in the Streets, and cry∣ing out a Dervice, a Dervice, had like to have stoned him to death. But the graver sort of Athenians, nay the Turks them∣selves, and particularly the Disdar, rescu'd him from their outrage, which he gratified abundantly by his care of their Children afterwards; teaching them to Read, Write, cast Accompt, and speak Italian; and which was much more, he taught them their Catechism according to the Council of Trent, being translated into the vulgar Greek, and Printed at Venice: and though in it the Errors of the Greek Church were formally condemned, their Parents regard∣ed it not, nor took notice of the dissuasion of their Archbishop who was highly against it. Nay they proceeded so far to the con∣trary, that according to their custom the Apostles Creed, as received among us, was put in measure and set to their Musick, in so much that we heard them sing it fre∣quently in the Streets; and this may very
well be attributed to the diligence and in∣sinuation of the said Father, who by his Piety, and a certain affability peculiar to that Order, wrought himself so happily into their affections, that both Turks and Christians invited him frequently to their Houses, with so great an opinion of the in∣tegrity of his life, that during his Visits they never sent away either their Wive or Daughters, which was a confidence they never used either to the Calogers or Imans▪ Nay farther, twice a year he was certain to be visited by the chief Kaduns and Mahu∣metan Ladies both of the City and Castle and that was during their pastimes and li¦berties at the Feasts of their Bayrams; a which time transported with their freedom they took delight in those little extrava∣gancies, and would come to his House t play their innocent tricks, and he coul not quit himself of them till he had opene his Garden door, and sacrificed his whol stock of Flowers to their service; He kep Sherbett always ready for their Slaves, an the Ladies were so kind as many times  drink of it themselves; for which boun of his they did him a hundred good Offic to their Husbands and Parents, protecti him against the Enemies of his Religio for which, in merriment they would t
him, they would make another inroad into his Garden. In the Chapel of this Monastery there was a Pew and a Stool to kneel upon for the Consul Chastagner; Monsieur Giraud the English Consul had only a little Seat in a Corner. Father Simon passed only for the French Consul's Chaplain, that thereby he might oblige the King's Ministers, and ingage them to favour the progress of his Mission; and he succeeded so well, that it is there only that Chastagner appears in his character, and shows himself with all the Formalities of his Consulship; and this he did effectually some three or four years since to a Deputy from Genoa, who came to Athens to settle a Consul there. This De∣puty was of the House of Doria (a great Family as you know) and looked upon himself as a Prince: The truth is, he had a very good train, which followed always in good order when he went abroad to see the antiquities of the Town, and that kind of Ostentation goes a great way with the po∣pulacy. He gave and received Visits from all the Turkish Officers: Chastagner in his turn went to pay his respects, and expecting that Doria would have given him the Fau∣teüil, he was nettled to find that honour omitted to a Consul of France: Chastagner
resented it highly, and watched an oppor∣tunity of returning his kindness, with which in a short time the Genois themselves presented him. Doria sent one morning very early to Father Simon, to desire he would be ready to say Mass to him precisely at Eight a Clock. The Father, as Chaplain to the French Consul, was obliged to ac∣quaint Chastagner, and to know whether he would be present. Chastagner under∣standing it was at the request of Doria, thought that a fit time to be revenged, and sent word he would be there, and Father Simon should attend him. The Clock struck Twelve and no Chastagner; during which time the Genois continued in very great impatience: at length in a formal pro∣cession they perceived six Janizaries march∣ing a-breast with their Truncheons in their hands; the Interpreter Baptista Jannis followed them, after whom came ten or twelve French Merchants, and some of the Vecchiados who were friends to our Con∣sul; last of all with his train or Attendants came the Consul himself in a Red Sattin Gown lined with a rich Fur, and entering sternly (without saluting of any body) in∣to his Pew that was covered with Tapestry wrought with the Arms of France, he fell to his Prayers. Monsieur Giraud was so
civil as to give Doria his Pew; when Mass was done, Father Simon according to his usual custom made a little harangue; at that time it hapned to be in Italian, and addressing himself first to his own Consul, he gave him the Title of Illustrissimo Sig∣nore, and paid him some little Complement, after which he faced about, and addressed himself very emphatically to the Prince. Chastagner pretended to be surprized, and that he had neither seen Doria nor his Equi∣page; and turning short, saluted him, and offered him place in his Pew, but without any precedence; the Prince refused his of∣fer, and went out of the Church before the last Gospel was done. Mass being done we went home, only one thing I forget to tell you, that the Lu∣therans that were present made no scruple of staying out Mass▪ After dinner we re∣solved to go ethe cademy, I mean the old Academy that gave name of Acade∣micks to the Schools all Europe over, that labured to propagate and compleat all Suces and Arts. Our Fellow-Travellers expected nothing but rubbish in their walk, declaring publickly it was not to be thought that that Incomparable Fountain of Science should remain clear and pellu∣cid to this day, considering the dulness and
muddiness of the Genius of the Modern Greeks. I who had conversed them a∣broad, had not found any thing of that stu∣pidity in them: The Capuchins who took great pains in the Instruction of their Chil∣dren, are witnesses not only of their viva∣city and quickness, but that they are more than ordinarily docile, and disposed to any kind of Learning: For as they told me, a young Athenian Boy that in two dayes time gets not by heart twenty pages of his Catechism, believes himself so negligent or sottish, that he has not the confidence to appear again to his Tutor without great Mediation.
ATHENS Ancient and Modern: WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF THE EMPIRE OF THE TURKS. BOOK III. OUR Janizary went out with us in the afternoon, but in the morning he was absent, in order as he pre∣tended, to provide entertainment for us
after dinner: I told you before, he was an ingenious person, and having found our humours to be inquisitive and generous, he studied all ways of gratifying them. We left the Bazar on the left hand, and cross'd the Ceramick Street without any remarks; and being got as far as the Temple of The∣seus, which is in the way to the Academy, and one of the last houses in the Town, our Janizary proposed to us to go see a Greek of his acquaintance who was a Dida∣scalos or School-Master: We desired no better, and were upon thorns till we were with him, but alas, how were we disap∣pointed, (who expected nothing but the sublime notions of Plato, Zeno, and Ari∣stotle,) when the Janizary told us he was a mechanick; how were we surprized to consider a man of that quality should suc∣ceed in the place of such excellent persons. We found about thirty young Lads sitting upon Benches, and their Master at the head of them teaching them to read; he rose up when we came in, and received us very ci∣villy, in which, to give them their due, that Nation is not sparing. The Janizary desired him to go on with his Boys, and give us the liberty of seeing his method, which was pretty, and much beyond ours; the Master causing the whole Classis to read
at a time without confusion, every Scholar being obliged to attention, and to mind what his next neighbour reads: They had each of them the same Authour in their hand, and for example, if he had thirty Scholars, he chose out some continued Dis∣course, and gave them but thirty words to read; the first Boy reading the first word, the second Boy the second word, the third Boy the third, and so on. If they read roundly and right, he gave them thirty words more. But if any of the Boys were out or imperfect, he was corrected by the next who was always very exact in observ∣ing him, and he his neighbour, till the whole number of words were read: So that the thirty Scholars lying all of them at catch, and ready to take advantage of any defect in their neighbour, stimulated by an ambition of being thought the best Scholar, every one's Lesson was the Lesson of all; and happy was he that could say it the best. To obviate any of the Scholars in eluding that order by preparing himself for any single word; their places were changed, and he who at one reading was in the first place, was removed a good distance in the next. Thus one Lesson was enough for a whole Form how numerous soever, and which was very convenient for the Master, the Boys
were not constrained to come to him one after another, for every one was a Master to his Neighbour. Supposing we had a mind to be at liber∣ty, our Janizary was so civil as to leave us to our selves, pretending some little affairs of his own, but with promise to return in a very short time. The Civility of the Didascalos was so great, that he would not suffer us to refuse a Collation that he offered; and to accom∣modate us the better, he conveyed us into his Chamber, from whence he had careful∣ly removed his Wife to a Neighbours house, by an effect of the Grecian Jealousie: But he sent for two Calogers of his acquaintance to entertain us in her stead. They were reputed two of the gravest men of the Town, and our Landlord had enlarged much upon their parts. Our first dish was Botargo of Larta, which is a kind of Sau∣sage made up with eggs and the belly of a Fish they call Cephale, and we a Pollard; it is an excellent Ragoust, and nothing in the world better to drink withall. The best Botargo is made at Larta, which is the An∣cient Town of Ambracia, betwixt Epirm and Acarnania; after our Botargo, came is a dish of incomparable dry'd Neats Tongues brought from Constantinople, than which
no place affords better. Our minds were fixt upon our Antiquities, and we were im∣patient to be gone, nevertheless in com∣plaisance we were glad to feed, or at least to pretend to it. The Calogers eat nothing, for you must know, they never eat flesh: The Wine was better than ordinary, for ge∣nerally in Athens it is blackish and not fine, which is their own fault, for their Wine would be good enough, if when they press their Grapes they did not put in so much water: the best Wine in these Parts is the Wine of Lepanthe. On the South-side of the House where we were, and as it were just under the window, there was a little in∣closed Vineyard pitifully managed, though the stocks of the Vines were thick and well grown enough to have invited the Dida∣scalos to more care, and better cultivation; and when he told us the Wine that we drank came out of such another Vineyard, I could not forbear rebuking his negligence in not improving of that: One of the Ca∣logers, and he that the Didascalos had re∣commended (for the greater Conjurer of the two) replyed in Italian, which he spake very well, that the ground indeed was very good, and would produce very good Grapes, but they might hang 10000 Years before the Wine would be fit to
drink. We stared one upon another to hear him talk at that rate, and thought it odd and ridiculous, especially coming from an Athenian, and one who had been mag∣nified so highly. We proceeded afterwards to their Bread, and found fault it was no better made: The Didascalos told us the fault was in their Mills, and that at present the River Illisus was parted into so many cuts, that there was not water enough to grind the Corn. And why then, said Dre∣slington, do you not make use of Wind-Mills? Why, said the Caloger very gravely, we caused five or six to be set up in a large Vale hard by, and scarce any of them was serviceable: That Answer me thought cleared the point, and quite took away my Opinion of those Greeks; we could not forbear blurting to one another, and de∣claiming in Latin against the ignorance of the present Greeks: They in the mean time kept their countenance, and looked very demurely; we thought them affected, and that by their looks they had been highly pleased at what they had said, and we laughed at them the more: The School-Master smiled, and said not a word. Bu Beraldi who had said nothing till then, ad∣vised us not to be too rash in our Judge∣ments, for in his Opinion the Greeks did
but droll upon us, and by their trifling an∣swers rebuke our impertinent chat, and de∣sire to rid themselves of the importunity of our questions; adding that no rallery was more biting than that nonsencical way of theirs, where by cross and improper answers they seemed to correct, and many times con∣found such People as pretended to be so subtil. But Beraldi might say what he would, he could not perswade us but they were as very Coxcombs as they appeared; and to mend the matter, there was so much starchedness and formality in their look, that the wit of Man could not have better∣ed our impression; especially when giving them an account of an Ancient Athenian called Alcibiades, who sacked Constanti∣nople, called formerly Bizantium, they stood gaping upon me as men in a maze: Men I named several of their most illu∣strious Ancestors, as Olympiodorus, Thrasi∣bulus Harmodius and Aristogiton, they stopped me in my cariere, and asked whe∣ther they were Christians; whether they were of kin to Constantine; and whether in their dayes they were as considerable as their Dimitrios Beninzellos Stamatis Pa∣leologuos, or Polimenos Zarles? still oppo∣sing some of their Vecohiados to every one of those brave men as I named them.
At length the Caloger pulling off his mask, and justifying what Beraldi had conjectu∣red, I cannot but laugh (said he with some eagerness) at your Alcibiades and your Olympiodorus; He that should attribute our present subsistence to their bravery, or to the Wisdom of Photion, would be more remarkable for his folly, than Socra∣tes was formerly for his Sagacity. There is not a stranger comes to Athens, but ob∣serving the present condition of the Coun∣try, he deplores our misfortunes, with grea expressions of sorrow, to see so Famous a City in the clutches of Barbarians, and i a Pious Zeal cryes out against that ambiti∣on which animates your Princes, and prompts them rather to tear one another i pieces, than to confederate as well for thei own interest, as ours against the tyranny o the Turks. This is the common sentimen and discourse of all Travellers that com hither. But what does it signifie? 'tis bu impertinent talk, and I do not question bu five or six hundred years hence they wil complain to as little purpose of the ill ma¦nagement of the Liberty and Power amon you, and the remedy will be as near. Th half-witted people in your Country laug at our ignorance, but I beseech you wit what Justice? were we not ready in O
Times to communicate with you, and im∣part our Notions in all the Excellent Sci∣ences. When you had forgot what you received from Plato, and Aristotle, and Epi∣curus, we were so kind in the middle of the fourteenth Century, to supply you a∣gain with the Learning of Argyropolis, Theodore Gaza, George Gemisto, and Anto∣nicus: You look as you were surprized, but for whom do you take us Athenians? To silence you quite, I reserve for the last the poor but incomparable Caloger Bessa∣rion, who by one of your Popes was made a Cardinal, and sent Legate into France 1472. to accommodate the difference be∣twixt Lewis XI. and Charles the last Duke of Burgundy. You pretend to be the great∣est Historians in the world, and yet pos∣sibly you may be ignorant that the Pope did that at the Funeral of Bessarion, which was never done before at the Funeral of any Cardinal, for he in person attended his Corps to the Grave, contrary to the con∣stant practice of that Court. I will not swear, that with your skill in the Latin Gib∣brish you ever heard this Story that I shall tell you; George Gemisto was a Platonist, George of Trapezund a Peripatetick: these two Sects were formely in great emulation, and perhaps are none of the best friends at
this day; George of Trapezund writ against the Doctrine of Plato, and I question not but some of his works falling into your hands has been the occasion that Aristotle has been of late received into your Schools. Come to Constantinople, come to Sinopi a Famous Port in the Black Sea, and you will find Professors in Philosophy that will dis∣course with you seven years together. My modesty will not suffer me to speak of those in Athens; In those three there are publick Schools for the teaching of those Notions; but in the rest of the Towns of Greece, we have no Science but what teaches us con∣tempt of this world, and preparation for the next. Our Philosophy teaches us to detest Sin, and our Theology to Pray. The great Apostle, to whom this Town is in∣debted for its Conversion, insinuates no∣thing else, and that is the main drift and scope of his Epistles to us. For you, I be∣seech you, what fruit is there of your Ar∣tificial Eloquence? of the confused tumult in your Schools? of the vain and obstinate contests of your Doctors, your chimerical dissertations upon what you call Criticisms, and we nothing but fooleries? Your great questions in Philosophy are rather subtilties and curiosities, than matters of use; in a word, meer Metaphysical reflections be∣yond,
if not contrary to natural experience, serving rather to perplex and obumbrate, than to illustrate the Truth, whilst the ni∣ceties of your Great Colledge are either the cause or support of New Heresies, ex∣travagant Sects, monstrous Opinions, Con∣federacies, Civil Wars, and corruption in matters of Justïce. Since Plato was reje∣cted, and Aristotle received into your Schools, how many of your Learned Do∣ctors have there been, who would make the Peripatetical Doctrine the foundation of their Christianity, declining the Autho∣rity of the Scripture, and not only doubt∣ing, but questioning and disputing Pro and Con with great ardency whether there be a God or not? You will ask perhaps, have not we the same difference and respect for these Philosophers? No, they were our own Countrey-men, and taught publickly here; yet when Reason dissents, we are the first in the Lists against them. And having spoken thus freely of our exercises in Peace, let us now see how we can match you in enterprizes of War: We will not look back to former Ages, in that Oase you have little to pretend; but it is not above 464 years since we defeated one of your most Considerable Fleets at the Mouth of the Strymon, which is a River in Macedo∣nia.
Your Arms had never any advantage over the Greeks, but at the taking of Con∣stantinople, and even that was done by fraud and impiety; for the Army which your Allies assembled (about 15 years af∣ter the defeat at Strymon) for the recove∣ry of the Holy Land, being arrived at Zara in Dalmatia, instead of reducing Palestine as was declared, changed their design, and undertook the Enterprize against Constan∣tinople, and thereby betraying and falsify∣ing the Oath of the Croisade, and pervert∣ing the Charity of those Christians who had so bountifully supplied them, they Marched unexpectedly against Constanti∣nople, surprized it contrary to their publick Profession, and the pious hopes and in∣tention of the good people of your Nati∣ons; afterwards you set up two or three Emperours, of which one paid his head to expiate his Usurpation. When first our Em∣pire became sensible of the Ottoman Arms, had you consulted either your own Interest or Religion, you would have joined your Forces with ours, and endeavoured to have stopped in the source an evil that must needs draw such ill consequences upon your selves. If it should ever happen (which God forbid) that Sicily should fall under the same Calamities as are at present upon
Candia, what would become of poor Italy, Where there is not one strong Town, and scarce a man worthy to be the posterity of those ancient Heroes? and yet you do not object it to them that they are at this day as ill furnished with Caesar's and Scipio's, as we are with Alexander's and Olympiodo∣rus's. The Genois, with immortal scandal to the name or Christianity about 130 years since supplied Amurath with the Ships that transported the first Turkish Troops into Chri∣stendom: Your Cabals and your Factions have frustrated us even of our own proper succours and relief; and when we thought to have found our only protector and de∣liverer in the person of Scanderbeg, Pope Pius II. though he saw him balancing the fortune of the Turks, interrupted his pro∣gress, and would not be quiet till he had taken him from that Holy War, and brought him into Italy to concern himself in those quarrels among the Christians, and drive the French from Naples. Not long after, what unworthy reception, what infamous treatment did you give to Prince Zizim, el∣dest Son to Mahomet II. and Protector of our City? The unhappy Gentleman find∣ing himself rejected by a seditious part of the Army, threw himself into your Arms, and opened a way thereby for your Forces
to have marched into the very bowels of Turkie. In the judgment of all Christen∣dom it was fault enough to have slipped so fair an opportunity, but you added trea∣chery to your negligence, and suffered, I may say, caused that poor Prince to be poi∣soned. I shall be so favourable to your ho∣nour as not to name the Persons, but this I shall say, you disappointed us Greeks, who expected his company, and looked upon him as the only hopes of our re-establish∣ment, and you ruined his friends in his own Country: This may be forgotten among you, but the Ottoman Princes will remem∣ber it; and after the miscarriage of Zizim not one of them will be tempted for refuge to you, let what persecution soever arrive. So then as to us, it is opportunity, not cou∣rage that is wanting. Our Nation is not degenerated; are not they our Soldiers which at this day fight your Armies, and over-run your Provinces? you cannot de∣ny but the Ottoman Force consists princi∣pally of persons forced or stolen from us, and that the name of Janizary does not ab∣solve them from being Greeks, or divest them of their natural vigour. Tell me I pray you, what Country-man is the Grand Signior himself, since so many Generations  the Ottoman Family has been established
in Constantinople; and their heirs have pro∣ceeded out of the loins of young Grecian Damoisels that have been presented to the Seraglio: The Hunkiar Asaki, the Empe∣rours chief Sultaness, at this day the only delight of Mahomet IV, and Mother of the young Prince that is like to succeed him, is a Grecian born, and was taken at the sacking of Retimo in Candia about Twenty one years since. To be short, we are be∣come ne people, and it is with us and them as it was formerly with the Saxons and English; the Goths and the Spaniards; the Gauls and the French; and if it would please God to permit the doctrine of Chri∣stianity to be received at the Port, and the diversity of Religion betwixt us to be a∣bolished, (which makes our moral dif∣ferences irreconcileable) we might say, and say true, That the Emperour of the Greeks is at this day greater and more pu∣issant than the Emperours of Constanti∣nople have been formerly. Moreover, I do believe you are unacquainted with a thing that our Historians do justifie, and that is, that the Ottoman Family are now Emperours of the East more by descent and lineal succession than Conquest; for you must know the present Princes of Turkie do derive from the Emperours of Greece by
a younger Son of the Imperial Family, who upon some discontent retired to the Sul∣tans of Iconium, where he married, and gave original to the House of the Otto∣mans: So that the Greeks may assume some part of the honour which has been gained upon you by the Valour and the Conduct of the Turks. I call it their Valour and Conduct with the more confidence, because I cannot think that you believe all those Victories and Advantages obtained by your Enemies, are but the effects of their good Fortune: Certainly Fortune is never so con∣stant, but where there is Judgment and Conduct to fix it; but so much the worse for you if their prudence has no part in their prosperity. Are you not ashamed that the stupidity of the Turks should be so much too har for your great managery and cunning? You will say God has a mind to chastise you for your exorbitancies; if it be so and you know it, why do you not correct them, and let your Conversion make your attonement? No no, you will scarce ever be wiser, and we shall have still reason to demand where is that prodigious wisdom, and transcendant address, that in your own thoughts advances you so infinitely above the Greeks?
The Caloger having ended, the School-master took the word out of his mouth, and addressing to us, told us that he had forgot to speak of the great Valour of the Grecian Janizaries; If we would make a noise, and boast of our Courage, we need no more than name three of our Heroes, whose undauntedness has been so conspicu∣ous in Canadia, I mean, Zimbi, Balzama, and Calamo: The two first had each of them the Command of a Regiment, the third of a Company; all three serving the Venetian with so much gallantry and pru∣dence, that they were equally venerable both to the Turks and the Christians: If your curiosity carries you into that Island, you will hear more of them. Imagine if you can how strangely we were astonished at this apology of the Greeks, and how we stared one upon ano∣ther to hear so many good things from a man we had concluded little better than a Statue. He humbled our Virtuosi, and brought us unanimously to ask his pardon for the unjust conception we had made of his parts. I have mentioned him to you before, his name was Hyeros Monachos Da∣maskinos; Bertaldi was very well pleased that he had judged of him so right: and Damaskinos confessed with such kind of
harangues he had confounded several Tra∣vellers, and corrected their vanity. Had he many such Rencounters, the honour of that Country would quickly be vindicat∣ed; but most of the Franks will not give him their attention, and if at any time they happen into discourse, and he presses them with any thing, they are immediately in a huff; he is a Sot, and a Fool, and there's an end of the Conference. We presently found that our officious Janizary had got him thither on purpose to entertain us to our minds. Damaskinos spake the Greek, Turkish, Latin and Italian Languages very well; he had a smattering likewise of French, having gained some words by his conversation with Father Simon, with whom he had great intimacy. Damaskinos was one of the three Professors of Divinity and Philosophy who read publickly in A∣thens, though to us in modesty he con∣cealed it. The Archbishop and Demetrios Beninzellos were the other two. The Do∣ctrine of the Archbishop being proscribed, his Lessons are only exhortations to Christi∣anity; both of them read in their own Houses, without any Salary but what comes from the good will of the Scholars: Da∣maskinos and Beninzellos have not never∣theless been so successful in Scholastick
points, and criticisms of Divinity, as in matters of Philosophy; yet there is no stranger comes near them at expounding the Greek Fathers. At length we took our leaves both of our Didascalos and Calogers, we parted with great friendship, and fol∣lowed our Janizary who was returned, and tempted us away. He conducted us towards the Dypilon, which was the only Gate remaining of the old City. There were three Gates one within another, great, well built, curious∣ly wrought, and deserved to be reckoned among the best Antiquities in Athens. Thu∣cydides, Polybius, Plutarch, and all the ancient Historians have mentioned them, but none of them more particularly than Titus Livius, who speaking of Philip King of Macedon has this passage, Ad Dypilon ac∣cessit, porta ea velut in ore Ʋrbis posita, major aliquantò, patentior{que} quam caeterae, & intra eam, extra{que} latae sunt viae. He advanced to the Dypilon, a Gate that stands in the very mouth of the City, bigger something, and broader than the rest, and the Streets large both withinside and with∣out. Lucian tells us that there stood formerly the Tomb of the Physician Toxaris, who among the Athenians was in great venerati∣on,
and often invoked by them upon any violent Feaver; and he ventures upon the very place, assuring us it stood on the left hand as we passed to the Academy, not far from the Temple of Theseus. There is to be seen likewise the Tomb of Anthemocri∣tus the Herald at Arms, whom the Megari∣ans killed against the Law of Nations: This Gate had also been called Thryasia, Thracia, and Ceromica. On the right hand from Dypilon, we had the sight of a very ancient and fine Wall, with the ruines of an admirable Gate: It had formerly been the Gymnasium of Ptole∣my King of Egypt, in which, among ma∣ny Brass Statues, there was one of Mercury in Stone, an excellent piece that passed fo one of the best in the whole Town. You must know that by the word Gymnasion, the Athenians understood equally such pla∣ces as were designed for the Exercises of the Body and the Mind; and accordingly here it was that for some time Cicero studied un∣der Antiochus the Philosopher. If there be any place in all Athens where Travellers are more than ordinarily critical it is here: some will have these to be the ruines of the Temple of Jupiter Olympus  which indeed was quite at the other end o the Town; others will have them to hav
been the Palace of Themistocles; but that is but fancy, and uncertain, for there are several Palaces bestowed upon him in A∣thens, and particularly an old relique near the Temple of Neptune, of which more by and by. The most probable opinion is, that Themistocles his Palace was on the South-side of Ptolemy's Gymnasion, not far from Melita, as Plutarch has described it. On the side of these ruines there are the remains of an old Brick Wall, of which Vi∣truvius speaks, and looks, as he says, upon the Mount Hymettus, not far from the Mountain of Saint George. On the right hand towards the Acade∣my, and near the Dypilon stood the ancient Temple of Theseus, remarkable for the Feasts which the Ancients solemnized in ho∣nour of that Heroe, and for the distributi∣on of Meal which was made among the poor of that Town: But the greatest testi∣mony of their veneration for their Founder, was their making an inviolable Asylum of his Temple, in which all Slaves were received and protected from the ill usage of their Ma∣sters: It was built after the Battel of Mara∣thon, Consecrated during the Victories of Ci∣mon, and repaired (as the rest) by the orders of Adrian, since when, by the bounty of cer∣tain
certain Christian Princes, it has been turned into a Church; at present it is much decay∣ed, and not likely to be repaired but by the misfortune of making it a Mosque: Hitherto the Turks have attempted it, but in vain; The Christians is have been so hap∣py as to keep it, by their Interest with the Keslar Agasi. The Turks in madness pre∣tend they would not be troubled with it, and that being without the Town it would not be convenient for them. Because it stood without the City, some of our company would not believe it was the same that is so much mentioned in an∣cient History, in respect that Plutarch has placed it in the middle of Athens; not considering how much this City is altered since Plutarch's time, nor observing the vast demolishment before the Temple towards the Field, and perhaps not knowing that all that side was inhabited and divided in∣to three great Wards, called Kyera Siki, The Academy, and the Colonos Hippios: and it could not be more exactly in the midst of Athens, than by lying betwixt the present Town, and that place which they call now Asti, or the City. But besides these con∣victions, the very Walls and Building are sufficient to perswade us of its antiqui∣ty.
About this Temple there were formerly four considerable places; a Court or Tribu∣nal, a Prison, the Horcomosion (where the Peace was concluded betwixt Theseus and the Amazons) and the Theatre of Regilla, which Theatre was built by Herodes Atti∣cus, because the Theatre of Bacchus, though great and magnificent, was not sufficient to receive the vast multitude of spectators that came to see their publick representati∣ons. At this day, hard by the said Temple, is to be seen a large and fair Marble Statue of a Lyon couching upon the ground, and as it were asleep; to distinguish it from that upon the Coast, and that other in the Ca∣stle, who are both Rampant, and as it were in a rage: Upon which score the poor peo∣ple of Athens, as they pass by this Lyon, they whisper it in the Ear, and tell it, You may sleep on, Lyon of Athens, and take your rest, for the Lyon upon the Coast and the Ly∣on in the Castle watch for you. Some four or five years since, this Lyon was the occasion of a Prodigy in that City. The Wife of one of the Janizaries of the Castle passing many times with her Husband by this Lyon, rested herself one day before it, and fixing her eyes firmly upon it, she hapned to conceive at the same time, by which means her imagination impregnated
with that Object, and re-inforced every day by the sight of the Lyon in the Castle, it had so strong an impression upon her, that at the end of Nine months she was brought to bed of a Monster with a head like a Lyon, which the Disdar caused to be stifled. Having passed by that, we went on by the Gardens in the ruines of the Faubourg of the Academy or the Ceramique, for it is called equally by both names. Before I came to Athens, I have admired a hundred times that among so many Learn∣ed men as have Translated and Commented upon Pausanias, and particularly Amazeus and Meursius, never any of them gave us a Plain of that City: But my astonishment ceased when I was in this Faubourg, and considered the ground, and I could not but acknowledge they had done well. I shall give you but one instance. Pausanians hav∣ing given us a description of the Areopagus, jumps immediately to the Academy, and who would not upon probable conjecture believe but two places that are so jumbled together in his Writings, should be next neighbours in their scituation? and yet there is no more communication nor proxi∣mity betwixt them than there is betwixt the Cours de la Reyne and the Place Royalle
in Paris, or St. Peter's Church and the Porte Latine in Rome, for there is a compleat League betwixt them, and to pass from one to the other you must cross the whole City. The Academy was called so for being the Inheritance of one Academus, who lived in the time when Theseus, after his infide∣lity to Ariana, stole away Hellen, and car∣ried her from Lacedaemon: Castor and Pol∣lux her two Brethren, pursued with what Forces they could make, and came as far as Athens; but not being able to discover where she was, they were privately adver∣tized by this Academus, which was a kind∣ness so well taken by the Lacedemonians, that in all the Wars and depredations committed by the Lacedemonians after∣wards upon the Athenians, their Armies still spared the Academy, for Academus his sake. Sylla was not altogether so civil, for he sacrificed to the Laws of War, and the liberty of the Soldier all those brave Groves and pleasant Walks which Cimon had made for the entertainment of the Phi∣losophers, and imployed the Timber to make Engines for the battery of the Town. There it was that such men were interred s had done any great Service for their
Country; among others, Harmodius, Ari∣stogiton, and Thrasibulus. Upon the two Wings of this Faubourg there was a kind of Forrest, of Marble Pillars, loaden with so many Statues and Epitaphs, that he, who in a short time had a mind to understand all the great actions of that Common-wealth, had no more to do than to read over all those Elogies and Inscriptions. Among the rest of the Tombs there was one for Zeno the Philosopher, which his old friend Antigonus obtained from the Athenians as a considerable favour. Plato had his Mo∣nument too, but nor so magnificent, for which he may thank himself, for it was he that regulated their exorbitancy in their Tombs, affirming that a Stone big enough to have four Verses engraven upon it, was big enough for the recording of any mans memory after he was dead. Not far from this Academy there stood a little Temple, dedicated to Bacchus Liber; a little consecrated Inclosure, in which they worshipt Diana, sirnamed Calista; and Mo∣numents to the honour of Theseus, Oedipus, and Pirithous. Among several Altars di∣spersed up and down, Minerva, Vulcan, Nep∣tune, Hercules, the Muses, Love, and Pro∣metheus had every one one. That was the first that ever was dedicated to Love, and
the first man that ever came thither to sa∣crifice was Charmus, the favourite of Pi∣sistrates. The Altar of Prometheus was fa∣mous for a Course which was run there du∣ring the Festivals consecrated to Minerva; for the Athenians sometimes on foot, and sometimes on Horse-back, started at this Altar (each with a light Torch in his hand) and running quite along the Faubourg to an appointed place, he who made his Course without putting out his Torch, had a Prize for his pains, and was in great reputation with the people. Plato being the first Philosopher that aught in the Academy, gave the name of Academicks to all of his Sect. After his death (which is now 2016 years since) Learning increased in Athens so considera∣bly, that two other Academies were erect∣ed, as well to accommodate the multitude of Scholars, as by reason of diversity of Opinions that began to spread among them: Arcesilas founded the second Academy, and Lecydes the third. Their Doctrine in general consisted in hese Principles, That nothing ought to be positively affirmed, because nothing could be certainly known. That there were of all things certain Species which they called Phantasies; which Species were not formed
according to the nature of the things, but according to the disposition of the body or object to which those Species were car∣ried: From whence they maintained that nothing subsisted actually in it self, or had any proper or peculiar Essence, but subsist∣ed only by reference, as they were formed in our Senses, not in the subject from whence they flowed, and this you may find in Aulus Gellius. Their Morality bore the character of Pi∣ety and Religion, and the doctrine of the Academy obtaining a long time, was taught in the University of Paris. At length the doctrine of the Peripateticks was introdu∣ced, and the Lycaeum prevailed with us as more subtil and consentaneous with Na∣ture. When we arrived at this famous School, how strangely were we surprized? how sadly were we affected to behold its ruine and desolation? There was nothing to be seen but heaps of Rubbish, and great splin∣ters of Stone over-grown with Grass, or co∣vered over with Earth. Here and there were a few Fig-Trees and Olive-Trees, and pit∣tiful Cabins where the Gardiners were lodged. If in so melancholy a spectacle a∣ny thing occurred of consolation, it was, to think that the name of that place, and
the qualities of that Genius which presided there, were transplanted to Paris; for in short, we must acknowledge as Rome did of old, Omnis ubertas, & quasi sylva dicendi, ab Academia ducta est. All our Elegance, and exactness of expression, is deducible from the Academy. But the name of Academy is almost lost in Athens, and it is called at this day The School of Plato. It is scarce possible to dig six foot deep into the ground, but you must find some considerable piece of Anti∣quity. Some three or four years since a Gardiner digged up a Pallas of white Mar∣ble, which he sold to Giraud for two Crowns. Giraud's Wife was, as I told you, an Athenian, of a pleasant merry hu∣mour, as appears by a trick she put upon Father Simon. She laid this Statue in a Bed betwixt a pair of Sheets, and sending for the Father, told him one of her Maids was sick, and desired to be confessed. The Statue was dressed very decently in night linnen, and the Father turned alone into her Chamber. The Father was grave and modest, and kept himself at a distance, and his modesty contributed to the Cheat. He fell immediately to his pious Exhortati∣ons, endeavouring thereby to dispose the poor Creature to Repentance, and the exa∣mination
of her Conscience. The Mistress of the House called out to him, from be∣hind the door, to speak out, for the Maid was deaf, and had been so a long time. The good man elevated his voice, and went nearer to the Bed, when the good wo∣man entring hastily into The Room, Let us see, Sir, said she, 'tis possible she may be dead, and then she has no need of your Confession, and so running to the Bed side, she turned up the Cloaths and shew'd him the Pallas, which put the whole company into a laugh∣ter. The House the Famous Misanthropos, is to be seen about a hundred paces from the ruines of the Academy: The place is now full of Fig Tree, and if you would entertain your self with the story of that renowned Enemy to mankind, read what Plutarch says in the Life of Mark Antho∣ny. Returning towards our Lodging, we came on the left hand to the foot of Mount St. George, where we saw the ruines which at this day they call the School of Zeno, though indeed it was nothing but his Tomb: You may remember what I have said of it in speaking of the Porcile or Stoa. About half a mile from the Town; the great Road is cut in the midst by two other, and make
a Carrefour, where there stood formerly a Statue of Mercury, sirnamed the Tetrace∣phalos. The Oratour Ephialtes (who if you will believe Pericles, was a great lessen∣ing and diminution to the authority of the Areopage) had his Tomb within a small di∣stance. On Thursday the 25. of April, we march∣ed out in the morning to visit the ruines of Stadion Panathenaicon, and the Palace of Adrian. By the Gate through which we passed to Raphti, we saw the Triclinion, an excellent piece of Antiquity, not yet taken notice of by any Authour: It is a large Stone, digged some years since out of the Earth, and embellished with incompa∣rable Bas-relief representing a Hall and a Banquet of the Ancients, from which Pi∣cture it is called Triclinion. A Greek has placed it in the wall of his House as an Or∣nament to it. Without the Port de Raphti we left the Palace of Adrian on our left hand, and on one side the place which they call Ta Mni∣muria; it is a Cemetery of the Turks, who quite through the Levant, are buried with∣out the City. The ancient Athenians pra∣ctised the same Custom, and it was by par∣ticular favour when they suffered any of their Tombs to be within the compass of
their Walls. But now a days the Christi∣ans are buried in their Churches. As we passed to the Bridge over the River Ilissus, we observed a place where formerly was the Tribunal called Ardettos, where the Judges took a solemn Oath to Jupiter, A∣pollo, and Ceres, to administer Justice ac∣cording to the Laws of the Land, and where the Laws were defective to proceed according to their Conscience. There it was that there was an Altar consecrated to the Muses called Ilissiades; and there it was that Codrus King of Athens was slain. Near the Bridge we saw another place, the ruines of a Chappel which they called Agios Phrancos, where the Image of St. Francis is to be still seen painted upon the Wall. When the Accioles were Masters of this Country, they erected a Chappel in honour of this Saint, which is yet in so great ve∣neration, that the Christians do at this day give that name to their Children in Baptism. The Bridge stands upon three Arches, through which the River Illisus passed in former times, but at present it is dry, hav∣ing been diverted and divided by an infi∣nite number of little Rivulets, cut on pur∣pose to supply the Water-works in the Gardens about the Town; and it was a
wonder to us to consider, that whereas commonly Fountains were contracted, and their Waters brought together to make Ri∣vers; here the Illisus was exhausted and annihilated to furnish their Fountains. The Bridan that passed of old through Athens, had a worse destiny, for its Chanel is lost, and nothing of it now to be seen. On the other side of the Bridge is the quarter which they call indifferently Agra and Agrae; where Boreas one of the Gods of the Winds stole away Orythia a Daugh∣ter of the King of Athens: and Diana the Goddess was first delighted with the recre∣ation of Hunting. The Soil is Sandy, and great plenty there is of Partridge, but they are not so good as ours. Not far off there is a little eminence, up∣on which are to be seen the ruines of the Goddess Diana, sirnamed Agrotera or the Huntress; to whom the Athenians annual∣ly made a Sacrifice of 500 male Goats, to acquit themselves of a Vow into which they entered before the Battel of Marathon. From this little Hill, we surveyed the ruines of the Stadion Panathenaicon; they are still so magnificent, that we were amaz∣ed to behold them, and could not but a∣mong our selves say of that morsel that was left, what Pausanias said of it when it was
entire, That it was not to be looked upon without admiration. This Stadion was the place where the publick Courses were kept; its figure was oval, and as exact, as if Nature had intended it on purpose as a list and bound of their Cariere. The rows of Stairs that are still visible, are of white Marble: and the Area was so large, that Adrian the Emperour (as a spectacle to the people) caused in one day a thousand Wild Beasts to be baited in it. At the foot of this Hill of the Temple of Diana, stands a Temple of Ceres, built of white Marble, as neat and spruce a piece of work as is in the world. It is now made use of by the Greeks for a Church, and in it there is the Picture of our Saviour upon the Cross, as well done as ever I saw. Here it was that Hercules was first initiated to the smaller Mysteries of Ceres, for the grand Mysteries were celebrated in another Temple dedicated to the said Goddess, but with the Title of Elusinion. From thence we passed to the Temple of Agne; I would not judge rashly of the devotion of our Company, but I am afraid it was not so much that that carried them thither, as cu∣riosity to see the place where Hercules had been.
From thence turning to the right, we went to see the stately Pillars, and magni∣ficent Portail remaining of the Palace of Adrian; the common people call it Dida∣scalion. The Emperour Adrian having turned it into a Gymnasion, had spared no cost either in the choice of his Marble, or the gilding and decoration of the Seeling and Wainscot; and when finished he put into it the Library of Pisistrates, who was the first that ever made so accurate a col∣lection of Books: and to speak truth never poor Books made so many peregrinations. Xerxes carried them first into Persia, from whence, a long time after, Seleucus Nicanor returned them to Athens; in the days of Sylla they transmigrated to Rome, but could not rest there, for Adrian sent them back to adorn his Gymnasion. Near these Pillars we saw the Ta Mni∣mouria or Cemetery of the Turks, and on one side, the rubbish of the Temple of Ju∣no, being the remains of a large one built by Adrian, and dedicated in common to Juno and Jupiter, it was called Pan-Hellenien, and is at present a Greek Church. Hard by there was a little Plain where the Turks used to gallop their Horses, which minds me of a story of Father Lewis, who as I told you before, had been a Lieute∣nant
Colonel, and as good a Horseman as was in the Army. This good Father re∣turning one day from Medelli on Horse-back, booted and spur'd, and with a long Greek Vest over his habit (which is permit∣ed when their Mission appoints them any extraordinary Voyage) passing over this place, he saw a mad-headed furious Jade throw five or six Turks one after another, and all of them reputed very good Jockies. The Sardar, Vaywood, and several Cheliby's were by. The Father could not but smile, and the Vaywood observing it, asked him if in France their Horsemen were better: The poor Father answered with another smile, which being looked upon as a con∣tempt of their Skill, and a defiance of their Nation, the Cheliby's were nettled, and cried out to have the Caloger get up: The whole company concur'd, and nothing could serve, but he must immediately mount, not doubting but the Horse would serve him in the same kind, and that in a short time they should see his divinity upon the ground. The Father pretended to ex∣cuse himself, but the Sardar was the more obstinate: I cannot say but in despight of the mortification of his Order, the good man might have some little vanity upon him, and be touched too much for the re∣putation
of his Countrymen. Be it how it will, he alighted from his own, and mount∣ing the mad Horse, he Gallop'd and chang'd, rid him all the Airs of an Academy, and all the Exercises of the Army, and, contrary to the expectation of the Turks, mastered him with so much comliness and dexterity, that the Vaywood telling the Cheliby's he had been a Souldier, and made several Campagnes in his own Country, they called him ever after the Colonel Calo∣ger. We came home the sooner, that after din∣ner we might take a larger walk, and we began it by the great Street called Cerami∣cus or Basar, which at this day is the fair∣est in the City: It took its name from He∣ros Ceramos, the Son of Ariana and Bac∣chus. But for the Vicus Ceramicus in the Suburbs as you go along to the Academy, it was called so from the Pot-makers that liv∣ed in that Faubourg, as the Greek word im∣plies. Our Janizary carried us into the Pan∣theon which stands on one side of this Street: I thought it much more magnifi∣cent than the Rotund at Rome, which was also a Pantheon, and built by Agrippa: That at Athens was built above Six-score years after by the Emperour Adrian. For
a long time it was a Greek Church dedicat∣ed to the Virgin Mary by the name of Pa∣nagia, but it is since turned into a Mosque by the Turks. There were two very fine Horses of the work of Praxatiles which A∣drian caused to be set up; they are still to be seen, but they begin to decay, and must erelong yield like other things to the mis∣chievousness of time. The Porticoes that of old time ran along from thence to the Gate of Dypilon, were remarkable for nothing more than for be∣ing the Walk and Rendezvous of all the Prostitutes of the Town, many of whose names are with the names of their Gallants written upon their Pillars and Walls; of which you may see more in the Dialogues of Lucian. The Bazar formerly the Market-place of the Ceramique, is still in that Street; in the middle of which there is a little Hall, with a Fountain on one side of it. On the ground where the Hall is built, there stood anciently an Altar consecrated to Mercy, and at a little distance another called Dode∣catheon, being dedicated to twelve Gods. On one side of the Dodecatheon was their Cyclos or place where they sold their Priso∣ners of War.
The richest of the Inhabitants, and par∣ticularly their Vecchiados have their hous∣es near this Bazar. The House of Dimi∣trios Beninzellos is on one side of the Pan∣theon: The House of his Brother Janis Be∣ninzellos is over against it. I had the cu∣riosity to see the Lodgings of Stamantis Cal∣chondilos, in memory of the famous Hi∣storian Laonicus Calchondilos who was an Athenian, and of the same Family. This Stamatis is one of the Vecchiados, and rich; but the rest of his Relations are very poor men, and one of them a Taylor in the Town. The publick Butchery separates the Ba∣zar from another great Market-place, which the Ancients called simply Agora; but touching upon the two Streets of Colonos and Colytos, the two ends of it were called by their Names. There is an excellent Sta∣tue to be seen in it, it is called Agoraeus, much like the Statue of the same Mercury before the Poecile: At present this Agora is called the Cadi's Place, because he has a House there himself, and his Seraglio looks out upon it. Over against this Place stands the Catho∣licon which the Christians call their Ca∣hedral, or Archiepiscopal Church. It is ot much greater than the Church of St. In∣nocents
in Paris. The Caloger Damaski∣nos is one of its principal Dignitaries, be∣ing Grand Vicar to the Archbishop. Tra∣dition tells us that this Catholicon was a Temple dedicated to Vulcan, and the same that was consecrated promiscuously to Vul∣can and Minerva: Minerva had a Statue in it with blew Eyes, of the same colour with the Waves of the Sea, because, as Plutarch affirms, she was thought to be Nep∣tune's Daughter. St. Austin tells us of a Child exposed in this Temple, and of a Dragon that hugg'd and defended it: Pla∣to says that the Souldiers listed in Athens for their Wars, had their Quarter in this place. In a direct line from the Catholicon, over against the Cadi's Place, stands the Phyla∣ki, or publick Prison. The Temple of Venus Ʋrania stands behind the Phyla∣ki, and is turned into a Mosque. It was no little satisfaction to us, to find the scitu∣ation of all these Buildings exactly to the description we met withal in the old Athe∣nian Orators; for you must not imagine tha only their Historians make mention of them. As we never went to see any quarter of the Town till we had considered and studied it very well in our Chamber; it was, me∣thought, very pleasant to hear us as soon
we came near any place, to tell one another This is such a Temple; this such a Build∣ing; and this such a Ruine; and our great satisfaction was to hit generally right. The Colytos is a quarter below the Cadi's place, and stands towards the South; Pla∣to, and that great Misanthropos Timon were born in it: Eschines the Oratour, contem∣porary with Demosthenes, lived in it: You may see in Plutarch the ingenious answer of Demosthenes when he accused Demades the Orator for having been taken in Adultery in the Colytos. Tertullian has a considera∣ble observation of this place; he tells us that Children do sooner learn to speak there, than any where else; and Philostra∣tes affirms that they are generally born hand∣somer and more beautiful there, for which reason they are called the delights of Greece: I astonished the Inhabitants when I told them these things; but as to the beau∣ty of their Children, Experience does at this day confirm the testimony of the An∣cients. And thus I have brought you through a quarter, of which Pausanias has not men∣tioned a word, no more than of that of Meli∣ta which came so near the Colytos that there was nothing but a Pillar that distinguished them. It was the Nymph Melita, one of Her∣cules
his Mistresses that gave that name to that place, in which there was a Temple con∣secrated to Hercules, and an excellent Statue of him done by the famous Gelidas, who was Phidias his Master. Besides that, there were likewise three other Temples, one dedicated to Diana, sirnamed Aristobul, and built by Themistocles; another to Heros Melanippos the Son of Theseus; and the third to Heros Eurysaces the son of Ajax, from which Eurysaces Alcibiades was de∣scended. Finding in this quarter several Greek Churches, and particularly two Covents of Calogers, or Religious of the Order of St. Basilia, we were very inquisitive whe∣ther none of them were built upon the ru∣ines of some of these Temples, but tradi∣tion failed us, and we could not have that satisfaction which we found in other places, where examining the Cornishes and Cha∣pters, and Frizes betwixt the Pillars, we found sometimes Eagles, sometimes Thun∣derbolts, as the symbols of Jupiter; some∣times Serpents and Clubs as the symbols of Hercules; Harps of Apollo, and so of the rest; but here we could find nothing o them: However we were assured that there was the Palace of Themistocles; that Epi∣curus and Photion had their Houses there;
and History tells us of a great Building there where those persons assembled who prepared any thing for the Stage. The other ancient quarter called Colo∣nos, is near the Melita, and divided only by a large Portico called Macra Stoa, be∣cause composed of five others joined to∣gether. In this Colonos it was that anci∣ently the old Artificers and such people lived as wrought for the publick; for which reason it was likewise called Misthi∣s; but without the Town there was ano∣ther Colonos, called Hippios, which the Translators of Pausanias call Equestre ju∣um; it is below Zenon's School, and East∣ward of the Academy; from thence we di∣rected our walk towards Mount Pentelicus: and by the way We passed by an ancient Gate they call∣ed Pilae Hippades, or the Horse Gate, be∣cause in that Colonos Hippios there were store of Horses to be lett: On the right hand we left the ruines of a magnificent Aquaeduct, begun of old by Adrian, and inished by his successor Antoninus Pius: This Aquaeduct served for conveyance of water from the Didascalion to Adrian's Palace. In the way from hence to Raphti, not far from this Aquaeduct, on the right hand
we saw the place where stood the ancient Gate of Acharnae; and more to the South the Gate of Melita, which they called Py∣lae Melitides; beyond which Gate lay the Faubourg of Coela, where were the Tombs of Cimon and Thucydides. The Colonos Hippios seemed a very plea∣sant place to us; Pausanias only names it, without any mention of four remarkable Temples to be seen there: one of Venus, another of Neptune, a third of Prometheus, and fourth of the Eumenides or infernal Furies. In this last it was that Oedipus took Sanctuary, when full of remorse for his Par∣ricide and incestuous Marriage, he betook himself thither implore the mercy of the Athenians, who received him with their natural hospitality. At the foot of the Mount Pentelicus we found an old reservatory of waters that were conveyed by the Aquaeduct to the Palace of Adrian: We found a Spring there whose waters were very pleasant, and of  more than ordinary freshness, they called it Brisis or Vrisis, for they pronounce  both ways: the Mount Pentelicus they cal To Vouni tou Agion Georgiou; but they pro∣nounce Ahyou for Agyou, and Hyoriou fo Georgiou.
We ascended the Mountain but slowly, because our Physician entertained us as we went along with a discourse upon the seve∣ral Simples and Plants which grew there in great excellence: We saw also the Quarries, out of which was taken a great part of the Marble imployed in adorning the City of old. Upon any great Rain the fall of Wa∣ter from this Mountain was very great; and searching for the Chanel of the Torrent called Cycloborus, we found three or four that were dry, and probably all of them that which we looked for, because if we will believe the Poet Aristophanes, that Torrent did frequently change its Chanel, and run down with a more than ordinary noise. Upon the top of the Mountain there was a Chapel called Agios Georgios govern∣ed by a Caloger; the Chapel stands in the place where Pausanias tells us there was anciently a Statue of Pallas. The common people at this day do by mistake attribute that to this Statue, which Antiquity with more justice ascribes to the Statue of Pallas in the Castle, viz. that on the top of her Lance she carried a Banner that might be discerned as far as the Cape de Colonnes. This Chapel is a place of devotion for the Athenians, to which they often repair in Pilgrimage. From this Mountain we di∣scovered
with ease the whole circumference both of the Old and New Athens: And casting our eyes upon two or three Monaste∣ries of the order of St. Bazil, not far from the Mount Hymetta, and upon certain Vil∣lages upon the roads to Thebes and Megara, one of our Company pointing us to a Moun∣tain about a League off, acquainted us that that was the Mountain which the Ancients called Icaria, at the foot of which there was a Town call'd by that name where the first Comedy was invented. This put it into our heads to Visit the next morning the Theatre of Bacchus, and thereupon com∣ing down from Mount Pentelicus, we en∣tertain'd our selves with the consideration of the Village of Icaria, It is most certain the inhabitants of this Town were the first inventors of Comedy: Icarius, Lord of the Mannor, and famous for being the first Planter of Vines in those parts, having one day caused his people to fley a Goat that he took spoiling his Grapes, he caused the Skin to be blown up, and giving it to the Peasants, they in merri∣ment leaped and skipped upon it having dressed themselves with Vine leaves, and besmear'd their faces with the Lees of Wine: Which sort of Dancing grew to a custom in Vintage time, and was used in all
the neighbouring Villages: and the fumes of the new Wines having at such times an ill-effect upon their brains, because it often happened that they were ill treated by the rich Citizens of Athens, who had lands in the said Towns; the Peasants took the opportunity of these Feasts to affront and retaliate upon their adversaries. When night came, attended by throngs of people that this divertisement had drawn together; they marcht along together in a tumult to inveigh and clamor against those who had done them any injury, ad∣vancing to their very doors, and upbraid∣ing them publickly: Those who had au∣thority in those Villages failed not the next Morning to inquire into the Riot, and to commence an Action against all those who were so enormous the night before; and comonly the tumult ceased either for fear of punishment, or shame. This expedient succeeding so well in the Country, and ap∣pearing a good remedy against those dis∣orders, the same custom was taken up in Athens: The Rendezvous or Confluence of common people was generally in a Medow called Lenaeon in the quarter called Lymnae; and because it was near the Ancient Tem∣ple of Bacchus, by degrees these kind of Pranks grew into the ceremonies of Reli∣gion,
became part of their divine worship, and by little and little to be a particu∣lar part in the Festivals of that God. As occasion served they continued their in∣vectives (under that pretence) against such as had offered them Violence. At length the Poets took up the same Method to up∣braid particular vices, or to turn their fol∣lies into ridicule: Then it was that the Athenians withdrew their representations from their Market place; and Exhibited them in a large Room which they called a Theatre, and dedicated it to Bacchus, to in∣struct Posterity, that it was the Vintage time that gave the first occasion to Come∣dies. At first their whole action was per∣formed by the Chorus, which was the whole body of their Musick both instrumental and vocal. Thespis the Poet was the first man who, dissatisfied with the singing of the Chorus, brought in one Actor, with the natural way of recitation: And Eschiles as much offended to see one person ingross the whole Play, brought up the way of conversation, and exhibited two Actors upon the Stage. The Poet Cratinus in∣troduced three; and afterwards their num∣ber was advanced to five, which was the reason they divided their whole Play in∣to five Acts. Then was the whole acti∣on
performed betwixt the Comedians, the Mimicks, the Chorus, and the symphony or Musick: and the whole show seen upon two Elevations or Platforms, which served as Posts or particular places for the several persons: The Comedians Quarter was called Proscenion, and was peculiar to them: The other was in common, and call∣ed sometimes the Orchestra, and sometimes the Logaeon. There were five intervals be∣twixt the five Acts, in which the Specta∣tors were entertained either by the Chorus, or the Mimicks. The word Mime was used promiscuously for the name of the Poem, or for the Actor who danced as he recited, and made his postures and gesticulations as he was prompted by the subject. Some∣times the Mime was called Pantomime, which is but a term of exaggeration that puts greater force upon the thing, for Mi∣nes is an Imitator, and Pantomimos is an imitator of every thing. Sometimes their representations were Heroick, to excite to generosity, but for the most part they were upon amorous Intrigues; and criminal pro∣stitutions: At such times their Dances were lascivious, their Gestures indecent, and their Songs immodest, according to the ob∣scenity of the subject, in so much that the Orchestra began to be infamous. But a∣bove
above all, none was so impudent as the Dance they called Lamprotera, in which they not only danced stark naked, but added the fil∣thiness of words to the effrontery of their postures: So that though the Proscenion was not guilty of these impurities, yet it became disgustful to the adversaries of Co∣medy, who were not willing to distinguish it from the Orchestra; whereby the Come∣dian has suffered much among those who will not allow any difference betwixt him and the Mimick; but the Proscenion may easily be justified; for we need no more but cast our eyes upon the Tragedies transmit∣ted by the Ancients, and we shall see that in the action of those heroick parts it is impossible the Comoedian should intro∣duce that baseness of Gesture, or be guilty of a dissolute Dance, in so magnificent a matter. And if in time that Corruption has crept into Comedy, if sordid expressi∣ons have mingled with good instruction, and scandal gone along with their docu∣ments, it does but infer that few things are so pure, but they are subject to be altered, and those that are altered may by good cu∣stoms be rectified again. And indeed we are not to admire if St. Cyprian and other Fathers of the Church declaim against Stage-plays, and on the other side Thomas Aquinas, An∣toninus,
Cardinal Cajetan and Raynerius do magnifie the use of them, seeing both sides have spoke according to the different ways of writing in their several times. These are the reflections with which the fight of Icaria inspired us; and indeed Co∣medy being a thing which originally we re∣ceived from Athens, it was but reasonable we should consider whether it was propor∣tionable to the other great faculties that we derived from thence; and whether we were not justly to admire that wisdom and con∣trivance which invented so pleasant a way of relaxing our cares, diverting the activity of our Spirits, and sweetning our ferocity and moroseness by the concourse and society of Spectacles. On Friday the 26. of April, in the morn∣ing we took a large Breakfast by way of precaution against the long walk which we proposed to our selves. Besides that, our Janizary had sent two men before to at∣tend us at the Fountain of Enneacrunos with more belly-timber, and two or three lusty Flasks of Lepanthe Wine, esteemed the best in those parts. These Flasks among the Athenians are a kind of Glass-bottles that hold each of them three or four pints. The Venetian calls them Bosse's; but our common Bottles the Athenians call Laghe∣nis.
Our Janizary carried us first into the Chief Monastery of the Calogers, but with∣out his Interest we had never been admit∣ted into their Church: Their Church is one of the best buildings in Athens, and the Calogers have a particular care of it. There are many Shoomakers in the street where this Monastery stands, in the midst of which there is an excellent Fountain. Behind this Shoomakers-row stands the house of Bap∣tista Janis Traperi, a Native of Chio, and Interpreter to the French Consul. This In∣terpreter is one of the subtillest and most dangerous Wits in the whole Levant: He is Turk among the Turks, Greek among the Greeks, Franc among the Francs, and hy∣pocritical with all the world: In matters of Commerce, he is particularly intelli∣gent; never tells the mystery and bottom of his affairs to any body, to make himsel necessary the longer; and indeed that ne∣cessity has preserved him a hundred time both from the Kangiar and poison. He ha two Brothers in Athens not altogether so rich, but of better reputation. The Con∣sul is as happy in his Janizary as in hi Dragoman, for he has got a true Soker tha will drink more Wine than four of our Ma∣riners of Provence, and his Wine is nothing so good. This honest Mahumetan is called
Ibrahim Bassa, but you must not think that with such a fellow the word Bassa passes for a Title of Honour. The house of the old Archbishop is over against this Monastery, over which he has the superinspection, for besides him they have no Superiour: Their habit is black, and their subsistence partly from their Founda∣tion, and partly from what they earn with their needle; but should that fail them, the charity of their neighbours would not, for in that Town no body begs; if any be in∣digent, some body or other takes him home to his house, and there is never an Hospital in Athens. Some of our Travellers are to blame, and their character not to be believed when they report that the Calogers of Athens are exorbitant and irregular; certainly they have taken that scandal from the Turks, or some other Libertines of that Country, and we our selves are not free from such sort of calumniators with us. About two hundred paces from this Mo∣nastery they shewed us a little house, where not long before an accident happened that evinces the Piety of the Athenians, and proves that the Zeal of Christianity is not more fervent among the Ecclesiasticks than mong the Laity of that Town. There
lived in that house a good Man and his Wife, who had only one Son of about ten or twelve years of Age, but excellently handsom, and very well educated. The Turkish Commissioners that raised their tri∣bute of Children, put this Boy down for one into their List: the Father and Mo∣ther were poor people, and had not where∣withall to ransom their Son (for in Athens that is one of their priviledges, and any man who is able, has liberty to redeem his Children) terrified with this misfortune, they conveyed away their Child, but the Turks seized the Father in the Sons stead, and to force him to discover, they clapt him in irons: The poor Woman followed after her Husband, crying and lamenting as if she were mad; the Turks turned back and beat her, her Husband comforted her what he could, beg'd of her to be con∣tented, and to return to her Family. The Son understanding how his Parents were used, came home to his Mother, and with tears in his eyes, Do you suspect my courage dear Mother? said he, I will after my Fa∣ther, and save his life though with the loss of my own: The Mother overwhelmed with grief, and divided cruelly betwixt her Husband and her Son, knew not what to advise, but at length leaving him to him∣self,
he came to the Commissioners of the Tribute, and told them, If the service of the Sultan be the only thing in question, I will readily lay down my life at his feet; but my Religion I cannot change, nor is it necessary, for perhaps I may serve him as a Christian, as well as any of your Agemoglans. The Commissioners cox'd him, and caress'd him; He desired his Father might be dis∣charged, and having kiss'd and embrac'd him, presented himself to the Irons, speak∣ing still with great reverence to our Reli∣gion, and reflection upon the Turkish: per∣sisting so eagerly in that discourse, the Turks began to be angry, but still endeavoured to reclaim him; however he continued firm to his Principles, declared, and repeated it over and over, that he would dye a Chri∣stian; and remained so positive, that the Turks fell into a rage, and upbraided him with blasphemy, and having accused him of it, and made some formal process before the Cadi to countenance their cruelty, they cut he poor Child to pieces with their Swords n the middle of the Bazar. This occasion presenting it self, I shall give ou the Relation of the Zeal and Piety of  Young Athenian Damoisel; that at the ame time you may have a double Example, nd be satisfied of the Virtue as well of one er as the other.
This Virgin was one of the handsomest in all Athens, and yet her prudence and sagacity was greater than her beauty: From her minority she had alwayes expressed a great deal of Devotion, and yet she durst not follow its motions, which prompted her exceedingly to the Church. For appre∣hending the insolence of some Turk as she passed thorow the streets, she went thither seldomer than otherwise she would have done; and the truth is, when ever they appear, the Turks will take the first oppor∣tunity to accost them. In spite of her cau∣tion, a spruce young Turk got a sight one day of this Virgin, and fell in love with her; having made his address to no pur∣pose, as he lost his labour, he lost his pa∣tience with it, and conspired with certain of his Accomplices like himself, to gain her by force. They have a certain Feast (like our Easter) which they call Bairam Cout∣zong, at which time, having more freedom of debaucherie than ordinary, they resolv∣ed to put their designs in practice, and ac∣cordingly entred by force into the young Athenians house, who was at home along with no body but her Mother who was a Widow: In apprehension of their violence, they both of them cry'd out as soon as they saw them, but no body came into their re∣scue;
for, besides that, during the liberty of the Bairam, the Christians do generally keep themselves close, their house was in a by-place, and somewhat out of the way: The resistance, and refractoriness of this young Damoisel inraged them to such a de∣gree, that finding their importunity unsuc∣cessful they fell to blows, and gave her se∣ven or eight stabs with a poinard: that which was most admirable in the passage, was, that still as they stab'd, she presented her face, as if she had been desirous to be wounded there, to ruine that part which had caused such extravagant passion in those Brutes: They left her for dead, and 'tis reported that the only thing that recovered her, was the joy she conceived to find her self disfigured beyond any such influence for the future: But the Assassines were glad to fly, and never appeared since; for complaint was made to the Keslar-Agasi, who would without all doubt have punish∣ed them severely. Since this accident, in ll the Families of Athens, (both Turk and Christian) no discourse is held among the oung Maidens, but up comes this story; nd the good women have no better lesson o each their Daughters, than to imitate his Damoisel; nor better memorial for hem, than to show them the scars of her
face. When we were in Athens, the poor Girle was living in the Isle of Engia, If the Christian Religion was not suffici∣ent to move these Athenian Damoisels to Chastity, the fear of punishment would do it effectually. Those who are defective that way, are condemned to be sold for slaves, and upon conviction 'tis not easie to escape. 'Tis the Cadi's interest to see that Law strictly executed, for the profit is his, and upon the least accusation he causes them to be inspected by the Midwives: Not but there are wayes of evading it, and a thousand artifices are found out to prevent their slavery; sometimes the Confessor in∣tercedes, and suggesting the danger of their turning Mahumetans, abates the rigour of their Laws, and conceals the dishonour of their Families. In a word, in all Greece manifest immodesty is no where so severely punished as in Athens. The Virgins in Athens are generally handsom, witty, and vindicative; you may judge what they were formerly, by the single example of Thais, who followed A∣lexander the Great in his Expedition into Persia: Being with that Monarch one day when he was in a good humour, she pro∣posed to him to burn the Palace-Royal at Persepolis, and was so plain as to profess a
desire of putting fire to it her self, that the world might say, that the very Damoisels which attended in his Conquests in Persia, had revenged the burning at Athens, when of old it was set on fire by Xerxes; and her beauty and eloquence so far recom∣mended her ambition, that she was grati∣fied in her motion, and the Palace set on fire that very night. Our curiosity carried us from thence out of the Castle to the Southward betwixt the Phalerum and the Porto-Lione, where was anciently the old City of Athens, called by way of excellence Asti, or the City, the foundation of which, according to the te∣stimony of Pliny, began there. The two Brothers, Euryalus and Hyperbius were the first who built houses there, before which time they were lodged in Grottos, still to be seen at the foot of the Castle. The quar∣ters of Lymnae, Coepi, Diomea, Cynosarges, and Alopece are still on that side, and were all we saw that Walk. We returned by the Temple of Jupiter, and keeping still by the foot of the Castle, we passed behind the house where, the Je∣suites had formerly their retreat, and on our right hand we saw the remains of a building, at present called, To Palati tou Themistocles, or Themistocles his Palace.
Among the Ancients there was nothing could give Authority to the Modern Ap∣pellation, for by them it was called the Pa∣lace of the five hundred, which was the number of Select Men chosen every year by the Ten Tribes of Attica, each Tribe na∣ming fifty, who alternatively, and according to the rank of their several Tribes had the supreme management of affairs for five and thirty dayes together, and their Court be∣ing held in the place called Prytane, gave the name of Prytanes to the said fifty Sena∣tors. Cajetan, Drogoman to the Consul Gi∣raud, had his Lodgings in this Palace of Themistocles. A little beyond it we saw the Temple of Neptune, a very admirable Stru∣cture. Of the three Temples Dedicated an∣ciently to that God, we could meet no∣thing that could assure us whether this was the Elates, the Cynades or Asphalius. It is at present a Greek Church, govern'd by the Caloger Damaskinos, whose house being hard by, and upon the brow of a Rock, is the highest in the whole City. 'Tis report∣ed, that many rare Manuscripts are kept in that house. Near the Temple of Neptune there is a Fountain of the same name, whose waters are turned for the benefit of the Castle:
From thence we came into the Vicus Cera∣micus, where we saw on our right hand the place where formerly stood the Leocorion, or Monument of Leos, who having sacri∣ficed his Daughters for the safety of the publick, deserved well to have a Tomb in the City. Facing about to the left, we saw the ruines of a magnificent Building, called the Kings Portico, that is to say, the Por∣tico of the King of the Sacrifices, or the second of the Archontes. The Portico of Jupiter Elutherion was behind it, and Eu∣dancon, or the Tomb of Heros Eudanos was hard by, which Eudanos was sirnamed An∣gelos the Son of Neptune. Thence towards the Castle, we observed the Metroon or Chapel of the Mother of the Gods, in which place died Lycurgus the Son of Ly∣cophron, as famous in Athens, as the Legi∣slator Lycurgus was in Sparta. The Barathron or Orygma, that famous dungeon into which their criminals were tumbled, was behind that Metroon at the foot of a steep Rock in the Castle; and near the Barathron, was the Tribunal called Pa∣rabysthus, in which only small Causes were tryed; and that Court consisted of eleven Judges: The nearness of this Court to the Barathron (which was an ignominious place) was the occasion that some Authors
have said, that the Parabysthus stood in a vile and abominable place. At small di∣stance from the Kings Portico, we saw the Bucoleon or Court where the King of the Sacrifices had his Tribunal: Not far from that we saw the ruines of a small Chapel, called Agios Dionysios, where Mass is said constantly upon Saint Denis his day. To restore that Chapel one would have need not only of Money, but good interest at the Port, where they suffer Christians to repair their Churches, they will not suffer them to rebuild them when they are down: This Chapel joyns to the Archbishops Pa∣lace, which they pretend was the Palace of Saint Denis. The place is very pleasant, and is the lodgings of the Archbishop and five Calogers that make up his whole Fa∣mily. They shew us a Well there, which among the Christians is in great Venerati∣on, because as their tradition tells them, Saint Paul was a prisoner in it, and rescued by the Authority of Saint Denis. Not far from the ruines of the Pryta∣neum we saw the Court where the fifty Se∣nators Assembled who had the Administra∣tion of the Publick Affairs: The perpetual Fire was kept there. The Laws of Solon were there in deposito, and such illustrious men as had done any signal service for their
Country were maintained there, and their Posterity at the Publick Charge. On the right hand towards the Temple of Theseus, there was a Grove dedicated to the Heroina Aglaura daughter to King Ce∣crops, and behind the Grove was a field Consecrated to Famine; the field was call∣ed Limoupedion. Formerly the Gate called Hiera stood at the end of this field: Hi∣era is as much as sacred, and it was called so, because it was the way to Eleusis, by which they passed in their famous Proces∣sion belonging to the mysteries of Ceres. n this place they had erected a fair Statue of Anthemocritus, for whom they had also set up a Tomb by the Gate Dipylon. With∣out the Port Hiera was anciently a large eubourg, whose ruines are still visible. It was called Hiera Siki, or the Holy Fig∣e; and the way to Eleusis was called Hi∣ra Odos. The Port Dipylon lies Eastward of the Hiera, and betwixt them is another called the Ceramick Postern; not far from whence is a place called Oenos, where they sold their Wine, which gave it its denomination; for in Athens most of their chief streets are called from the principal Commodities that re sold there. That space of the old Town that lies betwixt Dipylon and the
Ceramick Postern, was called Oeon or the Desert, because, though it butted upon the Ceramicus, yet no part of the great af∣fluence of people that passed there could be seen. The Famous Temple of Anaceon was not far off, which was Consecrated to Castor and Pollux by the name of Diosc∣res. Formerly Slaves were sold in it, and when Pisistrates disarmed the Athenians, he cause'd them to assemble in that place. Westward of the Porte Hiera was the Pyraeum, and the part of the Town betwix them, was called Heptachalcon, through which Sylla came when he surprized A¦thens. We contented our selves to view all thi from a little Hill near the Arch-Bishop' Palace, without troubling our selves to go to them: that day we thought of nothing but running from one place to another, a if we had intended that way to have tyre our curiosity; besides, people are quickly satisfied where nothing but ruines are to be seen. Advancing from thence towards the an¦cient Gate called Pyraeum, we saw severa Portico's; that of Attalus where the R¦mans erected a particular Court, and calle it by their own name: The Portico of Tre¦con called by Aristophanes Alphiton St
because they sold Meal in it: In it there was an excellent Picture of Helen drawn by euxis. The Chapel of Heros Chalodos (of which Plutarch speaks in the life of The∣seus) was not far off, and by it a house where we saw several Statues of Potters Earth, and among the rest the Statue of Amphictyon King Athens. We saw like∣wise where stood the house of Polytion, remarkable for the libertinisme of Alcibi∣edes when he prophaned the Mysteries of Ceres with the young Debauchees of the Town: In process of time this house was turned into a Temple and dedicated to Bac∣chus. Not far off was a Gymnasium of Mercu∣ries with a Porticoe and Market-place of the same name; and because nothing of An∣tiquity ought (at least in my fancy) to be lost, and the least observation is to be re∣corded in that case; it is not amiss to let you know that near the Portico there are to be seen the ruines of a large Courèon or Barbars Shop, of which Lysias makes mention. Behind this Portico, is the Garden of Me∣lanthus the Philosopher, in which Garden the Orator Lycurgus was buried; a little beyond we saw Statues representing a Com∣bate betwixt Neptune and the Giant Poly∣bot:
Not far from the Port du Pyraeum we saw a Temple, considerable only for some certain Statues of Praxitiles his work; from thence we went to the Pompeon, which is the place where they deposite all the Implements and Utensils belonging to their publick solemnities. Beyond that Gate there is a Tomb adorned with the Statue of a Horsman, by Praxitiles own hand. The old Pyraeum Gate was twice Musquet shot from where the new one stands now. From thence we turned towards the Castle, following a Path on the right hand that led us towards the ruines of the Temple of Jupiter Olympicus. Titus Livius has ve∣ry elegantly expressed its magnificence in these, Templum unum in terris inchoatum pro magnitudine Dei: The only Temple in the world begun with proportion to the Gran∣deur of a God. But it was not finished in his days, for the greatness of the design kept it unfinished for above seven hundred years, though several Kings contributed largely to have it finished; the Emperour Adrian perfected it at last, at the expence of more than nine Millions. Its circumfe∣rence was about half a mile, and in its whole extent scarce a place but was embel∣lished with some excellent Statue, more va∣luable
for the curiosity of the work, than for the Gold or Ivory which had been pro∣digally lavished upon them. There was also to be seen the Temple of Saturn and Rhea; the Grove of Olympia, and a Ditch that has been famous ever since Ducalion's Flood; for it is from tradition believed that the waters of that deluge were carried off through that, and they fancy it the more credible, because there is Ducalion's Tomb hard by. There is also the house of Morychia, and another of Char∣midas, who was a man of a most prodigious memory. Southward of this Temple stood ano∣ther dedicated to Apollo and called Delphi∣nion; it was also a Court that took cog∣nizance of, and judged finally in Causes where Murder was evidently committed and confessed, but justified to have been done according to Law. The old Port of Eugeus was hard by, and his Palace not far off: A little lower was the Quarter called Coepi or the Gardens, where there was to be seen a Statue of Venus of Alcamenes his making; in the opinion of Phidias, the choicest of his work, and esteemed rather a Miracle than a Master-piece, There was likewise a Temple dedicated to Venus Ʋra∣nia, and by it, another to Euclaea, another
to Proserpine, and another to Ceres, which last was called by way of excellence Eleusinion, because the Grand Mysteries of that God∣dess were celebrated there, in which only women were assistant, though several of the Ceremonies were very licentious: You may read elsewhere (if you please) the In∣trigues betwixt Ceres, Baubo, and Bacchus, which made a great part of the representa∣tion in that solemnity. One thing is remarkable in the Quarter called Asti, that it is so full of Temples, and Monuments of Piety, that there is scarce room for private Houses: You have some∣thing like it in Paris; from the Palais to Nostre Dame (which lies as it were in the Arms of the Seine that runs of each side of it) the Churches are so thick, as almost to touch one another: You may number them at your leisure. To the Eastward of the Temple dedicat∣ed to Jupiter Olympicus, there was another dedicated to Lucina, called by the Greeks Elithia, and another to Serapis. The place where Theseus and Pyrithous swore amity, was not far from it. The Street of the Sa∣cred Tripods ran from thence to the Pryta∣neum, and crossed another place called al∣so the Sacred Tripods, in which there had been a stately Temple of the same name,
adorned with the Statue of a Satyr, one of the most excellent of Praxitiles his pieces, is will appear by this following Story. Praxitiles was enamour'd of the incompa∣rable Phryne, who for a long time imploy∣ed all her entreaties and caresses to make him tell her which was the best piece he ever had made; not being able to prevail that way, she got it out of him by an arti∣fice. She corrupted one of his Servants, and obtained of him to come running in to him in a great fright, and surprize Praxi∣tiles with the news, that his Work-house had been on fire, but that only a certain number of his Pictures were burned: In ex∣traordinary discomposure Praxitiles cryed out, Unhappy man that I am, I am utterly ndone, if either my Satyr or Cupid be a∣mong them. Phryne had her design, to set∣tle his mind, told him it was but a trick of hers, and having taken his Cupid for her self, he dedicated his Satyr to Bacchus. In this Street there was formerly a trian∣gular Market-place, in which there stood a Court or Tribunal, called in those days Trigonon, and at some distance Southward of the Prytaneum there were three other Tri∣bunals that had been anciently very fa∣mous.
I cannot more properly compare the pro∣ximity of these Tribunals than to those in Paris, where you have three soveraign, and several inferiour Courts within the circum∣ference of the Palais. One of these three Courts in Asti was cal∣led Heliaea; which was so much frequented by the Athenians, and had so many Causes pleaded in it, that the other Courts were many times obliged to remove thither: It was an open Court, as is impiyed by the name; for Heliaea in Greek, is the same that Sub Dio was among the Romans. The se∣cond was called Strategion, and was the place where the Archontes sate: and the third was called Thesmothesion, because the six last Archontes presided there, and as I said before, called themselves Thesmothe∣tes. To the Eastward of these Courts we saw the Statues of the ten Eponymes, who were the Ten Heroes that did anciently denomi∣nate the several Tribes of the Country of Attica: For the first of the Archontes, that is to say he who presided in the Strategion, called himself Eponyme. Behind the Statue of these ancient Epo∣nymes was a place called Tholus, where the Prytaneis made their solemn Sacrifices, and by it (passing by the Castle) we saw the Temple of Mars.
The wall of the Castle behind the ground where this Temple stood, was properly that part which they called Cimonion, or the South wall, where formerly was to be seen Medusa's head, and Jupiter's Buckler called Agys. In the Rock beneath it we saw the Vault, where stood the Tripos consecrated to Apol∣lo and Diana: A little farther we saw se∣veral other Caverns, into which the poor Shepheards hurry their Flocks upon any alarm or apprehension of the Corsairs land∣ing. Not far from thence were the ruines of the Odeon or Musick School, a magnificent Building formerly, where many eminent Musicians have contended for the Prize that was allowed by that Republick to the most skilful among them: and within a small distance there was anciently a Market-place where they sold Meal, and a Court or Tribunal where many times the Archon∣tes heard Causes. In his Wars with Mithridates, when Syl∣ threatned Athens with a Siege; the se∣ditious Aristion burned all the Wood-work of the Odeon, lest it should commode the Romans in their approaches to the Town; but it was afterwards repaired by the boun∣y of Ariobarzanes King of Cappadocia.
At a small distance from thence we passed into the Quarter of Lymnae, considerable for the Famous Temple of Bacchus. In that Quarter we saw a place called Lymno∣machiae, where the youth of the City were accustomed to exercise themselves at Wrest∣ling and Fisty-cuffs. We saw another place that was again become a Meadow after a long intermission, having been drained and built with many fair houses. This Mea∣dow was anciently called Lenaeon, and had on one side of it a famous Grove of Poplar-Trees called Aegyron. The Peasants when they brought their Comedies to Athens, began their Recreations there; and the people of the City made use of the Trees in that Aegyron to build the Scaffolds upon which they placed themselves to behold their rustick representations. In that Meadow we observed a little Ri∣ver and followed it against the stream, in cu∣riosity to know whither it would lead us; it brought us to the famous Fountain Enne∣acrunos, called anciently Callirhoe; it is much fallen from its ancient magnificence. In stead of the cost and new Tyle that Pisi∣strates bestowed upon it, there is nothing to be seen now in it, buy the green Turf of the Meadow. Being desirous to tast of the Waters, I found them excellent; and our
Germans, contrary to the Genius of their Nation, in spight of the Lepanthe our Ja∣nizary had brought in his Flasks, fell as heartily to the Water and were as well pleas∣ed with it as my self. But among all these variety of objects, we were sensible there was one still wanting, and casting our Eyes up and down, we di∣scovered behind the Trees, among the Grass, what we sought for, and that was the re∣liques of the first Theatre in the world. We had no sooner got to it, but Dreslington cryed out in his facetious way, At length we have found it, and are arrived at the illustrious Throne of four great Empresses, Melpomene the Empress of Tragedy; Thalia of Comedy; Euterpe of Pastorals, and Calliope of other Verse. The circum∣ference of this Theatre is still visible, and we judged of the magnificence of the whole by the ruines that remained. Most part of the ancient Buildings in Athens or Rome that are either half, or utterly demo∣lished, may one day possibly be repaired, or something built in imitation; but this excellent piece of Antiquity is of a sort that can never be restored: For though both Princes and People do still retain their old love and inclination to those kind of shows, yet now adays they rather affect and
endeavour convenience than magnificence in their Theatres, I hold my self obliged therefore as much as in me lies to preserve the memory of so unimitable a Fabrick, and to pick out of Ancient Authors, and from my own observation of the place, the dif∣ferent parts that composed it, seeing scarce any one of them has given us a particular description: I must be free with you in this, and acknowledge, that if any where, here it is that I expect you should value my observation, and the curiosity of my Tra∣vels. Among all the things of which An∣cient Authors have treated, the constructi∣on of their Theatres is the most obscure and imperfect, and delivered with most contra∣diction. Vitruvius has left us in the mid∣dle, and given us no account of its dimen∣sions, situation, nor number of its principal and constituting parts, presuming I suppose that they had been well enough known, or could never have perished. For example, he does not determine the quantity of the Diazoma or Praecinctiones, which we call Coridors, Retraittes, Paillers, which are several rows of Benches. Besides, in things that he does specifie, he sets down such rules as we find actually were never ob∣served; as when he tells us of two sorts of heights observed in the building of their
stairs, it is manifest that neither the one nor the other have any proportion with what are still remaining of the Ancient Theatres and Amphitheatres. Among our Modern Writers, the Jesuite Gallutius Sabienus, and the learned Scali∣ger have omitted the most essential parts; and the unformed mass of Bulengerus his ci∣tations, are enough to fright any mans cu∣riosity; some of them we have consulted our selves, as Atheneus, Hesychius, Pollux, Eustathius, Suidas, and others, but all their light is so weak and imperfect, that had we not viewed the ground, we had been still in the dark: But our curiosity putting it into our minds to take an exact plane of it in Profile, we had opportunity to consider th real measures and proportions of the parts still visible in Athens, and comparing them with rational presumptions taken out of such Authors as had imparted to us the use of such parts as were absolutely demo∣lished, they supplyed us with probable con∣jectures of all their dimensions. We made use of Rule, divided accord∣ing to the common foot among the ancient Athenians, not much differing from that we use now in France, which exceeds the present measure in Athens about eight or nine lines; so that three of our feet in
France, is more than three Athenian feet by above two thumbs breadth; so then a hundred of their feet answer to about nine∣ty four of ours, and some six inches, resect∣ing the little fractions to avoid cavil in our Calculation; so that you must remember to judge of all the following measures by the French computation. By this expedi∣ent we found with what equity the Anci∣ents called this Edifice Hecatompedon, for we perceived that the semidiameter of our Plane or Ground-plat was forty seven foot and three inches, which made the diameter to arise to a hundred of their feet, and gave it the name of Hecatompedon. By the word Theatre, the Ancients in∣tended the whole building where the Peo∣ple Assembled to see any of their publick representations. The famous Architect Phi∣lo built this in the time of Pericles, above two thousand years since; and Philos design was followed by Ariobarzanes King of Cap∣padocia, who repaired it the first time, as the Emperour Adrian did afterwards. It con∣sisted without, of three rows of Portico's o Galleries, one above the other, and within there were two principal places, one for the Spectators, and the other for the Spectacle themselves. The parts designed for the Spectators were the Conistra or Pit, the
rows of Benches called the Diazoma, the little stairs, the Circys, and the Echea; the parts appropriated to the Actors were the Orchestra, the Hyposcenion, the Logeon or Thimele, the Proscenion, the Parascenion, and the Scene. To take a Plane of this Edisice, a circle was drawn whose semidiameter consisted of forty seven foot and three inches: Having made our Circle, we retrench'd a fourth part, and drew a line of ninety degrees, which line determined the front of the Scene, that is to say, the front or face of the Decorations, for properly the word Scene imports nothing else. The small part of the diameter, which the line of ninety degrees had cut behind the Scene was about fourteen foot; and a∣bout eighteen foot from the said Line to∣wards the centre of the Circle, a Line was drawn parallel with the face or front of the Proscenion, (for (as I said before) so it is that they call an elevation or plat-form that was peculiar to the Comedians) so that the breadth and depth of that place was eighteen foot compleat; and the face or front of the Proscenion retrenching one hun∣dred forty two degrees and forty six mi∣nutes of the circumference of the Circle, the remainder, that is to say, two hundred
and seventeen degrees and fourteen minutes was the full circumference of the inward part of the Theatre; so that the draught was more than a semicircle, contrary to the general Opinion that it was a perfect He∣micycle. The bottom or lower part of this cir∣cumference they called Conistra, or the Pit; the Romans called it Arena. In Athens the Orchestra took up some part of the Coni∣stra, insomuch that some have mistaken a part for the whole, and called it all Orche∣stra: This corruption, or promiscuous use of words proceeded especially from the Ro∣mans; and it is remarkable, that though the Roman Theatres had almost the same parts with the Athenian, and those parts had almost the same names; yet there was great difference betwixt their proportions, situations and uses: But it is our Province to describe the Greek Theatres, and to med∣dle no farther with the Roman. The inward building of the Threatre ran along like the arch of a Circle to the two corners of the Proscenion; and in that part of the circumference were erected four and twenty rows of seats or benches which went round the Conistra or Pit, and were intend∣ed for Spectators: These benches were di∣stinguished, eight and eight, by three Co∣ridor's
or passages▪ which the Athenians called Diazoma; they were of the same figure with the rows of seats, and were con∣trived for the passage of the Spectators from one story to another, without incommo∣ding those who were placed before; and for the same convenience there were little stairs that passed from one Coridor to ano∣ther cross the several rows; and not far from those stairs there were doors by which the people entred from the Galleries on the outside, and took their places as they thought fit. The best places were reckoned upon the eight ranks betwixt the eight and the se∣venteenth, and that space was it which they called Bouleuticon, designed for the parti∣cular Offices of Justice: The other rows were called Ephebicon, and were proper to the Citizens after they were eighteen years of age. The height of each of these rows of benches was about thirteen inches, their breath about two and twenty; but the lowest bench was near four foot high from the level of the floor: each step of the stairs was but half the height of the benches, and as their height was but half, so was their breadth. The height and breadth of the Coridor's or passages was double the
height and breadth of the benches; but the stairs were not parallel, for the spaces betwixt them grew sharper as they came near the Pit, and ended in the figure of a wedge, from whence by the Romans they were called Cunei; and to prevent the fall∣ing down of the rain upon those steps, there were certain pent-houses set up to carry off the water. Along the Coridors at convenient distance in the thickness of the wall were certain holes, in which were placed little vessels or kettles of brass open towards the Scene, and with little holes for an use that I shall mention by and by. These holes or cells were called by the Athenians Echaea. Above the upper Coridor there was a Gallery called Cercys, where their Women were placed; but those who were infa∣mous or irregular in their lives, had ano∣ther place by themselves. In this Cercys they placed likewise such Strangers and Al∣lies as were free of that City; for none could be admitted there but such as had their freedom. There were other place proper to particular persons, and those places descended by succession to the eldes of the Family. This Theatre was not so capacious a that which was built in Rome by Marc
Scaurus the Edilis; for in that there was room for seventy nine thousand persons; a good Geometrician will easily compute the number of persons that this would hold, and he who desires it may take the pains to inform himself: there was a foot and half allowed for every mans place; and this we may conclude, that the people assembling there many times to regulate disorders in the State, there must be room at least for six thousand men; for by the Attick Laws there were of necessity to be six thousand suffrages to make a decree of the people authentick. Thus much for the place appointed for the Spectators. As to that which was de∣signed for the Actors, the Orchestra (being an elevation out of the Conistra or Pit) be∣gan about fifty four foot from the front of the Proscenion or Post of the Comedians, and ended at the Proscenion. The height of the Orchestra was about four foot from the ground: Its figure was a long square divided from the seats of the Spectators: In certain places of this Orchestra were the Musick, the Chorus, and the Mimicks con∣veniently disposed: Among the Romans it was put to a more honourable use, for the Emperour, the Senate, and the Vestals had their places upon it.
Upon the flat of the Orchestra at Athens towards the place of the Comedians, was another elevation or plat-form called Lo∣geon or Thimele, which among the Romans was called Pulpitum; from the Conistra or Pit this Logeon was raised about nine foot, and five from the Orchestra; the figure of the Logeon was square, and had four and twenty foot of a side: there it was the Mi∣micks practised their Interludes, and the Chorus made their Recitations. At the foot of the Logeon upon the Or∣chestra was a row of Pillars incompassing a place called the Hyposcenion, and this was a part of the Greek Theatres that Modern Writers have not well understood; some have confounded it with the Podion, or place within the Ballisters, betwixt the Pro∣scenion and the Scene in the Roman Thea∣tres: But that Opinion is manifestly ab∣surd, from the difference both of their uses and situation: I will make it more clear to you if ever I return to Rome, from whence I design you a description of the Theatre of Marcellus; others will have the Hypo∣scenion to be the forepart of the Proscenion contained in the space betwixt the floor of the Orchestra, and the flat of the Prosce∣nion, but I shall confute that fancy here∣after.
The Hyposcenion therefore was a place upon the Orchestra for the convenient re∣pose of the Musick, and persons belonging to the Logeon; for the Chorus and Mimicks kept still in the Hyposcenion till their parts in the representation obliged them to a∣scend into the Logeon. The Poets them∣selves sate likewise in the Hyposcenion, and what I say, is justified by Atheneus, when he tells us that Asopodorus Philiasius deri∣ded the unjust acclamations of the people, among whom all things are many times ap∣plauded; for he observes, that Asopodorus being in the Hyposcenion, and hearing the obstreperous approbation that was given to a player upon a Flute, What is this for? cryed he, my life for it, it is some new sot∣ticism that they are taken with; from whence it is plain, it passed not for a front or outside, but for a certain place where Asopodorus had placed himself, either to sit out the whole Play, or perhaps only in his passage to some other place, which indeed it probably implyed, for his words are, being already in the Hyposcenion. The compass of the Hyposcenion was the same with the Logeon; its breadth was a∣bout six or seven foot: but to be short, the Logeon, the Hyposcenion, the Orchestra, and the Conistra are four distinct places which
many persons have by mistake comprised under the word Orchestra, as the following places have been signified under the name of the Scene. The Proscenion or place for the Actors was raised two feet above the Logeon, se∣ven foot above the Orchestra, and eleven above the Pit; and it is not to be imagined so great an Architect as Philo would with∣out reason have given such different heights to all those different places; besides thei being seen, he contrived those places so, that the sound of the Musick, and the me∣lody of their Voices might be conveyed with more advantage, and more equal di∣stribution to the ears of the People, accord∣ing to the different elevations and degree in which they had placed themselves: Up∣on the Proscenion there was an Altar, call∣ed by the Athenians Agyeus, and dedicated to Apollo. The Scene, as we observed before, wa nothing but the Columns and Ornament in Architecture raised from the foundation▪ and upon the sides of the Proscenion, fo its beauty and decoration. When ther were three rows of Pillars one above ano¦ther, the highest row was called Episceni¦on. Agatarchus was the first Architect wh found out the way of adorning Scenes by
the Rules of Perspective, and Eschilus as∣sisted him. Parascenion was a general word for the whole space before and behind the Scene, and the same name was given to all the avenues, and passages from the Musick-room, to the place where the Actors kept. And thus by the word Scena they con∣founded the Parascenion and the Scene. The Athenians oftentimes made use of Machines, the principal of which was call∣ed Theologeon; it was generally in the air, and brought in the Gods when the Poets thought fit to introduce them: For that reason it is, that among the Learned An∣cients they are so much decryed, being (as they believed) of no other use but to re∣lieve the sterility of the Poet, whose brains growing muddy, and unable by natural or ingenious extrication, to clear himself of some indecorum or perplexity in his plot, brings himself off in a moment by bringing in one of the Gods upon a Theologian, who by his pure authority, and an unseasonable and ridiculous contrivance, in a moment, from some remote place brings a man home to his own Country; restores a man to health who had been sick, or rescues some body from the calamities of a Prison; a fancy so insufferably idle, that the Athe∣nians
have in raillerie turned it to a Pro∣verb, and when they see a man at a non∣plus, and ignorant what to do, they cry out in derision, Apo Micanis, as the Cri∣ticks in Rome upon the same occasion were wont to say, Deus è Machina; Now for a God from a Machine. Nevertheless, we are not to believe the Comedies of the Ancients were altogether so profane as some would represent them; for when their Gods came forth in the The∣ologeon, Tully tells us, Ex ea (Machina) Dii effata saepe fabantur, homines ad virtu∣tem excitabant, à vitio deterrebant: From thence the Gods did many times deliver their Precepts, exciting men to Virtue, and deterring them from Vice. The outward building was of Marble, and consisted of three Porticoes or Galle∣ries one above another, of which the high∣est was called Cercys. Were I not tired with calculating already, I would have sent you the exact models and dimensions of them all. This Theatre was open at top. The Thea∣tre of Regilla not far from the Temple of Theseus was covered magnificently, and had a fair roof of Cedar. The Odeon or Thea∣tre for Musick was covered likewise, and Plutarch will tell you it was that which
gave occasion to the Poet Cratinus to droll o ingeniously upon Pericles, who had ta∣ken the care of it. In the Theatre of Bac∣chus there was no covering but over the Proscenion and Cercys, and therefore the Athenians being exposed to the injuries of the weather, came usually with great cloaks thrown over to secure them from the rain and the cold; and to defend against the Sun, they had the Sciadion in fashion of our Parosols, which the Romans used also  their Theatres by the name of Ʋmbrellae; ereupon when any sudden storm arose, he Play was interrupted, and the specta∣ors dispered; some sheltered themselves in the outward Galleries; some in the Por∣ico of Eumenicus that joyned to the Thea∣re; but in the Temple of Bacchus (though ear enough) no protection could be had, ecause it was opened but once a year; ne∣ertheless in fair weather their Comedies ere extraordinarily magnificent, and in∣iched and recommended to the people by  thousand Artifices, as exhalation of o∣ours all over the Theatre; diffusion of li∣uors in little odoriferous showers upon the eads of the People; the uppermost Cori∣or, and the Cercys being adorned with ultitudes of Statues, which being hollow, nd full of concealed Pipes, squirted or
shower'd down Rose-water, and other sweets among the People, thereby tempering and moderating the excessive heat of so nume∣rous an assembly. Their Plays were acted alwayes by day∣light. When Lentulus Spinter had cover∣ed the Roman Theatres with Tile, they played now and then in the night. The priviledge of entring into the Theatre o Bacchus cost each Citizen at least two Oboli sometimes three: An Obolus with them▪ was about as much as a Son Marque o French Money; which payments were lai out wholly upon repairs; for all the appa¦ratus, and pompous preparation of clothes and other ornaments, was provided by per¦sons of quality who exhibited the Play▪ At the Creation of the Archontes ther were five or six several Comedies acted pub¦lickly, in which the emulation of the com¦petitors was sometimes so great, that in  contest for the prize of Poetry and Musick Alexis and Cleodemus died upon the spo with meer transport and rapture for th applauses of the People, and the Prizes the had won: But favour and faction did man times rob the Victors of their just Prize wch was the occasion of Menander's sarcas who, finding himself wronged, and the Po Philemon triumphing unjustly upon him b
the corrupt and debauched suffrage of the people, came to Philemon in the midst of his acclamations, and whispering in his Ear, asked him, whether he was not ashamed of his Victory? This Menander was a famous Poet, had made a hundred and five Come∣dies, but never gained the Prize but for eight: Euripides was another who had made sixty Comedies, and fifteen Trage∣dies, yet never came off Conquerour but in five. Thus have I given you a description of the Theatre of Leneon or Bacchus, which Theatre was imployed not only for their publick Plays, and spectacles, and assem∣blies of State; but sometimes as Schools for the eminent Philosophers to read in to their Disciples; nor were Theatres so much decryed in the Primitive times as some would perswade us: The Doctrine of Chri∣stianity was originally taught there; Cajus and Aristarchus were carried forcibly out of the Theatre at Ephesus as they were expounding the Gospel; and St. Paul was intreated by his Disciples not to hazard himself there for fear of the like vio∣lence. Before I had seen and considered this Fa∣brick in Athens, I could not believe that the excellence and curiosity of Architecture,
was to be shown only upon a Theatre: It was not enough for Philo, like an admirable Architect, to regard the just symmetry and proportion of parts, and to make one side and the other, the upper and lower part of the Building suitable and concurrent; but as well as in Architecture, he shew'd great judgment both in Musick and Physick, and indeed there was a kind of necessity for it; for the Voice being like to be lost in an open and spacious place, where the Walls, though of Marble, at that distance could give little or no repercussion to make it audible to the People, Philo contrived those Cells or Holes in the thickness of the Coridors, and in those Cells he placed the Brass Vessels that I mentioned before, each of which Kettles was supported by a wedge of Iron, and placed in their several, so as not to touch the Wall, that the voice pro∣ceeding from the mouth of the Actor as from a Center, and being carried circular∣ly to the Coridors, might strike upon the concavity of those Vessels, and from them be reverberated with more clearness and force: But the Musick in the Hyposcenion had more advantage; for the Brass Vessels being disposed Mathematically, and at a distance that agreed exactly with the inter∣vals and modulation of the Musick, every
Note was sustained and reinforced by reper∣cussion from those Vessels placed there me∣thodically on purpose; their number in all were twenty eight. To his care for improving the harmony to the people, he added his care for their healths; for carrying always in all his Buildings great regard to that where-ever he lodged or disposed them, he thought it no improper reflexion to consider that without some smattering in Physick (to understand how the Weather and the Sun affected mens bodies) it would be impossi∣ble but the pleasure and transport at those spectacles, impetuously agitating the spirits of the spectators, must needs cause an alte∣ration in their healths, against which he provided very well by a judicious placing of the Windows and Columns, and by a learned Oeconomy and disposition of the Winds and Sun, which were admitted or rejected as he pleased: but his chiefest re∣gard was to the Westerly Wind, which was received with great care for a particular ef∣ficacy it has in carrying things far, and di∣stinctly to the Ear: But this Wind being commonly infested with Vapours, it was his Master-piece to turn the Lights of the Galleries with such exactness, that the in∣temperance of that Wind might produce
no rheums nor defluxions among the peo∣ple. The Scene looked out upon the Ca∣stle Hill, and had the Cynosarges behind it; the Musaeon was on the right hand of it, and the Caussey to Pyraeum on the left. At this day there is nothing remaining of Eumenicus his Portico, which consisted for∣merly of a double Gallery divided by cer∣tain rows of Pillars. The Floor of this Portico was raised a good distance from the ground, so that from the Street they ascend∣ed to it by Stairs: It was of a long square Figure, embellished with green Palisado's▪ to please the eyes of those who walked i it. Here it was that their repetitions were made and prepared for the Theatre, a their Musick and Symphony was in th Odeon. And here we could not but wish that i our Countries we had such a Portico as thi of Eumenicus, not only to regulate ou Theatres in point of Architecture, and re¦duce them to the Athenian Model; bu even for reformation of our customs, b subjecting our Poets to the rigour of th Laws, or at least condemning them to s¦lence, who by profane and scandalous ge¦stures or jests, do make a mockery of Re¦ligion, wound the modesty of the auditor
and deprave and debauch the manners of all that are present. Having examined the Theatre of Bac∣chus, we proceeded to the Fountain Enne∣acrunos, where our Flasks of Lepanthe proved as necessary as delicious: From thence we passed into the Quarter of Asti, to trace out the School of Epicurus; for as to his House Laertius tells us it was in the Quarter of Melita, not far from the School of Themistocles. And here I must tell you, that neither History nor tradition could give us the least light where it stood; only it is agreed by common consent it was in a Garden belong∣ing to the old Town. Pliny assures us that Epicurus was the first that ever made a Garden within the Walls of that City, and that he did it for the convenience of his School. The Sect of Epicuraeans, though general∣ly exploded, have notwithstanding found certain reasons to excuse or palliate their doctrine; for though their principal propo∣sition is, That pleasure is the chiefest good; yet his Disciples will tell you that you must not be frighted at words, but search deep∣er into the merits of the Cause, and then you will find that pleasure is the chiefest good, but that that pleasure consists only in
being virtuous: But however his Enemies have disparaged and reproached his Do∣ctrine, it is certain many illustrious persons among the ancient Romans have followed it, as Julius Caesar, Cassius, Mecenas; and it is remarkable that Seneca in his Morals was never so plausible or acute, as when he began with some grave sentence out of Epi∣curus. We continued our walk and visited the Quarter of Diomea, where there was for∣merly a Tribunal or Court consisting of six∣ty Judges, as also a Temple dedicated to Jupiter, and called the Diomean. The an∣cient Diomean Gate was at the foot of the Hill Cynosarges, which we ascended by de∣grees, and had the prospect of several ru∣ines. Upon the top of this Hill it was the Cynick Philosophers kept their School: From the top of this Hill we surveyed the whole Quarter of Asti, which put us in mind of a story of Diogenes the Cynick. The Athenians upbraiding his poverty, and interrogating him about his House, be∣cause he had none to live in, he replied, That they themselves had provided him with variety of noble Buildings, showing them the magnificent Cloisters in the Tem∣ple of Jupiter Olympicus, and the Palace of Polition: We could easily discern the
foundation of this Temple, and I mention it only to advertise you of the errors of se∣veral Travellers in their description of its situation. Upon this Cynosarge it was, that illegiti∣mate and spurious Children were exposed, and a Gymnasion or place of Exercise erect∣ed for them; for the Children of Freemen, and Strangers, the Athenians confounding them all together. Plutarch will tell you with what subtilty and address Themistocles extinguished the distinctions of Birth and Quality in that place. There was also a Temple consecrated to Hercules, who, though the Son of an Adulteress, was ador∣ed and invoked on that account. Not far from the said Temple, was a Court to which any Bastard that had suspicion of his Father, might cite him, and constrain him (if he could prove it) to own him. If you will believe the Athenians, it was an Advocate or Lawyer in this Court who was the occasion of that smart wipe that Diogenes gave the Lawyers and Physicians of his time: For a great contest hapning in the presence of Diogenes betwixt an Advo∣cate and a Physician about places; it being referred to his arbitration, he decided it in his manner, Praecedat Fur, sequatur Car∣nifx. Let the Thief go before, and the
Hangman follow. Not far from this Court we saw several Altars consecrated, some to Hercules, some to his Mother Alcmene, some to his Wife Hebe, and some to his friend Iolaus who was a partner in his Victory over the Hydra. Eastward of this Hill we saw several Tombs, among the rest, the Tomb of Iso∣crates the Orator, and the Lacedemonian Anchimolus, of whose combate and death you may read in Herodotus. The Quarter of Alopece is at no great di∣stance, in which Socrates and Aristides were born: There is now a large but dry Canal where the Waters of the Ilissus did formerly discharge themselves for the com∣munication betwixt the City and Sea; in so much that Vessels came up to the very foot of the Musaeon. There is likewise a Grove of Olive-Trees that runs along half way to Porto-Lione; and on the other side it extends it self from North to South, makes a kind of a Semicircle, and is a great Ornament to the Town. Descending from the Cynosarge, by that part where the old Monuments were to be seen, we found (upon the declension) where the Ereae stood formerly, or the Gate of Sepulchers; from whence steering back a∣gain to the Town, we left the Theatre of
Bacchus on our left hand, and passed by the Tomb of Talus, an excellent Artist, who invented the Saw, and Passer, and se∣veral other Instruments. Not far from this Tomb we viewed the Temple of Aescula∣pius, and within its Walls the Fountain of Hallirrothius, Neptune's Son, slain by Mars in that place. Antiquity believed that there was a subterraneous passage from this Fountain to Phalerum, through which such things as were thrown into the said Foun∣tain, were convey'd underground to Pha∣lerum. In our way from thence to the Castle we saw the Temple of Themis, and hard by it the Tomb of the beautiful Hippolytus the Son of Theseus, by the Amazon Hippolyta; The same Hippolytus that was so much in love with Phaedra. Towards the Castle, we saw likewise the Temple of Ceres, sirnam'd the Courotrophos; but now it is called the Temple of the Goddess Terra. Passing betwixt the Castle Hill and Tra∣jan's Arch; that little interval was remark∣able for the Temple of Perdrix Sister to Daedalus; as likewise for the Temple of the Eumenides or Erymnes, or infernal Furies. The Fountain Panopis was anciently there, but now it is dried up, and not far from it was the ancient Gate called Diocharis, but
we left that on our right hand, as we did the Areopagus, and the Gate Ithonia. The Palladion (a Court consisting of a hundred Judges called Ephetes, half of Athens, and half of Argos) was a little lower in the way to Phalerum. When we had reposed our selves a little at our Lodgings, as our custom was we fell to our Memoirs, and set down what we had observed. The next day we review∣ed with more curiosity and application what we had but run over the day before; copying several ancient Inscriptions; tak∣ing draughts of the Temples and most re∣markable pieces of Architecture; searching for Meddals; discovering the most honou∣rable of the Vecchiados; regaling our Equi∣page who came to see us; and making our Visits to the Sardar and Cadi just then re∣turned to Athens. I tell you our business, and you may easily judge how we were pleased: I do assure you we passed our time very merrily, having nothing but good Cheer and good Company to molest us: and as I have told you the virtues, so I must tell you the vanity of some of our people (and it is common among strangers) nothing could serve the turn, but the Mar∣ble and Brass must mention them hereafter in Athens, whereupon several of them writ
their names upon the most conspicuous Pil∣lars, for want of tools to ingrave them; and in revenge for my laughing at them, they writ mine in two or three Languages, and two or three different terminations. In the evening on Saturday the 20. of May, when we thought nothing of Osman Chelebi, we saw him brought into our house by our Janizary, to whom the other Turks had applyed themselves to know what he was. Never was surprize so acceptable, we ran all of us to embrace him. He told us he was going for Candia in a Saique that unladed certain Goods at Parto Lione, where he hoped to embarque again next morning, and find a company of brave Tur∣kish Officers that he had left there. I was the man of our whole Gang who made him the least Caresses, being taken with a sud∣den desire to go along with him to Candia, and take a view of that famous Camp which is not at all understood in Christendom, though the condition of the Town be very well known. I took Osman aside, and desired I might go along with him as his slave; at first he was averse, pretending it was unsafe for us both in respect of the small acquaintance he had in the Turkish Army, being uncertain whether he should find any of his old Ca∣merades
that were with him in Hungary, and if not, the least suspicion would be dan∣gerous to us both. But I was prepared a∣gainst those objections, and asked him what it was he could apprehend at Athens where his person and design was utterly unknown, and if there were no danger there, there was less in the Camp, from whence Slaves and Renegades came and went securely eve∣ry day, who in regard of their carriage and language were more suspicious than I. With these and some other Reasons he was satis∣fied, and assisted me with a contrivance much better than I could devise for my self: He had left at Porto Lione a Turkis Officer, who was a suitor to one of Musta∣pha Bey's Daughters, and looked upon him as his Brother in Law already. Upon the score of the intimacy betwixt them, Osman did not question but he would do me all possible kindness, and undertake to secure me in my Voyage. This Officer was called Amurat Aga, a person who had about two months before been sent from the Camp upon business of importance that required his speedy return. I was much pleased with the expedient, and conjuring their secresie, acquainted my companions with my de∣sign. My Companions were troubled to lose me, and the more, because I was their
principal Interpreter. They askt me how I could leave Athens at time when they were proceeding to such excellent discove∣ries; but I answered them as Isocrates did those of old, who demanded if there was any Town in the World so pleasant as A∣thens: Isocrates intimating, that their en∣tertainments were pleasing indeed, but not solid enough to detain a man long, replyed very facetiously, That Athens was fitter for Courtship than Marriage; melior Meretrix quam Ʋxor. So Osman and I getting up betimes, I took my leave of my Camerades, and ha∣ving given them hopes of seeing them short∣ly again, and setled our Correspondencies at Emporion, Zeithon, Volo, and particularly at Larissa, embracing with great kindness, we parted. Taking my leave of Athens thus abrupt∣ly, I could do no more than send you this Description, which I hope you will not think altogether unexact; for doubtless those things which escaped our curiosity, may have the same success with those who come after us: however they will do very well if they can discover where those An∣tiquities stood that we over-passed, parti∣cularly the Phorbantheon or Temple dedi∣cated to Phorbas; the Eacontheon or Tem∣ple
of Eacus; the Temple of the Charl∣tes; the Temples of Celeus, and his Wife Metanira; the Temples of Leena, Lamia, Pherea or Hecate; of Burychius, Adiman∣the, and Oxythemis: We shall be behold∣ing to them, as the Town now lies, if they can inform us of those sacred Vallies so ob∣vious among ancient Authors. We must ingenuously confess we could find nothing of them, nor of the three hundred and sixty houses, called Leschae, where the poorer sort of Athenians were provided for by the publick; those Authors having given us no light where they stood: Nor can we be so audacious, as to prescribe the precise place of the Ceramicus, where the Plane∣tree stood, to which they fastned their sen∣tences against Women that were seen dirty or undressed in the street; for in such cases every such Woman was condemned in a pe∣nalty of a thousand drachmes, and the con∣demnation with the name of the Woman transgressing in that manner, affixed to the said tree: Their thousand drachmes a∣mounted to about three hundred seventy five Livers French. A true and faithful discovery of these places, would (I confess) be a great curiosity, and very grateful to all people that are inquisitive.
And now let me intreat you not to be dissatisfied if you find not my Plat-form an∣swerable to Hilduinus his description of A∣thens, which description being taken up wholly upon trust, and upon the credit of one Aristarchus, is certainly the lamest and most imperfect I ever saw; for abating the came of Athens, and the Areopagus, the rest, by general consent, and the present condition of the ground, is utterly false. I have been so curious as to make a Critical Selection of the faults in it, which shall be sent you when you please.
ATHENS Ancient and Modern: WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF THE EMPIRE OF THE TURKS. Book IV. ON Sunday the 5th. of May early in the Morning, Osman Chelebi and my self departed from Athens, and in the mid-way betwixt that and Porto-Lione
we overtook Father Simon marching upon the same design, but he being on foot and we on horse-back, we quickly left him be∣hind. His business was to go on board a Genoa Vessel that was then in the Harbour, and take care of the Consciences of its Crew; for when ever any Christian Vessel puts into that Harbour, it is incumbent up∣on the Capuchins (in respect of their Mis∣sion) to look after them, there being al∣wayes some or other sick, and in need of their Ministery, even in Protestant Ships. A∣bout a quarter of a league farther we met a poor miserable French Man, a Burgun∣dian, who had been a Drummer in Candia, and running away, got off into the Turks Camp, from whence they conveyed him to Napoli di Romania: Being arrived there, he turned Renegade, took the name of Mahe∣rem, married, and at last, by consent of his Wife, (who cared but little for him though she had had a young Turk by him) remo∣ved his quarters, came to Athens, and en∣tred himself into the service of the Consul Chastagner. Every person that runs from Candia to the Turks Camp, has a Crown of the Grand Visier, and a good Pass-port whether he see him or not; but if admitted into his presence they are sure of ten or twelve
Crowns, a Pass-port, and a good Vest into the bargain; commonly they are transported to Morea, where the Christian Consuls and Vice Consuls are obliged by the Cadi's to take care of their passage into their own Countries, but for the most part they leave their Religion, as well as the Town; our Janizary shew'd us five or six of them at A∣thens, who were going to Larissa: One of them was an Italian, a witty man, and his name Francesco Bernardino. His whole istory would be troublesom to tell; He expressed great sense of his fault, and I am  hopes he may return; however, he told e many particularities of the Siege. Being within Musket shot of our Inn in Porto-Lione, Amurat Aga being walking with other Turkish Officers, having spied sman, came running to meet him: Os∣an presented me to him very civilly, told im that I had belonged formerly to Musta∣ha Bey, and lived some time at Emporion; hat at present my Relation was to a Tur∣ish Officer in Candia, to whom I was re∣iring, and that being a person of some erit, he desired him to take care of my rotection, if there should be need of it in y Voyage; and Amurat promised it as enerously. I went directly on board the Saique that
was to carry us to Candia, (for fear I should meet upon the shore any of the Genoeses of my acquaintance) and about ten or ele∣ven of the clock, with a favourable N. W. wind we set sail, and in two hours time we getting sight of the Cape de Colonnes, in a short time we left it to the N. E. A Saique is a Greek Vessel, with a Main mast twice as high as other Ships, whic makes them discovered much farther; whe they are in apprehension of the Corsairs they furle their sails, to keep themselve from being descried. Their manner o building, and the height of their Mast hi¦ders them from sailing with a side-wind, b with a full wind it is impossible to reac them. We were chased by a small Christian Ve¦sel within sight of St. George d' Arbora. W had on board twenty Turkish Officers  more, all of them in appearance very read to defend themselves, but none so muc (in my fancy) as an old black Eunuch th belonged to Fateima Kadun, Mother  the Vizir Azem or Grand Vizir; the E¦nuch was returning to Fateima in Candi where that Masculine Lady was assisting h Son with a care and activity above both h Age and her Sex. All the Passengers pa great respect to this Eunuch, and knowi
well of what moment the countenance and protection of such great persons are, and of what importance their character of an Of∣ficers Conduct; seeing him so brave and couragious, they all of them put on a good face, but more out of complaisance and de∣sign upon him, than any natural valour. He called them together, spake to them with his Sword naked in his hand, and his Military Oration was a Prayer: Muselmen (said he) This is the day of Gods infinite Mercies, he who is Lord both of our Alcoran nd Time: Blessed be his Omnipotent Ma∣jesty: Who knows but we may this day be Martyrs? Methinks his Divine Majesty has opened the eyes of his Slave, and I see five thousand Angels drawn out and ready for the relief of every Muselman that fights couragiously against those Infidel Christians: Blessed be that holy Light; may his Mercy, his Arms, and the Gates of Paradise be open to the Soul of every Muselman that dies in this Combat. Let us not put off the prepa∣ration of our souls, till we be mortally wounded; and yet of this we may be cer∣tain that none of us can fall, till God Al∣mighty has determined our days. Let us fight then couragiously for the Glory of the High God! Let us cast our selves, and re∣pose wholly upon the strength of his Arm:
It is he that must strengthen, 'tis he that must inspire us; and doubtless had not be sided with us in this War with the Christi∣ans, we could never have conquered so many Provinces, nor saved so many millions of Souls. Their Officers are full of such sort of sen∣tences taken out of their Azoares, which is as much as to say, the Chapters of their Al∣choran. When his Speech was done, they all embraced, promised amendment of their Lives; and an Officer of the Topigi Bassi, or Grand Master of the Artillery, who had had formerly some quarrel with Amurat-Aga, came to him, asked his forgiveness, and reconciled himself so effectually, that ever since they have been the best, and most sincere friends in the world: But all their Devotions were lost, for the Christian be∣ing an ill sailer, and finding himself unable to come up with us, gave us over, and tack∣ed about towards the Archipelago. A French Renegade of Provence, that was a∣board us, told us, the Christians were gone to double the Cape de Grip, which it seems is a phrase among the Christian Privateers, and implys that they are Pirates, and in pur∣sute of their Calling. One thing I was much amazed at in our great Officer of the Artillery; before we
were chased by the Christian Privateers, all his discourse was of the use and execution of Canon, how excellently he could ma∣nage them at Sea, and hit his mark in spite of the tossing and agitation of the waters; yet when it came to the Test, he had not wit enough to open a Port-hole: and cer∣tainly the Turks are the worst Canoniers in the world, and the most unfit to manage a Sea-fight: You may judge then to what purpose our valour would have been. We had in our Saique a young Turk not above three years old, carrying by his Father into Candia, to beg a boon of the Grand Vizir; the Eunuch, upon appearance of the Chri∣stian Corsaire, put a little bow in his hand, and set him upon the Decks to threaten the Christian, incouraging him as soon as they came within distance to call them Giaours, (as well as he could) by way of provocati∣on and defiance. Nor is it a new thing to see younger Sol∣diers than he in the Turkish Armies; a Child, of what age so ever, is no sooner possessed of a Ziamet, or a Timar upon the death of his Father, but in ostentation and complement to the Grand Signior he is car∣ried to the Wars: I saw one of them in Hungary carried upon a Camel in a Pannier, and a Goat along with him, to supply the
young Janizary with milk; and the Grand Vizer many times diverted himself with him. The Ziamets and Timars are certain pieces of ground that the victorious Turks have taken from the Clergy and Nobility in the Countrys that they have conquered, which Lands being confiscated, are given by the Grand Signior for the maintenance of some Zaim or Timariot; Zaim or Tima∣riot being the Title of the Man, and Ziamet or Timar the appellation of the ground: The difference betwixt a Ziamet and a Ti∣mar is only in the quantity of Acres, and the value of them; for a Ziamet is seldom worth less than twenty-thousand Aspers per Annum, if it be under it is called a Timar: Twenty thousand Aspers are worth about seventeen hundred Lievers French Money, both of which may be transferred by the consent of the Beglerby, or Governour-Ge∣neral of the Province; but if they be of more than ordinary value, and lye upon the Frontiers, they belong to the Grand Vizer, and cannot be transferred but by his approbation. The young Soldier that was with us in the Saique, went to Candia to solicite for preferment, which he was very like to ob∣tain, having had his Father and two Bro∣thers
slain in the Service. I was much con∣founded at our first coming on board to find that Osman Chelebi gave out underhand that he was going to Candia to beg the same Ziamet from that young Child; every body blamed his design, and I, who had al∣wayes an Opinion of his Prudence, thought him indiscreet in that, as believing the Grand Vizer a person of too much Justice and Consideration to give it away from a person whose Relations had purchased it so dearly: But Osman told me privately his design was upon another Ziamet that was vacant; of which having secret notice, he thought fit to publish his pretences to the other, to prevent solicitations for that. It is not to be imagined with what industry and cunning the Turks do pursue those kind of preferments. Only the Janizaries are ex∣cepted, as being uncapable of that sort of preferment. One would have thought those persons who design upon Benefices in France have learned from the Ziams and Timariots to keep their scouts in the Country to give them private advertisement of Vacancies. In Candia the Spahi's (who are in some fa∣vour with the Grand signior) are very di∣ligent in informing themselves of the num∣ber of Zaims and Timariots actually in ser∣vice, and have alwayes their spies in ambush∣cade
upon any desperate service to give them Lists of the slain, that they may im∣ploy all their interests to succeed them. In our passage I understood many In∣trigues both of the Ottoman Court and the Army; for though the Turks are not very talkative, and the presence of the Eunuch made them careful what they said; yet the Renegado of Provence being displeased at their reservedness, and not yet come up to the closeness and mortification of the Turks; caused them to talk in spight of their teeths. He was come lately from La∣rissa, and some of them were very inqui∣sitive about Affairs of the Court; for my own part I spake very little, as fearing I might be suspected, but I put Osman Chele∣bi upon asking him several questions that gave me great satisfaction. About the height of Cerigo (which we left sixteen or eighteen Leagues to the West) we met a Saique that came on board us: She had been at Canea with Victuals, and being upon her return, gave us notice that the Turks expected that Town would be suddenly besieged, all the Christian Fleets being united in order to that design. Those Turks who were most concerned in the occurrences of the War, arguing among themselves about the preparation of the
Christians, could not imagine they would attempt the Vizer in his Camp with a less Army than 50000 Men: of which number all their Auxiliary Troops coming much short, they concluded the design of the Christians would be rather to give the Can∣dians some diversion by besieging Rhodes or Canea. And indeed to besiege Canea would have been in effect to have besieged the Besiegers, and force the Vizer to re∣move lest he should be shut up in the Island; for the Conquest of that Town would have cut off his communication with Morea, and intercepted his supplies. But 'tis a private Maxim among the Venetians, not to be long obstinate in a War: They will have Peace (when they see their time) at any rate, and accordingly they dispose of their re∣lief. We believed therefore (upon this Saiques intelligence) that before we should get there, Canea would be blocked up; whereupon we stood off as far as we could, steering our Course to the S. E. to put in at Fraskia which lies to the Southward of Cape Sansona about nine or ten Leagues from the City of Candia. Being got within five Leagues of Fras∣kia, we discovered the Mountains covered with Snow, and particularly the Mount S. Paul. Not long after we perceived the fa∣mous
Mountain of Jupiter that is hard by Candie. We passed betwixt the Isles of Pelagia and Standia, which lie N. E. and S. W. one of another: at length, the 8. of May, we came to an Anchor in Fraskia, one of the best places in all Candia for shel∣ter and anchoring: at present there is very good Water, and formerly there was store of Wood, but the Siege has exhausted it: 'Tis a Port very commodious for the Turks, but yet much infested by the Venetians, who are for the most part Cruising on that side, because though on the other side Poli∣castro be nearer Candia, yet there is no anchoring but for small Vessels. From Porto-Lione, or if you will, from Athens to Candia, is much the same distance as from Brest to Haver de Grace, or from Marseille to Ligorn, that is to say about 90 Leagues. It is observable that the stream run strongly upon the North Coast of that Island, and is caused by the violence of the Current out of the Archipelago. This Isle of Candia is that which formerly was called Crete, famous for the nativity of Jupiter, whose Sepulchre is to be seen there at this day, but I must confess I did not see it. The Paganism and Piracy of this Island, have rendered the Inhabitants equally fa∣mous,
and Minos their King was the first who made them considerable at Sea. It is situate betwixt 34 and 35 degrees of Latitude; I did not trouble my self to ex∣amine its position by my Instruments; and besides, Osman Chelebi had advised me not to discover the least skill in Mathematicks, for fear I might be taken for an Engineer or a spie. On the North-side it looks towards the Isles of the Archipelago; on the East to∣ward Cyprus; on the South toward the Country of Barca; and on the West to∣wards Sicily. 'Tis something larger than Cyprus, but lesser than Sicily: Its length from E. to W. that is to say, from Cape Solomon to Cape des Gabarouses is about 70 Leagues: Its breadth from Cape San∣sona to the Port of Girotela, is something more than 20 Leagues. About 144 years before Christ, Metellus subdued it to the Romans, after which it was a part of the Eastern Empire: eight hundred and forty three years since, it was Conquered by the Sarazins: two hundred years after, it was taken from them by the Genoeses: next it fell under the domina∣tion of the French when they conquered Constantinople, under the Conduct of Bald∣win. The new Emperour settled it after∣wards
upon the Venetian for what they had contributed to his Conquests, and they have enjoyed it about 464 years. Since the Year 1645, the Turks having taken Ca∣nea (called anciently Sidonia) it has been much infested by them; and this is like to be a critical year, for God knows who will be Master of it before the year be out. The humour of the Candians is very just∣ly described by St. Paul, Cretenses semper mendaces, malae bestiae, ventres pigri, te∣stimonium hoc verum est. We could not any way more certainly provoke their Ca∣logers (for they follow the Greek Church) than by repeating the words of St. Paul in Greek. Their Prophet, mentioned by St. Paul, was the great Philosopher Epimeni∣des, who was invited by Solon into Candia, to digest, with him, those Laws which he gave afterwards to the City of Athens, where Epimenides erected several Altars to the unknown God. We were no sooner on Shore at Fraskia, but ten or twelve Spahi or Horsemen came up galloping to examine us; for since the report of the approach of the Christian succours, they keep exact Watch upon the Coast, and having but few Cavalry in their Camp, the greatest part are distributed upon the Roads, and near all the Harbours
in the Island, but in such Parties add Bri∣gades, that they could easily unite and march according to their signals from their Sentinels, which were placed all along the Rocks upon the Coast. In the Town of Fraskia we found no∣thing but rubbish; the Venetians having sacked it themselves, and demolished a Mo∣astery of Calogers not far from the Port; however we staid 3 or 4 hours in those ru∣ines and the next day we saw several Ves∣sels come in thither with recruits of Jani∣zaries and Spahi's. The old standing bo∣dy of Janizaries consists at present of 30000 men (twice the number it was in its primi∣tive institution) besides what assume that itle in the Garrisons of that vast Empire, who are thought to be rather more than 00000. Of these 30000 established Jani∣zaries, there are near 20000 in Candia at present, the rest remain in Constantinople (to secure the Grand Signiors Brothers) nd at Larissa to attend upon his person: ut not a third part of them that ever had een Agemoglans, or Christians Children; any Renegado's and natural Turks being dmitted daily into their numbers, besides he Pastors from Asia, with whom they are leased to dispence for four or five months ervice in the Seraglio, instead of an Ap∣prentiship
that they should serve in other places. When a Chorbachi or Captain has a Com∣mission for raising a Company in any Ci∣ty or Town, the Sangiac Bey or Cadi, pla∣ces a Chiaoux, or some other Officer at the door of their Mosco, or else in the Market-place, and makes proclamation that so ma∣ny Soldiers are to be listed: If they come not in freely, the Cadi (knowing the num∣ber of every Family) sends to them and commands whom he lists, sometimes every second Man as occasion requires. In the same manner they raise their Belonk Spahi's or common Troopers, distinguishing them from their Timar Spahi's, who are obliged to maintain themselves upon their Timar or Ziamets. Those recruits which we saw at Fraskia, were of these Belonk Spahi's  for the other sort are never recruited▪ Their arms are a Saber or Sword, a Zaga or Launce, a Giled or Javelin, and a Bo and Arrows; for none but Janizaries Az¦pes, and Forlorn-Hopes are permitted to ca¦ry Muskets. They have commonly fif Arrows in a Quiver, and every Arrow co two Aspers, which is something more th a Penny. The whole Accoutrement, Bo and Quiver, and Arrows, costs 1440 Aspe which in French money is about 37 Live
and upwards, and these are all furnished at the Grand Signior's charge. Some of their Quivers are so richly imbroidered and adorned, that they cost 4 or 500 Franks alone. Their best Arrows are made at Caire. The Officers imployed for recruits, use the same artifice as they do in France, in∣veigling their men with hopes of making some Brigadiers, others sub-Brigadiers, and ll Commanders. Not one of these new aised Spahi's but was promised to be in∣corporated with the Silhataris, or Spaha∣glaris, which two are of six sorts of their Cavalry the most considerable, as being tanding Forces, and duly paid out of the Exchequer; the meanest, twelve Aspers a ay, and those that are brave and do any hing remarkable, a hundred: So that not  man of these new Spahi could talk of any hing but of the Yellow Colours which is the tandard of the Silhataris; or the Red Co∣ours which is the Standard of the Spaha O∣aris. When in truth they were designed for e lowest of the six sort of Cavalry, never ised but upon extraordinary necessity, and ivided into four Squadrons. One carries White and Red Colours, another White and ellow, the third Green, and the fourth White, under the Titles of Houlefigi, Solk uleifi, Solk Hourebak, and Sak Kourebak.
We could not find the least convenience to convey either our old or young people to the Camp; all the Islanders being reti∣red to the Mountains with their Cattel, so that we were glad to make use of our feet. Upon our left hand we left Policastro stand∣ing upon a Rock on the Shore, and passed a small River called Armiro, to Cazal de Gangra, which we found burned down to the ground. We heard the thundring of the Canon, and though till within half a league of Gangra we had passed pretty well without any dismal conceptions of the War, yet then we began to understand bet∣ter, and had no need of direction in our way to the Leaguer. We could easily gues where it was, by the thick smoke that was raised by springing the Mines about the Fort of St. Andrew which was directly be∣fore us: the Grand Vizer's Quarters was just in our way. Then it was I began to fancy my self in Turky, and to prepare my self to behold the splendour of the Otto∣man Court, and the terrour of the East  and doubtless the whole force of the Otto¦man Empire was assembled in that siege.  would have been in vain either at Constan¦tinople, Adrianople or Larissa it self to hav sought the soul that acted this great body▪ The absoluteness of the Grand Vizer, th
courage of his Troops, and the gravity of his Counsel might well pass for the Gran∣deur of the whole Empire. It is here there∣fore I must take the liberty to give a ge∣neral character of their present State, and particularly of their great General who commands it, for 'tis not possible to think of Candia, but the Turks and their whole Government will immediately occur to our reflexion. To give a deeper impression of the great∣ness of this Prince, we cannot proceed bet∣ter than by considering the number and quality of the persons who tremble at his displeasure: apply it if you please to the immense Power of the Sultan when he makes any great preparation: Malta trem∣bles, Spain is fearful for his Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, the Venetian anxious for what he holds in Greece, Dalmatia and Friul; the Germans apprehensive for what remains to them in Hungary; Poland is a∣larmed, and the consternation passes on as far as Moscovie, and (not resting there) ex∣pands its self to the Christian Princes in Gonrgistan and Mingrelie: Persia, Arabia, the Abissins, are all in confusion, whilst neither Man nor Woman, nor Beast in all this vast Tract, but looks out for refuge till they be certain whither his great Force
is intended. A strange torrent, that runs with that rapidity from Spain to Persia, from Germany to Aethiopia: Vienna in Au∣stria, and Tartach near the Kingdom of A∣den are become Neighbours; and what say you of two of his Neighbours that have alwayes been at more than thirteen hun∣dred leagues distance? you have not often heard of such prodigious vicinity: And yet for all this, there being nothing so strange as the destiny of the Sultans, who in this latter Age have governed this puissant Empire, it will not be impertinent to ex∣plain it by the History of Mahomet the fourth the present Emperour. Sultan Achmet, Grandfather to this Ma∣homet IV, died in the year 1617. and left five Sons. Osman, Amurath, Orcan, Bajazet and Ibrahim: Of these five Brothers, four were strangled, and two of them after they were Emperours, that is to say, Osman and Ibrahim. Osman succeeded to the Empire 1617, and was cut off by his Rebelliou Subjects in the year 1621. Amurath suc∣ceeded him, (for the Reign of his Uncle Mustapha is reckoned for nothing) and ha∣ving taken Bagdat (commonly called Baby∣lon) was the only person of the five tha died a natural death. Orcan and Bajazet were murdered by him, according to the
barbarous policy of those Emperours; and yet as bloody as he was, he spared Ibrahim, looking upon him as a weak person, and by consequence not dangerous. Amurath dying upon his debauches in 1640. Ibrahim, Father to Mahomet IV, was advanced to the Throne, and his destiny (attending till he was Emperour, before it would suffer him to fall) left him over to the cruelty of his Janizaries, who in a Mu∣tiny strangled him in the midst of Constan∣tinople in the year 1648. His Son Maho∣met IV, being but seven years old, was re∣ceived to the Crown, and is the present Emperour 1669. having had in his Family three Uncles, and his own Father stran∣gled. Ibrahim, though plunged in the delights of the Seraglio, more than any of his Pre∣decessors, formed his design against Chri∣stendom in the year 1644, being provoked by the Chevalier de Bois-Baudran a French-man, who was at that time at Sea in a ship of Malta, and happened to intercept a great Gallion which the Sultan had sent for Aegypt laden with very rïch Presents intend∣ed for Meccha: There were also several Turkish Women of Quality, and a young Boy that many believed was Ibrahim's Son: The Boy was Christened in Malta 1656,
and in 1658 took upon himself the habit of a Jacobin under the name of Dominik Othoman. The noise of this loss alarmed Ibrahim in his Seraglio, and incensed him so highly, that the next year he fell upon Canea. How formidable then ought the ambition and puissance of the Turks be, when the softest and most effeminate of their Princes durst undertake so dangerous a War, upon so small an occasion? Ibra∣him died four years after he had begun that War, and left four Sons, and several Daughters: His Sons were Mahomet IV, Soliman, Bajazet and Orcan: These four Princes were by three several Women, Sul∣tan Mahomet's Mother is alive at this day, and called in honour Validè Sultan, which is as much as to say the Sultanness Dow∣ager; Bajazet and Orcan are by another, and their Mother is likewise alive; but the Mother of Soliman is dead: Soliman is se∣cond by birth, a hopeful Prince, and Baja∣zet as forward as he, which recommends them highly to the Janizaries; Orcan is of another genius, more addicted to Piety and Religion, and therefore, as the Turks say, good for nothing but a Priest; but 'tis possible his dulness and devotion is but a pretence to keep him from strangling by taking away all suspicion from the Empe∣rour,
or rather from the Grand Vizer who Governs all at present, and whose interest it is not to endure any active or turbulent Princes, lest they should eclipse, and per∣haps ruine his Fortune. Mahomet IV. has a scar in his face, which scar he received from his Father the last year of his Reign; and the occasion was thus, This young Prince was brought up in the Seraglio among the she-slaves, where till they are about twelve years old, the Chez-adde are generally brought up; Chez-adde is the name given to all the Sultan's Sons whilst their Father is living. Maho∣met was alwayes in the Arms of the fair Odaliques; and she who caressed him most, be would be sure to be withal: They would make him talk a thousand smart things, sometimes against one, sometimes against another, as quarrels arose among them, (and their jealousie would seldom suffer them to be long without) with this custom of pra∣ing freely among the Women, the Boy got a habit of speaking sharp things. Ibrahim being one day walking in the Garden of the Seraglio, caused two of those Mutes, called Bizchami to dance before him; those Biz∣chami must be Negro's and Eunuchs, or they cannot be admitted into that private apartment. It is a custom, when the Sul∣tan
has been pleased with any divertise∣ment, to present those who entertained him; and all persons at that time about the Sul∣tan, do constantly do it. Ibrahim, the Ke∣slar-Agasi and the Odaliques, presented the Mutes immediately, which being neglected by the young Prince, (though to that pur∣pose one of the Odaliques had thrust some pieces of Gold into his hand) Ibrahim was angry, and turning to him, demanded why he did not present the Mutes as other peo∣ple had done; because, said the young Prince very briskly, I am not so much a fool as other people; the sharpness of his answer put Ibrahim into a passion; in the heat of which, forgetting the Ring upon his finger, he struck him with his hand so hard upon his face, that his Diamond cut the skin, and left a scar that is to be seen at this day. The Keslar-Agasi carried away the Child immediately with the blood run∣ning about his face, and roaring as loud as if he had been killed: The passion of the Emperour being over, and he much trou∣bled at what he had done, ran after the Child, and in such hast, that not minding where he went, he tumbled into a Foun∣tain that was in his way; which accident doubling the confusion, the Odaliques that were thronging after the Child, came back,
and pulled the Sultan out of the water. The Sultan Mahomet is of a tender and delicate complexion, but he manages it very ill. The Malecontents (who are very numerous in that Country) call him in de∣rision the Hunts-man or Aviegi. He takes great delight in the noise of Canon, and has them often shot off only for his enter∣tainment. He shoots very well both with the Bow and the Musket: He is very cou∣ragious, and extreamly desirous to be in person with his Army, whatever the Chri∣stians publish to the contrary, imagining that his great affection to hunting, and his propensity to the pleasures of Women, makes him apprehensive of the hazards of War. Would his Council have permitted it, he had been long since in Candia; such was his zeal to be in the Army, that he threatned oftentimes to steal to them in disguise; and when being a hunting, he was at any time lost, and failed to return at his accustomed hours, the whole Court was afraid he had given them the slip: But be∣sides that his being in the field would have eclipsed the Glory of the Vizer, and ren∣dered him of less importance to his affairs; the absence of the Sultan, and the dangers to which he would have been exposed, would have enhaunced the courage of the
Malecontents, and such who having been in∣strumental in the murther of his Father, were afraid of his revenge, and did ardent∣ly desire his death. The Turks will tell you wonders of his Wit: But every Nation cryes up the viva∣city of their Prince; This is most certain, he had for his Tutor a person called Vani Effendi, one that passes for so worthy and so learned a Man, that if any one pretends to extraordinary Judgement or Sagacity in any thing, the Turks by way of Irony will tell him, Yes, you are wiser, and understand more than Vani Effendi. Among all the Brothers of the Sultan, the Peoples eyes are fixt most strongly upon Soliman, whose Mother being dead, has procured him the compassion of the Army more than any of the rest, and by conse∣quence exposed him more to the jealousie of the Sultan, who had like to have stab∣bed him with his dagger at Adrianople in the year 1666. some months before the Grand Vizer went for Candia, where he has continued ever since: The particulars you shall have hereafter. Since that acci∣dent the Janizaries have taken a greater care of the lives of Soliman and his Bro∣thers, and by an action as couragious as prudent, have put them under the tuition
of the Sultaness Validè the Mother of Ma∣homet, but with caution that she be re∣sponsible for them, though they do well understand that she would sacrifice them all to the interest of the Sultan: And indeed nothing can be more strange than to see the Sheep committed to the custody of the Wolf. This Sultaness is a Lady of great Magnanimity and Spirit. In the beginning of her Sons Reign she caused the old Va∣lidè widow to Achmet to be strangled. That old Lady was an ambitious Woman, who to keep her self in the Supreme Con∣duct of Affairs fomented the division be∣twixt the Spahi and the Janizaries, who were the death of her Son Ibrahim. The Sultan Mahomet has had two Sons besides Daughters, his eldest Son died, and was a Child of great hopes: The Mother of the young Prince is dead also, and much lamented by all the Officers of the Seraglio for her extraordinary bounty. She was ex∣ceedingly beautiful, but her Countrey and Extraction were never known; she was ta∣ken and brought away by the Tartars when she was but four years old, and in a short time sold to a Bassa, who designed her im∣mediately for the pleasures of the Empe∣rour, and brought her up accordingly.
'Tis true, the Tartars are obliged by ex∣press order from the Grand Signior to ke an exact Register of what Slaves they take either of one Sex or the other, of their age, their names, and their Country, thereby to justifie that they have brought away none of the Grand Signiors Subjects, which be∣fore that Order they did frequently do▪ These Tories bring to Constantinople some∣times thirty, sometimes forty of these poor Girles, all of an age, but of different Coun∣tries; being arrived there, their first busi∣ness is to renounce their Christianity, and take upon them the Mahumetan Religion; after which the Tartar gives in his Register; and receives his discharge from the Cadi: But their Register is not regarded when they are gone, and by consequence the Countrey, Pedigree, and all other circum∣stances of their Slaves quickly forgotten, so as it is but seldom known from whence their great beauties come. By consent of all Travellers, there is no Countrey in the World produces so fine Women as Circassia, a Countrey in Asia upon the Mer major be∣twixt the lesser Tartars and Gourgiston. It is death for a Christian to buy a Circassian Slave, the Turks reserving them for them∣selves; but when they are brought into the Seraglio, and grow eminent for their
Beauty, their friends will quickly find out the place of their Nativity, and in flattery pronounce them Circassians, so much has that Countrey the reputation for bringing forth the most excellent Beauties. Thus the charms of this Lady discovering her birth, gave occasion to all about her to perswade her she was a Circassian, and she was pleased with it so well, that she would smile, and be much delighted when they called her so. Sultan Mahomet has now but one Son, about five years of age, born in the year 1664. but he has yet no name, for he was not Circumcised: The Mother of the said Prince was a Greek of Candia, and born in Petrino, where, when she was very young, she was taken and made a slave in the year 1647. when the said Town was subdued, and plundered by the Turks. She has at this time a great Belly, and follows the Sul∣tan where ever he goes, and he loves her very passionately. She is reported to be very handsom, though a little disfigured with the small Pox. It is thought she will suddenly remove from Larissa to Constan∣tinople, to lye in near the Sultana Validè, who, as I said before, continues in that City to have an eye over the Sultans three Bro∣thers, and to keep the Spahi and Janiza∣ries
at variance. The present Favourite Sultana, is by the Turks called commonly Assaki, or Mistris to the Prince. She is very jealous of the Sultan, and in the year 1667. caused at Adrianople a young Geor∣gion Damoisel to be strangled, because the Emperour began to delight in her com∣pany. My description of these particularities in the Ottoman Affairs, would be very imper∣fect, should I not give you some general hint of their Matters of State, by giving you an account in two words of the two last Vizers, or Chief Ministers; and this i of the more importance, because Ibrahim and his Son Mahomet have as it were asso∣ciated their Vizers in their Empire, or ra∣ther contented themselves with a vain he∣reditary title, to leave to their Vizers an Authority so absolute and vast, that by way of inversion the two Sultans might be called, and not improperly, their two Mini∣sters chief Slaves. Gioan Capigi Bachi by a good fortune peculiar to his house, was the seventh Vi∣zer of his Family, though that honour ne∣ver descended immediately from Father to Son, as it has done of late in the Family that possesses it now. Gioan Capigi Bachi Governed without controule during the
animosity betwixt the Spahi's and the Jani∣zaries; but the story of this Vizer, of Sa∣lik, Pacha, and the rest being either obso∣lete or well known to you already, I shall only give you a touch of Coprogli Mehemet Pacha who was Vizer during the minority of Mahomet IV, and speak afterwards of his Son Coprogli Achmet Pacha who commands at present in Candia, and go∣verns the whole affairs of the Empire with great authority and reputation. Coprogli Mehemet Pacha was made Vizer 1653, when the Sultan Mahomet was en∣tring into the Twelfth year of his age: He had been Sangiac Bey of Baruth a City in Sy∣ria, to the South of Mount Libanus. Those Governments are bought, and he of the Competitors who bids most, does usually carry them: Their way of bidding is by Purses, and he who gives the Sultan most Purses is the man: every Purse is reckoned worth five hundred Crowns. You may ea∣y imagine that this way of selling the chief Offices of State, redounds more to the pre∣judice and oppression of the people, than the profit of the Prince, for the Officer will be sure to make himself whole at their cost whom he governs, and the Prince cannot in equity reprove him. At the end of three years (which is the common du∣ration
of those Sangiacats) Coprogli not having been able to pay all the money to the Emperour for which he had contracted, was a fair way to have lost his head, had it not been for the friendship of some in the Divan or Council of State, who obtained for him the Government of Alepo to see how that would inable him; but he was no hap∣pier there than where he was before, or rather he was no more corrupt or exacting, for the people do magnifie him for his mo∣deration; but that is not so good as ready money with the Turks, especially now a-days, when the whole Treasure of that Prince is nothing but the fruit of Violence and Extortion. He returned to the Port unable to pay those Purses which he ought to the Grand Signor as before: The Tef∣terdar or Super-Intendent of the Finances, caused him to be arrested, and he was made close Prisoner with several other Officers of Quality accused of corruption; who tak∣ing the imprisonment of Coprogli for a evidence of his ill principles, entred into a strict intimacy with him. Coprogli was cunning, and to fish them, pretended to impart to them certain of his own counter∣feit exorbitances, whereby he drew then into such a confidence as prevailed with them to discover to him all that they had
really done. The Keslar-Agasi (who at that time had a great share in the publick Affairs, and the Caimacan or Lieutenant Generalship of the Vizer) came many times to interrogate the Prisoners, by order from the Sultana Validè. Upon occasion, the Keslar-Agasi having some private discourse with Coprogli, Coprogli told him as a secret, that if he would be a means to procure his liberty, he had an infallible way to fill the Sultan's Treasury. The Keslar-Agasi found him to be a man of parts, and recommend∣ed him so effectually to the Validè, that he was not only discharged but the very same day made Vizer Azem, that he might be invested with a character requisite for tak∣ng an account of the Finances. And those revolutions are frequent in Turkie, where a man often transmigrates from an inferiour condition to the highest. This new Mini∣ter was not advanced two days to his dig∣ity, but he called before him above twen∣y of those Officers with whom he had been  fellow prisoner, and in that condition, een made privy to all their corruption; pon their own confession he seized upon ll they had, and when he had done, in a  large Hall through which the Sultan did ften pass, he caused all the money that he ad taken from those Prisoners to be put up
into Bags, and disposed upon a Table co∣vered over with a Cloth, under which there appeared to be something else. He attended the Sultan's coming by, and the young Prince having pleased himself very well with surveying the Bags, taking up the Cloth in expectation to have found more underneath, he saw about twenty heads reeking in blood as being newly cut off. The Sultan amazed at the sight, demanded whose they were, and what they did there▪ The Vizer replyed, They are vomiting up the blood of your Subjects, which your Majesty will find in those Bags, for that is no∣thing but the money which they have robbed; but they are not like to do so a∣gain. This was an odd way of proceeding but he was more sanguinary, and govern¦ed with much more severity than his Son▪ He had one of his teeth that stuck out o his mouth like a Bore's Tush, and fright¦ed people to look opon it. He was a grea lover of Wine, and laught at all Religiou scruples thereupon; but in that he was quit contrary to his Son, who abhors it abor all Liquors. The great design of this Vizer was to a¦vance the authority of his Master, muc diminished by the frequent seditions of th Janizaries, whose insolence he endeavou∣ed
to repress for the security of his own for∣tunes as well as for the Sultan's advantage. The Janizaries instead of being satiated with the blood of Ibrahim, taking encou∣ragement from the youth of Sultan Maho∣met, and the weakness of his former Mini∣sters, (of whom they had either strangled or deposed the greatest part) refused the service in Candia upon pretence of certain priviledges that exempted them from any service at Sea; but the truth is, they were afraid to trust themselves so far from Con∣stantinople, where they were quartered conveniently, and had their Cabals con∣stantly in their Oda's; and indeed that was the great consideration that kept the Grand Signior from returning to Constan∣tinople. Coprogli was constrained to inter∣rupt his progress in Candia; but to find the Janizaries work where they could not excuse themselves, and which he was sure would revenge his Master upon those mu∣tinous Cattel, he took opportunity from the ambitious projects of Ragoteki, Hospo∣dar or Prince of Transilvania, who contra∣ry to the orders of the Port, had made War upon Poland, and entred privately into confederacy with the Swedes. Here∣upon the Vizer sent into Transilvania the old Bands of the Janizaries, and all the
most turbulent Officers among them; most of which were cut off either at the taking of Waradin, or in the several skirmishes of Ragoteki. Afterwards they were forced to raise their Siege from before Clausem∣bourg (the usual residence of the Hospo∣dars) but however that Enterprize proved ineffectual, it devoured many of their best men. The affairs of Transilvania gave some respite to the Wars in Candia. Eve∣ry Bassa that was sent General into that Island, secured the Army to himself, and gave obedience to Orders from the Port, no farther than they agreed with their own private designs. They were unanimously bent upon affrighting the Emperour, and if possible, destroying him. Coprogli Me∣hemet to obviate their designs, and make an Example of these seditious Officers, had caused the famous Delli Ʋssani Pacha (Ge∣neral in Candia, and as brave a man as ever was among the Turks) to be strangled. And certainly it was great imprudence in the said Delli Ʋssani Pacha, after he had disobeyed his Orders in Candia, and in a manner revolt∣ed from the Sultan, to be so wheedled and blinded with the fair promises of the Vizer as to come frankly to Constantinople, and put himself into the Vizer's hands, by whom he was immediately committed to the Castle of
the seven Towers, with several Christian Of∣ficers taken in the Wars of Candia, and sent Prisoners thither. The Executioner strang∣led him in the presence of the said Officers by particular direction form the Vizer, to torment and excruciate him the more. Coprogli was married to an illustrious La∣dy, who as I told you is still living, and in Candia promoting the affairs of her Son. She is called Fateima Kadun; She is a La∣dy of a large Soul, and a Wit infinitely a∣bove the rest of her Sex, as appeared by her subtilty in advancing her Son to the dignity of his Father, which was without president, for till that time it was never known that the Son succeeded the Father in so important a charge. The Father be∣ing upon his Death-bed, the Validè Wi∣dow of Sultan Ibrahim, understanding there was no hopes of his recovery, sent to visit him the six other Vizers who made up the Divan, of which they were mem∣bers, but the Grand Vizer, the head, and indeed absolute Master: Their order was to confer with him about the mysteries of State which had been committed only to him. Fateima Kadun having notice of their Visit, and designing to make the For∣tune of her Son, perswaded her dying Hus∣band to pretend himself speechless, which
he did, and the Vizers being admitted, be∣lieved him really incapable of any such discourse, and accordingly complained very heavily how much his being speechless would be prejudicial to the interest of the Empire. Fateima interrupting them, told them, You see by misfortune my Husband is unable to advise you any farther, but there is his Son with whom he has deposi∣ted all those secrets that concern the State; he is the only person can advance, he is the only person can perplex the Publick Af∣fairs; my humble advice to the Sultan is, that he would speedily consider what he is to do, and either prefer my Son to the Dig∣nity of his Father, or strangle him; that if he may do his Majesty no service, it may not be in his power to hurt him. Her Counsel being reported to the Validè, who was well acquainted with the abilities of Achmet Pacha, it made such an impression upon her, that she gave ear to Fateima's Proposition, as having loved her very well, and conversed her often when her greater Negotiations brought her to the Grand Vi∣zer. By this Stratagem Achmet Pacha was sworn Vizer Azem in the place of his Fa∣ther, and (as an addition to the wonder) when he was scarce thirty years old, where∣as till him, never any was advanced to that
Honour before forty at the least. This hap∣pened in the year 1662. The new Vizer Coprogli Achmet Pacha following the maximes of his Father, resol∣ved to prosecute the War in Transilvania, if possible to extinguish the Mutineers that remained among the Janizaries, before he revived his old quarrel in Candia. But the interests of Hungary having ingaged the Emperour of Germany in its relief, the new Vizer in the year 1663. came in person to the Army, which before was commanded by Ali Pacha, and that Campagnia took New-hausel: The next year 1664. he rai∣sed the Siege of Canisia, and carried a Fort by storm from Count Nicholas de Serini; after which he attempted to pass the River Rhaab under the noses of the Christian Army, with design to have made an excur∣sion into Austria, and harassed that Coun∣trey; and he had proceeded so far as to have broken and cut off a considerable body of the German Forces, under the Command of the Prince of Baden, when being incounter'd and stop'd in his Carier by a Squadron of French, who (animated by the bravery of the Duke de Fuillade) took the Post which the Germans had a∣bandoned, defeated a select body of the Turks, and beat the whole Party over the
River. This great Victory obtained in the latter end of the year 1664. obliged the Vizer Azem to conclude a Peace with the Emperour of Germany; after which re∣turning to Constantinople, the considerati∣on of his services, and the qualification of his person recommended him so highly to the Sultan, that ever since he has had the sole Government of his Affairs. The next year 1665. was spent in ratifi∣cation of the Peace, in suppressing private∣ly, and defeating the design of the discon∣tented Party (who had espoused the inter∣est of the Sultans Brothers) and in prepa∣ration for the War in Candia. All the Of∣ficers about the Sultans Person, and all the Members of the Divan, who were any wayes suspicious, were removed by a thou∣sand pretences, and their places supplyed by his Creatures: But in the Army he re∣tained the old Officers on purpose to de∣stroy them. It is most certain, no solid preferment is to be got, or at least enjoy'd long, without his protection. When upon necessity of his absence he has disposed about the person of the Sultan certain young Favourites to entertain and attend the Grand Signior in his Sports, if by imprudence, or inadver∣tency they have given the Grand Vizer any
occasion of jealousie, he has found wayes immediately to supplant them. He has at present, as Favourite to the Sultan, placed about him a young Gentleman of Cogna in Natolia, his name is Koulogli Mousaip, which is as much as to say, the Favourite Son of a Slave. He is of his person a very hand∣some man, an excellent Huntsman, rides well, and in a word, performs all the Tur∣kish Exercises with great dexterity. This Koulogli Mousaip (being much more dis∣creet than any of those who had been be∣fore him in the same station, and been stran∣gled by the Vizer) is very well satisfied, that to continue a Favourite with the Sul∣tan, he must not give the least umbrage to the Vizer; and therefore he avoids all oc∣casion of mentioning Publick Affairs to the Grand Signior, unless it be to magnifie the Exploits of his Chief Minister. 'Tis re∣ported of him, that he never concerned him∣self in any great thing but once, and that was when meeting one day in the streets of Adrianople a poor Greek Priest of his own Town Cogna, with whom he had been well acquainted in his minority, he called him to him, and after several caresses and ex∣pressions of kindness, offered to make him Patriarch of Constantinople, which the poor Papas thought too great for his conduct,
and contented himself with an Alms. The Port resolving to make a strong At∣tach upon Candia, the Sultan left Constan∣tinople in March 1666. and is not yet re∣turned, nor like to be in a long time; and all, to humble the Citizens of Constantino∣ple, who have been too forward in their concurrence with the Janizaries, designing thereby to chastise their malevolence, and make them sensible of the incommodities that ensue upon the absence of their Prince. The Grand Vizer attended him as far as Adrianople, from whence the Sultan remo∣ving to Methoca a City in Romania, in an excellent Countrey for Hunting, the Vizer took his leave, and crossing Macedonia, and Thessalia, he arrived at Thebes, where he continued for some time, till the Troops that were to attend him could be brought together. They took their March by the Famous Isthmus of Corinth, called at pre∣sent Hexamile, and came to imbark some at Napoli di Romania, anciently called Nau∣plion in the Province of Argos, and part at Porto-delle-Botte which is the old Town of Cyphanta. The Vizer himself imbarked at Malvezie (called otherwise Monembazie) and not at Napoli di Romania, as some peo∣ple have published. This Malvezie is the ancient City of Epidaurus called Limera,
whose Harbour is so bad, that a Vessel that draws but six foot water, cannot enter without striking: But the Vizer was car∣ried off in a Tartan to a Galley that attend∣ed him with five and forty others for his Convoy to Canea, where they landed him safely. His Mother Fateima Kadun had been conveyed thither four dayes before by four Galleys. Kadun I have told you (if I be not mistaken) is as much as Madam with us. This Fateima has made it appear, that in Turkie, her Sex is neither so contempti∣ble nor so much contemned as has been re∣ported. Her Magnanimity is so great, that I must tell you, as the whole Eastern world is convinced of the Potency of her Son, so they are sensible her interest with him is such, that she governs him absolutely, and by consequence manages the whole Affairs of the Empire. The Vizer remained four months at Ca∣nea to inform himself of the condition of the Venetians, and prepare himself for the Siege of Candia. The beginning of May 1667. he brought his Army to a Rendez-vouz at New Candia, an old Castle with a few pittiful houses about it, some two leagues from the City. About fifteen or six∣teen years before, the Famous Delli Ʋssain
Pacha leaving that Island to go (as I said before) and finish his dayes miserably at Constantinople, the Troops that he left be∣hind him, intrenched themselves at New-Candia, and called it Eina-die, which is as much as to say, harm watch, harm catch; For the Venetian Garrison making frequent Excursions, and the Turks being as busie from thence, gave it the name of Eina-die, and in my judgement with a great deal of propriety. The Genzar-Aga, or Maistre de Camp to the Janizaries, being a Creature of the Vi∣zers, took a general view of his Army at Eina-die, and found them complete fifty thousand men, besides about fourteen thousand Pioneers, and several Victualers, and such kind of people following the Camp. Most of the Pioneers were forced out of the Islands in the Archipelago and Morea; the Army having ruined their Huts at Fina-die, advanced against Candia, where the Vizer met them from Canea. The City of Candia was called formerly Cytaeon, not much differing from Cytion in Cyprus, where Zeno was born, who was the Founder of the Sect of the Stoicks. This Candia (in Ancient Times so Famous for its bigness and wealth, that in the Reign of the last Emperours of the East it denominated
the whole Island) is scarce cognoscible now but by the glorious reliques of its ramparts, which notwithstanding have, and do still resist the strongest Efforts that ever the whole Ottoman strength has been able to make. 'Tis the common talk of those parts, that never City has sustained so fierce a Siege so long a time; perhaps they may reckon for one Siege all the Encampments that the Turks have made there from the year 1647. when they belcaguered it first, for when they discontinued their formal Leaguer, they blocked it up so close for above twen∣ty years together, that the Garrison durst not stir out above Cannon-shot from the Walls; and in that sense it has been effectu∣ally the longest Siege that has been menti∣oned in History. The Town is fortified with seven Basti∣ons, five towards the Island, and two (viz. St. Andrew, and Sabonniera) towards the Sea: These two are in a streight Line at the two ends of the Harbour, which is call∣ed Dramata, and looks toward the North. About a year since, the Turks quitted their old Works that they had raised to no pur∣pose against the Bastions towards the Island, and turned their approaches upon the two Bastions towards the Sea. On the Sabon∣niera
side they press not so hard, by reason the ground consisting much of sand, their Works are apt to moulder as fast as they make them: But the hottest service is on the side of St. Andrew, where their ap∣proaches are carried on by the Sea side, un∣der the protection of an Artificial Mountain which they removed thither from another place. The Post of St. Andrew is a kind of half Bastion, built only with a Flank that scoures towards the Fort of Panigra, but towards the Sea, it is only a Plat-form that flanks nothing, and has nothing to flank it. 'Tis a strange thing, that for twenty years together, both besiegers and besieged should have neglected this Post. Standing upon a hard Rock, the Turks thought it unminable, and therefore unapproachable; and the Christians believed themselves safe there by the meer nature of the place: But both of them were mistaken, and the Chri∣stians worst of all, for the place must be suddenly relieved, or it will be certainly lost, and had it not been for an opportuni∣ty, in which the French signalized their ex∣perience and courage, the Town had been taken on that side by a demy Gorge, which is a piece of Fortification, that till then was never used in any Town, to the great dis∣paragement
of the Venetian Engineers; the first discovery of that place was made by certain Renegadoes that ran into the Tur∣kish Camp, where there are but too many of them: About the latter end of the year 1668. the Duke de Feuiliade brought to the succour of the Town four Brigades of French Gentlemen Commanded by the Count de S. Paul; the Duke of Chasteau-Thierry; the Duke of Caderouse, and the Count de Villemor. The Marquess de la Motte Tenelon, had not the Command of a Brigade, as being left free to execute the extraordinary Commands of the Duke de Feuillade, who advised with him in every thing; and this by accident gave him means to do the besieged the most signal piece of service that could be expected from any one Man; for viewing the Works on that side, he perceived the Turks were Masters of all the ground betwixt the Fort St. Andrew and the Sea; had planted their Batteries, fixed their Lodgements, and provided very well for the security of their Posts; and which was most dreadful to him, they were battering the Scotch Work, which was the only place that could give any defence to a breach they had already made in the De∣mie-Gorge. The Scotch Work was an old Tower in the middle of a Wall that flank∣ed
the Demie-Gorge so effectually, that if that Flanker was made unserviceable, the Town was impossible to be defended. The Marquess de la Motte Tenelon having re∣monstrated all this to the Venetians, and convinced them of the importance of that place, they left it to his care to prevent the great danger which at that time was very pressing upon them. The first thing to be done, was to repair the old Capponnieres towards the Sea which they themselves had destroyed, and quitted not long before. A Capponniere is a little Lodgement or Post for their outermost Guards to lye in, it is made of Planks, driven half way into the ground, and lined with earth, in which there was room for about a dozen or fif∣teen Musqueteers, that sired upon occasion out of little holes made to that purpose. The Turks had brought vast quantities of earth, and thrown them upon the Cappon∣niers, and thereby brought their ap∣proaches to the very foot of the breach. The Marquess was present at the recovery of these Capponniers, and had the Turks al∣wayes in his teeth with only nine or ten foot of earth betwixt them: Having reco∣vered, and refitted his Capponniers, he ran a Gallery under the Batteries and Lodge∣ments of the Turks, and blew them up in∣to
the air, thereby giving the besieged con∣venience to repair the Scotch Work, from whence they shot so effectually with their Cannon, that it has been too hot for the Turks, and they have not attempted it since. But for this Work, the Town had been ta∣ken above three months ago. You would not believe it, and yet it was certainly true, the French were at that time forced to preach Moderation and Temper to the Venetians, whose Commanders were then so full of animosity and emulation, (e∣specially Morosini and Cornaro) that their Councils of War were nothing but Threats, and Exprobrations, and Manifesto's, and Protestations one against the other; our great Officers (who were admitted to those Councils) were amazed at their own pru∣dence and temper, in respect of those who had alwayes reproached our Nation by its heat and activity. Had I not been▪ told this by more than one or two of the Rene∣gades, I should never have believed it. The Turks understood it very well, and laught at the Venetian Pantalons, for that was the name they gave the Venetian Of∣ficers. This is certain, the Garrison has never effectually seconded the Efforts of their Auxiliaries. The Venetian, as it is thought,
being unwilling to be relieved by such in∣considerable supplyes, have fancied, that by exposing them, and suffering them to be cut off, their Masters, the Christian Princes would be provoked to espouse them more vigorously to repair their own Honours, and by degrees grow to make the Venetian Quarrel their own. Upon Friday the 10th of May 1669. (which the Turks count the 9th of their Douleggaide, and of their Egire 1080.) I arrived at the Camp, two days before their little Bairam, which fell out the 11th of May; for there being that year seventy compleat days from the end of the Moon of Ramaden, to the tenth of the Moon of Douleggaide, the little Bairam happened the tenth of that Moon, and the Ramaden concluded the last day of our February. The Turkish Camp had no Lines either of Circumvallation or Contravallation; a Line of Circumvallation would have been utterly useless, because they feard no suc∣cours by Land. And the Garrison think∣ing themselves very happy if they can keep their own ground, there was no great need of any Contravallation against their Sallies; only about Cannon-shot from the two Ba∣stions, the Turks thought fit to cast up a few pittiful Lines, to shelter their place of
Arms, where they draw up, when com∣manded out upon any considerable Service. These Lines, instead of being brought up streight one to another, as with us, are turned with a bow at both ends, which seems repugnant to our Rules; but our cu∣riosity is not so usefull among them, for the Enemy never going directly towards an at∣tack, nor many times together the same way, the pedantry of our methods would be to no purpose. The whole strength of their Camp con∣sists of great Plat-forms, which those Infi∣dels have raised upon the shore, and plant∣ed them very liberally with Cannon to play upon the Christian Ships. There are also Plat-forms that lie low, and even with the water, made on purpose to hinder the de∣scent of the Venetians. I went first to the Vizers Quarter, which among us would have been called the Royal Quarter. It lies towards the Fort of Saint Andre westward of the Town; and in that quarter most of the Janizaries and select Troops of the Army are disposed. The Quarter of the Romiliots, or Euro∣pean Troops under the Command of the Beglierbey of Sophia was before the Fort of Panigra on the S. W. side of the Town. The Messerliotts or Troops out of Aegypt
and Arabia were quartered on the South; the Natolians or Troops out of Asia on the South East: And towards their Lazaret or Hospital, over against the Post of Sabio∣nera directly to the East, lay a considerable body of Janizaries, with detachments, and commanded parties out of all the other Quarters. The Chief Officers commanding in those several Quarters, have no certain place al∣lotted to themselves, as with us, for the Vizer changes them as he pleases, and many times removes the whole Brigade from one Quarter to another. The Bassas, who at my coming were in principal Command, were the Vizer du Camp, which is as much as the Vizer Azem's Lieutenant-General: the Beglerbey of Romulia; the Capoudan Bassa Brother in Law to the Grand Vizer; the Genizar-Aga, a brave Man, and his Creature; Zambatag Ogli-Houssekni Son to one of the Sultans Sisters; Zatt-Patat-Ogli, for a Turk a very understanding man in all Foreign Affairs, and designed to be Bassa of Cairo; Frane Mehemet Pacha, a Rene∣gade Portugesse, to whom the Grand Vizer has promised tho Government of Candia when taken: And Bebyr Pacha, a man of Execution, and one who speaking very well the Language of the Franks, would be a
proper person to Treat with the Christi∣ans. The General of their Horse called Spahi∣lar-Agasi, continued at Canea, from whence he made frequent Cavalcades about the Island to keep an eye over his Horse which were quartered all along upon the Coast under the Command of six Colonels, or Boulouk Agalar's. It is not above four years since this person was made General of the Cavalry; his predecessor was slain by the French at the passing of Raab near St. Go∣thard in the year 1664. The Quarters of the Vizer Azem is the only fix'd Quarter in the Army, and chosen with all the convenients that is consistent with the security of the Camp. The little Turkish Vessels can land just by him, with∣out passing before the Town; it lies upon the Road to Canea and Policastro, and there is no Forrage but on that side: His Troops are sheltered from the City by a little hill, which gives also to the Besiegers an advan∣tage to raise Batteries: But its greatest Commodity is from the River Giofro, which runs at the foot of the said Hill. The Ri∣ver is not much bigger than the Gobelins at Paris, and yet it contributes exceedingly to the miseries of the City of Candia, for with∣out those waters the Turks could not have subsisted so long.
At the beginning of the first Siege in the year 1648. some of the Venetians poisoned those waters, without advising with their General, and it was the destruction of a∣bove twenty thousand Turks; which being no fair action, according to the punctilio's of War, the Turks (who of themselves are not over-apt to give quarter) revenged it effectually by most incredible barbarities. I was astonished at the number and beauty of the Tents in that Quarter: For the Hutts and Cabins for the common Sol∣diers, I saw three great Boards that had served to make ten thousand of them. You will ask what kind of things those Cabins are among the Turks, and how they are built: They take of the fattest earth they can find, sprinkle it with water as they do Mortar, and having marked out a propor∣tion of it of about seven foot in length, and six in breadth, they take three large Planks, and fasten them round, as they were to make a Chest: The Planks are used as a kind of Mould for the casting of these Cazernes, for when the Boards are disposed right, they throw more water up∣on the Mould, and then let it stand till it be dry: when it has stood long enough, is grown to a consistence, and is sufficient∣ly stiff to stand by it self, the Planks are
taken away, and imployed in another place. Every one of these Cazernes or Cabins is allowed to be five foot high, covered a top with certain old pieces of Wood, over which they lay a little of their prepared Mould, which they suffer to dry, and with very good effect; but for thatch, it is not to be thought on in Candia, where they have neither sowing nor reaping, and trees are more scarce than straw; the great ones have been all cut up to make their Pali∣sadoes and Fortifications, and the little ones have been burned: In short, each of those Caverns built according to the above-men∣tioned dimensions, will receive twelve Soul∣diers; but for greater numbers, they are proportion'd accordingly. The Grand Vizer was not lodged in a Tent; they had built him a Serrai or Pa∣lace half a quarter of a league about: The Turks presumed when he once sate down before the Town, he would not suddenly rise again, and therefore they thought fit his Quarters should be made durable. The Walls of his Palace were of stone some six or eight foot high from the floor; the rest of the House (which in some places was two stories high) was made of that sprinkled dirt dryed, and a little old Timber. In the Camp there were at least a hundred of these
Serrai's set up by the Principal Officers for themselves. The Serrai or Palace of Delli-Houssain-Pacha, built in the time of the first Siege over against the Fort of Marti∣nengoe, was the most considerable of them all: When the Army was drawn off, and the Siege discontinued, it was set on fire by the Venetians, but the Beglerbey of Romu∣lia has repair'd it again. Before the Grand Vizers Serrai was a kind of a Gibbet set up with seven horse tails upon it; each Beglerbey in the Army has six before his door: But those are honorary and no more, the Grand Vi∣zer's is a great mark of authority. When the Sultan in person is in the Camp, he ha nine tailes before his Tent or Palace, or where ever he lies. The Aga of the Jani∣zaries has no such thing before his, though he be one of the most considerable Officers in the Army: Before the Tents of the o∣ther Bassas there are two, and six before the Caimacan of the Vizer, who is in the nature of Super-intendant of the Army. The Gibbet set up for these Tails before the Grand Vizer's Tent is four square, and when the Army marches, the square in which the Horse tails are fastened, directs the way the Army is to take: for if the tails be fastned towards the East, their mo∣tion
is to be that way; and so in general all their Campments and Lodgements in their march are signified by that part of the horizon towards which the tails are hung. Being got into the Camp, each of us found some of our friends, and immediate∣ly dispersed. Amuret-Aga went one way and we another; I continued with Osman Chelebi in a Hutt that was offer'd him; his two Brothers in Law (Sons of Mustapha Bey) that he thought to have found before Candia, and quartered with them, were sent in Garrison not long before to Girapi∣etra, a Post that they have fortified in that Island. In the Turkish Army, though it be very numerous, any body that one inquires for is easily found out. Their Oda's are known and distinguished by their succession and order of their numbers, as first, second, third, and so on: But for greater instructi∣on, at the door of every Chorbagi is hung up the name of some animal or other, as a Lion, a Camel, an Eagle, &c. and a great paper with the name of it in large Cha∣racters. We were scarce setled in our Hutt, but the silence that is alwayes very remarkable in the Turkish Army, was on a sudden in∣terrupted
by a most dreadful noise in spring∣ing their Mines that were ready under the Fort of St. Andre, and the Yells of the Turks advancing to the Assault: The Can∣non both in the Leaguer and City, made up the Consort. This was the first time I ever saw the Grand Vizer, he was got a top of a little eminence out of Cannon-shot from the Town, to see the execution of the Mines, and success of the attaque: The sight of this great person struck my heart more violently than mine eyes: He is but of a middle Stature, yet very vigorous and strong; his Face is something pitted with the small Pox, and his Cheeks very red; his Eyes are black, and hollow, and stern; his Complexion is tauny; his Beard long and very black; he was on foot in the midst of fifty or threescore of his Guards armed like Albanians, with their Captain Delli Bachi at the head of them. The Vizer was dis∣coursing with Zambatag-Ogli-Housekni, a young Gentleman, and as they said there, much like the Grand Signior who is his Uncle: The Vizer had no sooner placed himself, but all his Officers came about him. It is concluded by all hands, that he is personally brave, and as great a Souldier as ever they had; yet he is cautious, and runs not head-long himself upon every oc∣casion,
to visit the Works; with a small, but excellent Perspective, he was viewing the order of their attaques; but because the dust and the smoke did many times obstruct him, he sent ever and anon some body to understand how things went in every Post; which messengers, to give him an exact ac∣count, exposed themselves so freely to the Enemies shot, that of thirty sent out, there was but four returned. This was one of the hottest attempts du∣ring the whole Leaguer; the Turks had sprung three Mines under the Fort of Saint Andre. Whilst the Vizer was imployed with his Perspective-Glass in observing the execution of the Mines, wagers were lai'd by the Officers about him that the Work was blown up, and a gale of wind blowing away the smoke discovered who had won: The execution was great, carrying away a whole row of Palisadoes from the besieged, and making a breach in which the Turks endeavoured many times to lodge them∣selves, their swords in their hands, but were repulsed with great slaughter. They gave out that they had slain the General of the Christians, but the repulsed Troops never return without some such story for preser∣vation of their Honour: but at this time there was some reason for their report, for
a day or two afterwards we understood by a fugitive, that the Marquess of Saint An∣dre, a French Man, and Governour of the Town was in that action wounded in the face by the splinter of a stone: This hap∣pened the 9th of their Douleggiade, and ac∣cording to our Kalendar on the 10th of May 1669. The Troops that are daily designed for the Guard of the Trenches, are relieved e∣very twelve hours: And when an Oda is appointed for the whole day, the Chorbag∣gi takes one half of them to mount the Trenches, and twelve hours after is reliev∣ed by the Oda Baschi with the other moity. But an Oda consists commonly of three or four thousand men, which are easily divi∣ded for service. In the evening two Chia∣ouxes having placed themselves before the Grand Vizers door, one of one side, and the other of the other; they make procla∣mation as loud as they can, and cry out Allah, Allah; upon which the Souldiers as∣sembling in great numbers, the Chiaouxes set certain prices upon the heads of the Christians for the next day; this is their custome every night, that the hopes of re∣ward might animate their men, for nothing is better money than the head of a Chri∣stian; but their heads are not alwayes at
a rate; when the Christian Army is strong, and heads harder to come by, a head is worth 25 or 30 Crowns; but when their Army is weak, and heads are like to be plentiful, nine or ten Crowns is a good price, and they think it well if the Market would hold there. The next day being a Festival, and their Bayram, they set twen∣ty Crowns upon a head. There was also a rate set for every piece of a Palisade that could be forced from the Works of the City, and brought to the Vizer, and the price for the next day was set at three Crowns. The Venetians set their Prices in the same manner upon the heads of the Turks; but they are not so good Chapmen, for ten or twelve Livers is as much as they give for a head; and at that rate they come in sometimes so plentifully that they have been known to set their Walls round with them, and all such other places as have been within sight of the Enemy. But there was a time once when these kind of Tro∣phies were prohibited in the Town, and that was when the Plague was in the Turks Camp, then the head of one Infidel might have been enough to have infected ten thousand Christians. In the year 1667. an accident hapned in the Vizer's Camp that was very rare;
There was in the Quarter of the Messerhots a great heap of Christian heads, and it was reported that one of those heads moaned and complained every night, and that half the Army in that Quarter had heard it: and it was the more wonderful with them, because they believe nothing of the return, or apparition of Spirits, but laugh at those stories. This accident made such a noise that it came to the Ears of the Vizir. The Vizir being a curious, but no credulous person, went himself to the place, and heard an odd kind of noise from out of one of the heads that lay uppermost upon the Pile: The Vizir was a quick man, and observed that the Head standing with the Face to the wind, the wind blew strongly into the Nostrils, and not being able to get out but with difficulty, by its working and agitati∣on in the Skull produced that sound. He caused the Nostrils to be stopt with Clay, but the Soldiers reporting still that the Head was heard to complain, and that it was doubtless some among the Christians who had dyed a Turk, the Vizir caused that and the whole heap to be thrown into the Sea. Every morning at five a clock the Sol∣diers are called to their prayers by sound of Trumpet; the Troops in their several Quar∣ters
repair immediately to their place of Arms: To begin their Devotions they cry out as loud as they can Allah three times, and they make a noise with it that may be heard two Leagues; and in this it is that they may well reproach the carelesness of our devotions. He that should behold their modesty and humility at their prayers, would wonder it should be possible that so much courage and piety could consist. They have a larger sort of Drums than ordinary that call them from their Prayers, of which there is but one in every Quarter, and that is either placed upon a piece of wood to that purpose, or else upon a Ca∣mel before the Vizer or Beglerbey's Tent who Commands in chief. Their noise is almost like Thunder, and heard two or three Leagues, and the profound and uni∣versal silence of their Camp, makes it heard the farther. The smaller Drums are for the Soldiers commanded by the Beglerbeys; for the Janizaries use no Drums, nor in∣deed any other Instrument in the room of them, no not so much as in their March. There are Chiaouxes on purpose, who car∣ry Orders to the Janizaries when at any time they are commanded. In that case they hang up Colours before the Tent of the Chorbaggi, and the Word passes from
one to the other. In their Marches they follow the directions of the great Drums which belong to their General Officers: The common Drums are beaten at both ends, with two sticks of an unequal big∣ness, With their right hand they beat quick and strong, with their left they strike more slowly, and make a sound in my judgment more solemn and martial than ours. Every Beglerbey has his Company of Guards, composed only of his own Foot∣men called Moulaggi: Upon a March the Moulaggi are always mounted, and on Horse-back, but in Candia they serve on foot. These Moulaggi have their Bag∣pipes, their Haut-bois, their Trumpets, and Kettle-Drums, and upon several occasions do make use of them all. The Zaims and Timariots have likewise their Kettle-Drums. As to their Colours or Standards, every Oda has its Bairakter or Ensigne. This Officer is never without several Colours, to set up and display upon the Platform of their Batteries, upon their breaches or their logdments in an Attack. The Colours are commonly charged salterwise with Syme∣tars vert upon a Field Or: sometimes Gules in a Field Argent. Sables is forbidden as
altogether ominous. Sometimes they in∣scribe in Arabick Letters, the name of God, or some of his Attributes. In their skirmishes with the Christians they are very proud if they can get any of our Colours, because they know it is a loss highly regret∣ted among them, and very dishonourable: but they do not show them, nor hang them up publickly as we do; only now and then the Renegadoes will keep them and hang them up in their houses, as retaining our Customs, though not our Religion. The Order observed by the Turks in their night-Guards, is different from ours; they have indeed their Horse-Guards petrolling about all night long; but with their Foot it is quite otherwise: They never put one single man upon a Sentinel, but place little Squadrons of thirty and forty men in a Squadron about their Camp, and espe∣cially towards the Enemy, on which side they place their Squadrons or Parties about two or three hundred paces distance at the most. They have none of our Perdue's, thinking it little less than madness to trust the lives of 100000 men to the vigilance or fidelity of a single person, contrary quite to our opinion, who think it as extrava∣gant to disturb a whole Army to watch, when one man may do it as well; but I am
rather of their judgment than our own. Their opinion is sober and cautious, ours more vain and secure. Let the occasion be what it will, their Foot never go the Rounds, and therefore are never trusted with the Word. When these little bodies upon the out-Guards descry any body near them, they cry out Kimpsem, who goes there? which is followed immediately with Dourbourda, stand. Their common an∣swer is Biz-iz, 'Tis we; for they suppose no man will come alone with a good de∣sign, and therefore our complement, A Friend, would not pass with them. If there be two or three in the company, and none of them replies, the next Word from the Guards is Ʋldurun, or kill them, kill them, and commonly they are as good as their word, and then give the alarm to the whole Camp. At the beginning of the Siege they were not so strict, there being no talk of succours from Christendom, nor no apprehension from the Islanders; then if any of their Guards had espied a man, after their Allah Allah three or four times, they called out in the Frank language, A Largua, A Lar∣gua, which is a Sea phrase, and as much as who are you for? Those who are question∣ed, do answer immediately Alla; other∣wise
the Court of Guard cryes out Alla a∣gain, and fires upon them. It would be no easie matter for the Venetians to think to surprize the Turks by crying out Alla; for the Turks have a peculiar way of speaking that word, pronouncing it in the throat, according to the way of the Arabians. In the same manner the Spaniard pronounces Muger, in which it is not possible for a French man to imitate him. Our Christians that are not used to the Turkish articulation, will tell you, that when those Infidels go to an ingagement, they do it with strange yells and noises, which indeed is nothing but their pious in∣vocations: However at those times the word Alla is alwayes in their mouths, and I doubt the fear that seizes us commonly at those times, makes the Turkish Musick less gratefull to our ears. Those who have skill in Souldiery, will perhaps condemn this custom of the Turks, and object, that the Romans (who were greater Conquerours of the two) observed better Order in their Camps. I will not meddle with the speculative part, let us come to the active: 'Tis true, the Turks have not that regular way of incamping, as the Romans had, nor their method of fight∣ing; for the Turks understand nothing of
wheeling, or the other Military Motions that the Greeks and the Romans have de∣rived to us, and yet in three hundred years they have won more Battels, and made lar∣ger conquests than the Romans in eight hundred; 'tis true, afterwards the Romans out-did them, but the more shame for the Christians now, who understanding the way of facing about, the way of countermarches, doubling of ranks and files, and several o∣ther Motions, are yet so often beaten by the Turks. There is one thing which to me has been alwayes very admirable; Most Authors that write of the Turks, and o∣ther People ambitious of Honour, are per∣petually counselling to make War upon the Turks, representing them Cowards, and Sots, and easily conquered: By their account the taking of Constantinople is a trifle, and so easie, 'tis not worth the name of an En∣terprize; I wonder they can forbear dispo∣sing before-hand of the plunder of that great City, and that every one of them has not reserved three or four of the Principal Odaliques in the Seraglio for himself. What then must be the odds betwixt us in Mar∣tial Discipline? Why? the Turks are more obedient to their Officers, are more at uni∣ty among themselves, more sober, and less fugitive; and this certainly must be the
reason, for their skins are no harder than ours, unless possibly it be that Empires have their periods like particular men. On Saturday 11. of May, on the morn∣ing the whole Camp put themselves in arms to begin the Festivity of their Bayram, which they signified to the Christians by three rounds of great shot from their Bat∣teries, and as many salvoes of small shot from their Infantry who gave very good fire: But the whole Army was not drawn up as I expected. Every Quarter rejoy∣ced by it self. I think there could not be braver men seen in the world than the Grand Vizer's Janizaries: Their Arms were so bright, they were able to dazle a mans eyes: the fierceness of their looks, and the Majesty of their Motion presaged their success: their Dolimans or Coats were as good as new, very well shaped, though made of a course cloth from Salo∣nica; they had not had them above two months: Once every year the Sultan gives them new Coats at his own charge, and the time that they are delivered is about the month of Cheuval, that they may be neat and spruce against their Grand Bayram: they had not their Zercola's or long Coifs upon their heads which they wear upon Solemnities; in the Army they would be
troublesome; they had only Bonnets or Caps of wooll or coloured cloth, with their handkerchiefs roll'd about them to make them look like Turbans: They wear no beards, but not upon the score that we pretend, who would have it a mark that they are the Sultan's real slaves, for, as they say, he who is a Musleman, what is he else? All the rest of the Sultan's Subjects, wear their Muschatoes very long, and they would let their under lips grow so too, were not they fearful of being taken by the beard in their Battels, and so put to the worst. 'Tis most certain, that for the same reason Alexander the Great commanded his Captains, that all the Macedonian Soul∣diers should cut off their beards: And the Abanthes, a war-like People of Eubea, do use it at this day. In the Grand Vizer's Quarter there was near fifteen thousand Janizaries, besides a party of them sent about to the Post of Sabonniera: I judged the whole Army to consist of about forty five thousand men, and near as many others, Cannoniers, Pio∣niers, Sutlers, half of which upon occasion were able to bear Arms: Should I tell this among the Christians, I should hardly be believed; for they please themselves in de∣basing the numbers and courage of the
Turks, and perhaps it is a stratagem of the Venetians to wheedle their Allies: So a∣mong them the Turkish Army must not be above thirty thousand strong. 'Tis true, about a year since, the Plague and incommodities of the Army had redu∣ced them to that number: and I know at Tunis (where I was at that time) the Turks confessed it themselves, to excuse the small∣ness of their Progress; they pretended like∣wise that the Town of Candia stood upon an impenetrable, inaccessible Rock, and was defended by a Garrison of sixty thousand men. It was great pleasure to hear how they magnified our numbers, and the strength of the City, and yet kept us all in with an Army of twenty five thousand men at the most: Not that the Emperour could have wanted more men, but the Vizer in gallantry had made an Oath, with that small number of Turks to beat and destroy the sixty thousand lubberly Christians that had pin'd themselves up in that inaccessible Rock. That was a day of great Execution; one of the Turks Mines blew up a Post of the Christians near Saint Andre, where many a brave man of the Garrison perished; the Vizer was in no little danger himself, for having laid aside his Perspective, and ad∣vanced
in the Trenches to the very Ditch of the Town, to survey their Works, and observe his advantage, he stood personally exposed to all the fire from the Garrison for a complete half hour together, and Kiaca-Bey the Lieutenant General of the Jani∣zaries was shot in the Arm, not two steps from him; the Vizer when he saw it, with an angry kind of smile, said, I think these rude Christians would not have us Celebrate our Bayram to day: but for all that, he stirred not till a Lodgement was finished that he had ordered, and to that end, he caused his dinner to be brought to him into the Tren∣ches. The rest of the day was spent in Douna∣ma, or publick rejoycing: The Turks ac∣cording to their custome on their Bayrams send one another Presents, as we do at New-years-tide. One Janizary gives his Came∣rade Tobacco, and he to requite it, takes him to the Sutlers, and gives him a dish of Coffee, or strong waters. The Vizer aug∣mented the pay of those who did any thing signally; if their pay was six Aspers before, he advanced it to twelve; and God knows what emulation and courage that raised in the several Oda's: The Principal Officers regal'd the Grand Vizer. The Beglerby of Natolia sent him six black Eunuch Boys,
and received from him a rich Saber or Sword of a more than ordinary temper. The Vizer sent a noble Tent to Zambatag-Ogli-Houssekni. Such of the Spahi as had been defective in their duties, and were to be drubb'd, according to their discipline of War, were pardon'd in respect of that day; as also such of the Janizaries, as for their misdemeanours were condemned to be bea∣ten with cudgels on their buttocks. A Ti∣mariot or Teskerectis that before was worth but five or six thousand Aspers a year, was advanced to a Teskereber, or a Timar of twenty thousand pound. Some of the Ja∣nizaries produced the heads of Christians that they had concealed three or four days together, to have their recompence inlar∣ged that day. The Kaimacan gave three Sequins to a Pioner for having taken a pair of Gloves from a Christian; and to take a pair of Gloves is looked upon as a great prize, for the Turks wearing none them∣selves, 'tis no easie matter to come by them any other way. I saw the Vizer as he passed to the Eouy∣lai, (which is one of their services of devo∣tion) he was talking to Mehemet-Aga his Kiaia, or Intendant of his house, an honest man, moderate, and one who has done many good offices to the Christians. The
Grand Vizer was going to his own Mosque, for he had one belonging to his own Quar∣ters, to which none but his own servants resorted. He has alwayes five or six Imans or Priests which attend him in the Army to perform Divine Service, and every great Officer has two or three. The Vizer was attended by a throng of Officers, and select men of his Troops that followed him in confusion. At the head of the Procession were ten Trumpets, and as many Bag-pipes playing and sounding before him: There was likewise a Touke or kind of a Banner with seven horse tails fastned to a Pike; but the other Touks carried before the o∣ther Officers had fewer according to the difference of their qualities, six tails before a Beglerbey, and two before a Bachas. When prayers were done, he treated all the Of∣ficers and three Oda's or Companies who had performed very well in a late action. He never dines alone, but sends alwayes for the Officers that come off the Guards, that either at dinner or afterwards they may give him an account of their pro∣ceedings. He loves good Meat, but ab∣hors Wine; contrary to the humour of his Father, who delighted in it exceed∣ingly. He diverts himself sometimes a Hunting, sometimes at Chess, and takes
great pleasure in seeing his Officers dance. He had with him besides, seven or eight Hoingi, or Dancing-Masters, who danced to two or three Base-Vials, or Instruments very like them: Sometimes they danced alone, sometimes two and two, and some∣times more: They dance likewise with a sort of Castignettes, and do very well: These dancers have upon them little strait wastcoats that come down to their gir∣dle, from whence they have a kind of pet∣ticoats (like our Women) which come down to the ground, and are very wide; and their great dexterity being in turning swiftly and long upon one foot, the wind getting under their petticoats fills them up like a sail: In this posture the Hoin∣gi will bow, plunge, leap up again, ap∣pear and disappear with strange prompti∣tude and exactness. There was one thing I thought remarkable; Not long since in Turkie there was a sort of Religious Ma∣humetans called Dervis, whose Devotion consisted in dancing in their Mosques, which they would perform with indefati∣gable swiftness: The Vizer having dri∣ven them lately out of Romulia, those who had no mind to go so far as their Princi∣pal Covent at Cogna in Asia, turned Ho∣ingi, and danced as eagerly for Money
as ever they had done for Devotion. In the Evening the Grand Vizer took Horse, and rode to Eina-die, or New-Can∣dia, to confer with Fateim Kadun, who was come thither to meet him, from her Quarters at Philopoli, which is a great House standing upon the Road betwixt Candia and Girapietra. Nothing passed in the Siege, nor indeed in the whole Empire, but the Vizer imparted it to his Mother. She brought with her into Candia forty or fifty Eunuchs, two thirds of which num∣ber are imployed constantly all over Tur∣kie for intelligence: All news from La∣rissa is conveyed by some or other of them, I say news, because Orders are sent always by other people. The greatest resolves are still concerted betwixt her and her Son; and the supplyes of Men or Money were managed for the most part by their Eunuchs, for which the Vizer's Slaves bare them no good will: It was so much mo∣ney out of their pockets, and their gain was so great, that it was reported some months since, two single Voyages were worth to one of Fateima's Eunuchs above twenty thousand Crowns. The Eleventh at night, the Vizer's Quar∣ters was all in Arms, upon Alarm of a Mine which the Venetians sprang before
the Fort of Saint Andre: There were slain in that business above sixty Janizaries, most of them Officers, as good as any in the Army, and all of them the Vizer's Crea∣tures; and it was reported, that the Vene∣tians to improve their advantage, were sallying out of the Town; but that was but a report. The twelfth of May in the Morning I saw several Companies of Janizaries come to bid their Chor-baggi's or Captains good morrow, and 'tis it seems their custome e∣very morning. To requite their Civility, the Captains present every Souldier with a dish of Coffee, which is the only thing that ever they return them. When a Soul∣dier is killed, his cloaths go to the Chor-baggi, but his Arms and the Money about him is delivered to the Treasurer-General of the Army, who is accountable for it to the Vizer: But the Money passing through the hands of the Chor-baggi, to whom the body is brought off to be stripped, does many times stick to his fingers, and come short to the Treasurer. But if a Janizary be mortally wounded, and has time to make his Will, he may bequeath what he pleases to the Souldiers of his own Oda, to supply their necessities: They are paid but once in three months, and, as I said
before, their pay is unequal. The new raised men have but six Aspers a day, which is about three pence half penny of ours; and those who have most have but twelve pence, but then the Grand Signior finds them Victuals: Their allowance to six Souldiers is a dish of Rice, and about a pound of bread to a Man; every fourth day they have six ounces of flesh, and their drink is all out of the River of Giofiro: they may supply one another out of their pay or their plunder, but they must be sure to keep touch with their Sutlers, and have a care of committing the least inso∣lence towards them. At first it was death for a Janizary to drink Wine, and they made it a point of Religion, because of the Seditions which their drunkenness had produced; but of late, the severity of that Law has been turned upon the Sutlers who furnish them; and the Janizary escapes with fifty good blows upon the buttocks, inflicted punctually by the Oda Baschi, or Lieutenant of the Company, with a good cudgel. When a Turkish Souldier has done any thing that deserves death, they dare not execute him publickly, but he is strang∣led in private, which in my judgement argues a weakness in the Government and Authority of their Officers: But the Ja∣nizaries
look upon it as a respect to men of the Sword; for the whole Empire be∣ing nothing but their conquest and acqui∣sition, it is but suitable to the Dignity and Justice of their Monarch, to have their errours and offences concealed, and their persons preserved from publick infamy and disgrace. I had alwayes hitherto a great curiosity to be prying into their Trenches, and ob∣serve the disposition of their Works; but it fell now to my share, and I could not avoid it. The danger was great, and death never so manifest to me as now. The being exposed to the continual shooting from the Town, was the least of my trouble; but the fear of being discovered by the Turks, and punished as a spie, was a thing that stuck very close to me, and made me al∣most repent my curiosity that had brought me to Candia. I repaired forthwith to my old Confident Osman Chelebi, and told him how it stood, who smiling, told me, If I could secure my self from the one, he would bring me off from the danger of the other. His Friends had solicited so effectually for his Timar, that it was time for him to think of doing something extraordinary: Every Timariot is obliged to bring as ma∣ny
men to the War, as he has times three three thousand Aspers in the revenue of his Timar, and those hen are called Ge∣belous. In Candia ther imployment was only to carry Earth, or be serviceable to their great Guns: Osman Chelebi accord∣ing to his share was to find four of these Gebelous: In complement I must needs make one of them, to save him that ex∣pence. I did not at first consider the thing, nor imagine I had been serving against the Christians; if I had, I should have made more scruple, and perhaps pretended con∣science in the case. I expected, that by the favour of some Officer of his acquain∣tance, I should have been excused, if I had advanced about a hundred paces into the Trenches, when the Guards had been re∣lieved, which might have been done with∣out any great hazards, that time being the least dangerous, for if the Christians had sallied to disturb them, they would have had upon their hands the Troops that came off, as well as those that went on to relieve them; but I reckoned without mine Host. I attended Osman Chelebi to the Tent of the Grand Engineer of the Ottoman Army called Isouf Meymar Azem, Meymar being the title which they give to any Eminent
Engineer or Architect. We went with him to the Seraile of the Topigi Bachi, or Grand Master of their Artillery. This Of∣ficer (one of the most considerable in the Empire) was a poor Mariner at Constan∣tinople who lived upon ten or twelve pence a day, by crossing the water betwixt Con∣stantinople and Pera: He put himself a∣mong the Officers of the Artillery, and passed with them into Candia, where the Grand Vizir having displaced the Topigi upon some exception against him, and ob∣serving this Mariner to be very handy and dexterous at removing and ordering the Cannon for the Batteries, advanced him to that Office, and made him Topigi Ba∣chi, quite contrary to the practice in our Countries. Among the Christians a man of Birth and no Merit, shall be sure to make his Fortune; among the Turks a man of Merit, let his Extraction be what it will, shall be sure to be preferred. With the Topigi Bachi we found a great number of Topigilers or Cannoneers and Gebegilers, or people that have care of keeping the Arms, and preparing their Fire-works; to be short, every man be∣ing to be imployed, they clapped a Scut∣tle at my back, and a Mattock into my hand, and thought they did me a great
deal of honour, for of three hundred Zi∣ams, Timars, and Gebelous that were wait∣ing for Orders, I was the first that was provided: Osman Chelebi himself put on the same harness, and being to furnish three more Gebelours, he picked out three mi∣serable Greeks, who for six Aspers a piece, suffered themselves to be tied by the legs with a thick Cord (like Pigs leading to the Market) for fear they should escape into the Town, which they do as often as they can. I had been tied with the rest, but that Osman Chelebi undertook for my Fidelity, which turned much to my dis∣advantage; for the Meymar believing me well affected thereupon, did me the fa∣vour to put me among those who were to throw the Grenadoes, and at that time were appointed to run up to the Chri∣stians Works, and pull away their bags of Wool and Earth, wherewith they had faced their Redoubts; and this was to be done in haste, when the Enemy was hottest a firing; to coxe me, they told me by this means I should have oppor∣tunity to be one of the first that should cut off the Christians heads; and indeed of fifty heads that were brought off, a∣bove thirty were cut off by those Gre∣nado men; and they perswaded me more∣over,
that two heads woud do my bu∣siness, and make my Fortune for ever. Then it was I began to repent me of my forwardness, and I vowed solemnly to God Almighty, that if I went on with these Grenadeers, I would if possible, e∣scape into the Town, and lose my life there to expiate my impious curiosity: In order to my Grenadiership, they had taken my Scuttle off my back, and put a linnen bagg full of Grenadoes about my shoulders like a scarff; but it came into my mind to tell them, that I feared I was not dexterous enough for that service, and desired that they would rather put me among those who were to pull down the Palisadoes; for, lest I should render my self suspected, I thought it not sit to decline one service, and recommend my self to another that was not so dangerous; yet I had my reason, for that time was not altogether proper for pulling down Palisadoes; the best time for that being after a rain, when fastning ropes to them, they can loosen them with more ease; or else in a great wind, by firing Bavins un∣der them: To gratifie my request they let me alone with my Scuttle and Mat∣tock, and away I marched with a Ras∣cally Renegado, who, during our attaque,
had orders to run away into the Town, and inform himself of its condition. They had given him his Lesson, as Osman Chelebi told me, and directed him to tell strange stories out of the Camp, to make him the more credible to the Christians. He had instructions to tell them, That the Vizir inraged at the cowardize of his Troops, had killed three Officers with his own hand; that they were almost starved in the Camp, the Soldiers mutining every day, and the Grand Signior resolved to cut off the Vizir's head, if the Town were not taken in a month; and that as a mark of his displeasure to the Grand Vizir, he had sent to him to deliver a rich Vest and a Sabre that he had given him not long be∣fore; by such stories as these they too often delude the poor Christians. By the way we met a party of Gionoul∣lous or Voluntiers, who follow the Army at their own charges in hopes by some great action to merit a Timar, which is the usu∣al recompence the Vizir bestows upon such persons; but then they must wait for a vacancy, and they will be sure to have an eye upon them. As we passed them we heard two or three of these Gionoullous, seeing our Ziams and Timariots marching upon service, wish good luck to the Chri∣stian
Musquets, that they might make room for them; and indeed those Timariots are never drawn out for an attaque, but the Ginoullous send their prayers along with them, that they may never return. We passed on to the first Trenches which the Turks had made upon the Rock, for having brought their Approaches so far, they could not any way secure themselves but by bringing Earth from other places. When I saw their Trenches, I was amazed to think how the Christians had described them: 'Tis true, they are not made so me∣thodically as ours, with lines parallel to the front of the place besieged. The way of the Turks is to advance as much as they can, and every forty paces to make an el∣bow or little turning, which yet does not hinder their line. Their Intrenchments or Approaches are twice as broad as ours, which at the bottom are at most but seven or nine foot; whereas the Turks Trenches, when the ground will permit, are fifteen or sixteen foot wide, that the Troops ap∣pointed to sustain the Pioneers, may make a large front the better to repel the Salleys of the Garrison. One thing I observed a∣mong them that is practised among us, They never begin to post their Soldiers in the Trenches till they have brought their
approaches to the Counter-scarpe; for till they be advanced thither their Troops are lodged in the Redoubts, or places of Arms. Their places of Arms are open behind like ours, for the better drawing themselves in∣to Battalia to repulse a Salley. Their Re∣doubts are generally faced with Stone: Their Trenches are made with Blindes, and their Blinds are made with thick pieces of Timber covered over with Faggots, and Earth upon them to shelter the Pioneers while they are at work. We drew out about fifty or sixty Pioneers to repair a battery which the Canon from the Town had beaten down. I saw some of their Guns there that carried six and twenty pound Bullet. From this Platform it was, that looking towards their works, I saw as it were a Forest of Palisado's that frighted me exceedingly: Imagine you saw a great Battalion of Pikes, with their Pikes advanced; their works were set as thick with Palisado's, whereas in some places, the Palisado's in the opposite works were ten foot asunder. The ground had been blown up a hundred times by the Mines of one side or the other. In short there was not one foot to spare, but immediately some Trench or other was thrown up in it; either a Bonnette, a Caponniere, or an An∣testature,
and that you may not be per∣plexed with those terms, being a sort of works almost quite unknown in France, I shall explain them as follows. The Bon∣nette is a kind of Ravelin set round with Palisado's; 'tis filled three foot thick with Earth to cover them from shot, but with∣out any Ditch. The Antestatures are little Traverses or Retrenchments thrown up in haste with bags of Earth, or Palisado's in some place that they cannot keep entire, but the Enemy having possessed themselves of one part they would willingly preserve the rest. In spight of the danger I was in, I could not but admire that prodigious ground where more than once or twice ten thou∣sand men had been imployed a month to∣gether, to force a single man back but four yards. No ground in the world did ever cost so dear, though it were a Mine of Gold. The possession of four Fathoms of ground in Candia, had been in dispute a∣bove twenty years, and gained at last with Rivers of blood, and many times the best blood in Europe. But I was taken from my contemplations to work in a Gallery that was to be carried on to the very wall of the Town. A Gallery is a way under∣ground
carried on under the Enemies works for the passage of the Miner when he goes to prepare the Chamber of the Mine, with intention to blow up some work. The Galleries of both parties do often meet, and then they who can drive out the other, either with sire or smoke, are ma∣sters of both, and the vanquished must re∣tire. We no sooner struck a stroke with our Mattocks, but we clap'd our Ears to the ground to listen whether the Christians were not at work as well as we; for many times both sides are working not above a foot from one another. At some times, and in some places the Pioneers for fear of being heard, have been glad to loosen the Earth with their Nails, or work it out with the point of their Knives. If any Mine be near, 'tis immediately sprung, to blow up the Pioneers, and oftentimes the con∣dition of the Earth deceiving the Engineer that causes it to be blown up, falls back upon those who gave fire to the Mine, and the great art is to make them evapo∣rate. In the little time I was digging there, I met more bones and carkases of men than shovels-full of earth; Sometimes I digged
a man up from under my feet, and per∣haps had I digged there but one hour be∣fore, I might have found him alive, and had him begg'd of me to pull him out. I must confess I had at that time great hor∣rours upon me, and being perceived by a young Turk that had been used to the Trade, I was laught at for my pains. Up∣on the same occasion he had many times leaped into the Christians Galleries, and brought away several of their Heads: He told our Camerades aloud that I was so a∣fraid of the Swords of the Venetians, that he saw me three or four times put my hand to my neck to feel whether my head was not cut off. I opened my Eyes as well as my Ears to inform my self whether the Christians were not at work near me, and to speak truth, for the security of my head I found an obligation upon me to have a care how I slept in that Quar∣ter. At length the Mine being fitted, we re∣tired to see it play; when we came forth of the Gallery we saw several Janizaries laughing to see us in that condition: There is a mortal hatred betwixt the Ja∣nizaries and the Timariots, for the Jani∣zaries being never imployed but at handy-strokes,
have them in contempt who are imployed in the Mines. Osman Chelebi was not a person that would be abused, and therefore seeing one of the Janizaries deriding him, told him, You are a happy man, for I have digg'd you a hole to hide your self in. Another Timariot that was not commanded along with us, but expect∣ed us when we came off, at the end of the Gallery, came to congratulate with one of his friends, and embracing him, demanded, Do you come back empty handed? have you made your fortune upon the Christians, and brought ever a head along with you? Yes one, (re∣plied his friend) and that is my own, which I assure you was in no little dan∣ger. 'Tis not to be imagined how much the Janizaries despise the Timariots, and all the Spahi in general. They call them in derision Sinek, which is as much as Flies, and this the Spahi are forced to indure, because of the authority and strict union among those sort of people: The nick∣name that the Spahi and Timariots give the Janizaries, is Toslouk, or Buskins, because they wear such kind of things a∣bout
their Legs, but then they will be sure to be the stronger, or they will never ven∣ture to provoke them. At the same time that we gave fire to our Mine, the besieged sprung two of their own: It was a dismal spectacle to behold the Men and the Earth thrown up pro∣miscuously into the Air, and the smoke being but little, gave us that lamentable convenience. Some of the Christians were blown alive into the Trenches of the Turks; and some of the Turks wasted into the Ditch, others upon the Ramparts of the Town with their Arms in their Hands. It was like a horrible shower of flesh to be∣hold the separated Members come down, whilst others were bruised and blown a∣bout from one side to another. We ran with all speed to disingage such as were buried alive; some we found only fright∣ed, without any hurt. They shew me an Azappe, or one of their Perdu's, who had been twice digged out of the ground; but all were not so happy, for some of them were half buried, stuck fast from the Gir∣dle downwards, and cried out with all their might, but they had as good have been quite under ground, for the Chri∣stians
ran out and chopped off their heads. The effect of these three Mines was on∣ly to have blown up some of the Guards; to have destroyed some Works; and in some measure inlarged the Breaches. The quantity of Powder required for a Mine, is fifteen, sixteen, sometimes Twenty, and Five and Twenty Barrels, according to the weight and thickness of the ground they would blow up. The Venetians to blow up the Placca made use of a Hun∣dred and Fifty Barrels, and they were no more than was necessary, being to blow up a Rock of Two and Twenty foot thick. It was in my power to have learned the construction of their superficial Furnaces as they called them in Candia where only they are in use; but I had not that curi∣osity, and indeed I found I had had alrea∣dy too much. Osman Chelebi came to Complement me at my coming out of the Works; and to cajole me, told me I had done wonders. That it was taken notice of by the Turks, that I was to value my self much upon their approbation: That I should doubtless have the honour to be
continued, and be by degrees infallibly advanced to some imployment more wor∣thy my address. He told me moreover, that there was a design on foot, to commit the conduct and firing of one of their su∣perficial Furnaces to me; and the manner of those Furnaces is thus. Three or four Bombes or Fire-balls are shut up close in a Wooden Box, and the Box conveyed as near the Enemies Work as possible; when 'tis as near as you can get, you hide it in the ground, and cover it over with earth. There is nothing in the world better, nor quicker at ruining an Approach: There is no great difficulty to give fire to it, be∣cause it may be done with a Saucidge (as they call them) or a Train, at what di∣stance you please. The great danger is in placing the Box, which though done for the most part in the night, does not make it altogether safe; for the Engineer is obliged to have a special care of his head. Osman Chelebi presented me with one of them, but God knows how joyful∣ly I received it. The Christian Engineers have no sooner invented a new way, either for their For∣tifications or Fire-works, but the Meymars
have present advertisement by some of the Renegado's from the Town. The stories they have told of him in the Camp, have not only discovered but recommended to the estimation of the Turks, the Inventions and Experiments of the Chevalier Verneda, who commands all the Engineers in the Garison; and the address and dexterity of Giovine who is excellent at Counter∣mines. I found it was not true (though I had often been told it) that there were certain well disciplined Troops of Christi∣ans in the Turkish Service. At the begin∣ning of the Siege indeed, the Turks being willing to have wheedled the Greek Nobless that belonged to the Isle of Sfacciottes, did promise them free exercise of their Religion if they would serve against the Venetian; but they were so far from ac∣cepting the Proposal, that to show their detestation, during the first years of the Mahumetan Invasion, they made the Turks sensible of their indignation and courage, by many atchievements against them. Of this Island of Sfacciottes were the famous Colonels, Zymbi, Balzamo, and Calamo, of whom the Caloger at Athens had given so fair a character, and of whose bravery I may perhaps give you a relation here∣after.
Many of the Inhabitants were Ori∣ginally Italians, from whence their Fore-fathers had been invited by the Grecian Emperours into the said Island after the de∣vastation made in it by the Sarazens. I must needs confess I have slept better than I did the twelfth of May at Night; I fancied my self called every moment to go away with my superficial Furnace, and see it do execution: I had no maw to the Service, I found my Conscience not so good proof against the remorses I felt for having served against the Christians al∣ready; and if you will have the truth, perhaps there was some little mixture of fear. But the 13th of May in the morning beyond my expectation, Osman Chelebi having left me three hours before, came back again to me in great haste, and told me he had a request to me that I must not deny him: I thought of nothing but that I had been to go along with him upon service, to enter some Breach, or spring some Mine with him; but he told me I must needs do him the favour to return to Emporion for him, for the Grand
Vizer had given him a very good Ti∣mar in those parts; he himself being un∣able to quit the service, was constrained to desire the courtesie of me to carry his Letters of Provision to his Father in Law, and to press him to take possession of the Timar, by turning out a person who by surprize had got a Grant of it from the Beglerbey of Romulia; My Spi∣rits began immediately to revive: He needed no such fine language to perswade me, I offered my self with the greatest willingness imaginable, not so much as straining a complement so far as to let him know how much pain and trouble it would be to me, to leave him behind: He gave me his dispatches under the hand and seal of the Vizer's Caima∣can. The Caimacan is an Officer consider∣able, has a share in the Civil Affairs, and manages them in part. In all Turkie there are never but three contemporary Cai∣macans, and sometimes but two: One is constantly Resident at Constantinople; an∣other alwayes attends the Grand Signior, and if the Grand Vizer be remote from the Court, he has another with him;
but when he returns to the Sultan's Court, that Caimacan is suspended. The Grand Vizer's Caimacan was like a Se∣cretary of State, or President of the Council, and at that time had the Su∣perintendency of the Army in Candia. A Saique being in ten dayes time to depart from Fraskia, it was resolved I should take that opportunity to pass in∣to Greece, so that as it pleased God, I sate still in the Camp all the 13th of May, not troubled with the fatigues or dangers of the Mattock and Scuttle; and Osman hired some of the Azappes and Greek Pioneers to discharge the Duty that was upon him in respect of his Timar. In the Evening one of the Christians running to us out of the Town, brought News that one of our Bombes falling into the Basion of Saint Andre had killed the Magnifico Cornaro Proveditor General for the Republick of Venice, a Person, who being the very Soul of their Army, gave the Christians the greatest occasion of Consternation that they had hitherto ex∣pressed; and the Turks on the other side, that their Joy might hold some propor∣tion
with the sadness of their Enemy, te∣stified it by their continual Salvo's both from their Cannon and Small-shot. It was above a Twelvemonth since the Vi∣zer had Summoned the Town. Upon this accident he caused a White Flag to be hung out, and sent them a Summons; but the Christians reposing still upon the Con∣duct of the Marquess de Saint Andre, by their great Firing gave him to understand that they were not yet reduced to Terms of Capitulation: Whereupon for the in∣couragement of his Camp, the Vizer cau∣sed it to be spread abroad, that he ex∣pected within three or four dayes an Am∣bassador from Venice to beg Peace upon his knee; adding, that Venice it self was Tumultuous and full of Factions upon the protraction of the War; and that the People being ruined and exhaust with insupportable Taxes, were ready upon the first opportunity to throw them∣selves under the protection of the Turks: This was the great Artifice of their Gene∣ral, and the common discourse and belief of his whole Army. To conclude, I departed from the Camp the 21. of May, with a Pass-port from
the Caimacan, and Letters from Osman Chelebi: About midnight I arrived at Fraskia, where I embarked in the afore∣said Saique, and left the Coast full of Horsemen, who at that time kept bet∣ter and more exact Guards than former∣ly, upon expectation of a descent by the Troops of the League, and the Christian Princes: They had News already that their several Fleets were come out, some from Thoulon, some from Civita-Vecchia, and some from Malta; and the Rene∣gadoes had made the Camp ring with the names of the Generalissimo Vincenzo Ro∣spigliosi, of the Duke de Beaufort, the Duke de Navailles, the Comte de Vivonne, and the Chevalier Acarigi General of the Gallies of Malta; So that 'tis an er∣rour to believe the Turks are ignorant of the very particulars of our Affairs, when it is their interest to know them: The English and Dutch Vessels which are im∣ployed daily in carrying over Men and Ammunition to Canea, do tell them all our designs: 'Tis true, by an effect of their great courage and prudence, the Turks do not seem to regard it; yet they have their constant Intelligences, and make preparations privately against them;
and sometimes 'tis possible they are abu∣sed, as the Christians are: however let their reports or assurances as to this ap∣proaching great action be what it will, God grant there may be a good under∣standing betwixt the Commanders of the several Nations which make up the Suc∣cours expected; If there be, it may please God they may prosper, if otherwise, there is great danger they will miscarry. FINIS.
