H495 27049676 109933
LONDON'S Triumphant Holiday. BEING A brief Relation of the chiefest memo∣rable proceedings, that hath attended his Majesty since his troubles. With a brief acount of that late happy month of May's actions, in Voting, Proclaiming, Landing, and his coming to London, to his and this Nation's Royall and faithfull Parliament; being receiv'd in great triumph. With a short, but true acount of his miraculous escape from Worcester, from that bloodthirsty Tyrant OLIVER CROMWELL, The Murderer of the King his Father, and the Ruiner of three Kingdoms. Written by a Faithfull Subject and Sufferer for his Majesty CHARLS HAMMOND. LONDON, Printed for Francis Grove near the Sarazens-Head on Snow-hill without New-gate. 1660.
LONDON'S Triumphant Holiday. Being a brief Relation, of the chiefest memo∣rable Proceedings that hath attended his Majesty since his Troubles. TRiumphs hath ever been allowed of, and com∣mendable by all Nations under the Sun, not one∣ly of Heathens, but Christians too; so far forth as we do not, in adoreing the Creature, forget the Creator, as the Herodians did. Solomon saith, there is a time for all things, a time to laugh as well as to weep, a time of joy as well as sorrow. But let our rejoycing be in the Lord, who always is working for the best for them that fear him. This great work, or we may, miraculous wonder, May make the very Atheists of these Times see, there is a God that governs, that can turn and overturn in a moment; and in a month bring in a Reformation without blood, which the gods of our own inventions hath been a Reforming (De∣forming we may say) these twenty years, sheading Royall and Innocent Blood to mix with their untempered morter, and with the bones of innocent Martyrs, build the walls of their confused Babel; and wasted this Nations Treasure, to set up a bloody Traitor to Rule over it; who, whilst he was living, (I am afraid) some lov'd and serv'd him more than God, or else they would not have so Deifi'd him on the earth so long after his death; but he was kept so long, or, as I may say, the Popet of him, for they took two-pence a piece in Westminster to see him, where he lay there in his Hospitall Roabs, for it was bestowed on him by the forc'd alms of the
Country, and they thought to have had a gathering for it; for the mony was borrowed for the present of some of his volun∣tary or forc'd friends, which, I believe, they are all the mour∣ners that ever was for him: I believe, he did degenerate so from Nature, that his own wife or children could scarce drop a tear for him; if they did, it was more for fear of losing their Estates or Honor, more than him. But what should I relate more of him, it asks whole volumes to declare his wic∣kedness. I shall, with Gods leave, here relate to you most of the chiefest passages, that hath hapned this last memorable month of May, in relation to his Majesty, our most gra∣cious Soveraign, CHARLS the Second, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, whom God hath most wonderfully brought into his own Birth-right, which hath béen detained from him by bloody Mechanick Rebells. The first day of this month of May, 1660. he was Voted by both Houses of Parliament right Heir to the three King∣doms, it being Tuesday, a remarkable day in this work. The eighth day following, being Tuesday, he was proclaimed with great joy and triumph in London, and the like perform∣ed in most parts in England, to the utmost of their powers, So he was proclaimed, and the Commissioners was with his Majesty in Holland by the next Tuesday, being the fifteenth day, and the Wednesday after, being the 23d. day, his Ma∣jesty set sail for England, and Tuseday following, being the 29th. day, and his Birth-day, he was entertain'd in Lon∣don, with great triumph and joy, which I shall for the more satisfaction of all you that are his faithfull Subjects, give you a brief and true acount of most of the Royalest en∣tertainment he received since his landing. Fryday the 25th. his Majesty Landed at Dover, where his Excellency General Monk fell on his knees to his Maje∣sty, which the King would not suffer, but took him up, im∣bracing him more like a Father then a Subject; his Maje∣sty walking with him towards his Coach, where the Mayor and Aldermen, and Mr. Reding met him; and presents him with a very fair Bible, claspt with gold very Rich; his Ma∣jesty, and the two Dukes; and the Duke of Buckingham, rod in the Coach, till within two or three miles of Canter∣bury, and then the King rid with the two Dukes, the Duke
of York on his right hand, and the Duke of Glocester on the left, with the General, and the Duke of Buckingham, and divers others of the Nobility being come to Canter∣bury, he was presented by the Recorder, in behalf of the City, with a very gallant Speech, and a gold Tankerd, as a Token of their loyalty, the Mayor and Aldermen being present; and the City did expresse abundance of joy. The King staying there till Monday morning, where the King honoured the General with that high honour of Knight of the Garter, the King putting the George about his neck, and the two Dukes put on the Garter; none ever so highly ho∣nour'd in the solemnisement of that Order before, as I ever heard of; and confirms him General of England, Scot∣land, and Ireland, and Master of the Horse, and one of his Prive Councel. Divers others he knighted, as Alder∣man Robinson, as ever a faithful Royalist all these times in London, and Major General Massey, who when he was Governour of Glocester for the Parliament, none of the King's party can say, but he was a gallant Enemy, and had all the Virtues of a Noble Soldier; he was valiant, faithful, and merciful, parallel'd by few of that side, in those times of his Command; and since hath been a faithful Sub∣ject, and sufferer for his King; an example for all faithful Subjects to imitate, to see the Proverb fulfil'd, after suf∣fering comes ease; many more received honour from his Majesty, and I make no doubt, but they deserved it, or else should not have received it. But these two I know, and I love to speak no more then I know. But to go forward to his Majesties march: on Monday, being the 28th day, he set forward betimes to Rochester, where he came about four of the clock in the afternone, where he honoured Colonel Gibbons his house, he made that his Court that night, and the two Dukes with him; after he had a little refresht him∣self, he went to Chattam, to see the Ship cald the Royal Soveraign, where he was entertained by Mr. Pett, with a Banquet: so coming back to Rochester, the next morning, was presented to him a very rich and weighty Bason, and Ewer silver and gilt. About five of the clock he set forwards, the Roads lind with the Militia Forces of Kent, and di∣vers Maids throwing the wayes with flowers and herbs, and
the Towns hanging out white sheets. At Dartford Heath a Declaration was presented to his Majesty for the Officers of the Generals Army, declaring their joy and their faithful∣nesse to his Majesty. At Black-heath there was a general Randevouz, where all the Army and all others were drawn up in order, where his Majesty expressed himself, to the great content of all the Army. There was many bonfires there, but one great one at Black-heath, where the Maidens had got the States Arms in the Country to burn, and dansing round about the fire in white, with Musick and a Morise∣dance, when his Majesty came by, and with a loud voyce through all their Company, cryd out, God save the King; which made his Majesty smile, a thing seldom seen, he al∣waies being solid, having a majestick careful coutenance. So this Royal Army marched to St. George's Fields, where the Lord Mayor and Aldermen attended to receive him, and presented the Sword to him upon his knees, which his Majesty took and returned again. A Tent was set up, and a Banquet of Sweet-meats provided; his Majesty ta∣king a very small Refreshment, marcht on towards Whit∣hall, in this manner as followeth. The Militia Forces made a guard on both sides, from Southwork to the Bridge, all the streets strowed, and the windows hung with Tape∣stry and Cloath, according to their ability, as rich as they could get, and many Garlands hung in the streets, with the best Flowers; and from London-bridge to Temple-bar, on the one side was the Train-bands, and on the other side the Companies of every Hall in their Liveries; raild all the way, and hung with several Colours, according to the Com∣panies Colours of Cloth. The Conduits running with wine. All the rich Streamers on one side of the way, with the Arms of the Companies, and the windows most richly hung with Silk of rich colours, and Tapestry, and Cloth of Aras. This was the manner of the march, first came Major General Brown, leading 300. stately Gallants, all in Cloth of Silver Dublets, stoutly horst and richly acouterd. Then came 200. in Velvet Coats, led by my Lord Mainard; then another Troop, consisting of near 300. in Bust-coats, silver lac'd sleeves, and green Scarfs, these led by that loyal and faithful Subject Alderman Robinson; then another
Troop of about 200. with Red and Silver, very richly moun∣ted, led by my Lord Mordant; after this a Troop Green, eight Footmen, six Trumpets, their Colours Pinck and Silver, the Footmen Green and Silver, consisting of about 150. another consisting of 250. Gray and Blew Liveries; 30. Footmen, silk and silver lace, the Colours Sky and Sil∣ver; led as I was told, by my Lord of Oxford; then 300. led by my Lord of Cleveland, most Noble Men, Knights, and Esquires, the Coulours Blew fring'd with Gold; then 100. more Black fring'd with Gold. Then came several very rich Troops, commanded by Viscount Harford, consi∣sting of about 400. Several other commanded by Knights: the Body that came before his Majesty, of Nobility and Gen∣try, with the Citizens, and their servants, well mounted behind in good order, and well acouterd in habit, Gentle∣mens Fellows I believe, consisting of about 3000. and up∣wards, with Trumpets sounding, but their Musick was drowned with the Shouts and Voyce of the People for joy; yet they were not satisfied with this most rare Show in the bravery, wished them passed, their desires all longing to see him, whom they had so long lookt for, his Majesty: but af∣ter this rich Show of the Country Galantry, now comes the Citie's Pomp, in a most stately civil manner. Fist, came a Noyse of Trumpets, two with the Kings Arms in their Coats, and a Kettle-drum; then the Shrief's men about fourscore, in new red Cloaks with silver lace; after them about 400. Citizens of several Companies, black Velvet Coats, with gold Chains about their necks; some with rich Pearl Chains, of great value; every one his Page with his Livery, most richly mounted; after these came a part of the true Mourners of Zion, being Ministers that hath been true Subjects and sufferers, Doctor Wild, Doctor Warmstree, and about ten more, such as had indured to the end; no time∣servers, nor never changd their Gowns for Cloaks, these rid in heart (I believe) rejoycing in the Lord, to see the day of their Redemption here, from those that would have stopt their mouths, if the Lord had not frustrated their designs; and those Prayers that hath been counted Popery by some, I believe the Lord hath heard such Men as these, that hath been term'd Baal Priests, by the sons of Belial, hath pro∣ved
as Moseses to stand in the gap, and by Prayer hath stopt Gods Iudgments, which we fully have deserv'd for our Re∣bellion, Sacriledge, and Murder; after these came his Majestie's Life-gard, with Trumpet; and a Kettle-drum, commanded by my Lord Gerard, led in Divisions by Sr. Gilber Gerard, Colonel Pragues, and two Cornish Gentlemen, Sir Chichester Wreay, and Major Rosecaron; after them the City Marshal, his Footmen in green, trim'd with Crimson and White; then the City Waits; then the two Shriefs, and all the Aldermen in their Scarlet Gowns, their Foot-men lac'd with silk and gold; then came the He∣ralds, and two rich Maces, in rich Coats, and the chief No∣bility and Privy Councel, all riding brave; before his Ma∣jesty rid the Lord Mayor, bearing the Sword; the Lord General, and the Duke of Buckingham, all bare-headed; Then you might behold the three Pearls, of this Nation, his Majesty, and the two Dukes, the Duke of York on his right hand, and the Duke of Glocester on the left. Three Pearls they may be rightly styl'd, and I hope they will prove of inestimable value to these Nations; three such Princes, no Kingdom besides ours can parallel in the World for Bro∣thers: His Majesty endewed with such Virtues, as the worst of his enemies cannot say, but they are wonderful to behold, in a Prince that hath been so much constrain'd to see the susperstitious and follies of many strange Nations, and hath never been led away by them, being much indued with piety and sobriety, mercy and humility; as this day of Triumph you could have beheld no outward glory in habit, he riding in a plain Sasnit suit, his head onely adorn'd with certain Falds or Plumes of red and white Feather in his hat, the Duke of York with red and yellow, the Duke of Glocester was sprinckled with several Colours, many of the Noble Mens servants, were in richer habit then these three Princes, but I believe they were counted more beautiful in the eyes of the people, then all that passed before, they be∣ing so ravished with joy, some Ladies drapt their fans and hancerchiefs out of the windows, their sence of seeing being so much fild, it berest them of all other sences for the present, which made the King smile; he seeing a fan drop out of a Ladies hand in Pauls Church-yard, as she was shaking it
about. In the Strand a many Ladies had got Rapiers in their hands, and flourisht them out of the windows, as mean∣ing that now they would fight for him rather than lose him now they had him. Many other passages which I saw not nor heard not, which I believe did revive his Majesty's heart, to sée his Subjects joy. Also after his Majesty was passed, came my Lord of Northamton, with a gallant Party of Horse, of all Gentry, a bout 300. or more, all richly clad and mounted; after them came thrée Regiments of the Gene∣rals Horse, all arm'd cap a pe, and though they were not richly acouter'd, yet 'twas as gallant a sight to sée for a Sol∣dier as the other, and a better sight in service. That silver Van, flanckt with this Iron Rear, Three Princes leads, no Nation we need fear: Renouned George, thy Fame on earth will never dye, For under God, thou gavest this Kingdom's liberty. His Majesty coming to Temple-bar, all along to White∣hall the Militia Forces garded on both sides, and Sr. Iohn Stowell, that great sufferer for his Majesty met him, with divers Officers of the Kings Army, being a gallant Party. So the King coming to White-hall, was entertaind by the House of Lords and Commons, both presented him with Spéeches by the Speakers, declaring their joy for his so hap∣py arrival, in power and safety, to the thrée Kingdoms great comfort, which now they fear'd not will quickly end in peace and prosperity, to these almost-ruined Nations, for want of his presence. The day being ended, for it was seven of the cloch ere his Majesty came to White-hall; when he was safe, the Pieces went off small and great, from the Tower, and all along the City, and not a Piece was fir'd or to be fir'd be∣fore night. Such Bonfires we made, there was never the like in England; one at the Banck-side six or seven stories high, and in Westminster, was the States Arms and the Effigies of Crumwell hung up for all to behold, with torches, and at last burnt in the fire, with great hollowing and houp∣ing, for joy they were rid of this idol, that England had so much worshipt. I shall now give you a short but true acount, of the
Sufferings of this Prince before he came to his Kingdom. At his Fathers death, he was at his Sisters Court the Prin∣cesse of Orange, whereas the news came unexpected, it came the harder; for he thought to have heard a fair end of the Treaty, and his Father setled: He studied then which way to gain his Birth-right; many wayes he and his friends try∣ed, but all came to no effect; but the news still that fil'd his sorrowful ears, was just so as it came to Ioe, one after ano∣ther; the murdering and destroying of his Loyal Subjects the Scots, when they were treating with him to make him King, they thought to disable him of his best friends, that they might force him to what they pleasd to have. I leave the World to judge of their innocency, as they pretend from the first be∣ginning of these times: I pray God make their children more Loyal then the fathers, and that I hope they can take no exceptions at; pray God the selling of the King, and the murdering of Montrose, be not laid to the charge of the souls of the chief actors of it: indeed they did what they could, some of them to settle him, and did crown him, but I be∣lieve, had it not been self-ends, God would have blest their designs the better at Worcester, where his Majesty was mi∣raculously deliverd; where his horse was twice shot under him, and could scarce be invited to leave the Field, when 'twas so near lost, the Highlanders fighting it out very nobly, but the Scotch Horse but cowardly; his Majestie got away to a house, had his hair cut off with a knife by my Lord Wil∣mot, then takes him to a Wood near Wolverhampton, and in a hollow Oke, and staid there three dayes; afterwards brought to Mistrisse Lanes, by my Lord Wilmot, and by her as her Serving-man, was convai'd to Bristol, no body but Mr. Lasted, her Father in Law knew him, where he was fain to wind up the Iack, he telling the maid he was a Naylour's son, which causd his Majesty to smile, the wench gave him such course compliments, which he was very glad to take: afterwards describd by a Butler, but yet a faithful servant to him, and through many difficulties and dangers, at last got over sea to France, where he declares his sad misfortune, they bewailing of him, yet joyful he had scapt himself, yet this joy did not long continue in the Court of France; but this bloody Oliver never left, till he had hunted him thence,
and all the Family, by making a Peace with France, Ma∣zerein the Cardinal being this Traitors friend, all the time no great honour he'le gain by it now, but let him give more testimony, he must leave France; then to Holand, to his sister, and staid a while there; then to Germany, where the Lord still raised Princes to his friends, and at last, that ever to be loved by this Nation, and that freely, the King of Spain nobly entertains him, and the Duke of York, who had been a great enemy to him when he served the King of France, which will be for the shame of France, and honour of Spain for ever: there this wicked Oliver left not, but like the Devil, never left any means un-attempted to destroy him, as then he had imploy'd one Captain Maning, who was near the King, who discoverd all things that was done there to his Master here; thus the devil, and man, did work to destroy him and this Nation; but he had too honour∣able a death, for it so inflam'd his Majesties true servants, to hear of such a false Traitor amongst them, that he was shot by one of them before he enterd the Prison: many more most strang and wonderful tryals of patience was there in his travels and sorrowful pilgrimages, before he attain'd to that happy Restoration, which God hath now blest him and us with; whom God still preserve, whom I hope God will by his providence, as he hath done hitherto, answer all the prayers of him and his friends, for him as remarkable. His Father was murderd on the 30. of Ianuary, it faling on a Tuseday, and ever since he hath kept Tuseday as a fast, in memory thereof; besides, it hath been known, many pri∣vate Devotions, which God hath answerd: it was on a Tuseday he was voted by the two Houses of Parliament, King, and proclaimed King on a Tuseday, and came to White-hall on a Tuseday; therefore it may incourage all Christians to prayer, for by fervent prayer God answers many times by the same means, and the same time; and God you see hath answered his prayers: but how many more Fasts and prayers hath here been set up, and Thanksgivings, for shedding of blood, but what can there be expected from bloodthirsty and cruel men but hipocrisy, which their best Actions was no other.
The brighter still the Sun doth shine, Upon a dunghill with her beams divin, The more base sents and stinking vapours rise: I'le leav't to you the verse to paralise. Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, Eccles. 10.17. a lesson very fit and observal for these times; it was taught by him whom none can deny, but he was the wealthiest and the wisest Prince and Preacher that ever was before Christ, or since Christ; and none but Christ himself, who was both King, Priest, and Prophet, had that powerful operation, and knowledge as he had; and indeed it must needs be for his wisdom from above, read but Ec∣clesiastes and his Proverbs, and you shall see and confesse, that they must needs come from the Spirit of God though from his mouth delivered, and we shall find all true in them; and for this one place which I have quoted by woful experi∣ence, this our Land can witnesse for truth, for since this Land hath been governed by them, who by other actions could not, &c. did not shew that ever they were the sons of Gentry, much lesse of Nobility; and these have been the Heads and Governours of our poor distressed, and almost ru∣ined Kingdoms these many years, who maintaind their Pre∣rogatives by perjury, oppression, sacrilidge, and murder; who did so far deoperate from being nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers of Gods Church and people, who hath pro∣mised that Kings and Queens shall be, Isa. 49.23. they have not onely murdered their Father, that religious pious Prince, of blessed memory CHARLS the first, but they have as much as in them lay, like Vipers, eat out the Bow∣els of their Mother the Church, and not satisfied with that, but were about to sacrifice her to the Idols of their own In∣ventions, and so to destroy her Root and Branch. Not be∣ing contented with what they had got, Kings, Queens, Bi∣shops, Deans, and Chapters Lands, but did not stick to say openly, if they prevailed, the Church and Priest too should suffer, as in derision they call them, which they know not that they deride Christ himself in that title, nay these that cry up so for Iesus Christ, hated the office and dignity of him, who takes the title of King, Priest, and Prophet;
and truely I believe, that they have been so much against Papists in their mouths, terming these decent Ordinances of God, that was maintaind in the Church, to be Popery, it will be proved, and is partly known, and found by some, that Iesuites have been the chief ringleaders of them; for those that have been seduced by them, I hartily desire of God that he would make them see the errors of their wayes, by his wonderful works of Providence, which he hath already done in this unheard of Reformation, which he hath brough in with his Word, and not with the Sword, by the power of his Spirit, and not by the arm of flesh, by turning the hearts of Subjects to their Soveraign, to submit to him, and not to resist him. God is a God of peace, scatter thou the people that delight in war, saith David, Psal. 68. he was a man after Gods own heart, and surely he would not prary so, but that he knew God did not delight in those that thirsted after blood; if David was startel'd and toucht in his heart, for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, who sought his life, and yet he was annointed King too, saying, the Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my Master, the Lords Annointed to lay my hand upon him, 1 Sam. chap. 23. nor you never read: that he ever sufferd his souldiers either to do him or his servants wrong, but to fly and defend themselves. O then, with what impudence could they justifie that most horid unheard of barbarism Murder, that was committed upon the person of the late King, whose hearts never struck them for cutting off his head, a deed that they can show no president for since the Creation of the World, neither by the Laws of God nor the Laws of any Land; which gilt they would have laid upon the whole Nation, saying, they were chosen by them; but the Lord that knows the hearts of all men, knows it was odious in the eyes of most of the Na∣tion, as it is seen at this day; for upon the Prayers and Cryes of his Church and People, hath prevail'd, and now he is making inquisition for the innocent blood of that Royal Martyr, and the rest of his layall Subjects, that hath sufferd for him. Where can they fly now from the face of an angry God; there is no way for them, but to submit themselves to the mercy of God and the King, for there is no escaping for them, they are so odious in the eyes of all, that their very
intimate Friends will not hide them, no, nor will take pi∣ty on them; no Land-man will secure them, no Sea-man will convey them over Sea; if they do, no Nation will trust them, for they that have been so unnatural to their own Country, and such Rebels and Traytors to their own Prince, to murder him; the greatest Tyrant in the World will hate them, and if they had acted it for him, he would say as Richard the third said to Banester, when he be∣trayed his Master, he loved the Treason, but he hated the Traytor; and if any Prince suffer them to passe through their Country, they must take it as a greater favour than they deserve. But stay, my Subject tells me I am about the blessednesse of a Land, whose King is the Son of Nobles. O happy Land have we, whose King is the Son of a Noble, Pious, and Religious Prince, as ever sway'd the Scepter since the Conquest, and this our most dread Soveraigne CHARLS the second, whom God grant long to reign over us. I believe the worst of his Enemies that ever heard him and saw him in all his banishment, in the worst of times all say, but he deserves the love both of God and Man, which the Lord hath shown by his most wonderful Restoration to his Crown and Dignity, which all his loyal Subjects did believe would be, as I believe those that knows me, hath heard me say as much in the worst of times, yet to be wrought so peaceably, so powerfully, and so suddenly, 'tis more then ever could be imagined, that we must all say with the Apostle, St. Paul in the 11. of the Romans, vers. 33. O the deepnesse and the riches both of the wisdom and know∣ledge of God, how unsearchable are his Iudgements, and his wayes past finding out: but Solomon saith, Proverbs 16.7. When a mans wayes please the Lord, he maketh his very enemies to be at peace with him; as I desire the worst of his enemies to consider on, (if the Lord hath not yet recon∣ciled their hearts to him), this one place of Scripture, com∣paring it with the actions and transactions of our times, we must confesse that he is our David of God, and that his wayes hath pleased him; for he hath made us all which were his enemies, to be at peace with him. I hope some may per∣haps say, that he had those here that never was enemies to
him; I am afraid, if they seriously look into their own con∣sciences, they shall find, their sins with the rest, fil'd up the Measure, that made God pour out his wrath upon us, and so took away so good a Prince from us, which we were not worthy of: and I shall desire all, and especially those that were alwaies faithful to his Father and him, and never none of times-changelings, that now the Lord hath done so merci∣fully for us, that we may walk answerable to that mery in our conversion from all manner of wickednesse, that his Par∣ty hath been branded with, and especially these two sins, which they have been most addicted to, Oaths and Drunken∣nesse; I believe that many have sworn and drunk healths to him, that never either praid or fought for him; and let me tell them, whosoever they be, I know the King's Majesty will be so far from owning them to be his Friends, that he will rank them with the worst of his Enemies. If we will be counted the Kings Party, or Caveliers, as they have cal∣led us, and that was the worst they could call us, let us strive to imitate him in all his Virtues, which I believe and am assured, by the just and true Reports, of those that have known him, and seen most of his actions since the time of his Banishment; that they say, and declare, he is indued with all Virtues fit for a Prince, a cherisher of Virtue and a ha∣ter of Vics; and for his mercy, let those that were the worst of his Enemies declare it; for I know no other will be look'd for from me but to commend him, who under God I desire alwaies may command me. I will be bref with you, Frst, You that did reckon your selves his friends, send up to Hea∣ven as many prayers for him as you have drunk his healths on Earth to him: and in the next, Do as you would be done by, and remember that Petition in the Lords Prayer, For∣give us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse a∣gainst us; and seek no reveng, but remember, vengance is mine and I will repay, saith the Lord: and as you have professed your selves Christians, and God hath given you that faith and patience, to hold it out to the end, and now hath given you your desire, let the World see, that as we hated the Hypocrisie and Tiranny, of our worse than Egyptian Task-masters, so we hate the thoughts of them who alwaies said, oft we had had the best of it, how well we should abide,
and as they had a faith without works, let us show our faith by our works, and let our fruits of the Spirit be Scripture proof with love joy and peace as well as long-suffering; which when we have performed that, let us perform the rest, or else we shall show our selves and prove our selves to be fathers of the falce spirits of these times, or those falce lights which hath run up and down this Land, like those lights that are seen in the night, that leads poor Travellers out of the way, till it brings them in one filthy quagmire or other, and then it leaves them; therefore as God hath kept us hitherto from following those false lights: Let our lights so shine before men, that they seeing our good works may glori∣fie our Father which is in Heaven: And let us walk wor∣thy of this his great mercy, of restoring us our lawful King, and our Councellors as at the beginning; and I hope the Lord hath a blessing for this Land, in that he hath given us a King, the son of a King to rule over us, whom God preserve with a long, prosperous, and peaceable reign, and blesse all his Councils from the highest to the lowest, with wisdom and courage, like Iethro's Magistrates, fearing God, dealing truly, hating covetousnesse: so ending with that Text, in the 24. of the Proverbs the 21, and 22. verses, My son fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; for their calamity shall rise sud∣denly, and who knoweth the ruine of them both? Thus I have shewed you the truth as much as in me ly∣eth, of his Majestyes happy arival and entertainment into London, which I am not able to expresse, nor is not to be set forth with pen in a small Volum; for I believe never was any Prince in the World entertaind with more Ioy and Triumph than he was, all the way from Dover to White∣hall, if the inward Love of their hearts were agreeable to their expressions and ontward habit, I believe the World could not parallel more loyal Subjects. To them that were not so, I leave them to consider the Motto of the Garter, Evil to them that evil thinks. Convert O Lord, or else confound all those, That are thine, the King and CHARLS's foes. Exsurgat Deus, dissipentur inimici.
