i988-variant 16170571 104972
C2 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the Lord Lieutenant and Council. ORMONDE. WHEREAS, We have by the Blessing of God discovered and dis∣appointed a Traiterous Conspiracy for surprizing and taking His Majesties Castle of Dublin, His Majesties principal Fort in this His Kingdom) which the said Conspirators had designed to do on the 21th. Day of this present Moneth of May, And whereas divers of the Conspirators are apprehended and com∣mitted to Prison, where they still remain; And whereas divers others of the said Conspirators (being conscious to themselves of their own Guilts) have found means to escape, and are not as yet apprehended, namely, Thomas Blood, late of Sarny near Dun∣boine, in the County of Meath, Colonel Daniel Abbot, Major Abel Warren, Andrew Mac Cormock, a pretended Minister, lately of Magherawly, in the County of Down, Robert Chambers, a pretended Minister, Colonel Gilbert Carr, commonly called Gibby Carr, John Chamberlin late of Dublin Brewer, John Fooke late of Atherdee in the County of Lowth Esquire, Lieutenant John Ruxton late of the same, Lieutenant De la Rock, Major Henry Jones, late of Stelorgan, in the County of Dublin, Major Alexander Staples late of Londonderry, Lieutenant Colonel William Moore, who was lately Disbanded, and had been formerly Garrisoned at Gallway, and afterwards at Athlone. We therefore do by this Proclamation in His Majesties name strictly charge and command all and every the said forenamed Persons, that within eight and forty hours after the publish∣ing of this Proclamation, within the County where such Person or Persons shall then be, he and they do render his and their persons to Us, the Lord Lieutenant, or to one of His Majesties Privy Council in this Kingdom, or to one of His Majesties Iustices of Peace next adjoyning to the place or places where such person or persons now are, or then shall be, wherein if they or any of them shall fail, We do hereby Declare and publish them and every of them to failing, to be Rebells and Traitors against His Majesty, His Crown and Dignity, and to be accordingly prosecuted by all His Majesties good Subjects. And we do hereby publish and declare that all and every Person and Persons that shall relieve or con∣ceal any of the said forenamed Persons at any time after the publishing of this Proclamati∣on as aforesaid, that they also shall be proceeded against as Relievers and Abettors of Re∣bells and Traitors, And we require all His Majesties Officers and Loving Subjects to endeavour the Apprehension of all and every the said forenamed Persons. And we do here∣by declare that any person or persons that shall apprehend the said Thomas Blood, Major Abel Warren, Andrew Mac Cormock, Robert Chambers, Colonel Gilbert Carr, commonly called Gibby Carr, or any of them, and bring him or them, or cause him or them to be brought to the High Sheriff of the County, wherein he or they shall be apprehended at, by or before the 24th. day of June next shall have as a reward for the said Service, the sum of One hundred pounds for every of the said last named persons, so to be apprehended and brought in as a∣foresaid by or before the said 24th. day of June next. Given at His Majesties Castle of Dublin the 23th. of May. 1663. GOD Save the KING. Mau. Eustace, Cane. Drogheda, Mount-Alexander, Anglesey, Massereene, Dungannon, W. Caulfield, R. Coote, Santry, Hen. Tichborne, Ja. Donelan, Jo. Bysse, J. Temple, Paul Davis, Tho. Pigot. DƲBLIN, Printed by John Crooke, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer next door to the Bear and Ragged-Staffe in Castle-street.. 1663.
