J360 12566202 63342
By the King, A PROCLAMATION. For the Speedy Calling of  PARLIAMENT. JAMES R. WE have thought fit, as the best and most Proper means to Establish a lastin Peace in this Our Kingdom, o call a Parliament, and have therefore O∣dered Our Chancellor to cause rites to be Issued forth for Summoning  Parliament to meet at Westminter, upon the Fifteenth day of January next en∣suing the date of this Our Royal Proclamation. And that nothing may b wanting on Our part towards the freedom of Elections, as We have already Restored all Cities, Towns Corporate, and Burroughs throughout Our Kingdom, to their ancient Charters, Rights and Priviledges; So We Command and Require all Per∣sons whatsoever, that they presume not by Menace, or any other undue means, to influence Elections or procure the Vote of any Elector. And we do also strictly requi and Com∣mand all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Officers to whom the Execution or Re∣turn of any Writ, Summons, Warrant, or Precept for Members to the ensuing Parlia∣ment shall belong, that they cause such Writ, Summons, Warrant and Precept to be duly Published and Executed, and Returns thereupon to be fairly made according to the true Merits of such Elections. And for the Security of all Persons both in their Elections and Service in Parliament, We do hereby Publish and Declare, That all Our Subjects shall have free liberty to Elect, and all Our Peers, and such as shall be Elected Members of Our House of Commons, shall have full Liberty and Freedom to Serve ad Sit in Parliament, notwithstanding they have taken up Arms, or committed any Act of Hostility, or been any way Aiding or Assisting therein. And for the better Assurance hereof, We have Graciously Directed a General Par∣don to all Our Subjects to be forthwith prepared to pass Our Great Seal. And for the Reconciling all publick Breaches, and Obliterating the very Memory of all past Miscarriages, We do hereby Exhort, and kindly Admonish all Our Subjects, to dispose themselves to Elect such persons for their Representatives in Parliament, as may not be By assed by Prejudice or Passion, but Qualified with Parts, Experience and Prudence proper for this Conjuncture, and agreeable to the Ends and Purposes of this Our Gracious Pro∣clamation. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 30th day of November, 1688. In the fourth Year of Our Reign. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Re-Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred  Majesty: Anno DOM. 1688.
