J316 12889163 95070
royal coat of arms JAMES R. JAMES the Seventh by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all and sundry Our good Subjects whom these presents do or may concern, Greeting. Whereas by the decease of Our most dear and most entirely beloved Brother King Charles the Second of ever blessed Memory, the Parlia∣ment of Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, which was current before that time, is now actually dissolved. And seeing upon divers weighty Considerations, of great Importance to our Service, and to the Peace and Tranquillity of that Our Ancient Kingdom, We have thought fit to call a Parliament to meet at our City of Edinburgh upon the Ninth day of April next ensuing the date of these Presents. We do therefore Require and Command all Arch-Bishops, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, Lords, and Offi∣cers of State of Our said Ancient Kingdom to be present and attend that Dyer. And We do also Require and Command all our Sheriffs in the several Shires, and their Deputs forth∣with to call and conveene all the Freeholders in the respective Shires, to the end that according to the Laws and Acts, of Parliament, Elections may be made of sit Persons to be Commissio∣ners for this Parliament. And We do likewise Require and Command Our Royal Burrows to make choice of Commissioners accordingly; and them and all Persons having Interest, to attend this Our Parliament, under the Pains contained in our Laws made thereanet. And to the effect all Our good Subjects may have notice of this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, We do hereby Command Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers, Purse∣vants, and Messengers at Arms, to make timeous Proclamation of these Presents at the Mer∣cat-Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burrows of the several Shires of that Our Kingdom. Given at Our Court at VVhite-hall the Sixteenth of February 1685. And of Our Reign the first Year. By His Majesties Command, MORRAY. EDINBƲRGH, the 20 of February 1685. ORdered by His Majesties Privy Council, that His Majesties said Proclamation be forthwith Published at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and all other places needful, with all the usual and accustomed Solemni∣ties. And Printed. WILL PATERSON, Clericus Secreti Concilij GOD save the KING Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, and Reprinted at London for L. Curtiss, near Fleet-bridge. 1685.
