j478 10750100 45648
These Three Books of the same Author Mr. James Janeway, are Printed for, and Sold by Dor∣man Newman. HEaven upon Earth, or the best friend in the worst of times; The third Edition enlarged, Price 2 s. 6 d. Death unstung, a Sermon Preacht at the Funeral of Thomas Mousley an Apothecary: With a brief Narra∣tive of his Life and Death: also the manner of Gods dealings with Him, before and after his Conver∣sion: Drawn up by his own hand; Price 1 s. A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Thomas Savage, Price 4 d.
A TOKEN FOR CHILDREN: BEING An Exact Account of the Conver∣sion, Holy and Exemplary Lives, and Joyful Deaths, of several young Children. By James Janeway, Minister of the Gospel. — Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the Kingdom of God: Mark 10.14. LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms at the Corner of Grocers Alley in the Poul∣trey, 1676.
To all Parents, School-ma∣sters and School-Mistresses, or any that have any hand in the Education of Children. Dear Friends, I Have oft thought that Christ speaks to you, as Pharaoh's Daughter did to Moses's Mother; Take this Child and Nurse it for me. O Sirs, consider what a pre∣cious Jewel is committed to your charge, what an advantage you have to shew your love to Christ, to stock the next Generation with Noble Plants, and what a joyful account you may make, if you be faithful: Remember, Souls, Christ, and Grace, cannot be over-valued. I confess you have some disadvan∣tages, but let that only excite your
diligence; the Salvation of Souls, the commendation of your Master, the greatness of your reward, and everlasting glory, will pay for all. Remember the Devil is at work hard, wicked ones are industrious, and a corrupt nature is a rugged knotty piece to hew; but be not discouraged, I am almost as much afraid of your laziness and unfaith∣fulness, as any thing. Do but fall to work lustily, and who knows but that rough stone may prove a Pil∣lar in the Temple of God? In the Name of the living God, as you will answer in shortly at his Bar, I command you to be faithful in Instructing and Catechizing your young ones; If you think I am too peremptory, I pray read the com∣mand from my Master himself, Deut. 6.7. Is not the duty clear? and dare you neglect so direct a Com∣mand? Are the Souls of your Chil∣dren of no value? Are you willing
that they should be Brands of Hell? Are you indifferent whether they be Damned or Saved? shall the Devil run away with them without controul? Will not you use your utmost endeavour to deliver them from the wrath to come? you see that they are not Subjects uncapa∣ble of the Grace of God; what∣ever you think of them, Christ doth not slight them; they are not too little to dye, they are not too little to go to Hell, they are not too little to serve their great Ma∣ster, too little to go to Heaven; For of such is the Kingdom of God: And will not a possibility of their Conversion and Salvation, put you upon the greatest diligence to teach them? Or are Christ, and Heaven, and Salvation, small things with you? If they be, then indeed I have done with you: but if they be not, I beseech you lay about you with all your might; the Devil
knows your time is going apace, it will shortly be too late. O therefore what you do, do quickly; and do it, I say, with all your might; O pray, pray, pray, and live holily before them, and take some time daily to speak a little to your Children, one by one, about their miserable conditi∣on by Nature; I knew a Child that was converted by this sen∣tence, from a godly School-mistress in the Country, Every Mothers Child of you are by Nature Chil∣dren of wrath. Put your Children upon Learning their Catechism, and the Scriptures, and getting to pray and weep by themselves after Christ: take heed of their compa∣ny; take heed of pardoning a lye; take heed of letting them mispend the Sabbath; put them, I beseech you, upon imitating these sweet Children; let them Read this Book over an hundred times, and observe
how they are affected, and ask them what they think of those Children, and whether they would not be such? and follow what you do with earnest cries to God, and be in travel to see Christ formed in their Souls. I have prayed for you, I have oft prayed for your Children, and I love them dearly; and I have prayed over these papers, that God would strike in with them, and make them effectual to the good of their Souls. Incourage your Chil∣dren to read this Book, and lead them to improve it. What is pre∣sented, is faithfully taken from ex∣perienced solid Christians, some of them no way related to the Children, who themselves were Eye and Ear-witnesses of God's works of Wonder; or from my own knowledg, or from Reverend godly Ministers, and from Persons that are of unspotted reputation for Holiness, Integrity and Wis∣dom;
and several passages are taken verbatim in writing from their dy∣ing Lips. I may add many other excellent Examples, if I have any encouragement in this Piece. That the young generation may be far more excellent than this, is the Prayer of one that dearly loves little Children. James Janeway.
A PREFACE: Containing DIRECTIONS TO CHILDREN. YOƲ may now hear (my dear Lambs) what other good Children have done, and remember how they wept and prayed by themselves; how ear∣nestly they cryed out for an interest in the Lord Jesus Christ: May you not read how dutiful they were to their Parents? How diligent at their
Books? how ready to learn the Scrip∣ture, and their Catechisms? Can you forget what Questions they were wont to ask? How much they feared a lye, how much they abhorred naugh∣ty company, how holy they lived, how dearly they were loved, how joyfully they died? But tell me, my dear Children, and tell me truly, Do you do as these Chil∣dren did? Did you ever see your mi∣serable state by Nature? Did you ever get by your self and weep for sin, and pray for grace and pardon? Did you ever go to your Father and Mo∣ther, or Master, or Mistress, and beg of them to pity you, and pray for you, and to teach you what you shall do to be saved, what you shall do to get Christ, Heaven and Glory? Dost thou love to be taught good things? Come tell me truly, my dear Child; for I would fain do what I can possibly to keep thee from falling into everlast∣ing Fire. I would fain have you one of those little ones, which Christ will
take into his Arms and bless: How dost thou spend thy time? is it in play and Idleness, and with wicked Chil∣dren? Dare you take Gods Name in vain, or swear, or tell a lie? Dare you do any thing which your Parents forbid you, and neglect to do what they command you? Do you dare to run up and down upon the Lords day? or do you keep in to read your book, and to learn what your good Parents com∣mand you? What do you say, Child? Which of these two sorts are you of? Let me talk a little with you, and ask you a few Questions. 1. Were not these Children sweet Children, which feared God, and were dutiful to their Parents? Did not their Fathers and Mothers, and every body that fears God, love them, and praise them? What do you think is become of them, now they are dead and gone? Why, they are gone to Heaven, and are singing Hallelujahs with the An∣gels: They see glorious things, and having nothing but joy and pleasure,
they shall never sin no more, they shall never be beat any more, they shall ne∣ver be sick, or in pain any more. 2. And would not you have your Fathers love; your Mothers Commen∣dation, your Masters good word? Would not you have God and Christ love you? And would you not fain go to Heaven when you die? And live with your godly Parents in Glory, and be happy for ever? 3. Whither do you think those Children go, when they dye, that will not do what they are bid, but play the Truant, and Lye, and speak naughty words, and break the Sabbath? Whi∣ther do such Children go, do you think? Why, I will tell you, they which Lye, must go to their Father the Devil into everlasting burning; they which never pray, God will pour out his wrath upon them; and when they beg and pray in Hell Fire, God will not for∣give them, but there they must lye for ever. 4. And are you willing to go to
Hell to be burned with the Devil and his Angels? Would you be in the same condition with naughty Chilren? O Hell is a terrible place, that's worse a thousand times than whipping; Gods anger is worse than your Fathers an∣ger; and are you willing to anger God? O Child, this is most certainly true, that all that be wicked, and die so, must be turned into Hell; and if any be once there, there is no coming out again. 5. Would you not do any thing in the World rather than be thrown into Hell Fire? would you not do any thing in the World to get Christ, and grace and glory? 6. Well now, what will you do? will you read this book a little, because your good Mother will make you do it, and because it is a little new Book, but as soon as ever you have done, run away to play, and never think of it? 7. How art thou now affected, poor Child, in the Reading of this Book? Have you shed ever a tear since you
begun reading? Have you been by your self upon your knees, and beg∣ging that God would make you like these blessed Children? or are you as you use to be, as careless, and foolish and disobedient, and wicked as ever? 8. Did you never hear of a little Child that died? and if other Children die, why may not you be sick and die? and what will you do then, Child, if you should have no grace in your heart, and be found like other naughty children? 9. How do you know but that you may be the next Child that may die? and where are you then, if you be not God 's Child? 10. Wilt thou tarry any longer, my dear Child, before thou run into thy chamber, and beg of God to give thee a Christ for thy Soul, that thou mayest not be undone for ever? Wilt thou get presently into a corner to weep and pray? Methinks I see that pretty Lamb begin to weep, and thinks of getting by himself, and will
as well as he can cry unto the Lord, to make him one of these little ones that go into the Kingdom of Heaven; Me∣thinks there stands a sweet Child, and there another, that are resolved for Christ and for Heaven: Methinks that little Boy looks as if he had a mind to learn good things. Methinks I hear one say, well, I will never tell a lye more, I will never keep any naughty Boy company more, they will teach me to swear, and they will speak naughty words, they do not love God. I'le learn my Catechism, and get my Mother to teach me to pray, and I will go to weep and cry to Christ, and will not be quiet till the Lord hath given me Grace. O that's my brave Child indeed! 11. But will you not quickly for∣get your promise? are you resolved by the strength of Christ to be a good child? Are you indeed? nay, but are you indeed? Consider: dear child,
God calls you to remember your Crea∣tor in the dayes of your Youth; and he takes it kindly when little ones come to him, and he loves them dearly; and godly people, especially Parents, and Masters and Mistresses, they have no greater joy, than to see their Children walking in the way of truth. Now tell me, my pretty dear Child, What will you do? shall I make you a Book? Shall I pray for you, and en∣treat you? Shall your Good Mother weep over you? And will not you make us all glad, by your turning quickly to the Lord? Shall Christ tell you that he will love you? And will not you love him? Will you strive to be like these Children? I am per∣swaded, that God intends to do good to the Souls of some little Chidren by these Papers, because he hath laid it so much upon my heart to pray for them, and over these Papers, and thorow mercy I have already experi∣enced, that something of this nature hath not been in vain: I shall give a
word of direction, and so leave you. 1. Take heed of what you know is naught; as lying, O that is a grie∣vous fault indeed; and naughty words, and taking the Lords name in vain, and playing upon the Lords Day, and keeping bad company, and playing with ungodly Children: But, if you do go to School with such, tell them that God will not love them, but that the Devil will have them, if they continue to be so naught. 2. Do what your Father and Mo∣ther bids you, chearfully; and take heed of doing any thing that they for∣bid you. 3. Be diligent in reading the Scrip∣ture, and learning your Catechism; and what you do not understand, to be sure ask the meaning of. 4. Think a little sometimes by your self about God and Heaven, and your Soul, and where you shall go when you die, and what Christ came into the world for. 5. And if you have no great mind
to do thus, but had rather be at play, then think what is it that makes me that I do not care for good thinks; is this like one of Gods dear Children? I am afraid I am none of God's Child, I feel I do not love to come to Him: O, what shall I do? Either I must be Gods Child or the Devils; O, what shall I do? I would not be the Devils Child for any thing in the world. 6. Then go to your Father or Mo∣ther, or some good body, and ask them what thou shalt do to be Gods Child; and tell them that thou art afraid, and that thou canst not be contented, till thou hast got the love of God. 7. Get by thy self, into the Cham∣ber or Garret, and fall upon thy knees, and weep and mourn, and tell Christ, thou art afraid that he doth not love thee, but thou would fain have his love; beg of him to give thee his Grace and pardon for thy sins, and that he would make thee his Child: Tell God thou dost not care who don't love thee, if God will but love thee: say to him,
Father, hast thou not a blessing for me, thy poor little Child? Father, hast thou not a blessing for me, even for me? O give a Christ; O give me a Christ; O let me not be undone for ever: thus beg, as for your lives, and be not contented till you have an an∣swer; and do thus every day, with as much earnestness as you can, twice a day at least. 8. Give your self up to Christ: say, dear Jesus, thou didst bid that little Children should be suffered to come unto thee; and Lord, I am come as well as I can, would fain be thy Child: take my heart, and make it humble, and meek, and sensible, and obedient: I give my self to thee, dear Jesus, do what thou wilt with me, so that thou wilt but love me, and give me thy grace and glory. 9. Get acquainted with godly peo∣ple, and ask them good questions, and endeavour to love their talk. 10. Labour to get a dear love for Christ; read the History of Christ 's
sufferings, and ask the reason of his sufferings; and never be contented till you see your need of Christ, and the ex∣cellency and use of Christ. 11. Hear the most powerful Mini∣sters; and read the most searching Books; and get your Father to buy you Mr. White's Book for little Children, and A Guide to Heaven. 12. Resolve to continue in well-doing all your dayes; then you shall be one of those sweet little ones that Christ will take into his Arms, and bless, and give a Kingdom, Crown and Glory to. And now dear Chil∣dren, I have done, I have written to you, I have prayed for you; but what you will do, I can't tell. O Children, if you love me, if you love your Parents, if you love your Souls, if you would scape Hell Fire, and if you would live in Heaven when you dye, do you go and do as these good Children; and that you may be your Parente joy, your Coun∣treys honour, and live in Gods fear, and dye in his love, is the prayer of your deal Friend. J. Janeway.
A TOKEN FOR CHILDREN. EXAMPLE I. Of one eminently converted be∣tween Eight and Nine years old, with an account of her Life and Death. MRS. Sarah Howley, when she was between eight and nine years old, was carried by her
Friends to hear a Sermon, where the Minister Preached upon Matthew 11.30. My yoak is easie, and my bur∣den is light: In the applying of which Scripture, this Child was mightily awakened, and made deeply sensible of the condition of her Soul, and her need of a Christ; she wept bitterly to think what a case she was in; and went home and got by her self into a Chamber, and upon her knees she wept and cryed to the Lord, as well as she could, which might easily be perceived by her eyes and countenance. 2. She was not contented at this, but she got her little Brother and Sister into a Chamber with her, and told them of their condition by nature, and wept over them, and prayed with them and for them. 3. After this she heard another Sermon upon Prov. 29.1, He that being often reproved, hardeneth his heart, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy: At which she was more affected than before, and was so exceedingly solicitous about her Soul, that she spent a great part of the night in weeping and praying, and could scarce take any rest day or night for some time together; desiring with all her Soul to escape from everlasting flames, and to get an interest in the Lord Jesus; O what should she do for a Christ! what should she do to be saved! 4. She gave her self much to at∣tending upon the Word Preached, and still continued very tender un∣der it, greatly favouring what she heard. 5. She was very much in secret prayer, as might easily be perceived by those who listened at the Cham∣ber Door, and was usually very im∣portunate, and full of tears. 6. She could scarce speak of sin, or be spoke to, but her heart was
ready to melt. 7. She spent much time in read∣ing the Scripture, and a Book called The best Friend in the worst times; by which the work of God was much promoted upon her Soul, and was much directed by it how to get acquaintance with God, especially toward the end of that Book. A∣nother Book that she was much de∣lighted with, was Mr. Swinnocks Christian Mans Calling, and by this she was taught in some measure to make Religion her business. The Spiritual Bee was a great companion of hers. 8. She was exceeding dutiful to her Parents, very loath to grieve them in the least; and if she had at any time (which was very rare) offended them, she would weep bitterly. 9. She abhorred lying, and allow∣ed her self in no known sin. 10. She was very Conscientious
in spending of time, and hated idle∣ness, and spent her whole time ei∣ther in praying, reading, instruct∣ing her little Brothers, and work∣ing at her Needle, at which she was very ingenious. 11. When she was at School, she was eminent for her diligence, teachableness, meekness and mo∣desty, speaking very little; but when she did, it was usually very spiri∣tual. 12. She continued in this course of Religious Duties for some years together. 13. When she was about four∣teen years old, she brake a Vein in her Lungs (as is supposed), and oft did spit blood, yet did a little recover again, but had several dangerous relapses. 14. At the beginning of January last she was taken very bad again, in which sickness She was in great di∣stress of Soul. When she was first
taken, she said, O Mother, pray, pray, pray, for me, for Satan is so busie that I cannot pray for my self, I see I am undone without a Christ, and a pardon! O I am undone! un∣done to all Eternity! 15. Her Mother knowing how serious she had been formerly, did a little wonder that she should be in such agonies; upon which her Mother asked her what sin it was that was so burdensome to her spi∣rit: O Mother, said she, it is not any particular Sin of Omission or Commission, that sticks so close to my Conscience, as the Sin of my na∣ture; without the blood of Christ, that will damn me. 16. Her Mother asked her what she should pray for, for her? she answered, that I may have a saving knowledg of Sn and Christ; and that I may have an assurance of Gods love to my Soul. Her Mo∣ther asked her, why she did speak
so little to the Minister that came to her? She answered, that it was her duty with patience and silence to learn of them: and it was exceed∣ing painful to her to speak to any. 17. One time when she fell in∣to a fit, she cried out, O I am go∣ing, I am going: But what shall I do to be saved? O what shall I do to be saved? Sweet Lord Jesus, I will lye at thy feet, and if I perish, it shall be at the Fountain of thy mercy. 18. She was much afraid of pre∣sumption, and dreaded a mistake in the matters of her Soul, and would be often putting up ejaculati∣ons to God, to deliver her from deceiving her self. To instance in one: Great and mighty God, give me faith, and true faith, Lord, that I may not be a foolish Virgin, ha∣ving a Lamp and no Oyl. 19. She would many times be laying hold upon the Promises,
and plead them in prayer. That in Mat. 11.28, 29. was much in her Tongue, and no small relief to her spirit. How many times would she cry out, Lord, hast thou not said, Come unto me all ye that are wea∣ry and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. 20. Another time her Father bid her be of good cheer, because she was going to a better Father; at which she fell into a great passi∣on, and said, but how do I know that? I am a poor sinner that wants assurance: O, for assurance! It was still her Note, O, for assurance! This was her great, earnest, and constant request to all that came to her, to beg assurance for her; and, poor heart, she would look with so much eagerness upon them, as if she desired nothing in the world so much, as that they would pity her, and help her with their prayers; never was poor creature
more earnest for any thing than she was for an assurance, and the Light of Gods Countenance: O the pite∣ous moan that she would make! O the agonies that her Soul was in! 21. Her Mother asks her, if God should spare her life, how she would live; truly Mother, said she, we have such base hearts that I can't tell; we are apt to promise great things; when we are sick, but when we are recovered, we are as ready to forget our selves, and to turn again unto folly; but I hope I should be more careful of my time and my soul, than I have been. 22. She was full of natural af∣fection to her Parents, and very careful least her Mother should be tired out with much watching. Her Mother said, how shall I bear parting with thee, when I have scarce dryed my eyes for thy Bro∣ther?
She answered, The God of love support and comfort you; it is but a little while, and we shall meet in Glory, I hope. She being very weak, could speak but lit∣tle; therefore her Mother said, Child, if thou hast any comfort, lift up thy hand, which she did. 23. The Lords day before that in which she died, a Kinsman of hers came to see her, and asking of her, whether she knew him, she answered; yes, I know you, and I desire you would learn to know Christ: you are young, but you know not how soon you may die; and O to die without a Christ, it is a fearful thing: O redeem Time, O Time, Time, Time, pre∣cious Time! Being requested by him not to spend her self: she said, she would fain do all the good she could while she lived, and when she was dead too, if possible; up∣on which account, she desired that
a Sermon might be Preached at the Funeral concerning the precious∣ness of Time. O that young ones would now remember their Crea∣tour! 24. Some Ministers that came to her, did with earnestness, beg that the Lord would please to give her some token for good, that she might go off triumphing; and Bills of the same Nature were sent to se∣veral Churches. 25. After she had long waited for an answer of their prayers, she said, Well, I will venture my soul upon Christ. 26. She carried it with wonder∣ful patience, and yet would often pray that the Lord would give her more patience, which the Lord an∣swered to astonishment; for con∣sidering the pains and agonies that she was in, her patience was next to a wonder; Lord, Lord give me patience, said she, that I may
not dishonour thee. 27. Upon Thursday, after long waiting, great fears, and many Prayers, when all her Friends thought she had been past speaking, to the astonishment of her Friends she broke forth thus with a very audible voice, and chearful Coun∣tenance: Lord, thou hast promi∣sed that whosoever comes unto thee, thou wilt in no wise east out; Lord, I come unto thee, and sure∣ly thou wilt in no wise cast me out. O so sweet! O so glorious is Jesus! O I have the sweet and glorious Je∣sus; he is sweet, he is sweet, he is sweet! O the admirable love of God in sending Christ! O free grace to a poor lost Creature! And thus she ran on repeating many of these things a hundred times over; but her Friends were so astonished to see her in this Divine Rapture, and to hear such gracious words, and her prayers and desires satisfi∣ed,
that they could not write a quar∣ter of what she spoke. 28. When her soul was thus ra∣vished with the love of Christ, and her tongue so highly engaged in the magnifying of God; her Father, Brethren, and Sisters, with other of the Family were called, to whom she spake particularly, as her strength would give leave. She gave her Bible as a Legacy to one of her Brothers, and desired him to use that well for her sake, and added to him and the rest, O make use of time to get a Christ for your Souls; spend no time in running up and down in playing; O get a Christ for your Souls while you are young, remember now your Crea∣tor before you come to a sick-bed; put not off this great work till then, for then you will find it a hard work indeed. I know by experi∣ence, the Devil will tell you it is time enough; and ye are young, what
need you to be in such haste? You will have time enough when you are old. But there stands one (meaning her Grand-mother) that stayes behind, and I that am but young, am going before her. O therefore make your Calling and Election sure, while you are in health. But I am afraid this will be but one nights trouble to your thoughts; but remmember, these are the words of a dying Sister. O if you knew how good Christ were! O if you had but one taste of his sweetness, you would rather go to him a thousand times, than stay in this wicked world. I would not for ten thousand, and ten thousand worlds part with my interest in Christ. O how happy am I that am going to everlasting Joyes! I would not go back again for twenty thousand worlds; And will not you strive to get an interest in Christ? 26. After this, looking upon one
of her Fathers Servants, she said, What shall I do? What shall I do at that great day, when Christ shall say to me, Come thou Blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom pre∣pared for thee? and shall say to the wicked, Go thou cursed into the Lake that burns for ever: What a grief is it to me to think that I shall see any of my friends that I knew upon Earth turned into that Lake that burns for ever! O that word for ever! Remember that for ever; I speak these words to you, but they are nothing, except God speak to you too. O pray, pray, pray, that God would give you grace! and then she prayed, O Lord finish thy work upon their Souls. It will be my comfort to see you in glory; but it will be your everlasting hap∣piness. 30. Her Grandmother told her she spent her self too much; she said, I care not for that, if I could
do any Soul good. O with what vehemency, did she speak, as if her heart were in every word she spoke. 31. She was full of Divine Sen∣tences, and almost all her discourse from the first to the last in the time of her sickness, was about her Soul, Christs sweetness, and the Souls of others, in a word, like a continued Sermon. 32. Upon Friday, after she had had such lively discoveries of Gods love, she was exceeding desirous to die, and cryed out, Come Lord Je∣sus, come quickly, conduct me to thy Tabernacle; I am a poor crea∣ture without thee: but Lord Jesus, my soul longs to be with thee: O when shall it be? Why not now, dear Jesus? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; but why do I speak thus? Thy time dear Lord is the best; O give me patience. 33. Upon Saturday she spoke ve∣ry little (being very drowsie) yet
now and then she dropt these words, How long sweet Jesus, finish thy work sweet Jesus, come away sweet dear Lord Jesus, come quickly; sweet Lord help, come away, now, now dear Jesus, come quickly; Good Lord give patience to me to wait thy appointed time; Lord Jesus help me, help me, help me. Thus at several times (when out of her sleep) for she was asleep the greatest part of the day. 34. Upon the Lords Day she scarce spoke any thing, but much desired that Bills of Thanksgiving might be sent to those who had for∣merly been praying for her, that they might help her to praise God for that full assurance that he had given her of his love; and seemed to be much swallowed up with the thoughts of Gods free love to her Soul. She oft commended her spi∣rit into the Lords hands, and the last words which she was heard to
speak, were these, Lord help, Lord Jesus help, Dear Jesus, Blessed Jesus— And thus upon the Lords Day, between Nine and Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, she slept sweetly in Jesus, and began an everlasting Sabbath, February 19. 1670.
EXAMPLE II. Of a Child that was admirably affect∣ed with the things of God, when he was between two and three years Old, with a brief account of his Life and Death. 1. A Certain little Child, whose Mother had dedicated him to the Lord in the womb: when he could not speak plain, would be crying after God, and was greatly desirous to be taught good things. 2. He could not endure to be put to Bed without family duty, but would put his Parents upon duty, and would with much devotion kneel down, and with great pati∣ence and delight continue till duty was at an end, without the least ex∣pression of being weary; and he see∣med never so well pleased, as when he was engaged in duty.
3. He could not be satisfied with Family-duty, but he would be oft upon his knees by himself in one corner or other. 4. He was much delighted in hearing the word of God either read or preached. 5. He loved to go to School that he might learn something of God, and would observe and take great notice of what he had read, and come home and speak of it with much af∣fection; and he would rejoyce in his book, and say to his Mother, O Mother, I have had a sweet lesson to day, will you please to give me leave to fetch my book that you may hear it? 6. As he grew up, he was more and more affected with the things of another world, so that if we had not received our information from one that is of undoubted fidelity, it would seem incredible. 7. He quickly learned to read
the Scriptures, and would, with great Reverence, Tenderness and groans read, till tears and sobs were ready to hinder him. 8. When he was at secret prayer, he would weep bitterly. 9. He was wont often times to complain of the naughtiness of his heart, and seemed to be more grie∣ved for the Corruption of his Na∣ture than for any actual sin. 10. He had a vast Understand∣ing in the things of God, even next to a wonder, for one of his age. 11. He was much troubled for the wandrings of his thoughts in du∣ty, and that he could not keep his heart alway fixed upon God, and the work he was about, and his af∣fections constantly raised. 12. He kept a watch over his heart, and observed the workings of his Soul, and would complain that the were so vain and foolish, and so little busied about spirituas things.
13. As he grew up, he grew daily in knowledg and experience; and his carriage was so heavenly, and his discourse so excellent and experimental, that it made those which heard it, even astonished. 14. He was exceeding importu∣nate with God in duty, and would plead with God at a strange rate, and use such arguments in prayer that one would think it were im∣possible should ever enter into the heart of a Child; he would beg and expostulate and weep so, that some∣times it could not be kept from the ears of Neighbours; so that one of the next house was forced to cry out, the prayers and tears of that Child in the next house will sink me to Hell, because by it he did con∣demn his neglect of prayer, and his slight performance of it. 15. He was very fearful of wick∣ed company, and would oft beg of
God to keep him from it, and that he might never be pleased in them that took delight in displeasing of God: And when he was at any time in the hearing of their wicked words, taking the Lords Name in vain, or swearing, or any filthy word, it would even make him tremble, and ready to go home and weep. 16. He abhorred lying with his Soul. 17. When he had committed a∣ny fault, he was easily convinced of it, and would get in some corner and secret place, and with tears beg pardon of God, and strength against such a sin. He had a friend that oft watched him, and listned at his Chamber-door, from whom I received this Narrative. 18. When he had been asked, whether he would commit such a sin again, he would never promise absolutely, because he said his heart
was naught; but he would weep, and say, he hoped by the grace of God he should not. 19. When he was left at home alone upon the Sabbath days, he would be sure not to spend any part of the day in Idleness and Play, but be busied in praying, Reading in the Bible, and getting of his Cate∣chism. 20. When other Children were playing, he would many a time and oft be praying. 21. One day a certain person was discoursing with him about the Nature, Offices, and Excellency of Christ, and that he alone can satisfie for our sins, and merit ever∣lasting life for us, and about other of the great Mysteries of Redempti∣on: he seemed savingly to under∣stand them, and was greatly delight∣ed with the discourse. 22. One speaking, concerning the Resurrection of the Body, he
did acknowledg it; but that the same weak body that was buried in the Church-yard, should be raised again, he thought very strange, but with Admiration yielded, that nothing was impossible to God; and that very day he was taken sick unto death. 23. A Friend of his asked him whether he were willing to dye when he was first taken sick; he answered, no; because he was a∣fraid of his state as to another world: Why Child, said the other, thou didst pray for a new Heart, for an humble, and a sincere Heart, and I have heard thee; didst thou not pray with all thy heart? I hope I did, said he. 24. Not long after, the same person asked him again, whether he were willing to die? He answe∣red, now I am willing, for I shall go to Christ. 25. One asked him what should
become of his Sister, if he should die and leave her? He answered, the will of the Lord must be done, 26. He still grew weaker and weaker, but carried it with a great deal of sweetness and patience, wait∣ing for his change; and at last did chearfully commit his Spirit unto the Lord, and calling upon the Name of the Lord, and saying, Lord Jesus, Lord Jesus, — In whose bosome he sweetly slept, dy∣ing as I remember, when he was a∣bout five or six years old.
EXAMPLE III. Of a little Girl that was wrought up∣on, when she was between four and five years old; with some account of her holy life and triumphant death. 1. MAry A. When she was be∣tween four and five years old, was greatly affected in hear∣ing the word of God, and became very solicitous about her Soul and everlasting condition, weeping bit∣terly to think what would become of her in another World, ask∣ing strange questions concerning God and Christ, and her own soul: so that this little Mary, before she was full five years old, seemed to mind the one thing needful, and to choose the better part, and sat at the feet of Christ many a time and oft with tears. 2. She was wont to be much in
secret duty, and many times come off from her knees with tears. 3. She would chuse such times and places for secret duty, as might render her less observed by others, and did endeavour what possibly she could to conceal what she was doing when she was engaged in se∣cret duty. 4. She was greatly afraid of hy∣pocrisie, and of doing any thing to be seen of men, and to get commen∣dation and praise; and when she hath heard one of her Brothers say∣ing, that he had been by himself at prayer, she rebuked him sharply, and told him how little such prayers were like to profit him, and that was little to his praise to pray like a hypocrite, and to be glad that a∣ny should know what he had been doing. 5. Her Mother being full of sor∣row after the death of her Hus∣band, this Child came to her Mo∣ther
and askt her why she wept so exceedingly? her Mother an∣swered, she had cause enough to weep, because her Father was dead: No, dear Mother, said the Child, you have no cause to weep so much, for God is a good God still to you. 6. She was a dear lover of faith∣ful Ministers. One time after she had been hearing of Mr. Whitaker, she said I love that name dearly for the sweet words that he speaks con∣cerning Christ. 7. Her Book was her delight, and what she did read she loved to make her own, and cared not for passing over what she learned without ex∣traordinary observations and under∣standing; and many times she was so strangely affected in reading of the Scriptures, that she would burst out into tears, and would hardly be pacified, so greatly was she taken with Christs sufferings, the zeal of Gods Servant, the danger of a
natural state. 8. She would complain often∣times of the corruption of her na∣ture, of the hardness of her heart, that she could repent no more tho∣rowly, and be no more humble and grieved for her sins against a good God; and when she did thus complain, it was with abundance of tears. 9. She was greatly concerned for the souls of others, and grieved to think of the miserable condition that they were in; upon this ac∣count, when she could handsomly, she would be putting in some pret∣ty sweet word for Christ; but a∣bove all, she would do what she could to draw the hearts of her bre∣thren and sisters after Christ; and there was no small hopes, that her example and good counsel did pre∣vail with some of them when they were very young to get into cor∣ners to pray, to ask very gracious
questions about the things of God. 10. She was very conscientious in keeping the Sabbath, spending the whole time either in reading or praying, or learning her Cate∣chism, or teaching her Brethren and Sisters. One time when she was left at home upon the Lords day, she got some other little chil∣dren, together with her brothers and sisters, and instead of playing (as other naughty children use to do) she told them, that that was the Lords day, and that they ought to remember that day to keep it holy; and then she told them how it was to be spent in religious exercises all the day long, except so much as was to be taken up in the works of necessity and mercy; then she pray∣ed with them her self, and among other things begged, that the Lord would give grace and wisdom to them little Children, that they might know how to serve him as
one of the little ones in the compa∣ny with her, told afterwards. 11. She was a Child of a strange tenderness and Compassion to all, full of Bowels and Pity: whom she could not help, she would be ready to weep over; especially if she saw her Mother at any time troubled, she would quickly make her sorrows her own, and weep for her and with her. 12. When her Mother had been somewhat solicitous about any worldly thing, she would, if she could possible, put her off from her care one way or other. One time she told her, O Mother, grace is better than that (meaning something her Mother wanted) I had rather have grace and the love of Christ, than any thing in the world. 13. This Child was often musing and busied in the thoughts of her everlasting Work; witness that strange question, O what are they
doing which are already in Hea∣ven? And she seemed to be hugely desirous to be among them that were praising, loving, delighting in God, and serving of him without sin. Her language was so strange about spiritual matters, that she made many excellent Christians to stand amazed, as judging it scarce to be paralell'd. 14. She took great delight in reading of the Scripture, and some part of it was more sweet to her than her appointed food; she would get several choice Scriptures by heart, and discourse of them sa∣vourly, and apply them suta∣bly. 15. She was not altogether a stranger to other good Books, but would be reading of them with much affection; and where she might, she noted the Books particu∣larly, observing what in the rea∣ding did most warm her heart, and
she was ready upon occasion to im∣prove it. 16. One time a woman coming into the house in a great passion, spoke of her condition, as if none were like hers, and it would never be otherwise; the Child said, it were a strange thing to say when its night, it will never be day again. 17. At another time a near Re∣lation of hers being in some streights made some complaint, to whom she said, I have heard Mr. Carter say, A man may go to Heaven with∣out a Penny in his Purse; but not without Grace in his heart. 18. She had an extraordinary love to the people of God; and when she saw any that she thought feared the Lord, her heart would e'n leap for joy. 19. She loved to be much by her self, and would be greatly grieved if she were at any time deprived of a coveniency for secret duty; she
could not live without constant ad∣dress to God in secret; and was not a little pleased when she could go into a corner to pray and weep. 20. She was much in praising God, and seldom or never com∣plained of any thing but sin. 21. She continued in this course of praying and praising of God, and great dutifulness and sweetness to her Parents, and those that taught her any thing; yea, she did greatly encourage her Mother while she was a Widow, and desired that the absence of a Husband might in some measure be made up by the dutifulness and holiness of a Child. She studied all the ways that could be to make her Mothers life sweer. 22. When she was between Ele∣ven and Twelve years old, she sick∣ned, in which she carried it with admirable patience and sweetness, and did what she could with Scrip∣ture
arguments to support and en∣courage her Relations to part with her that was going to Glory, and to prepare themselves to meet her in a blessed Eternity. 23. She was not many days sick before she was marked; which she first saw her self, and was greatly rejoyced to think that she was marked out for the Lord, and was now going apace to Christ. She called to her Friends, and said, I am marked, but be not troubled, for I know I am marked for one of the Lords own. One asked her how she knew that? She answe∣red, the Lord hath told me that I am one of his dear Children. And thus she spake with a holy confi∣dence in the Lords love to her soul, and was not in the least daunted when she spake of her death; but seemed greatly delighted in the ap∣prehension of her nearness to her Fathers house. And it was not
long before she was filled with joy unspeakable in believing. 24. When she just lay a dying, her Mother came to her and told her she was sorry that she had re∣proved and corrected so good a child so oft. O Mother, said she, speak not thus, I bless God, now I am dying, for your reproofs and cor∣rections too; for it may be, I might have gone to Hell, if it had not been for your reproofs and correcti∣ons. 25. Some of her Neighbours coming to visit her, asked her if she would leave them? She answer∣ed them, if you serve the Lord, you shall come after me to glory. 26. A little before she died, she had a great conflict with Satan, and cried out, I am none of his; her Mother seeing her in trouble, ask∣ed her what was the matter? She answered, Satan did trouble me, but now I think God all is well, I
know I am none of his, but Christs. 27. After this, she had a great sense of Gods love, and a glorious sight, as if she had seen the very Heavens open, and the Angels come to receive her; by which her heart was filled with joy, and her tongue with praise. 28. Being desired by the standers by to give them a particular account of what she saw: she answered, you shall know hereafter; and so in an extafie of joy and holy tri∣umph, she went to Heaven, when she was about Twelve years old. Hallelujah.
A Fourth Example of a Child that began to look towards Heaven when she was about four years old, with some observable passages in her Life and at her Death. 1. A Certain little Child, when she was about four years old, had a conscientious sense of her duty towards her Parents, be∣cause the Commandment saith, Ho∣nour thy Father and thy Mother: And though she had little advantage of education, she carried it with the greatest reverence to her Pa∣rents imaginable, so that she was no small credit as well as comfort, to them. 2. It was no unusual thing for her to weep if she saw her Parents troubled, though her self had not been the occasion of it. 3. When she came from School, she would with grief and abhor∣rency
say, that other Children had sinned against God by speaking grievous words, which were so bad that she durst not speak them again. 4. She would be often times ad∣miring of Gods mercy for so much goodness to her rather than to o∣thers; that she saw some begging, others blind, some crooked, and that she wanted nothing that was good for her. 5. She was many a time and of∣ten in one hole or other in tears up∣on her knees. 6. This poor little thing would be ready to counsel other little chil∣dren how they ought to serve God, and putting them upon getting by themselves to pray; and hath been known when her friends have been abroad, to have been teaching Chil∣dren to pray, especially upon the Lords Day. 7. She very seriously begged the Prayers of others, that they would
remember her, that the Lord would give her Grace. 8. When this Child saw some that were laughing, who she judg∣ed to be very wicked; She told them, that she feared that they had little reason to be so merry. They asked whether one might not laugh? She answered, no indeed till you have grace, they who are wicked have more need to cry than to laugh. 9. She would say, that it was the duty of Parents, Masters and Mi∣stresses, to reprove (those under their charge) for sin, else God will meet with them. 10. She would be very attentive when she read the Scriptures, and be much affected with them. 11. She would by no means be perswaded to prophane the Lords Day, but would spend it in some good Duties. 12. When she went to School,
it was willingly and joyfully, and she was very teachable and exem∣plary to other children. 13. When she was taken sick, one asked her whether she were willing to die? She answered, Yes, if God would pardon her sins. Be∣ing asked how, her sins should be pardoned? She answered, through the blood of Christ. 14. She said, she did believe in Christ, and desired, and longed to be with him, and did with a great deal of chearfulness give up her soul. There were very many observable passages in the Life and Death of this Child, but the hurry and grief that her friends were in, buryed them.
The Fifth Example of the pious Life and joyful Death of a Child which dyed when he was about twelve years old. 1632. 1. CHarles Bridgman had no sooner learned to speak, but he betook himself to prayer. 2. He was very prone to learn the things of God. 3. He would be sometimes teach∣ing them their duty that waited upon him. 4. He learned by heart many good things before he was well fit to go to School: and when he was set to School, he carried it so, that all that observed him either did or might admire him. O the sweet nature, the good disposition, the sincere Religion which was in this Child! 5. When he was at School, what was it that he desired to learn,
but Christ and him crucified. 6. So religious and savoury were his words, his actions so upright, his devotion so hearty, his fear of God so great, that many were rea∣dy to say, as they did of John, What manner of Child shall this be? 7. He would be much in reading the holy Scriptures. 8. He was desirous of more spiri∣tual knowledg, and would be oft asking very serious and admirable questions. 9. He would not stir out of doors before he had poured out his Soul to the Lord. 11. When he eat any thing, he would be sure to lift up his heart unto the Lord for a blessing upon it; and when he had moderately re∣freshed himself by eating, he would not forget to acknowledg Gods goodness in feeding of him. 12. He would not lye down in his bed till he had been upon his
knees; and when sometimes he had forgotten his duty, he would quickly get out of his bed, and kneeling down upon his bare knees, covered with no Garment but his Linings, ask God forgiveness for that sin. 13. He would rebuke his Bre∣thren if they were at any time too hasty at their meals, and did eat without asking a blessing; his check was usually this; dare you do thus? God be merciful unto us, this bit of bread might choak us. 14. His sentences were wise and weighty, and well might become some ancient Christian. 15. His sickness was a lingring disease, against which, to comfort him, one tells him of possessions that must fall to his portion; and what are they, said he? I had rather have the Kingdom of Heaven than a thousand such inheritances. 16. When he was sick, he seem∣ed
much taken up with Heaven, and asked very serious questions about the nature of his soul. 17. After he was pretty well sa∣tisfied about that, he enquired how his soul might be saved; the answer being made, by the applying of Christs merits by faith; he was pleased with the answer, and was ready to give any one that should desire it, an account of his hope. 18. Being asked whether he had rather live or dye, he answered, I desire to dye, that I may go to my Saviour. 19. His pains encreasing upon him, one asked him whether he would rather still endure those pains, or forsake Christ? Alas, said he, I know not what to say, being but a Child, for these pains may stagger a strong man; But I will strive to endure the best that I can. Upon this he called to mind that Martyr Thomas Bilney; who
being in prison, the night before his burning put his finger into the can∣dle, to know how he could endure the fire. O (said the Child) had I lived then, I would have run through the fire to have gone to Christ. 20. His sickness lasted long, and at least three dayes before his death he prophesied his departure, and not only that he must dye, but the ve∣ry day. On the Lords day, said he, look to me; neither was this a word of course, which you may guess by his often repetition, every day asking, till the day came indeed, what, is Sunday come? At last the lookt-for day came on; and no sooner had the Sun beautified that morning with its light, but he falls into a trance; his eyes were fixed, his face cheerful, his lips smiling, his hands and face clasped in a Bow, as if he would have received some blessed Angel that were at
hand to receive his soul: but he comes to himself, and tells them how he saw the sweetest body that ever eyes beheld, who bid him be of good cheer, for he must presently go with him. 21. One that stood near him, as now suspecting the time of his dis∣solution nigh, bid him say, Lord into thy hands I commend my spi∣rit, which is thy due; for why? thou hast redeemed it, O Lord my God most true. 22. The last words which he spake, were exactly these; Pray, pray, pray, nay yet pray, and the more Prayers, the better all pros∣pers; God is the best Physitians, into his hands I commend my spirit, O Lord Jesus receive my soul: Now close mine eyes: For∣give me Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, all the World. Now I am well, my pain is almost gone, my joy is at hand, Lord have mercy
on me. O Lord receive my Soul un∣to thee. And thus he yielded his Spirit up unto the Lord, when he was about twelve years old. This Narrative was taken out of Mr. Ambrose his Life's Lease.
The sixth Example of a poor Child that was awakened when she was about five years old. 1. A Certain very poor Child that had a very bad Fa∣ther, but it was to be hoped a very good Mother, was by the Provi∣dence of God brought to the sight of a godly friend of mine, who upon the first sight of the Child, had a great pity for him, and took an affection to him, and had a mind to bring him up for Christ: 2. At the first he did with great sweetness and kindness allure the Child, by which means it was not long before he got a deep interest in the heart of the Child, and he began to obey him with more readi∣ness than Children usually do their Parents. 3. By this a Door was opened for a farther work, and he had a∣greater
advantage to instill spiritual Principles into the soul of the Child, which he was not wanting in, as the Lord gave opportunity, and the Child was capable of. 4. It was not long before the Lord was pleased to strike in with the spiritual Exhortations of this good man, so that the Child was brought to a liking of the things of God. 5. He quickly learnt a great part of the Assemblies Catechism by heart, and that before he could read his Primmer within Book; and he took a great delight in learning his Catechism. 6. He was not only able to give a very good account of his Cate∣chism, but he would answer such questions as are not in the Cate∣chism, with greater understanding than could be expected of one of his age. 7. He took great delight in dis∣coursing
about the things of God; and when my Friend had been ei∣ther praying or reading, expound∣ing or repeating of Sermons, he seemed very attentive, and ready to receive the truths of God, and would with incredible gravity, di∣ligence, and affection, wait till du∣ties were ended, to the no small joy and admiration of them which ob∣served him. 8. He would ask very excellent questions, and discourse about the condition of his soul and heavenly things, and seemed mightily con∣cerned what should become of his soul when he should dye, so that his discourse made some Christians even to stand astonished. 9. He was greatly taken with the great kindness of Christ in dy∣ing for sinners, and would be in tears at the mention of them; and seemed at a strange rate to be affected with the unspeakable love of Christ.
10. When no body hath been speaking to him, he would burst out into tears; and being asked the reason, he would say, that the very thoughts of Christs love to sinners in suffering for them, made him that he could not but cry. 11. Before he was six years old, he made conscience of a secret du∣ty; and when he prayed, it was with such extraordinary meltings, that his eyes have looked red and sore with weeping by himself for his sin. 12. He would be putting of Christians upon spiritual discourse vvhen he savv them, and seemed lit∣tle satisfied; unless they vvere talk∣ing of good things. 13. Its evident, That this poor Childs thoughts vvere very much busied about the things of another vvorld, for he vvould oftentimes be speaking to his Bed-fellovv as mid-night, about the matter of his
soul; and when he could not sleep, he would take heavenly conference to be sweeter than his appointed rest. This was his usual custome, and thus he would provoke and put forward an experienced Christian to spend waking hours in talk of God and the everlasting rest. 14. Not long after this, his good Mother died, which went very near his heart, for he greatly honoured his Mother. 15. After the dead of his Mo∣ther, he would often repeat some of the promises that are made unto Fatherless Children, especially that in Exod. 22.22. Ye shall not afflict any Widow or the Fatherless Child; if thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry. — These words he would often repeat with tears, and say, I am Fatherless and Mother∣less upon Earth, yet if any wrong me, I have a Father in Heaven who
will take my part; to him I com∣mit my self, and in him is all my trust. 16. Thus he continued in a course of holy duties, living in the fear of God, and shewed wonder∣ful grace for a Child, and died sweetly in the Faith of Jesus. My friend is a judicious Christian of many years experience, who was no ways related to him, but a con∣stant eye and ear-witness of his god∣ly life, and honourable and chearful death, from whom I received this information.
EXAMPLE VII. Of a notorious wicked child, who was taken up from begging, and admi∣rably converted; with an account of his holy Life and joyful Death, when he was nine years old. 1. A Very poor Child of the Parish of Newington-Butts came begging to the door of a dear Christian friend of mine, in a very lamentable case, so filthy and nasty, that he would even have turned ones stomack to have looked on him: But it pleased God to raise in the heart of my friend, a great pity and tenderness towards this poor child, so that in Charity he took him out of the streets, whose Parents were unknown, who had nothing at all in him to commend him to any ones Charity, but his misery. My friend eying the
glory of God, and the good of the immortal soul of this wretched Creature, discharged the Parish of the Child, and took him as his own, designing to bring him up for the Lord Christ. A noble piece of Charity! And that which did make the kindness far the greater was, that there seemed to be very little hopes of doing any good upon this Child, for he was a very Monsier of wickedness, and a thousand times more miserable and vile by his sin, than by his poverty. He was running to Hell as soon as he could go, and was old in naughti∣ness when he was young in years; and one shall scarce hear of one so like the Devil in his infancy, as this poor Child was. What sin was there (that his age was capa∣ble of) that he did not commit? What by the corruption of his Na∣ture, and the abominable example of little beggar boyes, he was ar∣rived
to a strange pitch of impiety. He would call filthy Names, take Gods Name in vain, curse and swear, and do almost all kind of mischief; and as to any thing of God, worse than an Heathen. 2. But his sin and misery was but a stronger motive to that graci∣ous man to pity him, and to do all that possibly he could to pluck this fire-brand out of the fire; and it was not long before the Lord was pleased to let him understand that he had a design of everlasting kind∣ness upon the Soul of this poor child: for no sooner had this good man taken this creature into his house, but he prays for him, and labours with all his might to con∣vince him of his miserable conditi∣on by Nature, and to teach him something of God, the worth of his own Soul, and that Eternity of Glory or Misery that he was born to; and blessed be Free-grace, it
was not long before the Lord was pleased to let him understand, that it was himself which put it into his heart to take in this Child, that he might bring him up for Christ. The Lord soon struck in with his godly instructions, so that an amazing change was seen in the Child, in a few weeks space he was soon con∣vinced of the evil of his ways; no more news now of his calling of Names, Swearing, or Cursing; no more taking of the Lords Name in vain; now he is civil, and re∣spectful, and such a strange alte∣ration was wrought in the child, that all the Parish that rung of his vil∣lany before, was now ready to talk of his reformation; his com∣pany, his talk, his imployment is now changed, and he is like ano∣ther creature; so that the glory of Gods Free-grace began already to shine in him. 3. And this change was not on∣ly
an eternal one, and to be discern∣ed abroad, but he would get by himself, and weep and mourn bit∣terly for his horrible wicked life, as might easily be perceived by them that lived in the house with him. 4. It was the great care of his godly Master to strike in with those convictions which the Lord had made, and to improve them all he could; and he was not a little glad to see that his labour was not in vain in the Lord; he still experien∣ces that the Lord doth carry on his own work mightily upon the heart of the Child, he is still more and more broken under a sense of his undone state by nature; he is oft in tears and bemoaning his lost and miserable condition. When his Master did speak of the things of God, he listened earnestly, and took in with much greediness and affecti∣on what he was taught? Seldom was there any discourse about Soul∣matters
in his hearing, but he heard it as if it were for his life, and would weep greatly. 5. He would after his Master had been speaking to him or others of the things of God, go to him, and question with him about them, and beg of him to instruct and teach him further, and to tell him those things again, that he might remem∣ber and understand them better. 6. Thus he continued seeking af∣ter the knowledg of God and Christ, and practising holy duties, till the sickness came into the house, with which the child was smitten; at his first sickning, the poor child vvas greatly amazed and afraid, and though his pains were great, and the distemper very tedious, yet the sense of his sin, and the thoughts of the miserable condition that he feared his soul vvas still in, made his trouble ten times greater; he was in grievous agonies of spirit, and
his former sins stared him in the face, and made him tremble; the poison of Gods Arrows did even drink up his spirits; the sense of sin and wrath was so great, that he could not tell what in the world to do; the weight of Gods displea∣sure, and the thoughts of lying un∣der it to all eternity, did even break him to pieces, and he did cry out very bitterly, what should he do? he was a miserable sinner, and he feared that he should go to Hell; his sins had been so great and so many that there was no hopes for him. He was not by far so much concerned for his life, as for his Soul, what would be∣come of that for ever. Now the plague upon his body seemed no∣thing to that which was in his soul. 7. But in this great distress the Lord was pleased to send one to take care for his Soul, who urged to him the great and precious pro∣mises which were made to one in
his condition, telling him that there was enough in Christ for the chief∣est of sinners, and that he came to seek and save such a lost creature as he was. But this poor Child found it a very difficult thing for him to believe that there was any mercy for such a dreadful sinner as he had been. 8. He was made to cry out of himself, not only for his swearing and lying, and other outwardly notorious sins; but he was in great horrour for the sin of his Nature, for the vileness of his heart, and o∣riginal corruption; under it he was in so great anguish, that the trou∣ble of his spirit made him in a great measure to forget the pains of his body. 9. He did very particularly con∣fess and bewail his sins with tears; and some sins so secret that none in the world could charge him with. 10. He would condemn himself
or sin, as deserving to have no mercy, though that there was not a greater sinner in all London than himself, and he abhorred himself as the vilest creature he knew. 11. He did not only pray much with strong cries and tears himself, but he begged he prayers of Chri∣stians for him. 12. He would ask Christians, whether they thought there were a∣ny hopes for him, and would beg of them to deal plainly with him, for he was greatly afraid of being deceived. 13. Being informed how willing and ready the Lord Christ was to accept of poor sinners upon their re∣pentance and turning, and being counselled to venture himself upon Christ for mercy and salvation, he said he would fain cast himself upon Christ, but he could not but won∣der how Christ should be willing to dye for such a vile wretch as he was;
and he found it one of the hardest things in the world to believe. 14. But at last it pleased the Lord to give him some small hopes that there might be mercy for him, for he had been the chiefest of sin∣ners; and he was made to lay a lit∣tle hold upon such promises, as that, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. But O how did this poor boy ad∣mire and bless God for the least hopes! How highly did he ad∣vance free and rich grace that should pity and pardon him! and at last he was so full of praise, and admiring of God, so that (to speak in the words of a precious man, that was an eye and ear-witness) to the praise and glory of God be it spoken, the house at that day, for all the sickness in it, was a lit∣tle lower Heaven, so full of joy and praise. 15 The Child grew exceeding∣ly
in knowledg, experiences, pa∣tience, humility, and self-abhor∣rency, and he thought he could never speak bad enough of himself; the Name that he would call himself by, was a Toad. 16. And though he prayed be∣fore, yet now the Lord poured out upon him the Spirit of prayer in an extraordinary manner, for one of his age; so that now he prayed more frequently, more earnesily, more spiritually than ever. O how eagerly would he beg to be wash∣ed in the Blood of Jesus; and that the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that was over Heaven and Earth, and Sea, would pardon and forgive him all his sins, and receive his Soul into his Kingdom! and what he spoke, it was with so much life and fervour of Spirit, as that it filled the hearers with astonish∣ment and joy.
17. He had no small sense of the use and excellency of Christ, and such longings and breathings of his Soul after him, that when mention hath been made of Christ, he hath been ready almost to leap out of his bed for joy. 18. When he was told that if he should recover, he must not live as he list; but he must give up him∣self to Christ, and to be his Child and Servant, to bear his Yoke, and be obedient unto his Laws, and live a holy life, and take his Cross, and suffer mocking and reproach, it may be persecution for his Name sake. Now Child (said one to him) are you willing to have Christ upon such terms? He signified his willingness by the earnestness of his looks and words, and the casting up of his eyes to Heaven, saying, yes, with all my Soul, the Lord help∣ing me, I will do this. 19. Yet he had many doubts
and fears, and was ever and anon harping upon that, that though he were willing, yet Christ he feared was not willing to accept him, be∣cause of the greatness of his sin, yet his hopes were greater than his fears. 20. The Wednesday before he died, the Child lay as it were in a trance for about half an hour, in which time he thought he saw a Vision of Angels: When he was out of his Trance, he was in a little pett, and asked his Nurse, why she did not let him go; go, whither child, said she? why along with those brave Gentlemen (said he): but they told me they would come and fetch me away for all you, upon Friday next. And he doubled his words many times, upon Friday next, those brave Gentlemen will come for me; and upon that day the Child dyed joyfully.
21. He was very thankful to his Master, and very sensible of his great kindness in taking him up out of the streets when he was a beg∣ging, and he admired at the good∣ness of God, which put it into the mind of a stranger to look up∣on, and to take such fatherly care of such a pitiful sorry creature as he was. O my dear Mother (said he) and child of God, I hope to see you in Heaven, for I am sure you will go thither. O blessed, blessed be God that made you to take pity upon me, for I might have dyed, and have gone to the Devil, and have been damned for ever, if it had not been for you. 22. The Thursday before he dyed he asked a very godly friend of mine, what he thought of his condition, and whither his soul was now going? for he said he could not still but fear least he should de∣ceive himself with false hopes,
at which my friend spoke to him thus, Child, for all that I have endeavoured to hold forth the grace of God in Christ to thy Soul, and given you a warrant from the Word of God, that Christ is as freely offered to you, as to any sinner in the world; if thou art but willing to accept of him, thou mayest have Christ and all that thou dost want, with him; and yet thou givest way to these thy doubt∣ings and fears, as though I told thee nothing but lyes. Thou say∣est thou fearest that Christ will not accept of thee; I fear thou art not heartily willing to accept of him. The Child answered, in∣deed I am: Why then Child, if thou art unfeignedly willing to have Christ, I tell thee he is a thousand times more willing to have thee, and wash thee, and save thee, than thou art to de∣sire it. And now at this time
Christ offers himself freely to thee again; therefore receive him hum∣bly by Faith into thy heart, and bid him welcome, for he deserv∣eth it: Upon which words the Lord discovered his love to the Child, and he gave a kind of a leap in his bed, and snapt his fingers and thumb together with abundance of joy, as much as to say, Well, yea all is well, the match is made, Christ is willing, and I am willing too; and now Christ is mine, and I am his for ever. And from that time forward, in full joy and assurance of Gods love, he continued ear∣nestly praising God, with desiring to die, and be with Christ. And on Friday morning he sweetly went to rest, using that very ex∣pression, Into thy hands Lord I commit my spirit. He died punc∣tually at that time which he had spoke of, and in which he expected
those Angels to come to him; he was not much above nine years old when he dyed. This Narrative I had from a ju∣dicious holy man un-related to him, who was an eye and ear-witness to all these things. FINIS.
A TOKEN FOR CHILDREN. The Second Part. BEING A farther Account of the Conversion, Holy and ex∣emplary Lives, and Joyful Deaths of several other young Children, not published in The First Part. By James Janeway, Minister of the Gospel. Psal. 8.2. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Suck∣lings host thou ordained strength. LONDON, Printed for D. Newman, at the Kings Arms at the Corner of Grocers Alley in the Poultrey, 1673.
A PREFACE TO THE READER. Christian Reader, IN the former part of my Tokens for Children, I did in part pro∣mise, that if that piece met with kind entertainment, it might be fol∣lowed with a second of the same na∣ture. If it did not seem a little to sa∣vour of vanity, I might tell the World what encouragement I have met with in this Work; but this I will only say, that I have met with so much as hath perswaded me to give this little Book leave to go abroad into the World. I am not also ignorant, what Discou∣ragement
I may meet with from some, but as long as I am sure I shall not meet with this, that it's improbable, if not impossible, that it should save a Soul; I think the rest may easily be answered, or warrantably slighted. But because I am perswaded by some, that one Example in the former, (viz. that of a Child that began to be serious between two and three years old) was scarce credible, and they did fear might somewhat prejudice the autho∣rity of the rest, I shall say something to answer that. They which make this Objection are either good or bad; if bad, I expect never to satisfie them, except I should tell them of a Ro∣mance or a Play, or somewhat that might suit a carnal mind, it is like holiness in older persons, is a matter of contempt and scorn to them, much more in such as these I mention. The truth of it is, it is no wonder at all to me, that the Subjects of Satan should not be very well pleased with that, whose design is to undermine the inte∣rest
of their great Master: nothing will satisfie some, except Christ and holiness may be degraded and vilified. But hold sinner hold, never hope it, Heaven shall never be turned into Hell for thy sake, and as for all thy Athe∣istical Objections, Scoffs and Jeers, they shall ere long be fully answered; and the Hosannah's and Hallelujah's of these Babes shall condemn thy Oaths, Blasphemies, and Jeers, and then thou wilt be silenced, and accept conver∣ting Grace turn thy heart quickly, thou wilt for ever rue thy madness and Folly, when it is too late to remedy it. But if the Persons that make this Objection be godly, I question not but that I may give them reasonable satisfaction. First, consider who it is that I had that example from. It was one Mrs. Jeofries in, Long-Lane in Mary Magdalen Bermondsey Parish, in the County of Surry, a woman of that same in the Church of Christ, for
her exemplary Piety, Wisdom, Expe∣rience, and singular watchfulness over every punctilio that she speaks; that I question not but that her name is precious to most of the Ministers of London, at least in the Burrough; and as a reverend Divine said, Such a Mother in Israel, her single Testi∣mony about London, is of as much authority almost as any one single Ministers: And having since dis∣coursed this matter with her, she calls God to witness, that she hath spoken nothing but the Truth; only in this she failed, in that she spake not by far so much as she might have done con∣cerning that sweet Babe. I might add, that I have since that, seen a godly gentleman out of the Countrey, that did profess to me, that he had seen as much as that in a little one of the same age, who since that time, I hear, went sweetly to Heaven. Doth not the Reverend Mr. Clark, in his Works, quote a Child of two years old that looked towards Heaven?
Doth not credible History acquaint us with a Martyr at seven years old, that was whipped almost to death, and never shed one tear nor complained, and at last had his Head struck off? I do not speak of these as common matters, but record them amongst those stupendious Acts of him that can as easily work Wonders as not. What is too hard for the Almighty? Hath God said he will work no more wonders? I think most of Gods works in the business of Conversion call for Admiration: And I believe that Si∣lence or rather Praise would better become Saints, than questioning the truth of such things; especially where an apparent Injury is thereby done to the Interest of Christ, the Honour of Gods Grace, and the Reputation of so eminent a Saint. I judge this suf∣ficient to satisfie most, as for others I trouble not my self; if I may but promote the interest of Christ, and the Good of Souls, and give up my Account with joy, it's enough. That
the Lord would bless my endeavours to these ends, I beg the prayers of all Saints, and yours also sweet Chil∣dren that fear the Lord; and that Parents and Masters would assist me with their warm application of these things, and that Children may be their Crown and their Joy, is the Prayer of one that desires to love Christ and little children dearly. James Janeway,
A TOKEN FOR CHILDREN. The Second Part. Example VIII. Of a Child that was very serious at four years old, with an Account of his comfortable Death when he was twelve years and three weeks old. 1. IOhn Sudlow was born of reli∣gious Parents in the County of Middlesex, whose great care was to instill spiritual Principles into him as soon as he was capable of under∣standing of them; whose Endea∣vours the Lord was pleased to crown with the desired success; so that (to use the expression of a holy man
concerning him) scarce more could be expected or desired from so little a one. 2. When he was scarce able to speak plain, he seemed to have a very great awe and reverence of God upon his spirit, and a strange sense of the things of another world, as might easily be perceived by those serious and admirable questi∣ons which he would be oft asking of those Christians that he thought he might be bold with. 3. The first thing that did most affect him, and made him endea∣vour to escape from the wrath to come, and to enquire what he should do to be saved, was the death of a little Brother; when he saw him without breath, and not able to speak or stir, and then car∣ried out of doors, and put into a pit-hole, he was greatly concerned, and asked notable questions about him, but that which was most af∣fecting of himself and others, was
whether he must die too, which be∣ing answered, it made such a deep impression upon him, that from that time forward he was exceeding serious and this was when he was about four years old. 4. Now he is desirous to know what he might do that he might live in another world, and what he must avoid, that he might not die for ever, and being instructed by his godly Parents, he soon labours to avoid whatsoever might displease God; now tell him that any thing was sinful, and that God would not have him do it, and he is easily kept from it, and even at this time of day the apprehensions of God and Death and Eternity laid such a re∣straint upon him, that he would not for a world have told a Lie. 5. He quickly learned to read exactly, and took such Pleasure in reading of the Scriptures and his Catechism, and other good Books, that it is scarce to be parallel'd; he
would naturally run to his Book without bidding, when he came home from School; and while o∣ther children of his age and ac∣quaintance were playing, he reckon'd it his Recreation to be doing that which was good. 6. When he was in coats, he would be still asking his maid serious questions, and praying her to teach him his Catechism or Scriptures, or some good thing; common Di∣scourse he took no delight in, but did most eagerly desire to be sucking in of the knowledge of the things of God, Christ, his Soul, and another world. 7. He was hugely taken with the reading of the Book of Martyrs, and would be ready to leave his Dinner to go to his Book. 8. He was exceeding careful of redeeming and improving of time; scarce a moment of it, but he would give an excellent account of the ex∣pence of it; so that this Child
might have taught elder persons, and will questionless condemn their idle and unaccountable wast∣ing of those precious hours in which they should, as this sweet Child, have been laying in provision for Eternity. 9. He could not endure to read any thing over slightly, but what∣soever he read he dwelt upon it, laboured to understand it through∣ly, and remember it; and what he could not understand he would oft ask his Father or Mother the meaning of. 10. When any Christian friends have been discoursing with his Fa∣ther, if they began to talk any thing about Religion, to be sure they should have his company, and of his own accord he would leave all to hear any thing of Christ, and creep as close to them as he could, and listen as affectionately though it were for an hour or two: He was scarce ever known to express
the least token of weariness while he was hearing any thing that was good, and sometimes when neigh∣bours children would come and call him out, and entice him and beg of him to go with them, he could by no means be perswaded, though he might have had the leave of his Parents, if he had any hopes that any good body would come in to his fathers house. 11. He was very modest whilest any stranger was present, and was loth to ask them any questions, but as soon as they were gone, he would let his father know that there was little said or done but he observed it, and would reflect upon what was past in their discourse, and desire satisfaction in what he could not understand at present. 12. He was a Boy of almost pro∣digious parts for his age, as will ap∣pear by his solid and rational que∣stions; I shall mention but two of many.
13. The first was this, when he was reading by himself in Draiton's Poems about Noah's Flood and the Ark, he askt who built the Ark? it being answered that it was likely that Noah hired men to help him to build it: And would they (said he) build an Ark to save another, and not go into it themselves? 14. Another question he put was this; Whether had the greater glory Saints or Angels? It being answered, that Angels were the most excellent of Creatures, and its to be thought their nature is made capa∣ble of greater glory than mans. He said he was of another mind, and his reason was, because Angles were Ser∣vants, and Saints are Children; and that Christ never took upon him the nature of Angels, but he took upon him the nature of Saints, and by his being man he hath advanced human nature above the nature of Angels. 15. By this you may perceive the greatness of his parts, and the bent
of his thoughts, and thus he conti∣nued for several years together, la∣bouring to get more and more spi∣ritual knowledge, and to prepare for an endless life. 16. He was a Child of an excel∣lent sweet temper, wonderful duti∣ful to his Parents, ready and joyful to do what he was bid, and by no means would do any thing to dis∣please them, and if they were at any time seemingly angry, he would not stir from them till they were tho∣rowly reconciled to him. 17. He was not only good him∣self, but would do what he could to make others so too, especially those that were nearest to him; he was very watchful over his brethren and Sisters, and would not suffer them to use any unhandsome words or to do any unhandsome action, but he would be putting them upon that which was Good, and when he did at any time rebuke them, it was not Childishly and slightly, but
with great gravity and seriousness, as one that was not a little concer∣ned for Gods honour, and the eter∣nal welfare of their Souls. 18. He would go to his Father and Mother with great tenderness and compassion (being far from tel∣ling of tales) and beg of them to take more care of the Souls of his brethren and Sisters, and to take heed least they should go on in a sinful Christless state, and prove their sorrow and shame, and go to Hell when they die, and be ruined for ever. 19. He was exceedingly affected with hearing of the Word of God preached, and could not be satisfied except he could carry home much of the substance of what he heard; to this end he quickly got to learn Short-hand, and would give a very pretty account of any sermon that he heard. 20. He was much engaged in secret Duty, and in reading the
Scriptures; to be sure morning and evening he would be by himself, and was, no question wrestling with God. 21. He would get choice Scrip∣tures by heart, and was very perfect at his Catechism. 22. The Providences of God were not passed by without considerable observation by him. 23. In the time of the Plague he was exceedingly concerned about his Soul and Everlasting State; ve∣ry much by himself upon his knees. This Prayer was found written in Short-hand after his Death. O Lord God and merciful Father, take pitie upon me a miserable Sinner, and strengthen me, O Lord, in thy faith, and make me one of thy glori∣ous Saints in Heaven. O Lord keep me from this poisonous Infection, however not my will but thy will be done, O Lord, on earth as it is in heaven, but O Lord, if thou hast ap∣pointed
printed me to die by it, O Lord, fit me for death, and give me a good heart to bear up under my afflictions: O Lord God and merciful Father, take pity on me thy child, teach me O Lord thy Word, make me strong in faith. O Lord I have sinned a∣gainst thee, Lord pardon my sins; I had been in hell long ago if it had not been for thy mercy; O Lord, I pray thee to keep my Parents in thy truth, and save them from this Infection, if it be thy will, that they may live to bring me up in the truth: O Lord I pray thee stay this Infection that rageth in this City, and pardon their sins, and try them once more, and see if they will turn unto thee. Save me O Lord from this Infection, that I may live to praise and glorifie thy name, but O Lord if thou hast ap∣pointed me to die of it, fit me for death, that I may die with comfort; and O Lord, I pray thee to help me to bear up under all afflictions, for Christ his sake. Amen.
24. He was not a little concerned for the whole nation, and begged that God would pardon the sins of the Land, and bring it nearer to himself. 25. About the beginning of No∣vember, 1665. this sweet Child was smote with the Distemper, but he carried it with admirable pati∣ence under the hand of God. 26. These are some of his dying Expressions. — The Lord shall be my Physician, for he will cure both Soul and body.—Heaven is the best Hospital. —It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth good in his eyes. Again, —it is the Lord that taketh away my health, but I will say as Job did, Blessed be the name of the Lord. — If I should live longer, I should but sin against God. Looking upon his Father, he said, If the Lord would but lend me the least finger of his hand to lead me through the dark entry of Death, I will rejoice in him. 27. When a Minister came to him, amongst other things he spake
somewhat of life. He said, This is a wicked world, yet it is good to live with my Parents, but it is better to live in heaven. — 28. And hour and an half before his Death, the same Minister came again to visit him, and asked him, John, art thou not afraid to die: He answered, No, if the Lord will but comfort me in that hour. But said the Minister, How canst thou expect Comfort, seeing we deserve none? He answered, No, if I had my de∣serts I had been in hell long ago. But, replied the Minister, which way dost thou expect Comfort and Salvation, seeing thou art a Sinner. He answe∣red, In Christ alone. — In whom, about an hour and an half after, he fell asleep, saying he would take a long sleep, charging them that were about him not to wake him. He dyed when he was twelve years three weeks and a day old.
Example IX. Of a Child that was very eminent when she was between 5 and 6 years old, with some memorable passages of her life, who died about 1640. 1. ANne Lane was born of ho∣nest Parents in Colebrook in the County of Bucks, who was no sooner able to speak plain, and ex∣press any thing considerable of rea∣son, but she began to act as if she was sanctified from the very womb. 2. She was very solicitous about her Soul, what would become of it when she should die, and where she should live for ever, and what she should do to be saved, when she was about five years old. 3. She was wont to be oft ingaged in secret Prayer, and pouring out of her Soul in such a manner as is rarely to be heard of from one of her years. 4. I having occasion to lie at Cole∣brook sent for her Father, an old
Disciple, an Israelite indeed, and desired him to give me some account of his Experiences, and how the Lord first wrought upon him. 5. He gave me this answer, that he was of a child somewhat civil, honest, and as to man harmless, but was little acquainted with the power of Religion, till this sweet Child put him upon a thorow in∣quiry into the state of his Soul, and would still be begging of him, and pleading with him to redeem his time, and to act with life and vigor in the things of God, which was no small demonstration to him of the reality of invisibles, that a very Babe and suckling should speak so feelingly about the things of God, and be so greatly concerned not only about her own soul, but about her Fathers too, which was the occasion of his conversion, and the very thought of it was a quickning to him for thirty years, and he hopes never to wear off the Impressions of it from his spirit.
6. After this she (as I remember) put her Father upon Family duties, and if at any time he were for any time out of his shop, she would find him out, and with much sweet∣ness and humility beg of him to come home, and to remember the pretiousness of time, for which we must all give an account. 7. She was grieved if she saw any that conversed with her father if they were unprofitable, unsavoury or long in their discourse of common things. 8. Her own Language was the Language of Canaan: how solidly, profitably and spiritually would she talk? so that she made good people take great delight in her com∣pany, and justly drew the admiration of all that knew her. 9. She could not endure the company of common children, nor play, but was quite above all those things which most Children are ta∣ken with; her business was to be
reading, praying, discoursing, about the things of God, and any kind of business that her age and strength was capable of, idle she would not be by any means. 10. It was the greatest Recreati∣on to her to hear any good people talking about God, Christ, their Souls, the Scriptures, or any thing that concerned another life. 11. She had a strange contempt of the World, and scorned those things which most are too much pleased with. She could not be brought to wear any Laces, or any thing that she thought superfluous. 12. She would be complaining to her parents, if she saw any thing in them that she judged would not be for the honour of Religion, or suitable to that condition which the providence of God had set them in, in the world. 13. This Child was the joy and delight of all the Christians there∣abouts in those times, who was still
quickning and raising of the spirits of those that talked with her. This poor Babe was a great help to both Father and mother, and her memory is sweet to this day. 14. She continued thus to walk as a stranger in the world, and one that was making hast to a better place. And after she had done a great deal of work for God and her own soul, and others too, she was called home to rest, and received in∣to the arms of Jesus before she was ten years old; she departed about 1640.
Example X. Of a Child that was awakened when she was between seven and eight years old, with some account of her last hours and triumphant Death. 1. TAbitha Alder was the Daughter of a holy and Reverend Minister in Kent, who lived near Gravesend. She was much instructed in the holy Scrip∣tures and her Catechism by her Father and Mother, but there ap∣peared nothing extraordinary in her till she was between seven and eight years old. 2. About which time, when she was sick, one asked her what she thought would become of her if she should die? She answered, that she was greatly afraid that she should go to hell. 3. Being askt why she was afraid she should go to hell? She answered, because she feared that she did not love God.
4. Again being askt how she did know she did not love God; she replyed, what have I done for God ever since I was born; and besides this, I have been taught, that he that loves God keeps his commandments but I have kept none of them all. 5. Being further demanded if she would not fain love God? She an∣swered, yes with all her heart, if she could, but she found it a hard thing to love one she did not see. 6. She was advised to beg of God a heart to love him: She answered, she was afraid it was too late. 7. Being asked again whether she was not sorry that she could not love God: She answered, yes, but was still afraid it was too late. 8. Upon this, seeing her in such a desponding condition, a dear friend of hers spent the next day in Fasting and prayer for her. 9. After this, that Christian friend askt her how she did now? She an∣swered with a great deal of joy, that
now she blessed the Lord, she loved the Lord Jesus dearly, she felt she did love him. O, said she, I love him dearly. 10. Why, saith her friend, did you not say yesterday, that you did not love the Lord, and that you could not? What did you mean to speak so strangely? Sure (said she) it was Satan that did put it into my mind: But now I love him, O blessed be God for the Lord Jesus Christ. 11. After this she had a discovery of her approaching Dissolution, which was no small comfort to her. Anon (said she with a holy Tri∣umph) I shall be with Jesus, I am married to him, he is my husband, I am his Bride, I have given my self to him, and he hath given him∣self to me, and I shall live with him for ever. 12. This strange language made the hearers even stand astonished: but thus she continued for some little time in a kind of extafie of joy
admiring the excellency of Christ rejoycing in her interest in him, and longing to be with him. 13. After a while some of her friends standing by her, observed a more than ordinary earnestness and fixedness in her countenance; they said one to another, look how earnest∣ly she looks, sure she seeth something. 14. One asked what it was she fixed her eyes upon so eagerly: I warrant (saith one that was by) she seeth death a coming. 15. No (said she) it is glory that I see, 'tis that I fix mine eye upon. 16. One askt her what was glory like? She answered, I can't speak what, but I am going to it; will you go with me? I am going to glory, O that all of you were to go with me to that glory! with which words her Soul took wing, and went to the possession of that glory which she had some believing fight of before. She died when she was between 8 and 9 years old, about 1644.
Example XI. Of a Child that was greatly affected with the things of God when she was very young, with an exact Account of her admirable Carri∣age upon her Death bed. 1. Susanna Bicks was born at Lei∣den in Holland, Jan. 24. 1650. of very religious Parents, whose great care was to instruct and cate∣chise this their Child, and to present her to the Ministers of the place, to be publickly instructed and catechised. 2. It pleased the Lord to bless holy education, the good example of her Parents and catechising, to the good of her Soul, so that she soon had a true savour and relish of what she was taught, and made an admirable use of it in a time of need, as you shall hear afterwards. 3. She was a Child of great du∣tifulness to her Parents, and of a very sweet humble spiritual nature,
and not only the truth, but the pow∣er and eminency of Religion did shine in her so clearly, that she did not only comfort the hearts of her Parents, but drew the admiration of all that were witnesses of Gods works of love upon her, and may well be proposed as a pattern not only to Children, but to persons of riper years, 4. She continued in a course of Religious Duties for some consider∣able time, so that her life was more excellent than most Christians, but in her last sickness she excelled her self, and her deportment was so ad∣mirable, that partly through won∣der and astonishment, and partly through sorrow, many observable things were past by without com∣mitting to paper, which deserved to have been written in letters of gold: But take these which follow as some of many which were taken from her dying lips, and first published by religious and judicious Christians
in Dutch, afterward translated into Scotch, and with a little alteration of the stile (for the benefit of English Children) brought into this form by me. 5. In the month of August, 1664. When the Pestilence raged so much in Holland, this sweet Child was smitten, and as soon as she felt her∣self very ill, she was said to break forth with abundance of sense and feeling in these following words: If thy Law were not my delight, I should perish in my affliction. 6. Her Father coming to her to encourage her in her sickness, said to her, be of good comfort my Child for the Lord will be near to thee and us, under this heavy and sore Trial, he will not forsake us though he chasten us. Yea, father (said she) our heavenly Father doth Chasten us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness; no cha∣stisement seemeth for the present to be joyous, but grievous, but after∣wards
it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness to them which are exercised thereby. The Lord is now chastening of me upon this sick bed, but I hope he will bless it so to me as to cause it to yield to me that blessed fruit, according to the riches of his mercies which fail not. 7. After this she spake to God with her eyes lift up to Heaven, saying, Be merciful to me, O Fa∣ther, be merciful to me a sinner ac∣cording to thy word. 8. Then looking upon her sor∣rowful Parents, she said; It is said, Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee, and he will never suffer the righteous to be moved. Therefore, my dear father and mo∣ther, cast all your care upon him who causes all things to go well that do concern you. 9. Her mother said unto her, O my dear child, I have no small com∣fort from the Lord in thee, and the fruit of his grace whereby thou hast
been so much exercised unto godli∣ness in reading the Word, in Pray∣er and gracious Discourse, to the edification of thy self and us. The Lord himself who gave thee to us, make up this loss, if it be his plea∣sure to take thee away from us. 10. Dear mother (said she) though I leave you and you me, yet God will never leave us; for it is . Can a woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the fruit of her womb, yet will not I forget thee, behold I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands. O com∣fortable words both for mother and children! Mark, dear Mother, how fast the Lord keepes and holdeth his people, that he doth even grave them upon the palms of his hands. Though I must part with you, and you with me, yet blessed be God, he will never part either from you or me. 11. Being weary with much speaking she desired to rest a while,
but after a little time awaking a∣gain, her father asked her how it was with her? She made no direct answer, but asked what day it was? her father said it was the Lords day. Well then, said she, have you given up my name to be remembred in the publick Prayers of the Church: Her father told her he had. I have learnt, said she, that the effectual fervent Prayer of the righteous avail∣eth much. 12. She had a very high esteem for the faithful Ministers of Christ, and much desired their company where she was; but knowing the hazards that such a visit might ex∣pose them and the Church to, she would by no means suffer that the Ministers should come near her per∣son, but chose rather to throw her self upon the armes of the Lord, and to improve that knowledge she had in the Word, and her former expe∣rience, and the visits of private Christians, and those which the
Church had appointed in such ca∣ses to visit and comfort the sick. 13. One of those which came to visit her, was of very great use to her to comfort her, and lift her up in some measure above the fears of death. 14. Though young, she was very much concerned for the interest of God and Religion, for Gospel Mi∣nisters, and for the Sins and the Decay of the power of Godliness in her own Countrey; which will further appear by what may follow. 15. Her father coming in to her, found her in an extraordinary passi∣on of weeping, and askt her what was the cause of her great sorrow? She answered, have I not cause to weep, when I hear that Domine de Wit was taken sick this day in his Pul∣pit; and went home very ill? Is not this a sad sign of Gods displeasure to our Countrey, when God smiteth such a faithful Pastor. 16. She had a high valuation of
God, and could speak in David's language, whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on earth that I can desire in comparison of thee. She was much lifted up above the fears of Death; what else was the meaning of such expressions as these? O how do I long! even as the Heart panteth after the water brooks, so my soul panteth after thee, O God, for God, the living God, when shall I come and appear before God. 17. She was a great hater of sin, and did with much grief and self-abhorrency reflect upon it; but that which lay most upon her heart was the Corruption of her Nature and Original Sin. How oft would she cry out in the words of the Psalm∣ist, Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, and I was altogether born in sin: She could never lay her self low enough under a sense of that Original Sin which she brought with her into the world.
18. She spake many things very judiciously of the old man and put∣ting it off, and of the new man and putting that on; which shewed that she was no stranger to conver∣sion, and that she in some measure understood what Mortification, Self-denial and taking up of her Cross, and following of Christ meant. That Scripture was much in her mouth, The sacrifices of God are a contrite heart; a broken and a contrite spirit, O God, thou wilt not despise. That brokenness of heart (said she) which is built upon and flows from faith, and that faith which is built upon Christ, who is the proper and alone Sacrifice for Sin. These are her own words. 19. Afterwards she desired to rest, and when she had slumbred a while, she said, O dear father and Mother, how weak do I feel my self! My dear Child (said her fa∣ther) God will in his tender mercy strengthen thee in thy weakness.
Yea father (said she) that is my con∣fidence: For it is said, The bruised reed he will not break, and the smo∣king flax he will not quench. 20. Then she discoursed excel∣lently of the nature of Faith, and desired that the eleventh of the He∣brews should be read unto her; at the reading of which she cryed out, O what a stedfast loyal faith was that of Abraham, which made him willing to offer up his own and only Son! Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. 21. Her Father and Mother hearing her excellent discourse, and seeing her admirable carriage, burst out into abundance of tears: upon which she pleaded with them to be patient and content with the hand of God. O (said she) why do you weep at this rate over me, seeing, I hope you have no reason to questi∣on, but if the Lord take me out of this miserable world it shall be well
with me to all eternity. You ought to be well satisfied, seeing it is said God is in heaven, and doth whatsoever pleaseth him: and do you not pray every day, that the Will of God may be done upon earth as it is in heaven. Now farther this is Gods will that I should lie upon this sick bed, and of this disease; shall we not be content when our Prayers are answered? Would not your extreme sorrow be murmuring a∣gainst God, without whose good pleasure nothing comes to pass. Al∣though I am struck with this sad disease, yet because it is the will of God, that doth silence me, and I will as long as I live pray that Gods will may be done and not mine. 22. Seeing her Parents still very much moved, she further argued with them from the Providence of God, which had a special hand in every common thing, much more in the disposal of the lives of men and women: Are not two Sparrows
sold for a farthing, and not one of them falls to the ground without our heavenly Father? Yea, the hairs of our head are all numbred; there∣fore fear not, you are of more value than many Sparrows. Adversity and Prosperity they are both good. Some things seem evil in our eyes, but the Lord turns all to the good of them which are his. 23. She came then to speak par∣ticularly concerning the Plague, Doth not (said she) the Pestilence come from God; why else doth the Scripture say, shall there be evil in the City which I have not sent? What do those people mean, which say the Pestilence comes from the Air? Is not the Lord the Creator and Ruler of the Air, and are not the Elements under his Govern∣ment? Or if they say it comes from the Earth, hath he not the same power and influence upon that too? What talk they of a Ship that came from Africa; have we not read long
ago together out of Lev. 26.25. I shall bring a sword upon you, and a∣venge the quarrel of my covenant, and when you are assembled in the Cities, then will I bring the pestilence in the midst of you. 24. After this, having taken some little rest, she said, O now is the day for the opening of the first question of the Catechism, and if we were there, we should hear, that whether in death or life a Believer is Christs, who hath redeemed us by his own precious blood from the power of the Devil; and then she quoted, Rom. 14.7, 8. For none of us liveth unto himself, and none of us dieth to himself. For whether we live we live unto the Lord, and whether we die we die unto the Lord, whether then we live or die, we are the Lords. Then be comforted, for whether I live or die, I am the Lords, O why do you afflict your selves thus? but what shall I say? with weeping I came into the world, and with
weeping I must go out again. O my dear Parents, better is the day of my death than the day of my birth. 25. When she had thus encoura∣ged her Father and Mother, she desi∣red her Father to pray with her, and to request of the Lord that she might have a quiet and peaceable passage in∣to another world. 26. After her father had prayed for her, he asked her whether he should send for the Physician; she answered, by no means, for I am now beyond the help of Doctors. But said he, my Child, we are to use the ordinary means appointed by the Lord for our help as long as we live, and let the Lord do as seemeth good in his eyes. But said she, give me the heavenly Physician he is the only helper, doth not he say, Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give ye rest, and doth not he bid us call upon him in the day of distress, and he will deliver us, and we shall glorifie him:
Therefore, dear father, call upon him yet again for me. 27. About this time a Christian friend came in to visit her, who was not a little comforted when he heard and saw so much of the grace of God living in a poor young thing, which could not but so far affect him as to draw tears of joy and admiration from him, and her deport∣ment was so teaching, that he could not but acknowledg himself greatly edifi'd and improv'd by her carriage and language. 28. That which was not the least observable in her, was the ar∣dent affection she had for the holy Scriptures and her Catechism, in which she was throughly instructed by the godly Divines of the place where she lived which she could not but own as one of the greatest mercies next the Lord Christ. O how did she bless God for her Ca∣techism, and beg of her Fa∣ther to go particularly to those Mini∣sters that had taken so much pains with her to instruct her in her Ca∣techism, and to thank them from her a dying Child for their good in∣structions,
and to let them under∣stand, for their encouragement to go on in that work of Catechising. how refreshing those truths were now to her in the hour of her di∣stress. O that sweet catechising, said she, unto which I did always resort with gladness, and attended without weariness! 29. She was much above the vanities of the world, and took no pleasure at all in those things which usually take up the heart and time of young ones. She would say, that she was grieved and ashamed both for young and old, to see how glad and mad they were upon vanity. and how foolishly they spent their time. 30. She was not forgetful of the care and love of her Master and Mistress which taught her to read and work, but she desired that thanks might also be particularly given to them. Indeed she thought she could never be thankful enough
both to God and man for that kind∣ness that she had experience of: But again and again she desired to be sure to thank the Ministers that in∣structed her either by catechising or preaching. 31. After some rest her Father askt her again how she did, and be∣gan to express somewhat of that sa∣tisfaction and joy that he had taken in her former diligence in her read∣ing the Scriptures and writing, and her dutifulness, and that great pro∣gress that she had made in the things of God, upon which she humbly and sweetly desired to own God and his kindess in her godly education, and said that she esteem∣ed her holy education under such Parents and Ministers as a greater portion than ten thousand Gilders, for thereby I have learned to com∣fort my self out of the Word of God, which the World besides could never have afforded. 32. Her Father perceiving her to
grow very weak, said, I perceive Child thou art very weak: It is true Sir (said she) I feel my weak∣ness increaseth, and I see your sor∣row increasing too, which is a piece of my affliction; be content, I pray you, it is the Lord which doth it, and let you and I say with David, Let us fall into the Lords hands, for his mercies are great. 33. She laid a great charge upon her Parents not to be over-grieved for her after her death, urging that of David upon them, while the Child was sick, he fasted and wept, but when it died, he washed his face and sat up and eat, and said, Can I bring him back again from death, I shall go to him but he shall not return to me. So ought you to say after my death, our Child is well, for we know it shall be well with them that trust in the Lord. She did lay a more particular and streight charge upon her mother; saying to her, dear mother, who
have done so much for me, you must promise me one thing before I die; and that is, that you will not sorrow over-much for me: I speak thus to you, because I am afraid of your great affection; con∣sider others Losses what they have been; Remember Job; forget not what Christ foretold; In the world you shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer in me you shall have peace; and must the Apostles suffer so great tribulation, and must we suf∣fer none? Did not Jesus Christ my only Life and Saviour sweat drops of blood? Was he not in a bitter agony, mocked spit at, nailed to the Cross, and a Spear thrust tho∣row his blessed side, and all this for my sake, for my stinking sins sake? did not he cry out, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Did not Christ hang naked upon the Cross to purchase for me the garments of salvation, and to cloth me with his righteousness, for there
is Salvation in no other name. 34. Being very feeble and weak, she said, O if I might quietly sleep in the bosome of Jesus! and that till then he would strengthen me! O that he would take me into his arms as he did those little ones, where he said, Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven, and he took them into his arms, and laid his hands on them and blessed them. I lie here as a child, O Lord I am thy Child, re∣ceive me into thy gracious arms. O Lord, grace! grace! and not justice, for if thou shouldest enter into judg∣ment with me, I cannot stand, yea none living should be just in thy sight. 35. After this she cryed out, O how faint am I! but fearing least she should dishearten her mother, she said, while there is life there is hope: If it should please the Lord to recover me, how careful would I be to please you in my work and
learning, and whatsoever you should require of me. 36. After this the Lord did a∣gain send her strength, and she la∣boured to spend it all for Christ in the awakening, edifying and com∣forting of those that were about her; but her chiefest endeavour was to support her dear Parents from extraordinary sorrow, and to comfort them out of the Scriptures, telling them that she knew that all things did work together for the good of them that did love God, even to those which are called according to his purpose; O God establish me with thy free Spirit! Who shall sepa∣rate us from the love of Christ, I am perswaded that neither life nor death, nor angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present nor things to come, nor heighth nor depth, nor any other creature shall separate us from the love of God which is towards us in Christ Jesus our Lord. My sheep (saith Christ) hear my voice,
and I know them and they follow me and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, and no man shall pluck them out of my hands. My Father who gave them me is greater than all, and none shall pull them out of my Fathers hands. Thus she seemed to attain a holy confidence in God, and an assurance of her state as to another world. 37. When she had a little refreshed her self with rest, she burst forth with abundance of joy and glad∣ness of heart, with a holy triumph of faith saying out, Death is swallow∣ed up of victory, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law, but thanks be to God who hath given us the victory through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 38. That she might the better support her friends, she still insisted upon that which might take off some of their burden, by urging the necessity of death: We are from the
earth and to the earth we must return: is the mother of us all, the dust shall Dust turn to dust from whence it is, and the Spirit to God which gave it. 39. The She discoursed of the shortness of mans life. O what is the life of man! the days of man upon the earth are as the grass and the flowers of the field, so he flourish∣eth, the wind passeth over it and it is no more, and his place knows him no more. 40. She further urged the sin and sorrow that did attend us in this life, and the longer we live the more we sin, now the Lord will free me from that sin and sorrow. We know not the thoughts of God, yet we do know so much, that they are mercy and peace, and to give an expected end. But what shall I say, my life shall not continue long, I feel much weakness, O Lord look upon me graciously, have pitie upon my weak distressed heart. I am oppressed, undertake for me, that
I may stand fast and overcome. 41. She was very frequent in spiritual ejaculations, and it was no small comfort to her, that the Lord Christ did pray for her, and pro∣mise to send his spirit to comfort her, It's said (said she) I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter. O let not him leave me! O Lord, continue with me till my battel and work be fi∣nished. 42. She had very low and under∣valuing thoughts of her self and her own reighteousness; what meant she else to cry out in such language as that, None but Christ! without thee I can do nothing. Christ is the true vine! O let me be a branch of that vine! What poor worms are we! O dear Father, how lame and halting do we go in the wayes of God and Salvation. We know but in part, but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfct shall be done away. O that
I had attained to that now: But what are we of our selves? not only weakness and nothingness, but wic∣kedness. For all the thoughts and imaginations of mans heart are on∣ly evil, and that continually; we are by nature children of wrath, and are conceived and born in sin and unrighteousness. Oh! Oh! this wretched and vile thing Sin! but thanks be to God who hath redeemed me fromit. 43. She comforted her self and her Father in that great Scripture Rom. 8.15, 16, 17. Ye have not re∣ceived the Spirit of bondage again to fear but ye have received the spirit of adoption by which ye cry Abba, father. It is the spirit that witnes∣eth with our spirits, that we are the children of God; and if Children, then are we heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ. You see thence father, that I shall be a fel∣low heir with Christ, who hath said, In my fathers house are many
mansions, if it were not so I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and take you to my self, that where I am there ye may be also. O Lord take me to thy self. Behold, dear Mother, he hath prepared a place and dwelling for me. 44. Yea, my dear child, said her mother, he shall strengthen you with his holy Spirit, untill he hath fitted and prepared you fully for that place which he hath prepared for you. 45. Yea Mother, it is said in the 84. Psalm, How lovely are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, my soul doth thirst, and longeth for the Courts of the Lord: One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand; yea, I had rather be a Door keeper in the house of God than dwell in the tents of the wicked. Read that Psalm, dear Mother, therewith we may comfort one another. As for me, I
am more and more spent, and draw near my last hour. 46. Then she desired to be pray'd with, and begged that the Lord would give her an easie passage. 47. After this, she turned to her mother, and with much affection she said, Ah my dear and loving Mother; that which cometh from the heart doth ordinarily go to the heart, once more come and kiss me before I leave you. 48. She was not a little concern∣ed about the souls of the rest of her re∣lations, and did particularly charge it upon her father to do what he could possibly to bring them up in the ways of God. O let my sister be trained up in the Scriptures and Catechising, as I have been. 49. I formerly wept for my Si∣ster, thinking that she should die before me, and now she weepeth for me, and then she kissed her weeping Sister. Also she took her young little Sister in her arms, a
Child of six months old, and she kissed it with much affection, as if her very bowels had moved within her, and spoke with many heart-breaking words both to her Parents and the children. 50. Her Father spake to one that was by to take the poor little Child away from her, from the hazard of that fiery distemper, and bid his daughter to give her from her, for he had already too much to bear. Well Father, said she, did not God preserve the three Children in the fiery furnace, and did not you teach me that Scripture, When thou passest thorow the Fire, thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. 51. She had a very strong Faith in the doctrine of the Resurrection, and did greatly solace her Soul with excellent Scriptures, which do speak the happy state of Believers as soon as their Souls are separated from their Bodies, and what she
quoted out of the Scripture she did excellently and suitably apply to her own use, incomparably above the common reach of her sex and age. That in 1. Cor. 15.42. was a great support to her, The body is sown in corruption, but it shall be raised incorruptible, it is sown in dis∣honour, it shall be raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, but it shall be raised in power. And then she sweet∣ly applies it, and takes in this cor∣dial. Behold thus it is, and thus it shall be with my poor mortal flesh, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, because they rest from their labours, and their works do follow them. The righteous perish and no man layeth it to heart, and the up∣right are taken away, and no man regardeth it, that they are taken away from the evil to come, they shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, every one who walked in their up∣rightness. Behold now Father I shall rest and sleep in that Bedchamber.
52. Then she quoted Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter end upon the earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold, and net another, though my reins be consumed within me. Behold now Father, this very skin which you see, and this very flesh which you see, shall be raised up again; and these very eyes which now are so dim, shall on that day see and behold my dear and preci∣ous Redeemer; albeit the worms eat up my flesh, yet with these eyes shall I behold God, even I my self, and not another for me. 53. Then she quoted Joh. 5.28: Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice and come forth, those who have done good unto the Resurrection of Life. See Father I shall rise in that day, and then I
shall behold my Redeemer; then shall he say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the beginning of the world. 54. Behold now I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life that I now live in the flesh is by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. I am saved, and that not of my self, it is the gift of God, not of works, that no man should boast. 55. My dear Parents, now we must shortly part, my speech faileth me, pray the Lord for a quiet close to my combat. 56. Her Parents replied, Ah our dear child how sad is that to us that we must part! She answered, I go to heaven, and there we shall find one another again, I go to Jesus Christ. 57. The she comforted her self to think of her seeing her precious brother and sister again in glory.
I go to my brother Jacob, who did so much cry and call upon God to the last moment of his breath: And to my little sister, who was but three years old when she died: who when we asked her whether she would die; answered, yes, if it be the Lords will. I will go to my little Brother, if it be the Lords will, or I will stay with my mo∣ther, if it be the Lords will. But I know that I shall die and go to heaven, and to God. O see, how so small a babe had so much given it to behave it self every way, and in all things so submissively to the will of God, as if it had no will of its own; but if it be the will of God, if it please God, nothing for her, but what was the will and pleasure of God: And therefore, dear Father and Mother, give the Lord thanks for this his free and rich grace, and then I shall the more gladly be gone. Be gracious then, O Lord, unto me also, be gracious
to me. Wash me thorowly from my unrighteousness, and cleanse me from my sin. 58. After this her spirit was re∣freshed with the sense of the par∣don of her Sins, which made her to cry out, Behold God hath wash∣ed away my sins, O how do I long to die! The Apostle said, In this body we earnestly sight and groan, longing for our house which is in hea∣ven, that we may be clothed there∣with. Now I also lie here sighing and longing for that dwelling which is above. In the last Ser∣mon which I heard, or ever shall hear, I heard this in the New Church, which is matter of great comfort unto me. 59. Then she repeated several notable Scriptures which were quo∣ted in that Sermon, afterward she desired to be pray'd with, and put petitions into their mouths, viz that all her sins might be forgiven, that she might have more abundant
faith, and the assurance of it; and the comfort of that assurance, and the continuation and strength of that comfort, according as her ne∣cessity should require. Afterwards she prayed her self and continued a pretty space. 60. When Prayer was ended, she called to her father and mother, and demanded of them whether she had at any time angred or grieved them, or done any thing that did not be∣come her? and begged of them to forgive her. 61. They answered her, that if all children had carried themselves so to their Parents as she had done, there would be less grief and sor∣row on all hands than there is; and if any such thing hath escaped thee, we would forgive it with all our hearts, you have done as became a good Child. 62. Her heart being quieted with her peace with God and her Pa∣rents, she began to dispose of her
Books; particularly she intreated her Mother to keep Mr. De Wit's Ca∣techise Lectures as long as she lived, for her sake, and let my little Sister have my other Book as my remem∣brance. 63. Then she said she felt her breast exceedingly pained, by which she knew that her end was very nigh. Her father spake to her as he was able, telling her the Lord would be her strength in the hour of her ne∣cessity. 64. Yea (said she) The Lord is my Shepherd, although I pass through the valley of the shadow of death, I will not fear, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me: and it is said, the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Shall I not suf∣fer and indure, seeing my glorious Redeemer was pleased to suffer so much for me. O how was he mock∣ed and crowned with thorns that
he might purchase a Crown of righ∣teousness for us: And that is the crown of which Paul spoke, when he said, I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give unto me in that day; and not only to me, but to all who love his ap∣prearing. 65. Ye are bought with a price▪ therefore Glorifie God with your souls and bodies which are his. Must I not then exalt and bless him while I have a being; who hath bought me, ye bought me with his blood? Surely he hath born our griefs, and took our infirmities; and we esteemed him smitten and stricken of God: But he was wounded for our trans∣gressions and bruised for our sin, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes are we healed, and the Lord laid upon him the ini∣quity of us all. Behold the Lamb of
God that taketh away the sins of the world: That Lamb is Jesus Christ who hath satisfied for my sins. So saith Paul, Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and through the spirit of our God. 66. My end is now very near, now I shall put on white raiment and be clothed before the Lamb, that spotless Lamb, and with his spotless righteousness. Now are the angels making ready to carry my soul before the throne of God. These are they who are come out of great tribulation, who have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. 67. She spoke this with a dying voice, but full of spirit and of the power of faith. 68. Her lively assurance she further uttred in the words of the Apostle. We know that if this earthly house, if our tabernacle be dissolv'd, we have one which is built of God, which is eternal
in the heavens; for in this we sigh for our house which is in heaven, that we may be clothed therewith. 69. There Father you see that my body is this Tabernacle which now shall be broken down; my Soul shall now part from it, and shall be taken up into the heavenly Para∣dise, into that heavenly Jerusalem. There shall I dwell and go no more out, but sit and sing, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of hosts, the Lord of Sabbaths! Her last words were these; O Lord God into thy hands I commit my spirit, O Lord be gratious, be merciful to me a poor sinner. — And here she fell asleep. 70. She died the first of Septem∣ber, 1664. Betwixt seven and eight in the evening, in the fourteenth year of her age; having obtained that which she so oft intreated of the Lord, a quiet and easie depar∣ture, and the end of her faith, the salvation of her soul.
Example XII. Of the excellent carriage of a Child upon his death bed when but seven years old. IAcoh Bicks, the Brother of Su∣sannah Bicks, was born in Leiden in the year, 1657. and had religi∣ous education under his godly Pa∣rents, the which the Lord was plea∣sed to sanctifie to his Conversion, and by it lay in excellent provisions to live upon in an hour of distress. 2. This sweet little Child was visited of the Lord of a very fore Sickness upon the sixth of August, 1664. three or four weeks before his Sister, of whose life and death we have given you some account al∣ready: in his distemper he was for the most part very sleepy and drousie till near his death, but when he did wake he was wont still to fall a praying. 3. Once when his Parents had
prayed with him, they asked him if they should once more send for the Physician? No (said he) I will have the Doctor no more; the Lord will help me: I know he will take me to himself, and then he shall help all. 4. Ah my dear child, said his Father, that grieveth my heart: Well (said the Child) Father let us pray, and the Lord shall be near for my helper. 5. When his Parents had prayed with him again, he said, come now dear Father and Mother and kiss me, I know that I shall die. 6. Farewell dear Father and Mo∣ther, Farewell dear sister, farewell all. Now shall I go to heaven unto God and Jesus Christ, and the holy angels: Father, know you not what is said by Jeremiah: Blessed is he who trusteth in the Lord: now I trust in him, and he will bless me. And in 1 John 2. it is said, Little Children love not the world, for the world passeth away.
7. Away then all that is in the world, away with all my pleasant things in the world: away with my Dagger for where I go there is nothing to do with Daggers and Swords; men shall not fight there but praised God. Away with all my books; there shall I know suffici∣ently, and be learned in all things of true wisdom without books. 8. His Father being touched to hear his child speak at this rate could not well tell what to say; but, my dear child, the Lord will be near thee and uphold thee. 9. Yea Father (said he) the A∣postle Peter saith, God resisteth the proud, but he giveth grace to the humble. I shall humble my self under the mighty hand of God, and the shall help and lift me up: 10. O my dear child, said his Father, hast thou so strong a faith? 11. Yea, said the Child, God hath given me so strong a faith up∣on himself through Jesus Christ
that the Devil himself shall flee from me, for it is said, He who believeth in the Son hath everlasting life, and he hath overcome the wicked one. Now I believe in Jesus Christ my Redeemer, and he will not leave or forsake me, but shall give unto me eternall life, and then I shall sing, holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Sabbath. 12. Then with a short word of Prayer, Lord be merciful to me a poor sinner, he quietly breathed out his Soul, and sweetly slept in Jesus when he was about seven years old. He died August 8. 1664. Hallelujah.
Example XIII. Of one that began to look towards Heaven, when he was very young, with many eminent passages of his life, and his joyful death, when he was eleven years and three quarters old. 1. Iohn Harvy was born in Lon∣don, in the year 1654. His Fa∣ther was a Dutch Merchant, he was piously educated under his virtuous mother, and soon began to suck in divine things with no small de∣light. 2. The first thing very obser∣vable in him was, that when he was two years and eight months old, he could speak as well as other children do usually at five years old. 3. His Parents judging that he was then a little to young to send out to school, let him have his
liberty to play a little about their yard, but instead of playing, he found out a school of his own ac∣cord hard by home, and went to the school-Mistriss, and intreated her to teach him to read, and so he went for some time to school without the knowledge of his Parents, and made a very strange progress in his learning, & was able to read distinct∣ly before most Children are able to know their letters. 4. He was wont to ask many seri∣ous and weighty questions about mat∣ters which concerned his soul and Eternity. 5. His Mother being greatly troubled upon the death of one of his Uncles, this Child came to his Mother, and said; Mother, though my Uncle be dead, doth not the Scripture say, he must rise again; yea, and I must die, and so must every body, and it will not be long before Christ will come to judge the
world and then we shall see one another again, I pray Mother do not weep so much. This grave Counsel he gave his Mother, when he was not quite five years old, by which her sorrow for her Bro∣ther was turned into admiration at her Child, and she was made to sit silent and quiet under that smarting stroke. 9. After this, his Parents re∣moved to Aberdeen in Scotland, and setled their Child under an able and a painful School Master there, whose custome was upon the Lords day in the morning, to examine his schollers concerning the Sermons that they had heard the former Lords day, and to add some other questions which might try the understanding and know∣ledge of his Schollers; the question that was once proposed to his form was, whether God had a mother? none of all the Schollars could answer it, till it came to John Harvy,
who being asked, whether God had a Mother, answered no; as he was God, he could not have a Mo∣ther, but as he was man, he had; this was before he was quite six years old. His Master was somewhat amazed at the Childs answer, and took the first opportunity to go to his Mother, to thank her for instructing her Son so well, but she replyed, that he was never taught that from her, but that he understood it by reading, and his own observation. 7. He was a Child that was extraordinary inquisitive, and full of good questions, and very careful to observe and remember what he heard. 8. He had a great hatred of whatsoever he knew to be dis∣pleasing to God, and was so greatly concerned for the honour of God, that he would take on bitterly, if that any gross sins were committed before him. And he
had a deep sense of the worth of Souls, and was not a little grieved when he saw any one do that which he knew was dangerous to their Souls. 9. One day seeing one of his near Relations come into his Fa∣thers House distemper'd with drink as he thought, he quickly went very seriously to him and wept over him, that he should so offend God, and hazard his Soul, and beg'd of him to spend his time better then in drinking and gaming, and this he did, without any instruction from his parents, but from an inward principle of grace, and love to God and souls as it is verily believed. 10. When he was at play with other Children, he would be often times putting in some word to keep them from naughty talk, or wicked actions, and if any did take the Lords name in vain, or do any thing that was not becoming of a good Child, they should soon hear of it
with a witness; nay once hearing a boy speak very profanely, and that after two or three admonitions, he would not forbear nor go out of his company neither, he was so transported with zeal, that he could not forbear falling upon him to beat him; but his Mother chiding of him for it, he said, that he could not indure to hear the name of God so a∣bused by a wretched boy. This is ob∣served not to vindicate the act, but to take notice of his zeal. 11. He was a Child that took great delight in the Company of good men, and especially, Mini∣sters and Schollers; and if he had any leisure time, he would improve it by visiting of such, whose dis∣course might make him wiser and better; and when he was in their society, to be sure, his talk was more like a Christian and Scholler, then a Child. 12. One day after School time was over, he gave Mr. Andrew
Kant. (one of the Ministers of Aberdeen) a visit, and asked him several solid questions, but the good man asked him some questions out of his Catechism: and finding him not so ready in the answers as he should have been, did a little re∣prove him, and told him, that he must be sure to get his Catechism perfectly by heart; the Child took the reproof very well, and went home and fell very hot upon his Catechism, and never left, till he got it by heart, and not only so, but he would be enquiring into the sense and meaning of it. 13. He was so greatly taken with his Catechism, that he was not con∣tent to learn it himself but he would be putting others upon learning their Catechism, especially, those that were nearest to him; he could not be satisfied, till he had perswa∣ded his Mothers Maids to learn it, and when they were at work, he would be still following them with
some good question or other; so that the Child seemed to be taken up with the thoughts of his Soul and Gods honour, and the good of others Souls. 14. He was a conscientious observer of the Lords day, spend∣ing all the time either in secret prayer, or reading the Scriptures, and good books; Learning of his Catechism, and learning of the Word of God, and publick duties; and was not only careful in the performance of these duties himself, but was ready to put all that he knew upon a strict observation of the Lords day; and was exceedingly grieved at the pro∣fanation of it; one Lords day a ser∣vant of his Fathers going out of the house upon an extraordinary oc∣casion to fetch some Beer, he took on so bitterly, that he could scarce be pacified, because that holy day was so abused (as he judged) in his fathers house. 15. When he was betwixt six
and seven years old, it pleased God to afflict him with sore eyes which was no small exercise to him, because it kept him from School which he loved as well as many boys do their play, and that which was worse, he was commanded by the Doctor not to read any Book whatso∣ever, at home. But, O how was this poor Child grieved, that he might not have liberty to read the holy Scriptures; and for all their charge, he would get by himself, and stand by the windows, and read the Bible and good Books; yea he was so greedy of reading the Scripture, and took so much de∣light in it, that he would scarce allow himself sometimes time to dress himself for reading, the Word of God was his great de∣light. Yea, though he hath been bear for studying so much, yet judging it Gods command that he should give himself up to read¦ing,
he could not be beat off from it, till he was so bad, that he had like never to have recovered his sight more. 16. It was his practice to be much by himself in secret prayer, and he was careful to manage that work, so as that it might be as secret as possible it might be, but his frequency and constancy made it to be so easily observed, upon which, one time one having a great mind to know what this sweet babe prayed for, got into a place near him, and heard him very earnestly praying for the Church of God, desiring that the Kingdom of the Gospel might be spread over the whole world, and that the kingdom of grace might more and more come into the hearts of Gods people, and that the Kingdome of glory might be hastned. He was wont to con∣nue half an hour, sometimes an hour, upon his knees together.
17. He was much above the vanities that most Children are taken with, and was indeed too much a man to live long. 18. He was very humble and mo∣dest, and did by no means affect fineness in apparrel, but hated any thing more than necessaries either in cloths or diet. 19. When he perceived either his Brother or Sister pleased with their new clothes, he would with a great deal of gravity reprove their folly, and when his reproof sig∣nified little, he would bewail their vanity. 20. Once he had a new suit brought from the Tailors, which when he looked on, he found some ribbons at the knees, at which he was grieved: asking his Mo∣ther, whether those things would keep him warm. No, Child said his Mother, why then said he, do you suffer them to be put here, you are mistaken, if you think
such things please me; and I doubt some that are better then us, may want the money that this cost you to buy them bread. 21. He would intreat his Mo∣ther to have a care of gratifying a proud humour in his Brother and Sisters, he did tell them of the danger of pride, and how little reason they had to be proud of that which was their shame; for said he, if it had not been for sin we should have had no need of cloaths. 22. At leisure times, he would be talking to his School-fellows a∣bout the things of God, and urge the necessity of a holy Life; that text he much spoke on to there; the Axe is laid to the root of the tree, and every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. Every Mo∣thers Child of us that doth not bring forth the fruit of good works, shall shortly be cut down
with the axe of Gods wrath, and cast into the fire of Hell; and this he spake like one that believed and felt the power of what he spake, and not with the least vi∣sibility of a childish levity of spi∣rit. This was, when he was be∣tween seven and eight years old, and if he perceived any Children unconcerned about their Souls, he would be greatly troubled at it. 23. After this, his Parents re∣moved not far from London, where he continued till that dreadful year sixty five; he was then sent to the latine School, where he soon made a very considerable Pro∣gress and was greatly beloved of his Master; the School was his be∣loved place, and learning his re∣creation. He was never taught to write, but took it of his own ingenuity. 24. He was exceeding dutiful to his Parents and never did in the least dispute their command,
(except, when he thought they might cross the command of God) as in the forementioned business of reading the Scriptures when his eyes were so bad. 25. He was exceeding content∣ed with any mean diet, and to be sure he would not touch a bit of any thing till he had begged Gods blessing upon it. 26. He would put his Brother and Sister upon their duties, and observe them whether they per∣formed it or no, and when he saw any neglect, he would soon warn them; if he saw any of them take a spoon into their hands before they had craved a blessing, he said that is just like a hog indeed. 27. His Sister was afraid of the darkness, and would some∣times cry, upon this account; he told her, she must fear God more, and she need then be afraid of nothing. 28. He would humbly put his
near Relations upon their duty, and minding the concerns of their Souls and Eternity, with more seriousness and life, and to have a care of doing that which was for the dishonour of God and the hazard of the Soul. 29. He was of a compassionate and charitable disposition, and very pitiful to the poor, or any that were in distress, but his grea∣test pity was to poor Souls; and as well as he could, he would be putting Children, Play-fellows, ser∣vants, neighbours, upon minding their poor souls. 30. One notable instance of his true charity, I cannot omit. A certain Turk was by the pro∣vidence of God cast in the place where he lived, which this sweet Child hearing of had a great pity to his Soul, and studied how he might be any way instrumental to do it good, at last finding a man that understood the lan∣guage
of the Turk, he used means to get them together, which he at last procured; the first thing that he did, was to put his friend upon discoursing with the Turk about his principles, whether he acknowledged a Deity which the Turk owning; the next thing he inquired after, was, what he thought of the Lord Jesus Christ. At which the Turk was troubled and put off the discourse, and said, he was athirst and an hun∣gry; which the Child being in∣formed of, by the interpreter, immediately went to a Brew-house near at hand (his own house be∣ing far off) and did intreat the Master of the Brewhouse to give him some Beer for the Turk, and the argument he used was this; Sir, here is a poor stranger that is athirst, we know not where we may be cast before we dye; he went to another place and begged food for him; using the same ar∣gument
as before, but his friends hearing of it, were angry with him, but he told them he did it for a poor stranger that was far from home, and he did it that he might think the better of the Christians, and the Christian Reli∣gion. 31. He would have a savoury word to say to every one that he conversed with, to put them in mind of the worth of Christ and their Souls; and their nearness to Eternity. Insomuch, that good people took no small pleasure in his company. The Taylor that made his cloths, would keep them the longer before he brought them home, that he might have the benefit of his spiritual and Chri∣stian society; and more frequent visits. 32. He bewailed the miserable condition of the generality of man-kind, (when he was about ten years old) that were utterly
estranged from God, though they called him Father, yet they were his Children only by Creation, and not by any likeness they had to God, or interest in him. 33. Thus he continued walking in the ways of God, ingaged in reading, praying, hearing the Word of God, and spiritual discourse, dis∣covering thereby his serious thoughts of Eternity. 34. He had an earnest desire, if it might be the Lords good pleasure, to give himself up to the Lord in the work of the Ministry, if he should live; and this out of a dear love to Christ, and Souls. 35. He was (next to the Bible) most taken with reading of Re∣verend Mr. Baxters works, especi∣ally his Saints Everlasting Rest; and truly, the thoughts of that Rest, and Eternity; seemed to swallow up all other thoughts, and he lived in a constant preparation for it, and
looked more like one that was ripe for glory, then an inhabitant of this lower world. 36. When he was about eleven years and three quarters old, his Mothers house was visited with the Plague; his eldest sister was the first that was visited with this distemper, and when they were praying for her, he would sob and weep bitterly 37. As soon as he perceived that his Sister was dead, he said, the will of the Lord be done. Blessed be the Lord, dear Mother, said he, you must do as David did, after the Child was dead, he went and re∣freshed himself, and quietly submit∣ted to the will of God. 38. The rest of the family held well for about fourteen dayes, which time he spent in religious duties and preparing for his death; but still his great Book was the Saints Rest; which he read with exceeding curi∣osity, gathering many observations
out of it in writing for his own use. He wrote several divine meditations of his own, upon several Subjects, but that which seemed most admi∣rable, was a meditation upon the ex∣cellency of Christ; he was never well now but when he was more immediately ingaged in the service of God. 39. At fourteen days end, he was taken sick, at which he seem∣ed very patient and cheerful; yet sometimes he would say that his pain was great. 40. His Mother looking upon his Brother, shaked her head, at which he asked, if his Brother were marked; she answered, yes Child? he asked again, whether he were marked, she answered nothing; well says he, I know I shall be marked; I pray let me have Mr. Baxters Book, that I may read a little more of Eternity before I go into it. His Mother told him that he was not able to read; he said,
that he was; however then pray by me, and for me; His Mother answered, that she was so full of grief, that she could not pray now; but she, desired to hear him pray his last prayer. 41. His Mother asked him, whe∣ther he were willing to die, and leave her, he answered yes, I am willing to leave you, and go to my heavenly Father. His Mother an∣swered, Child, If thou hadst but an assurance of Gods love I should not be so much troubled. 42. He answered, and said to his Mother, I am assured, dear Mother, that my sins are forgiven, and that I shall go to Heaven, for said he, here stood an Angel by me, that told me, I should quickly be in glory. 43. At this, his Mother burst forth into tears, O Mother, said he, did you but know what joy I feel, you would not weep, but rejoyce. I tell you I am so full of comfort,
that I cant tell you how I am; O Mother I shall presently have my head in my Fathers bosome, and shall be there, where the Four and Twenty Elders cast down their Crowns and sing Hallelujah, Glory and Praise, to him that sits upon the Throne: and unto the Lamb for ever. 44. Upon this, his speech began to fail him, but his Soul seemed still to be taken up with glory, and no∣thing now grieved him but the sor∣row that he saw his Mother to be in for his death; a little to divert his Mother, he asked her, what she had to Supper, but presently in a kind of divine Rapture, he cried out, O what a sweet Supper have I making ready for me in glory, 45. But seeing all this did rather increase then allay his Mothers grief, he was more troubled, and asked her, what she meant, thus to offend God; know you not, that it is the hand of the Almighty. Humble your self under the mighty hand of
God, lay your self in the dust, and kiss the rod of God, and let me see you do it in token of your sub∣mission to the will of God, and bow before him. Upon which raising up himself a little, he gave a lowly bow, and spake no more: but went chearfully and triumphingly to Rest, in the bosome of Jesus. Hallelujah. FINIS.
These BOOKS of the same Author, Mr. James Janeway, are Printed and Sold by Dorman Newman. HEaven upon Earth, or the best Friend in the worst of times; The third Edition Enlarged, Price 2 s. 6 d. Death Ʋnstung, a Sermon preacht at the Funeral of Thomas Mowsley an Apothecary. With a brief Nar∣rative of his Life and Death, also the manner of Gods dealings with Him, before and after his Conver∣sion: Drawn up by his own hand, price 1 s. A Sermon preached at the Fu∣neral of Thomas Savage, Price 4 d. A Token for Children, first and second part, the price of each 6 d.
