K534 13080512 97229
A Second Admonition TO THE Dissenting Inhabitants Of the Diocess of DERRY, CONCERNING, Mr. J. Boyse's Vindication of his Remarks on a Discourse Concerning The Inventions of Men IN THE Worship of GOD. With an APPENDIX Containing an Answer to Mr. B's Objections against the Sign of the Cross. By WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Derry. London, Printed for R. Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1696.
Heads of the Discourse. CHAP. I. Matters of Fact. Sect. I. THE Numbers of those that Neglect all Publick Worship on the Lord's Day. p. 3. II. The frequency of Sacraments. p. 11 III. The Number of Communicants. p. 20 IV. The Directory a hindrance to Commu∣nions. p. 24 V. Mr. B's Excuses for few Communi∣ons Examined. p. 27 VI. The Reading the Scriptures. p. 38 VII. The Mysteries of Religion. p. 44 VIII. The Catechism. p. 54 IX. Bodily Worship. p. 59 X. The Practice of Reverence by Dissen∣ters. p. 75 XI. The Praises of God. p. 77 XII. The Rule of Human Prudence. p. 79 XIII. The 3d, 4th and 5th Canons. p. 97 XIV. Mr. B's Demands. p. 99 XV. Mr. Sq. p. 107 XVI. Personal Vindication. p. 112
CHAP. II. Of the Reasoning part of Mr. B's Book. Sect. I. MR. B's stating the Case as to pu∣rity of Worship and Discipline. p. 126 II. Mr. B's Partiality p. 138 APPENDIX. Containing an Answer to Mr. B's Objections against the Sign of the Cross. Sect. I. THE proper Method to discover the true Nature of Sacraments as Signs. p. 159 II. That Sacraments are primarily Signs of God's Grace, & not of our duty. 171 III. That the Scriptures Warrant us to use other Signs that are not Sacraments for the several uses assigned by Mr. B. to Sacraments. 201 IV. Of Representing Signs. 208 V. Of Obliging Signs. 221 VI. Of Distinguishing Signs. 240 VII. That the Cross is such a Sign as the Scriptures Warrant. 251 Conclusion. 274
A SECOND ADMONITION TO THE Dissenting Inhabitants Of the Diocess of DERRY, Concerning Mr. J. Boyse his Vindica∣tion of his Remarks on a late Dis∣course of William Lord Bishop of DERRY, CONCERNING The Inventions of Men, in the Worship of GOD. CHAP. I. Concerning Matters of Fact. I. I Thought it necessary in a former Ad∣monition to give you some account of my design in my Book concer∣ning The Inventions of Men in the Worship of God, in order to ena∣ble you to pass a judgment on Mr. Boyse's Remarks on it: He has thought himself con∣cerned
to write a Vindication of them; And tho' I do not suppose it very necessa∣ry, I shall give you a few Reflections on it. It consists of Matters of Fact and Reason∣ings. I shall say a little to each of them, and leave you to judge of it. And I pray most heartily to God that it would please him to direct you. The matter is of great moment, since it concerns the Worship of God; and (whatever Mr. Boyse would sug∣gest) the true point is, Whether about Nine in Ten of you shall Worship God publickly any where on the Lord's Day, or stay at home? If I can prevail with you to come to the Established Worship, you may easily and conveniently Worship God in your Parish Churches every Lords▪ Day, or oftner; and receive the Lords-Supper four times every Year, at least, and oftener if you desire it. But if I cannot perswade you to this, about Nine in Ten of you must stay at Home, as you have done for many Years, and per∣haps not have a fit opportunity of Commu∣nicating afforded you once in Seven Years.
Sect. I. Concerning the Numbers of those that neglect all Publick Worship on the Lord's Day. THis then shall be the First Matter of Fact, of which I shall endeavour to make you sensible, since Mr. Boyse questions it, and jests at my concern about it, Vind. p. 2. The account he opposes to it is in these words, That in the Parish of Templemore, alias Derry, there are two Meetings, in which there will be found above 2400 who ordina∣rily Worship God every Lord's Day—the least Congregation amongst you are ordina∣rily 600, and some above a thousand that do Worship God every Lord's Day, so that where Ministers are settled you do not know of one in twenty that do not ordinarily attend Publick Worship. This account he says he has from your Ministers: You will easily be Judges of the truth of it; and therefore I desire you to consider, II. First, That even in Derry there are Congregations much less than 600, and sel∣dom in Burt above 400 or 500; and that those two Meeting-Houses, tho the largest, will not hold 1200 to Hear. I sent to count, and am assured both have not a thousand or∣dinarily.
2dly, I desire you to remember, that tho' these Meeting-Houses are both in the Parish of Derry, yet the Inhabitants of 11 Parishes depend on them, who have no nearer, or more convenient Meetings to go to: That is to say, Fanthen, Desertegny, Clonmany, Coldagh, Clonca, Donagh, Movill, Clander∣mot, part of Faughanvale, part of Cumber, and part of Donaghedey; a District in length from Malin to Donaghedey Church, about 33 Miles; and in breadth, from the Church of Faughanvale to the lower end of Inch, about 14 Miles: In which there are 14 Churches and Chappels; and in which 12 Conforma∣ble Clergy-Men continually Officiate, Prea∣ching in the Morning, and Catechizing, for about one half of the Year, in the After∣noons, with an Explanation of some heads of the Catechism: This scope of ground is well Inhabited; and if I mistake not, is near as big as the County of Dublin, and con∣tains, at least, one fourth part of the whole Diocess; and if there be in the Parish of Templemore of your perswasion 2400 as Mr. Boyse intimates, and I do believe there are, there can hardly be less in the other 11 Pari∣shes than 4 times as many, and then in all about 12000 depend on these two Meeting-Houses; Of which I doubt, if a thousand at∣tend Publick Worship on one Lord's Day
with another: And if we allow 1200 as Mr Boyse suggests, yet it doth not mend the matter; for it is still but a tenth part of the whole. III. Your next Meeting is yet in a worse condition, for there depends on it Tamlagh∣finlagan alias Ballykilly, Drumchose, Aughan∣low, Balteagh, Dongevin, Banagher, part of Cumber, part of Faughanvale, and of Tam∣langhard; a District containing some of the richest and best planted Parishes in the County of Londonderry, and in length, from the point of Magilligan to the further part of Banagher, at least 20 Miles, and in breadth from the Church of Faughanvale to the ut∣most part of Balteagh or Drumchose about 14. Yet here the Meeting-House will not contain, as I am informed, above 400. The like may be said of the Meeting of Ag∣hadowy; upon which there depend the Pari∣shes of Aghadowy, Kilrea, Desertoghill, Erre∣gill, part of Macosquin, part of Tamlaghocri∣elly, and the Chappel of Fagevy in length from the old Church of Camus, to the most distant parts of Tamlaghocrielly 13 or 14 Miles; and from the Ban River to the most distant parts of Desertoghill, about 10 or 12. The like might be shewed of Maghra, Ard∣stra and Donaghmore; and there needs no more to prove the truth of this than to
consult the Maps of the Counties. IV Let me add, that even these are not constantly supplyed; for the Ministers, what on account of assisting their Neighbour Mini∣sters at Sacraments, what on account of their visiting other parts of the Kingdom; and what on account of their private Affairs, do frequently miss and disappoint their People; Insomuch that in Ardstra, for Example, their Minister has been absent at least 7 or 8 Months. If then we lay these things toge∣ther, and take one Meeting and one Sunday with another, I think my Computation was very modest, when I conjectured, that hardly one in ten of you Worshiped God any where on the Lords-day. V. But because I would have as little dis∣pute with Mr. Boyse as possible, I will take his own Computation, and allow, 1st, That there are 9 Meeting-Houses in the Diocess; tho really for the last 2 Years there has been only 8, and for the last 7 or 8 Months, only 7 2dly, I will allow that there are 700 at each Meeting (Mr. Boyse sayes 600 ordina∣rily, and some above 1000) tho' really take one Sunday, and one Meeting with another, there are not 300. 3dly, I will allow that there are but 30 thousand Dissenters in the Diocess; tho re∣ally
there are more. And now let us see how many Worship God on the Lords day; and how many prophane it by staying at home, according to Mr. Boyse's own account: And it is thus; Nine times 700 make 6300, the Number of Worshipers; which taken out of 30000, there remains 23700 that stay at home and attend no Worship at all. Perhaps half as many as Worship God in all the Dissenters Meetings in Ireland. A thing that deserves a serious Consideration and Concern; and tho Mr. B. seemes to make light of it, (Vind. p. 2.) yet sure to use my endeavours to perswade these 23000 to at∣tend their Parish Churches, rather than to stay at home on the Lords day, was my du∣ty as a Christian Bishop and Pastour; And how Mr. B. will Answer to God, that he has contributed to hinder my Endeavours, tho he professes he did not design it, I leave it to our Common Judge and Master. VI. Neither Mr. Boyse nor your Ministers could be ignorant of this, since it arises clear∣ly from their own Compuration. And I leave you to judge, whether it looks not like amu∣sing the World, and serving a Party to publish such an Account as he and they have done: For to tell us of two Meeting-Houses in one Parish, when indeed there are only those two in one quarter of the Diocess, I am sure
looks like such a Design. Yet this has been your case for many years past, and is like to be in a great measure for many to come: For when can you expect Ten Ministers more than you have in the District of Derry and Burt? And yet these would be rather of the fewest to accommodate each place with a Meeting at a due distance: VVhen can you expect Seven instead of one in the Di∣strict of Ballykelly; or Six in the District of Aghadowy, and proportionally in the rest? VII. I desire you to observe, that Mr. B. p. 26. declares, That it was not his design to hinder you from joyning with the Established Church in our ordinary Lords-day Service, and Expresly declares his own Opinion for the Lawfulness of it: I hope your own Ministers are of the same Opinion, since he professes p. 24. That he had a just call to write his Remarks, and that from the Dissenting Mini∣sters of this Diocess: And Three of them, by their Certificates, seem to approve of his Performances. If then it be their Opinion, that it is lawful for you to joyn in Our Pub∣lick Worship, at least when you cannot go to your own Meetings, and that you had bet∣ter do so than stay at home, especially where the Established Ministers are sober, able, or∣thodox and diligent, as those of this Diocess
I presume generally are; I desire you to call to mind whether your Ministers have decla∣red their opinion to you in this point or no. If they have, consider how you will answer your neglect of God's Publick Worship so long, at the last day, when it shall appear you might lawfully have joyned in it. But if your Ministers have not made any such Declaration of their Opinion in this point, tho they know it to be Lawful, judge with your selves, whether they have dischar∣ged the Office of Faithful Guides to you, in revealing to you the whole will of God, as they ought to have done; since they have suffered for many Years, and yet do suffer about Nine in Ten of you to stay at home on the Lord's day, and joyn in no Publick Ser∣vice of God, rather than joyn in the Wor∣ship, Praises, Prayers and Sacraments Cele∣brated in your own Parish Churches, or hear the Scriptures Read, and the great Myste∣ries of the Kingdom of Heaven opened to you by such Ministers as you cannot but in your Conscience acknowledge, and many of you have acknowledged, to be equal to your own in Piety, Learning, Diligence and Industry, and who would have been eminent amongst you, if they had been of your Party. I conceive the resolution of this Question to be of great Moment to you, and a great
step to our Peace and Union; and therefore you ought every one of you to require your Ministers direct and positive Resolution in it: By which you will perceive, whether your Guides are of one mind in this weigh∣ty Affair; and if they be, you'l consider how you came to be ignorant of it, as your Pra∣ctice and Profession declare you are, and where the fault is to be laid. I the rather press this, because I know that several are willing and desirous to frequent the publick Worship, but dare not, fearing the malice and hatred of their Neghbours, who treat them as A∣postates that do so, and contrive their Ruine. The truth is, Your Ministers have Prea∣ched you into a Dislike of the Established Worship, they have represent∣ed it as Mr. Craig∣head proves the Kneeling at the Sacra∣ment a breach of the Second Command∣ment, because the Signs have Coadoration with Christ, partaking of the same Worship; p. 113. And, The Second Commandment stands in our way, discharging Religious Worship designedly before any Creature; p. 143. Idolatrous, and by these means they have entire∣ly separated you from us, as to all publick Worship, and have got you to depend on themselves: And now when they have you, they are not able to supply you, but have dealt with you as the false Mo∣ther did with the Child before Solmon, they would rather you
should not worship God at all, than with us. But whether this looks like Zeal for God's Worship, I must leave it with you to judge: As for my self, I hope I shall not be reputed (I am sure I shall not become) your Enemy, be∣cause I tell you the Truth; And shall apply the words of St. Paul, Gal. 4. 17. To you and your Teachers, They zealously affect you, but not well, they would Exclude you, or ra∣ther Us, (as in the Margine of your Bibles) that you may affect their. Sect. II. Concerning Frequency of Sacraments. I. BUt, Secondly, Because the Frequen∣cy of your Sacraments (which is the next greatest Matter of Fact) has a great de∣pendance on this Last; I shall consider it next, and compare my Assertions with Mr. Boyse's, and engage you to judge who comes nearest the Truth. My words at which Mr. Boyse takes so great Exception are these, Dis. Chap. 5. Sect. 3. N. 3. When People were relaxed from the particular and certain Rules of our Church by the first breaking off of those of your Perswa∣sion from us, the Lord's Supper was laid aside wholly for several Years by some Congregations. I appeal to you, whether it is not yet reckoned a great thing among you, if once in a Year or
two a Communion be Celebrated in one of your Meetings, nay, among some of you it is omit∣ted for several Years—By the best enquiry I could make, I could not compute that one in ten that go to your Meetings ever Receive thro' the whole course of their Lives—I should be glad to find that I were mistaken in this Computa∣tion. Mr. B. denies every one of these, with many hard words; and asserts, p. 136. That it is Universally usual in every Meeting where an Ordained Minister is, to have the Lord's Supper Administred once a Year, and twice in the larger Towns. To convince the World of the Truth of what I said, and of Mr. Boyse's mistake, I laid down the account I received of this Mat∣ter, and found that the Sacrament was Ad∣ministred but about Nine times in Seven Years in all the Meeting-Houses of the Dio∣cess before the writing of my Admonition, which was May 1694, as appears from the date of it: Mr. B. is very ill pleased with my Computation, and alledges, that a very particular enquiry has been made. (Vind. p. 16.) The Account of which he sums up in these words, The Year 88 falling within the Compass of the Seven Years mentioned by the Bishop, you had it in that Seven Years 22 or 23 times. If it had been thus, it is very lit∣tle to the purpose, since even so it doth not
amount to once a Year in every Meeting where there was an Ordained Minister. But Mr. Boyse might have observed that Eight of these were Celebrated amongst you last Summer, since my Admonition; that is, at Burt, Strabane, Donaghmore, Ardstra, Bally∣kelly, Aughadowy, Maghera, and Derry. This Last appears by the Derry Certificate it self to have been July 22, 1694, near three Months after my Admonition was Written; which shews, that he includes the Sacraments of Summer 1694. There remains then con∣fessedly but about 14; and I do not think it material to contend about five Sacraments in a whole Diocess in Seven Years. II. But Secondly, Mr. B. is so far from shewing any mistake in what I asserted, that I think he has furnished me with a sufficient proof of it, for he affirms, p. 16. That after a very particular Enquiry, he finds in the Years 87 and 88. The Sacrament was administred in Derry twice, in Donaghee∣de twice, in Drumrah twice, in Ardstra twice, in Urny twice, in Donaghmore twice, in Lif∣ford once, in Clandermot once. These then are all the Sacraments, that your ministers on a particular Enquiry could find Admini∣stred in these two Years in this Diocess: and indeed, I perceive they took great pains in the Enquiry, sending Quaeries about to this
purpose; It appears then, that in other Mee∣tings in this Diocess there was none Admini∣stred in those two Years; and of such as had Ordained Ministers, there was these follow∣ing: 1 Burt. Mr. Ferguson their present Minister. No Sacrament in 1687 or 88. They had before, Mr. Grahms, Mr. Haun∣ton, Mr. Haliday; These Officiated about 20 Years, and had but three Sacraments that I can find. 2 Ballykelly. Mr. Crooke their present Minister, has ser∣ved above 30 Years. No Sacrament in 87 or 88. When or how often before, not known. 3 Aughadowy. Mr. Boyd their present Minister, for above 30 Years. No Sacrament in 87 or 88. Nor can I find when, or how often before. 4 Tamlaghocricly. Mr. Gilchrest for many Years before the Troubles. No Sacrament in 87 or 88. Nor any before, that I can find.
5 Macosquin. Mr. Lowry before the Troubles. No Sacra∣ment in 87 or 88. Before him, they had Mr. Boyd, Mr. Wil∣son, Mr. Eliot; but no Sacrament for 16 Years that I can find. 6 Maghera. Mr. Kilpatrick who officiated above 20 Years. No Sacrament in 87 or 88. The Sacrament Administred Seven or Eight times, and no more in those 20 Years that I can find. 7 Dumboe. Mr. Wilson, till the troubles and four Years before. No Sacrament in his time. Mr. Blair before, no Sacrament two Years before he died; I cannot find how many be∣fore. 8 Strabane. Mr. Wilson before the troubles for 20 Years. No Sacrament in 87 or 88. But one or two at the most in his time, as I can find. Here you may observe, that Eight Meetings in this Diocess for the Years 87 and 88, had no Sacrament at all; of the rest some had
one, some had two, as is alledged; which to shorten the dispute, I will take for gran∣ted; since this is sufficient to prove, that it is a great matter if a Sacrament be Admi∣nistred in one of your Meetings in a Year or two, which was my Assertion. And I have been so far from wronging you in it, that it appears, after the most strict Enqui∣ry, that none had above one in a Year; in which number, Mr. B. reckons six; two had but one in two Years, and Eight Meetings had none at all in these two Years. But Secondly, How they behaved them∣selves before those two Years, appears suf∣ficiently from the Account I have added; and if there should happen to have been twice more Sacraments than I have an Ac∣count of, yet it would not excuse your Mi∣nisters from a very Criminal Neglect, and fully justifies my Assertion, That the Sacra∣ment is often omitted for several Years to∣gether in some of your Meetings, and in some places for ten Years or more: In which Number, are Tamlaugh o Crilly, Macosquin and Strabane, the second best Town in the Diocess. Thirdly, It shews what you are to judge of Mr. B's Assertion, p. 14. That it is U∣niversally usual in every Meeting where an Ordained Minister is settled, to have the Lords-Supper
Administred constantly once a Year; Here are eight had none in two years, and I doubt whether it has been a constant Custom in any one Meeting to have it once a year; at least I have seen no Voucher for it. III. As to his asserting Your having the Lord's Supper administred constantly twice a Year in the larger Towns, I have told you in my Admonition, p. 153, That I can call only three such in this part of the Country, that is Londonderry and Strabane, in this Diocess, and Colrain in the border of it. Now, as to Londonderry, it has had this Sacrament ad∣ministred but twice in Six or Seven Years, and Colrain but once in that time. And as to Strabane, tho' it, as well as the other, had a setled Minister in it, before, and some time since the Troubles, yet I am informed from good hands, that in Six and twenty Years the Lord's Supper has been Administred but twice in it. The point then here is, whether the holy Sacrament was Administred twice yearly in larger Towns, in which number these three are; and if it was not, then Mr. B. is mista∣ken. As to what I asserted of Colraine and Strabane, I find no doubt made; but he pro∣duces a Certificate from Derry, in which it is said, that the Sacrament was administred May 87, April 88, July 91, July 92, July 93,
and July 94. And the Certifiers desire, that this may be compar'd with the passage I have above cited out of the Admonition, p. 153. And Mr. B. adds, p. 23. That he hopes I will either yield this Point, or produce as credible Vouchers as these. But I take this to be a full Voucher for what I there asserted, and a Demonstration that Mr. Boyse was mistaken, when he affirmed, that the Sacra∣ment was constantly Administred twice a Year in larger Towns, Rem. p. 136. This was the Point in question, and Mr. Boyse's Voucher is positive against him in it. I say, that in six or seven Years (that is from May 1688, till May 1694, when my Admo∣nition was written) the Sacrament was Ad∣ministred twice at Derry, (in which the Certificate says three times) twice in six and twenty Years in Strabane, and once in Col∣raine in seven. All the Contradiction then between this Passage and the Certificate is concerning one time in Derry, that is 1691, the Account of the other Towns being un∣questionable. Now, supposing my Infor∣mers mistaken in this one time, I think it is very little to the purpose: Here is an Account of about Forty Years, and the In∣formers, as is pretended, miss'd one Sa∣crament; whereas Mr. Boyse's Informers mistook about fifty in sixty, to make the
whole come up to two a Year, as appears from this Certificate. But after all, I am not satisfied that there is any Mistake at all in my Account in this one Sacrament in di∣spute, and can produce good Reasons for my believing so, if it were worth the while. However, I desire the Oath that the Certi∣fiers offer about the truth of their Certifi∣cate in all the parts of it, since it carries a manifest sign of some tampering in it, being dated Sept. 25. 1694. and signed by Alexan∣der Lecky, Mayor elect, who yet, as every body may know, was not elected Mayor till November following. Upon the whole, if Mr. B. had produced a Voucher, that the Sacrament was administred twice a Year in each of these Towns, it had been something to the purpose; but as it is now, it makes directly against him. I am sorry that I am forced to take notice of these little things that are not to the Cause; for if instead of five Communions in seven Years (accord∣ing to Mr. B's Account) you had had four∣teen in such a Congregation as Derry, I should still reckon you very Negligent, and to have violated the Scripture-Rule in an unexcusable manner.
Sect. III. Concerning the Number of Communicants. I. THE second thing I affirmed concern∣ing this Sacrament was, That by the best enquiry I could make I could not compute that one in ten that go to your Meetings ever Receive thro' the whole course of their Lives: In opposition to this, he affirms, That by the best Computation your Ministers can make, there is not one in ten, rather in twenty or thirty, that do not Receive, except such as are with▪ held for want of competent Knowledge, or on the ac∣count of Scandal; Rem. p. 137. There is a great difference between these two Asserti∣ons: I say one in ten, Mr. Boyse and Your Ministers say nine in ten, nay, nineteen in twenty, or nine and twenty in thirty. Ei∣ther they or I must be widely mistaken, and which of us come nearest the truth will appear on Examination of the Proofs which Mr. B. himself produces. In his Vindication, p. 19. he asserts, That the Ordinary Hearers in the two Meetings of Derry and Burt are about 2400—That we may compute about 1600 Communicants in both. Now, tho' me allow a considerable deduction out of this num∣ber for Strangers, that may be supposed to have
Received, yet the number of Communicants be∣longing to those two Congregations, compared with that part of their Hearers that are of Age to Receive, will sufficiently demonstrate, that the Bishop's Computation, that not one in ten Receive, must be very wide from truth. II. Now, to this I reply, First, That Mr. B. has produc'd no Voucher of the number of Communicants in your Meet∣ings before my Book and Admonition, these two Sacraments of which he speaks being last summer, one of them after the writing of my Admonition, and the other after it was publish'd; and I hope I contributed to the Numerousness of them. But Secondly, Now your Ministers have used their utmost Endeavours, and brought as many as they cou'd to Communicate, let us examine whether Mr. B. or I come nearest truth, in order to discover it. I desire you to remember two Assertions of Mr. B's; the first, Remarks, p. 136. Where-ever the Sa∣crament is Administred, 'tis usual for two thirds of the Congregation to be Strangers.—And it is usual for most of the Members of the Neighbouring Parishes to frequent it. Se∣condly, p. 137. That those that Communicate once, do it ordinarily on all following occasions. If then we take away two thirds from 1600,
there remains 534; the proportion of 2400 belonging to these two Meetings that ever Communicated at once; which is not one in four; and is much nearer my computation than that of Mr. B's or your Ministers: and which is alone sufficient to shew that I consider'd the matter better than they. But Thirdly, I desire you to observe, that the 2400 are supposed to be of the Parish of Derry, and there is no account of the other eleven Parishes that depend on these two Meeting-houses; the not mentioning of which gives the matter a quite different face from what it really ought to have; and being consider'd, after all, I see no rea∣son to alter my conjecture of one in ten. And this will appear from the following suppositions, which I think much nearer truth than Mr. B's. First, I suppose that one fourth of those that received at Derry received also at Burt; and on the other hand, one fourth of those at Burt came to Derry, other wise it could not be true what he now asserts, Vind. p. 17. That the most devout and serious of you Communicate four or five times a Year. Secondly, I suppose, that those made up another fourth, who came out of  and Ray Meetings, nearer Burt than Derry, tho' in Rapho Diocess, and out of Letterkenny, Strabane, Lifford, Donagh∣more,
Ballikelly, Rapho, and Colraine, and other remote parts, from every one of which there came some to Derry, and I be∣lieve to Burt; and then there remains 800 Communicants belonging to the twelve Pa∣rishes that I have shew'd depend on these two Meeting-houses, which is not a tenth part of them. Fourthly, Let me observe, that most other Meeting-houses are in worse circumstances than these, as I have already shew'd; in Ballikelly there was no Sacrament confessed∣ly from summer 1686 till 1693, that is for seven years, and then, as I was informed, there were not 400 Communicants: Nor do I see any thing yet to oblige me to a ter my account; but let it be 800, if we allow two thirds of these to be strangers, accord∣ing to Mr. B's assertion, there remain 268 Communicants in that District, in which there are five or six thousand People. The like may be shewed of Aghadowy, Maghera, and others; All which consider'd, I think I spake modestly, when I said one in ten. III. But to comply with Mr. B. as much as I can, I will take his own informations, and examine this matter by them.
He mentions only one Sacrament celebra∣ted in each Meeting-house amongst you this Year; there are but eight in the Diocess, but I will allow ten Sacraments. Secondly, He pleads for 1600 at two Sa∣craments in Derry and Burt; I will allow pro∣portionally for each of the rest; tho' really some had not 400. The Number then of Communicants in the Diocess were this Year 8000, and those in effect are all that ever Communicated: For he affirms (as I already observed) that those that Commu∣nicate once, do it ordinarily on all following occasions. Of these two thirds were Stran∣gers by his own Confession; that is, such as came from other Parishes or Diocesses, where they were likewise Communicants: From whence it follows, that only 2666 di∣stinct Persons Communicated; which is not one in ten of thirty thousand, (the Num∣ber of those of your Perswasion in this Diocess.) Sect. IV. The Directory a hindrance to Communions. I. THere remains now my third Assertion to be examined, that after the Esta∣blishing your Government, the Lord's Supper
was laid aside wholly for several Years: this indeed I reckoned as an Effect of your Di∣rectory, as you may see in my Book, Chap. 5. Sect. 3.. N. 3. And to make it good, I will put you in mind that it orders, That how often the Lord's Supper shall be Celebrated, may be determined by the Ministers and other Church-Governours. By other Church-Gover∣nours, the Assembly tells us in their Humble Advice, &c. are meant Officers commonly called Elders. From which it follows, that where there are no such Elders, the People must want the comfort of this Sacrament; and the Parliament refusing the Erection of such Elders in every Parish, the body of the People of England were kept from the Lord's Supper for many Years; insomuch, that in the Year 1649, I find Ministers meet∣ing together to determine this Question, Whether there were any Course warranted by the Word of God, wherein Ministers might proceed to the Administration of this Sacrament, as their Case then stood. I find ten of these Ministers met at Taunton, and wrote a Let∣ter, dated June 13. 1649, on this subject, to Mr. Henry Jeanes of Chedzoy, desiring him, that He would be pleased to take the Question into serious Consideration, and give his thoughts of it: And say they, We are the rather en∣clined to desire your particular Resolution there∣in,
because we understand that you have Ad∣ministred that Sacrament, and therefore doubt not but you have some way satisfied your self therein. Upon this Mr. Jeans wrote a Piece, publish'd 1650, entituled, The Want of Church-Government no Warrant for a total omission of the Lord's Supper: or, A Debate of that Question which hath so wonderfully per∣plexed many, both Ministers and People, whe∣ther or no—the Lord's Supper may be law∣fully administred in—a Church destitute of Ruling Elders. He intimates, p. 5. that they had omitted it five, six, or seven years together, and might for the whole space of the remainder of their days: for, saith he, to sup∣pose that we shall never live to see the Church of God here in England setled in a Presbyte∣rian way, is a supposition of that which is neither impossible nor improbable. II. From this you may observe to what a miserable condition your Directory had brought the People of England, as to the participation of this Institution of Christ. I do believe Mr. Jeans's Book might do good, and bring some o do what it seems he alone had ventur'd to do in those parts, even to administer the Lord's Supper; yet many continued in the omission of it, as appears by the testimony of Dr. Causabon,
who lived at that time, and has this pas∣sage in his Vindication of the Lord's Prayer, published 1660, (p. 55.) Publick Catechising so necessary to uphold Christianity among Men, tho' not so pleasing to itching Ears, as ordinary Preaching is: The use of the Sacraments, which in divers Parishes were formerly duly Admini∣stred, are now scarce known or named. Mr. Boyse may give him hard words for this, as he gives me, but the thing is too notorious to be denied And when it was thus in Ox∣ford, where Dr. Owen had the Government, and in Dublin till the Restauration, you may imagine how it fared with Country Parishes; whereas therefore Mr. B. would throw this practice of rare or no Communions pecu∣liarly on you; 'tis manifest, that you have only followed the President set you in Eng∣land and Ireland, by the body of Dissenters in their Prosperity; and they are concern∣ed in it as well as you, tho' I did not address my self to them. Sect. V. Mr. Boyse's Excuses for few Communions Examined. I. IT remains to Consider some things that Mr. B. offers, that seem to exte∣nuate or excuse your Ministers, us to their
rare Communions. The first is, Rem. p. 137. That Ministers of particular Congregations prepare their own People for it, by visiting em round, Examining every particular Mem∣ber anew, about their spiritual estate, and ma∣king due Enquiry about their Conversation; all which takes up a considerable time. Now to this I answer, that it is the Duty of Mi∣nisters to enquire concerning the spiritual estate of their People, when it may be con∣veniently done; but there is no Obligati∣on on them to examine Men anew before every Sacrament: The Scripture says, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat. Your Directory requires no such Examina∣tion; nor is it agreeable to the sence of your own Party; as appears from the Vin∣dication of the Presbyterial Government, by the London Ministers 1649, who own (p. 59.) this Examination or Profession is not required every time a Man comes to the Sacrament, but only at their first admission; and a com∣pleat Member is, by vertue of his first admis∣sion, freed from all After-examination, except in Case of Scandal. For your Ministers therefore, on pretence of their extraordi∣nary pains in Examining, to Celebrate the Lord's Supper but once in the year, is, plainly to prefer their own tradition to
the Command of God, that requires fre∣quent Celebration of this Sacrament. II. But secondly, Mr. B. alledges, that you were Persecuted, and that made you have the Sacrament so seldom: This he alledges for Strabane (Vind. p. 17.) but I answer, First, That Persecution is no Reason for omitting the Lord's Supper, any more than for omitting Sermons; whilst your Mini∣sters could not get opportunity to Preach, they might be excused for omission of this Sacrament; but it is full as easie to draw People together to receive the Sacrament, as to hear a Sermon; and to Administer it to them, as to Preach twice or once a day. If we will be content with the plainness and simplicity with which Christ instituted it; and accordingly we find the first Christians, in the deepest Persecutions, were as con∣stant in the one as in the other, and thought the receiving it then most necessary to for∣tifie their Members with Resolution to en∣dure Torments and Martyrdom. From whence it is manifest your Ministers have a Notion of this Sacrament different from the Primitive Martyrs. But Secondly, I desire you to consider your manner of Administring this Sacrament, concerning which Mr. B. tells us, (Remarks,
p. 137.) that amongst you Every Parish ha∣ving usually but one Minister, 'tis requisite the Ministers of neighbouring Parishes should assist them on that occasion; and consequently they usually bring their People along with them. I may add, that there are often four or five Ministers at your Sacraments, and some∣times 4 or 5000 People, when only 400 receive: you have likewise usually a Ser∣mon some day before, and the day after. I confess, Persecution is an effectual means to hinder the Celebration of the Lord's Supper in this fashion; for no Government that is jealous of a People, will suffer them to meet or continue together in this man∣ner. But I desire you to remember, that Christ never required these things at your hands, and therefore your omitting the Lord's Supper, because you were not permit∣ted thus to celebrate it, is another instance of your Ministers making void the Com∣mands of God by their own tradition. Lastly, I believe some of your Ministers might be hinder'd from publick Preaching and Sacraments, for some short time, that is, whilst some of your Brethren were in Arms against the Government at Pentland-hills and Bothwell-bridge, against whom they never made any publick Declaration or Address that I can learn; but that this continued
for any considerable time, or that the in∣spection was so strict that they might not have Administred the Lord's Supper as our Saviour instituted it, doth not appear, nor is pretended. And it is manifest, that this is only a Pretence, since they were no less negligent in the year 1687 & 88, when they had their full liberty. III. A third thing offered by Mr. B. is, Vind. p. 15, that I know well enough, that for two Years of the seven, at least, both the Mini∣sters and People were scattered, and had no opportunity of Celebrating the Institution. I must profess, that I neither know, nor have heard of any such dispersion of the People or Ministers, as to hinder you from an Opportunity of Celebrating this Sacra∣ment for two years. The Irish Army came into this Diocess about April 1689, and left it in August following; during which time some of your Ministers were in Derry, and some in Scotland. The People in the Coun∣try were then, and for a considerable time after, in a miserable condition, and plun∣der'd of what they had; but there were still great numbers of them, and in their Circumstances being depriv'd of Worldly Comforts, they needed, and I hope were prepared for spiritual: But your Ministers
did not afford it to them as they ought to have done; and this I do still make an ag∣gravation of their Negligence, tho' Mr. B. makes it an Argument of Imprudence in me to do so: But I desire you to consider the Case, and judge. Mr. Crooke returned af∣ter the Siege to Ballikelly, where there was still a large Congregation; yet as he had been Negligent for two years or longer be∣fore, so he continued unawakened by God's Judgments in the same Negligence, till Summer 1693. Mr. Boyd had the same Op∣portunity at Aghadowy, and yet shared in the same Guilt. Mr. Ferguson returned soon after the Siege, to his Congregation at Burt, yet had no Sacrament till Summer 1692. Mr. Craghead returned soon likewise to his Congregation at Donaghmore, and af∣ter removed to Derry, and yet had no Sa∣crament till Summer 91, as is confessed at large in the Derry Certificate; so far were these from going about and Administring to their Afflicted and desolate Neighbours, that they starved their own Flocks, and kept them from this Food of Life. And this they did not only after the Siege, till I came to this place, but in it at that time when continual Deaths before their Eyes ought to have awaken'd them to more Devo∣tion.
III. Mr. B. alledges, Vind. p. 16. That the Conformists there ought to have a share in this reproof: For those that he has desired to enquire upon the place could not learn that they Administred it more than the other. I have en∣quired of this matter, and am assured by those that Received at that time, that this Holy Sa∣crament was Administred Monthly in the Cathedral, as was usual, that eleven Clergy-Men received it together, and that towards the latter end, when Wine grew scarce, Dr. Walker reserved a proportion for the Sacra∣ment, and when he apprehended it would not hold out, he declared, That rather than not Celebrate he would mix it. A Practice much more allowable than omitting it: Besides the publick Administration, it was frequently Administred to the sick; And as to the Cler∣gy that remained in the Diocess they beha∣ved themselves worthy of their Character, Travelling on foot many Miles to visit the Sick, Baptise and Preach; And as soon as they could procure Wine (which was not to be had till after the Siege was rais'd) Admini∣stred the Lord's Supper, which so many as were not chas'd by the Enemy from their Cures, had done the Easter before, and did again Christmas after.
IV. But now I must tell you that Recrimi∣nation, if true, is a plain Confession of Guilt, and a sign of a desperate Cause; It may be very proper for a man that has Authority, and is called to it by his Duty, as I take my self to be, to reprove what he finds amiss amongst those that he conceives to belong to his Inspection. But for any one to go about to defend the Guilty by recriminating, is to harden and encourage them in their sins, by finding them out Examples and Presidents for their wickedness, and is in effect to tell them, what they are too apt of themselves to offer as an excuse for the worst of Practices, that others are as ill as they. Surely Examples fortify most of the World in Sin, and I am heartily sorry that any one of Credit should point out this way of recrimination to harden them by it. He is very guilty that has no way to clear himself but by blackening another; and when that is done, without truth, as the case is here, it is a grief to a good Man to think that serving a Party should Influence any to do it. V. But Mr. B. gives me very hard words (Vind. p. 15.) for looking back no further than my own time in my account of Sacra∣ments administred in the Establish'd Church; whereas I give an account of yours for seven Years. If I had for 30, I do not see any harm
in it; but the truth was, that many Ministers were dead, and I could not meet with any that readily could inform me. But to satisfy you, that I had no design in this, I will not give you the best Account I can get for these three Years that are omitted. Tho' I suppose all are not come yet to my knowledge. In the Year 1688 the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was Ad∣ministred in the Cathedral, 12 times. In the Parish Churches, 83 times. In the Cathedral, in the Year 1689, 12 times. In the Parish Churches, 41 times. In the year 1690, in the Cathedral, 12 times. In the Parish Churches, 39 times. In all, 199 And now I do not see what advantage it was to me to have omitted this, or why Mr. B. should express such resentment at it. St Paul cautions us against Evil Surmisings, 1 Tim. 6. 4. And whether the imputing this to Disingenui∣ty in me be of that sort, I leave you to judge, if you compare the two years of the Troubles, there is 104 of ours to none among you.
VI. The last excuse Mr. B. makes for your Ministers, is their Sickness; this he alledges in behalf of Mr. Wilson for Strabane, Mr. Rowat for Lfford, and Mr. Crooke for Ballykelly; but this is no excuse: These were as negligent when well, as sick; and none of them was a year without Preaching several Sundays twice. And it is full as easy to Administer the Sacra∣ment to two or three hundred, as to Preach a Sermon. It is usual for 3 or 4 of your Mi∣nisters to assist at Neighbouring Sacraments, and one assistant would have prevented any disappointment of the People, which Mr. B. says (Vin. p. 16.) hapned twice at Balindret. Ministers that are infirm may very lawfully omit one of their Sermons on the Lords Day, and Administer the Sacrament in lieu of it; In which Case there is no hardship on them, since the People give it to one another amongst you, without any blessing at the de∣livery to each: Neither doth your Directory require the Minister to make any Exhorta∣tion whilst the People are receiving, nor after they have received, only says, he may in a few words put them in mind, &c. And there∣fore whilst your Ministers make two Ser∣mons a-day, and yet pretend disability for Administring the Lords-Supper, we must reckon this another instance of your making void the Commands of God by your own
Tradition. A Sermon that justles out the Sacrament, is a Human Invention, as much as Alms that hinder a Man from relieving his Parent, Mark 7. 11. VII. These are all the excuses that Mr. B. seem to have made for you, and I doubt they will appear very slender in the eyes of God, when he calls your Teachers to an account for their Stewardship in dispersing the Misteries of God. It had been much more proper me∣thinks for a Christian Minister to have re∣proved you for your negligence, than to have denied plain Matter of Fact, and pleaded such Excuses. Mr. B. doth both in his Remarks and Vin∣dication, object to us the Diocess of Down and Conor; I think he has little reason to do it to Me: But I must now tell you, that the neglects there were neither so Universal, nor unexcusable as these of your Ministers have been in this particular; and had you been in Chancery, Michaelmas Term last, you would have heard as much said for the most negli∣gent there, as Mr. B. has written for your Ministers: which only shews, that Money and interest will find colours for every thing. But the negligence of your Ministers sufficiently shews the want of Discipline amongst them; and that the Inspection of a Bishop would do them no harm: And I hope this Admonition
will not hurt you, nor them. I shall think I have done a good work, and thank God for it, if I can awaken you to more care for the future; and reckon that the nearer you come to the Scripture-Rule, the nearer you will come to us, and there will be the more hopes of an Union, which I shall always heartily en∣deavour. Sect. VI. Concerning the Reading the Scriptures. I. THE third Matter of Fact in dispute be∣tween Mr. B. and Me, is concerning your Reading the Holy Scriptures. The words he excepts against are these (Disc. Chap. 3. S. 3. N. 3.) but the most sad and deplorable defect of your performances of this Duty is your casting out the Word of God from most of your Publick Assemblies, directly contrary to God's Institution and Ordinance for the Instruction of his Church, insomuch that in many of your Meetings, setting aside a Verse or two for a Text or Quotation, at the discretion of the Mi∣nister, the voice of God is never publickly heard amongst them—And in all the Meetings in the North of Ireland in a whole Year perhaps there is not so much Scripture Read, as in one day in our Church—And 'tis a sad thing that a man may go to most meetings, many years,
and never hear One entire Chapter read in them. The things Asserted here, are, First, That the Reading of the Word of God, as God Instituted and Ordained it for the Instruction of his Church, is cast out of most of your Meetings. I shewed, that God ordered his Word to be read Regularly and in Order▪ and that this Reading of it is cast out not only of most of your Meetings, but out of all of them, there not being one of them that yet appears to have read either Testament through in 30 Years before the writing of my Discourse, or indeed ever that I can learn: And therefore till I see good Vouchers that the Word of God has been thus Read, I think there can be no question of the Truth of this Fact. It is not only the manner of Reading is here in Dispute, and denied by me, but the thing it self, of which we can never be sure without the Manner be settled; for when there is a certain me∣thod for Reading the Word of God, as in our Church, we can be sure that it is Read: But this is so far otherwise with you, that no man that ever I yet met with, or could have an account of, could vouch that he heard so much of the Bible read in your Meetings in his whole Life as is read in the Cathedral of Derry every Year, and in many other
Churches; and ought by our Rules to be in all. Now when a Man has been a Hearer 50 years in your Meetings, and cannot affirm, that ever he heard two intire Books of the Bible read in them, I reckon that the Word of God, as God requires it for the Instruction of his Church is cast out of those Meetings, and that they act directly contrary to his Command. Therefore except Mr. B. produce Vouchers, that in most of your Meetings, the whole Word of God, or the most material parts of it, have been read in a competent time, he will never acquit them before God or impar∣tial Men, of this fault: If the Books that have been Read, and the time be specified, the Truth will then appear; but without this I shall look on any general assertion as a sub∣terfuge, and a declining the light. II. The Second thing asserted by me, is, That in many of your Meetings, seting aside a verse or two for a Text or Quotation, at the Discretion of the Minister, the Voice of God is never heard. This is owned by Mr. B. to be true, in effect, as to the Winter-Quar∣ter in most of your Meetings (Rem. p. 92.) but how far this Winter-Quarter is stretch∣ed, wants being cleared; for some have stretched it very far: And as to those that he affirms now to Lecture in Winter in this Diocess, I desire to know how long they have thus Lectured. Last Winter I believe
they did, but I must see a good Voucher be∣fore I believe that either all of them Lectu∣red any part of every Year before, or all but one, constantly in the winter. Secondly, You have Meetings in the After∣noons, as well as in the mornings, and the Scriptures ought to be read in them, but in these you have only a Text and Quotations; and therefore what I affirmed, is true, not only of many of your Meetings, but of one half of them all. III. The Third thing opposed by Mr. B. is, That perhaps in all the Meetings in the North there is not so much Scripture read as in our Church in one day. To prove this, I took Mr. B's own Concessions (Rem. p. 92.) and according to them, shew'd, that there was really four times more Scripture Read in our Church in one Day than in all the Meetings in the North in a Year. But he seems not willing to stand to these Concessions, and farther ex∣cepts (Vind. p. 9.) that eleven Psalms which I reckon as Chapters read for Instruction, were Forms of Thanksgiving. But I answer, That these agree very well together; the Apostle having Commanded us to Teach and Admo∣nish one another in them at the same time we speak or sing them; as appears from Ephes. 5. 19. and Col. 3. 16. And indeed it is manifest that the Psalms were written for Publick In∣struction, as well as for Publick Thanksgiv∣ings
and Prayers: Twelve of them bear the Title For Instruction before them, as most of them are called Prayers, Psal. 72. 20. &c. Thirdly, He will have Two Chapters allowed for Quotations in your Sermons eve∣ry day; but I particularly excepted Quotati∣ons from the account. And quoting Scripture is not Reading it, nor is that the way God appointed his Word to be Read, Deut. 31. 10. Nor did the People of God so Read it: Nor doth your Directory prescribe this as Reading but Preaching. Lastly, no body knows what or how many these are, or how they are applied; all these depending on the Dis∣cretion of Your Ministers: But after all, he makes his Computation, and concludes, that in a whole Year there is near as much Read in your Meetings as in two Days in our Church; for saith he (Vind. p. 10.) In the Nine Meetings of this Diocess there are Read in a year 1287 Chapters; of which 936 are Quotations: and in one day in our Church but 714 which is a little more than half what is Read in those Nine Meetings in the whole Year. This is truly his Conclusion; and I value your time more, than to dispute about it, and therefore let it stand so. IV. The last thing I asserted in this matter was, That a man might go to most Meetings many Years, and never hear one intire Chap∣ter Read in them: What has been done may
be done; and I have met with several that have thus frequented Meetings several Years, and could not say they had heard an intire Chapter Read at a time: I sent one to en∣quire, and he returned an account only of six Verses read for a Text to the Lecture; and I have been informed, that usually no more were read. And therefore whereas Mr. B. asserts (Rem. p. 92.) that usually a whole Chapter was read; this may be true, since my Book; but that it was otherwise before, is Notorious. But when it appears what Books have been Read in each Meeting eve∣ry Year before, 'twill be easy to judge how much has been read each Lords-Day; and without this, it is impossible to judge exactly of it; and till I see particular Evidence to the contrary, I must suppose that what hapned in these times when I sent to enquire, was what was usual. Upon the whole, the slight you put on the Word of God, by throwing it out of your Meetings, when you cannot have time to put your own Glosses on it, your allowing two hours to your Sermons, and not ten Mi∣nuits to the Reading God's Word, are faults that Mr. B. may endeavour to palliate, but will never solidly justify. The true way to an∣swer them is to mend them, and I am heartily glad to hear that you have made some pro∣gress that way, tho' far from what is re∣quisite.
Sect. VII. Concerning the Mysteries of Religion. I. A Fourth Matter of Fact denied by Mr. B. is, That a man may frequent your Meetings all his life, and yet have no se∣curity, or hardly possibility of Learning from your publick Teaching, all the great Mysteries of his Religion. I laid before you in my former Admoni∣tion, p. 17. the excellent Method our Church had taken to secure the Publick Teaching of all the great Mysteries of Christianity to all her Members, by appointing a certain time in the Year for each of them; whereas there is no such Rule or Order for your Ministers: And whereas Mr. B. asserted there was an ob∣ligation put on you by the Directory to teach all those mysteries, I shewed he was mista∣ken; and he now contends (Vind. p. 12.) that you need none besides the Scriptures: which is (as I shewed in my Admon. p. 20.) a very great defect since the Scriptures require we should have such a Rule besides. II. Secondly, I shewed, that I had examined and put it to many of your perswasion, whe∣ther they ever heard any of your Ministers that professedly made a whole discourse on
the Trinity, Conception, Nativity, Resurrection or Ascension of our Saviour; or on his sending down the Holy Ghost: And I did, and do profess, that I never met one Man that could satisfy me in it, or assure me, that his Minister had done it: And I concluded from hence, that it was a most dangerous matter to leave these things to mens choice. III▪ To this Mr. B. replies, Vind. 11. that I overlooked the plain Evidence, nay, the De∣monstration he produced against the truth of this charge in these words, That your people are in Publick Teachings yearly Catechised, in which Exercise all the Mysteries of the Christian Re∣ligion are Explained to them. But I answer, First, That I did not overlook this, but particularly answered it, where I thought most proper, Admon. p. 23. and shewed that there is no Rule in Your Directory, that requires your Ministers to examine either Privately or Publickly; so that their perfor∣mances in this point are meerly Voluntary, and therefore their Hearers can have no se∣curity by this. Secondly, I added, that your Directory doth exclude Catechising from being any part of God's Publick Worship; either Ordinary or Extraordinary; as appears from the preface to it, which proposes it as rules for all parts of Publick Worship; and likewise from the
Title, which pretends the same: And yet the book says not one word concerning Catechi∣sing, but excludes it by excluding our Com∣mon-prayer Book, that requires it as a part of publick Worship: so that amongst you, whatever Mr. B. pretends, Catechising is No Publick Teaching, nor are your people, by any rule that I know amongst you, oblig∣ed to attend it in publick; and this I reckon as another inexcusable defect of your Di∣rectory. Thirdly, Your way of Catechising is not sufficient for this purpose. Mr. B. describes your manner of Catechising thus, Rem. p. 85. They divide their Parishes into so many Di∣stricts, and accordingly for every District once a Year, they Publickly appoint the time and place when they intend to Catechise them, and accord∣ingly go thro' the whole Catechism with 'em. I will add the account I had of this matter from good hands. The Dissenters practice in instructing and Examining the Younger sort, is in this manner. The Minister has a Meeting for this purpose in six several places in this Pa∣rish, and Examins once a Year in each place. His Method is to take four or five heads of their Catechism, and to ask questions concerning them, and expound them; according to which method, if they took the Catechism in Order, which yet I do not find they do, the Minister would be at least
ten Years in going over the whole of it in one place. Let us suppose then a man constantly to attend Catechising in his District, once a Year, yet it is impossible the Minister should teach him all the Mysteries of our Religion sufficiently, at one time; and if he take one Mystery at once, which is as much as he can do, if he explain it as he ought, you see what it comes to: He has no security of hear∣ing them all explained at any time, your Mi∣nisters not being bound to any method; and if they should bind themselves to one, yet so many years are required to go thorow them, that a man has no security to live so long. But further, I find that Catechising is generaly amongst you only in Order to a Sacrament, and whilst there are no Sacraments Admi∣nistered, there is usually no publick Catechi∣sing; and then Judge in what condition those places were that wanted Sacraments, for Se∣ven, Ten, or more years. And perhaps to avoid the trouble of examining, was the very reason that there were none Celebrated, as Mr. B. himself partly confesses. The truth is, this seems to me a meer pretence set up to excuse your Ministers for their Negligence in Preaching the Gospel; that is, the greatest, the highest, and most necessary parts of it; it being plain, that a man may remain igno∣rant
of them all his life, notwithstand∣ing your publick Teaching, whatever Mr. B. pretends to the contrary. IV. But Secondly, He objects, that your Ministers most frequently insist on the particu∣lar mysteries of the Christian Religion (Vind. p. 12) and quotes a passage from one of them, affirming it and taxing me most severely for asserting the contrary. But I Answer, These are but general Affirmations of the Persons accused, without any particular proof. I told you in my Admonition, p. 18. That the Greatest Mysteries of the Gospel, are the Conception, Birth, Passion, Resurrection, Ascention, and final coming of our Saviour to judge the quick and dead; the Doctrine of the Trinity, in whose Name we are Baptized, and the descent of the Holy Ghost. Let me add to these, tho' they are included in them, the manifestation of our Saviour to the Gentile World, which the Scriptures reckon a great Mystery, the Communion of Saints in one Ca∣tholick Church, and the Doctrine of Repen∣tance and Forgiveness of Sins. Each of these are, and ought to be at least once, or twice a Year solemnly and professedly taught in our Church, at their proper and appointed times, and in the Explanation of our Cate∣chism: so that we are sure that at least we shall hear them so often. Now to know whe∣ther
Your Ministers or Ours preach the Gospel most Diligently, Faithfully and Ex∣presly: it is not sufficient to say in general that you do it often, but we must know how often each Minister has solemnly, professed∣ly, and in a full discourse explained and en∣forced each of these Mysteries. V. For Secondly, it is not sufficient for one to pretend that by the by, and on occasion they have touched these Mysteries; for they are of that nature and moment, that people ought to be taught, that these, and none else, are the peculiar Mysteries of the Gospel; that all other Knowledge or Preaching is of little value in respect of teaching these; and the Ministers that teach them plainly, diligently, and solidly, are the true Preachers of the Gospel; and those that preach them slightly and seldom, are unfaithful Stewards. That each of them is of that consequence, that to ex∣plain them, prove them from Scripture, enforce them, and press and shew the Be∣nefits and Effects of them, requires fre∣quent and particular sett Discourses upon them; and the least that can be expected is, that they be handled once every Year so∣lemnly, fully, and professedly.
And here let me desire you to recollect your Memory, and consider, whether you have heard each of these treated thus be∣fore my Book appeared: if you did, you have reason to think your Ministers prea∣ched in earnest the Gospel to you; but if they omitted any of these, if they did not give you at least one Sermon on each of these great Articles in a competent time, they omitted so much of the Gospel, and were unfaithful Stewards of the Mysteries committed to them, and must be judged so if they continue in this Neglect. I shall be glad if they amend it, but am sure the Order in Our Church provides better a∣gainst it. VI. We hear Complaints every day as if the Gospel were not preached in Our Church; we are reproached as if we taught little but Morality; and Mr. B. talks of Desolate Congregations amongst us. Now, while these Mysteries are Solemnly, Con∣stantly, Solidly, and Professedly taught at least once a Year in every one of our Churches, bating Accidents of Sickness, &c. Judge with your selves how unjustly we are accused, and what ill terms I should have received, if I had charged you with such a Crime, when your Innocency was so demonstrable: But till you produce as plain,
certain, and obligatory a Rule for the teaching of them, as I have done amongst us, you can never be so secure of learn∣ing them from your Ministers publick Teaching as we are. I must profess again that I have put it to many of you my self, and have got others to do the same, and could never be assured that they heard one Discourse professedly on the Trinity, Con∣ception, Nativity, Resurrection, or Ascension of our Saviour, or his sending down the Holy Ghost; much less one or two every Year, as it is with us. And till Mr. B. produce Vouchers of the times and places, I shall believe those that have been thus put to it, would have told a thing so remarka∣ble, and in which the Honour of their Mi∣nisters is so much concerned, if they could have done it with truth. VII. Fifthly, Those people that have for many years complained, that Christ and the Gospel was not preached amongst us, may justly be suspected not to understand what the Gospel is: And whilst they accu∣sed us of preaching nothing but Morality, I am afraid that they reckon these Mysteries, and our pressing the necessity of a good Life from them, only dead and moral preaching, and that they expect some grea∣ter and more spiritual Mysteries from us:
But if any pretend to such, they are un∣faithful Teachers, and fall under the Apo∣stle's Censure, Gal. 1. 8. VIII. Lastly, Let me say one word to you of our own Communion. You see (my Brethren) what an excellent Order our Church has establish'd to secure your being taught all the Mysteries of the Gospel, by appointing a peculiar time of the year for teaching each of the principal of them: This way of keeping the great Works and Mercies of God in memory, is what Na∣ture teaches us as the most effectual method, and it is also approved by Presidents in both the Old and New Testament, and is of such force, that Experience shews us that this one Rule, well observed, has been the principal means of preserving Christia∣nity in the worst of Times, and under the most barbarous Tyranny and Persecution of the Dr. Smith, in his present State of the Greek Church, owns, That he admir'd whence it came that so few of the Eastern Christians were proselited to Mahometism, considering their Circumstances, and concludes, p. 14. Praesens satis edoctus tandem dedici, &c. At last being on the place, I learnt that the solemn Observa∣tion of Festivals and Fasts, by God's assistance, prevented the whole East from falling entirely from the Christian Faith; chiefly, if not only by means of these the Christian Religion triumphs over so many most cruel Contrivances▪ being secured and fenced by this as by a holy Charm against the poyson of Mahometism; for by the return of these Feasts, which are celebrated with great Crowds, with an holy Emulation, The History of the Birth, Death, and Re∣surrection of Christ, and the rest of the Mysteries that make up the sum of our Religion, are brought to their me∣mory, &c. And he observes, that the History of the Apostles and Martyrs, with the Courage and Pati∣ence represented in the days of their commemoration is that which arms them with Courage to endure all the Cruelties and Persecutions of the Turks. Sir Paul Ricaut speaking of the Constancy of the Greeks in the Christian Religion, has these words, p. 15. If any Art or Policy can be said to have place over the Affections of the People, none seems more efficacious than the strict observation of their Fasts and Feasts of their Church, by which the People are taught, as in a visible Ca∣techism, the History of Christianity, more (I dare say) than by their ill-composed Sermons, or repetition of the Scriptures in the vulgar Tongue; for being severely im∣posed, and observed with much Solemnity, they affect the Vulgar with an air of something Divine. Turks; and therefore let me entreat
you, as you love your Saviour, and expect a share in the Happiness of his Kingdom, that you would diligently observe those times ap∣pointed by the Church for the instructing you in the Mysteries of his Kingdom; whilst you do so, you are sure that you will be fed with the true Bread of Life, the old and sub∣stantial Articles of your Faith, that are able to save your Souls, and will not be led away with every Wind of Doctrin, or new coined
Mysteries of great Pretenders: Therefore let neither the Abuses or Arguments of your Adversaries discourage you, nor much less Covetousness or Laziness divert your atten∣dance: And remember, if at any time your Ministers do not teach them, it is contrary to the Order of our Church, and proceeds generally from your Non-attendance, and then you only are guilty of the Neglect. Sect. VIII. Concerning the Catechism. I. A Fifth Matter of Fact denied by Mr. B. is, That hardly one in ten get your Ca∣techism by heart, nor one in five hundred retain it. This I proved by my own Experience, and can by the Testimony of many Witnes∣ses that were present at the Tryals, to which Mr. B. replies, Vind. p. 13. That this is to be imputed to the sullenness, or the bashfulness of those I examined. But I found no such thing as bashfulness in them; and as to sullenness, many of them were under obligations to me, being my Tenants, or otherwise obnoxious; and they generally endeavour'd to answer, but could not remember either the Words or Matter. I got several to make the same
Experiment, and they returned me the like account. II. Mr. B. alledges that there are in the Parish of Derry two Meetings, And in those two Congregations 600 can give a good account of, and repeat the Assembly's Catechism. To this I reply, First, That this tryal is since my book, and doth not come home to the time of which I speak: I am glad if so many can do this, and believe my Book contributed to it. Secondly, There are in those Meetings 2400 Hearers in their Rolls, and then after all their Labour and pains, only one in four has gotten it. Thirdly, There are many in this Parish that do not enter themselves in your Books, and yet go to your Meetings and no where else; there is no account of these, who are the most ignorant. Fourthly, Here is no account of the whole District that depends on these Meetings, of which 600 is not the tenth, if the twentieth part. Fifthly, A Catechism is chiefly designed for the ignorant, and such as cannot read; and here is no Voucher that one such has it, and they generally speaking are never like to get it; so that Your Catechism is useless to those to whom it is most necessary.
Sixthly, Here is no assurance how many of these will retain it for any considerable time: An Experiment has been made of this, and a Man of good Natural parts has not been able to retain it a Month after Examination: I am sure some Eminent Persons of your Per∣swasion could not give an Account of it sometime before I Published my Book. I ac∣cidentally discoursed four or five of them about repairing a burying place, and prov'd to them, that it was a duty so to do, from that question in your Catechism, What benefits do Believers receive from Christ at death? To which the answer is, that The souls of Belie∣vers are at their death made perfect in holiness, and do immediately pass into Glory, and their Bodies being still United to Christ do rest in their Graves till the Resurrection. Therefore to expose their Bodies to Doggs or Swine, or any other Indignity, is to affront Christ to whom they are United. They seemed surprized at this; and as I understood after∣ward, did not believe me till they went and consulted the Catechism: From whence I concluded, that they did not know, or believe the Doctrine thereof; much less remember the words, which indeed I did not expect from them. Lastly, I do not believe your Ministers can certainly tell who have the Catechism, and
who have not. The Questions they ask are so few of each, and so confin'd to one head (as I am informed) that perhaps there are very few for whom they could vouch on such Ex∣aminations: And often the Persons guess be∣fore-hand in what place of the Catechism they shall be Examined, and prepare for it. Upon the whole, I am afraid my conclusion is too near a Truth; and I am confirmed in it by experiments every day: In which I do not expect the repeating the Catechism, but the Lords-Prayer and Ten Commandments and Belief, which many either never learned, or have forgotten. These then are not rash or mistaken Accusations, as Mr. B. alledges (p. 11.) but the effect of Tryal and Certain∣ty. I can very well distinguish between si∣lence and ignorance, whatever Mr. B. sug∣gests. All that he alledges to justify his pre∣tences, is (Vind. p. 2) That Any one that con∣siders the Genius of that people, and their parti∣cular dissatisfaction with his Lordship, will be easily inclined to believe this to be the genuin ac∣count of the matter. I do believe your Mini∣sters whom I have reproved, are angry at me; and some (I am informed) in this Coun∣try pray against me by Name in their Pul∣pits; and those joyn with them that are deep in your Interests, as it is a Faction, rather than a Religion. But I thank God, I do not
find any such dissatisfaction as Mr. B. would have the world believe. On the contrary, I find great respect from the Pious and Hum∣ble; and many have been so far from Sul∣lenness, when I have discoursed them, that they have even with tears bewailed their ig∣norance. So that I do not find all the Endea∣vours that have been used, or the Misrepre∣sentations spread either by Mr. B. or your leading men have been able to hinder, in a great measure, the effect of my Book; and even they that are most angry at it, are for∣ced for very shame to mend several things; and some have had their Eyes opened by it; and do not only frequent their Parish Chur∣ches, but Communicate in them. These are all the Matters of Fact of which I took Notice in my Admonition, and you see (without troubling my self with any other Informations than those Mr. B. has Published) the truth sufficiently appears in every particular: Yet he is not content with these, but renews several others which I passed over, either as not material, or so apparently true on my part, that they need∣ed no Justification: Yet since he has insisted on them again, I will take Notice of the most material.
Sect. IX. Concerning Bodily Worship. I. SIxthly, Therefore he reckons it as a mistake in Matter of Fact, that I affirm, that The Directory Excludes all Bodily Wor∣ship; These he quotes as my words, Dis. p. 128. and Vind. p. 23. Tho' these are not the very words I used, yet I will shew there is no mistake in them. First, Then the Composers of the Di∣rictory own no Worship of the Body, as requisite in the Service of God; nor do they require any either in general, or particular; and for this, I urge not only their omitting it in general, but their leaving it out in these particular places; where if they had believed it a Duty, they could not without the great∣est unfaithfulness have passed it over. If any place of Scripture require Bodily Wor∣ship, certainly the First or Second Command∣ment must do it; and Mr. B. owns (Rm. p. 107.) that in the Second Command, These External marks of our Inward Reverence, when we offer up our Prayers and Thanksgivings, are required by God. But if you look into your Larger or Shorter Catechism, the Assembly owns no such Duties to be required in those
mandments, or so much as hints at them: Nay, in the particular and large Catalogue of Sins Forbidden in them, there is not so much as Irreverence in Publick Worship men∣tioned. Look likewise into the Confession of Faith, Chap. 1. where Religious Worship is handled, and there is not the least mention made of Bodily Adoration, tho' that only be called Worship in Scripture; as I shewed Dis. Chap. 4. Sect. 1. N. 6. and I do not find that it is denied: Therefore if the Assembly thought it still to be a Christian Duty to Worship God with the Body, it was great unfaithfulness in them to omit it in all the places they treat of Religious Worship in their Directory, Catechism and Confession of Faith. II. Secondly, They positively forbid it in one place where it was most proper, that is, in our first appearance in Gods peculiar presence in the Publick Assemblies. To this Mr. B. answers (Rem. p. 108.) That this Order was only Levelled against the Custom of Bowing towards the Altar: Which is a plain mistake, for it forbids All Adoration or Bowing themselves towards one place or other; therefore not only towards the Altar. He alledges Secondly, Rem. p. 109. That the Assembly forbid Bowing should be used by the People as they entered the Church, because
they supposed such External Adoration should be only used, when some part of Publick Worship was to be performed. But I answer, They supposed in this, that which neither they or Mr. B. have proved from Scripture, or I believe ever will be proved; since Adora∣tion is to be used in the Congregation, not only to signify our joyning with them in Publick Prayers or Praises, but likewise to declare that we come into the Assembly as Worshipers, not Spectators, and to stirr up and prepare our hearts to meet our God: Every good Man comes there with a design to appear in God's presence, and with ex∣pectation to receive a Blessing from him in the answer of his Prayers; and ought to have his heart affected with this, when he enters especially. And tho' no Publick Worship is performed by the Minister at that time; yet he that enters ought to ac∣knowledge by Adoration his Belief of God's presence amongst a People met to Worship him, and exert an act of submission in his mind, and certify it with his Body, and joyn some short Prayer or Ejaculation with it: And when I see a Man who comes into an Assembly thus prostrating his Body, and lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, to suppose that this is separated from A mental Act of Worship, is as uncharitable as
Eli's censure of Hanna, when she thus pray∣ed privately in the Tabernacle. And there∣fore 'tis very unreasonable which Mr. B. re∣quires (Re. p. 107.) That I should prove Meer Bowing the Knee, &c. When there is no other part of Worship offered, neither Vocal nor Men∣tal, is yet made in Scripture a part of Worship. Since I suppose Bowing our Knees in a Pub∣lick Assembly is a sign of our sence of God's presence, and our inward submission to him, which it signifies and testifies to all present, tho' no other part of Publick Worship is at that time performed by the Minister. Without this Inward sense, it is Hypocrisy, not Worship; And so are all our Praises and Prayers when separated from this Mental Devotion, being only parts of Worship as they signify our sense of God's Excellency, and our desires to be assisted by him: And if Bowing the Knee, &c. signify our Submission and sense of God's Sovereignty, as Universally, Certainly, and Explicitely, as Praises do our sense of his Excellencies; the one is as proper a part of external Worship as the other. And indeed only bending the Body is called Wor∣ship in Scripture, as I shewed in my Book; and it would seem to me, by Mr. B's denying it to be a proper part of Worship, that he will not allow the Scripture to call things
by their proper names, but will set up his Reasons against the Letter of it; as I have observed him often to do. To conclude, That the Assemblies of Christians are places for secret Prayers of each apart (when they do not interfere with any Publick Office, as well as for Publick) appears from the whole tenour of the Scripture, and the con∣stant practice of the Churches of God An∣tient and Reformed. And that those secret Prayers ought to be offered with Adoration, as well as the Publick, is likewise manifest. And therefore the Directory, by forbidding Adoration at our first coming into Church, has excluded it where it was most proper. III. But Thirdly, I take it for granted, that when an Old Law or Rule is laid aside, and a new substituted in the place of it, all things contained in the Old repealed Law or Order are laid aside, which are not con∣tained and again injoyned in the New. By which Rule the Directory doth plainly ex∣clude all Bodily Worship: For in the Preface to it, we are told: that They resolve to lay aside the former Liturgy, with the many Rites and Ceremonies formerly used in the Worship of God, and have agreed on this following Dire∣ctory for all the parts of Publick Worship at Or∣dinary and Extraordinary Times. Here then the Liturgy, with all the Rites and Ceremo∣nies
used formerly in the Worship of God are laid aside; not only our Praises, Pray∣ers, &c. are excluded, but all the Rites and Ceremonies with which they were per∣formed, such as Kneeling, Standing, &c. And instead of these, we are oblig'd to no more than is ordered in the Directory. Prayers, Praises, &c. are there indeed Or∣dered, and the way of performing them prescribed, but not a word of Bodily Wor∣ship; and therefore it is plainly excluded among the other Rites and Ceremonies that are laid aside. IV. All that Mr. B. alledges, to prove that this Bodily Adoration is required by the Directory, is, (Rem. p. 109.) That it requires such as come into the Congregation after Publick Worship is begun, Not to be∣take themselves to their private Devotions, but Reverently to compose themselves to joyn with the Assembly in that Ordinance of God that is then in hand; which can import no less than putting themselves into a bodily posture, most suitable to that Ordinance. But I answer, This passage imports no such thing; the Assembly has no where explained Reverence in this sence, or given the least reason to believe that they thought one posture more suitable to one Ordinance than another, except Sitting at the Lords Supper; which posture they seem
to approve thro' the whole Service; for they require those that come in To take their Seats or Places; which in common accepta∣tion is to sit down, and they never require them to rise. It was therefore incumbent on Mr. B. to prove that by Joyning Reve∣rently in Prayers or Thanksgiving (for Ex∣ample) is meant Standing or Kneeling at them, or else this is no Vindication of the Directory. But Secondly, We are not left to guess what is meant by Joyning Reverently in the Ordinance then in hand; The Sentence im∣mediately going before explains it, where the Assembly tells how the people are to Joyn in Publick Worship, even by forbearing to read any thing—Abstaining from private Whisperings, Conferences, Salutations, or do∣ing Reverence to any Persons—From all gaz∣ing, sleeping, and other indecent behaviour which may disturb the Minister or People—. This is the way they are to joyn in the Ser∣vice of God. But not one word of putting themselves into a Bodily Posture most suitable to the Ordinance that is in hand. It is plain therefore, as I said before, that they exclu∣ded these when they laid aside the many Rites and Ceremonies used formerly in the Worship of God, and never restored them.
V. Let me add further, That Reverence and Worship are very different things: We ought to behave our selves Reverently to all our Betters, and at all times: But Worship is peculiarly to our Superiours, who have power over us. And as the things are dif∣ferent, so there are different outward Acts that express them, and neither Your Di∣rectory, Confession of Faith, or Catechism, or any other Authentick Rule that I know of amongst you, require any one visible Act peculiar to Worship in Your Assemblies. Nor do I see by what Authority your Mini∣sters can exact it from their People, where they pretend to Conform to the Directory; nor can it be pretended that the Composers of it forgot this: For it is manifest that they remembred it so far as to forbid all Adoration, where it was most proper, that is at our coming into the Assembly, and never require nor allow it any where af∣ter. VI. Thirdly, What I have said concern∣ing the sense of the Assembly that Composed your Directory, is agreeable to the Notion Dr. Twiss their Chairman had of this Mat∣ter; as appears from his Letter directed to Mr. Mede, dated July 27. 1635. 'Tis the 59 in the Collection: In which he gives this censure of Bodily Worship, The Lord re∣quires
the true Worshippers should Worship him in Spirit and Truth in distinction from Worshipping him either at Jerusalem, or in the Mount the Woman spake of; but as to the out∣ward gestures, I doubt I shall prove a Novice as long as I breath, and we affect not to make Ostentation of our Devotion in the face of the World; the rather because thereby we draw upon our selves the censure of Hypocrisy: And sometimes if a Man lift up his eyes he is cen∣sured as a P. I confess there is no outward gesture of Devotion which may not be as hand∣somly performed by as carnal a heart as breaths. And in his thirteenth Letter, being the se∣ventieth in the forementioned Collection, he adds, And as for outward Complements, nothing more pleases a Natural Man in Reli∣gious Worship, and he finds himself apt enough in it, yea, far more apt than he who knowing and considering that God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him must Worship him in Spirit, are most carefull for the performance thereof; Whereupon while their Minds are intent they find themselves not so free for outward Comple∣ments; the care whereof is apt to cause avoca∣tion and disturbance in that unum necessarium. Hence in the same Letter he blames himself for being prevailed with to rise up at the solemn Glory given to the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and commends one that could never be perswaded to it. Thus you see how the Prolocutor of the Assembly ridicules Outward Worship, un∣der the Names of Outward Postures and Complements. You find himself likewise alledging, in opposition to it, our Saviours Command of Worshipping in Spirit, Jo. 4. 24▪ And the very same Arguments that I men∣tioned, and Answered in my Discourse, Chap. 4. Sect. 3. Plainly intimating withal, that it is a piece of Ostentation to use these Acts of Bodily Worship, a sign of a carnal heart to be pleased with them; and to neg∣lect them, a sign of an Heart intent on God's Spiritual Service. Yet Mr. B. gives me very hard words for Answering these Ar∣guments, alledging (Rem. p. 125.) That he never heard any Dissenter alledge such tri∣fling Reasons,——That I framed them my self; and intimates, that few can be of so Sottish an Opinion: And yet you see the Chairman of Your Assembly offered these Reasons, and Mr. Mede answered them Sixty Years ago, as trifling and sottish as they are in Mr. B's Account: And perhaps his de∣claring himself of these, and other as odd Opinions, was one reason made the Par∣liament name him for Chairman. I wish
he had not influenced them to lay aside all Bodily Worship in the Service of God. VII. Fourthly, The Directory excludes Bodily Worship by imposing Sitting at the whole Office of the Administration of the Holy Sacrament, even at those Prayers and Thanksgivings that are most properly Chri∣stian, and peculiar to the compleat Mem∣bers of Christ's Church. The words of the Directory are these; The Table being de∣cently covered, and so conveniently placed, that the Communicants may sit about it, or at it, the Minister is to begin the action, with sanctify∣ing and blessing the Elements. Here you see the Communicants are to sit about the Ta∣ble, or at it, whilst the Minister begins the Blessing and Thanksgiving. Mr. B. replies two things to this (Rem. p. 113.) First, That Sitting during the time of receiving the Elements, is supposed, tho' not enjoyned by the Directory. But Supposing in this Case is En∣joyning; otherwise our Liturgy doth not en∣joyn Kneeling in the Act of Receiving: For the words of it are, That the Minister shall deliver the Elements to the People, into their hands, all meekly kneeling. This (ac∣cording to Mr. B.) only Supposes the People to Kneel, but doth not enjoyn it; but it is manifest, that in these Cases to suppose that People Sit or Stand, is equivalent to Im∣posing,
because if they do not sit or stand, they do not conform to the Order. But Secondly, He alledges, That this im∣ports No more, than that the Table must be placed, that the Communicants may sit about it, but that they must actually sit during the Blessing or Thanksgiving, is no where affirmed, much less imposed. But I answer, It is as much supposed, and consequently enjoyned, that they should sit during the whole Acti∣on, as during the Receiving: That they must sit sometime is plain; the Question is, when? All indifferent Persons will under∣stand it to be at that time where it is men∣tioned; that is, before the Minister begin the Action. And the whole Directory sup∣poses both Minister and People in the same posture throughout, and gives no Order for altering it when they come to distribution or receiving; which they would in all rea∣son have done, if they had meant that they should Bless and give Thanks in one posture, and receive in another. Let me add, That the President and Pra∣ctice they had before them was contrary to Mr. B's Interpretation; I mean the Church of Scotland: The Doctrine, Worship, Di∣scipline, and Government of which they had sworn to preserve in their Covenant. Now, in the Liturgy of that Church, which
is plainly their Precedent in this part of the Directory, (as any one will see by compa∣ring them) the Order is conceived thus; The Exhortation ended, the Minister cometh down from the Pulpit, and sitteth at the Table, every Man and Woman likewise taking their Places as occasion best serveth; then he taketh Bread, and giveth Thanks; And after all, the Action thus ended, the People sing the 103 Psalm, or some other of Thanksgiving; which ended, one of the Blessings before▪ mentioned is recited, and so they rise from the Table. Here is Sitting enjoyned throughout. Thus you have understood the Directory hitherto; And thus your People have practised to this day: And in this the Assembly were sworn to preserve you. And this I did say, and must say, hardens you against Re∣verence in the other parts of the Worship of God. For if Sitting be a suitable posture for offering up the most solemn Prayers, Thanksgiving, and Praises to God, and such as are peculiar to Our Religion, as Chri∣stians, they certainly are suitable to all others. And yet this the Church of Scot∣land and Assembly have determined to be suitable. And therefore Mr. B. is very un∣reasonable, when he asserts, (Vind. p. 31.) That He is no more obliged to defend any par∣ticular Persons in that posture, that indulge it
out of Sloth, than I am to defend the toying or laughing that is too often used in our Church. This he repeats out of his Remarks, but the case is not parallel. For First, We have particular Canons against all such Behaviour, namely, the Se∣venth, that forbids Any Person to be other∣wise at such times busied, than in quiet atten∣dance to hear, mark, and understand that which is read, &c. And the 88th, which requires the Church-wardens, &c. to see, That none walk, talk, or stand idle in the Church-Yord, or Porch; much more in the Church. And the 91st has these words; They shall also see, that in every meeting of the Congregation Peace be well kept; and that none behave themselves rudely, or disorderly in the Church. And to that end they shall warn the people, that they bring not with them to the Church, Dogs, Hawks with bells, or Children which are not so nurtured, as they can be kept quiet in their Seats, without running up and down. Neither shall they suffer any person to disturb the Service or Sermon, either by untime∣ly ringing of Bells, or by walking, talking, laughing, or any other noise, which may hinder the Minister, or offend the People. And the Names of all such as offend in this kind, they shall truly and personally present in the Ordi∣nary's Visitations. Till he shew as express
a Rule against Sitting at Prayers in the Di∣rectory, he and all that own that Directory are concerned in this charge. But Secondly, It is very uncharitable, and without Ground, to insinuate, That Toying or Luighing is as universally practis'd with us, as Sitting with you. I have been in more Churches than Mr. B. and I must profess, that I have generally observed the People behave themselves with reverence and devotion; and I do not believe that any Church in the Kingdom can be justly charged with Irreverence of this kind, any more than your Meetings, except perhaps one; and that is not because those that do it there are not admonished of their Duty, but because they are too big to be Cor∣rected. I have not said this to encourage you in your Irreverence, but to shew you the Un∣reasonableness of it, and to convince you of the Weakness or Unfaithfulness of the Guides your Party followed when they left our Church, of whom your Advocate is ashamed, and whom he would fain excuse by denying plain Matters of Fact: As for me, I do assure you I should be much better pleased to find I was mistaken in your Prin∣ciples and Practices, then that the whole Body of you should be guilty of such an
Irregularity; and therefore, if I had obser∣ved that you had reformed effectually these Abuses, I should not have troubled my self with a Vindication; for my design was not to Accuse, but Reform you: yet I thank God my Endeavours have not altogether proved unsuccessful upon you, even in this point. VIII. Mr. B. affirms (Rem. p. 111.) That your Ministers frequently in their Discourses to their People recommend Standing or Kneel∣ing in their publick Prayers; and p. 112, That they have faithfully declared to their people their dislike of Sitting. Now, pray let me give you this easie Test to distinguish your Faithful Ministers from the Unfaithful; Those of them that have frequently and heartily reproved you for Sitting at your publick Prayers, before my Book appeared, count them in this point Faithful Ministers of the Gospel; and those that have not done so, reckon them, as they truly are, Unfaithful and conniving Shepherds. And take heed how you trust them in other cases. I thank God for it, that by all I can learn, my Book has done more to reform this Unseemly Practice, as Mr. B. himself calls it, (Rem. p. 112.) amongst you than all your Ministers these 50 years; and plain∣ly shews, that they need some inspection to mind them of their Duty.
Sect. X. Concerning the Practise of Bodily Reverence by Dissenters. 1. A Seventh Matter of Fact with which Mr. B. anew charges me, (Vind. p. 23.) is, That I affirm, that the Dissenters are Taught, that external postures of Bodily Worship may in no case be practised: for which he quotes my Discourse, p. 137. I wish that Mr. B. while he taxes me for Accusing you Unjustly, and misrepresent∣ing you, were careful of avoiding such dealings toward others. If you look in∣to the place quoted, you will neither find the Words nor Sence of what he alledges against me; my Words are, That in case of Necessity we think our Outward Performan∣ces may be lawfully omitted; but you are Taught, that in no case they may be lawfully practised: You are Taught rather to stay at home, and not to Worship God at all publickly, than to conform in Outward Gestures or Cir∣cumstances. In which words it is plain, First, That I address my self to you in par∣ticular, and not to Dissenters in general, as he represents me. Secondly, It is evident I spake here of the Outward Gestures and
Circumstances to which our Church re∣quires you to conform, in order to joyn in her publick Worship; and not of all External Postures of Bodily Worship: And it is too sad a Truth, that above Twenty thousand of you in this Diocess refrain, and have refrained every Lord's day from all Publick Worship for many Years, ra∣ther than joyn in these; and that you have counted our Standing, Kneeling, &c. ido∣latrous heretofore, appears not only from your Practice and Profession, but from your Authors. Witness the Reasons for which the Service-book urged upon Scotland, ought to be refused, printed 1638, in which—the Third Reason is, because it hath a number of Popish, Superstitious, and Idolatrous Cere∣monies; amongst which are reckoned, the Priest's Standing, Kneeling, Turning to the People, and the Peoples Standing at Gospels, at Gloria Patri, &c. Creeds, their Answering the Minister, and many such-like, in number above Fifty. These unchristian and unjust Censures are still in many of your Minds, and for ought I find, they are the chief Objections you have against our Service; and I be∣seech God in his Mercy to grant, that ei∣ther my Reasons, or Mr. B's Concessions, may remove them, so that we may hear
no more from you of the Idolatry, Super∣stition or Popery of our Ministers Kneel∣ing at their Prayers, or standing at their Blessings; or of our Peoples Kneeling at their Confessions of Sins, at their Prayers and Communions, or Standing at their Praises, Thanksgivings, Professions of Faith, and other parts of our Service, that require a more solemn attention and concern. Sect. XI. Concerning the Praises of God. 1. I Shall add an Eighth Matter of Fact, that has relation to the same Affair, and that is concerning your praising God; Mr. B. alledges (Vind. p. 23.) these as my words, and puts them, as such, in Italian Characters, That You have no other way of Praising God, but by singing a Verse or two of a Psalm. And quotes my Discourse, p. 24, for them; but if you look into the place, you will find that these are neither my words nor sense: I am there only com∣paring your use of Psalms and Hymns in the Praises of God, with ours; and I ob∣served that our Church praises God every day with five or six Psalms, besides other Hymns——Whereas You only praise him in a
piece of a Psalm of a few Verses. A thing so notoriously true, that without pervert∣ing the words, 'tis impossible to find any Exception against them. He objects indeed, That your Directory prescribes Extemporary Thanksgivings, and spends many Pages in his Remarks about them. But I answer, Thanksgivings and Praises are different things, tho' they com∣monly go together; and your Extempory Thanksgivings are reckoned in your Directo∣ry under the Head of Prayers: The Title under which they are prescribed, is that of publick Prayer after Sermon: The Rule is, The Sermon being ended, the Minister shall give Thanks, &c. And then the Prayer ended, let a Psalm be sung. I had no intention to de∣ny these, but reckoned them, as your Di∣rectory doth, with your Prayers: Which gives no other Rule for the Praises of God, but under the head of singing Psalms; the words there are, It is the Duty of Christians to praise God by singing of Psalms; the only Rule for the Praises of God in the whole Directory. Properly speaking, Psalms and Hymns are the Scripture way of praising God, tho' in a large sense we praise him by our Confessions of Sins and Faith; and by our Prayers, as well as by our Thanksgi∣vings.
Sect. XII. Concerning the Rule of Human Prudence. 1. A Ninth Matter of Fact is, concerning the Rule of Human Prudence, that we find, Rem. p. 7, & 9, he charges me, Vind. p. 28, with Mistaking that Rule, and supposing that he denied that God had given us any par∣ticular Directions at all in reference to the Modes of Worship. But I must declare I nei∣ther did, nor intended to ascribe any such Opinion to him; I knew very well, that he owned many such, but he positively affirm∣ed, Rem. p. 7. That tho' God has commanded publick Prayer, Praise, Hearing, Celebration of the Lords-Supper, &c. yet at what time or place we shall assemble in, in what order these parts of Worship shall be performed, what par∣ticular devout posture we shall use among several equally expressive of our religious Reverence, what Translation of the Bible, or Version of the Psalms we shall chuse, what portion of the Scripture shall be Read, Explained, and Ap∣plied, what Utensils shall be employed in the celebration of the Sacraments; and a multitude of such Circumstances, and Modes of that kind, are left to Human determination; only there∣in the general Rules of Scripture must be regar∣ded.
Now, tho' Mr. B. in other Matters allows particular Directions for the Modes of Worship, as he calls them; yet it is plain in these of Time, Place, Postures, Translations, Order and Circumstances, he allows no parti∣cular Directions in Scripture, by which we are obliged, but only General Rules. Against this I Argued in my Admonition, and shewed that God had not only given us General Rules for these Matters, but likewise many particular Directions and Examples con∣cerning each of them; indeed so many, that if we diligently attend, and mind the Consequences of them, and apply them to like Cases, we may have sufficient dire∣ction from Scripture to Order our Wor∣ship in each of these respects, and that it is a great Presumption to lay aside these particular Directions and Examples, and to substitute other in their stead, because our own Prudence judges them more for Edifica∣tion. II. As for Example, The New Testa∣ment shews us, that there was a Translation of the Psalms in Prose, and it doth not ap∣pear that either our Saviour or his Apostles used any other Translation, or the Church of God for 1500 Years: But Mr. B. tells us, Vind. p. 29. That the Command which obliges Christian Churches to sing Psalms, ne∣cessarily
obliges us to turn 'em in such sort of Metre and Verse as will best accommodate them to be sung by the People. Now, this I say, is directly to set up the Determination of our own Prudence against Scripture-Prece∣dent, and to accuse Christ, his Apostles and the Church of God, of not having done that which the Command of God obliged them necessarily to do; since it doth not appear that they ever Translated the Psalms into any sort of Verse to accommo∣date the People; but plainly supposed they might sing them very well in Prose, as they found them Translated to their hands by the Seventy Interpreters. They are in no better Metre in the Greek, Latin, Syriack, or in any other antient Translation used by the Church of God, than in the Common-Prayer-Book. Yet the generality of those that used these Translations were not ex∣cluded from Singing them according to God's Command, nor are they with us: And indeed if people were not prejudiced against them by such false reasonings as Mr. B. offers, it is easier to sing them, and understand them when sung by others, in our way (which is the Antient Christian Method) than when sung according to the New Metre Tunes.
As to the Original Hebrew Psalms, I knew very well that Learned Men had dis∣puted much about them: That some have endeavoured to find Measure in them, others Rhime; but after all, they come ge∣nerally to that result which gave you, Dis. Chap. 1. Sect. 1. N. 3. That it is evi∣dent they are poetical, but the poetry of them consists rather in the stile or manner of expres∣sion than in any certain measures or verses. And the same is observed in the Hymns and Songs of the New Testament; Such as those of Zacharias, and the blessed Virgin: Which are plainly Poetical Composures, and as much Hymns as any of David's Psalms, and as fit to be sung. And more particularly those two Songs which the Church is represented Singing in the Rev. Chap. 9. and Chap. 15. which are as much Verse in the English as in the Origi∣nal. He alledges indeed, Vind. p. 29. That the Psalms of David were wrote in such▪ sort of Metre and Verse as was then used. But this is more than any one knows, and no ways concern us, since the Translation of them, which we find under the New Testament, and the Hymns and Songs Recorded in it, are not in that sort of Verse or Metre, or Poetry that was then used in the World,
but in such as we find in the Old Testa∣ment; and such as our Church still retains in our Hymns and Psalms: Nor has she ever allowed by any Publick Act the Metre Psalms; much less that they should justle out the Scripture-way of using them in Prose. III. Secondly, The Scripture directs us to use all the ways of offering up Psalms to God that were then common. First, By Singing them together; So did Moses and the Children of Israel, Ex. 15. Secondly, By Courses; So did the Priests and Levites, Ezra 3. 11. Thirdly, By a select Choire; So was the custom in the Temple. Fourthly, By one's Singing, and the rest joyning with him in their minds, and attending for their Edification and Comfort. So the Prophets did that had inspired Psalms, 1 Cor. 14. 26. For it is not con∣ceiveable how the Congregation could joyn their Voices in a Psalm that was either in∣spired in the place, or brought prepared by the Prophet, since we all agree that there was no Reading a line, as with us, and then Singing it. Fifthly, By speaking or reciting Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs. Sixthly, By plain Singing them. And
Seventhly, By playing to them; So Eph. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs▪ Singing and making Melody in your Heart to the Lord. The word we render making melody, is literally (as I have formerly observ'd) Singing or play∣ing to an Instrument: And these three, Speaking, Singing, and Playing, are literally the ways men used their Hymns, Poems, and Songs: And the Apostle directs us to use our Psalms all these ways, as we have oc∣casion; adding, that we must use them to the Lord only, and with grace in our Hearts. These are the Precedents and Directions the Scriptures give us for the use of our Psalms; and our Church retains them all on occasi∣ons. And to pretend that all or any of these are impractical, disorderly, or contrary to Edification, I take to be a great presump∣tion; and this I suppose to be your Case, and Mr. B's. He asserts, Rem. p. 13. That the New Testament recommends no other use of Psalms but Singing, and quotes, Eph. 5. 19. to prove it; whereas the very Letter of the place recommends Speaking them, and Playing to them, as well as Singing them. And so Protestant Interpreters, both our own and Strangers, understand it.
Thirdly, You and he have laid aside all these ways Precedented in Scripture, and substituted instead of them one that is not yet a hundred year old, peculiar to these Countries, and not commonly used in other Singing; I mean reading a line, and the people Singing it after; which Mr. B. confesses, Remarks p. 28. to be indeed A de∣fect, but such as we must be forced to conde∣scend to, unless we could prevail with all our People to get Psalm Books, and learn to read, or to commit 'em to memory: As if all the poor Christians in the Apostles time had had Psalm-Books; or cou'd have read; or had the Psalms by heart; or as if our Neighbour Reformed Churches were in a better Case in this point than we: But this is plainly to suppose that the Apostles and and the Church of God were ignorant of this necessary means of Edifying the Peo∣ple till a few years ago; and that the Scripture failed to give us Direction what we are to do with the Psalms when the people want Books, cannot read, or have them not by heart: Which has ever been the Case of many since they were first Sung. But the same Scripture that com∣mands us to do all things for Edification, commands us likewise to use the Psalms as I have shewed, and never prescribes or
mentions the defective way used by you; and therefore we may be sure Singing the Psalms by a Choir, Reading them by Cour∣ses, and Playing to them are not contrary to Edification: And to oppose the Deter∣minations of Human Prudence to these par∣ticular Precedents, is to make the Word of God of none effect by your Tradition: And is what I blame in You and Mr. B. as Teaching your own Inventions. I posi∣tively declared that I did not condemn Singing Metre - Psalms as unlawful, but only your casting out the Prose intirely in your publick praises of God, and prefer∣ring the Metre meerly on the strength of our own prudential Determinations; as more edifying and fitter for a Congrega∣tion. This I took to be a preferring your own Reason, or Tradition, to the Word of God. IV. The same I say concerning Extempo∣rary Prayer: I never denied but Extem∣porary Prayers may be lawful, nay, ne∣cessary on Extraordinary Occasions, when a man has not a Form ready, or time to Compose one. I granted, that in this case, we may depend on the assistance of God's Spirit, as in all other cases of Necessity; or at least hope for pardon, of course, to our Infirmities.
But I shewed, Dis. Chap. 2. Sect. 3. N. 3. That God had Commanded Forms of Prayer, both to Priests and People, in the Old and New Testament: That the Church of the Jews use a Form of Prayer in their Publick Ordinary Service; that the Psalms of David are a Collection of such Forms, and so are called, Psal. 72. 20. And it doth not appear, that any other publick Prayers were ordinarily used in the Temple; and that we have many Prece∣dents of such. I add now, that such Pray∣ers are sufficient to express all our Desires to God on Ordinary publick Occasions, which are constantly the same; and if any thing Extraordinary happen, the Church may provide a Form for it, it being unreaso∣nable that it should be left to every private Minister to impose what Confession or Peti∣tions he pleases on the people; or at least in such a solemn affair as uttering to God the Sense of a Nation, or even of a Congrega∣tion, a Minister ought to reduce what he intends to say into Form, and consider it well beforehand, that he may be sure that the Words are fit and proper for the Pub∣lick, as well as the Matter. I shewed further, That there is no Pro∣mise in Scripture to furnish us with Words without this care; and, that the Spirit of
Prayer promised in Scripture doth not in∣clude any such Gift either to Minister or People: And therefore to lay aside Prayers by a Form, in our Ordinary publick Occa∣sions (which are still the same) is plainly to prefer our own Inventions to Scripture∣precedents, and our prudential Applicati∣on of a General Rule, to the method pre∣scribed in several particular cases under that General Rule by God himself. I grant, Praying Extemporarily, and Prayer by a Form, are different ways of Worshipping God, or Modes, to use Mr. B's phrase, (who commonly, in these cases, shelters himself in some new difficult Word, which many of you do not understand.) But, I say, We have only precedents for one of these ways in Scripture, in performing of publick Prayers in an Ordinary Setled Con∣gregation; and therefore for you to lay aside this way (as you do in your most publick and ordinary Addresses) for Ex∣temporary Prayers, is to prefer your own Wisdom to God's. If the thing it self had been feasible, the method of Answer∣ing this Argument against Extemporary Prayer was easie; nor was there any need of that long Discourse you find in Mr. B's Remarks, or the hard Words he gives me about it. The whole difficulty incumbent
on him, was to shew some Command of God in Scripture, requiring us to Worship or Pray to him in a Conceived, or Un∣premeditated, or Free-Prayer, as he calls it; or some Example in a Setled Ordinary Congregation, where it was practised. Till he do this, his Arguments for the Useful∣ness of such Prayers, and for their Necessi∣ty, drawn from their being more Moving and more Edifying than Forms, are only opposing his own Experience to the Pre∣cedents of Holy Scripture; And it seems to me, that only the itching Ears of peo∣ple who love Novelty and Variety give ground for such Surmises: But these are Vices against which they ought to be cau∣tioned, not to be cherished and encouraged in them, as Mr. B. does, Rem. p. 163. since they are apt to cheat men with a false Devotion, and are not necessary to a true one; of which, had Mr. B. been throughly sensible, I conceive he would not have gi∣ven me such very hard words for inter∣preting an Itching Ear, to be an Ear that loves them; or affirmed (as he does, Rem. p. 101.) That no Expositor before me ever dream'd of such a sence of them. I wish he would consult a few more Expositors before he peremptorily determine concer∣ning the sence of Scriptures: He might
have found Estius, Alpide, and Galvin, no∣ted Commentators, concurr in this sence with me, and the Context, as well as the Words, where they are used, enforce it, 2 Tim. 43. For the time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine; but after their own Lusts, heap up to themselves Teachers ha∣ving itching Ears. Which words plainly give two Reasons that move people to heap up Teachers to themselves, their Lusts and their Itching Ears; but Mr. B. would per∣swade us, that the Apostle meant only one of them; whereas the Experience of all Ages has found, that the desire▪ of Novel∣ty and Variety has made Men ready to entertain Fables and False Doctrines, as well as their Wanton Fancies, or Various In∣olinations, as he alledges: If by Wanton Fancies he meant any thing else than a Fancy that loves Novelty and Variety, and if the same be meant by it, then he had no reason to abuse me for a whole Page together, for interpreting the words in that sence, since he himself doth the same. M. B. I confess, offers some Scripture Precedents for Extemporary Prayer in pub∣lick, Rem. p. 36. namely Solomon's, 1 King▪s 8. 22. Asa's, 2 Chron. 14. 11. Jehosophat's, 2 Chron. 20. 5. Hezekia's, Isa. 36. 15, 16.
Ezra's, Chap. 9. 5. Nehemiah's, Chap. 9. 5. But these are not to the purpose; they are all of them on Extraordinary occasions, and in Extraordinary Assemblies, in which 'tis granted, that Extemporary Prayers may be necessary. Secondly, They are generally the particular Prayers of the men that offe∣red them, and not of the Assembly; such is Solomon's, Hezekiah's, and Ezra's. Third∣ly, It doth not appear but they were all Forms written and prepared beforehand. I take it for granted, That the Confession in Neh. 9. was so, for eight Levites repea∣ted it, the people standing; as appears by the fifth Verse, Then the Levites, Jeshua and Cadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebijah, Ho∣dijah, Shebaniah, said, Stand up and bless the Lord your God for ever and ever. And so they go on with the Confession, and it is like the People joyned their Voices also, for they used to joyn in the Blessings and Prai∣ses of God; to do which, the Levites now in∣vite them: And in the latter end of the Confession it is said, V. 18. Because of all this, We make a sure Covenant, and Write it. This Confession is then plainly the Preface to that Covenant, and therefore these are no clear Instances (as he alledges) or Prece∣dents for Extemporary Prayers in an Ordi∣nary Setled Congregation; much less is there any Command for such: Whereas
the Precedents for Forms of Prayer are ex∣press, and the Command to use the Lord's Prayer in particular, literal, Luk. 11. 2. When you pray, say, Our Father; to which Mr. B's Interpretation is a Contradiction; When you pray you need not say Our Fa∣ther, &c. either in Ordinary publick Ad∣dresses to God, or Occasional. V. Let me observe further, that tho' Mr. B. gives me such hard words for not distinguishing between the Spirit of Prayer and the Grift, Rem. p. 60. yet he doth not bring one place of Scripture where they are distinguished: It was directly my busi∣ness, to shew, That there was no such Ordi∣nary Gift, without the help of Forms, ne∣cessary or promised, either to the Children of God, or (which is the same thing, as Mr. B. now states it, Rem. p. 59.) to all Mi∣nisters or private Christians, In the diligent use of such helps as they are furnished with, and frequent exercising themselves in this excellent Duty. This is a point so material, that we ought to have plain Scripture for it, and a clear promise that God will give this Gift to us on all occasions ordinary and ex∣traordinary, without the help of Forms, if we use the means, endeavour it hearti∣ly, and exercise our selves in it. But Mr. B. has not produced one particular,
much less clear promise to this purpose; only he argues the Conveniences of it from general Rules, which signifie nothing when duly examined; neither ought to be put in the balance with our Saviour's Command and Scripture▪ Precedents: And therefore I had good reason to suppose that Mr. B. set up his Rule of Human Prudence to the exclusion of any particu∣lar Rule or Precedent in Scripture in these Duties he mentioned: Nay, I had good Warrant to believe, that he allows a di∣spensing Power even against express Scri∣pture-Rules and Precedents, when his Hu∣man Prudence judges them contrary to Edi∣fication: He asserts this positively in the matter of Ordination, and I had reason to believe the same as to matter of Worship. Saith he, Reflect. p. 37. Positive Precepts must always yield to Moral, and Matters of meer Order to the end of the Duty ordered: and the former must never be pleaded against the latter. This I take to be a dangerous Position; for it is in effect to say, that all the particular Rules in Scripture about the Worship of God, and Discipline of his Church, cease to be Obligatory on any party of Men that think them contrary to Edification: Whereas we ought to sup∣pose, that they never are contrary to it,
and therefore are never to be laid aside; and that tho' they seem to us to be con∣trary, yet they are not, but are some way misapplied; which is to be amended with∣out Dispensing with them. Thus I may be assured, that praying to God by a Form is very edifying, because I find Precedents for doing so in Scripture; and I ought to look on it as a very corrupt Human Prudence, that suggests the contrary. And herein, as I take it, lies the principal difference between Mr. B. and Me, concerning this Rule; I argue, that Forms of Prayer, sing∣ing Prose-Psalms, &c. are edifying, because I find them used in Scripture; he argues, That they ought not to be generally used, because his Human Prudence and Observati∣on finds them contrary to Edification. I must leave you to judge which of us pay the greatest deference to the holy Scri∣pture, or have the greatest opinion of our own Prudence. VI. To conclude this Head, I will deal easily with Mr. B. and allow him the In∣terpretation of his Rule which he now gives; and tho' he says, That only the ge∣neral Rules must be regarded, yet I will al∣low he did not intend to exclude particu∣lar Directions; and I will take the Rule as Mr. Baxter has it, from whence I sup∣pose
Mr. B. took it, in these words; (Con∣formity stated, p. 13.) We never held, that the Scripture is a particular Rule, command∣ing every Accident and Circumstance about God's Worship (but only a general Rule requi∣ring all to be done in Love and Peace, and to Edification, and decently, &c.) in those Circumstances which must be some way deter∣mined, and God hath left to variable Human Determinations, such as are Time, Place, U∣tensils, Translations, Sections, Metres, Tunes, Methods and Words in Preaching and Prayer, Habits, Gestures, and many such-like. This Rule is laid down in the Name of all your party, and I hope you will stand by it; for it not only justifies our Holy-days▪ Commu∣nion-Table, Rails, Habits, Desks, Pulpit and Fonts, as I shewed in my Admonitton, but also our Office for the Dead; for we have a general Rule in Scripture to pray always, more especially when we meet with any loss, or cause of sorrow: And I sup∣pose our Human Prudence doth determine, that the death of a Friend is a very sen∣sible loss; that the time of his burial is a very proper time for Prayer; and his Grave, where we take our last farewell of him, is a very proper place to express our hope of his Resurrection, and to thank God for that hope; which is the sum of
that Office of our Church. The same may be said for the Thanksgiving of Women after Child-birth, and indeed for every other Office appointed by our Church; and every practice even of our reading the Apocrypha, and Standing at the Gospel; the one being a gesture within the very Letter of the Rule, and as the Prudence of the Church has judged for many Ages, very edifying; and the other full as warrantable as your Ministers Reading the Covenant and Acknowledgment of Sins, which they were ordered to do two Lord's days, Octob. 6. 1648. Nay, it justifies that which we are no ways obliged to justifie, tho' Mr. B. of∣ten objects it to us, that is, Bowing to∣wards the East, or Altar, it being no Rule of our Church, or universal practice; For God has in general commanded us to wor∣ship him with our Bodies; and it is very convenient, decent, and solemn, that the whole Congregation should bow one way, without meeting each others Faces. If therefore Human Prudence determine, that this gesture shall be used at certain times, and that it shall be towards the East or Communion-Table, it only does what the Rule impowers, and it fully justifies it.
The same may be said of bowing the Head at the Name of Jesus, which yet is not re∣quired of you, there being no Rule for it in the Church of Ireland; and the same is obvious of all these other things Mr. B. excepts against, Vind. p. 28. Sect. XIII. Concerning the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Canons. 1. ATenth Matter of Fact is his adding and taking away from our Third, Fourth, and Fifth Canons. He professes that he cannot imagine wherein he has added to them, Vind. p. 33. For the determina∣tion of this I desire you to Consult the Re∣marks, p. 179. and there you will find him affirming that our Fifth and Third Canon Excommunicate ipso facto all that are guilty of the Crimes mentioned in them; and in∣timates the same concerning the Fourth: But he has added these words ipso facto out of his own head, or by inconsiderately transcribing Mr. Baxter, who indeed quotes the Third, Fourth and Fifth English Ca∣nons; but the Irish Canons which Mr. B. here quotes, treat of different matters, and
have no such words in them; and yet these words are so material, that he founds his principal Arguments against these Canons on them; alledging it (Rem. p. 180.) as a great absurdity that they Excommunicate without any other Admonition than what the Canons themselves give; and that they peremptorily cut off from Christ without pre∣sonal warning; and p. 146. That all are de∣nounced Excommunicated who affirm or maintain the Doctrines condemned in those Canons. Whereas those Canons neither denounce any Excommunicated, nor Ex∣communicate any ipso facto; and tho' the Crimes be very grievous, such as Preach∣ing against the Established Worship in the Common-Prayer-Book; condemning our Orders, unchurching our Congregations; separating from us as profane; and set∣ting up Altar against Altar; yet the Ca∣nons do not impower the Bishops to Ex∣communicate Persons so guilty till they be Cited, Admonished, the Fact proved, and they persist impenitently in their Errors: Whereas if they were Excommunicated ipso facto (as Mr. B. alledges) there needed only Citation and a proof of the Fact, and a Declaration of the Sentence.
Sect. XIV. Concerning His Demands. 1. BUT Eleventhly, As Mr. B. denies, that he has added to our Canons, so he likewise asserts, Vind. p. 33. That he has reviewed all the demands he has made in his Remarks, and can see no unjust re∣presentation in them. I do not think it proper to trouble you with an Examina∣tion of all those. I will only put you in mind that I hinted at some of them in my Admonition, p 49. as in the fifth, where he represents us absolving the Uncensured; which is a very unjust representation: For the Absolution of the sick is not the absol∣ving of the Uncensured, but of one that by, A special Confession of some weighty▪ matter that troubles his Conscience has submitted himself to the censure and judgment of a Minister. Secondly, In the seventh demand he cen∣sures our Canons in the matter of such as are to be Ordained as very desective; which is a very unjust representation, they being as strict as the Apostles, 1 Tim. 3. and in such a degree, that if duly observed,
no insufficient person can be admitted into Orders. I will add two or three more, for I can∣not go thro' all. II. Thirdly, Therefore in his second de∣mand, p. 171. he represents the Authority of Bishops to be so devolved on their Chancellours, as to be out of their one hands; and humbly desires they would endea∣vour to recover the spiritual part of it. This is an unjust representation, and shews he does not understand our Constitution, or practice; for, First, In many Cases the Bishop cannot devolve his Power on his Chancellour, but must act himself. Second∣ly, The Chancellour's Power doth not ex∣clude the Bishops in any case. On the contrary, he is only his Substitute when absent, and his Assistant when present: The Bishop may when he pleases sit in his own Courts, and when he pleases admit what Clergy-Men he thinks proper to assist him, and dispose of all things according to the Canons; He may reserve a cause to his own Hearing; pass sentence in it accord∣ing to his own Judgment; and dismiss or suspend it; and in every step act indepen∣dently of his Chancellour. It is true, he cannot in some Cases dispose of the Chan∣cellour, or Registers Fees; to which (being
a Lay-perquisite) the Common Law intitles them; and it is not the Churches fault that we cannot reform it. But from this it sufficiently appears that to represent our Jurisdiction as out of our hands is very unjust. And here let me take notice of a most unjust Reflection Mr. B. has cast on the Jurisdiction of this Diocess, in particular: He asserts, p 157. That you have very lit∣tle hopes of Reformation of Manners, from either the Persons that compose those Curts, or from the manner of their proceedings; and hopes that I should not expect that you should turn Informers, to bring Grist to our Mills. And intimates, That we only draw peo∣ple in there to make a Prey of them. These are every one most unjust Representati∣ons; and I dare appeal to the several hun∣dreds I have had in my Court, since I came to this Diocess, for the truth of what I assert: I can answer for my self and all the Officers of the Court, and dare affirm that none of them ever made a Prey of any. I shall only give the Chancellours ac∣count of this matter, and desire Mr. B. to try if he can produce one instance to the contrary. My Lord, after all the tenderness of your Lordships Ecclesiastical Courts, I am sur∣priz'd
to find that Mr. B. (in his Book against you) speaks to your Lordship of such Courts as bring contempt on the censures of the Church, decreeing 'em on frivolous causes, in a rash and precipitant manner, making 'em an Engine to squeeze the Purses of men, rather than reform their Manners, p. 155. as hunting for Prey, and on that score drawing men into their clutches, p. 156. as scandalously managed: The cen∣sures of the Church prostituted to so vile a purpose as that of filthy lucre, and that thereby the Temple of God is turned in∣to a House of Merchandize, p. 171. This, in a Book so full of harsh innuendo's may make some Readers believe that the Accounts he has from hence (of which he sometimes speaks) give him ground to talk at this rate. And seeing these things are said to the Bishop of Derry, and the Reformation of them desir'd, those who are strangers to your Lordships Courts, and your Diocess, may be inclin'd to believe that the Jurisdiction here is managed by such Harpy's as he has described; for what Courts can your Lordship reform but your own? and why is this objected to your Lordship unless you are supposed to be guilty? Therefore as far as this may be understood to relate to your Lordships Diocess (concerning which, properly, all the Dispute is) I shall beg leave of your
Lordship to offer this short answer to it. I have never heard that any Judge of the Consistory of Derry since June 1691, when I came first into this Diocess, receiv'd any Fees but what came through my hands; for I attended con∣stantly on the Courts since that time (as Sur∣rogate the first year, and Chancellor the two last) to your Lordships knowledge, who was duly present at them when you were in Town. Now during these three Years there are, or have been, about 200 Persons (reputed of that Perswasion that Mr. B. seems to vindi∣cate) proceeded against in the Ecclesiastical Courts of Derry, presented by the Church-Wardens, for Fornication, Adultery, Incest, &c. From all which, there has not been taken for the Judges Fees to the value of Ten Pounds. The last Fifteen Months I resided in my Parish, Seven miles distant from the Court, yet attended without any Surrogate, lest I should be obliged to grant the full Fees to others which I remit often my self; so that my many necessary Journeys, my neglect of my own pri∣vate Concerns, my staying many Nights and Weeks from my own Dwelling, being conside∣red, any reasonable person may compute my Gains. I shall not enter into any Invidious comparison between this Management and the times of Presbitery or Independency; but sup∣posing that my Brethren may justify their
Courts in the same manner, if the Scene of the present Dispute were not laid in this See: I shall content my self with this, That all men may hence discern, whether our Courts have deserved the severe Intimations before∣mentioned, or whether Mr. B's. friends here, have been devoured as a prey, &c.—— Ballychelaghan June 6 1694. My Lord, your Lordships, &c. Robert Gourney. To conclude, I dare affirm, that all the Officers of the Court of Derry, have not had Forty Pound Fees from all the several hundred Criminals that have been in it since I came into the Diocess; so far have they been from Oppressing or Squeezing any: And yet I am not satisfied that this Mildness is commendable, for I find the greater part so lost to all sense of Goodness, and so exceedingly sordid in their Tem∣per, that they had rather do Penance both at Meeting and Church than pay a few Shil∣ings; and perhaps on such people, the fear of paying a little Money, would work a grea∣ter Reformation, and awaken them more than all other Endeavours.
III. Fourthly, He represents Ministers in his Sixth Demand, p. 173. as depriv'd of their Pastoral Power that belongs to them, and Wishes that Bishops would exercise their Authority in concurrence with their Presbyters; and another of your Ministers represents Bishops as the sole Pastours of the whole Diocess, Mr. Craghead p. 145. Now all these are Misrepresentations. For First. There are many acts of Episcopal Power and Authority which a Bishop con∣not exercise without the concurrence of his Presbyters. Secondly, There is not one act belonging to a Congregation, except confirming the Baptised (which has ever been peculiar to Bishops) but a Presbyter, with the consent of his Bishop, may exercise it. Thirdly, A Presbyter has as much power in the matter of Excommunication as any Presbyterian Minister, since he can re∣prove, rebuke, exhort and suspend from the Sacrament; which is all that any of them can do. And whereas Mr. B. alledges that he must turn Informer against such as he suspends, in the Spiritual Courts, where they are sure to be put to great Charges. This is another Misrepresentation; For there is no such necessity of putting into the Court such Offenders, except their Sins be pub∣lick; or if they should be put into it, that
they should be put to much Charges, ex∣cept they continue impenitent, and then it is necessary they should pay the Fees of the Office, which are very small, whatever Mr. B. suggests, and 'tis the Offenders own fault, if they be otherwise who make them so by their obstinacy: To con∣clude, a Presbyter must act in dependance and with consent of his Bishop in many things, but this doth not hinder him from being a Pastour, joyntly with his Bishop of the whole Diocess, and particularly in his own Cure. IV. Let me Observe further, That nei∣ther Presbyterians or Independents can with any reason Object this to our Presby∣ters; for every Presbyterian Minister de∣pends on his Brethren in these acts. And can neither Excommunicate or perform any other Proper Act of Government, that concerns the whole Church, without consent of a Synod; and if his depending on a Synod in these Acts, doth not hinder him from esteeming himself a Pastour, why shou'd a Presbyter with us not count him∣self a Pastour, since he has as much power alone as your Ministers, and as much in Conjunction with his Bishop, as yours have with a Synod? and especially when it is considered that the presence and consent
of a Bishop is easier had than that of a Synod; and the Bishop is obliged by known Rules and Laws to concur in those things that are reasonable, whereas generally your Matters are Arbitrary and depend on the major Votes. As to the Congregational Ministers, They in these Acts depend on the consent of their own Congregations, in whom (according to them) the power of the Keys is Originally seated; and they cannot Excommunicate any without consent of their People, which is more opposite to the nature of a Pastour, than acting with the consent of a Bishop, and in Subordination to him; and indeed such Ministers are rather meer Servants, than Pastours of their People: In this point therefore, Mr. B. has made a very unjust Repre∣sentation of our Principles and Practice. Sect. XV. Concerning Mr. Sq. 1. THE last Matter of Fact, of which I shall take notice, concerns a person rejected from Orders in our Church, and now a Preacher of your Party. Mr. B.
affirms, that your Ministers declare, that they know of no such Person, and says, That if I mean Mr. Sq. he declares he was never examined, as to his Learning, by us; and that most that know him, think, that if I reject all those, of my Clergy, that are not Mr. Sq's. superiors in Learning, I must exclude a great many of those that are now in this Diocess. You see how he necessitates me to give an account of this affair. This Gentle∣man whom I did not name, out of the great respect I had to his Relations, soon after the Troubles, procur'd Mr. Robert Gage, of this Diocess, to present him to the then Bishop of Rapho, for the Order of a Deacon; the Bishop, according to the 31st Canon, demanded a Certificate of his Degree, good Life and Conversa∣tion under the Colledge Seal; but that he neither had, nor could procure; where∣upon, the Bishop refus'd him. After I came to this place he applied himself to me, both in person and by his friends; but I refused him and them, till such time as he was publickly Examined according to the Canons: In the mean while I dis∣cours'd him several times, and found him unfit as to his Learning, yet wou'd not discourage him, but advised him to such
Books as I thought most fit and necessary for him: When the time drew near, that I intended to have an Ordination, he Peti∣tioned to be admitted to the Publick Exa∣mination which was to precede it; I read the petition written in his own Hand, but the Latin so false and improper, that it appeared by it, he was not Master of the Grammar, much less of the Latin Tongue. I consulted some of the Clergy about him, and came to a resolution not to admit him; but to do it in the softest way I cou'd; I discours'd him again, shewed him his Defects, and that it wou'd Expose him to be Examined publickly, especially at the same time, when others were to be Examined of Parts and Learning, and therefore advised him to delay till some other time, and till he cou'd get a Certi∣ficate from the Colledge, without which I could not regularly Ordain him: He seemed Discontented, and the next thing I heard, was, that the Sunday after he went to the Meeting, and declared against the Church. This is the Truth of the matter, and I must declare, that I never admitted any, to any Order, Benefice or Curacy, in this Diocess, who were not by many Degrees his Superiors in Learning, Parts and Steadiness of Thoughts; and
as to those that were Preferred in the Diocess before my coming to it, I sup∣pose that Mr. Sq. himself will have more Modesty than to compare himself with them: I must add, that he is not the only person has served me at this rate. II. And from this you may observe. First, That no people are more impa∣tient of Discipline, than such as would perswade the World that they are the Great Patrons of it, and most Zealous for it. This Gentleman, that is now joyn∣ed with you, for purer Ordinances and Discipline, was so disgusted by the strict∣ness of ours, that he left our Church. Secondly, You may observe, that some people are resolved to be Ministers at any rate, and when those that have the Keys of the Church will not admit them, they leap over the Wall. Thirdly, You see by this how much Men advance their Reputation and Interest, by being of a Party. Here is a Gentleman that had so little Reputation amongst us, for learning and sufficiency, that he was not thought fit to be a Deacon, by two Bishops, and several Clergy Men; And yet by joyning with you, most of your Party that knew him in Dublin, where they are best able to judge, prefer him to
many of the Clergy of this Diocess. So unjust and partial are Men in their Judg∣ments where their Party is concerned; and thus it has been since Divisions were first in the Church: St. Paul hints at it, 2 Cor. 10. 12. And Tertullian speaks to it in point, above 1400 Years ago, in his Book De Prescriptionibus, where he observes of those that divided from the Church, that they Ordained, Apost at as nostros ut gloria eos obligent, quia veritate non possunt. Nus quam facilius proficitur quam in Castris Re∣bellium. 'Twere too severe to Translate these words; but the meaning is, that so a Man left the Church, he might have Re∣putation and Orders easily amongst the divided Parties. Fourthly, You may observe, that it is not always Conviction of Conscience brings Men to your Party; Here in the begin∣ning of the week a Gentleman gave in a Petition in his own hand writing, and was earnest to be admitted into Orders; and being put off, next Sunday he declares himself of Your Party against the Church. He must have great Charity, that will sup∣pose this to proceed from meer Convicti∣on of Conscience. Fifthly, You may observe, how unfit Judges the People are of the Ability and
Qualifications of Men for the Ministery, and how easy it is to deceive and impose on them, in which I have had Experience in three or four other Cases. Sixthly, This shews the misery, and mischief of Parties in the Church, and how impracticable they render Discipline. I have taken what care I cou'd to obvi∣ate this; and have refus'd to admit some that were driven out of Scotland by the fury of the Rabble, till they brought a Certi∣ficate from their Adversaries, of their Lives and Conversations; and that they had no other Exception against them, except their not complying with the Church Government there Established. Whether your Party take the same Mea∣sures, they know best that admitted Mr. Sq. to Preach. Sect. XVI. Personal Vindication. I. THere is one thing further that I am obliged to take Notice of, rather indeed to comply with the suggestions of my Friends, than that I judge it necessary, or so much as convenient. It concerns my
own Person, and not the Cause; and I rec∣kon where▪ ever a man that pretends to answer a Book meddles with the Person or Personal Affairs of his Adversary, it is a plain Confession that he has the worst of the Argument, and that he is forced to make up with Slight and Art what is want∣ing in point of Reason. Yet this Mr. B. has done in several places of his Remarks, and has employ'd most of those Arts that popular Lawyers make use of to carry their Clients Cause at the Barr, but are very improper to be used by the Advo∣cates of Truth, who ought to have no view but the Glory of God, the Advance∣ment of his true Worship, and the Peace and Unity of his Church. I am conscious to my self, that I had no other aim in the writing my Book; and I hope I may say that the deep concern I had for the due Observation of the Worship of God, and the danger of such as neglect it, did in∣fluence every Sentence in it. I had before me the great Obligation that lay on me as a Pastour and Father in the Church; even the great and solemn Oath of God, made in my Ordination. I remembred that the truest Evidences of the presence of the Spirit of Christ, and hardest to be counterfeited, are Gentleness, Good∣ness
and Meekness; and I called to mind that a tender Father wou'd not reprove his erring Children, nor a Man treat his Friend with Bitterness, Pride, Scoffing or Lightness. That a Pastour has no less rea∣son for bowels of compassion towards his straying Sheep, than a Father towards his Children: That a Christian was as deep∣ly obliged to Meekness towards his erring Brother, as any Man towards his dearest Friend. And tho' that Brother be mista∣ken in his Judgment, and alienated in his Affections to the highest degree, even to Railing and Madness, yet the injured person ought still to treat him with the same gentleness and tenderness, and look on all those Extravagancies as the effects of a Spiritual Feaver, which to a Mind tru∣ly affected with the love of Christ, are as little provoking as the ravings occasioned by a natural one, and much more to be pitied. II. These were the Considerations I had before me, and the Measures I took in writing my Book, and I hope in God they shall always remain with me, and influence my words and actions; and, I thank God, they yield me a comfort and satisfaction above all that the World can afford me.
But this was very different from what many of your Party expected; they mea∣sured me not from what I am, or from what I do and say, but from the Repre∣sentations some of themselves had made of me. 'Twas from these that a rumour went abroad whilst my Book was in the Press, that I was publishing a most furi∣ous Book full of bitterness and railing; and that I wou'd now discover what a passionate angry Man I was: This went current; But when my Book appeared I thank God it was of a different sort, and and very much surprised those whose in∣terest it was to represent me and it otherwise; and by all I can learn, no∣thing displeased them more than the Se∣riousness, Charity and Civility with which it was Written. III. Mr. B. seems to be sensible that this gives my Book some advantage, and takes great care to prevent it; Some∣times he makes slight of it, sometimes endeavours to expose it as ridiculous: But his greatest endeavour is to perswade you that it is not real and sincere in me. To make this appear probable he pro∣duces several Arguments both in his Pre∣face, and in his Remarks. In the last he insists on one, p. 157. on which he thinks
fit to enlarge again in his Vindication (p. 25) 'Tis taken from a Clause in the Leases of the See of Derry, whereby the Tenants are obliged not to sett to Mass-Priests, or Dissenting Ministers: This he thinks will excuse all the hard words he gives me, and prove me guilty of un∣fair dealing; but this is to censure Acti∣ons before he knows the reason of them, as I suppose every body may observe; and since it concerns only my own Per∣son, I did not think it necessary to make any Apology for it; and I assure you my tenderness to you, and indeed to our common Christianity, obliged me rather to suffer the reproach, as I have done in many other Cases, than to Publish those things of which I apprehended the com∣mon Enemies of our Religion might make advantage. And had not the importunity and perswasions of my Friends, to whose Judgments I have a Deference, required it now from me, no provocations of my Answerers shou'd have done it. However I shall endeavour to give an account of this matter in the least offensive way I can; and if any thing seem hard in it, the blame must be justly theirs who gave the occasion.
IV. I find this Clause verbatim (so far as relates to Popish Priests) in the oldest Leases of this See of Derry; in which there has been, since the Reformation, a succession of Wise, Learned, and Pious Men, my Predecessors. Dr. Montgomery, Dr. Babington, Dr. Downam, Dr. Bramhall, Dr. Wild, Dr. Mossom, Dr. Ward, and Dr. Hopkins, were Men generally famous for their Works yet remaining, and for their Eminent Service they did to the Church of God. These found it necessary to put this Clause into their Leases (at the first making of them) or to continue it, in as many as were renew'd. So far therefore this is no new Clause; it being (as I have said) in the oldest Leases of the See, and put in by Wise and Good Men, for good Reasons. I found the same Reasons not only to continue it, but to extend it to all Tea∣chers Dissenting from the Church; and should have thought my self answerable to my Successors, if whilst the Reasons were as good, I had departed from the wise Conduct of my Predecessors. That the Reasons are as good, will appear from what follows.
My Predecessors found that their Te∣nants liv'd easily as to Rents, and freest of any from Exactions or Oppressions, and that this made, as it still makes, those that are averse to the Office and Revenues of a Protestant Bishop, yet desirous to be their Tenants: That the Popish Priests especial∣ly found their Advantage in living under them, both to their Temporal and Spiri∣tual Interest; for they had such influence on their own Party, that none of them durst come in competition with them, in taking their Farms; and so they had them at what rate they pleas'd, and (where they had such influence) the Protestants durst not take them; by which means they were able to keep them waste, if they could not get them to themselves; which I have effectually found in a Farm where one of them had crept in. And as to their Spiritual Interest, it was no ill Policy to secure those places where the Bishop had greatest influence. I am sure these things are true of your Ministers; and these, or the like Motives, so far pre∣vail'd on them, that before the Troubles they had at least one half of their Meet∣ings on the Church Lands.
Again, no one would willingly have a Tenant that looks on him as an Usurper, or is sworn to Extirpate him as soon as he can; this was a good reason to refuse Po∣pish Priests for Tenants, and holds no less against such of your Teachers as adhere to the solemn League and Covenant. I must mind you also, That Coshering and Exacting on Tenants by way of Meat and Lodging, is against the Laws of this Kingdom; and the Popish Priests lived by such ways, but were not near so oppressive to their Neighbours as your Meetings are: Your Sacraments especially are attended with a most oppressive Coshering; and so it is, and must be, where Four or Five thousand meet together from distant pla∣ces, and stay several days. And indeed, none that live near the Meeting House can call their Meat or Drink, or Grass, or Houses their own, during these times; or dare refuse them to those Cosherers, if they would live quietly. And here I must declare, That I had private Information from several of my Tenants of this Op∣pression; and they were heartily glad when they found I had contrived a way to ease them, tho' they durst not publickly own it.
There is a further Reason, and that is, That Men whose avowed Principle it is to tolerate no body, when they have power, ought not to pretend to the same Favour with other People that are moderate. This is a just Exception against Popish Priests; and for ought yet appears, it is no less against your Teachers, some of which seem to be of as persecuting a Spirit as they; and have so far influenced the most zealous of their Hearers, that they alrea∣dy persecute, as far as they have Power, those that Dissent from them; insomuch that (as I observed before) some that are heartily desirous to come to Church, dare not, for fear of being undone by their Neighbours. And no Wonder it should be so, since you are taught in your very Catechism to Oppose all False Worship;See larger Cate∣chism, Q▪ What is required, and what is forbid∣den in the 2d Commandment and, according to each ones Place and Calling, to re∣move it. And Tolerating a False Religion is recko∣ned, in express terms, a Breach of the Second Commandment. A Clause very unfit for a Catechism, that ought to contain only the Principles of our Holy and Meek Religion, and which I do not find in the Catechism
of the Council of Trent, notwithstanding the persecuting Spirit of that Church; and indeed, it is not only a wicked, but an im∣prudent thing to impose on all Christians the necessity of either persecuting all their Neighbours that are mistaken in Matters of Religion, or violating their own Conscien∣ces; which sufficiently shews the Spirit of those that compos'd your Catechism, and discovers the Principle that makes you so uneasie to your Neighbours; which Princi∣ple your Teachers still refuse to Re∣nounce. These, I suppose, are sufficient to shew, That there is neither Rashness nor Uncha∣ritableness in this Clause of my Leases, which has now been three times objected to me in print, twice by Mr. B. and once by Mr. Craghead; as if it were indeed of moment, or any thing to the Subject of my Book. But this makes it plain, that the Business of the Answerers was, to Answer my Book by prejudicing People against my Person; a certain sign, that they wrote for a Party rather than Truth. After all, I must profess to you, and have always declared, that it never was my intention by that Clause to hinder any one to live under me that was peaceable, and of whose Honesty, as a Tenant, I
could have any reasonable Security, of what Perswasion soever he was; but I thought it but reasonable to reserve to my self and my Successors a Liberty to make a difference between moderate honest Men, whom one may suppose to be lead by Con∣science, and others that appear to be acted by other Motives; which shall always be the Rule of my Proceedings. There is a further matter under this Head which Mr. B. objects to me (Vind. p. 25.) in these words, We like not the gentle Lan∣guage of Writs de Excom. Cap. By which he would insinuate some very hard or un∣fair Dealing in me. A few words will clear it; I never procur'd more than one or two of these Writs to be executed, and that against a Person who refus'd to stand for Sidesman (being duly elected by his Parish) or to find another for it, which the very Act of Toleration in England requireth to be done; and the Government on full Con∣sideration of the Matter, found I had rea∣son in it; and the Person confess'd, that he would never have contended it (as in∣deed he neither had, nor could have any scruple) had not his Minister, Mr. Crook, engag'd to bring him off, if he stood it out; which I am able to prove. But Mr. B. makes no scruple to Censure his
Governours, before whom this matter was adjudged, and pronounce concerning things of which it is manifest he had no due In∣formation. Having thus examin'd the principal Mat∣ters of Fact, I must observe, that Mr. B. (who makes himself your Advocate) in the end of his Vindication (p. 55.) takes it for granted, that the Matters of Fact with which I charged you, and for the truth of which I appealed to your own Know∣ledge and Consciences, were false; and alledges it as the greatest provocation gi∣ven you, that I appealed to your selves as Evidences for what you certainly know to be untrue. I do not find any sufficient ground for his asserting this in your behalf; I have conversed with many of you since the writing of my Book and Admonition, be∣fore many Witnesses, and could never meet with any of you that could deny any One Matter of Fact in them. And as to the Vouchers that Mr. B. has produc'd to dis∣prove what I said, they are so far from justifying what he asserted, as to your pra∣ctice, or contradicting what I charged on you, that the truth of his Assertions de∣pends still on his own Credit. But what∣ever effect his endeavours to palliate the Matters with which I tax you may have
on Strangers, they can never make you think otherwise of them than what you know. And I am sure you cannot but know, (what I have been now necessitated to prove in the foregoing Chapter) that the main and most considerable Matters which I charg'd on you were true; That your Communions have been scandalously infrequent; That your Publick Worship of God was generally performed by you sitting, which I reckon irreverent; That you had no Orderly Pub∣lick Reading of the Scriptures, nor any Practicē that could properly be called Read∣ing them; That you have no Order or Rule of teaching the Great Mysteries of our Religion in your Sermons or Set Dis∣courses; which certainly do deserve such Set Discourses, if any thing can deserve them. I am conscious to my self, and have God for my Witness, that I had no Design in what I have publish'd of your Faults in the Worship of God, but to endeavour, accor∣ding to my Duty, your Amendment of them, (of which could I have made you sensible in a private way, you should not have been told so publickly.) And it had been a very ridiculous Undertaking for me, as I often have observ'd before, to put the
stress of your Reforming them (which I most seriously coveted and desired) upon your Knowledge of the Truth of them, if I had not been sure that you did suffi∣ciently know it; nay, had I not under∣stood it from the Mouths and Confession of Many of you. But the Truth is, these things are so Notorious, ev'n from the Defence which your Advocate and his Certifiers would make for you, that I had, and still have, all Reason to Appeal to your own Consciences for the Truth of them, and to hope for the desired Success of my Writings in your Amend∣ment of them▪ from the Undeniable Evi∣dence of this Truth in your selves; which Success, I thank God, I have already in some measure found, and do beseech Him still to encrease.
CHAP. II. Of the Reasoning Part of Mr. B's Book. Sect. I. Mr. B's stating the Case between You and Us, as to Purity of Worship and Discipline. I. I Proceed now to some Observations on the Reasoning Part of Mr. B's Book; and the first thing I shall take Notice of, is his Stating the Difference between You and Us. Vindic. p. 33. we have these words; Where there are in a Kingdom Two Parties, or Bodies of Protestants, in one of which both the Worship and Discipline of Christ is more fully restor'd to its Primitive Simplicity and Purity; in the other, there are some Defects and Corruptions left in their Worship, and Discipline almost entirely neglected, or perverted and abused; I think every considerate Christian should prefer
the stated Communion of that Party, in which necessary Reformation has made a happier Pro∣gress. I confess, I am partly of Mr. B's Opinion; and think, for this very reason you ought to embrace the Communion of Our Church, as of that in which both Worship and Disciplin is more fully restor'd to its Primitive Simplicity and Purity; for I do not know one thing in which You have the advantage of Us; as will appear on Examination of these Particulars. II. First, In Discipline you have nothing to boast of, since you have no Authentick Rule concerning it at all; as I shew'd in my Admonition. And when Proposals were made concerning it, they were re∣jected by a Parliament of your own Party with great Abhorrence; We cannot, say they in their Declaration 1646, consent to the granting of an Arbitrary and Unlimited, Power and Jurisdiction to near Ten thousand Judicatories to be Erected within this King∣dom, and this demanded in a way inconsistent with the Fundamentals of Government, exclu∣ding the Power of Parliaments. The Questi∣on then between Your Discipline and Ours, is, Whether it is better to have no Rules, but meer Arbitrary Power in Ten thousand Judicatories, to exercise a Discipline in∣consistent with the Fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, and the Power of Parlia∣ments; or to have certain and determi∣nate Rules for the Exercise of it; such as our Canons and Rubricks, which are very consistent with the Constitution of the Kingdom, and would certainly reform the World if executed; and nothing hinders their execution (that I know) but Your Separation. I cannot reckon it a Happy Progress in Reformation, as Mr. B. does, to throw down a well-establish'd Discipline founded on good Authority, and with good Rules, and Establish nothing in the place of it. 'Tis not Purity of Discipline to make it Arbitrary, and have no Rules at all. And yet I am afraid many are for reforming Faith as You have reformed Discipline. III. Secondly, in your Church▪ Constitution, you are not yet agreed; and we do not know what you would have. I observed that Mr. B's sense of these things is much different from yours; both as to the Rules and Manner of Proceeding in your Judica∣tories insomuch as you are not yet agreed who shall have the power of the Keys, Whe∣ther a single Congregation, or a Presbyte∣ry (Adm. p. 47.) To make you a little sen∣sible of this, I will compare Mr. B. and his Parties Sentiments with Yours.
First then, You own generally, That a National Church is of Divine institution; but Mr. B. and his Party declare, (Reflect. p. 4.) That such a National Church is not of Divine Institution, and is indeed only A Combination of Churches, as united under one Civil Soveraign; its true Notion lies not in any Combination purely Ecclesiastical and In∣trinsical, but Civil and Extrinsical. Secondly, You hold, that many particular Congregations may be under one Presby∣terial Government. Mr. B. and his Party, That no particular Church shall be subordinate to another,—and, That none of them, their Officer or Officers shall Exercise any power, or have any Superiority over any other Church, or their Officers. Heads of Agreement, p. 11. You hold, That it is agreeable to the Word of God, that there be a Subordina∣tion of Congregational. Classical, Provin∣cial, and National Assemblies, for the Go∣vernment of the Church. Mr. B. and his Party, That Church-Councils are not for Go∣vernment, but for Unity; not as being in Or∣der of Government over the several Bishops. Reflect. p. 58. and Heads of Agreement, p. 10.
Thirdly, You hold that Excommunica∣tion is a shutting the Kingdom of Heaven against impenitent Sinners. But with Mr▪ B. and his Party, Excommunication it self, in their respective Churches is no other than a declaring such scandalous Members as are irreconcilable, to be incapable of Commu∣nion with them in things peculiar to the visible Relievers. (Pref. to the Heads of Agreement) In which sense any two Men may Excom∣municate a third. It requires no Power at all to declare a Man incapable of Commu∣nion with me, but only Judgment; and so there is an end of Church Governors and Censures. Fourthly, You hold, That those that are Ordained ought not to be Ordained again; but Mr. B. and his Party teach, That if any hold, in case of the Removal of one formerly Ordained, to a new Station or Pastoral Charge, there ought to be a like solemn Recommending him and his Labours to the Grace and Blessing of God: No different Sentiments or Practice herein, shall be any occasion of Contention or Breach of Communion amongst you. Fifthly, You hold, That Ruling Elders are of Divine Right, and your Constitu∣tion, so far as appears to us, is founded on them; but Mr. B. and his Party de∣clare, that whereas divers are of Opinion,
that there is also the Office of Ruling Elders—and others think otherwise: They agree that this makes no Breach among them. Heads of Agreement, p. 13. Sixthly, You hold, That the Ruling Offi∣cers of a particular Congregation, have only power to suspend from the Lord's Table, and that Casting out belongs to the Presbytery. But Mr. B. and his Party hold, That each particular Church hath Au∣thority from Christ, for Exercising Govern∣ment, and of enjoying all the Ordinances of Worship within it self. Heads of Agree∣ment, p. 4. All these are material Differences, and concern the Being of a Government, and in all of them you differ from Mr. B. and his Party, and only in one of them from us, that is, in the Fifth, and then judge what Progress it is in Reformation, to se∣parate from a National Constitution, to joyn with such that do not so much as pretend to it. IV. Thirdly, Your Purity, that should invite Men to joyn with you, doth not con∣sist in Doctrine; for in this, confessedly, you have no Advantage of us; for these very Heads of Agreement acknowledge it sufficient, as to Soundness of Judgment in Matters of Faith, to own the Doctrinal part
of those commonly called, The Articles of the Church of England; which we all Subscribe. You then have made no Progress in this Point. Fourthly, As to Preaching the Gospel, which is a necessary Mark of the Purity of a Church, it is manifest, You come short of Us▪ the great Mysteries thereof being neither so Diligently, so Constantly, so Regularly, or so Universally taught by your Ministers, as in our Church, nor so Good and Obliging Rules for doing so: So that Men that would hear them taught in this manner, ought to joyn with us; as I have already shew'd. Fifthly, As to the Administring the Sa∣craments, which is another necessary Mark of the Purity of a Church: Your Ministers have been Notoriously Defective; they have let many dye without Baptism, that had a Title to it; and have been no less Negligent in Administring the Lord's Sup∣per, insomuch, that not one of them have done their Duty this thirty Years, in Ad∣ministring it often, as Christ requires. Therefore those of you that would par∣take frequently of this Sacrament, must joyn with our Church.
Sixthly, As to Holiness of Life, you have no Advantage over us, being no better than your Neighbours; and if you take away such as are not of us, as a Church, but as we are the Governing Party, and who will always Joyn themselves to that which is so, I doubt whether you be so good. There needs no more to convince you of this, than to consider, that Mercy, Justice and Truth are counted by our Sa∣viour to be the great things of the Law; and you will not find that the Protestants in the North of Ireland, of which You are the greatest part, are more noted for these than the Protestants in other parts of the Kingdom; which sufficiently shews, that whatever you pretend, your Discipline has no great effect; of which other Demon∣strations might be given; it may seem in Speculation an Advantage, as the Auricular Confession of the Papists, but has hitherto produced as little effect. Seventhly, As to the Lives and Conversati∣ons of Your Ministers, You have no reason to boast, till we see their Interest separated from their Engagements to Sobriety; and till they have undergone such a Scrutiny as the Clergy of Down and Connor did; that is, till they be try'd by above 300 Oaths, as the Clergy there were, if we reckon the
Church-wardens and other Witnesses. And as to their Tempers, I do not find that they are more Mortified, more Humble, have a less Opinion of themselves, or command their Passions better than other People; and for the proof of this, I appeal not only to those of this Diocess, but to the most emi∣nent, most celebrated, and leading Men that have been of Your Party: Consult their Writings, and you will not find more Meek∣ness, Humility, or Charity in them, nor less Passion, Bitterness, and Gall, than in their Adversaries: Witness the first and second Admonition in Queen Elizabeth's time, Mr. Cartwright's Writings, Mr. Ru∣therford, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Alsop, and if you please, Mr. Boyse's. Now, we are told by St. James, chap. 1. 26. If any man among you seem to be Religious, and bridle not his Tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, that man's Reli∣gion is vain; much more if he bridle not his Pen. There will be peevish, passionate, and railing Writers of all Parties; but Men that are truly Holy will hardly be provoked to any degree of these Vices, and ought never to be trusted as Guides, if they are. IV. Lastly, As to your Worship, you have no perfect Rule for it; for Mr. B. has gi∣ven up your Directory as imperfect in seve∣ral
particulars of great moment, and left it to your own Discretion to mend it, Vind. p. 35. I think I have proved it to be not only imperfect, but in one Particular, that it confessedly teaches contrary to Scripture, and believe I have shewed, and can shew, that it does the same in several others. This seems to me to be the state of the Case between You and Us; and I have as good reason to suppose it thus, as Mr. B. has to suppose that the Worship and Disci∣pline of Christ is more fully restored to its Primitive Purity and Simplicity amongst You than Us: For which, I think, there is no pretence. V. Mr. B. alledges, (Vind. p. 32.) That the Abuses contained in his thirteen De∣mands, Rem. p. 170, are the chief Obstacles to a happy Union among us, which has been so long the Earnest Desire of all good men. But this doth no ways appear to be true, since no men Labour'd more earnestly to remove some of them than Papists, and those of no Religion, who are willing to destroy our National Constitution, as being a Curb and Barrier against them; and when they can once effect that, they know well enough how to hinder the Settlement of any other. As appear'd fully by the Long Parliament, that took down our Government, but ne∣ver
Establish'd another; and as to their being the chief Obstacle to our Union, con∣sider whether we were nearer an Union when they were removed; on the contrary, Sects and Divisions grew more in Four years, than in Fourscore before; Witness Mr. Edwards Gangrena, p. 125, 143. and throughout: and this amongst Persons coun∣ted Religious; and therefore Mr. B. before we take his Word, must give us good assu∣rance, that the removal of them will not open a Door to all Heresies, Strange Opini∣ons, Fearful Divisions, Looseness of Life and Manners, as it did then; and as the weaken∣ing of them has done of late. Some of those he calls Abuses, when truly represented, ra∣ther seem to us the Barriers against Divi∣sion, than Obstacles of Union. What is really amiss is not in our Constitution, but in some Restraints the Common-Law puts on us; and it is a Question whether it be safer to remove them. The Lawyers and the Parliament say no, when we have la∣bour'd for it. And none more fierce to press their continuance than those of your Party. However, these are no more to be imputed to us, than the great Grie∣vance of Impropriations; or your Mini∣sters not having the Tythes and Churches, is to be imputed to them. But, to deal
ingenuously, all this is not to the Matter; the great Task incumbent on Mr. B. is, to shew a Precedent in Scripture of two Parties, such as he describes, where, on pretence of purer Discipline, one of them gathe∣red a Congregation of Christians in the same place, distinct and separate from others, who Worshipped God in true Faith and Holiness. This I did put to him in my Admonition, p. 48, and he has given it no Answer, tho' the most Material thing in it, and Decisive of the Question; and with∣out which you will never Justifie your selves by Scripture, for absenting your selves from our Assemblies for Worship, much less your sending out Emissaries to draw off others. There was the same Reason for Forming such Parties in the Apostle's time as now; some indeed did it upon mighty Pretences to the Spirit, and to Pu∣rity, speaking great Swelling Words of Vani∣ty, and having Mens Persons in Admiration. But St. Jude tells us, that those who Separa∣ted themselves were Sensual, having not the Spirit. And Mr. Edwards observes the same of many of your great Professors, that first formed the Separation. There is nothing more easie or more deceitful than great Pretences to Purity, and Men truly humble and good seldom insist on
them, as being deeply sensible of their own Imperfections, and ready to believe better of others than themselves: 'Twere much more to the purpose for us to joyn in the Common Worship of God, and in joynt and continual Prayers together, That God would give us Mortified, Humble, and Pure Hearts, than to pretend Purity of Parties, and to stand by our selves, and with those in Isa. Chap. 65. 5. Cry, Come not near me, for I am holier than thou. Divisions are a Work of the Flesh, 1 Cor. 3. 3. and the great Insuperable Obstacle to Discipline. I pray God to make you sensible of this, and to send down a Spirit of Unity, Peace, and Purity upon us. Sect. II. Mr. B's Partiality. I. IN the Second place, let me put you in mind, that Mr B. doth not ob∣serve that Golden Rule of doing as he wou'd be done unto; for he takes the Li∣berty to put the most favourable Con∣struction he pleases on his own words, and expects we should admit them: But
on ours, he puts the worst he can, and is dissatisfied that we will not own them. Of which I will only give you a few In∣stances. II. First, He affirms, Rem. p. 136. That the generality of you, as he is assured, do Communicate four or five times a year. This he interpreteth (Vind. p. 17.) only of the most devout and serious; which is very different from the Generality; since if One do it, the words may be true in the sense he gives of them; but I have allow∣ed (as you see before) One in Four, of your Communicants to be thus devout and serious. III. Secondly, He affirmed,  136. That all of you have the opportunity of Communicating 10, 12, or 15 times a Year, if you will take the advantage of recei∣ving it, as often as it is administred with∣in a few Miles of your respective Habita∣tions: This he interprets, Vind. p. 19. To be Estimated from those parts, where the main Body of Dissenters are to be found—and p. 19. That he is not obliged to prove it concerning every particular one in the Remotest parts of the Province of Ulster. As if the Diocess of Ardmagh, Clogher, Rapho, Derry, Drummore, with a conside∣rable part of the Diocess of Down and
Connor, were more in the Remote parts of Ulster than Antrim, Carrickfergus, Gle∣narm, and the other places he mentions: But I fully shewed in my Admonition that there is no Congregation in the Diocess of Derry, nor, I believe, in any of the other places named, in which the people may Communicate ten times a year without Riding 40 Miles: which is very unrea∣sonable to expect, let them take what advantage they will. Nor had I any in∣tention to consine you to one Diocess, as Mr. B. wou'd insinuate, Vind. p. 18. I mean honestly and plainly in what I say, and never designed to help out a Cause by Equivocations. And as to those places Mr. B. has mentioned, they are all in a Nook or Corner; as may be seen by the Mapp; and yet by his own Confession it requires 24 Miles Riding to attend them, and sometimes 30; which are not a few Miles for the Generality of Country People; being an unreasonable Charge, and im∣practicable by many, especially by Wo∣men and Servants, who have as good a title to the Lord's Supper, and are often as serious and devout as the Masters of Fa∣milies. This contrivance therefore of sending People from their Parish Churches,
no ways answers, either in point of Con∣veniency or Order, to the frequent Admi∣nistration of that Sacrament in every Pa∣rish, nor is Equivalent to it, as he sug∣gests p. 32. IV. Thirdly, Whereas he asserts (Rem. p. 13.) That it is Universally usual in every Meeting where an Ordained Minister is settled, to have the Lords Supper Admi∣nistred—twice in the larger Towns, every Year. He now tell us Vind. p. 17, That the twice a Year in the Larger Towns was intended, and is true of Belfast, Carrickfer∣gus and Antrim: As if Lisburn, Colerain and Londonderry were not larger Towns then Antrim; and as if Strabane, Newry, Ballymenagh, Ballymony, Ardmagh, Dun∣gannon, Downpatrick, and many others were not in an equal rank with it. And yet he has not produced any Voucher, that this practice has been constant in these very three Towns, or how long. These, and many such, are the favourable Interpre∣tations he allows himself. V. But then, as to us he is resolved to put what sence on our words he pleases, and oblige us to stand by it. Thus he will needs know my design in publishing my Book better than my self, and oblige me to design it for the generality of
Dissenters in England, as well as in Ire∣land (Vind. p. 6.) Tho' the whole scope of it, the Addresses in it, my Management of the Impression, and the very Title I sent with it to the Press [For the use of this Diocess] (tho' lost there, as the Printer must acknowledge, and another substituted in place of it, without my knowledge) sufficiently declare the con∣trary. VI. Secondly, He will pretend to know the design of our Church's using the Cross in Baptism, better than all her Sons from the Learned Hooker to this day; as you may see, Vind. p. 44. VII. Thirdly, Our Church in her Ca∣techism in answer to that question, What is required of Persons to be Baptised? deter∣mines, that Repentance and Faith are requi∣red. Mr. B. (after Mr. Baxter) puts a very absurd sense on these words, and then disputes against them; alledging that by Repentance and Faith is meant present Faith and Repentance, Vind p. 35. directly against the Catechism, which requires on∣ly present Faith and Repentance in those that are capable of them. But of Children who have a right to Baptism, and are not capable at present of actual Faith, &c. She accepts a ratio∣nal
Presumption, that they will believe, when capable, and an Engagement made by the Parents and Congregation, under whose power they are, solemnly declared by their Proxies and Vouchers, the God∣fathers and Godmothers; It shews a mighty Prejudice against the Established Church, and a delight to find fault in those that insist on such forced and dis∣owned Construction of our words; if we should deal thus with the Holy Scripture, it wou'd expose even them. VIII. Fourthly, Whereas I quote your Directory▪ for a certain Position, Chap. 2. Sect. 3. N. 2. meaning thereby, that Book which commonly goes under that Name among You, and whose words one of your own Ministers, Mr. Craghead, quotes as the Express words of the Directory, p. 45. Mr. B. will oblige me to mean The Directory made by the Assembly of Divines, for Publick Worship: Whereas I meant not that part of the Book, but the Directions, which are your Directory for Private Worship, as the other for the Publick; and which being bound together with the other, and with the Directory for Ordi∣nation of Ministers, and other pieces, do all commonly pass under the Name of the Directory, and are so quoted by one
of your own Ministers, as I have already shewed: Yet this he imputes to me as a very unpardonable mistake, and repeats it again in his Vind. p. 23. I suppose every Body sees this is nothing to the matter, whether that Position I quoted was in the Directory for Publick Worship, or in the Directions for Private; since both are owned and received by you to whom I wrote: Therefore for Mr. B. to insist on it a second time, plainly shews that his business is with the Person, not the Cause; and that he writes for a Party, not the Truth; otherwise he would not offer a matter the second time that is no∣thing to the purpose, and for which there was no ground, besides his being unac∣quainted with the terms used among you. IX. Fifthly, Whereas I laid it down as a thing that wou'd be granted me by you, that all ways of Worship are dis∣pleasing to God, That are not expresly con∣tained in Scripture, or Warranted by Ex∣amples of Holy Men mentioned therein: Mr. B. misrepresents my sense (Vind. p. 30.) as if I had intended by this Rule to exclude such things as may be deduced by clear consequence or parity of Reason from them. Now I desire you to compare
this Rule with your Catechism, and you will find it expressed there in these words, The Second Commandment forbiddeth the Worshiping of God by Images, or any o∣ther way not appointed in his Word. And in your Confession of Faith (Chap. 21. N. 1.) thus: The acceptable way of Worship∣ing the true God is instituted by himself, and so limited to his own revealed Will, that he may not be Worshiped according to the imaginations and devises of Men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any visible Representations, or any other way not prescribed in the Holy Scripture. This Rule is stricter, and needs greater Limitati∣ons than the words of my Book. For, First, Here is no Allowance for things Warranted by Scripture, tho' not prescribed, as many things are. Secondly, There is no Authority given to the Examples of Holy Men in Scri∣pture, which are sufficient to warrant a Re∣ligious practice in Gods Worship, tho' they do not amount to an appointment or pre∣scription, and are not alwayes obligatory. In short, your Catechism and Confession of Faith, if we take them according to the Letter, make all wayes of Worship unacceptable and unlawful that are not prescribed and ap∣pointed in Scripture. Whereas my Rule allows Examples and Precedents of Holy Men to be
a sufficient Warrant. I supposed (and I think with reason) that you understood this Rule in your own Catechism and Con∣fession of Faith, with due Limitations; and therefore had no reason to suspect, but you would understand it with the same Limi∣tations in my Book, it being a manifest partiality to except against it when used by me, and yet allow of it (tho' expres∣sed with less caution) in your Catechism and Confession of Faith, which yet ought to be more exact in wording a Rule, than is necessary in a private Man's Writings. Of this partiality Mr. B. is guilty, and plainly discovers by it, that he has one Rule for interpreting the words of his own Party, and another for interpreting those of his Adversary. But Secondly, I desire you to observe, That in my whole Book I never used this Rule, otherwise than with those Limitati∣ons that I have now expressed; nor has Mr. B. produced one instance wherein I did otherwise: As for Example, I tax you with bringing in the Inventions of Men into the Service of God, in your Use of the Psalms; not for singing the Meetre Psalms, for that I allow lawful; but for introducing them without necessity, to the exclusion of the Prose Psalms, for Singing
of which we have Scripture-Warrant and Example. I taxed you likewise with in∣troducing a Human Invention into the Worship of God, in your Expounding Scripture; not that Expositions of Scripture are unlawful, but to make them necessary every time the Scripture is read, is Lite∣rally such an invention; and so is likewise your excluding the Regular and Orderly Reading the Word of God, as he has ap∣pointed for the Edification of his Church, to make room for your Lectures; of both which, you have been guilty these Fifty Years last past. I past the same Censure on your Extemporary Prayers; not that I condemned them in all Cases, but because on the account of them, you had turned the Lord's Prayer, prescribed in God's Word, and the Use of Forms in the Or∣dinary Prayers of the Assembly (which is the Scripture way of Praying on such Oc∣casions) out of your Meetings: Where∣as it is manifestly a Teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of Men, to Teach, as you do, that Praying extemporary is more acceptable to God, or more edifying, than Praying by a Form; there not being the least colour in Scripture for such a Do∣ctrine. I might shew the like in every place of my Book, where I used this Rule,
either in proving the Orders of our Church, or in disproving yours; so that Mr. B. had no reason to find fault with it. But Thirdly, The Rule needs not these Limitations, it being agreed by all sober In∣terpreters, That whatever can be deduced from Scriptures by Clear Consequence or Parity of Reason, is sufficiently warranted by them, though not expresly contained in them; so there was no necessity to explain the Rule, though I was willing to avoid the Exceptions even of the Captious; and there fore put in the Explication you find in my Second Edition. Fourthly; Mr. B. excepts against my using the Phrase of Ways of Worship, and alledges I used it frequently to signifie Circumstanti Modes of it, Vind. p. 30. But I Answer▪ That I used the Phrase with which you were acquainted, whereas I believe few of you ever heard of Circumstantial Modes of Worship before; and I used it in the Sense you generally do, when you ask for Scripture to warrant our using the Psalms by way of Answering, our using Forms of Prayer, our singing with Instrumental Musick, our joyn∣ing our Voices in some Prayers, our Re∣ceiving the Sacrament in a Worshiping posture, and the other particulars against which you except in our Publick Service▪
and I shewed these Ways are not only war∣ranted, but prescribed for the most part in Scripture: Whereas those Ways you have introduced in the place of them, have neither Command or Precedent in Scripture. If these that I have named in our Service and yours, be Circumstantial Modes, they are the chief and greatest Ex∣ceptions that I ever found any of you make against joyning with us; and they are the great matter of Reformation set forth in your Directory, tho' Mr. B. seems to make light of them. From the whole, I think it appears, That Mr. B. has both perverted and misapplyed my Rule; and yet on this perverted sense of my Words, are founded most of his Arguments against our publick Worship. X. Lastly, This Method of sixing Prin∣ciples upon me, and then writing a Book to Confute them, is not new with Mr. B. He did it once before at a very unseasonable time, and still persists in Taxing me with his own Consequences, as if I indeed own∣ed them. Thus, Vind. p. 25. he charges me with passing a Vertual Sentence of Damna∣tion publickly upon you, by Denying you to be a part of the Catholick Church; and this he puts in Italian Letters, as if they were my Words; but there are no such Words in any Book I have yet written, nor any
just Ground to fix such a Sentence on me; the whole Mystery of this, so far as I know it, is thus. Mr. Many, formerly Dean of Derry, on his turning Papist, published his Motives which prevailed with him to do so: To these I wrote an Answer, in the Year 1687, by which, I thank God, the Protestant Cause lost nothing, and it was so well approved, that it was Twice Re∣printed in England: But Mr. B. cou'd not digest it, and therefore wrote Reflections on it; and the greatest Exception he has against it, is, that I say in it, That I meant by the Catholick Church, the whole Body of Men professing the Religion of Christ, and living under their Lawful Governours. From which Words, Mr. B. draws many strange and absurd Consequences, alledg∣ing that they Un-Church all Dissenters, all foreign Churches, and render the Re∣lation of all true Christians to our Blessed Lord (as his Members) as questionable as the Title of the Pastor under whom they live; with many other absurd Inferences con∣trary to the Literal Assertions of my Book; which therefore he would perswade us con∣tradicts it self: But the World knew me too well, to need being troubled with a Justification; and tho' I had prepared one, my Friends assured me it was unnecessary
to publish it, and I still am of the same opinion. XI. For I must let you know, that I said no more in those Words than the gene∣rality of Protestants said before me. Some in the same Words, and the rest in effect and meaning, even those of your party not excepted: For I take it for a general Principle of Protestants, That the Preach∣ing of the Word of God, and due Admi∣nistration of the Sacraments are the true Marks of the Catholick Church; and that a lawful Ministry is necessary to these, in∣somuch, that your own Confession of Faith tells us, That neither Sacrament may be dis∣pensed by any, but by a Minister lawfully Or∣dained, Chap. 27. & Chap. 28. That the Outward Element in Baptism, is Water, wherewith the Party is to be Baptized, in te Name, &c. by a Minister of the Gospel law∣fully called thereunto: And the Confession of the Church of Scotland has declared, Chap. 23. That Sacraments be rightly Ministrate we judge two things requisite, The one, that they be Ministrate by Lawful Ministers.—The other, That they be Ministrate in such Elements, and in such sort as God hath appointed, or else we affirm that they cease to be the right Sacraments of Christ. You see then from the Declaration of your own Party, that a lawful Ministry is
required to the due Administration of the Sacraments, and without such Administra∣tion there can be no true Church; and a Man that is not duly Baptized, is not yet a visible Member of the Catholick Church, though he may belong to it. From these it were easie (if one would imitate Mr. B's way of Reasoning) to draw the same Consequences as he doth from my Words, indeed worse; and to argue that these Posi∣tions make every Man's Baptism as uncer∣tain, as the Ordination of the Minister that Baptized him; and that every Church is as uncertain of her being a True Church, as of the Lawful Calling of her Ministers: And all those Questions Mr. B. starts con∣cerning the Lawful Calling of Ministers and Governors, will come in here as pro∣perly as he brings them against me; but whoever should draw such Consequences from these Principles, which are common to most Reformed Churches, would be as unjust to them as Mr. B. is to me. For in this, the sincere will and endea∣vour is accepted, both by God and Man, for the deed; and therefore neither the Assembly of Divines, nor the Church of Scotland intended to make void the Bap∣tism of those, who out of the sincerity and simplicity of their hearts received it from such as they supposed lawfully called Mi∣nisters,
but were not; neither did I ever intend to exclude from the Catholick Church, such as either out of weakness of Judgment, submitted themselves to Pastors whom they believed lawful; or out of ne∣cessity (when they could not get others to officiate to them) submitted to such as they found settled. And this I shewed to be my Sense from St. Augustint's Words, quoted at large in the Sixth Page of my Answer to Mr. Manby, of which Mr. B. never took any notice when he made all his Consequences for me, tho' there need∣ed no more to destroy them all. XII. But I must now tell you, that this is no comfort to such, as out of Interest or Passion, divide the Church, and heap up to themselves Teachers according to their own Lusts; nor to such as knowingly, or out of wilful negligence joyn themselves to such: These I take to be the Hereticks St. Paul commands us to reject after the first and second Admonition, and they are Self-condemned; for the Church can con∣demn them no otherwise, but by casting them out by Excommunication, and they have thus condemned themselves already by their separation; and I see no reason any one has to be displeased at these Prin∣ciples, except he be conscious, that out of
Interest or Passion he has divided the Church, as I am afraid many are, or think it a small matter to make such Divisions: Or Lastly, is indifferent whether his Mi∣nister is lawfully called or no, as indeed too many are, who are not much concern∣ed how a man came by his Ordination, so he preach to their mind. But I suppose the best way to deal with a Papist, will be to assert not only the Lawfulness, but Regularity of our Ministry, and I thank God, we have done it effectually; if Mr. B. could have done as much for his Par∣ty, he needed not have gratified Papists (tho' his Party at that time were caress'd by them) in endeavouring to Answer a Book, grounded on Principles, which they could not Reply to, as appeared by the event. But this has always been the Me∣thod of those that separated from the Church; so Tertullian tells us, De Prescrip∣tionibus. Cum hoc sit Negotium illis, non ethnicos convertendi, sed nostros evertendi; hanc magis Gloriam captant, si stantibus ru∣inam, non si jacentibus elevationem operantur, &c. The Sense of which is, That those Separatists made it their Business to op∣pose and draw off the Members of the Church, and set up their Petty Sects, but did not joyn against the common Enemy.
XIII. I must put you in mind, that there are some Men espouse a Party, and resolve to make themselves the Champions of it; and when they want direct Proofs against their Adversaries, they draw strange and absurd Consequences from their Opinions: And though they know very well, that those to whom they ascribe them, detest these consequences as much as themselves, yet they set them up, as if they were re∣ally held by those to whom they impute them; and endeavour by strains of Rhe∣torick, and vehement Interrogations, to render them odious: This may take with such as are heated with Faction, and love Books for ill Language and Violence; but understanding Men know such Treatment to be only an Artifice to keep up the Spi∣rit of a Party, and make a shew of Rea∣son where direct Proofs are wanting: And that it is really a giving up a Cause to fly to these Arts, and therefore they deserve no Consideration. Neither should I have troubled the World or my Self, to tell you, that I hold none of the absurd Consequen∣ces Mr. B. fixes on me, or that they do not follow from any principle of mine, had not one of your Ministers, that ought to have had more Integrity and Justice, improved this Calumny on Mr. B's Autho∣rity
so far as to affirm, that I Held, and Published, that such as you belong not to the Catholick Church—being without Christ, having no hope, and without God in the world: All which he puts in the Italian Letters, as if they were my Words, (Mr. Craighead p. 147.) Whereas I never either in Words or Writings used such Barbarous Expres∣sions, or past such an Unchristian Censure on any Man, much less on any Body of Men that professed to believe in Christ. But I can heartily forgive him, and wish him no more harm than that he may be sensible he has wronged me in at least an hundred particulars besides this. I do not think it necessary, at present, to take any further Notice of his Book: This is sufficient to shew how truly he has represented Matter of Fact, so far as he concurs with Mr. B. And as to his Rea∣soning Part I am content any one that reads my Book should read his; and judge whe∣ther he has either truly represented my Sense, or Answered my Arguments. I am well pleased that you have it in print, since by comparing it with Mr. B's, you may plainly see that your Advocates are not yet agreed on what Principles to defend your Cause; there hardly being greater difference in Principles between the An∣swers
and my Book, than between the two Answers themselves. But the greatest ad∣vantage that I expect by it, is, That it will be a means to discover to Posterity how far the Learning and Sincerity of your Teachers were agreeable to their Reputa∣tion and Profession; and what sort of Men have been followed by those that separate from Our Church.
THE APPENDIX. CONTAINING An Answer to Mr. B's Objections against the Sign of the Cross. Sect. I. Of the proper Method to discover the true Nature of Sacraments as Signs. I. MR. B. in his Remarks on my Discourse to you Concerning the Inventions of Men in the Worship of God, has given me many hard words, for not treating of the Cross in Baptism (as I have observed in my Admonition, where also I have given my Reasons for not doing it, since it did not belong to the ordinary part of Worship, which I only engaged to handle, p. 55.) imputing it to want of Candour and Inge∣nuity. And tho' I had given him no occa∣sion for it, yet he resolv'd to bring in
this Dispute about it; because (as he al∣ledges) it most directly concerns this Charge of Human Inventions in the Worship of God, Rem. p. 463. And that here The Dissenters particularly us'd to fix their Charge of Human Inventions against us. This then seem'd to me the most direct and strongest Objection you had to prove your Charge against us; and in which Mr. B. put most Confidence; so that if this failed, and had no force, the rest must fall in course. And therefore I consider'd It only, and I believe in such a way as is fully satisfactory to all that Impartially read what I have said, and what Mr. B. has Answer'd: And tho' I might well let it rest on that foot, yet there being several things in Mr. B's An∣swer that tend to mislead your Judgments in greater matters than the Sign of the Cross, I have thought it requisite to give it a new and distinct Consideration. The Sign of the Cross indeed I allow to be of no great weight in it self; but if we consider that the condemning the Use of it is in effect to Condemn the Univer∣sal Church, that has used it from the Apo∣stles time, that to make such Signs unlaw∣ful, when God has not made them so by any Command, is to add a Doctrine of our own to the Gospel, a great Supersti∣tion,
and a Breach, on our Christian Liber∣ty. And Lastly, That the false Reason∣ings brought to oppose it are of such ill consequence, that if they are not detected and exposed, there is hardly any thing in a Church can be safe from such Cavils, but the same sort of Arguments will reach to the most approved Practices. If these things, I say, be consider'd, this Dispute about the Cross will not appear of so little moment as some may imagine; nor will it be safe for the Governours of Our Church to comply with the Teachers of such Doctrines, lest they betray the Purity of the Gospel, by allowing the Doctrines of Men, that would make that unlawful in it self which God has left indifferent. We can very well join in Communion with a Church that does not use the Sign of the Cross, as the Apostles did with such as kept the Jewish Ceremo∣nies, and abstained from certain Meats: But when any come to impose this on our Consciences, as forbidden by God, we must in such Cases imitate St. Paul, who refus'd to give place by Subjection, no, not for an hour, Gal. 2. 5. We reckon it a Liberty and Pri∣vilege of the Church of God, and of all her Members, to signifie the Sense and Devotion of their Minds towards God in such be∣coming Actions and Words as Universal
Custom has made significant of our Thoughts and Passions in such Cases; as I have alrea∣dy proved in my former Admonition, p. 68. and shall further prove in this. And for any one to teach this to be unlawful, is to de∣prive us of a Privilege God has vouchsafed to us, to impose on our Liberty, and to teach such Doctrines as St. Paul condemn'd for Doctrines of Devils, 1 Tim. 4. 12. For For∣bidding to Marry, and to abstain from Meats, are there reckon'd such Doctrines, because they make that unlawful in it self that God has allow'd; and he has no less allow∣ed us to express the Devotions of our Minds by significant Actions, than he has allow'd us to feed our selves by all kind of wholesome Meats. And therefore they that condemn the one as unlawful, are equally Superstiti∣ous with those that then condemned the other. II. To proceed then, I desire you to re∣member that I undertook two things in my Admonition: First, To shew that Mr. B's Arguments against the use of the Cross were of no force: And secondly, That it was warranted by Holy Scripture. I shew'd you, that his great Objection against it was, that we make it A New Human Sacra∣ment, and that then it must be A Human Invention. But, in order to satisfie you that
we ascribed nothing of a Sacramental Na∣ture to it, I observ'd, that three things were necessary to make up a Sacrament: First, An Outward visible Sign instituted by God, signifying some spiritual Grace or Be∣nefit which we expect from him. Secondly, An Obligation on God by some promise of this to grant us that spiritual Grace or Benefit when we duly use the visible sign. Thirdly, A Pe∣nalty on us when we do not use it. I shew'd you, that we ascribed none of these to the Cross in Baptism, and consequently, that it hath nothing of a Sacrament in it. For it must be consider'd, that the word Sacrament is no Scripture-word, but the Church has taken it up to express some pe∣culiar Institutions, Rites, or Signs which we find appointed by God; and the true way to know whether we ascribe any thing of a Sacramental nature to any sign, is to consi∣der the nature of those Signs which we all agree to call Sacraments, and to observe di∣ligently and impartially wherein they agree amongst themselves, and differ from all other signs. I examin'd this as carefully as I could, and found that they all agreed in those three things which I have before men∣tioned; and that they differ'd from all other Signs peculiarly in this one thing, That they obliged God, by his Promise upon the
due use of these Signs, to give us the Grace or Spiritual Benefit signified by them. It is this Promise annexed to these Sacraments that makes them so valuable and precious to us, above all other Signs, and without it they would be meer Ceremonies, and might be omitted or supply'd on very Ordinary Terms: Whereas now nothing but Necessi∣ty can excuse us from the use of them, if we would enjoy the Promises of God an∣nexed to them. Mr. B. in his Vindication doth not deny the three things which I have named to be necessary to a Sacrament, nor doth he think himself oblig'd to prove that we ascribe any of them to the Cross; but he alledges, that the account I have given of Sacraments, is very Lame and Defective, omitting several Considerable Uses of them, which were the chief strength of his Argu∣ments against the Cross, (Vind. p. 37.) And (p. 38.) he adds, That these sacred Rites that are appointed by God, both in our first publick Entrance into the Covenant, and our publick Renewal of it at the Lord's Table, are design'd for several Uses, and principally for the three following. 1. As Representing Signs for Instruction concerning the Privileges and Duties of the Covenant, and our Guilt and Polution, &c.
2. As Obliging Signs to Confirm and Rati∣fie the Covenant entered into, and this both on God's part, p. 39. and from us to God, p. 40. 3. As Distinguishing Signs or Badges of our Profession, and the Relations we thereby are invested in; which afterwards he explains by Baptism, being a Mark and Character of those that belong to that one Visible Body or Church, of which Christ is the Lord and Head; and opposeth it to that one Internal Baptism, which he calls the certain mark of belonging to one invisible Church, p. 43. The mean∣ing of which Words is not easily compre∣hended, since he doth not explain whether he means by a certain Mark of belonging to an Invisible Church, an outward and visi∣ble Mark, or how internal Baptism can be such a Mark; whereas I think the genera∣lity of such as have written Considerately of these Matters, have made the external Baptism a Sign and a Mean of the inter∣nal, and of our Union not only to the visible, but likewise to the invisible Church when duly received; and only such as have in some measure imbibed the Soci∣nian Doctrines have explained Baptism as a Mark of Union to the Visible Church, in exclusion to the invisible.
These are the Uses for which he tells us Sacraments are design'd. And, p. 44. adds, That the Cross is set up for several Sacramental Uses, even the like as Baptism and the Lord's Supper are appointed for (except that one use of their being Obliging Signs on God's part to ratifie his Promises.) And from thence in∣fers, (p. 45.) That the Cross is hereby made as much a Sacrament as Men can make a Sign of their own. III. This would indeed have been a good Inference, if he had prov'd, that the Uses he has nam'd (so far as they differ from the three parts of a Sacrament before laid down by me) do not belong to any other Signs warranted in Scripture, but only to the Sacraments. But he has not in the least attempted it; and it would be in vain, for I shall shew, beyond exception, that all the Uses which he has named of Sacraments (so far as they can be applied to the Cross) are common to many other Signs Warranted by Scripture; and not at all peculiar to Sacraments; for the Cross cannot be made a Sacrament (not a Human Sacrament it self, which is indeed no Sa∣crament, but a noise of Words to amuse common People with, and affright them) but by being set up for such Uses as are so peculiar to the Sacraments, that they be∣long
to them only, and not to any other Scriptural Signs whatsoever. That which has led Mr. B. into this mistaken way of Reasoning, is, That he consider'd what he conceives the Two Sa∣craments agree with another in, and in what they differ from one another; Vind. p. 38. But then quite forgot to consider wherein they differ from all other Scriptural Signs, which if he had done, he would have found that they do not differ from other Signs in any of the uses which he has named, except that of obliging God by his Pro∣mise to confer some spiritual Grace. He that would know what a Man is, must not only consider wherein all Men agree, but likewise wherein they differ from other Creatures. All Men agree in Life and Mo∣tion, but if any one would conclude from thence, that whatever has Life (as for example, all Beasts have) is a Man, would be looked on as a very ill Reasoner; and yet this is Mr. B's Method. He found both the Sacraments agree in being designed for Representing, Obliging and Distinguishing Signs of the Duties, Privileges, and Rela∣tions of the New Covenant, whence he calls them Federal Rites, and spends several Pages to prove them designed for these Uses, and from thence would conclude, that every
Sign that represents, obliges, and distin∣guishes, must be a Sacrament, from the instance of the Sign of the Cross; but with as little Reason as it would be concluded in the former Case, that whatever had Life and Motion is a Man. IV. Before I proceed further to the con∣sideration of these Uses, I must caution you, first, That I do not pretend to under∣stand all the Designs of God in instituting Sacraments; for they are Mysteries, and God has no where told us, that he has discover'd all his Purposes in them. If we reflect on the Passover, the great Sacra∣ment of the Old Testament, we shall not find that God did Explicitly discover the main design of it to the Jews, which was to signifie and apply the Death of Christ to such as celebrated it; and, Who can be sure that there is not a hidden and my∣stical design in Baptism and the Lord's Supper, of which we are not aware, and of which, at least, we have not a clear and explicit Notion? This Consideration ought to make us diligent in the use of them, and modestly cautious in our discourses and ex∣planations of them. Secondly, 'Tis easie to observe, that Mr. B. has not expressed the Uses of Sa∣craments in the Language of Scripture,
but in that of the late Systems of Divi∣nity and interested Writers; and seems rather to have regard in them to some late Notions and Prejudices, particularly of the Socinians, than to the Ancient Doctrine of the Church, collected from the Word of God. And indeed, if it were not that I hope I may contribute something to clear the Notions of Sacraments to Vulgar Capaci∣ties, and convince them of the Necessity of frequenting them, which I find the Socinian Notions (too much encourag'd by some) have very much shaken, I should think what I have before said alone sufficient to An∣swer Mr. B's whole Discourse concerning them, and to shew it to be of no force. But whilst Men are made to look on Sa∣craments as primarily designed to bind us to our Duty to God, and not rather as Pledges and Conveyances of his Grace to us, they are apt to be deterr'd, by having their Duty set before them in so strong, and the Grace to perform it in so weak a Light; whereas if Men look on them prin∣cipally, as Tenders of Grace and Assistance to perform their Duty better and more ea∣sily than they did before, and consider this as the proper and peculiar effect of them, as Sacraments, and that which distinguishes
them from all other Signs (as I have and shall prove it is) this will encourage them to come to them cheerfully, and bind them∣selves readily to that Duty which they here hope for Grace to discharge; in which hopes God will not deceive them. But Mr. B. has so order'd the matter, that he has perverted most of those Scriptures that give us this hope and assurance, to a quite different purpose; so that in the relation I stand towards you, I am obliged to in∣struct you in the orthodox sence of them, and vindicate them from the Socinian glosses he thus puts on them. I proceed therefore, first, to shew you, That the Sacraments are primarily signs of God's Grace, and not properly of our Duty, tho' they imply it. This I think necessary to do, to make you understand the true nature of Sacraments; for otherwise I must let you know it is not necessary to the point in dispute about the Sign of the Cross; for whether the Sacraments are im∣mediately signs of our Duty or no, it is plain (as I shall shew you in the Second place) That the Scripture warrants us to use other signs of our Duty besides them. And (in the Third place) That the Cross is such a sign as the Scriptures warrant.
Sect. II. That the Sacraments are Primarily Signs from God to us of his Grace; and not properly of our Duty, either as required by God, or pro∣fest by us, tho' they imply it. I. THIS is plainly the Doctrine of our Church in her Catechism and Arti∣cles: In the first She teaches, That a Sacra∣ment is an Outward and Visible Sign of an Inward and Spiritual Grace given unto us by God, restraining the Sign to this Grace of God. And in her Articles she declares, That Sacraments be not only badges or tokens of Christians Profession, but rather they be cer∣tain sure Witnesses and Effectual Signs of Grace and God's good-will towards us, by which he doth work invisible in us, Art. 25. And again, Baptism is not only a sign of Profession and Mark of difference whereby Christian Men are discerned from others that be not Christened, but it is also a sign of Regeneration or new birth, whereby as by an Instrument, they that receive Baptism rightly are grafted into the Church, &c. Art. 27. And further, The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love that Christians ought to have amengst them∣selves
one to another, but rather it is a Sacra∣ment of our Redemption by Christ's Death; in∣somuch that to such as rightly, worthily, and with Faith receive the same: The Bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of Christ, &c. Art. 28. In all which places, our Church makes the Grace of God (effectual∣ly Communicated to us in the due use of the Sacraments) to be properly and principally signified by them. To these Articles I sup∣pose you do assent, they being approved by the Heads of Agreement, which Mr. B. as∣serts to be the Common Principles wherein both the Presbyterian and Congregational Divines are agreed, Rem. p. 142. II. Besides this Authority of our Church, I think most Divines that have written to purpose on this Subject, distinguish between the things signified by a Sacramental Sign: The things pre▪required in us to the use of it, and the Benefits, Consequents, and Effects of it. Thus in the Lord's Supper the things properly and immediately signified are the Body and Blood of Christ, which are there∣in communicated to us. The things pre∣required in us are, to Examin our selves, to have a lively sense of God's Mercy in Christ; to have a thankful remembrance of his Death, and be in Charity with all men. These are the Wedding Garments to make us accepta∣ble
Guests at this Feast. Lastly, the Benefit or Effect of this Sacrament is, The refreshing our Souls by the Body and Blood of Christ, as our Bodies are by the Bread and Wine. I might instance the same in the other Sacra∣ment of Baptism, but an Example will make it plainer for both. We will suppose then a King grants a Pardon to a Rebel under the Great Seal. Now, the Great Seal, in this case, signifies (as every body knows) the King's Favour and Grace to the Person to whom it is granted; this is the direct proper and im∣mediate signification of it. But it is sup∣posed or pre-required that the person so favoured is willing to accept of the Pardon granted by it, and that he is resolved to be a faithful Subject for the future. The Con∣sequent of this Pardon is, that he who has it shall enjoy his Liberty, Estate and Life, as formerly. Now, if any should argue from this, that the Great Seal is a sign of our Submission and Allegiance, and of the enjoyment of our Liberty, Property, &c. it would be in effect the same as if they should say, that a red Sky at Evening in Harvest (which pro∣perly signifies a fair day to follow) is a sign of the Obligations which Husbandmen lye under to imploy their diligence in the sea∣son
offer'd, to preserve the Fruits of the Earth, and of full Barns and encrease of Wealth; because these are all Antecedents or Consequents of the fair day, which such a Sky properly and immediately signi∣fies. III. Mr. B. in opposition to this Doctrin, takes some pains to prove the Sacraments designed to represent our Duty to us, and to signifie our Obligation to perform it, and applies several places of Scripture to this intent. But I desire you to observe, that the thing Mr. B. ought to prove, is, that they are Signs from us to God: for tho' they represent our Duty to us, they may still be Signs from God to us, signifying his Will requiring us to perform such Duties, and not from us to God, signifying our In∣tention and Resolution to perform them: for it is necessary carefully to distinguish between God's signifying his Will to us by certain signs, which require or represent our Duty, and our professing Obedience to him in such significant Actions as are proper to express it. The former, God doth in many Types and Signs in the Old and New Testament, besides the Sacraments, which signifie them only by Consequence and Im∣plication not directly; and the latter we do in every Act of Outward Devotion such
as Bowing, Kneeling, Standing, putting on Sackcloth, &c. all which represent our Duty, and are professions of our Intentions to perform it. Tho' therefore Mr. B. should prove by Scripture that the Sacraments represent our Duty as required by God, yet it were nothing against me, except he prove it to be proper and peculiar to Sacraments to represent our Duty as profest by us, to the Exclusion of all other Signs. However, tho' I need not take Notice of the Scriptures he produces to this pur∣pose, they not being to the point in hand, yet because they are all perverted from their true and genuine sense I think my self obliged to Vindicate them from his false glosses, and shall with them likewise consider his other Arguments on this Head. The first is, John 3. 5. Except a Man be born of the Water and the Holy Ghost he cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven. This he produces, Vind. 38. to prove that Wash∣ing with Water is by its Resemblance In∣structive to us concerning the Priviledges and Duties of the Covenant we enter into. But here is nothing concerning Instruction; but the plain and litteral meaning of the place is, That Baptism represents to us
the Will of God to give us a New Birth by Water and the Holy Ghost. The Water doth not only Instruct us in the Necessity of the Regenerating and purifying Vertue of the Holy Spirit, as he seems to suggest, but when duly used, it carries that Vertue along with it. The second place produced by him, to prove the Water in Baptism to be an In∣structing Sign concerning our Duty and Priviledges, is, Tit. 3. 5. He saved us by the Washing of Regeneration and Renewing of the Holy Ghost. This fully proves that it is God's Institution, that we shou'd be saved by Water and the Holy Ghost in Bap∣tism: if Mr. B. thinks that we are only Instructed in that Priviledge by the Wa∣ter in Baptism, as he seems to do, he contradicts the very Letter of the Holy Scripture, which says we are saved by it, and he seems to be influenced in this point with Socinian Notions. The third place is Acts 22. 16. Arise, be Baptised, and wash away thy sins. This he produces to prove that Baptism is De∣signed to Instruct us concerning our guilt as well as pollution, and the necessity of our being cleansed from it by the laver of our Media∣tors Blood. But sure the place proves quite another thing; not only that we are In∣structed
by Baptism concerning the ne∣cessity of being Cleansed, but that we are actually Cleansed and Washed in our Mediator's Blood by it, and have our Sins then, and not before, forgiven us: So the Scriptures frequently Teach us, and so the Church has ever understood it: it is not for any Merit of our Faith or Repentance that our Sins are forgiven us, and there∣fore God may as Justly, and has as posi∣tively made Baptism a condition of our Pardon when it may be had, as either of them. Christ may apply the Vertue of his Blood to us on what terms he Pleases, and since he has made Baptism a Condi∣tion, the meaness of the thing ought to be no Exception, any more than the washing in Jordan was a just Exception to Naaman the Syrian. We are therefore as much regenerated by Baptism, Cleansed, Saved and Pardoned by it, as Naaman was Cured of his Leprosy by Washing in Jor∣dan: And can no more be partakers of these benefits without it, when we may have it, then he cou'd without the other. It is therefore of very ill consequence to interpret these places of bare Instruction, and I hope Mr. B. will not say he meant so to interpret them as to Exclude the real force and efficacy.
The fourth place is, John 6. 53. 54. Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my Blood hath Eternal Life—For my Flesh is Meat indeed▪ and my Blood is Drink indeed. This he pro∣duces to prove, that in the Lords Supper There is not only a Commemorative Representa∣tion of the Death of Christ, but also an In∣structive Representation of our spiritual Com∣munion with him in his Body and Blood. And of Those Duties—by which we are said  Eat his Flesh and Drink his Blood, Vind. p. 39. But there is no colour for such a gloss. The Place speaks of feeding by Faith on the Flesh and Blood of Christ▪ either in or out of the Sacrament. 'Tis certain and confessed by the Church of God, that there is a peculiar Feeding on the Body and Blood of Christ by wor∣thy Receivers in the Sacrament of the Lord's-Supper; and that there is not only a Commemorative and Instructive Repre∣sentation of them as Mr. B. alledges, but a real and true Communion of them; your Confession of Faith uses the Words Real∣ly and Indeed, Chap. 29. and therefore i is great perverting of those Words of St John to interpret them of such Comme∣morative and Instructive Representation only, and a ready way to bring in the Socinian Notions of Sacraments.
The Fifth place, Vind. p. 39. is, Rom. 6. 3, 4, 5. So many of us as were Baptised into Christ, were Baptised into his Death, therefore we are Buried with him by Bap∣tism unto Death: that like as Christ was Raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also shou'd wàlk in Newness of Life. He alledges (Vind. p. 39.) That dying unto Sin, and walking in Newness of Life is not signifyed as the Be∣nefit Conferred by God (as I suppose) but rather as the Duty required from us. And to the same purpose he quotes Coloss 2. 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him—and you being dead in your sins, and the uncircomcision of your flesh hath he quickned together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses. It is manifest from the plain Words of these places, that the Apostle here shews what God has done for us, and from thence infers what we owe to him: He has mortified Sin in us by Baptism, he has buried us with Christ, he has forgiven us all Tres∣passes, he has quickened us together with him as he raised Christ, and given us a New Life by his Holy Spirit; let any one judge whether these are Benefits we receive from God, as I affirm, or rather Duties required from us, as Mr. B. alledges.
Every one of these (as the Church of God has ever Taught, and as the gene∣rality of Christians, except Pelagians of old, and Socinians of late, have professed to believe) are Acts of God's efficacion Spirit upon us, and not Duties required of us, tho' they infer Duties to be per∣form'd by us. We cannot quicken our selves, or kill Sin in us till the Spirit of God deliver us from the Body of Death▪ and quicken us by a new Principle, and then, when he has given us a New Life it is (as the Apostle infers) our Duty to walk in the Newness of that Life This is plainly the Apostles Reasoning▪ Rom. 6. for after he hath shewed wh God has done for us, in giving us h Grace to mortify our Lusts, and to en∣liven us with Christ, he concludes, V. 12 Let not therefore Sin reign in your Morta Body, that you should obey it in the Lu thereof. The Sixth place he produces is, 1 Cor 6. 11. But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus. He alledges, th that these Expressions refer to Baptism which is true: but, that it is our Duty to Wash, to Sanctify, to Justify our selves rather than receive them as Benefits from
God, is not to be allowed. These are acts of God's Spirit upon us; in Baptism we ex∣pect and receive them from him, and when we have received them, it is then our Duty to imploy the Grace he has bestowed on us, lest we receive it in vain; and this obligation to improve the Talent God has given us in Baptism, is a clear Consequence from his having so freely given it to us. The Seventh place Mr. B. urges to prove, that Baptism is a Sign from us to God, of our Obligations to the Duties of his Covenant, is, 1. Pet. 3. 25. Baptism doth also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience towards God.) I think this is so far from proving what Mr. B. produces it for, that it proves the direct contrary. Our Saviour tells us, that he who Believes and is Baptised shall be saved; that is, Faith and Baptism are the means or conditions of our Salvation; Baptism is God's Act by his Ministers, and Faith is ours (that is, the Act of it, tho the Gift and Grace be his) but except we perform our part, Baptism will do us no service; nor ought the Mini∣sters, who are the dispensers of God's Fa∣vours, to admit us to it, till we satisfy them some other way of our Sincerity, than meerly by our demanding Baptism▪
Therefore the Apostles requir'd a solemn profession of Faith, Repentance and Obe∣dience from such as were to be Baptised, and Obliged them to answer such Questi∣ons as the Church has ever put to those that came to Baptism, till your Directory threw them out. Now, this clearly proves, that Baptism doth not directly and imme∣diatly signify our Duty or Obligation to God, since another Rite was added to sig∣nify, that even a solemn Profession of our Faith and Resolution, that we would for∣sake the Devil and his Works, believe in God, and keep his Commandments, ex∣pressed by solemn Answers to several Questions. These Answers bind and oblige us to our Duty to God, before we can be Baptised; and then comes Baptism, which is God's act, by which he pardons our Sins and Adopts us as Sons; or as our Church expresses it, grants us A death unto Sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness. And the not observing this, seems to me the rea∣son of that great Omission in your Di∣rectory, of which I took notice, Admoniti∣on, p. 56. That No express Covenant is Or∣dered to be made in the Name of the Child Baptized, either by the Parent or any else. For the Authors of the Directory having determined, that Sacraments are Instituted
Solemnly to engage Church-Members Into the Service of God in Christ (Confession of Faith, Chap. 27.) it will follow on Mr. B'S Principles (which seem in this point to be the same with theirs) that it is unlawful to demand another Engagement of those that are to be Baptized, or, that they shou'd by another Rite, that is, by Solemn∣ly Answering certain Questions, dedicate themselves to the Service of Christ; because as he Argues (Vind. p. 52.) It is a need∣less doing that over again by a Rite of our own devising, which is sufficiently done by a Rite of Christ's Institution. And therefore the Directory only Orders the Minister, before Baptism, to Use some words of In∣struction touching the Institution, Nature and Ends of this Sacrament; But doth not re∣quire any Profession or Engagement from those that are to be Baptised, or in their Name, or any answer signifying their con∣sent, vow or resolution to believe and serve Christ, quite contrary to St. Peter, who tells us in effect, That Baptism will not save us without this Answer of a good Conscience. I think this one place is suffi∣cient to shew us, that we are obliged by other means than meer accepting the Sign of Baptism, and that the thing that direct∣ly binds our Duty on us, is, our solemn
Profession of our Faith and Duty, which we must signify by such signs and means as are proper to signify our sincerity in other Cases; And, that Baptism doth not signify those, but supposeth them; the whole design of that being to entitle us to God's Grace and Favours, upon supposi∣tion that we are qualified for them. Mr. B. indeed objects, That Baptism is the Solem∣nizing a mutual Covenant between the blessed God on the one part, and us on the other; and therefore it is first a Sign from us to God, of our consent to the proper terms of his Covenant, before it can be a Sign from him to us of our Interest in those benefits. If this were so, then there needed no other Sign of our consent besides the use of Bap∣tism▪  St. Peter shews us the contrary, that we are to signify our consent by o∣ther means, even by a Solemn Profession, and taking on us expresly those Obliga∣tions that are the proposed Conditions of the Covenant; and when we have bound our selves by this Rite and So∣lemn Profession, and declared our consent to those Terms, then, and not before, we are admitted to Baptism for the Remission of Sins. 8thly. He further argues from St. Mark 1. 4. where Baptism is called the Baptism
of Repentance for the Remission of Sins: That it is, First, A Sign of our Repen∣tance towards God, before it can be a Sign from him of the Remission of Sins, p. 41. But the meaning is plainly, that John Preached Remission of Sins by Baptism on Condition Men repented: And the Question is here, whether Baptism signi∣fied that the Men Repented, or that God wou'd forgive the Penitent when Bapti∣zed; If the last be the meaning, then it is a Sign altogether from God to us; But if the First, then it is indeed a Sign from Men to God. But that it cannot be so, is clear, because Repentance was first to be signified by other Signs, such as Confession of Sins, promise of Amend∣ment, &c. before the Persons were to be Baptised, and therefore Baptism did not signify, but suppose Repentance. I do own there is a Covenant made between us and God in Baptism: We promise Faith and Obedience, and signify them by a Solemn Profession, and other Signs: God gives us his Spirit for Remission of Sins, and a new Birth; and this is signified by Baptism, which is the Sign and Means that Con∣veys them. 9thly. He produces, Gal. 5. 3. Every Man that is Circumcised is a Debtor to the
whole Law, Vind. p. 42. I answer, That every Man that accepts the King's Pardon and Protection under the Great Seal, is obliged to be a good Subject, and keep the Laws; yet it doth not follow, as I have already shewed, that the King's great Seal is a Sign from us to the King, but solely from him to us. 10thly. He argues (Vind p. 41.) That Baptism was called a Sacrament because it was reckoned (like the Military Oath of the Roman Soldiers) as a solemn listing of the Person Baptized into the Service and Warfare of Christ. To this I answer, First, That the same Persons that call Baptism and the Lords-Supper Sacraments on this Account, do likewise call several other Rites Sacraments; And therefore, in their Opinion, to bind and oblige our selves to our Duty was not peculiar to those Signs, which we now only call Sacraments. Se∣condly, I own there is such an Oath made at Baptism, which binds and obliges us to be Faithful; and thereupon we are ad∣mitted by Baptism into the Number and Priviledges of Christ's Soldiers: But Bap∣tism signifies God's act admitting us, not ours, any other way than by Consequence and Supposition: And therefore we may make many such Vows beside what we
make at Baptism, and signify them by such Signs as are proper, without any offence; if we should do it by Writing and Sealing it were no harm; which▪ wou'd both be binding and obliging Signs on our parts, yet no Sacraments, or sinfull human Inventions, any more than the Cross. 11thly, He argues, p. 42. That Sacri∣fices were Covenanting Rites, and quotes, Psal. 50. 5. Gather my Saints together, those that have made a Covenant with me by Sa∣crifice. To which I answer, There were two things in Sacrifices: First, The offering of them to God as a Sign of our Homage and Duty, which we owe him, as we pay Tribute to the King; And this was the Offerers Act, and fully signified his Duty. And then there was God's admitting the Offerer to feed on them after they were made his; and this was God's Act and a Sign of his Favour and Reconciliation to the Person. Therefore Sacrifices were Signs of our Duty to God, as well as of his Favour to us; but the case is otherwise in Bap∣tism and the Lord's-Supper; the offering that reconciles us to God, was made by Christ, not by us; and we are reconcil'd by vertue of that: And the Sacraments do
only apply to us the Washing or Propitiation of Christ's Blood, and feed us as recon∣cil'd Guests on his Body; and therefore are wholly Signs from God to us, and other Signs are necessary on our part to signify our Duty. And therefore the Primitive Christians brought Meat and Drink for a common Feast at the Lord's Supper, to signify the sincerity of their Love, and Testify it to the World; and we do yet Offer part of our Substance, for the Relief of God's Servants at this Sacrament: both which are Signs as well as Instances of our Duty; and plainly shew, that our Duty is not so signified in the Sacraments, but other Signs are necessary on our part. And if a man who came to demand Baptism, shou'd, as a Sign and Token of his Resolution to renounce the Devil, the World and Flesh, give a large Portion of his Substance to some Charitable use, it were very lawful for him to use this Sign, and no affront to Baptism, as if it were not sufficient to signify our Duty and Obligation to God: And such an Act would be a very acceptable Sacrifice to him. 12thly, He urges, Acts 2. 38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be Baptised eve∣ry one of you in the Name of Christ, for the remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the Holy
Ghost, for the Promise is unto you and to your Children. Whence he infers, That they were by Baptism first to profess their Repentance towards God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus, and then receive the promised Benefit, Remis∣sion of Sins, Vind. p. 41. But here is not one word of professing Repentance by Bap∣tism, nor can any such thing be inferred from the Words; but on the contrary, they prove that the Sins of the Penitents are remitted by Baptism, and they intitled to the promise of the Holy Ghost; the grant∣ing both which are Acts of God's Favour bestowed on us in Baptism. If Baptism were designed to profess or signify our Re∣pentance directly, there needed no other Profession or Signs of Repentance, accord∣ing to Mr. B. because the Sign appointed by God wou'd be sufficient; but no Mini∣ster ought to Baptize any, till by a solemn Profession before, and other Signs and To∣kens, they satisfy him in some measure of the sincerity of their Faith and Repentance, as I have already shewed. 13thly, He alledges our Saviours Com∣mand to Baptize, Mat. 28. v. 19. Go ye therefore and Teach all Nations, Baptising them, &c. This Command he says (Vind. p. 41.) plainly implies that one great use of Baptism, was to be a solemn Bond upon them,
to the Duty of that Christan Profession they had imbraced, and the Baptising them, In the Name of the Father, &c. has been always supposed to imply a solemn Dedication of them by this Sacred Rite to the Faith, Worship and Service of the Blessed Trinity. But I answer, That the plain meaning of these words is, that Christ gives his Apostles power to admit Disciples by Baptism, in∣to the Priviledge of being Taught by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as their Ma∣ster and Law-giver. The Question is, whe∣ther Baptism signifies God's admitting us to this Priviledge, or our chusing him for our Lord and Master: That is, whether it signifies God's Act or ours. I think it easy to determine this Question, since it is manifest, that Faith and Repentance, which include our Submitting our selves to God, are Qualifications required to Baptism, and the person that demands it must sa∣tisfy the Ministers of the Sacraments, that he is sincere in his Submission by such Signs and Profession of Repentance, and of Faith, as are proper to signify them, before they ought to admit him. I own Baptism is a Bond, and dedicates us to God's Ser∣vice; but it is a Bond laid on us by God, who requires Faith and Repentance of those that are Baptised, and sets them apart
and Consecrates them to his peculiar Ser∣vice, and to the Priviledges that attend and are promised to such. 14thly, He produces, 1. Tim. 2. 19. Ne∣vertheless the Foundation (or Covenant) of God stands sure, having this Seal, (on God's part) the Lord knows them that are his, and (this Seal on our part, as he alled∣ges) Let him that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity. From whence he infers, As the Covenant is mutual, so the external Rite is intended to ratify our Re∣stipulation as well as Gods promise. But I answer, This place proves, that the Cove∣nant of God requires, on our part, a Duty, to depart from iniquity, as well as it in∣cludes a Promise that God knows who are his (that is, will Own, Protect and Re∣ward them) but that the Sacraments are our Seals to this Covenant, cannot be in∣ferred from thence: The Covenant it self is a meer Favour and Grace vouch∣safed us by God, and we must take it in nature of a Grant from him, on what Conditions and under what Seal he pleases; and accordingly he has put the Sacra∣ments (the Seals thereof) into the hands of his Ministers, who are his Officers (or as we may call them, his Chancellors) to dispence his Pardon and Favours to those
that are qualified for them. Our business is therefore, to qualify our selves, and then apply to his Officers, that are duly appointed by him for the Seals of our Pardon; and we are to satisfy them by proper Signs of our Sincerity, before they ought to seal this pardon to us. The Sa∣craments therefore are God's Seals, not ours, dispensed by his lawful appointed Officers, not by our Deputies or Mini∣sters, which do indeed imply and sup∣pose a Duty from us, but are not imme∣diately appointed to Signify that Duty, or that we resolve or ingage to perform it, but that God will accept of us if we do, and to do which accordingly, they lay the strictest Obligations on us, by way of Consequence. Lastly, He urges my own words against me. That I allow in my Discourse, p. 4. That in the Sacraments We not only express our dependance on God for his Grace, but like∣wise oblige and bind our selves to serve him. Now (saith he) How this can be true with∣out making the Sacramental Rite a Sign from us to God, of that obligation to his Ser∣vice, I cannot comprehend. In Answer to this, when I say, That we express our Dependance on God for his Grace in the Sacraments, and oblige our
selves to serve him, I mean that our com∣ing to the Sacraments is an effect of our Faith and Dependance on God, and a De∣claration to the World that we resolve to serve him, as he has required those to do who expect he shou'd fulfil the promises that he has made to worthy Receivers: But that therefore the Sacraments are pro∣perly or purposely or principally Institu∣ted to signify these acts of ours, doth no ways follow; or that it is proper to Sacra∣ments as such to do so: And there needs no more to convince any reasonable Man of this, but to remember that we do ex∣press this Dependance on God, and Ob∣ligation to serve him by every act of Worship, as well as by the Sacraments; And therefore this use can be no ways pe∣culiar to them: And for any to confound the things Pre-required on our part to our use of the Sacraments, or the effects and Benefits of them, with what is direct∣ly and properly Signified by the Signs, is very unreasonable, and a sign that the Person, who doth so, either doth not un∣derstand their Nature, or has a mind to keep up a Dispute. Mr. B. may alledge this is New, but it is plainly the Do∣ctrine of our Church, as I have shewed, and is founded on Reason and Scripture.
Suppose from the instance I have before given, any shou'd Argue that the Great Seal is a Sign from us of submitting to the King, and of Obedience to him; and that therefore to shew our Obedience or Gra∣titude to the King by any other Sign, were Treason and a taking on us to counterfeit the Kings Seal; wou'd not such a Man be looked on as a very unreasonable Dispu∣tant? And yet this I take to be exactly the Case between Mr. B. and Me: We both agree (I suppose) that Sacraments are Signs of some Inward and Spiritual Grace, which only God can give us; and that he has promised these to us in the due use of the Sacraments. But then it is pre-sup∣posed and required, that we use them duly, and be qualified as God requireth; From whence Mr. B. infers, that the Sacraments signify those Qualifications and Dispositi∣ons in us that they pre-suppose and re∣quire: And therefore to signify them by any other Signs, is to make a New Human Sacrament, which is in effect to counterfeit the Broad Seal of Heaven. But I say, that to do this is no more to make a Human Sacrament, than to signify by such other Signs as are usual and proper to express such Dispositions of mind in other Cases, my acceptance of the Kings Pardon, and
my Resolution to Acknowledge his Mercy to me in granting it, is to make a New Pardon for my Self, or to counterfeit the King's Seal. From whence you may see how We express our Dependance on God for his Grace, and oblige our selves to serve him in the Sacraments, without making the Sa∣cramental Rite properly or primarily a Sign from us to God, much less principal∣ly or peculiarly; which is the only thing wou'd do Mr. B's Cause any service in this Case. For if other Signs signify these, as well as the Sacraments, it is plain they do not belong to the Sacraments, as such; and I have already shewed, that the Sacra∣ments were not designed properly or prin∣cipally for this end; nor are they sufficient for it, since God has thought fit to ap∣point other Signs for this purpose, and Warranted us to use such words and acti∣ons beside them as by general custom are proper. And I can see no more harm in using other Signs, besides the Sacramental, to express our Duty and Acknowledg∣ments to God when we Celebrate them, than in using other words than Christ ap∣pointed in the Institution. The Argument is full as strong against the use of the one as of the other; For if the Sacramental Signs be sufficient to this purpose, the
words are likewise sufficient. And then to add New words of our own to the same purpose for which God appointed the words of Institution, is as much to accuse his Insti∣tution of Imperfection, as to add New Signs. Yet I suppose it is no harm to add such words as may make Receivers understand the Nature and Uses of these Mysteries; or express their Faith and sense of God's fa∣vour, and the gratitude they have for it. And then, I suppose, there is as little harm in expressing the same by such Signs as common Custom has made significant there∣of as by Words; Both being Warranted by God in Scripture. And whereas Mr. B. alledges (Vind. p. 46.) That it belongs to God alone to appoint the Religious Rites, where∣by we bind our selves to his Service as to the Supreme Magistrate to appoint the Ceremonies used in our taking the Oath of Allegiance: I answer, That it belongs much more to the Supreme Magistrate to prescribe the words of the Oath, than the Ceremonies: And it is much more Penal to add or take away from the words of the Oath, or to change them, than to add to the Ceremonies pre∣scribed in taking it; for that is often no fault at all, and therefore to add to the words of Institution any of our own, will be more Penal than to add to the Ceremo∣nies.
This whole Objection therefore about a Human Sacrament, is a meer amusement of Words: For if a Human Sacrament signify any thing that is Criminal, it must signify our pretending a Divine Institution for a Rite of our own Contriveing, and assign∣ing a Divine effect to it: This is indeed to counterfeit God's Seal, and a great Sin. But to signify our Duty to God by a Rite that properly expresses it, is no more to be called a Human Sacrament than Writing a profession of Loyalty to the King, or en∣tering into a Recognizance for our good Behaviour, and Sealing it with our own Seal, is a counterfeiting of His. And whereas Mr. B. alledges, Vind. p. 43. That to make a Sign a Seal on our part, is to make it a part of Religious Worship and a Sinful Human Invention. I answer, That we ought to distinguish between the proper Acts or Parts of Divine Worship, and the Man∣ner or Means of Expressing those Acts: on∣ly God can appoint a proper Act or Part of Worship, but the Manner or Means of Ex∣pressing it, is often left to us, and is to be determined by our present Circumstances. Thus appearing in God's Presence with Reverence, Humility and Submission is an Act of Worship directly required by the Holy Scriptures, but to Express this Hu∣mility
and Submission by Uncovering our Heads, is not particularly there required: but inasmuch as universal Custom amongst us (for it is otherwise in other places of the World) has made this an Expression of this disposition of our Minds, when we ap∣pear before our Superiors, therefore we use it in our appearance before God, without making it a proper part of Worship or a Human Sacrament. And so on the same ac∣count, God requires that Women shou'd appear before him with Modesty, and a due sense of their inferiority to Men, as I shewed in my Discourse, chap. 4. sect. 2. p. 2. And inasmuch as universal Custom had, in the Apostles time, made a Veil a mark of Womens subjection to Men, and it was immodest for them to appear un∣veiled in publick places, therefore the Apo∣stle, 1 Cor. 11. requires, that they be veiled in the Christian Assemblies; which yet did not make this Veiling themselves a part of Divine Worship, nor a Sacrament; and therefore, amongst us, where this Custom doth not obtain, the Veiling of Women in the Church is laid aside: and by parity of Reason, confessing Christ Crucified, and Glorying in his Suffering on the Cross, is a part of Worship, which universal Custom of all Churches and Ages has taught us to
Express by making the Sign of the Cross: But Expressing this Act of Worship by this Means, and in this Manner, doth no more make it a part of Divine Worship, or a Human Sacrament, or a sealing the Cove∣nant on our part, than Expressing our Re∣verence and Submission, by Uncovering the Head (or Feet where that is customary) makes those parts of Divine Worship, or Veiling Women, to signifie their Modesty and Subjection, makes it a Human Sacrament. I might add many other like Instances from Scripture, but shall content my self with one, which we find, 2 Kin. 19. v. 14. where He∣zekiah receives a Letter full of Blasphemies against God; upon the receit of this Letter he went up into the House of God, and spread it before the Lord. And with this signifi∣cant Action offers up his Prayer to God. It is the Custom for persons that have recei∣ved a Threatning Letter, that reflecteth on their Lord or Friend, to carry it to him who is concerned, and lay it before him, as an effectual means to stir him up to Justifie himself, and to Protect those that depend on him; and doing so is a Sign of Fidelity and Dependance in the person that thus makes the Application: Therefore Heze∣kiah spread the Letter before the Lord, there∣by Expressing his Faith, Trust, and Resigna∣tion
to God, which are proper Acts of Worship, and particularly required at our Hands, but to do this by spreading a Let∣ter, is no where particularly commanded, yet it was accepted by God. Hezekiah's doing it, was no introduction of any Inven∣tion of Men into God's Worship; nor was it a Human Sacrament; yet it was used to the same purpose that we use the Sign of the Cross, which signifies no more than our Faith, Trust and Dependance on a Crucified Saviour, and a Resignation to his Service; which is all that is meant in the 30th Canon of the Church of England, by our dedicati∣on to God. Hezekiah therefore did as much dedicate himself to God's service by spreading the Letter before God, as we do by making the Sign of the Cross: and the one is as well Warranted as the other, and is as far from being a Sacrament.
Sect. III. That the Scriptures warrant us to use other Signs that are not Sacraments, for the seve∣ral uses ascribed to Sacraments by Mr. B. so far as the Sign of the Cross is concerned in those uses. I. BEfore I proceed to the direct proof of this, I must observe, that the Words wherein Mr. B. expresses the uses and ends of Sacraments, are not clear or certain, but admit of several Senses; in some of which they express indeed the pro∣per uses of Sacraments; but in others, on∣ly those uses that belong to other Signs, as well as to Sacraments: And therefore it will be necessary to consider apart each of these uses laid down by him, which he reduces to three General Heads, namely, Represent∣ing, Obliging, and Distinguishing, and to ex∣plain to you the several Senses of which they are capable. After this, I shall prove, that the Sign of the Cross is not a Representing, Obliging, or Distinguishing Sign, in any of those Senses which express the proper uses of Sacra∣ments, and that in those Senses in which the Cross is a Representing, Obliging, or Di∣stinguishing
Sign the Scriptures Warrant other Signs, that are not Sacraments, for the same uses. Signs then, I say, may be called Repre∣senting, Obliging, and Distinguishing upon several accounts, and in several senses, par∣ticularly in these following. First, A Sign may be called a Representing Sign, because it signifies to us God's con∣ferring on us, and conveying to us, certain Graces, Favours, or Privileges, represented to us in and by the Sign. So the King's Charter to a Corporation, signifies the King's Pleasure, that they should enjoy cer∣tain Privileges and Immunities. Mr. B. owns this sense of Representing Signs, when he says, that Sacraments are Representing Signs for Instruction in the Privileges of the New Covenant. That is, (as I suppose the words are intended to mean) that Sacra∣ments represent to us, or instruct us, that it is the will and pleasure of God that we should enjoy those Privileges. 2dly, A Sign may be called Representing, because it signifies God's Pleasure and Com∣mand concerning some Duties set forth and represented by the Sign, which God would have us perform. Thus the King's Char∣ter doth not only signifie the Privileges and Immunities granted to a City, but likewise
the Offices and Duties the King requires from such as enjoy those Privileges. And this sense of Representing Signs is owned by Mr. B. in (what I suppose he means by) Sacraments being Instructive in the Duties of the New Covenant; which Duties imply our natural Guilt, Pollution, and Weakness, and the necessity of being cleansed from them. 3dly, A Sign may be called Representing, because it signifies our Desire, Purpose, and Resolution to accept the Grace, Favour, and Privileges God has promised us, and to perform the Duties he has imposed upon us, together with our Gratitude and Sense of his Favours. Thus a City honoured with a Charter may declare its Acceptance and Sense of its Prince's Favours, by put∣ting that Charter in a rich Case, carrying it in Procession when they receive it; like∣wise by Addresses, Bonefires, Ringing of Bells, Illuminations, and such other Actions as usually represent the Grateful Affections and Resolutions of our Minds: And it is to be observed, that tho' these Signs repre∣senting the Duty and Gratitude of the per∣sons thus Favoured, be not required in the Charter, nay, tho' Oaths or other Declara∣tions of their acceptance be particularly specified in it, yet no Prince ever takes ill at their Subjects hands these voluntary Signs,
representing the Duty, Gratitude, and Ac∣ceptance of his Favours. I do not find Mr. B. takes notice of this sense of Repre∣senting Signs, but it is a sense very obvious, and must be allowed of by all. 4thly, Signs may be called Obliging, be∣cause they Oblige God by his Promise to give us, when we duly use them, the Grace, Benefit or Privileges signified by them; and such Signs as represent God's Will to con∣fer Grace on us in the first sense of Repre∣senting Signs, are Obliging Signs in this sense; that is, they Oblige God to give the Grace represented in them: so that Obliging and Representing Signs in this sence are in effect the same, and run into one another; and in this sence Sacraments, as is owned both by Mr. B. and me, are peculiarly Representing and Obliging Signs. 5thly, A Sign may be called Obliging, be∣cause it declares God's Will to us, by signi∣fying, that he requires certain Duties and Returns from us; which Declaration of God's Will by Words or Signs, obliges us to perform those Duties. And Signs that represent in the second sense the Duties re∣quired by God, are Obliging from God to us in this sense; for whatever Sign instructs us by representing any thing to us as our Duty, doth likewise oblige us to perform it;
so that Obliging Signs, in this sense, are the same with Representing, and need not be distinguished. 6thly, A Sign may be called Obliging, be∣cause it declares our Intention, Resolution, and Promise to perform what is required of us in our Covenant with God; and Signs that represent, in the third sense, our ac∣ceptance of God's Grace, and resolution to perform our Duty, are also thus obliging, and are properly Signs from us to God; the same are likewise ratifying and dedica∣ting on our part; which is owned by Mr. B. p. 45. where he tells us, That to Oblige and Bind our selves to serve God, is the same thing as to Dedicate our selves to his service: And indeed, a Sign can be no otherwise Ratifying and Dedicating on our part, than as it signifies and declares our Resolution and Promise to perform the Duties we owe to God. 7thly, A Sign may be called Distinguish∣ing, because it signifies and conveys to us some Privilege and Benefit which effectually distinguisheth us from the rest of the World, and obliges others to own us as so privile∣ged. Thus the King's Patent to a Noble∣man distinguisheth him, and obliges others to take notice of him. And thus the re∣generating Principle of Grace, conveyed to
us in Baptism, makes an effectual distinction of Christians from other Men; and the Pri∣vileges convey'd to us thereby, oblige all other Christians to own us as fellow-Mem∣bers and Heirs of the same Hope with them∣selves. Hence Signs Representing Graces conferred by God (in the first sense) or Obliging on God's part (in the fourth sense) are likewise peculiarly Distinguishing Badges and Signs of our Christianity in this last sense. 8thly, Lastly, A Sign may be called Di∣stinguishing, because we thereby testifie, pro∣fess, and declare to the World, that we Claim and Own the Privileges and Chara∣racters that God has bestow'd on us: And thus every Christian Duty we perform, every Profession we make of our Faith, either by Words or Actions, are Distinguishing Badges and Signs of our Christianity, pe∣culiarly such Signs as represent our Duty, or Gratitude in the third sense, or obliges us to perform it, in the fifth sense are thus likewise Distinguishing. From all which it is manifest, First, That Mr. B. has expressed the uses and Ends of Sacraments in a very confused and uncer∣tain manner; to Represent, Oblige, and Di∣stinguish being in effect the same, and run∣ning into one another; and yet each of
them containing very different uses under them that ought carefully to be distinguish'd; so that he has made a distinction where there was no necessity for it, and omitted to di∣stinguish where it was necessary. Secondly, You must observe, that Repre∣senting Signs in the first and second sense (that is, as they represent either Benefits conferred on us by God, or Duties imposed on us by him) Obliging Signs in the fourth and fifth sense (that is, as they signifie God's obliging himself by his Promise, or us by his Command) and lastly, Distinguishing Signs in the seventh sense (as they signifie Privileges bestow'd on us by God) are all of them Signs from God to us, not from us to God. Thirdly, Only Representing Signs in the third sense, Obliging in the sixth, and Di∣stinguishing in the eighth, (that is, as they represent our Resolutions, Promises, and Professions, and as they bind and distinguish us by them) are Signs from us to God; and it will appear on examination, that the Sign of the Cross is only concerned in these last uses, and that the Scriptures Warrant other Signs, that are not Sacraments, for them.
Sect. IV. Of Representing Signs. AS to the first Sence of Representing Signs, that is, as they signifie to us God's conferring on us and conveying to us certain Graces or Priviledges represen∣ted to us in and by them. I desire you to take notice that this is the first thing that I shewed in my Admonition, (p. 56) to be necessary to a Sacrament; that is, An out∣ward and visible Sign, instituted by God, of some inward and spiritual Grace or Benefit which we expect from him. I shewed you likewise (p. 178.) That the Cross is not used by us to signify any Grace or Benefit communicated to us from God: And this is the universal Sense of All that have undertaken the Defence of it in our Church; but Mr. B. from some Conjectures of his own, undertakes to prove, that we mean by it, that which we profess and de∣clare not to mean. Thus, Vind. p. 44. he thinks there is just ground to conclude the contrary from the words of the Thirtieth Canon of England, which acknowledges, that the Holy Ghost by the mouth of the Apostles did honour the name of the Cross so far, that under it he compre∣hended
not only Christ Crucified, but the Force, Effect and Merit of his Death and Passion, with all Comforts, Fruits, and Pro∣mises we receive or expect thereby. From whence he concludes, that with us the Cross must be an External Sign to signify the same things which the Holy Ghost had Honoured the name of the Cross to signify. But I answer, that none of the Expoun∣ders of our Canons, or Defenders of the Sign of the Cross have thus interpreted this Canon; nay, on the contrary, they have given it a quite different sense, as he himself owns in this very place, where he Quotes the Author of the Case relating to the Cross in Baptism, explaining the Canon in another Sense. Now for Mr. B. to put a Sense on the Words of our Canon, and make an In∣ference from them which none of us own, but Protest against, is to set up an Adversa∣ry purposely that he may confute him; and such Proceedings are looked on by all im∣partial Men as the effects of Prejudice and Engagement to a Party. Nay, not only the Divines of our Church Protest against his Inference from this Ca∣non, but the very Canon it self makes a quite contrary Inference, concluding from the Scriptures signifying by the name of the Cross, Christ and his Benefits; that the Pri∣mitive
Christians used the Sign of it, not to signify these Benefits as communicated to us by God, but to Testify thereby that they were not ashamed of it, but owned him for their God and Saviour, who suffered the Death of the Cross for them, and Signed their Chil∣dren with it, when Christened, to Dedicate them by that Badge to his Service whose Benefits be∣stowed on them in Baptism, the name of the Cross did Represent. The use then of the Cross ac∣cording to the Canon is not, as Mr. B. wou'd infer, to signify an Act of God towards us, to confer any Benefit on us, or require any Duty of us, but to signify and represent our own Act, whereby we Resolve, Pro∣mise and Bind our selves not to be ashamed of a Crucified Saviour, or his Benefits pur∣chased by his Cross, and signified to us un∣der that Name in Scripture; And not only our Church but all other Christians from the Apostles time, have for this reason looked on making the Sign of the Cross, as a very fit Instance and Declaration of their Glorying in Christ's Sufferings, and Readi∣ness to follow him in them; which is an effectual Dedication of our selves to his Ser∣vice, tho' we do not think it a fit External Sign to signify God's Communicating to us the Graces or Benefits of the New Cove∣nant, because that being an Act of God,
ought only to be Represented and Convey∣ed to us by Signs particularly Instituted by him, whereas our Glorying in his Sufferings, and Dedicating our selves to follow him in them, being Acts of ours, may lawfully be signified by such Signs as Universal Custom has made proper; as will appear more at large in this Discourse; What I have said being sufficient to shew, that the Cross is no Representing Sign in this sense. II. 2dly, As to the second sort of Re∣presenting Signs, which signify and discover to us God's Pleasure and Command con∣cerning some Duties set forth and repre∣sented by them, which Duties God wou'd have us perform. Let me observe, that the Cross is no more a Representing Sign with us in this sense than the former, since we do not use it to signify or declare God's Will to us, that we shou'd perform any Duty, but on∣ly our own Resolution, and Purpose to per∣form those Duties, that God himself has signified under the Name of the Cross in Scripture, and that we shall not be ashamed to confess Him, that was Crucified on it: This is manifest from the very words of our Office, in which the Sign of the Cross is used only as a Token that hereafter the Bap∣tised Person shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ Crucified, and manfully to
fight under his Banner against Sin, the World and the Devil, and to continue Christ's Faith∣ful Soldier and Servant unto his lives end, This is the only use our Church makes of the Sign of the Cross; and you see plainly that it is here made only a Token of our owning a Crucified Saviour, and an Instance that we are not ashamed of his Cross and Sufferings: And indeed it is as plain an In∣stance of our not being thus ashamed, and of our resolution to follow him, in taking up our Cross and engaging in his Warfare and service, as giving an Alms is an Instance of Charity. But here is nothing of God's de∣claring or signifying his will to us by this sign, that we shou'd perform these Duties, or any intimation that we use it to this purpose. And yet if we did use it, it wou'd not give it any thing of a Sacramental nature, much less make it a Human Sacrament, for it is no peculiar, much less Principal use of Sa∣craments to represent Gods Pleasure to us, that we shou'd perform certain Duties, since we find many Signs used in Scripture to this pur∣pose that are no Sacraments. I shall content my self with two Instances, amongst many, The First is that of the Sabbath Day, Ezek. 20. 12. Moreover I gave them my Sabbaths to be a Sign between me and them, that they might know me, that I am the Lord that sanctifies
them. Here the Sabbath Day is described as a Covenanting Sign between God and his People, representing to them, and Instructing them from God in their Duty to know the Lord that Sanctified them. We have ano∣ther Example, Exod. 19. 10. Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day, and to mor∣row, and let them wash their cloaths. This Washing their Cloaths was certainly a Rite or Sign Representing to them from the Lord, the inward Purity required of them, and instructing them that it was God's Will that they should approach him with Holiness, and yet I suppose neither this nor the former were properly Sacraments; and indeed Mr. B. owns, p. 39. That all barely Instru∣ctive Signs are not Sacramental or Federal ones. I add, that from these Instances it appears, that all Instructive Signs, tho' Federal or Covenanting are not Sacramental, and there∣fore Mr. B. had no reason to Tax me as he doth in the same place, for Omitting this Use in my Account of Sacraments, since my design was only to mention those Uses that are peculiar to Sacraments; and it is mani∣fest by his own Confession, that this is not so peculiar to them. III. 3dly, The same must be said concern∣ing Signs that Represent and Signify our Desire, Purpose and Resolution, to accept
the Grace, Favour and Priviledges God has Promised us, and to perform the Du∣ties he has Imposed on us, together with our Gratitude and Sense of his Favours. To Represent in this Sense is not peculiar to Sacraments, much less a Principal Use of them, nor has Mr. B. produced one place of Scripture to prove this to be such a Pecu∣liar Use. On the contrary, we have many Example, in Scripture, where other Signs are recommended to us for this purpose: Thus we find the Reubenites and Gadites and half Tribe of Manasses building an Altar, Josh. 22. 10. without any particular Com∣mand from God, as sufficiently appears from the whole Affair. The design of this Altar was not for Sacrifices; but v. 22. that it might be (say they) a Witness between us and you, and our Generations after us, that we may do the Service of the Lord before him, with our Burnt-Offerings, and with our Sacri∣fices, and with our Peace-Offerings, that your Children may not say to our Children in time to come, Ye have no part in the Lord. Here we have an Altar set up as a Sign, Testimony and Memorial, Representing and Testifying that these People did Desire, Resolve and Purpose to Serve God according to his Commands, and that they claimed a Share and Interest in his Favours and Service: Yet
this Declarative Sign of their Stedfast In∣tentions to Serve God and perform the Duties he required of them, was not Sacra∣mental; tho' it was not for Burnt-Offer∣ings, yet it was the Pattern of the Altar of the Lord, v. 28. and Represented their Claim to that Altar, together with their Resolution to perform their Duty at it; and surely this is more like a Sacrament than u∣sing the Sign of the Cross to testify, that we claim an Interest in it, and are not a∣shamed of it: For the Cross was the Altar on which our Sacrifice was offered, and we may as lawfully make the Pattern of it to testify and claim our Right in the Sacrifice that was offered on it, as the Reubenites made the pattern of the Altar of the Lord to testify and claim their right to the Sacrifices offered on it. Every Impartial Considerer will see that the Case is Exactly Parallel as to this point. I might Instance in many other such Signs in the Old Testament if it were necessary; but I shall add one or two out of the New. First, it was a Duty required of all Men to acknowledge and Recognize our Saviour as the Messias and King of Israel. If we look into the 21st Chapter of St. Matthew, we may observe that the Multitude did acknow∣ledge him as such, and expressed their ac∣ceptance
of him, their Resolution to sub∣mit to him, and thankfulness for his fa∣vours, by such Signs as were usual on such Occasions. It was the Custom to receive great Kings and Princes with solemn Accla∣mations, to strew the way when they Ente∣red into any place with Branches and Gar∣ments: Therefore the Multitude did thus own our Saviour to be the Messias and King of Israel, and their desire to submit to him. And that not only by Acclamations and joyn∣ing their Voices in their Praises and Thanks∣givings, but likewise (in the eighth Verse) They spread their Garments in the way, and o∣thers cut down Branches from the Trees, and strewed them in the way; which tho' not re∣quired by our Saviour, that we can find, were accepted, as well as their Hosanna's; yet these Representing Signs, tho' direct Ac∣knowledgments and Declarations of their Accepting our Saviour as their King, and of their submitting to him, had nothing of Sacraments in them: And therefore the Sign of the Cross, tho' it Represent to the World that we own a Crucified Christ, and that we resolve not to be ashamed of him, has nothing in it of a Sacramental nature, any more than the Branches and Garments strewed in his way.
A Second Instance in the New Testament shall be the Kiss of Charity. I shew'd you in my Admonition, p. 74. That 'tis a special duty to lay aside all Hatred, and to be in Charity with one another when we come to the Lord's Supper; and that this duty was signified by a Holy Kiss, whereby the Com∣municants represented their Desire, Purpose and Resolution to perform this duty: This is home to the Point, and exactly parallel to the Cross in Baptism; and if the one be a Sacrament, the other is likewise. The same may be said of the Feast of Charity. Mr. B. Answered three things to this, Vind. p. 52. First, That he doth not see that this was a Religious Rite at all: But this is directly contrary to Scripture; the word Religious is never applied to Rites or Places in it, but that which we call Religious is there called Holy, and the Scripture gives this Title to the Kiss, here mentioned in three places, calling it a Holy Kiss, to di∣stinguish it as well from the Civil as Pro∣phane, Rom. 16. 16. 1 Cor. 19. 20. 2. Cor. 13. 12. and in the fourth place where it is used, 1 Pet. 5. 14. it is called a Kiss of Charity. I suppose the Difference between Civil and Religious Signs consists in this; that one sort of these signifies Civil matters, and the other Religious: Now this Sign was used
in the Christian Assemblies to Signify, De∣clare and Testify the Grace of Charity, which is the Sum and Perfection of our Re∣ligion, there are not clearer Proofs that Baptism is a Religious Sign, than these; and you may judge with your selves what it is that hinders Mr. B. from seeing it. But 2dly, He objects (Vind. p. 52.) that this was a Real expression of their mutual Cha∣rity; This I own to be true, and do believe that every Sign made significant by general Custom, when used as it should be, is a real Expression and Instance of the thing it sig∣nifies; so making the Sign of the Cross is a real Expression and Instance of our Glory∣ing in Christ, as much as Kissing one ano∣ther is of our mutual Charity; the same thing that made the one so, made likewise the other, that is, universal Custom. 3dly, He objects, That it is reaso∣nable to suppose that it had a temporary Institution. I own, it is not only reasonable to suppose this, but certain that it had, since it is Four times Commanded in Scripture; but this is so far from preventing the Holy Kiss from being a Sacrament, that it shou'd the rather be one because it had this Institu∣tion. This I look on as a demonstration, that a Sign that meerly Represents our Desire, Resolution and purpose, to perform a cer∣tain
Duty, tho' Commanded in Scripture, hath nothing of a Sacramental nature in it; and therefore the Cross is not a Sacrament, nor has it any thing of a Sacramental use by Representing our Duty to confess Christ Crucified. Let me further observe, that the Church of God has laid aside this Teaching and Re∣presenting Sign, tho' Instutited in Scripture, and Practised for many Years; and there∣fore must be supposed to have Authority to Institute others of the like nature in the Celebration of the Sacraments, since the same Authority is necessary to Abrogate as to Institute any Religious Action or Represent∣ing Sign. And this is no more, in effect, than I find owned by some of the most Eminent Men of your party; so Mr. Bowles, in his Pastor Evangelicus, Lib. 3. Cap. 1. Potest Ecclesia sive Signa sive Media statuere, &c. The Church has Power to appoint both Signs and Means, by which Men may Testifie their Pious Affections before others, whilst they Celebrate Divine Worship. Provided these Signs be such as the instinct of Nature doth suggest, or be taken from what is Customary in Life, according to the difference of Nations, and have nothing of Scandal in them, for these Signs are only de∣clarative, which, so far as I know are granted
to be Lawful by all. Amongst these he reckons Rending the Garments, Covering the Head with Ashes, Powring out Waters, 1 Sam. 7. 5. for a token of Repentance, writing and sealing the Covenant when re∣newed, the Feasts of Charity, the holy Kiss and Veiling Women; and he might as well have reckon'd the Sign of the Cross, as a Token of our not being ashamed of Christ Crucified, for this is a declarative Sign of our pious Affections, as well as any of the other; it is warranted by general Custom, as well as they are, and it is only declarative, for we ascribe no Virtue or Efficacy to it, but declare against its having any such Vir∣tue in express terms, in the Thirtieth Ca∣non, which enjoins it. And whereas Mr. B. alledges, that we use it to Bind and Dedicate our selves to God's service, and as a Distinguishing Badge of our Christian Profession, p. 48. I doubt not but it will appear in the next Sections, that eve∣ry one of those declarative Signs mentioned by Mr. Bowles, do Bind and Dedicate to God's service those that use them, as much as the Sign of the Cross, and are purposely designed to Distinguish the pious and devout Worshipers of God, as well as to express their devout Affections before Men; and that therefore Mr. B's insisting on the Cros∣ses
being a Dedicating Sign, or a Distinguish∣ing Badge, to prove it a Sacrament, is no more than a Playing with Words, and Amu∣sing the Reader, by endeavouring to fix that Doctrine on us under Equivocal Terms which we utterly deny. And the only Que∣stion here will be, Whether we or Mr. B. know our Doctrine best; if our Church, if our Divines may be believed, the Cross is only a declarative Sign of our pious Affe∣ctions, not to be Ashamed of Christ Cruci∣fied, &c. But if you believe Mr. B. it is something more that makes it a Sacrament. But this belongs more properly to the next section of Obliging Signs; and I shall pro∣ceed to consider those. Sect. V. Concerning Obliging Signs. I. BUT Fourthly, A Sign may be called Obliging, because it obliges God by his Promise to give us the spiritual Grace or Benefit signified by it, when we duly use it: This was the second thing I observed ne∣cessary to make up a Sacrament. I told you in my Admonition, p. 65. That this is the very thing that constitutes a Sign to be a Sacrament, and distinguishes it from all
other Signs; and this being wanting, tho' a Sign had all other things like a Sacrament, yet it would no more be a Sacrament, than an Image that in every thing resembled a Man, but wanted a Soul, would be a Man. Mr. B. owns, that this is necessary to a Sa∣crament, and doth not pretend, that we ascribe this use to the Sign of the Cross; and therefore I may dismiss this point as agreed. However, I think it necessary here to ob∣serve, That when God has given a Man power to confer any Favour or Benefit on another, tho' he has not appointed any Sign by which that person is to confer it, yet the Scripture warrants him to use such Signs as are proper in the conveying it. Thus our Saviour, Mark 3. 15. gave his Disciples power to heal sickness, but did not, that appears, order them to use any Sign in the performance of it; yet Mark 6. 13. we find they used Oyl, a symbol of Joy and Health. They anointed with Oyl many that were Sick, and Healed them. They used also the Signs of sending Handkerchiefs and Aprons to the same purpose: so likewise our Saviour gave his Disciples power to bestow the Holy Ghost, but ordered no Sign; yet we find the Apostles used the common sign of Bles∣sing: so Act. 8. 17. Then laid they their
Hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. Lastly, Our Saviour gave his Apo∣stles power to ordain Governours in the Church, but appointed no Sign for it; yet they used the common Sign employ'd in these Cases, Acts 13. 3. When they had Fasted and Prayed, they laid their Hands on them, and sent them away. There are several other such Signs in Scripture, which are not Sacra∣ments; because, tho' a spiritual Benefit or Gift be conferred with the use of them, yet it is not by vertue of any Promise annex'd to the use of the Signs themselves, as it is in Baptism and the Lord's Supper, but by vertue of the General Command to those Authoriz'd Persons to confer those Benefits or Graces, in the conferring of which, these Signs are no Means or Conditions, nor have they any other part besides that of being Solemnities of the Action, and signifying the Persons Intention to exercise the Power that God has given him, at the time when he uses them; and this is carefully to be observed, otherwise we shall easily be mista∣ken in the Nature of Sacraments, and ima∣gine things to be so that really are not. II. Fifthly, A Sign may be called Obli∣ging, because it is a Declaration from God of his Will, That he requires certain Du∣ties and Returns from us, which are sig∣nified
and represented to us in the Sign, which Declaration obliges us to perform those Duties, and make those Returns. I have shewed already in the second Particular, That only God can appoint these Signs, and that such declarative Signs of God's Will, where they have no Promise annexed of some spiritual Grace or Bene∣fit, are not Sacraments, tho' they are Ob∣ligations on us from God. I must add, That the Sign of the Cross is not used by our Church to any such purpose; as appears sufficiently from what I have said before on the second particular use of Signs as Re∣presentative. III. Sixthly, A Sign may be called Obli∣ging, because it declares our Intention, Re∣solution, and Promise to perform the duties God requires of us in our Covenant with him; a Sign that is thus Obliging, is like∣wise a Ratifying and Dedicating Sign on our part, and is owned to be the same by Mr. B's Vind. p. 45. For we cannot be said to ratifie our Covenant with God, or dedi∣cate our selves to him by a Sign, for any other Reason, but because it declares and signifies our Resolution and Promise to per∣form our Covenant with him. We do own, That the Sign of the Cross is an Obliging, Ratifying, and Dedicating
Sign in this sense; that is, it declares and signifies our Resolution and Promise to perform all the Duties God requires of us in our Covenant, not to be ashamed of Christ Crucified, but manfully to sight un∣der his Banner against Sin, the Devil, and the World. The great stress of Mr. B's Argument to prove the Cross an Human Sacrament, seems to consist in this; as appears from what he says p. 45. where the whole force of his Argument against the Cross depends on our making it a Rite, whereby we Oblige and Bind our selves to serve God: But, in order to clear the mat∣ter, I will shew, that an Obliging, Ratifying, Dedicating Sign in this sense, has nothing of a Sacramental Nature in it; but that we may make use of such Signs to this purpose as common Universal Custom has made proper. This I will shew, First, from Scri∣pture; and, Secondly, from your own Pra∣ctice, and then shall make appear, that the use of the Sign of the Cross is altogether of this sort. IV. 1. For the proof of this from Scri∣pture, I appeal to the Jewish Church after the Captivity. The Jews had been guilty of many breaches of God's Covenant made with their Fathers; and there was great necessity to renew it on their part, and
accordingly we find they applied themselves to do it, with Fasting, with Sackcloaths and Earth upon them. Neh. 9. 1. and after a so∣lemn humiliation and confession they renew their Covenant with God, and declare their Resolution and Promise to keep it, by such methods as were usual to oblige men in other cases; that is, first by an Oath, Neh. Chap. 10. 29. They entred into a Curse and into an Oath to walk in God's law, which was given by Moses. 2. They Bind, Engage, and Oblige them∣selves by certain usual Signs; never, that we can find prescribed by God, that is, by writing and sealing the Covenant, Neh. 9. 3, 8. We make a sure Covenant, and write it, and our Princes, Levites, and Priests seal un∣to it. Now, to make a Covenant with God, the same that Circumcision entered them into, even to walk in God's law which was gi∣ven by Moses, was certainly to oblige, engage and dedicate themselves to God's service. Mr. B. himself alledges, Vind. p. 42. That Circumcision was an external Bond on those that received it, to observe that Law; yet notwithstanding this Bond of Circumcision and their renewing the same Obligation in the Passover, these Jews added new Bonds to their Covenant, and made use of new Signs to engage and oblige themselves to
keep it, and to ratifie and confirm it on their part. It cannot be deny'd but Signing and Sealing are outward Signs, and their use is to ratifie and confirm that to which the Name and Seal is put, and to oblige the Persons to perform what they promise in it; if therefore these be peculiar and prin∣cipal uses of Sacraments, it clearly follows that these Jews, by using these Signs, made two Sacraments (for ought appears, out of their own Head): But if God command∣ed them, then here are two Signs, obliging, confirming, and ratifying the Covenant they entred into, of divine Institution, and then they must be divine Sacraments, which no body ever yet pretended that I have heard of. The truth then is, that to renew our Covenant with God, to declare our Reso∣lution, Purpose and Promise to obey God's Laws, and keep his Covenant, either by such Words or Signs as universal Custom has made expressive of such a Promise, &c. are alike lawful, and the one has no more of a Sacramental nature in it than the other. V. I shall add one Instance more out of the New Testament, and that is, laying on of Hands, a Sign used in Blessing, from the Patriarchs to this day: Fathers used it in blessing their Children, Priests in blessing
not only the People, but likewise in blessing Persons and Offerings dedicated to God, but more particularly it is used in that solemn Blessing to which our Church di∣rects us in our Catechism, under the title of being Confirmed by the Bishop. For the understanding of which you must observe▪ 1. That the Apostles, who had commissi∣on to Teach and Baptize, did, upon their Converts declaring their conviction of our Saviour's being the Messias or Christ, im∣mediately Baptize them, tho' they were not particularly instructed in all the parts and duties of the Religion they embraced; as appears sufficiently from the second of the Acts, where in one day 3000 were Con∣verted, and the same day Baptized: as ap∣pears v. 41. Then they that gladly received his words were Baptized; and the same day there were added to them about 3000 Souls. It is not to be supposed thot all these could be fully instructed in all the necessary Arti∣cles of their Faith, but it was sufficient that in general they believed in Christ, and were willing to learn his Doctrine as op∣portunity offer'd: The same appears in Baptizing the Jaylor and his Family, Acts 16. and on several other occasions. This is one Ground of Baptizing the Chil∣dren of the Faithful with us, because it is
supposed that God, according to his Pro∣mise, will in Baptism give a Principle of Faith to such: which, together with the influence of their Parents on them, and of the society whereof they are members, will dispose them to learn the Principles of their Religion as soon as they are capable; so that there is a radical Faith, and presu∣med willingness, tho' not an actual. 2. At the beginning of Christianity the Converts were many, and the Teachers few; and it would have too much confined them, if they had been obliged to teach every Convert in the ordinary methods of Learn∣ing; and therefore God gave the Apostles an extraordinary power to confer the Ho∣ly Ghost not only led those that received it into all truth, but likewise enabled them to teach others; which appears from several places of Scri∣pture, particularly from Acts 8. & 19. 6. When Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came up in them, and they spake with Tongues and Prophesied. 3. When the number of Teachers were sufficiently multiplyed, this extraordinary manner of teaching Converts, and enabling them to teach others was not necessary; not but the Holy Ghost is still the true Teach∣er
of his Church, insomuch, as without his influence, no Man can attain such a degree of Knowledge as to save his own Soul, or instruct others; all true Knowledge then is still from him, but it is not without our own industry, or study, or the assistance of those that Christ has commissioned to Teach us in an ordinary way. 4. Such as were Baptized immediately after their Conversion before full instructi∣on, or in their infancy, when particularly and explicitly instructed, were brought be∣fore the Church, and there made a solemn Recognition of their Faith, and declared their Resolution to adhere to it; where∣upon the Bishop, or chief Governour of the Church laid his hands on them, Blessed them, Prayed for their continuance in Grace and Knowledge, and admitted them as com∣petently instructed Members; by this they were taught and assured, that the Grace and Knowledge they had, was from the Holy Spirit; and that the encrease and continuance of it must be Expected from him. 5. This laying on of hands is reckoned a principle of our Religion, Heb. 6. 2. and joyned with Baptism. That this is the true meaning of the Place, will appear, not only from the Pra∣ctice
of the Church of God, that has con∣tinued the use of this Sign from the Apo∣stles time to this day, but likewise from the best Interpreters of all sorts and Ages; a∣mongst the Ancients, St. Chrysostome, St. Au∣gustine, and Theophylact, thus interpret it; amongst the Romanists, The ordinary Gloss, Lyra, and many others; amongst the Re∣formers, Calvin, Beza, and Didati; and the Assemblies Notes, which I hope will weigh somewhat with you; Amongst the Socinians Crellius; so that, one would think that all Parties were agreed in it. Mr. B. indeed gives me very hard words for reckoning this a principle of Christia∣nity, tho' I have the express Letter of Scripture for doing so; and in his Remark, p. 88. interprets Baptisms, and laying on of Hands of the Jewish Washings and Sa∣crifices, directly contrary to the Apostles Profession, who in the first verse declares, that he intends to leave these Principles here named, and to pass on to perfection; whereas he is so far from leaving, those Jewish Washings and Sacrifices, that he passes on to them, and spends a good part of his Discourse on them, as may be seen in the 9. and 10. chapters; and indeed, the applying Jewish Types to the passages in
the New Testament which they prefigured, was a Doctrine not for Beginners, but as in Chap. 5. 14. for those that by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both Good and Evil: when the Lords Supper was thought too great a Mistery to teach such Beginners, and therefore is not mentioned amongst these Elements, no wonder if the Types of the Law which were much more obscure were thought Improper. But to proceed, we have here laying on of hands reckoned a Principle of Christia∣nity, and judged by all parties a proper Sign to be used, when Persons Baptised in their infancy, or before full instruction, come to Ratify and Confirm with their own Mouths their Baptismal Covenant, and to promise a faithful observance of it to the end; in which sense it is plainly an obliging Sign on our part, as much as a Seal is to a Bond; and hence it has been called a Seal from the very Apostles time, as may be seen in Clemens Alex. that lived near them, and many others of the Ancients, yet it is no Sacrament; neither hath it any more of a Sacramental nature in it, than laying on hands in Ordination. Besides this Ratification and Obligation on our part, it is used by our Church to Certify those that ratifie and renew their
Covenant, of Gods favour and gracious goodness to them, yet this doth not make it a Sacrament, since the Ministers of God by vertue of the Keys, have Power to cer∣tifie all such as in earnest consent to Gods Covenant at all times, of Gods favour and gracious acceptance of them, and may e∣specially on such solemn occasions as this of their publick Recognition of their Baptis∣mal Covenant, or on their publick Re∣conciliation after Penance, certifie them of it by proper Signs, (suppose by a kiss as well) as by words, and such Signs signi∣fie only their intention at that time, to ex∣ert the general Power God has given them, as I shewed before in Anointing the Sick, laying on hands for the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and for Ordination; which have nothing of a Sacramental na∣ture in them, because no Promise obli∣ging God is annexed to them. VI. Having thus shewed from Scripture, that we may make use of such Signs to ob∣lige our selves to Ratifie and Confirm our Covenant with God, as general Custom has made proper; I come in the second place, to shew the same from your own practice. And this I shall make appear from two Instances; The first, is that of the solemn League and Covenant, The pre∣cedent
which your Party took for this, was the Jews renewing their Covenant with God, Neh. 10. And the General Assem∣bly of Scotland in their acknowledgement of publick Sins, call it the Oath and Cove∣nant which they made with God, and the Covenant and Cause of God; and indeed it obliged them to all the Duties we owe to God and Man; which is as large as our Baptismal Covenant. Into this Covenant with God they entred, not only by Words but Signs also, and bound themselves to the performance of it; first by Subscribing it which is one Sign, as in the Act of the ge∣neral assembly; Act 6. 1648. secondly by standing up at it; thirdly by lifting up their Hands; so the House of Commons took it, Sep. 22. 1641. and by swearing thereunto, did worship the great Name of God, and Testify so much outwardly by lifting up their hands, and subscribed their Names to it. Lastly, the Parliament ordered, Feb. 2. 1641. that the whole Kingdom should take it standing, their right hand bare, and lift up; all these were plainly federal Rites, and did declare and signifie the Intention, Purpose, and Vow of the takers to per∣form this Covenant with God, and con∣sequently were Obliging, Ratifying, and Confirming Signs on their part, and I doubt
not but many thought they did therein Dedicate themselves anew to Gods service; for as I have already shewed, a Sign, that signifies our vow and promise to serve God is a dedicating Sign; if therefore the Sign of the Cross be a Sacrament, because it is a Token that we shall not be ashamed to Confess Christ Crucified, and that we re∣solve to serve him to our Lives end, then all these were plainly Sacraments, for they were Tokens of the same thing in the Estimation of those that used them. I shall add one instance more, and that is, giving persons names in Baptism; this as I observed in my admonition, p. 7, 2, sig∣nifies our giving up our Names to Christ and engaging to be his Servants; and therefore these Names are a lasting badge and token to us through our whole lives, of our de∣dication to Christs service, and an obliga∣tion on us to behave our selves accord∣ingly. To this Mr. B. replies two things; First, Vind. p. 53. that all this is suggested by my own fancy, without any ground, for you know of no other use of this Practice in Baptism, than that the Persons Baptized may be notify∣ed to the Congregation.
To this I answer; First, that it doth not come home to the Point, since it doth not determine whether it be Lawful to use this Sign of giving a Name to the purposes I have mentioned; if it be lawful so to use it, no matter whether you use it so or no; for it is still an unanswerable argument that an obliging Sign as such has nothing of a Sacrament in it. 2. It is plain the Scriptures direct us to this use of giving Names, as well as the general custom of the world; for we plain∣ly find names given to signifie that those who receive them, were either admitted as Servants, Sons, or Priviledged Persons; and in all these Cases their Names were obligatory Badges. To this purpose a name was constantly given by the Jewish Church at Circumcision, and by the Chri∣stian at Baptism; and that Name in the Primitive Church was entred in the Dip∣tycks or Church Roll; they were called by it to receive the Holy Communion, and when cut off from the Church, their Names were blotted out of these Sacred Tables or Rolls; and therefore their Names gi∣ven them in Baptism, were effectual ob∣ligations and badges of their profes∣sion.
3. I do not find any Authentick decla∣ration of your Party against this use of Names, nor any Authority Mr. B. has to declare your sense in the matter: Your Directory orders a Name to be given at Baptism, which shews the Authors thought it material, and not meerly a civil thing; for the design of the Directory is to order the worship of God, and there was no rea∣son for them to appoint a civil Ceremo∣ny in so material a part of Gods worship as Baptism is; Mr. B. says, that it is, that the Person may be Notifyed to the Congrega∣tion; that is, that they may distinguish him to be the Person that was Baptised: Now that which distinguishes and makes it known through his whole Life, that he is a member of Christ, is surely a badge of his profession, and obliges him to do nothing unworthy of it. You call the Name you re∣ceive at Baptism your Christian Name▪ and as your Surnames shew your Family, so your Christian Names shew your Profession. I may add to this, that some of your party have been very nice in giving Names, and have called their Children by such Names as they thought wou'd most likely put them in mind of their Duty to God, and oblige them to perform it; thus some called their Children, Grace, Charity, Prudence, Faith∣full,
Praise God: to what purpose, but to be a Badge, Token, Memorial, and Obligation to them to practise these Graces? Lastly, the Notes of the Assembly on Gen. 17. 5. Observe on God's giving Abraham a Name, that some take the giving of a new Name to note a Sacramental Renovation in the new sence of Circumcision, which now was first added to the Covenant, and thence hath it been the Pra∣ctice of such as profess Religion, to give Names to their Children at their Circumcision; upon which they pass no censure. And Mr. Ains∣worth (for whom I suppose you likewise have a value) has this Observation on it: Abraham is the first Man in the World whose Name is changed of God: And it signified a change of Estate, and a renewing with in∣crease of Grace from God; therefore this is after mentioned, as one of his Favours; Neh. 9. 7. So Jacob's Name is made new, Gen. 32. 28. and all true Christians, Esay 62. 2. Rev. 2. 17. So that what I said concerning giving of a Name to your Children, and par∣ticularly God's giving one to Abraham, is not suggested by my own Fancy, as Mr. B. alledgeth: I wish he would adhere to the literal sence of Scripture, and the best Commentators, as I am assured I endeavour to do.
But secondly he objects, that if this were true, then this is a Scriptural Warrant for giv∣ing Names to Children at Baptism, as a token of their admission into Gods Family, Vind. p. 53. and then it is a Ceremony of Gods own ap∣pointment. To which I answer, that this is a full proof that a Sign appointed by God to signifie our admission into his Family, of gi∣ving up our names to him, and engaging to be his Servants, is no Sacrament; and then it follows, that it is so far from being a prin∣cipal use of a Sacrament to be a binding Sign only, that on the contrary it is no proper or peculiar use of it at all; but common to other Signs; and then our using the Sign of the Cross for an obliging Sign on our parts is not to ascribe any thing of a Sacramental nature to it. From the whole, I suppose it fully appears both from Scripture and your own practice, that we may use some other Signs besides the Sacraments to Oblige, Ratify, and Con∣firm our Covenant with God, and bind our selves to his service, and that our doing so doth not make those Signs Humane Sacra∣ments. And I desire you to remember that the whole design of our using the Sign of the Cross is, onely to declare and testify to the World, that we look on our selves as per∣sons
thus Bound, obliged and dedicated to Gods service, and that we are resolved not to decline that Service, or be ashamed of it, for any danger or infamy that may attend it; tho' it should expose us, as it did our Sa∣viour, to the painful and shameful death of the Cross. To Bind, Oblige and Dedicate our selves to Gods service are properly acts of our minds: all that outward Signs can do, is to declare and express these inward Acts; and surely there cannot be any outward Action that more properly or naturally doth declare our resolution and purpose to dedicate our selves to the service of a Crucifyed Saviour than making the Sign of the Cross: if then it be lawful, as I have proved both from Scripture and your own practice, to express and declare these Acts of our minds by other Signs than the Sacraments, our using the Sign of the Cross to this purpose can never make it a new Sacrament, or unlaw∣ful. Sect. VI. Concerning Distinguishing Signs. I. I Shall now proceed to the Third sort of Signs which Mr. B. mentions, which he calls Distinguishing. I have shew'd you,
That these may be of two Sorts, and come under the Seventh and Eighth Considerati∣ons of Signs, as I have laid them down, Sect. 3. of this Appendix. The Seventh is, That a Sign may be called Distinguishing, because it signifies and con∣veys to us some Privilege or Benefit which effectually distinguisheth us from the rest of the World, and obliges others to own us as so privileged. Thus the King's Patent to a Noble-man distinguisheth him, and obliges others to take notice of him. And thus the Regenerating Principle of Grace, convey'd to us in Baptism, makes an ef∣fectual distinction of Christians from other Men; and the Privileges convey'd to us thereby oblige all other Christians to own us as Fellow-members and Heirs of the same Hope with themselves: And thus the Lords Supper doth likewise distinguish us, by communicating to us the Body and Blood of our Saviour, by which our Union with Christ is preserved and encreased, and the Graces and Privileges received in Baptism are renew'd, strengthen'd and confirmed to us. I grant therefore, that the Sacraments are Distinguishing Signs in this sense, and this use of them is plainly contained un∣der the first thing that I shewed to be ne∣cessary
to make them up, that is, an out∣ward and visible Sign instituted by God, sig∣nifying some spiritual Grace or Benefit which we expect from Him. Such an inward and spiritual Grace or Benefit granted to us in the Sacraments doth indeed Distinguish us from all others, and entitle us to the Pri∣vileges of Children; and the Sacraments are Conveyances and Badges of that Grace or Privilege, as much as the King's Patent is of Nobility, or laying on his Sword is of Knighthood. To make a Distinguishing Sign in this sense were indeed to make a Sacrament; and we readily own, that God only can appoint Signs to make one Man thus differ from another, or bestow such Badges on them: But our Church has ful∣ly declared, that the sign of the Cross is not any such Badge: And therefore Mr. B. is very unjust to us, when he affirms (Vind. p. 45.) that being Cross'd, we as truly (ac∣cording to the Establish'd Church) wear the Livery of Christ as by being Baptiz'd: a Ca∣lumny without ground or pretence. In Baptism our Church, according to the Scri∣ptures, teaches us, that we put on Christ; that is, lay aside our Sins and Lusts, and become Partakers of the Divine Nature, 1 Pet. 14. whereby we are privileged as Sons of God; this is the true Badge and
Distinction of Christians; but our Church never said any such thing of the Cross, and therefore to say that we as truly wear the Livery of Christ by being Cross'd, as by Baptism; or that the Cross is as effectually made the common Symbol or Tessera of our Discipleship, as Baptism; are most grievous Calumnies. I beseech God to pardon those that endeavour to keep up a Party against us by such Accusations, and to turn their Hearts. II. But then, Eighthly, a Sign may be called Distinguishing, because we thereby declare, testifie and profess to the World that we claim and own the Privileges and Characters that God has been pleased to bestow on us as Christians. And thus in∣deed the sign of the Cross is a Badge and Token of our Christianity. But then, this is no proper or peculiar, much less prin∣cipal use of the Sacraments; our keeping the Lords Day, our appearing in a Christian Assembly, our Kneeling, uncovering our Head, our Fasting on publick occasions, our Standing at our Confession of Faith, are all of them Badges, and Tokens in this sense of our being Christians, as well as the sign of the Cross; and are all of them warranted by the Scripture. The same may be said, as I have already
shew'd, of our Christian Names, and of many other Signs used among us, and pre∣cedented in Scripture. Particularly, That of your giving Tickets to those that are to Communicate, con∣cerning which I shewed you, (Admon. p. 7.) that it was an Outward and Visible Sign: And Secondly, That it signified your Right and Claim to the Lord's Supper and Com∣munion of Saints; which is a spiritual Grace or Privilege. Thirdly, That it was a Badge and Token, whereby Privileged Members were distinguished: And Fourth∣ly, a sort of necessary Term of Commu∣nion. To this Mr. B. replies, (Vind. p. 53.) 1. That a Ticket with you is a Sign of nothing more, than that the Person that brought it was allowed to Communicate at that time. To which I Answer, That to be allowed to Communicate at any time is a great Grace and Privilege; and therefore this Ticket is plainly a Badge of a Man's Aptitude, Pri∣vilege, and Title to the Membership of Christ; and a Declaration from the Mini∣ster who gave it to him, that he thinks him entitl'd to it at that time; and to declare who is fit and unfit, who shall be admitted or not admitted, is a Spiritual Act, and belongs to the Power of the Keys:
And this is a clear Proof that we may sig∣nifie our sense of Spiritual Things, even in particular Duties, by Signs as well as Words when they are proper. Secondly, He Objects, that this is no Badge; because many may be Members that have no Tickets at present, because they do not at present Receive; but even to distinguish Persons at present fit to Receive from others that are not, is to make it a Badge in a very weighty matter. Thirdly, He argues, That a Mans having a Ticket would not secure his Admission, if he were not known to be a Member of that, or some other Congregation. This indeed shews, that it is no infallible Mark; a Man may steal this Badge, or come dishonestly by it, and when that is discovered, he shall be se∣cluded; But in the mean time it is a Badge that gains a Man Admittance without any Question, if it be not discover'd to be coun∣terfeit: It is therefore a Livery of Christ's Privileged Members at that time; tho' if it be known, that any has stolen this Livery, he shall not be Owned or Admitted to Christ's Table by it. It cannot therefore be denied, but it is a sort of external Wed∣ding Garment Fourthly, He argues, that it is no neces∣sary term of Communion, since no man that
is a Noted Member of that or any other Con∣gregation, shall be refused, tho' he have no Ticket; but many are not Noted Members, and it is a necessary term of Communion to them. But suppose a Man Refused and Condemned it as an Human Invention, and Human Sacrament, and all those that used it as Idolaters, and Superstitious, and would set up another Communion if you did not lay it aside, would you disuse it to gratifie such a man? This is really the case between you and us; I leave you to judge what you would think of such an unreasonable per∣son. But, Fifthly, Mr. B. alledges (Vind. p. 45) in such multitudes as Receive, this or some such Expedient is necessary to distinguish Communicants from meer Spectators; to which I answer, that then some other Badges and distinguishing Signs may be necessary be∣sides the Sacraments, and therefore it is no use peculiar or proper to them to be Badges or Signs of our Profession, and the relations we thereby are invested in, as he contends; for sure to be admitted as Communicants, is a relation wherein we are invested by our Profession; yet you see we may invent a Sign to distinguish this Relation and those that have a Title to it.
But I must put you in mind, that there is no necessity for this Badge, except what is criminal, and of your own making: If every Minister would administer the Holy Sacrament frequently in his own Congre∣gation, (as he ought to do) there needed none of these Multitudes or Crowdings that are at your Sacraments, to which People come thirty or forty miles, as the Papists go on Pilgrimages at certain times to their Jubilees or celebrated Saints, and which are the occasion (as it generally happens in such Crowds) of Looseness and Intemperance, and a great hinderance to Devotion, by crowding such Families as live near the place where the Celebration is, whereby both the Guests and Families are hinder'd from that Quiet and Retirement, which seem very necessary to true Devotion at such times. Lastly, he Objects, That this can be no Badge, or like to the Cross, except this pe∣rilous Ticket had a Cross on it, or the persons that brought it were ordered to wear it on their Breasts or Foreheads, as a Sign whereby they publickly profess their remembrance of and re∣newed dedication of themselves to the service of a Crucified Saviour, as the adult Members of his Church; Vind. p. 54. I cannot be∣lieve Mr. B. means here, that the adult
Members of our Church are order'd to wear Crosses on their Breasts or Forehead, to profess their Remembrance of, and Re∣newed Dedication to the Service of Christ, there being no such Order or Practice a∣mongst us. But, when all is done, I see no great dif∣ference between bringing a Ticket in my hand to profess, that I intend, and have a Title, to participate of the Body and Blood of a Crucified Saviour: Which is your use of a Ticket: And carrying a Cross on my Forehead (if there were any such Custom or Order) to profess and shew, that I am not ashamed of him, and intend to perse∣vere in his service. Nor do I see that a King, who carries it in his Banner when he Fights for the Preservation of his Religion and Subjects against Infidels, makes it a Sa∣crament, more than you do your Ticket; which is another Name for a Badge. To conclude this Point, It is very obser∣vable in what manner Mr. B. treats it, and me in effect, for producing it. 'Tis, I con∣fess (says he) a very dangerous Ceremony, in which he has found out abundance of very strange and mysterious significations.—If all these wonderful Spiritual Significations assigned to this Poor Ticket, &c. p. 53, & 54. If indeed this perilous Ticket had had a Cross
upon it, &c. By these and several other Scoffing Expressions he endeavours to ex∣pose the mention of this thing, and my Ar∣gument from it for the Use of the Cross, as matters too slight and inconsiderable to be Offer'd, or to have any Words made about them; and yet doth not consider how momentous he thinks it, to make so many Words about the Sign of the Cross, which in it self, and in our Use and Application of it, is not of greater moment, or so like a Sacrament as your Ticket; this seems to me a very great Instance of the power of Partiality and Prejudice; for the wonderful Spiritual Significations (as Mr. B. is pleased to call them) Assigned by me to your Ticket, are in effect no more than upon examina∣tion he owns to belong to it, and pleads to be necessary for the decent and orderly Cele∣bration of the Lord's Supper; and therefore are more Justly Assigned to it by me than those which he Assigns to our use of the Cross. And there is this difference, that we disown those Significations which he would Affix to the Cross, whereas he can∣not deny those that I Assign to your use of a Ticket; as I have already shew'd. And this gives me occasion to put you in mind of a Book printed 1607▪ written by one Parker, with great seriousness, and a
great shew of Learning, with several thou∣sand Quotations; and in it he charges the Cross with the breach of all the Com∣mandments, and has Chapters under these several titles; The Murther of the Cross, The Adultery of the Cross, The Wrong of the Cross, The Slander of the Cross, The Concu∣piscence of the Cross. I think every one of them is as well founded as Mr. B's Charge of its being a Human Sacrament; and I doubt not, but when Faction is a little cooled, and Men allow themselves to think, it will appear full as unreasonable as Mr. Par∣ker's Charges do to all impartial Men. And were Men so disposed, they might make as great a stir about this Ticket, and pretend as Just Cause for a Schism from you, on account of it, as you do from us, on account of the Sign of the Cross; for a very little thing has always served facti∣ous Men for an opportunity of disturbing the Peace of the Church. Upon the whole, I think it fully appears, that both Scripture and your own Practice warrant us to use other Signs, which are not Sacraments, for the uses ascribed to Sacraments by Mr. B. so far as the Sign of the Cross is concern'd in those uses: and I hope, that what I have said concerning Representing, Obliging, and Distinguishing
Signs, may help to give you a clear Notion of the true uses of Sacraments, which Mr. B. has rather Obscured than Ex∣plained, by expressing them in such words as are no way proper or clear, but of a very uncertain and ambiguous signification. Sect. VII. Concerning the Crosses being Warranted by Scripture. I. HAving thus Justified the Use of the Cross from Mr. B's Charge of being a Humane Sacrament, I shall now consider what he hath said against its being warran∣ted by Scripture. I shew'd in my Admoni∣tion, That 1st, We are Obliged to express the in∣ward Reverence and Sense of our Minds concerning God, by some outward Means. 2dly, That the Scriptures Command us to express those inward thoughts and sense of our Minds, by Actions as well as Words, where it may properly be done. 3dly, That the Scriptures teach us to ex∣press our thoughts and sense concerning Religious Matters in such Words and Acti∣ons, as on other serious Occasions serve to express the like sense and disposition of our Minds.
4thly, That Glorying in the Sufferings of Christ, and professing our selves ready to follow him, even to the most ignominious Death on the Cross, is a Duty incumbent on us by Scripture. 5thly, That it is very proper at Baptism to make this Profession. 6thly, That we are not only Warranted to do it by Words, but likewise by Actions. 7thly, That making the Sign of the Cross is an Action which Universal Custom in all Ages and Churches since the Apostle's time has apply'd to this purpose. These I proved by Scripture and Reason, and he that would confute me, must prove it unlawful to express the particular Du∣ties we undertake in the Sacraments, by Actions that are by general Custom expres∣sive of these Duties. II. To all these Mr. B. makes several Re∣plies. I shall first consider his Replies, and then proceed further to confirm my own Proofs. First then, he argues, This doth not reach the main Uses of the Cross, which I was con∣cerned to Defend; that is, its being a Dedi∣cating and Distinguishing Badge; For this, says he, pretends to prove no more, than that it is an instructive Sign, to signifie or express this particular Duty of Glorying in the Sufferings of Christ, Vind. p. 40.
I have observed, that when Mr. B. is to answer an Argument of Force, he often puts it off with an unscriptural hard Word or a Jest. Thus, when I shewed the reasona∣bleness of directing all our Praises expresly to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whom we equally are oblig'd to Glorifie, he turns it off with a Jest, Rem. p. 22. calling it A Wonderful Knack of turning the Psalms of David into Christian Hymns. And yet it doth so effectually answer that end, that no Iew or Socinian will joyn in them when so used. So when I urged a plain and li∣teral Proof of Scripture, to shew that the People may joyn their Voices in the publick Prayers of the Church, as plain as any is for their joyning in singing Psalms, Acts 4. 24. They lift up their Voice with one accord, and said, &c. This he tells us, Rem. p. 50. proves no more than a consent of their Minds, contrary to the Letter of Scripture, which assures us, that they lift up their Voices and said, as well as consented in their Minds. Yet he offers only a Scoff for his contradict∣ing Scripture, alledging, Rem. p. 51. That it brings in a confused Noise in a Christian Assembly, too like a Dover-Court, where 'tis said all speak and none hear. The like might be shew'd of his use of difficult unscriptural Expressions. Thus when I prov'd beyond
contradiction, that only bowing the Body, or such-like Gestures, are called Worship in Scripture, he puts it off, by telling us, that these devout postures are more properly an Adjunct of Worship, than a part of it; and that they are not a distinct Duty from Pray∣er and Praises, &c. Rem. p. 100. directly contrary to Scripture that Enjoyns them severally. Thus, to prove the Cross un∣lawful in Baptism, he tells us, Rem. p. 6. That it is a stated Appendage▪ of a part of Divine Worship, and all such Rites are un∣lawful: Which are very fit Words to a∣muse Ignorant People, but of no use to de∣termine the Controversie. And I take this before us to be of the same nature; for it is not easie to understand what▪ is meant by an Instructive Sign. Signs as well as Words are designed to express the Thoughts, the Intentions, the Dispositions and Passions of our Minds; and when we Kneel, for exam∣ple, at our Prayers, it doth not only instruct and teach us, that it is our Duty to submit to God, but it declares, that we actually do it, and our Resolution to continue in it, and is a motive and means to humble our own Minds, and invite others to do the like; and so it is an Obliging, Distinguishing, and Mo∣ving Sign, as well as an Instructive. The like may be said of our Standing at the Profes∣sion
of our Faith, which doth not only in∣struct us in our Duty, that we are to be∣lieve those Articles, but likewise declares, that we do actually consent to them, and oblige our selves to continue in them, and wou'd have all others to do the like; and so is not only an Instructing Sign, but likewise a Distinguishing, Professing, Dedicating and Moving Sign: for it Answers plainly all these purposes, and yet is commended by Mr. Baxter in his Infant-Baptism, chap. 6. Obj. 1. The like may be said of the Cross; It doth not only instruct us, that it is our Duty to confess Christ Crucified, and to be∣come his Servants, but it signifies, that we actually do so, and consequently signifies our obliging our selves to it; and distinguisheth those that do it: All which my Arguments plainly reach. III. But Secondly, Mr. B. objects, Vind. p. 50. That he cannot grant, that the Scriptures warrant our expressing the sense of our Minds in all Religious things or matters by significant Actions; because the particular Duties we owe to God are almost Numberless; Neither do the Scriptures warrant us to contrive distinct Sig∣nificant Actions, to express each distinct part of our inward Worship. To this I answer, 1st, That I expresly de∣clared (Admon. p. 68.) that we are not to in∣vent
new Words or Actions, to signifie our submission and thankfulness to God, but are to use such as the general Custom of our Country has made significant in the like ca∣ses: And therefore, if any distinct parts of our Duty to God have no particular Actions to express them made significant by General Custom, we need not to invent new ones, but content our selves with Words, or the application of such general significant Acti∣ons as may infer the particular Duty we are about to express. 2dly, The general Heads of our Duty are few, and most of them have such Grave and Solemn Actions appropriated to them, as not only instruct us in the Na∣ture of them, but likewise move and in∣fluence our Minds to perform them with Se∣riousness, engage us to that performance, and distinguish the Serious from the Neg∣ligent and Irreverent. And that it is lawful, not only to use such to express in∣ward Worship in General, but likewise the particular Duties of it, I have sufficiently proved in my Admonition p. 68. 69, 70. tho' Mr. B. alledges the contrary without Answering my Arguments; and I shall now further enforce them. 1st. Expressing our Submission and Sub∣jection to God is a particular Duty, and
this is expressed by Kneeling, which by u∣niversal custom signifies it; for we Kneel only to our Superiors, and to those to whom we owe Submission: Kneeling doth not signifie Reverence, or Humility in Ge∣neral, but that particular Reverence and Humility that is accompanied with Sub∣jection. 2dly, To profess our Faith and Acknow∣ledgments to God, is a particular Duty, therefore at our Confession of Faith and Praises we stand; for standing at the Read∣ing and Declaring any thing does peculi∣arly signifie an Assent to it; and there∣fore it was prescribed at your taking your Covenant. 3dly, Subscribing and Sealing a thing, is by Universal Custom a Sign of Ratifying and Confirming what is so Sealed, and of our Binding our selves by it; therefore as I have already shewed, the Iews after the Captivity Writ and Sealed their Cove∣nant with God. 4thly, Deep sorrow and contrition for Sin is a particular Duty, and this we find in Scripture signified by Rending the Gar∣ments and Beating the Body. 5thly, Acknowledgment of our own Vile∣ness, Corruption, and Unworthiness, is a par∣ticular Duty; and this we find in Scripture
signified, Neh. 9. 1. With Fasting, with Sackcloth, and Earth upon them; these did not express inward Worship in General, nor were they meer bodily Gestures, as Mr. B. alledges, but were Signs of parti∣cular Duties. 6thly, Rejoycing in the great Delive∣rances and Mercies vouchsafed us by God, is a particular Religious Duty; and this we find signified by Singing, Feasting, Dan∣cing, sending Portions to Friends, and White-Garments; which do not signifie meerly inward Worship in General, nor are they bodily Gestures only; but Affect∣ing, Moving, and Distinguishing Signs. 7thly, Condescention to serve one ano∣ther in the meanest Offices of Charity, is a particular Duty; and this our Saviour signified to us by washing his Disciples Feet; which was not only an instance of our Sa∣viours Humility, as Mr. B. alledges, but a Sign to Teach and Move his Disciples to do the like. 8thly, To lay aside all hatred and malice, and to be in perfect Charity with one ano∣ther, when we come to the Holy Sacra∣ment, is a particular Duty: and this is sig∣nified by a Holy Kiss in Scripture, as I have already shewed; the same is true of the Feast of Charity, tho Mr. B. excepts a∣gainst
it as well as against the kiss of Cha∣rity, alledging that it is no religious rite at all, but rather a real Expression of their mutual Charity; Vind. p. 5. 2. but I answer, that its being performed publickly in the Con∣gregation and in the midst of divine offi∣ces sufficiently shews that it was Religious; and its being a real expression of Charity is so far from hindering it from being a Sign, that it proves it to be one; there is no surer Sign of Charity than real Expres∣sions and instances of it; effects are the surest Signs of causes; If we should ap∣point such a Feast now to be celebrated in Church with the Sacrament, none wou'd doubt its being a Religious rite, and per∣haps some wou'd call it an Imposition. 9thly, To be buryed to Sin is a particu∣lar priviledge of Baptism, and infers, a Duty, which was signified by dipping under Water; to this Mr. B. answers, first, that it is not certain the Apostles words, Rom. 6. 4. refer to the dipping under Water; but to this I reply, it is certain, that generally the Primitive Christians used this way, tho' in particular cases they dispensed with it; as we do with the use of the Cross: second∣ly, it is certain the best Interpreters do thus understand this place, with which concur your Assemblys Notes, who tell
us that in this Phrase the Apostles seems to allude to the Ancient manner of Baptism, which was to dip the Parties Baptized, and as it were to bury them under the Water for a while, and then to draw them out and lift them up, to represent the Burial of the Old-Man and our Resurrection to newness of Life; nor is there any other Just reason of the Phrase to be given, and therefore Mr. B's doubt concerning the certainty of it without any reason (for he gives none for his doubt∣ing) is in all probability to be attributed to his prejudice: for if this be true, it intire∣ly ruins his notion of humane Sacraments; since here is a Representing, Obliging, and Distinguishing Sign added to Baptism: which is all the Exception he has against the Cross. But secondly, he alledges that I ought to prove, that the Christians of that Age had Arbitrarily and without warrant from Christ or his Apostles set it up; but I think it suf∣ficient for me to shew that it was set up, and that it is a Rite distinct from Baptism; both which are apparent; it is incumbent on Mr. B. to shew where Christ or his A∣postles instituted it. 'Tis manifest, that it is not in the first institution by our Savi∣our, for that requires only washing with Water, which may be performed either
by dipping or pouring on water; This then is a Rite Superadded to Baptism of a representing and obliging nature, and so in∣terpreted by St. Paul himself: therefore all such Rites are not Sacraments, or unlaw∣ful: It is manifest St. Paul approved the Rite, but there is no evidence of its Di∣vine Institution; and therefore the Church has made no scruple to lay it aside, and that without any absolute necessity; for the warming Water for Baptism used in some Places to this day, might prevent the in∣conveniency of a cold Country; which is all Mr. B. alledges for disusing it; Vind. p. 52. but cou'd not excuse us, if this were part of the institution. 10thly, To change our condition in Baptism, from the power of Sin to Holi∣ness, from Sons of Wrath to Sons of God, is a special Privilege; and to live accord∣ingly, a Duty. Now, this was signified by the change of Cloaths, when Persons were Baptised; and to this, as I shewed in my Admonition, the Apostle alludes, Gal. 3. 27. For as many of you as have been Bap∣tized into Christ, have put on Christ; to this Mr. B. Answers as to the former, that it is not certain, the Apostle alludes to this Custom; but here again, I have the best in∣terpreters thus Expounding it; I have the
Practice of the Church of God using this Rite from the Apostles time, I have the ne∣cessity of the thing to prove it was done in their time, for Dipping in Water cou'd not be without putting off, or change of Cloaths, and there is no other Reason giv∣en of the Phrase; and therefore Mr. B's Doubt without reason, is of no moment in such a Case; he may justly be suspect∣ed to doubt out of Prejudice that must lose his Cause, if the thing prove true that he doubts of. But 2dly, he argues, that if the Apostles expression refers to these two Rites as used to these purposes, it will be more reasonable to con∣clude that they are part of the ordinance of Baptism, and consequently to be still retained and used by us, Vind. p. 52. I think it much more reasonable to suppose that Mr. B. is mistaken in his account of Sacra∣ments, than to suppose either of these Rites were part of the ordinance of Bap∣tism, or that we are obliged to retain or use them; we have the ordinance delivered to us twice in Scripture, and neither of these rites are mentioned in it, and there∣fore they are no part of it; They were certainly used in Baptism in the Apostles time, and to those purposes I have men∣tioned; and the Consequence is, that Mr. B's.
charge is groundless that wou'd make such Rites humane Sacraments and unlawful; and approaches near to the Doctrine that makes that unlawful which God has not made so, 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3. 11thly, To reject a person from the means of Grace is a religious Act, and be∣longs to the power of the Keys; Now the Scriptures warrant us to do this, by shaking off the dust of our feet, which doth not signify our duty in general, but in parti∣cular, our detestation and abhorrence of the Obstinacy of the persons, against whom we use it, or rather indeed, Gods reject∣ing them; and it no more makes Confir∣mation a Sacrament, because in it we assure the Persons Confirmed of Gods favour by laying on of hands, than it made shaking off the dust from the feet a Sacrament, be∣cause it was used to assure the persons a∣gainst whom it was done of Gods reject∣ing them from his grace, and the like may be said of the Sign of the Cross. 12thly, To receive a penitent member in∣to the Society of a Church is a particular and Religious Duty; Now this the Church of Scotland Orders to be done not only by words, but Signs also; So in the first book of Discipline in the order for publick of∣fenders, The Minister ought to exhort the
Kirk to receive that penitent brother in their favours—and in Sign of their Consent, the elders and chief men in the Kirk shall take the penitent by the hand, and one or two in the name of the rest shall kiss and embrace him with reverence and gravity, as a member of Christ Jesus: From which it appears, that this Church (for which I suppose you have a va∣lue) thinks that it is lawful to express our thoughts about religious things by Signs as well as Words; And I do not see but taking by the hand, kissing and embracing a Man in token that he is admitted as a re∣conciled member of Jesus Christ, is every whit as much a Sacrament as Signing him with the Sign of the Cross, in token that he shall not be ashamed to confess Christ Crucified. 13thly, To confess and acknowledge our scandalous sins to God and his Church, is a particular Religious Duty and a part of worship; Now the Church of Scotland in the form of Excommunication in Knoxes Liturgy, orders a murtherer to confess his Crime thus, He shall stand three several Sun∣days in a place before the Church-door, bare footed and bare Headed, cloathed in base and abjected Apparel, having the same Weapon which he used in the Murther, or the like, bloody in his Hand, and in conceived Words shall
say, &c. Undoubtedly, they that Ordered this, made no Question, but we might ex∣press the sense of our Minds in Religious Matters, by Signs as well as Words. These were not to express inward Worship in ge∣neral, nor are they meer bodily Gestures, but symbolick Signs and Badges of Re∣pentance. Mr. B. may think himself un∣concerned in these two last instances, but I believe you will not. IV. His third Objection against my Proof of Scriptures Warranting the use of the sign of the Cross, is, That the same Argument will serve as well to Justifie many other Rites which the Romish Church has added to Baptism, and the other parts of God's Worship; Vind. p. 48. Now, to this I Answer, 1st, That it was incumbent on Mr. B. in this Point (as I told you in my Admonition) to prove by Scripture, that it is unlawful to signifie or express the particular Duties we undertake in the Sacraments, by Actions that are by general Custom expressive of those Duties, and to answer the Scriptures I pro∣duced; but he has not produced one single Instance from Scripture, where such Signs or Expressions of a particular Duty are condemned, meerly because they thus signi∣fied or expressed it: Which I take to be a plain Consession that he wants direct Proofs,
and till he produce some such Scripture-Proof, he cannot acquit himself of teaching that to be unlawful which God has not made so, the Sin of those that forbad Meats and Marriage, 1 Tim. 4. 2dly, To condemn a thing for imagined Consequences, without direct Proof, is a very uncertain and (which is worse) a very dangerous Method: for it lays a Snare in the way of the Weak: A Man that knows that the Church of God has used the Sign of the Cross since the Apostle's time universally; that the Church of England and Ireland ap∣prove of it, together with the Protestant Churches of Sweden, Denmark, and the Lu∣theran Churches of Germany, and sees what can be said for it, will not easily be perswa∣ded that it is unlawful; and when he hears Protestants affirm, that the many Rites which the Romish Church has added, may as well be Justified, and that the first Reformers seem to be unreasonable in rejecting them (as Mr. B. alledges, Vind. p. 49.) he will be apt to con∣clude, that there is no great harm in them; and I doubt not but the imprudent drawing such consequences has actually reconcil'd many to Popery, and some to Atheism; and therefore a man that loves his Religion will be very sparing of Drawing them; for he will consider, if he have direct or Scripture
Proof for a thing, they are needless; and if he have no direct or Scripture proof for his Tenent, he has reason to suspect the truth of it: For, I suppose, every ill thing is forbidden in Scripture, and may be Con∣demned from thence: As for the drawing Consequences, they may serve to render a Tenent Odious, but rarely serve to satisfie a reasonable Man without direct Proof. 3dly, The Advocates of the Church of Rome are deeply concerned to defend their own Worship, and have produced all the Arguments they could against us; and yet I think, I may say, have failed in them all; and I do not believe Mr. B. will pretend to manage them better than they have done; tho' this be not the first time he has lent them his Assistance, with what design I will not judge: But this consideration alone were sufficient to excuse me from answering this Argument. Yet, lest it should really have that influ∣ence on weak Minds, that such Arguments sometimes have in the mouths of pretended Friends or professed Enemies, to make them have a better Opinion of the Roman Rites than they deserve, I will endeavour to give you a true account of this matter, that you may see what Rites we condemn in the Ro∣mish Church. I think this due to the justi∣fication
of our Reformers, reflected on by Mr. B. as unreasonable. 1st Then, We condemn such Rites and Ceremonies as signifie any peculiar presence or power of God to be in any place or thing where he has not promised it; because it is not in the power of man to dispose of God's Influence or Presence, or to tye them to any Action, Thing or Place without his own Act: Upon this account the Heathen Images, Temples and Altars were all unlaw∣ful; and so are those of the Papists, if we take them as they pass in the Estimation of the Vulgar. 2dly, We condemn all Representations of any glorious Being, in order to worship it, as being against the Second Commandment expresly. 3dly, We reject all such Signs as pretend to carry any supernatural efficacy or vertue with them; because all such efficacy and vertue must proceed from God, and we ought not to presume that he will communi∣cate them to Signs or Rites, except we have his Promise for it; and on this account we judge the Popish Holy Water, Oyl, Spittle, Crossing, &c. to be superstitious. 4thly, Such Rites as by their number or quality engage the Thoughts, and divert them from attention on God's Service, such
are the many Crossings (two hundred, if I remember right, in one Office) Bowings, Kneelings, Kissings, and frequent motions from one place to another in the Mass. 5thly, Such Signs as are not easily under∣stood, Dark and Dumb Ceremonies, as our Church calls them; whose design and signi∣fication are not easily comprehended by the People: such are the many Vestments of the Popish Priests, the Furniture of their Altars, the Lights, Oyl, and Salt in their Bap∣tism, &c. 6thly, Such as neither present universal Custom or Nature have made proper and significant of the things they are designed to express; or if formerly they have been sig∣nificant, are now antiquated, having lost their signification by time, as words do, (the Custom that made them significant being changed) as it has happen'd to putting off the Shooes at our coming into the House of God, covering the Head, the Kiss and Feasts of Charity, the dipping in Baptism, and chang∣ing the Cloathing, the continuance of which we count burthensome and superfluous. 7thly, Such as are not proper to influence Mens Minds, and engage them to perform the Office they are about with more serious∣ness and attention; or, as our Church ex∣presses it, that are not apt to stir up the dull
Minds of Men by some notable signification: such are many Gestures of the Priests in the Mass, and many other Ceremonies of the Roman Church. 8thly, Such as pretend to propitiate or reconcile us unto God, because that can only be done by means of his own appointment; on this account we reject Agnus Dei, the Pilgrimages, Processions, Whippings, and Fasts of the Papists, that are performed with Opinion of Merit. 9thly, Such as have been abused and per∣verted to superstitious uses, and cannot be separated from them; on this account chiefly we have laid aside the common use of Crossing: Not but we believe it was Piously and Prudently used by the Primitive Christians, as an Instance, Expression, and Badge of their Profession amongst Heathens and Infidels; but it was so abused, and the Opinion of Efficacy and Vertue in it to drive away Devils, and to produce other Spiri∣tual Effects, so rooted in the Minds of Men concerning it, that there was no probabili∣ty of taking away the abuse of it whilst the thing remained: And besides, the com∣mon use of it doth now no more amongst us signifie our common Christianity, but is be∣come the peculiar Badge of a Papist, and so has lost its primitive signification.
To conclude, we condemn only those Rites of the Roman Church against which we have these Exceptions, or the like, (as where they want Gravity or Decency) and we are able to Justifie our Exceptions by Reason and Scripture; but we never con∣demn'd any Rite of that Church, as Mr. B. doth the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, either first, because it Represented to us our Duty, and instructed us in it. Or, 2dly, Because it signified our purpose, re∣solution, or vows to serve God, that is our Obligation or Dedication to his Service. Or, 3dly, Because it distinguished Christians from Heathens, Worshippers from specta∣tors, or the devout Worshippers from the negligent. On the contrary, we think these to be proper▪ and allowed Scripture uses of out∣ward signs in Gods Worship; and it were a just exception against any of them, if they did not serve to some of these purposes. Mr. B. may call such signs foolish Inventions, &c. as he seems to do, Vind, p. 51. and charge the Church of God for using them; but we ought to be modest in such censures, and remember the danger of calling our Brother fool, as we are taught by our Savi∣our, Matt. 5. 22. we never used such Ob∣jections
against Popery, from our first Con∣trovertists to this Day; and this alone may convince you that Mr. B's. Principles are not the common Principles of Protestants. And it is a great disservice to our cause (which we have maintained, thanks be to God, with success, without the assistance of Mr. B. his party or Principles) to tell the World that we used such Arguments as these. VI. Lastly, he objects that the multiplicity of these Rites (or in the Bp's language signifi∣cant actions) had almost eaten out the vitals of Religion, Vind. p. 51. But I answer, 1st, That we do not plead for the multipli∣city of them, but for such as are decent, pro∣per and edifying, and which universal custom has made significant, not such as Mens fan∣cies can invent; to admit some of the first sort in Religion, doth no more open a Door to our Fancies, than admitting such Words as general custom has made significant to express our desires, gives us Liberty to in∣vent new ones never heard of before, or to introduce the Artisices of Mens Wisdom into our divine Discourse; which have done as much mischief as significant Actions, and are expressly forbidden. 2dly, The significant Actions our Church uses are far from a multiplicity, they are
indeed fewer than we find used in the New Testament, and if we have err'd on either hand, which I hope we have not, it is not in the multiplicity, but rather in the fewness of them. 3dly, They are with us so far from eat∣ing out the bowels of Religion, that on the contrary, the little care Men have of using such, has destroyed the sense of Religion in a great many, and induced them to make no distinction between Good and Evil, Sacred and Profane, in many cases. 4thly, The multiplicity of words which are signs to the ear, are as apt to eat out the bowels of Religion, as the multiplicity of significant Actions, and our Saviour gives us an express caution against them, Matt. 6. 7. the like we have Eccles 5. 2. so that the whole Dispute seems to me, to be between the Eye and the Ear, which shall be gratified; and excess in either, have had too much the same Effect. Too many visible Signs are apt to eat out the heart of Religion, and make it degenerate into Shew; and too many words which are audible Signs, are apt to have the like effect, and make Religion de∣generate into Talk; of both which, the Church of God has had equal Experience, and are both equally to be avoided.
CONCLUSION. THus I have examin'd all that Mr. B. has Objected against our Worship, from the instance of the Sign of the Cross; and prov'd it to be no Human Invention, but warranted by Scripture, according to the Rules laid down in my first Discourse to you, for the determining what are Human Inventions in the Worship of God. Mr. B. Indeed wou'd perswade you, that by those Rules he has retorted upon me my own Arguments against your Worship; and alledges (Vind. p. 55.) 'Tis strange, that (except that of Crossing) I have not so much as endeavoured to vindicate any one practice of the Establish't Church, from my own Argu∣ments retorted on me. But I Answer, first, that to retort Arguments is generally, only a shift of Disputants when the Arguments pinch them, and they want fair and direct Answers, and seldom are either justly or convincingly apply'd: and therefore weigh little with such as seek only Truth, and not the service of a Party. And indeed Mr. B's. were of such a nature that I durst well trust them with indifferent Readers, the mean∣ing of them being only this; if the Dissen∣ters Worship be mixed with Human Inven∣tions,
that of the Establish't Church is guilty of the same fault, which is a method to blac∣ken both, but to defend neither; and may help to open your Eyes, and let you see that the Arguments formerly brought by your Advocates against our Worship, are equally conclusive against your own in this point; and therefore you are as much obliged to Answer them as we are. And I desire you to observe that Mr. B. has no way Answered them on your part, but by flying to his Rule of Humane Prudence, which I do not find you do generally approve, and therefore, even according to your own Opinion, he has not cleared you from the charge of Humane Invention which I brought against your Worship. But 2dly, I have shew'd you plainly (in the 2d Chap. Sect. 2. N. 9. of this 2d. Ad∣monition) that he has perverted the sense of that Rule I laid down concerning things Contain'd in and Warranted by the Word of God; and on that perverted sense, he has founded all those retorted Arguments which he alledges, I did not Answer. But having explain'd that Rule in my 2d Editi∣on, so as he can find no exception to it, it was a sufficient Answer to all his Argu∣ments. 3dly, I knew that the sense of my Words,
before I so explain'd them, cou'd not but be manifest to every indifferent, and under∣standing Reader; and therefore, while with Reason and Justice, I disown'd the sense he wou'd put upon my words in that Rule, I thought, and still think, that I needed not trouble you any farther with answering particularly the Arguments which he has Retorted on that perverted Sense. Mens thoughts are generally cohe∣rent, tho' their words do not always seem to be so; hence it happens sometimes that they may be wrested, and in these Disputes a Man who endeavours to make a shew of Reasoning for his Party, catches at some ambiguous or doubtful Expression of his Ad∣versary, and by putting an ill sense on it, which he knows will not be owned, he fills a Book in shewing that the Arguments make against him who produceth them; and this is what Mr. B. calls Retortion, and is another Artifice of those that write for a Party to amuse the World, and which I take Mr. B. to have practised ve∣ry much in all that he has yet written; but whilst a Man takes this course, there is no∣thing written with such accuracy, but he may make it contradict it self; Ev'n the holy Scriptures not excepted. I therefore thought it sufficient for me to
Answer your great and principal Objecti∣on, which is this of our using the Sign of the Cross; since this is the most direct and strongest proof you pretend to bring of Humane Invention in our Worship. In it Mr. B. tells us, that all Dissenters agree, that it doth directly concern the charge of Hu∣mane Inventions; and that here Dissenters used to fix their charge: To examine all your other Arguments, in which you do not agree as in this, were both endless and needless; for if this, where you used to fix your charge, fail you, 'tis plain you are on an ill Foundation. I have insisted on that objection, which is your strength against our Worship, and am sure, from what I have said, you have good Reason, 1st, To suspect Mr. B's surmises concerning me in other things, who supposes that I did not mention the Cross, because I cou'd not de∣fend it. 2dly, To doubt the firmness of this ground, where, Mr. B. says, you all fix your charge. And now I must earnestly Admonish and Warn you to look into your own Hearts, and put it home to your Consciences, whe∣ther these pretences will bear you up at the last and great Day, when you shall be call'd to account for your neglect of the publick Worship of God, while you might have
had opportunity of frequenting Ours: And if, upon enquiry, you find Facti∣on or Carnalness to be at the bottom, and Idolatry or Humane Sacraments to be only pretences (as I think they can be no more than pretences, to those that impartially Read these Papers) you may conclude they will sink at that Day from being Pleas be∣fore the great searcher of Hearts. You and I must come to this Tryal, and▪ 'twill then appear, whether I that have used my utmost endeavours to bring you to the pub∣lick Worship of God, or Mr. B. who scoffs at my concern, and Zeal for that Wor∣ship, and for your attendance at it, have approved our selves most to our great Master. Mr. B. as I observed before, owns it Lawful for you to come to our ordinary Lords day Service when you have none else to go to; and he had acted both an Ingenu∣ous and Christian part, had he endeavour'd as diligently and zealously to perswade you to do this, as he has been eager to put this stumbling-block of the Cross in your way against our Worship, (at least from thence to confirm and encrease your Pre∣judice against it) but as he has managed it, he has given ground to suspect, that his zeal is answerable to his endeavours, which
are apparently much greater for his Party, than our common Christianity. I entreat you therefore seriously to consi∣der of these things, as of what you must one Day give an account. And to believe, that I have not made all these words about the Sign of the Cross for its own sake, but ra∣ther to remove, if possible, that Principle out of your Minds, by which you are obliged to look on all such Signs as unlawful; for this Principle duly pursued, must prove a stum∣bling-block, and occasion of perpetual Di∣visions to the end of the World, in all So∣cieties of Men where it is embraced. I have endeavoured to shew you, that it is a Principle unwarranted by Scripture; it is the Spring and Seed-plot, at least the pre∣cence of our present Divisions; and is suf∣ficient, if allowed, to Justifie a separation from any Church, that either is, or has been in the World, since there is not one Party of Men, that pretend to be a Church, but have Signs, that are as much Representing, Obliging, and Distinguishing, as we desire to make the Sign of the Cross. Even the Qua∣kers keeping on their Hats, as a matter of Conscience, and using Thou and Thee in con∣versation, are to them as much Instructive, Obliging and Distinguishing Signs as the Cross is to us; nor can it secure you to refrain
from such Signs as others use, for even that Abstinence is also an Instructive, Obliging and Distinguishing Sign, especially to such as make it a matter of Conscience; and so it is im∣possible to avoid using such Badges. If there∣fore People shou'd quarrel against all Signs on the same score as Mr. B. does against the Sign of the Cross, they may quarrel on to the end of the World, and there can never be any setled Union: And unless such Princi∣ples be removed from the Minds of well∣meaning People, 'twill be impossible to Unite them in any Establish'd Church or Order, or to hinder Divisions from springing up, if they were so united, since Evil-minded Men would never want as plausible Matter to amuse and dissettle them, as the Sign of the Cross is pretended to be. And I was the more willing to take some pains in this Affair, because I have some hope that what I have said may help to perswade you to put a greater value on Sacraments, and to understand their Nature, Efficacy and Necessity when they may be had, better than, I am afraid, many of you do. I have no more to add, but to assure you, that what I write is with a Design to do you Good, and to satisfie my own Mind in the conscientious discharge of my Duty and Of∣fice as a Pastor amongst you; I have endea∣voured
to do this both by Words and Wri∣ting, and all other means in my power; I shall by God's help persevere in them, and leave the success to Him. I beseech him, of his great Mercy, to take away all Obstinacy, Par∣tiality, Error, and Prejudice from all Men, especially from those under my Care; and to endow us all with a Spirit of Meekness, Charity, Patience and Humility, that we may Love one another, and unite in the Praises and Worship of our common Lord and Savi∣our, the Lord Jesus Christ. This is, and ever shall be, the Prayer of Londonderry, March 13. 1695. Your Loving Pastour, WILL. DERRY.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by R. Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church-yard. THE Church History clear'd from the Roman Forgeries and Corruptions found in the Coun∣cils and Baronius: In Four Parts. From the begin∣ning of Christianity to the end of the Fifth General Council, 553. By Tho. Comber D. D. Dean of Durham. Aristophanis Comaediae Duae Plutus & Nubes, cum Scholis Graecis Antiquis. Quibus adjiciuntur Noctae quaedam simul cum Gemino Indice. In usum Studiosa Juventutis. A Daily Office for the Sick; compil'd out of the Holy Scriptures and the Liturgy of our Church; with occasional Prayers, Meditations & Directions. The Catechisms of the Church, with Proofs from the New Testament, and some additional Questions and Answers, divided into twelve Sections, by Z. I▪ D. D. Author of the Book lately publish'd, entitu∣led, A daily Office for the Sick, with Directions, &c. A Church Catechism, with a brief and easie Ex∣planation thereof, for the help of the meanest Ca∣pacities and weakest Memories, in order to the esta∣blishing them in the Religion of the Church of England. By T. C. Dean of Durham. The Pantheon, representing the Fabulous Histo∣ries of the Heathen Gods, and most illustrious He∣roes; in a short, plain, and familiar Method, by way of Dialogue, for the Use of Schools. Written by Fra. Pomey, of the Society of Jesus, Author of the French and Latin Dictionary, for the use of the Dauphin. Q. Horatii Flacci Opera; interpretatione & Notis illustravit Ludovicus Desprez Cardinalitius Socius ac Rhetor Emeritus, Jussu Christianissimi Regis, in usum Serenissimi Delphini, ac Serenissimorum Principum Burgundiae, Andium, Biturigum. Huic Editioni ac∣cessere Vita Horatii, cum Dacerii Notis ejusdem Chro∣nolegia Horatiana, & Praefatio de Satira Romana.
