L2645 12111357 54207
NEVER FAILE: OR, That sure way of thriving UNDER ALL REVOLUTIONS IN An Eminent INSTANCE From 1639. to 1661. LONDON: Printed for Henry Marsh at the Princes Armes in Chancery-Lane neer Fleet-Street, 1663.
TO THE Most Illustrious JAMES DUKE of YORK. May it please your Highness, SPeculation is the life of a Schol∣lar, and action is the life of a Prince.Arist. Pol. 6. 2. Aquin. eth 1. 2. suarez et urid. ibid Rev. D. Pi∣ep. ded. cos∣mgr. It sufficeth the one to meditate up on the great things which former ages have done, while the other doth great things, which future ages my meditate upon: the one Mentes sapientiores su qui es∣cend. Pla. vid Rev. d Reyn Passion: e Arist. et ali∣i, &c. rests when he hath Bacon de Augment. scient. des∣rtes medit. 7. Digby immortality soul
7. raised a scheme, a frame,  an De Idea in Deo vid. Grot. Christ. relig. 1. An∣not. ex An∣ &c. Idea within himselfe propor∣tionable in all things to the He hath made all things in nuber and msure Syr. Synes beautifull in his ime, Ecl. 3.11. order, and method of beings without him; while the other having understood this vid Dic∣kens. Delph. Phaen. de Pan. Scalig. exercit. 6. c. 7. m. Tertull. de Palleo. 2 Plat. de 2. all is urged by his eager virtues to performe things as great as those he understood; and actions as great as his thoughts. There is Norunt Garamantes et Indj &c. I have heard Turks, Jews, speak hono∣rably of you no tongue, nor lan∣guage, but hath heard that you are as eminent for your action as for your birth; That you are a Prince in both, in both your selfe is as well known as your name. I need not informe you (great Sir) that all great actions in any way are guided by a Arist eth 6.7 Mel. . 2. Null qua na¦tura impedi∣te s con∣filio expedi∣untur: Liv. see Reyn: n Hos. 14. v. 9. Ser. 7. wisedom from above, first pure then peaceable, ac∣cording to the principles and max∣imes of that way, together with the conclusions rationally, deducible from those principles to their pe∣culiar ends by a discreet applicati∣on of proper
meanes; for it was  your selfe that mannaged the great affaires of France and Spaine with a wisedome as Medi t∣lissi ibij,see Duke of Rho, In∣terest of States and Kingdomes. distant from the sud∣den rasnesse of the one, as from the solemne slownesse of the other; bare action the priviledge of lower be∣ings, valour the glory of those more noble, or honour becoming your selfe sufficed you not, wihour a wisedome guiding all these above your selfe and yeares; Therefore when I entertained thoughts of drawing a rude draught of these great actions, and counsels that I look upon as the best patternes of Modern Policy, I mean these of this honourable Person, who discovered most of a Politicians virtues, with∣out any of its vices; that could be wise as a Serpent, and yet innocent as a Dove; I immediately resolved to dedicate it to your selfe; wisdom is justified of its children, the Dia∣mond only can
cut Diamond, the  wise onely understand the wise; when I presume to make your Highnss the Ptron of this Modern Policy, I intimate you ought to be the sub∣ject of another, which some Dig  soule might attempt with a Pen as Hero∣ick as your word; writing your life, with as much Majesty as yo lived it with. Or a Pour∣traicture of his sacred Majsty CHARLES the second, with his two illustrious Brothers the Duke of Yorke and Gloucester. Sold by H M at the Prin∣ces Armes in the lower end of Chan∣cery lane. When envy suppressed the worth and malice blasted the innocence of our dread Soveraign with those ca∣lumnies (that were never licenced but in the age when Men spoke what∣ever they thought fit, there being no King in Israel;) I humbly de∣sire your Mediation for a pardon to my inconsiderable selfe, who was then past all fear of loss Amorem sserit Plato . Cael. Rhodig. 16. 15. durst vin∣dicate injured truth and Majesty ad∣vancing them above interest, preju∣dice, & malice, by a course I thought most conscientious as a Christian, and most generous as a Man; my
highest designe was to establish his sacred Majesty in the hearts of his people, which was all poor I could doe towards his establishment in his Throne. Now envy, malice, and ignorance dares abuse that renowned Person whom the King hath desired to ho∣nour, to whom we owe even your very selfe, I could not ut doe his Majesty, the Nation, and Himselfe right in justifying his honourable actions, which I doe sufficiently when I repeate them; I must con∣esse I am sorry that former powers allowed me that leasure I had to vindicate the best Majesty; but now his Majesty is come again to his own House in peace; I am contented to be at leasure to doe justice to the best Loyalty. Diou. Hal∣. see Suet. in Tit. Vesp. Leighes Caesars: Mallel: M.S S. Bib. Bodl.Vespasian one like your selfe, the darling of
Mankind, as he dismissed one sad from him; so he professed that his Doores were alwayes open for Schollars: But to his favourite Appollonius desiring accesse for Dion and Euphrates, he said but to you my very breast is open, a poor Schollar despaires not of a gracious admission to your royall presence, while he is confident you will give his grace the Duke of A∣male admission to your very heart: But alas! Its high time to leave your Highnesse full of thoughts to ad∣vance the honour and good, and to improve the virtue and valour of your dread Soveraigne and gracious Brothers Dominions; and to retire with my best affections, devoutest prayers, & my honest endeavours into the croud—of your Admi∣rers, and Servants, David Lloyd.
Modern Policy, The Second Part. The occa∣sion.GOD (as great soules observe) hath equally suffered by the too much worship the superstition of the World that was drowned flattered him with; and by the too little which the Atheisme of that World which shall be burned slandered him with. Good men (saith Vossius) are equally in∣jured with the honour the fabulous age be∣stowed upon them by Legends, as with that the sullen & silent age denyed them while the one raised their worth to that heighth that it cannot be beleived; the o∣ther keepes it so low that it cannot be
known; The good Apostle is abused as much when the Barbarians cry he is a God as when they say he is a Malefactor: when he was worshipped at Lystra, as when he was stoned there; His Excellency the Lord Generall Moncke suffereth equally by the Courtiers smooth Panegyricks, as by the ignorants dull silence, or the envious his malignant calumny, while his renowned actions are made the issues of loose fancies roving at uncertain worth, rather then the issues of his great virtues; and after ages shall know rather how happy Poets they are, then how great or how good a Man he was. § 2 It will be therefore but a reason∣able service equally due to his Excellency and to the World; to do his publick per∣formances so much right as to expresse them with the same integrity they were accomplished with; and to expose them in their own naked Grandeur and plain state more solemne with the solid and great then splendid with the gaudy & vain; the highest honour that can be done to great and solid worth is faithfully to repeat it, the great∣est elogy that wit can grave upon it is it selfe.
§ 3 Birth and Education.The right honourable Sir George Monck Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Lord Generall of all the Forces in his Majesties dominions of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland; Master of the Horse; and one of his Majesties most Ho∣nourable Privy Councell; being borne a Gentleman of the posterity of ancient No∣bility, and former Majesty, (as that hap∣py Pen may easily evince, which may hereafter in an History due to this re∣nowned Hero's life, consecrate to eter∣nity Him and it selfe) and educated as honourably as he was borne; 1. under such a discipline that moulded his tender oule to that frame that was not onely ad∣vantagious towards the succeeding parts of his education, but towards the Regu∣larity of his whole Life: 2. Under that erudition that successively instilled inge∣nuous and good rudiments into his ten∣der breast, in the order that was proper to his tender years, Age at once maturing his parts, enlarging his capacity, and ad∣vancing his lectures, untill some years e∣ducation, had accomplished his mind with that stock of active, usefull, and
manly knowledge, that furnished him with those vertues that are a perfection to noble na∣tures, and a rest and tranquility to great minds, 1. bridled and checked the irregular sallies of the inferiour faculties, and the impetuous passions incident to those years, 2. fashioned his behaviour to that humanity, that gentleness that was due to Mankind, and that modesty and gravity, as was due to himselfe, 3. regulated his dis∣course to that temper that became the product of judgement and right reason, and raised him to thoughts of imploy∣ment worthy and ingenuous, abhorring to busie himselfe vitiously, or imper∣tinently. § 4 In a word; when education had made him a compleat Man, he be thought himselfe that he was borne to Labour as na∣turally as the sparkes are made to flye up∣wards, being endued with that as Jamblichus calls it, that ever moving and restlesse principle his soul, and trusted with those abilities that suggested to him that he was not so far neglected by God or Nature, as to be placed in the World without imployment. § 5 Employ∣ment.He found that if he
looked up to Heaven, that was alwayes in its course  with its severall glories, rejoycing to run their race; if he ascended above humani∣ty, and assumed the nature of Angells, imployment would pursue him thither, and overtake him; for they stand alwayes before God to know and do his pleasure. If a Man in honour would quit his Birthright whereby he is a little lower than an Angell, and become with Nebuchadnez∣zar like the Beasts that perish; yet both the Field and Forrest are severe Monitors to imployment, each animal being continu∣ally engaged in an orderly exercise of those powers they are endued with Yea the dull Earth (besides its constant exercises in spring, after it's long vacati∣on) hath been discovered by some of late to spend it selfe and to be spent in constant efluviums and emanations. To descend to Hell, and lower he could not go, he saw the accursed Spirit imployed and busied, Satan going to and fro in the Earth, and industriously walk∣ing about seeking whom he may devour, ma∣king diligent use of the faculties, abili∣ties, dexterities, which either his nature or experience have furnished him withall, towards the end he proposeth to himselfe.
And therefore wondered what they meant that gloried in the ignominious honour and abasing exaltation of being above imployment, which bcomes Hea∣ven, Angells, and Men made perfect, and of being priviledged for that idle¦nesse which is below Earth and Hell, as if it were praise-worthy to be unprofitable-burdens of the Earth, to be born onely to consume the fruit of it, to eat and drink to day, and to morrow to die; as if they were brought to the Earth, as the Leviathan to the Sea, to take their past-time therein. § 6 A Souldi∣er.He was ready to embrace any in∣genuous imployment opportunity offred him and his parts deserved, not (though as a younger Brother) as a prize either to ambition or covetousnesse, but as an op∣portunity to exercise his vertues, a sphear wherein he might move vigorous∣ly for the service and honour of his Country, and (as mens parts, abilities, and capacities, are their best directions in the free choice of their calling wherein they intend to abide with God) finding himselfe master of those manly and severe endowments, that qualifie great natures
for the rougher engagements of Camp and Warre, and are above the smoother dalliances of Court and Peace, he listed himselfe among the noble train of Cavi∣leers, and of their number that were de∣signed for actions worthy and great. § 7 WarAlthough his Excellency had not any right of his own lost which he was to recover by War (which is defined to be the state of two parties contending by publick force about right and wrong) and if he had, yet being a private person (since the constitution of publique Courts of jus∣tice) he ought to submit his right to the fair triall of judgement, "rather then to put it to the ordeall of force and tumult, for hence it is that the reverence of the Law was found out, that nothing might be done by force," see Paul. L. non est de rep. 1. Cassian. l. 4. van. 1. Ep. 4. Theod. edict. 10. 124. et L. exstat. D. quod metus. Serven. 11. AEn Virg. though Am∣brose de offic. 3. 3. Ambros 1. lib. arb. 5. ep. 155. 10. 59. Eustied. Amic. de Gratian. . vel caus. 13. q. have been taught to speak by some as otherwise minded) see Canon. Epist. 55. edit. novis.
Yet when lawfull power and publique  persons for the maintenance or recovery of their rights that are invaded or threat∣ned by some mens ambition or coveteous∣nesse, Those lusts whence come Warres and Fightings among us, have set up a Warre (War being of such concernment and con∣sequence to Commonwealths, that its treason and that justly by most Laws to undertake a War without highest autho∣rity; Plato de leg. l. ult. cic. de leg. l. 2. L. 3. D. ad l. Jul. maj. et Cornel leg. Justin. cod. valent. Aug. cont faust. l. 22. c. 74. p. 206. lin. 10. liv. Dec. ult. vel. l. 29. vict. de bello numero 9.) I say when lawfull power hath raised a War: Its lawful for pri∣vate persons to assist others, being not wholly for themselves; it's commendable to become champions to afflicted right, to put forth a noble hand to rescue op∣pressed innocence out of the jawes of ty∣ranny, it's the best way a younger bro∣ther can raise himselfe by raising the af∣flicted, and nothing ought to be more ser∣viceable to a man saith Cic. 2. de off. than another man; it behooves every one to take up Arms upon injury done to him∣selfe or others, Arles Rhet ad Alea. c. 3. and happy are those
Common-wealths  wherein every one thin anothers injury to be his, and minds not onely his own things but the things of others, and no man thinks himselfe unconcerned in that which is humane, Lactant. car. var l. 6. Its usuall to engage in War for fellow-Citizens, for Mercheants, saith Cic. ad Quint. and ver. 2. by the leave of the su∣pream power; indeed he were not a man that had not so much of the sociable na∣ture as to help a man, Simler rep. Helvet. Senec. de. ira 1. c. 7. p. 51. he is not vali∣ant that will not assist weaknesse, Euripid. supplic. nor he just, that will not do right to the injured. Praebent saxa perfugium feris,—aura{que} famulis, Ʋrbib{que} prssis mlo—tutamen urbes, &c. See Mores de kocz. praec. 77. 80. Ben. Maim. in pec N. c. 7. And he is not Loy∣all that will not serve his Prince; and there being as great a necessity there should be Wars, as the Apostle saith, that there should be divisions among us, its not unworthy of great persons so disposed, to seek their fortunes in a War, and having given themselvs to attain
abilities suitable  to the variety of exercises to be met with in that way, its reason they should follow it, not as mercenary and hired to kill men, and thinking there is most right where there is most pay, Plato in theat. Bellin. de re mil. 2. t. 2. p. 106. n. 4. casting their life away for that which they have onely for their lives, Plato Bacch. Diod. sic. l. 18. though yet to be encouraged with rewards and stipends, for (saith St. Paul) who ever went a warfare at his own charge? 1 Cor. 9. 7. see S. August. de verb. Dom. AEgid. de ait. super disp. 31. n. 8. § 8 Irish war.His Excellency was ready for ser∣vice when his late Majesty had a sad occasi∣on to employ his ablest Subjects to sup∣presse the Rebellion in Ireland occasioned by the Pope, 1 upon pretence of Religion, 2 a right to Ireland, and 3 the oppression of the Catholicks in that Kingdome; but re∣ally upon the old maxim, that he that would gaine England, (which his holinesse longs after) must first begin with Ireland, and upon a Prophecy found in the Vatican encouraging them at that time there-unto together with some sad divisions by Ro∣mish Emissaries to be raised in England a∣bout that time.
§ 9 His Excellency well knowing that War is lawful: 1 By nature Man (as Galen de usu partium hath it,) being made for war and peace, see Arist. de part. animal. 4. 10. Cassiod. de anima. Arma{que} in armatos sume∣re jura sinunt Ovid. dente lupus cornu taurus petit, &c:Ho. For 2. by Scripture, which re∣cordeth it approved by the Priest of the most high God, Gen. 14. 20. which provi∣deth Lawes for it; and recordeth the Worthies that fought the Battailes of God, and mentioneth Men after Gods own heart Men of War; and devout Men, Centu∣rians, and forbids not Souldiers their employment, but forbids them violence and falshood, advising them to be content with their wages. § 10 And knowing likewise, that this of all wars was most lawfull, being for his Majesty against such subjects as begun without authority, It being a generall a∣greement of all Societies even the Aborig. to obey Superiours least otherwise a Common∣wealth become a solitude, or a confused throng where every one commands, and none obeyes, Valer. maxim. l. 1. Salust. 2. to the Prince as Tacitus writes, doe all Men give the power, and to subjects the glory of obe∣dience;
It being death to resist by the Law, Deut. 17. 12. Job. 1. 18. see Philo. in Flacc. l. 2. c. 3. and damnation by the Gospell; he that resisteth the power, resisteth the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, Rom. 13.2. Concil. chalced. et Trull. can. 4. Tolet. 4. Luess. Can. 5. II. and without cause. § 11 For 1. War is not to be under∣taken as they pretend for Religion; the Papists might know that Peter was bid long agoe to put up his sword; It being (as Gregory a Prophet of their own once said) an unheard of way of preaching to beat Men into a beleife; It's the errone∣ous his punishment (saith Plato) to be taught rather then to be murdered: M. Anton. l. 9. valent in Am. marcel. l. 30. None ought to be compelled to be∣come religious saith the counsell of Tolet. c. de Jud. and Tertull::: 2. 2 War is not lawfull to fulfill prophe∣cies; which are uncertain in themselves, and in the time of their accomplishment; and its not our duty to doe what is fore∣told, but what is commanded. viz. Lun∣lau. Turc. Hist. l. 18. Procop. Persic. 2. 3. The Pope hath no right over Ireland:
For 1. if Christs, (as Pet. Dam. saith) then his Vicars Kingdome is not of this world: 2. Paul would not, and therefore why doeth Peter meddle with them that are without: 3. A Bishop ought not to strike much more not to War for a Kingdome: 4. Our Kings enjoyed it as Lords, and then as Kings, time enough to prescribe three times over; being at first invited to it by the Irish: And then 5. if the Papists were oppressed, which they were not unlesse it were with indulgencies and favours, as that Champion in the olympick games was pressed to death with Roses; yet the Pope did  medle foolishly in other Mens business; & subjects are not to redresse greivances by Wars, bt by petitions, they are to beseech their Soveraigne, and not to force him. § 12 His Excellency might think it as reasonable and just as it was honourable to assist his Soveraign against the mighty who upon these forementioned unjust grounds, (which may better become the compleat History of the Irish Rebellion) assaulted his Majesties undoubted right to be bestowed by the Pope upon the Duke of Lorrain, and to
endeavour un∣der  his Majesties authority to reduce the Rebellious to obedience, and punish the bloody murthers, it being a primitive constitution, that he that sheds mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Constantine upon this account made War against Licinius, and others made War against the Persians, Zonar. et menand. P. et Aq; 2. 2. 108. § 13 Command.And therefore as well satisfied in the lawfullnesse of his undertaking (as every Souldier ought to doe who carrieth his life in his hand, and may expect (as the Theban Souldiers (a pattern for all o∣thers) argued with Julian) to die daily, and ought not to submit his precious life to the lusts and will of others, which hath too much to do to serve its own divers lusts and pleasures, he heads a Regiment by the Lord-Deputies's Commission, (that great man who understood well whom he employed, who as curiously observed other mens worth as he care∣lessly neglected his own: and was choice in his instruments, because he was so in his designes and imployments, well knowing his great actions must be
left to the management of great soules)  and this is the first of those publick un∣dertakings wich are the subject of this discourse. § 14 Discipline.Wherein the first thing he was eminent for, was Discipline, without which Commanders lead thronged multitudes and not armies, and listed routs ra∣ther than Regiments; he was not less care∣full of morall than of the military Disci∣pline, well knowing that that Souldiery will hardly vanquish an enemy that is vanquished by its own debauchery, Ire∣land (they say) endures no poyson, his Excellency would endure no dangerous exorbitancy to envenom his Regiment, nor any perverse Achan that would trouble his Camp, and next the care of keeping his Souldiers Men, and restraining them (when going out of themselves) within the compasse of humanity, he added that of making them Souldiers, that they might not be to Learn when they were to perform their duty. Turpe est in arte militarj dicert non pu∣taram. § 15 Besides that by his preparation the enemy might suspect that thier plot was discovered, and by his readinesse that
it was prevented, when men did but seeme to suspect an unknowne plot they have often discovered it, and withall few Souldiers brought together in a military , as they can vanquish many out of rder, so they can affright more; the of∣ten mustering of Souldiers among a dan∣gerous people, is not the least part of their policy, who know what pannick feare armed multitudes strike into the dispersed vulgar. § 16 Familia∣rity.His Excellencies solemn famili∣arity no Mother of contempt was obser∣vable, whereby he insinuated himselfe so far into his Souldiers affection that they could have wished their lives doubled that they might have one life to spend for his person as they had one for his cause. His Language with Caesar was not Milites, but Commilitones, not Souldi∣ers, but Fellow-Souldiers; nor was this out of any designe so much as out of nature, and that note of Livy tooke no place here, Credant haud gratuitam in tanta majestate Comitatem fore, that so much Majesty never condescended with∣out designe, nor was that of the Comick a good rule here; Non temerarium est ubi
dives blande appellat pauperem; altera manu¦fert Lapidem, panem oftentat alter a Nemini credo, qui longe blandus est dives pauperis. § 17 And when the sad tim that called for his actuall service; condition of Ireland, (now without a De∣puty, (the last being beheaded; the sad Prologue that ushered in this Tragedy; the red morning of whose bloody death presaged this tempest; as he prophecyed rather than spoke upon the Scaffold:) and by reaso of the jealousies at the same time stirred up between his late Majesty and his Parliament by Rome and Hell; (one not daring to trust the other to be chari∣table) without supply and assistance, grap∣ling with the power of Rome from within, and from without from all the Kings that had given their power to the Beast:) kept his Excellency and other Worthies to the defensive, and confined their care more how to save themselves handsomely then how to subdue the enemy; which though their cause and valour prompted them to: (for qui molstos arcet ex hon, Conscientia sumit siduciam, bonaque i spes adest, inde quod injuriam non infer it sed au∣ferat, Alex. orat. ad. mil. Herod. 5.) yet their
prudence checked them from, with the prudent caution in the Gospell of consi∣dering, whether they were able with ten thousand to hurt them that came against them with twenty thousand, for doubtlesse such and much greater was the ods, between these two adversaries. § 18 Though his Excellency spent not that time he stayed there without some offensive sallies upon the enemy; we must offend sometimes in our own defence, and give our enemies occasion to complaine that we will not patiently lye open to their full stroke; as that Roman brought an action against a Man, because he received not his whole dart. § 19 Yet he was most eminent then upon necessity, as he was since upon designe in a prudent reservation of himselfe; It being as great skill to ward off blowes, as to give them; he was as wise as that Lewis of France in preventing danger; who had foresights to prevent mischiefs when they were coming, but not a present prudence to engage them when come, though yet he was as ready in encountring dangers as that Henry of England, who could (as
Bacon observes who drew his life with a pencill s majestick as his Scepter) with ready ad∣vice command present thoughts to en∣counter that danger with success which he could not with foresight prevent; he gave then, great signes of an admirable dexte∣rity in mannaging disadvantages vvhich he hath since given full proofe of, vvhen he opposed himselfe against a declining age: engaging thousands with his single selfe. § 20 His stratagems were as conside∣rable as any Mans in so narrow a com∣mand; for though force and terror be most proper to wars, yet we may lawfully use guile; Sive dolo sive vj clamve Palamve Hom: Quicquid agendo Hostica delenda vis est Pind: dolus an virtus quis in boste re∣quiral virg. Your enemy you lawfully may spoyle, Whether by open force or secret guile. Bellandum est astu levio laus in duce dextra. —Lesse praise I gaine, By my strong hand I war with my strong braine. Silius l. 5. ex Polib. l. nono. xenoph. : 1. Thacid. l. 5. Maris comites irae insidiaeque virg. Elbarba hudiatum saith Mahomet, Wars must have some deceit, Eust ad Il. x. versu
120. o honourable is it to be wise as Ser∣pents, that Saint Chrysostome in his first Book de Sacerdotio pronounceth that Ge∣nerall most praise-worthy that hath ob∣tained his victory by stratagems. § 21 The other private particulars (that that History may enquire into, which is due from after age to his blessed memory) will not beare those grave ob∣servations which are designed in this dis∣course for those more publick; his per∣formances in this lower spheare being swallowed up with those of his superiors as the glories of lesser lights are undone at the appearance of a greater: Wherefore, § 22 I passe to the cessation made by his Majesties order; and the alteration in his Excellencies affaires thereupon. For the jealousies forementioned being heightned to a War between his late Ma∣jesty and his two Houses of Parliament by their industry who are so well read in Ma∣chiavell, as to have learned that the best way to enjoy a Kingdome is to divide it; One side affirming our Government by a fundamentall constitution, a  as Aristotle, a  as Sopho∣cles an
as Plutarch, and an as Strabo saith, an absolute and full King∣dome, wherein his Majesty was by no meanes obnoxious to his Subjects; being Supreame over all Causes and Persons, accountable to none but to the blessed God, as the Hebrew Barnachman hath it, who (saith Job) shall say to Kings yee are wicked, or to Princes yee are ungodly. The other side asserting our constituti∣on mixt, and our Supreame power divi∣ded between the King, the Lords, and the Commons, as Chalchondylos formerly asserted of England, Arragon, Nvarrre, vide Plin. l. 6. c. 22. and some new Politicians of late, who though they confesse, that in the beginning Kings had all power, as Pomponius and Justine out of him; yet afterwards (as Tacitus observes) the People established Lawes which the King was to obey, Tacit. 3. Annal. Cic. de rep. 1. et Fenestell, 3. 2. And indeed we had the best constituti∣on of a as Solon, and an as Lycarg, is by some made to speak.
§ 23 But upon some discontents the  severall powers clashed and mistrusted each other; and gave themselves over to such feares and jealousies as put each rash∣ly upon thoughts of War which cannot be just unlesse it be necessary; and there∣fore not to be undertaken, upon every causlesse feare of uncertaine danger; But then there were some with Attila, that, Cared not how the War begins, If they could bring it to their ends.  This civil War was managed a while with variety of success, that neither side should either presume or despaire. § 24 It pleased God his Majesty suf∣fered some disadvantage at last, successe being not commanded to attend the best cause here, nor miscarrage the worst, greatnesse and goodnesse, justice and vi∣ctory being not yet married; there is so much security of te happinesse of another life; that Christs Kingdome was not, and our hapiness is not of this World; though many have been perplexed with that que∣stion, Cur bonis male sit, why it fares so ill with the good, yet a Bible well understood hath taught them, that there is neither love nor hatred to be knowne by any thing under the Sun; when we
goe into the Sanctuary  we are taught that its unwarrantable to appeale to heaven for the decision of this or that controversy by the successe be∣stowed upon this party or that cause, ac∣cording to its righteousnesse and due merit. Pluto in Aristophanes is commanded to be as favourable to the wicked as the good; because if virtue were rich, she should be courted more for her dowry then for her beauty; so if Justice or Reli∣gion had the advantage of prosperity (we should be apt to follow it as the common Souldiers, more for the prey then for the canse; Christ would be followed againe for loaves. § 25 His Majesties unhappy affaires in England, made some alterations in his Councels; together with no lesse unsea∣sonable then unlawfull interposition of those of Scotland in our affaires; for since civill society was instituted; its certaine the Rulers of every one have attained a speciall right (in which others have no share) over their own Subject, so that in them onely resides the supreame power of Judgement, whence there is no appeal saith Thacydides.
Nos quotquot hujus Colimus urbis maenia, Sufficimus ipsi nostra judicia exequi: He∣raclides: Spartam tibi quae contigit orna—nobi fuerit Cura mysaenae: Proc. vandal 2. c. b. n. b. (although when Subjects suffer whats intollerable humane Society hath allowed, and prompted one Nation to as∣sist another, so the Romans assisted the Persians; so the English succoured the op∣pressed Dutch and French.) § 26 These advantages prevailed with his Majesty to order the honourable Mar∣quesse of Ormond to bring the Rebels to a cessation upon the most advantageous termes: and to spare so many of his best Regiments for English service; among whom his Excellencies is brought over as one every way accomplished for the exi∣gence of those times affaires; Neither needed his Majesty make use of a Quintili Varo redde legiones; So compleat are his Companies, that he might reply to his Majesty with reverence to our Saviours words, and of those which you have given me, I have hardly lost one. § 27 No sooner was he and others landed on
English ground, but they were  entertained with a Surprize, by some Par∣liament Forces, before they had time to know which was their foe, which was their friend; For the Scene was altered nd their noble hands were to be imbrued now in Protestant, and not in Popish blood; their swords were to be sheathed no long∣er in Irish, but in English bowels; It had been some comfort had it been strangers that they engaged with, but alas! it was with those of their own and their Fathers house; It was wth their familiars, those wth whom they had taken sweet councell to∣gether, they of their own faith, one Bap∣tisme, and one hope, were their aid cal∣led against aliens, it were easy to resolve, saith Aristides Luctrica 5. but a suddaine disaster prevented these debates, they be∣ing set upon by that Person whose under∣takings were more suddaine then others thoughts, and sometimes then his own. § 28 The Parliament were too well informed of these Regiments to give them the strengthning advantage of uniting with the Kings main body, and better in∣structed in that maxime, dum singuli pag∣nant vincuntur universi, then to let them pass without attempts upon them singly.
§ 29 His Excellency and others were taken Prisoners, and had now nothing left them but the glory of suffering for his Majesty, he is deprived of all those things that make a Souldier, and now what remaines but those prayers & teares that may make a Martyr; And in this ca∣pacity of a Prisoner did he remaine in the Tower so long a to see his Majesty utter∣ly defeated, imprisoned a himselfe, (the anointed of the Lord was taken in their Nets, under whose shadow we said we should live in peace) yea and murthered too; to see Monachy laid aside, Parlia∣ments forced, Lawes, Priviledges and Properties invaded by their own Patrons; and the veyle that the uncertaine Warre kept on the Rebells face, now by a cer∣taine successe drawn off: At their first en∣trance to England the Irish Forces were puzled; Against whom to direct their loyall Swords while each side was for the King, for Lawes, for Liberty, Property, and Religion; But now they were satis∣fyed in what they meant, that fought for his Majesty against the King. Now the whole World saw that they least intended what they most
pretended; Homer they that sit at our helme looked one way but rowed another, whey they should make his Majesty glorious, they summon all the wit and malice of their side to make him infamous; when they should bring him to his Throne they bring him to the Scaffold, the Liberty they with much blood and treasure obtained for the Par∣liament is it seemes an unparalleld force; the Religion to be established are all the antiquated and condemned errours and heresies with the exploded Schismes that attended them, so many Religions that sober & unconcerned Spectators thought we had none, so easy is it in a throng of Religions to loose Religion. § 30 His Excellency saw how prospe∣rity opened those Persons whom another condition kept close as mid day discloseth those shels whom night keepes shut, ad∣vancement discovers a Man; when Appius had his wish, finem fecit gerendae alienae personae; he left wearing another mans Person: maxim pars morem hunc homines habent, quid sibi volunt dum id impetrant boni sunt, sd id ubi jam penes sese habent, ex bonis pessimi, et fraudulentissimi sunt.
Bee the man Had got hi Snd He was all Puritan What he would have He thus obtained And then resumed knave § 31 And now he was in love with hi imprisonment, seeing cleerly by this time that good cause that consecrated his mi∣sery, advanced his Prison to a sanctuary, and his close retirement to a religious life, in the good company of his many ho∣nourable and reverend fellow-sufferers; his withering and tedious durance being deceived away by the happy alleviation of Society; wherein it was doubtfull whether he took or gave more content. § 32 There were no meane Persons then that buzzed in his Excellencies eare his Majesties neglect of him, in that upon the severall exchanges of Prisoners on both sides he was not thought off; It seemes there broke out through his con∣cealement & obscure restraint that worth that was not by our grandees thought be∣low their temptations. But his Excellency was so well appoint∣ed with naked honesty, that he was proofe against all suggestions to disloyalty. He that looked upon his service to his Majesty as its own
encouragement, and  upon his loyalty as his own reward, u∣ed no a neglect, or contem, his care was not so much what he was in others thoughts, as what he was in his own; he is great that is just, good and great in his con∣science. And moreover his Majesty was so beset with malignant Courtiers that he could hardly see any Person in his own worth, without a malicious tincture from those mediums they passed through; otherwise he knew the Sun beheld not a more gra∣cious Master to condescend humbly to take notice of his subjects service, to ac∣knowledge it gratefully, and to reward it liberally. His Excellency was not ignorant how coldly the renowned Montrosse was enter∣tained for those services that were then (without disparagement to any) unparal∣lelled; and have not been since seconded by any but those of his own. But now he and three Nations have reason to think it was not his Majesty but God that delayed his releasement; re∣serving him for better seasons, wherein it might please him to make use of his Excellency; when
rebellion had  run to the end of the line, and the iniqui∣ties of the Amorites became full: And it was time to check successefull villanies that blustered in the World, casting terror round about, and threatning Heaven and Earth; and to vindicate oppressed right and afflicted innocence. Perijssem (might he say) nisi perijssem: I had been undone had I not been undone, for had he been released probably he might have partaked in some of the stragling undertakings of those times which provoked as unhappy to his Maje∣sties cause as to the undertakers; for these slight endeavours kept together their di∣vided adversaries with the common dan∣ger, and hardned them with their miscar∣riage; for they now thought that success hallowed their villanies; Honesa scelera successus facit, Sen: Whereas if Men had stood still, the fury of the Rebels had been spent upon themselves, for as they say wine must be fed with flesh, otherwise it will devour its own strength, so usurpati∣on must have an adversary up for a fomes to its power, otherwise (as we have since seen) its like to feed upon its selfe; wher∣fore
who knowes not that his Excellency  was reserved for such a time as this. § 33 And although he had been slight∣ed by his Majesty, (which was not impos∣sible, considering the evill councell about his Majesty (that betrayed him to his friends and foes) against whom he himselfe had as great cause to raise a War a his Parliament:) yet that his enemies who durst not put him to death (it being a∣gainst equity saith Sen. ep. 1. & Alexander in Plutarch, against the Law of War saith Salust. in his Jugurt History, and great cru∣elty saith Diodorus Siculus l. 17. against the custome of War saith Caesar l. 2. de belle Gallioo: Taul. Anali. 12. to murther Prisoners quos mars reliquit praelio supersti∣tes Eurip.) entrust him with liberty is the eternall Monument for his worth and faithfulnesse; this was a Man (as his late Majesty said of that honourable Strafford) that even Principalities and Powers that would not trust might feare. § 34 Upon the Parliaments unhappy successe, Men of dangerous designe and loose Principles, usurping Supeame power: 1. From the Sword, when most that fought in this unhappy War protest they fought not for power but for
Li∣berty:  2 From the people when though they are not Servants by nature, as Arist. would have it, yet neither are they all Masters, for who then would obey? or if they had the power, all the World knows that they would otherwise dispose of it then to these Persons) Proceed (as its u∣suall after civill Wars) against the Kings party as Traytors for their loyalty; whose carriage in the War could not be treason against their Government, which they acknowledge is the issue of the War: and now searching Prisons they chose out the chiefe for exemplary justice (as the fattest commonly falls a Sacrifice) and shed the blood of War in the time of peace; and revenged themselves, (1. Inhumanely saith Sen. 2. Unjustly as they were inju∣red, saith Tyrius, yea beastly saith Plut. for saith he, Beasts bite him that bites, see Grotius, de bello et pace part. 2. p. 80:) Upon his sacred Majesty (though they were checked with a Touch not mine anoyn∣ted: and though no Man 1 Sam. 26. 9. could lay hands upon the Lords anoynted and e guiltlesse;) and upon the flower of the Nobility and Gentry that had escaped their fury in the Field.
§ 35 His Excellency being a younger Brother had not estate enough to make his offences capitall; yet had too much worth to be at liberty, and to be an ene∣my; there appeared it seemes in his single Person what whole Nations might be afraid of. Therefore Cromwell that had Souldier enough in him to understand a Souldier takes the advantage of his Excellencies solitude for a tptation, and assaults him with an all this will we give you; withall adding (as most commonly his speeches had a sting in the tayle) that there was no lesse could purchase his Liberty of the Parliament then his service. § 36 His Excellencies thoughts are now divided between two equall incon∣veniencies, uncertaine how to guide a dis∣creet choice; to continue himselfe in Prison (now he might be enlarged upon the inauguration of these new powers) were sullenly to put himselfe beyond all hope of being serviceable to himselfe, his cause, his Countrey; to goe and serve his successefull adversaries, and to abet pros∣perous villany with the same hands he once withstood it were to betray his for∣mer actions, and condemne himselfe:
not without some suspition of time-serving,  as if with that Marquesse of Winchester he had been made rather of the complying willow, then of the royall and solid oake; ready alwayes for the prevailing side. § 37 Upon a sober debate with him∣selfe (for War must be once well thought on, wherein they say a Man cannot erre twice) though morals by reason of the variety of unexpected circumstances are so uncertaine that its Arist. 1. eth. Cic. 1. et 3. et. Rhodius l. 2. c. 3. and quod dubitas ne feceris saith Pliny l. 1. ep. 19. covar. de mal. c. 7. p. 2. n. 9. what is not of faith is sin saith the holy Ghost Rom. 14. 23. if a Man doth any thing ad doubts he is damned:) yet part∣ly by the strength of his own great reason; partly by the advice of his Oracles whom he had ready to consult with in all emer∣gencies; (Its most excellent to be able to direct ones selfe, saith Minutius out of Hesiod, next to follow the good directions of others, vas{que} disp. 62. c. . n. 10. victor. de Judic. rat. 1. n. 12.  the company of wise men brings learning and wisdome unto Kings; The Romn Emperours undertook no War without the advice of Faeciales, nor the Christian without their Bishops saith Grotius bell. et pac. p. 1 117.) he left it to
posterity, that betwixt two evils his Excel∣leny could doe well. § 38 For with the consent of his best friends; with the blessing of his reverend Confessour the L. B. of E. with the ap∣probation of his own heart (and if our hearts condemne us not we have confidence towards God) He listed himselfe under the Par. for the Ks. service, professing (as I am credibly informed) to the B. of E. that as he expected Heavens blessing with his Lordships, he now served his enemies on∣ly for his friends advantage; And me∣thinkes the reverend Father, with other his noble and reverend fellow-prisoners bespeak him as David doth Hushai the Ar∣chite, 2 Sam. 15. 32, 33, 16, 17,18,17, 14, 'If you continue with us, you will be a burden to us as we are to you, but if you return, and say unto these younger pow∣ers, I will be your servant, as I have been a servant to the powes before you so will I also be yours; then may you defeat the councell of their Achitophels; Have you not with you also Zadock and Abiathan the Priests (two reverend Per∣sons, whom had I time to goe and aske their leaves, I would mention to the World not without due prefaces of ho∣nour,) & me thinks when some enemies
were ready to say is this your kindness to your friend? why would you not goe with your friend? he might reply as well as Hushi and no better, whom the Lord, and this people, and all the Men of Israel chose, his will I be, and with him will I abide.' And we have seen how by the councell of our Hushai, the Lord had appointed to defeate the good councell of eminent Achitophels to the intent that the Lord might bring evill up∣on these Absaloms; The incomparable Grotius out of L. sec. 1. de dolo malo, saith it was too crudely spoken by Cicero that our whole conversation ought to be alto∣gether free from simulation or dissimulati∣on; without which we cannot live among those that are wise in their own generati∣on; so lawfull is it (as Thom. 2. 229. 40. or 3. 9. 7. artic. silv: in verbo bell. p. 1. n. 9. decides the question out of St. Augustine upon the fifth Psalm) to cast the vayle of dissimulation, not that  but , that compliance and dispensation as Saint Chrysost. calls it over the face of truth, that God himselfe seemes sometimes to goe along with successefull wretches in the pursuit of their lower designes while he mannageth the eternall councell of his own will,
thus Paul harmlesly becomes all  things to all Men that he might gaine some; although , as well as , ought to be  a Man in whome there is no gile, and if it were possible to deale opely with all Men. § 39 But his Excellency besides was not to learne that usefull Men must not withdraw their service from their Coun∣trey to spight Usurpers: we must goe on each in our place to keep up Law, peace, and order according to an Usurpers will; though not for his Authority, but for publick good, which is the onely Sove∣raignty we are under in the absence of the Lawfull Mgistrate ordained of God; pro∣vided we contribute as little as vve can for the establishing of the Usurpers; Cyllas Lavves vvere of povver saith Quint. l. 2. c. 1. so far as the state of the Citty vvas contained in them; that it could not stand (as Florus upon those Lawes) if they were dissolved, see Saurez. de legib. l. 3. c. 10. n. 9. § 40 And now not onely Ireland, but England called like the Macedonian, come and help us; for they that turned the World upside down were almst come hither also: Campanella Cotzen, and Richleu in their politicks having long since made Ireland a passage into England; so its not so much
an order of Parliment, as a law of natur ditted by common safety and publick good that seemes to command him over into Ireland; which must not be neglected for any private quarrell; Themistocles and his Antagonist left their private grudges at home; when they were employed a∣broad for publick service; if the intelli∣gences were removed, their own (they say) and the Worlds interests would turn the Spheares. § 41 Its true the Rebels pretended a League with his Majesty, and therefore they should be rather succoured then op∣posed by his friends: But the wise knew that had his Majesties subjects helped these Rebels to a conquest over the Parliament, they had helped them to a conquest over themselves, for they were as impatient of a Protestant Monarchy, as of a Free state or rather more, for this was thought to be of their own designe and contrivance; and the other the object of their malice and antient hatred. His Majesty himselfe though much perswaded by his Mother, could not be prevailed with to joyne with those in Ireland; for though Thucy∣dides say the Athenians did well in a case of necessity to seek aide not onely of the Grecians but of the Barbarians; Yet me∣thinks
I heare Fulco of Remes in Fred. l. 4. Hist. Rhemensi c. 6. admonishing our Charles as he did another; who may not be afraid seeing you covet amity with the enemies of God; and to the overthrow of the Protestant name take unto you Popish armes, and enter into Leagues detestable; they are great offenders saith Alexauder in Arrianus, who serve the Barbarians a∣gainst the Greekes, contrary to the Lawes of Graecia; shouldest thou help the un∣godly, and love them that hate the Lord, 2 Chron. 19. 2. O King let not the arme of Israel goe with thee, for the Lord is not with Israel, nor with any of the Children of Ephra∣im, 2 Chron. 25. 7. Be yee not unequally yoked with misbelivers; for what felloship hath righteousnesse with unrighteousnesse, what communion hath light with darknesse, 2 Cor. 6. 1. 15. § 42 His Excellency resolves (upon the termes proposed by the Parliament) for the Irish service in the capacity of a Collonel of Foot; but first he must take the engagement; when usurpation hath ravished just power, it usually supports it selfe with the two Pillars of Armes and Oathes; a good Man feareth an oath, and therefore his Excellency, upon mature
deliberation made a promise equall to an  oath: (for a noble soule of  as the Persians, such bonae fidei as Augustus, that Isoc. de evag. Gunther. Leg. &c. Its word is as strong as its oath:) that he would be true and faithfull to the Common-wealth without a King or House of Lords; and he is not a Man that would not be faithfull to the interest, Common-wealth, and good of his own Nation as well without as with a King; which was the primary, favour∣able, proper and significant import of that ingagement to the best judgements of that time. § 43 He is no sooner made sure, but he is sent by that Man of dispatch, O. C. (into whom the old Emperour of Ger∣many thought Gustavus Adolphus his hasty soul was got by a metempsuchosis) with Reynolds and others to Chester, and thence wafted over by a favourable gale immedi∣ately to Dublin, and made his way reso∣lutely through the thickest of his enemies to relieve the distressed City; where they staid not long but impatient both of restraint and delay; they sally out for more elbow-room with that successe that they had the pursuit of the enemy for
ma∣ny miles, untill they came upon my Lord  of Ormond's whole Army ready for an o∣verthrow, such was their confusion and disorder. The honourable Lord of Ormond un∣happily thus associated, being betrayed to that security that he is playing at Tables, and his Army and cause lyes at stake. After this Victory these lower Com∣manders are carried about with the rapid motions of O. C. that violent first mover, who upon his first arrivall Jehu-like drave furiously tovvards Trogedah vvith all his Forces; took the place by storm, and spa∣red neither Man, Woman, nor Child, In∣deed throughout he vvas resolved to use the highest right and lavv of War; vvhich after ages may dare to call an injury; strangers were not spared, for by the Law of War strangers upon an enemies ground is an enemy, Philo. de judice ex vetere Ora∣culo. Malcha excerp. legis: nor sacred Per∣sons, my Lord Broghil hanged a Bishop (notwithstanding the common clamour for their Father in God) with an haec sunt vestimnta patris: no native escaped the severall parts jusly suffering for the guilt of the whole: Its lawfull to continue the punishment of a guilty Nation; for one generation after its fault, Arist. Pol. 7. c. 13. Lib. in. rat. de sedit. Ant. Yet its
the generall Law of War (if yet it have any law, and it be not true what that rash head blurted tha martiall Law was as ab∣surd as martiall peace) Hstis sit ill et qu extra praesidia, &c. Liv. 37. Baldus 1. de just. Bembus Hist. 7. mercy, sanctuary, &c. are say the Souldier, for the miserable ra∣ther then for the guilty, venet. de Asylis Thu. 1585. Cambd. Eliz. 1593. and we tooke all his Cities at that time, and utterly destroyed the Men; and the Women, and the little ones, and we left none to remaine, Deut. 2. 34. Ps. 137. ult. But with this flux of blood, they said they stopped a greater; Sanguinis fluxum diffusa venula revocamus Tert. The very repot of this siege reduced all Ireland: for immediately the two next Garrisons Trim and Dundalk are quitted; such a pannick fear seizing upon the Soul∣diers, that they were not able to endure a summns: this successe is seconded with the taking of Werford, Rosse, Kingsale, Corke, Youghal, Bandon-bridge, Barrow, and Duncannon, Enistroge, Carricke, Waterford and now Cromwell no sooner seeth a Citty or an Army, but he onquers it; In the meane time his Excellencies particuar honour was involved in that great renown of the Generall; whatever glory he ac∣quired it was as the Civilians say for his Master.
§ 44 Ireland now acknowledging onquest in ten months, (for they were there but from the midle of August, 169 to the next May, 1650.) which ten Ages formerly durst not boast of; They return by order of Parliament to England to assi them in those dangers that threatned them on every side; especially from Scot∣land that had ingaged it selfe by a lat Treaty at Breda to assist his sacred Majesty. 1. In bringing the Murtherers of his late Father of blessed memory to conligne punishment. 2. In recovering his royall right. § 45 Cromwell being to goe for Scot∣land, (the House having now concluded that the War should be offensive; and my Lord Fairfax laying down his Commis∣sion) makes choice of his Excellency for one of his Commanders in that desperate expedition; which he willingly under∣goeth when he heard the quarrel stated by Lashley upon the account of the Old Cause, 'and not upon the account of the King whom they disowned, as one sticking too close to his Fathers sins forsooth, his House & Friends:' Judging souls thought that War was for his Majesty rather then against him, that Cromwell there was loy∣all; and that it was a
great courtesy for  our Soveraign to be conquered, least a sad successe had gained him a Kingdome with the losse of Religion, Law, and Liberty, however his Excellency thought it unre∣sonable to see his Native Countrey submit its Law and Religion to the sawy imposi∣tion of a neighbour Nation that had been indeed often taught to take Lawes from us; but never to give us any. § 46 When his Excellency was in Scot∣land, jealous Oliver joynes with him Lam∣bert and Okey to watch his thoughts, words and actions, and to check him from any designe of loyalty; which he discreet∣ly observed, and therefore managed each action committed to his trust, as that a∣gainst the Highlanders, Dundee, &c. with such resolution as made him beleeved cordiall to the cause, and able for service, and therefore advanced him to the com∣mand of Lievtenant Generall in Scotland; It was his honest ambition to be eminent in every thing he undertook, so he hoped at last to arrive at that power that might sway Kingdomes to a compliance with his Majesties interest, as successfully as he saw them now swayed against it. § 47 And therefore when his Majesty marched for England by the way of Car∣lisle, he refused to follow him,
and chose  rather to compleat former victories in Scotland as Commander in chiefe, then to gaine new ones in England under Oliver: Therefore waiting anxiously betwen hope and feare upon his Majesties successe in England, he took care to reduce Scotland into a subjection to the Parliament untill an opportunity offered it self of restoring it to the King, who had utterly lost it had not he lost it. § 48 But no sooner were the Scots Wars finished, but Holland threatneth us. 1 Partly upon his Majesties account being engaged to his assistance: 1 By the Prince of Orange: 2 By Admirall Vantrump who had not forgot the high honours bestow∣ed upon him in England in the year 1641. 3 By an overture made between his late Majesty of blessed memory, and their Em∣bassadour the night before his death; Partly upon their own account claiming a right in our Seas which we for times out of mind were taught to See Grati∣um in are lib. Seld. a∣re Clo Stri. M. Com. Greg. Thol. jur. reg. Franc. prop. L. L. quae propria ulpian l. o. L. L. quae comuiae: vid servium in 12 AEn. virg. u∣stc. in il. . n. 22.— deny them.— See Fleta and Selden notes upon it; see Draytors Polyalbyon, Grotius de jure belli et pacis of propriety; see Saxon Lawes in Spelm and Selden: Just. and Theod. Codes: the Danish Lawes in the exact Collect of Beccius: Whitlockes observat. &c.
§ 49 His Excellecy is called upon  from Scotland to Sea in joynt commio with Blake, and Deane, he willingly sub∣mits knowing he was to engage for the right of his native Countrey, I meane the dominion of the narrow Sea, which be∣longed to England as a hedge (so the Sea is called in Eurip and most Poets since out of him) belongs to the inclosure, and indeed is the best of its enjoyments. § 50 He being at some losse in Sea af∣faires discovers as much wisedome in makig use of other Mens skill, as others did in acting by their owne; others di∣rect he encourageth, and spirits the dull Sea-men to action; to passe by the mean∣er passages his most solemn performance was the last engagement with the Dutch for which the Parliam. honour him with a gold chaine, and oblige him by a com∣mand over the Army in Scotland; which he underwet willingly, so securing to himselfe and his Master one Kingdome while now an Usurper swallows up two. § 51 Being come to Scotland he takes care that the councell who were in joynt power with him, should be Men of solid Principles and good Interest, & if he must be troubled with some fanaticks, they were some soft, easy and quiet Men that stood for cyphers, and were only
to ill up  a umber, and not to maintain a party. § 52 He takes care to restraine that Scottish spirit that is never quiet Conque∣rour nor conquered; and remembring what sad use they had made of former in∣dulgencies, proceeds with force and ri∣gour, resolving that they should really fear him, who he knew would never really love him. § 53 He disarmed, imprisoned, and in∣nocently trappanned them, (though none of them suffered the least upon his ac∣count in state or life) and so amused the cunning Scot, with active policy, that he had scarce time to think of plots, or to contrive villany. § 54 And when some Loyall persons under the honourable Middleton, at∣tempted something 1654. he easily sub∣dued them, first dividing and then con∣quering them; he was as ready to suppress those men that attempted any thing In∣considerately for his Majesty, as he hath been since to incourage them when they attempted any thing soberly: It was a∣bout that time Oliver would have had him out of Scotland, and therefore had not he opposed his Majesty then, probably he had not been in a capacity to restore him now.
§ 55 In Scotland he impartially exe∣cuted all Lawes enacted by the Supreame power in England tending to the peace & welfare of that Nation: so that his seve∣rities had not formerly enraged them more than his justice obligeth them, and therefore Oliver omitted no opportunity to tempt him out of Scotland, by calling him to the other house, &c. which temp∣tations he dextrously put off (choosing (with Caesar) rather to be first in Scotland than 3d. or 4th. in England) so that the Usurper was heard often to say "that he could do many things were G. M. out of Scotland: And if I am not deceived by knowing and good men, the Usurper up∣on his death-bed (when he was urged to name his successour) professed, It was in vain to set up a Protector in Egland for George Monck would bring a King out of Scotland.
MODERN POLICY. The Second Part. Sect. His Ex∣cllncies behviour upon Cromwel's death.ALthough upon Cromwel's death, it was thought, the awe (where∣by he checked the private de∣signes of each party to an ho∣mage to his own) was so happily remo∣ved; that the severall Grandees would now publickly pursue their aime at that Su∣premacy, to which each of them was wil∣ling to advance Cromwell first (one daring enough to break the ice to an
usurpation)  that they themselves might be his Se∣conds: and because (as Seneca saith) See∣lera dissident, their villainous Enterprises would interfer and clash, each of them resolving to admit neither equall nor su∣periour; it was thought honest men might have opportunities to joyn toge∣ther in vindication of lawfull Soveraignty and publick Right, while the Theeves and the Magna Latrocinia. publick Robbers (as the Pirates told Alexander) fell out about oppression and wrong; Take off the common Princi∣ples in which Rebels agree, ad the common persons that keep them together with those Principles, their variety of humors and inte∣rests bring them immediately to a division, and then to a ruine, Machiavl. Kings l. 2. c. 3. on Livy l. 6. c. 2. sect. 3. These Rods that have lain so long upon our backs might be singly broken, when they could not be broken united, and in a bun∣dle. But Cromwell taking as much care to keep usurped power as he took to gain it:—Nec minor est virtus quaerere quum per∣tatueri: and being a man of , as Arist. de An. l. 2. c. 1. Et. 4.
c. 3. of desires as vast as his thoughts,  and as boundless as his soul:  as Iamblichus Carm. 6. And therefore its pitty (as Socrates saith) that great and good have been separated) he secured not the Government with more policy to himself then he doth to his Heires after him for ever! for (naming his Son Ri∣chard Successor, according to a power cun∣ningly gained by him from the Paliament in a Petition and Advice 1656.) he con∣trived him an impregnable interest; first in Ireland, by his Brother Henry made there Lord Deputy: secondly in Scotland, by a Councell and an Army, made up, for the most part, either of Relations, or o Fanatiques, or of New-purchasers of the Kings, Queens, and Bishops Lands, all equally engaged to the Usurper: thirdly in England, 1. by a Councell made up of his Fathers own Creatures: 2. An Ar∣my under his Brother in Law Fleetwood Commander in chief; his Unle Desbo∣rough as Major Generall, and severall other Relations of his in great command; so that his Army was like that of Abrams, of his own house: 3. The City awed by a pack of Sectaries, under one Io. Ireton a Creature of his, since the marriage
of his  Brother Henry with Oliver's Daughter. 4. The Countrey people generally so much pleased with the obliging carriage, to which Oliver politickly brought him up, that they generally said, If we must needs have an Usurper, we will be content to have him. Sect.His Excellency saw Richard so well set∣tled, that to attempt any thing against so well layed a Government, in the behalf of his most Sacred Majesty, had been but to hazard the best Cause, with his own and his Friends persons and fortunes, against a tide, which swelling higher by the opposition, would quickly have overwhelmed them: And therefore he submitted himself to a compliance with the Power then in being; acting by its authority; knowing (as Grotius saith, jure belli & pacis p. 1. c. 73.) That the acts of empire which an Usurper exerciseth may have power to oblige, not out of his right, which is none, but because its better his Commands should prevail and be of force, then utter confusion be brought in; the Laws and Iudgements being taken away; See Suarez leg. l. 3. c. 10. n. 7.
vid. de potest. civ. n. 23. And so his Excellency went on with the Usurper, strengthening the hands of the evill doer for publique good, while he was weakening him in pri∣vate interest: We may observe in Nature, that the severall parts of it, though they are ordinarily true and faithfull to their standing rule, law, and duty, (the light go∣ing upwards and the heavy downwards, &c.) yet they are allowed to comply with a violence, that brings them out of their place & order, against their inclination and law, to fill up such chasmes, and supply such vacuities as may endanger the dissolution of the whole. Besides, I think really his Excellency, together with our Gracious Soveraign, had rather the Invader should be left in posses∣sion, then occasion given to such danger∣ous and bloudy commotions, as they both trembled at the thoughts of, which yet must necessarily follow upon any violence against those men, who have strong Facti∣ons on their side at home, and as strong Confederacies abroad. It was their opinion, , Plutarch: Or as Favonius hath it, Ci∣vill War is worse then unlawfull Government.
Mihi pax omni cum civibus bello civilii  utilior videtur, Cic. Titus Quintus thought it better the Tyrant Nubis had been let alone at Lacedemo, when he could not otherwise be thrown down, but with the ruine of the Common-wealth, likely to perish in vindication of her Liberty: For (as Aristophanes hath it) A Lion is not to be bred in a City; but if he be brought up he must be kept: For indeed we nec morbum ferre possumus nec remedium, Liv. Yea, we were so unfotunately ck, that we feared, plus pericul a medico quam a morbo: For though Usurption falls heavy upon many particulars, yet the blody consequences of an intestine War are worse spading and permanent. Sect.His Excellency was as carefull to keep others within an usefull moderation and prdence, as he was to act according to it himelf; and therefore upon Oliver's death He and the Councel make an Order: That there be none brought from beyond the Seas to Scotland, and that none be carried from Scotland
beyond the Seas, without speciall leave, and a Passe. That there be no unusuall meetings of Persons danger∣ously affected to the Peace of that Nation, &c. And seized upon severall persons danger∣ously busie about his Majesties Affairs in that Kingdome; whereby he at once seemed to be very cordiall against his Ma∣jesties interest and for that of the Usur∣pers; and really did his Majesty the best service imaginable, and his Friends the greatest curtesie: 1. Restraining them from those attempts which had been their ruine: AEquum non est (saith Stal∣lius) ut sapiens disipientur causu in pe∣ricula & turbas se conjiceat: See Nehem. 9. 27. 2. And withdrawing from the Usurpe that advantage whih he made of such vain and empty oppositions, towards his own esta∣blishment and
settlement who knows no that Oliver ws advaned to that height  we ere while admired and feared, by those plots which he subtlely contrived, and others were foolishly trapanned to? by whose discovery and defeat he rendered himself formidable, and by sly innuati∣ons, of what danger the Government, and the three Nations were in, by reason of them, prevailed with his Conventions to secure the Common-wealth, by promoting his power daily, upon the occasion of one pretended Plot after another, untill he srued himself up to the power of the most absolute Monarch in Europe. His Excellency thought that monstrous Power would fall away of it self, which might be held up and strengthened by op∣postion; A Lacedemonian in Plutarch when he read, Hos dum Marte parant domi∣natum extinguere, saevus ante saliuntis Maenia mors rapit: added, Merito viri illi periere; expectare enim debuerunt, ut ipse per se dominatu conflugraret. Sect. His ac∣quiscing in Ri∣chards free Parlia∣ment.In the mean time he resolved to acqui∣esce discreetly in the determination of the free and full Parliament, which Richard and his Councell were happily
necessitated to call; towards the right constitution of which, he contributed much in the choice of such Parliament men for Scotland, as the Malignant party in England would not have willingly admitted to the House; who when they entered, assisted the Honest party in such counsels as would have brought down the power which Oliver set up with so much bloud and treasure, in the twinkling of an eye, without any noise or stir: wherefore they were suddenly after dissolved by the Army, with a consent that Richard gave to it: . Although his Excellency was sorry to see such unwarrantable violence offered to a free Parliament, made up of the honou∣rable Representatives of three Nations; yet he was pleased to see that vast Power taken from Cromwel's Family, by the same Authority that gave it them, even before a third Heir enoyed it: He so well fore∣saw the future establishment of these Na∣tions, through these severall revolution (as the establishment of a fair World out of a Chaos) that he stuck not in an Ad∣dress to the Parliament (whom the Army had invited to reassume their power, which they had once forced them from, and now looked upon as the onely Authority that
could serve their turn and interest) to say, that the Nation was then born in a day. Sect. His carri∣age to∣wards the long Par∣liament when re∣called.When those Members that the Army had called in, refused the admission of the secluded Members, those worthy Patriots, that were resolved to doe their King and their Counrey right; when they resolved to surp the Government, denying the Na∣tion their priviledge of being governed by a free and full Parliament, and siding with a company of Sectaries and desperate per∣sons, that were engaged to rine our Church and State, neglected our honoura∣ble Nobility, our worshipfull Geny, our reverend Clergy, and in a word slighted three Kingdomes, and with their assistance awe us with Militia's, and oppress us with Assesments so farre, to the discontent of the whole Nation, that they agree upon a generall Insurrection upon the first of August; but upon some discoveries made by the unhappiness of the Honourable the Lady Howard (whose Sex was not capa∣ble of that secrecy which her Loyalty might be intrusted with) and others, they were prevented in most places, save onely
in Cheshire, Lancashire, and Wales, where Sir Thomas Middleton, Sir George Booth, Sir Philip Egerton, &c. by reason of their distance fom the Parliament and Army, got together such a considerable party, that alarumed the whole Army under Lambrt, and an Irish Bigade besides to march to∣wards them: whom his Excellency be∣held favourably, and had they brought their design to any issue, he would have as∣sisted to bing those refractory Members at Westminster to some reasonable termes: Although he would not have engaged against those Members, (being obliged unto them, and thinking not with Cicero, that a man may break his oath with theeves; or with Brutus in Appion, That , That the Romans esteem no faith, yea nor oath to be kept with Tyrants,) yet would he have used his interest with them to reduce them to a Modera∣tion.T. Fregis sidem. A. quàm neque dedi, neque do Infideli cui periam. Accuis. Sect. His design upon Sir G. Booth's rising.But upon Sir George Booth's overthrow, Lambert, blown up with the success, sores high, and contrives, that
the Army now highly caressed by him, with the thousand pound sent by the Parliament to buy him Jewell, &c. should stickle for his Honou to be Commander in chief of all the For∣ces in England, Scotland, and Ireland, the next step to the Protectorship of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that the Par∣liament, in case they denied it, should be dissolved; which he saw done accord∣ingly. Sect. His reso∣lution a∣gainst the Armies Arbitrary power.Whereupon Lambert calling together his Counsel of Officers, makes sure of a correspondence with the Army in Ireland, and Scotland, and therefore dispatchet Collonel Barrow for Ireland, and Collonel Cobbet to General Mnck; who though he was a Member of the Army, yet was he likewise a Servant to the Parliament; and of two Confederates he is to be preferred that hath a just cause of warr. The Athe∣nians were to assist their fellows the Mess∣nians against their other fellows the Lace∣demonians, De. Orat. de Megalop. Me∣thinks I hear his Excellency replying to Collonel Cobbet's Message, as the Anans did to the Spartans, Aicis auxilia feren∣da contra hostes non contra Amicos; vid. fidel. Tubal. l. 4. c. 31. l. 7. Ptolom. apud
Appianum in leg. exceptis: Or with him in Alexandrides. Ego esse vester non queam Comilito, Quando nec leges nec mores Consentiunt Sed multis inter se Convallis discrepant. Vid. Orat. Partazae ad Lazs apud Agath. l. 3. c. 2. n. 6. Sect.The noble Generall, according to his instructios from London, secures Cobbet; at once preserving his Army from such dangerous ininuations as that person brought along with him thither; and to cut off all the advantages the Army in England might have of the informa∣tion he might carry home with him. He impri∣sons Cob∣bet the Ar∣mies Mes∣senger.Its true an Embassadour is per saecula po∣pul sanctum noen Papin. & Pompon. l. si quis D. de legal. yea, Sancta sunt car∣pora legatorum var. l. 3. del. Tutius regres∣sus legato Radevic. append. de Polon. morian. l. 12. de mauris; so that they were not to be violated in life, limb, estae, or li∣berty; for it is contra jus legatorum, lega∣tos in vinculis habere Menand. de Iust. 2. Imp. But Collonell Cobbet is rather a Messen∣ger
of a Faction of Subiects, then a prope Embassadour of the Supreme power, and therefore he must not claim the right of a Embassadour: It's the pecliar preroga∣tive of Majesty, and Supreme Authority (aith Dion. Hulicarn.) to create Magi∣strates, to make Laws, to make Warre and Peace, and to send Embassa∣dours. Legates must not be received from An∣tony, for saith Cicero, In that Case we have nt to doe with Hanniball, an enemy of the Common-wealth, but with one of our own Countrey. Nobly doth the Generall im∣prison him, who brought along with him th face of a Faction, and the authority of Rebels; who would have honoured him, Si senatus faciem secum attulerat auctori∣tatem reip. Cic. Philip. 7. Sect. He models his Army.And then his Excellency feeling the temper of his Army, upon Collonell Cob∣bets Message (accoding to the power gi∣ven him, when he was made Commissio∣ner for governing of the Army, with Sir Arthur Haserig, Collonell Walton, Collo∣nell Morley Collonell Okey, &c. by the Parliament, just before their dissolution)
he models it, and secures such Officers (as he found, either too loosely principled, or already too dangerously engaged, to be en∣trusted in so honourable an expedition as he resolved upon;) in Tantillon Castle first, and since in the Basl Islands, so confi∣ning their principles and persons within those walls, which otherwise might have too sad an influence upon that whole Ar∣my and Nation. Sect. He de∣clares.And then thinks fit to declare his reso∣lution, to assert the authority of Parlia∣ments against all violence whatsoever, in two Remonstrances, one to the whole Nation, and the other to the Churches. Whereupon the English Officers bethink themselves of a Declaration too; 'where∣in supposing the end of Government to be the publick good, they must perswade the world that they are the onely promo∣ters of that in the world:' In melle sunt inguae sita vstrae, atque orationes lacte; orda flle sunt sita, atque acerb aceto inguis dicta dulcia datis, ut
corde amara aciis. Pretence white as milk, And as soft as silk, Will do the feat; Your hearts as sowre as gall Purpose our thrall, And thus ye cheat. 'They ravish us with apprehensions of li∣berty, while they enthrall us with oppres∣sion; and as their usuall manner is, they bespatter the Parliament with their foul∣est ink, making (according to an ordi∣nary figure in Policy) every infirmity a fault, and every fault a crime:' yea, they were almost ready to swallow that grosse abuse; , Isocrates, of making the Office guilty of the Officers abuse. And withall they declare the necessity of their proceedings; they thus make a virtue of necessity, seeing no other virtue will be so easily induced to serve their pro∣ceedigs; and she may well be the patron of all licentiousness, who her self hath  law. They declare the necessity of continu∣ing the cashiered Officers
in power, which is a necessity onely of their own creating,  and ignifies no more, but that they are compelled to cover wrong with wrong; as if it were not enough to have done michief with an Army, but we must con∣tinue that Army to defend and justifie it: Their is, That his Maje∣sty must be kept out of his just rights, and that the Nation be deprived of their Laws, Liberties, Religion, &c. And thence it follows, as a Conclusion becoming that Premise, that it's necessary our Army be commanded by Persons, that are the worst Rebels against the one, and the greatest Violators of the other: . Sect. The effi∣cacy of his Declarati∣on.But his Excellencies rationall Declara∣tion (which he published to give the world the same satisfaction, for his un∣dertakings, that he had already in his ow breast, scorning the  of Ioseph. An. 15. Crantz. Saxon. 11. Nicet. l. 3. & 4. and willing to provide honest things, even in the sight of men) out-weighed their Pamphlet with the Ju∣dicious; because they saw in his few words; (for he, with Stenelaidos the Ephor, would not stand debating with words,
being injured above words) that he asserted Authority, the ligamet of humane socie∣ty, against Violence and Rebellion; he asserted the true publique, instead of a pri∣vate good; he stood for liberty against li∣centiousness and oppression: In a word, because they saw him expressing himself throughout like a Person of worth and ho∣nour. Messen∣gers sent to him.After this of the Armies Declaration, they send two more Messen∣gers to his Excellency, his dear Brother in Law, Doctor Clerges, and another, to satis∣fie him more fully of their proceedings; for his Excellency, as if he wanted nothing else all this while but good intelligence, writes them an ambiguous Letter, intima∣ting, that he might comply with them bet∣ter if he had but the happinss to under∣stand them. Indeed it was but prudence, to suspend all expressions that might make them despair of his compliance with them, untill he were ready to appear against them. Sect.And these are followed by Whaley and Gffe,
Caryl and Barker, as Messengers from  the Churches, who had a Bird for every Conquerour: Its the boast of a Dutch∣man, that he can sail with all winds; the Compass breaths not more varieties then these dexterous souls have changes, and garbs, and suitable compliances. 'Its the perfection of an Oratour, to make happy applications to the severall humours and geniusses of all sorts of men:' That's the character of these Church-men; these Inde∣pendent Willows are pliant to the poor power of a contemptible Committee of Saf∣y; as Alcibiades shifted disposition as he al∣tered place, so they proportion themselves to time place, person, religion, with such a plausibleness, as if they had been born one∣ly to serve that Opinion, which they har∣boured but as a guesse, while it continued in sway. He calls an Ho∣norable convn∣tion of Nobility and Gen∣try at E∣denbo∣rough.In the mean time his Excellency (be∣ing by a call (as he expressed himself to the Convention) from God and man, engaged for England, to restore the Parlia∣ment to their due freedome and honour) assembles the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland at
Edenburgh; to whom he pro∣posed: Sect. His pro∣positions to them, with there Answer and his Reply.1. That they would secure the peace of that Nation during his absence, which would not be long. 2. That they would supply him with some men for this undertaking, which he engaged upon his Honour should be to their satisfaction. 3. That they would advance what mo∣ney they could beforehand. And hearing by the Earl of Glencarne, the Chair-man of that Assembly, that 1. The Scots were, since their being disarmed, uncapable of keeping the peace. 2. That they were so unconcerned in the issue of his undertakings, that they saw no reason they should engage with him. 3. That they would advance a yeares tax before-hand. 1. He gives the Lords and Gentry power to arm themselves. 2. He satifieth them privately in the design of his expedition. 3. And accepts of their yeares tax (O rare) before-hand; that being what he first intended, though what he last proposed.
And thereupon he dismisseth the As∣sembly, which he would not have called together but in a case of necessity, which makes any thing lawfull; it being one of the Regalia (as G. Thls hath it) to call Assemblies. And then he resolves to stay no longer then his supplies of men and money come in: In the mean time he encourageth Sir Charles Coote, the Lord Brohill, &c. to take this opportunity to reduce Ireland, with it's sectarian Governours (the first po∣senous Creatures that ever came over thi∣ther) according to their design layed be∣fore any thoughts of the dissolution o this Long Parliament; but he advised them to proceed leisurely, and by piece-meal, for that, which at one view would be a mormo to fight them, give it them but in part, and it would please them: All great mu∣tations (saith the noble Falkland) are dangerous, evenwhere what is introduced by that mutation is such, as would have been very profitable upon a primary foun∣dation, Sect. His pru∣dent ma∣nage∣ment of a Treaty.Yet hearing that Lambert was coming against him with
thirteen thousand men,  (resolved pro regn patriam petes, conju∣gm flammis dare) indeed Imperia pretio qulibet constat bene, according to the advice of an high-spirited Fury) he (with that King in the Parable) sits down and cosiders with himself, whether with his seven thou∣sand men (which was all he could bring to the field from his Garrisons, the High∣lands, and the new supplies) was able to enter battell with his enemy, that leadeth thirteen thousand; and finding himself too weak, before the enemy enters his Territories, he sends Messengers of peace, he thinking of the unexpected Accidents before he did engage, Thucydides adviseth, was loth to hazard the justice of his Cause upon the chances of a battell; we, may quit something of our own right to avoid pursuing it, with so much hurt to other men as Warre carrieth along with it; Vict. de jure bel. n. 14. & 33. Arist. Polit. 4. Rhet. ad Alex. 3. Pausan. l. 5. Philost. l. 23. Sen. suas 5. Yet withall he provides for Warre; being (as Ioseph. 2. Cont. Appian) To preserve the Laws; other losses he could bear patiently, but when he is forced to depar
from the Laws, then he will fight even beyond his strength,  and endure all extremitie of Warre. He sends three to treat with those at Wallingford, viz. Collonell Wylkes, Lieute∣nant Collonell Clobery, and Major Knight, with letters to Gen. Fleetwood, 'intima∣ting his readiness to comply upon reaso∣nable terms with his old friends and fel∣low souldiers; and his sorrow for the ad∣vantages which were given the common enemy, by this unseasonable distance of friends.' Sect. His Let∣ters to the City.But withall he sends letters to the City, 'to encourage them to stand fast in their Liberty, for their Laws, Priviledges, Pro∣perties, and lawfull Government;' for which he there expressed himself ready to live and die: which letters were deliver∣ed by Collonell Alured, and Collonell Markham; but by reason of the conclu∣sion the fore-mentioned Treaters came to, so contrary to the contents of those letters, they were a while under Cassan∣draes fate, of not being believed, though they brought in them the highest truths imaginable, as time the father of truth hath since made maifest.
Sect.The Treaty is concluded in an agree∣ment upon these termes: 1. That his Majesties Title be renoun∣ced. 2. That England, Scotland, and Ieland, be governed as a free State, with∣out any single Person, or House of Peers. 3. That an able and a godly Ministry be encouraged, and the Universities regulated. 4. That the Army be not disbanded without its own consent. 5. That there be a meeting of three from Scotland, three from Ireland, and three from England, not Officers of the Army, and five from Scotland, and five from Ire∣land, and five from England, Officers of the Army, to consult about a further settle∣ment. Sect.But his Excellency had discreetly re∣served to himself the ratification of the Treaty, so that nothing should be of force untill he confirmed it with his own Seal; and therefore upon the return of his Com∣missioners by his own order, he (imprison∣ing Collonell
Wylkes for going beyond his  Commission) declareth the Treaty void, and marcheth towards the Borders, in∣tending to make Berwick, which he had secured at first, his Head-quarters; hold∣ing correspondence with his friends all over England, especiall in the West, as the information Collonell Cobbet gave his friends at Wallingford House intimated. Sect.At Berwick he gave the Messengers of the Army, and of the Churches, very plau∣sible answers, whih yet signified nothing, receiving and dismissing them with great respect; but yeilding to them nothing prejudiciall to his cause; so that one of the Ministers, upon his return home, must needs tell his Congregation, That the seed of the Serpent is irreconcileable with the seed of the woman. Sect. Overtures towards a second treaty' with the grounds of it.Fabius saved Rome by a delay; his Ex∣cellency being advised from England, That if he could keep at distance with his Ad∣versary untill the first of Ianuary, the work would be done without bloud-shed; make some overtures of peace with Lam∣bert, but alwayes insisting upon the re-ad∣mission of the
Parliament to the exercise  of their trust, to be granted before they enter upon ay Treaty. Sect.Now some Commissioners for the Par∣liament, viz. Haserig, Walton, and Morley, having gained Portsmouth with the conset of Collonell Whetham, formerly of the Counsell of Scotland, whereof his Excel∣lency was President; and Lawson (not∣withstanding all endeavours by that Syren Vane, to perswade him to the contrary) declaring with the Navy for the Parlia∣ment; and the Land forces for want of pay revolting; the Army in the North moul∣dereth away, and yieldeth to time ad delay. Sect. He mo∣veth to England with his whole Ar∣my.Thus all force being removed from the Parliament, and they sitting, thought themselves not safe untill he by his autho∣rity and presence came to awe the Sol∣diery and the tumults, that want nothing but an Head to lead them to another Re∣bellion. Sect. His pru∣dent ma∣nagement of affairs throughout his progress to a subservien∣cy to his design.His Excellency (whom former Powers could not draw from Scotland with either fear or
favour) takes this opportunity to  do his Countrey and King a publick right: And so (though ordered to bring with him onely three hundred men, and dispose the rest for quarters) he marcheth with his whole Army, modelling such Garrisons and Forces as he met with to a posture subservient to his design, intrusting them with men faithfull to his and the Nations Interest, which were now no more two but one: and commending the care of Scotland to Major Generall Morgan, a Person very in∣dustrious in assisting his Excellency, going to him in his greatest extremity from Lon∣don, to encourage him and his Army to a resolution in those designes, that were as great as they were good, he marcheth with his own Army, which he knew was tryed and ithfull: whereas the other Forces (an aire dato conducta cohors bellica, miles dona sequens pretioque suum mutare favo∣rem suetus, & accepto pariter cum munere bello, hunc habuisse dator pret quem jusse∣rit, hostem, Bell. de re mil. 2. p. t. 2. n. 4.) would upon the least temptation (as he told the Parliament) betray both himself and them too.
And in his way finds the Honourable His confe∣rence with the Lord Fair∣fax in his way to York-shire. Lord Fairfax, with Sir H. Cholely, &c. in Armes against free Quarter, and for a free Parliament, with whom he had pri∣vate conference, to each parties satisfacti∣on. Sect.Here he receives a Message from the City by the Sword-bearer; to which he returns this Answer. 1. That he was resolved for the Parlia∣ment as it was on the 11. of Octob. last. 2. And yet when he came to the City (which he said would be shortly) he as∣sures them he would satisfie their expecta∣tion. Thus at once he keeps himself to his own Commission, owns the onely face of Authority then in being, under whose Au∣thority he might act safely, & yet prately manageth things according to his own principles and thoughts: So inferiour Orbes suffer themselves to be swayed by the motion of the superiour, while yet they steal a motion of their own: The Parliament serve the Publick for them∣selves; His Excellency will serve them for the Publick; 'Being inviolably constant to his Principles of
Virtue and religious Prudence; his Ends are noble, and the meanes he useth innocent: His Worth had led him to the Helm of our State: The Rudder he useth is an honest and vi∣gorous Wisdome: The Starre he looks on, for direction is in Heaven; and the Port he aimes at, is the joynt welfare of Prince and People.' Sect. He is ca∣ressed by the whole Countrey but not under∣stood.And then he proceeds towards London, being courted by the Counties as he passed, as the Patron of Authority, Law, Liberty, and Property, (his Expedition looking like a Kings Progress rather then a Souldiers March) and addressed o by the most considerable Gentry, to use his interest in restoring them to their Birth∣rights, their Laws, their Priviledges, and a full and a free Parliament; whose de∣sires if he had satisfied, he had utterly dis∣appointed; for to have discovered him∣self, had been to defeat the hope of the whole Nation: Veritatem voluit celari non mendacium dici, Aug. q 20. in Gen. And therefore he usually answered them, that he would see 1. All force removed from the Parliament. 2. The House filled. 3. See that there be good provision made for future
Parliaments: And so he kept  himself dark to his Adversaries and his common Friends, though he was light to himself, his Prince, and his discreeter Friends, Quibus pro sermone nutus mtus∣que membrorum est; uti, Plin. de AEthiopum Ge l. 6. 30. Arist. Nu. 4. c. 8. Incerta disseruit, tractu∣rus interpretationem pro ut coduxisset, Ta∣cit. Hist. 3. He gave answers doubtfull and inclining whither they were drawn: Manass. Ben. Iser. Concil. q. 39. Notwith∣standing there were two sent of purpose to watch him Scot and Robinson, who re∣turned as wise as they came: His Excel∣lency dropped never a syllable that Suspi∣tion it self could be afraid of, all the while they were with him; every word he let fall was he well-weighed issue of Judge∣ment and Reason, that did signifie, but not beray his mind: His expressions were Oracles, as well for their clear worh to his discerning Friends, as for their dark doubt∣fulness to his preying Enemies, So Christ himself spoke to his Enemies in Para∣bles. Sect. He con∣ceales his resentment of the Par. hard usage to those that made address to himAbout this time his Excellency saw how dangerous it had been for him to de∣clare
for the Nations right, when it was high misdemeanour but humbly to wish for it; when groans for grievances, as once at Rome, were dangerous, and com∣plaints were treason; when men are im∣prisoned for what Nature, Reason and Law hath declared to be the right of man, and our Parliament declared to be the right of English men; I mean, An humble Petition for Right. He saw Sir Coppleston Bamp∣field for Exeter, and Sir Robert Pye for Berk-shire, without any respect at all to the Counties whence they came, the Message they carried, or the Honourable Person to whom they were imployed, confined to the Tower; and yet he having, with that Earl of Leicester, his passions in his poc∣ket, looks upon them with an unconcerned eye, and takes no care for the liberty of few imprisoned persons, least he should lose the opportunity of redeeming an en∣slaved Nation. Sect. How he controls his Soul∣diers.His Excellencies march to England was slow & orderly: So first taking time to ob∣serve the posture, genius, and inclination of the Kingdome. Secondly, and keep∣ing his Souldiers close to himself, ready
for any occasion, and in order; fobidding all private meeting of Officers or consul∣tations about State Affars; assuring them that he and they were rather to obey Pow∣ers, then to control them: and that every person should be so long in Command un∣der him, as they were in obedience under Authority. Sect. A Letter to Mr. Roll in his name.In his March he takes occasion to an∣swer a Declaration of the Western Gen∣tlemen, that run too high at that time to be complied with, and yet was too just and equall to be neglected: Wherein he pub∣lished expressions, that like a well-framed picture, look'd smilingly upon all sides; especially let the honest part of the Nati∣on see a Grant of their whole wishes through a denyall: 'For (said he) the Nation could not be settled without a Civill Warre, unless the severall interests 1. Of such new Sects (as Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists) never known here before the Warres. 2. Of such new Factions, as the purchasers of Kings, Queens, and
Bishops Lands, were provi∣ded for by such a comprehesive settle∣ment as might include all sides:' (,  Aristot. Eth. 6. Quod com∣mune est, connectit civitates, quod singulorum dissipat, quare & publice & privatim u∣tilius est ut publia magis quam privata curentur. Plato 4. legum; a Law is to be profitable (saith Cato L. D. de leg. l. 3. in fine D. D. petit haered) to the grea∣ter part and the main: Semper non quod privatim interest, uni ex sociis servari de∣bet, sed quod communi societati expedit L. actiones sect. Labeo D. Soc. That is good for the Bee that is good for the Hive (An∣toninus) and therefore Monarchy in the State which a free Parliament would in∣troduce being so inconsistent with the la∣ter sort of mens interest, and Monarchy in the Church which is the necessary at∣tendant o State Monarchy (for no Bishop no King) "they being so inconsistent with he interest of the former sort of men was not the best way of establi∣shing these Nations: Whereby he gave us to understand rather what he thought expedient, then what he thought lawful; intimating withall to the discreet and wise," that those things were his as well as the Natios designe, but it was not yet time to accomplish them.
As soon as time and prudence had con∣quered all remaining difficulties, he could be as much for a free Parliament, and the happy issues of it as themselves. In the meane tim, though his Loyalty promp∣ted him to serve his Majesty, and his Countrey; yet his Prudence taught him not to engage against Impossibilities: In a word, he lets not fall one word in that Let∣ter, that seemed to deny that any of those things therein mentioned were lawfull, though hee dropped some that signified that all those things were not Then expe∣dient. Sect. His hono∣rable La∣dies arri∣vall at London.When a long and tedious March, with the Prayers and Wishes of the whole Na∣tion, had brought his Excellency to Saint Albanes, his honourable Lady borne to succour afflicted Loyalty and Majesty was arrived at Whitehall: Our Venus being brought by Water to meete her Mars by Land, how seasonably is shee arrived to give heat and life to his cooler thoughts, and to spirit his grave and slow designes into accomplishment he sayd the King should Come, but she sayd Now: Her eager
Passions, those Whet-stones of ver∣tue  (Cic. Acad. 9. l. 4. Tusc. 9. l. 4.) Set him on to a performance, when his cauti∣ous Wisdome checked him to a Retreat, A furiis agitatus amor, A sacred fury of Love: , Cael. Rhodig l. 16 c. 15. Raising her wishes above all thoughts of difficulties, suggested to her expedition: but he remembring that Arist. Poli. 3. c. 16. That Passions are not fit to conclude of Enter∣prize, Methinks answers her Importu∣nate Loyalty: As Latinia doth Turnus, —Quantum ipsa feroci Virtute exupero, tanto me impensius aequum est Consulere, atque omnes metuentem expen∣dere casus The more undaunted Courage doth you move Its fit my serious feares shew the more Love In mature Counsells, and in weighing all The various dangers, and Event may fall.
The impatient Lady was so intensively fixed on restored Majesty, that shee seem∣ed to decay with a lingring Expectation to enjoy it, , Theocrit. Idyl. 2.) she hardly rested night or day from some e∣minent service for her Soveraign, he took up her thoughts, her discourse, insomuch that her hopefull Son, when checked by some Gentlemen for an often mention of the King, replyed pretily, I am sure my Fa∣ther and Mother talke of him every night When the honourable City drooped under a fear of the Issue of the late doubtfull ex∣pedition of his Excellency, she speakes them to a Life and Resolution with these words: Did you (Gentlemen) un∣derstand Generall Monck as well as I do, you might trust him. He lodg∣eth at White-Hall.When he had stayed there some days to refresh his Army to consult with his Of∣ficers, and to look about him for the setle∣ment of every thing in its place, in a sub∣serviency to his designe, He marcheth to London, and refuseth not the accommoda∣tions offered him at Whitehall, as some thought he would; being too wary to o∣pen himselfe, when he had the
opportuni∣ty  to hide himselfe by an acceptance of a curtesie. Sect. He gives account of his ex∣pedition to the House.At Westminster (when he had indulged himselfe some time or the imbaes of his dearest Consort, that deserved his first and dearest Affections) he attends the House solemnly according to their Order, conducted by Scot and Robinson on each side of him who was a virtue to each ex∣treame, and modestly refused the Chaire tht was offered him, now as above him∣selfe in Humility, as he was above others in worth: They with most Regret and Ten∣derness receive Honours that most deserve them. Sect. His de∣portment and speech.Leaning on the back of the Chaire, pro∣vided for him, he delivered himselfe in a choice, pure, breife, clear, vigorous Ex∣pression of the great Notions in his mind to this purpose. 1. "That he deserved no Thanks, having done no more then his Duty:" He is lesse willing to hear Commendations, that hath done most worthy of them: though he had attempted great things resolutely and valiantly, he heared Applauses and Elogies for them, by so
much the more tenderly, by how much they were more justly due. 2. He turned their Thanks, Applauses, and Commendations from himself the In∣strument in their Restauration to God the Author: Accipio, agnoscque, Deos, Virg. AEn. 12. —. . —If God will ight Soph. Aj. Ezek. 3. He can make the weak men put the strong to light, Anton. By God, and therefore to God are all things, Rom. 11. Ult. But knowing that it is, . Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. Sen. Ep. 95. Chrysoft. Hom. 25. Its not the menioning so much as the improving of mercies, which expresseth out thankfulness to God, Ovid. AEshyr. Apud Plut. de audit. Pt. A. Gel. l. 1. c. 15. Tertul. de Patria, c. 1. Therefore he humbly desired the Par∣liament to satisfie the Expectation of the Nation, in
the establishment of their Laws  Liberties, &c. Upon this their wonder∣full Restauration; God had beene at the charges (as I may so speak) of so many wonders from above, not his Excellency of so much care and paines below to re∣store them, not so muh that the should seek Their own, as the publick good. 3. He desired them particulaly to take off the Suspition men had of their perpetuity, by determining their own Sessions, and providing for future Parliments (A consti∣tution si vetustatem spectes vetustissima, si dignitatem honoraissima, si jurisdictionem Copiosissima) Where the Nation by its se∣verall Representatives might gravely, de∣liberately, and safely consult its own peace and setlement. The Major part as Grotius saith in his Hyl. Gothi....) prevailing over the minor "Otherwise theres no hope of Peace: Where there are multitudes of Coun∣sellers there is safety. 4. Thn he commended to them a mo∣deration in their qualification, intimting, That it would be their Prudence not to nar∣row but widen their Interest: Withal, telling them, the noble Gentry were so ingenuos, That faire meanes would bring to that compliance, when hard usage would
de∣terre  them: English spirits must not be forced but won by an acquiescence, they are not to be subdued but with kindness. 5. He wisheth them to be tender in im∣pong Oathes (though yet he thought none were to be admitted to any trust in England, as none ever was without an In∣gagement to be faithfull to the Power in Being.) In all Governments Fundamen∣talls are ecured by standing Lawes, obli∣ging all to a faithfullnesse and constancy to them, when the supestructures are capable of alterations by the growing Wisdome of succeeding Ages, and Powers) He was sen∣sible of the abuse of Gods Name in our fre∣ent Oathes: E toutes manieres sa este un fort belle Ordinance & institution, de en user point du nom des dieux legerement de peur de les Contaminer, Car la Majeste des dieux ne se doit Imployer, qu' en un sainct, & Vene∣rable purete. Its wisely ordained that the Names of the Gods should not be used upon trifling occasions: for the Majesty of the Gods should not be imployed but in holy and venerable purity. Malvezzi on Philostratus. Casaub. Exercit. 202. 2, Of the abuse of force whence,
.  Scholl. in Aristoph. Untill men have used them so commonly, that they can shake off their Cords with as much ease as Sampson did his Withs, and breake over these Hedges of Faithfullnesse when they please: Though Vt Masora sepes, legi decimae di∣vitiis vot a sanctimoniae, silentium sapientiae, sacramenta fidelitatis, Pirke Aboth As the Masora Hedges in the Law Tythes Hedge in Riches, so Oathes kepe in faithfullness, so restraining and bounding our hearts that are as unstable as Water, whose propriety is to be Arist. Gen. 5. Corrupt. l. 2. c. 2. to be apt to shed abroad when left to it self: but alass! His Excellency, since men make too much use of that piece of Lysander , that Children are to be cosened with Rattles and men with oathes: with whom pactum non pactum est, non pactum pactum est cum illis Lubet, Paul. Aul. An oath shall no oath be, if they no ad∣vantage see: but an oath, an oath shall be if it with their designes agree they were so good at that of Euripides, Iurata
lingua est, mente juravi nihil, that his Excellency thought fit to put the Parliament in mind that they had more need to repent of their former oathes then to take new. 6. He warnes them to take heed of ad∣mitting Cavaleers and Phanatiques into places of any imployment or trust: doing the Cavaleers no injury, for they could not have wors thoughts of them then they had, but secretly weakning the Parliament, by rendring their friends the Phanatiques odious to them, and so useless and unser∣vicable: when he seemed to discharge Ca∣valeers from imployment, he meant those whose actions had been more serviceable to their enemies then their friends, whose rash and unadvised zeal had done more harm than their Loyalty was ever like to do good; for those sober persons that were in a mean between madness and AEnthu∣siasme, were such as we have seen manage their moderate Councils in two Moneths, with more success on his Majesties behalf then others have managed their valour in twenty years. 7. He commends to them Scotland, as a Nation that indeed had of late deserved to be encouraged, and assures them of Ire∣land, with the persons in whose hands that Nation was.
8. He commends to them a Free State, for he would gladly lay down his life; but he knew well that Nunquam libertas gratior extat quam sub rege pio, That it is the high∣est freedome a State can hope for, to serve a good Prince. Sect. The Par∣liament imploy him to the City.And then he withdraws to his place in the Council of State where the first thing under consideration was the reducing of the City, now stiffly resolved to own no power save that of a Free and full Parlia∣ment, where he saw that that Parliament and Council of State were neer a period: by those strong attempts they made to keep themselves alive, (Morientium morsus acerrimus, the last endeavour of the dying is most vigorous) for they order, 1. That he should march into the City with so many Horse and Foot, to force them to an obedience to the Act of Asses∣ment: Its the guise of men in power to act themselves in the plausible part of their Go∣vernment, leaving the more offensive passa∣ges to their instruments. His Excellency coming up to the City, at Guild-Hall pe∣remptorily demands the Assessement, by an order from the Parliament and the Council of State, to which
demand procee∣ding  from him beyond expectation, the City after a little respit for extasy and a∣mazement, return this answer, In Magna Charta confirmed by the Petition of Right, and renewed by this present Parliament, a day before their forcible dissolution upon the 11. of Octob. they were to pay no Taxes, &c. but by their consent iu Parliament, which now they had not: Yet to give no offence to the Parliament, the Council of State, or his Excellency, desire time to consider of it: and indeed those debates upon which depended the welfare of the Nation, with its Liberties, priveledges, and properties called for time and leisure. His Excellency in the mean time writes to the House to know their pleasure, to which they answer that 1. He should imprison the Honourable Col. Bromfield, Alder. Bludworth, L. C. Jackson, Maor Cox, &c. 2. That he should remove their Chaines, digge up their posts and break their Gates. Which strange orders were sent not on∣ly to try his Excellencys patience and obe∣dience, but to make that emnity open which was but suspected between him and the City; so did Achitophel advise Abso∣lom
to ravish his Fathers Concubines be∣fore all Israel, that Israel might be assured that he and his Father were enemies. And his Excellency obeys them readily, thereby gaining an opportunity to discover the genius of the City, which he had not otherwise there known certainly to be so resolute for, and so true to Liberty and right. Sect. They af∣terwards degrade him.But the Parliament as they intended, that by that imployment so offensive to the City, he should weaken his Interest; so they contrive that while he is busy in it he should be weakned in his power: His Commission for Generalship expiring, they renew it not according to his desert, but impower six more of themselves to be e∣qual with him in command that never came neer him in merits, according to their interest, viz. Hazslerig. Walton, Mor∣ley, &c. which when his Army heared as they were not satisfied with their late im∣ployment, so much less were they satisfied with this reward; the lessening of their Generals power when they might justly expect his advancement, and therefore be∣ing assured of the City, by a conference at the three Tunns at
Guild-Hall, his Excel∣lencies  Head quarters, His Offi∣cers Re∣mon∣strance thereup∣on.They humbly re∣monstrate, First, their sence of that vio∣lence they were commanded to offer the renowned City, a violence unparraleld in our worst of daies, which though they made havock of most part of the Nations, yet spared the ancient City, for its late performances too honourable, and for its antiquity too reverend to be so abused. Secondly, their fear of several persons eminent in this late disturbance, who had their freedome within and without the Ci∣ty, to consult, plot, and design what might reduce us to our former misery. Thirdly, their abhorrency of a late Pe∣tition delivered in the House by Praise-God Barebone, so subversive of all order and power, so dangerous to all Religion, wor∣ship, and discipline, so destructive to all Lawes, Statutes and Customes that to re∣peat it was to confute and condemne it, and all sober eyes have as soon abhorred it as seen it. Fourthly, Their wish that the Parliament would quickly determine their session, and provide for succeeding Parliaments. Sect. He ad∣heres to the City for a Free Parliament.Which as soon as his Excellency had communicated to the
Speaker by a Letter  he marched to London for quarters decla∣ring for a Free Parliament, and cating himself upon the love, and faithfulness of the City, and Contre, that they might stand by him in the prosecution of publick good. In which resolution he persisted, (not∣withstanding, 1. The flatteries of the House, caoling him with the Honour of Hampon Court, and his Brothe the Hono∣rable Sir  h. Clergis, with the Hamper Office which was woth a 1000 l. a year. 2. Their sares, into which (had it not been for his incomparable Lady, he migh hve been trappanned by a dinner, to whih he was to be invited by the Council of State. 3. their threatnings expressed in Haslerigs Speeches, (that breathed nothing but fire and sword.) In the mean time taking his quarters among the Citizens, he expects patiently the issue of the Parliaments de∣bates, in answer to his last Letters to them, and finding they thought of nothing but the setling of their own interest and con∣tinuing of their power; he desired the messengers they sent to treat with him, to delay time, to procure a conference be∣tween
some Members of the House, and  some honourable patriots that were exclu∣ded from it, which was granted and had before him for mutual information, He heardt the con∣troversie between the Seclu∣ded and the other Members.in which he udiiously weighed each sides reasons and arguments being all the while silent himself, and conluding with himself upon the result of the whole, that the set∣tlement intended by the house was upon oundations too naow to bear up a pub∣like good: He admits Secluded Members to the House.he resolved to withdraw all force from the house, and admit men of more sober, moerate, and therefore of a more pblick spiit, who would establish us upon ermes comprehensive of every con∣siderable interest among us, making each part happy in the welfare of the whole; which he did upon the one and twentieth of February, Cressane careat pulchra dies nota. 5. Meeting the Secluded Members at White-hall, and expressing himself to them in a speech not delivered by himself to avoid offence, but by his Secretary; wherin he commended to their care. Sect. His speech to them at White-Hal.1. Religion that , as Ari∣stol. 7. that first care of Magistrates, it be∣ing in Plato and Plutarch, Coagulum omnis societatis &
fundamentum, and efficacissi∣um vinculum benevolae amicitiae unius dei Cultis Philo: so great an awe hath Religi∣on had alwaies upon the spirits of men, prevailed with by the thoughts of eternal weal and woe, that to settle it . Iust. Mart. Apol. would be a royal work, which his Excellency pro∣posed in the most sober and moderate way, imaginable between some mens too close and severe rigor, which hi Excellency had discountenanced in Scotland, and others too loose indulgene which he checked by a publike slike of a Sermon preached be∣fore him at St. Pauls for that abomination that makes desolate, I meane a toleration for every one to do what is good in his own eyes. 2. He commends to them the State; desiring them to provide for a Free and full Parliament, in whose resolves he himself and the whole Nation might acquiess. Sect. He is Vo∣ted Gene∣ral.As soon as they sit, they vote his Excel∣lency according to agreement, Lord Gene∣ral of all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland; which trust he managed with much discretion and faithfulness, model∣ling his Army to a temper suitable with the designes he had in hand, disarming the Phanatiques in
City and Countrey, in the  mean time taking care to arm Loyalty, while he layd the Factions naked. Sect. He rejects all temp∣tations to baseness.Now olet the wold see his Excellen∣cy had the best Souldiery, virtues, valour, and wisdome; without any of their vices, ambition, &c. He slights all temptations of Command, Power, and Authority, which were offered him, and resolves ra∣ther to be a Loyal Subject, then an usuping Soveraign: he had rather have obsequii glo∣riam (as Tacitus calls it) the Glory of Obe∣dience, then the Majesty of command. Sect.The Parliament having setled the City in its just power, by Mayor, Aldermen and an honourable Common-Council, and an incomparable Militia, under as woth Commanders as ever led English men t the field: and vacated the Phanatique power in the Countrey, and setled the Militi of the three Counties in honourable an great hands, of men of worth, and interest and provided for the future Paliament they dissolve upon the 16. of March, lea∣ving the care of the Nation to an incomparable Council of State, and the care of th Army to his Excellency, as Commander in chief, and Major General of the City, and the
care of the Navy to his Excellency, and  the Honourable Lord Mountague. Sect. His Ex∣cellency entertai∣ned in London.His Excellency in this interval condes∣cends to the divertisements of several en∣tertainments by most Companies in Lon∣don. The Honourable soiety of the Mer∣cers beginning; but in the middest of pastimes and pleasures his great and solid mind (as invincible by these soft, as formerly by his harder services), orgets not the greater affairs of State. Sect. His pru∣dence in the inter∣val of power.And he keeps good correspondence with his Army b feqent conferences: at last he brought them to declare their acqui∣escence in the resolves of the approahing Paliament, to the confusion of sh whose hope lay wholly in their reluctancy against lawful power. Sect.When Lamberts esape had sirred up the drooping spiits of the factios to de∣signes theatning and formidable; his Ex∣cellency first discreetly ordereth the Forces in the Countrey, so as to prevent their uni∣ting in any considerable posture, and then Honourably offers his own person for the service of his King and Countrey: In the mean time taking care to settle the Militia of
London, and Westminster, so as they might be able to guard themselves if he should be called abroad to engage against the Enemy. Sect.He takes care likewise of Intelligence, well knowing of what concernment it is for a Nation to have an impartial relation of the actions of the supreme power. Sect.The Parliament being sate, whereof he was a Member both for Devonshire and Cambridge, he carrieth himself there with that modesty that might become the mea∣nest Member, hardly so confident as to own the honour that honorable House con∣ferred upon him by their solemne thanks to him. Sect. His mo∣desty.And would hardly accept the 20000. l. bestowed upon him, until the Kingdomes account and stated, his Majesties occasion supplyed, his publike debts payed: so little did this publike minded Worthy care for his own things, and so much for the things of others. Sect. He sends his bro∣ther in Law to his Majesty.When his Majesties gracious Declarati∣on and Letters came over, to give occasion to modest Loyalty to discover himself, his Excellency having received the Declarati∣on with a Letter to himself, (by the leave
of the House which he humbly asked) he sends his Brother the Honourable Sir Th. Clergies to attend his Majesty, with his humble answer, wherein was inclosed a loyal address from the Army, to let the world see how well a Generals command became him, who had modelled his Army to that temper, that there seemed to be but one soul controuling that whole great bo∣dy, that expressed its allegiance to his Ma∣jesty unanimously as one man. Sect.When the Honourable Parliament, (each Member whereof deserves an ever∣lasting monument) had upon that blessed 1. of May voted the Government by Kings, Lords, and Commons) a constituti∣on to be admired and envied, but not imi∣tated) and were preparing Commissioners to attend his Majesty, to desire him to come to his Parliament and People with all speed possible. His care to make all things ready a∣gainst his Majesties coming.His Excellency takes care for Pallaces to entertain him, his own incomparable Lady condescending to the drugery of a common maid for the service of her Sove∣raign and then gives order for so many Regiments of
Horse to attend his Majesty,  taking grea care, and giving many discree orders for his Majesties security, providing with vlour aginst open foes, and prudence against base friends, knowing his Majesty had good reason to pra with the Italian God deliver me from my friends. Hom. . 313.  Who have taken Theogenis wicked Counsel to his Cyrnus. Vid. dom. vit. Agric. Tacit. Annal. l. 1. Sect.His Excellency according to his Ma∣jesties order, waites upon his Majesty at Dover (being unwilling to Land before he came) with so much humility, as if he had not knowne any worth and merit in him∣selfe; and was received by his majesty as if he had knowne nothing in him but worth and desert: how Honorably doe the best of subjects and the best of Kings greet each other? how modestly doth the Subject kneel? how humbly doth the So∣veraign kiss and embrace: its one property of love to condescend with a  Eurip.
Hal.  So Parents out of love to their Children lisp, and play, and fit their speech and dal∣liances o the age and infirmities of their children. Sect. He meets his Ma∣jesty.In that renouned progress of his Majesty to London his Excellency had the honour to ride nex before his Majesty, with the Il∣lustrious Duke of Buckingham all the way to London, and with the Honourable Mayor through London: where the whole Nation saw him more Honourable in that he restored a soveraigne, then if he had been one more gloious in his Loyall Subjection then in an usurped majesty: his bare head was more honourable then othrs Crowns. His ten∣derness of his Ma∣jesties preroga∣tive.When some careful of the Subjects li∣berty would have bounded his Majesies prerogative within the compass of the Lawes (it being a power not to be intrusted to frail flesh and blood to be above Law) and what was more have capitulated with him for his own right, and brought him to his Throne upon termes: his Excellency withstood the motion, scorning to fetch home a fettered Majesty, and to restore
a captive Soveraignty: if he brought in a  King, he would also bring in prerogative; and a plenam potestatem, 2. Ed. 4. 17.21. H. 7 2. H. 7.7. as it was in principio reru, where Gentium nationumque imperim penes reges rat, Iust. l. 1. See R. B. Ios. in Mishput Aammelech: and indeed prerogative can∣not be inrusted to a mortal more capable of it than our Soveraign, who thinks it his highest power not to be able to do an inju∣ry; and his highest prerogative to take no∣thing from his Subjects but a liberty to offend, Principi summum rerum arbitrium di dederunt, subdits obsequij gloria relicta est, and may it suffice us when we admit his Majesty to a Soveraignty over us, that we know, Regem in ipsum imperium est Io∣vis, God is Soveraign over him. Sect. His care for justice.It was thought his Excellency would in∣tercede with his Majesty for a general par∣don to all parties and persons, but his Ex∣cellencie perceiving his Majesties extra∣ordinary inclination to mercies, thought fit rather to encourage him to do Justice. 1. That innocent blood may not be up∣on our heads or upon our posterities, such blood as may overthrow a world: Its a earful thing to let a Nation fall
into the  hand of the living, by a neglect to satisfie that justice which divine mercy will not defraud, and therefore humane mercy dares not. Secondly that posterity may look upon their late villanies with horror when they see them punished with severity. , Plato apud A. Gel. l. 6. c. 14. Fa∣mosos publica furca figendos pluribus placuit ut conspectu deturre antur alii ab iisdem faci∣noribus F. de. paenis L. 28 P. fumosos Pet. E∣rod. de cret. l. 2. il. 14. Zeppa. de leg. l. 1. c. 11. Plin. l. 29. c. 4. 3. That compleat justice be done to all sufferers of the Clergy and Layty, righe∣ousness establisheth a Nation, and the guilty must be as contented for the good of the Nation to suffer Justice, as the innocent may be to enjoy right. But his Majesty and his Excellency hath taught the Nation to sing of mercy and judgement Ps. 101. 1. by their , Arist. Rhet. Iudex u medicus syropos habet & aln. R. ai. trans. p. 3.
Sect.When his Majesty had leisure for any thoughts of setling his Officers of state he began in his own family, (for as a Bishop so a King must rule well in his own family) for how saith St. Paul, can be rule the Church that cannot rule his house, and how saith A∣ristotle Can he govern Kingdomes that go∣verns not his own Court: Indeed Kingship (saith Selden, in his titles of honour, Weems exercitations 3. Aist. Polit. 7. Rev. Bp. Will. in his jura Maiesatis) was first exer∣cised in the narrow compass of an house∣hold, and those increasing to Cities, Kings a while contentedly possessed those Cities, and Cities swelling into Nations, we had our Kings of Nations. Whence his Excel∣lency had the honour himself of being Master of the Horse, and to commend the incomparable Sir. Will. Morris (eminent in his Countrey for piety, prudence, publike-mindedness, and valour for rejected truths, eminent in his worthy book called Caena quasi  for depth of judgement, solid and accute reason, sharp, quick, yet clear apprehension, for comprehensive reading, for a copious fancy, for a choice,
grave, brief, perspicuous, pleasant, vigorous, and  merately vehement expression, with a graious frame of spirit running through each part, and the whole of it) for the first Secretary of state. Sect.His Majesty well weighing That in the multitude of Counsellors there is safety, called his Excellency with his own high-borne Brothers in suffering as well as nature, the Honourable Marquesses of Hartford, of Or∣mond, the Lod Chancellor Hide, &c. to the Council Table, where there is no per∣son that need go beyond him who first hath been pesent at all the subtile debates wheby the . The Rulers of the darkness of this age promoted their mysteries of iniquity. 2. Who hath managed the troblesome affairs of Scoland so succesfully for so ma∣ny years. 3. Who had manifested so much pru∣dence in his late expedition, that the King solemnly desired his sage advice for the settlement of his Kingdome. Sect.But his Excellency conscious enough of the worth and ability of the most honoura∣ble Council is not so intent upon
the affairs of state, as upon those of the field his own pculiar charge, where his chief care  to model the Army to a frame subsevient to his Majesties and the whole Nations inte∣rest; and well knowing that the whole Ar∣my is at the beck of superiour Officers as much as the lower Ob & at the command of the first mover, he diposed of most commands to persons of honour, worth, and found interest: His Majesty himself with his two Royal Brothers, honouring their respective Regiments with their com∣mand. Sect.And now it may be expected that from this confluence of the highest worth, the most eminent virtues, the most renouned performances, the result must be the highest honour . Arist. d mor. l. 4. c. 7. Charron wisd. c. 7. Hall government l. 1. c. 5. and therfore his Ma∣esty was pleased to call his Excellency to the House of Peers as Duke of AumarleSee Hey∣lin Surv. France Seele blane French. Nob., Earle of Torrington, Lord Monk of Pothe∣ridge, Beauchamp, &c. Knight of the most Honourable order of the Garter, &c. ho∣nours that others indeed have enjoyed, but his Excellency made it his chief business to deserve: and I hope as he
hath attained  this honour with great actions, he will main∣tain it with greater until he is gathered to his Fathes full of honor and of daies, until having seen 1. That Sacrd Majesty which he was an instrument to reore, established above malice, envy, ambition, rebellion, faction, and treason, by a sage Council, well constittd Parliaments, a well disciplined Army, and Navy, well chosen Officers and Minies of State. Secondly the subject secured against all encroahments (by a Prince whoe prero∣gative i i that e cannot do wrong) in their persons, eaes, lives or liberties, through wholesome, st, and good lawes, the Chuch established 1. Against all Heresy in the fath once delivered to the Saints a∣gainst all shisme by the Primitive order, discipline and govenment. See 39. Art. Ro∣gers. Dr. Overal. Dr. Ellis. Bp. Andr ibid.3. Against all prophaness, 1. By a wor∣ship in spiit and in truth, 2. decent, 3. in order 4. to edification, 2. by the power of godliness) his daies be wallowed up of eternity, and his honour be exchanged for An eternal weight of Glory. FINIS.
