L903C 31355640 110568
ΙΕΡΟΝ ΣΟΛΟΜΩΝΙΟΣ. THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON Pourtrayed by Scripture Light Act: 7:47 . Heb: 10.1 Lord I have loved the habitation of thine house and the place where thine honour dwelleth ps. 26.8. London, Printed by Io: Streater Whither the Tribes goe up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel,Psalm. 122.4. PATMOS St. John on the isle of Patmos I saw the holy City, the new Ierusalem cōming downe from God out of heaven. SOLOMON depiction of Solomon ZADOK depiction of Zadok
ORBIS MIRACULUM, OR THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON, POURTRAYED BY Scripture-Light: WHEREIN All its famous Buildings, the pompous Worship of the Jewes, with its attending Rites and Ceremo∣nies; the several Officers employed in that Work, with their ample Revenues: and the Spiritual Mysteries of the Gospel vailed under all; are treated of at large. Psal. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the dayes of my life, To behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. Psal. 43.3. O send out thy Light and thy Truth, Let them lead me, let them bring me to thy Holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles. Psal. 84.1.2. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts: my Soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the Courts of the Lord: My heart and my flesh cryeth out for the Living-God. LONDON, Printed by John Streater, for George Sawbridge, at the Signe of the Bible on Ludgate-hill. MDCLIX.
In this vacant side, be pleased to take a view of the whole work in this following Scheme. The History of the Temple of Solomon, in 10 Chapters, con∣taineth the Proem treating concerning the preparations of Chap. 1. David, p. 3. Solomon, pag. 6. Dimensions Chap. 2. of the Foundation. p. 19. Porch. p. 21. Sanctuary. p. 22. Oracle. p. 25. Side-Chambers. p. 29. Buildings about the Cover∣ed Temple, wherein of the Chap. 3. quantities of the outward Court, p. 45. Priests Court, p. 48. Gates, p. 51. Porches, p. 55. Vessels, Utensils and Ornaments. Chap. 4. In the Oracle as the Cherubims and Palm-Trees on the Walls, p. 58. Ark of the Covenant. p. 59. Cherubims on and by the Ark. p. 60. Golden mercy-Sear. p. 60. In the Sanctu∣ary the Incense-Altar. p. 62. Table of Shew-bread. p. 65. Golden Candlestick. p. 66. Porch the two Brazen Pillars. p. 68. Priests Altar of Brasse. p. 70. Court the Brazen Sea. p. 73. Lavers 10. p. 77. The High Priests Vestments▪ p. 87. Worship and service, where∣of in the Chap. 5. Officers. High-Priest. p. 91. Priests, p. 92. Le∣vites. Singers. p. 95. Porters. p. 101. Judges. p. 105. Nethinims. p. 107. Things offered, The Quantities and measures. p. 109 Festivall times. p. 111. Number of Sacrifices. p. 112. Various Sacrifices as the Burnt offerings. p. 114. Sin-offerings. p. 116. Trespass-Offerings. p. 118. Peace-Offerings. p. 121. Meat-Offerings. p. 122. Drink-Offerings: p. 126. Revenues and Endowments, arising from the Chap. 6. Land and Cities assigned. p. 129. Offerings and Gifts. p. 133. Dedication. Chap. 7. p. 136. Duration. Chap. 8. under— Priests. p. 145. Kings. p. 152. Sacred Mysteries. Chap. 9. relating to the Covered Temple. p. 206. Courts. p. 238. Utensils. p. 247. Officers. p. 285. Services. p. 320. Endowments. p. 354. Destruction. Chap. 10. pag. 364. A Catalogue of the several Views, cut in Copper. 1. A general Draught of the Temple, with its encompassing-Buildings. Pag. 14 2. The covered Temple, by itself. Pag. 20 3. Ground-plot. Pag. 34 4. Cherubims and Palm-Trees. Pag. 58 5. Ark of the Covenant. Pag. 59 6. Altar of Incense. Pag. 62 7. Table of Shew-bread. Pag. 65 8. Golden Candlesticks. Pag. 66 9. Two Brazen Pillars. Pag. 68 10. Altar of Brasse. Pag. 70 11. Sea of Brasse. Pag. 73 12. Brazen Laver. Pag. 78 13. High-Priest in his gorgeous Attire. Pag. 87
Of the Temple built by King Solomon at Jerusalem. THe glorious Fabrick of Solomon's Temple at Jerusalem, was the first House in the whole World, that was ever dedicated to the Honour and Service of the Sacred Majesty of the true and Living GOD: which for stately Magnificence, and the Antiquity of its foundation, doth most justly challenge praecedency to all Buildings, set apart for publick Worship, in any Nation under the Sun. For the delineation of this ancient and pompous Structure, once beautifying the Land of Canaan, that I may proceed in some clear method, Let me lay the Scene of the ensuing Discourse in this follow∣ing frame. First of all, I shall contrive the Porch or Proem of the Tract, exposing to view the grand and famous preparations for the Building; which being ab∣solved in the first Chapter, I shall then descend to the main body of the work in nine succeeding Chapters, wherein may be treated, P 20: 1. In the 2d place, concerning its Dimensions and Figure. P: 15. 3. The Courts and Buildings round about it. P: 35. 4. The Ornaments and Utensils. P: 57. 5. The Services and constant Worship therein managed. P: 91. 6. The Endowments and Revenues. P: 128. 7. The Solemn Dedication. P: 130. 8. The Continuance and Duration. P: 140. 9. The mystical Significations. P: 166. 10ly and lastly, Its fatall Period and Dissolution. Of all which, when I shall (by Divine permission) have finished my Discourse in this its designed order, a period shall be fixed to this Treatise. P: 364.
To the Reverend and Learned, The Warden, Fel∣lows, and Students of Wadham Colledge, in the Famous and Flourishing Ʋniversity of Oxford. Reverend and Learned, IT was not long since my happiness and honour, through the gra∣cious Providence of God, to enjoy a Fellowship for several years in that your goodly Seminary of all polite Literature; wherein I hope several hearts are under Divine hewing and squaring for the service of God in his Temple. During my continuance there, I received many favours from you in those Academical preferments which I then enjoyed: Your great love therein I cannot but gratefully acknowledge, and constantly bear in minde, having been greatly ani∣mated and encouraged to the discharge of those Employments by your aid and assistance. Since that time, it hath pleased the All-wise Maje∣sty of heaven to place me as a Labourer (though most unworthy) in his Vineyard. Most stately and magnificent is the Fabrick of God's house therein scituate, yeilding admirable delight to such whom Free-Grace is vouchsafed to give spiritual eyes to discern it, far surpassing the splen∣dour of its ancient Type, The Temple of Solomon; which was once the wonder of the world. Some spare hours from my constantly returning services I have through mercy enjoyed, wherein to take some solitary turns among the beds of Spices, and there to refresh my thoughts with the view of the corresponding Parallels. After several retirements, ha∣ving taken some small survey thereof; I conceived it my duty (which I owe to your Foundation) to present the first Essay of this my impolished draught thereof to your view, earnestly craving of you to undertake the Patronage of your Incumbent in this work. I confess I should have ac∣costed you in the language of the Gowned Nation; but I seriously pro∣fess, I had no design (when the whole work was finished except the ninth chapter) to have appeared publikely in it, having resigned it up as a piece of service to a friend, for the company of a larger Treatise of his written in our Mother-Tongue upon a subject of this like nature; and thereby I should have passed through the world with more contenting secresie. But since some urgent providences (well known to several of my friends) have over-ruled me to walk without another's shelter, I thought it no un∣safe course to pitch upon your Candid and Learned Protection. Obliged Duty challenges the tender of my respects, and former experience lays the foundation of your expected Favour. The natural love and affection which I ever found planted within me toward that place of my Educati∣on (even as I have generally observed I know not what Genius [may I so term it] or affectionate tincture to run in the veins of such as have been bred at Wadham) strongly invites me to the former, and I cannot dispute the equitable return of your kindness in the latter; being grounded up∣on past experiment. I shall mean-while not cease to breathe out hearty
Prayers towards the Golden Mercy-Seat, That all within your Walls may be set up for standing Pillars in the House of God, that your hearts may be flaming Altars, your Tongues golden Harps, and that Gar∣ments of praise may be your Covering. That the great High Priest would please to sprinkle your Consciences from all dead works with his own most precious blood, and that he would carry your Names engra∣ven upon the Stones of his Brest-plate continually before the Father. That Holiness, Vertue, all savoury and wholsome Knowledg, and what∣soever is Praise-worthy, may flourish and be ever verdant within your Walls. That golden Crowns of Learning, imbellish'd with sparkling Diamonds of Grace may adorn your Heads and Hearts, and give forth a most Orient and Radiant lustre in the Schools of the Prophets. That not only the Lamp of Knowledge shining out of the Sanctuary may il∣lustrate your mindes with Scripture discoveries; But that also the Soul satiating Bread of life from the golden Table (as of old it was the Priests every Sabbath) may be your portion. That ye might all taste of the hidden Manna, that Aaron's Rod might fragrantly blossome among you, and that God would write his Laws, according to the tenour of the New Covenant, not in Tables of stone, but the fleshly Tables of your hearts. That your hope may be fixed within the Vail, sure and stedfast; whither the Fore-runner is entred for all the Saints. It would be one of the choice joys of the Lovers of that place, to hear concern∣ing you, that Mercy and Truth have met together, that Righteousness and Peace have kiss'd each other: That all profaneness and unholiness being utterly rooted up and cast out to the Dunghil, there may such pro∣ceed from thence, as may prove Truth's able Champions against the Goliahs of Errour; and persons of cementing and healing Tempers, to soder and salve the Schisms and Rents in the Church: that Trees of Righteousness may be transplanted out of your pleasant and fruitful Nursery into the Garden of God, which may yeild all manner of fruit in due season. That silver streams of consolation may flow from your Spring (being seasoned with the salt of Grace) to refresh wearied souls, and abundantly to water the dry and thirsty places of Immanuel's land. That God's Urim and Thummim may be with you, enabling such of you as are consecrated to God, to teach Jacob his Judgements, and Israel his Law: That you may burn the spiritual Incense of sweet smelling Pray∣ers before him, and offer up the whole burnt Sacrifices of the Divine Ordinances upon the glorious Altar within his Gospel Temple. So Prays Your hearty Well-wisher, Samuel Lee.
A PREFACE to the READER. Courteous Reader, I Here present thee with the sometime most pompous and splendid Glory of the whole world, The Temple of Solomon at Jerusalem: For prospect, the most pleasant; for foundation and walls, the strongest; for all its circumambient buildings, the most Magnificent; for costly Ornaments, the richest; and for its mysterious Rites, the most Sacred Structure that ever the Sun saw. It is commonly reported (as I remember) of Austin, That if he could have obtained the pitch of his wishes, he would gladly have seen Christ upon Earth, Paul in the Pulpit, and Rome in her Glory. I wonder he mentioned not a fourth, viz. The Temple in all its ho∣ly-day bravery, I mean, at the solemn Dedication thereof by King Solo∣mon. In the Land-skip of this Treatise thou maist have a short, and I hope in some measure, a true glance of its Royalty. Though formerly, as a Gen∣tile, thou mightest not presume to enter these Sacred walls: yet now, the par∣tition-wall being down, thou mayest draw near to the Holy of Holyes, without fear of Crassus his doom, never to thrive after his irreverent and bold in∣trusion. But before I lead thee (Good Reader) into the Temple it self, give me leave to detein thee, while I discourse of some few things in haste, which are necessarily to be premised to the following Work. Some matters, I confess, might have been handled more concisely, and some consequences might pos∣sibly have been wrapt up in a narrower compass. But considering that Obscu∣rity is the daughter of Brevity, and that the unproficiency of some Readers proceeds from the over-frequent use of terms of Art, and too compendious expressions: I have taken the counsel of Aelian, in the first Chapter of his Tacticks, not to involve the sense in obscure and intricate words; who blames most of the preceding Writers, in his kind, thus, [, &c.] That they wrote, as if all men knew already the things about which they compiled their Treatises: manifesting by their dark terms (wherein they laboured to be intricate) that they intended not instruction, but osten∣tation. To let that pass, The same Author promised , Types or Figures to Illustrate the matter, that the Eye might assist the un∣derstanding: So in this Treatise thou wilt find some figures of the Temple in∣terserted, which though not fully to my mind, yet may moderately serve for the advancement of the true and genuine apprehension of its description, as well as to delight the pious fancy of the devout Reader. The next thing I am to mention, is that form and figure of the Temple which is exhibited in the fifth part of the Apparatus preceding that late fa∣mous Work of the many Languaged Bibles. I should not for modesties sake, and the great respect I beare to such noble Labours, whereby not onely our Country, but the very age is honoured, have mentioned any thing of this nature: Had it not openly exhibited the frame thereof different from what is here produced, whereby the very Body of this VVork at the first blush, would have lain under dislike in the Censure of every vulgar eye.
However, I am not a little satisfied, that the Learned and worthy Pub∣lishers of that splendid VVork, have not declared it as their own determinate Judgement, but nakedly proposed it as the conjecture of Villalpandus and Capellus; and have themselves onely ordered some Plate-views to be con∣tracted for the beautifying of their preliminary Tract, leaving the asserti∣on of the identity of that visionary Structure with Solomon's unto others. I hope to make it evident in as brief a manner as possible, befitting a Pre∣face) that there was never such a Temple extant, as is described by Villalpan∣dus (the most learned and laborious Temple student, that ever proceeded into publick light) which he hath deduced from the profound and mysterious visions of the Prophet Ezekiel. Not to speak at present to any other particulars, The wall of the outward Court described by that Prophet, will yield an invincible demonstration to this assertion.Ezek. 42:16, 17, 18, 19, 20, & 45.2. For in his 42. and 45. Chapters, he doth plainly declare, that every side of the square walls of the outward Court, did contain 500. Reeds in length, which will produce in full sum 2000. and that compared with fur∣longs, is co-extended with very near 31. of that measure, as may appear evi∣dently by the 49. page of this Treatise, beneath. But that the Temple should be near 31. furlongs in compass, is very incongruous, and not imaginable, be∣cause the whole mount Moriah (whereon the Temple was built) fell vastly short of this compass in the whole circuit thereof: there being spare ground left upon the mountain, besides what was immured within sacred walls, ac∣cording to the general consent of Temple-Writers. Nay, that which ampli∣fies the incongruity, the Compass of the whole City it selfe, was but 33. fur∣longs, as in the forecited place of this following Treatise, is undeniably pro∣ved out of Josephus, a person no doubt sufficiently acquainted with Jeru∣salem. So that consequently, if the Temple wall should be 31 furlongs in cir∣cuit, according to express measures mentioned in Ezekiels visions, then there will remain but two furlongs for all the stately Palaces and private buildings in the City, a thing apparent to every eye, how much it declines from the path of truth. Nay the very Map of Jerusalema given in by Villalpandus himself, sufficiently convincing in this matter. Wherefore Capellus being much per∣plexed with these measures laid down in the Prophet, is over-liberal in his censure upon the sacred Text it selfe,Pag. 15. Col. 2. ad Calcem. and expresly affirms a corruption of the place. [Vitium omnino videtur, & pro , legendum ] There seems evidently (sayes he) a fault, and that we ought to read Cubits for Reeds. But this strange dealing with, and hard measure meted out to holy Scripture, to make no less then four such gross faults in four Verses to∣gether, I leave to the Judgement of others, of what dangerous consequence this will prove for learned persons to exercise the acuteness of their fancies to torture, and wrest the sacred Writings, and to expel whole words to justi∣fie a private perswasion of their own. Wherefore being himselfe somewhat jealous it seems, how such dealings would be resented by sober spirits, at last he flyes to a spiritual meaning of the place, that since the Temple limits in the Prophetical description do so wonderfully surpass the Circuit of the very Mountain it selfe, surely it was to Typifie the Church of Christ, being the Gospel-Temple, whose great enlargement was signified by that vision: which interpretation seems to be very solid, and may be farther evidenced by the portions set out by the same Prophet for the City of Jerusalem, for the
Priests, for the Prince and the whole Land in succeeding Chapters, which do all exceedingly transcend the true Geographical limits of the City,Ezek 45.6. & 48. or the Holy Land, or any of the other portions; So that these visions which the blessed Prophet saw in the fourteenth year after the City was smitten,Ezek. 40.1: and the Temple ruined, cannot be laid as a firm ground and Basis for the erecti∣on of the true Figure of Solomons Temple. For who can convincingly and demonstratively assert, that the Prophet doth there describe the state of that first Temple in its pristine glory, because some things therein mentioned do correspond to what is laid down in the Books of Kings and Chronicles. Or else, that it was the pattern of the second Temple, because the Buil∣ders thereof in many particulars framing their structures according to the president of Solomons, (which some of the Ancients had seen) possibly might fall in with some points of Ezekiels: Seeing it appears obviously, that it did disagree in the main dimensions, if we compare the general de∣lineation of the covered building mentioned in the Commission of Cyrus,Ezra. 6.3: with that of Solomons, or the other in the Prophet Ezekiel. Wherefore I fully close with his last apprehension as most kindly and genuine, that it was a Typical Figure of the spiritual Church, and no other in the main designe thereof. Upon these accounts I have not taken this Prophetical vision as the ground-work of the following Treatise, but have proceeded upon others hereafter sug∣gested. Possibly more light might have shined in upon these descriptions, had the Work of Eusebius been preserved to our dayes, whereof Jerome in the Proem to his Tract of Hebrew places, makes mention in these words, [Ip∣sius Hierusalem Templi{que} in eâ cum brevissimâ expositione picturam,Hieronym: Tom: 4. p. Edit: 1520: &c.] That he had exhibited to publick view, a Picture of Jerusalem it selfe, and the Temple, with a short explanation. But he doth not ac∣quaint us whether it were of the first or second Temple: Neither is it much material, (though I suspect it to have been of the last) seeing now it is past recovery, And of such things that cannot be obtaind, its vain to bewail the loss. According to what helps are extant, and have falne within the compass of my knowledge. I have endeavoured to compose this Tract, tendered with all humble submission to the Godly and Learned in the Church of Christ. In any thing wherein I differ from others, I have been exceeding tender and sparing of any the least reflection, alwaies concealing the names of such as dissent from my perswasion, as indeed it became me according to the Rules of Chri∣stian modesty. Through the whole discourse, I have endeavoured to follow the advice of one of the Tutors of Antoninus, Not to be sollicitous about words,Antoni▪ de Seipso. p. 9. Plut. Vit. vol. 2. p. 273 Hieron. ad Rustic. Tom: 1. p. 44. they being but the shels of things, having ever esteemed it (with Plutarch) to be the sign of a low & sordid temper, to contend about terms. Sage is that passage of an ancient; The Wine-press of Truth must not be filled with the leaves of words, but the Grapes of substantial matter. Wherefore I shall entreat of thee (Courteous Reader) that thou wouldst not be offended with the general plainness of my style, as not flourishing with the stately trappings of Rhetorick, emboss'd with Gold. All my wishes are, that there may be therein found matter sutable to sober palates. As to which though my own fears be great, yet I hope the very subject being encircled with difficul∣ties,
will obtain some protection for me at thine hand. For indeed it may speak of it selfe, as the fore-front of Minerva's Temple did at Saum in Aegypt,Plut. de Isid. & Osir. gr, mr. Part 1. p. 631. being adorned with this Inscription; [,] I am whatsoever is past, present, and to come; Never did any mortal reveal [me] plain∣ly. 'Tis indeed true of Christ, the wisdome of the Father and his mystical union with the Church foretyped by the Temple, which remains to be fully explained and unfolded in Heaven. Many were the Fables wherein the Heathens involved their spurious wor∣ship,Aleand. Tab. Hel. p. 1: Clem. Alex. p. 509. & Plut. de Isid: p. 164: In his Life. that thereby they might attract the minds of the vulgar. Among other things, the Aegyptians placed Sphinges before the entrance of their Tem∣ples, to note the sacred mysteries therein contained. But here, there is not one piece or utensil, but may plead for a Sphinx to stand before it; Where∣fore by reason of the abstruse and hidden dephs therein, I remember Mr. Rothwel was once advised by a Bishop, not to study Types: But having se∣riously thought, how much admirable and spiritual matter might lie couch∣ant under those legal vails, he set himself seriously to the study of them, with great success and benefit to the Church of God in those dayes; though his useful Book be now lost which he compiled of them, as it is reported in his life. The Jews themselves were not so rigid, but indulged the study of the most difficult Scriptures to such as were past 30 years of age. The truth is, there are multitudes of Scriptures in the New Testament, which cannot be clearly unfolded but by the exposition of the legall Ceremonies: For when once the the leaves of Types are lifted up, we may discern rich clusters of Grapes hanging underneath to admiration mixt with joy. But as to my particular dealing in this matter, I would crave leave to give in a true report of my entring upon and compleating of this present work, which in brief is this: A loving friend having had some intentions to publish a Work, holding some consanguinity with this, intreated me as my leisure permitted, to draw up some lines concerning the Temple at Jerusalem, which might be annexed to his as a supplement, which having at length finished according to all the Chapters here presented save one, I freely resigned my pains unto him for his use, to attend his own work, according to his former intention, having obtained a strict promise for the concealment of my name therein. But he perceiving what great labour his own would cost him, and to what a volum it might arise, began to be discouraged in his design. Hereupon I, who never before intended to have gone alone in this, or to have been known, was ur∣ged at length to compose a ninth Chapter concerning the mysteries of the Temple, to adde it to the rest, and commit the whole to the wise and holy hand of God, and to the word of his blessing. So that indeed over-ruling providence hath brought that to light which was never designed in any considerable am∣plitude, but onely in a few sheets, in a private way to subserve the design of a friend, and testifie my respects to him. I confess the subject, though very deep, yet was sweet in the meditation upon it, and somewhat sutable to my intended inquiries, as the Lord should vouch∣safe me the enlargement of life, & give me gracious opportunities to perform it; & that which was one comfort more, it lay somewhat out of the Road of the
bitter skirmishings of these Times. If any thing herein be spoken of as to any present point on the stage of this day; it is not copiously handled,Praefat. ad Grosted. de Cess. Legali. but so far forth as my solitary path led me to cross over the main Road so full of Dust and Justling. But alas! being in the very midst of my labour and travel through the ninth chapter, I met with enemies upon the Road, persons of sordid and most illiberal Tempers, whose mouths are fill'd with the dirt of lies and slanders, whose Tongues the Royal Prophet compares to sharp swords, and empoysoned arrows, who have been the instruments of some late personal troubles (well known to many.) The Lord rebuke them, and forgive them: Or else I had en∣larged more amply, and reviewed it more diligently then my time would then possibly permit. In respect to which ninth part especially, as unto the whole likewise, I humbly crave the pardoning love and kindness of all learned pious, and curteously disposed Spirits. Many Sciolists there be, who looking through the tube of censure, will cry out of spots in the very Sun; when alas, 'tis but a fly upon the glass of envie, through which they pore: yet how many spots may be really discerned in this poor Tract by able persons, I am very sensible: from such I crave Indulgence. I doubt not but it will meet with some irreligious Lucians,De Art. Poet. that will scorn the very matter and subject of the Treatise, as times do go: Others like Sca∣liger, that gave all the Poets the ferula, may possibly carp at the contexture and composition of the work. Let the first remember, that though no inherent, yet there was of old a typical and relative holiness within these sacred walls: The Temple shaddows being cast from the Sun of Righteousness. Such I shall leave to the Temple discipline of an awakened Conscience, which in some good time may scourge them with the small cords of accusing thoughts, or else cause them to approach more reverently. As for the latter, let them but expose their conceited flourishing wits to publike view, and I may promise them this deser∣ved favour and equitable requital: That some may as Liberally, as Magiste∣rially, and with as Stoical a frown condemn their rare and polite Writings, as they have dealt by others. In the mean time, let me desire them to rumi∣nate on that true saying of our profound Countryman [Hi prae caeteris so∣lent aliena liberius carpere, qui nihil proprium ediderunt,]Bradwardin: Praefat. de Caus. Dei. Those are the freest censors of others labours, who never publish'd any of their own. Solid Learning holds no oonsort with dis-ingenuous morosity. None more subject then children to fling stones at others;Chrysostom cont. Judaeos A. Christi, 400. as a great Light once in the Church said concerning the scorn and laughter which the Jews in his days poured out upon the Christians, that thereby they betrayed their childishness and folly, and unacquaintance with Divine knowledge. Such as sayl upon the vast Ocean of Learning, perceive their own knowledg to be equally boundless with the natures of things; which have no shoars (now in our lapsed estate) to terminate the In∣tellectual vision, and therefore usually of all others are the most modest and sparing in their censures: when as mean spirits that sit in little Cock-boats upon narrow Rivers, can easily spy Banks on both sides; on the right hand of spiritual mysteries, and on the left of humane Learning, being generally most confident of their own attainments; and like shallow Brooks, make the greatest pratling. Noble minds that can engrave an  upon the golden Ring of Sciences, are usually of the calm and milde temper of Archimedes. 'Tis for Doggs to bark, and Swine to mire it; when as generous spirits, well ballanced
in their Morals, can trample upon aspersions as low things, and count it a matter below a Heathen to return them. But hoping that the excellency of the Sacred Mysteries lodged within these Pa∣laces will attract all sober persons, possessed with a serious frame of spirit, to take delight in waiting at the posts of Wisdom, and beholding the beauty of the King of Saints, when held in his galleries, while the Spikenard sendeth forth the smell thereof.2 Chro. 7.2. For such I desire to pray most ardently, That as the glory of the Lord did in ancient times fill the Temple at its Dedication; so the same Divine presence may constantly reside in the Temples of their hearts, and give them radiant conceptions of these Divine Mysteries in the enjoyment of Gospel Or∣dinances, where his Majesty holds sweet Communion with his people. There was of old a Wall of separation intercepting between the soul and God; but now through the blood of that glorious Sacrifice offered up once for all, there is a way paved for us into the Holy of Holies. A vail of Ceremonies once dark∣ned the glorious light of Free Grace,Cant. 2.9: but now 'tis rent in sunder. Christ of old stood behinde the Wall, he look't through a window of the Temple, and the Lattices of ancient Rites; but now he sheweth his face more fully, and more gloriously. Then was the night of Ceremonies and Shaddows; but now 'tis spent,Rom. 13.1: nay the dawning of the day hath opened its ruddy Countenance in a full view of Grace.Erasm. in Jerom. Tom 1. p. 35, The Sun of the Gospel hath long stood still in the Meri∣dian, on this famous day of our glorious Joshua, who hath led his Church into the Land of Canaan; and the Lord grant it may never go down, till all his enemies are made his foot stool. Of the old Temple we may say, as our blessed Lord to his Disciples, when viewing the stately stones thereof, Arise, Let us go hence: for a greater person then Solomon is here: a more glorious Temple is now made manifest, coming down from God out of Heaven.
THE TEMPLE OF Solomon. CHAP. I. The first Chapter containes the Proem or Porch to the main Body of this Trea∣tise; Wherein, are exposed to view the famous Preparations for the Structure of Solomon's Temple. DAvid being anointed King by Samuel the Prophet at Bethle∣hem, and therefore secretly maligned, and afterwards open∣ly prosecuted by Saul, fled in the time of his distress to the Prophet of God, dwelling then at Najoth in Ramah, and privately resided with him. Sanctified afflictions,1 Sam. 19, 18. enhance Spiritual Devotion, which being managed by a divine and a holy Prophet, many times produce, according to the person's quality, noble, and heroick designs for the glory of God: such a one [probably sugge∣sted by Samuel] was this. Whereupon they consulted together at Najoth, that when David came to the Kingdom, he should remember his Vow in distress to build, or at least to prepare all materials for the erecting of a glo∣rious Temple for Gods name in the City of Jerusalem. We find these good men laying heads and hearts close together in the contrivement of all things even to the very Porters that were to watch in the gates of the Tem∣ple, and reckoning them up by their Genealogy in their several Villages.1 Chron. 9.22. To this Building we read, that Samuel afterwards was a principal Benefactor, and set down by name in the first Book of Chronicles.Chap. 26.2. Nay we find Saul the son of Kish not wanting in dedicating some Treasures to this house of
God. After them, mention is made of Abner, the Son of Ner, the Captain of King Sau's Host, and Joab the Son of Zerviah, Captain of King David's Hosts (good patterns for Souldiers) nay the chief of the Fathers also, and the Captains of thousands and hundreds, all dedicating some of their spoils won in Battails, to maintain the house of the Lord. But above all, King Da∣vid bears away the Crown in this sacred business, bestowing vast and honou∣rable gifts towards its lustre and beauty. What this King did, the Scripture doth largely enumerate, and God most kindly and favourably accept. 2 Sam. 24.24·1. The first and main thing he did, yea the groundwork of all, was the Pur∣chase of the place, being the Lands and Possessions of Araunah the Jebusite; at the particular direction of God himself by the mouth of the Prophet Gad. Happy that threshing-floor that was turned into an Altar to dedicate First-fruits to God. Happy that Husbandman, whose common field was turned into holy Inclosure: and happy those Oxen that worn out in honest labour, do at last dye Martyrs in holy flames; and happy that Jebusite that's con∣verted into a true Israelite. O happy that Mountain! that once being a Fortress of the Lame and Blind Idols of the Pagan Canaanites, shall become the Temple and Palace-Royal of Jehovah Jiereh,2 Sam. 5.6, 8. the living and the seeing God.Gen. 22.14. Isa. 2.4. Mic. 4.3. 2 Sam. 24.22. Those times are pronounced blessed, when Swords shall be beaten into Plough-shares, and Spears anvilled into Pruning-hooks. But more hap∣py sure are these, when Plough-shares shall be turned into Fire-pans, Pru∣ning-hooks into Censers, when Plough-boot and Cart-boot shal be consecra∣ted Wood, to burn upon Gods Holy Altar. But did David serve God with that which cost him nothing? No sure! He paid a sufficient price, even fifty shekels of silver: which, together with the succeeding sums, that I may reduce to our English value; it's necessary to preface in a few words, concerning the Hebrew Coins, and their Divisions. In brief then, 20. Gerahs make a shekel; 60 shekels, one maneh or pound, 50 manehs or 3000 shekels one Talent, one hundred drams or Adarconims are equivalent to 60 shekels, or one maneh or pound, if you compare 1 Kin. 10.17. and 2 Chron. 9.16. together. As to the shekel, I'le speak a little both to its figure and value; and first as to the figure, the chief face of it had in∣scribed about the Pot of Manna these words  Shekel of Israel. The second or reverse, had Aaron's Rod blossoming, with these words,  Jerusalem the Holy. obverse of shekel, bearing the figure of the Pot of Manna reverse of shekel, bearing the figure of Aaron's rod blooming For the weight and value, Caspar Waserus, and Edward Brerewood, in their Treaties of this nature, tell us, according to their best inquiries, that each shekel was in value proportionable to 2 s. 6 d. English, and that it weighed about half an ounce Troy.Hist. p. 249. Sir Walter Raleigh sets a shekel at the rate of 2 s. 4 d. But I rely rather upon the learned Treatise of Mr. Greaves his Denarius, who with the consent of the learned Primate of Ireland, Dr. James Ʋsher,Pag. 77. having exactly weighed several of them,states it according to the English standard, to be exactly 2 s. 5 d. onely, according to which, one
Hebr. maneh of silver will be 7 l. 5 s. of our money. One Talent will be 362 l. 10 s. which is 50 manehs, or 3000 shekels.Exod. 38.26. For if 603550 men be rated to pay half a shekel a piece, then they paid 301775 shekels, which is recounted to be one hundred Talents, and 1775 shekels.Ver. 25. So that 300000 shekels which the 600000 men paid, is equal to one hundred Talents, wher∣of each Talent contains three thousand shekels: which number of shekels contained in one Talent, seems also probable by the Brass mentioned, v. 29. whereof there being not found fully 71 Talents, Moses shews there were 70 Talents, and two thousand four hundred shekels, whereas if there had been full three thousand, it had fill'd up the quantity of another Talent. So that it seems there was above two thousand four hundred shekels in one Talent by this verse, and exactly three thousand, as appears by the former calculation. One thing more I would speak to, and that is the proportion of gold to sil∣ver; which according to Plato, Julius Pollux, Bodinus, Bornitius, Villalpandus, Brerewood, and generally all learned Authors is accounted to be duode∣cupla, or twelve times as much in value as the like quantity of silver: Which although it hath now and then a little vatied, according to the Standards of Princes, or the scarcity of metals; yet a twelfth-fold proportion is the gene∣rally received Opinion and Custome of most Nations; according to which, we shall rate our gold in these preparation-Offerings for the Temple. So then, according to this valuation of a shekel, King David paid fifty shekels of silver for the threshing floor of Araunah, li. s. d. 6 0 2 i. e. according to 2 s. 5 d. the shekel. 6 l.—0 s.—2 d. Now whereas it's said he paid six hun∣dred shekels of gold, we are to understand it of the whole Mountain of Mo∣riah to build the Temple thereon;1 Chron. 21.25. which according to twelve-fold propor∣tion is 870 l. of our money. li . s . d . 870 0 0 For it is not Adarconim but  shekels in the Hebr. text: Now six hundred shekels of silver at 2 s. 5 d. the she∣kels arise to 72 l. 10 s. which increased by 12. gives the sum forementio∣ned. This then is the first thing which King David did, to buy the place,1 Chron. 28.11, 12, 13. which at two payments came to 876 l. 0 s. 2 d. the whole. 2. The second thing that David performed, was the model of the Tem∣ple, and all its Buildings, received from God, and given to his Son Solomon, being the pattern of the Porch, Houses, Treasuries, Upper-Chambers, inner Parlors, the place of the Mercy-Seat, of the Courts of the House, the Cham∣bers round about; the Treasuries of the house of God, and the Treasuries of the dedicate things. Of the Courses of the Priests, the Vessels and the work of the service in the house of the Lord. 3. Thirdly, he furnished his son with many rare and costly materials:1 Chron. 22.14. whereof for metals he first dedicated a hundred thousand Talents of gold: Now one hundred thousand Talents of silver [according to the foremen∣tioned rate of a shekel at 2 s. 5 d.] arise to 36250000 li. of our money. Which being twelve times increased, according to the proportion of silver to gold, will give the sum to be 435000000 li. of our Sterling money.4350000000 l. All this gold was for the Instruments of gold, the Candlesticks, Lamps, Tables,1 Chron. 28.14, 15, 16, 17; 18. 1 Chron. 22.14. Flesh-hooks, Bowls, Cups, and Basons; as also for the Altar of Incense, and the Chariot of Cherubims. He set apart moreover a thousand thousand Talents, or a million of silver, which arises to 362500000 li. of our money wherewithall to make the instruments of silver, even for Candlesticks, Lamps, Tables, and Basons. Besides this, he provided Brass in abundance,362500000. C. 28. v. 15, 17. 1 Chron. 22.3. 1 Chron. 18.8. Ver. 10, 11. even without weight: some whereof was brought from Tibhath and Cun the Cities of Haderezer, King of Zobah, and therewith Solomon made the Brazen Sea, and the Pillars and the Vessels of Brass. He dedicated also Vessels of gold, silver, and brass, that were sent him as a Present from the King of Ha∣math, and those Treasures also, which he brought from Edom, Moab, Ammon, the Philistines, and the Land of Amalek.
1 Chron. 22.3, 14.Moreover he gave Iron in abundance, and that without weight, for the Nails, Doors of the Gates, and their joynts. As to precious stones, we find him to have prepared Onyx stones, and stones to be set, and glistering stones, and of divers colours; nay, all manner of precious stones,1 Chron. 29.2. C. 22.2. and Marble stones in abundance, and hewn stones wrought by Masons, that were strangers in Israel. C. 22.4. 2 Chron. 7.6.He provided also Cedar-trees in abundance. He gave also many Instruments of Musick, which he had made for the Le∣vites therewith to praise the Lord. 4. Fourthly, he appointed the Orders and Offices of the Priests and Le∣vites in their courses of service for sacrifice and singing, together with the stations of the Porters in their Watches at the several Gates of the Tem∣ple.2 Chron. c. 23. & 24. & 25. 5. Fifthly, and lastly, Besides all this, out of his affection to the house of his God,2 Chron. 29.4 he gave even of his own proper goods three thousand Talents of the gold of Ophir: which in sum results, according to the former stated propor∣tions to 13050000 li. of our Coin.13050000. li. Besides this, he gave seven thousand Talents of refined silver, to over-lay the Walls of the House withall, which is equivalent to the sum of 2537500 li. of our money.2537500 li. After this grand mass of Metals, and other Treasures given by himself alone, He calls out to others to lend their helping hand, saying: And who then is willing to consecrate his service this day to the Lord?1 Chron. 29.5, 6. Then the chief of the Fathers, the Princes of the Tribes of Israel, and the Captains of thou∣sands and hundreds, with the Rulers over the King's Work, offered willing∣ly this ensuing sum:21750000 li. First, five thousand Talents of Gold, that is, 21750000 l. and above that, ten thousand drams of the same metal. Each dram being the hundreth part of the maneh, or Hebr. pound: which is usually so among most Nations, and may be cleared to be so among the Hebrews (I suppose) from these two places compared. The first whereof says, that Solomon made three hundred shields of beaten gold, and that three pound of gold went to one shield.1 King. 10.17. 2 Chron. 9.16. The word is  three manehs. The other place sayes, he made three hundred shields, and that three hundred (Shekels, we say) went to one shield. In the Hebr. it's onely said, that three hundred of gold went to one shield: Whereby we learn, that one maneh, and an hundred of some one sort of the Hebr. Weights were equal, which could not be shekels: For in Ezekiel it's expresly recited,Ezek. 45, 12. there went but sixty shekels to a maneh: Therefore it remains most probable they were these drams, one hundred whereof were in one Hebr. pound, equiponderant to sixty shekels, which in silver is 7 li. 5 s. of ours. The hundreth part whereof is 1 s. 5 d. q. & ⅗ of our money. Now according to the twelvefold proportion of silver to gold, a dram of gold is 17 s. 5 d. ob. q. ⅕. I know the learned Brerewood doth count it by a round number of 15 s. being near in value to the Adarconims in the text. But it is to be considered, that Ezra, or who else, that wrought the Book of Chronicles, while in the Captivity, using the Aurei Darici, or these Adarconims of the Persian Empire, might make use of them, to express the Hebrew drams of gold, as being the nearest piece in value. Though it's evident enough, that it's neither an Hebrew word originally, nor a coin used by Solomon, who lived some hundreds of years before Darius, whose stamp and rate it bare. Now that one Adarconim fell in so jump with the hun∣dreth part of the Hebr. pound, is but a naked conjecture. Wherefore accor∣ding to the proved division of a li. into one hundred pieces, we have adven∣tured to take it in the Rate assigned.
According to which the Princes added to their former sum 13986 li.—13 s.—4 d. of our money, in valuable proportion to their drams of gold.13986—13—4. After that we read of an addition of ten thousand Talents of silver, that is,3625000 li. 3625000 li. of ours. Moreover they added of Brass eighteen thousand Ta∣lents, and one hundred thousand Talents of Iron, besides precious stones. These two inferiour Metals I shall not stand to reckon according to the uu∣all proportion of their value to silver. For if we lay together the severall sums of gold and silver, I think we have a bag big enough to build the Tem∣ple Walls of massie silver, and Vessels of massie gold, as a learned man thinks,Brerewood de numms, cap. 6. and therefore suspects the Talent of gold not to have been of such a quanti∣ty, as usually stated. I confess there is one place which much favours this Conjecture, and that is concerning the Crown of the King, or, as some ap∣prehend, of Molech the God, of the Ammonites, which weighed a Talent of gold, with the precious stones taken from him at Rabbah, and set upon King David's head: which had it weighed three thousand shekels,2 Sam. 12.3▪ or fifty Hebr. manehs or pounds, or one hundred and twenty five pound of our Troy weight, reckoning three thousand shekels to the Talent; and each shekel to avoid prolixity and trouble at 2 s. 6 d. or our half Troy ounce, it would have proved a weight for a Crown not imaginable, and would have almost crusht the Conqueror under this triumphant Ornament into his grave. Yet herein the learned Scotchman, Mr. John Weemse, in his Observations Natural and Mo∣ral, p. 141. offers his Solution, by a Conjecture that the Crown was first broken, and purged by fire, and then made up into a convenient form into a less quantity, and fitted for the victorious Temples of David. But I rather adhere to the conceit of Dr. Rivet, upon Exod. 25. who expounds it of the value of a Talent of gold, and not of the weight, by reason of the precious stones that were in it. But however this be answered, (with some fair and probable interpretations of Villalpandus, and others, to secure this place, which I cannot now fully insist upon) seeing it's generally agreed upon, that the Talent was of this quantity and value fore-stated, we shall not be Nig∣gards in these sacred Expences; but draw up all the sums in Battalia toge∣ther, and see what a Volley of Shot they will pay towards the discharge of Temple-Expences, wherein we shall account each shekel of silver at 2 s. 5 d. each Talent at 362 l. 10 s. and for gold, each dram at 17 s. 5 d. ob. q. ⅕. and each shekel of gold at 2 l. 9 s. and each Talent at 4350 li. of our current money.     li . s . d . Talents. Shekels. The Purchase first 000000006 00 02 0000 50 Silver.2 Sam. 24.24. la st 000000870 00 00 0000 600 Gold.2 Chron. 21.25. In Gold.   43500000 00 00 1000001 Chro. 22.14.   In Silver.   362500000 00 00 1000000Ibid.   Gold   013050000 00 00 30001 Chron. 29.4.   Silver   002537500 00 00 7000Ibid.       813088379 00 02         The sum total of David's Offering alone.     The Princes Offering. Talents. Shekels. Drams. In Gold 021750000 00 00 05000 0000 00000 000013986 13 04 00000 0000 100001 Chron. 29.7: Ibid. 10000 drams. Silver 003625000 00 00 10000 0000 00000
The Princes 025388986 13 04 1000000. 00050. 00000 David's 813088376 00 02 0007000. 00000. 00000         0010000. 00000. 00000 The sum 838477362 13 06 1017000. 50 of Silver.     Talents. Shekels. Drams.   100000. 600. 10000.   3000.       50000.       108000. 600. 10000. of Gold. Hereby you may perceive that K. Da∣vid, and his Princes together, gave 108000 Talents, 600 shekels, and 10000 drams of Gold, and 1017000 Talents, and fifty shekels of silver to this Work: which in our money amounts to eight hundred & thirty eight millions, four hundred seventy seven thousand, three hundred and sixty two pounds, thirteen shil∣lings, and six pence, all deposited in the hands of Shelomith, a famous Lord Treasurer, the 6th in a direct Line from Moses, being the Son of Zichri, Jo∣ram, Jeshajah, Rehabiah, Eliezer the son of Moses. Nay, so magnifique a sum it was, that Dr. Donne, sometime Dean of Pauls, in his Encoenia, or Dedication Sermon for Lincolns-Inne Chappel, conjectures, that if all the Christian Kings that are,1 Chron. 26.25. Exod. 18.4. would send in all they have at once to any one service, it would not equal this Royal-Sum of David and his Princes. A noble sum indeed! yet David modestly and humbly acknowledges all that he gave,1 Chron. 22.14. to be but of his poverty; which we must understand, as refle∣cting upon his many troubles and warres, much wasting his Treasury. But he adds a very divine passage,1 Chron. 29.14. saying, It was all of Gods own, and rejoyces that he and his people had hearts to offer so willingly. After all this, David being forbidden to build, yet went as far as he durst, having set Masons to work in hewing of stones, and provided cunning Gra∣vers,1 Chron. 22.2. and men skilful in Works, both of Metal and Embroidery: the like whereof Solomon desires the King of Tyre to send him. All which being done,2 Chron. 2.7. David falls asleep in the Arms of the great Shepheard of Israel, and leaves the management and perfecting of all to his Son. In the last place, we come to Solomon furnished with so vast a purse, the nerve of Peace as well as War, to empty upon so glorious a Work, as the building of an Habitation for the God of Israel: and yet notwithstanding, let us see what stately preparations he made. Stately, indeed, if some say true,2 Chron. 5.1. that he used not one mite of his Fathers Treasures that were thus dedi∣cated to God. Because it is written, say they, That he brought all (which his Father had dedicated) into Gods Treasury, as a Reserve for extraordinary Emergencies and Reparations. But if these Suggesters had remembred the fore-going Story, which tells us, that such gold, and such silver of David's gifts were laid out by weight upon such and such Ornaments and Utensils,1 Chron. 28. they would never have troubled their Readers with such a needless help to the advancement of Solomon's magnificence; appearing splendid enough, and according to the rate of his vast and Royal Revenues: which (if Villalpandus hit right, in his comparing and casting it up,) far exceeded the Annual Incomes of the richest of the Roman Emperors. But as to this King in the first place, for Gold, we find him supplyed by Hiram with sixscore Talents of that metal,1 King. 9.11, 14. amounting, according to former proportions, to 522000 li. of our money: which some may conceive to have been em∣ployed in the Temple, though it doth not clearly so appear, but that it
was a help to him in the building of all his stately Structures,Ver. 15. both Sacred and Civil. To which purpose, he had besides laid a great Tax upon his own people. In the next place, we read of his providing stones of several sorts and sizes,1 King. 5.17. under the name of great stones, costly stones, and hewed stones: which you may lay together, if you please, as great costly hewn stones, for the Foundati∣on of the house of God. As to Timber, we read of three sorts onely,1 King. 5.8, 10. Cedars and Firre in one place, and of Almug-trees in another: some whereof were brought in ships from Ophir, to make Pillars in the Temple, as we translate it: But concerning the use thereof we shall find a more full discussion in the 2d Chapter, where we speak of the Westgate Shallecheth in the Outward Court, and of Solo∣mon's stately ascent to the house of the Lord; which was beautified and strengthened with Pillars or Rails of Almug-trees. Some whereof he used for the Harps and Psalteries of the Singers. The like of these Trees from Ophir were never seen before, nor since in the City Jerusalem. Some quan∣tity of these kind of Trees, he received out of the Forest of Lebanon.2 Chron. 2.8. C. 2. v. 7, 14. Other things he provided, as Purple, and Crimson, and Blue, and fine Linnen, together with cunning Artificers to weave them for the Vailes of the Temple and Vestments of the Priests. All these materials being thus prepared to his hands, this mighty King undergoes the charge of all the Workmanship, and gathers a magnificent Army of skilful and industrious persons to manage the business:183601. 1 King. 5.15. 80000. 70000. 3300. v. 16. 2 Chron, 2.2, 17, 18. 3600. which arose to a sum of an hundred eighty three thousand, and six hundred men and one. Fourscore thousand whereof were hewers in the Mountains: Threescore and ten thousand were bearers of burdens: and three thou∣sand three hundred Officers, as 'tis related in the Books of Kings: but there were three thousand, six hundred, as we read in Chronicles. To solve it, Possibly three hundred at a second Review might be added to the number of Officers, for the greater care of the business.2 Chron. 8.10. There being fifty Head-Of∣ficers, and at first but two hundred and fifty Officers next inferiour to them among three thousand three hundred; and after review, there were three hundred added more: so that then there were fifty supream-Officers,1 King. 9.23. five hundred and fifty of the next rate and employment, and three thousand under-Officers, which makes the full sum of three thousand six hundred. All which, with their Workmen, were but strangers in Israel, not Natives:1 King. 9.21. 2 Chron. 2.17. or rather strangers in bloud, though neighbors in habitation, being remnants of the Canaanites not yet destroyed, their number being in full 153600. Besides these, he employed thirty thousand men of Israel to work in Leba∣non by courses, ten thousand in every moneth,1 King. 5.13. and each third number rested two moneths at home; over whom, the King placed Adoniram as chief Of∣ficer: which being joyned to the former number of strangers, makes up the whole sum at first mentioned even 183601. Moreover, we read of a vast number of men sent to him from his Father-in-Law Vafres, the King of Aegypt: so sayes Eupolemus in Eusebius, who recites also a like vast number of the Tyrians. Scripture mentions nothing of the former: But as to the latter, that King Hiram,1 King. 5.6: 2 Chron. 2.8 upon Solomon's Re∣quest, did assist him with the help of his Subjects, is clear, though not to the number: Which surely was considerable, if we poll the men by their bellies, and if all the specified quantity of Provision was dispensed onely to these Workmen; which seems to be so in one place, which sayes,2 Chron. 2, 10. That these mea∣sures were allowed for the Hewers, viz. Twenty Thousand Measures of Wheat, and as much of Barley; Twenty Thousand Baths of Wine, and as much of Oyl: Although another place tells us, it was allowed as an An∣nual
Pension for King Hiram's Houshold  for his House: which may be admitted by a metonymy to signifie these his servants,1 King. 5.11. as by the parallel place, it seems to be so interpreted: Now, though the King might take a taste possibly, yet certainly the quantities in general were imployed to the Work-mens content. The word here for Measures is  Corim, now a Core is equal to a Homer: and usually as a Homer contains ten Ephahs in dry,Ezek. 45.11. & ver. 14. so doth a Core, because of equal capacity. The quantity of the Bath we have endeavoured in the fith Chapter of this Treatise to find out, ac∣cording to the proportion of an Omer to seven Attick Coryla's laid down by Josephus, whom we shall endeavour (God lending life and opportunity) to examine in another Tract, as to Measures: onely at present, this supposition being granted for true and exact, then doth the Bath, and the Ephah its Sym∣metrical Vessel, contain 52 pounds or pints, and ½ or six Gallons, one Pot∣tle and ½ pint. Now because of the hard Work in the Mountains, we will allow these proportions to the men in Wine. There being spent 616 Tun, and 16 Gallons of Wine upon them, and as much of Oyl, and double as much of Wheat and Barley in a year; we cannot, in conscience, allow less then a pint of Wine in a day for a poor Labouring-man to encourage him: which being of the Red-wine of Palestine, mixt with water, would be a good refreshment. So that there being 1241984 pints of Wine in Twenty Thou∣sand Baths, they will serve 3402 men fully throughout the Julian year of 365 days, and somewhat more then a Tun of Wine over, viz. 254 pints for the chief Officer. But if you make enquiry, by the quantity of Corn, al∣lowing a pound of Wheat; and a pound of Barley to each man, generally drinking Water, but sometimes encouraged with Wine and Oyl, which is more probable: Then the number by this computation will prove to be ten times as many; to wit, 34022. A company not much above the num∣ber of Solomon's own servants, which was thirty thousand, as you heard be∣fore. We read in Herodotus a choenix of corn allowed to each person in Xerxes his Army for a day, in his Polymnia, p. 446. Edit. Steph. 1618. that is, two pound and a quarter, as learned Agricola rates it in his second Book, de Mensuris Graecis, p. 120. and Moses also allowed an Homer of Manna for each man in a day in the Wilderness; that is, above a pottle of that food a day,Exod. 16.13. as you may see, Cap. 14. Now although I read inBibl. Hist. l. 2. Diodorus Siculus, that Semiramis drew together two hundred Myriads, or 20 hundred thou∣sand men to build the famous City of Babylon, a number almost 14 times as many as these Builders of Solomon, both of his own, and Hiram's Subjects put together, which were but 217623 persons: Yet we must consider, She built a City of most vast extent and compass, viz. of 365 stadia; that is, of 45 miles, and ⅝ of a mile, according to the laxe and ordinary proportion of 8 stadia to a mile: whereas this Temple was but about half a mile in circuit, as we shall see hereafter. Besides, we must remember the vastness of the Walls, and the 250 Towers upon them round about that City, together with all the Buildings within it. Moreover, we find that City to have been finisht in a year, whereas this was 7 years and a half before it came to its perfection; all which time this number of men was employed. That I may let pass Diodorus his report of her ambitious mind, calling her , that she endeavoured to out-vye all her Predecessors. To conclude, I might suspect the Author's Relation, as being of a thing far distant from his age and much relying upon Ctesias in that matter, a Writer whom Aristo∣tle himself in his History of Living Creatures, lib. 2. cap. 17. gives the Lye in plain Greek, without a Complement. Whereas Solomon's builders are rec∣koned up in those sacred Pages, which know not what a Lye means; and far exceed the number of those that Chaeops imployed in building the portentu∣ous
Pyramid which was ten Myriads, or one hundred thousand men by the testimony of Herodotus, l. 2. To proceed, the Timber fetcht out of the Moun∣tains of Lebanon by these Labourers, was brought by Sea, in flotes,1 King. 5.9. 2 Chron. 2.16. Quaresm. de terra Sancta, l. 4. c. 1. 1 King. 7.14. 1 Chron. 2.14. & 4.11. to Joppa the Sea-port of Judea, and thence to Jerusalem by Land, which was about 40 miles of Italian measure distant from Joppa as one Author places it. More∣over, Hiram King of Tyre (being moved thereto by King Solomon in a Let∣ter) sent to Jerusalem his own Name-sake, one Hiram, a rare Artificer, skil∣ful in all manner of curious Works; as Casting, Graving, Polishing: &c. who accordingly made the two Brazen Pillars, the Molten Sea, the ten Lavers, and the several Instruments of the House of God. At last, when all was finisht and compleated,1 King. 9.11, 12, 13. King Solomon gave to King Hiram twenty Cities in the Land of Galilee, as a Present: But they pleased him not. One Proemial Enquity more we shall crave leave to exhibite, before we come to the main Design, and that is the exact distance (as far as may be de∣duced out of Authors) of this famous City Jerusalem (wherein the Temple was built) from London the Metropolis of England; That we may know whereabouts in the World our Discourse lies. To this purpose, it's neces∣sary, first, to know (if possible) the exact Position of Jerusalem under the Heavens. Mr. Selden, a man that hath made many useful Collections tells us out of a Rabbi,De anno Civili, cap. 13. Edit. Bertii; lib. 5. c. 16. that for Longitude Jerusalem lay in 66 gr. and ½ from the first Meridian, and for Latitude in 32 gr. Ptolomy acquaints us, that the Lon∣gitude was 66 gr. and the Latitude 31 gr. 40 minutes; and moreover that London hath 20 gr. 0 min. of Longitude, and 54 gr. 0 min. of Latitude. But we shall rather follow more modern Observations, and particularly that of Kepler, in his Rudolphin Tables, who sets Jerusalem in the Lat. of 32. 10. and London at 51. 32. and their difference in Longitude to be three hours, and four minutes: or rather as Longomontanus, his Scholar, at 3 hou, 6 min. So that if London lye in 24 gr. 20. from the first Meridian in the Azores, then Jerusalem will lye in 70 gr. and 50′ of Longitude from the same place.   Long. Lat. London, 24. 20. 51. 32. Jerusalem, 70. 50. 32. 10. To calculate their distance then by the Doctrine of Triangles, In this following Sphaericall Triangle, A. B. C. Let D note the situation of London, its Latitude spherical triangle B D A E E C BD 51 gr. 32 min. Its Longitude being 24 gr. 20′ And let E point out Jerusalem: its Latitude CE 32 gr. 10 min. Its Longitude being 70 gr. 50 min. So then the Data or things given are, First, the side DA. the complement of London's Latitude 38 gr. 28 min. Secondly, the side AE the complement of Jerusalem's Latitude 57. 50. Thirdly, the Angle DAE being the difference of Longitude 46. 30. The Quaesitum, or thing sought after, is the side DE. The Work whereof, according to the Canon of Logarithms will stand thus:   Rad . AC 90 gr. 10,000000 AE. 57. 50 Diff. Longit. Cosin. DAE 46. 30. 9,837812 AF. 28. 40 Compl. Lat. Tang. DA 38. 28. 9,900086     London.       EF 29. 10   Tang . AF 28. 40. 9.737898.    
  Co sin. AF 61. 20 9,680982       Cosin. FE 60. 50 9,687842       Cosin. DA 51. 32 9,793832       Cosin. DE 50. 55 9,799692     Whose complement is 39 gr. 5 min. the exact distance of Jerusalem from London raised from this computation. Now that we may convert these degrees and minutes into miles: the Question will be, how many miles on the Surface of the Earth answer to a degree in the Heavens? The common, though false Vote, will give in an account of 60 miles of Italian measure to a degree: Which some would seem to maintain and confirm by the dictate of the Learned Ptolomy in his Geography, lib. 1. cap. 11. & lib. 7. cap. 5. who sayes, that one degree of such a Circle, which contains 360 in its circumfe∣rence, does ; that is, take up five hundred Stadia or Furlongs upon the Periphery or Exteriour Surface of the Earth. But Snellius in his Eratosthenes Batavus, lib. 2. cap. 3. pag. 138. labours to prove out of Hero, and others, that five Alexandrian feet (which probably were used by Ptolomy, an Inhabitant of Aegypt) were equal to six Roman; and consequently▪ that the Aegyptian stadia were lar∣ger then either Graecian or Roman: and thence would infer, that the quan∣tity of a degree upon Earth, was much larger then sixty Italian miles, accor∣ding to the mind of Ptolomy. Martianus Capella speaking to this purpose, sayes, that by Ptolomies account, every degree takes up five hundred stadia, that is, sayes he, sixty two miles, and five hundred paces, each stadium being equal to one hundred and twenty five paces, lib. 6. pag. 198. Edit. Grotii. If any desire to peruse the several Opinions of the Ancients, concerning this matter, he may find them recited by Clavius upon Sacrobosco, cap. 1. in the Se∣ction,Pag. 104. Edit. Lon∣din. 8. lib. 2. cap. 13. Sea-mans Practice, ch. 2. de ambitu terrae. But to proceed to more certainty, if we consult Gas∣sendus the late Astronomy-Professor at Paris, we shall find him abundantly larger, even to the allowance of seventy three Italian miles to one degree. To which account, Mr. Norwood, a late learned Improver of his Mathematicall Knowledge towards the advancement of the Art of Navigation, doth very near agree in a little Tract of his: Wherein he relates his Observation of the Altitude of the Pole taken at the two prime Cities of this Nation, London and York, in two Summer-Solstices by a large Instrument. The difference of the two Altitudes he afterwards comparing with the measured distance of those places, performed by great and industrious pains and diligence along the High-ways, lying betwixt them, in the year, 1635. having allowed for Ob∣liquities, ascents and descents, found a degree in the Heavens to be co-ex∣tended with 69 miles, 4 furlongs, and 14 Poles of English Statute-measure, upon Earth. Now forasmuch, as an Italian mile consists of five thousand feet; whereas the English contains five thousand, two hundred, and eighty, (not troubling our selves at present with the inconsiderable difference of an English foot from the Roman; it being but 66 parts longer then the Roman in such an assumed quantity, as takes up two thousand such like parts (where∣of more in the next Chapter) if we reduce the seventy three Italian miles into feet by five thousand, we find a degree in the Heavens to take up on the surface of the Earth 365000 Italian feet,Gassend. Epi∣cur. Philo∣soph. Part 1. p. 243. Edit. 1649. according to Gassendus and Snel∣lius. Again, if we reduce the English quantity of miles, furlongs, and poles into feet, the Product will be 367191 feet answerable to a degree: Whence it is apparent, that the difference is but small, wherein the English Obser∣vation exceeds the other, viz. but three furlongs, twelve pole, and thirteen feet; that is, not half a mile in all: As to which, if we adjoyn Gassendus
his Proxime to his 73. which he uses, we may even count them coincident. Our industrious Countrey-man, in his next Chapter, most ingenuously ac∣knowledges his Experiment not to be performed with that nice exactness and curiosity; which might be used,Mr. Greaves in his Roman foot, p. 31. according to the Rules he ther layes down; it being a thing worthy the attempt of some noble person to per∣form; nothing unbeseeming a Prince, who in the Eastern parts did once un∣dertake it: But our Observations and Experiments are now come to grea∣ter maturity, for the encouragement of so worthy a Work: especially since the useful Invention of Logarithms hath been brought to light for more compendious Calculation. But as to our purpose, I shall mention one Opi∣nion more concerning the former business, and that is of the incomparably learned in the Mathematicks, Mr. Oughtred, the great Ornament of our Na∣tion, now deceased; who in his Appendix concerning Navigation,Pag. 21. at the end of his Book, called, The Circles of Proportion,Cap. 3. Probl. 3 allows onely 66 of our English miles, and somewhat more to a Degree. Now then according to the vulgar account of 60 gr. to a mile, Mr. Wingate in his use of the Logarithms, setting Jerusalem's Latitude at 32 gr. 0 min. London's at 51 gr. 50 min. and the difference of Longitude at 47 gr. 0 min. hath calculated their distance to be 2355 miles. If any be pleased with Mr. Oughtred's quantity of 66 miles, he shall find 39 gr. 5 min. the distance before found, betwixt Jerusalem and London, in degrees and minutes, to be resolved into 2579 miles, and ½. But according to Mr. Norwood's proportion of 69 miles, 4 Furl. and 14. Pole to a degree: he that compares them in account with 39 gr. 5 min. will find 2717 miles, 7 Furlongs, 30 Poles, and ½ to be the distance of these two Ci∣ties inquired after. Onely two Suppositions must be admitted in this Cal∣culation: First, that the Longitude and Latitude of Jerusalem is exactly sta∣ted: Secondly, that the Earth is smooth and plain in its Surface or Con∣vexity. For the distance will be much augmented to the Travellers sweaty brows, in climbing the Alpine Mountains, and sliding down the many steep Declivities, which he shall meet with, in his way: besides the many impedi∣ments, by reason of the Rivers, Seas, and High-ways, in their various Obli∣quities, according to the different Customs of divers Nations. Furthermore, if any shall desire to know the Point of the Compass, on which Jerusalem bears from London, he may determine it even to a degree, if he will take the pains to make a true Chart, and by the Scale of Rumbes to set off its distance, according to the direction of an ingenuous person,Mr. Henry Philip's cap. 4. Probl. 2. in his Book, called, The Geometrical Sea-man: Or if any be desirous to hunt after more punctual exactness, even to minutes, let him consult Mr. Norwood's Trigonometry, in the Appendix of his second Book, Probl. 2. and 6. whence he may perform it by Logarithms: or Mr. Oughtred's Tract of Navigation, in the Appendix to his Circles of Proportion, Chap. 7. Quaest. 5. Or Mr. Win∣gate, in his use of the Logarithms, Chap. 4. Prob, 2, set forth in Octavo, Anno 1633. which may very easily be calculated, according to the ensuing Figure A B C D rectangle and Method: wherein A shall represent London's La∣titude 51 gr. 32 min. D, Jerusalem's Latitude 32. 10′. C, D. the difference of Longitude 46°—30′. The Meridional difference of the two Latitudes 26°. 19′. These things being the Data, we proceed to the Calculation by propoportion, and say: As the side AC. 26°. 19′. 1,4174319. To the side CD. 46°. 30′. 1,6761678. So the Radius. 10,0000000.   11,6761678.
To the Tangent of DA.C. or AD. B. 10, 2587359. which is 61 gr. 8 min. 20″. 56. 15. 0. The fifth Rumbes Angle Substracted, which is SE. and by E. 4. 53. 20. So that Jerusalem lies from London SE and by E, 4 degrees, 53′. 20″. Easterly. But because Rumbes are Helispherical lines, therefore I shall ra∣ther proceed according to the method proposed by Mr. Norwood, for say∣ling by a great Circle, Probl. 6. pag. 13. Whereby we find (though I shall omit the Transcription of its Calculation) that the distance of Jerusalem from London, in the Arch of a great Circle arises to 38 gr. 49 min. where∣by we see the difference from the former Calculation producing 39 gr. 5 min. is but 16 minutes. We find moreover by this last method, that the Angle of Jerusalems Position lyes from the South part of the Meridian 46 gr. 2 min. 52″. So that it lies from London South-East, and 1 gr. 2′. 52″. more towards the fifth point of the Compass, viz. of SE and by E, which is the most exact place of its Situation, respecting the Metropolis of England. It bears then we see from London towards a point in the Compass, which lies betwixt the South-East, and the East South-East in a direct Line of Posi∣tion, being the Segment of such a Circle, which is equivalent to any of the greater Circles of the Sphere. According to which, some devout Archi∣tects (perhaps respecting the Mother-Church of all Nations at Jerusalem) have built many of our Churches not full East and West, but looking to∣wards a Point between the full East, and the South-East. But as to the most precise determination of its distance and position, if some curious Artist, residing among our Consuls in the Levantine Countries had formerly, or should hereafter exquisitely observe a Lunar Eclipse at Jerusalem, which might be visible, and also observed at London the very same time, we might obtain a more punctual decision of this Inquisition, upon which we have in∣sisted. But least the situation of Jerusalem, as to the Altitude of the Pole there, and its distance from the first Meridian should not prove (by some Eclipses perhaps to be observed hereafter at the same time in both places by the mutual consent of some able Astronomers resident in each) to have been exactly stated by fore-cited Authors: We shall adde its bearing and distance from some famous Towns in the same Countrey, and so conclude. In the first place, not being fully satisfied about the direct Position of Joppa (the Port-Town of Judea) before-cited, out of Quaresmius, to be 40 miles from Jerusalem: I observed out of Ptolomy (who being a neer Neigh∣bour in Aegypt, might possibly himself have made Observations in Syria) that the Longitude of Joppa, from the Canaries, is reckoned at 65 gr. 40 min. and its Latitude from the Aequator at 32 gr. 6 min. According to these Data, having calculated by the former method, I found it to be neer about 27 minutes distant from Jerusalem in a direct line: which being re∣solved into miles (by Mr. Oughtred's allowance of 66 to a degree) brings forth their distance to be of English miles 29 42/60. or 7/10, or which is all one 3696 feet, that is, almost ¾ of a mile. But seeing the English miles exceed the Italian by 280 feet in each mile, there will arise 31 miles, and 1816 feet of Italian measure for their distance: If there were no Hills, nor Windings in the common-high-ways, according to the supposed stating of Joppa's Si∣tuation by Ptolomy.
But according to Gassendus and Norwood (which I rather adhere to) al∣lowing 73 Italian miles to a degree, the 27 minutes distance will produce 32 51/60 miles upon Earth in a straight line. To which agrees the modern Observation of one Timberlake, an English Traveller, in the Description of his Pilgrimage to the Holy-Land, setting it just at 32 miles distance. Bro∣cardus the Monk (I know) sayes, it was eight Leagues from Jerusalem;Pag. 33. Edit. Colon. 1624. which, at 4 to a mile, makes 32 miles: Although I confess in the Preface to his Book, a League is said to be an easie hours travel. But I rather suspect an errour in the Copy because the same Author pag. 45. tells us, that Rama was ten leagues from Jerusalem, and in the same Rode that Rama was▪ three from Joppa: which, by three to a League, makes 39 miles. To which ac∣count Breidenbachius, sometimes Dean of Mentz in Germany, doth assent in the recital of his Travels in those parts, that Joppa was ten miles,Edit. Mentz. An. 1486. pag. 36, 38, 82, 83. or three leagues from Rama, and that Rama was thirty long miles, or ten leagues from Jerusalem. Whereby, as also by Moryson's Travels in Turkie, giving in the same distances, it appears to be the common account of the Countrey. I have spoken the more of Joppa, because thence was brought the Timber of Mount-Lebanon all by Land: which though distant in a direct line, but about 33 Italian miles; yet might be 40 miles, according to the crooked Win∣dings, and the great Hills that were in the way, according to the Observati∣ons of modern Travellers, both of our own Nation, and Forreigners. A te∣dious way to bring all the Timber of the Temple through: But the noble Heart, and large Purse of Solomon, thought nothing too much for the House of his God. Now as to other Towns round about Jerusalem, St. Hierom in his small Tract of Hebrew places, sayes, That Bethel was 12 miles, Anathoth 3, Bethle∣hem six. Concerning this Bethlehem, our Saviours Birth-place, Justin Mar∣tyr (who was born in Palestine, as he himself attests in the beginning of his second Apology) sayes, that Bethlehem was but 35 stadia from Jerusalem. Bethsur, twenty; Bethany, two; and Rama, in Benjamin,Antiq. l. 8. c. 2. Pag. 62. Edit. p. 58. Sylburg. Edit. Bertij in folio, p. 12. Aelia, or Jeru∣salem. 20. Eleutheropolis, 24. Ascalon. Ptolom. Geogr. lib. 8. Asiae Tab. 4. six miles from Je∣rusalem. Which last, Josephus sayes was 40 stadia. The same Father pla∣ceth Hebron 22 miles from Jerusalem, and Beersheba in the outmost Border of Judea, twenty miles South of Hebron. I might proceed to calculate the distance of Samaria, Tyre, (where Origen was buried, according to Breiden∣bachius) Damascus, Jericho, Nazareth, and the rest, if I intended a Geogra∣phical Description. But I shall onely adde one more, and that is the fa∣mous place in St. Hierom, called, Eleutheropolis, long sought for by some: Which appears out of Antonines Itinierary, to lye twenty miles from Jerusa∣lem, South-Westerly in the High-way to Ascalon, and that it lay 24 miles North East of Ascalon; and furthermore 18 miles South of Diospolis, or Lidda. To conclude, Jerusalem was the Head-City of Palestine (a Province of Asia the Great) bounded on the West by the Mediterranean Sea. The longest day at Jerusalem was fourteen hours, and ⅛, or 7 minutes, 30 se∣conds, according to Ptolomy: But if any will state it exactlier; they may, ac∣cording to the supposed Latitude, calculate it more precisely. Having now finisht this inquiry of our Cities Situation, we shall conclude with a Petition for favour, at the hand of every courteous Person, for so long detention in this previous Discourse, and draw towards a period of this first Chapter. In this City thus situated, stood the Mountain Moriah,Nicol. Fuller, Miscel. sacr. l. 2. c. 14. whose significati∣ons, with sundry Observations annexed, may be learned out of an excellent Critick of our own Nation.
On this Mountain stood our famous Temple, which we are about to de∣scribe, whose Eastern-Gate and Wall, faced Mount-Olivet. The Holy of Holies, within this Temple, stood Westward; partly to imply, that the Wor∣shippers of the great and living God should not worship the Sun, according to the Superstitious Customes of the Eastern Heathens:Procopius Ga∣zaeus, in Reg. lib. 1. cap. 6. pag. 192. Edit. Menri. But the omnipo∣tent God, and Creator of that Sun, who appointed his Temple to be so situa∣ted, in opposition to Pagan Idolatry; which is one reason of many of the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, if Gulielmus Parisiensis may be Judge. Partly also it was thus situated, to denote the motion of Gods presence into Eu∣rope, and the Western parts of the World: Or lastly, as others think, to have a respect to Mount-Calvary, the place of our Lords suffering; whose body was typified by the Temple; and his meritorious death, by all the Temple-sacrifices. Having thus finished, what was purposed by way of Preface, it rests, that we now proceed to the main Body of this Treatise in the Nine Chapters following. Place here the Figure of the view of the Temple-Building, and its Courts.
overview of the Temple building and its courts
CHAP. II. Of the Dimensions, and Figure of the Temple. THE Foundation of this Sacred Pile was laid in the two thousand nine hundred ninety third year of the World current,The Time. in the four hundred eightieth year after the Children of Israel came up out of Aegypt, in the fourth year of King Solomon's Reign, in the se∣cond day of the second moneth; which the late most Learned and Reve∣rend Primate of Ireland, in his Annals of the Old Testament,1 King. 6.1. Part 1. pag. 57. and Petavius, in his Rationarium Temporum, Part 2. l. 2. cap. 11. make to syn∣chronize with the three thousand seven hundred and second year of the Ju∣lian Period, May 21. being Monday, and the one thousand and twelfth year current before the common Christian Aera. To which, if we adde One thousand six hundred fifty seven compleat years, thence will issue 2669 compleat years, fully ended this May the 21, 1658. since the Foundations of Solomon's Temple were laid. The place of its structure was in the Mountain of Moriah,The Place. within the Walls of the City Jerusalem, very famous for the intended Offering of Isaac by his Father Abraham, and designed by God himself for this famous Tem∣ple, when the Angel appeared to King David (at the ceasing of that fearful Plague for numbring the People) by the Threshing-floor of Arannah the Jebusite. In which very place, the King built an Altar, and offered sacrifice to God. In the room whereof, K. Solomon afterward erected the great stan∣ding Brazen Altar of the Temple. The quantity of ground, which this Moun∣tain spent in its Circuit, is not set down in Scripture; neither is it precisely and Geometrically determined by any of the ancient Writers, or modern Travellers, that I have yet had the happiness to peruse. This is certain, that the whole compass of the Mountain of the Lords House was much larger,Josephus de bello Judaico, lib. 1. cap 16. pag. 746. sayes, it contained as much more, being wall'd in by Herod. then that distinct piece of Holy Ground, on which the Temple and its Courts were built: especially, since we find the famous Antonian Tower at the North-West end of the Temple, to have stood upon the sacred Moun∣tain. But as to the quantity and measure of the Holy Ground, we shall speak in the third Chapter, where we treat of the several Courts. For our purpose is to proceed in the Description, as near as may be, according to the method of Solomon's Architects. But before we set to the main Work, it's doubtless expected on all hands, that we should exactly define the length of the Hebrew Cubit, in proportion to our English measure. This Task might have been taken off long since; if the most curious and exquisite Labours of that learned and painful Tra∣veller Mr. John Greaves, sometimes Astronomy-Professor in Oxford, had been perfected and printed; which he mentions at the end of his choise Tract of the Roman Foot. It's hoped, that persons of Learning and Virtue, will scorn to suppress so useful a Piece for the Common-Wealth of Learning, if it be in any tolerable measure prepared and left in their hands, to whom his Books and Papers were committed. In the mean time (though I intend not to weave a long Discourse at present upon this point, yet) I shall offer to con∣sideration, a short Parallel between those two renowned Authors, Josephus and Tacitus, in their Description of the Walls of Jerusalem, at the Siege of Titus, which may give some light in this particular.
Lib. 6. De bello Judaico, c. 6. p. 913. G. Edit. Graeco Lat.Josepus speaks thus of the Wall—. The solid Wall was twenty Cubits high; indeed the Battlements were five Cubits higher. And further, . But the Towers exceeded the Wall by twenty Cubits: First, they were fourty Cubits high in all. And again, concerning the Tower Hippica, he sayes, That the main body of it was , thirty Cubits high. Above that, there was a Well to receive Rain-water, and that he calls , and sayes it was , twenty Cubits high. On the top of that there depiction of a portion of the Walls of Jerusalem a. . b. . was a house , 25 Cubits high: Over this,  the open places 2 Cubits: & yet higher : The battlements 3 cubits high: and then concludes, , that the whole height came to 80 cubits. Now pray let's ask Tacitus what he says to this point, who breaks his mind in a few words, but fully thus, Extrema rupis abruptu, & arres, ubi man ju∣visset in sexaginta pedes, inter devexa, in centenos vicenosque atollebantur: What more clear to our purpose?Lib. 5. Histor. p. 625. Edit. Tug. Bat. 1640. He tells us, the Towers upon the Walls, where the Wall ran on the brow of the Hill, was sixty foot; which Josephus told you before was fourty Cubits. Tacitus sayes, where the Wall ran in the Valleys, there the Towers were one hundred and twenty foot high: such a Tower was that called Hippea, standing in the Walls; which Iosephus sayes was eighty Cubits: so then hence we learn, that fourty Cubits, and sixty feet; eighty Cubits, and one hundred and twenty feet are equal: and the propor∣tion betwixt Hebrew Cubits, and Roman feet, was Sequi altera; i.e. One Cubit of the Hebrews, was one foot and ½ of Roman measure. In a word then, to reduce the Cubit to our English foot: wherein the happy and curious pains of our fore-praised Author, hath determined our labour, as to the proportion betwixt the Roman and the English foot. For∣asmuch, as he with great judgment hath fixed upon the Foot taken from the Monument of Cossutis in the Colotian▪ Gardens at Rome, and manifested it to be the true Roman foot, pag. 32. And moreover, having exactly compared it with the English foot taken by himself from the Iron-yard or Standard of three feet at Guild-Hall in London, he found it to contain punctually 1934. such parts whereof the English foot contains two thousand. See pag. 22. and 33. It rests then (upon this supposition, that the Roman foot and half punctually answers to the Hebrew Cubit) that we proceed to reduce this, to English measure. As to this reduction, let us first adde One thousand nine hundred thirty and four, the whole Roman foot, and nine hundred sixty seven its half together; and it produceth two thousand nine hundred and one parts; which substracted from three thousand parts, the foot, and ½ of English measure, leaves ninety nine like parts, wherein the Roman foot, and ½, and consequently, the Hebrew Cubit falls short of an English foot, and ½ or 18 inches of our measure. Lastly, seeing three thousand parts gives eighteen inches, what will ninety nine deficient parts yield to be cut off from our half yard, that it may pre∣cisely answer to the Hebrew Cubit?
For answer to which: First, suppose our inch to be divided into an 100 parts: and the result will be, 59 6/15 of an inch; Inches . Parts 17 99 15 0 59 6 17 40 9 which being cut off from our English half yard, leaves one foot, five inches, fourty parts, and 9/1: or more roundly, neglecting the last fraction, we say, that the Hebrew Cubit contained of our measure, according to Guild-Hall Standard, 17 inches, 40/100 parts, or ⅖ of an inch. To conclude, I dare not hence peremptorily determine as to this pun∣ctual nicety, that the Cubit did neither exceed, nor fall short of this proportioned dimension. For who knows not, that Historians work is not to act the Geometrician: Neither do any sober men expect such exactness from any, but an Euclid, an Archimedes, a Vitruvius; and not from a Josephus, or a Tacitus. Therefore, when we read in them the proportions of Mea∣sures, we are to expound them , and according to the vulgar acception. For in this very present point, who would not count it a pretty little Wonder, that the Hebrew cubit should fall in so exactly with a Roman Foot and half, without the least Fraction? But that it is very neer the mat∣ter, I am much inclined to believe upon several other accounts: Whereupon as a more firm Basis, I hope to build a larger Discourse concerning this, and other the like points of measures, if God grant life and leisure. But you will say, What a small House will this prove; that is termed in Scripture so exceeding magnificent; and in another place very great?1 Chron. 22.5▪ 2 Chron. 2, 9· if the Hebrew Cubit be of no larger extent. I answer, the magnificence is not to be understood onely of the covered Holy House, but of all the Courts and Por∣ches, Buildings, and Gates, in and about it, throughout the whole Mountain: which you will find in the next Chapter to be of a very large compass. Be∣sides the admirable cost, and mighty sumptuousness of it, which made it ex∣ceed in glory all the Structures that ever were in the World beside. But, secondly, you will say this Temple-measure was different from the ordinary Cubit, by the testimony of Scripture it self; which tells us,2 Chron. 3.3. it was built by Cubits after the first measure. I answer: This infers not, that it was built by a greater Cubit, but parallel to the first: Whether greater, or less, the Scripture doth not determine. In∣deed the place seems to refer to the Tabernacle-measures of Moses: which when any will clearely demonstrate to be greater, I shall be of his mind. In the mean time, all that I have to offer is, that as usually in the erecting of a new frame, or model of Government, wise Prin∣ces of old stated and cized all manner of measures; and as for measures of Longitude, usually took them from the proportions of their own bodies. The Grecians had their foot from Hercules; and I have read (as I remember) that our K. Henry I. made our English Yards according to the length of his own Arm. And so might Moses give the Hebrews their Cubit from his own Elbow. Now as a mans foot (if he be a well-proportioned man) is usually the sixth part of his own height; so the Cubit is the fourth part, ac∣cording to the Observation of Vitruvius. If so be Moses took off the Cubit from his own Arm, or the fourth part of his own Body:Lib. 3. c. 2. it being not probable, that the stature of man was decreased by half, in that space of time, betwixt him and Solomon, Then may the Cubit prove to be neere our present Dimension, (though I see little reason to conclude any noto∣rious Declination in the World, or any of its parts since the Floud); especi∣ally seeing we find, that Sesoosis, King of Aegypt, the Son of Amenophis,) who was drowned in the Red-Sea; as may very probably be gathered, by compa∣ring of ancient Authors) styled Sesostris by Herodotus, lib. 2. Vexores by Justin, lib. 2. cap. 3. Vesores and Vesozes by Oorosius, lib. 1. cap. 14. and Ve∣sosis by Jornandes, cap. 6. is related by Diodorus, Sic. to be in stature but four
cubits, and four palms, lib. 1. which, according to the Saemian cubit of Hero∣dotus, being the same with the Aegyptian, or the Roman of Vitruvius, yielding a quantity betwixt 6 & 7 foot of our English measure: of wch stature, there have been some even in our days. Further, in his Calliope, speaking of the dead bodies, that after the Plataean Battel, were carryed into one place, he reports, among other rare and wonderful things; as of a Skull without a fu∣ture: of a Jaw-bone, that had a set of Teeth of one continued bone; and of the body of a man of five cubits length: He mentions it, as a most strange matter, worthy to be recorded to Posterity. Besides, we find the Tombe of Chaeops, or Chemmis, one of the Successors of Sesostris, King of Aegypt, (accu∣rately examined by Mr. Greaves,Pyram. p. 97 & 98. at his visit of the great Pyramid built by that King) to be but six foot, and 488 parts of a 1000 in a foot, according to the English Standard: As also many other Observations of his, from embal∣med bodies in Aegypt. This Tombe was made, as he relates, out of Diodo∣rus, by Chaeops, who began to rule 1266 years, before the comming of our Lord.Pag. 38. Besides, we must account, that the body being wrapt up in manifold Fillets, as Herodotus relates, 1000 Ells, being spent upon one body, as learned Greaves did find in Aegypt. We must allow some part of the Tombe for this.Pag. 50. Herodotus relates also in his Clio, that in the days of Cyrus, Croe∣sus the Lydian King, sent to Delphos an Image of a Woman, who was his Ba∣ker, . but of three Cubits height; and in the same Book relates of Phya, a Woman, that for great stature should be a counterfeit of Minerva, to command the Athenians to introduce Pisistratus into his Ty∣ranny; and yet she was three Digits less then four Cubits in stature, Vegetius also in his first Book, de re Militari, cap. 5. sayes, That C. Marius, when Consul alwayes enjoyned, that the Chief of the Roman Souldiers should be six foot high, or five foot and ten inches high at least. Now his first Consulship fell out in the Cimbrick Wars 105 years before Christ, according to Helvicus, and others. Therefore what is said of Goliah, being six Cubits and a span, and of an Aegyptian of great stature to be five Cubits, 1 Chron. 11.23. I take to be meant of this Cubit. I cannot then but wonder, that any should so fondly dream of the declination of humane stature, and absurdly conclude from such a thin and jejune conjecture, that by Cubits of the first mea∣sure, must necessarily be meant a Duplicat to the Present of Solomon's. Others,Cappellus. from the misapplyed Stories of the Brazen Pillars, would have a Sacred Cubit to be double to a Common. But there's as much reason for that, as for two kinds of Weights and Moneys: Where∣as shekels are not said to be according to the Sanctuary, because double to the common; but because equal to the Standard-shekel of the Sanctuary, which was the place for all Measures and Cizes to be laid up, as in a most Sa∣cred Repository, 1 Chron. 23.29. Whereby we may learn, that commutative justice was neer in as high reputation with God, as his own Divine Sacrifi∣ces. Nay, he regarded not the Peace-Offerings of Fat-Beasts, unless Judg∣ment also did run down like Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos 5.22, 24. It were to be wished, that in ours, and all other Christian Nations, that all Measures were, throughout the same Countrey, of the same proportion and dimension, according to the Statute of Magna Charta, (so little observed among us, though so extreamly behoofeful in that point, to the publick interest, that the crafty Sellers might not so constantly impose upon harmless and simple persons, as to the legerdemain of Measures a∣mong Traders:) Which commands, cap. 25. That there shall be but one Mea∣sure for Wine; but one for Beer, but one for Corn, but one for Cloth; and so concerning Weights: Which, though confirmed by many Parliaments, and so to be esteemed a Fundamental-Piece of our Liberties and Birth-Right:
Yet to our shame, and the general loss of the Buyers, is not that Law restored to its purity. That as the Jews; so might we also, have but one Weight, and one Measure, and these laid up in our Temples, as most sacred things, under the tuition of Sacred Persons, to be kept close in the most se∣cure Archives possible. But as to present Cubit in hand, one thing more I have to offer about the first Measure, (seeing Moses was learned in all the wisdome of the Aegyp∣tians, the principal part whereof was Geometry,Act. 7.22. they being necessitated every year after the overflowing of Nilus, to measure the Limits and Bounds of most mens Land a-new; as Herodotus in the Life of Sesostris, in his Euterpe: together with Diodorus Siculus, in his first Book, and 81 Section (according to some Copies,) do both attest.) That possibly Moses and his People, might use the Aegyptian Measures: which if true, (though we have no word in Scri∣pture for it) then I will recommend to the Readers consideration, a notable Memorandum of the Aegyptian Cubits out of Herodotus; holding it not con∣venient to spin out any more time on this Subject. The place is in Euterpe,Herodotus. or of his History, lib. 2. In English thus: A Pace is six Foot, or four Cubits. A Foot is four Palms; A Cubit sixe Palmes. If you say it is Samian measure, generally used by that Author, I answer with his own words in the same Book, . The Aegyptian Cubit is equal to that of Sa∣mos. To conclude, what ever the Cubit were, either of Moses, or Solomon, the Dimensions of the Temple being described, not by yards or feet; but under the name of Cubits, the judicious Reader may imagine its length, according to his own most exact conception, and so conceive the House as large and magnificent as he please: sobeit he be careful, that the Battering-Ram of his fancy, do not cast the Walls, Gates, and Porches, and the poor Levites in their Watches, into the Valleys of the Moriah-Mountain. For the whole Hill, with the Temple, and Antonian-Buildings included, did not contain much more, then about six stadia in compass, as Josephus hath left upon Record.De Bell. Judaic. lib. 6. cap. 6. What a stadium in Josephus is, you may see in the third Chapter of this Treatise. Since we have then a little cleared off our hands, this tough and knotty rubbish of a Cubit, so much as to our present Design: let's begin to lay the Foundations of the Temple, and so proceed forward to the Top-stone of that admirable Fabrick. The Foundation. THE Foundations of this Royal-Building were laid with great costly hewen stones: Of what depth, Scripture is silent.Foundation. 1 King. 5.17. De re rust. l. 1. Tit. 8. But if Palladius be a good Architect, they should be in depth a fifth or sixth part of the height, when the place is solid. This being on a Rocky Hill, as Josephus writes, we may allow for the Porch of one hundred and twenty Cubits high, the depth of Twenty Cubits; and for the whole House, being Thirty high, five Cubits depth, for the Foundations; and on each side, half a cubit broader then the Walls of the House. The full thickness of the Walls are not deducible out of Scripture:Walls, 1 King. 6.6. Onely thus much we may clearly evince, that they were four cubits thick at least, just by the ground: For we read of three Cubits abated in the thickness of the Walls, for the Beames of the side-chambers to lye upon. On which account, we do allow but one Cubit for the thickness of the Tem∣ple-wall, from above the Roof of the third and highest Story of the Cham∣bers, to the Roof or Top of the Temple it self.
But if we allow 6 at the Bottome, there will remain three at the Top which is the least we can allow; considering the height, together with its magni∣ficence, and designed duration. If six at Top, as usually most do grant, then there will be found nine at Bottome, or 10, as the learned Ribera would have it. I know some would squeeze six Cubits out of Ezekiel's Visionary Temple, for the thickness of its Walls: but we shall go in the middle pro∣portion, and in our Figure, adde to the internal capacity the thickness of six Cubits for the Walls, till some Rabbinical Architect shall conjure up the Ghosts of Solomon's Builders to decide the Controversie. depiction of the convered Temple The Figure of the Covered Temple. 1. The Tower of the Porch 2. The Porch 3. The Holy place 4. The Oracle 5. The windowes of the holy place 6. The side Chambers.
Of the Porch. BEfore I enter upon the Proportions of this Building,Situation. its necessary we should remember the Temple-Student, what point of Heaven the Porch and its stately Entrance did face: For which purpose, let's consider, that Ezekiel in his Captivity-Vision, being brought into the Inner-Court of the Lords House, saw 25 men between the Porch and the Altar, with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and their faces towards the East,Ezek. 8.16. worshipping the Sun toward the East. Whereby is tacitely implyed, that the Body of his Visionary-Temple, or the Covered House (the Pattern in many things of Zorobabels Structure) was Westward of the Brazen-Altar. If this be not enough, observe out of another place, that the Gate of the out∣ward Sanctuary [that is the Holy-place of fourty Cubits long,Ezek. 44.1. as I shall shew by and by] which looketh toward the East, was shut: Yet once more, when he was brought to the door of the same House again, we read, That he saw Waters issuing from under the Threshold of the House Eastward. For the Fore-front of the House stood toward the East.Ezek. 47.1. I hope this is a sufficient Testimony, being treble-twisted, to draw any sober mans consent to us, see∣ing that the situation of the second Temple, according to the concurrent judgment both of Jews and Christians, did imitate the former of Solomon's. So that now none need fly to any Idiotismes, or Proprieties of the Hebrew Language for a Sanctuary, to shelter the true situation of the Temple, as some have done. The beautiful face of the Porch, we will then begin to erect towards the East-quarter of Heaven,1 King. 6.3. Length. Breadth. 2 Chron. 2.4. Height. Dr. Lightf. Templ. p. 89. whose inward Capacity shall be contained within a Line of Twenty Cubits length from North to South [for its length ran parallel to the breadth of the House] and a Line of Ten Cubits for its breadth from East to West. The height of the whole Porch was very state∣ly and pompous, viz. One hundred and Twenty Cubits. Not that it was all empty and void to the Top, but probably had Chambers and Winding-stairs, ascending up to the Roof. But that the lowest Concameration of the Porch was more then 22 Cubits, and ½ in height may be evident by the height of the Pillars of Brass, whereof we shall speak anon. Probably, the height of its lowest Room within, might be equal to the rest of the House, viz. Thirty Cubits. As for the Battlements on the Top of the Porch,Battlements. we may conceive them to be much of the same proportion with those of the Walls of the City fore∣described, that is, the height in the open spaces, was two Cubits, and the Propugnacles three Cubits, or thereabouts, or rather stately Rails of Stone, besides the more curious Ornaments of Pinacles. From the Top of this Porch I have read, that the Dead-Sea might easily be discerned:Bell. Judale. lib. 6. cap. 6. which claims affi∣nity with Truth, according to what Josephus relates concerning the Tower Psephina, in the North-West Angle of the Walls of the City, which was 70 Cubits high from the ground; and that not so high as this upper-part of Moriah, according to some: from whence he tells us, that Arabia, the Sea, and the utmost Coasts of the Hebrews, might be seen. This is attested also by Brocardus (who saw its Ruines) that all Arabia, Jordan,Pag. 35. Pag. 36. and the Dead-Sea-might be perceived from that Tower in a clear day: . sayes Aristeus, That the Tem∣ple was built on the Summity of the Moriah Mountain, which was built on higher ground then that Tower of Psephina.
What an admirable Prospect may Towring-Fancies conjecture to have been within view, from the Top of this rare Pile, which stood (as some re∣late) on more elevated ground then any part of the City, and was withall fifty Cubits higher, then the former Tower of Psephina, where leaving our devout Students in Perspective, to plot the Land of Canaan after a more ex∣act manner then yet we have received; let's descend into the Lowest-Room of the Porch, which we find without Gates, according to the general Opi∣nion: but there was a very magnificent Entrance raised by many steps out of the Area of the Priests Court. The height of the Arched Portal is not laid down in the Sacred Leaves: But that the Room within was wholly overlaid with pure Gold, we have sufficient Testimony enough to dazle the eyes of the greatest contradiction.2 Chron. 3.4. Which Radiant Adornment, might cause some hesitation, concerning the received Opinion of its being without Doors, because of the grand Curiosities within, which would else be exposed to all Weathers; but especially since we find mention of the Doors of the Porch,2 Chron. 29.7. in the Book of Chronicles, expresly called in the Hebr.  which that they were the Doors of the Outer-Sanctuary opening into the Porch, I leave it as an improbable Answer to the determination of Learned Rabbies. Of the Sanctuary. THE Sanctuary, or Holy Place, or Body of the Temple, sometimes cal∣led the Greater House; sometimes the House onely: or the middle-part betwixt the Porch and the Oracle, had these Dimensions. For the ex∣tent of its length within the Walls,1 King. 6.17. 1 King 6.2, 3. pag. 89. in quarto. from East to West, it contained 40 Cu∣bits. The breadth from North to South was 20, and the heighth 30. I know Arias Montanus would have it within, to be but 20 Cubits high, pa∣rallel to the height of the Oracle; and that there were private Chambers over it, as well as over the most Holy Place: but because he, nor any else, have yet proved it out of Scripture, we leave it to the decision of the Judi∣cious Reader. The Doors. 1 King. 6.33, 34, 35. For the Parti∣tion Wall, see the next Secti∣on. 2 Chron. 4.22. 1 King. 6.35.The Doors of this House, or Holy Sanctuary, at the West end of the Porch, or the East-end of this Holy Place, were of folding leaves made of Fir-Tree, and the Posts on which they hung were of Olive-Tree, made four-square. Now whereas it is said, these Doors were of Gold in one place, we understand the meaning by another place, which sayes, they were covered with Gold; that is, with thin Plates of that excellent Metal, which were laid and embossed upon carved Cherubims, Palm-Trees, and open Flowers. The Walls. As to the Walls, the Out-side exposed to open view, was, as is conceived by some, all over-layed with silver. For which very purpose, we read, that David appointed seven thousand Talents of refined silver,1 Chron. 29.4. yielding a most glorious and shining Spectacle to all Beholders, though others apprehend them onely to be of white polished Marble.1 King. 6.18. The in-side of the Walls was first covered with Cedar, and carved with Knops and Open-Flowers; or, as it is expressed [verse 29.] with carved Figures of Cherubims, Palm-Trees, and Open-Flowers; and all these laid in Gold of Parvaim. Nay, we find that it was also in some select places most gorgeously adorned and garnished with precious stones:Ibid. but of what sorts, and in what curious method dispo∣sed, we cannot learn.
The Floor. The Floor of this House was first laid with Planks of Fitte,1 King. 6.15, 30. and Boards of Cedar, and all over-laid with pure Gold. The Windowes. Concerning the Windows, we neither read of their number, nor the parti∣cular dimension of any: neither their fashion, or of what materials. A Que∣stion might be moved, Whether they were of Glass, seeing the Phoenicians,Plin. 1. 36. c. 26. the first Inventers of it, were Neighbours to the people of Israel, and gave in great assistance to this glorious Work: Besides, it's sufficiently known, that the Glassie Sands of the River Belus, were within the Territories of the Tribe o Asher. But whether the Discovery were so ancient as the time of Solomon, I have not yet read. What Herodotus hath spoken in his Thalia of the Aethiopians, burying their Dead in a Tombe of Glass, dug out of a Rock, is mentioned by him, to have been seen by the Messengers of Cambyses, sent to the Aethiopian King: but he doth not tell us of any more ancient use of it. To this about Glass Tombes in Aethiopia, Strabo, in the 17th Book of his Geo∣graphy, p. 822. of Casaubon's Edition, and Diodorus Sic. l. 2. Sect. 15. and lib. 3. Sect. 9. and Ctesias Cnidius in Diodorus, agree with Herodotus, though Ctesias dissent from Herodotus, about the manner of intombing. To this purpose, I remember also in the Arabian Story of the Pyramids, recited by the learned Mr. Greaves. That the King which built the Pyramids▪ put in the Westernmost of them glass, that might be bended, and not broken, p. 82. All which Story, is by him counted little less then a Romance: Yet possibly, there might be Rocks in Aethiopia, like to those in Moscovia, mentioned by M. Fletcher in his History; whose Scalings might be transparent and flexi∣ble (and not so fragile, as our Artificial Glass) which we use for Ship-Lan∣thorns, and other ends. But how ancient the Invention of Glass truly was, I have not yet found, so as to give any real satisfaction. For although Theo∣phrastus (the Successor of Aristotle in his School, in the 114th Olympiad, as Laertius writes, which was about 320 years before our Lords Incarnation) doth recite a story of a Glassie matter made of Earth and Brass mixt, in his Book de Lapidibus: yet he puts a  to it, that he received it but by Tradition, and doth not speak clearly to the point in hand, about the time of its Invention. Yet concerning the Antiquity of Glass, I have one thing more to offer, and that is,Jos. 11.8. & 13.6. what we read of in the relation of Josua's victo∣rious pursuit of his Enemies (as we have it in our Text) even to Sidon, and Misrephoth-Maim; in which places, Arias Montanus renders the Hebrew words thus, [Ʋs{que} combustiones aquarum] unto the place of the burning of Waters. Another Version hath it▪ [Ʋnto the Confluxe of Waters.] Ano∣ther, [unto the place of hot Baths] Another, [to the Salt-pit Waters] But Junius translates it thus [Us{que} ad fornaces vitrarias] that is, to the place of the Glass-Furnaces, which much fancied the Learned Knight Sir Walter Ra∣leigh, conceiving that this place might raise a good conjecture, that the Glas∣sie Sands of the River Belus were in request for that use among the Sidoni∣ans, even in the days of Josuah; as may appear in his Marginal Citation, in the second Book of the first Part of his History, Chap. 2. Sect. 1. † 2. p. 282. But certainly, had this Invention been so anciently in use, Solomon's Temple should have enjoyed the improvement of it, and we should not have found King Ahaziah falling through a Lattice in his Upper-Chamber, but a glasse-window
rather, as being a more excellent Ornament for a Kings Palace, Nay,2 King. 1.2. it is very probable, we should have had famous mention of this rare Invention in Scripture in case it had been in use. For as to the Loo∣king-glasses of women mentioned by Moses,Exod. 38.8. it's clear by the Text, that they were of polished Brass. Neither read I, as to the time of the Invention of our Artificial Glass any determination precisely set down in Pliny, or Panci∣rollus, or his Commentator Salmuth; or in Polydor Virgil, or Rhodiginus, or in Isidorus Hispalensis, who have professedly handled the Inventions of the Ancients: Wherefore, at present, we shall be content with gilded Lattesses for the Temple-windows. I know Procopius Gazaeus, on 1 King. cap. 6. sayes thus: . They were of bored stones: But I leave that Author peeping through them. For their form or fashion, it's probable they were of an oblong square, their length being perpendicular to the plane of the Horizon, and according to the mode of ancient sacred Buildings; narrow without, and broad within; partly for the strengths sake of the Building, partly for devotion, which is much distracted by great and glaring Windows. Much like it seems they were to the Windows of some of our ancient Brittish Churches; as particularly, that of Saint Paternus, now Llan-badern vawre, in Cardigan-shire in Wales, or some of the more ancient Saxon Churches in this Land. For their length, we can produce no clear testimony: onely this is certain, the lowest part must be conceived to have been at least fifteen Cubits from the Pavement, because the Cham∣bers on the Out-side of the Temple-Walls did reach so high, if not more, as shall be manifested by and by. The Roof. The Roof of the House, we may safely conclude to have been flat, accor∣ding to God's general command,Deut. 22.8. Neh. 8.16. 1 Sam. 9.25, 26. 2 Sam. 16.22. 2 King. 23.12. Act. 10.9. Jer. 19.13. Jer. 32.29. and their practice at the Feast of Taberna∣cles in the days of Nehemiah; together with several other places of Scrip∣ture to that purpose. At the Sides, it was guarded with Battlements, and probably adorned with Pinacles. It was not sustained by any Pillars (that we read) either of Metal, Stone, or Timber; which, by the way, yields some help, as to the fore-stated Cubit: which if it were in duple or sextuple pro∣portion to what is mentioned, as some would plead, the Building would have needed supporting-pillars, or else the Roof must have been built with Arch-Work drawn from the Side-Walls,Neh. 8.16. and so have proved circular, or  contrary to the Jewish Custome whose Roofs were made so plain, that they usually,2 Sam. 11.2. in Evenings, took their delight in walking upon their Houses. But as to the Temple, whether there were a crested Rising in the middle I will not dispute: but certainly, as to the breadth of the House, according to our Cubit, there's no need of such a cresting, in respect to the Beams of Cedar, whereof plenty enough might be had of twice the length of 20 such Cubits;1 King. 6.9. onely, possibly there might be a gentle Rising to cast the Rain-wa∣ter off. The Covering then was of Beams and Boards of Cedar without: but surely the Cedar was not exposed to the injuries of Weather, without some slatting, or Metal-sheets most probably. But with what Metal this Covering sub Dio was, the Scripture is silent: probably, not of Lead, because nothing is spoken of that Metal at all in any particulars of the Temple. If we should over-lay the Boards with Gold, I suppose none devoutly given, would grutch at such expence, especially being out of anothers purse.
But it is not probable that the Out-side did equal the Inner: therefore what if we allow it to have bin sheeted with sliver; seeing a King of France, St. Da∣gobet the 11th from Pharamund, (far inferiour to Solomon in riches, i Villalpan∣dus count right,Gagvinus's Hist. fol. 38. Gall. who sayes, the Revenues of our K. exceeded those of the Ro∣man Emperours) covered the famous Church of Saint Dennis with Silver. To countenance this conjecture a little, let it be thought as proper that the Roof should be plated with silver, as that the Walls below should be on the Out-side beautified with that Metal, as some conceive. Some being a litle niggard∣ly, & secretly stealing away the Silver-Covering, would impose upon the Roof with Tiles of Brass, thinking possibly there was no sight or shew of such a cost∣ly material, as Plates of Silver in that place: Which Plates, whether of Brass, or Silver, might be laid on and fastned, much like those upon Saint Mark's Tower, and part of the Dukes Palace in Venice; as Schottus in his Itinerar. Ita∣liae, p. 40, 47. relates. But let such as grutch at this pomp know,Cieling. that the grea∣test glory of this Building was hidden from common or profane eyes, and that vain Ostentation was no end aymed at by our sacred Artificers. On the Top of all, I have read in Eusebius, out of Eupolemus, that there were Bells disposed in an Artificial Method, to fright away Birds:2 Chron. 3.5, 6. See Euseb. Prepar. Evangel. lib. 9. cap. 34. pag. 451. Edit. Paris, Graeco-Lat, The in-side of the Cedar-Beams of this stately Roof was cieled with Firre-Trees adorned with Carvings of Palm-Trees, and Chains, and over-laid with Gold. Of the Oracle. THE Oracle, sometimes called the Inner-House, the Inner-Sanctuary, the Holy of Holies, and the most Holy House, comes next to be sur∣veyed: Where first its requisite we should view the Partition between the Holy place, and this Holy of Holies:Partition. which mindes me of what I should have mentioned before concerning the Partition, between the Porch and the Holy Place. That there was a Partition, I am induced to believe; part∣ly, because there is mention made of a stately Door with Folding-Leaves, which needed not to be, if above it, and on both sides of it, the Porch and Holy place were common. Besides, what an unhandsome and improper Spectacle would it be, to have a Door to shut and hinder entrance, if on all sides else it were open. Besides, I would fain know, what support there was for the West Wall of the Porch, which was ninety Cubits higher then the House, if there were neither Wall nor Pillars beneath; nor Arch-work from the side-walls, because of the vast magnitude of such an Arch. Moreover, I am the more perswaded to this thing, by the concurrent Opinion of our Reverend Translators, who tell us,1 King. 6.33. that the Olive-Tree-Posts of the Doors of the Temple, were a fourth part of the Wall. Well then: Let there be a Wall of six Cubits thickness erected between the Porch and the Holy place, arising to One Hundred and Twenty Cubits in height. The place for the Doors and Posts containing a fourth part of the Wall, that is according to their construction of the Text: This Partition Wall running North and South Twenty Cubits. The 4th part, viz. five Cubits of this, was taken up by the Doors and Posts. There remains but one Conjecture more, and that is, as if the words might favour such a construction, as this, that the Posts whereon the Doores were hanged, began to be set up on each side at the fourth Cubit distance from the Wall. There remains then twelve Cubits for the Posts and Doors:
which indeed it's probable, were very large, because folding, and divided into two leaves, But I leave both Conjectures to the consideration of abler Grammarians, as to the Hebrew Text, and more expert Architects, as to the high Pile of Ninety Cubits of stone over the Doors, if they be granted to be so large. Now as to the Partition between the Oracle, and the Holy-place, it is conceived generally, that it was but one Cubit thick: (but I shall set down three Cubits, whereof in the conclusion of this Chapter) being attested by the Writings of the Rabbins, in their Discourses about the second Tem∣ple, which had its president in many things from this of Solomon's. But as to these Partitions,1 King. 6.2. one thing may be objected out of that place in the Kings, which sayes, The House (taking both Holy-place and Oracle together) was but sixty Cubits in length: Whereas these Partitions being added, will produce sixty seven, for the length of the house; besides the Porch. To this, I answer; That Text is to be understood of the two inmost Plots, or Area's laid together in one sum; i.e. Fourty the House, and twenty the Oracle within; whereas there is no account at all of any of the Walls. Now whether this Partition-Wall of three Cubits thick, from North to South, were built of any rare precious Stones, or of ordinary Marble (concei∣ved to be the material of the whole Temple) we cannot decide. But that we may confirm this Opinion, that there was a Wall in this place, it's ap∣parent, according to the sentence of Junius & Tremellius, who read that Text [and he made a Partition] fecit interjectum parietem.1 King. 6.21. De Rep. Hebr. lib. 2. c. 14. 1 King. 6.31. Cunaeus also is flat in the point in these words,—Inter Sanctum & Sanctum & Sanctorum mu∣rus quidam unius cubiti latitudine, &c. First, there was between the Holy place and the Oracle, a certain Wall of a Cubit breadth: Besides, our Tran∣slators again imply their mind sufficiently in that Verse, The Lintel and Side-posts were a fifth part of the Wall,  in Hebr. which one ren∣ders, Postes pentagona: The Vulgar, Postes{que} angulorum quinque; The Se∣venty, , One Version of the Arabick paraphraseth the Text thus;The Doors. On each side of the Doors he placed five Cubits length of Olive-Tree, which he made Arch-wise, and raised the Door five Cubits high, and made for it thick and strong Posts. Junius and Tremellius render it, according to our Translators, a fifth part of the Wall. Hence, from all these Versions, we may raise a Three-fold Conjecture of the meaning. Either that the Posts were made in form of a Pentagonal-prisme: Or, as some usually, though ab∣surdly, term it, five-square. Or else we are to understand it, That the Door and Posts took up a space of ground, lying betwixt five Cubits, & measured from the North and South-Walls on both sides; that is, they were extended to & took up ten Cubits space in the Wall: which implyes, the Doors to take up as much place as the Wall on each side did;Ezek. 41.11. the whole breadth of the House being twenty. The Wall, on one side had five; on the other side five; and the Doors,Ezek. 41.2. Dr. Light∣foot of the Temple in Christ's days, p. 87. with their Posts, ten; which is the Opinion of a man of our own Nation, very learned in the Oriental Languages and Antiquities. The last Conjecture is this, bottomed upon Tremellius, and our Transla∣tors Versions; That the Posts and Doors contained a fifth part of the Wall; that is, four Cubits; the Wall being eight Cubits long on each side. Thus the Notes on the French Translation also, La cinquieme partie de la parof. assa, quatre couées. But submitting wholly to acuter Judgments, and standing no longer upon the Threshold, we will look upon the materials of the Doors, which were of Olive-Tree, and cared with Cherubims, Palm-Trees,1 King. 6.31. 1 King. 7.32. and Open-flowers, and all over-laid with Gold. The Hinges of these Doors, as also of the Holy-place fore-mentioned, were of Gold.
The Walls of the Oracle. The Walls of this most Holy place were of squared polished Marble (as is generally received by the Jews of Old) their out-side, as is conceived,1 Chron. 29.4. 1 King. 6.16, 20, 21. 1 King. 6.29. 2 Chron. 3.8. was covered with Plates of Silver; the in-side with boards of Cedar, wrought with Cherubims, Palm-Trees, and Open-flowers, and all over-laid with fine Gold: For we read, that the Walls of the House, both within and with∣out, were thus adorned; i.e. both the Holy-place, and the Oracle: The fine Gold expended upon the Oracle amounted to Six Hundred Talents. The Quantity of the Oracle. The Dimensions of this most Holy-place, God's Parlour,1 King. 6.20. or Privy-Cham∣ber, were on this wise, (in a word) A perfect Cube excavated, or 20 Cubits high, long and broad. The Floor of the Oracle. The Floor of this Oracle was first covered with Boards of Cedar,1 King. 6.16, 20. and then over-laid with Gold, The Windows of the Oracle. Concerning Windows; Whether this Holy of Holies had any or not, the Scripture is very dark, and gives us no light at all, by express naming of any Windows in the Oracle: it seems more probable on the Negative, be∣cause the Oracle it self being but twenty Cubits high, could admit but of a very small quantity of Room for those Windows, by reason of the Cham∣bers round about the Out-side of the Temple: which Chambers, according to the inward capacity of each joyned together,1 King. 6.10. 1 King. 6.6. arose to a sum of fifteen Cu∣bits, for each was five Cubits high; and of them there were three Stories. Now, besides this inward capacity of the Chambers, we must consider of room for the Beams of the three Floors, and Uppermost-Roof at top. In∣somuch, that Villalpandus, a most laborious and learned Temple-Student, (in his Comment. upon Chap. 41. of Ezekiel, Tom. 2. Part 2. Lib. 4. Cap. 34.) states the height of these Chambers on the Out-side of the Temple, to be Cubits 18, and ¾: So that hence there rests but one Cubit and a quarter for the Windows of the Oracle, which would prove very uncomely, and not be∣fitting the state and magnificence of the Temple to have two or three little Pidgeon-holes at the Top of the Oracle. Besides, if they be framed, according to Arias Montanus, they will prove less then those of the Holy-place, which would be in no ways beautiful, according to Rules of Symmetry and Propor∣tion. Nay, he is pleased to make part of the Oracle-Windows in his Scheme of the Temple, three or four Cubits higher then the Oracle it self by his own Scale. But to let this pass, I know it is observed by some, that several places of Scripture, (where God is said to dwell in thick darkness) do allude to the Habitation of God's Majesty, between the Wings of the Cherubims in that dark Oracle. To whom Darkness shineth as the Light.Psal. 139.12. Seeing the Creator needs not the black Sackcloth of the Sun, in comparison with his most transplendent and inconceiveable glory; and the pale Moon, his own-made Lamps, which he framed for his Creatures to do their work by. Besides, this place was opened but once a year for the High-Priests Entrance,Lev. 16.13, 14, &c. whose work was not of such a nature, as needed more light then what the opened Doors of the Holy-place might yield.
There is nothing urged on the other side, of any moment, but the acce∣tion of the word  (where mention is made of windows) that Baith com∣prehends the whole Temple:1 King. 6.4. Whereas that allegation is false, if taken gene∣rally, and apprehended to be constantly predicated of the whole Covered Temple, as it must; or else it makes not against us. For if you observe the 17 Ver. of the same Chapter, the Temple of fourty Cubits length before the Oracle is expresly termed the House; and in the Hebr.  The very same word being used for the Holy place apart by it self, as well as for the whole Covered-Building; We shall therefore, at present, till clearer light spring forth, close up these sacred Mysteries, from the profane glances of Sun,Job 25.5. Moon, and Stars, which are not pure in his sight. The Sides of the Oracle. To proceed then in the Description of this glorious place, let's take notice of the Sides thereof within to have bin be over-laid with Gold; as also the Floor and Roof, and fastned with Nails of Gold, according to the sense of the Vulgar Latine,1 King. 6.21. which renders that perplexed place [He made a Partition by the Chains of Gold before the Oracle] thus, Et affixit laminas clavis aureis, He fastned the Plates of Gold (viz with which on all sides this Holiest place was overlaid) with Golden Nails, which was done by boring little holes into the Golden-plates, and the Cedar-boards underneath; and so driving square Golden-Rivets into those holes: The weight of which Nails, or Rivets,2 Chron. 3.9. we read, was fifty shekels, (each shekel being near about half an Ounce of our Troy Weight:) which according to the usual value of Gold, viz. of 3 li. an Ounce, will produce 25 Ounces in Weight for these golden Rivets, yielding 76 li. sterling, in value, of our money. Antiq. Ju∣daic. quarto, pag. 90.But by the Chains, in the preceding difficult place, Arias Montanus un∣derstands Chains of Gold, whereupon the Vail was hanged. Others, un∣derstand Artificial flowred Wreaths, and Chain-works made in gold for Ornament in the sides of the House; and so we will leave it, according to the mind of Dr. Lightfoot before-mentioned. Yet there remains one thing which I have read in the Jewish History, of the Spanish Jew, Solomon made more common by the Translation of George Gentius,Pag. 358. who tells us, That the Sides of this Holy of Holies, for ten Cubits high, (or, as he hath it, ten Ells high) were all wrought of Net-work: In every square hole whereof, there was fixed some resplendent and shining precious stone or other. In one place, a Saphire; in another, a Carbuncle, &c. Insomuch, that the riches and value of that place was beyond estima∣tion. To which Josephus sets his Solemn Sacerdotal Attestation, Antiq. l. 8. c. 2 p. 267. The Roof of the Oracle. 1 King. 6.15, 16, 18.The Roof of this House was (as the whole) laid with Beams and Boards of Cedar, and over-laid with gold, and set (as some conceive) with precious stones. Of the Vail of the Oracle. 2 Chron. 3.14.Last of all, we are to hang up the Vail, which doubtless was within the Wall of the Holy of Holies; For else the High-Priest might come within the Vail, and yet not be in this most Holy place, if the Wall and the Doors were nearest to the Oracle. Whereas the main mystery lay in the Vail,
noting the flesh of Christ. Besides, in Moses's Tabernacle,Heb. 10.19, 20. there was no other Partition then the Vail; which when the High-Priest was entred through, he was within the Holy of Holies. But if Arias his fore-cited Opinion be true, That the Chains of gold were for to hang the Vail upon, then they being within the Oracle, this must necessarily. However, for its materials, we have them clearly decided by Scripture to have been of blew,2 Chron. 3.14. and Purple, and Crimson, and fine Linnen, all wrought with Winged Che∣rubims. To conclude; there remains to be considered, Whether the out-side of the Roof of this House were covered, sub Dio, in the Open-Ayr, at twenty Cubits height, or whether there were any Rooms within those Superiour ten Cubits parallel to the height of the Holy place. As to this, I fall those three Verses, viz. the 8th, 9th, and 10th,2 Chron. 3. (of 2 Chron. Chap. 3.) are to be understood concerning the Oracle, or Holy of Holies, and its Parts, Dimensi∣ons, and Materials onely, as 'tis most probable, then it should seem there were Chambers over this Oracle. The very words [Of the most Holy House] in ver. 8, and 10, do carry them clear: and as for the Golden Nails in the beginning of the ninth, I know none but agree in it, that they concern the Oracle. Why then must half a Verse be interpreted of Cham∣bers I know not where, seeing no other part of the Temple is mentioned near them, but the Oracle, both before and after. Let us be excused then, if we adhere to Montanus in this point, that the Upper-Chambers there men∣tioned to be over-laid with gold, are two Chambers of five Cubits a piece, (according to the quantity of the other Side-Chambers) which being over the Oracle, possibly were Repositaries for those things of Moses, his Holy of Holies, viz. such, and so many as were not used by Solomon, which was utterly unlawful surely to condemn to any profane use. Of the Side-Chambers. THere yet remain to be viewed and described the Side-Chambers of the Temple, by way of Appendix to this Chapter, as they were to the Temple it self. Of the Situation. In the first place, let's observe, that there were no Chambers adjoyning to any part of the Porch: For although the Text tell us,1 King. 6.5. there were Cham∣bers round about, yet it explains it self, when it sayes, They were round about the House; that is, the Temple and Oracle,1 King. 6.6. there being no mention of the Porch at all; which apprehension, agrees with the general consent of Wri∣ters. Of these Chambers, there were three Stories: the nethermost where∣of was five Cubits broad; the middle, six; the highest, 7. Of the Breadth. Now, how it came to pass, that the highest Chamber should be the broa∣dest, the Text, in our Translation, renders an account thus: For without,Ibid. in the Wall of the House, he made Narrowed-Rests round about, that the
Beams should not be fastned in the Wals of the House] The Exposition of this place will clear up the different Measures of the Chambers thus: The Wall of the Temple for five Cubits height above the ground, was a Cubit thicker then it was in its height above those five Cubits: So that at five Cubits height, there was a plain parallel to the Horizon of a Cubit broad round about the Temple;1 King. 6.10. or if you will call it, a Seat of Stone, whereupon one end of the Cedar-Beams of the Chambers did rest to bear up the Roof of the lowest, or the Floor of the second Story. Five Cubits higher from thence, or at 10 Cubits height from the ground, the thickness of the Temple. Wall was yet a Cubit less; and upon that second Seat thus made by a Cubits re∣batement in the Wall, rested the Cedars Beams for the Roof of the second, and Floor of the third Story. At 15 Cubits height from the ground, the thickness of the Temple-wall was yet still a Cubit less then it was at 10 Cubits height, which yielded a third Seat, on which the Beams for the Roof of the third and highest Story were laid. So then, hence we learn, that as the Wall of the Temple abated in thickness, so the Measure of the Chambers increased in breadth; that the lowest being five; the second six; the third did prove 7 Cubits broad; and yet on the Out-side, the stone-work of the Chambers was perpendicularly equal: So that they made a shew to Spectators, at a distance, much like the lower Leads of our English Churches. The height of the Chambers of the Temple. Here also remember, that we use the numbers of 5, 10, and 15 Cubits for the Rebatings in the Wall at such heights, meerly because Scripture is silent of the thickness of the Floors between Chamber and Chamber: Whereas properly, when the height of each Chamber is said to be five Cubits, we must apply this to the inward content of the Chambers: For though Temple-Writers generally tell us,1 King. 6.10. that all the three Stories were 15 Cubits high, yet we read no such thing in Scripture; onely that each was five Cubits high: Which, that it is meant of the inward capacity, is probable from the usuall Descriptions of the other Temple-Buildings; as of the Porch, Holy-place and Oracle, whose Dimensions are onely proportioned to the inward part: as is clear of the Oracle, by the extent of the Cherubims Wings. Besides, from the quantity of a Cubit before-stated (which I hope, by divine permissi∣on, more fully to demonstrate hereafter in another place) If it be but a Roman-Foot and half, or very near that point, then the Beams, and Boarding, and Carved-Work, will take up so much of each Story, as that a very tall and proper man would almost touch the Cieling, which would prove very un∣seemly in such Buildings. Besides, if the judgment of Arias and Villalpan∣dus may be taken, they raise the Top of the third Story to 18 Cubits, and ¾ allowing a Cubit, and ¼ for each Partition. The number of Chambers belonging to Solomon's Temple. How many Chambers there were appendant to Solomon's Temple, Scri∣pture doth not recite:Ezek. 41.6. Antiq. l. 8. c. 2. But Ezekiel, in his Visionary-Temple, mentions 30 round about: and Josephus instructed by Jewish Tradition, acquaints us also with the same number, in these words: . He built round about the Temple. Thirty little Houses.
Besides, in the second Temple, it's clear, there were just so many. All which put together, strongly incline me (seeing the second Temple (though much broader.) Yet was much of the same length with Solomon's) to believe that their number was neither more nor less then 30. Wherefore, as they were in the second, so we shall be content, at present, to set them down 12 on the North, 12 on the South, and 6 at the West-end of the Temple; that is, four on a Floor on the North and South, and two at the West. The length of Solomon's Temple. As to the length of each Chamber; this is a certain way, in case they were all of one Size, to allot a fourth part of the length of the Temple and Oracle for each Chamber, and its separation from the other, on the North and South sides: But at the West-end, the just half. Onely here we must, in this distribution, warily consider, that the thickness of the Temple-walls, conjoyned in the North-west, and South-west Angles, must extend the length of the Chambers as far, as the thickness of the Wall did increase the outward Dimemtions, beyond the inward of sixty Cubits, commonly so com∣puted. Besides, we must consider, that the Contignation, or Floorings of the Chambers themselves, did meet in their own particular mutual Angle, di∣stinct from the Angle of the Temple-wal. For, if you observe the Ichnography of the Temple, the Chambers, and their own Out-walls meet in an Angle; or else the Temple-Angle would be discovered: Whereas they did circum∣scribe, or close round about, as you may see in the Area, or Ground-plor of the Temple. So then, if you take the Measures thus: fourty Cubits for the Holy-House; three for the Partition, as I shall mention anon, my conjecture in the close of this Chapter; Twenty for the Oracle, six for the space parallel to the thickness of the Temple-walls; and five for the space parallel to the Chambers at the West-end, that they may fall into a just square. It will then be apparent, that the spaces for the Chambers, on both sides, and the end, with the Temple, will fall into a Figure, containing four Parallello∣grams; as you may see in the 35 of the first of Euclide. The length of these spaces, is 74 Cubits; which divided into four parts, gives 18 Cubits, and ½ for each Chamber and its Wall: Whereof the first Wall begins at the West. But seeing the thickness neither of the Temple-walls, nor of these Chambers is determined in Scriptures, we cannot apply any exact measure for the length of each, or of all the Chambers together; and therefore item would be very absurd to lay any stress upon such conjectures, which we sub∣mit fully to every acute Architect. The Doors of the lower of these Chambers were on the ground: But for the middle Chambers on the right side of the House; that is, the South,1 King. 6.8. at the top of Winding-stairs; and out of the middle, there were Ascents into the Upper-rooms. Where it is to be observed concerning the Door: First, that it was in la∣tere, or in the side of the House, not in the Front. And again, in latere Do∣mûs, not in latere cellarum, in the side of the House; not of the Chambers, that is between the Temple and the Chambers; and were made, as some con∣ceive, in the very thickness of the Temple-wall, on the South-side of the Temple, and that the Door opened into the Holy place. Moreover, it is conceived, that there were no Doors on the Out-side at all; and that above there were Galleries to walk round about on all sides the Temple, to any particular Chamber: as also, into the chambers over the most Holy place: Nay, and those over the Sanctuary also; according to Arias, who would have that place within to be no higher than the Oracle, i.e. Twenty Cubits, and to
have the remaining Ten spent in Chambers; which some desire to extract out of David's Pattern of the Temple, given to his Son Solomon; where we have mention of Houses, Treasuries, Upper-chambers, and Inner-Parlours; that is,2 Chron. 28.11. of the Rooms over the Temple it self, the Upper-chambers, and In∣ner-Parlours, being the Rooms above & below, in this Appendant-Building, which we are now describing. But we shall obtrude nothing eagerly, lea∣ving this, and all our Labours, to be viewed and amended by exacter Judg∣ments, both as to the Interpretation of this Text, and the decision of the whole matter. The Stairs fore-mentioned, doubtless, ascended to the Top of the highest Roof of these Chambers, which probably were adorned with Battlements, and Pinacles, as the Top of the Temple it self. Thus have we finished, by Gods good hand, the delineation of the Covered-Temple: We have nothing now to do in this Chapter, but to give in a na∣ked Skeleton of the whole Work, as to its Dimensions, and so conclude, lea∣ving the Reader to the Cuts themselves, thereupon to spend the rest of his Devout Meditations. Here first, as to the inward Area's, or Ground-plots, leaving out the Walls, the Proportions seem to be according to these Dimensions. Breadth. Cubits. Chambers 5 Porch 10 Oracle 20 House 20 Length. Cubits. Chambers 15 Porch North & South 20 Oracle 20 House 40 Height. Oracle 20 Sanctuary 30 Porch 120 The Cabalistical Mystery of these Dimensions of the Temple, lyes in the Name of JESUS, say the Rabbins, in this manner: 60 Long,         30 High,         20 Broad.         30 30 10] 60 [6 20 10   60   10 300   0   י   ש ו   J E S U.   A rare Discovery! whereof may be read in Schiekard's Happerusch. Bechi∣nath, pag. 65. But I shall leave that to its Authors to justifie, who doubt∣less were infested with Hypochondriack Melancholy, and had need to have their sublimated Mercury a little better fixed. To quit this profound Abysse of the Pythian Tripos of the Rabbies, that knows no solid bottome of Reaon; We may observe from preceding De∣scriptions, that the House was broad, 20; high, 30, long, 60 Cubits. The
length was double to the height, and treble to the breadth. The Porch was broad 10 cubits; the House broad, 20; high, 30; long, 40. The house and Porch long, 50: the House and Oracle long, 60: the Porch, House, and Oracle long, 70. The House was high, 30; and the Porch, 120; that is treble to the heighth of the House. The House and Oracle long, 60: the Porch high, 120: that is, double to the length. In the last place, I will present my Conjectures (for any higher appella∣tion I dare not give them, in a matter so far distant from our Times, and so obscurely recited) concerning the Dimensions of the Temple, considered together with its Spaces and Walls; as also the Appendant-chambers, and their Walls. As to all which particulars, I cannot in modesty undertake to determine, but leave that to better Judgments. In general then, the breadth and length of this Temple, as we shall at present plot it,Exod. 27.. & 12. will con∣tain the full extent of Moses's Tabernacle, Court and all, if so be you will allow the Chambers to be fully drawn out parallel to the East-End of the Porch. But it's true, they were not so; yet the Porch and Temple were of the same extent for Longitude, as that Tabernacle in the Wilderness, accor∣ding to these following Dimensions. The Breadth, thus:   Cubits. A The South Wall of the Chambers, 04 B The Chamber-floor 05 C The South Temple-wall 06 D The Temple-floor 20 E The North-wall of the Temple 06 F The North-chamber floor 05 G The North-chamber wall 04 The Breadth 50 The length, East and West.   Cubits. H The West-wall of the Chambers 04 I The Floor of the West-Chamber 05 K The West-wall of the Oracle 66 L The Floor of the Oracle 20 M The Partition-wal between the Oracle and the Holy-place; which being allowed 3 Cubits for to raise a Symmetry, or duple propor∣tion to the breadth, will make the whole an hundred: or if you please to allow the West-wall of the Chambers six, and this but one onely, as commonly, it comes all to one. 03 N The Holy House 40 O The Wall betwixt the House and Porch, to support its height of One Hundred and Twenty Cubits 06 P The Porch-floor 10 Q The East-wall of the Porch 06 The Length 100 The Heighth of the House.   Cubits. The inward height 30 The Roof one Cubit at least 01 The Battlements above the Roof, ac∣cording to the proportions of Jo∣sephus, in the Wals of Jerusalem. 05   36 The Height of the Porch.   Cubits. The inward Height 120 The Roof 001 The Battlements 005   126
The Porches Breadth, East and West.   Cubits. The East-Wall 6 The Area 10 The West-Wall 6   22 Its Length.   Cubits. The South-Wall 6 The Area 20 The North-Wall 6       32 Here we see the Breadth 50, the Length 100, the Height 36: as to the House in general. But as to the Porch in particular; its Breadth 22, its Length 32, its height 126. So much for the second Chapter, treating of the Temples Dimensions, which may be perceived in the annexed Figures of that Sacred Building. ground plan of Solomon's Temple The Ground-Plot of the Temple.
CHAP. III. Of the Courts and Buildings about the Temple. THere are various Opinions of the number, quantity, and form of the Courts of the first Temple. Some hold that Solomon built but one Court; and that,1 King. 6.36. by the two Courts mentioned in Scripture, we are to understand (say they) first, the Priests Court, which indeed they grant he built,1 King. 6.36. and to be called the Inner-Court. But by that called the Outer or greater Court they conceive we are to understand it of the Mountain of the House, which lay wide and open. Some hold there were two Courts built even by Solomon himself, which in conclusion, I believe, will prove the truest. Others there be, that hold he built four, though upon very improbable grounds. As for the quantity of one or other, I find as yet none peremptorily de∣termining: for indeed Scripture in that is fully silent. For the form or fashion, many hold that both Courts did compass the Temple on all sides round about; which, with submission, I suppose, after serious search, will prove most correspondent unto truth. Others are of a mind, that the Priests Court did not compass the Temple, but that the outer did. Others think, that neither of the Courts did compass the Temple; but that both of them stood on the Eastside of the Temple, one before the other. Now all the Weight of this last Opinion lyes on poor Josephus his back; wherein we shall with all modesty endeavour to clear, that his words seem to be misapplyed to their purpose: and afterwards (I hope) in some mea∣sure, make it appear evident, that there were two Courts, or walled Area's in the time of the first Temple, built by King Solomon, and attested by Josephus himself to be round about the Temple. But first let us lay this Rub gently out of the way, by enervating that Opi∣nion of two Courts one before another, grounded upon misconstruction of Josephus. The place cited for this fancy of theirs,Joseph. Bell. Judaic. lib. 6 cap. 14. pag. 915. Edit. 1634. Graeco∣lat. is de bello Judaic. lib. 6. in these words,— &c. Which place, because I would neither burden the Press, or the Reader, with the Greek at length, I shall give it in English thus. [But the Temple was built, as I have said, upon a hard Mountain. At first, the uppermost Plain was scarce sufficient for the Temple, and the Courts of the Altar [The word here in the Greek is  and is taken for the Court of the Altar in this place; and pag. 918. D. and expresly Josephus declares concerning David, when God ac∣cepted his Offering (after the Plague) on Moriah, . He determined to call the whole place, i.e. of the Holy Mountain, the Altar of all the people, pag. 245. F. To proceed then in the recital of his words, as follows] For the Verge thereof (sayes he) was steep and precipicious. But when King Solomon (who also built the Tem∣ple) had raised a firm Wall on the East side, there was a Porch built upon the for∣ced Bank of Earth. But on the other sides, the Temple lay naked; till in after∣times the people always adding earth the top became even and large.] Now in this citation, the great stress of the question lies in the sense of those words, , the Temple was naked or open.
For the Explication of which words, I beseech the candid and judicious Reader; First of all to consider, that Josephus doth not say, The Plain was Not sufficient: But  scarce sufficient. Besides, he doth not say, [The Hill] but : the smooth equall Plain at top without any the least declivity, was scarce sufficient: Whereas in truth, it was the more fit and proper place for to build the Temple upon, because of its praerupt declivities: Which being framed into several squares superior each to other, might yield a most pleasant and delicious Prospect, not unlike the stately Gardens of that ancient Seat of Sir Edward Stradlings at St. Donats in Glamorgan-shire, or any other of the like nature among the Palaces of our Nobles in this Nation. For according to this projection of the frame of the Temples Situation, the Courts and other Buildings might lye somewhat below it, that so by graceful steps and ascents, out of one Court into another, the Temple might appear the more August, stately, and lofty to all Spectators. But I mainly desire the ingenuous Reader to re∣member, that Josephus is not here discoursing of Solomon's Temple ex indu∣striâ, but cursorily,  by the way onely: Wherefore he is not here so much to be attended to, as in those places, where he makes it his parti∣cular work and business to describe the form and measure of Solomon's Buil∣dings. There you shall find him reading another Lesson. If then any shall insist upon it, and take his words here so strictly and rigorously, I fear his pro∣voked Ghosts will prove angry, and engage fully against them by and by. Yet however, as to this very place, the words immediatly going before shew, that he was hinting at those mighty Foundations of four hundred Cubits deep in stone (mentioned elsewhere fully) which being raised up to their intended height, by a perpendicular Line, aggestions of Earth and Rubbish were added to the declivity of the Hill, to make the Hill and the Stone-Foundations even. Upon which Foundations, Solomon raised a stately Porch, called so in after-ages by his name. Now immediately upon these words, comes in the controverted passage [But on the other sides the Temple was naked] Of what was it naked? of Courts and Walls? as they would hence infer? No sure! the last thing he spake of, was of Porches: of such then we will, grant the Temple was naked, viz. As to such rare stately double Porches built on such vast and famous Foundations, as were upon the East-side, we may yield, that the other parts were somewhat less splendid and famous: Nay possibly at the first Work of Solomon, the other sides might not be por∣ched by him: but that after he had finished his own and the Queens house, it appears somewhat probable by Scripture it self, that he porched both Courts round about, as in after lines may more fully appear: and therefore this  possibly may be favourably interpreted of the first days of King Solomon, that so we may salve Josephus his credit and reputation: Which will else appear to be very infirm and lubricous. We will not then construe him in that sense, as if there were no ordinary Wall compassing the Moun∣tain of the House, or ordinary Porches inclosing a piece of ground, which was termed the Outer-Court. This, according to Josephus himself, we can∣not grant: For, concerning walls and Porches round about, we shall find our apprehension by and by to be sufficiently averred, that they were extant under the first Temple, (with their Gates opposite to the four Cardinal Winds) and all this shewn by Josephus, that they were even built by King Solomon himself, where he handles that Kings Fabricks of set purpose.
Besides, the words following, as well as those preceding in this present Text of our Jewish Historian, do also argue, that Josephus meant by this phrae of the Temples nakedness, its being destitute of such stately Porches on each side, at its first Erection except on the East-Quarter: For he tells us afterward, that in ensuing Times, there was a Three-fold Wall about the Temple, and that the Foundations of the lowest parts of the Outward Wall were three hundred Cubits high; in some places more:1 King. 6.36. and that the stones were fourty Cubits large. Upon such Foundations (sayes he) there were Buildings erected worthy of them; to wit,1 King. 7.11. double Porches sustained by Pil∣lars of Twenty five Cubits high, that were single stones of Marble: And moreover he relates, that those Porches were Thirty Cubits broad, and the whole compass of them, together with the Tower Antonia, was six Fur∣long. Hence we may learn, that for such stately Fabricks as Solomon's Eastern Porches, and those afterwards added, there was necessity of mighty strong Foundations. Of which vast Foundations, with their stately Porches built upon them , the Temple was destitute, and lay open, in comparison of the East-side, where Solomon himself had yet at first onely built them. But that there was a Wall including the greatest part of the Mountain of the House with several Gates, the same Author shall presently satisfie you, and that fully. Wherefore, as to such vast additions of Earth, as some ima∣gine, I have this conception onely to give in, viz. That where the Walls were raised straight up out of the Valley, for to build these Porches upon, the Earth was pared from rough and uneven places of the Hill, and convey∣ed by Labourers from place to place, to fill up those hollow inequalities be∣tween the raised Walls, and the sloping declivity of the Hill; for all that was thus labouriously performed, was to this end, even to make the Temple ground rise by degrees smoothly from the East-gate of the Outward Wall up to the Temple it self. For the Mountain it self was but little added ro by all these industrious Labours, as to its main parts, receiving no accession of Pelion's, or Ossa's Cast upon it, or laid to it, as some fondly dream Concer∣ning which, you may please to read that Learned piece, (of the Temple, in our Saviour's days) written by Dr. Lightfoot, pag. 4 & 5. But submitting the whole to sober and unbyassed persons, I shall now proceed to prove that their Work were two Courts compassing the Temple, which I shall divide into two Sections: First of all, that there were two, and that even by Scripture it self. Secondly, that these two encompassed the Covered Temple. To which purpose, we read in the Book of Kings,1 King. 6.36. That Solomon built the Inner-Court, with three Rows of hewen stone,1 King. 7.11. and a row of Cedar-beams. Again, we find in the same Book another passage, relating to Posterity, that the great Court round about, was built with three Rows of Hewen-stone, and a Row of Cedar-beams. Whence we may in∣fer, by the Rule of Relation, even from an Inner-Court, that there was an Outer; and from a great Court, that there was a less. Besides, we read ex∣presly of Courts in the plural number; so sayes the Author of the Chroni∣cles, That the Levites Office was to wait on the Sons of Aaron in the Courts, and in the Chambers.1 Chron. 23.28. 1 Chron. 28.6. Ver. 12. In another place David tells his Peo∣ple, that God had said to him, That Solomon his Son should build his House and his Courts. To whom, in the 12th Verse, he gave the Pattern of the Courts of the House of the Lord. Hence likewise we infer, that there were two for certain, if not more, in the very days of Solomon.
That there were any more then two Courts in Solomon's days, it cannot be clearly decided; but 'tis most probable, in the Negative, by some passages of Scripture, which speak in so many terms, concerning the two Courts in the House of the Lord,2 King. 21.5. 2 Chron. 33.5. 2 King. 23.12. in the which Manasses built his Altars, that were overthrown by godly Josiah. If any should object, that these are to be un∣derstood of the two principal Courts, whereas we read of a Middle-Court, and a New-Court, and a Court of the Women in Scripture, before the days of Manasseh; let them remember, that those three names were given onely to one Court, which was laid out and built possibly by Jehoshaphat, in whose days we first read of a new Court.2 Chron. 20.5. Though some conceive that the Outward Court was called by the name of New-Court, as being in those times so fa∣mously repaired, as if it had been new built, and might justly demerit that denomnaition. The great Outer-Court then which we have gained from Scripture, which proceeds from the mouth of Truth it self, whether it were an inclosed piece of ground round about the Covered Temple, and the Priests Court, contained within its circumference, I shall next endeavour to open. To this purpose, that this Exteriour Court,Isa. 2.2. Mi. 3.12. & 4.1. Zech. 8.3. contained within its Wall, the whole Area, or Plot of Sacred Ground taken out of the Mountain of the House of the Lord, I hope, may be clearly evinced before we conclude. For, first, we read of no other Courts extant in the days of Solomon, then the Priests Court; and the outer Court which is expresly laid down in the Book of Chronicles.2 Chron. 4.9. Besides, it's generally confessed by the Learned, both Jews and Christians, that there were never no more Courts then these four. 1. The Priests Court, with a small distinction in it for the people, (that were clean) of three Cubits high. 2. The Womens Court, called the New-Court, as some conceive. 3. The Chel or Inclosure of Stone round about these Courts, which may be valued at the reputation of a small Court. 4. The Court of the Mountain of the House. Now, if neither the Womens Court, nor the Chell, were built in Solo∣mon's time, but in the Reign of after-Kings, then it remains, that the Court of the Mountain of the House, must be the Outer-Court of King Solomon: for a large proof whereof, I refer you to that excellent Tract of the second Temple,Dr. Light∣foot, p. 101. written by the fore-praised Author, a man most learned in all Rab∣binical Knowledge, and the ancient Customes and Histories of the Jewish Nation: who out of L' Empereur in Middoth, fol. 67. and others, doth mani∣fest this more fully. The which also I hope to make clearer in succeeding Lines, by the Gates at which Solomon appointed the Levites to watch: which Gates were in the Walls of this Outward Court. Besides, notwith∣standing the Chel was not extant in Solomon's days; yet under the first Temple it seems to be,Pag. 95. which he endeavours to clear by an interpretation of that place, where 'tis said  that the Rampart and Wall did la∣ment. By the Wall, interpreting the Court-wall: By the Rampart, or Chell, the space that encompassed it round about, which were (as it seems by this Text) destroyed by the Chaldeans. Moreover, that these two Courts which Solomon built are not to be un∣derstood of the two parts of the Priests Court, distinguished by a little Par∣tition, (that the People might look over) it will appear more evident by and by from the Gates and Watches of the Porters, which were placed in the Outward great Court encompassing the Temple: For so we find
them exactly distinct in the Book of Chronicles, where read,2 Chron 4.9. That King Solo∣mon made the Court of the Priests, and the Great Court: shewing, that a certain Court made by Solomon, distinct from the Priestly Court; and being compared with that, was greater; and therefore a comparatis called so: as also because there was no more Courts then this, except the Priests: It is called, The Great Court, fitly expressing the demonstrative Article  be∣fore the Hebrew word  in that Text. Whence it appears, that the Priests Court was the lesser; Whereas, if that small fore-mentioned se∣paration in the Priests Court (including a piece of ground by all descripti∣ons less then the place where the Priests did minister in their Office,) should give Title to this great Court, then the great Court (so called in this Text) would not prove so large as the lesser, in comparison with which it re∣ceived its denomination of greatness, and so there will arise a fine contradi∣ction in very terms. Moreover, that there must be laid out a very large Court without the Priests Court in Solomon's days,1 King. 8.14. 2 Chron. 6.12. may appear from the vast multitudes of People which were at the dedication of the Temple, called [All the Congre∣gation of Israel] no doubt all the males of all the Land, according to the command of God: for the Dedication was just in the same moneth with the Feast of Tabernacles. How many hundred thousands were then pre∣sent, let men judge by Joab's Catalogue, brought in to David at the num∣bring of the People; to wit, one million, and 300000. valiant men:2 Sam. 24.9. which none will be so absurd to think, that they could stand possibly within many such Partitions, as were in the Priests Court, and into the Priests Court it self they might not enter. But then seeing we must place them without, let's observe after Solomon's prayer was ended, that when fire came down from Heaven upon the Sacrifices, the Scripture says that all the Chil∣dren of Israel, &c. bowed themselves with their faces to the ground (and that's not all, but 'tis added) upon the Pavement  not onely the Natural Earth, but an Artificial Pavement from— Stravit. The place then which contained these many thousands of Peo∣ple was all paved with stone: which is one usual ingredient into the ma∣king, and consequently the describing of a Court; that is, an open place, wal∣led in and paved; such as was this great and famous Court, wherein these vast numbers of the males of Israel did now stand and worship falling down upon its Marble Pavements, when they saw the Celestial fire descending from Heaven upon the Sacrifices. As for the Gates and Walls about this Court, we shall fetch them up by and by, whereby to determine this Courts encompassing the Temple round about. Secondly, In the second place I shall endeavour to manifest even from Josephus himself (whose Authority hath been hitherto so abused and wre∣sted to countenance a contrary Opinion) that there were two Courts com∣passing the Body of the Covered Temple round about, and both built by King Solomon. Pray then be pleased to turn to that place of Josephus his Histo∣ry, where according to the proper series of Times,Joseph. An∣tiq. lib. 8. cap. 2. p. 262 F. Edit. Graeco-Lat. Genevae, 1634. Fol. discoursing of the Reign and Acts of King Solomon, he givs in a large and ample account of the sump∣tuous building of the Temple in the eighth Book of his Antiquities: and there (when handling these matters of set-purpose) you may read expresly recorded these words  &c. Which words, and the following, may be thus transla∣ted. [But he compassed the Temple round about with a Wall, called, , in our Countrey Language, by the Greeks , raising it to the height of three Cubits to keep off the multitude from entring into the Holy Court, and signifying
admission to the Priests onely. But without this Wall, he built a Court in a four-square Plót of ground, raising great and broad Porches, and opening with High-gates: Each whereof did look upon each of the Winds, being shut with Golden Doors. Into this Court all the People might enter, that were distinct from others in their purity, and observation of the Laws. But this outward Court appeared unspeakably admirable: nay, beyond the belief of a mans own eyes. For filling up deep Vallies (such as for their wonderful depth, it was not easie to look down to their bottome) and raising them four hundred Cubits high, he made the top equal to the heighth of the Mountain, on which the Temple was built: and so the out∣ward open Court became equal in height to the Temple-Court. (that is, its inward Court: For  here is taken for the Temple-building, and the inward Court about it, and  for that outward Court.) Then he compassed that Court with a building of double Porches, fastning the Pillars in the top of the natural Rock, and the covering of them was adorned with a Roof of Cedar. The gates also of this Outward Court were all made of silver] Here you have Jose∣phus in the orderly course of his History, particularly handling the Buil∣dings of Solomon, and expresly relating, first, the compassing of the Temple with an inward Court, The words are , He compassed the Temple round about upon all Quarters with a Wall. For so the force of the word  and  does undeniably import. He shall be counted a person little tinctured with the knowledge of the Greek Lan∣guage, and poorly acquainted with Herodotus, Thucidydes, Polybius, Plutarch, or Strabo, or any of the Greek Historians that shall attempt to deny it. But as if that were not enough. Josephus to make sure work, addes  1. Round about on all sides. Onely by the way let us be wary that we do not hence infer that the wall was circular: for by  Josephus onely ex∣presses the force of the Hebrew word  which any moderate Hebrician knows to be used in Scripture sometimes, when the figure of a building is quadrangular, as I shall shew below; cap. 5. As when he speaks of the thirty side-chambers that were built by Solomon about the Temple, he uses the word  pag. 239. G. This Wall then thus compassing the Cove∣red Temple,Ribera, pag. 45. was but three Cubits high, as Josephus relates: for this end (says one) that the people might look over and behold the Priests and their Sa∣crifices. For according to the common acception of a Cubit, it answers well near to a yard, and ½ of our measure, giving admission to the eyes of or∣dinary cized men. Secondly, in this Story of Josephus, you may observe an outward Court, compassing the inward, which is cleared by this passage, that it had Gates opening to the four Winds of Heaven. Whereas if this outward Court stood onely ab anteriori parte, just before the inward Court toward the East, then it had not any Gate properly belonging to it opening to the West: for that Gate on the West of the Outward Court fancied to be of this anterior situation, was the famous East-gate of the Priests Court, and properly belon∣ged to the inner-Court: Whence it will follow, that the exteriour Court, according to this their conjectured Situation, will have no West-gate at all. But to let this pass at present, the quantity and measure of the West-Wall of the outward Court, together with the situation of its gates, puts all out of controversie: For by what hath past, and shall be cited, you may perceive that each side of this outward four-square Court was a Furlong at least in length.
Thirdly, It's famously known, that the outward Court, (or exterius Fa∣num, as Gelenius renders those words ) had those rare Cloisters built by King Solomon; which seemes in some measure manifest, by Scrip∣ture it self. Because we find, in the second Temple,John 10.23. Act. 3.11. & 5.12. that our Lord and Sa∣viour conversed with his Apostles, and they with the People, in Solomon's Porch: Which though ruined by the Chaldeans, was yet afterward, upon Solomon's own foundations of 400 Cubits deep (that were not by them de∣stroyed, as shall be spoken to in succeeding pages) re-edified, and did bear his name. Now these holy Persons, being not Priests, could not, by the Law, be admitted into the inner Court. Wherefore it rests upon the proof of that assumption, (that Solomon's Porches built on such rare and stupendi∣ous foundations were on the East side of the outward Court in those ancient daies) I say, it followes that there was such an exterior Court extant in those times, thus porched by that magnificent King: whose example, for the form, and the expresse tract of Walls and Porches, was generally imi∣tated by the Architects of the second Temple, as I have often mentio∣ned, according to the sense of grave and serious Authors, not without good probability of truth. Now this assertion, of Solomon's Porches being built in the outward Court, is expresly recorded for truth by Josephus himself, in these words, ,Joseph. An∣tiq. lib. 20. cap. 8. pag. 699. G. &c. or thus in English, [The People perswaded the King (that is, Herod) to repair the East∣ern Porch: now this Porch was in the outward Court, and was built upon Walls raised up out of a deep Vally, 400 Cubits, of pure white foursquare stones. The length of each stone was 20 Cubits, the height six, the work of King Solomon, who at first built the whole Temple.] Here you see his mind fully, as to those admirable foundations, concerning which,Apparat. part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 8. the learned Villalpandus hath spent a whole Chapter, labouring to prove, that Solomon's building of Mil∣lo, mentioned in the Book of Kings, is to be interpreted of this stately Pile, which he raised out of the Vally, after he had finished his own house of Le∣banon, and the Queen's; so that he is clear in the point, that all the immense Substructions or Foundations round about the precipitious Verge of the Mountain, being the compasse of the outward Court, were built by King Solomon, with severall Gates, and a Wall; but with Porches at first, only on the East side: which he proves more at large. Explanat. in Ezek. cap. 40. Tom. 2. Part. 2. lib. 2. Isagog. cap. 18. There yet rests an other place of Josephus to be urged,Joseph. An∣tiq. lib. 15. cap. 14. pag. 543. G. when treating of what Solomon performed vey expresly, and with great diligence, in these words. , &c. [The Brow of the Hill was rocky and steep, gently arising from towards the East side of the City up to the highest top.] This Brow () or rocky Verge of the Hill, Solomon our King, by the direction of God, first of all, walled up to the top with mighty workmanship: , round about the top of the Verge of the Mountain. He built also beneath, beginning under the foot of the Hill, which is compassed with a deep Vally toward the South. On the inside of the Wall, from top to bottom, the stones were fastned to the rockes with Lead: so that it was wonderfull to behold the vastness and heghth of this foursquare structure. As to the greatness of the stones, it was openly conspicuous to view: But inwardly their Joynts were fastned one to another with iron, unmoveable against all the injuries of time. Having wrought up this foundation, thus fastned together, to the top of the Hill, and fill'd up the hollow places between the upright Wall, and the declivity of the Hill: he made the Plot of ground eeven and smooth to appearance, on the top of the Hill. Now all this did contain in compasse, round about, full four Furlongs, each An∣gle containing in length one furlong, (that is, each side from Angle to Angle; where, by the way, take notice that Josephus expounds himself, what he
meant by those words before cited, : not circular but quadrangular, as we before expounded him.) But within this, even just up∣on the top, another stone Wall did compasse the Hill about, upon whose Eastern Ridge there was built a double Porch equall in length to the Wall, (that is, a Furlong) the middle whereof lookt toward the Doores of the Temple.] Thus far Josephus. After which words, concerning the buildings of Solomon, he tells you what other Kings, and, particularly, what Herod, performed. Though I must here confesse, the Latine Translation doth not fairly repre∣sent it for Solomon's, yet if we observe the Greek words narrowly, the Anti∣thesis will inferr it. For speaking of that glorious King, he saies, , He built above round about the summity, or top: and adds : But beneath he built a farr more admirable work: which he prosecutes in the after-words, accordingly to what he had spoken, lib. 8. cap. 2. expresly of Solomons Walls of 400 Cubits height raised out of the Vally, as is before cited, to be at the top a foursquare work, and is here amplified, as to the measure of its quadrangular Extent. Alas! it was not for Herod, one under the Romans, and vext with continuall wars, and inconsiderable, as to Solomon's Territories or Riches, to do such works as these. Wherefore severall have justly suspected whether ever he med∣led with the Temple, unlesse as to Reparations and Ornaments. Which was in these Substructions inviolable by time, and adorned by former Kings on the East, which was a furlong long aswell as the rest. Which Court thus foursquare, and each side of a furlong extent, and built by Solomon, is also asserted by Ludov. Cappellus in his Apostolicall History pag. 15. By what precedes, we may perceive it more and more confirmed, out of the mouth of Josephus, that Solomon built all the vast Foundations round about, toge∣ther with the whole foursquare Wall, at the top, on the Brow of the Hill, each side of the Square being one Furlong in length, that is, 625 Roman feet,cap. 13. lib. 1. cap. 1. lib. 2. cap. 23. according to Censorinus in his Book De die Natali, or A. Gellius in his Noctes Atticae, or Pliny in his Naturall History. Now, though this Stadium of Josephus be most properly to be accounted according to the Gre∣cian measures, yet it breaks no squares with us: for the Stadium of the Ro∣mans and the Grecians is accurately noted by Lindebrogius,pag. 86. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1642. 0 in his Notes up∣on that place of Censorinus, to be the same, if the Calculation be carefully observed: where he cites Lucas Petus de Mensuris & Ponderibus, and Hues de Globis, that although the Grecian be but 600 Foot, and the Roman 625 Foot: yet he gives this reason for their Parallelism: Nam pes Graecus excedit pedem Romanum semiunchâ: For a Greek foot is longer then a Ro∣man by half an inch. So that 600 half inches, at 12 inches in a foot, make up those 25 Feet in the Roman Stadium, beyond the number of feet in the Grecian. Moreover, from the last cited place of Josephus, we may observe, that So∣lomon is mentioned to have built Porches, at first, on the East end onely: which serves to expound the so much vexed, and misinterpreted Passage of Josephus, which was in Controversy, viz. That the Temple was , that is, It was destitute of Porches on any other side of the Temple, at least in the first times of Solomon. For the Scripture seems to favour his porching of the Courts of the Lord's house round about, at the twenty years end, when he had finished the house of Lebanon, his Pallace and Throne, to∣gether with the Queens house, according to the order of its Relation 1 King. 7.12. Though, its certain, Preoccupations are frequent in the sa∣cred Leavs; as immediately about the Utensils of the Temple, after all; and therefore we shal not rigidly press upon it from Scripture, though Josephus in his 8th book is peremptory in this point, as you have read above. So that if you will permit Josephus to be his own Interpreter, as 'tis all the reason in
the World he should, behold him now joyning hands with our exposition. Thus much then may abundantly (I hope suffice, as to the two first Ar∣guments, out of Scripture, and out of Josephus, to prove two Courts round about the Temple, especially out of the last, whose Authority was alwayes brought to contradict it. The third Argument may turn upon the Hinges of the Temple Gates, in the outward Court, opening of their own accord for a decision to this controversy: which were placed to all the four winds, saies Josephus. E∣vidently clearing, that the great Court was round about the covered buil∣ding. For he tells us expresly in another place, concerning the inward Court of the second Temple (according to very judicious Persons, it being correspondent in most things to the first) that it had no Gate toward the West. These are his words, . If then there were Gates to all the winds,De Bell. Judaic. lib. 6. cap. 6. p. 916. F. and if there was none on the West in the inner Court, it followes, that the Western Gates of the Temple must be placed in the outward Wall of this great Court, compassing the Temple and the inner Court round about. Fourthly, The Compasse of the wall of the outward Court being four Furlongs, according to Josephus his description of Solomon's buildings, each furlong taking up a whole side of the Quadrangle: doth clearly determine the Gates on the West side to be in the wall of the outward Court, which by its largenesse must needs be supposed to compasse the inner. I will yet add two probabilities to this purpose, that the Court did com∣passe the Temple. The first may be taken from the dimensions and positi∣on of Moses his Tabernacle. Wherein we read that the Court was set up round about [The Tabernacle.] This might be fully demonstrated from the length and bredth of the Court and Tabernacle.Exod. 40.8. The Court is expres∣ly declared to have been 100 Cubits long and 50 broad. The covered Tabernacle, Torniellus and others do evince,Exod. 27.18. from the measures of the Boards and Curtains, to have been but 30 Cubits long and 10 broad within,Annal. ad ann. 2544. Num. 60. and consequently to have been placed within the Court. Now, that the Temple did in many things imitate Moses his Tabernacle, though general∣ly double to its dimensions, is clear to every one: being 60 long and 20 broad, as to inward capacity, the Walls not being considered; whereas Moses was but 30 in length and 10 in bredth, a abovesaid. Wherefore then, as Moses his covered Tabernacle stood within its Court inclosing it round on every side: so it is somewhat probable that in this particular the Imitation might sort; even that the covered Temple stood within the Walls of its Courts. The second probability may be deduced from Zorobabel's and Herod's Temple, agreeing in most things with Solomon's, as very sober Authors, upon serious deliberation, do hold forth; only the Fabrick of the last covered house was somewhat larger. But Herod's Courts, conceived by many to be praecisely wrought up in the very vestigia or prints of Zoroba∣bel's Walls, did compass the Temple round about, as may be cleared out of the Jewish writers, and particularly out of Codex Middoth and L'Empe∣rour the learned Commentator upon it. Which probably being erected, according to the pattern of the ancient Temple of Solomon, with the con∣sent of severall judicious Writers, as I have often hinted, may in some mea∣sure help to confirm the assertion of its compassing Courts, before largely treated of, from the testimonies of the sacred Scriptures, and our often ci∣ted Historian of the Jewish Nation.Montania. Abulensis. Villalpandus &c. pag. 91. col. 1. lin. 14. At length, to conclude, the consent of many very learned men, both Jews and Christians, in this particular, is very considerable. Though in∣deed Montanus doth somewhat vary from others in the frame and form of
the compassing Courts, conceiving them to be largest at the East end, and narrowest at the West. But of the Courts encompassing the Temple never did any doubt, (that I yet read of) till Ribera, upon the misconstruction of Iosephus, in that forecited passage [] had obtruded upon other oversequacious pens the same conceit: whereof sufficiently, in foregoing lines. Recapitula∣tio.Thus much may then suffice, as to the number of Courts in Solomon's daies. First, that for certain there were two in number. Secondly, that most probably there were two onely. Thirdly, that for form they were quadrangular, and both compassing the Temple. If you will adhere to Montanus, then you must not conceive each Quadrangle to be aequi-lateral: but the East Wall to have been far longer then the Western. Yet if you will follow the generall opinion: Then the Courts, wherein the covered Temple stood, were each of them of a square aequi-laterall Figure, one with∣in the other. Fourthly, it's most probable that the new Court, or Wo∣mens Court, together with the Chel, or separate place, of 11 Cubits broad, enclosing both the Priests and the Womens Court, round about with a Wal, were not extant in Solomon's daies. But, that they were laid out during the first Temple, and enclosed with walls, it's imagined by some to be manifest in a good measure from Scripture it self, and the Testimony of Jewish Wri∣ters. But because their last Erections were not digested by Solomon, nor distinctly mentioned in Scripture, we have taken leave to dismisse them to the descriptions of the Rabbies, and their Sectators, and the Commentators on the visionary Temple of the Prophet Ezekiel. Of the Quantities of the Courts. SInce then we have found out two Courts encompassing the Temple, let us try if Josephus will yet lend his hand any further, from the Records and Traditions of the Jews, to determine their Quantities and Dimensions, who may well be creited, having with his own eyes beheld the admira∣ble and vast foundations of Solomon's, on the East side of the Temple, raised up out of the deep Vally, and not destroyed in his time. Nay some or So∣lomon's civill buildings remained in the dayes of Rabbi Benjamin,pag. 43. E∣dit. L'Em∣pereur. 80 1633 if he may be credited in his Itinerarium,  speaking o what he saw at Ierusalem, viz. Some remnants of the Stables of Solomon's Court, which Solomon (saies he) built with very strong Buildings, and with great Stones, the like whereof no where to be found. This Rabbi wrote his Travels in the common year of our Lord 1173, as L'Empereur in his praevious dissertation doth manifest. If this be true, it's very probable, the vast foundations of the Temple might be much more extant in Josephus his daies: who hath told us plainely, that each side of the outward Court, even in Solomon's dayes, was a compleat furlong. For though that King should be supposed to have built the Eastern Porch only (albeit Josephus saies he porcht it round and that it was four-square lib. 8. as above cited) yet if that eastern part were a furlong in length as he saies lib. 15.Antiq. l. 15. And the whole work likewise was  in quadrangular form, and that the rest of the sides were aequall to this, as the same Author asserts: it will then prove 4 furlong in compass. Each furlong or stadium of Josephus being 600 Grecian feet, or 625 Roman, which is all one, as before I mentioned out of the Commentator upon Censorinus. The story is, that Hercules run∣ning in his greatest speed, as much as he could at one lusty breathing, fi∣nished the space of 600 of his own measured feet, and there being out of breath made a stop or station, and thence arose the measure of the Olym∣pick Stadium: which the Grecians afterwards generally received. Now
the Roman foot, as I said before, being half an inch less then the Grecian, 625 of theirs (consequently) will be commensurate to 600 of the Olympick feet, and make but the compleat measure of one and the same Stadium. So then from 625 Roman feet, 625 4 2500 De re rust. l. 5. Origin. l. 15. c. 15. being quadrupled for the Walls of the four sides of the Outward Court, there arises 2500 Roman feet for the compass of the Wall of the Outward Court: which being divided by five (because five Roman feet make one of their Paces, as Columella, and Isidorus, and ma∣ny others truly relate) gives in the Quotient five hundred Roman Paces; that is, just half a mile of their measure, for the exact Circuit of the Wall of the outward Court of the Temple. But there was more ground upon the Mountain of Moriah then this (which was thus sacred) by two whole Sta∣diums; whereupon, afterwards, the Tower Antonia was built: For Jose∣phus testifies, that the whole compass of the Temple, together with this Tower was six Furlongs: and it's also clearly manifested, by that Learned Dr. Lightfoot, in his Second Temple,De bello Ju∣daico, lib. 6. cap. 6, Pag. 4. out of an ancient Rab∣bin. To reduce the compass of the Holy Ground to English measure, let us first remember, that every Statute-mile is three hundred and twenty Perch in length or eight Furlongs; each Furlong containing fourty Perch; and every Perch sixteen foot and ½. Secondly, let every English foot be divided into twelve Inches, or one thousand Parts; and each part into twelve Scruples: so that each Inch, or twelfth part of those thousand, will contain 83 of those parts, and four sub∣divided scruples. Thirdly, according to this Division, let's remember, that the English foot exceeds the Roman by 33 such 1000 parts; that is, the Roman foot contains in length but 967 of those thousand,33./1000. whereinto the English foot is divided; as the Learned Mr. Greaves hath fixed it: which, 33/1000 parts of the Roman foot's deficiency, in respect to the English, being substracted from 83 parts, and 4 scruples (that are equal to one English Inch, as above∣said) leave fifty parts, and four scruples remaining of one of our Inches: so that the Roman foot is somewhat above the third part of our Inch deficient as to it's co-extension with our English foot. Consequently, each English Pace (of five foot, or five thousand such Parts before-mentioned, to a Pace) will exceed the Roman Pace by 165 of the same parts;   164 12 1. Inch 83 4   81 8 that is, of our measure, one Inch, eighty one Parts, and eight Scruples. Furthermore, five hundred English Paces arise to three Furlong, thirty one Pole, eight Foot and six Inches, or five hundred Parts of a Foot of English Measure: Furl. Pole. Feet. Inches. Part. Scrupl. 3 31 8 005 83 4 0 5 0 01 80 4 3 26 8 04 3 0 Which exceeds five hundred Roman or Italian Paces (or their half mile, answering to the four Stadia before-mentioned) by five Pole, no Feet, one Inch eighty Parts, and four Scruples of our Measure: Which latter being substracted from the former sum of the five hundred English Paces, yields a residue of three Furlongs, twenty six Pole, eight Feet, four Inches, three Parts, and no Scruples: The exact extent of the Wall of the outmost Court, according to our English Measure. So that this being the compass
of the Wall of the outward Court of the Temple, according to our Statute-measure, in proportion to the Roman foot, whereof 625 make Josephus his Furlong equivalent to the Grecian (as 'tis said above) we shall find it pre∣cisely to fall short of an English half-mile, 13 Pole, 8 Feet, one Inch, 80 Parts, and four Scruples. Furl. Pole. Feet. Inch. Part. Scrupl. 3 39 16 5 83 4 3 26 8 4 3 0 0 13 8 1 80 4 Middoth. c. 2. Edit. L'empereur. p. 35. Hist. Ju∣daic. ex Hebr. in Lat. ver. à Gentio, p, 359, &c.Now upon the supposition of Josephus his fixing the length of the Wall exactly, and that it did truly correspond with the length of four Stadiums, according to his recital; we have with more nicety, then some perhaps will think requisite, reduced the outward circuit of the holy ground, to a precise and determinate portion of our English mile. However, those that please, may say, in general, that it was almost half an English mile in com∣pass. But now seeing the Rabbins generally with open mouth, and one Vote, declare this Court-Wall to have been 500 Cubits square, which seems to contradict Josephus; let's try if we can by any means reconcile them. It's true, these Rabbins treat usually of the second Temple; and therefore no need may some think of reconciling them to Josephus, whom we have ci∣ted in this particular for the first Temple. To which may be answered, that Josephus lays down the same measure for the External Court of both Temples: Upon which, and other accounts, it is, that sober and learned persons have generally conceived the form and quantity of the Outer-Court, to have been the same under both; and therefore it will be perti∣nent enough to our work in hand, to make an inquiry into the sense of the Rabbies, so far as my small acquaintance will give me leave to trade with them, and to observe what communion there is droven betwixt them and Josephus. To this end it will not be amiss to call to mind, that Villalpan∣dus, in many places, doth quote Josephus, as averring, that the Wall of this Outer-Court, was but 400 Cubits square; and, particularly, in his Ap∣paratus, Pag. 118.8. But he no where tells us in what place Josephus doth so declare himself, that I yet find, though upon diligent search: Neither have I yet observed, though upon careful perusal of all his Books, that Jose∣phus himself doth any where mention the Quantity, circumscribing the Outer-Court by Cubits, but by Furlongs; as Antiq. l. 15. cap. 14. unless the printed Copy be false in one place, which I vehemently suspect in his History of the Jewish Wars. The words are these, [] The Interpreter, probably, having used another Copy,Lib. 6. cap. 14. Secun∣dum Grae∣cam, Edit. p. 916. E. then that which we now have printed, hath varied much, thus [Spacium erat usque ad murum CCC Cubitis planum] The space unto the Wall for 300 Cubits, was plain or eeven; and therein also hath probably committed a fault (or else the Copy is corrupted) for CCCC. two C's being contracted into the first letter of [Cubits] which gave me the Rise to suspect, that in some Vatican Manuscripts, or of other ancient Libraries which Villalpandus might possibly have viewed: it was written thus, . If the Original were so of old, then it would play fair on Josephus his side, confir∣ming his own Relation in a place before-cited; where it's said, that each side of the square was a Stadium, or Furlong. Now 'tis sufficiently known,
that a Greek Stadium (with which, as the other Measures also of capacity better known to the Jews, then the Roman quantities, Josephus frequently compares his Hebrew Measures) was exactly 600 Grecian feet; of which before: So sayes Censorinus; Stadium Olympicum est pedum, DC. Besides,Cap. 13. de die natali. Suidas professedly tells us in the word ] ; That a whole Stadium is 400 Cubits, which agrees with the place of Josephus before corrected, and with what we formerly said concerning a Cubit, that it was nearest about a foot and a half. Here the Account falls in precisely with Grecian Measures: For 400 Cubits, 600 Grecian Feet, and one Stadium, you see, are now coincident. Well then, as to the reconciliation intended; Josephus says,De Bell. Lib. 6. c. 14. pag. 916. C. Antiq. l. 15. c. 14. p. 544. B. Pag. 27. l. 18. that the whole compass of the sacred ground, together with the Antonian Tower, was six Furlongs; which must be thus understood, That the Temple-ground contained four Furlongs in compass: for so he sayes distinctly, that each side was a Furlong; and that the Tower-Plot took up in compass two Fur∣longs, even as Dr. Lightfoot hath determined it in his Second Temple, and was four-square at the North-West end of the Temple Porches. Each side of the Tower then was half a Furlong; so that the North and West-sides took up but half of the whole, viz. one Furlong: by which computation, Josephus will agree with the Rabbins exactly enough. Though I fear both of them speak but at large, that their Measures may fall into round num∣bers. But let it be here remembred, that this Tower being at first used for the Mansion-house, and laying up of the Garments of High-Priest; which standing upon a spare place of the Mountain of the House, is by them cast into the Reckoning of Holy Ground: Not but that yet there was some portion of ground remaining on the West, and on the North, for profane, and not at all counted in any of their sums. So then taking the Circuits of the Temple, and Antonia, distinctly and apart, we see that the Temple was four Furlongs about, and Antonia but two; which being put into one sum, makes six. But if you joyn the Circuit round about both of them, reckoning onely the two Out-sides of Antonia, that are farthest from the Temple, there will result but five Furlongs for the compass of the holy ground, commonly so reputed. To which, very clearly and patly, agrees a passage of Eusebius, out of Aristaeus, concerning the Pipes, laid under the Temple, for conveyance of Water, in these words, , for five Furlongs round about the Foundations of the Temple: See Euseb. Prapar. Evang. Lib. 9. Cap. 38. The same, word for word, we read in Aristaeus his own Greek Copy, Pag. 27. lin. 11. Edit. Basil. 80 1561. in Epistola ad Philocratem. Wherefore, seeing the Greek Stadium of Josephus was six hundred feet, if you multiply them by 5, (that is, five Furlongs) they will yield three thousand feet for the Circuit round about. Moreover,Vitruv. l. 3, cap. 1. pag. 40. lin. 9. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1649. four Palms (generally being the known parts of a Foot) being multiplyed into three thousand, will produce twelve thousand Palms, the Circuit of the Walled Ground. Now the Rabbies say, that the Mountain of the House was five hundred Cubits square: so that in the four sides added together, it's Circuit arises to two thousand Cubits: which being multiplyed by six Palms to a Cubit, that is a foot and half (as is before said, and may more amply be manifested in another place) there issues twelve thousand Palms equal to the measure of Jose∣phus, which makes him and the Rabbies not to fall out in the Building of the Temple.
Hence then it follows, that the Outward-Court, and its Wall is more ex∣actly determined by Josephus than by the Rabbins, who lived since him, and saw not what he reports, as an ocular Witness; who tells us expresly, as is before related, even concerning Solomon's Outward-Court, that it was four-square, each side containing a Greek Furlong in length, and the Whole round about being almost half an English mile; as is before compu∣ted. Thus much then for the Compass of the Outward-Court. Of the Inner-Court. THis Inner-Court is sometimes called the Priests Court. The quan∣tity whereof, under Zorobabel's Temple, about three hundred and ten years before Christ our Lord's Incarnation, Josephus relates out of the Writing of Hecataens Abderita,Contra Ap∣ton, lib. 1. pag. 1049. D. speaking of the Wall that encompassed the Temple and Altar, in these words; . The Stone-Wall encompassing it, was for its length, five Jugera; and, in breadth, one hundred Cubits. Now Suidas sayes, in the word , that it was the sixth part of a Stadium, which before, we have maniested to have been six hundred Grecian Feet; which is proper to Hecataeus, a Geeek Writer. Hence then we learn, that in those days, the length of this Court, from East to West, was five hundred Grecian feet, which is parallel to three hundred thirty and three Cubits, and ½. If the Hebrew Cubit should prove neerer to a Grecian foot and half, than to the Roman, (which being of an intricate Hisquisition, I leave to another Dis∣course.) But these 333 Cubits excellently well concur with the length of the Plot of the Inward Courts of Zorobabel's Temple, the Walls not be∣ing admitted into Dimension. For the constant computation of them is thus: The Priests Court 187 Cubits long: The Womens 135: And the Chel 11; which produces the 333 Cubits of Hecataeus, wanting but 1/3 of a Cubit, to parallel with his , or 5/6 of a Stadium, for the length of this Court. But as to Roman Measure, five hundred Greek feet are equal to five hundred and twenty feet, & ten Inches, which is equivalent to three hundred fourty and seven Cubits, and four Inches, if a Cubit be but a foot and ½ of Roman measure: so that this will yield above fourteen Cubits for the two outmost Walls; besides the 333 Cubits before spoken. Now as to the breadth, Hecataeus mentions one hundred Cubits; which un∣less we accept, concerning the bare ground on the North and South-side of the covered Temple, destitute of any building, it will not agree with the Jewish Descriptions. But if it be so understood, then the breadth of the covered Temple Walls and Chambers, being fifty Cubits, as is said before: This being added, makes the sum agree in 150 Cubits for the whole breadth: whereof more by and by. But you will say; This whole story of Hecataeus is concerning the Se∣cond Temple of Zorobabel's. To this I onely, at present, answer; That if the Outward Court Walls were raised in the same place under the se∣cond, wherein they stood under the first Temple; then is this a good testi∣mony of Hecataeus to our purpose. For which we shall not very earnestly contend, though there be good probabilities for that purpose. It is true, the length and breadth of neither Court can be defined out of Scripture, unless you will joyn issue with Villalpandus, as to his Visionary Temple in Ezekiel: which (o nomine) because related but in Vision, cannot be a sound Foundation for material Temple-Buildings; especially seeing the
Dimensions of the Wall, round about the Outward Court are laid down by Ezekiel to be two thousand Reeds, each Reed being six Cubits, and an hand breadth. Now seeing that two thousand Cubits are five Furlongs at four hundred Cubits to the Furlong, as abovesaid; Then two thousand Reeds will be six times five, that is, thirty Furlongs, besides two thousand hand-breadths, which arises to 333 Cubits, and 2/6, or 1/3, that is, almost ano∣ther Furlong; whereas Aristaeus, an Eye-witness, (if his Copy he true which we have, though the Authors work concerning the seventy Tran∣slation, is warranted by Tertullian, pag. 31. in his Apology against the Chri∣stians, pag. 637. 80.) testifies in these words concerning the City Jerusalem it self, , Its compass was fourty Fur∣longs. Now, if according to Ezekiel, there were about thirty one Furlongs in compass, expended upon the Temple-Buildings, there will remain then but eleven for all the City besides; which is most absurd, Nay, Josephus who knew it better, sayes the whole City was but thirty three furlongs in compass, De bello Judaico, lib. 6. cap. 13. Graec. pag. 914. B. which receives farther confirmation by his Testimony, concerning the circumvallation of Titus, in his Siege against the City, which he relates to take up but 39 stadia, in his 6th Book. De Bello Judaico, cap. 31. or 13 Lat. Pag. 937. B. in these words, : Whence we must necessarily infer the compass of the City it self to be less then the Line of the Besiegers, which incompassed the City of thirty three Furlongs in circuit, as he had related before. So that there will be left by Ezekiel's Measures of the Temple, but a little above two Furlongs for the whole City. Insomuch, that we may justly wonder at the costs and pains of Villalpandus, in his large Volumes, building a Temple without any solid Foundation for its Dimensions, to be extended upon the holy Mountain, which was incomparably less in its whole Circuit, then Ezekiel's Temple-Courts. Well then, we must not be peremptory in this business: I shall onely present to consideration thus much concerning this inward Court of the Priests in Solomon's days: That seeing the Temple it self, or the covered Building was in its inward Dimensions, double to Moses his Tabernacle; why may not the Court about it be double to Moses his Court? The holy Place and the Oracle, with Moses, was 30 long; with Solomon, 60 long. The breadth in the Tabernacle was 10, and in the Temple 20. Then seeing Moses his Court was one hundred Cubits long and fifty broad, why may we not thence allow the Priests Court round about Solomon's Temple, to be two hundred long, and one hundred broad? This conjecture is some∣what fortified by the plain Ground-Plot, or Area, of this Court under the second Temple: For we read expresly,Codex Mid∣doth. p. 169. cap. 5. Sect. 1. that it was one hundred eighty and seven long: so that our two hundred Cubits yields six Cubits, and ½, for the thickness of the Walls, East and West, in that Court, to make its Dimensi∣ons co-incident with the second Temple. But as to the breadth, North and South, let's consider, that the Temple-Building, with its appendant Chambers, in its inward Area, (not measuring the Walls; for in these pro∣portions, they are to be excluded) was triple to the inward Area of Mo∣ses his Tabernacle, which was but ten Cubits broad within. Now in the Temple, the Holy Place was twenty Cubits broad, and the Ground-Chambers, on each side, were five Cubits a piece in Floor, that's ten for both, making thirty in all for the inward A real capacity of the breadth of the covered Temple, neglecting the Walls: So then, upon this suggestion, consequently, the breadth of the Priests Court will fall out to be one hun∣dred and fifty Cubits in all, which is in triple proportion to the Court of Moses's Tabernacle, being but 50.Exod. 38.12, 13.
But some will say, as to this contrivance, the Porch was left out, as to the length; for that made it 70 in all, which makes another proportion be∣twixt them, as to length. I answer; First, that the Porch was onely for beauty, but the Side-Chambers were for use. And, secondly, the marvellous co-incidency of this our conjecture, with the Measures of the second Temple, doth much allure us,Middoth. Ibid. to lay down these proportions. For therein we read, that this ve∣ry Court was 135 broad in open Area, leaving 7 Cubits, and ½ for the thick∣ness of the two Walls, on the North and South, that it may ly parallel with 150 Cubits of our supposed breadth of this Inner-Court, in triple propor∣tion to the Court of Moses's Tabernacle. These Courts then in some measure, (I hope) are fixed, as to their num∣ber and fashion, including the Temple within two Squares; though as to their Dimensions, I can say nothing peremptorily: onely that the great Court (if Josephus may be believed,) was four hundred Cubits square, and so compleatly finished, as to the Foundations out of the Valleyes, the Wals, the Gates, and the famous Porch at the East end, and other ordinary Por∣ches round about, even by Solomon himself; as we have before manifested from that Author. The Priests Court probably, fixed by proportion, ta∣ken from the Tabernacle to the Temple, and concurring with the Dimen∣sions of that Court under the second Temple. 2. Chron. 20.5.There remains yet something to be said of the new Court, which we evi∣dently find erected before the destruction of Solomon's Temple, and was called the Womens Court under the second: Not as if they alone did re∣sort into that place, but that they could go no further. There was also the separate place, or the Inclosure, called Chel, which ran round about both the Priests Court, and the Womens. But their quan∣tity is utterly undeterminable out of Holy Scripture,Lam. 2.8. King. 42.1. what it was under the first Temple. Besides, they not being extant in Solomon's dayes, pertain not necessarily to this Description. Neither shall we need to give in the Plot of these Courts, unless any would imagine, that the Jews did precisely raise the Walls of these Courts, in the very Tract of the old Ruines, which pos∣sibly might be so; though we cannot prove it, as to all the Courts: Yet Josephus is a clear Witness in this point,Lib. 15. c. 14. p. 544. B. p. 545. D. as to the great outward Court, that it was walled in the same place under both Temples: if we compare what he sayes concerning the Buildings of Solomon and Herod, together. Where∣fore, as to these last Courts, we are content to leave their Measures in the same posture under the first, as they are punctually described to have been under the second. We are sure the Walls of both Temples were of like fa∣shion, if we compare 1 King. 6.36. with Ezra 6.4. Moreover, Dr. Light∣foot gives in his Verdict, that 'tis almost past peradventure, that Cyrus gave his Commission for the second Temple, after the Pattern of Solomon's, ha∣ving learned it from the Jews about him, Temple, pag. 43. As to this point, I suppose from good Authors (I am sure, from Scripture) it will be as hard to contradict it, as for us to prove it. We shall then, at present, conclude up∣on the Dimensions of these two Cubits briefly. The Great Court square, 400 Cubits. The Priests-Court, within the other; long, 200; broad, 150; Desiring the more diligent Reader, and one better acquainted with these Antiqui∣ties, to touch them charily and gently: For we have set them up onely at present for a tryal, how they will suit with the conveniencies of Temple-Worship, and more firm consequences, either from Scripture, or approved ancient Authors, that may be hereafter brought to light, either to approve, or disprove the Premises; and we do accordingly promise, that with all
care and speed we shall endeavour then to fix them in their most exact places. Of the Walls, Gates, Porches, Treasuries, Pavements, &c. in both these Courts. IN the next place, we are to speak concerning the Walls, Gates, and Pave∣ments, Porches, Stairs, Treasuries, and Houses, of dedicate things within those Courts, which Solomon built: for as to the New-Court, and the Chel, we shall leave them to the Describers of the second Tem∣ple. For the Walls then, how thick or high in the Outward Court, Scripture is silent; and so is Josephus also: unless, as to the second Temple, which if exactly like the first, we have nothing to do, but to refer the whole work to its Describers. Aristaeus sayes, in his time, they were ,Pag. 26. above 70 Cubits high. That the great Court; as also the inward, were both walled round about,1 King. 7.12. we have it recorded in Scripture; together with the manner or form of the Walls viz. with three Rowes of Hewen-stone, and a Row of Cedar-Beams, which we find to be the very same for the second,Ezra 6.4. in the Commission of Cyrus; which makes us fomewhat inclinable, to think, that their very Posi∣tion also was in the same place with the former. But I leave that in bivio. The Gates. As for the Gates of the outward great Court, we read, that the Doors, or Folding-leaves, were over-laid with Brass;2 Chron. 4.9. but their Situation we are to learn from the Discourse about the Porters of the Temple, in 1 Chron. 26.13, &c. Where we find, as followeth. 1. An East-Gate: For the Lot fell to Shelemiah Eastward, vers. 14. at which Gate there were to watch six Levites, ver. 17. This,6 Levites. under the se∣cond Temple, was called Shushan Gate. Some think, it was called the Kings Gate: Not that the King went in, that way, but because King Solo∣mon built it in a more sumptuous and extraordinary manner then the rest.1 Chron. 9.18. In some one of the Chambers, in this Gate of old, sate the Sanhedrim, and sometimes also in the East-Gate of the inner or higher Court, as may be learned out of Jeremy, by comparing these places together, Jerem. 35.4. & 36.10. 2. The North Gate. For the watching at which Gate, the lot fell to Zechariah, a wise Counsellour, the Son of Shelemiah, called also Meshe∣lemaiah, See 1 Chron. 26 v. 2. and v. 14.4 Levites. Here there were four Levites placed in the daily watch v. 17. 3 The South Gate. For which the lot fell to Obed-Edom, v. 15.4 Levites. Here there were four Levites in constant watch, v. 17. Whether there were two Gates in the South Wall, or not, is disputable. For though Josephus sayes  In the plural: yet he speaks there of the second Temple. From hence some hold there were two, and probably so, under the second. The Rabbins also agreeing to it, and calling them the Gates of Huldah. But that there was but one under the first Temple, I rather incline to think, because there are but four Porters mentioned Southward. There being at the four main and principall Gates, four alwayes set to watch.
4 The West Gate called Shallecheth, from Casting up; the word being derived from  to cast up, as being denominated from that famous Cau∣sey, which Solomon made here, to passe on from his own house over the Vally into the Mountain of the Temple.1 Chron. 26.16. Esa. 6.13. pag. 17. The Gate stood by the Causey of the going up, as we render it, whereof there is famous mention. Each side of this Causey was planted with Oaks and Teyle trees, as Dr. Light∣foot hath well observed. There were also made stately Railes of Algum trees, by transposition, called also Almug trees, which some take to be Co∣rall,Edit. Gentij. pag. 357. 2 Chron. 9.11. 2 Chron. 2.8. 2 Chron. 9.10. and to be fecht out of the Sea neer Tyre; so, a Rabbi. But this is im∣probable, because such a hard materiall was not proper or fit to make Harps, and Psalteries, which were made of the same Algum trees. Besides they are expresly said to be fetcht from Lebanon, and from the golden land of Ophir. Others say, they were the same wood that we now call by the name of Ebony; others, Brazil wood: because they have fancied Ophir to be Peru. Others, with the learned Buxtorf, explain it of the best sort of Cedars, to which we shall incline till better light; being sure that Leba∣non was very famous for Cedars. Possibly this might be some more excel∣lent sort then the ordinary which is commonly mentioned. The 70 in Chron. render it , Wood of the Larch-tree, as some interpret  which will not easily burn as Vitruvius sayes lib. 2. c. 9. concerning a Castle neer the Alps built of it, which Caesar could not destroy by fire. The vulgar Latine calls them Thyma ligua: which Dodoneus expounds of the wild Cypresse. Well, what ever the Wood were, it was a rare and choise sort, whereof the King made stayes for the house of the Lord, we render it in the Text, Pillars: in the Margin of our Bibles, Railes or props, The Word is  Avenarius turns it thus,1 King. 10.5. 2 Chron. 911. Fultura quae scilicet utrâque parte gradus sustinet. The Seventy two render it . In ano∣ther place the same thing is rendred , we read in the Text Terrises, in the Margin, Stayes, and (that which suits best of all) High-wayes, to the house of the Lord, by the Seventy , which is the proper meaning of the word, as may be found in many places of Scripture, where it is so rendred, and particularly, Esai. 33.8. and 49.11. This famous Causey, planted with trees on both sides, for shade and pleasure, and railed with Railes of Cedar, or some ocher choise and excellent wood, for safety, was that stately ascent to the house of the Lord, which Solomon made for a pas∣sage from his own House into the Temple, through the chief Western gate, called Shallecheth from this admirable Causey, which the Queen of Sheba did not without cause behold with pleasing wonder.2 Chron. 9.4 This Gate was cal∣led Coponius his Gate, under the second Temple. Where for the service of watching, there were placed also, as at the three other Cardinal Gates, so so also here,1 Chron. 26.18. 4 Levites. four Levites. The lot fell to Shuppim and Hosah v. 16. Now because this Gate was open onely to the King and his Family, and because a great part of the City lay on the West side of the Temple, we read of o∣ther Gates in this Western Wall. As first of all, the Gates of Asuppim which were two little ones, being at the Southermost end of the Western Wall,1 Chron. 26.15. v. 18. 4 Levites. together with a Treasury called the House of Assuppim, lying betwixt them. The lot for the watch at these two little Gates fell to the Sons of Obed-Edom. To each Gate two, v. 17. that's four Levites to these two Gates. Whereby it seems they were but little ones. For the famous great Gates, that stood in the midst of their Walls, had four a piece. That here were two Gates, the Text insinuates by the division of the number of Porters, saying not four: But toward Assuppim two and two, that is, two to each Gate.
Then lastly comes in Parbar-Gate, which is expresly fixed Westward, and two Levites placed in their watch at that Gate. v. 18.2 Levites. We have then you see four Prime Gates, to the four Winds, and three lesser ones, towards the West besides; that's seven in all: And twenty four Levites, in their constant order, watching at every one of the Gates, according to the lot of their Father's Houses, and their several Divisions. Of the Gates of the Inward Court. BEfore we come into the Priests Court, to view the Gates, we must as∣cend by fifteen steps or degrees, which for form were semicircular, the whole were in height seven Cubits and a half, each being half a Cubit in Rise. Where by the way, take notice, if the Cubit were a whole yard, as some would fix it: it would prove, Hic labor, hoc opus, to climb up those Staires. The Ascent would be neither gracefull nor pleasant. These were the steps whereon the Levites sang the fifteen Psalmes of degrees. Which thing, together with the Conformity of this Ascent to the second Temple, is the onely motive why such a number is delivered. Those Psalmes (as is delivered by many grave Expositors) being assigned by David to be sung upon this Ascent. Being entred we can find but five Gates in this higher Court of the Lord's House, if Scripture be consulted. 1 The East-Gate, called the higher Gate of the Lord's House, which was either new-built or repaired by King Jotham, and is called,2 King. 15.35. 2 Chron. 27.3. as some think, The High Gate of the House of the Lord. Though there is one place which seems to favour an apprehension that the high-Gate there men∣tioned was the same with Shallecheth, or the West-Gate of the outward Court towards the King's house. For if you observe 2 Chron. 23.20. The Scripture tells us that Jehojaedah with the rest brought young King Joash, newly crowned in the Temple, from the House of the Lord: that is, the in∣ner Court, where he was crowned and anointed neer his royal pillar, as we have before observed, and then being brought into the outward Court, they came with him through the high-Gate into the Kings House, where the immediate connexion of the Kings House seems to imply, that the High-Gate, so called, of the Temple, was that which was neerest to the Kings House. There are two probabilities to strengthen this conceit. First, that it was called the high-Gate, because situate on the highest ground of Moriah: which was at the West end of the Temple: so confessed by all. Secondly, the Eastern Gate though pompous, yet it's observed by Dr. Lightfoot that its Battlements were made low,Temple ser∣vice, cap. 17. §. 2. that the Priest on the Ex∣piation day, on Mount Olivet, might behold the Porch of the Temple. Be∣sides, probably, the Western Gate was built the more magnificently, be∣cause of the royall entrance of the Kings. But to proceed; This Eastern Gate of the inner Court, being thus (as is conceived by most, with whom we will not fall out) magnificently rebuilt by Jotham, had, by reason of its new Erection, the name of the New-Gate of the Lords House. The Entry whereof was kept by the Fathers of the Levites, who had there also a famous Chamber, where of old time the High Court of Judicature,Jer. 36.10. Ezek. 8.7, 11. called the Jewish Sanhedrim, did sit in counsell. This Gate was called by the name of Nicanor under the second Temple. Concerning which, and the remaining Gates, the diligent Reader may consult the forecited learned Author, in his second Temple, for a clear guide in these particulars.
In the South-Wall of this inward Court, there were of old but two Gates, that we yet find recorded in Scripture. Jer. 20.2.1. The High-Gate of Benjamin, because it stood on somewhat higher ground then the other, and was called by the name of Benjamin, because it stood in the Lot and Territory of that Tribe, as the Temple with the Altar fully did. This was called the Gate of Kindling, under the second Tem∣ple. 2. The lower Gate of Benjamin, which stood in the South-Wall over against the Altar, and was called the Water-Gate under the second Tem∣ple. On the West-side of the Temple, and in the Western-Wall of this Inner-Court,De bello Jud. lib. 6. cap. 6. p. 916. F. there was no Gate at all: So Josephus, and all the Ancients, spea∣king of the second Temple, do fully agree: Whence it clearly follows, that the Western Gates must be placed, as before, in the wall of the Outward Court. If the Supposition of the first Temple, its being an example in its most considerable Buildings and Frame for the second to follow (wherein most agree) be built upon solid Foundations. On the North there were two Gates in their Position exactly correspon∣dent to the Southern. 1. The Upper North-Gate opened upon the Body of the Temple, and is called the Gate of the Lords House toward the North, but tearmed the Gate Beth-Mokadh under the second Temple:Ezek. 8.3, 5, 14. In which place the Women sate weeping for Tammuz, as they are represented by the Prophet Eze∣kiel. 2 The Gate of the Altar, because it was right against the Altar, and op∣posite to the lower Gate of Benjamin. This is the lower North-Gate, and under the second Temple was called Nitzotz,Ezech. 8.5. or the Gate of the Song. These are all the Gates of the Priests Court, that are mentioned in Scrip∣ture under the first Temple, which proves not, that there were no more: But onely gives us to conclude, that no more are yet cleared up for our en∣trance into this Court. The Pavements. The Pavement of both Courts, with what stones it was laid, is not clear. That there was one in the great Court,2 Chron. 7.3. is very evident: For the Text sayes, All the People bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the Pavement, and worshipped, who were not admitted into the Inner-Court, whereby it's most probable, that the Priests Court was also paved, because of their various services that did require it. It appears also very probable, that the Priests Court was paved, by that Relation of Ahaz his taking Sown the Brazen Sea from off the Oxen, and setting it upon the Stone-Pave∣ment, Most probably, in the same Court, where it stood in its gallan∣try.De bello Jud. lib. 6. c. 14. p. 916. C. 2 King. 16.17. The second Temple had its Court laid with all manner of stones, when as the Riches of the Nation was nothing comparable to what it was in the dayes of Solomon: and therefore we may justly conceive, that the first was far more transplendent in these Ornaments. Each Court was made plain and even with ascents, by steps, out of the first into the second, and out of that into the Temple Porch. Under the second Temple there were 15 steps,Id. l. 6. c. 14. pag. 917. B. as before is said, out of the great Court, at the East-Gate, entring into the higher Court, or that of the Priests. Besides the advance out of that Court into the Porch, was by 12 steps, as is commonly conceived of the first in similitude and likeness to the second.
The Porches. The Porches of each Court follow next to be spoken to: For which purpose, let's see what may be the meaning of that place, where it sayes,1 King. 6.36. 1 King. 7.12. ver. 10. that the Inner-Court was built with three Rowes of Hewen-stones, and a Row of Cedar-Beams, seeing that in the same manner also the outward Court was built according to the measure of Hewen-stones of ten Cubits, and of eight. Possibly ten long and 8 broad; or, some ten long; some 8 long; or else cubical. Some understand that Text, of Rowes of stones in the thick∣nss of the walls, lying plain and even one with another, parallel to the Ho∣rizon and Cedar-beames within the Stones for the inside of the Courts and Porches; so Montanus. Others understand it of three Rowes of Stones on upon another in height, and Cedar beams at top: So Ribera. Some by this expression understand the Cloisters round about the Courts,, Joseph. Ant. l. 8. c. 2. pag. 266. G. That they were built with three Rowes of Stones, of ten Cubits high and eight Cubits thick a piece. So that the out-wall of the Cloisters was eight Cu∣bits thick, and thirty Cubits high of solid stone, and then Cedar beames at top lying crosse upon Pillars within. The wall running East and West the beames were laid at top North and South, with Pillars underneath, which made a walk covered at top, and open on the insides, towards the open Pavements of the Courts, the beames being supported with Pillars, like as the Royal Exchange or the Piazzo in Covent-Garden. If this be the truth, then 'tis clear by the Text, that Solomon himself did Porch both the Courts; for they are both decribed to be of the same form of Building in the fore∣cited places:2 King. 7.12. the last whereof Villalpandus peremptorily interprets of the outward or great Court of the Temple, Explanat. in Ezech. Tom. 2. Part. 2. Lib. 1. Isagog. Cap. 9. Pag. 22. Col. 2. D. and Part. 2. in cap. 40. Ezech. lib. 3. cap. 25. and joyns Tostatus with himself in the same Opinion. If so be this be truth, then 'tis clear, that Solomon built a stately Wall at least, even round about the outer or great Court, if he did not porch it round: But Josephus, when he treats particularly of Solomon's Buildings,Antiq. lib. 8. c. 2. pag. 266. G. speaks plainly, that Solomon did porch even the outward Court round about, as well as the inward. His words are, , &c. Without this (meaning the inward Court-Wall) He built the  (or outward Court) which was Holy Ground also, but not equally to the inward. For he sayes presently, that no persons but such as were clean, according to the Law, might enter into it) in quadrangular or four-square form, erecting great and broad Por∣ches: which seems to refer to the very last words, even to all sides of the Quadrangle. But if you will not have Josephus to quarrel with himself, you must interpret him of the Eastern Porches onely, which it is clear, from other places of his Works that Solomon built them fully. But if the former expression, in Scripture, of the Hewen-stones, and Cedar-Beams, be meant of Porches, then farewel any niggardly Expositors, and let Solomon's Buil∣dings be as large and sumptuous as his Heart: onely at the Eastern end, we will delineate double Porches. Now whereas before some scrupled much of having but a Wall on the West side of the Temple, because of the fore∣cited expression, that Josephus sayes, the Temple was naked till after-times: Let's take the same Author's mind into counsel, and we shall find he tells us, that Solomon himself did equal those Precipices, and made the out∣ward Court equal, i.e. In smoothness, to the Court of the Temple, and there speakin of double Porches, sayes, they were round about.Antiq. l. 8. c. 2. pa. 263. A. His words are . He compassed that also with double
Porches,  referring to the , or the outward Court, whereof he is now treating. So that Josephus acquainting us in his sixth Book, of the Jewish Wars, that in Solomon's days the Temple was naked and open on all sides but the East; till after-ages raised the praecipitious declivity, with ac∣cumulation of Earth: (that so he may not appear contradictory to himself) we must explain him of those vast Substructions of Stone-Walls, raised out of the deep Vallies, and stately double Porches built upon them, as at the East end: Whereas, if he means by , that it had no Wall, no Court-room, though uneven, and no single porcht Buildings at all: but that the West-end of the covered Temple stood upon the Brink of the praecipi∣tious Rock; we must make Josephus either a Lyar, or of a slippery-memo∣ry, or his present Book to be very corrupt. But, for my part, I had rather excuse it by a slip of his Pen in this place of the Jewish Wars, where this  is mentioned: Seeing in the Books of the Antiquities, where he doth of set-purpose, handle the famous Acts of the Kings of his Nation, he plainly tells us, Solomon porcht the Temple-Courts round about; which we have proved in the second Chapter at large, to have been in Circuitu Templi, encompassing the covered Building. Now his Books of the Jewish Antiquities were written after the other of their Wars; as he himself as∣sures us, Antiq. l. 1. cap. 22. p. 20. F. & lib. 13. cap. 9. p. 443. F. Wherefore in this last written Book of his Antiquities, clearly describing of Porches round about, even built by King Solomon, he doth tacitely retract his for∣mer errour about the nakedness of the Temple in his Jewish Wars; Where∣fore I cannot but wonder at Ribera, and his Proselytes, in this particular, that they should lay the stress of their opinion about the deformity of the Temple on these two or three words; so often mentioned; especially seeing he himself gives Josephus this deplorable Character [sayè ita lubricus est, ut cum maxim? tenere eum credas, elabatur] Riber. de Templ. l. 1. c. 28. He says, a little before, that he was a grave Historian, and an Eye-witness, and yet presently that he is such a slippery fellow, that when you do most confide, in having attained the true sense of his mind, He slips like an Eele through your fingers: Almost as bad as that Stigma imprest upon another Author, which I have heard of; He was a good Historian, but that he wanted truth. To let pass then the modern Opinions of some few that slip down the de∣clivity after Ribera for want of Courts and Walls, as having no plain Foun∣dation for their own standing, we shall proceed to a further view of this magnificent Temple; having, we hope, clearly recovered its pristine lustre in the circum-ambient Buildings, and gained most beautiful Porches, with stately Pillars round about both the Courts: Onely where there were Gates with their Buildings, and Chambers with their Treasuries. That there were Treasuries and Chambers round about in the Courts, is evident by King David's Pattern given to Solomon, which no doubt he ex∣actly followed, or else God would not have declared himself well pleased with his Offerings.1 Chron. 28.11, 12, 13. The place, for the Pattern, is in the Book of Chroni∣cles, wherein v. 11. we read of the covered house, with its Porch, Houses, Treasuries. Upper-Chambers, and Inner-Parlours; and then ver. 12. of the Courts of the House, and all the Chambers round about, and the Treasu∣ries. In the Buildings of the Outward Court were the Chambers and Lodg∣ings of the Levites especially in those near the Gates,1 Chron. 9.27. where their Offices lay. Some places there were for the Ministerial Vessels, and the Instru∣ments of the Sanctuary: Other Rooms for fine Flower, Salt, Wine, Oyl, Frankincense, Spices, Ointment, &c. See Ver. 28, 29, 30.
Mattathiah (the first-born of Shallum) with his Brethren, was Porter at the East-Gate, and his Office pertained to things made in Pans. So that the Pastry-Office, it should seem, was in some Rooms of the East-Gate of the Inner-Court. Others were appointed over the Shew-Bread. The place whereof, under the second Temple, was in Beth-Mokadh, and so possibly under the first. The Singers also, and Players on Instruments, had their fixed Chambers, which was under the second, and probably so in the first-Temple, in Nit∣zotz, or the Gate of the Song, which was before, called the Gate of the Al∣tar. But how to dispose all the Chambers and Treasuries exactly, as to the times of the first Temple, is beyond any Inference from Scripture. If so be the second was proportionable and conformable in these points to the first: then we need to exhibit no other then a Transcript of L'Empereur in Middoth, and of the Learned and excellent pains of Doctor Lightfoot, who hath made great use of his Rabbinical Learning, for the opening of Scripture. To conclude, whether there were any small low separating, Wall in the higher, or Priests Court, as we read of under the second, cannot be determi∣ned clearly out of Scripture; and therefore we shall leave that sub judice; and now at length remove our Camp to the next Chapter. CHAP. IV. Concerning the Vessels, Ʋtensils, and other Ornaments of the Temple. THat we may proceed in some orderly method; let us first place the Heavenly Houshold-stuff, within the Covered Temple; and after that, the several Utensils in their Courts. Within the covered Building, there were two Ground-Rooms, and a Porch: In each whereof, we shall find rare and magnificent Ornaments; for the glorious Majesty of Heaven was pleased to keep house among the Children of Israel, having His Presence-Chamber in the Sanctuary, and His Privy-Chamber in the Oracle. These glorious Chambers were adorned on all sides with Cherubims, and Palm-Trees, carved in Cedar, and over-laid with Gold, according to this ensuing Figure.
The Figure of the Cherubims, and Palm-trees. depiction of Cherubim and palm trees which decorated the chambers of the Temple IN the Oracle, or Holy of Holies, stood these following things: 1. The Ark of the Covenant of the Lord was set in this most Holy place under the Wings of the Cherubims, the very same that Moses made in the Wilderness: whereof you have the lively Icon, or Figure, in this en∣suing Draught.
The View of the Ark of the Covenant. depiction of the Ark of the Covenant THE matter of the Ark read to be Shittim-wood, that grew plentifully in Arabia, and especially in Abel-Shittim, in the Plains of Moab,Numb. 25.1. & 33.49. possibly taking its name from that place, where was the 42d Mansion of the Israelites. The quantity of the Ark was not large, being in length but 2 Cu∣bits, and ½; in breadth and heighth equal, viz. One Cubit and a half: It was over-laid with pure Gold within and without, and had a Crown of Gold round about.
It had four Golden Rings, two on each side, close by the four corners, with two staves made of Shittim-wood,Exod. 37.1-6. 1 King. 8.6, 7, 8. and over-laid with Gold, for the Levites to carry it in the Wilderness: which very staves were brought into the Temple, to remember the people, that if they brake God's Covenant, the staves yet remained within the Rings of the Ark, even in the fixed Temple, ready to bear away the Symbole of God's gracious presence from them. 2 Chron. 5.10. Exod. 32.15, 16. Exo. 32.15. & 34.4. Deut. 10.3. Deut. 10.8. 1 Kin. 6.19. Exo. 34.28. 2 Chro. 6.11. 1 King. 8.9. 2 Chro. 5.10.In this Ark there were the two Tables of Stone, which Moses put there∣in at Horeb, whereon were engraven the Ten Commandements, not as they are usually painted in Churches on two sides onely, but on all the four sides of the Stones. It was the Work of God. It seems they were not very ponderous and large: because Moses carryed them both in one hand. They were called the Tables of the Covenant, (and the holy Ark wherein they lay, the Ark of the Covenant) because they contained the Ten Commandements; which if they kept, God made a Covenant with them to bless them. There was nothing else put within this Holy Chest, as is expresly declared in two several places of Scripture. The Mercy-Seat. Over this Holy Chest, containing the Stone-Tables, there was laid a co∣vering of pure beaten Gold, called, the Mercy-Seat, equal in its measures of length and breadth,Exod. 37.6. to the Ark; and was placed betwixt the Stone-Tables, and the Cherubims: between whose Wings, God's Majesty is said to sit. It signified Jesus Christ, the Mediator betwixt God and Us, interposing be∣tween God's Wrath and our Persons, who have broken the Commande∣ments that lay within. The Cherubims. Exod. 37.7.On the two ends of this Mercy-Seat, stood the two Cherubims of Mo∣ses, both of Beaten Gold: Their Name is deduced from  to Ride, as some think; because God is said to ride and to sit between the Cheru∣bims, Psal. 99.1. Their Forme or Figure was in the shape of young men; as some apprehend from that place of Scripture, which mentions a young man sitting on the right side of the Sepulchre of our Blessed Lord, in a long White Garment, Mark 16.5. The same which the Holy Evangelist Mat∣thew calls the Angel of the Lord, Math. 28.2. Such also were the Ap∣paritions of Angels, in the days of the Ancient Patriarchs, as is generally received. [These Cherubims were made out of one Piece, even out of the Mercy-Seat were they made:Exod.37.8.] So that by these words thus repeated, it should seem, that the Mercy-Seat, and the Cherubims, were made out of one and the same Beaten-Piece of Gold: which shewed the constant atten∣dancy of the Angels upon Jesus Christ.Heb. 2.7. They stood upon it, 1. Noting, that our Lord, according to His Humane Nature, was made a little lower then the Angels. Their faces are said to be opposite one to the other, and made looking down upon the Mercy-Seat, noting their desire of understanding the Mystery of Christ's Incarnation. 2. They stood upon the Mercy-Seat, shewing that Christ was the Basis,1 Tim. 5.21. Jud. 6. v. or Foundation, of the standing or confir∣mation of the Elect Angels, that forsook not their first estate. They spread out their Wings on high, noting their prepared alacrity to fly on the Messa∣ges of God; and they stood covered with their Wings over the Mercy-Seat: Some think, and perhaps not improbably, according to some of the Prophetical Visions, that these Cherubims had four Wings: two whereof
were lifted up on high, and two covered their feet,Isa. 6.2. being a modest expres∣sion of the Holy Spirit. But it's clear out of that place in Exodus, that their faces were one to the other; that is, one lookt Southward,Exod. 37.9. the other North∣ward; and their Wings also stretcht North and South, their faces being in∣ward. Whereas Solomon's Cherubims stood on the Ground, and their fuces were towards the House; not inward, as our Translation reads it; but as the Hebrew  and their faces were towards the house;2 Chr. 3.13. Baith being taken for the Holy Place, and Debir for the Oracle: So that their, Fa∣ces were toward the Holy Place, looking Eastward, downward out of the Oracle, into the Sanctuary. There were then, besides Moses his Cherubims standing up the Ark,2 Chr. 3.13. v. 10. 1 Kin. 6.23. v. 28. 2 Chron. 3.11, 12, 13. two other Cherubims standing on the Ground, made (as we read it) of Image-work. The material was of Olive-Tree, and overlaid with Gold. Each Wing, of each Cherubim, was five Cubits long. All four Wings being ex∣tended to the length of Twenty Cubits, viz. the whole breadth of the Oracle. The two inward a Wings touched each other; and the two ends of the outward Wings touched the Wall of the House. The height of each of Solomon's was Ten Cubits a piece; under whose two inward Wings, stood Moses his Ark and Cherubims: These four Cherubims are likened, in Scripture, to a Chariot of four Wheels, whereon the Divine Majesty did sit, and utter his infallible Oracles,1 Chron. 28.18. Psal. 99.1. and are called therefore the Chariot of the Cherubims; though some think each of these greater Cherubims stood upon a Chariot, and therefore called so: But the Text doth clearly speak out, that they stood on their feet, 2 Chron. 3.13. which is conceived to be meant not onely of their Erect Posture;2 Chron. 5.7. but also of their Situation upon the Golden-Floor; whereas the other two stood on the Ark. Besides the Ark, and these its Appurtenances, there seems (by the Epistle to the Hebrews) that within this most Holy Place was laid the Pot of Man∣na, and Aaron's Rod that budded.Heb. 9.4. Numb. 17.10. For so (that there may be a clear Re∣concilement of Scripture) we must understand the Author of that Epistle, (by the Relative ) to make a Reference to the Oracle, or Holyest of all, mentioned in the third Verse, and not the Ark: which relation of a Pronoun, to a remote Antecedent, is not altogether unusual amongst even some Learned Authors. There be some that think, possibly, they were in the Ark till Solomon's time; and then, by Divine Appointment, laid in some other place. For why should Scripture say expresly, in two places, they were not in the Ark, seeming thereby to imply some change,1 King. 8.9. 2 Chr. 5.10. as to this particular: which if so, then the Epistle to the Hebrews, speaking of Moses's Tabernacle, may consist more Grammatically with it self, and other Scrip∣tures, if this may be the true mind of the Spirit. The Golden Censer of Aaron, also, was laid up in some place near the Ark, for which the fore-cited Text is as clear as for the other. We read al∣so of five Golden Emerods, and five Golden Mice, dedicated by the Lords of the Philistims unto God, when they were smitten for their sin; which were put up into a Coffer, and sent with the Ark, as a Memorial of God's Vengeance, and of their Deliverance. But whether they were conveyed in∣to the Holyest Place, with the Ark, and reserved unto Solomon's Temple, is one of the , and therefore we must leave it for a clearer Discovery. In the time of Moses, there was also the Book of the Law, called, by some, the Deuteronomion, laid on the side of the Ark: But whether or no it was placed there in Solomon's dayes, we do not read: yet we find in Josiah's Reign, when the Temple was purged, the Book of the Law was found in the Temple by Hilkiah the Priest; though no express mention be made of the Oracle.
Of the Vessels and Ʋtensils in the Sanctuary, or Holy Place. WE shall dispose these in the same order, that the Scripture menti∣ons them; that is, First, the Altar of Incense; Then the Tables and the Candlesticks; as may be seen, 1 King. 7.48, 49. and 2 Chron. 4.19, 20. depiction of the altar of incense The Altar of Incense.
As to the Golden Altar of Incense, it's first requisite to clear it up, that it was placed in the Sanctuary without the Oracle and its Vail. In Mo∣ses his Tabernacle, it's clear, that it had stood without the Vail. For Moses having placed the Ark, lets down the Vail, and then places the Table Northward, the Candlestick Southward, and this Altar before the Vail;Exod. 40, 3, 21, 23, 26. that is, at the upper end of this Room just in the middle before the Vail. But a clear Inference we have out of Leviticus, where, upon the Expiation Day, the High-Priest was to take a Censer full of Burning-Coals of Fire from off the Altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet Incense beaten small, and bring it within the Vail.Lev. 16.12. If the Altar stood within the Vail, then it were absurd to say thus, that Aaron took a Censer of Coals from off the Altar within the Vail, and brought it within the Vail. But when as its Position was without, it's pro∣perly said, that with these prepared things he went from the Altar into the Oracle within the Vail, to burn sweet Odours. Again the Text says, that after the High-Priest had done sprinkling the Mercy Seat, with the blood of the Bullock, and the Goat, 7 times, that he shall go out unto the Altar, that is before the Lord, and put blood upon its Horns, and sprinkle it 7 times. If so be then Aaron must go one of the most Holy Place, before he can come to this Altar: It's evident,Lev. 16.18. that the Altar did not stand within the Vail. Thus much I desired to add, to that common and urgent Argument, of the daily burning of Incense by every inferiour Priest, in his course upon this Altar, who could not have admission within the Oracle, being open onely once a year, and to the High-Priest onely on the solemn day of Ex∣piation. For so we find the High-Priest, and eighty inferiour Priests, with King Uzziah, at this Incense-Altar; who durst not go into the Oracle, 2 Chron. 26.17. Now that Solomon's Altar was placed also in the Holy Place, appears by the Text alleadged, which says it was situate by the Ora∣cle, implying, that it was not within it, 1 King. 6.22. There is nothing worth answering, that I know of, which can be oppo∣sed, but that foresaid place of the Apostle, where it's said,Heb. 9.4. concerning the Golden Censer, that it was in the most Holy Place. To which, I say, either it is to be understood of that Censer, that was thus brought into this Oracle within the Vail once a year by the High-Priest, and so may be truly said to be in the Oracle, though not constantly, yet at solemn times; or else we must think of some other Interpretation. For whereas this may be con∣ceived by some but an evasion; because the Apostle seems by the word  not to note a Temporary, but constant possession, not onely ad usum, but ad situm: for that the very same word, , in the same verse, is spo∣ken of the Pot of Manna, which, who knows not but continued many 100 years within the Pot. There be some, therefore, would expound the word, , for the Altar of Incense it self: But are forced to do violence to the word. For in all the Septuagint Bible, I think they cannot manifest one place, where it is by them put for the Altar, whose Greek it's known, that the New Testament Pen men chiefly follow. Nay, in its native sense, it signifies Incense onely, and, by a Metonomy, the Censer wherein it was put. But to admit a double Trope to ride upon one word, is as harsh, as rare. Where∣fore, to reconcile this place to the Old Testament, I take it to signifie a Cen∣ser: For so the Epithete [Golden] challenges it from its native signification of Incense: And I humbly conceive, that possibly we may understand by it the Censer of Aaron, wherewith he burned Incense, when two hundred and fifty men, with their Censers, were appointed, by God, to try with him,Numb. 16.17. who it was that God had appointed to that Office. After the two hundred
and fifty men were consumed by Fire,Ver. 25. Ver. 38. their Censers were hallowed, and Plates made of them for the Altar, for a sign to the Children of Israel. Now, though the Text in Numbers does not tell us that Aaron's Censer was parti∣cularly laid up: yet, if we interpret this place in the Hebrews of that Censer, it is no way repugnant to any Scripture, nor to the Analogy of Faith: But helps exceedingly to inlighten and reconcile that place. I am the more in∣duced to incline to it, because it is joyned with two other things, viz. the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod: both which were laid up there, as a token of their Murmuring and Rebellion against the Lord, being two miraculous Effects, which God produced presently, upon their murmuring, to demon∣strate the Omnipotent Presence of the Divine Majesty, against whom, and His instituted Ministers, they had so grievously murmured. So then, after this grand murmure of Korah, there being two Miracles produced; the one, the swallowing up of many in the Earth; the other, the burning of two hundred and fifty, by fire, from Heaven: for the remembrance of it, this Censer, possibly, was added, as another Token, together with the Pot of Manna and Aaron's Rod, to be laid up in the Oracle before the Lord. There is nothing to be objected against this sense, but that because the Altar of Incense is omitted, ver. 2. therefore it's brought in ver. 4. and to be under∣stood to be within the second Vail, quoad usum, onely. To this I answer, That the Altar standing without the Vail, Aaron might take this Golden Censer that lay within the Vail, and with it taking Fire-Coals off the Al∣tar, and Incense in his hands, come and perfume the most Holy Place. I dare not be peremptory, in this point; although that a certain Golden Censer lay in the Oracle, constantly within the Vail, according to the ex∣press terms of the Apostle, is the mind of Learned Mr. Weemse, in his Expo∣sition of the Ceremonial Laws, pag. 48. However it be, I submit my Con∣jecture to all sober and learned persons; having, I hope, before evinced the true Position of the Altar of Incense, to be without, but near the Vail, which we now proceed briefly to describe. Exod. 30.1-10.The Altar of Incense, which Moses made, was, for matter, of Shittim-Wood, and over-laid with pure Gold round about. For form, four-square: For quantity or measure, two Cubits high: And as for length and breadth, one Cubit in each. It had a Crown of Gold round about, four Horns, two Rings, and two Staves. There be some hold, that Solomon cased the an∣cient one of Moses with Cedar, and so made a larger over it. A pretty fan∣cy quickly vented: Whereas we shall find expresly, that Solomon made one compleat. 1 Chron. 18.28. 1 King. 8.4, 6. 2 Chron. 5.5, 7.For, first, we read, that David prepared refined Gold, by weight, on pur∣pose for the Altar of Incense. Besides, when the Scripture says, that the Priests brought up the Ark, and all the Holy Vessels of the Tabernacle; It mentions onely the carrying of the Ark into the Temple, though Negative Authority is not absolutely Cogent; yet when as Solomon is written to have made another, and this is not mentioned to have been brought into the Temple, but rather laid up in some of the Chambers, I think we may safely shut Moses his Altar out of this pregnant Belly of Solomons. That So∣lomon made one, is expresly mentioned in two distinct places; and in a 3d place,1 King. 7.48. 2 Chron. 4.19. 1 King. 6.20, 22. that the inward material was of Cedar, and over-laid with Gold. How large it was, we read not, if we may double the quantity of Moses his Altar, it may be we may not transcend the limits of Truth: but it is best of all to be silent with Scripture.
depiction of the table of shewbread The Tables of Shew-Bread. IN the next place succeed the Golden Tables of Shew-Bread: as to which,1 Chron. 48.16. 1 King. 7.48. 2 Chro. 4.8. we find Gold prepared for them by King David; as also Silver; for the Tables of Silver, whose use of situation we ye read not. In the Kings we read but of one Table: But, in the Chronicles, we find expresly ten in number; together with their Situation, five on the right, and five on the left side of the Sanctuary. The Description of Moses his one Table may be seen at large in the Book of Exod. But the Dimensions of Solomon's we have not; though possibly double to his,Exod. 25.23-29. accordingly as the place wherein they were set was double to his in capacity. Some think that Moses his Golden Ta∣ble
was one, and the nine rest were according to that cize, wherein we shall be utterly silent.2 Chron. 4.19. Dr. Light∣foot, c. 14. §. 5. Lev. 24.7. Exod. 25.29. The use (we read) was to set the Shew-Bread upon them. On each Table, there were set twelve Cakes, six in a Row, one upon ano∣ther. They were square, and not round, as usually figured, with a Golden Dish of Frankincense, on the highest Cake, with Spoons, Covers, and Bowls of Gold. The Form of this Table, exhibited in the Draught, is according to Arias Montanus, the difference therein being onely, as to the length of the Cakes, which lay overthwart, exceeding the breadth of the Table, as some conceive. We have added a little Coronet onely to the Brim of the Table; as we read, Exod. 25.25. depiction of one of the ten golden candlesticks The Golden-Candlesticks, ten in number, the same with this in view.
The last things to be mentioned, are the Candlesticks.1 King. 7.49. Exod. 25.31. 1 Chron. 28.15. 2 Chron. 4.8. 1 Chron. 8.15. Their matter was of pure Gold prepared by King David. Their fashion, probably, like that of Moses. Their number was expresly ten. Their situation was five on the right side, and five on the left side of the House, that is, of the Sanctuary, even as in Moses Tabernacle; the Lamps are said to shine without the Vail of the Testimony, Lev. 24.3. In their height, and the extension of their Branches, Scripture is silent; Besides these, there is mention made of Silver Candlesticks designed by David, but how large, and where placed, or used, the sacred Leaves do not inform us. The Figure of the Candlestick here presented, is according to Learned Montanus his Conjecture upon the Mosaical Description. We have varied in the Foot onely, taking our pattern from the Figure of that Candlestick, which the Roman Emperour brought from Jerusalem in triumph; the fashion whereof, in some good measure, pourtrayed on Stone, is, as I remember, yet remaining, or very lately, at Rome; and drawn forth to the life by Villalpundus, in that noble Book of his, concerning Ezechiel's Temple. Besides all this, for the services of the Golden Altar, the Tables and the Candlesticks, there were many excellent Vessels of pure Gold, made by So∣lomon, which were appointed by his Father: as an 100 Basons of Gold, Bowls, Cesers, Cups, Flowers, Lamps for the Candlesticks, Snuffers, Spoons, Tongs, and all of pure Gold, besides some Basons of Silver; as may appear to them that will examine these ensuing places, 1 King. 7.49, 50. 1 Chron. 28.13.17. and 2 Chron. 4.8, 20, 21, 22.
depiction of the two pillars on the porch of the Temple The two Pillars standing in the Porch of the Temple. 1 King. 7.15. Jer. 52.21. 1 King. 7.19NExt, in view, come the two famous Pillars which stood in the Porch of the Temple; and were, for Matter, Brass; for Form, Cylinders; for Height, 18 Cubits a piece; for Compass, twelve Cubits; for Diameter, about four Cubits, which is conceived to be the meaning of that expression, That they were four Cubits in the Porch, that is, the Chapiters were four Cubits
Diameter, and so the Brass Cylinder under them, taking up so much ground-room in the Porch. But some there be, who would have the meaning to be this, that the Lilly-Work, which hung over the Pillars, was four Cubits deep round about the Chapiters. Indeed, the Chapiters seem to be of an Oval Form, for, their Diameter, in their middle, was four Cubits, and their Height five, if we compare the 1 King. 7.1.6. with the 19. ver. For having declared the measures of the Pillars, ver. 15. He proceeds to describe the Measures & Ornaments of the Chapiters, & tels us v. 16. that the height of each was five Cubits; and then mentioning some of their Ornaments, goes on to tell us, that the top of the Pillars (where they were placed) was of Lilly-Work, and that the Chapiters thus situated on the top of the Pil∣lars, which had a compass of Lilly-Work at their upper edge, were four Cubits, that is, in their middle Dimetient Line, and so were about twelve Cubits round, like unto the Pillar beneath. So that we may read and point the 19th verse thus, [And the Chapiters which were on the head of the Pillars of Lilly-work, were in the Porch four Cubits] that is, did comprehend in the Line measuring their Belly, as much as would take up four Cubits on the Floor of the Porch. So that  Opus Lilli, is by apposition to be construed with  Caput Columnarum; and the other words. [Four Cubits in the Porch] are to delineate the quantity of these Chapiters that stood on the Lilly-wrought head of the Pillars. The Ac∣counts for this Construction may be two-fold. First, because this Verse aimes not, at the mention of the Lilly-work on the Pillars: for if it did, then were it superfluous to mention it again, as a particular work by it self, v. 22. Wherefore it seems, that this verse aims ra∣ther at the Description of the Chapiters set upon that Lilly-work, which are the principal things, and so more nicely described, the Lilly work be∣ing but an Ornament. But, Secondly, if the hole of the Chapiter resting on the Pillar with this Lilly-work sustaining it, were as large as the Pillar it self, as is affirmed by some, to let in the top of the Pillar; and that this Lilly-work on the top of the Pillar, in a circling Border, stood out four Cubits in the Porch, at the bot∣tome of the Chapiter, fastned to the top of the Pillar, then will there arise twelve Cubits Diameter, that is, four of the Pillar, and four on each side of this Lilly-work, and so the pillars will be shut out of the Porch, which was but ten Cubits broad, 1 King. 6.3. On the top of the Pillars then were two Chapiters, of five Cubits higher then the Pillars with Nets of Checker-work; and each Pillar had seven Wreaths of Chain-work, with two Rowes of Pomegranates; in each Row,2 Chr. 4.12. 1 King. 7.16. 1 Kin. 7.41. Jer. 52.23. 2 Chr. 4.13. 2 Chr. 3.16. 1 Kin. 7.42. 2 Chr. 3.15. one hundred; but ninety six onely could be seen by those that stood upon the Pavement of the Porch. So that there were on both Chapiters four hundred goodly Pomegranates in all, which were put upon Chains in two Rows. Both Pillars, joyned together in their measure, were but thirty five Cubits high, that is, twice eighteen, bating one Cubit, because each Chapiter did sink half a Cubit within the Socket of the Cylinder for their fastning. So that each Pillar, with its Chapiter, was twenty two Cubits, and ½ high. The Pillars seventeen, and ½, and the Chapiter five: Whereas 'tis said, each Chapiter was but three Cubits high,2 Kin. 25.17. Dr. Light∣foot. pag. 61. &c. it's to be understood of the stately Em∣broidery, and Ornaments of Net-Work, Chains, and Pomegranates, which were at the beginning of the third Cubit. Thus being fitted and prepared, they were placed within the Porch; the Pillar on the right side that is, the South was called Jachin, being the future Hiphil from  stabilire, He shall establish: noting the fixedness of this pillar upon its Foundation,1 King. 6.21.
and that on the left hand, or on the North side, was called Boaz, in Hebr.—.1 King. 7.21. 2 King. 25.13. Rev. 3.12. being compounded of  in it, and  strong, or potent, from  to strengthen, or fortifie: Denoting the strength and firmitude of that stately piece of Brass. These famous Pillars, though never so strong, were broken in pieces, and conveyed to the City of Babylon; but Saints, that are Spiritual Pillars in the House of God, shall go no more out of that Hea∣venly Temple. depiction of the altar of brass The Altar of Brass.
Of the Vessels in the Priest's Court. THe most useful of all the Spectacles in this Court, and which fell under  daily imployment, was, the famous Altar of Brass,2 Chro. 4.1. 2 Chro. 8.12. Joel 2.17. 1 Chr. 28.17. 2. Chr. 4.11. 1 King. 7.45. Exod. 20.25. Deut. 27.5. Exod. 20.26. which was twenty Cubits long, twenty broad, and ten in height. Its Situation was be∣fore the Porch, that is, full East of it, whereon the Sacrifices were offered to God. The place of it is confirmed by that passage of the Priest's weep∣ing between the Porch and the Altar. As to the Sacrifices, we read of ma∣ny Instruments that were made for them; as Flesh-hooks of Gold: also Pots, Shovels, and Basons of bright Brass. Two things I would add; First, that probably, this Altar was made within of Stone, but unhewen, ac∣cording to God's command, and placed over with Brass. Secondly, That whereas God had commanded the Priest should not ascend by steps to his Altar, and seeing this of ten Cubits was so high, as far exceeded the stature of the callest High-Priest: some think it was but three Cubits high, as the Altar of Moses was (where, by the way take notice, the ordinary statute of man being but six foot, as Vitruvius, and others, have of old written, that is, about two yards of our measure; and this Altar being but a yard and half, we learn something of the quantity of a Cubit; whereof otherwhere) Now that it is said to be ten Cubits high, it is to be understood, say some, in respect to the Court of the people, which was seven Cubits lower then this of the Priests. But I rather incline to think, there was, as under the second Temple, an easie ascent by a declivity on the South side, though not by steps. The Brazen Scaffold. Next succeeds the Brazen Scaffold, whereof we have given no Icon, or Pictural Figure, because it was not of sacred use in it self,2 Chr. 6.13. Exod. 27.1. & 38.1. but onely ser∣ved the King in his Temple-approaches unto God, As to its Description then it was five Cubits long, five broad, and three high, being exactly, ac∣cording to the proportion of Moses his Brazen Altar, I cannot say, 'twas the same, because the Text speaks expresly, that Solomon made it for to stand upon, and kneel in prayer at the solemn Dedication of the Temple. Neither will I be peremptory, that it stood in this Court of the Priests: though these passages of Scripture seem to favour it. First, the Author of the Book of Chronicles acquaints us, that it stood in the middest of the Court, and that Solomon being upon it,2 Chr. 6.13. v. 12. is said to stand before the Altar of the Lord: which Altar, together with the Court and Temple, he was now about to hallow with his prayers and sacrifices. So that, as the Altar of Incense is said to be before the Oracle: and the Altar of Brass before the Porch, that is, East of them, and nigh to them: so this, before the Altar, stood East of it, but nigh unto it. Secondly, The Scripture sayes, that after prayer (which was made upon this Scaffold) He arose from before the Altar, which implyes, his nearness to it, according to the usual Hebraism of that phrase.1 King. 8.54. Now whereas it may be here objected, that the King being no Priest, might not enter into that Court.
I answer, though ordinarily he might not, as some conceive; yet upon extraordinary service, it's probable Solomon might and did. Nay, being at the Dedication, to offer Sacrifices, (that is, by mediation of the Priests service) why might not he draw nigh to his Sacrifices, as well as any private man in his particular time of offering up any Sacrifice to God.2 Chro. 7.7. Dr. Light-foot, second Temple, pag. 283. However, in the placing of this Utensil, I freely submit to the censure of the Learned, in Jew∣ish Antiquities: as also whether Adrichomius, in his Holy Land, placing it in this Court. pag. 161. annexing a citation of Hierom to that purpose, is to be trusted in this particular; an Author, I confess, ordinarily too magisteriall in his assertions. To conclude, It is supposed, that the King's Pillar, mentioned in the Sa∣cred Story, was annexed to this Scaffold, whereon the King did sit or stand, or kneel as occasion was, before the Altar. Of which you may read in the life of Joash, and Josiah, Kings of Judah, 2 King. 23.3. In the life of Joash, it is particularly written, that the King stood at his Pillar, in the enring in, 2 Chron. 23.13. that is, near the entring into the Priests Court. For if we carefully observe the 10th verse we read, that the people, with their Wea∣pons, were placed along by the Temple and the Altar, round about the King: and where should this be, but in the Priests Court, where the Cove∣red Temple, and the Altar stood. Besides, to remove one Objection these people, verse 10. are called the Levites, with their Weapons compassing the King, verse 7. Besides, after this, when Athaliah was come into the House of the Lord, that is, the first Court, verse 12. She looked, and saw the King standing at His Pillar near the Entry of the second Court, v. 13. and cryed, I reason, Treason. Then Jehojadah brought the Captains of the Host, v. 14. that were about the King in the Inner-Court, out into the other Court, and pursued Athaliah, and slew her. But I freely resign up this Conjecture, to the Learned and diligent Inquirer.
depiction of the brazen basin The Brazen-Sea
THe third Utensil to be mentioned, is the brazen Sea, sometimes called the molten Sea of Brasse, a most rare and admirable piece: cast in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarthan, in the plains of Jordan. For the matter;1 King. 7.46. it was of pure bright Brasse: For form, Villalpandus follow∣ing Josephus apprehends it to have been hemispericall:In 1 King. c. 7. p. 158 e∣dit. Meur. 1 King. 7.23. so doth Procopius Gazeus in his notes upon the Kings, . To this agrees Torniellus in his annals, &c. which conjecture they conceive to be favoured and countenanced by that expression of Scripture which tells us that it was round all about. But some more properly expound that ex∣pression of the brim onely, whereas beneath it might be foursquare: be∣cause we read of twelve Oxen on which it rested: Every 3 Oxen faceing each of the four winds, and having their hinder parts inward, under each square of the bottom of this great Vessell, and thence do conjecture, that for three Cubits high it was foursquare, and for the 2 highest Cubits it was round. Petrus Commestor in his Hist. Scholastica, hath yet another con∣jecture about the externall form of this Vessel in Reg. l. 3. c. 18. viz. That in its descent from the brim, it was continually narrower by degrees to the very bottom: So that in its fundus a line of ten Cubits would compass it about. Whence he learnt it, or how he can prove it, he doth not men∣tion. If either of these opinions should prove true, then Villalpandus his infe∣rence, of the measure of the Hebrew Cubit, deduced from the comparison of the cubitall dimensions of this Vessel with, and proportion to the num∣ber of Hebrew Baths contained within, it will be greatly weakned. We will not yet at present bid an utter farewell to Villalpandus his Cu∣bit, raised from his apprehension of the figure and shape of this Vessell as sphaericall: Although it doth not consist with the Quantity of a Cubit or a Bath, deduced from other foundations: On which, as a more certain ground, we may build the Extent of the cubitall measure, and the capacity of this Vessell, according to the method proposed by Agricola, in his Tract De restituendis Ponderibus & Mensuris, and by learned Mr. Greaves, at the end of his Roman Foot, which is this, that from the exter∣nall measure of some cubed Vessell of the Hebrews, we may find the quan∣tity of the Cubit, and consequently of the Bath, and thereby at length prove that this Vessell was not  but rather , or like a cone cut off in the midst. But this I leave to another disquisition. Besides, as to Villalpandus, it seems that according to his own hypothe∣sis of a hemisphaericall figure, he commits a grosse paralogism in multiply∣ing half the circumference,30 Semicubits. 10 Semicubits. 300 The Area of Semicubits. 15 Cubits. 5 Cubits. 75 Area. thirty, by half the Diameter, ten, to find the Area: And then the Area, so found, he multiplies by the third part of the Diameter, all which he performs by semi-cubits, which I shall manifest onely as to the Area at present. For if multiplication be made by semi-cubits, then the Area will prove to be 300 semi-cubits, and consequently 150 Cubits, whereas if you work it by entire Cubits, there issues but 75 Cubits of the Area of the great circle, whose circumference is 30, and Di∣ameter ten,1 Kin. 7.23. as this Brazen Sea is described to be, which is only laid down in round numbers, & not according to exact geometrical proportion. But to leave this at present.1 Kin. 7.26. The capacity of this Vessel in one place is set out at two thousand Baths,2 Chron. 4.5. in another at three thousand. Which is thus sol∣ved by some learned men, that the ordinary filling was onely with two thousand Baths, but if you would fill it up to the very brim, it would then contain three thousand, which solution the Hebrew phrase in the Chroni∣cles seems to import clearly , Fortifi∣cans,
Batos ter mille continebat; If you strengthen or fill up its measure it contained 3 thousand Baths. Indeed Villalpandus labours to untye the difficulty by a double Bath, the one being in proportion sesquialtera to the other. Some think to untiddle it by dry and liquid measures: which might easily be refuted in a proper place: the whole discourse we shall at present referr unto the Treatise of the Hebrew Measures. The Quantities of this brazen Vessell in Scripture are as followes,1 Kin. 7.23. 1 Kin. 7.26. its Diameter ten Cubits its Semidiameter five Cubits, its Circumference thirty, its Crassitude a hand-breadth. Now it's known that the circumference of a Circle, is more then triple to the Diameter by such a proportion, as is greater then 10/1 and lesse then 7/1 of the same. As you may read in Archimedes his acute Tract called, , in these words, . Together with Rivaltus his Comment set forth at Paris 1615 in folio, pag. 139. But the neerest rationall proportion between them is as 7 to 22 and accordingly, if 10 be the Diameter (as here in this brazen sea) then the Circumference will prove to be thirty one Cubits and 3/7, which will again exceedingly disturb the exactnes of Villalpandus his Cu∣bit: who though he do grant the Scripture not to speak geometrically in this point: yet, to raise the fabrick of his Cubit he proceeds by these round and vulgar numbers to the stating of his Cubit for Temple Measures: which being built on such an unsound Basis can give little hope of satisfaction to any curious enquirer. But to proceed.1 Kin. 7.26. The Brim was wrought like the Brim of a cup with flowers of Lillies. Under the Brim of this Vessell there were brazen knops about ten in a Cubit compassing the Sea round about,1 Kin. 7.24. 2 Chro. 4.3. 2 Chro. 4.4. in the simili∣tude of Oxen, these were cast together with the Vessell, for its beauty and ornament. It stood upon 12 brazen Oxen, three whereof, with their faces together toward the East, beheld the glorious Sun, when he gilded the Temple with his orient beams: the rest, mean while, with their lowd bellowings, flaming out of their brazen lungs, made an ecchoing thunder to leap about the Pavements, Walls, and marble Porches, awakening the carefull Priests and hastning them to the morning services. As to the situation of this famous Sea: It was set, sayes our English translation, on the right side of the House Eastward, over against the South,1 Kin. 7.39. 2 Chr. 4.10. or as it is described in the Chronicles, On the right side of the East end o∣ver against the South, where we rendring the Hebrew  over against, have given occasion to some to place it on the North side of the Priests Court, towards the North-East corner, whereas 'tis cleare out of many Au∣thors that the Hebrews tooke the right hand for the South, and therefore it is that the same Hebrew word  signifies the right hand and the South, Psal. 89.12. The North and South thou hast created them, 'tis in the He∣brew The North and the right hand, i. e. The South. So 1 Sam. 23.19. and 2 Sam. 24.5. Besides, there is a clear place that may decide this point in hand, in the Prophecy of Ezechiel, where the Prophet saies,Ezek. 47.1. the Waters came down from the right side of the House, at the South side of the Altar. So in Ezekiel 16.46. Samaria (being North) is said to be on the left, and Sodom (Southerly) is said to be on the right hand of Jerusalem. Josephus also makes sure work speaking of the placeing the ten Lavers, and this Sea.Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2. p. 271. G. in Solomon's dayes: , He placed five Lavers on the left side of the Temple: But this (i. e. the left side) was toward the North wind, and as many on the right hand Southward,
looking towards the East. Ribera joyns with us in this account, saying, The South Wall is called the right side; as Bede, Chap. 8. and others have no∣ted, because he that looks towards the East, hath the South on his right hand, the North on his left. Wherefore the 70. in this place, have rendred it, . and the Vulgar Translation, ad meridiem. Those that please may read Buxtorf, Pagnine, Mercer, Schindler in Pentaglott, majori, Avenarius, and other Learned Lexicographers, in the word Jamin: who all agree, that the right side, among the Jews, is to be interpreted by the South. Seeing also that Mimmul, the word in the Text, is frequently used for co∣ram,1 Kin. 7.39. versus: I hope it will be accounted no immodesty if we, with the gene∣ral consent of the most Learned in the Hebrew Tongue, declaring the right side, both in Scripture, and Jewish Authors, to be the South: I say, if we translate that place thus, [on the right side of the house Eastward, towards the South,] and so accordingly place it in the South-East corner of the Court of the Priests.2 Chr. 4.6. The use of which Vessel is expresly declared to be for the Priests to wash in, which we may crave leave to expound by that expression of Mo∣ses concerning his Laver, that the Priests were to wash  ex illâ, out of it, that is, as the Vulgar Translation very well glosses it, Missâ aquá la∣vabant, putting or pouring out water, they washed, Exod. 30.19. and there∣fore we have exhibited the Picture of it with a Syphon and Cock, to let out water into any Vessel at liberty, to wash the hands and feet of the Priests, according to Torniellus, and others. That the Priests did wash their Bo∣dies within this vast Vessel, seems very improbable. First, from the great height of it above the Pavement, it being five Cu∣bits higher, besides the thickness of the Brass, above the backs of the Oxen. 2. From its Sphaeroidical Figure, according to the common apprehen∣sion, there being no place but the Center, for a Priest to stand in; and a hundred to one but his heels tript up, as he went in to such a decliving Vessel. Thirdly, from the depth of the Water, which according to any of the imagined Figures of either exactly Sphaerical, or Sphaeroidical, or conical, or halt square towards the bottome, and half of it round upward toward the brim: It will fall out, according to the usuall quantity of a Bath, that such a Vessel, that hath two thousand, (much more, if three thousand Baths) and hath also but such a Diameter, as ten Cubits at the brim, will serve to swim, rather then to stand in, and wash the body: so that unless the Priests had skill in that Art, for ought I see, they must be drowned, or dive to the bottome, to seek some Rabbinical Treasure. But herein, as in all other things, I shall freely submit to the Judgment of sober and learned persons; resting rather, at present, on this Conception, that the Priests did wash their bodies at, or in some moderate Vessels, which received the Water from Spouts, or Cocks, running at pleasure, and derived from this stately Sea of Brass. Now whereas the Figure expresses a short Columne of Brass, with a broad Foot resting upon the Oxen, we have done it in connivence to Torniellus, rather then my apprehension, conceiving rather, that the Fun∣dus, or bottom of the Vessel, rested immediatly upon the Oxen.
Of the ten Lavers, with their Appurtenan∣ces, standing in the Priests Court. IN the fourth place, we are to speak of the ten Lavers, which we find stan∣ding in this Court likewise. The matter whereof was Brass: the capa∣city of each was fourty Baths. Every one was four Cubits in its measure, that is, as some interpret it, four Cubits square, according to the Bases, whereon they stood. Each Base being four Cubits long, as many broad, and three in height. They stood upon four Brazen Wheels: one Wheel be∣ing fixed on each square side of the Basis. The out-side of these Bases were carved with the Similitudes of Oxen, Cherubims, Lions, and Palm-Trees. Their more ample Description (running for the most part parallel, with the Learned Pen of Dr. Lightfoot,Pap. 229, &c. in his Paraphrase upon the fore-cited place) I shall here subjoyn in these following Sections; for seeing the Ho∣ly Spirit is pleased to enlarge very amply in their Descriptions, I hope all Religious and Devout Readers will not think a miss of the expence of a little time for the arriving in some good measure, at the meaning of that Blessed Spirit, in the intricate Description (as to our Translation) of that rare material of this sacred Temple, in this method following, accordingly as the ensuing Pages will more evidently demonstrate.
The Figure of one of the Lavers. depiction of a Temple laver 1. The Water in the Laver. 2. Its Lilly-like Lip. 3. The Upper-Border. 4. The Upper-Base. 5. The lower Border. 6. The Railes. 7. The sloping Shelves. 8. The underpropping Pillars. 9. The Wheels. 10. The Ground-plate.
A Description of the Figure and Compo∣sition of the ten Bases, with their Lavers. HEre let it be premised, that seeing every one of the ten Bases, and their Lavers, were of the same External Form, and inter∣nal matter, we may view the Faces of all of them in the Glass of one and the same particular Description exhibited in these following Sections, or Paragraphs; wherein, for the main, we shall follow Learned Dr. Lightfoot, as near as may be in the same foot-steps▪Second Tem∣ple, p, 229. craving leave to vary somewhat from him in our method and form of words; and in some other, though not a very sensible or grand difference. 1. A Flat Piece of Brass. ¶ 1. In the first place then, there were stately pieces of Brass provided for this use, taking up, in their Dimensions, four Cubits in breadth,1 King. 7.27. and the same in length, being styled in the Hebrew Text  Machina, the Machinations of Brass, if we may have leave so to term them, in respect to the rare vastness of their Bodies. The thickness of them is not so sufficient∣ly mentioned in the Text, as to take away the Foundation of Conjectures. Wherefore some have apprehended the height mentioned in the same verse, to hint out and imply the Crassitude inquired after. But the great∣ness of such a weight, and the conceived uselessness of such a thickness, as three Cubits recited in that Text, inclineth others to give in a different construction of these words, as if the height there mentioned should not re∣spect the main body it self of the Base, but relate rather to the distance of the Earth beneath, from the summity or ege of its upper Surface. From which Conjecture as being most probable, and, in some measure, deduci∣ble out of the Altitude of the Wheels, to be treated of in their place and order: The thickness of these huge flat pieces of Brass will be evinced to consist but of one Cubit and half, which will prove vast and considerable enough to our purpose. 2. The Borders. ¶ 2. In the next place, upon consultation with the fore-mentioned Text, we find in our Translation mention made of certain Borders,Ver. 28. termed in the Original  and turned by Montanus, Clausurae, or Shuts of Brass, from  to include, or inclose. The 70. use the words  & , to express the force of the Hebrew much to the same pur∣pose. But Junius fancies an elegant Vitruvian terme, whereby to express the mind of the Holy Spirit, according to his Conception, and calls them Zophori , by reason of the Sculptures of the Similitudes of
Lions, Oxen &c. in a most lively manner upon the out-side of these Brazen Borders. To proceed to their Description: There were provided certain pieces of Brass of an oblong square the length of each of their 4 sides, exten∣ded almost to 4. Cubits, being joyned near to the outmost edge of the Hori∣zontal Plain of the great Base, according (well near) with the length of that great Inferior Base:Ver. 28. their breadth was but of half a Cubit, or thereabouts, standing upright, or perpendicular to the flat Base, making a right Angle at the bottom with the Base, in a perfect square Figure on all the four sides round about.Ver. 29. & 36. This Brazen Border, for its more curious Ornament and Beauty, was engraven with Lions, Oxen, Cherubims, and Palm-Trees, which are not fully expressed in the Figure fore-going, by reason of its small quan∣tity. 3. The Ledges. Ver. 28.¶ 3. On both sides of this upright Brazen Border, insisting perpendi∣cularly upon the plane of the flat Base beneath, both the in-side and out∣side of the Border thus curiously wrought with Image-Work, there stood in orderly Rows, little upright Brazen Columnes, or Bars; which in our Translation are termed [Ledges] but in the Hebrew Text they are styled.  or Scaling Degrees, much like the Rounds of a Ladder: The same word almost, being used by Moses in Exodus 26. ver. 17. and turned by Pagnine [the degrees of a Ladder] where the Holy Penman is sedulously describing the Tenons of the Boards of the Tabernacle, as set in order one against another, according to the words of our last Translation in that place. The 70. in this present Text (which we have in hand) renders the Hebrew word by, , the Out-settings, or Prominencies of Brass: By some they are called Gradus & Scalae; by Junius, Tori Denticulati, that is, Bars standing upright like Teeth. We may perhaps fitly express their Fashion to ordinary Conceptions, by the round-turned Rails of a Balcony: which, if we imagine to be double-railed with a thin upright Board let down betwixt them, may possibly give in a true apprehension of the form of these Ledges with their Borders, as they are called in our Translation. The height of which Ledges, or, more properly, Bars of Brass, standing up∣right in two Rows, and receiving betwixt the inner and outward Row, a Border, or four-square upright piece of Brass wrought with Images, and being much of the same height with the Bars, we read to have been about half a Cubit erected above the even Surface of the vast Basis beneath. 4. The Ʋpper-Base. Ver. 35.¶ 4. Upon the Top of these Ledges, or Bars, standing thus upright, and inclosing the Brazen Border, both within and without, there was another flat piece of Brass provided; and being laid Horizontally, rested upon these Ledges and Borders. It is called in Hebrew , By the 70.  onely; by Junius, Fulcrum Superne, and, by our Translators, [the Base above] and was lesser by much in all its Dimensions, than the inferiour grand Base before-mentioned, over which it lay fixed upon the Brazen Pil∣lars, parallel to it at the distance of half a Cubit.
5 The Additions. ¶ 5. At the bottome of the little Brazen Barres,Ver. 29. and the Borders be∣twixt them, before described, beneath the Lions and Oxen, insculped upon those Borders, that is, even just where the Borders had their Commissurae, or Connexions with the great Base, on which they stood erect: There were cer∣tain Additions of thin work fixed, as our Translators render the original word : which Montanus is pleased to turn by [Copulationes] seeing it is derived from the Radix  adhaerere, to cleave, or to be joyned to any other Workmanship, as an Appendix. The 70. in their Version, are taken with these words, , the Works of Descension, or the Descending Workmanship. Junius turns it by Adjectiones, or Additions, viz. of Beaten-Work, that is, declining, sloping, or shelving Plates of Brass, like those Pend-houses, which we use to fasten with Brackets, or otherwise, over Doors and Windows, or Drapers shops, to shoot off Rain and stormy Wea∣ther from the former, or to falsifie Lights, for the better vending of their spurious Commodities. These Plates of Brass, in this manner, fastned to the upper edge of the great Base (covering the superiour part of the Wheels, which stood under their inward declivity) were contrived into this decli∣ning posture, for that end to which they were designed, that is, to cast off the filth, when the Priests washed the several parts of the Sacrifices upon them with Water, taken either in Vessels for that purpose, or derived through Cocks and Spouts, out of the Laver it self, upon these thin Addi∣tions, Appendixes, or Pend-houses of Brass, if we may have leave so to name them: which, for their Ornament, and Beautification, were engraven like∣wise with the same Figures, wherewith the Borders, above-mentioned, were adorned. 6 The Wheels. ¶ 6. Under these shelving Plates of Brass, thus described,Ver. 30. stood the four Brazen Wheels of the great Base: For the thin Additions did not make their own inward Angle over-acute, least the outward decliving Plane should be too stoping to keep the parts of the Sacrifice upon them, and so create great molestation to the Priests in their continual trouble, to preserve them from falling down to the ground; but yet sufficiently steep to cast off the Water from them, and also so conveniently situated, that the Tops of the Wheels might admit of motion upon occasion, with∣out grating upon the in-side of these thin Additions. Now these Wheels did not stand two on a side, as those of our Chariots and Coaches do: But every of the four sides of the Base had one Wheel annexed to it. Their Axle-Trees are described to have been joyned to the inferiour part of the body of the Base, and that the height of each Wheel was a Cubit and half, that is, the Axis, or middle of the Wheel, was of such a height: So that the whole Wheel, in the highest part of its Ring, or Circumference, did equal the Top of the great solid Base, or nearly thereabouts so high, onely consideration being had to the moderate declining of the side-additions, even now mentioned: which height of theirs, must needs prove true, if the lower edge of the great Base, be granted to have been a Cubit and half above the ground, as was said above. For then the fastning of the Axle-Tree, upon which the Wheel turns, being conceived to be at the bottome, and so to run under the Base, will plead an inference, that the Diameter of the Wheels Periphery, will prove to be about 3 Cubits in extent, though
not altogether so much, because the Center of the Axis, was somewhat in∣feriour to the Bottome of the Base, by reason of the supposition of its run∣ning under the Base in a good massie Body of a Cylindrical Form, for the sustentation of the great weight of the Base and Laver. So that hence will arise this Corollary, that the superiour part or Semi-circle of the Wheel, under the thin Additions, was not all out a Cubit and half high, but did ad∣mit some Diminution of its stature, for the sake of their Declivity, as above-said. These Wheels being each of them applyed to each of the four sides of the Base, were each of them, as to their exteriour Form or Fa∣shion, much like the Wheel of a Chariot; onely we must conceive them to be of more then ordinary thickness, in respect to their burden, though possibly very curiously wrought; as Torniellus, Villalpandus, and others, have fancied them, their Axle-Trees, Naves, Felloes, and Spokes, being all molten.Ver. 33. 7 The Plates. Ver. 30.¶ 7. These Wheels thus described, stood not upon the plain ground, or Pavement, of the Priests Court: But every Base (sayes the Text) had four Brazen Wheels, and Plates of Brass, that is, flat pieces of Brass, of a compe∣tent Crassitude, that lay in a four-square Form upon the Ground lowest of all, and supported the Wheels, and the Under-Setters, or great massie Pil∣lars that stood upright, under the four corners of the main Base; together with all its Ornaments, and the famous Laver it self, which contained the Holy Water for the service of the Temple. 8 The Pillars. Ver. 30.¶ 8. Upon this Foundation of Brass, if I may so tearm it, there were four Brazen Pillars fixed, of a convenient substantial magnitude, underneath every Base, at its four corners, for assistances to the Wheels, in the great Work of support for the Base, and its super-imposed Laver. These Pillars, by our Reverend Translators, are called [Under-Setters] in stead of the He∣brew word  rendred by the 70. ; by Junius Scapulae, Humeri, Shoulders, or shouldering Pillars of Brass, standing upright on the in-side of each of the thin depending Shelves of Brass. They were molten together with the Base in one mould, in the Clay ground of Zartan, and were con∣joyned to it, at the four several Corners, insisting or standing upon the same Plate of Brass, that lay flat upon the Ground, under the four Wheels be∣fore-mentioned. The position of these four Pillars, being under the seve∣ral Corners of the great and main Base; their use and end was for the sup∣port of that ponderous Utensil. For I cannot yet perceive any evincing Reason to conclude, that they did exceed the Top of the Base, and so did under-prop the Lip of the Laver it self, to keep it firm and steady: Because, for that end, the Laver bad an upper Base of its own, fixed upon the Rows of Brazen Pillars, wherein it was set, and was in a good measure less then the breadth of the great Base beneath; and was, undoubtedly, for that very end, even for the sides of the Cauldron, to sit down in, as in a fixed Seat, while the Fundus or Bottome of the Cauldron reached down to the Top or Surface of the great Base, whereupon its great weight lay. For the Cen∣ter of the Water's Gravity was in the middle of the Cycloidical Bottom of that Vessel, the lower sides of it being compassed with the Rails, and carved Borders of Brass, that yielded a most lovely shew to all Spectators. Besides, these Brazen Shoulders, or Pillars, could not be joyned both to the massie Base beneath, as being moulten together with it in one piece, according to
the insinuation of the Text;Ver. 34. and yet ascend also in an upright perpendicu∣lar posture, on the out-side of the shelving Plates, that were made for the washing and cleansing of the Sacrifices, seeing that these thin Additions, or sloping Plates, joyned together in a long shelving Angle at each corner of the Base. So then, there seems to be no need of such Pillars, to run so high, because of an upper Base, sufficient enough for that purpose, even to keep the Vessel from tottering. Moreover, inasmuch as we may observe the com∣mon Angles of the depending Shelves, to obstruct the erect Stature of the Pillars, unless we should fancy them piercing through the several cor∣ners of the Shelves, a thing not mentioned or heeded by themselves, or others, seeing the Additions are expressed to be round about. Besides,Ver. 36. there is great need of help underneath, seeing the Wheels gave no great supply of strength for the support of the Base, because their annexion to the four sides of the Base, would produce the meeting of their Axle-Trees underneath the Base, in one common place in the middle; unless we should conceive round pieces of Brass to have been moulten together with the Base, and to have stood out like round knops at the bottom, or lowermost edge of the sides of the Base, to be in stead of Axle-Trees, which will yield, s strength then the former, for sustaining of the Base and Laver above. Wherefore I should rather imagine these shouldering Pillars, to have stood under the main Base, and to have been fixed in that posture, as an Auxiliary to the Wheels, in the great work of supporting the imposed Utensils. Moreover, we suppose, that they were placed on the in side of the shelving Plates, or Benches, that so their standing under the Laver, might be understood and interpreted concerning their support of that Vessel, by mediation, or inter∣position of the grand Base. 9 The Chapiter. ¶ 9 Thus having finished all the inferiour parts of this pompous Utensil,Ver. 31. let us proceed to finish the upper part: as to which we may remember in the fourth Section of this present discourse, that there was mention made of an upper Base (that rested upon the Rows of brazen Pillars) which we find on the inside of it to have been round, as if a large circular piece of Brasse had been cut out of its middle part: which inward round, or circu∣lar Verge, is called in the Hebrew  by the Seventy ; by Montanus, Coronamentum; by Junius, Ambitus Coronarius; by us The Cha∣piter. 10 The Ʋpper-Border. ¶ 10 Upon this Chapiter, so called coronall or circular limb or round inside, there was fixed another border of Brasse, standing upright in a four∣square form or figure, the round compasse of the inner Coronet of the up∣per Base lying upon the foursqare upright border of Brasse, even at its foot or bottome, just as a circle may be imagined to be inscribed within a square. This square border which we are now mentioning was of an erect situation, of the full height of a Cubit above the upper Base fore spoken of in the fourth Section. But the dimetient line, which passed crosse-wise through the inward circular Ambitus or compass of the upper Base, & which reached from one side to the other of the highest square brazen border, was of the length of a Cubit and half. So that the mouth of the Laver, most probably round, had its circular Lips turning down, (like the Lilly-work of the great Brazen Sea, mentioned in former lines) and resting upon the four corners of this upper four-square Border, which was most artifici∣ally and cunningly engraven, and probably with the same Figures of Lions, Oxen, Cherubims, and Palm-Trees, wherewith the inferiour Borderings were adorned, that stood upright, upon the great Base, between its little
Brazen Columns before recited. So that in the frame of this brave Work, there were two Bases, and two Borders, each higher and less then the infe∣riour. At the Top of the higher most of these two Borders, was the mouth, or very near the mouth of the Laver, which in its body, or inward capacity, from the Top of this supream Border, descended a Cubit and half; and at its Fundus, or Bottom, probably, rested upon the great Base it self. But how high it ascended above the Border, is not so easie, in an exact manner, to de∣termine: which we shall leave to another opportunity, and descend to the 11th and last Section of this Discourse. 11 The Laver it self. Ver. 38.¶ 11. In the last place, the Laver, or Cauldron it self, now craves to be fixed and setled within this upper Border of Brass, last described, while the Fundus, or Bottom of the Vessel, rested upon the great massy Base underneath, within the inferior Border, that we have so often mentioned, to have been raised in with Columnets of Brass. Now this Vessel containing the Wa∣ter for use, ording to the degrees of its ascending height, did gradually amplifie and expatiate its internal capacity; as may probably be conjectu∣red, by comparing the Diameter of the Upper Base, at half a Cubits height, (which was recited before to have been a Cubit and half over) with the measure of its Top or Mouth, which our English Translation seems to inti∣mate to have been of four Cubits Dimension. The words of the Text, in the Hebrew, run thus , which some translate in this manner, Quatuor in cubito concha una, each Laver was four in a Cu∣bit. Junius thus, Quaternûm cubitorum er at labrum unum quod{que}; every Laver was of four Cubits. Which expression doth not clearly define the Figure of each Laver at the mouth thereof, to have been circular; and so, according to somes apprehensions, to have been co-extended with a Line of four Cubits length in the circum-ambient compass at the Mouth or Lip thereof, which was repandous or turning down like the White Lilly. Nei∣ther can it be manifestly evinced from the words of the Text, or the suppor∣ting Borders about it to have been four-square at the Top; and consequent∣ly, that the meaning of the Text should be, as if each side of the square Fi∣gure at Top should contain one Cubit in length, and four together, in all the four (imagined) square sides. For there be some Geometrical Rea∣sons (which might be suggested, arising from the Description of its inward capacity or content of fourty Bathes, united together with the fore-men∣tioned measure of four Cubits (in this present Verse we are now upon) be∣ing supposed generally to have been the Dimensions of this Vessel at its summity, or highest top or brink, where the bending of its Lip began to in∣cline downward, and not to admit of any further filling, without running over, such Reasons, (I say) do much incline me to believe, that the Form of this Vessel, was rather round in the whole body of it, then any where square at all. Moreover, I am sometimes moved to think, that its roundness at the bottom did increase upward, though moderately; yet by continual propor∣tion in its Diameter, till it arose up to its uttermost brim, being in general, (as far as I have yet learned) but an Icon of the Sea of Brass in a lesser Form, which we have formerly mentioned. Though I must needs con∣fess, that I perceive by the Writings of some sober persons, and such as are inquisitive in this particular, that the usual apprehension, concerning the Fi∣gure of this Vessel, is this, that it should be round every where, but belly out in a greater largeness about the middle, and then indent again about the neck, and above that expiate into its repandous, or turn-down Aethio∣pian
Lip, something like the Figure exhibited in the present Scheme pre∣fixed to this Discourse, which doth indifferently well accord with the large∣ness of the inferiour upright Border of Brass before described, for the enter∣tainment of the capacity of its belly: the neck of the Vessel being contra∣cted by the inward Circular Verge of the Upper-Base, and the great tur∣ning Mouth supported by, and over-laid upon the Upper-Border of a Cu∣bits heigth, before described. So that hence it seems, that the large belly of the Vessel should prove somewhat less then half a Cubit in height, be∣cause it was included within the first Border, and its Columnes, so often mentioned, and (that part, which for distinctions sake we call) the Neck was a Cubit higher; and, lastly, that the reverting Lip was of such a height and breadth, (as the infused quantity of fourty Bathes, mentioned in the Scrip∣ture will permit) which will appear preciser, upon a more exact examina∣tion, then can (at present) be insisted upon. We have therefore, at this time, according to the most generally-received Opinion, pitched upon this Conchous Form (if we may presume, without distaste, so to tearm it) as most generally agreeing with the Descriptions of both Ancient and Mo∣dern Authors, leaving the more full demonstration of the truth thereof to another and more proper opportunity, if the Lord see good: Seeing this Treatise is written in our own Language, and designs not such precise and accurate determination of these particulars; which I would most gladly see performed by a Learned Pen, and should acknowledge my self greatly be∣holding for a Supersedeas in these points, hoping that this my slender Essay may so far prevail, as to invigorate the Genius of some nobly-disposed per∣son; who might with ingenuous Candor, and more elevated Abilities, hold forth to the World the exact Historical Descriptions of Scriptural Things, and Persons in a more compleat and learned Method. Till which much-long'd for time, I shall beg a courteous interpretation, of my poor unwor∣thy Travels in these Curiosities. Wherein, I humbly conceive, it would prove very impertinent, at present, to interlard this Discourse with any far∣ther tedious Disquisition about the Form or outward Figure of this Vessel now in our hands; reserving its amplification to another Season and Trea∣tise about Measures, if the Lord permit the use of this Temporal Life, and convenient Providences, to finish some Thoughts upon these Subjects: which I should very willingly resign into the hands of persons of greater Ability and Leisure, rejoycing to see my self prevented by such a Tract, that might bring forth something to the World, de novo, and might tend to the satisfaction of diligent Inquirers, and to the improvement of the Com∣mon-Wealth of Learning. Let it suffice then at present, that the inward capacity of every Laver, is distinctly expressed to have contained fourty Bathes of liquid matter, and that every one of them had a distinct Basis of its own, whereon it was fixed and placed in its proper order. The Situation of these so famous Utensils, consisting mainly of those two parts, the Base and its Laver, or that great massie piece of Brass, of a four-square Form, resting upon Wheels, and Under-Setters, and bearing those stately Ponds upon their proud Backs, were ordered, by God Himself, in His Directions to Solomon, to be on this wise. On the North side of the Priests Court, there were five of them setled in a Row, and as many more upon the South, they being ten in number. The end or designed use of these Sacred Vessels was very constant, even for Daily Service, in the Administration of Water to the Priests of that Splendid Temple, who were to wash the several parts of the Burnt-Offe∣rings, and other the enjoyned Sacrifices, upon the decliving Shelves of Brass, before described, whereupon the several Spouts of the Lavers did run at
pleasure with clear and pure Water, according to the various occasions of the Sanctuary. Having thus finished the delineation of this Piece, in some measure, which we find so amply and fully; and yet, as to our Translation, so intricately laid down in Scripture, we shall now wave any further treat∣ing upon this Point, and proceed to the other Utensils in their proper place and order. But as for these lesser Vessels, Utensils, Ornaments, standing in, or laid up within the compass of this, or the other Court, and the several Chambers of the Temple, as the Desks and Musick Books of the Singers, the King's Pillar, all the Vestments of the Priests, the 120 Trumpets, the Slaughter-Knives, and all other Utensils about the Sacrifices; the Instruments of Mu∣sick, the Standards of all Measures, the Armory of all Weapons; as Spears, Bucklers and Shields, &c. The Repositories for Wood, Salt, Tythes, Offe∣rings; the Treasury Chambers; the Water, or Well-Rooms; the Lodgings of the Priests and Levites, that attended on the Holy Service in the Tem∣ple; their Description cannot be manifested out of Scripture. Were we to describe the Second Temple, we might be supplyed by the learned industry of many Forreiners, both Jews and Christians; but especially of those two learned Levites of our own Nation, Dr. Lightfoot, and Mr. Fuller; to whose great pains, the Common-wealth of Learning is deeply obliged: having gi∣ven us better Descriptions of the Temple, then any High-Priest of the Jews ever did. But seeing we mainly insist upon the Delineation of Solomon's Temple, let it at present suffice, that the fore-mentioned things were ex∣tant, and most exactly disposed, though it hath not pleased the Holy Spirit to transmit their accurate Descriptions to Posterity; while we, in the mean time, remain content, not to be wise above what is written.
The Figure of the High Priest in his holy Vestments and ornaments; together with the inferiour Priests, their apparell, the Sacrifices, and Utensils of the Sacerdotall function in the Temple. By Arias Montanus. depiction of the High Priest and his accoutrements A. Singing bookes B. Skins of beasts C. Trumpets D. Incense cups E. Slaughter knives F. Cauldrons, Spoones and pots G. Flesh hookes H. Wine and Oyle Vessels I. Bellowes K. Wood L. M. N. O. Creatures for Sacrifice P. The High Priest in his Pontific all habit described in ye close of ye 4th Chapter. Q. Ordinary priests R. The Incense Altar S. The Incense cup T. The Censer.
Observe in the High-Priests Figure. A Singing-Books. B Skins of Beasts. C Trumpets. D Incense-Cup. E Slaughter-Knives. F Cauldrons, Spoons, and Pots. G Flesh-Hooks. H Vessels of Wine, or Oyl. I Bellows. L, M, N, O, Creatures for Sacrifice. P The High-Priest himself in His Pontifical Habit. Q Ordinary Priests. R The Golden-Altar of Incense. S The Incense Cup. T The Censer. 1 The Broidered Coat. 2 Robe next under the Ephod, whereto the Pomegranates; and Bells of Gold were appendant. 3 Curious Ephod. 4 Girdle. 5 Mitre. 6. 6. Onyx Stones. 7. 7 Hookes. 8. 8. Golden Chains. 9. Breast-Blate of Judgment. 10 Ʋppermost Rings. 11 Nethermost Rings. 12 Silk-Laces. 13 Hinder-Ring. 14 The Plate of Gold upon the Mitre. 15 Bels of Gold. 16 Pomegranates.
Of the Priests, and High-Priests Vestments. THus having finished the Discourse about the Temple, its Parts, Courts, and Utensils; we shall now, as a Coronis to the whole Work, present the High-Priest in his Pontificalibus, ready to go in∣to the Temple to perform his duty. Exod. 28.41.First of all, He wore all the Garments that ordinary Priests did wear: We shall put them on in their order. 1 Next the flesh, the ordinary Priests had Linnen Breeches to cover their Nakedness from the Loins,Exod. 28.42, 43. even to the Thighs, of fine twined Linnen, Cap. 39. 2 They put on a close Linnen-Coat, that reacht from the Neck down to the Ankles with sleeves for their Arms.Ver. 40. 3 This Coat was fastned with a Girdle that went round about their mid∣dle of fine twined Linnen of Blue,Ver. 40. Cap. 39. v. 29. Cap. 39.28. and Purple, Scarlet, and Needle-work. Here, once for all, let it suffice to mention, that this Girdle, and other Vestments, were made with these various Threads. One was of Hyacinch, Violet or Blew Colour. Another of Purple Colour, tinctured with the blood of the Tyrian Shell-fish. The Scarlet was dy'd with the Grains of a Shrub growing in Galatia, a Province of Asia the Less, in Afri∣ca, and other Countries; as Pliny hath it, lib. 16. cap. 8. The last is of fine Linnen from Aegypt, and the Blew and Purple were Commodities brought to Tyre, from the Isles of Elishah, i. e. of the Aegean Sea, Ezek. 27.7. 4 On their Heads were fastned goodly Bonnets of fine Linnen. These were all Vestments of the ordinary Priests. The High Priest had Vestments in this order; as mentioned, Lev. 8.7, 8, 9. & Exod. 29. 1 His Coat, which was embroidered, Exod. 28.39. & 28.4. 2 His Girdle was of Needle-work of fine twined Linnen, and Blue, and Purple, and Scarlet, Exod. 39.29. Lev. 8.7. These two were (I suppose) the same for substance with the other Priests; but a little more curious for work. 3 The Robe, Lev. 8.7. called, the Robe of the Ephod, all of Blue Wo∣ven Work.Exod. 28.31. &. & 39.22, &c. There was a hole in the top of it, in the midst, with a binding of Woven Work round about the hole, like the hole of an Habergeon, that it be not rent. Beneath, at the hem of this Garment, there were made to hang Pomegranates and Bells; the Pomegranates were made of Blue, and Purple, and Scarlet, and twined Linnen. The Bells were of pure Gold, between the Pomegranates, round about. As to their number, Ribera out of Jerome says, there were 72 Pomegranates, and as many Bells, p. 139 But Scripture, in this, rests silent.
4 Then the Ephod was put on, Levit. 8.7. which was made of Gold, and Blue, Purple, and Scarlet, and fine twined Linnen. The Gold was beaten into thin Plates, and cut in Wires, to work it into the Blue, &c. with cunning-Work. This had two Shoulder-pieces joyned to its edges, whereon were placed two Ouches of Gold, having two Onyx Stones inclo∣sed in them, and therein graven, after the manner of a Signet, all the names of the Children of Israel, according to their Birth. To the two Gol∣den Ouches, were fastned two Wreathen Chains of pure Gold. 5 This Ephod was girded close to him, with the curious Girdle of the Ephod, Lev. 8.7. of Gold, Blue and Purple, of Scarlet, and fine twined Linnen. 6 The next thing is the Breast-Plate of Judgment, made of cunning-Work, just like the Ephod, It was four-square, being a span each side of the square; and it was doubled, that is, the cunning-work of Gold, and Blue, and Purple, and Scarlet, and fine twined Linnen, was double, that it might be the stronger to bear the stones, Exod. 39.9. In it were set four Rows of Stones. In the first Row was a Sardius, a Topaz, and a Carbuncle. In the second, an Emerald, a Saphire, and a Diamond.Exod. 39.13. In the third a Li∣gure, an Agate, and an Amethyst. In the fourth, a Beryl, an Onyx, and a Ja∣sper, 13 in all; each engraven in order, with the names of the 12 Tribes of Israel, and each was inclosed in Ouches of Gold. In the four Corners, were Gold Rings. The uppermost Corners had two Ouches of Gold, two Gold Rings, and in them fastned two Golden Chains of Wreathen-Work, one at each end: which Chains reached up to, and were fastned in the two Golden Ouches of the Shoulder-pieces of the Ephod. At the two lower corners, were two Rings of Gold also, which had a Lace of Blue running through them, to fasten the Breast-Plate therewith to two other Rings that were set in the Ephod beneath. 7 After this, there was placed in this Breast-Plate of Judgment,Exod. 28.30. the Ʋrim and Thummim, that they might be upon the High Priests Heart, when He went in before the Lord, to bear the Judgment of the Children of Israel upon his Heart before the Lord continually. Some think those words were written: Some think there was either two other Stones, or pieces of Gold; and, indeed, they knew not what. Others think there was no∣thing added, onely it signified the meaning of the 12 Stones; that when the Children of Israel, or any particular Tribe, or the King, or any other, should enquire the Mind of God, then they should receive an Answer from the High Priest, in the Name of God; which Answer, as to future things, should be as Ʋrim, that is, as Light, clear and perspicuous; and, either con∣cerning past, present, or future, should be Thummim, that is, perfect, and full of all Integrity and Truth. As to which, it is conceived, that when the Lord did answer Positively, and Affirmatively, the Stones did shine most radiantly; but continued in their common hue, upon the Negative. There is this Reason urged by some; Why they did not note any new ma∣terial added to the Breast-Plate, because when Moses relates the making of things, according to the given Pattern, we read of no such thing made;Exod. 39.32. Lev. 8.8. though the Text says expresly, that all was done, that the Lord commanded Moses: yet, in Leviticus, it says, He did: which I leave to mature consi∣deration.
8 The Mitre, lastly, was put upon his head; and, upon the Mitre, a Ho∣ly Crown of Gold; and, on the Fore-front of the Crown, a Plate of Gold, which was fastned to the Mitre with a Blue Lace; and on that Plate was engraven, as on a Signet, these words, HOLYNESSE TO THE LORD. The inferiour Priests in their order, and the High Priest according to His Superiour Dignity, being thus set forth in their goodly Array, were af∣terwards anointed with Holy Oyl, consecrated and sanctified by the blood of some Sacrifices, and so were prepared for the Services of the Temple, in the next Chapter.
CHAP. V. Concerning the Solemn Worship, and Service of GOD, in the Temple. THis Chapter might be distinctly methodized, and accordingly handled; either as the Worship hath respect to the various Per∣sons or Officers employed in several Sacred Functions: Or, second∣ly, as to the different Solemn Times of Service and Worship, in their Mysterious Solemnities: Or, thirdly, as to the various Sacrifices and Offerings, commanded by God, to smoak upon His Holy Altar. All which Particulars, we shall crave leave, in as brief a manner as possible, to exhibite in their due order and method, in three distinct Sections follow∣ing. SECT. I. Of the Temple Officers, their Names and Employments. IN the first place, we shall speak of the different sorts of Officers about the Temple, which are particularized under five several Names in Scripture, viz. Priests, Levites, Singers, Porters, Nethinims. The Priests are distin∣guisht into the chief Priests, and the other interiour Priests of the 24 Cour∣ses. Of the chief Priests.Ezra 7.24. The chief Priests, were two; the High Priest, and his Second; the High Priest was, by the Appointment of God, that Person, who was the Lineall Heir, in Aaron's Posterity, the eldest living that descended in the most di∣rect Line from his Loins. His Office was mainly upon the Expiation Day, (being the 10th of the 7th Moneth) to perform the Solemn Rites of that Service, in entring the Holy of Holies, not without blood, and to persume the Oracle with fragrant Incense, Exod. 30.10. Lev. 16.34. Heb. 9.7. Unto which Josephus adds, that He assisted in the Work on every Sabbath,De Bell. Ju∣daic. l. 6. c. 6. p. 9 18. F. in every New-Moon, and every Solemn Festival; as may appear out of the 1 Chron. 6.49. The second Priest was the most eminent among the rest; who, in case of Sickness, Pollution, or other Emergency, befalling the High-Priest, did supply that Office. Therefore is it, that some think Moses of old to have ben a substitute to Aaron: seeing Scripture doth expresly call both of them the Priests of the Lord, Ps. 99.6. We read moreover that Moses did officiate in the Priests office at the consecration of Aaron his Brother, Levit. 8. Howexer it be, wee find for cerain Eleazar and Ithamar, &c.
usually put together in the Days of Moses. Hophni and Phinehas, in the old Age and blindness of Eli. Zadock and Ahimelech, in the days of Da∣vid;2 Sam. 8.17. Chap. 15.35. 2 King. 25.18. Luke 3.2. and afterwards Zadeck and Abiathar▪ Serajah, the chief Priest, and (expresly in so many terms) Zephaniah, the second Priest, in the time of Judah's Captivation by Nebuchadnezzar. And lastly, in the days of our Saviour, Annas and Caiphas are called the High Priests; not that there were two in that great Office at once, as some have conceited, through the Jewish Corruption of the Commandements of God at that time; but that the one was a present help, and constant sub∣stitute to the other, in case of necessary detention from his actuall service. Of the Ordinary Priests. The ordinary Priests were such as sprang from the Loins of Aaron, and were in a Collateral Line of Kindred, allied to the High Priest, which were all Levites, as flowing from Levi, who was the Abavus, or Great Grand-Father of Aaron: But being separated from the rest of the Levites, for some more immediate service unto God, are generally termed Priests; whereas the term of Levite is restrained to all others of the Posterity of Levi, besides the Line of Aaron. These Priests, for the more easie carrying on of the Temple-Work, were divided into 24 Courses by Lot, according to this ensuing Table in the days of David, by his Appointment. But these Orders, as to their Genealogicall Succession, having been much confounded since that time, especially under the Captivity: possibly, the Priests of Nehemiah's List might receive new Names, according to a new Lot, for their several Stations; and therefore it is, perhaps, that we find the ancient Names somewaat varied, and some of the new Courses not to be found Registred, according to all the Names of David's Division. Howsoever, so far as they can be without many Transpo∣sitions of Letters clearly set down, we may read, as follows. 1 Jehojarib, 1 Chron. 24.7 called Jojarib, in Nehem. 12.6, 19. 2 Jedajah, 1 Chron. 24.7. Neh. 12.7, 19. 3 Harim, 8 Neh. 10.5. & 12.15. Or, Rehum, Chap. 12.3. 4 Seorim, 8 Perhaps Serajah, Nehem. 10.2.12.1.12. 5 Malchijah, 9 Nehem. 10.3. Or, Malluch, Neh. 12.2. Or, Melicu. v. 14. 6 Mijamin, 9 Nehem. 10.7. Or, Miamin, Neh. 12.5. Or Minjamin, Neh. 12.17. 7 Hakkez, 10 Perhaps Hatiush, Neh. 10.4. & 12.2. 8 Abijah, 10 Neh. 10.8. & 12.4 17. Luke 1.5. 9 Jeshuah, 11. 10 Shecaniah, 11 Neh. 12.3. Or, Shebaniah, Nehem. 10.4. & 12.14. 11 Eliashib, 12. 12 Jakim, 12. 13 Huppak, 1 Chron. 24.13. 14 Jeshebeab, 13. 15 Bilgah, 14. Nehem. 12.5, 18. Or, Bilgai, Neh. 10.8. 16 Immer, 14. Perhaps Merimth, Neh. 10.5. 17 Hezir, 15. Called Ezra, Neh. 12.1, 13. Or, Azariah, Nehem. 10.2.
18. Aphses., 15. 19. Pethahiah, 16. 20. Jehezekel, 16. 21. Jachin, 17. 22. Gamul, 17. 23. Delaiah, 18. 24. Maaziah, 18. Neh. 10.. or Madiah, Neh. 12, 5. Moadiah ver. 17. Of hese twenty four courses, The first course entring upon the first Sab∣bath after the Temple's dedication, continued so in the devolution of the work unto each succeeding course, from Jehojarib the first untill the capti∣vity, and, being afterwards fixed in the best order they could, did so endure till the daies of our Lord's Incarnation,Luk. 1.5. neer which time we read of Za∣chariah's Ministration at the Altar of Incense, being , (or as we translate it) Of the Course of Abiah, which was originally the eighth in number: it being called , as some think from this hebdomadi∣call or weekly entrance into the service. Which word (if critically insisted upon,) though it may not yield sufficient ground to build the assertion of this constant revolution of courses at such a set time as a week (and if so, yet is it not safe to lay stresse upon words, the argument, from Etymology, being very sandy, since the fall of the Tower of Babel, upon the tongues of our Ancestors) yet notwithstanding there are two places of Scripture that help us in this point (that we may dismisse verball niceties to their tongues, to whom they do movere Salivam) The former place acquaints us of the Priests entring in upon the Sabbath, and the latter,2 Chr. 23.4. 2 Kin. 11.7. of their going forth upon the same day, which is sufficient enough at present to our purpose: especially,Joseph. Anti. l. 7. c. 11. p. 248. G. mihi. since confirmed by Josephus (being himself a Priest) in these words: . And he ordained (speaking of David) that one Family, or course, should minister unto God for eight daies together, from Sabbath to Sab∣bath. Of these twenty four Tribes or courses,1 Chr. 24.4. sixteen were of the line of Eleazar, and eight of the race of Ithamar. The work impendent upon their shoulders, since the Tabernacle-Vessels were taken off, after the settlement of the Ark, in the fixed place of the Temple, was various and excellent, consisting principally in these follow∣ing particulars. 1 The work of sacrificing, with all its rites, did lye upon them in all Offerings on the Altar of burnt offering, nay,1 Chr. 6.49. 2 Ch. 29.22. the whole service of the most Holy place. 2 The Government of the Sanctuary and of the House of God was im∣pendent on their shoulders.1 Chr. 24.5. 3 They set the new-prepared shewbread on the golden Tables within the Sanctuary every Sabbath, and removed the old. 4 They ordered the Lamps of the golden Candlesticks every Mor∣ning. 5 They kindled the daily Incense to make a sweet perfume in the Tem∣ple, at the time of the dressing of the Lamps,1 Chr. 6.49. that the stench of that work might not be offensive. 6 They were rhe unappealeable Judges of Leprosy:Lev. 13.2, 3. and Jealousy be∣twixt man and wife. 7 They blew the Trumpets to the solemn feasts:Joel. 2.15. 1 Ch. 15.24. & 16.6. Num. 10.8. & 31.6. and also before the Ark at its solemn removals, and also to accompany the Captains of the Battel in War, with their silver Trumpets before the Battel, as may be perspicuousy evident out of severall places of the holy Scripture.
2 Ch. 13.12. Lev. 6.12, 13. Exo. 30.23. 1 Chr. 9.30. Mal. 2.7.8 They were to looke to the burning of wood continually upon the brazen Altar, that the fire once kindled from heaven might never be extin∣guished. 9 They were to make the holy Ointment with the appointed Spices. 10 They instructed the People in the Law of God. Of the Levites. The Levites, distinctly so called, were not Priests, but such as came from the stemme or root of Levi, excepting the Children of Aaron. These persons were appointed to wait upon the Sons of Aaron, in the Courts and in the Chambers,1 Chron. 23.28, 29. &c. in the purifying of all the holy things, and the work of the service of the house of God: Both for the Shew-bread, and for the fine flower, for Meat-Offerings, and the unleavened Cakes, and for things baked in Pans or fryed, and for all manner of Measure and Cize, (a good president, to learne us of what sacred estimation we should account, and what diligent care we should take in the conservation of the standard Ves∣sels; for the administration of commutative Justice) they were also to stand every Morning to thank and praise the Lord, and likewise at Evening. Yea, and to offer all burnt sacrifices unto the Lord, (that is, to assist the Priests in case of multitude of Offerings, such as were extraordinary) in the Sabbaths, new Moons, and Set-Feasts, by number, according to the order commanded them, continually before the Lord. And that they should keep the charge of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and of the holy place, and of the Sons of Aaron their brethren, in the Service of the house of the Lord. For which end they were at first numbred at the age of thirty years,1 Chron. 23.26, 27. 1 Chro. 23.3. &c. but after the daies of David alwaies at twenty: Because then they did no more carry the burden of the Tabernacle-implements and Vessels. Their num∣ber in the latter end of King David's reign was computed at thirty eight thousand; whereof twenty four thousand were set off for the work and businesse of the holy House: Six thousand to be Officers and Judges: four thousand were Porters, and four thousand were Singers and Players upon Instruments. So that the work of the Levites was mainly Templar, which lay within the precincts of the Temple: and partly provincial, as the devout Sr. H. Spelman ranks them.Tithe. p. 36. &c. 2 Chr. 8.14. 1 Chr. 16.4. Num. 18.3. But their capitall businesse, was to praise and minister before the Priests, and before the Ark, to record sacred affairs, to thank and praise the Lord God of Israel. They were not in any case to approach near the Vessels of the Sanctuary, no nor of the Altar, in any way of Ministration after the Nature of Priests, unlesse in case of necessity, when the number of the Priests was not sufficient for the greatnesse of some festivall solemnity, then we have an instance of the Levites helping them to flay the burnt Offerings,2 Ch. 29.34. till the work was ended: Else they might not. In so much, that when the Ark of the Covenant was ambulatory in the Wilderness, and unfixed before the Temple's erection; though the Le∣vites might bear it upon their shoulders, when it was wrapt up in the Vail; yet they might not either touch it,Num. 4.15. or (as some think) look upon it, when uncovered. Wherefore in David's time there seems to have been a double error committed about the Ark. The first was in carting that most holy and mysterious piece. For although the Philistines did send it home upon a new Cart toward Bethshemesh without ensuing danger; yet the Israëlites might not dare to deal so irreverently with that rare symbole of the divine presence,1 Sam. 6.11. as to set it on a homely Cart, if they diligently consulted the
Law of Moses.1 Chr. 15.12, 13, 14, 15. Ant. l. 7. c. 4. As to which very point David humbly confesseth his and the Peoples miscarriage. The second Error is conceived by some (out of Josephus) to have been this, even that Ʋzza the Son of Abinadab, being but an ordinary Levite, and no Priest, might not presume to touch the holy Ark, according to the strict inhibition of Moses, who therefore was so immediately and miraculously smitten down before God in the ve∣ry place of his transgression. So tender and jealous is the Lord of Hosts of every point of his instituted Worship, which might make us extream wary and watchfull how we draw nigh to God under Ordinances, even in the Gospell-daies, wherein though the ceremoniality of Worship is not so strict, yet the spirituality is far more advanced, and we are to draw neere with hearts more heavenly & abstracted from the impurities of the world, and it is dangerous dallying with his divine Majesty, in using any traditio∣nall rites, or ceremoniall inventions of man in his solemn service, being never so fairely coloured and varnished over with the specious pretences of decorum, unity, order, Church discipline, and peace. For certainly, God is not wanting in giving forth a platform for Gospel-worship in all points necessary for evangelical Churches, as to which God expects of us the same that he did of Moses, that we look to it, that we doe all,Exo. 25.40. Mat. 15.9. according to the patern shewn to us by Christ in the Mount. For in vain do we worship, if we teach the Commandements of men for the Doctrines of God: either to gratify the carnall Humours of Persons wedded to and soaked in the poysonous Cup of Romish superstitions: or to carry on a magisteriall de∣sign of being Lords of our Brethrens Faith and Practises, by imposing Dictator-like upon others consciences in punctilio's of externalls and ex∣traessentialls to Salvation: When as probably enough their opinions in those niceties have no more solid reasons grounded upon Scripture (the sole rule of Faith, Worship, and Manners) to evince their practise to be sober and judicious; than the Pope of Rome hath of title to his Patrimo∣ny, or universall Head-ship, from the Donation of Constantine, or the cruel Phocas of the Eastern Empire. But craving pardon for this small digressi∣on, upon the remembrance of the sad providence upon Uzza; let us pro∣ceed to rank these Temple-Officers, the Levites, in a foursold series. Whereto we shall speak awhile, 1 Concerning the Singers among them, 2 Of the Porters, 3 Of the Treasurers, and 4 Of the Judges. Of the Singers. We read in the sacred lines, that this was one great part of the work incumbent on a proportioned number of Levites for that pur∣pose: Whom David set apart for Temple-Musick, which was either vocall or instrumentall. The instrumentall either pneumaticall or manuall: All which is expressed in that verse,1 Chr. 15.16. wherein the chief of the Levites are commanded to appoint some of their Brethren, to be Singers with instruments of Musick, Psalteries, Harps, and Cymbals soun∣ding, by lifting up the voice with Joy. So that now these instruments mixed in consort with the Trumpets of the Priests made a lovely noise in the Court of the Altar.
It were worth our paines (if it were a thing feazible to give any satisfac∣tion) to treat awhile concerning the exact form of their Instruments and the method of their musical notes, and the manner of pricking their Psalms. But despairing of that at present I shall onely speak a little about the vari∣ous Instruments, which are mentioned in the holy Scriptures, and then of their 24 Courses. We read of these three sorts of Instruments, wherewith they praised God: and made a solemn sound therewith, to refresh the ears of those Is∣raelites who came to wership God at the Temple. 1 Cymbals. Ver. 19.1 Cymbals of Brasse, whereon the chief masters of Musick played and are related to have made a sound  the 70 render it , which some imagine to be round Balls, others, flat pieces of Brasse like Drums, to manage the Bassus or Base-part in the Musick. Ver. 20.2 Psalteries. 2 Others are said to make a sound or joyfull noise upon Psalteries, in the Hebr. , in the 70, . The word comes from  ceci∣di, and is usually applyed to leaves falling off Trees in Autumn: as if so be the Instruments were to be so choicely and gently toucht, as if a leaf on∣ly had faln upon them. Therefore is it added on Alometh, that is the silent or hidden Musick. For the curious gentle sound and most sweet Lute-like melody, which it gave forth.  the greek word, which some translate it by, is according to the great Etymologist derived  from the touching of it with the fingers. But others think it was plaid upon with a Bow, or Quill, or the like, and that it was an Instrument with a hollow belly like our Lutes, Viols, Gitternes, and the rest, because the Hebr. word Nebel is in one signification used sometimes for a Bottle or Bag of Skin,Psa. 144.9. hollow within. Whatever the fashion was, it seemes to have been an Instrument with ten strings. On a Nebel with ten strings will I sing saies David; yea, it is called a ten-stringed Instrument, by apposition distinctly from a Harp, Psal. 33.2. & 92.3. 1 Ch. 15.21.3 Harps. 3 Others are mentioned to have plaid  which is rendred by the 70, , with Harps on Sheminith, to excell. This Harp or Kinnor, one of the ancient Fathers resembles to the Greek letter Λ being an Instrument of wood, whose strings ran along from the Basis of the Triangle and from one of the sides also,Gen. 4.21. to the other: much like those of Wales or Ireland, which we call Harps at this day. That they were plaid upon with the band is implied by the story of Jubal before the flood,Pro. 30.28. when he is called the Father of all that do  handle the Harp, which word is expresly joyned with the actions of the hands, metaphorically ascribed to the Spider by Solomon. Wherefore it pleases Avenarius well, to derive the  from  by transmutation of ν into θ. It seems this Instru∣ment (whatever the form were) was composed but with eight strings in David's time. For it is termed in this place of the Chronicles  super octochordis, on the Kinnoroth Hasheminith, on Sheminith (as we translate it) that is, on Harps being eight stringed.
I know there be several, who upon the citation of Josephus, do conceive,Antiq. l. 7. c. 10. p. 243. A. mihi. that the Kinnors had ten Strings, and were touched with a Plectrum, or Bow, and that the Nablia had twelve Strings, and were plaid on with hands. It is not for me to endeavour to put Josephus his words out of Tune in this his Lesson, (which others have learned from him) by my scraping any longer upon these Instruments: though sometimes the Ear of a stander-by may tolerably air the Lesson which is plaid, as well as the Musician himself. I do not suspect Josephus his Skill in Musick: yet fin∣ding the strings of his Historical Harp crackt in many places, and in some things dissonant to himself, I am afraid his Copy is corrupt in this place, (upon the probabilities out of the Hebrew Texts before mentioned, and confirmed by some Learned Authors) as it is in many other places: which might be evidenced at large. But I shall herein submit my self to the Doctors in that Science, and put a pause or stop to this particular, and leaving our singing Levites in their Harmonious Consort, let's observe, how the rest of the Levites, Priests, and Porters, stood in their several Sta∣tions, and Watches, hearkning, wondring at, and praising their great Skill in that Coelestial and Spherical Mystery. The Instruments which they used, were some of them made of Firre;2 Sam. 6.5. 1 King. 10.12. others, of Algum-Trees: Of which Wood, we have treated more largely in another place of this Temple-History. The Times wherein this melodious Service was performed, were in the Morning and Evening, and generally in the time of sacrificing, noting how acceptable their Sacrifices were to God; and also that our prayers must be mixt with praises. That it was done in time of Sacrifice, appears by the Relation of the Work of Dedication in Solomon's days.2 Chron. 7.3, 6. For when as So∣lomon offered, the Levites waited with their Instruments of Musick; and the time is expresly declared, when they saw the fire come down from Hea∣ven, then they worshipped and praised the Lord, saying. For He is good; for His Mercy endureth for ever. Which Verse was the same that the Priests answered to by their Trumpets, and the Levites arrayed in White Linnen,2 Chron. 5.12, 13. having Cymbals, Psalteries, and Harps, did sing unto most melodiously. The place where they stood officiating in this Musical Employment, was at the East-end of the Altar. To which purpose, 'tis observable,Ver. 13. that some of the Psalms, are called Songs of Degrees, upon the account of that place where they were sung and plaid to, which some do think to be upon the 15 steps arising out of the great Court, into the Priests Court, at the Eastern Gate thereof. But now as to the ancient Hebrew Songs, we may even hang up our Harps upon the Willows, not being able to tune them aright in a Land so strange, and in an Age so remote from that of the flourishing state of the people of Israel in the Holy Country. Onely give us leave to remember Zion, while we do account their Antique, yet no doubt excellent Songs, as to the Metrical Composition, among the Deperdita, or things-lost, as to our knowledge. Although a Learned man, Dr. Gomarus by name, in his Lyra Davidis, hath endeavoured, in some measure, to revive the knowledge of their Meters comparing David's Psalms with the Poems of Pindar, and other Lyricks; yet we must confess, that what hath been yet spoken, as to the composing part, or fitting of their Songs to Instruments, makes no more melody in the Ears of these latter Ages of the World, then dumb Musick.
But as to their several Officers and Courses, for this Solemn and excel∣lent Service, the Scripture hath left upon Record these following Intima∣tions. In the first place we read, that they had three prime Officers, Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun; for whom many of David's Psalms were penned, probably for this end, that they might skilfully fit them to the various Notes of their Vocal and Instrumental Musick; and therefore are styled and directed; some to the chief Musician; some to the Sons of Korah; some to Jeduthun, and the like. The Sons of these principal Musicians, with their Brethren, and near Kinsmen,1 Chron. 25.6, 7. were disposed in a most exact and harmonious method, contai∣ning 24 Courses in all, of men that were cunning and well instructed in the Songs of the Lord. Each Course had 12 chief men, and all the 24 Courses made up 288. and the whole number of all that belonged to the Song,1 Chron. 23.5. under the chief Masters of all the Courses, set in order by David, were 4000: 2 Chron. 25.8, 9.The 24 Courses, had each their chief Officer, and 11 more with him, ac∣cording to this Order by Lot, Ward against Ward. 1 Joseph, the Son of Asaph, 1 Chron. 25.2, 9. 2 Gedaliah, Son of Jeduthun, v. 3, 9. 3 Zaccur, of Asaph, v. 2, 10. 4 Izri, or Zeri, of Jeduthun, v. 3, 11. 5 Nethaniah, of Asaph, v. 2, 12. 6 Bukkiah, of Heman, v. 4, 13. 7 Jesharelah, or Asarelah, of Asaph, v. 2, 14. 8 Jeshajah, of Jeduthun, v. 3, 15. 9 Mattaniah, of Heman, v. 4, 16. 10 Shimei, v. 17. He was the Son of Jeduthun. For though his name be omitted, v. 3. where mention is made of Jeduthun's Sons: yet that very verse tels us, there were six of his Sons. So that though but five Names are there recited, yet his name is to be supplyed out of the 17th verse. 11 Azariel, or Uzziel, of Heman, v. 4, 18. 12 Hashabiah, of Jeduthun, v. 3, 19. 13 Shubael, or Shebuel, of Heman, v. 4, 20. 14 Mattithiah, of Jeduthun, v. 3, 21. 15 Jerimoth, v. 4, 22. Being all the Sons of Heman. 16 Hananiah v. 4, 23. Being all the Sons of Heman. 17 Joshbekashah, v. 4, 24. Being all the Sons of Heman. 18 Hanani, v. 4, 25. Being all the Sons of Heman. 19 Mallothi, v. 4.26. Being all the Sons of Heman. 20 Eliathah, v. 4, 27. Being all the Sons of Heman. 21 Hothir, v. 4, 28. Being all the Sons of Heman. 22 Giddalti, v. 4, 29. Being all the Sons of Heman. 23 Mahazioth, v. 4, 13. Being all the Sons of Heman. 24 Romamti-Ezer, v. 4, 31. Being all the Sons of Heman.
These persons thus appointed to the Work of the Songs of Zion were freed from any other Service, being employed in that Work onely,1 Chron. 9.33. Night and Day. Now for the farther knowledge of the deduction of the Levites, from the Loins of Levi, together with the succession of Moses and Aaron, the Children of the former, viz. Moses, being the Lord High Treasurers of the Temple, of the other being High-Priests; let us present this Genealogicall Stemme before your Eyes, being deduced out of the 6th Chapter of the first of Chronicles, and other places of Scripture.
Jacob or Israel. Levi. 1 Gershon Exod. 6.17. 2 Libni, or Laadan, 1 Chr. 23.7 3 Jahath 1 Chr. 6.20 & 23.10. 4 Zimmah, 1 Chr. 6.20. Or Zinah, 1 Chro. 23.10. 5 Ethan, or Joah. 6 Adajah, or Iddo, 1 Chr. 6.21. 7 Zerah 8 Ethni 9 Melohiah 10 Baasiah 11 Michael 12 Shimea 13 Berae∣hiah 14 Asaph, the chief Singer. 2 Shimel, or Shimi. 3 1 Kohath, who lived 133 y. Exod. 6.18. 2 Amram Aaron 4 Ithamar. 5 Eli 6 Phinees 7 Abiezer 8 Buzi 9 Ozi 10 Eli, that brake his neck. 11 Ahitub 12 Ahime∣lech. 13 Ahijah 14 Abiathar Put from the High-Priest∣hood, by Solomon. 4 Eleazar. 5 Phinehas 6 Abishua 7 Bukki 8 Ʋzzi 9 Zechariah 10 Merajoth 11 Amari∣ah. 12 Ahitub 13 Zadock, who was High-Priest, in the time of K. So∣lomon in the room of Abia∣thar, 1 King. 2.2.35. 3 Moses Rehabiah Jeshajah Joram Zicheri Shelomith, The great Lord Trea∣surer of the Temple, 2 Chron. 26.25, 26. 2 Izhar 3 Korah. 4 Ebiasaph, Exod. 6.24. Or, Asaph, 2 Chr. 26.1. 5 Assir. 6 Tahath 7 Zephaniah 8 Azariah. 9 Joel 10 Elkanah 11 Amasai 12 Mahath. 13 Eskanah 14 Zuph 15 Toah 16 Eliel 17 Jeroham 18 Ekanah 19 Shemuel, or Samuel the Prophet. 20 Joel, 1 Sam. 8.2. 21 Heman the Singer. 1 Merari 2 Mahli. Numb. 3.20. Exod. 6.19. 1 Chron. 24.26. Mushi, 3 Mahli, 1 Chron. 23.23. 4 Shamer, 1 Chron. 6.46. 5 Bani 6 Anezi 7 Hilkiah 8 Amaziah 9 Hashabiah 10 Malluch 11 Abdi 12 Kishi, or Kusha∣jah, 1 Chron. 15.17. Or, Kish, 2 Chron. 29.12. 13 Ethan, probably the same with Jeduthun, one of three Masters of Song. If we com∣pare these places, 1 Chron. 15.19. & 25.1. & 2 Chron. 5.12. Obed-Edom. 1 Chron. 16.3.8
Hitherto sufficeth it to have discoursed of the melodious Singers of the Temple; with the Scheme of their Contemporaries, to illustrate the History. Let us now walk forth out of the Priests Court, toward the Gates and Trea∣suries, and take notice of the great diligence adhibited by these sacred Por∣ters, in their several Wards and Watches. Of the Porters. THE next Officers to be spoken to, are the Porters, who did watch at the Gates of the Temple day and night. The Psalmist calls upon them that stand by night in the House of the Lord, to bless His Name; and,Psal. 134.1. in a Psalm indited for the Sons of Korah to tune, he tells them, He had rather be a Door-Keeper in the House of God, then to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness;Psal. 84.10. or the Curtains of Alienation from the presence of him that dwelt between the sacred Cherubims. The number of these Porters, in a gross and full summe,1 Chron. 23.6. are remembred to have been four thousand, by the Appointment of King David, and seem to have been divided into 24 Courses, like as the Priests and Singers were. For one Text relates,2 Chron. 8.14. that Solomon did appoint the Porters by their Cour∣ses at every Gate, according to the Order of David his Father. According to which, if we examine the account so far, as it is brought in by Holy Scrip∣ture, we shall read of 24 chief persons, whose Sons and Brethren seem to come by course, after 7 days, from time to time, out of their Villages, 1 Chron. 9.25. to that Service, at the several Gates of the Temple: To which they were designed by Lot; as may appear more particularly by this Draught annexed, taken out of 1 Chron. 26. THE GATES. 1 On the East. The keeping whereof, by Lot, fell to Shele∣miah, ver. 14. called also, Meshelemiah, the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph, that is, Abiasaph, the Great Grandchild of Kohath; and under him, of these Le∣vitical Porters, came in by course con∣stantly 6 persons to watch there, v. 17. probably, the same person, who is called Shallum, the chief Porter, because his Lot fell out to be at the chiefest Gate; which appears by the very same account of His Lineage, 1 Chron. 9.19. 6. 2 On the North. The Lot hit upon Zechariah, a wife Coun∣sellor, being the son of Shelemiah; and under Him, at the North-Gate, there were appointed 4 to watch by course. 4. 3 On the South. The Lot came forth to Obed-Edom; and those under his Rule, Southward, verse 17. 4.
4. On the West. Toward Asuppim, or the Treasury-House, which stood at the South-End of the Western-Wall, and had two little Gates at each end of the Treasury, whereof we have spoken before. They were commit∣ted to the custody of the Sons of Obed-Edom, at each Gate two; as it is exprest, v. 17. two and two. 2. 2. At Shallecheth, or at the Causey of the King, 4 Porters, v. 16, 18. 4. At Parbar-Gate, two Porters, v. 18. and both these Gates were under the custody of Shuppim, and Hosah, v. 16. 2.     24 So that hence we may observe, that there were 24 Porters constantly fixed by their Courses in their stations for the Watch, at the Gates of the Outward Court of the Temple. They are recited to have been placed in the four Quarters of the House of God, even towards the East, West, North and South; and that they lodged round about the House, that is, in the Chambers of the Outward Court, having the over-sight of the Gates, and had the charge lay upon them of opening them every morning. Their exact Genealogie, in a direct Line from their Ancestors, is not precise∣ly and determinately recorded in a methodical manner, that I have yet ob∣served. Onely the Scripture is pleased thus far to insinuate, that the Por∣ters were of the Line of Korah and Merari. Of Korah, the Grand-Son of Kohath, descended Meshelemiah, the principal Porter of the Temple, being setled at the East-Gate, who is related to have been of the Sons of Asaph; otherwise, called Ebiasaph, the Son of Korah, Exod. 6.24. & 1 Chron. 26.1. The Sons of Meshelemiah were these, Zechariah, He was a Porter of the Door of the Tabernacle in David's time, 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chron. 26.2, 3. Jediael, 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chron. 26.2, 3. Zebadiah, 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chron. 26.2, 3. Jathniel, 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chron. 26.2, 3. Elam, 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chron. 26.2, 3. Jehohanan, 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chron. 26.2, 3. 1 Chr. 9.17, 19, &c.Elioenai. 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chron. 26.2, 3. This Meshelemiah is called otherwhere Shallum, the Son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah; who, with his Bre∣thren, kept the Gates, and the Entry into the House of the Lord. Shallum was chief, and with him were reckoned Ak∣kub, Talmon, and Ahiman, as Assistants.
Of the Family of Merari, 1 Chron. 26.4, &c. Obed-Edom, with his Sons following, Shemajah, The Sons of Shemajah. Othni, Rephael, Obed, Elizabad, Elihu, Semachiah. Jehozabad, Joah, Sacar, Nethaneel, Ammiel, Issachar, Peulthai. There seems to be another of this name also, in this Office, brought in & annexed to the other, with an ALSO in the same Verse, and is called the Son of Je∣duthun, 1 Chron. 16.38. Of this same Family of Merari, was Hosah, with his Children, Simri, Hilkiah, Tebaliah, Zechariah, &c. who waited upon the Temple-Watches,1 Chron. 20.10, 11. at the Western-End of the Sanctuary. Of the Treasurers. WE have heard that some of the Levites were Singers; others, Porters, or Watch-men: Now we come, in a word, to speak of an Appoint∣ment of some of the Levites to be Treasurers, whereof there was one Su∣pream, or Head-Officer, whose name, in the days of David and Solomon, is mentioned to have been Ahijah,1 Chron. 26.20. and that He was set over the Treasurers of the House of God, and of the Dedicate Things. Under him there were two other sorts of Officers: the first whereof kept the Treasures of the House of the Lord, that is, such as were constantly injoyned for the maintenance of the Temple; and they are recited by name to have been two Brethren, Ze∣tham and Joel, the sons of Jehieli; and Shebuel, the son of Gershom,Ver. 22. of the Po∣sterity of Moses, seems to have been the chief, being called the Ruler of these Treasures. The second sort was entrusted with the Treasures of the Dedicate Things, that is, the Gifts, or Free-will Offerings of the Princes,Ver. 24. Captains, Priests, or any other of the people, which were voluntarily presen∣ted unto God, out of spoils won in Battels, or any other way, whereby their substance was augmented. Such as Samuel, Saul, Abner, Joab, David the King, with the chief Fathers and Captains over thousands, or hundreds, in the Host of Israel, had freely bestowed on the Temple-Service.Ver. 26, 27, 28. Over which we read, that Shelomith was the great Lord-Treasurer; whose Linage, accor∣ding to all the Names of the Persons, between Him and Moses, that we yet find mentioned, was on this wise.
Levi Gershon 1 Chron. 17.20. 1 Chron. 23.7.Laadan, or Libni intermediate Sons not known 1 Chron. 23.8.Jehiel, or Jehieli. Zetham. Joeli. Kohath Amram Moses Zipporah Jethro Exod. 2.22.Gershom. Intermediate sons not known. Shebuel, o∣ver the Trea∣sures of the House of the Lord, verse 24. & 1 Chron. 23.16. Eliezer.Exod. 18.4. 1 Chr. 26.25. Rehabiah Jeshajah Joram Zichri Shelomith, Over the Trea∣sures of the Dedicate Things, v. 28. By this short Scheme, though imperfect, for want of Scripture-Light, we may perceive how highly God was pleased to honour the Posterity of Mo∣ses, in bestowing upon them mainly, the chief Trust of the Treasures of his House. Let us here remember, that these Overseers, and Guardees of the Treasuries, were reckoned among the Porters, as having the distinct charge of the Chambers, Doors, and Chests of the Treasures. For it is expresly re∣corded, that the four chief Porters had the over-sight of the Chambers, or Store-Houses, and the Treasuries of the House of God, intrusted with them. Moreover,1 Chr. 9.26. 1 Chron. 26.15, 17. 2 Chron. 25.24. we may observe, that the Sons of Obed-Edom, (known Porters) had the house of Asuppim, or the Gatherings, as well as of the little Gates, at each end of the House, committed to them, being the same Treasures that were robbed by the King of Israel, in the days of Amaziah, King of Ju∣dah. Lastly, it appears by that passage in the time of King Hezekiah's fa∣mous Reformation, which acquaints us, that Core, the son of Imnah the Le∣vite (the Porter toward the East) was over the Free-will Offering of God,2 Chron. 31.14. to distribute the Oblations of the Lord, and the most Holy Things. So that it appears, that the Treasurers and Overseers of the Dedicate Things, are to be computed among the Porters, but of a higher Rank, then the ordinary Ones, that came in and out by turns to wait at the Gates, to open and shut, and watch at them day and night. For some we find em∣ployed in taking the charge of the ministring Vessels, and bringing them
in and out by Tale, according to the Appointment of the Priests.1 Chron. 9.28, 29, &c. 1 Chron. 23.28. Some were set to the over-sight of the Vessels, and all the Instruments of the San∣ctuary, and the fine Flour, and the Wine, the Oyl, the Frankincense and the Spices. One had his Office over things made in Pans; others, over the Shew-Bread, to prepare it for the Sabbath; and others, in other diverse and various Employments of this nature. But enough of these: let us proceed to the Judges of the Nation, that were of this Levitical Tribe. Of the Judges. BEsides the Singers, Porters, and Treasurers, there were also Judges of this Tribe of Levi. Some whereof had their constant residence in the Countrey for this Service, and their number (distinct from the 24 thousand that set forward the work of the house) is reported to have been six thou∣sand, as Officers and Judges. To cut this Discourse short,1 Chron. 23.4. we shall onely speak to two things, their Linage, and their Office. As to their Linage, its known out of many passages of Scripture, that Ko∣hath, the son of Levi, had four sons, Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Ʋzziel. The Posterity or Issue of which four persons,1 Chron. 23.12. 1 Chron. 26.23. were styled by the Names of their Fathers. The Children of Izhar and Hebron were set apart for this work of Judg∣ment principally, as to the set stations. Though probably many hundreds of their Children might be also taken up in the immediate service of the Temple, as appears by the Singers of Hemans Company, that were the Iffue of Izhar, as may be seen in the Genealogical Scheme of the Singers in pre∣ceding pages. Neither is it improbable, but that those 24000 who were employed more immediatly in the Temple-Worship, (when they depar∣ted in their Courses from their service) did also perform this great and so∣lemn work of Judgment among the people. For they coming in, and going out by set-numbers every week in 24 Courses, did appear but once in 24 weeks at the Temple, unless at the three grand Solemnities; and so had leisure sufficient in their several Cities and Villages to teach the people the Laws of God, to expound the Letter of the Moral, Ceremonial, and Judici∣all Parts thereof, and to judge finally in all matters of Controversie about those Laws, and of their living according to, or the disobeying of them. Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward business over Israel, for Officers and Judges,Ver. 29. saith the Text in the Book of Chroni∣cles; and moreover, that Hashabiah and his Brethren,Ver. 30. men of valour among the Hebronites, 1700 were Officers among them of Israel, on this side Jor∣dan Westward, in all businesses of the Lord, and in the service of the King. On the other side of Jordan, Eastward, was Jerijah, chief among the Hebro∣nites, according to the Generation of his Fathers,Ver. 31. in the 40th year of the Reign of King David, who were found among the mighty men of Valour, at Jazer of Gilead, which was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Gad.1 Chron. 6.81. Of the Brethren of Jerijah, men of valour, there were 2700 chief Fathers, whom King David made Rulers over the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, for every matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the King. So that we find by Record 1700 of the Linage of Hebron,1 Chron. 26.32. on the West of Jordan, and 2700 on the East side of the same Line and Extraction; whence may probably follow, that the 1600 Judges yet remaining, of the number of 6000 mentioned at first, that they were of the Posterity of Iz∣har, and were employed on the West side of Jordan, which was the greatest part of the Land of Canaan, and, according to the proportion of nine Tribes & a half in that Region, had not so many as the two Tribes and half on the
East of Jordan, possibly because of its nearer vicinity to the Court, and the Royal Residence, and so needed not so many, because of the conveniency of their Appeals unto Jerusalem it self. As to their Office, the compa∣ring of two places of Scripture will manifest the great Dignity of their Employment, and the large extent of their power. In the first whereof God himself commands, that in matters of difficulty, if any strong Emer∣gency did arise in Judgment between Blood and Blood, Plea and Plea, Stroke and Stroke, being matters of controversie, within their Gates, they were appointed to go to the place which God should choose, that is, Jeru∣salem principally,Deut. 17.8. &c. and any of the Levitical Cities ordinarily, where the Judges had their fixed residence, and should come to the Priests, the Le∣vites, who should determine in a Sentence of Judgment, and the people were to stand to their Decisions; which if any man presumptuously dared to decline, that man was to be put to death, and evil to be put away from Israel. 2 Chron. 19.8. Ver. 10.Besides, we read in the History of King Jehoshaphat, that He did institute in Jerusalem Levites and Priests, to hear and determine Causes for the Judgment of the Lord, and for Controversies, and charged them, that what Cause soever did come before them, between Blood and Blood, Law and Commandement, Statutes and Judgments, that they should judicially ad∣monish them not to trespass against the Lord. So that from these and other places, it's easie to collect, that the Levites were Judges over Israel, in the highest matters concerning Life or Estate, or any other Controversie between man and man: It being observed by sundry learned Writers, that there was but one Court of Judicature among the Jews, whereof the Levites were the Judges, and the written Law of Mo∣ses was their Rule: not according to the corrupt Innovations of the Church of Rome, in erecting their Curia Christianitatis, for the securing of Church-men in all their out-rages from secular power, in this and in other Nations, and digesting of those Dung-Carts, full of Canonical Books (di∣stinct from the Civil Law, or the Municipals of each Countrey) enough, by their burden, to sink a thousand Asses into the River of Tyber. But to pro∣ceed. To these Levites did appertain the Records and Genealogies: For of this Tribe were the Judges, Lawyers, Scribes, Recorders, Genealogists, in all matters pertaining to the Administration of Justice, Exposition of the Laws, Writing out of the Copies of the Holy Books, to be read in the Countrey-Synagogues, the preservation of the Linage of their Tribes, the determination of Cases, and laying up the Rolls of the Records, in relation to things Sacred and Civil, either belonging to the King, or any of the peo∣ple. Insomuch, that the persons of the greatest rank and quality, either for dignity of Office, or Nobility of Person age, excepting the Royal Race of the Tribe of Judah, were of these. For we find them to be High-Priests, and chief Judges of the Land,1 Kin. 2.35. 1 Chron. 27.5. 1 Chron. 26.14. Generals of the Army, such was Benajah, the son of Jehojadah, in the days of Solomon, expresly called a chief Priest in the Book of Chronicles, Lord High Treasurers of the Temple, and Councellours of State to the King: such was Zechariah, one of the Porters of the Tem∣ple. Nay, to conclude, they were the onely persons that preserved Lear∣ning and Knowledge, in all the Arts and Sciences, wherein those Ages were versed, the Schools of the Prophets being under their Cognizance and Institution; and particularly, the Colledge at Jerusalem, mentioned in the days of Josiah. Insomuch, that the wisdom of our Saxon and Norman An∣cestors, is highly to be honoured: in that they first admitted the Bishops of the Province, as skilled in the Laws of God, to sit with the Earls of the Counties in their Tribunals, to assist them in decision of Causes, according to the Word, (especially such as were co-incident with the
Laws of God; even as Holy Ambrose, in his 32d Epistle, tells Valentinian the Emperour, concerning Blessed Constantine, Qui nullas leges ante pra∣misit, sed liberum dedit Judicium Sacerdotibus) which appears by Sir H. Spelman, in his Glossary, and his Treatise of Tithes, and in the first Tome of his Coun∣sels, in Seldens Janus Anglorum, and other his Pieces, in Mr. Sadler's late notable piece of the Rights and Priviledges of the Kingdom, and in many other, both Antiquaries and Historians, that touch the Saxon days. The latter, I mean the Norman Kings, in giving the presidency of the Court of Chancery usually to a Bishop, as being presumed to be a man of such Conscience and Knowledge in the Laws of God, the Rules of Chri∣stian Piety and Policy, the Laws of Nature, and of Nations, that matters appeaable from the ordinary Courts of Justice, might find there a speedy, safe, and righteous Issue. It being a Sanctuary to persons sweating under the rigour of the Law, the cunning of perverse Pleaders, the corruption of Juries and Judges in any of the other Courts. But hitherto let it suffice to have spoken of all the sacred Officers, which were genuinely extracted from the Root of Levi. A word of the Nethinims, and we shall end. Of the Nethinims. THese were the most inferiour persons, that were conversant in any Temple-Work, being of the Race of the Idolatrous Canaanites, and were the first-fruits of any whole Cities or Societies of men that were pro¦selyted unto God, presaging of old, the future admission of the whole Har∣vest of the Gentiles within the Pale of the Church. The Story is sufficiently known, how the people of Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kiriath-Jearim, by a wily collusion imposed upon Joshuah,Josh. 9.17. and the Princes of Israel, whereby they obtained an exemption of their persons from the common calamity of Canaan. But, upon discovery of their craft, they were solemnly adjudged unto Bondage; yet such as was very honou∣able, (if any servitude may be so styled) in that they were appointed for servants to the House of God, under the Priests and Levites,Ver. 23. and so might esteem it some accession of excellency to be placed rather in the Van of Bond-men, then in the Rear, and to be made the Lags of Free-men. What ever estimation they put upon it, certain it is, such sacred service was a great mercy to them, who having their lives spared, because of the Oaths of the Princes, might have been banished; but were now received unto the Know∣ledge & Service of the true God, and like to be set in the true path of Eter∣nal Salvation: so that whereas others are said to take the Kingdom of Hea∣ven by violence in another sense,Math. 11.12. here the Gibeonites may be said to have ta∣ken it by craft, and out-witted themselves into true happiness. The work which they were appointed to by Joshuah, was hewing of Wood, and drawing of Water for the Sanctuary, and for the Congregation (that is, for the service of the Congregation in their Sacrifices) and for the Altar of the Lord. Our Translation reads it thus,Josh. 9.23. Ver. 21, 27. Ver. 27. that [Joshuah made them such that day] But in the Hebrew the word is  & dedit eos; and he gave them from  Nathan, to give or deliver over. Whence it is, that they were styled the  Nethinims, or the persons given and deli∣vered over for such a service; and therefore the Text says, they were cur∣sed, that is, dedicated to God, as the first-fruit of the slaves of Canaan.Ver. 23. Even
as the City Jericho,Josh. 6.19. & 7.1. with all the goods, was cursed, as being the first-fruit of Cities, taken in the Land; therefore was all the Treasure of it consecrated to the Lord; and Achan herein sinned, by medling with the accursed, or dedicated spoils every person being cursed and condemned that durst touch any Dedications, to diminish from, or take them away. But as to these Nethi∣nims (which we have in hand) that were thus accursed and dedicated to the Sanctuary, the sons of Saul found is by sad experience, to be a dange∣rous point to meddle with consecrated persons as well as things. Concer∣ning whose Name,2 Sam. 21.9. the Paronomasia is more clear and evident in the Book of Ezra; where the Holy Pen-man creating of these persons, in the Regi∣ster of the Returns from Babylon, hath these words in the Hebrew Text, [] And of the Nethinims,Ezra 8.20. Shenathan David, which David gave, or as we read in our English Version [had appointed for the service of the Levites] that is, whom David had, de novo, constituted in their several set-courses, as He had done all the Officers of the Temple, in their several Stations, a little before his death; not that now they were at this time first employed in these Services, but had been ever, since the days of Josuah conversant in that labour: but were now methodized for Tem∣ple-service, according to the Incense of their Generations, since the days of their Primitive Admission, to be the Ministers or Servants of God in the lowest Works of the Sanctuary.Ezra 7.24. The Habitation of these Nethinims, or Gibeonites, was in Ophel, when the Temple was built,Neh. 3.26. & 11.21. that is, either in the Tower it self, as some conceive, or else in houses near to that Tower, or the Wall (so called) of Ophel, in a ca∣pacious place, or street possibly running near the Wall, and adjacent to the Tower of Ophel. On which stately Building, there was much expended by King Jotham, and it was afterward magnificently raised to a very great height by King Manasseh.2 Chron. 27.3. 2 Chron. 33.14. Now the reason why they lodged in or near Ophel, was, because of its proximity, or nearness to the East-Gate of the Temple, the ordinary stately entrance into that sacred place: For they be∣ing not of the Tribe of Levi, might not lodge within the Courts of the Temple. But those that were in course, to attend upon the Wood and Wa∣ter for the Sacrifices, and other sacred uses, lodged close by, till their Week was finisht, and then probably they went out to their Cities and Villages abroad in the Countrey, as the Priests and the Levites did: For we have ex∣press mention of Cities abroad, wherein these Nethinims, as well as the other Officers of the Temple dwelt.Ezra 2.70. But so much let it suffice, to have spoken, concerning the sacred Officers attendant upon Divine Worship in the House of God at Jerusalem. SECT. II. The second Paragraph of this Chapter, according to the Division of it in the be∣ginning, shall contain the several Seasons, Quantities, Numbers, and Mea∣sures, of things sacrificed unto God under the Jewish Paedagogie. IN the first place let's remember, that the Divisions of this Section, ra∣tione temporum, will, out of Scripture, produce some short Discourse about, 1 The Daily Service. 2 The Weekly. 3 The Monethly. And fourthly, the Annual Festivities, which were to be punctually observed, and solemnly performed in their due time and method, (according to the Divine Injunctions) in this Holy Place.
Here, before I proceed, it's somewhat requisite that I briefly speak a little to the dry and liquid Measures of the Hebrews, so far, and of so many onely, as we shall use in this Discourse of the Sacrifices. As to dry Measures, there are three onely that we shall use: The Omer, Ephah, and Homer. Concerning which, we find in Scripture,Exod. 16.36. Ezek. 45.11. Antiq. l. 3. c. 7. that ten Omers make an Ephah, and ten Ephahs produce an Homer. By a tenth deal of Flour, so often mentioned in the Levitical Sacrifices, we understand an Omer, which in the Hebrew Text of Leviticus, is called  and is retained by Josephus, who calls this Quantity and Measure  and tells us, that one of these Measures was equal to 7 Attick cotyla's. Each Cotyla containing 9 Ounces, according to the Learned Agricola. This being multiplyed by 7. produces 63 Ounces;De ponderi∣bus & men∣suris, lib. 2. pag. 85. and that being reduced to pounds of 12 ounces, according to the Medicinal Measures of the Greeks, leaves in the Quotient 5 li. and 3 ounces of Attick Measures, or 5 pints, (give us leave so to speak) and 3/12, or ¼, for one Omer, or 10th deal of Flour for a meat-offering to every Lamb. Consequently, ten times as much, that is an Ephah, is 52 li. and ½, which being reduced to English mea∣sure, makes six Gallons, one Pottle, and half a pint. So that one Omer was one Pottle, one Pint, and three Ounces of our Measure, or very near the matter, though we cannot now spend time in reducing the Attick pound to our English Troy Weight of 12 ounces, 8 pounds whereof makes an Eng∣lish Gallon, according to the Statute of the 12 H. 7. cap. 5. Secondly, As to liquid Measures, there are three onely that we have need to meddle with; the Log, Hin, and Bath: of which, one Log contained six Eggs, that is, as much Water as ran out of a Vessel whereinto 6 Eggs were put, after it was filled unto the brim:Schindler. or, as others, the content of 6 Egg-shells. Secondly, a Hin contained 72 Eggs, or 12 Logs:Buxtorf. so that in Sacri∣fice-measures mentioned in Scripture, (importing, that there were Vessels of such a content as followeth) The fourth part of a Hin is three Logs. The third part is four Logs; half a Hin, six Logs; and three quarters, nine Logs. Moreover, lastly, six Hins fill up a Bath. Now for Reduction to our Measures, as in the dry Measures, we pitch upon the Assaron, or tenth deal, because most used in this present Sacrifice Story: so we will now pitch upon the Hin, which with its parts is the measure frequently mentio∣ned in this business. As to this, Josephus (I will not say how truly and punctually) comparing the Hin with Attick Measures, tells us,Antiq. l. 3. cap. 9. p. 88. D. it was equal to two of those Measures, which the Athenians termed , which by the Commentator upon Nicander, at the end of his Alexipharmaca is thus ex∣plained , and afterwards . A Chus is six Sextaties, and a Sextary contains one li. and ½, whence we lean, that one Chus is 9 li. and one Hin is 18 li. of Attick, Measure. Consequent∣ly, there are 108 pounds in one Bath: and one Log, being the seventy se∣cond part of a Bath, will contain a pint and half, even three times as much as will be produced by such as converse with Egge-shels. But, indeed, I vehemently suspect Josephus, because (in reason) the quantity of Oyl, ac∣cording to this reckoning, for the daily Sacrifice,Exod. 29.40. being the fourth part of a Hin, or three Logs, comes to one Pottle, and ½ a pint of Oyl, to be mingled with one tenth deal of Flour, which was before stated out of Josephus his Attick Cotyla, to be one pottle, one pint, and three ounces of Flour, which is incomparably too much for the wetting of Flour to make a Cake, if I do not grosly mistake in good Housewifery. For as sure as can be, Josephus, though a Priest, his Office lay not among the Baking-Pans, or else he was poorly acquainted with Attick measures. Wherefore, that we may not
marre the Cake in the making, we had better take the measure of those that have put the Eggs in the Cakes, and measured the Oyl with the shells, and they will tell us, that one Log is but half a pint; and so the fourth part of a Hin, or a pint and half of Oyl, will serve a little better to mix with the Flour. But this way of dealing with Eggs in measures, I doubt will make nine measures of ten prove addle. For, first, they tell us not, whether we are to use the Eggs of Wrens, Sparrows, Hens, Eagles, or Ostriches, in this profound Design. Secondly, they suppose all Eggs of a kind to be of one bigness. And thirdly, they never heed that the Water of the Vessel, wherein they put their Eggs, will variously rise into a tumour on the surface, to pre∣serve from a solution of continuity, and that variously, more or less, accor∣ding as the Eggs be gently or rashly put in, and so yield Water, more or less, for your measure: they should have done well to have informed us of the proportion of motion in this action. If Physitians should have no more care, as to medicinal measures: then the Priests had in their services towards God, (if this be true) they might quickly send Hundreds of Pa∣tients out of this World, before they would go. But one thing more I have to say of Josephus, and that is, I am afraid he trades a little too deep, and goes too much on the score with the Septuagint. For though he tells us other-where, that a Bath is equal to 72 Sextaries; and here, that a Hin is two of the . i.e. 12 Sextaries, and so agrees with himself, because 6 Hins are 12 Attick Sextaries; each whereof contains one pound, six ounces: so that 72 Sextaries, arise to 108 pound for the Bath, as was said before: Yet here lyes the point to be proved, Whether a Bath be so much, or not. For shall I mind you, that Josephus observing the 70. to translate a Bath by , as they have done in several places, and then taking notice, that an Athenian ,Nicandri-Scholiast ad calcem. was 72 Sextaries: He tells us, without any more ado, that a Bath was so also. Whereas the Septuagint, whether wilfully, or ignorantly; or as a matter not worthy of such exactness and curiosity, (if we have their true Copy) do translate the Hebrew word Bath, and Batim, by  and : and the Log also they tran∣slate by .Kircher Concordan∣tia. So that if you will heedlesly follow them, a Bath and a Log shall be all one measure, according to the last mentioned Version of a Cotyla. Wherefore, at present, we shall take this course. First, let us re∣member, that a Bath, and an Ephab, are stated to be of equal measure, as to capacity:Ezek. 45.14. though the matters contained (the one being liquid, the other dry) differ greatly in weight; which is neither the sense of that place, nor our present inquiry. But seeing that Josephus (as 'tis above-written) up∣on his own account, not medling with the Septuagint, hath framed a word of his own for an Omer, or the tenth part of an Ephah, viz. , not used by them; and that it seems also upon other accounts, that quantity comes nigh the truth, as may be shewn (God willing) hereafter. We will accordingly, state the Bath according to God's Command, equal in capacity to the Ephah; which is 52 pints, and ½, or 6 Gallons, one Pottle, and ½ a pint for a whole Bath: and then the sixth part of a Bath, i. e. a Hin will be one Gallon, and three Quarters of a pint; and the twelfth part of an Hin, or one Log, will be ⅔ of a Pint, and ¾ of an Ounce, that is, three quarters of a pint, wanting but the fourth part of an ounce, or eight ounces, and three fourths of an ounce. Two Logs are equal to one pint, 5 ounces, and ½: three Logs to one quart, two ounces, and ¼ of an ounce: four Logs to one quart, and 11 ounces: six Logs to one Pottle, four ounces, and ½ an ounce.
And lastly, the proportion of Oyl for to mingle with the Flour, for the Cake of the Daily Sacrifice, being the fourth part of a Hin, or three Logs,Exod. 29.40. will prove (you see) to be one quart, two ounces, and a quarter of Oyl, i. e. almost a quarter of a pint. Thus have I done with this particular of Measures, as far as we have use of it at present; onely I beg of the courteous and ingenuous Reader, to use one Caution, that in the reduction of Attick, or Roman pounds, to ours, they would not strictly interpret me: which as to an exact and accurate proportion, is the business of another Treatise. Now then to recount the service of the Priests in the Temple, we read that David gave to his Son a perfect List of all the parts of their Duty:1 Chron. 28.13. which Account being not extant in any one single place of Scripture, we must have recourse to the various places where they be scattered up and down in the sacred leaves. To proceed then, we shall observe, First, That the constant service, without intermission, was that of the Porters, who were appointed to watch at the Temple-Gates,1 Chron. 23.5. day and night, by courses; and their number we find to be four thousand. Secondly, the daily service was spent in the sacrificing of a Lamb, mor∣ning and evening, with a meat-offering, that is, a Cake made of the tenth part of an Ephah, that is, an Omer of Flour,Exod. 29.38, &c. Numb. 28.4, 5, &c. mingled with the fourth part of a Hin, that is, three Logs of Oyl, together with a Drink-offering, which was the fourth part of a Hin, or three Logs of Wine. This was done in the Court of the Priests. But within the Temple, the Lamps of the Golden Candlesticks were to be dressed and supplyed with Oyl, morning and eve∣ning; and, at both those times, sweet Incense was to be burnt upon the Golden Altar, to cause a fragrant odour throughout the Temple. Though I know that an eminently learned man of our Nation, I mean Dr. Reynolds, in his Conference with Hart, Pag. 492, and 495. is of the mind, that the Lamps did not burn all day long, but were lighted at Evening onely, and kept light all, or the greatest part of the night: yet is it conceived by others, upon the account of the narrowness of the Windows admitting but little light, that the Lamps did burn continually,Exod. 30.7, 8. especially since there is express mention made of the dressing the Lamps every morning, Exod. 30.7. But we shall submit in this to the more Learned, in these ancient Rites of the Temple: onely observing, that the Songs of the Temple were solemnized at the time of the burning of Incense; as is hinted, Rev. 5.8, 9. and that at this time of Incense, the people used to pray without, Luk. 1.9, 10. More∣over, that this Musical Harmony was celebrated at the time of Sacrifice, as we have other where observed. Thirdly, the Weekly Service was performed on every Sabbath,Numb. 28.9, 10. which was double to the Daily; besides the Daily in every fore-mentioned particu∣lar. Fourthly the Monethly Service was celebrated on every New Moon, or first day of every Moneth;Numb. 28.11-16. and had for a Burnt-Offering two young Bul∣locks, one Ram, seven Lambs, and one Kid of the Goats, for a Sin-Offering. The Meat-Offering was three Omers of Flour, mingled with Oyl propor∣tionable; as in the Daily Service, three Logs to an Omer, that is, three quar∣ters of a Hin for every Bullock, and two Omers of Flour, and half an Hin for the Ram. The Drink-Offering was half a Hin of Wine for each Bullock, and the third part of a Hin, or four Logs for the Ram; and for every Lamb a Meat-Offering, and Drink-Offering of the same quantities, as usually in the Daily Sacrifice.
All this was offered on the New-Moon, besides the continual Burnt-Offerings of two Lambs with their Cakes and Wine. In the fifth place, let us treat of the Annual Festivities, which were prin∣cipally three whereof in their distinct order. First, The Passover, which sell out upon the 14th day of the first moneth, wherein every Houshold eat a Lamb,Exod. 12.4, &c. unless it were too small a Family, then they might joyn with their Neighbours. But these Offerings being particular, according to the multitude of Persons and Families, we cannot bring them unto a certain account. The next day (after the solemn slay∣ing of the Paschal Lamb, on the Evening of the 14th day,) being the 15th of the first moneth,Numb. 28.16-26. began the Temple-Sacrifices for 7 days together, every day alike; each day having as many Sacrifices, as the New Moon had; whereof before. Ver. 27-31. Lev. 23.12, 13.Secondly, The Feast of First-Fruits, answering to our Pentecost, had the very same Offerings with the New-Moon. Besides, one He-Lamb, and two Omers of Flour and Oyl accordingly; and but the fourth part of a Hin of Wine being the morrow after the Sabbath of First-Fruits. Thirdly, The Feasts of the 7th Moneth, on the first day of which Moneth were offered one Bullock, one Ram, 7 Lambs, and one Kid, with their meat-offerings,Numb. 29.2-7. and drink-offerings proportionably, as before; besides the usuall offerings of an ordinary New-Moon, and of the Daily Service. More∣over, on the 10th day of the 7th moneth, just as much as on the first day, was presented to God upon his Altar.Ver. 7-12. On the first day of the 7th moneth, there were Offerings for 7 days to∣gether, on this wise following. On the 15th of these 7 days, 13 young Bullocks, two Rams, 14 Lambs, and one Kid for a Sin-Offering, with their meat-offerings, and drink-offe∣rings, as before; besides the daily offerings. On the second day but 12 Bullocks, all the rest alike. On the third day . On the 4th 10. On the 5th 9. On the 6th 8. On the 7th, 7 Bullocks. On the 8th,Numb. 29.39. just as much as on the New Moon; and all these constantly every year; besides the Vows, the Free-will Offerings, and Peace-Offerings, which were great expences in Worship; besides the Red-Cow, and all the Passover Lambs, and all the Frankincense Salt and Firing, &c. To conclude, I will now give you in a Catalogue of all the ordinary con∣stant Offerings in one Year: in which Year I shall count 365 days, 52 Sab∣baths, and 13 New-Moons: though I know the Julian Year differs from the Judaical Calendar; yet by reason of the Jewish Intercalations, and re∣gulating their years thereby, there will be no great difference, when several years be compared together.
A Scheme of the Temple-offerings in one year.   Kids Bullocks Rams Lambs. Flour. Oil. Wine.           Ephahs. Omers. Baths, Hins, Logs. B. H. L. The daily Sa∣crifice for 365 days, 2 Lamb a day. 0 0 0 730 73 0 30 2 6 30 2 6 52 Sabbaths. 0 0 0 104 10 4 4 2 0 4 2 0 13 New Moon 13 26 13 91 19 5 8 0 9 6 3 0 Passover 7 days. 7 14 7 49 8 5 4 1 3 3 1 3 First Fruits. 1 2 1 2Lev . 23 19. 1 5 0 3 9 0 3 0 7Numb. 28.27 &c. 0 2 0 0 6 0 0 3 1Lev. 23.12, 13.                 Fir st day of 7th moneth. 1 1 1 7 1 2 0 3 0 0 2 6 Tenth day of 7th moneth. 1 1 1 7 1 2 0 3, 0 0 2 6 The 8 dayes of Taberna∣cles. 8 71 15 105 34 8 15 2 6 10 5 6 The sum total 31 115 38 1103 150 3 64 1 0 56 4 0 Here I have exhibited in a Table at one view, the several stated offerings throughout the Year constantly, given up to God at the Temple: I will not undertake, that it is exactly drawn up to a hair: But I hope it is pretty near the matter, which you see arrives to this summe in a year, viz. One Hundred and 15 young Bullocks, thirty eight Rams, one thousand one hundred and three Lambs, and thirty one Kids, smoaking upon God's Al∣tar: To which was added for Bread and Drink, one hundred and fifty Ephahs, and three Omers of fiue Flour, sixty four Baths, and one Hin of pure beaten Oyl, and fifty six Baths, four Hins, and six Logs, of excellent Wine. This was the constant Yearly Sacrifice: SECT. III. The third Section of this Chapter, promised in the beginning of it, shall treat concerning the various sacrifices under the Jewish Paedagogy, their Nature, Manner, Ʋse, and End, with their attendant Rites and Ceremonies. IN reading of the Scriptures wee find six various Offerings presented unto God. 1 Burnt-Offerings. 2 Sin-Offerings. 3 Trespass-Of∣ferings. 4 Peace-Offerings. 5 Meat-Offerings. And 6 Drink-Offe∣rings.
With two Appendixes,Lev. 2.13. Lev. 2.11. Vol. 3. p. 54. Salt and Incense. Hony and leaven were both forbidden expresly: as being of one Nature even to Ferment: as learned Weemse observeth. The main and ultimate End of these Sacrifices were to point at Christ, and to be the sacred Hieroglyphicks of his death and Atonement for Sin∣ners. The subordinate and intermediate End was, that therein the Jewish People should be exercised in sacred worship that was typicall. Gul. Parisi. de legibus cap. 8.The burning of the sacrifices noted the death and consumption of Sin. To represent also, to the minds of the Offerers, the dreadful effects of Sin as it merits death: together with the goodness of God to save the sinner, to pardon his sin, and by the death of his sacrifice to typify an Offering once for all in the latter daies. Some of these Sacrifices were for expiation of sins of Ignorance or Knowledge, if so be they were not committed presumptuously. For which sin there was no Sacrifice:Num. 15.30 Heb. 10.36. but the person was to be cut off from his people. Others were for acknowledgement of homage and tri∣bute to God the great and mighty LORD that made all things by the word of his power. Others for thanks-giving after the receipt of some eminent Mercy, and for many other Ends, as will appear more by and by. The things offered were either of Beasts or Birds or fruits of the Earth. Of Beasts these three only, Bullocks, Sheep, and Goates: Of Birds, Tur∣tles,De leg. c. 11 Ceremoniall Law. pa. 52. Vol. 3. Lev. 14.4. and Pigeons, and, as Parisiensis and Weemse think, Sparrows also, as in the case of Leprosy. So some take the word  to signify. We find it translated in our Bibles by Sparrows Psal. 84.3. & 102.7. The Crea∣tures you see are domesticall and mild. They feed on Herb and Grasse, are not fierce carnivorous Beasts: It's observed by some to that purpose, that they have neither crooked Nails and Claws, nor continued Sets of Teeth, and besides are the most usefull to man in his life. Of the Birds one is a mournfull Creature, the other, is commonly reported, by reason of its innocency and harmlesnesse, to be without a Gall. Fishes we see were not offered: because (say some) they could not be brought alive: which was one ingedient of the Sacrifices. Another was, to be without spot or blemish, not that of Colour in the Hair or Wool: but without any imperfection, either of naturall Monstrosity or of accidentall hurt or disease, and for the most part well-liking, fat, and young. The Blood was to be poured out, and the fat alwayes was dedicate to God all the Fat was the Lord's,Lev. 3.16. saith the Text in Leviticus. I shall now speak briefly, and in order, of these Sacrifices, of what Creatures, for what Causes, and how or∣dered, and in what feasts they were offered. 1 Of the Burnt-Offering. The Cause. This was either offered by Gods injunction for particular Causes recited beneath or else as a free will Offering:Lev. 1.3, 4. But in all cases it signified Atone∣ment for the person that lifted it up to God and shewed the demerit of sin, even to be burnt to Ashes by the fire of the Lord's wrath. The Kind. Lev. 1.3, 5, 10. &c. 22. v. 19.The Kind of Creature offered was either of the Herd, a Bullock; or of the Flock, a Sheep or Goat; alwayes a Male and without blemish: Among Fowles, the moaning Turtle or the loving Pigeon.
The Seasons and Occasions. The Seasons were either arbitrary or instituted: Arbitrary, when it was a Vow or a Free-will Offering.Levit. 22.18. Exod. 29.18. Lev. 8.18. Lev. 5.7, 10. Lev. 9.2, 3. Lev. 12.6. Weemse Vol. 3. p. 64. Instituted times are these remembred in Scripture. 1. A Ram at the consecration of Priests. 2ly, In case of the four trespasses mentioned in Lev. 5. the person transgressing was to bring either a Turtle or a Pigeon for a Burnt-Offering. 3ly, At the Initiation of Aaron and his Sons to their Office, there was a Ram for Aaron and a Calf and a Lamb of the first year for the people. 4ly, At the Purificati∣on of Women a Lamb wat burnt: If poor, then a Turtle or Pigeon, which a learned man observes to respect originall sin at the birth of a Child. 5ly, As to Leprosy: there were commanded to be offered by him at his clean∣sing two he Lambs and one Ewe Lamb, whereof one he Lamb being spent in the Trespass-Offering ver. 12. though the Text tell us not whether the Burnt-Offering were a He or a She Lamb:Lev. 14.12. Ver. 20. yet by the forecited rule that none but Males must be sacrificed in the burnt-Offering, therefore we put down a He Lamb, if the Leper were able; or else a Turtle or a Pigeon.Ver. 22. Lev. 15.30. Numb. 6.11. 6ly, At the cleansing of separated Women a Turtle or young Pigeon. 7ly, For Nazarites in two cases. First, at their restitution in case of de∣filement, a Turtle or Pigeon. Secondly, At the period of his separation, or the Manumission from his Vow, one He Lamb. 8ly,Ver. 14. Num. 7.15.-8.12. Num. 15.24. Exo. 29.42. Num. 28.3. At the Dedication of the Tabernacle each of the twelve Princes of Israel offered a Bullock, a Lamb, and a Ram. 9ly, At the consecration of the Levites, a Bullock. 10ly, For a Sin of Ignorance of the whole Congregation, a Bullock also. These hitherto related were instituted upon the incident cases mentioned. There remain yet the constant burnt-Offerings, which were these. 1 The daily Sacrifice of two Lambs, which were burnt together with their Meat-Offering and Drink-Offering upon the Altar. 2ly, On every seventh day, or Sabbath, four Lambs. 3ly,Numb. 28.9, 10. Ver. 11. Ver. 19. Ver. 24. Lev. 23.12. Ver. 18. Num. 28.27 On every new Moon distinctly for it self as a new Moone or first day of the Moneth, two Bullocks, one Ram, and se∣ven Lambs. 4ly, On the fifteenth day of the first or Passeover Moneth, being the first of the seven daies of that great festivity after the Passeover, 2 Bullocks one Ram, and seven Lambs, and so for seven daies continually. 5ly, In the Sheaf of the first fruits, one he Lamb. 6ly, In the feast of first fruits; If we consult the Leviticall Book, we read of seven Lambs, one Bullock, and two Rams. But in the Book of Numbers, seven Lambs, one Ram, and two Bullocks: which I shall leave to consideration. 7ly, In the first day of the seventh Moneth, or the feast of Trumpets, one Bullock,& 29.2. one Ram, and seven Lambs. 8ly, On the tenth day of the seventh Month, or the Expiation day, one Bullock, one Ram, and seven Lambs.Ver. 8. In ano∣ther place we read particularly in the case of Atonement upon that day, besides this Offering there was a Ram for the High-Priest himself,Lev. 16.3, 5. and another for all the People. 9ly and Lastly, On the fifteenth day of the seventh Month being the beginning of the feast of Tabernacles, thirteen Bullocks, two Rams, fourteen Lambs, and so constantly for seven daies, onely every day there decreased one Bullock from the Offerings, till at the seventh day there were but seven Bullocks. On the the eight and last day there was offered but one of each. The Manner. The Manner of service in the burnt-Offering was this for the Bullock, 1 The Person that brought it was to put his hand on the head of it:Lev. 1.4. as it was usuall in point of confession of sin.
Ver. 5.2ly, He himself was to kill his own Offering: some think the Priest did it, (who indeed did slay the constituted Temple-Offerings) but if the words be well considered, we find the Priest comming in to action after the the flaying of the Sacrifice. So in the relation of Hezekiah's Sacrifices, there seems to be a manifest distinction between the Persons that kill'd them and the Priests, 2 Chron. 29.22. But that which was the Sin-Offering of all Israel, the Priests did slay. Ver. 24. Ver. 5. Ver. 6. Ver. 7. Lev. 1.8.3ly, The Priest was to sprinkle the Blood round about the Brazen Al∣tar. 4ly, The Priest stayed off the Skin. 5ly, He cut it in pieces. 6ly, He put fire on the Altar, and layed the wood in order upon the fire. 7ly, He layed the parts, the head and the fat in order upon the wood that was in the fire which was upon the Altar. Ver. 9.8ly, He washed the inwards and legs in water, and then burnt all upon the Altar an Offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord. So much for the Bullocks burnt-Offering. If it were a Sheep or a Goat, the manner was the same, onely mention is made of its being slain on the side of the Altar Northward before God. Ver. 11. Ver. 15.I it were a Fowle. 1 The Priest wrung off its head and burnt it on the Altar. 2 The Blood was wrung out at the side of the Altar. 3 The Crop and Feathers were cast beside the Altar on the Eastpart by the place of the Ashes.Ver. 16,17. 4ly, It was to be cleft with the wings, but not our asunder, and so laid upon the Altar and burnt, an Offering made by fire of a sweet favour unto the Lord. Thus it was to continue & lye burning all night upon the Altar unto the morning:Lev. 6.9, 10. Then the Priest having put on his Linnen Garment and Bree∣ches took up the Ashes and laid them beside the Altar. After that putting off his priestly and putting on his other common Garments, he was to car∣ry forth the Ashes out of the Camp, and afterward out of the City, into a clean place:Ver. 12. while the fire on the Altar was still continually burning by a constant supply of wood laid in order upon it every morning. The Priest's Portion. To conclude with the last thing of this Section, and that is, what portion the Priest had in the burnt-Offering,Lev. 7.8. & 8.8. and that was the Skin of the four foot∣ed Creatures. 2 Of the Sin-Offering. The Cause. The Cause for which the Sin-Offering was enjoyned by God, is recor∣ded by Moses to be this,Levit. 4.2. If any Soul sin through Ignorance against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning things which ought not to be done. The Kind. The Creature in this case offered was of the Herds, either a young Bul∣lock, or Calf or a red Heifer: of the Flocks, a Male Kid, a Female Kid; or an Ewe Lamb: of Fowle, a young Pigeon or Turtle. The Occasion. The Seasons or Occasions of this Offering upon what account it was in∣stituted, were either for accidentall sins, or on set stations of the year. Levit. 4.3. Numb. 15.24. Levit. 4.14. Levit. 4.23. & Numb. 15.27. Lev. 4.28.32. Exod. 29.14. Levit. 8 2, 14. Levit. 9.2, 3. Levit. 12.6. c. 14.19. Ver. 22.1 In case the anointed Priest sinned, there was to be offered up a young Bullock for a sin-Offering. 2ly, For the sin of the whole Congregation, a young Bullock; likewise if it be for Ignorance in not observing the Levi∣tical Ordinances, a Kid. 3ly, For a Ruler, a Male-kid of the Goats. 4ly, For any of the Common People, a Female Kid of the Goats, or a young Lamb. 5ly, At the Consecration of an High-Priest, a young Bullock. 6ly, At Aaron's Initiation into his Office, a young Calf: and at the same time for the people, a Kid of the Goats: 7ly, At the Purification of Wo∣men,
a young Pigeon or a Turtle Dove. 8ly, At the cleansing of a Leper, an Ewe Lamb: If the Leper were very poor, a Turtle or Pigeon. But why an Ewe Lamb, if able, see above concerning his burnt-Offering. 9ly, At the cleansing of Women separated for uncleannesses mentioned in the Leviticall Law, a Turtle or young Pigeon. 10ly,Lev. 15.30. Num. 6.11. Ver. 14. Num. 7.16.8.12. For the Defilement of of a Nazarite, a Turtle or Pigeon: but at the end of his separation, an Ewe Lamb. 11ly, At the Dedication of the Tabernacle, every of the 12 Prin∣ces of the Congregation of Israel offered a Kid of the Goats. 12ly, At the Consecration of the Levites, a Bullock. The constant Sin-offerings through the year were these following. 1. On every new Moon, one Kid of the Goats. 2ly,Numb. 28.15, 22, 24. Ver. 30. & Lev. 23.19. Num. 29.5. Lev. 16.6. Ver. 7, 9, 10. Num. 29.11. Ver. 16. On the fifteenth day of the Passover Month one Goat, and so on, for seven daies together. 3ly, In the day of the first fruits, one Kid. 4ly, In the feast of Trumpets, one Kid. 5ly; On the Expiation day, that great and solemn fast to afflict their Souls, there was a Bullock appointed to make Atonement with, for the High Priest and his Family: and two Kids of the Goates for the Peo∣ple: the one for the Offering, the other for an escape into the Wilderness, according as the lot fell. Besides this Atonement-offering, there is ex∣press command for another Kid of the Goats to be offered up this day for a Sin-offering. 6ly, and lastly, On the fifteenth day of the 7th Month, one Kid of the Goats, and so for eight daies together, during the Feast of Tabernacles. The red Cow or Heifer, of famous mention in Scripture, by the manner of its Offering appears to be most properly ranked among these Sin-offe∣rings, it being neerest a-kind to it in the method of its solemnities;Num. 19.9. and besides, the Ashes laid up are expresly said to be a purification for sin. The Manner. The Manner of the Solemnity in the Sin-offerings, was this following. first, As to the Bullock of the Priest's Offering for sin. 1 It was to be brought to the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.Lev. 4.4, 5. 2ly. His hand who had sinned was to be laid on the head of his Offering. 3ly, He was to kill it. 4ly, The anointed Priest was to dip his finger in the Blood and to sprinkle it seven times before the Lord, that is,Ver. 6. Ver. 7. before the Vail of the Sanctuary. 5ly, He was to put some of the Blood upon the Horns of the golden Altar of Incense. 6ly, The rest of the Blood was to be powred out at the bottom of the Brazen Altar. 7ly, He was to take the fat of the inwards, the Kidneys and their fat and the Caul above the Liver and burn them upon the Brazen Altar. 8ly, He was to take the Skin and the Flesh, the Head and the Legs, the Inwards and the Dung,Lev. 8.17. Exod. 29.11, 12.14. even the whole Bullock, and to burn him to ashes without the Camp. 9ly and Lastly, He that officiated in the burning of the Bullock, was to wash his Cloths, and bathe himself in water,Lev. 16.27. and afterward he might come into the Camp. The manner of Offering the Bullock for the whole Congregation, had onely this different Ceremony: that the Elders,Lev. 4.15. &c. as the Representatives of the Congregation, were to lay their hands upon his head; and then he was to be slain. As to the He-Goat for the Sin-offering of the Ruler, and the Ewe Lamb or She Kid for a common Person; The Sinner was to lay his hand upon the head of his Offering: and then it was to be kill'd in the place, where the burnt-offering was slain. Then the Priest was to put of its blood with his finger upon the Horns of the Brazen Altar▪ but not to come into the Sanc∣tuary neer the Vail vvith its blood, as in the former case, but vvas to pour
out the rest at the bottom of the Brazen Altar. Then the fat of this offe∣ring was to be burnt upon the Altar, after the Manner and Ceremony of the Sacrifice of Peace-offerings,Ver. 26, 31. and therefore the parts of it were not to be burnt without the Camp, as the flesh of the Bullocks which were offe∣red for the Priest and the whole Congregation, before spoken of, had been:The Priests Portion. Lev. 10.18. but, according to the rites of Peace-offerings, it seems it was to be eaten by the Priests; Whereof more in the next Section. Levit. 6.26. Wherefore we read of Moses's being angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, that the Goat for the Sin-offering was not eaten in the holy place; and gives this reason, why it should; because the blood of it was not brought within the Sanctuary: But that whose blood was brought into the holy place must not be eaten, it must be burnt. Lev. 6.30. In the last place, the Manner of sacrificing the Red Cow or Heifer was thus, Numb. 19.1 There was chosen out a red Heifer without spot or blemish, on which there never came any yoke. 2ly, The High Priest was to bring her without the Camp, and there she was to be slain. 3ly, The Priest was to take of her blood with his finger, and sprinkle of it seven times before the Tabernacle. 4ly, The Skin, Flesh, Blood, and Dung were to be burnt in that place. 5ly, The Priest was to cast Cedar wood, Hyssop, and Scarlet, into the midst of the fire. 6ly, Both the Priest and he that burnt her were to wash their clothes and bathe their flesh in water, to remain unclean till the Even, and then to come into the Camp. 7ly, A person that was clean did gather up the Ashes, and laid them up in a clean place without the Camp, for the water of separation, and to be a purification for Sin; and then to wash his clothes, and to be unclean unto the Even. 8ly, The use of these Ashes was this, they were to take of these Ashes and put running water to them in a Vessel; Then a clean Person was to dip Hyssop in that water, and to sprinkle any Persons, Vessels, Tents, which had been neer a dead body, or had touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a Grave, on the third day and on the seventh, on which last day of his uncleanness, he was to wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be clean at Even: and so he that sprinkleth of the water must do the like. If this purification were not done, the Person that refused or neg∣lected it, was to he cut off from the Congregation of Israel. To which custome the Apostle,Heb. 9.14. expresly speaking, argues à minori, If the sprinkling of the Ashes of an Heifer on the unclean, sanctify to the purifying of the flesh: How much more shall the blood of Christ purge the conscience from dead works,De Legibus cap. 10. as that did from dead bodies As for the conceit of Parisiensis, that the red Cow did look back unto the sin of the golden Calf by way of Expiation, I leave it to its favourites: and proceed to the next sort of sa∣crifices. 3 Of the Tresspass-Offering. In this Section before we proceed, it's necessary to speak something about the difference betwixt the Sin-offering and the Trespass-offering. As to which I shall not spend time to recite the various opinions in seve∣rall Authors concerning this point. It's sufficiently known that the words  usually translated by Peceatum, or sin; and  Delictum or Trespass; are sometimes interchangeably used without any accurate or nice distinction▪ and their Offerings also in the same manner. As for ex∣ample, the very same which is called a Trespass-offering, Lev. 5.6. is called also a Sin-offering, Ver. 7, 8, 9, & 11. of the same Chapter. But when they are precisely distinguished, Sin-offering, strictly so called and taken,
& trespass-offering seem to be the species, or two sorts of sin-offerings more largely taken, and whereunto as a Genus they are both referred: So that Sin-fering, taken in its large sense, communicates to its Inferiors both name and nature. For as the Sin-ffering, so is the Trespass-offering, there is one Law for them, Lev. 7.7. But yet the communication is not equally alike to the one Species as to the other, and therefore draws somewhat nigh and may be reduced to that which the Logicians call Genus anologum. Wherefore according to that ancient Canon,Suarez Met. disp. 32. §. 2. Analogum per se positum stat pro famo siori significato: Sin-offering, when mentioned apart by it self, and in contra distinction to the other, is to be understood of that Offering which we spake of in the last Section: and is most commonly and gene∣rally so taken. But as to the true distinction betwixt them, when rigo∣rously taken, and in opposition one to the other: I shall desire to set down the words of Ribera de Templo,l. 4. cap. 6. p. 271. p. 186. Edit. fol. which are related in the very same tearms with small variation by judicious Rivet on the 40 Psalme, and highly ap∣proved as the best opinion about this point, who might have dealt a little more ingeniously in mentioning his Author, though a Papist. Cum{que} pateat (saies River) quando illa duo secernuntur, delicta esse quae per ignorantiam fiunt, & peccata etiam inter ea numerari, quae per ignorantiam facta sunt; inferunt, necesse esse, alteram esse ignorantiam, pro quâ offertur hostia pro peccato; alte∣ram, quâ hostia pro delicto expiatur. Eam, quae invenitur in quibusdam ex tis, quae propriè peccata hîc dicuntur, esse ignorantiam facti; eam verò, quae in delictis, esse ignorantiam juris, aut potius juris & legis oblivionem. Ita{que} illos pro Peccato offerre qui factum ignorant, hoc est, qui nesciunt alienum esse quod capiunt, aut sacrum esse quod edunt aut pollutum esse quod tangunt. Pro Delicto verò, quid, quod faciunt aut lege prohiberi nesciunt, aut certè non re∣cordantur. &c.] The summ of all which discourse is this, That Sinoffe∣rings were then presented: when the person at the time of the commission was ignorant of the Fact, that is, he knew not what he had taken, to have bin anothers; or that to have been holy which he had eaten; or that to have bin unclean, which he had casually or otherwise touched. But Trespass-offe∣rings were then brought: when the committer of such a sinfull action did not clearly understand or perfectly know, that was forbidden by the Law, or at least had at the time of his perpetration of the act sheerely for∣gotten its prohibition. So that it is observable, that forgetfulness is not mentioned as to those Crimes for which the Sin-offering was to expiate, but in the case of Trepass-offerings: as may be observed Lev. 5.2, 3. If the sin be hidden from him, that is, if he had forgotten: for so the phrase is explained ver. 4. by addition of these words, [When he knoweth it he shall be guilty.] To conclude then, The Sin-offerings did purge the Person and take off his guiltiness as to sins of pure and unwilfull Ignorance. The Trespass-offering was to remove the guilt of sins committed knowingly but through infirmity: and not with the full career and consent of the Will in a vio∣lent way against Gods Commandments. For such a sin was called Pre∣sumption, and (as was said before) had no Sacrifice allotted to it. As a Corollary then we may note briefly, That the Trespass-offering was appointed to expiate greater and grosser sins then the former, as may appear by their Catalogue, and some expressions mentioned in their re∣hearsall, whereof in the following List here exhibited. The Causes. The first four cases wherein the Trespass-offering was commanded were these.
Lev. 5.1, 2. &c.1 If any Person heard another swear, if he did not utter or reveal it. 2 If he touch the carkase of any unclean Creature. 3 If he touch any uncleanness of a man. 4 If he swear to do good or evill: if he do not the good, or if he do the evill he swore to, and knew not or had forgotten that such things are forbidden by the Law: then finding himself guilty, he was to bring an Ewe-Lamb or a Female Kid; if not able, then a Turtle or a young Pige∣on,Lev. 6.7. for his Trespass-offering, which in both the sixth and seventh ver. is cal∣led by the common name of a Sin-offering; or if yet unable, then a Meat-offering: whereof beneath. 5 If the Trespass be commited against the Lord immediately, in taking away any holy things, then he was to make amends for the harm, and to add a fifth part,Ver. 15, 16. Lev. 6.17, 18 and to bring a Ram for his Offering. 6 If he wist not, that is, had forgotten the prohibition of the Law di∣rectly spoken against such and such Sins, and so should prove guilty ex ig∣norantia juris vincibili, and that onely at that time per accidens, that is, ha∣ving been accidentally ignorant through mistake, over-sight, or non-atten∣dency: which he might easily have overcome, had he been diligent in the inquiry of God's Law, and the pondering of his action according to it: Wherefore the Learned Weemse saies, these sins were done ignorantly, as when one in drink kills another: but not from Ignorance or want of Knowledge that Murther is a grievous sin when in his sober wits. pag. 68. In this case, God was graciously mercifull to pardon his servant, and ap∣pointed him a Ram for his Trespass-offering. So that there have been two grand cases mentioned, in case of forgetful∣ness or imperfect Knowledge of the Lawes prohibition. Now followes a third in case of knowledge and witting commission of a sin, but yet through weakness or infirmity, being over powered by temptation and the prevalen∣cy of lust. As 1 If a Person did lye to his Neighbour concerning goods, that they were nor delivered, or in partnership, or in things taken by violence, or in things of plain fraud or deceipt, or concerning what was lost, and lies or swears falsely.Levit. 6.6. Num. 5.8. Lev. 27.3. In all these cases he was to restore the principall and also a fifth part, and a Ram for his Trespass-offering, together with his estimation, who if he were between 20 and 60 years of age, it was 50 Shekels of silver. Besides these, we read of two Cases more wherein these Offerings were presented, as 1 For the defilement of a Nazarite, who had broken his Vow of separation,Num. 6.12. Lev. 14.12. his past daies were to be lost, and to bring a Lamb for a Trespass-offering. 2 At the Purification of the Leper there was appoin∣ted one Hee-Lamb for a Trespass-offering. The Manner. 1 The Sacrifice for Trespasses was to be slain in the same place, where the burnt-offering was killed. Lev. 7.2. &c2 The Blood was to be sprinkled round about upon the Altar. 3 The Fat of the inwards, the Rump, the Kidneys, the Caul, and in ge∣neral all the Fat was to be burnt upon the Altar; and just as was dealt with the Sin-offering so with this,Ver. 7. Lev. 4.26, 31. there was one Law for both. Now whereas 'tis said that Sin-offerings were to be managed as the peace offerings. It is to be understood as to the burning of the fat, which was to be taken away, as from the Peace-offerings: not that they were divided accordingly into 3 parts.The Priest's Portion. Lev. 7.6, 7. Lev. 14.13. For of the Sin-offerings and Trespass-offerings, whatsoever was not solemnly given unto God by burning upon the Altar, was the Priests only; and their Males alone were to eat of it in the holy place. For as the Sin-offering is the Priests, so is the Trespass-offering his; it is most holy.
SECT. IV. Of the Peace-Offerings. The Cause. THE End of these Peace-Offerings was two-fold; either to testifie the freeness of their Hearts, in dedicating somewhat of their store to God, and then to implore some mercy at God's hands, or else to congratulate at His Altar for some notable or eminent Deliverance: In respect to which, if accomplished, they had vowed in their distress, to offer up to God a testimo∣ny of their praise. The first sort was called, Free-will Offerings; and therein, though the Sacrifice had a member superfluous, or were deficient in any part, it might be accepted. But for a Vow, which was the second sort,Lev. 22.23. it might not. In neither of them, might any blind, broken, or maimed Crea∣ture, or that had a Wen, or the Scurvey, or was scabbed, or was bruised, cru∣shed, or cut, be presented at God's Temple. For if they offered the Blind, the Lame and Sick, was it not evil?Mal. 1.8. Would an Earthly Governour receive such a Present at the hands of his Suppliant? much less should God be so dishonoured, more especially in the case of Vows, in the time of our being hedged in with perplexing difficulties. Men must be as careful to pay, as they were liberal to promise in the time of anxiety; and be sue to follow the Counsel of Asaph, To pay, as well as vow unto the Lord.Psal. 76.11. Deut. 23.22, &c. We must be quick in this work; for the Lord else will surely require it, and it will prove sin to us. The Kind. The Creatures offered were of the Herd; either Bullocks, or Heifers: of the Flocks, a Goat; Ram, or Lamb: They might offer Male or Female,Lev. 3.1, 6. of Fowl, a little Bird which some say is to be meant of the Sparrow; as in the case of Leprosie. The Occasions. The Seasons were either constant, or accidental, according to the Emer∣gency of Providencies. Of the last sort were these; 1. At the Consecration of a Priest, there was a Ram offered up for a Peace-Offering.Exod. 29.19, 28. Levit. 8.22-29. For if you observe, they dealt with this Ram, according to the Law of Peace-Offerings: onely in the Division of it: whereof anon. Secondly, At Aaron's Initia∣tion, a Bullock and a Ram for himself, and the like for the people, Lev. 9.4, 18. Thirdly, At the purification of a Leper, they were to take two Birds; to kill one of them in an Earthen Vessel over Running-Water; and then joy∣ning Cedar, Scarlet, and Hysop, with the other,Lev. 14.6. De legibus, Cap. 11. to dip him in the blood of the slain. The Cedar (as Gul. Parisiensis conceives) was for a handle; and the Scarlet Thread was to bind the living Bird in the midst of the Hysop, and all together to the handle; and therewithall to perform the Ceremo∣ny: which was also to be done to a house defiled with Leprosie.Lev. 14.50 51, &c. The reason why we rank this among Peace-Offerings, is, because all Thanksgivings for receipt of Mercies comes under this Tribe, with all their various Rites and Attendancies. Fourthly, At the period of a Nazarites vowed separation, he was to offer a Lamb for a Peace Offering; which possibly is styled a Ram,v. 17. that is, by way of Explication, that the Lamb was to be a Male,Num. 6.14. or a young Ram, about, or under a years age. Fifthly, at the Dedication of the
Tabernacle, each of the 12 Princes of Israel offered two Oxen, five Rams, five He-Goats,Num. 7.17. five Lambs, for Peace-Offerings. As to the constant Offe∣rings, in the Feast of First-Fruits, we read of two Lambs for a Sacrifice of Peace-Offerings: But of no other do I read, unless we may reduce the Pass∣over Lambs unto these Offerings;Lev. 23.19. Exod. 12.27. Lev. 22.30. Exod. 12.10. which indeed were Eucharistical, to put the people in mind of their great deliverance out of Aegypt: Besides, as in the Thanksgiving Sacrifice, it was to be eaten upon the same day, and none of it lest till the morrow: So was the Command concerning the Passover: let nothing of it remain till the morning; that which remained, was to be burnt with fire. The Manner. Let us then come to the manner of the Solemnity about these Peace-Offerings. Lev. 3.2.First, He that offered it, did lay his hand upon the head of this his Sacri∣fice, and kill it at the door of the Tabernacle. Secondly, The Priest was to sprinkle the blood upon the Altar round about. Ver. 3.Thirdly, All the Fat of the Inwards, the two Kidneys, the Caul upon the Liver, and all their Fat, was to be burnt upon the Altar, for a sweet savour unto the Lord. Ver. 7, 9.Fourthly, If it were a Lamb of the Flocks, then the Rump was to be burnt also. This was the Lord's part, in the Peace-offerings. The Priest's Part. Deut. 18.3. Lev. 7.31, 32.The Priest's Part, (as in all Sacrifices nor wholly burnt, which are above-mentioned) was the Skin; besides, the Cheeks and the Maw were his. And lastly, the Breast and the right Shoulder belonged to him as a Wave-Offering, and a Heave-Offering, in the day of Atonement. The rest of the Creature was for the person who brought it, to feast upon that Sacrifice, and to eat at the Lords Table with joy. But when the Priest offered up a Peace-offering, it was shar'd into two parts onely; one for God, to be burnt on the Altar;Lev. 8.25, 28, 31. Ver. 32. Lev. 22.30. Lev. 7.15, 16. Ver. 17. the other to be eaten by him after it was boyled. But what remained was to be burnt, If the Offering were for a Thanksgiving, it must be eaten by the Offerer the same day: If for a Vow, it might be eaten the same day part of it, and the rest on the morrow after: but is must ne∣ver be kept till the third day to be eaten, for if ought did remain, it was to be burnt with fire. SECT. V. Of the Meat-Offerings. The Cause. THE Cause for which these Offerings were presented, was the same with the former already mentioned, wherewith most frequently they were joyned: but whether united, or apart, it will appear by the recital of parti∣culars beneath, that they were commonly injoyned, as an Appendix to the
other Sacrifices: shewing the Interest God hath in us, and all our Enjoy∣ments: which coming from him, must be acknowledged by way of chief Rent in Sacrifice. The Matter. The Matter of there Offerings, were these things following: fine Flour, Barley Meal, green EarS of Corn, Oyl, Frankincense, and Salt. The Meat-Offerings differently composed of some, or other of these In∣gredients; were either conjunct with other Sacrifices, before mentioned, or separated from them, and apart by themselves, according to the Law of their Injunction. The conjoyned Meat-Offerings, did accompany either Burnt-Offerings, or Peace-Offerings. Meat-Offerings, conjoyned with Burnt-Offerings,Lev. 23.18. Numb. 15.4, &c. had this proportion following. If the Burnt-offering were a Lamb; then an Omer, or tenth deal of Flour, was to be mingled with the fourth part of a Hin of Oyl: If it were a Ram, then two Omers of Flour, and the third part of a Hi of Oyl: If a Bullock, then three Omers and half an Hin. If a Kid, the quan∣tity was the same as for a Lamb. Thus was it to be done in the Offerings of the Solemn Feasts. When Meat-Offerings were joyntly presented with Peace-Offerings,Ver. 8. the case is generally the same, unless in a Thanksgiving; for then the person made an addition. For he was to prepare unleavened Cakes, mingled with Oyl, and unleavened Wafers annointed with Oyl,Lev. 7.12, 13. Ver. 14. and Cakes of fine Flour mingled with Oyl, and fryed; with unleavened Bread beside. One of these Cakes was to be a Heave-offering for the Priest. There is no mention of any Meat-offering joyned with Sin-offerings. The separated, or dis-joyned Meat-offerings, even such as were presented alone by themselves, were in two Cases. First, in the Case of Jealousie,Num. 5.15. there were no other Offerings enjoyned but this following: The tenth part of an Ephah of Barley Meal, without any Oyl or Frankincense. A handful hereof was to be burnt upon the Altar,Ver. 26. the rest was the Priest's, according to the constant Law of Meat-offerings. Secondly, in case of Poverty: As to the four particular points, wherein the Trespass-offering was required, if the person were unable to arise to the Expence of those Flesh-offerings, in that Case enjoyned, and above-recited: Then the tenth part of an Ephah of fine Flour,Num. 5.11. without any Oyl or Frankincense, was to be presented in stead of the Lamb, Kid, or Fowl, and should be accepted for a Sin or Trespass-Offering; a handful whereof was to be burnt on the Altar; and the rest was devolved over to the Priests use and behoof, as in an ordinary Meat-offering.Ver. 13. The Occasion. The several Seasons, wherein these Meat-offerings, either conjoyned to, or separated from other offerings, were yielded up to God, were these en∣suing.Exod. 29.23. Lev. 8.26, 28. First, At the Consecration of a Priest, there was to be a Basket of unlea∣vened Bread; and out of is to be taken one unleavened Cake, a Cake of Oy∣led Bread, and a Wafer, all to be burnt upon the Altar. To which purpose, the Priest at his Sacred Unction, was to offer the tenth part of an Ephah, that is, an Omer of fine Flour to be mingled with Oyl, and bak'd in a Pan. It must be wholly burnt, and not eaten.Lev. 6.22, 23.
Lev. 9.4.Secondly, At Aaron's entring upon his Office and Function, there was offered a Meat-offering, mingled with Oyl. Lev. 14.10.Thirdly, At the cleansing of the Leper, the Meat-offering was to consist of three tenth-deales, that is, Omers of fine Flour mingled with Oyl, ac∣cording to the proportion of the 4th pert of a Hin of Oyl to each Omer; and besides that, a Log of Oyl for the other Ceremonies; which being per∣formed,Ver. 21. Num. 6.17. the remainder was the Priest's. Fourthly, At the Expiration of a Nazarites Vow, there was to be pre∣sented before the Lord, a Basket of Unleavened Bread, Cakes of fine Flour, mingled with Oyl, and Wafers of Unleavened Bread, anointed with Oyl. One Cake, and one Wafer were waved, as Wave-Offerings to be bestowed on the Priest;Ver. 19, 20. the rest was the Offerer's. Numb. 7.13, 14.Fifthly, At the Dedication of the Tabernacle of Moses, each of the 12 Princes of Israel offered both fine Flour and Incense, according to the quantity of the Silver Vessels, which they presented. Numb. 8.8.Sixthly, At the Consecration of Levites, there was a Meat-offering to be presented, according to the proportion allotted to a Bullock, that is, three Omers of fine Flour, and half a Hin of Oyl, as was before rehearsed. Numb. 15.20.Seventhly, At the Children of Israel's entring into the Land of Canaan, they did consecrate the first of their Dough, and presented it for a Heave-offering to the Lord. As for the constant Feasts and Solemnities, enjoy∣ned by God, every Burnt-offering and Peace-offering had its Meat-offe∣ring, according to the proportions fore-mentioned, and set apart for a Bul∣lock, Ram, Lamb, or Kid. Some of the Festivities have their particular Meat-offerings laid down. In the number whereof, were these following. First, the constant Shew-Bread, brought into the Holy Place every Sab∣bath day, and set upon the pure Golden Table, is to be here accounted; which came to the number of 12 Cakes for the 12 Tribes of Israel, each Cake of the Shew-Bread consisting of two Omers of fine Flour, and composed with Oyl:Lev. 24.7, &c. a handful whereof was burnt on the Altar, for a memorial of a sweet savour before the Lord. The rest was made into so many Cakes; six stan∣ding in an upright Row one upon another, and a Golden Dish of Frankin∣cense on the top of each Row, upon the Holy Table. These Cakes being ta∣ken away every Sabbath (when the New were set on) became the Priest's. Lev. 23.13.Secondly, In the Sheaf of First-Fruits, there were two tenth deals of fine Flour,Lev, 23.16, 17. mingled with Oyl, given in for a Meat-offering. Thirdly, In the Feast of First-Fruits, the Children of Israel were com∣manded to bring two Wave-loaves; each of them consisting of one tenth Deal of fine Flour,Lev. 2.13.14. baked with Leaven; and this is that oblation of the First-Fruits, which was commanded by God to be offered, and forbidden to be burnt, because there was leaven in it; and therefore was wholly re∣served for the Priests house, to consecrate the use of Leaven in their Bread, in their Habitations, when they fed upon the fruits of the Land, whereof they had now in these first-fruits presented a taste unto the Lord: who resig∣ned it over to his Ministers and Officers in the Temple,Ezek. 44.30. that a Blessing might rest upon their houses. But, as to the Offering in this Feast of First-Fruits, that did burn upon God's Altar, it was this; they were at that time to bring in some of the young new Corn newly ripe, & to beat the Corn out of the fullest green Ears,Lev. 2.14, 15. and to dry it by the fire; then to pour Oyl upon it; and then to lay Frankincense upon it. Part whereof, even part of the beaten Corn and part of the Oyl; together with all the Frankincense, was to be burnt for a memorial of their Thankfulness; as an Offering by Fire, of a
sweet savour unto the Lord. The rest (as is often remembred in all such Meat-offerings) came to the Priest. The Manner and Rites. The manner of this meat-offering (to put a period to this Section) was on this wise. First, there was fine Flour prepared; then a quantum sufficit,Lev. 2.1, 2. Lev. 6.15, 16. or a fitting proportion of Oyl powred upon it, and mingled with it, and then the Frankincense was laid on the top of the Cake, Wafer or Loaf, to make a sweet perfume, when the Nidor, or inconvenient scent of the Flesh and Cake, and Oyl, might otherwise stain the purity of the Air. The general proportion (as is above remembred) was this; to every tenth Deal, or Omer of Flour, there was the fourth part of a Hin of Oyl to be measured out. The quantity of Frankincense I do not find mentioned; unless we could bring forth the exact quantities of the capacity of those Vessels offe∣red by the 12 Princes of Israel, at the Dedication of Moses his Tabernacle.Numb. 7.13, 14. It's known among us, by the Statute of 23. H. 8. cap. 4. that the weight of several of our English Vessels, is commanded to be of such a quantity, ac∣cording to the proportion of its inward content or capacity. I know not whether there were such exactness used of old among the Jews: or, at least, whether these Vessels of the Princes were not ad arbitrium, and not accor∣ding to any Standard-Vessels, in their capacity. If there were any precise∣ness in their frame, as it should seem there was, because they did offer just so much fine Flour and Oyl, according to so many Lambs and Bullocks; which quantity, was stated by the Mosaical Law: Then there will appear some proportion of the Incense to the Meat-offering. For if you observe,Numb. 7.13. there was one Silver Charger, whose Weight was a hundred and thirty she∣kels, and one Silver Bowl of 70 shekels, both fill'd with fine Flour, mingled with Oyl: which arrives to two hundred shekels, that makes at half an Ounce. Troy the shekel (according to a laxe acception) an hundred Ounces in Weight. The Vessel of Incense, which we translate a Spoon, was but ten shekels, or five ounces in Weight. All these three Vessels were full,Ver. 14. says the Text: the first two, of fine Flour and Oyl: the last, of Incense. Now if the same proportion between the Weight of each, did extend also to in∣tervene between the Content of each: which, though I confess there is no solid ground for, yet some Neighbouring probability give us leave to in∣dulge at present in this Point; then it will be as two hundred to ten, or as eight pound four ounces, to five ounces, that is, where there was so much as eight pound four ounces in Flour and Oyl, expended in Meat-offerings, there was five ounces of Frankincense, to yield a fragrant savour upon Gods Altar. He that is more at leisure, may count all the Sacrifices of each Prince, and proportion the quantities of Flour and Oyl, according to the rule often mentioned; and then say, According as the Weight of the two Vessels, to the Measures of the contained Meat-offering, so possibly was the Weight of the Spoon to the Frankincense contained: which was adhibi∣ted proportionably to such Offerings. But to leave conjectural uncertain∣ties, the confection or making of the Incense, we read to be of Stacte,Exod. 30.34. Ver. 38. Ony∣cha, Galbanum, and pure Frankincense, of each a like Weight: which being compounded by the Officers of the Temple (for none else might make it) was paid for, according to its value; and the quantity which the Sacrifice of each Suppliant Offerer did take up. But as to the Daily Service, and Annual Festivities, there was a set quantity to be made,Ver. 36. and to be laid up in the Sanctuary for these uses.
As to the common Meat-offering, thus prepared with Oyl and Frankin∣cense, the Priest took a handful of it, even of the Flour and Oyl, with all the Frankincense, and burnt it for a memorial upon the Brazen Altar, for an Of∣fering of a sweet favour to the Lord. The Remnant was the Priest's Por∣tion. The Priests Part. Lev. 2.3 Lev. 7.9, 10.As for those Meat-offerings that were bak'd in Ovens, or drest in Frying-Pans, or upon thin Flat-Plates, they all fell to the Priest. Every Meat-offering also, that was mingled with Oyl, or that was dry, (that is, without Oyl) was theirs also. Lev. 2.4.Such of these Offerings; As, First, were bak'd in an Oven, were Unleavened Cakes, mingled with Oyl, or Unleavened Wafers anointed with Oyl. Ver. 5.Secondly, If drest in the Pan, then they were made of fine Flour unlea∣vened, mingled with Oyl, and divided into several parts, and Oyl poured up∣on them. Thirdly, If they were made ready in the Frying-Pan, they were then made of fine Flour mingled with Oyl,Lev. 2.11. and there was no Leaven, nor Honey, to be offered up to God in them. But Salt was expresly enjoyned, that it should not be wanting in any Meat-offering presented to God.Ver. 13. SECT. VI. Of the Drink-Offerings. Num. 6.17. Lev. 23.18. 2 Chron. 29.35. Numb. 15.5, 10. Numb. 15.5, 7, 10.THE Drink-offering was always of Wine; and was always also con∣joyned with other Sacrifices, but never alone. Burnt-offerings, and Peace-offerings, had Meat-offerings, and Drink-offerings joyned with them: but the Sin-offerings had none. In every Sacrifice where there was a Bullock slain, the quantity of a Drink-offering, was half a Hin of Wine: for a Ram, the third part of a Hin of Wine: for a Lamb, or Kid, the fourth part of a Hin. There are three Seasons distinctly mentioned, wherein Drink-offerings are by name enjoy∣ned: though we must be sure, that they were constantly poured out, accor∣ding to the Law, with all the Offerings fore-spoken of. But the particular times are these. Numb. 6.15, 17. Lev. 23.13.First, At the limited period of the Nazarites Vow, he was commanded to bring his Drink-offerings, together with the rest. Secondly, At the offering up, or dedicating of the Sheaf of First-Fruits, the Drink-offering then to be presented, was the fourth part of a Hin of Wine. Ver. 18.Thirdly, In the Feast of First-Fruits, the Drink-offerings are distinctly mentioned, and appointed for the 7 Lambs, one Bullock, and two Rams, that were slain in that Festival. The manner of this Offering, was to pour out the quantity of Wine allotted, even as the Blood of the Sacrifice, beside the Altar.
Thus much shall suffice, at present, for the brief History, or Relation of the Temple-Sacrifices: wherein I have endeavoured, as much as may be, to keep to the Letter of the Scripture. What is found defective in this Ac∣count, may be supplyed out of the ample Treasury of Dr. Lightfoot's Rabbi∣nical; yea, and all kind of Oriental Literature. As for all particularities of the Annual Festivities, and the other Solemnities, be pleased to consult his learned and excellent Treatise of the Temple-Service, where you may receive abundant satisfaction, while We endeavour to find out what Salary and Reward the Great God appointed to His Priests, for their great and constant pains in Temple-Service; which We shall lay down briefly in the next Chapter.
CHAP. VI. Of the Revenues and Endowments, assigned to the Temple, and its Officers. THE first Work we have to do in this Chapter, is to provide Houses over their heads, and to give in a Catalogue of the Cities which came to the Children of Levi by Lot, when Joshua divided the Land of Canaan: which Countrey is estimated by Sir Henry Spelman (in his larger Work of Tythes, pag. 3.) according to the Descrip∣tion of it by Jerom, not to have been equal to the Principality of Wales, with the Marches: yet it did yield, for inhabitation to that Tribe of Levi, 48 Walled Cities, more then are (as he says there) in all England: Which, though possibly most of them might not have been so large as many of our Cities and great Towns; yet surely were well strengthned, according to the Fortification of those days, seeing they are styled Castles in the Book of Chronicles, 1 Chron. 7.54. which we shall dispose in their Scriptural Or∣der. First, for the Priests, their Cities were nearest to the City of Jerusalem, and lay, for the most part, in the Kingly Tribe of Judah. Josh. 21 13-16, &c.In Judah they had Hebron, a Royal City, and a City of Refuge, with its Suburbs: but the Fields and Villages were disposed of to Caleb, a hap∣py man, that could live under the droppings of the Sanctuary all his dayes. Surely, his Fields were fat, that were washt with Rain from the Hills of Hebron. 2. Libnah, and then Jattir, Eshtemoa, Holon, or Hilen, 1 Chron. 6.58. Debir, Juttah, and Bethshemesh. Josh. 21.16. & 19.7.In Simeon, the Priests had Ain, or Ashan, 1 Chron. 6.59. In Benjamin, they had Gibeon, Gebah, Anathoth, and Almon, or Alemeth, 1 Chron. 6.60. So that the Priests had 13 goodly Cities, with their Sub∣urbs.Josh. 21.19. The Levites that were of Kohath, had these Cities. Josh. 21.21, &c. Josh. 21.25.In Ephraim, 1 Schechem, a City of Refuge: then Gezer, 3 Kibzaim, possi∣bly the same with Jokneam, 1 Chron. 7.68. and Bethoron. In Dan, they had Eltekeh, Gibbethon, Aijalon, and Gathrimmon. In the half Tribe of Manasseh, on this side, or West of Jordan, they had Tanach, called Abner, 1 Chron. 6.70. and Gathrimmon; possibly the same with Bileam,Ver. 26. 1 Chron. 7.70. In all, they had ten Cities, with their Su∣burbs.
The Levites that were of Gershom, had these Cities. In the half Tribe of Manasseh, beyond, or East of Jordan, they had,Josh. 21.27, &c. 1. Golan in Bashan, a City of Refuge, 2. Beshterah, called Ashteroth, 1 Chron. 6.71. In the Tribe of Issachar, they had Kishon, or Kedesh, 1 Chron. 7.72. Da∣bareh, or Dabarath, 1 Chron. 6.72. then they had Jarmuth, or Ramoth, 1 Chron. 6.73. And lastly, Engaunim, called Anem, 1 Chron. 6.73. In Asher, they had Mishal, or Mashel, 1 Chron. 7.74. Abdon, Helkath,Josh. 21.30, &c. Ver. 32. or Hukok, 1 Chron. 6.75. and Rehob. In Naphthali, they had Kedesh in Galilee, a City of Refuge, Hamoth-dor, or Hammon, 1 Chron. 6.76. and Kartan, called also Kiriathaim, 1 Chron. 6.76. These all belonged to the Gershomites, even 13 Cities, with their Su∣burbs. The Levites that descended from Merari had these Cities. In Zebulun they had Jokneam, and Kartah, and Dimnah,Ver. 34. otherwise called Rimmon, 1 Chron. 6.77. And lastly, Nahalal supposed to be the same with Tabor, 1 Chron. 6.77. In Reuben, they had Bezer, a City of Refuge,Ver. 36. the same is said to be in the Wilderness on the Plain, Josh. 20.8. then Jahazah, called Jahzah, 1 Chron. 6.78. and Kedemoth, and Mephaath. In Gad, they had Ramoth in Gilead, a City of Refuge, Mahanaim, Heshbon,Ver. 38. and Jazer. These are the Cities belonging to the Merarites, even 12 Cities, with their Suburbs. Thus we see the Priests had 13 Cities in the Tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin. Secondly, The Levites of Kohath had ten Cities in Ephraim, Dan; and Manasseh. Thirdly, The Gershonites had 13 Cities in Manasseh, Issachar, Asher, and Naphtali. Fourthly, The Merarites had 12 Cities in Zebulun, Reuben, and Gad,Josh. 12. that is, 48 Cities in all. Whereof nine were Kingly Cities of the Canaanites, and probably, according to those times, were bravely built and fortified, viz. Hebron, Jarmuth, Gezer, Debir, Libnah, Taanach, Kedesh, Jokneam, and Dor, or Hamath-Dor: Six were Cities of Refuge, viz. Hebron, Shechem, Golan, Kedesh, Bezer, and Ramoth-Gilead; and the rest, no doubt, were very fa∣mous among the thousands of Israel. These 48 Cities had Suburbs assigned to them for their Cattel, and their Goods, and all their Beasts. Here I shall not pass over in silence, the Conjecture of Sir H. Spelman, in his larger Tract about Tythes, Chap. 3. apprehending by the somewhat differing names of the Levitical Cities mentioned in Chronicles, that they had 68 Cities in all, before their transmigration into Babylon; according to the increase of their Generations. But hereunto I shall onely object the Opinion of another Judicious and Learned Knight Sir Walter Raleigh; who, by his citation of Junius to that purpose, seems to conceive otherwise, that they were but the
same Cities for the most part, onely having different names, or else in suc∣ceeding times somewhat varying from their ancient denomination in the time of Joshua, unless as to Ain and Ashan, in the Tribe of Simeon, which are mentioned as two distinct Cities, Josh. 19.7. & 1 Chron. 4.32. Furthermore, it will be a little worth enquiring what quantity of ground the Suburbs of each City took up: And 2dly, how they were measured; see∣ing there seems to be a contradiction in the Book of Numbers: Where verse 4. informs us, that they were to reach outward a thousand Cubits; and yet the 5th verse says, they were to measure on the East-side, 2000 Cubits. I an∣swer to the first: The Suburbs were various, according to the largeness of the City, which might happen to lye in a long square, or a Rhomboides, or a Trapezion, which is the most common Figure: seeing Cities are accidental∣ly formed, according to accession, or increase of Inhabitants, who seldom are so curious to mind Regular Figures, unless in Fortification. But upon the supposition of a set Figure, and its quantity, this may be answered easily. As to the second Question, we shall best satisfie the Querist, by giving in a Dia∣gram of a City built four-square: such as the Scripture-measures of that Text seem to intimate. Let then Bezer, the City of Refuge in the Tribe of Reuben, be the Example, (because it is mentioned, as built upon a Plain) which we will exhibit in this subsequent Figure. Let the four Angles of this Cities square Figure, diagram of the city of Bezer be A, B, C, D, each side; as from A to B, 1000, Cubits. Now sayes the Text, verse the 4th, [The Suburbs of the Ci∣ties shall reach from the Wall of the City, and out∣ward 1000 Cubits.] So do these Suburbs, from A to E, or D to G, or C to H, or B to K, or N to O, or P to Q. From the Wall of the City, there will still be 1000. Cubits to the Line of the Suburbs, that runs paral∣lel with the City-Wall. Now whereas the Text sayes, [round about] some have construed it, to intimate a Circular Figure, which cannot be true. For whether the City and Suburbs be both Circu∣lar, or whether the City be square, and the Suburbs circular, or vice versâ; it were easie to demonstrate, that none of these Figures can possibly agree to the Delineation laid down in the fifth verse. As for Example, In the Circular Diagram, following A, B, C, D. let the Diameter A C. running through City and Suburbs, be four thousand Cubits, that is, a thousand from the Walls on both sides, and the City consequently two thousand over: where will you find any Line or Lines from Sides or Angles, agreeing to two thousand Cubits outward from the Walls, either in one Line single, or in two Lines, from one Angle drawn to the Circumference of the Suburbs,
circular diagram of the city of Bezer that will fall in precisely with the measures in the fifth verse. The Chord Line F, that is a Contin∣gent to the Circular East-Wall of the City, being the most likely to fit the fifth Verse, will be found in its full extent to exceed 3000 Cubits, and its Semi-Chord, from G to F, will fall beneath two thousand. Moreover, suppose the City to be square; as H, I, K, L, within Circular Suburbs, there will then be but four Lines onely from the middle of the sides, to the Circumference that will arise to one thousand Cubits, as M, A. or G, B. Whereas from the Angles, to the same Circumfe∣rence, will be but five hundred; as from L to O, or K to P; and from other parts variously unequal, still falling short of a thousand, and so it will prove in any other Figure but a square for both City and Suburbs, whether the Figures be regular or irregular. Wherefore now to answer to the Objection from that word in the verse [round about] I say that  the word, in the Hebrew, for round about, cannot here signifie a Circular Figure; but is spoken of all the four sides of the square Wall that includes the City, and so we shall find it used frequently in Scripture,Exod. 25.31. for the compass of a square Figure: As in Exodus, the Scripture says, that there was a Crown of Gold made and placed round about the Ark: which appears by its Description to have been a long square: So likewise in the Book of Kings, The Side-Chambers are said to be built round about the Temple; whereas it's evident by the measures of the Temple, that it was no Pantheon, but a long Square also. And lastly, in Ezek. 42.20. He that measured the outward Court of that Visionary Temple, the Text says, he measured it by the four sides, and that it had a Wall round about, where the Hebrew words are . So that in all these places, this very same word is used for a square Figure. To mention no more therefore, and come to the point in hand, the 5th verse of this 35 of Numbers, teaches us plainly, both what the Figure was, and how to measure it. Our English Translation reads it thus [Ye shall measure from without the City, on the Ea∣stern side two thousand Cubits] and so on the other Quarters; which the Hebrew makes most evident  Angulum Orientis, ye shall measure at the Angle of the East two thousand Cubits. The word is fa∣mously known for an Angle or Corner; and so one sayes,Pagnin. Est propriè angu∣lus, qui aliò se vertat, and is thus used, Levit. 19.27. Nehem. 9.22. Amos 3.12, &c. which being well understood, makes this Text, and the first Diagram to agree fitly. For if you measure from any part,Exod. 25.11. 1 King. 6.5. of any of the four Walls of this supposed four-square City of Bezer, in the first Scheme; as from A to M, or B to K, or P to Q, or any other point at pleasure, there will still be produced a thousand Cubits from the Wall to the nearest Line of the Suburbs, according to the 4th verse. Again, whereas the 5th verse says, [Ye shall measure on the East side two thousand Cubits, or] as we have translated it, at the East Angle, or Corner; let us conceive it thus, that from the East-Corner, or Angle, suppose at A, a Line may run two ways from that one Point, one Eastward from A to E, and another Northward,
from A to M; each of which Lines measures a thousand Cubits, and both to∣gether two thousand: So that without the City, from the East-Angle, ye may measure two thousand Cubits; one thousand whereof extend toward the East; the other thousand toward the North. And this makes that vexed place to consist with a very fair and handsome construction. Now these Measures must be repeated at every other Angle, and then the City will be in the midst exactly, according to our former Diagram. To conclude then, I have in this City of Bezer put down the least quan∣tity that can be almost imagined for any famous Walled City, that so I might not over-shoot the summe of Land, which we shall gather up by and by from all the Cities for the Habitations of the Priests and Levites. For the longest Cross-street (unless it be a Diagonal, very improper for a Walled City) will prove but a thousand Cubits, or three hundred Italian Paces: whereas it's very probable, that Hebron and Shechem, and divers other Ci∣ties, were much larger. To come then to an up shot, each out-side of the Suburbs, as from A to S, according to this Figure, will be three thousand Cubits, and the whole compass of them twelve thousand, according to the Grecian Measures of Feet and Furlongs (largely spoken to above, where I have shewed, that four hundred Cubits are equal to six hundred Grecian Feet, which makes the Olympick Stadium, and six hundred twenty five Ro∣man Feet, to be just equal to six hundred of theirs) these twelve thousand Cubits will be reduced unto thirty Furlongs, or three miles and three quar∣ters about the utmost Limb of the Suburbs, of each of the Levitical Cities. Again, if all the 48 Cities be drawn into one Parallelogram, the Area will prove to be one thousand, four hun∣dred, and fourty Furlongs; each whereof plan of the 48 Levitical cities hath six hundred foot square. The com∣pass round about the whole will be two hundred and ten furlongs. So that if all the Levites Cities were joyned together in a plain Level, they would take up in compass twenty six miles, and a quarter of Italian measure: which measures of twelve thousand Cubits for each City, and of one thousand four hundred and fourty Furlongs for the whole, have some con∣sanguinity and resemblance to the Mysti∣cal City of New Jerusalem in the Revela∣tions, which is related to be twelve thou∣sand Furlongs in compass, and the Wall to have been one hundred fourty and four Cubits in Measure, Revel. 21.16, 17. The common square Root of each being twelve, a sacred number much prosecuted by the Learned Mr. Potter, in his 666. Chapter 5th. But God's Majesty contrived, that these foresaid Ci∣ties should not lye together, partly for the Priests pleasure, not to be stifled up in one close body; partly for the Peoples profit, to be taught the Laws of God. Therefore were they dispersed through all the Tribes, being mer∣cifully divided in Jacob,Gen. 49.7. and scattered in Israel, according to the Propheti∣cal Dictate of the Holy dying Patriark. Thus I have done with the first Enquiry, and that is, what Glebe Lands the Officers of the Temple enjoyed.
2 But did these persons, with the Revenues of their Lands,2 King. 12.4. Exod. 30.13. find for Sa∣crifices or Reparations? No such matter▪ We find a constant Tax laid upon all the people; which is called the money of every one that passeth the Count. And what that was, may be read in Exodus, to wit, half a shekel for every Head throughout Israel at any general Muster, least the Plague break out upon them: which Tax-money,Antiq. l. 7. c. 10. p. 244. David having forgotten (sayes Josephus) to take at his numbring the People, was the cause of that sore and sudden Plague at that time. 3 There was the money that every man was set at,2 King. 12.4. Neh. 10.32. De Bell. Ju∣daic. l. 7. cap. 26. Num. 18.21. Lev. 27.30, &c. which in Nehemiah's time, was a yearly Tax of the third part of a shekel for the service of the House of God; and as it seems by Josephus, there was an Annual Tax of two Attick Drachmes, equal to half a shekel according to him: which be∣ing formerly paid by every man to the Temple, was afterward imposed up∣on the Jews, for the Capitol at Rome. Fourthly, They had the Tenth of all the Land, even of the Increase of the Seed, of the Fruits of Trees, of Herds and Flocks, &c. Mr. Selden observes in his History of Tythes, Cap. 2. §. 4. p. 17. that this Revenue was far more then the Tenth. For, as he hath there computed it, of six thousand Ephahs of Corn supposed to be the Burden of such a man's Land, when all the Deductions for the Sanctuary were taken out, there remained but four thousand, seven hundred, seventy nine to the Owner. So that he paid 21 Ephahs above the fifth part of his reaped quantity; for there were one thousand, two hundred, twenty one Ephahs paid to the Temple. Concerning this, and many other of these Revenues, assigned to the Levitical Tribe, be pleased to peruse what is learnedly observed by Dr. Edw. Reynolds, on Psal. 110. p. 478. &c. And Mr. Weemse on the Ceremonial Laws, p. 123, &c.Exod. 23.19. Ezek. 44.30. Num. 18.12, &c. Deut. 18.4. Neh. 10.35, &c. Ezek. 44.29. Numb. 18.9, &c. Fifthly, They had the first fruits of all things, and that of the best, of Oyl, Wine, Wheat, Men, and Beasts. Some things whereof, as the first of men, and of unclean Beasts, were redeemed with Money, five shekels for every head, and paid to these Officers. Nay, they had the first of the Fleece of the Sheep, and of the Dough, &c. The quantity of this Offering of the First-Fruits, was not to exceed the 40th part, not to fall beneath the 60th part of those fruits, as it is observed by Ribera out of Hierom, upon Ezek. 45. See Ribera de Templa, lib. 3. cap. 2. Sixthly, For Offerings,] of the Meat-offerings, Sin-offerings, or Trespass-offerings, the Heave-offerings, or Wave-offerings, were all given to them. Seventhly, All Vows and Free-will offerings, and all hallowed or dedi∣cated things were theirs also. Eighthly, They had some shares in all Sacrifices,Num. 18.18. Deut. 18.3. Lev. 7.8. Weemse, Vol. 3. p. 123, &c. (except the whole Burnt-offering) as particularly the right shoulder, and the Breast, the two Cheeks and the Maw, and the skin of every man's Burnt-offering. All which Portions, may be more amply learned out of Mr. Steph. Nettles Answer to Mr. Selden, about Tythes pag. 120. and Mr. Weemse, a Learned Divine of the Scottish Nation. Ninthly, There was none of the Children of Israel that came up to Jeru∣salem before the Lord, at the three solemn Festivals, that durst come up empty-handed, it being God's strict command,Exo. 23.15. that they should bring some Gift or Offering to his Majesty: All which was received by these Offi∣cers. Tenthly, The recompences of many Injuries came also into their hands,Numb. 5.7, 8. which was the principal, and the fifth part besides. Eleventhly, We must also remember this, that no Priest, Levite, Singer, Porter, Nethinim, that is, the Gibeonite, the Drawer of Water,Ezra 7.24. &c.) or any Minister of the House of God did pay Contributions, as to civil Affairs, or
Exigencies. For it was not lawful to impose Toll, Tribute, or Custom, up∣on them: which indeed was but rational, because the Priests lived upon the Bounty and Alms of the people, by God's Appointment. Antiq. l. 3. cap. 11. p. 96. & l. 4. c. 4. p. 108.In the 12th, and last place, we shall add what Josephus tells us, that they were free from all Military Service, unless it were to blow the Trumpets, as was observed before. These are the Particulars of the Revenues and Duties incumbent upon the people for the Temple and its Officers, which was a noble and splendid maintenance, befitting such a Royal Priesthood. Indeed, it was conve∣nient they should have sufficient, lest wanting Necessaries, they should be compell'd to imploy themselves in sordid Affairs, for maintenance of their families, and support of their Posterity, and so should negligently handle Di∣vine Matters. Nay, it was proper they should have a plentiful maintenance, that they and their Temple-Services might not be obnoxious to the con∣tempt of mean and unworthy persons, such as is the generality of the Com∣minalty, who esteem neither Magistracy nor Ministery, if not attended with Honours and Revenues above the Vulgar Sphere. Wherefore, the All-wise Majesty of Heaven contrived most amply for this His Ministeriall Tribe that waited upon His Altar: For if you put all the fore-mentioned sums together, there will arise a Revenue for the Temple, and its Officers, above four times as much as fell to the Lot of tho richest Tribe in the Land of Canaan. Let us, to this purpose, view the numbers of the Levites, compared with the rest of the Children of Israel in Moses's time, when all these Revenues were appointed them.Numb. 1.45, 46. Dr. Edward Reynolds, on Psal. 110. p. 477. First of all we read that the number of the Males of the Children of Israel was 603550. from twenty years old and upward. Now we may safely conjecture, there were half as many more under twenty, if not full out. For where one man out-lives twenty years, many times two for one dye before that age; it may be more, if the Providence of God in that kind were exactly attended: but let us give in but half, that is, 301775 persons, which makes the whole sum to be 905325, the sum of the other Tribes. But all the Levites being numbred from a moneth old and upward, arose but to a sum of twenty two thousand.Num. 3.39. By which, if you divide the fore-going number of the people, the Quotient gives you : so that the Levites were not equal in number to the 41 part of the people. Now one would think they could expect in Equity but the one and fourtieth part of main∣tenance that arose from the Revenues of the Land of Canaan. But you will find, they together with the Temple had four times as much as the Weal∣thiest and fattest Tribe in the Land of Promise; which must be needs above the third part of the Income of the whole Countrey. Nay, in Ezekiel's Visionary Land of Canaan, the sacred Portion seems to be the third part of the Land. For if we observe, the whole House of Israel was to have been but five thousand Reeds broad, and twenty five thousand long, Ezek. 45.6. which cannot be understood of the City, which was to be but square four thousand, five hundred, c. 48.30. And being compared with the Portion of the Priests and Levites, considering also what fell to the Prince: it is conceived by some, that the third part of the Land was theirs; shewing the ample Provision which God determined made for the Gospel-days. From all this Discourse will clearly follow, an inference of great shame to many Christian Nations of Europe; who allow more ample mainte∣nance to very mean and inferiour Officers in the State, Civil and Military,
then to the very Captains in the Spiritual Army; who, for want of due supplies, are generally constrained, to their grief, to walk Antipodes, and contrary to their own Doctrine of Hospitality; many times, after their own departure, exposing their nearest Relations to stand in need of others Ho∣spitality to the great dishonour of God, and true Religion. Nay, such Coun∣tries many times compel the Stewards of God's lively Oracles, to serve Tables, and the Dispensers of the Mysteries of Faith, (not being able to pro∣vide like men for their own Housholds) even practically to deny the Faith, & unwillingly to prove worse then Infidels.1 Tim. 5.8. Whereas it is but equal by the Law of Nature, that the Embassadors of most joyful Tydings (such as is the Gospel, and the New Covenant of Grace) should have the most plentifull Rewards: when as the Legal Messengers brought News of a fiery Law, and a Yoke of costly and insupportable Ceremonies. Besides, their Work gene∣rally contained outward and bodily labour, which whets the Appetite, and strengthens the Digestive Faculty; whilest the New Testament Service, be∣ing of a more sublime Orb, is greatly exhaustive of the Vital Spirits, which calls for greater and more costly Supplies for their refection and sustenta∣tion. Let us in fine, remember, and beware lest St. Peter's Keyes, for want of Oyl; should contract an unseemly rustiness, and the beautiful Lamps of the Sanctuary, without a supply of the Juyce of the Olive, should go out in ob∣scurity, or at least burn exceeding dimly. A sordid maintenance, for certain, will produce a rusty and sordid Ministry. A Jeroboam's Priesthood of the lowest of the People, may well carry Wisps of Hay to feed Calves at Dan and Bethel. A thing to be trembled at in Gospel-days, that the Arch-Ene∣mies of the Truth should have their Designs so deeply fomented. But how∣ever, seeing God's Majesty hath ordained more copiously and splendidly for his own appointed Ministers in the Temple: Let then these Divine Offi∣cers go on chearfully to their Work of Sacrifices at the Solemn Dedication of the Temple in the next Chapter, and answer their Relations,Gen. 2.8. as Abra∣ham did his, when going up to offer in this very same Mountain of Moriah, with  God will provide.
CHAP. VII. Of the Encoenia, or Solemn Dedication of the Temple. HEre it is requisite, for the discharge of our duty, as to this Chap∣ter, that we first set down the circumstance of time, wherein this stately Work was performed: Wherein to avoid all Con∣tests, at present, We shall follow the renowned, pious, and lear∣ned Primate of Ireland, in His fore-cited Annals, pag. 58. who places it in the Three Thousand, Seven Hundred, and Tenth Year of the Julian Period, and the Three Thousand and first Year of the World, and shews, that it was co-incident with a Year of Jubilee: and in the seventh Moneth of that year called Ethanim.2 Chron. 5.3. The first day whereof (according to his Calculation, though it's greatly disputed to the contrary) did exactly concur with the 230 October of that Julian Year. The Temple was finished in all its parts in seven years, and about six moneths. For it was first founded in the se∣cond day of the second moneth, 2993. But the Dedication was prorogued to the 8th Year, because of the solemnity of the Year of Jubilee, sayes our Reverend Author.So Peavius de Doctr. Temp. lib. 13. p. 537. 1 King. 6.38. Solomon is said indeed to be but seven years in erect∣ing this Building and all its Appurtenances, that is, seven compleat years, though there were several moneths over. We shall then, according to His mind present this Season in a silent Scheme: onely let's remember, it was the 2758 Judaical Year, the Julian Cycle of the Moon five, and the Judai∣cal three, the Cycle of the Sun that year was 14, the Dominical Letter D. Therefore the Neomenia Tizri, or first day, or New Moon of Tizri, called Ethanim in those dayes, must be Feriâ Sexta, or Friday, Octob. 23. according to Him.
Ethanim. October. Feria.   8 30 6 The first day of the Feast of Dedication. 9 31 Sab. day The second of the Feast.   Novemb.   10 1 1 The 3d day; and Expiation Day, Numb. 29.7. 11 2 2 The 4th day. 12 3 3 5th day. 13 4 4 6th day. 14 5 5 7th day, 1 King. 8.65. 15 6 6 The first day of the Feast of Tabernacles, 2 Chron. 7.8. & Numb. 29.12. 16 7 Sab. The 2d day. 17 8 1 3d day. 18 9 2 4th day. 19 10 3 5th day. 20 11 4 6th day. 21 12 5 7th day. Here the two Feasts of 14 days ended, 1 Kin. 8.65. 22 13 6 8th day. A solemn Assembly, 2 Chron. 7.9. Numb. 29.35. 23 14 Sab. Sabbath day. At Even the Sabbath being ended, and be∣ing the 23 day of the moneth, Solomon sent the People away, 2 Chron. 7.10. There are great Wranglings among Chronologers in this particular. Cal∣visius places the 23 day of Ethanim, on the 5th of October, being Monday, as he says, A. M. 2940. Scaliger, An. P. J. 3703. the New Moon of Etha∣nim, October 12. and so his Scholar Helvicus. But a late Learned Author casts the New Moon upon Octob. 5. The first day of the Dedication, Octob. 11. and the departure of the People, Octob. 27. It would take up more time, then is necessary to imploy on this Design, if we should spend many Lines upon the Reconcilement of various Authors, that treat upon this Point: To which purpose, it were very necessary to enquire anxiously into the exact Julian Year wherein this dedication fell out, a & fterward to calculate the New Moon of Nisan out of the best Tables, and then to assure the Rea∣der, by the falling out of the New Moon, before or after the Equinoxe, whe∣ther it was a common or intercalated year. Nay, to be most exact, to deduce the Moons Conjunction, out of the Tables for the moneth of Ethanim it self, and then add to that time of the precise Synod,Lang. de annis Christi l. 1. c. 10. & Selden de anno Civili Judaeorum, cap. 13. 27 hours, and ½ for to give the Moon a visible Phasis; according to which day of its first ap∣pearance, the Jewish New Moons were vulgarly celebrated. If I should perform this at present, it would swell this Treatise too much, for which it is not of any great moment to insist; and therefore we shall proceed briefly to describe the pompous Solemnity of this Dedication. In the first place we read, that King Solomon, for this rare Festival, assem∣bled the Elders, the Heads of the Tribes,2 Chro. 5.2. 1 Kin. 8.65. and the chief of the Fathers of Is∣rael, and a mighty Congregation of all the Nation, from the entring in of Hamath, to the River of Egypt.
2 Chro. 7.7.After this, Solomon hallowed the middle of the Court, because the Brazen Altar would have proved insufficient to contain the multitudes of the in∣tended Offerings. The Elders of Israel being assembled, waited upon the King at Mount Zion, where the Ark of God's Covenant was yet resident, which the Priests took up upon their shoulders:1 Kin. 8.3, 4. The Levites, mean while, according to their several designed Ranks, carryed the Tabernacle of Boards and Cur∣tains wherein the Ark stood, with all the Holy Vessels of Moses. 2 Chro. 5.2.Thus in a pompous Holy Procession they walked leisurely from the Ci∣ty of David, the Ark being brought up to the sacred Mountain: the King and all the Congregation sacrificed before it Sheep and Oxen without number.Ver. 6. Ver. 7.Then the Priests conveyed the Ark of the Covenant into the Oracle, or most Holy Place, and set it under the Wings of the Golden Cherubims, which being done, and the Priests returned out of that mysterious place, one hundred and twenty of them with silver Trumpets (for Moses his were of silver) sounded in the Court, and near to them the Singers, Asaph,1 Chron. 6.33. Ver. 12. Hëman the Grand-son of Samuel the Prophet, and Jeduthun, with their Sons and Brethren, being arrayed in White Linnen, and accommoda∣ted with Cymbals, Psalteries, and Harps, stood at the East End of the Altar, lift up their Voices, and sung this Verse: For He is good; For His Mercy endureth for ever. While this admirable Consort of Vocal, Pneumatical and Organical Musick,2 Chron. 5.13. made a joyful sound throughout the Temple, its Courts, and the Neighbouring City; Behold a Cloud of Glory filled the House of God, with such bright and shining Beams, that the Priests could not stand to minister by reason of its Radiant Majesty. Immediatly upon this, King Solomon standing upon his Brazen Scaffold before the Altar and looking towards the Cloud of Glory, thus bespake the Divine Majesty,2 Chron. 6.1, 2. Ver. 3, 4, &c. The Lord hath said, that He would dwell in the thick Dark∣ness: But I have built an House of Habitation for thee, and a place for thy dwelling for ever. Then the King turns his face to all the people as they stood, makes a short, but elegant and pithy Oration, and gives them His Royal Blessing. After this, He turns His face West, again, to the Temple, and the Altar, directing His Eyes stedfastly towards that Divine Glory, and falling down devoutly upon His Knees,2 Chron. 6.12, &c. 2 Chron. 7.1, and spreading out His Hands toward Heaven, He powrs out a large and Heavenly Prayer before the Majesty of God, ri∣ding upon the Chariot of the Cherubims. At the conclusion thereof, miraculous Fire descends from Heaven, con¦suming the Burnt-Offering, and the Sacrifices, while the Glory of the-Lord filled the House with such Orient Splendour, that the Priests could by no means enter. Now when all the Children of Israel saw the Fire from Heaven, and the Glory of GOD upon the House, they bowed themselves with their Faces to the Ground upon the Payement, worshipped and praised the Lord (with one Voyce) saying, For He is good; for His Mercy endureth for ever.
Then the King offered His stately Sacrifice to the Lord of two and twen∣ty thousand Oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand Sheep. Thus the King and all the People dedicated the House of the Lord throughout seven days: After which followed the seven days of the Feast of Tabernacles; together with an eighth, being the solemn Assembly, the 22 day of the moneth. The 23 followed, which was the Sabbath,; and that being concluded, on the Evening of the 23 day, Solomon sent away the people to their Tents,2 Chron. 7.10. Lev. 23.40, & 42. (which were made, during this Feast, according to the Law, of Willows, and Palms) glad and merry in heart, for the goodness which the Lord had shewed to David, to Solomon His Son, and to His People Israel. After which night, having slept sweetly, on the first day of the Week, every one takes up his Journey to his own Habitation, according to their various distances from the Holy Temple.
CHAP. VIII. The Temples Duration. THis famous Building, being thus famously hansell'd and house-warm'd with so many fat Burnt-Offerings, we will account its continuance not from the Foundations first laying, when it was yet an imperfect Embryo: but from the 23 day of the moneth, Ethanim in the Julian Year, 3710. or of the World, 3001. which day, ac∣cording to our Author, being co-incident with the 14th day of the Julian Moneth,Lev. 25.9. November; and being the second Sabbath of the Year of Jubilee now begun, [For the first was one of the days of Tabernacles] shall be the first standing day of the Temple, and keeping house upon its own Revenues, apart from these grand and solemn Festivals, being united for the more Au∣gust and noble Celebration of its Dedication. From which day, till the Year of the same Julian Period, 4126. Aug. 27. being the Sabbath also, it stood four hundred and fifteen years,Ʋsser. p. 131. two hundred and eighty five days, according to the Julian Account; which I shall briefly exhibit in this La∣terculus, or Scheme, wherein the Names, Reign, number of the Kings, may be observed at one view under which it stood. Not but that it received many sore shakings, by many Heathen Kings, by the Idolatrous Neighbours of the Kingdom of Israel, or the ten Tribes; who many a time laid their Sacrilegious hands upon these Divine Materials. Nay, which is most to be lamented, it was wounded in the house of its Friends (that should have been) even some of the Kings of Judah: For all which, I refer you to the sacred Annals of the Kings and Chronicles, as to the larger view of those Transactions, which I have linked in a more compendious Chain before the close of this Chapter. Onely before I give in this ensuing Type, remem∣ber, that the Dedication being solemnized in the 11th of King Solomons Reign; and that He holding the Scepter 40 years, we must set down 29 for Him, after this great Dedication.
  Years .   1 Solomon 29 1 King. 11.42. 2 Rehoboam 17 Chap. 14.21. 3 Abijah 03 Chap. 15.11. 4 Asa 41 15.10. 5 Jehoshaphat 25 22.42. 6 JehoramWhereas it is related concerning Jehoram, that He reigned 8 Years; we are to re∣member, that the 4 first years of His Reign, were co-inci∣dent with the 4 last of Jehoshaphat's. 04 2 King. 8.16, 17. 7 Ahaziah 01 8.26. 8 Athaliah, Queen. 06 11.03. 9 Joash, compleat 39 12.1. 10 Amaziah 29 14.2. 11 Azariah, or Ʋzziah 52 15.2. 12 Jetham 15 15.33. 13 Ahaz, compleat 15 16.2. 14 Hezekiah 29 18.2. 15 Manasses 55 21.1. 16 Ammon 2 21.19. 17 Josiah 31 22.1. 18 Jehojahaz 0 Three Moneths 23.31. 19 Jehojakim 11 23.36. 20 Jeconiah 0 Three Moneths 24. 8.And ten days, 2 Chro. 36.9. 21 Zedekiah 11 24.18.   Years 415. 6 Moneths, and 10 Days. I will not say, that all the difficulties of this Chain of the Reigns of the Kings of Judah, as to their particular years, are clearly resolved by Chrono∣logers: But that the current and compleat years, being examined by the co-incident Reigns of the Kings of Israel, will produce the Sum Total of their Reigns, at the foot of the Catalogue: I suppose the Characters of the Temple's dissolution, by the 11th of Zedekiah, and the 19th of Nebuchadnez∣zar will clearly evince: So that we may hence learn, that it stood (though not constantly in equal beauty and lustre) under the Reigns of twenty Kings, and one Queen, the space of four hundred and fifteen years com∣pleat, and two hundred eighty five days, or a little above three quarters of a year, as was said in the beginning of the Chapter: Or, if you reckon from the first day of its Foundation laid (which as you heard, Cap. 2. in the be∣ginning of this Treatise, according to the Learned Primate of Ireland, was in the three thousand seven hundredth and 2d Julian Year, May 21.) to the four thousand one hundred twenty sixth Year, Aug. 27. It continued four hundred twenty four years, and ninety eight days compleat; as the same Author computes, pag. 131. To which Petavius agreeth in his Dia∣gram of the Kings of Judah, in his Rationarium, Part. 2. lib. 2. c. 11. pag. 108. I know the Rabbins, from their Pseudo-Mysterious Cabal, would fain de∣duce the length of its duration, to be four hundred and ten years onely, which they derive most learnedly from Bereshith, the first word in Genesis, having rare inspection into the blind Visions of Letters, and idle Dreams concerning syllables. But their Rabbinical Astronomers, soaring yet one Sphere higher, would make us believe, that the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuzaradan, was at the time of its conflagration, legible in the Heavens, there being eleven Stars then Vertical, which by a Rabbies Feskue might be pointed out for to make five Letters; and according to their Canon
of Abbreviatures, would yield a man learned in those Hyper-Aegyptian Hieroglyphicks, some words to premonish the Inhabitants of that Cities Ruine. But leaving these crude Conjectures, to be boiled up to a Romance in the Skull-Pans of those Chymical Divines, we shall proceed to mention the Names of the several High-Priests; under whose Rule, and by whose Guidance, the sacred Services of the Temple were administred: whereof we shall give in two Platforms; and, in each, three Authors, making up six in all; and then produce a Connexion of these Authors together, in a successive Story: wherein we shall endeavour, with all possible care and perspicuity, to untie the difficulties, that have as yet in many things lockt up this part of the sacred History from Vulgar Capacities, or Cursory Rea∣ders of these ancient Matters. The Authors I shall mention and digest, are these following. 1. The Holy Scriptures. 2. Josephus in the 10th Book, and 11th Chapter of his Antiquities, Pag. 342. G. Edit. Gen. who being himself a Priest, possibly might receive some Intelligence from his Ancestors in these Affairs. 3. Nicephorus Callistus, in his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 2. cap. 4. 4. The Book called , Or, The Breviary of Times; which is annexed by Scaliger, to Eusebius his Chronicles, and thought to be the Alexandrian Chronicle. 5. Nicephorus the Patriarch, set forth also by Scaliger in the same Book; and lately also at Paris. 6. A Jewish Chronicle, recited by Petavius in his Doctrine of the Times' lib. 10. cap. 49. pag. 242. and by learned Selden, in his Book, De Suc∣cessione in Pontificatum Ebraeorum, lib. 1. cap. 5. pag. 134. I cannot under∣take to bring all these in a peaceable complyance and union, and make them in all Points agree with Scripture: But shall first exhibite the So∣ries; and then endeavour to give the best satisfaction we can.
The First Platform. Josephus. Nicephorus Callistus. Scripture . 1 1 1 Zadok. 1 King. 2.35. 2 2 2 Ahimaaz. 2 Sam. 15.36. 3 3 3 Azariah. 1 Chron. 6.9.     4 Johanan. 1 Chron. 6.9.     5 Azariah. 1 Chron. 6.10. 4 4 6 Amariah. 1 Chron. 6.11. 5 5 7 Ahitub. 1 Chron. 6.11. 6 6 8 Meraoth. 1 Chron. 9.11. 7 7     8 8 9 Zadok. 1 Chron. 6.12. 9 9     10 10     11 11 10 Uriah. 2 King. 16.11, 15, 16. 12 12 11 Azariah, 2 Chron. 31.10, 13. 13 13     14 14 12 Shallum. 2 Chron. 6.12. 15 15 13 Hilkiah. 2 Chron. 6.13.     14 Azarian. 2 Chron. 6.13.14. 16 16 15 Serajah. 2 Chron. 6.14. 17 17 16 Jehozadak 2 Chron. 6.14.
The Second Platform. Nicephorus the Patriarch. Chronicles of Alexandria. The Jewish Chronicle. 1 1 1 Sadoc under Solomon. 2 2 2 Ahimaaz, under Rehoboam.     3 Azariah, under Abijah.   3             5 Jehojarib, under Joram.   4 4 Joahaz, the same with  of Josephus, and transposed for Jehojadah, and set un∣der Jehoshaphat.     7 Jehojadah, the same with Jehoahaz the 4th, and set under Joash. 3   6 Jehoshaphat, transposed, being the same with Zachariah, in Petavius, and set un∣der Ahaziah.     8 Phadea, under Athaliah and Joash, being called Phedajah by Petavius. 4 5  6 , the same person. 9 Zedekiah, under Amaziah.     10 Joel, under Ʋzziah.     11 Jotham, under King Jotham. 5 7 12 Ʋriah, under Ahaz.     13 Neriah, under Hezekiah. 6 8   7 9       14 Hoshajah, under Manasseh.   10 15 Sallum, under Amon. 8   16 Hilkiah, under Josiah.   11 17 Azariah, under Jehojakim. 9 12 18 Serajah, under Jehojakim. 10   19 Jehozedek at the Captivity.
This last High-Priest, called Jehozedek, Jehozadak, and Jozedek, was carryed to Babylon, being the son of Serajah, and the Father of Jeshuah, who assisted Zorobabel, in the re-edifying of the Temple of God, after the return of the Jews out of their Babylonian Captivity; as may appear out of these places of Holy Scripture following, viz. Ezra 5.2. Hag. 2.2. Zechar. 3.1. To conclude, Ezra, that famous Scribe, so often mentioned in Scripture, was the son of Serajah, Brother to Jozedek, and Uncle to Jeshuah the High-Priest, Ezra. 7.1. Now we shall endeavour to connex these several Lineal Successions of Priests, (which have been hitherto presented in these preceding Schemes, or Diagrams) in one Historical View, after an orderly method; declaring as clearly as may be, the corruptions of several of the Authors; and as far as the Lamp of Truth hath shined forth upon us, do our utmost to chain them by several probable co-incidencies with the Holy Scriptures, and af∣terward proceed to lay down the more ample story of the Temples dura∣tion, and the various Transactions respecting it, under the times of those Noble Kings that swayed the Imperial Scepter of Judah, whose times are more famously registred in the sacred Writings of Scripture-Pen-men, and accordingly more precisely made known to the diligent Inquirer into those Blessed Volumes. But in the first place, according to our proposal, let us examine the Suc∣cessions of the High-Priests, who served in that sacred Function under the first Temple. The Succession of the High-Priests under the first Temple. 1 Zadok being the first High-Priest in the Temple, and descended of Elea∣zar, the son of Aaron, was instituted and inducted into his Office by King Solomon Himself. After that Abiathar (of the Line of Eli, and Itha∣mar) had been displaced by that Royal King, for taking part with Adonijah in his Conspiracy for the Kingdom. This Zadok was the son of Ahitub, and is corruptly called , by the Alexandrian Chronicle; whose Li∣neal Descent will be more apparent, and manifest by this Gnealogical Scheme hereunto annexed.
Aaron. Eleazar, Josh. 24.33. Phinhas Josh. 22.13, 30. Abishua Bukki Uzzi, 1 Chron. 6.50. Zerahiah Merajoth Amariah Ahitub Zadok, 2 Sam. 8.17. Ithamar. Eli, Contemporary with Samuel; but how many persons were betwixt Him and Ithamar, is not mentio∣ned. Hophni. Phinehas. 1 Sam. 4.4. Ahitub 1 Sam. 14.3. Ahijah. 1 Sam. 14.3. Ahimelech, 1 Sam. 22.11. Abiathar, 1 Sam. 22.20. & 23.6. Ichabod, 1 Sam. 4.21. There be, that interpose betwixt Samuel's Eli, and Ithamar, three persons, viz. Abiezer, Buzi, and Ozi, but upon no warrantable grounds; and there∣fore scarce deserve to be mentioned in this place. Wherefore we shall pro∣ceed to our Temple-Priests. 2 Ahimaaz. the son of Zadok: This person, corruptly called  by the Alexandrian Chronicles, was sent by Joab to carry the tidings of Ab∣salom's death to King David, 2 Sam. 18.19, 23, 27, &c. 2 Sam. 15.27, 36. He is mentioned in the Roll of the High-Priests, recited in the Book of Chronicles, 1 Chron. 6.8. and possibly may be the same person, who mar∣ryed Basmath, one of the Daughters of Solomon; it being familiar for the High-Priests, to link themselves with the Royal Family: as is observable of Jehojadah, in the Reign of Joash, intimating the union of both the King∣ly and Priestly Office in Jesus Christ, who was prefigured by the High-Priests of Israel. 3 Azariah, the son of Ahimaaz, 1 Chron. 6.9. 4 Johanan, the son of Azariah, 1 Chron. 6.9. As to whom, it is concei∣ved, that he might be the same person, who is called by the name of Jona∣than, the son of Abiathar, 2 Sam. 15.36. Where it is to be noted, that both these are omitted in the Catalogues of Josephus, Nicephorus Callistus, Al∣sted, and the Hebrew Chronicle, cited by Petavius, although mentioned by the name of , in the Alexandrian Chronicle. Nay, none of these 4 first High Priests are found in the Register of Ezra: The reason whereof is conjectured at by Dr. Lightfoot, in his Temple Service to be, because the Service in the Temple began not till the days of Azariah, the son of Joha∣nan; as he expounds that place in the Book of Chronicles, of his executing the Priests Office. 5 Azariah, the son of Johanan, 1 Chron. 6.10. & Ezra 7.3. In the former Text he is said to be the man that executed the Priests Office in the Temple that Solomon built in Jerusalem: which I take to be thus under∣stood,
sc. that he was the first person, who did execute his office in that place onely, whereas his Predecessors had officiated in the days of David and So∣lomon, not onely in the Temple, but also in the Tabernacle at Gibeon,2 Chron. 1.3. and at Zion. Others apprehend it to be meant of some notable act, which he performed by virtue of his Office, and apply it to that Azariah, who thrust K. Uzziah out of the Temple: But the great distance of times will not give way to that Exposition: Seeing this Azariah, (if the two former be exclu∣ded from the High-Priesthood, as to the chief Office) might in the latter days of Solomon be of age sufficient, after the Decease of his Progenitors, to have performed his Work in the Temple, even in that King's days; and also in the Reign of Rehoboam, and Abijah, (which was but twenty years) and in some part of Asa's Reign. For some do apprehend, that Azariah and Johanan, the third and fourth in this orderly nomination, were of the Line of Ithamar, and as Substitutes to Zadok and Ahimaaz, might assist them, as secondary Priests, in time of sickness and separation from ordinary pollu∣tion, according as it was usual, whereof we have spoken before in the Office of the High Priests. Now whereas they are called Sons in a Lineal Discent, let's remember, that it is usual in Scripture for such persons to be styled by the name of Sonnes, by virtue of some Office wherein men succeed, or attend others. If this be a real truth, then the omission of the two former by Josephus, and others, will claim kindred with our Conjecture; and also help to fortifie it, concerning their not being the chief High-Priests; but as secondary, assistant to,1 Chron. 6.9, 10. and contemporary with the former. Yet seeing Scripture terms them, as lineally begotten one of another, in an orderly way of Generation, I shall not be peremptory, but leave the Knot to be solved by abler Pens. 6 Amariah, the son of Azariah, 1 Chron. 6.10. Ezra 7.3. who is ex∣presly recorded to have been chief Priest in the dayes of King Jehoshaphat, and to have been over the Jews in all matters of the Lord;2 Chron. 19.11. which some apprehend to be meant of his being of the Sanhedrin, or Great Council at Jerusalem. Part of his time was spent, probably, under the Reign of Asa likewise, and that he continued in this Kings days for some time. He is the same person, probably, who by Josephus, and Nicephorus, is called Joram, and by the Hebrew Chronicle Jehojarib, though transposed out of his due place, especially since we read of one Jehoram, at the Helm of the Priesthood, in Jehoshaphat's time. Now seeing this Joram is recounted by Josephus,2 Chron. 17.8. as the fourth from Zadok inclusively, having omitted Johanan, and Azariah the second. The last (if the fore-mentioned Conjecture should prove true concerning Johanan, that he was the son of Abiathar, and that the Line of Ithamar was re-introduced to their former dignity, though not to the su∣preamest place) might then possibly fall in contemporary with Ahimaaz, and Azariah the first. For many times (as we have hinted) we find two High-Priests coupled together, though one of them had the greatest prehe∣minence: whereby Scripture and Josephus might be reduced to a tolerable agreement; especially, since there be some probable apprehensions, that Azariah the second (of that name in the Series of nomination) might have officiated in the latter days of King Solomon, according to the sense of Dr. Lightfoot, in his Temple-Service, Chap. 4. Sect. 2. Pag. 24, 25. line 1, and 37. which assertion would prove very strange, if he were the fourth in or∣der from Zadok, in the beginning of the Temple-Work in Solomon's days; especially since Amariah (who is expresly recorded to have been his Suc∣cessour) is definitively laid down in Scripture (as we have said) in the exe∣cution of his Office, under the Rule and Dominion of Jehoshaphat, the 4th King after Solomon, there being about sixty one years from the last of Solo∣mon's
reign to the first of Jehoshaphat's. To conclude then; whereas it might be objected, that Johanan, and Azariah the second, (who are not pro∣duced by Josephus, and others) are distinctly mentioned in Scripture, as be∣gotten by the precedent, and so to be termed their sons; either we may imagine them to have been but of small duration in a successive Line: or rather that they are so termed onely Jure Officii, being indeed but Surro∣gates to the others (with whom they were co-incident in time) in several necessary cases; seeing it is sufficiently known, that those who were not natural sons, are yet styled by that name, upon account of their succession in the Government: which will evidently appear, by comparing together Matthew and Luke,Mat. 1.12. Luk. 3.27. the two Evangelists, and several other places of Scrip∣ture. 7 Ahitub, the Son of Amariah, 1 Chron. 6.11, 12. & Ezra 7.2. who is called by Josephus , and by Nicephorus plainly , who likewise expresly lays down the Character whereby to know him,Niceph. Callist. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 4. consonant to the Scripture it self: that this is the very man that lived one hundred and thir∣ty years, and flew Godoliah (that is, in Scripture-Language) Athaliah the Queen: which name and story evidently points at Jehojadah the High-Priest, Uncle to King Joash, and is termed also by Petavius, in his alleadged Chronicle, Jejadah, in distinct words; being the same person, doubtless, who in that confused Chronicle is set the fourth in number, and called Jehoahaz: from whence Josephus his  is corrupted; who for his great care of the Temple, and Worship of God, and the wonderful Reformation, effected in his days,1 Chron. 9.11. Neh. 11.11. is styled, The Ruler of the House of God. 8 Merajoth, the son of Ahitub: This person, though omitted in the 1 Chron. 6.12. yet is particularly mentioned in 1 Chron. 9.11. and in Nehem. 11.11. Now if Ahitub before spoken of, be indeed that Godly Je∣hojadah, as it seems very probable; then this Merajoth will prove to be the slain Zechariah, or some Elder Brother of his who succeeded Ahitub in the latter days of Joash the King. He is called by Nicephorus the Pa∣triarch, , who addes,  slain for his Zeal to God; which shews the corruption of his name for ; who is also called Merajoth, and was the same with Holy Zechary, as is attested by the fore-cited Chronicle, which places Jojadah, and his two Sons Zechariah and Phedajah contemporary with Queen Athaliah, and King Joash. Jose∣phus in his Greek Copy▪ names these three,  Nicephorus calls them , that is, Jehojadah, and his two sons, Zechary and Phedajah, who were slain at the Commandment of the King. Selden's Copy of the Seder Olam Zuta places Jehosaphat, Je∣hojadah, and Phadea successively: wherein, admitting one transposition, Je∣hojadah being placed first, Jehosaphat, may be put for Zachariah his Son, ex∣presly named in Petavius his Copy, where the name of Jehosaphat is defi∣cient; it being common for one person to have two names among the He∣brews. 9 Zadok, the Son of Merajoth, 1 Chron. 9.11. Nehem. 11.11. This High-Priest is styled by Josephus : by Nicephorus Callistus : and by the often-recited Chronicle, in plain terms, Zedekiah, agreeing very near with our Zadok, and is very probably the same man, who was Father in Law to King Uzziah, and did in such an eminent and zealous manner
thrust his Son in Law out of the Temple,2 Chr. 26.20. when usurping the Priests Of∣fice; and is called in the Text, mentioning that Fact, by his proper name, Azariah the chief Priest: but presently in the beginning of the twenty seventh Chapter is supposed to have his name altered by the Spirit of God and called Zadok▪ from that his courage in an act of exemplary Justice and Righteousness, and accordingly so recorded to after generations, by this name of Zadok, in the Babylonian Registers of Ezra the Scribe. This very Fact is mentioned under the name of a second Azariah in Nicephorus the Patriarch's Catalogue. Who is called by the Alexandrian Chronicle  with the annexion of another called , telling us that they lived under Athaliah, and Joash; which passage plainly carries in its very Fore∣head, the corruption of that Author, in placing  here viz. after Zadok, who was the famous Jehojadah, or Ahitub; and likewise in placing Zadok under Athaliah, who was under Ʋzziah. Before we come to the next, it is to be remembred, that Josephus inter∣serts two more Priests, called  but by Nicephorus  and by the Chronicle, Joel and Jotham. The first being pla∣ced in the daies of Ʋzziah, the other of King Jotham. But who they were, or where and how to insert them; Scripture yields no light, that I have yet discerned. 10 Ʋriah whom some think to have been of the line of Ithamar, and exalted to this dignity by ungodly Ahaz: who though he be not mentio∣ned in the Genealogies penned by Ezra, being omitted, as some guess, because of his idolatrous obsequiousness to King Ahaz about the Altar of Damascus: yet we have a certain record of his name and time, he being exprest again and again in the book of Kings.2 King. 16.11, 15, 16. With whose Scripture-name Josephus doth clearly agree, calling him , and more particularly Ni∣cephorus, expresly recording that he lived in the daies of Ahaz and He∣zekiah, and is supposed to be mentioned, Esai. 8.2. 11 Azariah another High-Priest succeeds, though not exprest by name in Ezra, or in the book of Chronicles chap. 6, or 9. Yet have we famous mention of him by the Title of chief Priest and Ruler of the house of God,2 Chron. 31.10, 13. in the daies of Hezekiah of blessed memory, and likewise that he was of the house of Zadock, being in Josephus corruptly called , in Nice∣phorus in the Chronicle Neiah, which claimes him as contemporary with Hezekiah. Here in this place, there intervenes another High-Priest cited by Josephus under the name of , by Nicephorus : by that Hebrew Chronicle, Osaiah; and in Selden's Copy Hoshaiah, which is probably a grand mistake, interverting the order, and inverting the name of Jehojadah before menti∣oned. For this  probably is the very same with  the sixth in the Alexandrian Chronicle, who is called  by Nicephorus Callistus, O∣saiah by the Jewish Chronicle, and  by Josephus in the fifth place. All conspiring either with the true or corrupted writing of the name of Jeho∣jadah. Otherwise, concerning this man's line, there being no Scripture-light, to me apparent; I shall remit him to his Authours, till clearer times. Moreover we must not here forget the two High-Priests inserted by some Authors, as followeth. First by Nicephorus the Patriarch, in his Chronography set forth by Scaliger, An. Do. 1606, together with Euse∣bius his Chronicles, and printed again A. D. 1658. pag. 307. of the greek Copy: and again in another Edition at Paris 1652, wherein he is called Arch-Bishop of Constantinople, pag. 407. I B. .
1 . Corrupted for  or Shallum the next High-Priest in order. In the Epitome of Chronicles likewise, being another Tract set out by Scaliger, pag. 240. and supposed by some to be an Alexandrian Chronicle, we read thus. . By which Authours some have been imposed upon to apprehend that Somnas or Sobnas, as also Eliakim, were High-Priests in the daies of King Hezekiah:2 Kin. 18.18. Isa. 36.22. Whereas indeed Eliakim the Son of Hilkiah was no other then the Ruler or Steward of the Kings Houshold, and Shebna the chief Scribe or Recorder, as appeareth by the royall History of the Kings of Judah. Without all doubt both these Writers were deceived by a misapprehensi∣on of the Prophet Isaiah,Isai. 22.21. who mentioning the Robe and the Girdle of Eliakim, might give occasion to conceive of them as High-Priests: Espe∣cially since the Text saith they were oer the House  they miscon∣struing the King's House for the Temple. Concerning which you may be more satisfyed in Seldens discourse De succes. Pontif. Ebrae. c. 5. p. 142. For in one verse of Isaiah the vulgar Latine calling Shebna Praepositus Templi,Isa. 22.15. the Provost or Ruler of the Temple; the sequacious pens of Popish Authours not daring to start from it for fear of the forked curse of the Tridentine convention, have followed this old and blind Error, as is well observed by Dr. Rainolds,pag. 78. in his conference with Hart concerning that inconse∣quent Argument of the Pope's supremacy drawn from one High-Priest set over the Jewish Church, during that oeconomy. To let then these Popish dreams alone to their wilfully stupified brains, as given up by God to believe lies: we will proceed to the rest of the High-Priests mentioned in Scripture-Records.2 Thes. 2.11. 12 Shallum, called the son of Zadok in 1 Chron. 6.12. and Ezra. 7.2. and Meshullam in 1 Chron. 9.11. In Josephus , In Niceph. . It is probable this man was not the immediate son of Zadok: because A∣zariah before him is said to have been of the House of Zadok: as if he nei∣ther had been the next immediate successor: But might have had Uriah as his Father betwixt him and Zadok, according to the Scripture-History of the sacerdotal function, unles it should refer to Solomon's Zadok. But we sub∣mit the whole to candid Judges, onely remembring that this man is gener∣ally conceived to have spent most of his daies under the reign of King Ma∣nasseh: who little regarded the worship of the Temple: Huldah the Prophe∣tess is call'd the wife of this High Priest by the Alexandrian Chronicle p. 24. 13 Hilkiah the son of Shallum, 1 Chron. 6.13. and 9.11. Ezra. 7.1, 2. Neh. 11.11. This man is famously known to have been in the daies of Josiah,2 Chr. 34.14. 2 Kin. 22.4. & 23.4. Strom. l. 1. p. 240, 241. edit Heins. 1616. a great coadjutor of his in that honoured and most memorable Re∣formation of God's Worship and solemn Service. Whereto all Compu∣tators do freely give in their Suffrages. Concerning whom Clemens Alex∣andrinus adds further, that he was the Father of the Prophet Jeremy, with which opinion concurs the Alexandrian Chronicle. 14 Azariah the son of Hilkiah, mentioned in Scripture, in 1 Chron. 6.13. and 9.11. Ezra, 7.1. But omitted by the three forecited Cata∣logues: yet having a threefold evidence from Scripture, we have accor∣dingly so fixed him. Yet Josephus in his History of the Jewish Antiqui∣ties bethinking himself,Lib. 20. c. 8. p. 700. D. asserts that there were eighteen High-Priests from the building of the Temple to its first dissolution: which number cannot be fetcht out of his Catalogue, unless this Azariah be admitted for one. To whom also, as to the number of eighteen, agrees our common Egesip∣pus,
which goes about the World as his, concerning the destruction of Je∣rusalem. 15 Seraiah the son of Azariah. 1 Chron. 6.14. Ezra, 7.1. He is cal∣led by Nehemiah's Register, the son of Hilkiah,Neh. 11.11. though it seems apparent by the Scriptures affixed to Azariah, that he stood not in so immediate a relation to him. But this place of Nehemiah possibly might give occasion to the three Authors to omit Azariah, whereas this person is called by Jose∣phus and Nicephorus ,2 Kin. 25.18, 21. and is reported to have been slain by the King of Babylon at Riblah. 16 Jehozadak the son of Seraiah, the Father of Jeshua, mentioned by the Prophet Zachary, and Brother of Ezra the Scribe, called by Josephus , by Nicephorus ,1 Chro. 6.14, 15. was carried captive to Babylon by the ar∣mies of Nebuchadnezar; with whom ends the Line of the Priest's during the first Temple. So that according to this view of the Succession of the High-Priests in∣tended for the enodation and untying of some former difficulties in the Historicall relation of the Jewish High-Priests in some measure: I humbly conceive, there needs no such vexatious and perplexing figure as a Meta∣thesis to be introduced: seeing the apprehended mislocations (wherein we ought to be extreme sparing of imposing upon any Scripture, without urgent necessity and clear Testimony from other places) may be now more safely laid aside, and the Chronicle vindicated to its purity in a regular pro∣cedure with its names. According to which, having examined severall Authors, the severall High-Priests of the first Temple may tolerably well synchronize with the Kings of Judah in this Method following. 1 Zadok 2 Ahimaaz 3 Azariah with King Solomon. & 4 Johanan with King Solomon. 5 Azariah with the latter end of King Solomon's reigne, Rehoboam, A∣bijah, and the beginning of Asa. 6 Amariah contemporary with the greatest part of Asa's reigne, and some part of Jehoshaphat's. 7 Ahitub or Jehojadah, who lived one hundred and thirty years, pro∣bably did concurr with the latter part of Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, Ahaziah, A∣thaliah, and part of his Nephew Joash. 8 Merajoth, so called in the Babylonian Register, but probably the same with Zachariah, in the reigne of Joash. 9 Zadok with Joash, Amaziah, and his Son in Law Ʋzziah. 10 Ʋriah in the latter end of Ʋzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and the begin∣ning of Hezekiah. 11 Azariah during the greatest part of the reigne of Hezekiah. 12 Shallum in the daies of Manasseh. 13 Hilkiah supposed by some to be in the latter part of Manasseh's time, all Amon's, and the most part of Josiah. 14 Azariah in the end of Josiah, Jehoahaz, and Jehoiakim's daies. 15 Seraiah in the time of Jeconiah and Zedekiah, and was then slain at Riblah. 16 Josedek, At the end of Zedekiah's reigne who was carryed captive to Babylon: after that the holy Temple was laid in rubbish. The more compleat Story of which most famous building as to the various accidents which befell it, shall now follow, while it continued under the reigns of the particular Kings of Judah.
Before we conclude this present Chapter, we shall give in an Historicall view of the state of the Temple, during the severall Kings of Judah, accor∣ding to the various changes related in holy Scriptures, under which it la∣boured; together with the year of the World, according to the Annals of the most learned Primate of Ireland. The state of the Temple under Solomon, the royal Founder of that glorious Pile.Anno Mundi 3000. 1 King. 11.9.THe Divine History presents to our view, in the first place, a very sad Re∣lation concerning Solomon himself, (to whom the Lord God of Israël had twice appeared) viz. that in his old age he should affront the Temple-Worship,1 Kin. 11.7. by the Erection of Heathenish Idols on Mount Olivet, the Hill over against Jerusalem, in the full view of the habitation of God's sacred Majesty. For there he fixed a seat for Moloch or Milcom the abomination of the children of Ammon: so called from the Kingly power of that dam∣nable Statue (inspired by the Divell) over the hearts of stupid Idolaters. Nay he was not ashamed to prepare a high place for Chemosh, which (it seems by the History of Jephthah) was also the God of Ammon, Judg. 11.24. Being also excellently styled in the Sacred Leavs the abomination of Moab, because of those horrid and libidinous Rites performed neer his dunghill Throne, His denomination being taken (as some observe) from  Palpare, a thing not fit to be explained. The reason, why the ancient Heathens did worship this Chemosh,Hos. 9.10. together with Priapus, of Baalphegor that shamefull Idoll, and others of the same Litter, under such detestable and pudendous figures,Edit. Hen. Steph. l. 1. p. 55. lin. 30. & lib. 4. p. 149. lin. 37. is best rendred by Diodorus Siculus to be , as the causers of foecundity. Therefore did they many times Male and Fe∣male lye together in the very Temples, imploring the aid of those beastly Numen's. For the same cause likewise was the Moon, or, as some think, the Planet Venus, exalted unto the dignity of Worship, under the name of Ashtoreth by the Sidonians, allowed also by the same King Solomon, in con∣nivence with his idolatrous wives, who stole away his heart from the true God. Yet, notwithstanding the full Millenary of Females which he en∣joyed, permitting mean while their Sacrifices to those strange Gods, possi∣bly to gain their aid in point of fruitfulness: we may bring in Solomon (though in a sense alien from that place,1 Kin. 11.3. Eccles. 7.28 cap. 2.19. Neh. 13.26. yet allusive to this purpose) com∣plaining in his own words, that among a thousand Women have I found but one man, Rehoboam, and him a foolish Prince, to sit upon my Throne after me. For we read but of one Son and two Daughters that he had, of all his Wives, 1 King. 4.11, 15. Did not Solomon King of Israël sin by these things? Yet none like him among the Nations, beloved of his God: to warn the wisest and the holiest amongst men to beware the dangerous inticements and solicitations of neer Relations unto sin. Concerning these Idols, whereby God was deeply provoked, you may please to consult more at large three learned men, viz.Syntag. 1. c. 5. & 6. Selden in his Tract Of the Syrian Deities,lib. 2. c. 5. Vossius in his books about Heathen Idolatry, and Nicolaslib. 11. c. 13 Fuller in his sacred Miscellanies. The exact time of Solomon's Age or Reign at the erec∣tion of these Pagan impurities, as not worthy to be mentioned in a divine Kalender, we do not read: Neither of the place of one of them, viz. Ash∣toreth, where it exactly stood, though it appears in generall that they stood
on the right hand of Mount Olivet, 2 Kin. 23.13. That is on the West∣side of the Mountain, being on the right hand, as they went up to the Tem∣ple to worship. O as others, the southerly side, which is commonly ex∣pressed by the right hand in Scripture. Happy King Solomon, had he been as great a stranger to their defiling and Kingdom-consuming Ceremonies; as we are to the praecise time and punctuall place of the situation of each of these abominable Idols. For if the Father had not so soulely praevari∣caed, his son probably had never felt the weight of the Loins of God's vengeance upon his Kingdom, nor the lash of those divine Scorpions, that in most righteous and just judgment whipt off ten Tribes at one blow from the Scepter of Judah in his daies: whereof we now proceed to speak. The state of the Temple under Rehoboam the second King after its Building.A.M. 3029. This famous Fabrick stood in its beauty, unspoiled of its Ornaments all the daies of Solomon, notwithstanding the grand provocations of the divine Majesty,1 Chr. 11.17 cap. 12.1. and so persisted during the three first years of the reign of Reho∣boam: But having strengthned himself in the Kingdome, he forsook the Law of the Lord and all Israël with him, denoting to us, That unsanctified prospeity, to a carnall Spirit, proves many times a sad Temptation to fearfull Apostacy. But did not God also forsake Rehoboam? yes surely! For when he had idolatrously turned his back upon the Temple, he be∣holds in his fifth year,Ver. 2. Shishak King of Aegypt marching in the Van of a terrible Army towards Jerusalem: probably incited by Jeroboam (but cer∣tainly by God) who under the reign of his Father had resided in Aegypt. This potent adversary and his Wars,Aut. Iudaic. lib. 8. cap. 4. Lib. 2. p. 127 Edit. Paul. Steph. A.M. 3026 Pag. 30. Argonaut. l. 4. ad ve. 272 Josephus peremptorily asserts to be falsly ascribed by Herodotus to Sesostus: Concerning whom the latter Historian relates in his Euterpe, that in Palaestina of Syria he himself saw stones inscribed with the memoriall of his Victoryes. But I rather in∣cline to the Judgment of the learned Primate of Ireland in his Scripture-Annals, and Mr. John Greaves in his discourse of the Aegyptian Pyramids, who comparing Manetho the Priest with the Scholiast of Apollonius Rhodi∣us Africanus, and Eusebius together, doth fully agree with Scaliger that this Shishak is the same King called by them Sesochosis, or Sesonchis, and possibly the same which Josephus de bello Judaic. l. 7. c. 18. calls Asochaeus; telling us of his taking Ierusalem: the same called by Herodstus Asychis, reciting some of his Lawes, lib. 2. and plainly called Sasyches, and related as a famous Lawgiver, by Diodorus, lib. 1. p. 59. Edit. H. Steph. Who came up to the holy City, rifled the Temple,1 Kin. 14.26 2 Chr. 12.9. ver. 10. and took away the Treasures of the House of the Lord, together with the Shields of Gold, which his Father Solomon had made. In the room whereof Rehoboam was constrai∣ned to substitute brazen ones, for the Guard to carry before him, when he went up to the Temple. This was the first plundering Bout which be∣fell that stately piece in this Prince's daies,Ver. 12. who having humbled himself lived the remnant of his life in the Sun-shine of peace, having reigned se∣venteen years in Ierusalem at his decease. Under Abijah the third King.A.M. 3046 Nothing considerable did occurre in his three years reign in relation to the Temple: But the Dedication of some Gold, some Silver, and Vessels of service to the House of God, which were carried within its sacred Wals by Asa his godly Son and Successor.1 Kin. 15.15.
A.M. 3049Ʋnder Asa the fourth King. 2 Chr. 24.3, 5It is recorded concerning this good King, that he took away the Altars of strange Gods, their high places, brake down the Images, and cut down their Groves, among all the Cities of Iudah, which was succeeded with serene daies of peace and quietness. Nay his Legions in war were atten∣ded with fortunate Lawrels in the famous Battel managed against Zerah the Captain of the Arabian Troops (as Sir Walter Raleigh excellently ma∣nifests him to be,Hist. of the World part. 1 lib. 1. cap. 8. §. 10. †. 6. 2 Chr. 21.16. and not of the Aethiopians of Africa) who came against him with a Million of men. Whence we learn, That prosperity both in peace and warr doth crown the heads of those Magistrates that promote the purity of God's Worship. Asa the famous Conquerour upon admo∣nition of Azariah the Prophet, in the fifteenth year of his Rule, and the third Month of the sacred year, put away all the abominable Idols out of all his dominions,2 Chr. 15.8. and renewed the brazen Altar for Sacrifices in the Court of the Priests, gathered all his People to Ierusalem, and offered of their victorious spoiles seven hundred Oxen and seven thousand Sheep to the God of Battell: At the same time he made a solemn Covenant between God and his People, and commanded that whosoever would not seek the Lord should be put to death. His Grand-Mother likewise he removed from being Queen (of the Idol Beth-peor,De diis Syris p. 160. Syn∣tag. 1. c. 5. Ver. 18. 2 Chr. 16.1. Anno Mundi 3064. 1 Kin. 15.18. 2 Chr. 16.2. as some conceive) stamping her Idol to pieces and burning it at the Brook Kidron. He brought like∣wise the Silver, Gold, and Vessels, into the House of God, (which himself and his Father had dedicated) in that famous year of his Reformation. In the thirty sixth year of his Kingdome since the revolt of the 10 Tribes, but the 16th year of his Reigne (as the reverend Primate observes in his Annals) he presents all the Silver and Gold that was left in the Treasures of the House of the Lord unto Benhadad the King of Syria, to bribe him to a breach of that League which he had contracted with his fatall Enemy, Baasha the King of Israël. Here we see that Sacriledge and Truce-break∣ing, two enormous sins, are linkt together: But he that dares put his hand to the Robbing of God of his Temple-Treasures, will not fear to be un∣just to man; as we behold sadly testified of this Prince, who being re∣proved by Hanani the Seer (sent from God) added yet more sins to the former, in putting the Prophet in prison, and oppressing the People at the same time. But from thenceforth God denounced War against him, and In the thirty ninth year smote him in his feet, and yet he added to seek to the Physitians and not to the Lord, and died in the one and fourtieth year of his Reigne. Take heed therefore of being hardned by holy mens sin, as well as of despairing by the story of their falls. It was no wonder to behold an Aegyptian King spoiling the Temple of God; But for an Asa the Protector and Enricher of the Temple to commit such Aegyptian wic∣kedness, for a godly King to manifest such heinous impiety demonstrates the Instability of the best without God's manutenency: who though not bound to preserve us alwayes from sin, yet hath ingaged himself to punish it even in the Children of David; when he threatned to visit their Trans∣gressions with the rod,Psal. 89.32. and their Iniquity with stripes: which is manifest in the Iudgments that befell this King,2 Kin. 15.14. whose heart in the main was up∣right before the Lord all his daies. The Spirit of God loves to give a gracious report of Saints, when gone into their Graves, and weighs their hearts, not their actions, in the Scales of the Sanctuary.
Iehoshophat the fifth King.A.M. 3090 This pious and victorious King being assailed by the forces of Moab and Ammon makes his application to him that dwelt between the Cheru∣bims, for divine assistance, and powred out a fervent prayer,2 Chr. 20.5. as he stood in the House of the Lord before the new Court. Whether this Court was distinct from the other two, or called new only from some late reparati∣ons made by his Father Asa in the fifteenth year of his Government: As the Hebrew doth not utterly reject, it being termed New-made or repai∣red from  restaurari as well as De novo. If a reall new Court, where to fix and describe it, or to say when it was built, is utterly unfeazible out of Scripture. But here finding the mention of it, we are obliged to recite it. Before which this famous King received an answer of success and victory. For which he neglected not to come with Psalteries, Harps,Ver. 28. and Trumpets to praise the Lord in this Mountain of his Holiness; and having reigned twenty five years, (being stained by joyning affinity with Ahab:2 Chro. 19.3. when the sore temptations of Riches and Honour in abundance intangled his Soul, 2 Chron. 18, 1, and ver. 28. and with helping that ungodly Fami∣ly,cap. 20.33. and permitting some high places to remain) he slept with his Fathers in peace. Iehoram the sixth King.A.M. 3112 The Government of this King was but short and generally very wicked: yet we read of some things which he dedicated to the House of God:2 Kin. 12.18 2 Chr. 21.19 ver. 11. 2 Kin. 8.18. But of what and how many, Scripture is silent: Yet of his deplorable disease, by the falling out of his Bowels, there is a memorable record, to terrify sinners in their attempts against the holy Law of God, and in joyning affi∣nity with the Enemies of God. Ahaziah the seventh King.A.M. 3119 A wicked son succeeds a wicked Father, being counselled by an ungod∣ly Mother to walk in the sins of Israel: yet we find, that he also disposed of some Treasures unto the House of the Lord. But it seems,2 Chro. 22.3. 2 Kin. 12.18 2 Chr. 24.7. being se∣duced by his wicked Mother Athaliah, he with his Brethren broke up the House of God, and bestowed all the dedicate things upon Baalim, and ha∣ving sate in the Throne but one year was slain by the followers of Jehu: shewing us how dangerous it is to be found in the society of the wicked at the time of the Execution of divine judgments. Athaliah the Queen.A.M. 3120 Athaliah the Wife of Ioram and Mother of Ahaziah (the daughter of Ahab and Grand-Daughter of Omri) seeing her Son slain,2 Kin. 8.18. 2 Chr. 21.6 22.10. arose and de∣stroyed all the Seed Royall of the House of Judah, except little Ioash: who was admirably preserved by his Aunt Iehoshebah (the Wife of Iehojadah the Priest) in some private Chamber of the Temple from the blood-thirsty fury of his cruell Grand-Mother. Who having arrived to the seventh year of his Age was anointed, crowned, and proclaimed King of Iudah, at the appointment of his zealous and godly Uncle Iehojadah. At which time the old Murdress comming into the Temple, was laid hold on,2 Kin. 11.15 2 Chr. 23.15 carried forth without the Ranges, and slain in the Horse-way leading to the King's
House. Murder we see, seldom passes unrevenged of God, and Tyranny rarely sayes its dying head upon a dry Pillow: Nay sometimes the place where divine wrath finds a sinner is signally fixed, to note, That the path of beasts is good enough to drink up the blood of an usurping and mur∣derous Queen. Joash the eighth King. Famous were the Actions at the Inauguration of this young Prince, performed by the High-Priest his Uncle, in contracting a Covenant be∣tween the Lord on the one part, Joash and his People on the other part, & another also between the King and his Subjects. The people being en∣couraged by the example of holy Jehojadah, 2 King. 11.18. brake down the House, Altars, and Images of Baal: they did their work thoroughly, and slew Mattan the idolatrous Priest and offered him as a Sacrifice up∣on his own Altars to the Justice of the true God. So excellent a Mercy is it for a Nation to have a zealous Ruler to goe in and out before them in the pure worship of God: such was Jehojadah the Protector of this King in his Non-Age. From whom in his ripening years (as having enjoyed such admirable Tuition under the wings of the Temple-Cherubims) we may justly challenge some notable Transactions towards the repaire of that holy Fabrick so violated and prophaned by his Predecessors. Neither doth he frustrate our Expectations:2 Rin. 12.4. but takes speciall care to advance mo∣ny from the People: hires Masons, Hewers of stone, and Carpenters, to repair the breaches of God's holy mansion. For receipt of the mony there was a Chest prepared with a Hole in the Cover,Ver. 9. and placed on the South-side of the Altar. When it was pretty well lined, they put it in bags,Ver. 15. Ver. 14. and being told expended it on the workmen, never calling the Trus∣tees to account, because they were faithfull. Now whereas its related in the Book of Kings that of this mony there were no Vessels made for the service of the Temple: we find an Explanation of it in the Book of Chro∣nicles,2 Chr. 25.14 that when the workmen were paid by the King and his Uncle for the reparation of the breaches: of the remaining mony Vessels of Mini∣stration were made; so that till they saw what mony was left of the char∣ges imployed in the great and main work of reparation, there were no Vessels made for the particular services: But the surplusage was faithfully laid out upon Bowles, Snuffers, Basons, Trumpets, Spoons, and other Ves∣sels of Gold and Silver.Ver. 14.15. After which they offered Burnt-offerings conti∣nually all the daies of Jehojadah who lived 130 years. But when this holy man was dead, Joash forgot his ancient zeal, and yeelded his Ears to be anointed with the Oyl of Flattery: Manifesting, within the compass of a few years, what a Mercy it is for a King to have faithfull and godly Counsellours, and on the other hand how dangerous it is to give Attention to fawning Parasites: who courted him out of his religious service to the house of God and turned him to Groves and Idols.Ver. 20.21. The sequacions Nature of Princes is the foundation of deadly changes in a State. Behold in Joash a lively example: who though warned by Ze∣chariaeh the Prophet his neer Kinsman; (whose Mother had kept him in his Infancy from ruine, and was now inspired of God to rebuke his Idola∣try) yet permitted the People to stone him in the Court of the House, be∣tween the Temple and the Altar,Ver. 22. and forgetting the kindness of his Father contracted the sin of Murder upon his own head. That this was the same man mentioned by our Lord in the Gospel-story,Mat. 23.35 though the name of his Father be there styled Barachiah, is most probable: For that the place
of his Murder there recited doth agree to this, and that Hierom observes on the place, that in the Gospell used by the Nazarenes he is termed the son of Jojada. Besides, it's observable that the two Names of Barachiah and Jehojadah do little vary in signification, the former signifying the bles∣sing or praising of God; the other, the acknowledging or confessing of God, (i. e.) in a way of praise. To let this inquiry pass: Did Joash goe unpunished? No certainly; but at the end of the year God's Judgments took up an expedition against this revolting and treacherous Prince,2 Kin. 12.17 and made Hazael King of Syria the General of his angry bands to execute his fierce wrath upon Judah. These Syrian Troops though small in number; yet re-inforced with the anger of God, destroyed all the Princes of the People,2 Chr. 24.24 and conquered an huge Host of Joash, and executed Judgment upon Him and his People: for they had forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers. The face of this Enemy be∣ing turned towards Jerusalem, Ioash took away all the hallowed things that were given by Iehoshaphat, Iehoram, Ahaziah, and himself,2 King. 2.18 together with all the Gold in the Treasures of the Lord's House and of his own, and sent them to Hazael: Wherewith the Tyrant being pacified, turned his face to Damascus. But though Hazael was, yet God was not gone from Ioash, but marched towards him in the paths of anger: For the Syrians left him under the hand of God in great diseases (as the same Word  in that Text doth other-where clearly signifie;2 Chr. 24.25 as you may read in 2 Chron. 21.15. Prov. 18.14. Ierem. 15.4. &c.) Neither did God per∣mit him to dy of such grievous Sickness; but bloody violence must be compensated with a dysastrous death, and accordingly we presently hear of his Servants conspiring against, and slaying him upon his sick bed;Ver. 25. That so a violent death might ride to his bed-side before a naturall death had dispacht him. The Spirit of God reciting the reason of all to be, for the blood of the Sons of Iehojadah. Neither yet doth vengeance forsake him but carryes him from the Sepulchre of the Kings: not suffering him to rest with his famous Predecessours. From all whose Judgments, we learn what a hatefull sin Apostacy from true Religion is in the sight of God: for in him that draws back, the Soul of God will take no pleasure:Heb. 10.38. Prov. 14.14 but the Back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own waies. Amaziah the Ninth King.A.M. 3165 The former Section exhibited the downfal of an irreligious Apostate: but herein we have the view of a notorious Hypocrite, who did that which was right, but his Heart was not perfect with God:2 Chro. 25.2 He had prosperous success against the Edomites of Mount Seir; but being lifted up with pride, would needs challenge the King of Israel to Battel: wherein being overthrown, and taken prisoner at Bethshemesh, in the Tribe of Judah, by Ioash, the King of the Ten Tribes, he was carryed as a Triumphal Captive to his chief City by the Conquerour: who being arrived at Jerusalem, brake down the Wall of the City, for the space of four hundred Cubits, lying be∣tween the Corner-Gate, and the Gate of Ephraim, on the North side of this famous Metropolis, that he might enter the capital City with the greater pomp and magnificence. After which stately admission,2 Chr. 25.24 2 Kin. 14.14 this King of Israel, spoils the Temple of all the Gold and Silver, and carryes away all the Ves∣sels that were found in the House of God with Obed-Edom's sons, who had the charge of the Treasury that lay in the house of Asuppim, near a Gate of the same name in the West-side of the outward Court of the Temple.1 Chr. 26.15 2 Chr. 25.15 But this wicked King who had worshipped the gods of Seir, that could not save
their stupid Proselytes out of his own hands, thus deeply provoked the Lord to such fierce wrath, that it prosecuted him to a violent death: for fal∣ling under the hands of his own servants at Lachish,Ver. 28. he was brought much like Richard the Third from Bosworth Field, upon horses, in an ignomini∣ous manner, to his Burial at Jerusalem. Thus we see, the discovery and downfal of Hypocrisie, a sin greatly detested of God: who uncloathed this Hypocritical Zealot of his Religious Cloak (which he wore in his first days) by the Warm Sun of Success in War against the Children of Edom. Where∣by being encouraged to shew what he was, and supposing he stood now strong upon his own legs, he bows down to the Idumaean Idols; but never rose up again into the pristine state and glory of his Kingdom: for being pursu'd by thick Troops of Divine Vengeance, at last he is constrained to resign up both Scepter and Life to the severe Avengers of God's broken Covenant. Thus usually, the Lord is pleased to deal with ambiguous Hy∣pocrites; first to discover, and then to ruine them. A.M. 3194Azariah, or Uzziah, the tenth King. I shall not meddle with any of his Civil or Warlike Actions, that do not Historically relate to the Temple, during his long and prosperous Reign,2 Chro. 26.5. Ver. 16. while he sought the Lord. But let's observe onely, that when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his fatal destruction; for having fortified the City, and repaired the ruines it suffered under his Predecessor, and done many noble Exploits;Ver. 9. at last unworthily usurping the Priests Office, he en∣tred into the Temple, to burn Incense upon the Golden Altar. Whereupon he was immediatly smitten with Leprosie by God, thrust out of the Temple by the High-Priest, and deposed from his Kingly Office, his Son Jotham be∣ing admitted to the Execution of Judgment in his room: yielding a nota∣ble document to the highest and most imperial persons in the World, not to intermeddle with sacred Functions. A.M. 3246Jotham the 11th King. His powerful Wars, crowned with notable success against the Ammonites as the reward for the preparing of his ways before the Lord his God, we shall omit;2 Chro. 27.6. and take notice onely of the stately high Gate, which he built for the House of the Lord; which is conceived to be the West-Gate, lea∣ding to the Kings House, and mentioned by an Historical Prolepsis, in the days of Joash,2 Chr. 23.20 a former King. But of this I have formerly treated, Chap. 3. Pag. 53. & do incline to think it to have been the great Eastern Gate of the Priests Court: which being decaied, he new built in a magnificent manner: It being called the Upper-Gate in the Book of Kings, and the New-Gate in the higher Court of the Lords House,2 Kin. 15.35 Ier. 36.10. by the Prophet Jeremy, from this King's new work about it, who having walked religiously, reigned victori∣ously, he dyed peaceably, and slept quietly in the Sepulchres of his famous Ancestors. A.M. 3262Ahaz the 12th King. Now arises up into the Throne one of the most wicked Kings of Judah, walking in the ways of the Kings of Israel. He made his Son pass through the Fire and burnt Incense in the Valley of Hinnom; he erected molten Images to Baalim,2 Kin. 16.3. 2 Chr. 28.3. and sacrificed in the high places, and on the Hills, and under every green Tree. Wherefore the Lord sent Rezin, the King of Syria,
and his confederate Pekah, King of Israel, to besiege him in Jerusalem: wherein, though they prevailed not to take the City, yet Rezin smote his Land, and carryed a great multitude away Captive to Damascus, and reco∣vered Elath, a strong Fortress from Judah,2 Chr. 26.2. which his Father Ʋzziah had fortified. Pekah slew one hundred and twenty thousand valiant men in one day, and carryed away captive two hundred thousand, with much spoyl to Samaria. This King being thus sorely distressed, sends a Message to Tig∣lath-Pilezer, King of Assyria, with a Present of the Silver and Gold found in the House of the Lord.2 Kin. 16.8. 2 Chr. 28.21 For he was not onely desperately plunged by the two former Kings; but sorely afflicted by the Edomites, and the Philistins; the former, carrying some away captive; and the latter, seizing many of his Towns. The Assyrian King, upon this invitation, falls in upon the King∣dom of Syria, slew its King, took Damascus the chief City, and subdued it under him: Whereupon Ahaz meets him at Damascus, and takes there the pattern of an Idolatrous Altar, and sends it to Ʋriah the Priest; and being returned, causes the Brazen Altar of the Lord to be removed, and his new Altare Damascenum to be placed in the Court for his own Sacrifices. New Inventions of men, in God's Worship, never thrive: for his Confederated Friend out of Assyria falls now upon the King of Iudah himself.2 Chr. 28.19, 20. Isai. 10.28 For he came up, saies Isaiah, to Ajath, he passed to Migron, and laid up his car∣riages at Michmash, mentioning with these, other Cities of Iudah: and saies, he shal shake his hand against the Mount of the Daughter of Zion.Ver. 32. 2 Chr. 28.23 In the time of this his great distress he did trespass yet more against the Lord: for he sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus that smote him, which was his ruine. Now he plunders the House of God to purpose, and makes mad work in the Temple. He gathers together the Vessels of the House of God and cuts them in pieces. He pulls away the borders of the Bases, and removes the Laver; takes the Sea of Brass off from the backs of the brazen Oxen and sets it on the stone-Pavements:2 Kin. 16.17 certainly he was troubled in conscience that they had so long served God in bearing that stately Vessel, and pitied their weariness under their long burden, out of a sacrilegious madness of Spirit mixt with his distress and necessity. The Covert also for the Sabbath which probably was built to shelter the Priests in rainy and tempestuous weather, he turns out of doores. Nay,Dr. Light∣foot harm. p. 116. Mr. Fuller's Pisgah, pag. 283. Usher. Annal p. 93. 2 Chr. 28.25 Ver. 22. Dr. Light∣foot. that stately Passage or Entry of the King to the Temple, called the Causey or Shallecheth on the West, he either obstructs, diverts or destroyes, and that either out of fear of surprizal by the Assyrian, or rather to manifest his utter rejection of the worship of God, in favour to the Emperour's Idolatry, Afterwards he put out the Lamps and leavs off burning Incense in the House of God: he shuts up the doors and turnes High-Priest to the Devill: For he made him Altars in every corner of Ierusalem, and in every severall City of Iudah he made high places to burn Incense to other Gods, and provoked to anger the Lord God of his Fathers. This is that King Ahaz! But what followes? Most probably deposed, for all this, by his faut or the King of Assyriae, and sees his own son lifted up to the royall Throne in his stead. For if his son Hezekiah began to reigne in the third year of Hoshea King of Israël, as you read expresly 2 King. 18.1, 2. Then did he begin in the fifteenth year of his Father Ahaz. For Hoshea's beginning to reigne in the twelfth of A∣haz. 2 King. 17.1. doth determine the fifteenth of Ahaz, to synchronize with the third of Hoshea, the commencement of Hezekiah's Reigne; who hereby must needs prove to be assumed into the Empire by his Father as the learned Bishop Usher would have have it, or else introduced by the As∣syrian, as learned Dr. Lightfoot declares. Besides, it is distinctly noted in 2 King. 18.9, 10. that Samaria was taken in the sixth of Hezekiah, which
was the ninth of Hoshea: Therefore the first of Hezekiah is the third of Hoshea and the fifteenth of Ahaz, when Hezekiah began to reigne in his Father's life time; who died after 16 years dominion, whether compleat or current is not exprest.2 Chr. 28.27 But he died ingloriously, and was not buried with honour in the Sepulchres of his famous Ancestors. Thus this abo∣minable Polluter and Prophaner of the Temple came to an untimely end, not being able to tell the hour of God's wrath upon the Diall of his ido∣latrous Wickedness: Though he erected a famous Materiall one in some place of his House or of the Temple, much spoken of and contested about by learned Authors, yielding a miraculous confirmation to the faith of his pious Successor.Vol. 3. in his judicial Laws c. 25. p. 89. Pag. 246. Pag. 162. Concerning this Diall, Mr. Weemse hath an exerci∣tation, but there speaks not of the place, only conceives it to have been a polar one. Mr. Gregory of (Christ's-Church in Oxen) in his posthumous Works seems to assent to Cornel. A lapide, that it was placed on a wall of the King's Palace, and that it was a South-verticall Diall. Adricho∣mius places it in the Temple, and saies, it was made of the brazen Altar of the Lord which he removed from its situation; but he proves nothing. I shall onely leave to consideration as to the place, that seeing some Altars are mentioned to be fixt on the top of the Upper-chamber of Ahaz,2 Kin. 23.12 & that spoken of in the mids. of a Relation concerning two Temple-pollutions, whether this Diall might not be supposed to have been placed on some wall of that Chamber, which he built, possibly in the Temple. A.M. 3277Hezekiah the 13th King. Glorious were the Atchievments of this holy King, who no sooner stept into the royall Throne but he presently made a solemn visitation of the Temple in the first year of his reign, and in the first Moneth of the sa∣cred year,2 Chr. 29.3. He opens the doors of that late-polluted House, shut up by his ungodly Predecessour, and repaires them in a magnificent manner, over∣laying the doors and pillars with Gold.2 Kin. 18.16 Then having gathered the Priests and Levites into the East-street, he makes an eloquent Oration to them, filled with divine and perswasive Rhetorick, and rouzes them up to the purification of the Temple from the idolatrous pollutions of Ahaz. Which when they had finished in the space of sixteen daies, they prepared and sanctified all the Vessels for divine use. Whereupon, they offered sacrifices of Atonement and Reconciliation for the sins of Ahaz in propha∣ning the Temple-Worship.2 Chr. 29.21 The Number of the burnt-Offerings brought by the Congregation were seventy Bullocks, one hundred Rams, and two hundred Lambs, and the consecrating Offerings were six hundred Oxen and three thousand Sheep.2 Chr. 30.2. Numb. 9.11 After which they solemnized the Passover on the fourteenth day of the second Month according to the Law of Moses in case of Impurity. The Sacrifices of Peace-offerings which were then presented to God were two thousand Bullocks, and seventeen thousand Sheep,2 Chr. 30.26 there being such joy at that time in Jerusalem, as the like thereof had not been known since the daies of Solomon. When this was finished, all the People, who had been present in the Temple, went out and brake the Images in pieces,cap. 31.1. cut down the Groves, and tumbled down the high Places and Altars in all Judah and Israël, and particularly destroyed the Brazen Serpent of Moses,2 Kin. 18.4. calling it Nehushtan, a poor piece of Brass, be∣cause the Israëlites had burnt Incense to it in an idolatrous manner. Moreover, he set in order the Courses of the Priests, and gave forth a por∣tion of his own Estate to maintain the constant and solemn Sacrifices of God's worship, and commanded the People to bring in their First-fruits
and Tithes to encourage the Priests in the Law of the Lord:2 Chr. 31.4, 5 preparing Chambers in the House of God wherein to lay them up. Thus did he work that which was right and good and truth before the Lord his God.Ver. 20. The Lord was with him whithersoever he went. Being encouraged by this his great prosperity he shoke off the yoke of the King of Assyria and smote the Philistins even to Gaza and the border thereof.2 Kin. 18.7. But after the esta∣blishment of the worship of God and his Kingdom. [Giving a true and an eminent pattern to all Princes to begin first with Temple-work and the Reformation of the Worship of God; if ever they intend to set warm in their Thrones, and settle the Scepter in their hands. Which Method being usually mistaken by great pretenders to Reformation, they general∣ly lay the Basis of their own ruine in the Quagmire and Queachy ground of rotten policy] Behold yet even after all this,2 Chr. 32.1. 2 Kin. 18.13 & 15.16. he was invaded by Sen∣nacherib the great King of Assyria, in the fourteenth year of his Reign. To pacify whose rage, he sent him all the Treasures of Silver, and the gold of the Pillars and Doores of the Temple. But that haughty King being nothing satisfied, whetted but his appetite for more Glory and Riches,2 Chr. 32.17 and sent railing Letters against the God of Zion. Hereupon this holy King of Judah spread the Letters before the Lord in his Temple, and,2 Kin. 19.14, 15. which was better and more acceptable, he spread his Hands and his Heart before the Lord, in a most ardent and heavenly prayer. Whence we may perceive that intended Mercyes are fetcht from Heaven in the Chariot of prayer, and a holy Prophet is made the mouth of God to declare his gracious an∣swer,Ver. 20. honouring his Ministers with the divine messages of his Will. Which was seconded that very Night by a direful stroke of vengeance on the Assy∣rian Camp, cutting off all the mighty men of valour,Ver. 35. 2 Chr. 32.31 with the Leaders and Captains of his Army, to the number of 185000 men. The King him∣self returning with shame was slain by the Children that came out of his own Bowels, in the House of his god. After this, Hezekiah being sick, and recovered, with the attendance of a miraculous signe of the Sun's retroces∣sion on the Dyall of Ahaz, he rendred not again according to his mercies: but being left by God to try him, and to know all that was in his heart,2 Chr. 32.31 he shewed his stately Treasures to the Embassadours of Merodach-Baladan King of Babylon, called by Ptolomy , in that excellent Canon of his, esteemed by Calvisius more precious then Gold, for the concatenation of the sacred and civil Histories of those times. But this good King humbled himself for the pride of his heart,Ver. 16. shewing his godly sincerity in heart-re∣formation lying low before God for his being lifted up before the Legates of an earthly Prince. After which, reigning in peace and great prosperity, the usual Concomitant of Integrity in God's worship, he died in peace,Ver. 33. and was buried in the chiefest of the Sepulchres of the Sons of David. Manasseh the 14th King.A.M. 3306 The ungodly Son of a holy Father puts on the orient Diadem, and suc∣ceeds in the royall Seat of Judah,2 Kin. 23.1. builds up the high-places destroyed by Hezekiah, rears up Altars for Baal, and makes a Grove like Ahab King of Israël, and worships all the Host of Heaven, for whom he built Altars in both the Courts of the Lord's House.2 Ch. 33.6, 7 2 Kin. 23.4. He caused his Children to pass through the fire in the Valley of Hinnm and erected a carved Image of the Idol Baal which he had made in the Temple of God in a most prophane and presumptuous manner, not hearkning to the menacing Messages sent by God. At last, the Majesty of Heaven bing deeply incensed, sent against him the Captaines of the King of Assyria, who tooke him among the
thorns, bound him with Fetters, and carried him captive to Babylon. In which affliction having greatly humbled himself before the Lord, and de∣precated the fierceness of his wrath by earnest supplication, he was brought again to Jerusalem and to his Kingdome. Where to demonstrate the sin∣cerity of his Repentance, he took away the strange Gods, and that damna∣ble Idol of Baal out of the House of the Lord, and all the Altars which he had built in the holy Mountain, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the City. Furthermore, he proceeds to the reparation of the brazen Altar of the true God, and sacrificeth his Peace-and Thank-offerings thereon, com∣manding Judah to serve the Lord God of Israël: who having reigned fifty five years, slept with his Fathers, and was buried in his own House in the Garden of Uzzah.2 Kin. 21.18 A. M. 3361Amon the 15th King. At twenty two years of Age began Amon to reigne in Judah, and wal∣ked in the wicked steps of the first years of his Father, sacrificing to all the carved Images made by him,2 Kin. 21.21. 2 Chr. 33.12 disgracing (what in him lay) the Temple-worship: But following him not in Repentance and godly Sorrow. For he trespassed yet more and more, till he was slain by the conspiracy of his own Servants in his own house, having reigned but two years only. His life when young being preserved only (as may seem) for the sake of Iosiah in his Loines; and his Dominion, to that end, that his godly Son might be fostered for a while, who was after to succeed him. God many times would thunder out his Iudgments against the Sons of Belial, were it not for some of his elect that shall flow from them: as far as we may with all humility and reverence give conjecture concerning the deeps of divine providence in his dispensations throughout the world. A.M. 3363Iosiah the 16th King. Now enters at 8 years of Age into the Kingly Throne the holiest Refor∣mer that ever wore the Crown of Judah. The Greeness of his years set a ver∣dant lustre upon his actions, like a stately Emerald incircling his Temples. For having attained but sixteen years of his life he began to seek after the God of his Father David: and at twenty years old he becomes mighty in zeal for the House of his God,2 Chr. 34.3. the Groves he cut down, the Altars of Ba∣allm he brake in pieces, the Images both carved and molten he stampt to dust, and strowed the powder on the Sacrificers Graves; he burnt the Bones of the idolatrous Priests upon their prophane Altars, and knockt the Altars themselvs in pieces with Mattocks, not only in Judah, but in Ephraim and Manasseh also, even to Naphthali round about. In the eighteenth year of his Reign,Ver. 7, 8. when he had purged the land and returned to Ierusalem, he commands some of his chief Officers to summe up the mony brought into the Temple,2 Kin. 23.3, 4, 5. &c. 2 Chr. 35.3. causes Carpenters and Masons to be hi∣red, Timber and hewen Stone to be provided, and places the Ark again in the most holy place, which it seems was removed by Manasseh. Mean∣while the Book of the Law being found by Hilkiah the Priest was brought to the King, read by Shaphan, wept over by Iosiah, and a message by him sent to the Prophetess, who answered him with a returne of peace, be∣cause of the tender meltings of his Heart under the denunciation of judg∣ment. The Reparations of the House being finished, and the Book be∣ing carried up into the Temple of the Lord, the King himself read it in
the ears of the Elders of Judah, and all the People, and standing by the royall Pillar in the wonted place, entred into Covenant with God, and caused them all to stand to it. After this he commands the High-Priest and his inferior Ministers to bring forth out of the Temple all the Vessels of Baal, of his Grove, and the Host of Heaven, to the Brook, burning and stamping them to dust, and laid the dust on the Graves of the Children of the People.2 Kin. 3.7. He proceeds further to break down the Houses of the Sedo∣mites neer the House of the Lord, that is, possibly of those who were the Officers of the shamefull and bestiall priapeian Ceremonies of Baalphegor, not fit to be uttered. For as common Idolatry is called Whoredome in Scripture: so this abominable Idolatry is probably called by the name of Sodomy. For the Text saies that Women did in those Houses weave Hangings for that Grove, viz. of Baal, that was cast out of the House of God, being probably an artificiall imitation of the Idol-Temple of Baal,Ver. 6. with a Grove of Trees about it in some solid mettal or stone, placed within those sacred Walls, He defiles also all the High-places where the Priests had burnt Incense, from Gebah to Beersheba, together with Tophet in the Valley of Hinnom, where the Children were fried in that hellish fire to Mlech: Whence it is,Chietomaei Graecobarb. N. T. p. 54. 2 Kin. 23.11. that the new Testament assumes the word  to shadow forth the intolerable Torments of the bottomless lake of God's aeternal Judgment. He took away the Horses of the Sun also, and burnt their Chariots with fire, which were dedicated by the Princes of Judah to the Prince amongst the Stars of Heaven, which had been placed at the en∣tring into the House of God. The Altars likewise, on the top of the Up∣per Chamber of Ahaz, were dasht in pieces, and those of Manasseh in both the Courts of the House were broken down and their dust cast into Kidron. The High-places of Solomon together with their Altars and Groves built for Ashtoreth, Chemosh, and Milcom on the side of Mount Olivet,Ver. 13. were ut∣terly ruined and overthrown, and their places defiled being filled with the Bones of men. Neither did he forget the Altar and High-place at Bethel, erected by Jeroboam that great sinner of Israël. The Bones also taken out of the Sepulchres in that Mount (whereon Bethel was built) he burnt on those Altars, and polluted their imagined sanctity. Thus he did in the other Cities of Samaria, slaying the Priests and burning their bones upon their Altars, and returned to Jerusalem.2 Kin. 23.23 2 Ch. 34. &c. At last he celebrates the Passover, on the fourteenth day of the first Month, in this eighteenth year of his Reign, in most solemn and magnificent manner, the like having not been performed since Samuel and the daies of the Judges, nor in the time of any of the Kings of Judah or Israël. To which purpose the King be∣stowed on the people thirty thousand Lambs and Kids, and three thou and Bullocks out of his own substance, the Princes also bestowed 2600 small Cattell and three hundred Oxen. The whole number of Sacrifices being 35900 for the service of the Temple. Which was so punctually and strict∣ly managed according to the Law of Moses, that like him there was no King before him, nor after him rose any King like him,2 Kin. 23.25 that turned to the Lord with all his Hart, with all his Soul, and with all his Might. Yet nothwithstanding after all this (saith the holy Spirit) the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath kindled against Judah for the high provocations of Manasseh and his other Predecessours. But Josiah was in this point happy, that he saw not the ruine of his Kingdome: but died in peace (according to the Prophecy of Huldah) of his conscience, say some:2 Chr. 34.28 though more probably of his Kingdome, as to utter desolation which was now hastening towards it. Though the express words strictly examined do not say, he should dy in peace, but be gathered to his Grave in peace: for
though he was wounded in battell in a rash adventure against Pharaoh Ne∣coh, who was going up in haste to the war of Assyria, having overthrown Jesiah in battell, marcht on speedily towards Carchemish, and left him to a peaceable buriall after his mortall wounds that were received at Megid∣do, called Magdolon by Herodotus: for he died at Jerusalem, and was bu∣ried, with a most solemn and mournfull funerall, in the Sedulchtes of his Fathers, the Obsequies being managed by Jeremiah a holy Prophet in sor∣rowfull Lamentations,Law. 4.20. weeping out that dolefull Elegy, The breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their Pits, of whom we said, Un∣der his shadow we shall live among the Heathen. A.M. 3394Jehoahaz the 17th King. After Josiah had reigned thirty one years, the People of the Land exalted Jehoahaz his Son into his Fathers Throne.2 Chr. 26.2. Whose Reign was both wic∣ked and short, not exceeding three Months. For the Aegyptian King af∣ter his Victory at Euphrates, returning to Jerusalem, put him down, cast him in fetters at Riblah, and carried him away to Aegypt, where he died, The Conqueror having condemned the Land in a great Tax, and set up ano∣ther son of Josiah in his Room. A.M. 3394Jehojakim the 18th King. The conquering Aegyptian set up this King in the royal seat, who could do no less then pay the Taxation to his Master, at which the Land was set, and then falls to the old idolatrous pranks of the preceding Princes. But he was invaded by another forreign Prince and bound in fetters to be carried to Babylon.2 Chr. 36.6. Some think the Emperour did not carry him thither: but the particle [also] in the next verse, adjoyned to the Vessels of the Temple, seems to insinuate that he went along with them. But whether he went or no, being not fully clear, it's certain that the Babylonian spoyled the ho∣ly Temple of many of its rich Vessels, and placed them in the Temple of his God in the land of Shinar.Ver. 7. Dan. 1.2. 2 Kin. 24.6. This is manifest, that if the Jewish King were captived, he was sent back upon certain conditions: for we find him dying at Jerusalem, and buried there in the 11th year of his Reign. A.M. 3405Jehojachin or Jeconiah the 19th King. The Dominion of this young King was but short, yet sowre; wicked∣ness being usually disht up with Judgment, for he reigned but three Mo∣neths and ten daies, and then at the end of the year Nebuchadnezar him∣self came to Jerusalem,2 Chr. 36.10 2 Kin. 42.14 and carried away ten thousand Captives, together with the King and all the Treasures of the Temple, and cut in pieces the goodly Vessels which Solomon had made, and set Zedekiah his Uncle in his room over the Realm: by his very name, given him by the Conquerour, importing the just Iudgments of God. A.M. 3405Zedekiah the 20th King. This was the Augustulus of the Judaean Empire, exalted by the proud Babylonian to trundle under his vast Empire, But being highly wicked in the sight of God: it came to pass through the anger of the Lord, that he rebelled against his Master,2 Kin. 24.20 that golden head of the Imperiall Statue of Daniel. Whereupon, in the eleventh year of his underling Reign, he
was taken neer Jericho flying from his head-City, and was brought to Riblah, and there saw his sons slain before his face, and after that, his own eyes were put out. Howbeit, though being blind he never saw any more misery, yet he felt enough; for he was bound in etters of Brass, and carri∣ed to Babylon. He that would not see the hand of the Lord lift up in Ie∣remiah's threatning Messages, must now sink under the weight of that iron Rod falne down upon, and crushing his Bones into a dismall and utter ru∣ine. But he wanted not companions of grief to alleviate his sorrow, es∣pecially the dolefull ruines of that incomparable Temple, enough to qua∣lify his Spirit, under his personall Sufferings, if they had been mixt with serious repentance, and if his blind Bals had been moistned with soul-mel∣ting Tears; so that with a brave Heroick Spirit he might never have repi∣ned at the loss of his own light, seeing the Lamps of God's House were ex∣tinguished: and like good Eli even contented to break his neck when the Ark of God is taken, and cry out with a funerall voice, and say with the famous Spartan Generall to his surviving Souldiers,Diodor. Reserve your selves for better times. Vitae est avidus, quisquis non vult Templo secum pereunte mori.Seneca in Thyeste, v. 881. Concerning the deplored ruines of which sacred and magnificent Pile, and its finall Catastrophe, more shall be spoken in the last Chapter, ha∣ving now continued about 415 years: During which space of time, it was ten times robbed and plundered, viz. 1. By Shishak King of Aegypt, and next by five of its own Kings, by one of the Kings of Israël, and by Nebuchadnezzar three times in the Reigns of its three last Kings, as may appear more fully in the foregoing Chronicle. But before we come to the last and deplorable Chapter of its Dissolution, we shall endeavour with all sobriety to refresh the mind of our pious and devout Reader with those rare evangelicall Mysteries, that were vailed under the Shadows and Cae∣remonies of this royall Structure: which we shall crave leave to exhibit in the succeeding discourse.
CHAP. IX. Concerning the divine Mysteries of the Temple. THis Chapter containes the Jewish Gospel, or the streaming forth of the glorious beames of Christ incarnate, whilst he walked un∣der theExod. 34.33. Vail of Moses. The Sun of Righteousness, like aPsal. 19.4 5. Bridegroome coming out of the caeremoniall Chambers, re∣joyceth as a strong man to run his race through the empyreall Regions of this mysterious Chapter. The forementioned2 Cor. 3.13, 14. &c. Vail is buried in Moses Grave, The Curtain of the Temple isMat. 27.51. rent in sunder, and divided a∣mong the Roman Souldiers. The waxen Comb of the ancient Figures and ypicall cells is fully melted, and rolled up in shining Tapers to illu∣minate Temple-students, in finding out the Hony that couches in theJudg. 14 8. cara's of the slain Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Jonathan dipt the top of Moses Rod in the Hony that was found in the wood of the ancient solem∣nities, and behold how his1 Sam. 14.29. eyes were enlightned.Psal. 34.8. O! taste and see that the Lord is good in giving to his evangelicall Israel, a Land flow∣ing with Milk and Hony. The Jewish fleece is now become like the barren heath, thatJer. 17.6. seeth not when good cometh: whereas the whole World hath been long since moistned with the dewes of Zion. Many Sons and Daughters from the East and West do now lye down in the bosome of Abraham: while theMat. 8.12. Children of the Kindome are shut out. Those that of old cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, may now water its ruines with their Tears, perfume it with their sighes, lament it with Elegies and dolefull Ditties, to bring to remembrance the beautifull Palaces, where once their Fathers worshipped: leaving brea∣ches in their own houses on purpose to commemorate its deplorable downfall: whilest the true Temple of the Lord areJer. 7.4, 5. these, who tho∣roughly mend their waies, and execute Judgment between a man and his Neighbour. That ancient stately structure no doubt was a compendious Map of the then Terra Incognita, or the unknown Land of the Gospell: It was Hea∣vens Geographicall Table of those Countries, whose shores only did appear to them through a dark mist, even the watrish Vapours arising up from the Brazen Sea, or the fuliginous smoake towring up toward Heaven from the Brazen Altar. But now, the greatest part of the Continent, the spa∣cious Plains, the flowry Meadows, the Cedar Mountains, the pearling streams, the shady Vallyes, the capacious Prospects, the Eshcol Vine∣yard, the Balsame Gardens of the Land of Canaan are discovered.
The Garden ofCant. 6.11. Nuts is now found out, whose pistachian shels of old were very beautifull, being stained red with the blood of the Sacrifices: but now tast sweeter then the choisest Hony that drops from the Comb of its own accord: To which place we shall endeavour to lead our diligent Reader in the various walks of this present Chapter. In the former parts of this Treatise we have insisted upon the Rind and Paring, now we shall comfort him with theCant. 2.5. Apples themselves: be∣fore we talkt of Flagons, now we shall poure out the Wine: before we viewed the Walls of an inclosed Garden, now we shall breathe among theCant. 5.13. beds of Spices: before we came to the mouth of a sealed fountain, but now we may exhaust Cups fill'd to the brim with potable Gold, the true Elixir, the Nectar of the Wells of Salvation: seeing the mistakenJoh. 20.15 Gardiner proves the true Messiah, leading his Children to the bauqeting house of his divine love, and inviting them with an affable voice and a cheerfull countenance,Cant. 5.1. Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved. This is the holy Mountain of Transfiguration, wherein Moses, Elias, and Christ do feast together on the discourses of his divineLuk. 9.31. passion, while honest Peter would have plaid the Carpenter for his holy Master, in erec∣ting a Tabernacle for each of those transparent Glories, to be vailed in from each other: not considering thatOrig. Hom 6. in Lev. E∣dit. Basil. 1545. p. 145. one Tabernacle, as well as one Mountain would have contented those radiant Persons: seeing that the Law of Moses, and the Prophets Oracles did all concenter and harmonize in that Grace and Truth which came by Jesus Christ. Deep are these Waters ofIsa. 8.6. Shiloah, that move but softly towards a full discovery of the Ocean of Glory, into which they unlade themselves. Dark and profound are the Mysteries that lay behind the Temple-walls: which possibly may shine forth more oriently, and smile with a more love∣ly aspect in the Churches Horizon, when the Seed of Abraham shall be∣come theMat. 21.2. wise men of the East, and shall more anxiously inquire for theRev. 22.16 bright Morning-star that shined over the Gates of Bethlehem: who being better acquainted with the Letter of the Ceremony, may then help us to expound that Gospell which of old wasRom. 10.16 Gal. 3.8. Heb. 4.2. preached to them insha∣dowes: For when they shall2 Cor. 3.16 turne to the Lord, the Vail shall be ta∣ken away, and their Recovery shall prove like a Resurrection orRom. 11.15. Life from the dead. In the meane while, we, the least among the many thousands of Judah, do crave leave to cast in the small Mites of our Substance into the Temple-Treasuries: wishing every Mite were a Shekel, every Shekel a Talent, to augment the discoveries of these rare and profound Mysteries: Untill the All-wise Majesty of Heaven be pleased to reveal more ample and illustrious manifestations of these hidden excellencies, thereby destroying in this ho∣ly Mountain of his Temple the face of thatIsa. 25.7. covering which is cast over all people, and the Vail that is spread over all Nations. For this purpose I humbly conceive it requisite, in the first place to treat of Types in generall, and the Nature of their prefiguration of the evangeli∣call Mysteries, and afterward to proceed in a distinct and orderly Method to the examination of the particular Types laid up in the Temple, toge∣ther with its appendant Ordinances. In reference to the Explication of Types in generall, it's convenient to follow the counsell of the great Philosopher [] first of all diligently to search out the force of the word, which if it hath in it
any designed connotation of the thing, whereon it is imposed, may lend us some slender help in this particular. The word it self is derived ; A Type being nothing else then , some metalline of earthy matter stampt or imprest upon, where∣in the Effigies or shape of the bottome of a stamping Instrument is exactly re∣presented to the eye: as an Image or a device that is formed or fashioned by the percussion and impression of a solid body. Thus coyned pieces of money may properly be styled the Types of their several stamps, which they exhibit and manifest upon their surface. Thus the wounds of our dear Lord and Saviour are in the Greek calledJoh. 20.25. , the Types of the nailes, that were driven into his holy hands upon the Crosse. Thus, the footsteps of the hammer of the Word upon the hearts of the Romans, who were obedient to the faith: or if you please, the figure or shape of the inside of the mould of Gospel-doctrine, whereinto their hearts were put by the Apostles preaching, is calledRom. 6.17. , the Type or forme of do∣ctrine whereinto they were delivered and effigiated according to the minde of Christ. According to this sense, we may conceive of the Gospel under the notion of a stamp, and of the Ceremonial Law, as the Type or Effigies or Shape of that Gospel stamp impress't upon it by God. Evangelical truths then are to be deemed as the Originals, & tanquam ideae (as one speaks) in mente Divina, as the Idea's or preconceived formes in the divine understanding of God, and most curiously exemplified in the Types of the Law. Those antient Types were the silver pictures imbellished with the Golden Apples gathered in Gospel-Gardens: They were the pleasantExod. 38.3. looking-glasses (so termed) made of pollished brasse, wherein the beautiful face of Christ was darkly reflected. They were the cloudy and fiery pillars directing the true Israëlites in their way to the holy Land, to find out Jesus disputing in the Temple about those lively Indexes of his incarnation. To proceed, the word , is by two learned verbalists Hesychius and Suidas, gloss't upon by two termes much of the same straine, viz.  and . The last of them conceives it to be nothing else but the dark repre∣sentation of any species, mentioning a person, who for his fluent eloquence, was saluted with a deep Complement, as one who was ; The Type or Copy of Eloquent Mercury. To this, Papias in Martinius adds, that a Type is a prophecy in things,Lex. Philol. and not in words, meaning doubtlesse, that , winged fluid words cannot bear the weight of a Type upon their airy shoulders, but persons and material things are to be counted the proper subjects of Types. Having done with the name, let's speak to the nature and essence of a Type, which may be comprehended in this Definiti∣on. A Type is an Arbitrary sign, representing future and spiritual matters by di∣vine institution.
The Definitum, or the Subject of the Definition, is term'd a Type, by a metaphor taken from Images, Statues, or Pictures, which are the curious artificial resemblances of their proper Originals. The Genus in the Definition is a Sign, which being an Adjunct of sub∣stantial Beings, falls under the Category of Relation, and hath the Founda∣tion of its relation in Quality. Even such as all Similitudes and Analo∣gies truly are, according to the Opinion of the great Philosopher [or who ever it was that compiled that Book of Metaphysicks, that commonly goes under his Name, which seems to limp, but not on so learned a Leg,Metaph. l. 4. c. 9. as Ari∣stotle did] whose words are these, , &c. . Things are said to be like each other, whose quality is one and the same, or which agree in quality. The Difference of the thing defined, is taken from its several constitu∣tive parts, which divide and separate it from all other Signes, and are these following. 1 One part of its difference is taken from the Efficient Cause, the Di∣vine Arbitrium, or Free-Will of God Himself, who instituted and ordai∣ned Types, they receiving their Esse, or Being , by the fore-appointment of Heaven: Whence may be deduced this ensuing Co∣rollary. That the proper and genuine Knowledge of Types, together with the solid Explication annexed to them, must be deduced out of Scripture one∣ly, which contains the Revelation of the Will of God, in respect to their imposition. 2 Another part is raised from the matter of a Type, which is the thing signifying, or representing: or that Subject, wherein the Type doth inhaere, and from which the signification is raised, in respect to the Antitype, that answers to it. As for Example, The Ark, the Brazen Altar, the Mercy-Seat, the Shew-Bread, the Candlesticks, or the like. 3 Another from the form of a Type. It's  esse, or the Formality of its Essence and Nature, lying in its imposed and designed signification in some kind of Analogy, or proportion to and with the Spiritual thing that is signified by it. As for Example, The Formality of the Type of the Oracle lies in this, that it should signifie and represent the Glorious Hea∣ven, whereinto our High-Priest is entred, according to the Doctrine of the Apostle, in His Epistle to the Hebrews. The Unction of Aaron typically signified the anointing of the Lord Jesus with the Oyl of Gladness, above his Fellows. 4 From the end of a Type: which was appointed, to shadow forth the excellent things of the Gospel, which as to the Jewes in their severall Generations, during their Legal Administrations, were as yet future, and appeared not upon the Stage of the World in full view, until the Consum∣matum est, till our Lord upon the Cross pronounced, IT IS FINISHED, declaring a full and final abrogation of all those ancient Jewish Ceremo∣nies. Though, no doubt, those Jews, who by an Eye of Faith did look up∣on Christ (as slain upon the Cross) in the Types of their Bloody Sacrifices, did suck some Gospel-sweetness from them, during that Legal Dispensa∣tion. From all these particulars, it clearly follows, that there are in every Type these three things mainly and principally to be considered. 1. The matter of the Type, or the thing signifying. 2. The object of the Type, or the thing signified.
3. The Ratio, or the signification interceding betwixt the Type, and its respective Antitype. Now because that in all Scriptural Types, their true and native signifi∣cation depends upon, and flows from the Divine Will; Therefore must we adhibite especial care and diligence in the management of Discourses upon these rare and excellent Subjects, and proceed with the most precise caution, that we attribute and ascribe nothing by way of prefiguration to any things or persons whatsoever, but to such as Holy Scripture doth either directly, or by strong and clear consequence hand forth to us. So that, al∣though there may intercede some Moral, Physical, or Historical Analo∣gy between some Legal Materials, and Gospel-Truths: yet must they not therefore presently be interpreted under the notion of Divine Types, un∣less there be some fair and probable hint upon rational accounts, deduci∣ble out of Scripture it self for such a construction. Nevertheless, it is most certain, that the Natural Harmony, and coincidencies of things one with another doth not, cannot obstruct the interpretation and acceptation of such for Types, if Scripture do but darkly insinuate them to be of that Kin∣dred, but rather exceedingly promotes, & advances, and inlighten; the Mind in the Conception and entertainment of them for such: Yet neither on the other side, doth any such Natural Harmony warrant them to be con∣strued for Types; unless God Himself hath stampt the Seal of Divine Insti∣tution upon their Harmony. Who will undoubtedly issue forth the Writ of a Quo Warranto, out of the Court of Heaven, against all such bold Intru∣ders into Divine Mysteries, who dare presume to expound them without a Scripture-Guide. We must always remember, to take up Philip into the Chariot, when we are reading Isaiah, about the TypicalAct. 8.32. Lamb that was dumb, before the Shearers, and opened not his mouth. But many of Old have forgotten to take heed to this Cynosure, or Pole-star, that shineth in the dark and shady Valleys of the antient Figures, having not lookt back with Abraham, at the Voyce of a Divine Angel, to the Ram in the Thic∣kets, even Christ that was held in the Briars of our imputed Transgres∣sions. Such were some of the antient Allegorizing Fathers: Others, of the School-men; and most of the late Mystical Divines (so styled) among the Papists. But yet there is no sound reason, why we should suspect some things of Old not to have been Types for this cause onely, because they carry in their Bosoms some Natural Consanguinity with the Spiritual Substances of the Gospel: in case there be any Divine Eradiation beaming from Heaven upon such particulars. For God hath Supream Dominion over all His Creatures, and can uncontrolably, by the Right of Creation, make, alter, and manage them all as He pleaseth, to His Divine, and Holy Ends. For the Explication of this Point in hand, we may apply some part of Aristotle's Definition of the Soul, recorded by Laertius in his life, in these words. That the Soul is the Entelechia of the Body, &c. viz. that it is that noble Form, which doth  or , inspirit, actuate, and inform and perfect the gross corporeal matter, and gives forth the impressions of its quick and subtle Essence upon the Body. Afterwards, ratione subjecti recipientis,Edit. Ca∣saub. 80. pag. 322. (we speak now according to Laertius his Conception of the Mind of Aristotle in this particular) in respect to the subject matter (or the Bodies reception of the impression of the Souls Entelechia, or that , as he calls it, the incorporeal form in the operation of its vigo∣rous Essence upon the dull and inactive matter of the body) He mentions a two-fold Entelechia; The one, Potential; the other, Habitual. Which di∣stinction, that it is to be understood, as the Entelechia doth respect the in∣feriour
our matter of the body, he endeavours to clear up by the example of a Mercurial Statue. To which purpose, there is a masse of wax prepa∣red for the impression of the external forme or figure of Mercury, which masse (saith the Authour) , hath an aptitude or disposition in it self, to receive the shape or lineaments of Mercuries body, and this he calls the potential Entelechia: In which sense the shape of mans body onely, not of a horse, or a dog, hath the po∣tentiality to receive the rational forme: which cannot be so fully resembled by things artificial, such as is this similitude of a Statue in this example of Laertius. The other, viz. the , or the habitual Entelechia is called by him,  The Actuall consummation and lively expression of the true figure and shape of Mercury, in the wax. All which will receive more light from Johannes Philoponus, in his Com∣ment upon Aristotle's second Book, De anima, page 99 & 100 Edit. Venet. 1535. Whose words (because the Book is rare) I shall crave leave to re∣cite. The text is this, .] . [For the matter is the power, but the form is the Entelechia, or the perfecting act]. He doth not say , in the dative case; but in the nomina∣tive. For the matter receiving the forme; that is said to be the Entelechia: but this is to be understood of both together, (which Aristotle himself, de ani∣mâ, Lib. 2. C. 1. Text 2. calls the , the third thing, viz. the Compound made up of matter and forme). Moreover, the forme it self is the Entelechia, for he opposes the Entelechia to the power; where∣fore the power is imperfect, but the Entelechia is its perfection. For it sig∣nifies [to be in perfection]. But in what every thing hath its essence, even in that it hath its peculiar perfection. But every thing hath its essence from its own form. Therefore the prefection of every thing is its form. If then the forme be the perfection, and the perfection be the Entelechia, he doth rightly and properly change the name of the forme into that of the Entelechia. To summe up all then, if the forme be the Entelechia, and if the soul be the forme, then the soul is the Entelechia; (or the perfecting act of the matter). But he doth not onely call the rati∣onal forme by the name of Entelechia: but the external forme of artificial things also. For in natural Philosophy, it is predicated of both. For the figure or fashion of a mans statue, is its Entelechia, having equally participa∣ted of the name of Entelechia, instead of forme, [because the name of forme is translated even to Accidents.] To the same purpose doth Simplicius speak in his Comment on the same place, Fol. 23. Edit. Aldin. 1527. To which may be added the Conimbricenses, p. 29. Edit. Lugd. 1627. Scali∣ger against Cardan, Exerc. 307. Sect. 12. &c. But craving pardon, for insisting so long on this point: let me beg leave to apply it to the matter in hand.
For in the like manner our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel may be termed  the first, the chief, the lively spiritual forme of the dead lump and masse of the ancient Ceremonies. Some things whereof might have in their own nature, a waxy aptnesse to receive the impression of the similitude and likenesse of a Type upon them, yet must not be so accounted for statues representing Christ, till they have their , their , or the actual impression signed and effigiated upon them, till their potential receptivity be invigorated and actuated by a divine hand. To which purpose we may observe, that some things in nature have in them some tolerable consignification of that thing for which they are desig∣ned by God himself. As for example, his glorious Majesty hath de facto imposed a signification of a future event upon a subject, which did exist in nature before that imposition, and in some measure did and still doth of its own accord prognosticate, what it is new designed unto by divine prae∣scription; which is no other then the Rain-bow, a , or apparition doubtlesse in the ages before the flood. For Heathens, who possibly had never seen the writings of Moses, do acquaint us with this as a prog∣nostick of rain. As for instance Aratus the Poet (cited by Paul for another end) hath this passage in his  ver. 206. & 208. Pag. 34. Edit. Grotii. Antwerp. 1600. , &c. : A double Rain-bow encircling the great heaven, is many times a token of rain at hand. On which place the Commentary ofEd. Par. 1559. pag. 103. Theon may be consulted. By which verses the Poet doth intimate that a single Bow is no prognostick of any durable or Soaking rain to follow. WhereforeLib. 6. Artic. 15. Fro∣mondus a late Meteorologist agreeing with Aquinas and the Philosophers of Conimbra doth declare that the Rain-bow naturally may  signe of no vast inundations to follow the Showres, which it signifies. For when the heavens are fill'd and overspread with thick and heavy Clouds, which to∣tally suppresse and obscure the beams of the Sun, there can be no Rain-bow visible at such a time: which must appear naturally in some thin and orid Clouds opposite to the Suns place at that instant. As Vitellio doth determine in his opticks. In Vapore rorido Iridemgenerari necesse est. Lib. 10. Theor. 66. p. 458. Edit. Basil. 1572. Though no doubt they have shined most beau∣tifully when very dark, and thick Clouds have bin situate behind them: yet such thick Clouds are not the proper cause of the appearance, but of the fortifying and strengthning the apparition; even as opacous matter behind the glasse makes the face appear the more visibly in it. Whereas the dewy distillings of thin Clouds properly makes the Rain-bow to appear, and therefore is it that many times after a great April showre, in the thin Reli∣ques, when the aire is filled with moist vapours, these Rain-bows have appeared with their hornes or ends terminating in a vally, and a great hill behind them, as once I observed near the River Tine in Northumberland. From all which we may safely conclude, that the Rain-bow is rather an Index of no continuing rain; partly because of thin vapours which cause its appearance, and partly because the Sun must at the same time shine; the heaven not being overwhelmed with Clouds. Yet neverthelesse, since the ancient deluge, it is become a certain and an infallible token, (whensoever it appears) that Gods majesty will never drown the whole world any more, because of the Covenant made with all flesh, having setGen. 9.13. his Bow in the Clouds, as a declarative token of his will. So that
God hath now stampt his divine impression upon the Rain-bow, to signi∣fie now more forcibly and inviolably the same thing, which of its own nature, though slenderly, yet in some measure it doth prenotifie. In the like manner, the infinitely wise God may please to inscribe or im∣pose a positive institution of his own, upon those very materialls, which from themselves do yeild some natural reflection upon the things which they typifie by divine ordination: whereby they are indeed elevated to a more ample and significant honour. As for example; in the Levitical Law,Fernet∣us in Thera∣peut. l. 5. c. 7. hysop that is of an abstersive and mundative nature, was used in the case of Leprosie. Nay, it is noted by Dioscorides, and his Commentator Matthiolus, that it helps those diseases which come from sharp Intercuta∣neous humour, Edit. Venet. 1554. p. 332. &c. and therefore is properly used to signifie our cleansing from sin. Again Cedar was the internal materi∣al of Solomons Cherubins, which is , an imputrible wood, no∣ting the perpetuity and immortality of the holy Angels. Furthermore, when the divine Majesty hath expresly declared in Scrip∣ture such a person, such an edifice, such an utensil to take upon it the habit of a Type, and hath instituted and appointed it to Commemorate some spi∣ritual good thing in the Gospel: Then may we in general accept of this for a safe guide in our procedure to the more particular part of such a great Type, and descend further to enquire out the Analogy and propor∣tion, to and with the Gospel-substance held forth in them: So be it, the inquiry be managed with great sobriety, humility, circumspection, and mo∣deration. From what precedes we may likewise inferr, that as to those types which signifie upon no other account then , by divine choice and decision: it is the safest way and most commendable to interpret them, only by what divine Revelations are extant in Scripture, looking directly upon them. As when the Corner stone of the Temple is applyed to Christ, or the beaten piece of Gold that was the cover of the sacred Chest in the Oracle, called the Mercy-seat; is applied to Christs mediator-ship, and the like. Whereas in those Types, which have any Analogical harmony naturally interceding betwixt them and their respective Antitypes, in joynt Connexion with Gods divine institution, some more liberty of am∣pliation may be tolerably allowed: so be it, they be handled with great diligence, accurate care, and submissive inquiries into the natures of such typicall things, and their correspondents in the Gospel, according to all their views and habitudes; with a choise respect had to the Orthodxoy of Faith, the Canon of the Scripture, and the Concurrent Judgment (in the main) of the grave and learned luminaries of the Church of Christ. Some persons have bin very apt to give a plenary indulgence to their own private fancies, and then to applaud and clap their wings at the thin∣spread issue of their own brains, which generally give little satisfaction to any, but themselves. It was a failing certainly in some of the Antients, (let me speak it, with all modesty and reverence yet had to their learning and strictnesse of life) as particularly in Origen, Ambrose, Bede, and others, to apply too particular a signification to every nice punctilio of the ancient Ceremonies. Surely they had Lynceus his eyes, (such as Orpheus in his Argonanticks relates him to have had, wherewith he could see crosse the Ocean) who in every naile, pin, stone, staire, knife, pot, and al∣most in every feather of a sacrificed bird could discerne, I know not what strange distinct and peculiar Mystery. It were fat better certainly to re∣member the Common Canon for exposition of parables, that their scope is mainely to be attended, and to be taken for our guide. So in Types the
, viz. the persons, places, rites, and utensils of greatest note, should be the subject of such discourses: the lesser particles being appen∣dant onely to the Grandeure and pomp of the Temple. Some whereof were ordained (as Parisiensis observes) for distinction of the Jews from Heathens: as the situation of the Oracle at the west end of the Temple, to distinguish them from the Fanes of the Lybians, Assyrians, Aegyptians, and generally of all Heathens, which looked toward theVitrvo. Archit. Lib. 4. c. 5. p. 70, 71. Edit. Elz. 1649. fol. East. Other parts were appointed to carry on and hold forth a general harmony: others for the preservation of the forme and Oeconomy of the Jewish worship; So that some onely, and they the chiefest and greatest materials did hint at spi∣ritual good things, in a particular manner. I shall not therefore be peremptory in any thing, but in that which Scripture it self doth directly lead to. As for others, which hold onely some Analogy with the greater, being as several parts and parcels of them, the intrerpetation whereof may be founded upon common consequences of reason, the like thereto being insinuated by other similitudes in holy Scripture; such I shall with all modesty and submission propose to the consideration of learned and ingenuous persons, not valuing the sick and morose cavils of illiterate and sordid Tempers; who are like the great boaster inNoct. Attic. Lib. 1. Cap. 2. A. Gellius that defamed all the sober persons in Greece and Italy, on purpose to extol his own dull apprehensions: but was seasonably reproved by Herodes Atticus, out of Epictetus; where let him behold and blush at his censure. Mean while let us consider, that those Types, which have some coun∣tenance from Scripture it self, for their divine assignation; but are not ful∣ly cleared up out of those sacred pages, and yet seem in their own natures to bear some resemblance to, and hold some proportion with the thing signified: Satis est (saiesMetaph. 80. p. 755. Calovius) si detur convenientia, in qua ratio Typi salvetur. It's sufficient, if there be such an agreement, as whereby the for∣mality of a Type may be preserved. The Types of old were the shells; the typified matter, the sweet ker∣nel within. So that as the fashion of the kernel is within, such is the external forme of the shell without, and accordingly we find it to have bin so in Types. The ancient Types are frequently compared to shadows: The Typified things then are the bodies from whence these shadows were projected or cast. So that the Type is hinted by this similitude, to have bin far inferiour to the body or substance from whence it was derived: and yet herein we may find some dark similitude and resemblance of that body, whereof it was a shadow. For look, even as a shadow gives the shape of a body sometimes in equal proportion, according to the position of the light, by means of which the shadow represents the intercepting body: So did the Types some of them admirably delineate and effigiate the shape of spirituall things. Besides, shadows which attend upon bodies, shew forth their motions, either progressive, or retrograde, the inclining of the whole, or the flexure of any member according to the various postures of the body it self; or else are increased and diminished according to the various height of the luminary. In like manner seeing Christ our mediatour is the glorious substance of both Law and Gospel, we may ob∣serve that in the Law his back was upon the Jews; Moses being admitted to behold theExod. 33.23. back-parts of God only, standing in the dark and opacous shadow of the Ceremonies: whereas in the Gospel we stand before the2 Cor. 4.6. face of Christ; the light of the knowledge of the glory of God shining
upon him directly, and from his face upon us by reflection, we being now removed from behind Christ out of those ancient shadows. Our blessed Lord the Sun of righteousnesse began to arise in the Protevangelium, or that antient promise given forth to Adam in Paradise, and daily rose higher and higher in more clear emanations of light upon the hearts of the Patriarchs in fuller promises of his coming, till at last he ascended up to the Just meridian when he appeared incarnate upon the earth, and accor∣dingly as the times dre nigher to his apparition in the world in humane flesh, so the shadows began more and more to decrease, and the appre∣henions of his incarnation to be more fully cleared up to their understan∣ding. Even as the higher the natural Sun gets towards the appointed eleva∣tion in his noone time glory: so do the shadows of all bodies decrease in their stature. Moreover the nearer they are in their position to the illuminating body, the more strongly and brightly are they irradiated according to that The∣oreme of Vitellio. Omne corpus umbrosum puncto luminoso propinquius, illuminatur ab illo puncto fortius corpore plus distante. Optic. l. 2. Theor. 22. Furthermore, in this resemblance of Types to shadows, if we observe the situation of the grosse and dark body, we find the shadows sometimes cast ab ante, before, and sometimes à parte posticâ, behind: when the body is fixed and the luminary moveable. In like manner we may speak allusively of the Jews, as of old standing in the shadow that was cast from behind the Lord of glo∣ry; we likewise have some shadows, but they are cast ab ante, from before his face as he is moving forward in his Kingdom of grace: such are the two Sa∣craments. For we behold his face in some measure, reflecting on the state of his incarnation, though palely represented in the layer of baptisme, and rud∣dily in the wine of His supper. The glory of his Divinity and Mystical head∣ship in heaven, lends us a shadow of his meritorious work in the Sacramen∣tal representations of his sufferings, by the Symbols of his body and blood. For in these Gospel daies there doth rarely or never appear anyPlacau de Typ. p. 8. shadow of the Lord Jesus without and apart from his Mystical body the Church. Therefore is it that we read of blessed Paul,Phil. 3.13. forgetting those things that are behind in the ancient shadows, and reaching forth to the things, the deep things of the Gospel that were before him in grace, and above him in heaven. In all Types there is some obscurity, even as the proper notion of sha∣dows lies in the absence of light from the place obscured, by the interposing and eclipsing body: wherefore the greater diligence is to be given in exa∣mining the various parts of the shadow, with the lines of incidence as they fall from the substance that intercepts the light. Moreover, it is not extraneous to our purpose to observe that one and the same body, may give forth many shadows varying in their appearance, according to the differing postures of its own parts, or of the whole body in general, at different times; or else in respect to the various aspect of the Luminary, in its different altitudes, or as the raies may be more or lesse refracted by the copiousness or the tenuity of vapours: In like manner, there may be various Types of the same spiritualCol. 2.17. substance, which is Christ. There may be several rounds in the Typical ladder, by which we ascend up into the knowledg of our Lord in the Gospel-firmament: which doth far transcend and surpasse all the ancient shadows of him in the Law. Where∣fore as in all similitudes there is some dissonancy or disagreement from the things which they shadow forth, to excuse them from identity: So here, we shall find great disproportions and dissimilitudes, wherein the Evange∣lical substance doth far out-bid the legal shadows.
That we may proceed then Methodically in the examination of these ancient shadows, (so far forth, as concerns the Temple, the proper subject of this Treatise: It being not the designe of this work in hand, to launch forth into the vast Ocean of all the Mosaical and old Testament Types) I shall first prove from holy Scripture, that the Legal Ceremonies were sha∣dows of Evangelical truths, and afterward treat in some measure about the method and manner of our enquiries into these deep Mysteries, laying down some Canons or rules, as the Basis or foundation of our progresse. As to the first particular, if the several expressions of the holy Spirit, be seriously weighed, sober persons (I hope) will find just satisfaction. To this purpose the Apostle to theHebr. 1.1. Hebrews acquaints us, that in ancient times God was pleased to speak to the Fathers by the Prophets , in several parcels and after various manners, delivering his minde in set portions unto the Church. But in the Lord Jesus is made manifest and brought to light,Eph. 3.10. , the manifold or multiformous wisdome of God; or, to speak with reverence, the opus Phrygionicum the embroydered needle-work of his wisdome: In a word, the opusSparti∣an in Pescen∣nio. p. 215. Edit. Lug. Bat. Musivum or (that we may allude to Moses in his Types) the Mosaick pictures and images of his glory. For by Moses came the Law, and that not onely in its morall, but also in its Ceremoniall part: where∣asJoh. 1.17. grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: grace, to supply our defects in respect to the Law Moral: Truth, in fulfilling and exhibiting the chief substance of the Ceremonial part in Himself. We read in the holy Scriptures concerning Typical persons, as well as things representing the state of the Evangelical Church to the ancient Fa∣thers. For in one place we may observe, that Adam (the head of all mankind in respect to the covenant of works) is called by holy PaulRom. 5.14. , the figure of him who was to come. In another place we read, that the Children of Israel and Moses their Law-giver, the Red Sea and the Cloud, the baptizing of the Israelites unto Moses, the Man∣na that rained from heaven and the rock gushing forth with water in the wildernesse,1 Cor. 10.6, 11. , that they were Types or Fi∣gures of us under the Gospel. Again in another Epistle the Apostle ha∣ving treated about various meats and drinks, about the ancient Solemne feasts, as New Moons and Jewish Sabbaths, argues expresly their vani∣shing nature from their being but shadows of good things to come, where∣asCol. 2.17. the body itself is of Christ. Furthermore the Author to the He∣brews (Paul most probably according to2 Pet. 3.15. Peter and the sense of the an∣cient Church in the time ofHomil. 9. in Exo∣dus. p. 96. Edit. Basil. 1545. Origen) doth plainly assert that the Priests under the Mosaical Law did serve unto theHebr. 8.5. example and shadow of heavenly things. Nay, in that Epistle, which might well be Styled a Commentary upon the Leviticall Ceremonies, he doth almost in every Chapter, give ample testimony to this point in hand: yet I shall instance but in a few more, as where he doth averre that the Tabernacle of Moses was a figure of more perfect and compleat services: It was butHeb. 9.9. , a parable during for the present time, whose moral and interpretation is to be taken out of the New testament. We must plough with our spirituall Sampsons heifer, or else we shall never expound the Riddle. For they were butHeb. 9.23. , subindicationes, dark patterns of heavenly things. Nay, the whole Law it self, (viz. Ce∣remonial) contained in itHeb. 10.1. a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of those things. Hence it is, that the ancient Ceremonies are termedHeb. 7.18, 19. weak and unprofitable, making nothing perfect; in another place,Gal. 4.3. Elements of this world, or worldly ElementsCol. 2.8. and rudiments
of the world, as otherwhere the Sanctuary is termedHeb. 9.1. worldly in opposi∣tion to its divine and spiritual antitypes: otherwhere its Ceremonies are called weak andGal. 4.8. beggarly Elements: by which a man cannot be enriched unto salvation. In which sense we may allude to that place where Gods Majesty is pleased to tell the Elders of Israel, by the mouth of his Prophet Ezekiel; that he gave their Fathers in the wildernesseEzek. 20.25. Statutes that were not good: that is, in themselves nakedly considered, they were such as whereby they could not live: for unlesse they diligently kept and ob∣served them, and looked through them, to the bringing in of aHeb. 7.19. better hope, they could not draw nigh to God with any confidence. For by the 28th verse following, the Prophet seems to intimate that by Statutes we are to understand the Ceremonial Ordinances. The word also in the Hebrew  which is here used, is the same with that in thePsal. 89.31. Psalmist, which Musculus expounds of the Statutes of the Ceremonial Law, distin∣guishing between Judgments, Statutes, and Commandements, as if the former reflected upon the Judicial, the next upon the Ceremonial, the last upon the Morall Ordinances enjoyned by Moses from God: But whe∣ther more judiciously then acutely, I shall referre to others. Seeing then the ancient Ceremonies are Metaphorically termed shadows, it is requisite to have some light, even to compare them with the body from which they are cast, as it is observed byOptic. l. 2. Theor. 57. p. 63. Edit. Basil. Alhazen [Umbra perci∣pitur è lucis unius absentià, alterius praesentià] that shadows are discerned by the absence of one light and the presence of another. The direct Rayes of the Suns body are absent from the place darkned, by the interposing body: but the Circumambient aire that is illuminated with other Rayes of light, helps us to discerne the shadow. In which sense, give us leave to compare at present, the Ceremonies to the shadows, the Gospel to the substance, and Christ to the luminary, and then divine Revelation inlightning the Churches horizon helps our eyes to discern those ancient shadows, which proceed likewise from him who is bothJob. 8.12. light and truth: whom we discerne refracted in the Law, by a ray of reflection in the Gospel, but by a direct beame, when we come to behold him1 Cor. 13.12. face to face. Furthermore, as a shadow doth but in a dark and obscure manne re∣present onely the externall form or shape of a man, with head, armes legs, and the trunk of his body in an erect posture, helping us only to di∣stinguish  from the figure of a beast or a tree, &c. So did the Law in a dark and obscure manner hint out the excellencies of the Gospel, and the figure and shape of our Lord in special. But when a man hath his repre∣sentation given forth in a more lively way by a picture, we then know it to be the Icon of such a particular person, whose feature we are well ac∣quainted with. Or yet more fully, by a glasse reflecting his very face upon us. Or most compleatly and absolutely by a carved Image, or a Statue of marble or brasse, wherein he is modelled, not only according to the true figure of his face, and the exact proportion of his limbs, but also the bulk, crassitude, and dimensions of every member. In such a manner doth the Gospel expresse the Lord Jesus to his beloved Church, even like a picture drawn to the life, like an , or looking glasse, like an Image perfectly suited and symmetrically correspondent to its lively prototype. Insomuch, that when the day break of the Gospel began to appear; then did the ancient JewishCant. 2.17, & 4, 6. shadows flee away, as the Spouse doth joyfully expresse it at the approach of her endeared Lord and Saviour. While the Church of God was confined to families, she walked in the light of the seven Starrs only: I mean the 7 precepts (commonly so called) of Noah; and now and then enjoyed some created Starrs of revealed promises
concerning the Messiah. But when increased to the dimensions of a Na∣tion, she was a little more illuminated with the Jewish Moons. At length the glorious light of heaven, the Lord our righteousnesse, did arise with healing under his wings, and shined over the walls of Bethlehem; irradia∣ting the people of Jewry, who before sate inLuke 1.79. Mat. 4.16. darknesse, and the Gen∣tiles a farre off, that walked in the shadow of death. Who now do with open face behold as in a2 Cor. 3.18. glasse the glory of the Lord, and are become the2 Cor. 3.3. Epistle of Christ written [] or depicted by the spirit of the living God. in the fleshy Tables of the heart: Nay, in a word they do bear or set forth in open view the very1 Cor. 15.49. image of the heavenly Adam. The period of all the ancient Ceremonies being fixed by our Lord upon the Crosse, when he said,joh. 19.30. IT IS FINISHED. They were intombed in his grave, and the seal of the bestAct. 15.24. council that ever was, impressed upon the stone which was laid on the mouth of the Sepulchre, and afterwards confirmed by theTertulli∣an. Contr. In∣daeos Tom. 1. Origen Cont. Cels. Can∣tabr. p. 261. Cyprian. Contra In∣daeos ad Qui∣rin. p. 29. Edit. Bas. 1530, &c. ancient Fathers, and all the Christian worthies of the Church in their several generations. By these and many other testimonies, the grounds of our former asser∣tion may be evidently perceived, viz. That Gospel truths were of old typified by the Jewish Ceremonies. Concerning the divine meaning whereof, I shall endeavour to inquire with all sobriety, according to these succeeding Rules or Canons, which contain the second thing proposed for our discourse, by way of introduction to the main design. The hints of some things therein contained, I do thankfully acknowledge, as insinuated by the learned Placeus in the fore-touched place. The first rule then, for the finding out the nature of Types, or for the Ex∣amination  of such, as are generally supposed to be so, is this: That when Scripture it self doth expresly pronounce and consequently determine such a person or thing under the old Law, to be a Type, signe, or shadow of some Gospel-truth; Then are we safe and free from error, and may proceed with comfort in our way towards the Temple, having the unrring con∣duct of the holy Spirit. Secondly, when any person or matter in the old Testament is accom∣modated to some spiritual subject, in way of strong allusion by the pen-men of the new Testament: then may we safely conclude (especially if the al∣lusion be frequent) that there was something Typically designed in that thing, by the spirit of God in the old Testament: although the Scripture do not in so many terms or words set down, that this of the Gospel is the antitype of the other in the Law. Thirdly, when there can be none or small satisfaction given in point of reason for the exhibition of, or the narration had concerning such or such a piece under the old Testament: but what may be more clearly evin∣ced and deduced from the Mystical signification of its Typical nature, in Relation to an Evangelical object: which being once hinted the under∣standing of a sober inquirer begins to have bright & satisfactory apprehen∣sions, concerning the intendment of such a relation and the truth laid up in it: Then may such a thing, strengthened with such good probability, (I hope) without any necessity of a censure, be construed under the nature and notion of a Type. Fourthly, when there proves some admirable Analogy or Proportion, either Moral, Historical, Physical, or Theological, interceding betwixt two things, deeply suspected by the generality of the Learned and Holy, all along since the time of Christ to have a mutual relation of Typical con∣cernment between them; one whereof is mentioned in the old, the other in the new Testament, with some light glance toward that in the old:
I hope we may then also, so it be with due moderation, not fearing rigid asterisms in the margin, give to such an ancient person or thing the name of a Type: especially since grave and sober men in several ages, have cast in their concurrent testimony into that interpretation. Fifthly, When there is some excellent attribute ascribed to a person or  matter under the old Law: which according to the meer history or bare letter of its relation, cannot either natively or tropically, find any clear conveniency or agreement with it: but yet will most properly and pertinen∣ly becoincident with some spiritual person or truth in the new Testament,Psal. 89.4, 36. when it is explained and opened, as for example. The Throne of Solo∣mon is promised to be eternal: which did neither agree with Solomon perso∣nally, nor his posterity; they being cast out of the Royal seat above 2000 years ago: So that it cannot be applied to Solomon but Typically as being a peaceable King for a great while; but to Jesus Christ onely really of whoseDan. 3.44. kingdome there shall be no end. In this case there will be no need to write, Type, over the head of such a thing; the matter is obvious and clear enough, that we may without hesitation insert it among the rest of its kindred. Sixthly and Lastly, When the holy Sctipture doth plainly nominate  some noble or sacred person of old: or some grand material of the Ta∣bernacle or Temple, as Typically significant of divine persons, or things under the new Testament: we may then proceed to inquire into the par∣ticular actions of such persons, especially such as were of publick concern∣ment: or into the various parcels and pieces, inscriptions, ornaments, or other appendixes of such grand material; whether or no there may not be found in them some consanguinity, with the more large and sump∣tuous utensill, and whether according to its degree and quality, it may not bear an harmonious part in the consort of Typical musick: or whether the blood-Royal of a Type may not runne in the Capillary veins of lesser imple∣ments, as flowing out of the vena cava of the larger pieces of the Temple. For, unlesse such a smaller material be admitted to commence the degree of a Type, (especially when some Gospel truth may properly and without straining be applyed to it, in concomitancy with the greater) there may pos∣sibly appear some chasm or widening deficiency in the main material; to be challenged by the captious for a blemish, and imperfection in the de∣signment of it, for a typical signification of spiritual matters. Yet herein, it is not my intention to be critically and anxiously inquisi∣tive, into every minute and inconsiderable particle, prying through the microscope of fancy into the knop of every spoon, the fashion of the slaughter knives, the thicknesse of each cauldron, the situation of each vessel, or the cubital dimensions of each material, as if some rare Mystery were laid up in their numbers: In which Ribera, and some others, are too curious in finding out Mysteries, where most probably none were intended, and dividing most subtlely () their small cummin into nice portions, shewing themselves (if I may so speak) to be overmuch wise, in the phrase of Solomon. I had rather consider those lesser parts (ut Typo ministrantia) as only subservient to the main Type, asIn Exod. Cap. 26. p. 1127. in folio. Dr. Rivet conceives in his exposition upon Moses his Tabernacle. As to the work then in hand, I shall in the first place implore the di∣vine aid of heaven, and the assisting presence of the holy spirit, in the il∣lumination of my mind, by the Lamps of the Sanctuary, and beg that my eye-sight may be washed and cleansed with those waters that issue from under theEzek. 47.1. threshold of the sacred Temple; That he who beareth the key of David, would graciously please to open a door of entrance for me:
that so I may rightly understand, and properly expresse my conceptions in reference to these Mysterious affaires. Secondly, I shall cautiously indea∣vour to proceed in this businesse, generally, according to the 6 fore∣mentioned Canons, as to the explication of the nature of these excellent Types. Yet herein I shall not need in the unfolding of their meaning, to alleadge and apply the aforesaid rules: which will prove tedious and use∣lesse: seeing common reason is a sufficient Cynosure or load-starre in that particular. Thirdly, It shall be my study and care to give diligent and deep intention of spirit to the things in hand, and yet I desire to propose them with all modesty and sobriety; not challenging any determinate assertion, unlesse where Scripture proves exceeding plain and evident: Intreating the Courteous Inquirer to pardon my infirmities, and not to passe too pre∣cipitant a censure upon the expositions, before he have conferred the ex∣plications with the preceding Canons, and the opinions of learned Di∣vines both ancient and modern: to whose apprehensions I freely and hum∣bly submit my self. Fourthly, I shall crave leave to acquaint my ingenuous Reader, that it is not the designe of this work to enlarge most amply upon all the significant parts of the Temple; much lesse upon all the antient Types and Ceremonies, they being a subject matter fit for persons of deeper insight and knowledg then I have arrived to. Who having bin much intreated by a neer Relation, (somewhat concerned in this peice as at whose cost all the figures were cut in brasse) to contrive one Chapter concerning the Temple-Mysteries: I was in a good measure unwillingly drawn to this work in particular, as indeed to the whole by a strange over-ruling Provi∣dence, as may possibly somewhat more appear in the prefixed Epistle. Wherefore I humbly and most earnestly entreat the kind interpretation of my poor labours, & the passing over my weaknesses by all learned and sober persons: hoping that this so thin and slender an Essay may quicken and in∣cite some abler quill, taken from some Seraphims wing, to pierce deeper into the heaven of these divine Mysteries, dictated by the all wise Majesty of God himself. As to some moderate explication whereof at present, that I may proceed in a Methodical path: Let me first in general treat a while, concerning the time and place of its erection together with the Famous builder King Solo∣mon, who undertooke the care and charges of that Excellent work; and then descend to speak to the several particulars in six Sections: that so the Tem∣ple-Mysteries may be digested according to the method of the several pre∣ceding Chapters, in the Compilement of its History: So far fotth, as there is any thing of spiritual signification in them. All which may be very Commodiously reduced to these 6 heads following, whereof I shall endeavour to discourse with all perspicuity and convenient brevity. 1. Of the covered Temple, and its several included divisions. 2. Of the Courts and buildings round about it. 3. Of its various Utensils and Ornaments. 4. Of the several divine Officers. 5. Of the solemn services in the Worship of Gods Majesty. 6. Of the beneficial Endowments, wherewith the Officers were en∣couraged in the performance of their several duties incumbent on them. Which particulars when I shall have handled with all expe∣dition and succinctnesse possible for such a work, through divine per∣mission and assistance: A close shall be then affixed to this Chapter, whose subject is the most choise and excellent, most rare and difficult of all the rest.
Concerning the Mysteries of the holy Tem∣ple, respecting the Time of its Erection. IN this Paragraph, containing an enquiry of what Mystery might pos∣sibly be wrapped up in the Circumstance of time, wherein this glori∣ous Edifice was erected; I shall only mention some apprehensions of others, who delight much to converse with numbers in the School of Pythagoras.In Hep∣taplo. Lib. 7. c. 4. p. 35. Picus Mirandula, a Learned man, yet deeply affected with such kind of Mysteries, conceited that the 6 dayes of the worlds Creation did prenote 6000 years of the worlds continuance, each day being put for a thousand years. Moreover, that in each thousand years continuance, there was somewhat notably correspondent with the Created works of each particular day. So that as the waters were distinguisht into their several seats on the second day, even so within the compasse of the second interval of a thousand years, the great overflowing deluge covered the face of the Earth. In like manner, as the fourth day produced the glorious lumina∣ries: So within the compasse of the 4th interval of a 1000d years, did Christ theMal. 4.2. Sun of Righteousnesse arise in the world; and the Church signified by theCant. 6.10. Moon, and theRev. 12.1. 12 Stars of the Apostles, shined in her Horizon. Nay the Temple, which prefigured Christ and his Church, was compleatly finished in the three thousandth year of the world, and fasted a whole millenary of years, viz. through the whole fourth day of the world, bating the intercision of a few years, during the Captivity of Babylon, which was supplyed by its continuance, about the same quantity of years after our Lords birth, till its dissolution by the Roman armies. There be others, who considering that the Temple was fully finisht in the 3000th year of the World, (according to Bishop Ushers Calculation, and other nice Chronologers) being just a 1000d years before our Lords incarnation and precisely in the middle point of the World's apprehended-duration, viz. of 6000d years according to the received tradition of the sons of the House of Eliah, mentioned by the sameIbid. pag. 36. Author in the very words of the Jewish Talmud; would out of these Rabbinicall flints extract some choise Mystical Oyl, to supple the Wheels of their fancy. As if so be, a glorious external visible Church must needs from thence be evinced to continue upon the Earth 3000 years, even just as many as the world had before continued without it, and that this admirable beauty of the Church-militant, commenced with the Temple's compleat erection. Be∣sides, as the Temple did continue, though not without some fatal concus∣sions for the space of a 1000d years: So in like manner a glorious Evan∣gelical Church thereby typified, should endure also for a 1000d years space: after the 6000 years of the world in general, shall be consumma∣ted and ended, when the rage and power of her enemies shall be extinct; when the Saints of the most High shall Live and Reign with Christ aRev. 20.4. 1000d years. And all this must be accomplished (say they) before the 2d and most glorious coming of our Lord in the Clouds, to passe sentence of condemnation upon the World of the ungodly, and to put an Ultimate period to its duration. Now forasmuch as the Temple suffered many hard things during its long continuance: we must not think (according to them) that the Saints Reign shall have any sad Chasm of affliction: seeing the
Antitype must alwayes out-vye and excel its prefiguration in glory and ex∣cellency. But for my part, holding it sufficient to have recounted these things to be left or entertained at pleasure, seeing there is no solid basis or foun∣dation (for these superstructures of fancy,) revealed in holy Scripture: I had rather resolve the Mystery of the Time of the first fixed state of the Temple, (if there be any couched under it) into the good pleasure of God, whose Majesty, if he had intended any such rare signification in the time of its building, would have delivered the meaning thereof more clearly to us, had it seemed good in his holy eyes. What is secret belongs to the Lord: but things revealed to us and our Children. Wherefore I shall proceed to a more material inquiry, concerning the place of its situation. Concerning the place where the holy Temple was built. IN this Section I mean not to tell long stories of Gods choosing the people of Israel above all Nations to serve Him: or of Canaan above all Lands for his people to dwell in: or of Jerusalem above all Cities, to place his name there: seeing the Lord loved thePsal. 87.2. gates of Zion, more then all the habitations of Jacob. But shall rather descend imme∣diately to treat of the holy mountain Moriah, it self: So frequently called in the holy Books, the mountain of the House of the Lord: wherein he hath promised to make unto all peopleIsai. 25.6. a feast of fat things, a feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined, whereby (no doubt) the holy Prophet in the name of the Lord doth insinuate the mountain of Moriah to be a most sublime Type of the Gospel-Church, exalted even to heaven by the means of grace and salvation: when he assures us in so many words, that all Nations should be feasted in that blessed mountain: which of it self was not sufficient to entertain within its circuit, no, not the one only Nation of the Jews at a set banquet, whereof more in succeding lines. In reference to our present work, the denomination of this mountain may yield us some light and information in this matter, seeing the very name of it probably was imposed by God himself: when he commanded Abraham to get him into the Land ofGen. 22.2. Moriah; whose manner in the imposition of names is to read a Lecture worthy the attention of Men and Angels. As to the signification whereof there are various Conjectures, offered by Learned men, and many of them are summed up by an EminentNic. Fuller. Mis∣cell. l. 2. c. 12. Critique of our own Nation. Some (it seems) derive it from  Myrrh, as if this tract of ground had bin antiently famous in bringing forth that curious rarity, conceiting withall, that the mountain of Myrrh mentioned in the Book ofCant. 4.6. Canticles, is to be interpreted and under∣stood of this fragrant place. Others would fetch it from the Syriack word  Mara, which signified [the Lord] as if it noted out the Grand holi∣nesse of that piece of ground, as being by peculiar designation, The Lords mountain. Others deduce it from  signifying fear, hinting forth to us a place destinated to the fear of the Lord, such as is exprest by his heavenly worshippers, in their solemn attendance upon God, according to the antient Mosaical injunctions. Whereas, in truth, the most genuine derivation of
the word, seems rather to be taken from  to see, declaring it to be the Land of vision. Wherefore some translate the former text in Genesis, (Vade in terram excelsam] get thee to the high or hilly Country: Aquila turns it , that is, perspicuous, shining or illustrious: Symmachus by,  the Land of vision, which is therefore interpreted, illuminating and irradiating, according as LearnedEdit. Ludg. 1530. Vol. 3. p. 216. Jerom in his questions upon Ge∣nesis. Others apprehend it to have bin so called from the Eminent con∣spicuousnesse of the place, being by reason of its height seen by travellers at a very great distance, & from whence by such as stood upon it many rare and lovely prospects, presented themselves to the covetous eyes of delighted spectators. Whereby is shadowed the rare beauty and comelinesse of the Church, the spouse of Christ, when she is Enammelled with theEzek. 16.14. glo∣ry of her Lord and Husband, and when presented to the view of others that passe by, in so much that they have bin inamoured with her beauty; and have turned in to her habitation to gain acquaintance with her: or else in respect to the profound and deep Mysteries, the delicious and pleasant pro∣spects of mercy and grace, which have bin presented to the view of such persons, who have stood upon this holy mountain. There be, that appre∣hend it to have bin termed the Land of Vision, from the apparition of that holy Angel, who accoasted Abraham at the intended sacrifice of his onely son. But the Learned man forecited, conceives some Typical hint of the Lord Jesus, to have bin involved in the very name, and accordingly ex∣pounds it of the apparition of1 Tim. 3.16. God manifest in the flesh, viz. of our blessed Saviour, who was born, conversed very frequently; and at last suf∣fered in this tract of mountains known of old by the name of the Land of Moriah or of Vision. In this particular ridge, being the mount it self precisely, whereon the Temple stood, someBreiden∣bachius. have blessed themselves with a conceit that good Jacob saw in his dream the ladder reaching up to heaven; and moreover that he called it Bethel, by an Historical prolepsis: whereas it is certain, the good Patriarch was then passing on in a journey, at a good distance from this place toward Syria. But the true place of the sacrifice of Abraham indeed was here, being frequently called in Scripture by the name of mount Zion, especially in the writings of the Prophets; where, by a Synecdoche, the name of one little hill is given and ascribed to all the mountaines thereabout, and so Moriah in a more laxe accepta∣tion of Zion, is frequently termed by that name: whereas in a more strict sense, Zion was properly the name only of the neighbouring mount, where∣upon King David dwelt: whose entertainment of the Ark, within the verge of his own house hath caused this denomination to be given to all the sacred places thereabouts; where the Ark of Gods presence was after∣ward seated. The constant residence whereof, by the appointment of God, and the care of Solomon, was upon the hill (strictly so called) of Moriah, within the walls of the City Jerusalem: where it was encompassed with a beautiful Temple, instead of the Mosaical Curtains. The glorious Ma∣jesty of heaven, chose a mountain rather then a valley for the habitation of his holinesse, thereby giving us to understand the excelsity, and dignity of the Gospel-Church in a figure, which was of old prophesied of, to beIsa. 2.2. Mic. 4.1. Dan. 2.44. exalted over all the Mountains and Kingdoms of the Earth. It was set up∣on a lofty mountain to shadow forth the visibility of the Evangelical Church in all ages, to such as have spiritual eyes to discern it.Mat. 5.14. For a City that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Besides, as buildings which are fixed upon mountains, enjoy a more pure and defaecated aire, therefore several of the antients have accounted such places as most proper for those persons, who study and consult their health more then their profit. In
particularIn Geo∣ponic. p. 31. Bas. 80.15.38. Didymus hath these words in his advice to this purpose. []. It be∣hoveth to build your houses on the highest places. For such are most commodious both for health and prospect.De re Rust. Lib. 1. Tit. 8. Palladius also gives counsel, thus; [Ipsius Pratorii situs sit, loco aliquatenus erectiore & sicciore, quàm catera, & propter injuriam fundamentorum, & ut laeto fruatur aspectu]. The situation of the Mansion it self, let it be in a place more lofty and dry, than of the others, to prevent injuries to the foundations, and that you may enjoy a refreshing prospect. Lastly,L. 1. C. 4. Vitruvius saies, Primum, electio loci saluberrimi, is autem erit excelsus. First of all, ye must design the most wholesome place for your dwelling, even such as is higher than Ordinary. In like manner the wholesome and healthful situation of the Temple of old, did decypher and mark out to us, that the health of our souls is then most prudently consulted, when we live in such places, where we may suck-in the sweet aire of the Gospel-Ordinances, in the assemblies of Zion. For as much also, as the mountains in their stately and elevated position are neerer to the Starrs, than ordinary Champion plaines or depressed val∣lies: we may thence conceive, that the noble exaltation of this place, where the Temple stood, might denote the Churches vicinity to heaven, whither all its fervent devotions must be directed: It being observable in Scripture, that the usual seats of divine worship were constituted in such places, as were very high, shadowing forth the heavenlinesse, which is required in the minds of divine worshippers. Besides, as it was usuall of old to build their fenced Cities and Castles upon hills, that were precipici∣ous and most inaccessible: So it was Gods good pleasure that the Temple of his presence should have the like secure situation, to note the impregna∣blenesse of the Church, which is set uponPsal. 2.6. mount Zion. Furthermore, It is recorded in the sacred Volumes to have bin built upon the threshing-floor of Araunah or Ornan the Iebusite, to manifest (saithP. 58. Ribera) that in time to come, the Gentiles should be admitted into consoederation with the Jews in divine worship: not unlike to whatVol. 1. pag. 125. Jerom had before ob∣served in his letter written (as Erasmus conceives) in the name of Paula and Eustochium to Marcella in these words, Angelus, &c. in Orne Jebu∣saorum regis areâ Templum Domini designavit, jam tunc significans Ecclesi∣am Christi, non in Israel, sed in gentibus consurgentem. The Angel, &c. designed the Temple of the Lord to be in the threshing-floor of Orne, the King of the Jebusites, even then signifying the Church of Christ arising, not in Israel, but among the Gentiles. Further, the Temple was built on a mountain to note its perennity and duration of the Church. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever, Psal. 125.1. He also that doth the will of God is promised to abide for ever, 1 Joh. 2.17. Finally, it was built in a mountain, possibly to set out the glory of heaven it self; even as our Saviour represen∣ted the radiancy of heaven to some of his Apostles, when he was transfi∣gured before them in the exceeding high mountain, (as is generally con∣ceived) of Tabor. His glorious ascension also into heaven, took its rise from the mountain of Olives.
Concerning the Builder of the Temple, King Solomon. SOlomon the most Famous and Peaceable King of Israel, was1 Chron. 17.12. ap∣pointed by God to erect this Royal Structure, who as to his name, disposition, and reign (for the grand serenity of his times) was a pregnant Type of the Prince of peace. Who being entred upon his Government, made Zadok1 King. 2.35. High Priest in the Room of Abiathar. The name of Solomon signifies peaceableness; the name of Zadok righteousnesse; even as Christ was a Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck, being Clothed with Royal Righteousnesse, and styled also by Isaiah, the Prince of peace, Isai. 9.6. hinting to us that at the entrance of Christ our Lord into his Royal Dignity, and glorious work of framing his Gospel-Church, thatPsal. 85.10. righteousnesse and peace kissed then each other, that truth should spring out of the earth, and righteousnesse look down from heaven. Solomon then was theAct. 7.47. Architect of that antient and famous Temple: But be∣hold aLuk. 11.31. greater then Solomon is here, the true Iedidiah, or beloved of the Lord, who coements the living stones of his Church together, with his own blood. It hath bin usual of old at the building of some famous Palace or Cathe∣dral, that the Royal Founder should lay the first stone with his own hands, having his own name engraven on it. It's lost time to humor a Jewish fancy, in determining the truth or falshood of a Rabbinical Relation, that King Solomon didShring∣ham in Jo∣ma. p. 106. insculp the Tetragrammaton or the unspeakable name of Johovah upon the first stone, laid in the foundation of the Temple: But this I am sure of, that the Father of mercies acquaints us in one place by an holyIsa. 28.16. Prophet, that he himself layed in Zion for a founda∣tion, a stone, a tryed stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure foundation: which the Apostle Peter assures us was no other then Christ himself, as I shall manifest hereafter. Concerning whom, under the name of an An∣gel, the Lord is pleased to charge his people by Moses in these words, Be∣ware of him and obey his voice, provoke him not; For he will not par∣don your transgressions,Exod. 23.21. for MY NAME is in him. We read concerning David, that he gave to Solomon his son the pattern of this house, with an example of all the choise accoutrements. In like manner our Lord and Saviour under the Type of Solomon, being called the2 Sam. 7.13, 14. Son of God; elsewhere from his own holy mouth assures us, that the work, which he had to do,Joh. 5.36, & 13, 3. he received of his Father. So that as Nathan was sent of a message from God to acquaint David that his son Solomon should build a house for the name of his divine Majesty, and that his sons Kingdome should be establisht for ever, parallel to another place in the Psalmist, assuring us that his throne shouldPsal. 89.29. endure as the dayes of heaven: Even so doth the Prophet Zachary inform us in the name of the Father concerning that man, whose name is theZach. 6.12. Branch, that He should build the Temple of the Lord, that is, the spiritual Temple of his Church. Wherefore our blessed Lord, when compared with Moses, is preferred be∣fore him, as being the Son of God; and is reputed faithful as a Son over his own house: whoseHeb. 3.6. house are we, if we hold fast our confidence, &c. to the end. But before I conclude this present Section, I shall endeavour to compare our blessed Saviour with Solomon, as the Temple builder, in several respects.
First, As Solomon prepared many costly materials, buying them of the Ty∣rians, Sidonians, Arabians, and other Nations: So did our Lord redeem or buy anew his living stones for the materials of his spiritual Temple, out of everyRev. 5.9. kindred Tongue, and Nation. Secondly, As Solomon imployed many skilful and laborious Artists, both of the Children of Israel, as well as of Phoenicians, and of the Aegyptians, as 'tis related by Eusebius: So did Christ our blessed Lord imploy in anti∣ent times many Priests and holy Prophets of the Jewish Nation, to gather in the people of those times to the knowledge of his truth. Afterward upon his Ascention (or Coronation day) he instituted and gave forth like∣wise Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers,Eph. 4.11. , for the edifying or building up of the Church, which is his body, unto the day of glory. Thirdly, Solomon did not only procure and hire these fit persons to car∣ry on the work, but he proceeded actually to the building and compleating that famous House at Jerusalem: so doth our holy Saviour by the in∣strumentality of those his faithful Labourers, imployed by him constantly, manage this great design of finishing his sacred Temple. For as the work∣men of Solomon did hew down Cedars, Fir-trees, and Algum-Trees in Le∣banon for the service of the Temple, and caused them to be brought in flores by water to Joppa, and thence to Jerusalem. So doth our Lord imploy such as shallHos. 6.5. hew his people, and take off the ruggedness of their dispositions: workmen of John the Baptists temper, that need not be to ashamed, when theyMat. 3.10. come with the Axe of conviction, and lay it to the root of the tree. He uses in this excellent work some Boanerges's, Sons of Thunder, to hew down the chosen and marke trees of election, out of Lebanon; the proud mountainous and rocky Lebanon of nature: out of the Mountains of self-con∣ceit, pride, natural righteousnesse, or liberty of will, (falsely so conceived) to close with divine proffers of mercy, without an immediate power from above; of civility also, and common morality. In this manner doth lear∣ned Jerom seem to apply two places of the Psalmist, where wicked men for their lofty pride, are compared to the Cedars of Lebanon. InPsal. 37.35. one place, where we read [a green bay tree] the text of Jerom runs thusTom. 8. Edit. Eras∣mi. Lugd. 1530. pag. 36. Vidi impium superexaltatum & elevatum sicut Cedros Libani; I have seen the wicked exceedingly exalted and lifted up like the Cedars of Lebanon. The other place is that, where thePsal. 29.5. voice of the Lord is said to break the Cedars; yea the Lord breaketh the Cedars of Lebanon. Both which, are hinted by him in hisTom. 5. p. 277. Comment upon the 60 of Esay. In so much that our blessed Lord seems most sweetly to say to his Church upon this ac∣count (if leave may be granted to allusions)Cant. 4.8. Come with me from Leba∣non (my spouse) with me from Lebanon: for theCant. 1.17. beams of our house are of Cedar, and our rafters of Firre. Such as being cut down out of the proud and towring mountains of nature by the Axe of the Law, were brought in flores of repentance to Joppa, (indulge the continuation of the Allegory) it being a place famous for this, that one of the first Gospel-miracles,Act. 9.36. &c. which Peter did, was performed there. Nay the choise evidence of the vocation of the Gentiles, into the fellowship of the Mystical Church, was here exhibited untoAct. 10.11. &c. Peter in a trance: where he received from God in a Vision, a Sheet let down from heaven, filled with all sorts of living Creatures, some whereof were unclean according to the antient Law and institution of Moses; Peter being thereby taught that the unclean Gentiles were now also to be taken up to heaven, as thatV. 16. Sheet was in that divine Vision. Furthermore, as to these our workmens proceeding in their Temple-la∣bours,
As we read that all the stones of the Temple were wrought with Iron tools by the Art of Masonry, before they were brought and laid in order and coemented together in the walls of that sacred House: In like manner the stones of the spiritual building are hewn and squared by the Preaching of the Law, which, as the Apostle tells us, is aGal. 3.24. School-master unto Christ, to fit and prepare us for the heavenly2 King. 22.14. Colledge at the Temple. If we shall accept it for a Type of heaven, as sometimes it is: then may we learn, that as the Stones and Timber were compleatly fitted to fall into their several places without noise of Tools and Instru∣ments, even so in this life doth the Gospel-Ministery fit and prepare the Saints for that Celestial place,Rev. 21.4. where sorrow and crying shall be heard no more. If we shall understand by the Temple, the worship of the Gospel, as Scripture doth frequently insinuate: this preparative work for the Temple-buildings may possibly shadow forth and allude to the Spirit of Bondage, preceding the spirit of Adoption. For our blessed Saviour hath sent forth not only hewers with rough garments like John Baptist & Elijah to prepare; but some workmen of the temper and strain of Barnabas also, like so many sons of consolation to strengthen and joyn the stones together, in the spi∣ritual building with the coement of Faith, Love and Joy. So that as the word of God is compared to an hammer by the ProphetIer. 23.29. Jeremy, to break in pieces rugged hearts: So likewise we find workmen at a gentle, peaceable and quiet businesse, laying Judgment to theIsai. 28.17. line, and righteousnesse to the Plummet, that the stones of the Temple may be said in an erect, in an even and regular forme: since we hear of thePsal. 19.4. line of the Apostles do∣ctrine which is gone out through the whole World. Fourthly, As King Solomon did solemnly appoint in a set frame and  orderly method, the 24 courses of the Priests for their several services; to∣gether with the duties of the Levites, in their various Charge; for a most noble end, even to praise God, and to Minister before the Priests, accor∣dingly as the2 Chron. 8.14. work of every day required, instituting likewise the Porters according to their Courses, to watch at every Gate: so hath our blessed Lord and Saviour ordered by divine institution, the several spiritual Ordinances in his Church: According to which every Saint is appointed in his station to worship the Father in spirit and in truth, seeing he is faithful in all his house, beyond Moses the Law-giver of the antient Israelites. Fifthly, As King Solomon did in most stately and pompous manner, per∣forme  the various rites of the dedication of this most famous and splendid Structure at Jerusalem: Even so the blessed Lord of life, and Saviour of the world ascending up on high,Psal. 68.81. gave gifts unto men, sending down his most holy spirit in the formAct. 2.1, 2, 3. of Cloven tongues, noting the variety of Languages wherewith they should be miraculously indued, and the various Nations, to which they should be sent, as likewise under the shape & repre∣entation of fire noting the fervency of zeal, and the illumination of knowledge wherewith they should shine throughout the World; at that time sitting upon the Apostles and Disciples, assembled together in one place at Jerusalem. By which plenary manifestation of the Spirit they were consecrated, anointed and initiated into the several glorious Evangelical Offices, to be then undertaken by them, and discharged in the Primitive Church. Sixthly and Lastly, This glorious King conversed in this Stately and  Famous House for many years together, taking great delight in the Sacri∣fices and solemn worship of his God. So doth the Lord Jesus the Pramer and builder of the spiritual Temple, take wonderful solace in his Gospel-Church, continually walking in the midst of hisReu. 2.1. seven Golden Candle∣sticks.
Yet herein we must observe, that, though King Solomon declined, in his latter dayes, to shew that he was but a man, although a most glorious and admirable Type of Jesus Christ: Yet herein our blessed Lord as he did farre out-bid all other prefigurations of himself; so also this personal Type of King Solomon, in this particular, that he never forsaketh the assemblies of his Saints, but is alwayesMat. 18.20. in the midst of them: For whom he once loveth,Ioh. 13.1. he loveth unto the end, or ( as some expound it) even to the death; Nay continuing his love beyond the term and period of his meri∣torious passion, he hath graciously promised to beMat. 28.20. with them alway even to the end of the World. Hitherto let it suffice to have treated thus largely concerning the prefatory matters respecting the Time, Place, and Architect of the Temple: Now I shall proceed to the main design in the 6 following Sections, according to the method, which I have before laid down: not without most humble im∣ploration of divine aid and assistance to be yeilded and afforded to me in the further prosecution of these abstruse and profound Mysteries: craving more∣over a gentle and favourable connivence, and remission of my failings, by all serene spirits, who possibly may please to converse with these so rude and impolite discourses. SECT. I. Concerning the Mysteries af the Covered Temple, and its included Rooms. AS to the management of this present Section, I shall crave leave to treat in the first place of the Mystical significations of the Tem∣ple in general; and afterward to descend to the most material par∣ticulars of the covered Building, whereof it may be requisite to discourse more largely. In general, the holy Scriptures do frequently insinuate the Typification of three things by the Temple, when taken in a more laxe and ample significati∣on: as for example, Our blessed Lord himself personally considered. Secondly, the Church or body of Christ mystical: And thirdly, every Saint also in par∣ticular. At least (I hope) it may be safely said, that the sacred writings do in all these 3 respects frequently allude to the antient Temple of Solomon: it being no unusual thing for the self same Type to hint at various Mysteries un∣der the Gospel, as may more amply and evidently appear out of the divine pages of Scripture by this ensuing discourse. 1. Some would have the Temple in general to prefigure and Typifie the blessed body of our Lord and Saviour, grounding their apprehension upon that famous place, where our Lord speaking concerning the destruction of the Temple in three dayes, is interpreted by the Evangelist John (who was the beloved Disciple, and lay in his bosome)Ioh. 2.19, 21. to have meant it of his own body. Upon which account, Tertullian,Hieron in Script. Ecclesiastic. Edit. Erasm. Ludg. 1530. Tom. 1. p. 287. who lived under the Emperous
Severus and Antoninus Caracalla, and is placed by Ierome in his Latine tran∣slation of Ensebius his Chronicles as flourishingP. 172. Edit. Scal∣lig. 1658. in the 208th year of our Lord) expounding that noble place of theIsa. 2.2. Prophet Isaiah, treating of the mountain of the Lords House, whereunto all Nations should flow in the dayes of the Gospel, reflects upon our blessed Lord in these fol∣lowing words, [Contr. Marcion. l. 3. p. 348. Ed. Par. 80. 1566. Uti{que} Christus Catholicum Dei Templum, in quo Deus colitur] Christ is the Catholick Temple of God, wherein he is worshiped. Athanasius moreover, citing this very place of holy John, affirmes that our Lord Christ was theContr. Arianos. Orat. 5. p. 323. Edit. Com∣melin. 1600. , that true house or building, and that therefore Solomons structure being but the , the image or Type of this spiritual Temple was destroyed, to manifest it to have bin but a meer Type, when as this true Temple had once appeared. In this point likewise doth holy & learned Ierom concurre asserting as much in these words [Ad Marcellam. Tom. 1. 126. ideò Tem∣plum Subrutum, ut typica historiae tollerentur] that therefore the antient Temple was ruined, that so the typical Histories might be taken away. Nei∣ther is Origen herein to be left our, speaking somewhat to this very purpose in his 7th Book against Celsus.P. 349. quarto Edit. Cantabr. 1658. , &c. He destroyed the City, and the Temple & the worship of God, consisting in sacrifi∣ces, and other constituted services in the Temple, &c. to that end that the Gospel & its more divine services thereby signified might be more firmely established. But to what purpose should I bring in a heap of Authors setting their seals to this antient truth: Seeing 'tis every where obvious in the writings of the Anti∣ents, attended likewise generally with the suffrages of modern times, especially of such, who delight not in carping at the Fathers. Wherefore according to the 6th Canon, before laid down in this Chapter, let the Temple be accomoda∣ted to our Saviour under the notion of an excellent Type. For as our blessed Lord is declared by holy John,Ioh. 1.14. , to pitch his Tabernacle and dwell among us: So the fulnesse of the Godhead is affirmed by the Apostle PaulCol. 2.9. , to inhabite bodily in Jesus Christ, as in a Temple: TheJohn Gregory notes in Scrip. c. 31. Edit. Oxen. Shecinah of the divine presence, being unspeakably manifest in the Messiah. Strange and uncouth is the fancy of VillalpandusTempl. Solom. de∣scrip. ex Villalp. per Cappell. pag. 20. in proaem. Bibl. Poly∣glott. Walton. stating the Temple's Typical similitude in proportion to and with the body of our blessed Lord upon the Crosse, with his armes stretcht out, and his legs conjoyned together in such a manner: as that his head should possesse the Sanctuary, his breast the Altar, his feet the Eastern gate: his two hands the two gates on the North and Southside of the Temple. So that as the passage or way to the Altar and Sanctuary lay open through those three principal gates: In like manner should the path to the true Sanctuary be madk plain and easie, through the wounds of his feet and hands. Whence it is that the brazen Sea, which was situated on the Southside of the Temple near the Altar, should prefigure the water and blood issuing out of the right side of our blessed Lord, for the washing away of our sins, and our spiritual sanctification. But these things (saith Lud. Cappellus) though acutely and ingeniously invented by Villalpan∣dus, yet are not a little strained and forced, favouring more of the sharpness and subtlety of humane wit, then of the solid wisdome and teachings of the holy Spirit. Wherefore I shall seek to accommodate some principal parts of the ancient Temple unto Christ personal, by way of allusion rather then by direct assertion, and afterwards remove to the next inquiry. In as much then as the Temple is reported to have bin built with pure white marble: thereby may be shadowed forth the unspotted purity, and Candid innocency of our blessed Lord; that, well might the heavenly Angel say of him to the Virgin MaryLuk. 1.35. , that Holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God: So that when the Prince
of this World came near to him in a way of temptationJohn 14.30. he found nothing in him of impurity and unholinesse as any fit matter or foundation for his ma∣licious design against him. Who is declared by the Apostle Peter1 Pet. 2.22. to have committed no sin, neither guile to have bin found in his mouth. We read further concerning the Temple, that it was adorned with Planks and Boards of Cedar; Firre and Olive which by their unctuous and resinous matter do not easily yield to putrefaction. In like manner, the body of our Lord had such an aequilibrium or excellent poise of the humours in its tempe∣rament and constitution, that he was never sick in all his life, as generally is conceived from the silence of Scripture in that point: But that his body was in the same habitude of freedome from sicknesse and death, as the bodies of our parents in the primitive garden, by the free donation of God and his manutenency, or conservation of them in such a state of equality, that the tetrachordon or the four strings of the humours, being choisely and divinely touched by the hand of heaven, should warble forth the most pleasant and melodious harmony of immortality. Now although our blessed Lord did undergo the pain of death, beingIsa. 53.5. wounded for our transgressions not his own, yet did not the Father of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,Psal. 16.10. Act. 2.27. leave his blessed body under the power of the grave, nor suffer his holy one to see corruption. Again, as all those forementioned materials framed of the wood of choise trees, and being most curiously carved, were overlaid with the purest gold, the most incorruptible and precious among metals: So may we observe in holy Scripture many of the excellencies of Christ compared to Gold. Wherefore the inamoured spouse describing her beloved to the Daughters of Jerusalem, conferrs his head withCant. 5.11. the most fine gold; which some referre to the divinity of Christ, others to his headship over the Church, especially since John in his Revelation-visions beheld the son of man sitting on a Cloud,Rev. 14.14. with a golden Crown upon his head, as being King over his mystical body the Church. In antient times, Gods majesty was pleased to utter his divine Oracles from out of the most holy place within the Temple: But in these last dayes He hathHeb. 1.2. spoken to us by his Son: who is expresly calledDan. 9.24. Rev. 19.13. the most holy by the Prophet Daniel, and was the person through and by whom the Father hath opened his minde to the World: For the onely begotten Son, which is in the bosome of the Father,Ioh. 1.18. he hath declared him. He is Ioh. 1.1. called the word of God, the Interpreter of the divine will in all ages; neitherMat. 11.27. knoweth any man the Father, but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. It was the1 Pet. 1.11. spirit of Christ in the Prophets of old, testifying before hand of his sufferings, and the glory that should follow: By the same spirit1 Pet. 3.19. he went and preached to the spirits of the old World, which are now in prison, by which also he taught2 Cor. 13.3. the Apostle Paul, and continues to inspire the hearts of his faithful Embassadours to the end of the World, having upon his Ascension-dayEph. 4.8, 12, 13. given gifts unto men, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministery, and the edifying of his Body; till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. Wherby is evidently de∣clared that the Gospel-Ministery divinely taught by Christ the Supreme Prophet of his Church1 Pet. 2.25. the Shepheard and Bishop of our souls, (Ioh. 7.46. who spake as never man spake) must endure till all the Elect be gathered and built up into a holy Temple in the Lord, which shall not be fully and com∣pleatly finished till the end of the World. Moreover, As in the Temple of Solomon there was an Ark made of Shittim-wood, containing the Tables of stone, (whereon the ten Commandements were engraven) and preserving them as a lively memorial of Gods Covenant, with
the Children of Israel, to protect and defend them in case they kept and obeyed those precepts of God. So Jesus Christ our blessed Saviour is de∣clared to haveMat. 5.17. fulfilled the Law, not only as it became a just and righte∣ous person so to do, but on the behalf of the elect, that so by theRom. 5.19. obedi∣ence of one many might be made righteous. Which he performed with so much alacrity and willingnesse of spirit, that he speaks of himself, thatPsal. 40.8. he delighted to do the will of God, yea the Law was within his heart; as a more excellent Cabinet then that which lay of old within the Oracle. To contract: As the curious vaile in the Tabernacle or Temple kept off the overcomming Majesty of divine glory, from the eyes of those persons, who entred the Sanctuary: so theHeb. 10.20. vaile of Christs flesh was drawn over Him as a Curtain, to obumbrate and shadow the radiant divinity of his God∣head, that rested in him in the daies of his Incarnation. As the Golden Altar of Incense was the seat of those fragrant Odours, which perfumed the holy of holies: So are the prayers of the Saints offered up by the Lord Jesus upon the heavenlyRev. 8.3. Altar of his intercession, which stands before the Throne, where our High Priest perfumes them in the golden censer of his own merit: and makes them acceptable to his Father. As the Table of shew-bread did exhibite food to the Priests that ministred before the Lord, after the Cakes had stood their limited time within the Sanctuary: So the Lord JesusIohn 6.32. descending from heaven, is that true bread of Life, whereupon Saints do feed, who are consecrated forRev. 1.6 Priests under the Gospel unto God the Father. As the Golden Candlestick did yield a beautiful light within the Temple continually before the Lord: Accordingly, doth our Lord Jesus term himselfIoh. 8.12. the light of the World, that whoever followeth him, and worketh by that light, shall not walk in darknesse; but enjoy the light of eternal life. The seven lamps likewise of that Candlestick, did signifie the various and excellent gracesRev. 4.5. of the holy Spirit, wherewith our Lord was adorned above his fellows, who took great delight inRev. 2.1. walking in the midst of those 7 golden branches. As the brazen Altar received the sacrifices which were offered up for the people's sins, to make an atonement on their behalf before God: So upon the Altar of the Crosse did the Lord JesusHeb. 9.26. put away the sins of his people by the Sacrifice of Himself. As the Gate of the Temple gave admission to the Priests into those myste∣rious places, where they executed their offices, and performed services accep∣table unto God. So the Lord Jesus is the door of the new Testament-wor∣ship, through which we must enter with our Gospel-sacrifices to performe our spiritual homage to his divine Majesty. In all our prayers we must have a special eye to Christ and his mediation: Even as Daniel in the Land of his Captivity kneeling upon his knees, prayed when theDan. 6.10. windows of his Chamber were open towards Jerusalem; and as Jonah, thoughIon. 2, 4, 7. cast out of sight, his soul fainting within him, yet looked towards the holy Temple: so must we in our deepest exigencies, and the most fainting fits of distresse look towards Christ our spiritual Temple, and through him only expect au∣dience at the throne of grace. In these and many other particulars, I might proceed to amplifie upon this point: but shall reserve them to a more copious enlargement in the succeeding treatise. 2. Let us go on in the next place to shew briefly, how the Church also, the mystical body of Christ was signified by that glorious building. Where∣in I shall but succinctly mention some few things, recommending the more large explication to their more proper and convenient places.
As the Temple was the material house, wherein God was worshipped un∣der the Jewish administration: So is the Church under the Gospel, the spi∣ritual1 Cor. 3.16. Temple of God, wherein his holy spirit dwelleth. Nos enim sumus Templa dei, & altaria, & luminaria, & vasa. We are (saithTertul. de Cor. mil. p. 753. Edit. Par. 80. Ter∣tullian) the Temples of God, the Altars, Lamps and Vessels. [Every Christian ChurchDr. Ed. Reyn. on Hos. Ser. 5. p. 131. quar. (as a most Reverend and Learned Dr. of our own Nati∣on) is the Israel of God, and every Regenerate person born in Zion, and every spiritual worshipper the Circumcision. Now Christ is crucified in Galatia, and a Passeover eaten in Corinth; and Manna fed on in Pergamus, and an Altar set up in Egypt: and Gentiles sacrcified, and stones made Children unto Abraham, and Temples unto God.] The Ark of old, contained the stony Tables of the Commandements; But now the Church of Christ preserves within her bosome the holy Scrip∣tures: God having graciously promisedJer. 31.33. to put his Law in their inward parts, and to write it in the fleshy Tables of their hearts. To be short, the Cherubins on the walls of the Temple signified the pro∣tection of Angels, who nowPsal. 34.7. encamp round about them that fear the Lord, as commissionated Guardians for their comfort, preservation, and delive∣rance, The shewbread in the Sanctuary did set forth the bread of life under the Gospel; the Lamps, the pure doctrine of the Church's Teachers; the Altar of incense, their ardent prayers; the Pillars in the Porch, their constancy and perseverance; the Laver, the washing of Regeneration: and the brazen Al∣tar with its appendant Rites, their confission of sin and expiation made on their behalf by the sacrifice of Christ. Thirdly and Lastly, I come to speak of the Typification of each particular Saint, as shadowed forth by that holy Temple: Even as the Apostle Paul doth expresly declare, making it strange that they should be ignorant of this truth:1 Cor. 6.19. What know ye not, that your body (saith he) is the Temple of the Holy Ghost? To which may be added the assertion ofTom. 1. pag. 105. Jerom to Pauli∣nus, [Verum Christi Templum anima credentis est, illam exerna, illam vesti, illi offer donaria, in illa Christum suscipe] that the soul of a believer is the true Temple of Christ, adorn and cloath that, offer gifts to that, entertain Christ in such a building. Wherefore craving leave to compare them by way of resemblance, desi∣ring that these parallels may not be strictly interpreted: The foundation of this Temple may be laid in humility & contrition of spirit, wherein the inhabiter of eternityIsa. 57.15. delighteth to dwell. We may referre the Porch to the mouth of a Saint: wherein every holy Jacob erects theGen. 28.18. &c. Pillars of Gods praise, calling upon and blessing his name for received mercies; when songs of deliverance are uttered from thePsal. 141.3. doors of his lips. The Holy place, is the renewed mind; and the windowes therein may denote divine illumination from above, cautioning a Saint to beware least they be darkned with the smoak of anger, the mist of grief, the dust of vain glory, or the filthy mire of worldly cares. The golden Candlesticks, the infused habits of divine knowledge resting within the soul. The shewbread, the word of grace exhi∣bited in the promises for the preservation of a Christians life unto glory. The Golden Altar of Odours, the breathings, suspirings and groanings after God ready to break forth intoGal. 4.6. Abba Father. The Vaile, the righteousnesse of Christ. The Holy of Holies may relate to the con∣science purified from dead works, and brought into a heavenly frame. The Ark to the heart of a Saint,Rom. 7.22. delighting in the Law of God after the in∣ward man: The mercy seat, to Christ dwelling thereinCol. 1.27. as the hope and foundation of glory. The two Cherubins to Faith and Love: from between
whose wings the Father of mercies uttereth the glorious Oracles of assurance, by theRom. 8.16. witnessings of his own Spirit. The pot of Manna may be resem∣bled to that foodRev. .17. of hidden joy, unknown to the World, which is the Quintessence of divine assurance laid by, for a Saint to feed upon and refresh his spirits in his deepest and darkest agonies. The rod of Aaron budding and flowring within the Oracle of their hearts, shews the ardent affection which the soul beats to, and the profitable fruit it receives by the Gospel-ministery; when having accepted the Law from the mouth of God by his Embassadors,Iob 2.22. he layes up his words in the secret recesses of his heart. Finally the Laver is repentance: the brazen Altar is a broken and a con∣trite spirit, the fire holy zeal, the sacrificing instrument is the two-edged sword of the Spirit; and the beasts to be slain, are the various lusts of the flesh: which we are to drag before the Altar by holy confession; to mortifie, by constant hatred; and offer up in a heavenly renewed conversation, as sacrifices acceptable and well-pleasing in the sight of God. To which purpose in some measure doth that famous Maull of Pelagianism speak in these words. [Austin de Civ. Dei. l. 10. c. 4. & more c. 5. & 6. Ejus est altare, cor nostrum, &c. et sacrificamus hostiam humilitatis & laudis in areâ cordis igne fervidae charitatis.] Our heart is his Altar, &c. we offer up to Him the sacrifice of humility, and praise on that Altar of the heart, with the fire of fervent Charity. Thus farre may it suffice to have insisted on the more general significations of the Temple, humbly craving a favourable pardon (of what infirmities have hitherto passed) at the hands of such Learned and Ingenuous persons: who may countenance my further endeavours after more clear satisfacti∣on, in descending to the several particulars, which, by divine permission, I shall proceed to handle. The Mysteries laid up in the Foundation of the Temple. IN the first place I shall search into the Foundations of the Temple, it being most proper to tread in the steps of the foregoing History of its erection; and endeavour with all diligence to turn over those ponderous and1 King. 5.17. costly hewn stones, wherewith it was laid of old in the daies of Solomon, to see what mystical treasure as hidden under them. Vain and futilous are the feavourish dreams of the antient Rabbins, con∣cerning the Foundation-stone of the Temple.Shering∣ham in Jo∣mae. p. 104. &c. Some assert that God placed this stone (usually mentioning but one principal stone) in the Centre of the World, for a firme basis and settled consistency for the Earth to rest upon. Others held this stone to be the first matter, out of which all the beautiful visible beings of the World have bin hewn forth, and produced to light. Others relate that this was the very same stone laid by Jacob for a pillow un∣der his head, in that night when he dreamed of an Angelical vision at Be∣thel, and afterward anointed and consecrated it unto God. Which when So∣lomon had found (no doubt by forged Revelation, or some tedious search like another Rabbi Selomoh) he durst not but lay it sure, as the Principal Foun∣dation stone of the Temple. Nay (they say further) he caused to be engra∣ven upon it, the Tetragrammaton or the ineffable name of JEHOVAH. All which stories are but so many idle and absurd conceits, yielding thus much of wonder, that any persons should be so besotted as to think ever to find such stupid and blind proselytes, who would indure to be imposed upon by such
fopperies, wherewith of old they did pollute the Jewish Religion: Even as brain sick Monks since the Primitive times have endeavoured to corrupt the Christians worship with their lying wonders and revelations, so often recited in their wodden Legends. Wherefore to let them passe, not without Solemn praise to God, who hath conferred upon us more clear light in the face of his dear Son; let us pro∣ceed while we enjoy that light to do the work that is required of us, and by the benefit of those blessed raies to look more narrowly into the spiritual foundation of the Gospel-Temple. To which purpose, considering, that the foundation of an house is properly that materia substrata, or underground matter, on which the building resteth, and whereby it is sustained and upheld; and furthermore, that Gods building or house in the World is his Church, which being constituted in our first Parents at the beginning, upon the Primitive foundation of righteousnesse and true holinesse, according to the Covenant of works, was assaulted by the storms of the Devil's malice and power; and falling from that excellent foundation (which Gods Majesty had laid in paradise with his own hands) hath ever since groaned most bitterly under the sad pressures of sin and tempta∣tion, complaining in the Language of Cain, that their deservedGen. 4.13. punish∣ment is greater then can be born by humane shoulders, and therefore earnest∣ly beggs the divine support of some new and more firme and unshaken foun∣dation, whereupon to rest for ever, without danger of inward mouldering, or external storms. Now for as much, as the Foundation of every building is two-fold: The first external and natural, being no other then the Earth it self,Heb. 3.4. made and framed by God: The other, internal and artificial consisting of stones; brick or timber, according to the nature of the super-imposed building: So hath the Church likewise a two-fold foundation. One whereof may bear some resemblance with the natural earth: accordingly as our Lord is pleased to speak of his Church under the notion of a similitude differing from this in hand, that theMat. 13.38. field is the world wherein his Church and people are placed. The other may be termed Artificial: (granting indulgence to the pro∣secution of the present Metaphor) TheHeb. 11.10. , builder, maker or framer whereof is God in a more speciall manner. Then which founda∣tion1 Cor. 3.9, 11. no man can lay any other, than what is laid, even Jesus Christ. He is that precious corner-stoneEph. 2.20.  by the Father in the heart of mount Zion.Isa. 28.16. In whom all the building being fitly framed together, grow∣eth to a holy Temple in the Lord.1 Pet. 2.4, 5. To whom comming as to a living stone, the Saints are built up a spiritual house, wherein to offer spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. So that neither the pretended and usurping-head of the Church at Rome, nor the Canons, constitutions, or traditions of that Apostate body, nor hu∣mane reason, though never so much concocted, digested, refined by the wit, art, or industry of man, can be owned for this foundation. 'Tis Christ alone, who must be received and acknowledged for this fundamental-rock, (the Basis of Apostolical confession) whereon to build the Church,Mat. 16.18. against which the gates of Hell shall never prevail. Our blessed Lord and Saviour then, is the whole and only foundation for the Church to rest upon, excluding Peter and all his imagined successors, together with all the Apostles from being Corrivals with Christ in this great work of sustaining the spiritual building. Now although the Pontifi∣cians plead hard for a Secundary and Ministerial foundation: yet can we by
no means admit any such distinction, which is so farre from being groun∣ded on Scripture, that it doth directly oppose the very expresse terms of the holy word, declaring that there can be1 Cor. 3, 11. no other foundation laid than our blessed Lord. Besides it is repugnant to found reason, to introduce any Secondary and ministerial foundation, that performs not the true and native duty, and cannot undergo the weight and burden of a proper and ge∣nuine foundation. For either Christ is the only, whole, and sufficient foundation of his Church, or not. If he be, as the Scripture holds it forth, more evident then the Sun at noon: then what's the meaning of that other foundation? which certainly, if it be not the primary and main foundation, then it cannot truly and properly be called a foundation at all, that doth not sustain the building: but must be a part onely of the building. For if it be a true foundation, it must subsist of it self, and not be laid upon another; as its basis or bottome. But if not, besides the flat denial of Scripture by these builders,Act. 4, 11. who have set at nought the head-stone of the Corner, wo must needs befall the Church, if their faith and hope of salvation, should leane upon suchLev. 14.45. Leprous stones, which God hath commanded to be carried out of the City, into an unclean place, But this point is most excellently and nervously handled by the famousTom. 2. de Rom. Pontif. Contr. 4. qu. 2. p. 551. fol. Dr. Whitaker, most amply, in his Controversies about the Pope of Rome, to the terror of the dark Conclave. Happy is the Church of Christ in having so glorious a person as the Son of God, to sustain and bear the weight and pressure of their sins, and to be the choise foundation of their faith to rest upon, in respect to eternal life: who is so termed by a Metaphor taken from material buildings, wherein the foundation doth uphold all the Rooms and Stories built upon it. In like manner, all the members and parts of the sacred and Mystical structure, laying the whole stresse of their happinesse upon Jesus Christ are carried on, till the top-stone of glory shall be brought forth. Which things are men∣tioned in many places of divine record, and prosecuted by an Allegory or continued Metaphor. Christ himself is by diverse of the holy pen-men called the corner-stone of the building, that is, of the foundation of the building: In which ex∣pression the main and principal part of the foundation is taken for the whole by a Synecdoche: Seeing the chief and most serviceable part of the foundation is that strong and large hewn-stone, which the Architect layes at the bottom-corner of each square of the building. Further, as a buil∣ding is compared by Scripture and other writers, sometimes to an humane body: the foundation in such a sense may very aptly be expressed by the denomination of a head. To which purpose we may observe that our LordCol. 1.18. the head of his Church, is often styled by the name of that prime stone, which is laid at the head of the Corner: as may fully appear from these following places of Scripture, Psal. 118.22. Mat. 21.42. Mat. 12.10. Luk. 20.17. Act. 4.11. & 1 Pet. 2.7. This excellent foundation-stone (thus laid in Zion, the holy mountain by the hands of God himself) hath also many rare and choise Epithets annexed to it, in the sacred writings. Whereof it will not be (I hope) amisse, to dis∣course awhile, referring to those various places, wherein they are dispersed. 1. He is called an elect or chosen-stone: disallowed indeed of men, but1 Pet. 2.4.1.  chosen of God, saies holy Peter: who good soul would blush, had he bin alive in after-daies, no less, then the picture of Paul, (as I remember) at Rome: In which the ingenious Painter being taxed for making his face too ruddy, replied in his defence, that it was for shame of some things done in the Ro∣man Church. Blessed Peter disowns himself, and looks upon Christ only,
as this chosen stone carved by God himself, out of the Quarry of mankind, and receiving aHeb. 10.5. body prepared by the Father, for the service of this spiritual building. He is styled thereforeIsa. 42.1. the Elect of God, in whom his soul delighted, being instituted for this very work by the eternal purpose and designation of his heavenly Father. WhoGal. 4.4. in the fulnesse of time appeared in humane flesh, that is, at the period and compleatment of those daies, which God had pitcht upon from all eternity; and had revealed and foretoldLuke 1.70. by the mouth of his holy Prophets ever since the World began. After which gracious manifestation of the Son of God in flesh, he was hewn and polished by his sufferings and torturing-death up∣on the Crosse, that he might be fit for the use of the wise Master-builder, as a foundation stone to support the new and glorious building of his Gospel-Temple. 2. ¶.2. He is called a precious stone, by a Metaphor taken from gemms and stones of great value. Ten thousand times more precious then that natural diamond-rock, on whichTintae∣gel in Corn∣wall. an antient Castle of our Nation once stood, now groaning under its deplorable ruines. Whereas this rock of ages shall never behold corruption. More precious indeed! as being of a super∣natural essence, and cut outDan. 2.45. of the mountain of eternity, without hands in respect to his Divine nature: which is free from the least shadow of a flaw, or any tincture of blemish shining most oriently with all the sparklings of divine perfections. Precious is this stone upon the account of its ad∣mirable qualities, and most efficacious virtues. Infinitely beyond the force and power of the famous Haematites, for stopping the bloody flux of our souls. Which would have bled to death through the gashes received in Paradise, had notLuke 6.19. virtue issued from Christ for its restraint. Beyond the fiery Carbuncle, in resisting the flames of his Fathers wrath, that are ready to suck up the vital spirits of wretched sinners, who dare presume to draw nigh to thisHeb. 12.29. consuming fire, without Christ, or converse with suchIsa. 33.14. everlasting burnings. Beyond the attractive vertue of the Magnetical stone, in theJoh. 12.32. drawing of souls after him, and alluring them into union and communion with himself. Nay more precious then the impenetrable Adamant, whereof some Antients report such a quality to be inherent in it, that those who carry it about them, shall prove Valiant in fight, and unconquerable in their enterprizes: Seeing we are made more then Con∣queroursRom. 8.37. through him that loved us, by whose meanes it is, that we1 Cor. 15.57. receive the victory, when fighting under the banner of this heavenly Achil∣les. Who being himself anointed with a more precious unction (Nat. Mythol. p. 817. then his of Ambrosia) from above, is in every part invulnerable except his heel, which for a while is bruised in his poor members militant upon the Earth, till all his enemies be subdued under his feet in the behalf of his dear Church. Besides, he is a most precious stone by reason of his incomparable rarity: there being but one of this nature found in the whole World. Who would not turn a spiritual Merchant, and, selling all that he hath, endeavour toMat. 13.46. purchase this inestimable treasure? This is that stone (saies holy Peter) on which onely our salvation restethAct. 4.12.. There being no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, than that new name engraven on thisRev. 2.17. white-stone,Jer. 23.6. the Lord our righteousnesse. The Lord Christ is the onely Sun, which by his bright and fulgent raies dispels the dark∣nesse of the Chambers of death and of the bottomlesse pit. He is the onely Phoenix, out of whose perfumed ashes doth arise the curiously plumed pro∣geny of the Church, whose wings arePsal. 68.13. covered with silver, and her fea∣thers with yellow gold. This is the only Stone, the Rock of Ages,1 Pet. 2.7. so
precious to them that believe, on which alone our feet can be steddily fixed,Psal. 40.2. that our goings may be established. 3. He is termed aIsa. 28.16. tried stone. Jesus of Nazareth,¶. 3. (as the blessed Apo∣stle Peter affirmes) a manAct. 2.22. approved of God by miracles, signs, and won∣ders. Who when tried by the divine Majesty in the fire of his wrath to melt away the drosse of imputed sin, did nec dissilire nec dissolvere, neither fly in pieces for want of radical Oyl, nor melt under that terrible calcination for want of tenacity and consistence. Though all the sins of the elect were put into the crusiple of his humane nature; yet he came out of the furnace invio∣lable, and was therefore Crowned with the diademe of a glorious triumph. Although he were soIsa. 53.5. sorely wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities by the hammer of the Law, and pierced by the sword; which was used by the right hand of himZech. 13.7. who was his fellow, yet this Royal stone did neither shrink out of his fixed place in the Corner, nor sink under the weight of divine anger. The Prince of this World made towards him with the infernal three-tined fork ofMat. 4, 3, 6, 9. tentations, to try the strength of this Corner-stone; butJoh. 14.30. found nothing degenerous in him, or in the least wise malleable by all his Art and fury. That great Goliath of Hell came marching up against him in his coat of maile, his helmet of brasse, and a weavers beam in his hand: But was so dismaly smitten in the forehead of his bold designes, by the mighty force of thisCypr. p. 277. stone taken out of thePsal. 110.7. brook of Kidron, that he fell down on his face to the Earth, which afterwards proved like a sharp and fatal,Exod. 4.24. Circum∣cising stone in cutting off the head of that uncircumcised Philistine, who had defied the armies of the Living God. The gates of hell and all the powers of darknesse were presently in an up∣roare; and (Junctis umbonibus) with their united forces, assailed him in a most cowardly manner even then, while he was exercised under the frowns of heaven: but he prevailed most victoriously, and carried them all Captive; (being chained to his Chariot wheels) to the Capitol of glory. Even as Sampson of old laid the gates of GazaJudg. 16.3. on the Hill before Hebron: So did our unconquerable Champion triumph openly over all Principalities and Powers, laying their gates upon the top of mount Olivet, the hill before Heaven, in the day of his glorious Ascension unto the Father, having fixed his immortal, and never to be unhinged Trophies in the Jawes, nay in the very Bowels of the kingdome of darknesse. In so much that what was said of old concerning the stone that was brought from Scone Abby near St. Johnston's in Scotland by our warlike King Edw. I. and placed under the Coronation-Chaire, in Edward the Confessors Chappel at Westminster, may be more abundantly verified in this Prince of life, being alluded to with some small variation. Ni fallat fatum, Christus quòcun{que} locatum Inveniet lapidem, regnare tenetur ibidem. If heavens decrees shall firmely stand, The stone that's laid by Gods right hand; Bethel. Gen. 28.18. With fragrant Oyl shall be annointed, And for a holy house appointed. This King of glory being solemnly inaugurated into his Royal Office, by his perfumed unction upon mount Zion, must Reign in every place and ter∣ritory throughout the World; according to the Prophetick pen of Daniel in∣terpreting the vision of theDan. 2.35. mystical stone, which shall at length grew into a great mountain, and fil'd the face of the whole Earth.In Ly∣sandr. We read in Plutarch
of a stone reported to have fallen from heaven, and therefore worshipt by the inhabitants of Cherronesus: Nay by a more infallible pen it is related concerningAct. 19.35. the Ephesians, that they adored (a ) an image which they credited to have bin dropt down from Jupiter. In which and the like im∣positions (of the old Serpent) upon poor deluded mortals, there may lye hid some A pish imitations of that divine truth of Christs coming down from heaven; and represented in the sacred Scriptures, by the Metaphorical expres∣sions of a stone, which we are now handling. The Heathens and their , (De Err. relig. p. 284. cum Hyg. 80. mentioned by Firmicus) whether made of stone, and uttering from those Statues, or out of rocky Caves, their , their ambiguous and doubtful tortuous Oracles, fearing lest they should mistake in the issues and events of their predictions, and so lose the honour of assumed deities, shall be dashed one upon ano∣ther against the walls of divine fury. TheZeph. 2.11. Lord shall be terrible to them, and famish all the Gods of the Earth: providentially guiding the hand of a poor Graecian, ignorant of the truths of God, to write a Treatise [Plu∣tarch. p. 149. Tom. 2. Francof. 1620. ,] endeavouring to give an account of the defect of Oracles in his daies. Wherein he shews that some infernal spirit from the Iland Paxae, now Ericusa between Corcyra, and Leucas, in the Ionian Sea, declared their silence to proceed from the death of Christ; which is shadowed in the dark words of Heathenish canting Language, , The great Pan is dead, reflecting upon Christ most truly, as the great Bishop and Shepheard of souls. Who when arisen from the grave lead, Captivity Captive, and stopt the mouths of deluding spirits in a great measure, inverting the tripus of the Delphian cell upon the mouth of that rank and putrid den of the old Dragon. But as to our blessedGen. 49.24. Shepheard, this stone of Israel, his Oracles are infallible: the rock on which he sits is impenetrable, as to the impression of any external violence: In all ages hitherto it hath stood inviolable; so shall it stand unmoveable against the force of the choisest Engines of the witlest and refinedst Archimedes of Hell, and triumph most gloriously against all opposition likePsal. 125.1. mount Zion which cannot be removed abiding for ever. For thePsal. 16.8. Lord was on his right hand, therefore this Holy one never saw Corruption. Hence is it that the Saints of the most High, who are built upon this sure and tried foundation, shall find themselves fixed upon such a Rock, that no ages can violate, no soaking showres can cause to moul∣der; no floods can dash upon, with the least sensible impression: although themselves by this their allision, shall be broken into a thousand flashes: no windes can shatter or so much as shake it, having stood impregnable against all the impetuous forces; that heaven (in just and righteous indig∣nation against imputed sin) or earth in a foolish rage, or Hell in a malicious fury, hath ever yet mustered or brought into the field against it. In so much that the holy Apostle (in opposition to the quaking fits of mount Horeb and the frightful leapings of Sinai, theBellon. Ob∣servat. twin-tops of that trembling mountain in the wildernesse of Paran in the day of Gods thundring out his fiery law from a midst the thick darknesse) might safely inferre that we haveHeb. 12.28. re∣ceived a kingdome which cannot be shaken, which cannot be moved. To conclude, As this imperial stone hath undergone the full weight of Gods just and deserved wrath in respect to sinners, whose burden our dear Lord was pleased to sustain on their behalf; having also couragiously and triumphantly repulsed all the furious rage of spiritual wickednesses in high places: so hath it likewise proved to have bin a tried stone in respect to the Saints of the most High, who upon constant and experienced trial have found it to their great comfort and inexpressible joy, to have bin a most solid foundation for their grieved and burdened souls to rest upon, in their sad∣dest distresses and perplexities.
This experience of it had good Jacob in that sad night, saying it for aGen. 28.11. pillow (the softest that ever he had, being lined with choise promises) for his troubled and musing head, when he was hastning on in a journey towards Padan-Aram, from the menacing browes of his angry brother. Then was it, that this holy man received the promise of the Messiah, that should come from his loines, when God told him in a dream, thatVer. 14. in his seed should all the families of the Earth be blessed. When awakened in the morning he set up that stoneVer. 18. for a Pillar and powred oyle upon it.Austin de Civ. Dei l. 16. c. 38. Ne{que} enim ado∣ravit cum lapidem, vel ei sacrificavit: sed quoniam Christi nomen à Chris∣mate est, idest, ab unctione; profectò figuratum est hinc aliquid, quod ad mag∣num pertineat Sacramentum. For (saith Austin) he neither worshipt that stone, nor sacrificed to it: but because the name of Christ is from unction; verily there is something figured by it, which pertaineth to a great Mystery. Another likewise of the Ancients speaks to the same purpose,Cyprian. l. 2. Contr. Judaeos. p. 277. Edit. Bas. 1530. Lapidem consecravit & unxit, Sacramento unctionis Christum significans. He (viz. Jacob) con∣secrated and anointed that stone, hinting at Christ by the Mystery of unction. To mention no more, evident is the testimony of one more antient then either of the former, who when speaking concerning the present work of Jacob at Bethel, hath these words in his dialogue with a JewJustin Mart. dial. cum Tryph. p. 244. Edit. Commelin. 1593.. . We have in like manner manifested, that Christ was figuratively set forth by a stone in many Scriptures. The holy Patriarch sleeping sweetly on this blessed stone, saw him at the top of the ladder in a vision, who supported him be∣neath; which was no other then theId. ibid. lin. 40. 41. Joh. 1.51. Son of God: teaching us that the secret support which a Saint enjoyes, is sometimes illustrated with radiant visions of assurance from heaven. If we repose our souls in their saddest agonies upon this anointed stone, we shall enjoy sweet silver-slumbers, gil∣ded with Angelical visions of divine love, reaching down the ladder of assu∣rance from heaven, by which we may ascend into the bosome of God: when we are terrified with the frownes of a threatning and persecuting World; while we are travelling towards Bethel, the house of God, the mansion of glory. This was the stone: which blessed Joseph, when sold by his unkind bre∣thren, found to be his help;Gen. 49.24. Rivet Exerc. 185. p. 696. Fol. even the stone of Israel (accordingly as his dying father did dictate in that solemn blessing) whereby his head was ele∣vated aloft beyond the rest of his kindred, and raised up to the second place of state and dignity in the kingdome of Egyyt. Moses, another Eminent servant of God; sate upon this stone on the top of the Hill, when his hands were held up to heaven in prayer; while Jo∣shuah was fighting with Amalek in the valley:Cyprian ibid p. 278. & sacramento lapidis & stabilitate sessionis Amalech superatus est ab Jesu, id est, Diabolus à Christo victus est. When under the mystery of that stone (saith a holy Martyr) and the stability of Moses session, Amalek was overcome by Joshuah, that is, the Devil was vanquisht by Christ. SoTom. 3. p. 46. Jerom to Fabiola, speaking of Rephidim the 11th mansion of the Isralites, hath these words, sedet Moses super lapidem dictum à Zacharia, qui septem habebat oculos: that Moses sate upon the stone spoken of by the Prophet Zechariah, which had seven eyes. In the clift of thisExod. 33.22. Dr. Rey∣nolds on Psal. 100. p. 166. quar. rock was Moses placed by God himself, when the Lord passed by him, and proclaimed his glorious name,Exod. 3.4, 6. THE LORD, THE LORD GOD, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodnesse and truth, &c. This was theDeut. 27.2, 3. Cypr. p. 277. stone, on which Moses commanded all the words of the Law to be written, when they were passed over Jordan into the land of promise. Joshua likewise the Captain of the Lords Armies, when he had given the
possession of the Land of Canaan, to the tribes of Israel; convenes them before the Lord at Shechem a little before his death, and sets up this Mysti∣calJosh. 24.26. stone under an Oake near the holy Sanctuary, and having adjured them solemnly to the fear and service of the Great God, he said unto all the people, Behold,Cyprian ibid Jul. Firmic. Mat. de Err. prof. relg. p. 27. Lug. Bat. 1652. this stone shall be a witnesse to us. For it hath heard all the words of the Lord, which he spake unto us. When the Ark was brought back out of the Land of the Philistines, it rested upon this1 Sam. 6.15, 18. Cypr. p. 278. stone in the fields of Bethshemesh: which is alone able to sustain the symbole of Gods presence among his people, and give forth the infallible dictates of his will concerning divine-worship, and the management of holy Ordinances. This was the rock of ages, in a Cavern whereof1 King. 19.9, 13. Elijah the Prophet once stood, being in the same mount of God, viz. Horeb, wherein the Lord had before manifested himself unto Moses, and now passes before Eli∣jah in the still and gentle voice of mercy. And why do we find such graci∣ous revelations of his Majesty to the holy Prophets in mount Horeb, a place so dreadfully shaken by the thundring dispensations of the Law: a place that yielded the two Tables of stone, wherein the Commandements of God were engraven with his own finger? But to shew, that as the positive Law of God was graven in pieces of stone taken out of that rock which sig∣nified Christ: So we might be comforted under the infirmity of our flesh since the fall, seeing Christ alone can retain and conserve the true impressi∣ons of the divine will upon his heart, and fulfill that law (which we had broken) by his perfect and intire obedience. With which, God being fully and compleatly satisfied, is pleased in that very place to declare himself a merciful God to poor sinners, in a covenant of grace promulgated both to Moses and Elijah, in that very mountain with the gentle, sweet and melting voice of Gospel love. They being the very same persons which afterward appeared with our Lord in the mount of Transfiguration, in the daies of his flesh. The pen-man of a famous Psalme; so often cited by the spirit of God in the new Testament, as yielding a very divine Oracle concerning Christ, whom though the builders had refused, yet he esteemed as thePsal. 118.22. head-stone of the corner, having had great and sweet experience of the strength and power of God connexed with mercy in the preserving of his soul from sin∣king in the horrible pit, and in the miry clay, by setting his feet upon that solidPsal. 40.2. rock of salvation. Noble Daniel being under a prophetick Ecstasis, when his soul was taken up by a very sublime rapture, rejoyces in the vision of this living and grow∣ing stone, which was cut out of theDan. 2.45. mountain without hands: out of the mountain of eternity according to his divine nature; or the mountain of the Jewish kingdome (asMatthiae Theatr. hist. part. 4. p. 6. others take it) according to his humane na∣ture without hands, Justin. Mart. Tryph. p. 235. . Seeing it is not the work of man, but the counsel of God; the Father of the Universe, who produced him: that at length he might swell into a vastVer. 35. mountain, filling the whole Earth. This is that famous stone, with the vision whereof Zechary comforted Zerubbabel, and the people of Judah when returned out of Captivity, that the stone laid before Joshua the High Priest, should haveZeph. 3.9. Cypr. ibid. p. 277. seven eyes en∣graven upon it by the Lord of Hosts, who replenished his Son with the ful∣nesse of the God-head, with abundance of all spiritual gifts and graces; espe∣cially with a singular watchful care over the Church in all its Calamities and distresses. Nay, all the Saints of God following blessed Samuel, may with
joyful shoutings pitch this happy stone, in the valley of vision, and call it their1 Sam. 7.1. Cypr. p. 278. Eben-ezer: For hitherto hath the Lord helped us: seeing our Lord Jesus is theIsa. 28.16.  fundamentum fundatum, the fixed, established and sure foundation laid in Zion by God himself, for his people to settle thereon all their hopes and expectation of glory. 4. He is styled a perilous stone,¶. 4. a dangerous rock of offence to all them that shall stumble at it. In himself indeed1 Pet. 2.7. he is precious to them that be∣lieve: but (per accidens) to them that refuse and reject him, he proves a stone ofIsa. 8.14. Rom. 9.33. offence and passive scandal. Nay all that burthen themselves with it, shall find it to be an active andZech. 12.3. burdensome stone, yea a sharp stone to cut them in pieces; though all the people of the earth should be gathered together against it. It will be found worse then any Tarpeian precipice, up∣on which such shall fall headlong (whosoever they be, that presume to deal with theAct. 1.18. rewards of iniquity) and bursting in sunder in the midst, shall present the gushing forth of their bowels to astonished spectators: He that falls upon it (saith ourMat. 21.44. Lord himself) shall be broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grinde him to powder. Here indeed, upon earth, the Lord Jesus is a foundation stone, lying low and obscure, during the exinanition of his state incarnate: but hereafter in heaven, he shall be brought forth, as theZech. 4.7. headstone of his Temple, with shoutings of Saints and acclamations of Angels, crying Grace Grace unto it. Here below, the great and proud Dons of the World being offended at his depressed and mean condition do impingere, stumble at and break themselves against that blessed stone; all their designes and machinations against him being broken in pieces like a potter's vessel: But if they shall persist in their rebellion and contumacy, finally to the last; At the great day of Judgment, this stone shall fall upon them to their fatal and utter ruine, when all power shall be committed to the Son, who then shall break them to powder. At that time, Blessed shall all be, who have not bin offended in him: when those that have hardned them∣selves against this munition of rocks, and have run their vessels against him; shall suffer a most dreadful shipwrack. Then those, who have presumed to spit against this glorious heaven, shall find their shameful spewing to return upon, and to cover the face of all their glory: Then those, who have dared to shoot their keen arrowes (dipt in the malignant poison of enmity towards him) against this radiant Sun, shall deeply bemoan more sharp darts fierce∣ly retorted upon their own bosomes, and piercing through their very hearts. 5. He is termed a corner-stone in many places of holy Scripture.¶. 5. From which expression, became he is called by the name of one corner-stone, only, (seeing that under the building there are not only four corner-stones; but many others laid in the several sides and middle of the supporting founda∣tion: all which do make up but one full and compleat substruction for the superior building to rest on) we are not to inferre that Christ is not the whole and intire foundation of his Church, needing others to hold Copartnership with him in this great work: But therefore is the Lord Jesus called the cor∣ner-stone by way of eminency: seeing it is such a stone as doth excell in strength, and exceed in quantity, all other stones that are laid togethr with it in ordinary foundations. The corner-stones are the main and chief sup∣ports of the building, and therefore most usually are of the largest cize, and cut out of the stoutst vein in the Quarry. Wherefore our Lord for his ad∣mirable strength in bearing the weight of the Churches sins, and preserving the state of their graces, and the hopes of their glory from ruine, is deno∣minated by the Corner-stone: whereas indeed the expression is figurative, the chiefest part being taken for the whole foundation. But besides this, I
shall humbly crave leave to present a new conjecture in reference to the point in hand, and earnestly beg a Candid acceptation thereof from ingenuous spirits, which is this; That seeing our blessed Saviour is indeed the onely and compleat foundation of his Church, and yet being mentioned in Scrip∣ture under the name, of a corner-stone in the Singular: I have entertained some thoughts, that although generally other buildings have many stones laid for their foundation; yet this spiritual and mystical building of the Church may be conceived not to be unlike that admirable Temple of Latna in Buto a City of Egypt, near the Sebennitical mouth of the River Nile: con∣cerning which Herodotus (attesting that he was an , and saw it him∣self) relates, that it was made and framedEnterp. seu Lib. 2. §. 155. , of one vast and entire stone. In like manner we may conceive the foundation of this spiri∣tual Temple to have bin made of one, great, vast, foursquare stone, supply∣ing the whole extent of the bottome of the building. Which by reason of the chiefest and choicest office of a foundation, (viz. to support all the an∣gles or corners) is termed by the Apostle Peter and others, (following the Septuagint in that renownedIsai. 28.16. place of Isaiah, so often mentioned) , the cornering stone: or such a stone, which in its four Angles respects and supports all the four corners of the building, and is therefore exprest by a collective term: Although, in our translation and according to the ordinary and common conception of the term of an Angular or corner-stone, whereby the word is turned; we usually apprehend of it, as it were placed in one onely corner of the foundation of this spiritual building. But at present (with the favour of the Learned) I shall crave leave to accept of the signification of Peter's words in such a sense, as may hint to us a large intire stone, that lyes flat at the botome, and extends to all the four corners; bearing and underpropping the whole building both in the middle and all the four Angles thereof: which noble and stately stone being indued with admirable strength, by reason of the greatnesse and immensity of its body, to undergo the burden imposed upon it; we cannot apply and resemble it in a spiritual sense to any thing better than to the infinite strength of the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord (on whose almighty shoulders there is laid help suffi∣cient, for our faith to lean on) to support and preserve us from sinking un∣der the direful weight of our sins into the crude, raw, indigested and boggy ground of our polluted righteousnesse, when oppressed by the impetuous storms of temptation, and when mourning under the ponderous pressure of Gods wrath, righteously imposed upon the backs of sinners. Hence is it, that they who believe shall not need to make haste away from it, as men do from boggy grounds; as the noble Prophet expresseth it in the forecited place: seeing it's firme ground, wherein the Angular stone of our help and salvation is laid. TheIsa. 9.6. government resteth on the shoulders of an omni∣potent Atlas, supporting Heaven and Earth, from falling under the leaden talents of divine wrath and justice. So that the foundation of our spiritual house is not laid in the sandy desert of our impotent and lubricous natures, or in the soft and shaking bogs of our filthy works; but the help and stresse of our happinesse is settled upon One, who is mighty to save. For (behold) a hand of grace and mercy descending from heaven, and fixing a most sure foundation: on which our souls may find a safe and secure repose from all their fluctuations and disquietments. Now for as much as the Apostles of Christ are termed alsoEph. 2.20. Rev. 21.14. foundations of the Church: Nay, seeing that even the Church it self is said to be1 Tim. 3.15. , the pillar and ground of truth: we are to understand the formerNoyes Temple, meas. p. 31. of a doctrinal foundation: the Apostles having bin such, as did edifie and build up the Church upon the head-stone of the corner: So
Paul speaks of himself, who like a wise master-builder, had laid his Corin∣thians upon Christ; as the1 Cor. 3.10. foundation of their faith. By the latter con∣cerning the Church, we are to understand the promulgation and conserva∣tion of that truth (once delivered unto it by our Lord himself and his holy Apostles) inviolable and indelible to the day of Christ, throughout all gene∣rations. But of this, possibly, I may speak more fully in another place of this Treatise. Wherefore to conclude this present paragraph about the corner-stone: let us also remember, that as this stone hath respect unto both sides of the building: so it may fairely represent that sacred function and office of our Lord in knitting and uniting both Jews and Gentiles in one Temple of his mystical body. Ideo etiamDe ces∣sat. legal. p. 153. (saith our famous Grostest sometime Bishop of Lincolne) utrius{que} testamenta sacrificia peregit Christus, ut in se angulari lapide continuaret duos parietes aedificii culturae Domini. Therefore did Christ also performe the sacrifices of both testaments, that he might joyn together the two walls of Gods worship in himself being the corner-stone. That so he might be∣come the foundationJud. 3. , of the salvation, common both to Jews and Gentiles. For through himEph. 2.18. , (saith holy Paul) we both, that is, of the stock of the Jews, and of the gentile race have an accesse by one Spirit unto the Father. Others there be, who interpret this cementing or uniting of the corner-stone to be understood in respect to Saints and Angels: Seeing the Father is related by the same Apostle,Eph. 1.10. : to ga∣ther together unto a head all things both in the heavens (that is, Angels and Saints triumphant) and also such as are upon the Earth (that is, Saints mili∣tant) in Christ, the head stone of the corner. 6. In the sixth and last place, he is termed1 Pet. 2.4. a living stone.¶. 6. To which purpose we may observe; that such stones which still remain in their native place within the Quarry, not yet dugg up, or removed out of their natural situation, are by the antients, whether Poets, Orators, or Philosophers, called living stones. At present one shall suffice for all, (it being a thing commonly noted) in the poems of theVirgil. Aen. lib. 1. v. 167. Mantuan muse, which descri∣bing the seats of the Nymphs, in a rock upon the African shore, sings thus; Intus aqua dulces vivo{que} sedilia saxo, Nympharum domus, &c. Where waters sweet, with gentle murmurs slide The Nymphs on seats of living-stones abide. Whereas on the other side, stones hewn out of the Quarry and translated in∣to stately Fabricks, do moulder away by the forcible impressions of stormy weather, and impetuous windes; and may be styled dead stones, though it be an unusual and harsh expression: when those that remain in their native seats decay not, but are rather increased and augmented, and in some sort said to grow. The common determination is, that these subterraneous bodies are inlarged in their quantity, by the petrification of adjacent matter.Cont. Cardan. Exerc. 108.9.4. Scaliger holds that they are increased by certain exhalations, that sweat out of the stones themselves, like as gummes out of trees; which by the astrin∣gent and indurating quality of cold, do admit of concretion in their exterior parts, and so augment their quantities. The acutePrincipo Philosoph. p. 231. Amsteled. 1644. quarto. Renatus Descartes differs from the former, teaching, that there are many sharp spirits, volatile salts, Oily exhalations and vapors of a Mercurial nature, that ascend out of the bowels of the Earth towards its surface: which according to various and different mixtures cleave together, (when the more lubricous, fluid, and aë∣real
parts are evaporated and flown away) producing such various sorts of stones, both common and precious in the upper parts of the Earth. The last that I shall mention is the opinion of our Country-manDe orig. font. p. 233. Lond. 1605. 8. Lydiat, who conceives upon many probable grounds that there are great subterraneous fires, actually burning in the bowels of the Earth; from which there ascend great quantities of spirits, and manifold vapours differing in moysture, or driness according to the inflamed matter beneath. The moyster parts of such exhalations are resolved into water, near the surface of the earth, by reason of the cold aire condensing these vapors into drops; (as is ordinarily seen in the art of destillation) which are the originals of springs and fountaines. Whereas, on the other side, the more dry exhalations being contained with∣in such compact parts of the circumambient earth, as do not easily yield channels and passages for their transpiration; (even as it is in ovens well stopt) do in length and continuance of time, as it were bake together into that firme solidity, which we see in stones: being also by new ascending va∣pours continually increased more and more. Now hence it is, that gene∣rally there is found plenty of waters in all mines and quarries, which being of near kind to the lapidescent quality (by which stones are generated) do sup∣ply the veins of those quarries with constant moisture, thereby assisting them against that gritling friability, which exposeth them to corruption, when ta∣ken forth of their native places. As to the point in hand (craving a favourable permission at the hands of the learned to speak in an allusive way); In like manner, the Lord Jesus is not only a solid rock, but a living rock, a rock that hath a fountain of living water in it, andExod. 17.6. Num. 20.11. flowing from it. He is that spiritual, living rock, which1 Cor. 10.4. followed the Israëlites in the wildernesse: so called by a metaphor taken from living creatures, that have a loco-motive faculty: In which place the Apostle is to be understood of the water which issued forth of the rock, that in a constant stream flowing from itMede. Vol. 1. p. 558. followed them in their several mansions, as they passed through that howling wildernesse. The first time that we read of water issuing out of a rock, was at Rephidim their 11th mansion, which sa∣tisfied their thirst and extinguished their present murmurs. Now it's evi∣dent that the water came gushing forth out of a rock inDeut. 9.21. mount Horeb,Exod. 17.6. and yet that mountain is the place of their 12th station; at which place also the Law was given, and the powder of their goldenDeut. 9.21. Calf was cast into the brook of water that descended out of that Moun. But herein Bellonius in his Itinerary observations (who carfully searched those parts) doth help us, in that he acquaints his Reader, that in this wildernesse of Sinai, there is a large tract of mountaines called by the same name; extending them∣selves a great length, and in one place arising into two craggy tops (like Par∣nassus in Phocis): one whereof is called Sinai particularly, giving deno∣mination to the wildernesse; and the other, Horeb: by both which the range of hills are promiscuously and interchangeably calld. He relates also that at this day, there is a ill of water sliding down from that hill: which whither it be the same that was opened by Moses at Gods appointment, who can tell? But we see by Scripture, that the water which Moses fetcht out of the rocky mountain of Horeb, for the people in Rephidim the 11th station; is recorded to have drunk-in the golden powder of their image in the 12th station, which sta∣tions possibly might be but little asunder. But if Alush, the 10th station should be Ptolomies, , and Jerom's Elusa, in his Hilarion; or if Rephidim should be Ptolomies, &De bell. Jud. l. 5. c. 14. ser. Ruff. p. 903. Josephus his , or Massah his , there will prove a very great journey for the Israëlites to march, before they came from that side of the Sinai mountaines westward whence the water flowed, to the great and ragged rock where the Law was given in their 12th station. All which I have hither∣to
suggested, a little to further the sense of that place of Paul before-cited, which according to the insinuation of our Reverend translators (adding [them] to followed] seems to carry this sense, That a stream of waters from the first smitten rock, followed them in that dry, sandy, and barren desert to refresh the congregation of Israel. But to let that inquiry passe at present: we are sure that our blessed spiri∣tual rock, the Lord Jesus doth supply the living stones of his building, with living water flowing from his blessed side. Who, though taken out of the Quarry of humane nature, and placed at the bottome of the sacred building of his Church; is inspired with a divine vitality, and hath received this gift from the FatherJoh. 5.26. to have life in himself, and to communicate of this life unto his members,Joh. 10.10. that they may have it more abundantly. On this living rock, as on the head of the corner, is the Church of God founded, and all the members do come to him as lively stones, so called by Peter in the forecited place; by reason of a new forme, life, or vertue infused into them, and flowing from their union with Christ. Therefore is it, that we read in the Prophet Ezekiel, that from under theEzek. 47.1. threshold of the Temple, even from this foundation-stone there said, that holy man of God did see in a vision, waters issuing forth in great abundance: which are to be in∣terpreted of the Spirit, which Christ, after his departure out of this world,Joh. 7.39. would send down among his Disciples. So that these Temple-stones being drawn out of theIsa. 51.1. pit of nature, and hewn by a gracious hand out of the old rebellious rock of Adam, are becomeEzek. 11.19, & 36, 26. fleshy and living stones, and are situated upon Christ, the grand foundation of his Church. Who though they have most happily lost that native vitality unto sin, which cleaved to them in the quarry of corrupt nature; yet now by their implantation into Christ, receive a new and spiritual life. The stones, which Deucalion and Pyrrha cast over their heads, after the great deluge, are called byComment in Iliad. 1. Romae 1550. Eustathius , quickened or enlivened stones. The weaving instruments also feigned by Homer, to be made of stone, whereon the Nymphs did make purple webs within their cave, are expounded byDe antr. Nymph. Romae 1630. Porphyry to be meant of bones and flesh, which by these goddesses were framed into living bodies, in that Den which mystically represented the Universe. But yet allowing these fables, or at least the truths shadowed by them, the stones spoken of are animated only with humane or mortal life: whereas the stones that we are treating of, which are laid upon Christ, and fixed in him the head of the Church, do receive from him a life which is spiritual and eternal. Seeing then, the Lord Jesus only is the foundation-stone of the Churches welfare, both in grace and glory: which God hath laid in mount Zion, at the bottome of this sacred building: let us esteem it a vain thing to seek him in any place upon Earth, but in his Temple, the Church; wherein he dwells and converses with his people by his Spirit.Luk. 2.27. Simeon andVer. 38. Anna with Mary the Mother of our Lord, according to the flesh; where do they meet with Christ but in this holy place? The two former having bin long expectants, and waiters for the consolation of Israel, at last found Him whom their souls loved, when presented before the Lord in his Temple. The Virgin Mary likewise having sorrowfully sought him in other places, for three daies together, at last met with him in theVer. 46. Temple, doing his Father's businesse. He that was theHag. 2.7. desire of all Nations, through whom alone both Jews and Gentiles, can expect restauration to the favour of God, would then more fully performe the promises of the new Cove∣nant of grace to his people, when he shouldMal. 3.1. come into his Temple. The Dove-like spouse, finds her safest and sweetest repose in theCant. 2.14. Clefts of this rock, in the secret places of the staires of the Temple-Tower. Nay, the
Sparrows and Swallows of the Gentiles, who formerly wereEph. 2.12. without Christ and without God in the World, have now found an house, yea, and nests for themselves, where they may lay theirPsal. 84.3. young; even thine Al∣tars O Lord of Hosts, our God and our King. The kingdome of heaven from a graine of mustard-seed, is shott up into aLuk. 13.19. great tree: so that those birds, which formerly lived according to the course of this World, according to theEph. 2.2. Prince of the power of the aire, do now lodge and sing in its branches. But to retreat to the former Metaphor: This is the noble stone of the corner, unto which the Church and all its particular members are fastned by the cement of Faith and Love. The union whereof is undiscernable by common and carnal eyes, not unlike the stones of the Typical Temple, which Josephus reports to have bin so admirably laid, and fastned with such rare artifice, that the junctures could not be perceived: as if the whole building had bin made one intire stone, and that not unlike to the Helio-Selenus, a precious stone mentioned byArt. Mirab. l. 4. c. 45. p. 694. Gregory of Tholouze, that shews the Synod or Conjunction of the two great luminaries, the Sun and the Moon: Christ the Sun of righteousnesse, and the Church the Moon of the Gospel-hea∣vens. Whosoever then erres in respect of this1 Cor. 3.10.11. &c. foundation stone, must of ne∣cessity erre likewise most grossely in the whole super-structure. We may observe then, that the builders of this World, who own an other Head, laying aside this Corner-stone, do consequently erre in the deep and profound doctrine of election, seeing we areEph. 1.5. predestinated unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ. The foundation of God remaineth sure, having this seal,2 Tim. 2.19. THE LORD KNOWETH who are his, even that such who name the name of Christ, should depart from iniquity. Those will erre also in the doctrine of Baptism, seeing we are to beAct. 19.5. baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. They will erre further in the doctrine of holy and spiritual-good works, which flow only from the principle of a new na∣ture, united unto Christ by Faith. ForJoh. 15.5. without him we can do no∣thing. They erre likewise in the doctrine of the Resurrection. For this is the belief that we are to hold firmely and inviolably, that ifRom. 6.8. &c. we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with him: who willJoh. 6.40, 54. raise us up at the last day. Finally, such will erre in the excellent doctrine of eternal salvation. For it isAct. 15.11. through the grace of the Lord Jesus, that we shall be saved. The Mysteries of the body of the Covered Building, called The Temple, in a strict sense. HAving finished the inquiry about the Foundation in some mea∣sure, in the foregoing discourse: It is high time now to work upon the Body of the Temple it self, or the covered building which was extant above ground; endeavouring with all sobriety and submission, to search out the mysteries contained within those famous walls. Concerning which, I shall crave leave to speak a few words in general, and afterward descend to treat of the three particular parts, included in it.
The immensity of the Divine Essence, and the most radiant excellency of Gods glorious Majesty, which no creature can behold in its full purity and live; cannot be contained and immured withinAct. 17.24. Temples made with hands. Wherefore it is observable that holy John relates that he sawRev. 21.22. no Temple in the new and heavenly Jerusalem, that is above: For the LORD GOD Almighty and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. Yet it was his own good and holy pleasure, thatAct. 7.47. Solomon should build him an House, wherein as to his manifestative presence, he was resolved to dwell more especially among the Children of Israel, his chosen people. In these Gospel-dayes (under which we live through divine goodnesse) when the worship of God is farre more spiritual, though his Majesty hath not appointed a peculiar City, wherein to place his name: yet is it not unlawful even in these times (but very commendable and useful) to erect material Temples, wherein the solemnities of Gospel-Ordinances may be celebrated, and the congregations of his faithful people may more commodiously meet together. Without which persons (you read the words ofCom∣ment. in Act. 17. part 2. p. 31. Streso) being there assembled, they have no more holinesse in them, than a Court or Palace: neither is theJoh. 4.21. &c. Prayer, or the Congregation lesse holy, though convented together in a field, than in such a building, if necessity should so require. Of old indeed,Mat. 23.17. the gold was sanctified by the Temple, and theVer. 19. gift by the Altar. But now 'its the1 Pet. 1.7. gold of Faith, andHeb. 13.15. the Sacrifice of Praise; which must sanctifie the Temple: If so be there is any metaphorical orMede's holinesse of Churches. p. 46. relative holinesse, which may safely, and without danger be ascribed to it. Especially at such a time, when the cloud of Gods graci∣ous and evangelical presence shall fill the Tabernacle, where his Saints and people are assembled in his name and fear. But as to the antient Temple, there is no scruple or doubt to be made of a degree of sanctity formerly attending it, different from that of ours, where∣in we meet for the management of divine services. Though for certain we ought to conceive so candidly and charitably of all men that bear the honour∣able name of Christians; that there can scarce be a person found so stupid and senselesse, as to think that there was any real inherent holinesse in those beautiful stones of King Solomon's building: It being most absurd, and irra∣tional to place so divine a quality in Subjects inanimate and artificial. But if we understand the holinesse to be ascribed to it, upon the account, and un∣der the notion of consecration; as things or persons which are separated from profane or civil use and dedicated to God: we may then safely allow of that famous place, that it was in the most solemne splendid and heroick manner imaginable, devolved over to Gods holy Majesty by King Solo∣mon. If again, we shall consider that place, as which God himself did choose, and pick out from among all the dwellings of Jacob, to be the1 Chron. 28.2. Psal. 99.5, & 132, 7. Lam. 2.1. footstool of his holy presence among his people, and in which he was pleased to dwell for many generations, smelling a savour of rest in their sacrifices, and de∣lighting in communion with them; so long as they kept up the beauty and lustre of his divine worship. If we consider moreover, that this was the very place, whitherPsal. 122.4. the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord, three times in the year: and that there, the choisest and most fragrant flowers of legal wor∣ship did smell most sweetly, even in the Courts of that most famous buil∣ding: We may safely hence apply to it the words of holy Jacob concerning Bethel.Gen. 38.17. This was none other then the house of God, this was the gate of Heaven. Finally, when we seriously call to mind the admirable divine Mysteries, which were engraven upon its stones, enammelled upon its gold,
carved in its Cedar, infolded within its doors, retired behind its veils, and laid up in its most holy Ark: we must not, we cannot, but break forth into solemn and joyful songs of its praise. Seeing that this Mountain of holiness was not onlyPsal. 48.1, 2. beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole Earth; but that God himself was also known for a refuge within her stately Palaces, and sacred Chambers: The divine signification whereof, I shall proceed to explain with all submissive reverence, and adoration of the Divine Majesty, residing within those Mystical walls, most ardently imploring thatDan. 2.28, 29, 47. God of gods, and Lord of Kings, (who is the onely revealer of secrets) to cause theAct. 9.18. scales of ignorance to fall from the eyes of my understanding, and to grant me graciously the visions of truth within his Sanctuary. The covered body of this Sacred Building, I shall then proceed to treat of in its three members, or divisions following. 1. The Porch. 2. The Sanctuary or holy place. 3. The Oracle or holy of holies. Of each in their distinct order. Concerning the Mysteries of the stately Porch of the Temple. BY the Porch is to be understood that stately forefront of the Tem∣ple, which sacred mount Olivet, and the Eastern parts of the World. The situation whereof toward the East was therefore injoyned by God, asMolin. de Altar. & Sacrif. p. 94. some apprehend to distinguish the Jews from the manners and customes of the Heathens; whose Temples generally were so built, that the Adyta or more sacred and inward parts, where their idols stood, were in the East end of their buildings, and the entrances or gates were westward, that their Gods might appear to them, as arising out of the East: and there∣fore the Prophet Ezekiel receiving a vision of the Idolaters in his daies, be∣held 25 menEzek. 8.16. with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and their faces toward the East, worshipping the rising-Sun. Hence is it, that the Christians of old did worship toward the East, not in imitation of the Heathens whom they abhorred, but in hatred to the Jews their other fatal enemies; who constantly worshipped towards the West, according to the site of the Mosaical Tabernacle, and of this Temple of Solomon. But to enlarge upon this point any further, I shall deferre till I am arrived to the East gates of the Courts of the Temple, whereof in their due place hereafter. As to the Mystical signification of this present part of the building, (now before us); The holy Scripture doth no where inlighten us in distinct and expresse termes: we must herein therefore speak only by permission and allu∣sion; not willing to passe it over in silence, because of its Connexion to the Sanctuary, and upon the account of its extraordinary magnificence, being a grand Ornament to the whole building. For if the Sanctuary (which I shall endeavour to clear up in the next place) did signifie the Church of Christ, and Gospel-communion with God in his holy Ordinances: then may this part of the edifice, as yielding admission into the Sanctuary, be expounded (according the 6th Canon before∣mentioned) of some Gospel excellencies. For as much then, as the Porch gave accesse to those, that were to enter into the Sanctuary or Holy place: who were all to passe through this pre∣vious
building which was set before the other. We may thence learn that men ought not rashly and rudely to rush and presse into participation in di∣vine Ordinances: but must be stopt a while by the intermediation of a Porch, for the preparation and setting their hearts in frame for such holy communion. We read of a mysterious Inscription upon the Gates of the Delphian Tem∣ple, situated under the famous HillHelio∣dor. Aethio∣pic. l. 2. p. 106. Edit. Franc. 1631. 8o. Parnassus, in the Country of Phocis in Greece: mentioned by Plutarch in a distinct Commentary upon it. Where after the recension of 7 several opinions concerning that famous [EI.] He fixes at last upon this definitive sentence of Ammonius,Plutarch . Edit. Hen. Steph. 1572. moral. Vol. 1. p. 697. [, &c. .] It is the self-sufficient compellation and denomination of GOD, which together with the word settles in the minde of the pronouncer; a true notion of the power of God, &c.] After a few words he goes on to tell us, that those that use it, do attribute a true, unerring and sole appellation of essence, competent to him alone. For there is nothing of essence really to be ascribed to us. Which to∣gether with many admirable and divine passages concerning the fluid nature of man, and the stable and unchangeable essence of God, gives a rise for a conception, that the ancient Heathens (before the World was totally in∣volved in the mists of darknesse and stupid idolatry) did retain some me∣morials of the RevelationDickins. Delph. Phaen. p. 97. of Gods name to Moses in that famous place of Exodus, where the Lord commanded him to tell the Israelites that Exod. 3.14. I am that I am, &c. had sent him to them. Ehejeh, or as Plutarch afterwards calls him, (d) , Iejus as the one and onely God.Plut. ibid. p. 699. Besides this Title at Delphos, There was antiently likewise at thePorphyr. de abstin. l. 2. p. 155. Temple Epidaurus, an inscription in these words, He to this fragrant Temple hastes in vain, Who doth not in his breast chast flames maintain. . And that's Chastity befitting a Temple (saith Porphyry in that place) when our thoughts are onely exercised and busied about holy matters. But whether or no there were any such like inscription on the front of this famous Porch of the Temple, though I am not able to resolve by reason of Scripture-silence [where as Josephus relates of pillars standing in one of the walls of the Temple in latter ages of 3 cubits high, ingraven with certain letters declaringDe bell. Judaic. l. 6. cap. 6. sec. Ruffin. p. 916. , that no stranger might be admitted within that holy place.] Yet this I am sure of, that the counsel of Paul is most safe and wholesome, that he that cometh to God, and draweth nigh in a way of holy worshipHeb. 11.6. should believe, , that HE IS, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Whether no the antient Temple had any such inscription of an Ehejeh upon it or not, to bring to mind the unutterable essence of God, whose face they sought that drew nigh to him in his sacred services; it is not much material, seeing now it is not in the mountain of Samaria, not in Jerusalem that God will be worshipped: but we must endeavour to preserve the memorials of his fear, and the indelible Characters of his infinite essence upon our hearts; when
we come to worship him in spirit and truth. For theJoh. 4.23. Father now un∣der the Gospel seeketh such to worship him. We must remember to cast a watchful eye upon theEccl. 5.1. feet of our affecti∣ons, before we approach to the house of God and seriously consider, whe∣ther we have taken straight steps in the paths of his commandements: and whether they are set in due order, and cleansed2 Chr. 30.19. according to the pre∣paration of the Sanctuary. For we mustHeb. 10.22. draw near with a true heart in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, viz. our conversations cleansed with the water of the spirit in the laver ofTit. 3.5. regeneration: as the antient Priests of the Temple did wash their bodies in the water of the brazen-sea, that stood in the inward Court, before they entred the Sanctuary to officiate in their sa∣cred functions. We are to observe further, that there were several steps, by which they were to ascend into this Porch; before they could enter the holy place: to shew the divine elevation of the souls of spiritual worshippers, even as Jacobs ladder had several rundles; which the ascending Angels were to climb before they could arriveGen. 28.13. near to God, who stood at the top thereof in that mysticall Vision: In like manner, in respect to our drawing nigh to God in divine worship, Soul-exalting humiliation, deep and serious Medi∣tation, searching Examination, self-judging condemnation by reason of our infinite unworthinesse to converse with so holy a Majesty, together with ar∣dent Ejaculations of our hearts in prayer, toward heaven his holy place, are the several steps by which we mount up into the Porch of Praeparation, that gives us admission into fellowship and communion with God, in his Sanct∣uary-worship. We read concerning Peter and John,Act. 3.1. [] that they ascended or went up, to the Temple at the hour of prayer, (grant leave to an allusion) thereby to shadow forth the elevation and lifting up of our minds in the heavenly Climax or Scale of praeparation, for the spiritual worship of his Ma∣jesty, in the assembly of his Saints. These Stairs or steps, in their extent from North to South, were of suffici∣ent length to admit many Priests in a joynt ascension up to the Porch, and so into the Sanctuary, if the occasional Service did so require, (as at the time2 Chr. 26.17. of King Uzziah's intrusion into the Priestly function, we read of the High-Priest and fourscore of the inferiour, at once with the King at the Incense Altar): The convenient copiousnesse of which Ascent, may hint to us, that in Gos∣pel daies many, with the voice of gladnesse, shall say one to another, Let usPs. 122.1. go, yea,Isa. 2.3. let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and He will teach us of his waies, and we will walk in his Paths. Which places, together with many other in Scripture, may reflect upon all the spacious and stately ascents at the severall Gates of the Courts, and of the Mount Moriah itself, where the legall Services were performed. This Porch (into which we have now brought our devout Reader) is ge∣nerally conceived to have been open and without doores on all sides on which it was not annexed to the body of the Temple, possibly intimating to us the open-heartednesse of God's Grace and Mercy under the Gospel, the freenesse of his Goodnesse, inviting all poor distressed Sinners to draw nigh to Him, so be it they make their addresses in a holy and pure Evangelicall man∣ner. ForProv. 9.1, &c. Wisdom hath hewen out her seven Pillars, hath built her House, hath slain her Beasts, hath mingled her Wine, and furnished her Table of Shew-bread within the Sanctuary, hath sent forth her maidens of honour, the Virgin-Embassadours of her pleasure, to cry with a loud voice, Whoso is simple let him turn in hither?Isa. 55.1. Ho, Every one that thirsteth,Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the
Bride say COME. For the Gates of the Temple of theRev. 21.25. new Jerusalem are never shut, yielding constant admission for those that are saved out of the Nati∣ons to walk in the light thereof. The costly and beautifull gilding, that adorned this holy Entrance, deno∣ted the Splendor and admirable Excellency of divine and spirituall worship, even at our first initiation into Society with God in his blessed Ordinances. Oh! how much of God doth a humble and holy Soul find within him, when he doth but sett his heart aright toward his testimonies? What sweet expe∣rienced tastes of God's goodnesse hath such a Soul enjoyed? With what di∣vine irradiations upon his understanding hath he been enlightned and enlive∣ned, when coming (sensible of his own emptinesse and unworthinesse) to hold spiritual converse with his holy Majesty. The veryPsal. 119.130. Entrance of his Word giveth light and a blessed understanding to the Simple. The fear of the Lord is thePsal. 111.10. Beginning of Wisdom, when we approach near the Foot-stool of his holinesse in solemn Worship, even in the very en∣trance of this blessed work. The great God having declared, that he will be sanctified by all them thatLev. 10.3. draw nigh to him, and by all the people he will be glorified. The extraordinary height of this stately and pompous building, (the Porch of the Temple) arising even to an 120 Cubits, as we have heard before in the former description, so famous for its pleasant and capacious Prospect before remembred; shews forth to us the excellent sublimity of divine contempla∣tion: Wherein the Souls of heavenly Worshippers being intensly conver∣sant, look down upon the Earth as beneath a Saint, and contemnMat. 4.8. all the Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them. The Heart of a Saint is most humble and lowly, who though exalted into divine communion, yet is the most noble, heroick, high-minded person in the whole world: being such a one as whose heart cannot be filled with the vast Empire of the whole Globe, or the Dominion of all the conceited and imagined worlds in the Universe:Col. 3.1. He whose affections are set upon things above, is like unto the Church that treadethRev. 12.1. the Moon under her feet. Upon the Top of this stately Tower (which the side walls of the Porch sustained), called by the Evangelist MatthewMat. 4.5. , The Pina∣cle or wing of the Temple, the blessed body of our Lord possibly wasD. Lightf. Temp. p. 58. ar∣rived, when he triumphed over the Devil, there tempting him to presumpti∣on. He was now it seems raised by the power of Satan (permitted to him by God) above the place of the Solemnities of sacred Worship: which may yield us this glance by the way, That it is a diabolical Tentation, a hellish delusion, when any poor Souls are elevated and lifted up in their hearts above the insti∣tuted Ordinances, wherein God hath appointed that we should worship him under the Gospel. Besides, it exhibits to our consideration the extream danger of spirituall Pride, when we are even exalted to heaven by the means of Grace. Our dear Lord, in his transaction with, and conquest over Satan, yielded us an Example, that as he himself did not, so neither might we dare to presume upon the protection of, or communion with Angels, unlesse we walk in all thePsal. 91.11. waies of God, who hath promised therein to keep us; and because he hath set his love upon us,Ver. 14. he will deliver us, and set us on high, because we have known his name.
The Mysteries of the Sanctuary or Holy Place. NOw let us enter the Gates of the Sanctuary,Ps. 118.19. the Gates of Righ∣teousnesse, Let us enterPs. 100.4. his Gates with thanksgiving and praise, let thePs. 24.7. everlasting Doores fly open, that we may see the King of Glory in this his sacred Palace, that we mayPs. 27.4. behold the beauty of the Lord and enquire in his Temple. Angelicall words (though pillar'd, with the firmest Reason, adorned with the choisest Gold of Rhetorick, andCant. 4.10. paved with melting Affections) are not Chariots majesticall enough to carry within them those Royall conceptions, which become those Mysteries that sate in state within these holy Chambers. Incomparably glorious was that place of old, wherein the unapproachable Majesty of Heaven was pleased to vouchsafe his presence, of favour and grace, among dust and ashes, to take up a habitation among Worms, and to receive Homage and Adoration from Creatures, in comparison with him, lesse thenIsa. 40.17. nothing and vanity. Yet so pleased it the infinite and incomprehensible God, so far to condiscend to the workmanship of his own hands, as to keep house in the midst of his peo∣ple, whom he was pleased to choose for himself out of all Nations, and within this sacred building to command several Golden Utensils to be made, and placed there for his use, as if he did indeed dwell amongst them. Here were the ten Tables of Shew-bread set before him continually: There the Lamps of the ten Golden Candlesticks burned, with pure Oyl Olive continu∣ally feeding their radiant flames: Above stood the golden Altar of Incense, sending forth its fragrant odours, while the King was held in hisCant. 7.5. Galle∣ries; to whom, while sitting at his Table, theCant. 1.12. Spikenard sendeth forth its rich Perfume. Whoever drawes nigh, but to the contemplation of these rare and profound Mysteries therein couched, let him pull off theExo. 3.5. shooes of his worldly Conversation and corrupt Affections: For the place whereon he stands is holy Ground: which is the earnest and ardent prayer of the un∣worthiest of his Servants, before he enters upon so solemn and sacred a work as this before us. In former Lines it hath been declared, That the Temple in generall sig∣nified the Gospel-Church; I hope also it shall appear in succeeding passages, That the Oracle, or most holy place, did signify and shadow forth Heaven, or the place and state of Saints in Glory: It rests then, that the Body of the Temple, called [] in a more eminent and yet usual manner [1 Kin. 6.7. The TEMPLE], but more properly and strictly styled, the Sanctuary, should decipher and exhibit the Type of the Church Militant upon Earth, and con∣versing with God in his divine Ordinances. His Majesty of old had ac∣quainted his people of Israël, that he would setLev. 26.11, 12. his Tabernacle among them, and walk in the midst of them; which was most graciously performed from the daies of Moses to the Reign of Solomon. At which time he de∣clares himself evidently, that it was his holy will to well in a fixed Temple at Jerusalem, promising that he would1 Kin. 8.29. place his name there. Now, that the glorious Fabrick of the Temple did mystically shadow forth the spi∣rituall House of the Evangelicall Church, the Apostle Paul will come in as a clear witnesse, in that solemn appeal to the Hearts and Consciences of his Corinthians, [1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spi∣rit of God dwelleth in you?] Yea further, he makes every particular Saint to
be a little Sanctuary for the Holy Spirit to dwell in, as may appear by that expostulation: [What, know ye not, that your Body is the1 Cor. 6.19. Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you?] Likewise, that the Church of God in general, is the2 Cor. 6.16. Temple of the Living God: alledging by way of Testimony, that place in Leviticus before cited. In another place the same pen-man declares, that the Building being fitly framed together, and fixe upon Christ, the choise Foundation, doth grow into a HolyEph. 2.21. Temple in the Lord. Other where he exhibits the infallible Characteristick o the Grand Antichrist to be this, that as2 Thes. 2.4. God he sits in the Temple of God, under the Gospel times, Lording it over the Church, and usurping the seat of Christ. In fine, giving Instructi∣ons to young Timothy, by an excellent Epistle, he tells him the end of his writing was, that he might know how to behave himself in the1 Tim. 3.15. House of God, which is the Church of the Living God. Other places might be added, but these may suffice for the present purpose: To which, as a Coronis, let me subjoyne a passage out of the Learned Jerom to the same effect, censuring such as doted too much upon material Temples; and were too superstitiously addicted to Pilgrimages unto the Holy Land. [Ad Pau∣linum. Tom. 1. Epist. 13. Qui dicunt Templum Domi∣ni, Templum Domini, audiant ab Apostolo, Vos est is Templum Domini, & Spiritus sanctus habitat in vobis; & de Hiersolymis, & de Britanniâ aequaliter patet aula coelestis.] They that cry, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, let them hear the Apostle; Ye are the Temple of the Lord, and the Holy Spirit dwelleth in you. The Court of Heaven is open to them that dwell in Britain, as well as at Jerusalem: To conclude, I shall add the worthy advice of Gregory Nyssen, which he gave to such as conceited some excellency, and rare merit, or the attainment of some more then ordinary accomplishment, if they took but a journey to Jerusalem. [Greg. Nyss. . Cum not. Molinaei Hanov. 1607. p. 14. , &c. But forbearing the tran∣script of the Greek, I shall give it in English as follows: [Let not therefore our Example offend any, but let our perswasion rather find Credit, because we give counsel about those things, which we have seen with our eyes. For we, both before we came to that place, and since also, have con∣fessed Christ to be the true God, neither is our Faith either lessened, or en∣creased by it. We knew the assumption of the humane nature from the Vir∣gin before we saw Bethlehem. And we believed his Resurrection from the dead before we saw the Sepulchre; and we have confessed his real Ascention into Heaven, before we saw the mount of Olives. But this profit onely have we reaed by our journy, to know by comparison, that our holy things are farre beyond these external places. Wherefore you that fear the Lord, praise him in the places where ye live. For change of place doth not effect a nigher ap∣proaching unto God: but where ever thou art, God will come to thee, if so be the habitation of thy soul be found to be such, as that the Lord may dwell and walk in thee. But if thy inner-man be full of wicked thoughts, although thou wert upon Golgotha, although upon mount Olivet, although thou wert under the moniment of the Resurrection; thou art as farre from the recei∣ving of Christ into thee, as they that acknowledge not the first principles. Perswade therefore (O Beloved) the Brethren to undertake a pilgrimage from the Body unto the Lord, and not from Cappadocia unto Pale∣stine. Having thus treated in general, let us now descend to some particulars, and in the first place crave leave to speak concerning the stately stones of the Temple, which were laid in the side-walls of the Sanctuary: concerning which, it is the common opinion that they were of pure white polished mar∣ble, denoting the beauty, preciousness and durability of the Saints.
The Lowest rank of stones, which were more immediately laid upon the Foundation, (before spoken of) are conceived to represent the Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of the Church. For as in the new Jerusalem, the spirit of God expresly saith, that theRev. 21.14. 12 Foundations of the City-wall had written on them, the names of the 12 Apostles, of the Lamb: So likewise in the holy Mystical Temple, we read that the Saints are built upon theEph. 2.20, 21. Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. So that, although the Lord Jesus be the maine and principal Foundation of the Church and all its members, whether Ministerial or others: Yet the Officers of the Church being compared with those that are to be taught and instructed in the Principles of Faith, are termed Foundations also: that is, Doctrinal, not the essential and real Foundation of Saints acceptance with God: Such is Christ Jesus onely. We shall read therefore the Apostles to be termed Builders in respect to Christ the chief Foundation; So Paul com∣pares himself to a1 Cor. 3.10. wise Master Builder, and then according to that Meta∣phor, the severalHeb. 6.1. Fundamental Points of Faith may be compared to the principal stones in the Building. Nay the Saints themselves that conferre about the things of God, are said to Build up, or1 Thes. 5.11. edifie one another. But to lay that aside: great is the consolation which the Prophet Isaiah bringeth to the Church in that memorable promise, given forth to her afflicted members, that herIsa. 54.11. Foundations should be laid with Saphires, her Windows with Agates, her Gates with Carbuncles, and her Borders with pleasant Stones: For all her Children shall be taught of the Lord. In another place the Psalmist promises that her Daughter shall be likePsal. 144.12. corner-stones, polished after the Similitude of a Palace. Judicious Calvin upon the 13th verse of the former place in Isaiah saies, that from thence it is Evident, that by the precious stones there mentioned, the Prophet is to be interpreted [non de doctrinâ, sed de hominibus, ex quibus spirituale aedificium Ecclesiae construitur] not of doctrines, but of men, out of whom the spiritual house of the Church is framed. This sweet pro∣mise doth seem to intimate that God would raise such interpreters, men pickt out of thousands, Sons of consolation, such as know how to speak a word in season to a weary soul; that the afflicted people, and tossed with Tempests should be inlightned, comforted, strengthned, and bottomed with strong consolation, by the power of the spirit of God in their Ministery. That men should be compared to stones in a Building is not unusual: the former being the parts of a political, the latter of an artificial house. And there∣in likewise principal men are usually resembled to Foundations andGal. 2.9. Pillars, as James, Peter, and John, are so set forth by the Apostle Paul. It is obser∣vable also concerning the Nazarites, a sort of people devoted and dedicated unto God, that by the Prophet Jeremy in his sad doleful Elegies for the di∣stressed state of the Church, they are comparedLam. 4.7. to Rubies and Saphires: Nay, the spiritual Nazarites, who have given up their names to Christ, and by Faith do esteem him the most precious, are commended by Peter, for coming to him as1 Pet. 2.5. lively stones: who like another Amphion doth by the pleasant harp of his Gospel-voice, allure these spiritual stones unto the Buil∣ding up of the walls of his Holy Sanctuary. It is fabled (as I remember) by the Poets that the walls of antient Troy were built in stately manner by Apollo and Neptune, with Sonorous or Ringing Marble. The stones of the Sanctuary are situated in such excellent Method and Order, that it is admirable for spiritual eyes to behold, their lives do in harmonious anthems reply to God's precepts, and their mouths break forth into singing to the glory of that God, whoPsal. 22.3. inhabits the praises of Israel. Insomuch that his servants take pleasure in these stones of Zion, and favour the very dust thereof: such as God himself will build up, and frame into a Holy Temple for his honour to
dwell in. Indeed by nature theLev. 24.40. &c. Plague of Leprosy is spread over, and hath eaten into all the stones of our Tabernacle: but he purgeth and purifi∣eth and cleanseth them by the blood of our High Priest that is sprinkled up∣on them. By nature these stones are as hard and impenetrable as theZec. 7.12. very Adamant, the hearts of men are as inflexible and unmalleable as theJob 41.24. nether mil-stone: yet out of such doth he raise up believingMat. 3.9. Children un∣to Abraham. Many of these stones, as well as the other materials of the Temple (such as Firre, Cedar, and Gold) are related to have bin fetcht from Tyre,1 Kin. 5.14, 15, 17. Lebanon and Parvaim: to signifie to us that the Lord Jesus should in Gospel times collect the members of his spiritual Church, from the remotest Ilands, and Kingdoms of the whole World. All these precious and excellent stones that are thus fixed upon, and joyned to Christ the prime Foundation, by the Coement of Faith, unto the Apostles doctrinal Foundations by the coement of obedience, and one to another by love, when once they are fitly set and com∣pacted together by the line and plummet of the Word; do hold communi∣on one with another in the mystical body, byJam. 5.16. mutual prayer,Heb. 3.13. exhorta∣tion,Gal. 6.1, 2. meek reprehensions, and bearing one anothers burthen, and so do fulfil the Law of Christ, and obey the new Commandement of Love, whereas a stranger intermedles not with this their joy. But whensoever it pleaseth the Author of Faith to hew some others, and make them fit and square for this excellent Building; this glorious Sanctu∣ary hath divers doors prepared for the admission of such into their spiritual fellowship. These Doors we read to have bin made of Firr Tree, and hung up∣on posts of Olive Tree; They were likewise curiously carved with Cherubims, Palme-Trees, and open flowers. Some are pleased to apply these doors to Christ himself, seeing our blessed Lord is recorded to liken himself to aJoh. 10.7, 9. Door, by which the Sheep of his Pasture do enter in. He indeed hath an authoritative commission from the Father to give unto the Elect, an admissi∣on unto Holy communion with Himself. Here though we will not exclude this allusive interpretation of a door, hinted by our Lord himself: yet may we safely apply the several ends for which doors are erected, in a more gene∣ral way, unto the Sanctuary about which we are now treating. The ordinary ends and uses of doors in Buildings are, 1. To give admission to such, whose propriety in the house doth challenge lodging and mansion within, 2. To exclude all others, who are strangers to the Family. And 3. To preserve those persons and things in safety and security, which are contained within the house. In like manner the Church is compared to anCan. 4.12. enclosed Garden, a Fountain sealed as well for the secure habitation of Saints, as for the unac∣quaintednesse of others with her state and condition.Isa. 26.1. Salvation hath God appointed for Walls and Bulwarks to defend Her. He hath strengthenedPsa. 147.13. the bars of Her Gates, and bMessed her Children within her: He hath also commanded her Gates sometimes to be opened,Isa. 26.2. that the Righteous Nati∣on, which keepeth the truth may enter in. These doors then may signifie the initiation of members into communion with the Church, that are taken out of the World by the mighty Power of God upon their hearts: together with the exclusion of such as areEp. 2, 12. aliens from the Common-wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise. For there shall in no wiseRev. 21.37. enter, any thing that defileth or worketh abomination; but such onely as are written in the Lamb's Book of Life. For without areRev. 22.15. Dogs, Sor∣cerers, and the rest of the impure and wicked rabble of the World. Violence shall not be heard in the Land of Immanuel: but the Church shall call Her Walls Salvation, and Her GatesIsa. 60.18. praise.
In ancient times, the Lord is remembred to have come down in aExod. 33.9. cloudy Pillar at the door of the Tabernacle, when he spake with Moses, Aa∣ron, and Miriam, and afterwards at another time, in the same manifestation, when heDeut. 31.15. treated with Moses and Joshua. In following Ages the Temple also was filled with the glorious1 Kin. 8.10. cloud of his presence. As to the first, we read that when ever the Children of Israël arose from their stations and travelled towards Canaan,Exod. 40.36. Num. 9.17. the cloud was taken up from off the Ta∣bernacle: Noting to us, that when ever the Gospel-Church should take its progresse towards heaven under its spiritual Ordinances, that the mystical cloud should be taken away: then are we promised to behold with open face,2 Cor. 3.18. and shall be changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. In respect to the latter, the presence of God in the Temple, we have a most excellent promise, thatIsa. 4.5. the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies, a Cloud, and a Smoak by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the Glory shall be a defence. A Cloud to comfort his people, andExod. 14.19, 20. to obscure them from their Aegyptian Enemies, a Pillar of flaming Fire to illuminate them in their way, and to keep off the wild beasts of this world from them. In which respect he hath promised to be aZec. 2.5. wall of Fire round about Jeru∣salem to protect and defend them. Of old, none but consecratedExod. 35.19. Priests might enter into this holy Sanctuary, whereof we are now taking a View: If the King himself presumed to enter, he was2 Chr. 26.18. smitten with Leprosy. Josephus in one place bewails the sad and prostrate Sate of the Tem∣ple, when Pompey, and some of his crew, entred those sacred Doors, and cast their profane Glances upon those mysterious Ornaments; my, they were so bold as to enter also into the Holy of Holyes, [Joseph. de ell. Judaic. l. 1.6.5.  (saith he) .] In which place it was lawful for the High-Priest onely to be present. But it may be observed, that the affairs of that great Captain did afterward decline towards the evening of his former Splendor, and the shadows of Envy and Opposition to lengthen upon him, till at length the Sun of his Grandeur sate in the darkness of Egypt, wherePlut. in Pomp. he was slain, and all his Glory was entombed in Mount Casius in the South part of Syria, asGeogr. l. 16. p. 700. edit. Casaub. Strabo &Lib. 22. p. 422. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1632. Mercellinus testifie. Which if true, 'tis somewhat observable that he should be buried, as a far off from his own Country, so in the borders of that Land, where he had committed so great an offence. That profanation of the Temple was very great, when Persons did enter those sacred walls beyond the Line of their function; and therefore good Jeremy did sorely lament a∣mong other Outrages, committed by Nebuchadnezzar's Army of old, this particularly, that theLam. 1.10. Heathen were entred into the Sanctuary; of whom, God had commanded that they should not come into the Con∣gregation. But now God hath consecrated to himself a wholeExod. 19.6. Kingdom of Priests, all the people of God under the Gospel being made a1 Pet. 2.5, 9. royal Priest-hood, are exalted into the State of Kings and Priests unto God, to offer up spi∣ritual Sacrifices acceptable to him by Jesus Christ. Not but that still there remains, even through the whole length and duration of the Gospel-Age, a distinct ministerial Office, residing in those, who are regularly set apart unto that excellent function, according to the appointment of the Spirit of God in the new Testament. Their duty it is to attend upon the sacred work of dressing the Lamps of Knowledge, of setting forth the Propitiation bread of Life, and of offering up the Saints prayers in the Church of Christ. Where∣fore, when the Saints in general are called by the honourable name of Priests, we are, in that appellation, to reflect upon the great measure of Knowledge, that in the latter daies is promised toIsa. 11.9. Hab. 2.14. cover the face of the Earth, even as
the waters do spread themselvs upon the Channels of the vast Ocean. We may further thence likewise meditate upon that great and sweet Communi∣on, which shall then intercede between Ministers and People: And lastly, forasmuch as the Services of the Priests of old did shadow forth some spiri∣tual things, which every Child of God is to perform under the Gospel: In that sense are all the Saints called Priests, as such who are continually to offer up to God spiritual Sacrifices in the Temples of their own hearts; whereof more (with God's good leave) may be spoken in the latter end of this present Chapter. To proceed, If then the Doors of the Sanctuary signified and held forth the admission of Saints into communion with Jesus Christ, by his inward and effectual Call upon their hearts: Give leave for resemblances in respect to the materials of the Doors themselvs, and the Posts whereupon they turned; the latter being made of Olive-wood, the former of Firr. The holy Scrip∣ture is pleased to set forth the Excellency of that fellowship which Saints enjoy with Christ in Ordinances, by participating of theRom. 11.17. Fatnesse of the Olive-tree, unto which they are united: and the constancy of their perseve∣rance by the ever-green fresh Verdancy of Christ's righteousnesse, through whose Sap onely is theHos. 14.8. fruit of Ephraim found, when ingrafted into him by Faith. Spiritual fruitfulnesse flowes from a principle, contrary to the ordinary course of nature: wherein the Cyon though it suck its Juyce and Nourishment from the Stock into which it is inserted, yet as to the fruit, it follows the kind of that Tree whence it was cut. But here the case is altered; for the fruit of Believers is found of the same nature with the Root from whence their Sap is communicated, and according to the Stock into which they are ingrafted and implanted. In this place I shall at present forbear to speak largely of the nature of the Firr and Olive: Seeing the Materials and Ornaments of the Doors were coincident with those of the Sanctuary within: where I shall more copious∣ly enlarge, when once we are entred into that most sacred and stately Palace. In respect to the genuine explication of the many excellent Mysteries there layd up, I shall conjoyn my ardent suit with holy David's unto theJam. 1.17. Father of Lights and thePs. 31.5. God of Truth;Ps. 43.3. O send out thy Light and thy truth: let them lead me, let them bring me to thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles. Since then we have finisht our view of the out-walls and doors, and have humbly implored a skilful and faithful Guide, Let us be incouraged to enter with reverence this Holy place, and take a strict notice of all the choise Orna∣ments within, on both sides, in the Floor, Windows, and stately Roof above. Wherein, I shall first speak apart of the Materials themselvs, and, after that, endeavour with all sobriety to search out what Mysteryes (whether Typical or by way of Allusion) may be couched under them. For as the Sanctuary, the Type; so the Church the Antitype, is allPsal. 45.13. glorious within. As to the ancient Type and its adornment, we read of great provision made of fra∣grant1 Kin. 5.6, 8, 10. Cedar, for boards to line the walls of this famous house within; Planks of Fir to lay under the Cedar boards for the Floor; wood of Olive for the Posts and Doors, and all overlayd with choise Gold, fastned with rivets or nailes of the same Metal, adorned with precious Stones, Sculptures of Cherubims, Palm-trees, and open-Flowers. Of which, to speak one word in generall; If so be the faire Marble stones (wherewith the sides of the Temple were built up to the Roof on the out-side) have been truly appli∣ed unto the Saints or Members of the Mystical Church, being called living stones by the Apostle Peter, and resembled to those of the Temple in other places of the sacred writings, penned since our Lord's Incarnation, as being infallible guides in the Application of the dark Mysteries of the old Testa∣ment:
then what can we conceive by Analogy to be more properly esteem∣ed as the true and genuine meaning of these rare and costly materials, expend∣ed upon the inside of the Sanctuary, than the various Ornaments of gifts and graces, wherewith the Church of Christ, and every particular Member, in its degree and station, is most curiously lined, and most rarely beautified? But first, of the Materials themselvs in order, and then of their particular Appli∣cation unto Saints. I shall begin with the Cedar, the first thing mentioned in Solomon's pro∣vision for the Temple, which was received from Hiram King of Tyre. A Tree of great excellency, and therefore desired of all Nations for pompous structures; Fit for an enduring Temple, forLib. 5. c. 5. Theophrastus, in his Histo∣ry of Plants, reports of them in the Catalogue of those Trees which are [] of an imputrible nature.Archit. l. 2. c. 9. Vitruvius moreover relates that the Ancients did usually anoint their books with the Oyl of Cedar, on pur∣pose to preserve them from Worms and Putrefaction.Port. Phy∣log. inl. 5. c. 1. Another writes, that the Books of King Numa (wherein were contained many Dictates of the Pythagoreans) were found safe and whole after the Revolution of 535 years, being preserved by some artificial use of Cedar, or Oyl made thereof.Isid. His∣pal. Others mention that the Temples of the antient gods of the Heathen had their beams of Cedar. Nay, the Statues of the Gods themselves were sometimes carved in Cedar. As to which,L. 13. c. 5. Pliny reports that one of Apollo, brought from Seleucia, was seen at Rome.Vitr. p. 35 Plin. l. 16. c. 40. The Temple of Di∣ana at Ephesus was covered with Cedar.Vitr. p. 35. The Temple of Apollo at Ʋtica in Africa, was built with beams of Numidian Cedar, and lasted 1188 years. It's recorded also by an ancient and famousDiosc. de mat. med. lib. 1. c. 89. Physitian, that it preservs dead bodies from putrefaction, by drinking up the superfluous mois∣ture; and therefore the Aegyptians are related, byL. 2. c. 87. Herodotus, to have used an Ointment made of Cedar in the embalming of their dead. Nay, anything almost beingPlin. l. 16. c. 39. anointed with the foresaid Oyl is preserved from worms, being of such a nature as wonderfully resists putrefaction. Nay, it helps against thePort. l. 4. c. 7. stingings of severall sorts of virulent Serpents, and cures also theId. l. 5. c. 14. Ulcers of the Lungs. The Tree grows most strongly, and flourishes on rocky and mountainous grounds, and is held therefore by the foresaidl. 6. c. 20. Author, (according to that natural signature, being of a pe∣netrating quality) to be an excellent cure of diseases in the bones. It is re∣ported furthermore bySyntag. Deor. c. 17. Gyraldus, that neer the times of the Trojan Wars, the Ancients of those times did perfume their Temples with the burning of Cedar. It is a Tree of exceeding2 Kin. 19.23. tall stature, and alwaiesDiosc. l. 1. c. 89. green, by reason of a hot and clammy viscous humour wherewith it is endued, thereby retai∣ning its leavs continually upon its branches. It yields a very choise kind of resine, mentioned frequently by Physiti∣ans and learned Herbarists, there being many admirable vertues by them assig∣ned to it. As to the Firr-Tree, (another of those Trees, whose wood was used in the Sanctuary) it is likewise of exceeding great heighth, when arrived to its full stature. Which, although it be not of so noble an extract as the Cedar, mani∣fested by its scent, as not so fragrant; yet is it of a durable, consistence and, when laid on the fire, yields a resinous Matter, well known to the Ancients, and not lesse to the people of Norway in our daies, it being a staple Commodity with that Nation for shipping. To which end it was employed ofVirgil. Aeneid. 2. old, as well as now, both for Masts and other Uses: and most frequently impro∣ved by the Northern Nations in common and ordinary buildings. Nay, it was advanced to honour inPlin. lib. 16. c. 10.40, 42. sacred matters of old, being dedicated to Bac∣chus:
and therewithal the aeternal fire (so called) at Delphos was fed and main∣tained, and with no other Fuel, asDe à a∣pud Delph. Ed. H. Steph. gr. Moral. part. l. p. 685. Plutarch hath recorded. Concerning its virtuesPag. 33. Ed. praedict. Vitruvius hath treated concisely. It grows with us in some parts, and thereby we know it to be ever-green and to endure a very long time, where it likes its seat. To conclude, that it was used in theMatt. lib. 14. Ep. 84. preservation of Books, Martial remembreth in his Epigrams. The Palm-Tree was used in the Sanctuary also, but in figure onely and Sculpture: not as to its wood at all: but yet doth challenge some Lines, be∣cause it was every where an Ornament of the Temple. The most excellent sort of these Trees are reported to have grown in Judea, according to the Testimony ofl. 1. c. 125. Dioscorides, and most plentifully neer to the dead Sea or Lake of Sodom, in the Champion plains of Jericho; which therefore is sty∣led, The City ofDeut. 34.3. Palm-Trees, in Scripture: and fully accorded to byDiod. Sic. l. 2. c. 48. Di∣odorus Siculus: and therefore, in the Coines of Vespasian, the conquest of 3. Judea is resembled by a Woman sitting under a Palm-Tree weeping, with this Inscription [Judea capta] Judaea conquered. It's a fruitful Tree, and mentioned by theJoel. 1.12. Prophet Jöel in the Catalogue of such plants. It bears that fruit which we call Dates, : resembling the Joynts of the Fingers, as 'tis thought the ancient name was thence taken; but the fruit is used with great benefit, both for Food and Physick, especially in broths and decoctions, for thin, macilent, and consumptive bodies. It is a sociable Tree: For some that are very critical in discerning the Sex of Plants do averre, that the Female will not bear, at least plentifully, unlesse it be planted near the Male: which is therefore so called, because never yield∣ing fruit. It is likewise an Ever-green, asLib. 16. c. 20. Pliny witnesseth, and was of old sacred to the Muses, whole President was the famous Apollo, and is re∣ported by the ancient Poets to have been born under it, as shall be spoken to,Pign. Mens. Isiac. p. 10. Edit. Franc. 1608. by and by. Highly prized it was in Aegypt, whose Priests used to lye in little Cottages made up of Palm-branches twisted together, and 'tis related that the Leavs were laid under the feet of Isis. It was used also by the Grecians, but to a different end, to crown the victorious Temples of the Pythian Gamesters. For it was alwaies esteemed above all other Trees, for a Symbole of Victory, as yielding lesse then any otherA. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 3. c. 6. to weights imposed upon it, and after the removal rises sooner to its former erect posture, it being veryJer. 10.5. strait and upright. Upon another account it was used of old for an Emblem of aPierius l. 50. c. 2. p. 651. 4o. Year, and of a Month; because (as they report) every new Moon it shoots forth new branches, and those but twelve: which are but improbable Nice∣ties and Toyes. However it was in great Veneration among the Heathen, for what Homer hath written concerning Latona,Hym. in Apol. v. 117. , &c. that she cast her arms about a Palm-tree in Delos when she brought forth Apollo and Diana, who were worshipped by the Ancients for the Sun and Moon. But there is a thing more observable concerning this Tree; that whereas others, which extend many and large branches, grow still nar∣rower toward the Top; This is very narrow at bottom, where the branches are inserted into its Trunk; and spreads very broad at Top toward heaven to receive its influences, while its fruit hangs down humbly towards the Earth, underneath the spreading branches. In the next place let us treat in few words concerning the Olive-Tree. WhereofPorph. de antr. Nymp. p. 231. Porphyry, in his description of the Cave of the Nymphs, gives an account why it was placed over its entrance, to signify the wisdom of God in the framing of the world for (saith he) : The Olive is the Symbole of the Wisdom of God, for it is the Plant of Minerva, but Minerva is Wisdome: The Country about Athens, (which City was dedicated to that Goddesse)
is related to be very fertile in these plants. But there was a nearer place, from whence the Temple might be furnished; even Mount Olivet, receiving its denomination from the abundance of these Trees growing thereabouts. It is remembred concerning Hercules, that his Club was made of Olive wood, for Apollonius Rhodius calls it , a Branch of Olive; which its thought he used as a Symbole of diuturnity: For two famous Na∣turalists,Theoph. de Hist. Plant. l. 2. & 5. Theophrastus and Pliny, have related that it is very long-lived, and hath great affinity with the Earth, insomuch that its dry stumps being stuck into the Ground will bud forth afresh, of which thelib. 1. c. 3. former gives this reason; Because such fat and unctuous Plants do not easily become dry, but do very tenaciously preserve their vital and genital principle. Its obser∣ved to have a thick Bark, which is the note of Trees that draw much moisture from the Earth. It loves a Temperate Climate, and the fruit is accounted to be of a very even constitution, and most proper and genuine for the body of man, andPort. l. 2. c. 1. fattens persons that are lean and exhausted with sharp Hu∣mours. It is accounted by some Writers a very beautiful Tree (and possibly it may be so in warmer Countries than ours, where it grows naturally), and thereforeHom. Ili. g. v. 53. Homer compares Euphorbus a comely young man to the green branch of an Olive-Tree, . The Plans arePlin. l. 16. c. 26. Port. l. 6. c. 31. Porph. ubi suprà. ever-green and flourishing, and therefore by the Father of the Poets calledOdys. n. v. 116. , when describing the famous Garden of Alcinous in the ancient Island of the Phaeacians, now called Corfu. Plutarch rendring the reason of leavs falling from trees in the Autumn, to be from the cold Air, and the drynesse of the Trees; saies, that the Olive, &c. lose nor theirs, be∣cause they are hot and fat, , Symp. l. 8. q. 10. Be∣sides, it is a Tree, that, where it takes, will last to a great Age, and, ifLib. 16. c. 44. Pli∣ny tell true, will live 200 years. It was (as hath been said) consecrated of old to Minerva the Tutelary Goddesse of Learning: and as it was it self the Embleme of Peace, thereby the Graecians did intimate, that Arts and Sciences do best flourish in times of Peace; when Minerva and her Prose∣lytes sit under an Olive-Tree. And because that Goddesse is represented armed under the Name of Pallas, they taught thereby that the firmest peace is obtained by the just and prudent Management of Arms. It seems this Tree hath been the Note or Symbole of Peace in very ancient times; ever since the Dove brought aGen. 8.11. Leaf of it to Noah, a fit Messenger for such a To∣ken, viz. of God's being at length pacified, and giving commission for the return of the Waters into their ancient Channels. It is observed by some, that it was used of old as the Tessera or Token of such a Peace that followed after war and trouble, and thereforeMartinii Cadmus. some from , the Olive, do de∣duce the Greek word , that signifies Mercy. It is reported, that after great Conquests in war, such, among the Romans, who procured a Tri∣umph for the Generall, were to be crowned withA. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 5. c. 6. wreaths of Olive, in case themselvs had not been in the Battel. It's reported also (let it lye on thePier. Hie∣rogl. lib. 53. c. 1. &c. Authors credit) that if, upon Iron, the Mettal whereof warlick Wea∣pons are formed, when made red hot in the fire, you pour the Oyl of Olives, it will tame the rigour of the Mettal, and make it in a good measure soft and plyable. Which if it be true, a natural reason may possibly be assigned to it, although from such kind of Experiments the Aegyptians, and other of the ancient learned Inhabitants of the East, did raise most of the significations of their Hieroglyphical Figures and Sculptures of Plants or Animals, and of the dedication of any of the Creatures to the Gods, reputing some Mystery to lye hid in the nature of all things. Accordingly from the several Excellen∣cies of this Plant, which they had taken notice of, in several Experiences, they have applied to it many mystical significations: If a man did see it in a Vi∣sion
or Dream, or had accidentally met with, or fell down near one of them, when going about any enterprize, or journey, or expedition in War, it was then a prosperous Omen to him of Success, & Happiness,Chartar. imag. Deor. p. 210. or of Par∣don, Peace and Mercy, if he went to entreat the diversion of a Prince's anger; of Meeknesse, Hope, Joy, Fruitfulnesse, and the long extent of his successful proceedings in all Cases. Nay, the Ancients made it the Embleme of Aeter∣nity. Hitherto suffice it to have spoken in brief concerning the Trees themselvs, whose wood or carved likenesse did adorn the Sanctuary. Now let us make an Essay of the mystical meaning of them, by way of accommodation and allusion. Some of the Ancients have thought, that by these excellent Trees the most eminent Servants of God in his Church were shadowed forth: For∣asmuch as we read often in Scripture of Men noted by Plants and Trees, as judiciousComm. in Esa. 53. fol. p. 808. Rivet and others have observed. The Parable of Jotham in the Ninth of Judges, and the2 Kin. 14.9. Message of Jehoash King of Israel to Amaziah King of Judah, with many other places, in the Canticles and the Prophets do evidence it. Wherefore learnedJerom. Tom. 5. p. 277. edit. E∣rasm. Lugd. 1530. Jerom compares Cyprian, and Hilary, and other Holy men in the Church, to Cedars and Firr-Trees, in his Comment on that place of the Prophet Esay, where there is a famous Prophecy, that in the latter daies the Glory ofIsa. 60.13. Lebanon should come to the Church, the Firr-Tree and others to beautify the place of his Sanctuary. The Beams whereof were to be laid withCan. 1.17. Cedar and its Rafters with Fir. Nay further, it's a very common resemblance, which both ancient and mo∣dern Interpreters glance upon, That, as the twelve Wells of water at Elim hin∣ted at the twelve Apostles; So the seventyExod. 15.27. Palm-Trees, at the seventy Disciples. But seeing the several Trees forementioned, as to their Sanctuary-Use, were imployed for inward Ornaments of the House, and annexed to the stones of the Temple, which signified the living stones of Saints, in the language of holy Peter: I shall crave leave to apply them rather to the in∣ward Graces and Vertues of the Saints, wherewith they are adorned in the sight of God and Man, then to the persons themselvs. In which respect, the extraordinary greatnesse of their body, and admirable strength, might possibly reflect upon theDr. Edw. Reynolds on Hos. 14. Ser. 5. p. 38. stability and firmnesse of the Church. The constant Verdancy of their ever-green Leavs might denote the duration of the Church in spiritual prosperity, notwithstanding all its storms; and yiel∣ding heavenly refuge and shadow to such as lye under her branches: For the Righteous shall be like a Tree, whose leaf shall neverPs. 1.3. wither. Their great procerity and tallnesse, especially in the Cedar and Firr, might be a re∣semblance of the growth of the Church, and its approximation to heaven. Their resinous or unctuo us qualities resisting, Putrefaction, might hint forth the constancy of the Church, and perseverance in Grace, against all her in∣ward corruptions and defilements. Their fragrancy, the excellent savour of holinesse and of the evangelical good works of Saints: who shallPsal. 92.12. grow like the Cedar, and theirHos. 14.7. smell shall be like unto Lebanon. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. The Palm-Trees (wherewith the Sanctuary was every where adorned, as being carved between the Cherubims on the Doors and Wals of the House, and cu∣riously wrought upon the Veil) were an excellent Emblem of the flourishing and conquering condition of the Church, notwithstanding the sorest pressures of her enemies. Her constant Motto in all Ages having been, that of the Palm, Depressa resurgo. The Church is expreslyCant. 7.8. See Ainsw. in loc. compared to this Tree in the Song of Solomon, in whose branches the Lord Jesus takes great delight. Possibly the Psalmist might reflect upon the Palm-Trees in the Sanctuary, when he brings forth that excellent promise, that the righteous shall flourish
like thePs. 92.12. Palm, especially since he mentions their being planted in the house of God, and bringing forth fruit in their old Age, where they shall prove fat and flourishing. That this Tree was used as the Embleme of Re∣covery o of trouble, in ancient times, seems probable by that speech of Job, who foreseeing, by a divine ray, his future rising out of the dust of Affliction, prophecyes of himself that he should multiply his daiesJob 29.18. as the Sand, saith our Translation; but as the Hebrew word  is by the Seventy translated , and the vulgar Latine Palma, and by sundry learned Lexicographers is turned by the Palm, which the following words seem much to favour, see∣ing the Metaphor of a Tree is so clearly insisted upon in the succeeding verse, when he tells us, that his Root was spread by the waters, and the dew lay all night upon his branch. So that the restauration of Job, to his former splen∣did condition, after he had been long prest under the weight of sorrow and calamity, seems to be fitly resembled by the Palm-Tree's rising up to its for∣mer erect posture after depression. As it was with Job, so it falls out with many a Saint; nay, the whole Church of Christ in general: though for a while it may lye under heavy pressures, yet at length it shall spread most glo∣riously, and triumph with greater lustre. Wherefore, when Christ the King of his Church was riding in solemn procession towards Jerusalem, the people cut downJoh. 12.13. Mat. 21.8. branches of Palm-Trees, and cast them in the high-way, where he was to ride: whence might be raised a most happy presage from the con∣stant and received Hieroglyphick of the Palm-Tree; that, though his King∣dome was but small, and obscure, opposed, depressed, and injured at first, yet at length it should recover most gloriously, and fill the whole Earth with its fruitful branches. We read that the Children of Israel, when celebrating the feast of Tabernacles, were commanded to make their BoothsLev. 23.40. of boughs of Palm-Trees as well as others: For as the feast was to commemo∣rate their dwelling in Booths in the Wildernesse, after their delivery out of Aegypt: So the branches of these Trees might, as in a Mirrour, give them the reflection of a great Mercy, after deep misery and bondage in the Land of Ham. But to conclude; Neither was the Palm a token of Victory among the Heathens onely: but also in sacred Scripture, where we may read of the holy Martyrs triumphing in heaven, with branches ofRev. 7.9. Palms in their ho∣ly and victorious hands. In the last place, for the Olive Tree; we read, that the door-posts of the Sanctuary were made thereof; whereby might be shadowed forth, that hea∣venly peace which Saints enjoy, when they are admitted through the doors of Ordinances into communion with God: O! then their Souls shall be a∣bundantly satisfied with thePs. 36.8. fatnesse of his House! Ordinances do most exceedingly raise and ennoble the Spirit of God's people, when those golden Pipes do convey the Oyl of Grace and Life from above into their thirsting breasts. When they are inwardly1 Joh. 2.27. anointed with that heavenly Oyl Olive of the Spirit of Grace, which should teach them all things. The Disciples had a promise on the Mount of Olives, (where the door of heaven was opened for the reception of our Lord into Glory,) that they should receive power after theAct. 1.8. Holy Ghost was come upon them in his divine Unction, to be wit∣nesses to Christ, even to the uttermost parts of the Earth. To proceed in discoursing further on the Ornaments of the Sanctu∣ary: As all the Cedar boards were laid most exactly, eeven and plain, doubtlesse with greatest care imaginable: so likewise the Saints that hold spiritual fellowship in the body mystical, are full of harmony and uni∣on;Eph. 4.3, 5. &c. endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. And as the Boards were fastned with nailes and riverts of Gold: this might exhibite the fixedness of SaintsPs. 61.4. abiding in the House of God for ever,
and trusting in the covert of his Wings, theirEzr. 9.6. Eccl. 12.11. Isa. 22.23, 25. Zech. 10.4. Nailes being fastned in a sure place by the Master of Assemblies, even in that place where God him∣self hath promised to2 Cor. 6.16. walk in the midst of his people, and to blesse them. All those things hitherto recited, with several after-mentioned, were ap∣pointed for the Beauty and Ornament of the Sanctuary within, where in∣deed was its chiefest lustre and glory; So is it with the Church, She is all gloriousPs. 45.13. within: Yea, and every Saint, as his joyes, so his graces are hidden from the Eyes of the World. That's the comfort of the Children of God, that like Christ our Head, They have meat to eat of, which the World knoweth not of: places in the Holy Sanctuary to take therein most refresh∣ful turns, which are invisible to the world. But for the further beautifying of this holy place, we read, that there were Open-flowers carved upon the Cedar, in a very pleasant and stately manner: which are supposed to have been formed inLightf. 2d. Temple p. 81. this wise: Throughout both the sides of the Sanctuary, there were long wreaths of bunches of Flowers and Cornucopiaes, carved in the fragrant Wood, running all along in a Line paralel to the Horizon; and the first row of these flowered Carvings began probably at the bottom of the Wall near the golden Floor; and, over them, Cherubims and Palm-Trees all along to the end on both sides. Then ano∣ther row of bunching flowers, and then Cherubims and Palm-Trees again, up to the top by the roof, in as many ranks as the bignesse of the Figures would permit, and suit with the heigth of the Sanctuary. Our Inquiry may be, for a little time, what sort of Flowers these were. To which the Glosse of the Chaldee Paraphrase proffers some satisfaction, constantly reading the Texts (where they are mentioned) by these words , bundles or wreaths of Lillies. We have frequent mention of carved and molten works, made like unto Lillyes in the Temple-stories: as in the Lip or Border of each of the 10 Lavers; In the turning down of the brim of the Brazen Sea, and in the fair Ornaments which were added to the heads of the two famous Pillars standing within the Porch before the Sanctuary. In respect to the present Sculptures in hand, As our Text calls them Open-flowers, so they might resemble the hope of the heavenly Glory, which flowres in the hearts of Saints, walking here below in the Ordinances of the Sanctuary. For as the hope of the harvest lies in the blade, so the hope of fruit and seed lies in the flowers of a Plant. In that, they were made to resemble the flowers of Lil∣lyes, it suits aptly with the frequent allusions made in Scripture unto Lillies, respecting the Church. The Spouse is compared by Solomon to aCant. 2.2. Lilly among Thorns; and the Bridegroom himself is brought in, as feed∣ing among hisCant. 2.16. & 6.3. Lillies. It is observable, that our Lord compares Solomon in all hisMat. 6.29. glorious raiment unto the Lillies, which because of the variety of his gorgeous Attire, might possibly be most resembled and set forth by that admirable and curiously coloured Flower, which we call the Tulip at this day, being brought to us originally from Persia, whose chief City was cal∣led Shushan, and a Province within that Empire termed Susiana, from the plenty of those curious Flowers growing there naturally. But as it passed through Asia, and the Turks of Constantinople, (whence we received it more immediately); it gained thence the present name of Tulip, from the Turkish attire about their heads. Now, if this were the Flower (as 'tis pro∣bable) whose Effigies was carved in the Sanctuary: although the variety of its colours (for which it is worthily esteemed the Queen of Flowers) could not be manifested, but by Enamelling the Gold which was laid upon the Cedar, a thing probably wherewith the Ancients were unacquainted; yet in consideration of its rare variety, we may resemble to it the excellent and
curious mixture of Graces and Vertues shining in the hearts and lives of Saints. But if it were no other then the ordinary tall white Lilly, or perhaps that curious, neat, and fragrant small flower, of the Lilly Convally, which grows amongst us: then, as whitenesse is many times used for the Embleme of purity, innocency, and chastity; so might these flowers denote the puri∣ty of the Saints Holinesse, the unspotted innocency of their lives towards men; the integrity of their hearts toward God; the untemerated chastity of their conjugal Love toward Christ: and, asEccl. 9.8. white Garments were used of old, in times of Joy and festival Solemnities; so might these shadow forth the unspeakable Joy of the Spirit, shed abroad in their hearts, upon the ac∣count of those gracious endowments wherewith they are qualified. But now, although the Church of Christ be thus undefiled, pure, and beautiful, in the sight of God, like the Lilly: yet shall not her beauty be as that fading flower; in the morning pleasant and lovely to see to, in the evening dry and withered; but, as the Flowers in the Temple-carvings were alwaies open, so shall her Graces and Ornaments be alwaies flourishing, till their Roots shall be transplanted into the Eden above, at the right hand of God, where the Rivers of pleasure shall alwaies preserve them from a flaccid de∣clining, when their Graces, flourishing here in the Garden of the Vally, shall be curiously tied into a Crown or Garland, which is1 Pet. 5.4. ,1 Pet. 1.4. , immarcescible and incorruptible, reserved for them in the Hea∣vens. Besides, because the Lilly is but a tender plant, and of small Roots, lest the duration of the Church should not seem to be clearly set forth by it, therefore are her Roots promised to be strong and abiding like the Cedars of Lebanon. So that as the other similitude did set forth the beauty and pleasant∣ness, this doth denote the perpetuity and continuance of the Church of Christ; as hath beenDr. Edw. Reynolds on Hos. Ser. 5. p. 38.4 to. observed by a most learned, holy, and reverend Worthy of our Church: Long may he continue both fragrant and fruitfull in our Sanc∣tuaries. But to proceed; All these curious Ornaments, hitherto mentioned, were overlaid with most precious Gold, even the Gold of Ophir or2 Chr. 3.6. Parvaim, differing names (asAr. Mon. anti. Judaic. l. 1. c. 9. some conceive) of the same place, which is appre∣hended to be no other then the Country of Peru (so called at this day), in the American Continent: a place very plentiful of Gold. Now, although the Assertors of this Opinion,) viz. that the ancient Ophir was the same place with the present Peru) are without doubt greatly mistaken: yet the Argu∣ment which some use against that assertion, viz. that America was not dis∣covered by the Ancients, no, not till the daies of Columbus as they conceit), is as false. ForBiblioth. Hist. l. 5. p. 207. Ed. Gr. H, Steph. Diodorus Siculus acquaints us, that the Phoenicians, those most famous Sea-men of old times, were by great storms driven off from the Coast of Africa, farr to the Westward, , for many daies together, and at last fell in with an Island (as he terms it, and as America is now almost fully discovered to be) of great magnitude and vast Extent, , lying from Libya ma∣ny daies sail toward the West: which Story can be fixed upon no place in the World save America, if the Relation of Diodorus had solid ground for its truth: For the few Islands of the Atlantick vast Ocean, called the Azo∣res, and some others, are very inconsiderable in their Bulk. Moreover this discovery of the Tyrians, our Author doth insinuate to have been performed in very ancient times. Concerning this place (as some conceive) Plato likewise doth treat in hisPag. 24. To. 3. ed. H. Steph. 1578. Timaeus, when he saies, that beyond the Pillars of Hercules, there was an Island in the Atlantick Ocean, , larger then Africa and Asia put together: and in more modern times, but a good while before Columbus, Madoc, a Prince of the British
blood, had found it out. Powels Hist. Wales, pag. 228. But whatever their actual discoveries were, it is evident and clear that the Ancients were very skilful in the knowledge and praediction of Eclipses, as is famously known concerning Thales, Hipparchus, Calippus, and many others, who could not be ignorant of theClavis. Com. in cap. 1. Spher. Jo∣han. de sacro Bosco. p. 146. edit. Lugd. 1618. Metam. lib. 1. Fab. 1. roundnesse of the Earth, it being demonstra∣ble from the Moons Eclipse, & might thence inferr, that there might very pro∣bably be other Lands on the other side the Globe, within the bosome of the Atlantick Ocean, to give a poize to the vast Continents of Europe, Asia, and Africa. For as Ovid had observed, possibly from the writings of some Ma∣thematicians, or some common stories then abroad in the World, —circumfuso pendebat in aëre Tellus, Ponderibus librata suis, That the EarthJob 26.7. hung within the compassing air, being equally poized with its own weight; the opposite parts pressing towards the Center, against each other. Which is the Ground whereupon theOf Lan∣guages p. 120 learned Breerwood doth most probably inferr, that the Terra incognita, or that part of the Earth as yet unknown to us, lying toward the Antartick Pole, doth equalize the whole Continent of these three parts of the Earth, into which the ancient Geogra∣phers did divide it, to counterpoize the great and vast tract of Land, which is discovered in the North parts of the World, even as far as 81. degrees, by William Hudson an Englishman, as Purchas relates in his Pilgrims, Part. 3. pag. 464. and before that; to 82 degrees of Latitude, in a place which theBert. Ta. bul. Geogra. Contract. Amsterdam 1616. p. 59. & 62. Hollanders made to, in the year 1596, if Bertius say true, and called it Spitsberg, from its craggy and mountainous inequality: And, lest any should object, that possibly the Southern Seas might be shallower then ours: it is answered by the experience of our own Mariners, who have found it, on the South of Africa and America, to the contrary. I am sensible how farr I have diverted from the businesse in hand upon the pleasantnesse of this Inquiry: yet shall I crave pardon for one word or two more, whereby I would shew, that we may even out of Scripture gather some∣thing concerning the roundnesse of the Earth. For at first the waters did cover the face of the Earth, before ever the Mountains were weighed in scales and the Hills in a ballance, which by the mighty power of God's word were taken out of the body of the Earth, underneath the incircling Waters; and laid on heaps, by his admirable and infinite skill and power, in such man∣ner as to give an equal poize, as well as toArias Mont. Anti. Judaic. p. 13. yield deep and vast channels and caverns for the waters to subside and sink into, which were also weighed by measure, Job 28.2. He it is who measured the waters in the [round]Isa. 40.12. hollow of his hand. So in the book of Job, where we read, He hathJob 21.14. compassed the Waters with bounds, the Text is . His appoint∣ment or constitution (as Arias translates) hath he described with a Compass upon the face of the Waters, and so to the same purpose the Seventy, , He encircled the waters according to his appointment. In like manner speaks the Spirit of God in the book of Proverbs; that Christ, the Wisdom of the Father, was with him, rejoycing alwaies before him, when he set aPro. 8.27. Compasse upon the face of the Depth. Whereby we learn that Solomon had probably some Knowledge of the circularity of the Earth and Water in one Globe. That the Earth was sphaerical, the ProphetIsa. 40.22. Isaiah seems to insinuate, when he brings in the Majesty of God sitting [ su∣per Globum Terrae, Montanus: , the Seventy] on the Circle of the Earth: Lastly, that the Heaven which environs this Globe on all sides, is also round, Eliphaz the Temanite observes, when he mentions God's walk∣ing
upon [] the circuit of the heavens. So that although Scrip∣ture most frequently speaks according to the apprehension of the vulgar, as in the Earth's station; of the ends and sides of the Earth, the Sun and Moon as being the two greatest lights, the measure of the brazen Sea, (whereof before) and in such like: yet there are very excellent hints of true physical Notions in the sacred Leavs, as in that of thePs. 132.7. Jer. 10.13 & 51.16. Eccles. 1.7. winds coming out of the Earth, and the rivers proceeding from the Sea, and many others; So in this particular of the roundnesse of the Earth and Water in one body. But, to conclude, (with an intreaty of pardon for this digression) whether or no the Tyrians had discovered America, before or so soon as Solomon's daies; or whether Solomon himself had by Scripture-light, or naturall speculation of the frame of the World, known the roundnesse of the Earth, and thereupon employed Navies to search out the World and its rarities, is not to be known; because of our defect in historical Writers of those times, especially of the Tyrian Annals, and others of Egypt, mentioned by Josephus: We cannot apprehend by the reliques and fragments of stories that remain of those times, or the neighbouring Ages when History began to be riper, that they had such extra∣ordinary skill in sailing upon the vast Ocean as hath been obtained since the rare invention of the Mariner's compasse: but that their discoveries were at∣tained either by reason of impetuous storms driving them beyond their pur∣poses upon unknown Regions, or else in coasting slowly by the reaches and Promontories of severall Countries. In which manner, no doubt, Solomon's ships did trend upon the Asian coasts, till they came to the habitation ofGen. 10.29. Ophir the Son of Jocktan, in the South-Easterly parts of Asia: concerning the punctual place of which Country near the Golden Chersonese; Stuckius upon Arian's Periplus of the Erithraean Sea; Purchas, in the first Part of his Pilgrims; Sir Walter Rawleigh, in his History of the World; and above all the learned Bochartus in his Phaleg will give satisfaction, to such as please to peruse them, while we speak to this excellent Mettal which Solomon brought from thence in great abundance, and employed it most bountifully in the a∣dorning and enriching of the Temple. Gold, the choisest of all Mettals, and the finest of that kind, must be used about the Sanctuary. The Apostle Peter compares Faith to1 Pet. 1.7. Gold that is tried in the fire, and therefore some do accordingly expound that place, of Faith, where our Lord exhorts the Angel of Laodicea to buy of himRev. 3. Gold tried in the fire. There be who expound it of the Word of God, which the Apostle would have to dwellCol. 3.16. richly in the Saints, and is more to be desi∣red thenPs. 19.10. Gold, yea then much fine Gold. Others, interpret it of the righteousnesse of Christ. But I shall enlarge a little more particularly concerning this excellent Mettal of Gold, and insert those Observations in their due place. It may be observed from Scripture, that many things are resembled to Gold; as saving and heavenly wisdom, though preferred before it: ReceivePro. 8.10. knowledge rather then choise Gold: forPro. 16.16. how much better is it to get wisdom then Gold: seeingPr. 20.15. the lips of knowledge are more precious then Gold. SometimesPro. 22.1. loving favour is compared with, but greatly to be valued before, Gold. Sometimes the purity of Christ's Government in the Church is shadowed by hisDelrio in Cant. 5.11. fol. 196. Par. 1604. head of Gold. Sometimes the Glory of eternal life is set out by it, when the City of the new Jerusalem is said to be ofRev. 21.18. pure Gold. Seve∣ral times the word of God is hereby set forth, to shew the estimation that is due to it. For so doth the sweet Singer of Israel intimate, when he saies that the Judgments of the Lord are morePs. 19.10. to be desired then Gold, he ac∣knowledgesPs. 119.72. the Law of his mouth was better to him then thousands of Gold, and professes thatVer. 127 he loves his commandments above Gold, yea
above fine Gold. Accordingly some have explained that place of the Apo∣stle Paul, where he speaks of some that build1 Cor. 3.12. Gold upon the foundation, holding it to be meant of the Word of God, Christ doctrinal being built upon, Christ the essentiall foundation of the Church. It is true, that an eloquent light of his Age, treating upon that place, after several words, concludes thusChrysost. Tom. 3. edit. Savil. pag. 298. lin. 8. : whence it is manifest (saith he) that the [Apostle's] speech is [to be understood] concerning actions. But what are the actions of spiritual builders (as such whom the Apostle doth elsewhere call Gospel-ministers) but their doctrines and teachings, which ac∣cording to their nature shal either be rewarded or destroyed. In this very sense doth learned Jerom expound that place, as may appear by these his expressi∣ons at large, in his Comment on the Prophet Haggai:Tom. 6. pag. 280. [Ego argentum, quo domus Dei ornatur, existimo eloquia Scripturarum, de quibus dicitur, Eloquia Domini, eloquia casta, &c. et aurum, quod in occulto Sanctorum sensu et in cordis versatur arcano, & splendet vero lumine Dei. Quod & Apostolum de Sanctis, qui super fundamentum Christi adificant, sensisse perspicuum est au∣rum, argentum, lapides pretiosos: ut in auro sensus occultus fit, in argento ser∣mo decens, in lapide pretioso opera Deo placentia. His Metallis illustrior fit Ecclesia Salvatoris, quàm quondam Synagoga fuerat; his lapidibus vivis aedifi∣catur domus Christi, & pax ei praebetur aeterna.] "The Silver wherewith the "House is adorned, I take to be, The words of the Scriptures: of which it is said, The words of the Lord are chast words; and the Gold, that which is laid up in the hidden meaning of holy things, and the secret place of the heart, and shines with the true light of God. Which it is clear, that the Apostle did understand of the Saints, who build upon the foundation of Christ, Gold, Silver, precious Stones; that the hidden meaning is set forth by the Gold; comely Speech by Silver; works pleasing to God, by the precious stones. The Church of our Saviour is more illustrious by these Metals, then the Synagogue was in times past. The House of Christ is built with these living stones, and eternal peace is granted to it. But to let that passe: Gold in Scripture is thought by many to be a com∣parison, whereby to set out the excellency of Faith, true saving Faith in Je∣sus Christ. As, where we see, upon the right hand of this Prince of Might, the Queen to stand in Gold of Ophir, the learned Rivet doth apply it to Faith and other Graces, as the Golden Ornaments of the Spouse of Christ: So, where we find her neck to be adorned withCan. 1, 10. chains of Gold, it may be applyed to the beautiful chain of Faith and other spiritual Graces, being her choise Ornaments in the eyes of Christ. In another place, we read of three Kings from the East, believing in him whose star they had seen, and pre∣senting our Saviour withMat. 2.11. Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrhe; which Grotius interprets of Faith, Prayer, and Repentance: We hear likewise ofRev. 5.8. gol∣den Vials, in the book of the Revelations, full of odours; which some have conceived to be the faithful hearts of Saints, sending forth the fragrant odours and sweet-sented breathings of their Souls in prayer toward heaven. But above all, that singular place is to be remembred to this purpose, where the Apostle Peter acquaints his dispersed Brethren1 Pet. 1.7. that the trial of their Faith is much more precious then Gold, being such as isRev. 3.18. tried in the fire, and is to be bought of Christ alone, whereby, though poor in this World, we may be madeJam. 2.5. rich in Faith. Of all Metals Gold is the most excellent, most beautiful, and refers its original (as the Chymists have written) to the influ∣ence of the Sun, the chiefest of the Planets; it's the most durable and solid, it is the most malleable of all, by reason of its vigorous tenacity, which two things were of old observed byIn Tract. . pag. 347. Gr. Par. 1552. Philo Judaeus, speaking of the golden can∣dlestick,
· One thing is, that it doth not admit rust: ano∣ther, that being drawn or beaten into very thin Membranes, as leaf-gold, it remains unbroken. Besides all this, it is esteemed, by eminent chymical Physitians, to be a great restorative to the vital parts, if duely prepared and fitted. What should I speak ofVitruv. lib. 9. cap. 2. its gravity, by which Archimedes found out the Imposture of the Syracusian Gold-smith, in the make of Hiero's Crown. Its great estimation in all Ages, insomuch thatA. Gell. noct. Attic. lib. 5. cap. 6. Mural, Naval, and Triumphal Coronets were made of it. Or lastly, Its conveniency for commerce, by reason of its deserved value and estimation, as being generally rated in its proportion to Silver, as 1 to 12, besides its duration and continu∣ance beyond all other Metals. It were an endlesse thing, and here improper, to insist long upon the nature and excellency of Gold, a Metal so much known and thirsted after: our Inquiry must be rather that of Persius,—In Sancto quid facit aurum?Sat. 2. v. 69. Rivet in Exod. p. 116. Certainly the immediate end of it was for the beautifying of the House of God. Not that his divine Majesty needed or cared for any such Ornaments considered barely in themselvs, or that the worshippers by any such dedications were the more acceptable to God: but good reason that the hearts of those who draw nigh to him, should be manifest, in conse∣crating the most precious of all their enioyments and substance unto him; whose name and presence he was pleased to place among, and afford to his People, at that house in Jerusalem. If therefore Wood be useful; the Ce∣dar, Firr, and Olive, must be brought, the choisest: If Metals, Silver and Gold, the most durable and of greatest esteem: If of Stones, the most preci∣ous: of Liquors and Gums, the most aromatical and fragrant: and so in the rest. Besides the Ornament of Gold, which was laid upon the Cedar boards, we read likewise that the House was garnished and set out with2 Ch. 3.6. precious stones; but what kinds, the Scripture is silent: therefore we can onely men∣tion them. The last things which beautified the House were engraved Che∣rubims: the form and figure is not perfectly known; but probably of the same kind with those in the Oracle: whereof I shall speak more largely in the third Section. Now then to recapitulate and recollect what hath been said and to apply all briefly to the Mystical signification intended by them. Some hold, that by all those curious materials the Saints themselves were signified, who differ one from another in gifts and graces. But seeing (as hath been before spoken to) the Marble stones of the Temple are, by the holy Scriptures, alluded to, when the Saints and People of God are called living stones, making up the glori∣ous spiritual Temple of the Gospel: it seems more apposite, to apyly these inward Ornaments of the Sanctuary to the inward vertues, graces, and divine qualifications of the Saints. If leave may be permitted to Allusions, I shall onely compare some divine Qualifications of the People of God, with the chiefest and most material ex∣cellencies of the fore-described Ornaments. The Cedar, Firr, and Olive Trees being alwaies green, may note the never-dying nature of Grace; where once it is planted, it never decaies. The exceeding high stature of the Firr, and Cedar, may shadow forth their continual growth till they come unto the perfect Man,Eph. 4.13. unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. As the Olive-tree is exceeding fat and fertile, yielding Berries of great use for man, both in food and Physick; together with the Oyl,Jud. 9.9. wherewith both God and Man is honoured: God in the frequent use of it in Sacrifices of Meat-Offerings, and in the Lamps of the Sanctuary: Man in his Unction to Offices both sacred and civill,Ps. 104.15. making his face to shine; it being called
the Oyl of joy, exhilarating the spirits, suppling of wounds, refreshing the feet after weary travels. Hereby insinuating the fertility and fruitfulnesse of Saints, the joy of Spirits in their service of, and communion with God, no∣thing so much refreshing their hearts, as the fellowship which they hold with his Divine Majesty, and one with another in holy Ordinances. Furthermore, the fragrancy of the Cedar, notes the savory smell of the holy Life of Saints: As the Gold was likewise another principal Ornament, It may signify the pre∣ciousnesse, the purity, theZech. 13.9. tryed and experienced excellency of all their graces, as having been often in the furnace of affliction, and the fire of tentati∣on and persecution, and have come forth in their Faith, Love, Patience, and other graces, more pure then Gold, most glittering and glorious: the great end being to purgeIsa. 1.25. away their drosse, and take away all their tinn, that they may be1 Pet. 1.7. found unto praise, honour, and glory, at the appearing of Je∣sus Christ. The precious stones likewise did most admirably set forth the oriency of their graces, together with their durableness, seeing stones of all things are least subject to impressions. Precious stones shine in the dark, so do Saints gra∣ces in dark times, they are beauties to the places where they live and inha∣bit. The fiery Carbuncle darts forth a resemblance of zeal; the blew Sa∣phire, of heavenly mindedness; the impenetrable Diamond, their constancy and courage; the clear Crystal, their unspotted innocency; the Red Ruby, their hot persecutions, and the like: Whereof more may be spoken, when we arrive to the stones in the High Priest's Breast-plate: but of the par∣ticular application of them to distinct graces, I desire to be interpreted , in a laxe sense. Too much curiosity and nicenesse being things I design most to avoid, having constantly thought that these things do but generally hint at the Churches excellencies, and probably carry not in them any particular reflection. Wherefore I intreat that I may alwaies be con∣strued according to this sense here laid down, as not indulging a private fancy: nor being any thing positive in these points, onely speaking by way of allusion; unlesse hints from Scripture do fortify and uphold them. Where∣fore to proceed (according to this intreated construction): In like manner the prominency or standing out of the precious stones (for so they are conceived to have been bunching out in squares) might declare the visibility, the exem∣plarinesse, and the radiancy of the Saints. The sides of the Sanctuary had three principal, great, and large ornaments; the Palm-Trees, the bunches of open flowers of Lillies, and the Cherubims. The Palm-Trees might denote the Saints patience, and the emergency of the people of God out of trouble and persecution: who, though depressed, yet are not broken; though cast down, yet not destroyed;2 Cor. 4.9. and that if they persevere, unto the end, they shall walk withRev. 7.9. Palmes of Victory in their hands after the Lamb, whithersoever he goeth. Besides; as the Palm-Trees stood upright with bunches of pendulous fruit: It might shew that Saints haveJoh. 4.31. meat to eat in the Sanctuary, which the world knoweth not of. As there were open flowers carved in Cedar, and covered with Gold: So the Saints, in the State of their conversing here below in Church-Ordinan∣ces, are filled with the hopes of Glory; Christ in them (the true LillyCant. 2.1. of the Vallies) theCol. 2.27. hope of Glory. As they are pure white Lillies, no∣ting the impolluted ground of their hopes: so doth this hope1 Joh. 3.3. purify them more and more, even as he is pure. Finally, As we find Cherubims on the wals, they might denote the constant communion of the Church with Angels. For even those pure Spirits do desire1 Pet. 1.12. to pry into the Mysteries of the Gospel. To the intent that now
untoEph. 3.10. Principalites and Powers in Heavenly places, might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God. To note likewise that we should do the will of our Heavenly Father, as the Angels in Heaven do perform it with constant alacrity and chearfulness. Therein might likewise be exhibi∣ted the constant protection of the Church; which God affords, not only by his own immediate presence: but by the subserviency of Angels, who are made ministringHeb. 1.14. spirits for them, who shall be heirs of salvation. Wherefore because of their presence at Church-Ordinances, Paul charges Timothy not only before God, but also the1 Tim. 5.21. Elect Angels: Women like∣wise that they should have1 Cor. 11.10. Power over their heads: that is, Vailes upon their faces because of the Angels presence in their Church-assemblies, as some have interpreted that obscure place. Thus much let be sufficient to have spoken of the inside Ornaments of the Sanctuary, a little of the Windows, Floor, and Cieling; and I shall then lead you into the sacred Oracle. The Windows were made to let in the Light of the Sun into the Sanctuary; I will not say there was any particular thing thereby typified, but give me leave to allude in conformity to, and harmony with the rest, so that as the other Ornaments shewed the various graces of Saints adorning the Church within: so these might signify a divine irradiation shining from heaven upon their under∣standings. Or, what if Christ's Gospel-Light should be noted byCant. 2.9. it as shining through the windows, who is represented shewing himself through the Golden Lattesses. Besides, since that windows in Scripture are some∣times taken for theEccles. 12.3. eyes: and finding that Prophets are termedKin. 17.13. Seers; Why may not these windows of the Temple typifie the Gospel-Ministers, that receive Visions from Heaven? For it is by thePsal. 36.9. Light of Heaven only we that can see and enjoy the true Light. John the Baptist is termed by our Lord himselfJoh. 5.35. a shining Light, and otherwhere the Apostles are called theMat. 5.14. Lights of the World; not as if they were immediate Fountains of Light, but as Starrs and Candles that shine with a borrowed Light: or like Diaphanous, or pellucid bodies that transmitt Light, which originally flowes from Heaven it self, teaching us that we must receive no Light from Teach∣ers in Church, but such as comes through them from Heaven. Wherein we see the difference betwixt them and other Saints: Ministers being capacita∣ted to convey light to others: as being indued with clearer capacities, and irradiated with Heavenly Visions. As glasse, Crystal, the Lapis Specularis, so much used by the antients for windows; and indeed all perspicuous bodies havingBasso Cont. Arist. stotl. p. 546. straight and direct pores are fitted for transmission of rayes of Light: although all Diaphanous bodies do not perform it with equal lustre; but accordingly as they are thick or thin; or as the pores are more or lesse ob∣structed by those material atoms, as of sand in the glasse, and the like, where∣of they consist: For indeed none of these pelluicd bodies, be they never so thin, but admit of some smallLydiat. prael. Astr. p. 24. Gassend. Epicur. Philos. Christ. 1. p. 302. refraction, although indiscernable to the eye; as hath bin observed by curious inquirers. We may from the mention of the Temple-windows, although we cannot learn that they were adorned with glasse: yet herein alluding unto holy Prophets and Evangelical Ministers, look upon them as fitted by God with clearer apprehensions, the pores of thier understanding being made more direct for the drinking in of the beames of divine Light, and transmitting them to others. Whereas the Capacities of ordinary Saints are commonly distorted with cares, and obstru∣cted with the sorrows, troubles, and businesses of this World. But let Prophets take heed that (as the beams of Light, receiving tinctures from red or green glasses, accordingly do distaine the ground) they suffer not the Light of Heaven, of its self pure and uncoloured, to be mixed and polluted with private passions and affections.
It is to be observed besides, that as those win lows were narrow without and broad within, to yield an expansive light into the Sanctuary: It might denote, that all the understanding which Gospel-Ministers receive from hea∣ven, must be imployed for the benefit of the Church of Christ. These Win∣dows were high likewise, as being above the side-chambers, appendant on the out side of the Temple; noting the end of the Ministry onely to present divine and heavenly Objects, but nothing of terrene and low concernment. If we take them to signify the medium or means of the particular illuminati∣on of each Saint, or the power and faculty of discerning, whereby Saints look up to heaven with an eye of love and desire, and on earth with holy scorn and contempt: we may take notice from the narrownesse of the Windows exter∣nally, and the breadth inwardly, together with their elevated situation, how little Saints do or should meddle with others conversations: looking prin∣cipally into their own breasts. The Floor of the Sanctuary (which was laid with planks of Firr, overlaid with Cedar boards, and plated with Gold) the place designed to be walked on; might shew the humility of the Saints, their meeknesse, lowly-minded∣nesse, and prostration of spirit before God's Majesty; who was pleased to2 Cor. 6.16. walk in and out among them, such Graces being more fragrant then Cedar, more beautiful then Gold. The Ornament of a meek and quiet spi∣rit1 Pet. 3.4. being in the sight of God of great price. We see the Ornaments of the very Floor were the same for matter with those of the insides of the house; to shew possibly that humility and lowly reverence of heart, as befitting best divine Ordinances, is of as high regard with God as other Graces: nay in some sort of higher esteem. For the humble shall beJam. 4.10. exalted by him, and receive more Grace from him: for as the person walking is in more conjunction to the Pavement or Floor whereon he stands, than to the other parts of the buil∣ding. Thus the Lord, the high and the losty One who inhabiteth aeterni∣ty, professeth that he will dwell with him and look on him with an eye of favour that is of anIsa. 57.15. & 66.2. humble and contrite spirit. Although humble and meek spirits are counted fools by the World, and quickly insulted upon, by every proud and insolent spirit; yet (as holy David, sitting by the rivers of repentance, and hearkning to the sighs of the groaning Willows, under the storms of divine anger, sweetly be moans himself) aPs. 51.17. broken and a contrite heart O God thou wilt not despise. Happy is the humble person, who lying upon his back in a prostrate post∣ure, and helplesse condition as to himself: yet alwaies is looking up to heaven! Even as the lowly Floor did constantly face the cieling of the San∣ctuary, which was all filled with Cherubims, a heavenly Host dispatcht from heaven, and ready at hand for their aid and comfort. Besides, the Roof of the Sanctuary, which was laid upon those Cherubims, held forth the constant divine protection of the Church, that resteth on all the Assemblies of the Saints, when feasting in that secret communion, which the true Members of the mystical and invisible body do maintain in their hearts with Christ.Isa. 4.5, 6. The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her assemblies a cloud, and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, for upon all the glory shall be a defence. And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a cover from the storm and from rain. God will be aIsa. 16.4. covert to his people from the face of the spoyler,Isa. 32.2 a covering from the Tempest and a hiding place from the Wind. Our second Solomon having made his Church like a Chariot as well as a Tabernacle or Temple, of the wood of Lebanon, &c. and theCant. 3.10. covering thereof of Purple: even his own righte∣ousnesse, to shield us from the danger of his Father's wrath. Nay, his ban∣ner
over us is love, in thisCant. 2.4. banquetting house of the Sanctuary. Where the people of God having satiated themselves with divine love, and fully satisfied with the curious views of all its unparallel'd rarities; It's now high time for them to enter the Holy of Holyes, with adoration. The Mysteries of the Oracle. BEfore we set foot into the Oracle, strict notice should be taken of the curi∣ous Vail embroidered with Cherubims, which hung down to the ground, cross the Temple, and before that most sacred place. But although in the Ta∣bernacle there was no other division between the Holy place, and the Holy of Holyes; yet in the Temple there was a partition of stone which divided be∣twixt them, and Doors in the midst of the patrition. Therefore we shall consi∣der the Walls without the Oracle, and then the Door; and after that, the Vail: and so proceed to give some account why probably there were no Windows; and then descend to the Floor, the Roof; and after that, to the side-Chambers of the Temple. To speak first, in general: There be some (as Rivet on Exod. p. 1129.) that say, The Oracle noted the Gospel-Church. However that be for certain It was the Type of Heaven; as 'tis clear, by the Apostle's acquainting us, that theHeb. 9.7, 8. High-Priest entered into it alone once every year, the Holy Ghost thereby sig∣nifying, that the way into the holyest of all was not yet made manifest, that is, while the first Tabernacle was yet standing. The meaning whereof may be this,Cloppenb. Schol. sacrif. p. 68. that so long as the sacred ceremonies were performing in the former part or room of the Tabernacle, which was called the Sanctuary, the entrance into the more secret part, or the Holy of Holyes, (called the second Taberna∣cle) was not yet made open. So that while the state of the old Law endured, and the rites and ceremonies of the Sanctuary continued in their vigour, till Christ appeared for the putting of a period to the Mosaical worship, there was no entrance or admission into Heaven, the Holy of Holyes. But when Christ had once offered up himself, and was expiring upon the Cross, then theMat. 27.51. Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, to give notice that the Door of Hea∣ven was now opened by vertue of his blessed sufferings: who,Heb. 10.11. after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sate down on the right hand of God. For the Apostle ver. 11. opposeth this to a Tabernacle not made with hands, i. e. the heavenly: into which by his body and blood entrance is made, ver. 13. In the Oracle we read of the Ark of the Covenant, the Cherubims, and the Session of the divine Majesty upon their wings. In like manner, when the Temple of God was opened in heaven,Rev. 11.29. there was seen the Ark of his Testaments whereof more hereafter, when I arrive to that mysterous Uten∣sil. The place of God's glorious presence is in heaven, whither all our pray∣ers are to be directed, accordingly as David prayes to be heard in his suppli∣cations,Ps. 28.2. when he lifted up his hands towards his holy Oracle. This divine place was a perfect Cube, hollow within, shadowing the per∣fection of happinesse; as the great Philosopher saies, that he that bears the shocks of Fortune valiantly isEthic. l. 1. , he is truly good and of a square posture without reproof. Besides, as a square figure is the most firm, in building; so it may denote the constancy, duration, and perpetuity of heaven. Wherefore Jerusalem, or the heavenly City that cometh from above, is described to lyeRev. 21.10. four square, that figure being aPlut. de defect. Orac. p. 662. & de E I Apud. Delphos. sign of rest. But in these things we speak by way of allusion. Between the Sanctu∣ary and the Oracle there was a thick wall interposed, noting a great separati∣on
between the Church Militant and Triumphant. In this wall there was placed the door of the Oracle, giving admission into it through the Sanctu∣ary: to shew that the onely way to Heaven is through the Ordinances of di∣vine worship. Of the Sanctuary-doors, the posts onely were of Olive, whereas the doors were made of Firr, but here they were both1 King. 6.31, 32. of Olive, shewing the per∣fection of the Saints peace with God when they enter Heaven: whereas be∣fore in their state in this World there are mixtures of infirmity and imperfect peace: out reconciliation though, fully purchased, yet is not fully enjoyed till we come to Heaven. The Olive Tree is a known Symbol of peace among the antients. Present∣ly upon the abatement of the flood, the Dove which Noah sent forth to des∣cry the asswagement of the waters, returned as a Messenger of peace with anGen. 8.11. Olive leaf in her mouth, declaringLuke 2.14. peace upon Earth, good will towards man. So when God was graciously returned to the people of Israel after the Captivity, sending Zechary on a missive to the People about the fini∣shing of the Temple; the Prophet received a Vision of twoZoch. 4.3. Olive-Trees dropping Golden (that is, clear, pure, and precious) Oyl into the Can∣dlestick of the Sanctuary: which by the Angel's interpretation intimated the influences of theVers. 6. Spirit of God upon that glorious work, till the top-stone of the Building should be brought forth with shoutings, crying,Vers. 7. Grace, Grace unto it. The Olive was a Tree dedicated to Pallas the fabled inventresse of Arts: and because Oyl is very useful some way or other, in all Arts manual which principally flourish in times of peace: therefore did they of Old make it the Symbol of peace, asNatal. Mythol. p. 301. some have written. Besides it is of admirable and soveraign vertue: a great Antidote against poyson, and for nothing more excel∣lent then for sodering and closing the lips of green wounds, curing the hurts which warr produceth. It was likewise of old by reason of the durable na∣ture of the wood of that Tree, which by its unctuous matter resisteth putre∣faction in a great measure, an Emblem of eternity. Therefore it is that we read of the Image of some of the Heathen gods to have bin made of this wood by the direction of the Delphian OracleHerodot. l. p. 318. to the people of Epidaurus. Pausanias also in his Peragration ofPhocica p. 334. lin. 27. Edit. Francof. 1583. Phocis, relates a story of the head of a statue made of Olive Tree, which the Methymnaeans had taken out of the Sea in a Net, and inquiring of the Pythian Oracle whose Deity it held forth, were commanded to worship Bacchus under it. It was the custome of the more antient Heathens to make the Images of their gods not of Earth or Me∣tals, but of wood; to note their deities to be causes of fertility and plenty, and particularly of the more durable and incorruptible Trees, and among the rest of the Root of an Olive Tree, asDe imag. Deor. p. 15. Chartarius notes out of Theophrastus, to denote their perpetuity. Wherefore the door of the Oracle (if we may compare divine Mysteries with these things) was made of Olive to signifie the perpetual duration of Heaven: and as the Olive is the Emblem ofFabri Agnisti p. 182. peace, so it might denote the eternity of our peace with God, when once entred into Heaven. The Olive-Tree is perpetually green in those Countries, where it is a na∣tive, and besides is exceeding fruitful: and the Oyl that is exprest out of its berries is usefulDr. Reyn. on Hos. 14. Ser. 5. p. 50. for unction and for Lamps. In the first sense, it makethPsal. 104.15. the face to shine, and becomes the Embleme of peace and joy: In the other, it notes a supply of divine Light from the glory of God and of the Lamb; by which the Saints shall walk in the new Jerusalem for ever. As it is fit for food and nourishment, it denotes that Christ theRev. 21.24. green Olive yieldeth the food of eternal Life to the Saints, after they are once planted into
Him, andRom. 11.17. partake of his fatnesse. The doors of the Oracle bearing the resemblance of the Saints entrance into Heaven, shews the conquest over the gates of Death, and the resurrection of their bodies to glory, when they are arrived at this place, which is no otherGen. 28.17. then the House of God and the gate of Heaven. The Olive and the Oyl issuing from its fruit, being of a suppling and hea∣ling nature, is often taken for the Embleme ofLuk. 10.34. compassion and tender∣nesse: noting that throughLuk. 1.78. the render mercy of our God it is, that the Day-Spring fromon high hath visited us, and inlightned us through the Olive gates of Heaven, into the possession of our Master's joy. The entrance was but one: as there is but one only way for the passage of Saints into Heaven, and that is through the mediation of Christ, who hath theRev. 3.7. key of David; He that openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth. The entrance into this glorious place of the Temple was by one door only: even as there is but one onely way to Heaven, through Christ who is theJoh. 10.9. Door of Life, and straight is that Gate, Mathew 7.14. But there were two leaves of this entrance whichDe Tem. p. 64. Ribera applies to Faith and Love: for which let that Authour answer. The foolish Virgins came not in season, and the door was shut, Mat. 25.10. To give us warning, what timely addresses we should make to the throne of Grace. On these Doors were the stately Sculptures of the Cherubims and Palm-Trees: the former shewing that Heaven is set open to such only, who, though in infirmity yet have endeavoured with an Evangelical sincerity, to do the Fathers willMat. 6.10. on Earth as chearfully and willingly, as it is done in Heaven by those Holy Angels. By the other, viz. The Palm-Trees is signifiedRev. 3.5. shall He who overcometh, shall be Clothed in white Raiment, andVers. 21. shall sit down on the Throne of Christ, even as He overcame, and is set down with the Fa∣ther in His Throne: wherefore the conquering Saints are remembred to beRev. 7.9. before the Throne and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their hands in that new and Heavenly Jerusalem, where there is anHeb. 12.22, 23. innumerable Company of Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect. The Vaile. The Vaile comes now to be considered in this its due and proper place. In that it did distinguish and separate the Oracle from the Sanctuary: It signified the portion or number of the Saints Militant, serving God in the Sanctuary-worship without the Vaile in the Ordinances of the Gospel, not being yet received into Heaven: who while they are at2 Cor. 5.6, 7. home in the body, are absent from the Lord walking by Faith, and not by sight or open vision of the glory in Heaven. Into which we are to passe by aHeb. 10.20. new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us through the Vaile, that is to say, his flesh. So that as there was no passing of old in to the Holy of Holyes, but through the Vaile: So there is no passage for us into Heaven, but by Jesus Christ, who is ascended with his assumed flesh into that Holy of Holyes, ma∣king way for all his members: shewing that till we follow the Captain of our salvation through sufferings, and the death of our flesh, we are kept off from communion with the Saints in glory. As the Oracle is the Heaven of glory, the habitation of Saints and Angels: So, The Vaile is to shadow forth the inferior Heavens. So Porphyr. de antr. Nymph. p. 116. which as Vaile orHeb. 1.12. Dickins. Delph. ex Varrone. p. 119. Vesture shalt thou fold them up.
There be, who (taking the Sanctuary to signifie the Jewish worship; and the Oracle, to note the Heaven of Gospel-Ordinances: and further considering the Veile as hindring our passage into, and our beholding of the Oracle) apply this Veile as aRivet in Exod. cap. 27. p. 1129. type of the distinction betwixt Jews and Gentiles: which separation as aEph. 2.14. partition wall the death of Christ hath taken away. Though others more probably apply it to the outward wall of the Temple that kept off the Gentiles from coming into that Court, where the Jews did worship: Whereof more anon in its proper order. The contexture of the Vaile we read to beExod. 20.31. of blew and purple, scarlet, and fine twined linnen, of cunning work, and imbroidered with Cherubims. The manner of the work was this, that one of the 4, suppose the fine twined threds of linnen made the warp or stamen: the other 3 made the woof or subiegmen, and were by curious Art framed into figured work of Cheru∣bims: as it is common in our daies, in all sorts of weaving, to expresse ma∣ny sorts of Beasts, Birds, Men or Flowers, most lively in their Works. Ribe∣ra following Josephus,. P. 454. lin. 29. Edit. Par. 1552. Turneb. gr. Philo Judaeus, our Country man Bede, and others of the antients, expound them in their discourse about theLib. 1. c. 21. Edit. 8o. Antwerp. 1598. Temple, p. 63. in these words. [The blew, because it resembles Heaven in its colour, sig∣nifies that the Life of the Faithful should be Heavenly, (not Earthly, such as is the Life of unbelievers) and full of the desires of the highest good, which Faith manifests. The Scarlet, because it imitates fire, signifies the ardor of Charity, and ought to be twice dyed, than not onely God may be loved, but also our Brethren. The Purple, which is stained with blood, (of the Ty∣rian Shell-fish) notes the imitation of Christs sufferings, and patience in Labours, and carrying the Crosse, as Bede saith, C. 15. The fined twined linnen (as the same Author hath it in the same place) because it grows out of the Earth with a green stalk, and is prepared by the great labour of Artists in such manner that, losing its natural colour, it is reduced to whiteness; doth fitly insinuate the Chastisement of our flesh, which is to be exercised by works of Repentance, and to be thereby tamed, that it may become white and clean. Cherubims are woven in the Velle, that we may study to imitate the life of Angels, as was said before, and that we should constantly make use of a great deal of knowledge (as Bede speaketh) in the good works which we performe; (For Cherubims signifie multitude of knowledge) alwayes looking towards the divine Oracles, and governing our walkings by behol∣ding of them, lest perhaps we should err from the path of vertue. Others there are, who taking the Veile to signifie the body of Christ, apply the purple to the blood of the Virgin: the elegant weaving, to the working of the holy Spirit: which did frame that excellent variety of his blessed mem∣bers. But these and the like (though some, saith the judicious Rivet in the forecited place, do wonderfully please themselves thereat) are idle fancies, and little to the purpose. For they that would in these things be wise above what is written, are plain fools. However I thought good to mention them, to excite sober spirits to a more full inquisition, if any Mystery should be con∣cluded under them. Possibly the glorious Embroidery of this curious Veile might signifie the diverse heavenly graces, wherewith our Lord was beautified without mea∣sure. The Cherubims that were woven in it, might possibly note the service and ready attendance of these blessed Spirits, who divers timesJoh. 1.51. Mat. 4.11. Mar. 1.13. Luk. 22.43. Ministred to him in the daies of his flesh. At the time of his blessed Passion, thisMat. 27.51. Mar. 15.38. Luk. 23.35. Veile was rent in twain from the top to the bottome, a sight no doubt exceeding strange and terrible to the Priests that entred into the Sanctuary: seeing it was no lesse then a miracu∣lous prodigy attending his death. So that as the Veile was rent, it signified
the rending his blessed body upon the Crosse, (his flesh being signifyed by it) that so his holy and spotlesse soul, after the giving up of his Spirit to the Fa∣ther, might enter into Paradise. As this Veil did hide the entrance into the Sanctuary; So it signified that all things were then covered with shadows, and that the Jewish Nation was separated from other people, according to the usual and common apprehen∣sion. Its being rent by the power of heaven at his death, did signify that Je∣sus, our true High-Priest, was then entring into heaven, as to his Soul, and was about to enter with both Soul & Body, as he did a little after from Mount Olivet. For as the Jewish High-Priest did enter once a year, with the blood of slain Beasts, into this most holy place; So Christ by the vertue of his own blood and the merit of his passion, did enter once for all into the sacred hea∣vens, causing all the ancient shadows to cease,Cloppenb. p. 137. and to be rent in sunder, and making way for all Nations to become one people to the Father. So that the rending of this Veil noted the removal of blindnesse from the hearts and eyes of such as receive him by true Faith: and the way to heaven was then laid open for us to follow him into the Holy of Holies; whither ourHeb. 6.20. Forerunner is entred for us, even Jesus, made an High-Priest for ever af∣ter the order of Melchizedek. In the next place, I come to speak somewhat of the excellent Ornaments of the insides of the Oracle. The Walls were lined with1 King. 6.16. Cedar boards,ver. 18. carved with Knops and open flowers,ver. 29. Cherubims and Palm-trees, and all overlaid withver. 20. Gold. Now, although one2 Chr. 3.6. verse may be applyed to the whole House, yet may it more especially be understood of this most Holy place, which doubtlesse had the choisest and richest Ornaments in this point, as we see it had in others by expresse terms. Unto which the Jewish History doth fully consent, as is before spoken in the second Chapter. The Floor also of this house and the Cieling were lined with1 King. 6.15, 16. ver. 30. Cedar, and covered with Plates of2 Chr. 3.8. Gold, and the Gold was the Gold of Par∣vaim, that is of the Island Taprobane or Ceilan, an Island of the East-Indies, lying between 5 and 10 degrees of North latitude: as theIn Phaleg lib. 2. c. 27. and Canaan lib. 1. c. 46. learned Bo∣chartus hath endevoured to prove. Seeing then the Oracle did decipher the glorious heaven, the manifesta∣tive place of the divine Majesty to Angels, and Saints glorified. Therefore, in a word (because I have treated largely of the Materials themselvs, when I spake of the Sanctuary) The Cedar which is odoriferous and imputrible may set forth the incorruptible state of Saints, and the perpetuity of heavenly glo∣ry; and the never-fading fragrancy of all their Graces, which shall then a∣dorn their blessed Souls. The Gold, the refulgency and shining radiancy of their bodies, which shall be like theMat. 13.43. Sun; nay, like toPhil. 3.21. Christ's most glorious body. The various Sculptures of Cherubims, Palm-Trees, and o∣pen-flowers, the Communion that Saints shall hold with the blessed Angels, the Victory wherewith they shall be crowned; and the constant flowring youth of Glory, which shall never wax old, but alwaies be in a florid and beautiful state. The various precious stones, the variety of Joyes where∣with the life eternal of Saints shall be for ever imbelished. Whereas the Materials are the same with those in the Sanctuary we may note, that the excellencies of Saints in Glory are but the full-blown flowers of the buds of Grace; shewing that Grace is Glory begun, and Glory is Grace per∣fected: That Heaven doth not change a Saint quoad speciem, in respect to his condition, but quoad gradum, onely advance him to a state of greater perfect∣ion in the same kind, which shall never have end. When once our hopes shall be set ashoar in heaven, we shall satiate ourselvs with the river of Life, and drink in of the Vision of his face, when wePs. 17.18. shall awake in his likeness.
InPs. 16.11. whose presence is fulnesse of Joy, and at whose right hand are plea∣sures for evermore. That we may come to a conclusion of our discourse about this glorious Oracle: Inasmuch as we have (with submission to the learned) probably conjectured, that there was no light intromitted into this sacred place from without: it may hold out to us, that when the Elements shall be melted with fervent heat, when the heavens, being waxed old like a Garment, shall be rolled up like a Scroul, and laid aside; the new Jerusalem shall have noRev. 21.23. need of the Sun or the Moon to shine in it: for the Glory of God shall lighten it, and the Lamb shall be the light thereof. So that there shall be no night there, no need of a candle, or of the radiant lamp of the natural heavens: ForRev. 22.5. the Lord God shall give them light, and they shall reigne for ever and ever. Of the Side-Chambers. There were built round about the Temple, 3 stories of Chambers, besides2 Chr. 3. upper Rooms likewise over the Oracle, which were doubtlesse for the grand Ornament of the building, and had their several uses, although the holy Spirit hath not expresly mentioned the services that they were designed to: though it be very probable that (since the Priests and Levites are reported to have brought, from the City of David, the Tabernacle and all the holy Vessels that were in it,2 Chr. 5.5. & such Utensils not being used by Solomon) they might be laid up here. Most absurd is the fancy of some Popish Writers, who compare them to the three degrees of Chastity, in Married Persons, Widows, and Virgins; o∣thers of them, to the three estates 1. of those that chastly use the conjugal band; 2dly, of Prelates and Doctors of the Church; thirdly, of those who addict themselvs to a contemplative life, as Monks and Hermits. The very menti∣on of these things is a sufficient refutation before sober persons. If there were any Mystery in these appendant Rooms, which we may consider as subservient to the great Type of the Temple; let us have leave to reflect a little upon our Saviour's Allusion, which possibly he made to these Chambers, when he comforted his disciples with this, that inJoh. 14.2. his Fathers House there were many Mansions: if it were not so, he would have told them, assuring them that he went before them to heaven to prepare a place for them. By which we are to understand the Mansions of Glory, in that2 Cor. 5.1. building of God, an house not made with hands, eternall in the heavens: so that when this bodi∣ly or earthly Mansion of our bodies, wherein our Souls are now contained, shall be dissolved, we shall hereafter rise together and fit together inEph. 2.6. hea∣venly places in Christ Jesus. Inasmuch also as we have observed these Chambers to be repositories for all the Vessels and Utensils of Moses his Ta∣bernacle, we may thence learn, that the contemplation of Saints in heaven shall be greatly refresht about the manner of worship, through which they passed in the Wildernesse unto Canaan; and that the Graces therein exercised shall be the measure of their rewards: For theirRev. 14.13. works shall follow them to Heaven, and they shall all be perfected and compleated in the fruition and vision of God.
SECT. II. Concerning the Mysteries of the Courts and Buildings, round about the Temple. IN the Historical discourse we find but two Courts encompassing the Temple in the daies of King Solomon. The first, or nearest to the Tectum or covered-building (treated of in the foregoing Section), was called the Court of the Priests, because the rites and ceremonies of Sacrifice were there∣in performed. The other, called the outer Court, the great Court, or the Court of Israel, was that whereinto the People of the Land of Canaan had free admission, in case they were clean according to the Law. Some speak of a third Court, common to the Gentiles, and therefore by Christian Writers sometimes termed the Court of the Gentiles. But it could not beDr. Lightf. Tem. p. 93. properly styled a Court, because without either Walls or Pavements, containing it seems the whole compass of Mount Moriah, where∣in the Gentile Proselytes might stand and worship. Some good portion of which ground of the holy Mountain (it is conceived) was encompassed with a Wall in the daies of our Saviour, and was the place out of which our bles∣sed LordJoh. 2.15. whipped the buyers and sellers, such not being supposed to have had admission into the Court of Israël. The state of the Gospel is accordingly applyed to all these Courts, so cal∣led. Among which, the outmost of all might signify Hypocrites and Forma∣lists, who appear in external shape as sacred worshippers standing in the open view of Ordinances. Or rather, (because such Proselytes might come, some of them with sincere and honest intention of heart, to worship) it might shadow forth the state of such persons whose faces are set toward Zion, & enquire the way to the Temple in the beginning of the work of conversion. The Court of Israël may be applyed and accommodated to the faithful Worshippers under the Gospel, who are more fully and clearly acquainted with spiritual service, and draw nearer to God in divine communion with him, and stand in a near enjoyment and fruition of his presence. The in∣ward Court was open onely to Priests and Levites, denoting the Church-Of∣ficers under the New Testament, who present the spiritual Sacrifices of Saints unto the Majesty of heaven, at the set-times of worship in the publick assem∣blies. The body of the Temple had two more principal parts, viz. the Sanctua∣ry and the Oracle. Ordinary Priests of old were admitted into the former, shewing the secret spiritual communion which the godly Ministers of the e∣vangelical worship do hold and enjoy with his divine Majesty. From him they receive the bread of life to dispense for the food of Saints. The Lamps of knowledge for illumination of the understandings of the faithful, they enlighten at the Golden Candlesticks within the Sanct∣uary. Their Prayers, being perfumed with the aromatical and fragrant Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ, yield forth a sweet smelling favour of rest at the Altar of Incense.
Finally into the Holy of Holies, none had access but the High-Priest himself; shewing Christs entrance into the Heavens, and mediating at the right hand of the Father for us. There be that consider only the Court of the Priests, and the covered Buil∣ding in this mystical notion: and apply all to the Heavens and Earth, accor∣ding to Josephus and Philo Judaeus, and the rest of the Jewish Nation, being ig∣norant of the great and unspeakable Mystery of the Messiah in a spiritual sense. Such, supposing the Court (which entertained both Beasts for sacri∣fice, and Men for the service) to signifiePic. Mi∣rand. praef. in Heptap. p. 4. this World, and the state there∣of, apply the Sanctuary to the starry Heavens, and the Oracle to the supercae∣lestiall world. These conceits I shall remit to their several Authours: Others conceive that the Court represented the Nations: The Holy place, the Church, and the Oracle figured Heaven: so that the Court was aMoulin. Prophecios p. 403. figure of the State of nature; the holy place, the state of grace, the other of glory. Others would have the Inner Court, (whereinto the Beasts were brought, and the sinner having, confest his sins over their heads) slain near to, and after burnt upon the Altar: the musick of the Levites, at time of sacrifice and other services here performed) upon this ac∣count to set forthRom. 12.1. our confession of sin, praying to God for pardon, the slaying of beastly lusts, the offering up of ourselves to God, as living and ra∣tionall sacrifices (those of old being but of unreasonable and brute Creatures) the works of repentance, and washing in the laver of renovation, our solemn prayse to God for his manifold mercies: and, in general, the state of such persons, as since the Revelation of the Word incarnate, do diligently serve and worship the infinite Essence in such Gospel-Ordinances, as were typified by the ancient Ceremonies solemnized within this Court: whereof more particularly (through divine permission in the 5th. Section of this Chap∣ter.) Those then which conversed without these walls of the immediate Wor∣ship of God, and rested only in the outer Court, might possibly shadow forth such persons under the new Testament, that are not yet emerged or come out of the common state of man by nature: but are yet carnal and unconverted; or, at least, as yet are not arrived into that intimate Communion and fellow∣ship with God, neither have sacrificed and dedicated themselves to his Ma∣jesty in holy and close walking; but have some general knowledge, and com∣mon conviction, and thereupon begin to look towards, and draw nigh to ho∣ly worship in the spiritual Temple. For, as I humbly conceive, the Worship of the Jewes, did not only hint at, and shadow forth, some parts of the exter∣nall form of Gospel-worship and Ordinances; but did more principally aim at the spiritual good things of the new Covenant, which were to be more fully given forth, after the appearing of Christ, and the powring out of the spirit upon all flesh in the latter dayes. If so be the inner Court (wherein the Priests of old performed the princi∣pall parts of legal worship) did set forth, in a shadow, the state of the Gospel-Ordinances, as it seemes probable (and seeing that it was that very Court, which was neerest to, and did incompass the covered Temple, without any other intermediate enclosure; and whereas the body of the Temple did signi∣fie the Church, the mystical body of Christ). Then might this Court conse∣quently (which we are now viewing) exhibit the constant attendance of the Evangelical Ministry upon the Church; and moreover, that we draw nigh to God's Majesty in our publick services, through the exercise of their Ministerial Functions. For as, of old, the Sacrifices annexed with Confessions and Pray∣ers were mannaged by the Priests, whilest the Song was carried on by the Le∣vites: so under the Gospel, the publick Worship is to be solemnized by the
instituted Ministers of Jesus Christ. So that as the Sanctuary held forth the Communion of the invisible Church, which she holds with Christ in a secret invisible manner, unknown to the World: this Court might further exhibit the Ordinances of the visible Church, wherein all the professed members (whether of the reall mystical body of Christ, or hypocrites and formalists) do joyn; and do all hold an external Communion with God in them, and are under the same external and visible priviledges. Furthermore, (allowing an analogy to what hath bin spoken:) The great outward Court, wherein the Jewes worshipped, might accordingly hold out to us the visible Professors themselves, under the New Testament, which draw nigh to God in those Or∣dinances, which the Gospel-Ministers (typified by the Priests) do handle and mannage within, in the inner Court. There yet remaineth a Conjecture to be mentioned of that famous and learned Critick of our Nation, Mr. Joseph Mede, which I shall nakedly propose, and resign up the censure unto men that are able, or are so immodest, as to reflect upon the memory of so deserving a person in the Church, as to Revelation-Mysteries. This candid and Re∣verend man, having resembled the Temple to Christ, thinks there was some Chronical Mystery involved in the Courts, as to the State of the Church, of Christ, in various times under the Gospel; and conceives that the Inner Court might denote the State of the Primitive times under Rome, while it was Pagan and Heathenish, while scorched and burnt in the fire of persecution, by the cruel Emperors and their Officers. As to which point the Altar in the Priests Court, seemed to denote the frequentMede on the Revel. part 2. pag. 3. Edit. Lond. 1650. Sacrifices of the holy Mar∣tyrs, whose Souls lying under the Altar, do cryRev. 6.9, 10. how long, how long Lord, holy and true, dost thou not avenge our blood? &c. This Altar (as theRev. 4.1. whole vision) was seen in Heaven, that is, in the Church: which is so called frequently, whereas by Earth, the wicked and un∣godly of this World, are meant in those mystical pages. The second or outward Court, he further conjectures to have been the sha∣dow of the State of the Gospel under Rome, Antichristian and Papall, for the space of two and forty moneths. In the mensuration of the Temple there∣fore, we read of a Precept given, to leave the outward Court unmeasured, be∣ing a place resigned up to the Gentiles to tread underfoot, during the time prementioned: In a way of worship (saithLightf. Templ. p. 6. one) (even as the treading of Gods Courts in the like sense is spoken of by the ProphetIsa. 1.12. Esay) and there∣fore commanded not to be measured, because of the numerous multitude of Worshippers under the Gospel, which it could not in the least measure con∣tain according to its ancient limits. But to be trodden down (saith the for∣mer) in way of profane contempt, idolatrous Worship, and persecuting fury against sincere and pure professors of the Truth. Suffice it, hitherto to have mentioned some Conjectures about the Mysti∣call meaning of these Courts in this our view: wherein I shall not immo∣destly presume to let loose the rains of fancy; but, with all humble submissi∣on to the sober and godly learned, I apprehend the most genuine and least forced interpretation of their typical signification (if there were any set Myste∣ry couched in them, as such capacious places) to be briefly this, That as the inward Court was made for the Priests therein to perform the rites and cere∣monies of their ancient service, into which there was no admission granted to the common people, unless when they brought a Sacrifice, and were to lay their hands on the head of their offering, and to confess their sins over it: so might it possibly denote and shadow forth a Gospel-Ministry, which in the various functions of the persons engaged in that sacred Office, should stand in a neerer capacity of service, and approximation to God, then any other calling or persons whatsoever. Further, as the outward Court contained within its
prescript limits, the ancient senes, when drawing nigh to God, beholding of the Priests in their services within, and joyning with them in the solemnities of legal worship: In like manner, the faithful people of the new Testament, the true inward spiritualRom. 2.29. Jewes, are next unto the Ministry, in publick and solemn Ordinances, wherein they come nigh to God under the Gospel. Now whereas formerly the Gentiles could not be admitted into the Court of Isra∣el, but were afar off without the walls of the outward Court: Such might shadow forth the state of carnall persons under the Gospel, or of formall professors, who give their presence in some measure to Ordinances: but as the bodies of them under the old Law stood at a great distance, so the hearts of these formalists under the new Testament, areIsa. 29.13. farre from God. But since the outward wall of the great Court (which kept the Gentiles in old time, from intercommuning with the Jewes) is broken down by the coming of Christ, who did appear (sayes holy Paul) for this end,Eph. 2.14. , to dissolve, unloose, or take away the mid∣dle wall of partition, or that wall which stood betwixt the Jews and Gentiles of old, Now all are brought into one Court, into one body and fellowship, and are become coheirs of the same common salvation. To conclude, It is observable, that the great Court whereinto the twelve Tribes did enter of old, was nothing considerable in its limits then, in re∣spect to what it was set out in its circuit by the Prophet Ezekiel, (whereof I have spoken before Chapt. 3. p. 49.) nay in the Revelation of St. John, (as was newly noted) it was left unmeasured, by reason of its quantity, and the great number of worshippers as some have thought. The measures mentioned in the Prophecy of Ezekiel, no doubt (what ever the other may denote) did sig∣nifie the great fulness of the Gentiles; and that the compass of the Church in Gospel-dayes, should be marvellously extended. Wherefore we read in ho∣ly Scripture, thatEph. 2.14. Princes shall come out of Egypt, and Aethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God: that is, the Eastern Aethiopians of A∣sia, asPs. 68.31. Herodotus termes them, or the Inhabitants of Arabia, as a learnedLib. 7. p. 408. Knight hath observed; nay, we read of the men of Rahab (or leigh Rehoboth) and Babel, two Cities of the Assyrian Empire, to be born in Zion. The formerRaw∣leigh Hist. part 1. c. 8. §. 10.3, 4, 5. Arias Montanus takes to be the same with Nineveh and call∣edPs. 87.4. Rehoboth, for its vastness and amplitude. Nay, the Inhabitants of Philistia and Tyre, even the Nations that are on the North side of the Holy Land, as the Phoenicians of Tyre and Sidon; on the West and South, as the Phi∣listims, Aegyptians; on the South-East and North-East, the Cushites or Aethio∣pians of Arabia and Midian, and the people of Assyria and Babylon; nay, all Nations shall come to the holy Mountain of the Church in the latter day. Having brought so famous a throng of People from all quarters of the Earth, within these Courts, we shall leave them ar their pious devotions; and consider the walls wherewith these spacious places were incompassed. We read that these Courts (especially the outer) were very strongly and desensibly walled by King Solomon, signifying thereby the constant protection which is afforded the Church by Jesus Christ the Antitype of that glorious King.Antiq. Judaic. p. 1. c. 8. p. 18. edit. 1593. She shall call her wallsGen. 10.15. Salvation, [ In the name of Jesus] and her Gates praise: or else theIsa. 60.18. Zech. 2.5. Isa. 5.5. walls may signifie protection of Angels about the Church: asIn Isa. Tom. 5. edit. 1530. p. 27. Jerom expounds that place of Isaiah, where the Prophet speaks of walling in the Vineyard, building a Tower in it, and setting up a Wine-press. By the Wine-press, he interprets the Altar, by the Tower the Temple; by the walls, the guard of Angels. Seeing also that great men are resembled toIsa. 2.15. & 41.15. Dutch An∣notat. walls or Towers for the defence of a City: we may consider them, as reflecting upon the Bulwark, or
defence of Magistracy, which God shall raise up in the Gospel-dayes, for the preservation of his Church and Ministry: there being a gracious promise thatIsa 49.23. Kings shall be nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be nrng Mothers to the Children of the new Jerusalem. In several parts of these walls, were many strong and stately Gates erected: We read that, in ancient times, in the Gates, or rather the Chambers over the Gates of the Cities, the Governours and Rulers sate in judgement, and the Sanhedrin or Jewish Councel sate in some Chamber of the Gates of these Courts: which might hint forth to us some spiritual Order, Rule and Go∣vernment in the Church of Christ, which should preserve the Church from ruine. Well did the Rulers sit in Chambers over the Gates, to view all that passed in or out: thereby noting, that where a holy, zealous, and true order∣ed Discipline is in a Church, the evening Wolves of Heresie and the suble Foxes of error walk not on the walls thereof: but because of these great and sad mischiefs, Judah mourneth, theLam. 5.18. Gates thereof do languish, and are black unto the ground. The chiefest and most beautiful gate of the Temple-walls did look towards the East; but yet was something lower then the rest (asJerem. 14.2. Ribera conceits out of Bede) ita ut exoriens Sol aequinoctiales sine ullo obstaculo rados suos per ostia Templi, & Oraculi in ipsam Arcam quae erat intra Sancta Sanctorum, mit∣teret: that so the morning Sun, (when cutting the Aequator in the beginning of Aries & Libra) might without any hinderance dart his beams thorough the Gates of the Temple and Oracle, into the Ark it self, which was seated in the Holy of Holies. I shall not intermeddle with that conceit, built I suppose upon an apprehension, that the expiation day was at or near that time of the year, when the Sun was in the Aequinoctiall: at which time, the doors of the Oracle being open, might admit the Sun, when just upon the Horizon, to shine upon the Ark. But when we consider the height of Mount Olivet in the East, we may safely lay that small point aside, and subscribe to this rather, that the East Gate was built low, that the Priest in the Solemnity about the Red Cow upon Mount Olivet,Pag. 17. might sprinkle of her blood toward the Temple, and look over this Gate through the Porch, towards the doors of the Sanctuary. Why the ordinary and most usual Gate for entrance, in the outer Court, and the principal of the inward, faced the East; most do conceive to be for these ends, viz. to oppose the Customs of Heathens, who made their chief Gates toward the West, that these stupid worshippers drawing nigh to theirLightf. Temple ser∣vice. p. 192. blind, deaf and dumb deities, might have their Idolls as it were, a∣rising upon them out of the East,Num. 19.4. with a salutifetous and chearful view. Of this their scituation, I have spoken somewhat formerly, when viewing the Porch. But as to this, may be opposed the saying of Herodotus concerningPs. 115.5. Pag. 141. l. 46. Asy∣chis King of Egypt, that he built a Portic for Vulcan's Temple, , towards the rising Sun or the East. Nay in one word with this doth concur the speech of Porphyry, tring of the cave of the Nymphs in these words, (f)  &c. .Pa. 104. For what cause, &c. doth he ascribe the South to the Gods? and not rather use the East and West in this matter. Seeing almost all Temples have their Statues and Entrances turn'd toward the East, that so those that enter looking toward the West, may yield their honour and service to their Gods, standing with their faces right against their Images. All that I shall rejoyn to this of Porphyries, is, that possibly after the Temple's
erection the Devil might also follow that patterne: thereby the more to en∣snare his duded t woshippers. ForStrom. l. 7. p. 320. Edit. Heins. Anno 1616. Clemens Alexandrinus tls us, [ The most antient Temples did view the Western quarter of Heaven: so that those who stood with their faces toward the Images, were taught to ruin themselves toward the East. But to conclude all; Why the ancient Christians did worship toward the East, and erect their Temples in that Posture as that the most sacred place (so repued) should stand at the east end, seems to be (saithDe Al∣tar. & Sa∣crif. p. 94. Molinaus) the hatred of the Jews who worshipt towards the We. [Veluerunt ergo e teres Christiani hac notâ à Judaeis discerni] Therefore the antient Christians were willing to be distinguished from the Jews by this note or custome. So that I cannot apprehend any great Mystery to be further couched in the position of Solomon's Temple in such a manner as that the entrance should be East, and the Oracle Westward; than to discriminate and put a difference be∣twixt the Israelites and the antient Heathens, as hath bin before hinted in ou discourse concerning the Porch of the covered Temple. Whether or no this Eastern situation of the gates for entrance into the Temple, might hint at the Income of Saints under the Gospel into spiritual worship to be at first principally by the Converts of Judaea, and the Eastern Nations; I leave to the consideration of the Learned. We know that Peter the Apostle of the circumcision conversed much in and about the Eastern gate of the Temple calledActs 3.2, 10. Beautiful, wrought miracles, and concerted many to the Faith in the dawning of the Gospel. To proceed; The Principal Wetern gate led to the King's house (as hath bin declared in the foregoing History) to manifest the necessary connexion between Holiness and Royalty, the amicable corespondence that ought to be maintained betwixt the Temple and the Court. Certainly that policy is dangerous to the State which is not founded upon piety. Kings must al∣wayes remember to go up to the house of God, and make inquiry at the Temple before they set their designes on foot. The sword of Gideon will prove but a weapon made of lead, it the sword of the Lord do not lead the Van of his Army. David when flying from Saul, takes to him a consecrated sword1 Sam. 21.9. from behind the Ephod at1 Sam. 22.19. Nob, a City of the Priests, and proves successeful in evading the hands of his persecutor. At another time when he was to fight against the Philistins, he2 Sam. 5.19. consults the mind of God, and at a second enquiy he is commanded not to stir, till he heard the sound of a going in the tops of the Mulbery-Trees: For then did theVers. 24. Lord go out before him to smite the host of his enemies. Afterwards in the Temple-dayes godly Jehoshaphat2 Chron. 20.4, 5. sought help from God, and powred forth an ardent prayer against the consederated Armies of Moab and Ammon. Good Hezekiah likewise being greatly troubled by the great Army of Sen¦nacharib, but more by hisChr. 32.17. raising etters against the Lord God of Israel, goes up into the House of God, and2 King. 19.14. spreads the Letters before him, and commits his Cause to his divine protection to the terror and miraculous con∣fusion of his adversaries, the comfort of his subjects, and for an example to all future Princes to commend their lawful Arms to the God of Battel. Hap∣py are those Kings who before their enterprizes seek to the face of God. Blessed are the Courts of those Princes that stand within the hearing of Temple Trumpets; and successeful are those Worthies that count it their highest interest, to hold constant intercourse with Heaven. But besides this Royal-gate, there were several others in the Western wall of the outer Court of the Temple, and more (as far as we have any Scripture-light) than on any other side: possibly, to denote the great and marvellous
Income of spiritual proselytes to the Gospel, from the Western parts of the World in future ages. There were likewise gates on the North and South, as before is rehearsed more fully. So that on all sides there was admission for persons to the Tem∣ple-worship: thereby signifying that manyPsal. 107.3. from the East and West, the North and the South, should come and sit down with Abraham in theLuk. 13.29. Kingdome of God. Behold persons coming from afar off, from the North and West, with others from theIsa. 49.12. Land of Sinim, or the Country of theGen. 10.17. Sinites Southerly of Jerusalem near Sinai, in the Land of Arabia. Nay God hath promised to save his people fromZech. 8.7, 8. the East and West, and to bring them to Jerusalem, and there will be their God in truth and righteous∣nesse. As the Temple: So Jerusalem it self did signifie the Church, Now the 12 Apostles are said to have theirRev. 21.14. names written on the 12 foundations of the gates of the new Jerusalem. As by whose holy and faithfulPotter in 666. p. 100. do∣ctrine all other Christians have had their admission into the Church, and are converted to the true faith. It is observed that the lodgings of the Priests and Levites were assigned in theJerem. 35.4, & 36.10. Gate-Chambers of the Temple-Courts: thereby premonishing the Evangelical Church, what provision ought to be made for Gospel-Officers in reference to habitation, convenient for their attendance upon divine wor∣ship. Moreover in the sides of these Courts there were porched-walls round about, commodiously fitted with seats for persons to repose themselves up∣on, as may be supposed in the first Temple, not unlike those whereof we are sure to have bin under the second: seeing our Lord himself acquaints us by the pen of the Evangelist, that HeMat. 26.55. sate daily with them teaching in the Temple. At another time we find himMark. 12.41. sitting over against the Treasury, beholding what gifts were cast into it. All which conveniences of walking and sitting in places pleasant and defenced from impetuous weather, might yield a glance of reflection upon that pleasurable delight and sweet fellow∣ship, that Saints should hold together under the Gospel in communion with each other. There being no speculation so sweet in the , the portico's of the antient Philosophers, no converse so refreshful in the shady walks of the ancient Temple-buildings, as are to be enjoyed in Gospel Ordinances: no Di∣alogues so amiable as holy conference: no disputes so mild, so grave, so convincing, and so little intermixed with the Checquer-work of vain jang∣lings: as those that are managed by meek and holy people in the Gospel-Courts and Porches of our blessed Saviour. The most famous of these was called Solomon's Porch, by way of eminency, as being on the East side of the outer Court, most Resplendent and Majesti∣cal, and as it seems bearing his name in the daies of our Lord: which though formerly destroyed by the Chaldaeans, as to the super-structures, yet reaedi∣fied again upon the very same foundations, which that glorious King had stu∣pendiously raised out of the Vally: whereof hath bin treated at large in the 2d Chapter foregoing. In this placeJoh. 10.23, 24, &c. our blessed Lord did Preach himself, and bespeak the people with so much perswasive Rhetorick (no man ever speaking like him) that many believed on his Name. Over these porched piazzo's were treasure-Chambers built in several places (as is generally con∣ceived) standing upon many stately marble pillars. In the which were laid up provisions of several sorts for the use and service of the Temple: shewing that even under the Gospel also there shall be treasures, andMich. 4.13. spoyles de∣dicated of mens substance to the Lord of the whole Earth. The open places of both these Courts (as hath bin formerly mentioned) were admirably paved with great variety of curious stones laid in checquered work. Shewing how
decently all places in and about the Temple were fitted for use: what hand∣some and splendid Ornaments were bestowed upon that beautiful Temple? what cost was expended? what neat and cleanly provision was made for all the parts of that antient and legal worship. To remember us, surely, that though there be not such holinesse now to be ascribed to publick places of worship, as was of Old; and although the main stresse of our service lies up∣on the spirituality of our hearts, and sincerity of our minds in drawing nigh to God; yet certainly that as to the very places where we now worship, there ought to be care taken for all decency and comlinesse, so far as may not trend upon the border of superstition. If so be the very Rooms of our Houses wherein we lodge and take our repast, cannot be endured to be offensive by uncleanness. I for our civil meetings, as in publick Halls and Senatories, men take the strictest care to have such places swept and garnished: how much lesse should publick Oratories and Temples for the Congregations of the Faithful to assemble in, be turned into Garrisons, Prisons, or Stables. Furthermore, We read concerning the Temple (Dr. Light. p. 3. 12. & Tem∣ple p. 191. as it stood in our Saviour's daies that all the Courts were curiously and strongly arched under ground with double arches, one upon another: which was on purpose done to prevent any secret making of graves in any of the Courts of the Temple: much lesse the Tem∣ple it self. ToLevit. 19.16, 18. touch a dead body was a great defilment: or the bone of a man, or a gave. Such a person was to be unclean for seven dayes, and there were appointed many curious rites about his purification there ob∣servable. It should seem in the dayes of our Lord, that ordinary burial places were without the gates of the Cities or Towns. As may be observed about Lazarus his grave, that Christ was notJoh. 11.30, 32. yet come to the Town of Bethany, and yet was at or near the grave: but more particularly about the raising of the young man of Naim, who wasLuk. 7.12. carryed out at the gate to∣wards burial. TheMat. 8.28, 33. Tombs likewise where among the possessed person con∣versed were without the City: Lastly our Lord himself as he sufferedHeb. 13.12. without the City, so was he buried. ForJoh. 19.41, 42. in the place where he was cru∣cified, there was a Garden, and in the Garden a new Sepulchre ofMat. 27.60. Jo∣seph of Arimathea, and there was the body of our dear Lord intombed. Nay the Common burial place was in the Vally of Kidron, asJerusal. num. 204. Adricho∣mius relates. Now whereas we read of the Kings of Judah buried in the Gar∣den of the Kings house: that was a particular Royalty, as among the Ro∣mans they permitted their chief and most noble Patriots or Generals to be buried in the forum, or other place designed within the Walls. As among the ancient people of God, so neither among the wiser Heathens were Sepul∣chers permitted within their Cities, much lesse in Temples. Plutarch in the cloe of the life of Aratus, saies, that there was among the Sicyonians , an antient Law against it. P. 1922. Edit. H. Steph. Tom. 3. And Petitus in his explication of the Athenian Laws, saies,Tit. 8. Pag. 495. Semper ex∣tra urbis pomoeria: that they alwayes interred without the limits of their Cities. As for the Romans the ancient Decem virate in the Laws of the 12 Tables commented upon byCap. 3▪ Pag. 20. Kittershushius, this is one. Hominem mor∣tuum in urbe ne sepelito, neve urito. Bury not, neither burn a dead body in the City. Whereof that commentator renders 3 reasons, 1. That a publick place should not be tyed up by private Religon. For they did exercise some kind of Religious piety toward the places of their dead, The Lares, Larvae, and Genii or Ghosts of the departed being esteemed sacred, 2. That the sacred places of the City he not polluted: which agrees properly to our purpose, 3. Because the Air is vitiated by the exhalations from dead bodies. In which point the Civillians would do well to consult and recite the opinions
of learned Physitians. To the same effect he mentions the Laws of several Emperours, asHenr. Salmuth in Panciroli. de reb. deperd. Tit. 62. p. 339. Hadrian, Antoninus pius (in Jul. Capitolin) Gratian, Va∣lentinian, Theodosius: who gave expresse charge, especially the last, and sent out Edicts against burying in Churches or Temples. It seems also that the civil Law of the Romans had obtained among us here in Brittain in this matter: and had continued for many ages till the dayes of Cuthbert the 11 Arch-bishop of Canterbury who obtained licence of the Pope of Rome to bury in Church-yards, asDe pre∣sul. Angl. p. 65. Edit. 1616. Bishop Godwin expresly mentions in these words [Hujus Pontificis precibus indultum à Papâ, ut in coemeteriis liceret mortuos sepelire in civitatibus sitis, cum anteà mos esset, cadavera extra pomoeria tumulanda deferre], At the request of this Bishop the Pope did grant leave to bury the dead in Church-yards, situate within Cities: whereas before, the manner was to carry them to burial into places without the Walls. Nay it should seem that liberty was also given to bury in Churches them∣selves at the same time; for this Arch-Bishop wasAntiq. Britan. p. 61. buried in his own Church: who died (as these 2 last cited Authours agree) A. D. 758. So that this undecent custome (it seems) of inhumation inWeavers funeral Mo∣numents. p. 8. Somner's Canterbury p. 232. Churches hath not bin in England but a little above 800 years, and began almost in the depth of Popery. Strange it is, that a thing to the Jews of old so abhorrent and detested; unknown to the Primitive Christians; so strictly forbidden by the Civil Na∣tions in their Laws, should obtain among Christians: in it self so unseemly, to the living offensive, to the dead unprofitable, unlesse that we grant prayers for the dead to be availeable, a piece of worship fit for such & as decent as the act of burial. It is somewhat inconsistent with them that place such holiness in Churches, so to pollute them with graves: for they are counted great polluti∣ons in the Book of God. But I crave pardon for insisting so long upon this Popish absurdity that is so riveted into mens minds by inveterate Custome, that it's almost out of view of cure. For my part I think it a great mercy for persons deceased to have comely and decent interrement, and according to their quality, both lawful and commendable it is to have Monuments of their Vertues erected over them: But why it may not be done in a place walled in for that purpose without the bounds of Cities, as of old it was custo∣mary, and is at this day at Newport and Yarmouth in the Ile of Wight, good presidents for us: nay, and be lesse subject to impaire, let others Judge. Sure we are, The Temple of Solomon, nor its Courts and Precincts, knew any such matter: but all its pavements were preserved in due Order and Method unviolable. Hitherto have we traced the naked buildings of that glorious Temple of Solomon: It is now high time to survey the Mysteries of the particular rarities set up in their due places within and without. Which with the gracious per∣mission of Gods holy Majesty, begging the silver influences of mount Zion, I shall proceed to lay down in the succeeding Section.
SECT. III. The Mysteries of the several Or∣naments and Utensils of the Temple. IN the beginning of this Section, let the method of our procedure be di∣gested, which will fall out commodiously according to four several principal parts of the building, wherein these rare Ornaments had their situation. Some whereof were in the Oracle, others in the Sanctuary, some in the Porch, and the rest in the Priest's Court. The Excellent things that were stuate in the Oracle were, the Ark, the Tables of Stone, the Mercy-Seat, the Cherubims, and, as some conceive, the Rod of Aaron, and the Pot of Manna even as before they were laid up in the adytum, or most holy place of Moses his Tabernacle. In the first place then, we are to begin with the Ark, and endeavour to understand and explain what Mystery was held forth by it. But here, before I speak to the mystical signification of this rare and admi∣mirable Vessel, containing the stone Tables of the Decalogue; let me not pass over in silence that which was observed by Heathens themselves concerning the Oracle at Jerusalem, that it had within it no Image or repraesentation of the divine Majesty which was adored by the Jews. In the first place Heca∣taeus Abderita,Joseph. p. 1048. c. 8. who flourisht in the 117 Olympiad, (as recited byCon. Api∣on. l. 1. p. 1049 Josephus) saies concerning the Temple; . That there was no Image, nor consecrated Statue, or other Donarium on the Walls at all. To the same purpose do several others speak, whom I shall briefly recite; as Diodorus Siculus in the Excerpta of his 40th book, where falsly affirming that Moses built the Temple at Jerusalem, which is true of the Tabernacle its previous Icon, he adds, that he shaped no Image or Statue of God, since that a humane shape can in no wise agree to him. Ve∣ry memorable are the words ofGeogr. l. 16. p. 700. &c. Strabo as to this in hand, the words in Greek I shall omit: Who speaking of Moses goes on thus, [ &c. For he declared and taught them that the Egyptians did not con∣ceive aright of God, while they likened the Deity to Beasts and Cattel: neither the Lybians or Grecians assigning the shape of man to God. But that alone was God (containing us all with the Earth and Seas) which we call Heaven, and the World, and the nature of all things. Will any be so presumptuous and bold, that is in his right Wits, to essigiate or shape an Image of him, like to any thing among us? Wherefore, rejecting all carved works, it behoves us to erect a Temple and holy house befitting such a Majesty, without any figure at all.] Upon this account it is, that the Heathens, seeing no Image or Statue at all in the Temple, could not tell what Deity it was the Jews worshipt. The Athenians had an Altar [] to the unknown God. Critias, being reproved, by Triphon in Lucian, for swearing by the Heathen Gods, at last swears [ &c.] by the unknown God at Athens, mentioned byPaus. Att. p. 1. lin. 34, 35. Pausa∣nias to have had an Altar at Phalarum, a Port of Athens: There (saies he) are [] the Altars of the Gods called Un∣known.
In another place in his Eliacks, discoursing at large of the many Altars that were near the Temple of Jupiter at Olympia, he mentions one close by the Altar of Jupiter Olympius called , The Altar of the unknown Gods. Wherefore Plutarch, in the life of Crassus, profes∣ses his want of knowledge to discern what God it was▪ which the Jews did worship. The place is worth reciting: [ &c. Crassus spent many daies in weighing the mony of the Goddesse which is worshipt in the Holy City;Plut. in Cras. p. 1010. edit. H. Step. and assigning a set number of Souldiers to the People and the Rulers, afterwards freed them for a sum of mony, whereby he lost his credit, and was despised by them. The first Omen (or token to him of bad successe) was from this Goddesse. Which some take to be Ve∣nus; others, Juno; others the (first) Cause and Nature supplying the begin∣nings and seeds of all things out of moisture, and manifesting the principle of all good things unto Man-kind. For as they were going out of the Tem∣ple, first Crassus the younger stumbled at the Door, and then the Elder fell upon him.] To this Inquiry of Plutarch, What the Deity was which was worshipt at Jerusalem; the Answer of Triphon to Critias (in Lucian's fore∣cited Dialogue) may be returned; [: But we having found out the God unknown in Athens, and worshipping him, lift up our hands to heaven, and give him thanks that we are made fit to be subject and obedient to so great a Power. Some glimmering knowledge of this great God had Socrates attained to, and was thereupon scofft at in that scurrilous Comedy ofPlut. . Aristophanes, styled , or Clouds; as if he worshipt those Exhalations: for which also at last he suffered death. Of whom Aelian, in his 2d. book of various History cap. 13. Plato, in a set Apology for his vindication, and Diogenes Laertius, in his life; Plutarch and Apuleius have inlarged. While we in the mean while are fully assured by an Apostolical pen, that this our God, of whom the World was generally ignorant,Act. 17.23, 24. &c. made the World, and all things therein, being Lord of Heaven and Earth, and dwelleth not in Temples made with hands. Wherefore, no wonder that the Heathens, searching after what Deity was worshipped in Judea, yet sate down withPhar. lib. 2. v. 590. Lucian declaring the Con∣quests of Pompey, Cappadoces mea signa timent, et dedita sacris Incerti Judaea Dei,— The Cappadocians at my Banners tremble, And Jews who at the sacred feasts assemble Of God, unknown to us,— Hist. l. 5. p. 622. Lug. Bat. 1640. Tacitus moreover treating of the Warrs of Titus in Judea, takes occasi∣on to speak of the Religion of that Country, in most things very corruptly: but as to our purpose at present expresly thus [Judaei mente solâ unum{que} numen intelligunt. Prophanos, qui deûm imagines, mortalibus materiis, in species homi∣num effingant summum illud, & aeternum, ne{que} mutabile, ne{que} interiturum. Igitur nulla simulacra urbibus suis, nedum templis sunt.] The Jews worship onely with their Souls, and apprehend the Deity, to be but one. They count such to be profane, who do fashion images of the Gods in the shapes of men with perishing matter. The most high God they deem eternal, un∣changeable and immortal: wherefore they have no images in their Cities, much less in their Temples. Din Cassius shall bring up the reare, who in the 36th Book of his History speaks thus, [
, &c.] They are of a diverie opinion (speaking of the Jewes) from all other men, as in all other things, so in their ordinary course of life; but especially in this that they worship none of the other Gods, but one they chiefly honour and adore: At that time (viz. of Pompey's Warrs in Judaea) they had no image at all in Jerusalem, holding their God to be of an inestable and invisible essence, exceeding all other men in his worship: un∣to whom they had built a Temple of great bulk and exceeding beautiful. Hence was it that the Heathens did so profanely jeer at the Jews, for lifting up their hands to Heaven as if they pray'd to the Clouds. So Petronius flouts at them,Satyr. p. 211, ed. Franc. 1621. 8o. Et coeli summas advocat auriculas, which we will translate to a more sober sense, Let Jews to Him lift up their eyes, Whose Throne is fixt above the Skyes. And therefore Juvenal, speaking how apt Children are to follow their Fathers in Religion, be it what it will, saies that some, having learned to be Jews, Satyr. 14. ver. 98.Nil praeter nubes & caeli numen adorant. They worship nought but Clouds, or else That God, who in the Heaven dwells. Nay, David seems to complain of his idolatrous Neighbours, exprobrating to him in his afflictions,Ps. 42.10. Where is thy God: as if so be, he were no where, who did not appear unto the eyes of men. Whereas invisibility is one of the choisest attributes of that immaterial, uncompounded, spiritual and in∣finite essence: whom we ought to serve with fear, and rejoyce before withPs. 2.11. trembling. Memorable is that passage of Lucian in his Philopa∣tris: which Dialogue (because forbidden by the Romish Index expurgatori∣us to be printed, for reasons best known to themselvs, while they suffer eve∣ry obscene Poet and Scoffer at Religion, and therefore not to be found in their latter Editions) I shall recite somewhat largely: [Pag. 466. edit. Basil. 1503. Tō. 4. . I will teach thee what the Universe is, and who was before all things, and what is the Systeme or frame of the Uni∣verse. Formerly indeed I suffered the same things thou dost: But since the Galilaean met with me, (one2 Cor. 10.1. bald on the forehead, and his Nose hooked) who had been carried up in the air into the2 Cor. 12.2. third Heavens,Paul. and learned thence most excellent things, did regenerate us by water, and brought us into the foot-paths of the blessed, and redeemed us from the Region of the un∣godly: And I will make thee a man in truth, if thou wilt hear me.] Which person that its meant of Paul, seems evident by Niceph. Cal∣list. lib. 2. c. 37. where describing of Paul, (as before he had our Lord, lib. 1. c. 40.) among other things saies, he was , &c. , &c.  bald on his head and that he had a nose handsomely bending. Where breaking awhile from that he speaks afterwards of the Creation and o∣ther matters, in these words,pag. 467.
. There was an incorruptible, invisible, incomprehensible light, which dissolved the darknesse, and dispelled that deformity by a word alone spo∣ken by it: as theMoses Exod. 4.10. slow-tongued (person) hath related. He establisht the earth upon the waters, streched out the Heavens, formed the fixed stars, and appointed their course, which thou worshippest as Gods. He hath beautifyed the Earth with flowers, He produced Man out of nothing into being, and He is in theProv. 15.3. Heaven beholding the just and unjust, and, writing their actions in books, will accordingly render to every one in that day, which he hath appointed.] Furthermore, that we may see the ancient Heathens had more knowledge of the divine Essence, partly by the light of Nature well improved, and partly by the light of Scripture and of the primitive persons carrying the Gospel about the Nations, may appear by a pas∣sge  little before the first citation: [ &c.] Crit. By whom shall I swear then? Trieph. By the soveraign, great, immortall God in the Heavens; by the Son of the Father; and the Spirit proceeding from the Father: One in three and three in one.] A God certainly of which there can be no shape or Image, and therefore surely the Gentiles knew more then we ordinarily think they did, at least the wiser sort: and more they might have known, had they been sedulously inquisitive into the matter. Because that which may be known of God, was manifest to them: for God hath shewn it to them.Rom. 1.19, &c. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternall power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse. Manifold are the Testimonies of the poor Heathens, concerning the unspeak∣able & inconceivable Essence of the Deity. Among other, excellent is the In∣quiry ofEdit. Heins p. 222 Maximus Tyrius in his 38 Dissertation, Whether Statues are to be dedicated to God or not? where he speaks thus, [. There is no more need to erect Images or Statues for the Gods, then there is for good men to have theirs. In the end,Pag. 226. he draws toward a conclusion in these words; , &c. [For God is the Father and Maker of all beings, ancienter then the Sun, ancienter then Heaven: More excellent or before all time and age and every fluid Essence, a Law-gi∣ver ineffable, unspeakable by our voice, invisible as to our eyes; who not being able to conceive aright of his Essence, let us fixedly endeavour (to search him out) by words and names, living Creatures, figures of Gold, Ivo∣ry, and Silver; from Plants, Rivers, tops of Mountains, and Springs, ear∣nestly thirsting after some knowledge of him.] Thus as Paul told the Athenians, that they did [] seek after the Lord,Act. 17.27. if possibly they might feel after him (in the dimm twi∣light of Nature) and find him out. Most remarkable is the Law of King Nu∣ma, commented upon by Plutarch in his Life in these words;Plut. in Numa p. 118. Tom. 1. vit. Edit. Hen. Steph. 8o. [, &c. Besides, those Laws wich he made concerning Sta∣tues or Images are altogether a-kind to the sense of Pythagoras. For he did not conceive the first principle of all things to be sensible or passible, but invisible, immortal, and to be apprehended by the mind. Numa therefore forbad the Romans to make any Statue of God, in the shape a of man or any other living Creature: Neither was there among them in former times, a∣ny picture or carved Image of God. But during the first hundred and se∣venty years (of the City), although they built and consecrated Temples, and erected little Sacraries or Chappels of wood: yet they neither fashio∣ned nor dedicated any Image at all. Counting it a prophane thing to express
more excellent Beings by such as are mean and low: Neither did they think to attain to the knowledge of God but by their Understandings.] To conclude,De imag. Deor. p. 39. Chartarius reports out of Pausanias, that a Temple was erected to Apollo under the appellation of Juventus, or youth in the Corin∣thian Territory within a grove of Cypresses, where there was no statue at all, for a certain secret reason, which his Authour durst not produce. Surely ifDe EI a∣pud Delph. p. 699 edit. H. Steph. Plutarch's Etymology and glosse upon the name of Apollo be right, that it is q. , not many, but one: shewing that there can be but one onely God, the first principle and mover of all things, and that the first being must needs be immense and infinite, without beginning or end, and therefore in continual flourishing state: well did those Corinthians to consecrate a house to the youth of Apollo, and add no statue at all. Though their darkness was grea∣ter, the farther the line of Heathens descended from the family of Noah, where they all were instructed by that Preacher of Righteousnesse in the knowledge of the true God, and his proper worship. But to come to an issue: Seeing then there was no manner of form or shape within the Holy of Holyes to represent the infinite Majesty of Heaven: God ha∣ving most expresly forbidden it by his command, written upon the Tables of stone that were laid up in that sacred place: Nay, the thing being attested by Heathens concerning this very Temple, and they falling foul upon, and con∣demning one another for this gross and stupid worship of any Deity framed by the works of mens hands; what great reason have the Jews and the Greek Churches and thesober Heathens, that any where do advance the light of Na∣ture: (nay, Turks likewise) to be offended at the Popish Idolatry, whose conversion is greatly thereby obstructed. Whereas God expresly forbids anyDeut. 4.16. graven Image, the similitude of any Figure; or the likenesse of male or female to be made to represent the Diety: Yet do the Papists permit and commend it as expedient for the unlearned and vulgar people, that the Divinity should be exprest in the Histories of Scripture that are painted in Churches. Now although the Papists do not think the Picture or Statue to be a God, neither did the wiser of the antient Heathens:Synod. Tri∣dent. Sess. 25. p. 241. edit. Rhotomagi. 1640. although it's probable the Devil did speak through the Trunks of the antient Images, and so imposed upon them: as the Papists did by the Statues of the Virgin in Cheapeside Crosse to delude the common people: which with various Trinkets were shewn and exhibited to publick view, by Thomas Lord Cromwell in the daies of K. Henry the 8th. and afterward to the fire: yet certainly for a man to make use of a Crucifix to stand before him in prayer, although he do not think it to be Christ, neither do worship that, but onely use it as a Commemorative figure, and a representation only to ex∣cite devotion: yet is this no lesse then refin'd Idolatry, which in some mea∣sure is confessed by Durand one of the Schoolmen, as produced by a worthy Divine of the Neighbour-Nation, in these words. The truth isRuther∣ford Church-Government, p. 164. edit. 1646. Religious geniculation before the Image, or at the presence of an Image, as if the Samplar were there present, is one and the same adoration given to the Image and the Samplar. Where he prosecutes the proof of this assertion; That to kneel before the Creature as a memorative object of God, is Idolatry. But of this and the like points, it is not my businesse to treat here: onely up∣on the account of the Oracle being destitute of any shape or figure of the Divine Majesty, I have hitherto discoursed; and shall now speak of the Ark, the first, and principal Ornament of this most sacred place.
Of the Ark. Lightfoot Temp. p. 261Before we speak expresly to its Mystery, let us consider the place where it was made, and how it was removed providentially from place to place, till at last it was fixed in this glorious Temple. Moses the man of God did make and frame it in the wildernesse of Sinai, where the Israelites Camped before theExod. 19.2. Mount of Horeb. For we read that the Tabernacle was reared up on theExod. 40.17. first day of the first month of the second year of their Exodus, of coming out of Egypt; and further that on theNum. 10.11, 12. 20th day of the second month of the same year they departed from that place: After which time the Ark marched along with them from station to station, till at last it was set down atJos. 5.10. Gilgal, for there the Children of Israel kept the Passeover the 14th day of the Moneth at Even in the Plains of Jericho: a City of the Benjamites, that stood betwixt Jericho and the Ri∣ver Jordan, and is accounted byTom. 3. ad finem de lo∣cis Hebr. p. 16. lin. 3. e∣dit praefat. Jerom to be situate two miles East of Je∣richo. After the Land was subdued, the Tabernacle of the Congregation was set up atJos. 18.2. Shiloh, a City of the Tribe of Ephraim, which the forecitedPag. 24. lin. 19. Father places at the distance of 10 miles from Neapolis or Shechem in the same Tribe. We read of the Ark's being afterward at Shechem, Josh. 24.1, 25, 26. and after that, at Mizpeh, Judg. 11.11. & 20.1, 27. & 21.1, 2. Whereby it should seem that the Ark might be occasionally transferred from place to place, though its ordinary residence was in the Tabernacle at Shiloh: which place the forecited Jew in his Itinerary, pag. 50. fixes at the distance of three Parasangs from Gibeah, (and from thence three more to Beth Nob) and further, that it was but two Parasangs or eight miles from Jerusalem.1 Sam. 4.1, 3. From this Shiloh, in the daies of Samuel, the Ark was fetcht out of the Tabernacle into the field, against the Philistines at Eben-Ezer, near Mizpeh in the Tribe of Benjamin; and as far as yet appears to me, never came within the ancient Tabernacle again: which possibly was translated to Nob, a City of the Priests, as may be seen by comparing1 Sam. 21.1, 4, 9. c. 22. ver. 11, 19. several verses of Scripture: which may be conceived near Anathoth, as named next in the register of some of the Cities of Benjamin inNeh. 11.32. Nehemiah, and it stood as some think here in the time of King Saul. From hence the Tabernacle was transferred to Gibeon, another City of Benjamin, which was 40 Stadia or Furlongs from Jerusalem, as Josephus attest, pag. 238. or at the furthest at 50. if so be that be the same place with the former, which is mentioned by the same Author, pag. 818. But when and from whence it was carryed thither it doth not fully appear; but that it was here in the daies of King David and the begin∣ning of Solomon is1 Kin. 3.4. 1 Chr. 16.39. & 21.29. 2 Chr. 1.3. plain and evident out of the sacred books, till it was2 Chr. 5.5. brought up to Jerusalem. But the Ark steered another course, by the special guidance of God: For the Philistins having overthrown the Israelites in Battel, took the Ark of the Covenant, and carried it from Eben-Ezer to1 Sam. 5.1. Ashdd, thence tover. 8. Gath, thence tover. 10. Ekron, and having continued se∣ven Months in the Land of the Philistius, it was sent home to1 Sam. 6.12. Bethshemesh in the Tribe of Judah, thence to Kiriath jearim in the same Tribe, called al∣soJos. 15.60. & 18.14. Kiriath-Baal, to the house of1 Sam. 7.1, 2. Abinadab in the hill, and thee it continued twenty years. This place is called2 Sam. 6.2. Baaleh of Judah, and the house of Abinadab that was inver. 3.4. Gibeah, or in the hill; which Josephus reports to have been at the distance of fifty stadiae or furlongs from Jerusalem the Head-City, pag. 907. Indeed we find one City of Judah to be calledJosh. 15.57. Gibeah, and I suppose it to be the same exactly withJosh. 15.9. 1 Chron. 13.5, 6. Kiriath Baal or Ki∣riath jearim, called Gibeah from its hilly situation: althoughVol. 3. p. 14, Weemse would have it a Mistake in the Translation, wherein an Apellative is made a
Proper Name: But seeing as I said, we find a City of Judah, in the book of Joshua, called Gibeah; possibly this place might have two Names. Howe∣ver that be, it's clear that the place was Kiriath-jearim, whichIbid. p. 10. lin. 18. Jerom in his Catalogue of Hebrew places, fixes but at 1 Mile distance from Jerusalem, in the way to Diospolis or Lydda. From this Kiriath-jearim it was brought to2 Sam. 6.6. Nachon's threshing-floor, otherwise called1 Chr. 13.9. Chidon, where Uzza was smitten, and the place therefore called by David Perez-Uzza, and then it di∣verted to the house of2 Sam. 6.10. Ver. 11. Obed-Edom, probably in the borders of the same City, and there it staied three months; and thence at last it was brought to theVer. 12. & 1 Chr. 15.29. & 16.1. City of David at2 Sam. 5.7. Mount Zion in Jerusalem, about the third year of his reigne over all Israel, and in the tenth alter his Unction at Hebron, it be∣ing a Sabbatical year, as theUsher Annal p. 52 learned Primate conceivs: and there it con∣tinued the residue of his Reigne in Zion, that is about thirty years, and in the eleventh of King Solomon's, when the Temple was fully finisht, it was brought1 Kin. 8.1. 2 Chr. 5.2. from the City of David, in a most solemn manner, into the glorious O∣racle or Holy of Holies. Having traced the Arks motions from place to place till it came to rest in Moriah's sacred Mountain, let me crae leave to add a few words about that kind of wood whereof it was made. Gregor. Lexi. sanct. p. 401.Some would have it to be a kind of excellent Cedar, whose wood will not putrify, and is the smoothest of all other sors, excelling in strength, so∣lidity, shining, and beauty. Others a kindAvenari' of Thorn, not subject to pu∣trefaction. It seems indeed to have been of a very durable nature by its con∣tinuation from Moses to Solomon, and thence to the captivity, about 900 years. Others, take it to be [ mentioned by Dioscorides de med. mater. cap. 74.] the Pitch-Tree; others, the Box. It could not be the ordinary and common Cedar, nor Pine, nor Box, nor Myrtle: for it is reckoned among them as a distinct species, under the name of the Schittah-Tree, by the Pro∣phetIsa. 41.18. Isaiah. Jerom, in his Comment upon Esay, saies it was a Tree like to the white-Thorn for colour and leaves but not for magnitude. That it was the same Tree whichLib. 2. Diodorus calls the  I dare not affirm, which he reports to have grown in that part of Arabia which the Nabathaeans dwelt in, that is, the posterity of Nebaioth, so called in Scripture, whoml. 12. c. 17. Pliny also placeth as borderers upon Syria. Yet truly, by the Balsame and Palmes which Diodorus reckons up to grow in that Country: it seems somewhat pro∣bable that it was the place whereabout Moses was, at the erection of the Ta∣bernacle. It is observable to this purpose, that theExod. 3.3. Bush wherein God appeared to Moses was in the same Mount where afterwards (near to it) the encamping of the Israelites was fixed, at the making of the several Vessels of the Tabernacle. Though by some it is thought to be aTalmu∣dists in Schindler. Thorn that bore Roses: by others, a white-Thorn: and a Bramble, by others: YetLib. 16. p. 767 edit. Casaub. Stra∣bo, out of Eratosthenes, tells us, that no other Trees grew in that North part of Arabia, but a few Dates, the Tamarisk, and the  or a certain prickly Thorn: which probably was the  Sineh or Bush of Moses, which might be the same which is turned in Diodorus by , and by some coun∣ted to be a sort of sharp prickly Cedar, and thought to be the Schittim wood whereof this Ark was made.Mar. 12.20. Act. 7.30. Our blessed Lord, and the Proto-martyr Stephen, following the 70, call it , and this might be the same Tree, in a low and shrubby state upon so dry and stony a place  Bellonius in his Obser∣vations when travelling that Country, saies there was but one sort of Thorn in all Syria: which is since brought over into England, and nursed in Noble∣mens Gardens with us, if it be the right, and termed Our Lord's Thorn. If it should be the same Tree with Moses his Bush, it is very worthy our note to remember the Churches preservation in all the flames of trouble and persecu∣tion,
to have bin managed by God's presence in the Ark in the midst of them. Indeed the Septuagint translate these Shittim Trees by , of the Tree Thya, byL. 5. c. 5. Theophrastus described to be tall, ever green, like the Cypresse, of a solid and sweet sented wood, smelling like Cedar, and not easily corrupted: Of which Homer speaks, when he tells us of Calipso's Island that there was a fire Odyss. 5.—, That smelt of Thus all over the Island, whereofl. 12. c. 14. Pliny treats at large. But to let that passe; whether the Schittah-Tree were odorous or not, is not mentioned, neither is it affirmed of the Arabian Schinus; which although some do not think to be this wood of ours, yet their reason drawn from a re∣port that it was not tall and big, is refuted byCap. 18. Lemnius in his History of Scripture Plants, where he saies, It was, patula & satis procera, spreading to a good height; and yet this last Author conceives it was thePag. 76. Citrus, allu∣ding therein to the Hebrew name. But if there were no Trees growing in those Deserts of Arabia, where Moses then was, but onely the three fore∣mentioned, according to the Testimony of Strabo, it seems most probable that it was that prickly Tree: seeing it was neither Tamarisk nor Date: the name whereof, mentioned by Diodorus alluding to the Hebrew, may yield some light. I know some count it to have been made of a wood that was brought with them out of Egypt, because the Text saies, that every man with whom wasExod. 35.24. found Shittim wood, brought it for the service of the Taberna∣cle: but that doth not follow, that this wood did not grow in the wilder∣nesse, where they offered it for the service of the Tabernacle, because the Text saies it was found with them. But indeed it doth not appear clearly and directly what sort of wood it was, and therefore we shall suspend any peremptory assertion, and proceed to the Mysteries of this excellent and rare Ornament of the Oracle. The Mystery of the Ark. THe Ark was the1 Sam. 4.22. Glory of Israel, and the Throne of God amongst his People: it was the signe of his presence, and before it were Sacrifices1 Sam. 6.14, 15. offered, and in the Wildernesse, when it set forward then Moses said,Num. 10.35. The Lord is in his holy Temple. Psal. 11.4. Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered. Many are the fancies of men an∣cient and modern, in this particular: But the Apostle hath left us a Key whereby to open this Mystery in some measure; since he expresly tells us, that Heaven was signified by the Oracle. For Christ (Heb. 9.24. saith he) is not entred into the holy places made with hands; which are figures of the true: But into Heaven it self. So that, though as to the state of the Jewes it was the Symbole of God's presence; yet, seeing their solemnities were Typical of things under the Gospel, we must enquire according to the mind of Scrip∣ture what the Ark did signify, and it seems it must represent somewhat in hea∣ven where Christ is entred. Wherefore, laying aside the recital of the vari∣ous opinions of learned men in this point, which would take up much time and paper, they being commonly mentioned every where almost. The most naked & clearRivet in Exod. p. 116. signification of this holy Vessel was (seeing it contained the Tables of stone or the Commandments) to represent the Divine Majesty: as he is the greatJam. 2.12. Lawgiver to the whole Creation, and especiallyPs. 147.28. Rom. 3.2. shewed his Word to Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments to Israel. For to them were committed the Oracles of God: who required obedience to them
under pain of death. In the Ark therefore we are to look upon God's divine Majesty, as making a Covenant with Man-kind: whose Royal Law speaketh on this wiseGal. 3.12. THIS DOE AND LIƲE. Wherefore, when theRev. 11.19. Temple of God was opened in Heaven, The Ark of the Testament was made visible. It was made of Shittim-wood, and overlaid with Gold; for which causeCramer. Schol. Pro∣phet. part. 4. p. 78. some apply the Ark it self to Christ, they say the imputrible wood no∣ted his Humanity, the Gold his Divinity: But these are niceties, and forced Applications not grounded on Scripture; whereas, seeing the most proper meaning of this Ark is of the legislative power of God, the Chest may be ac∣comodated to signify the constant and inviolable conservation of the pure and holy Lawes of God, given forth to the Church; seeing it was made on purpose to retain the two Tables of stone, written upon by God's own finger, whose breast is the fountain of the Churches Laws: and his constant presence there, noted that God did continually eye his people, whether they kept his Covenant. Now, though the Ark was to be abolished in due time: For in the latter daies they shall no more say, The Ark of the Covenant of the Lord: But they shall call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord,Jer. 3.16, 17. and all Nations shall be gathered to it. For God will manifest his presence in his Church in a more spiritual way. Yet during the state of the Jews, though Solomon made most Materials anew, he made no new Ark: but brought that which Moses made within the Oracle into the Temple; to note, that though some formes of worship and circumstances may vary, yet the moral Commandments of God are never to alter, nor the token of his presence as a King among his people. But now, since that no meer man ever yet kept the Law of God perfectly, onely the Lord Jesus hath fulfilled his whole Will: therefore God appoin∣ted a Mercy Seat to be laid as a Covering upon the top of the Ark, seeing2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself; not imputing their Trans∣gressions to them. The Law needed a Covering, by which our sins might be concealed from God's sight, which was properly called a Propitiatory: be∣cause God will not be satisfyed as to our sins, and become propitious to us, but alone through Christ,Ps. 40.8. the Law being within his heart, who came to do the Will of God, and was theRom. 10.4. End of the Law for Righteousnesse to them that believe. This Propitiatory or Mercy-Seat, the Covering of the Ark, was made all of beaten Gold, to shew the inestimable and precious vertue of Christs' obedi∣ence, and it is styled by the 70, . To which probably the Apostle Paul alludes, in the use of this very word of the Septuagint, treating of Christ's Righteousnesse: whomRom. 3.25. God (saith he) hath set forth to be [] a Propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousnesse for the re∣mission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. Holy John useth a word of neer consanguinity with the former, when assuring us, that Christ is1 Joh. 2.2. & 4.10. [] the Propitiation for our sins. This Golden Cover lay betwixt the divine presence (as mentionedExod. 25.22. sitting between the Cherubims) and the Tables of stone within: shewing, that God through Christ alone looks upon us as accepted, and keeping the Commandments. To this purpose the learnedLib. 1. §. 4. cap. 7. part 2. p. 187. Essenius in his disputations against Crellius the Socinian, hath a good Criticism upon this word, comparing it with other of the same termi∣nation, and observs that such words do hold forth the effect and consequent signe of that action, which the Verbs do signify from whence they flow, as the word  doth note the Reward of Victory. Some also do denote the place of the action: so , the place of Hearing: , the place of Sacrifice or the Altar. So , and, among the rest, this word , when it is used of the Cover of the
Ark, and may also be taken for the declaration of God's propitious good Will to Mankind through Christ, who was signified by that Cover. As for the Crown of Gold round about the Ark: it might denote the roy∣alty of God's Majesty in his Kingly power over the Church. Its having Rings and Bars to be carryed up and down, from place to place, might signify, That the Commandments of God were to be declared by the Priests and Levites to the People who were to bear it up and down upon their shoulder. These Rings were not taken away from it, though in the Temple; to denote, That if they broke his Commandments, the Symbole and Token of his presence should be carried away from them. On the Golden Mercy-seat stood two Cherubims, of one beaten work with it: and on the ground were placed two more, (as is declared above in the Description). The form and shape of the Cherubims, a thing not fully declared before, let me obtain leave to speak a little here to it. In the Temple described by Ezekiel, we read that the Cherubims which were placed on the insides of it, between the Palm-Trees, had two faces.Ezek. 41.19. The face of a man was toward the Palm-Tree on the one side, and the face of a young Lion toward the Palm-Tree on the other side. Whereby we learn that the Cherubims in the Temple were of that form, which was represented to him, in a Vision in the first Chapter, with four faces: two whereof are here expressed; the other are supposed to be swallowed up on the inside of the Walls, and we are to conceive them to have been the face of anEze. 1.10. Oxe and an Eagle, on the other sides. Ver. 5.The shape and lineaments of their bodies were like to men; but differing in four things, their heads, feet, and in that they had Wings, and were full of Eyes. Ver. 4.The Vision, we read, came out of the North: and so the first and princi∣pall face of that Cherub, of the four that stood in a square, looked South∣ward on Ezekiel, and was the face of a Man: on the right side, the face of a Lion; on the left side, the face of an Oxe; and behind, the face of an Ea∣gle. Herein, as to the denomination of the right and left sides of the Cherubim, we are to conceive of it as derived from man, who if he look to the South (as one of these in the Vision) his right hand is toward the West, his left to the East. Now then, seeing the principal face is the humane, as derived from the most noble of the four Creatures; and whereas we read that the Cherubims on the Mercy-Seat did look down upon it, let us conceive it to be meant of their humane face. That Cherub then, that stood on the North end of the Propitiatory, with its man's face looking down upon it; had its Lions or right-side face West∣ward; its Oxe-face Eastward, or down the Sanctuary to the Court of the Priests; its Eagle's face Southward. The other Cherub, annexed to the Propiiatory on the South-side, had its Lion's face East, toward the Sanctuary; its Oxe's face West; its Eagle's North; and its Man's face South, and downward on the Covering of the Ark. The two Cherubims which stood upon the ground, and were of Solomon's making, looked with their faces toward the Sanctuary Eastward, as was spo∣ken to suprà pag. 61: which, If we apprehend (as 'tis most probable) to be meant of their humane faces; then did their right side or leonine face look Southward; their face like an Oxe on the left side, Northward; and the Eagle-face Westward.
But as to these appearances, it's probable that they were not faces, carved upon four sides of one head; but as it is observed byTemple in Christ's time. p. 245. Dr. Lightfoot, spea∣king larger of this matter: they had four distinct heads arising from the Neck, as the words of the eleventh Verse seem clearly to import,  thus rendred by Arias Montanus  Et facies eorum & alae eorum disjunctae desuper: Both their faces and their wings were disjoyned upward. So the word  is used generally, to sever, Judg. 4.11. and to divide, Gen. 10.5. Their wings were six, as the ProphetIsa. 6.1, 2. Esay numbers them, in respect to the Seraphims, the same with these, for it was a Temple-Vision: with two he covered his face, with two he covered his feet, and with two he did fly. The like we read in theRev. 4.8. Revelation of St. John, of the four Beasts that were about the Throne. It's true, it cannot be inferr'd directly from the Vision of Ezekiel, in the first Chapter, that the Temple-Cherubims were of the same form with his there described. But a very probable conjecture may be thence raised upon this account, that as he describes there the Firmament like Crystal, and very terrible, which was over the heads of the Cherubims:Ver. 22. and upon that Firmament, a Throne of Saphire; and in the Throne, the ap∣pearance or likenesse of a Man: From his Loyns upward the appearance was of fire of the colour of Amber, and downward as bright flames,Ver. 27. & cap. 8.2. and round about the Glory was like the Rainbow. This was no other then the Throne and Seat of God's Majesty, as he was pleased in a Vision to represent it to the Prophet: So had the Lord his Seat and Throne upon the Wings of the Cherubims over the Ark. But whereas there is mention made ofcap. 1. ver. 16. cap. 10.9. four wheels of the colour of Be∣ryl within the four living Creatures, (For soCornel. A-lapide in Ezec. c. 1. p. 16. edit. Pa∣ris 1622. A-Lapide most properly placeth them: For the Prophet having fully viewed and described the Che∣rubims, seems to spy as it were beneath between their legs upon the Earth these wheels ver. 15. as fitted to sustain the Chariot of the visionary Glory. Besides,cap. 10. ver. 6. ver. 11. the fire was within the wheels which were within the Cheru∣bims, as the vulgar Latine translates it, and so the Syriack also. Besides in the 11th ver. the wheel is said to follow the face, that is most probably of the Cherubim.) In the like manner the Ark, God's Throne in the Temple, though we read not that it had wheels; yet there is somewhat allusive to it, in that there is mention made of a1 Chron. 28.18. Chariot of Cherubims, wherein God's Majesty is said to ride: Nay, the Throne of God is expresly said to have wheels, Dan. 7.9. Further, as the Throne of God in heaven, is described by John: (which was shadowed forth by the Oracle as hath been declared) we read of four beasts like to those in Ezekiel, having six wings. In these excellent visions there seems strong allusion to the forme, shape, and accessary Ornaments of the Temple-Cherubims: although I confesse they do not necessarily evince it. The remaining description of theirc. 1. v. 8. having hands between their wings, and that their whole body, backs, hands, and wings, were full ofc. 10.12. eyes, and of theirSee their picture in A-Lapide's ti∣tle to Isaiah. feet being like Calvesfeet: must be built upon the same¦tion But to leave the description of them: and proceed to the mystical exposi∣tion of the Cherubims, in whatever form it was that they were made. By the former Key we must proceed to open the Mystery of these Cheru∣bims. For having asserted and manifested, by the Epistle to the Hebrews, that the Oracle wherein they stood, did typify heaven whereinto Christ is en∣tred once for all to make intercession for us: it seems we must interpret these curious Attendants upon the Ark, of some Persons that wait upon God's
Majesty and Christ in heaven. To this end and purpose the Apostle Peter leads us by the hand into the explication of them, telling us that [] the sufferings of Christ, and his mediation for us under the Gospel, and the sending the Spirit from heaven, are such, , as into which the Angels desire earnestly to stoop down and look into, s they did of old upon the Mercy-Seat. But before I proceed to enlarge in this point, I must lay one Objection out of the way: wherein some labour to shew that the four living Creatures in E∣zekiel, and the four beasts in John, are not to be meant of Angels, especially in the last, (which they deem parallel to the former); for two Reasons. 1. Because Angels are mentioned as distinct from the Beasts, Rev. 5.11. and so Rev. 7.11. To which I answer, That it doth not follow, that therefore the four Beasts are not Angels, because they have not the same denomination with the rest; but the name of Beasts: For this name is given to them by way of allusion to the figures of them mentioned in the ancient Visions of Ezekiel: which are generally, by the most learned Interpreters, expounded of Angels, who, for their Eyes and Wings, their wisdom, knowledge, and alarity to do God's Will, are so resembled. So that although there is mention made of many Angels round about the Throne besides these: even as in the Temple-Walls there were carved Cherubims, and on the Veil likewise; such might denote the wonderful company of these winged Messengers, that are dispatcht as ministring Spirits for the heirs of salvation: yet these might denote the con∣stant attendance of some of the Angels neerer the Throne; such as did give the seven Golden Vials to seven other Angels, Rev. 15.7. But 2ly, Whereas the Beasts together with the Elders are alledged to have said that they were redeemed to God by the blood of the Lamb:Rev. 5.9. To that I answer, That the Angels may in some sort count themselvs hap∣py by the benefit of Christ's blood, as to conservation in their Estate, being called elect Angels:1 Tim. 5.21. Eph. 1.22. and Christ himself said to be a head to principalities and powers. Besides, if we strictly examine the Grammar of the eighth verse in Rev. 5. the Text saies, Every one of them had Harps and golden Vials, where the words in the Greek are [] in the Masculine Gender, referring to  the Elders, the more immediate Antecedent, and not to  or the four Beasts which is the Neuter Gender. Accordingly in the Temple at the time of Sacrifice, in which the Allusion harpeth, we know that the Le∣vites sang and played with Instruments according to their 24 Courses in which they did Minister: which denoted the 24 Elders. But I shall not ri∣gidly insist upon this: although we find a set number of sealed ones harping before the Throne and the four Beasts,Rev. 14.3. and the 24 Elders in another place: it being very improper to assigne the transmission of the work of the powring out the seven Vials to Angels, by the Ministers of the Word round about the Throne, as was mentioned cap. 15.7. Psal. 68.17. Act. 7.53. Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2. Mat. 18.10.Wherefore seeing that in Scripture the Angels are mentioned to be neer God. The Chariots of God are 20000, even thousands of Angels, the Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place: who gave forth the Law by the disposition of Angels; and who are they that alwaies stand before the face of our heavenly Father, but those glorious Angels? Their faces then, of a Man signified Wisdom: of a Lion, boldnesse and courage: of an Oxe, laboriousnesse, industry, and patience: of an Eagle, swiftnesse and alacrity in performing the Will of God. 1 King. 8.7.Now, although I must confesse, one place imports clearly, That the Tem∣ple-Cherubims had but two Wings: yet to speak by allusion to the other places mentioned: With two Wings they cover their faces, as being not able to be∣hold
the radiancy of divine Glory: with two they cover their feet, that is, in a modest expression what may be guessed at, shewing that the Angels are not pure in his sight: with two they flew on the messages of God. They were full of eyes, shewing the acutenesse, perspicacity and sharpness of sight:Zec. 4.10. they are the eyes of the Lord, that run to & fro throughout the Earth. They had Calves feet, dividing the hoof, alluding to the clean Beasts in the Levitical Law: so that, though three of their shapes were bestiall, as thereby denoting some excellent properties in the Angels which we find in each of these Beasts, whose faces they bore: and although the Lion and the Eagle be unclean, yet the feet did shew that these Creatures were clean: that is, holy and unspotted Angels standing before the Throne. Cramer. schol. Proph. part 1. p. 348Some speaking of the Cherubims on the Ark expound them of the two Testaments looking upon Christ: But we shall let passe that and many other conjectures in silence, and speak onely to that of Angels. Their looking one toward another, might hint forth their intuitive know∣ledge, mutual love, concord and harmony. Yet as they look down on theExod. 25.20 Mercy-Seat, it denoted, first their inability to behold directly the Glory of God's face who dwelt between their wings. But as the Glory of God did reflect upon the shining golden Mercy-Seat: so they beheld it; to note that the very Angels themselvs cannot see the face of God and live, unlesse as it is reflected by Christ the Mediator. In the Temple there were two more then those upon the Ark, which it seems stood upon the ground. Unto which four it is probable that St. John doth allude in his Revelation, concerning four Beasts near the Throne, of which we toucht before. But why the number was increased in Solomon's daies, it is hard to say,Weemse vol. 3. part 1. unlesse it might be a Typical Prophecy of the increase and augmentation of the Church after the true Solomon should appear: and consequently, that on the Churches behalf more Angels might attend the Throne to carry the manifold Messages of Mercy and Goodnesse from the Throne of Grace toward the increased number of the Faithful. And indeed, it is worth the minding, that these two new Cherubims in Solomon's Temple stood with their Wings stretcht out over the other two, and with their faces looking downward toward the Temple,Heb. 1.14. declaring the readinesse of their po∣sture to be employed as ministring Spirits, for the heirs of salvation in the mystical body of the Church. Besides these things, In the daies of Moses was laid up within the Oracle the Deuteronomion or Book of the Law: But whether or no in the Temple,Deut. 31.26. 2 Kin. 24.8. it cannot be decided; yet under Josiah's famous Reformation, Hilkiah the High-Priest found the Book of the Law in the House of God,2 Chr. 34.14. given by Moses. But whether or no the , or a Transcript, or what part of the house it was found in, it is not exprest. If it were laid in this Oracle, it signifies, That all tha Laws of the People of God, both ceremonial and ju∣dicial as well as morall, do flow from him, and continue alwaies before him. As for the Pot of Manna, which we read of in Moses's Tabernacle, it seems probable it was brought up to the Temple by that expression,1 Kin. 8.4. that All the ho∣ly Vessels that were in the Tabernacle did the Priests and the Levites bring up; and besides,Exod. 16.32, 33. at the first it was commanded to be laid up by the Testimony (that is the Ark) to be kept for the future generations. That Manna did Typify Christ, is a most clear and generally granted asser∣tion: Seeing our Lord applies the Manna to himself, Joh. 6.32, 48. &c. and the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 10.3. as he calls it spiritual food, and the Water out of the Rock, spiritual drink, applies it to Christ expresly; who is called
,Rev. 2.17. Hidden Manna, and so termed in reference to the Type: for first of all, aNum. 11.9. Dew fell upon the ground, and the Manna upon it. Then upon the Manna lay another Dew, for when theExod. 16.14. Dew was gone up, there lay a small round thing on the face of the Wildernesse: So it seems it lay between two clean sheets of Dew. Besides, it was literally hidden also; For a Homer of it was laid up near the Ark. The Soul that inwardly feeds upon Christ in the promise, hath food the World knows not of, and hisCol. 3.3. life is hid with Christ in God. It denotes then that Christ in the food of life, and as It came down from heaven, so did Christ in his Incarnation. But it was carried into the Oracle the Type of heaven: to shew, that Christ after his Incarnation is ascended up to God again, and as it was put in a golden Pot, a Vessel assumed (for bodies are sometimes called1 Sam. 21.5. 2 Cor. 4.7. Rom. 9.22. Vessels in Scripture) so the golden Pot might de∣note the unspotted and pure Humanity. But here, before I proceed: seeing we have food laid up in the Oracle, and, as we shall see anon, (in the Sanctuary) there was bread on the Table: let's inquire what might be the difference. I answer, This Manna did signify Christ, the true sacramental bread, theJoh. 6.51. living bread. The Shew-bread in the Sanctuary denoted the doctrinal Bread, or bread of the Word, given forth by the Priests and Ministers to the People: Whereof more anon. Let's then compare this Manna with Christ, the true Bread of Life. 1. Of the Name of Manna there are three accounts usually given. The first Derivation is from  numerare, to number, distribute, or set out a portion. For every one had hisExod. 16.16. Ver. 18. Homer of it in a day. He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack. That is, when the Father of the Family came to distribute a Portion to each, he set out a Homer to every head. To which the Apostle Paul alludes in the citation of this place, when exhorting the richer among the Corinthians to help the poor out of their abundance, that there might be2 Cor. 8.14. equality: as of old among the Israelites, God would have those that gathered more Manna then others, to supply the want of such who had gathered lesse. So among Christians, God would have those that are rich by his blessing on their la∣bours, to assist the mean and poor with their riches. But whereasExod. 4.16. our Translation saies, The People shall go out and gather a certain Rate, aDr. Gell. on the Penta∣teuch. p. 224 &c. Ver. 16. learned man rendring the words more strictly according to the Originall [ The Word of the day in its day] conceives that the Spirit of God points at a mystical Underdanding of the Manna, and that it did signify the bread that was to come down from heaven; and accordingly ver. 16. where we translate [This is the thing] he following the Hebrew praecise∣ly,  translates it, This is the Word; and cites Arias Monta∣nus turning it, Hoc est Verbum; the Vulgar, Hic est Sermo; the Seventy, ; and the Chaldee paraphrase,  Hoc est Verbum, This is the Word, and in the Verse before,  This is that Bread, as our Lotd speaks of himself,Ver. 15. I am that Bread , even the Bread of Life. A second derivation of the Word is from the same root  parare prae∣parare; to prepare or provide: It being such a Bread as was prepared of God without the Israelites toyle and labour. The third and most probable is from the Interrogative in the 15th Verse,  Man-hu,Ver. 15. Deut. 8.3. Quid hoc, What is this? For they knew not what it was. So Moses told them afterward: He fed thee with Manna, which thou knew∣est not, neither thy Fathers &c. and vers. 16. He fed thee in the Wildernesse with Manna which thy Fathers knew not. There be that have mentioned a fourth from  Donum, as a gift of God. Joh. 4.10.
On all these accounts Christ answers to Manna: For as that was given out by portion; so to every one is given Grace,Eph. 4.7. according to the measure of the gift of Christ. As that was prepared andNeh. 9.20. given by God; so 'tis the Fa∣ther (saith our Lord) thatJoh. 6.32. giveth us the true bread from Heaven. Lastly, As the Israelites knew not Manna to be the bread, which God hadExood. 16.12. promi∣sed to give; So neither did the Jews in our Lord's time know him whom the Father hadJoh. 6.27. sealed and sent: For theyVer. 41.42. murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread that came down from Heaven: and they said, Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How is it then that he saith, I came down from Heaven? Secondly, As to the Quantity or bigness of each grain of Manna,Exod. 16.14.6.31. Be∣hold upon the face of the Wilderness, there lay a small round thing; as small as the hoar-frost on the ground and it was likeNumb. 11.7. Coriander-seed, which some have translated by Mustard-seed: but the Greek  in the Lxx: doth confirm our Translation. However in its being compared to congealed drops of dew and Coriander-seed: we see how small and contemptible a thing it was, to the outward eye. So was Christ despised of the world and rejected ofIsa. 53.3: men. Thirdly, The Figure or outward shape of Manna was round, as we read in that verse of Exod. 16. Whereby some would have the perfection of Christ to be set forth by that capacious Figure. But 'tis not good to fetch bloud out of Types by too much squeezing. Fourthly, The colour of Manna. It was like Coriander-seed, for its littleness, andExod. 16.31. white, the colour thereof being as theNumb. 11.7. colour of Bdellium. The seed of that Coriander which grows with us, when ripe, is of a whitish colour, tend∣ing to yellow. Some report, that its colour is not white, to wit, of such as grows in the Eastern parts of the world; and thereforeIn veec  Pagnine citing a Rab∣bi conceives that the Text must be thus pointed and paraphraz'd. It was like Coriander-seed, (that is) for its littleness and roundness, and it was white, not that it was like to Coriander for colour, For its colour was as Bdellium. Some out ofl. 12. c. 9. Pliny expound this Bdellium to be the gum of an Arabian tree: But its plain by him that the tree and the gum was black, but transparent, being of a dark-red turning toWicked Antedotarm p. 371. E∣dit, 1642. black, and so cannot be the thing this Manna is compared to. Others, because the Lxx. do translate  by  conceit it to have been of the colour of Crystal, transparently white. But others will have it to be a Pearl-Margarite white and round, such as we some∣times find in shell-fish. To which purpose there is a story related by a Jew in hisBenja∣min Itinerar. pag, 105. Itinerary, that on the 24 of Nisan, they take rain when falling upon the waters, and shut it up in a vessel, and let it down to the bottom of the Sea: then about the middle of the moneth Tizri, they let down men with ropes and bring up the vessel, and finding little creeping creatures in it, they cut them open & take out this Pearl, which they call Bdellium. It seems by the coasting of his journies, that this place was not far from Ormuz near the mouth of the Persian gulf; It was a Town on the Arabian or west side of that gulfPurch. Pilg. part. 1. pag. 237. more North then the Island Baharem. Although its more then probable that the foresaid story is corrupt, yetPolon. Po∣lyhist. cap. 56. p. 432. ed Lug. Bat. 1646. there was a sort of shell-fish taken up thereabouts, wherein they found these Pearls, and call'd them by the name of Bdellium: and that which is remarkable, that the next place in the Jews Itinerary,Ammian Marcellus. pag. 172. is  to Havilah,Gen. 2.12. the place where (as Moses tells us) was found the Bdellium and the Onyx stone. From all which we learn, that the grains of Manna were round, some what tran¦sparent andBarthol. de luce. ani∣mal. p. 132. white. To apply it briefly to Christ. Whiteness of old was the Emblem of inno∣cency, sincerity, and beauty. Innocency; and therefore there runs a promise,
that when God pardons his peopleIsa. 1.18. their sins shall be as white as snow; so the Saints that are made Priests unto God, are resembled in their glorified estate, to be habited like the Priests of old, inRev. 7.13.19, 18. white sinnen. Sincerity and Integrity; and therefore the Judges of old rode uponJudg. 5.10. white Asses. And in the Vision of Daniel, the Ancient of Dayes coming to judg∣ment, is represented with a garment asDan. 7.9. Rev. 20.11. white as snow, haing a white Throne set for him. For Beauty: the mixture of white is a great Ingredient of beauties Panegyrick. My Beloved (saith the Spouse) isCant. 5.10. white in the first place, and also ruddy; And the other side the Bridegroom commends his Spouse to beCant. 6. 1 Pet. 2.22. fair as the Moon. In all which respects, Christ is the chiefest among ten Thousand * an unspotted Lamb; Innocency and Purity being fully in him. Fifthly, As to the taste of Manna, it was likeExod. 16.31. wafers made with honey, and like fresh oyl. Which Ainsworth conceits to be thus understood: that when it was fresh gathered and uncooked, it tasted like sweet Wafers: but when baked or otherwise prepared, it tasted like oyl. For its pleasant and most delicious sweetness,Numb. 11.8. Nonnus in his Paraphrastical Version of John, calls it the bread,  of Honey dropping snow. In another place , famous hony-flowing Manna, and  the bread of Heaven, or, as the Psalmist, Angels food. Whatever Manna was to the Israelites: sure we are, nothing so sweet and pleasant to a gracious soul, as theCant. 1.2. kisses of Christs mouth, for his love is better then wine. O taste and see, sayes the Psalmist, that theJoh. 34.8. Lord is good. His mouth is mostCant. 5.16. sweet, yea he is altogether lovely; and this they cannot but experimentally affirm, if so be they have1 Pet. 2.3. tasted, that the Lord is gracious. HowPsalm 119.103. sweet are thy words to my taste, cries David, yea sweeter then Hony to my mouth? 1. Manna descended from Heaven in a miraculous manner, Such was the birth of Christ: his Divine Nature he brought from above, his humane body was produced by the unspeakableLuke 1.36. power of the Holy Ghost. Manna was divided equally among the Israelites: So Christ gives out himself withoutAct. 10.34. respect of persons: the meanest may have as great a portion in him as the greatest. 3. Manna was a plentiful food, none wanted; but all had it fully and free∣ly. Of hisJohn 1.16. fulness have all we received, even grace for grace. Its call'd thePsalm 73.24. Corn of Heaven, Angels bread: not as if it fell like crumbs from their Table: but as descending from Heaven their habitation; or, as some think, because it was dispensed by the ministration of Angels: or so call'd rather by way of excellency, that if Angels were to feed, they would like Manna; this Ambrosia would suit their palate. It fell in the night or towards morning. Our Lord was born in theLuke 2.8. night, in the night of Jewish Ceremonies, but toward the dawning of the Gospel-morning. Whereof Paul speaksRom. 13.12. Dr. Taylor of Types: pag., The night is far spent, the day is at hand. 5. It fell round about the Camp of Israel. The food of life is no where to be found but in the Church. It was merè gratuitum: a gift of Grace to Israel, they plowed not, sowed not, planted not for it. No labour, no merit of theirs procured it. Adam indeed might get his bread with the sweat of his brows: but if Angels sweat out their hearts, they could not obtain this bread without a free gift of Grace. 'Tis so with Christ; all the good nature, and moral honesty in the world, cannot of itself procure one glance of love from God, not one smile of Grace through Christ. 'Tis ofEph. 2.9. gift, that no man should boast. ForRom. 3.27. boasting is exclu∣ded by the Law of Faith. It was a miraculous food its beyond the limits of nature to produce it. All the Application of Actives to Passives, will yield but an abortive Birth.
I may apply hither that expression of Job, (a) Who hath begotten these drops of dew? Out of whose womb came Manna, and this bread of Heaven, who hath gendred it? In like manner the coming of Christ out of his Father's bosom was a miracle of love. To reconcile Justice and mercy each to other,Job. 38.29. was a miracle of Wisdom. To spare the sinner and kill the sin: A miracle of grace and favour. To regenerate fallen sinners, and give them a life of Faith: A mysterious miracle of divine power. All Heaven born Christians are so many walking-Miracles: so many pillars of Wonder. Its observed by some, that the works of Creation are said to be performed by Gods fingers. When I consider thy Heavens (sayes David) the work of thy fingers,Stolla in Luk. Psalm 8.3. the Moon and Stars which thou hast ordained: Whereas his extraordinary and miraculous works, are represented as done by his powerful Arm. The deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, and causing them to pass over the red-sea,Exod. 6.6, 15.16. 1 Psalm 77.15. Luke 1.51. was performed by his out-stretched Arm. So sayes the Virgin Mary: He hath shewed strength with his Arm: To note the miraculous production of Christ into the world. Now though that be but a nice Notion, yet there is truth in the thing, that the work was performed by the extraordinary power of God. 7. The raining of Manna was in the week time, there was none upon the Sab∣bath: to note an eternal Sabbath coming, wherein shall be no ordinances at all, But twice as much the day before, to note their plentiful distribution in the end of the world. Now is the time for these golden Showers of Manna.It began to rain on the Lords-Day, and ceased on the Jewish Sabbath. Origen. pag. 87. Hos. 2.14, 15. It rain∣ed, to note its plenty: & a double portion on the 6th. day, to signifie our fulness of it in the later ages of the Gospel. When once the Israelites were past over Jordan, they had no Manna, but while they were in the howling Wilderness. God many times ends sweet messages of Christ to the soul when in the Sinai of a troubled estate; when the bryars and thorns of the Wildernesse prick the soul; when the heart is thorowly stung with sin, when its weary laden, Christ is sent to give it rest. I will allure her and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak to her heart, saith the Lord to his Church, and give her Vineyards in the Valley of trouble. When once past over Jordan the River of Lethe, that runs into the (Mare Mortuum) the sea of Death; expect no more Manna, no more bread of Life, no more time for Repentance or reception of mercy. Wherefore (to allude) that place, where the son of man is said to have power upon earth to forgive sins; thereby,Luke 5.24, is not only intimated the annexion of the Divinity o his humane Nature, God being manifest in the flesh, and his having power co-equal with the Father: But also, that when once we are off the earth, if not forgiven here, no more remission or means of Grace is to be expected hereafter. Here indeed we want this bread, the staffe of our spi∣ritual life to lean upon, and in the support thereof to walk from strength to strength till we all appear before God in Zion. Then we shall feed upon the Corn of the good land of Canaan, upon the Milk and Honey of Heavenly joyes, and Drink of that River of pleasure, which flows at his right-Hand for evermore. 8. Manna before it was eaten, was ground in Mills, beaten in Morters, baked in pans: sodden in pots to prepare it for use, and afterwards it tasted and relished according to that which each person most affected or longed for, If the Jews do not fail in their Stories. All to set forth Christ how he was scourged, reviled, pierced, dead and buried. He trod the Wine-press, he stood in the fiery burning Furnace of his Fathers wrath, that he might be pre∣pared for Believers to feed upon him by Faith: and indeed whatever is said of Manna, that Christ is even and much more abundantly all and in all to a Saint; whatever we stand in need of, is to be found in Christ. Joy in tribu∣lation, Wisdom in difficulties, Srength against enemies, support in deserti∣ons, Riches of Grace here, and a massy Crown of Gold for heaven hereafter.
Manna, when gathered, if not eaten before the morning, putrefied, and bred worms and stank. If we do only gather the word by hearing, and not presently feed upon it by Faith, and digest it in a holy life, it will be of no va∣lue nor efficacy o our souls—But so much of Manna. The Rod of Aaron. As in Moses time there was laid up in the Oracle Aaron's rod which blossomed: It is likewise probable, that it might be laid up also in the Oracle of Solomon, though it be not praecisely mentioned. The story of Aaron's Rod is at large recited in the 17th of Numbers, which may be consulted at leisure. Aaron being the High Priest and chief of the Tribe of Levi (as all the Princes of the Tribes had their Rods or staffes, Numb. 21.18. So he) had a Rod for an Ensign of Government. He was a Signal Type of Christ, as the Apostle to the Hebrews doth clearly manifest. Some think that all the three Offices of Christ respecting the Church, were signified by these three choise things in the Oracle. The Ark with its Crown round about it, and as be∣ing the Throne of God, noted his Kingly Office. The Manna, his Propheti∣cal or Pastoral Office. And the Rod of Aaron his Priestly. And therefore it is, that he is so often styled in Scripture, the Branch, as Isaiah 4.2. & 11, 1, 10. & 53, 2. Jer. 23.5. & 33, 15. Ezek. 17.22, 23. Zech. 3.8. & 6, 12. Rev. 5.5. & 22, 16. The Hebrew word in some of those places is in the Septuagint version rendred by . Which makes me to reflect upon that place in Luke, where theLuke 1.78. , is rendred by us, the Day spring from on high. Now considering that the old Greek Version was much eyed by the new Testament Writers: we may translate it, The Branch from on high hath visited us- and overshadowed us with his healing Boughs: and therein possi∣bly might be an allusion to Aarons Rod, or Branch laid up in the Oracle, signi∣fying Heaven: which that it did denote Christ is the opinion of Justin MartyrDialog. Cum Tri∣phare. Jud. pag. 24. . The Rod of Aaron bringing forth Buds, did declare him High Priest. Isaias did prophesie of Christs birth by the Rod out of the root of Jesse. To speak then a while to this Rod of Aaron: being the note of the Mi∣nisterial function, as residing in him and his successours: and that none should take to themselves that honour, but such as are called of God as was Aaron. Heb. 5.4.Here give me leave to enlarge a little upon this flourishing subject of Aa∣rons Rod. A Rod in Scripture denotes Government, and so this Rod signifies Christs royal Dominion in his Church. He will send, thePsalm 110.2. Rod of his strength out of Zion. He is to rule over his people with aPsalm 45.6. Scepter of Righteousnesse. Sometimes it hints at judgement. Hear theMic. 6.9 Rod, and who hath appointed it. 1. The Rod of affliction. Shall I come to you (saith Paul to his Corinthians) with a1 Cor. 4.21. Rod? i.e. with some Church-censure. Sometimes it notes Teaching and Doctrine. He shall smite the earth with theIsa. 11.4. Rod of his mouth, i. e. with doctrinal reproof. Feed thy people with thyMic. 7.14 Rod of Instruction. The Metaphor being taken from Shepherds, who carry wirh them a Rod & a crook the one to drive their sheep into green pastures, and the other to catch them.Psalm 23.4. Thy Rod and thy staffe comforted me. Thereby they kept off the Wolves & the wild Beasts from the Folds. Mercury of old was the Caduceator & Virgifer of the gods, be∣ing painted, with a Rod twined with Serpents, to note its Rhetorick, and
perswasive Eloquence in speaking, he being interpres divum. Christ is the re∣vealer of the Father's will, he lay in his bosom, and hath declared him, Joh. 1. 18. Sometimes it signifies ease, because this is the end of a Staffe or Rod, to lean upon as JacobHeb. 11.21. leant upon his Staffe; to shew that the Evangelical Ministry, whereof Christ is the head, is a safe resting place for the Church. This Rod of Aaron was made of an Almond-Tree, of which its observed byPlin. l. 16. c. 25. Pliny, that it flowres the first of all Trees, even in Jan. in the more Sou∣thern Countries, and brings forth ripe fruit there in March. To shew how quickly those that are designed for the Ministry, should blossom toward Heaven; young1 King. 18.12. ObadiahsJer. 1.5. Jeremiahs,Luk. 1.15. John Bap∣tists,2 Tim. 3.15. Timothies, even in their youth, savouring the things of God. This doth likewise reflect upon the effect of their Ministry, how soon God will bring to passe what they precict in his name, when they receive their Visions from him in the holy Mount. Therefore Jeremy, who was a Priest of Ana∣thoth, saw the Vision of anJer. 1.11. Almond-Tree, to confirm his heart in the work of the Ministry. The vulgar Latine reads that place [by virga vigilans] a watch∣ful Rod, hining how God would hasten the judgement he threatned, unless the people repented: and further, to shew what diligence and vigilancy Mi∣nisters ought to use in their Embassies, they must beIsay 11. Watchmen and Sees of the night. We read that the Egyptians resembled God by the hie∣roglyphical sculpturePlutarch. de Iside & Ostride mo∣ral. part 1. gr. p. 632. ed 1. H. Step. 573. of a Rod or Scepter, with an Eye in it; noting his omnicient care and wisdom in the Government of the World. Every Go∣spel-Minister should have for his hieroglyphick, an Almond Rod, with an Eye annexed to it; not to rule and teach onely, but a so providently to foresee the evill coming, and to warn the people of approaching judgements. Besides, it was a fruitful Rod. The Rod of Aaron hadNumb. 17.8. Buds, Blos∣soms, and ripe Nuts, all at once. As to the words in the letter, there is a little haesitation among theDr. Gell on Penta∣teuch, p. 512. learned, why it should be translated thus, the Rod of Aaron budded and brought forth buds, as if so be it were a tautology, whereas in the Hebrew it is And behold the Rod of Aaron for the House of Levi budded: and it sent forth buds, &c. The same radicall word  being used first in the Verb, and then in the Noun. The 70 not ashamed to use the same word likewise, , It budded and brought forth buds: and so Paul Heb. 9.4. onely speaks in general, , the terme being comprehensive of all the rest, after mentioned in that verse in Numbers. The meaning this: the Text first sayes in the general, that Aaron's Rod did ger∣minate or bud, or sprout forth, which ye please; and then comes to the parti∣culars, rehearsing in order how it was: or else to express, that at the very same time there were upon it botn buds, flowers, and fruit; and probably, leaves also: which might be included in the general signification of the Verb, set in the first place. Junius & Tremelius renders it, Ecce flourisset &c. Producens enim germen emiserat florem & educebat amygdala. Behold it had flowred, &c. For bringing forth buds, it sent forth flowers, and brought forth Almonds, much to the sense of our present acceptation of the Text. The Almond-Tree is exceeding plentiful in its flowers; and when they knit well, its a sign, say some, that it shall be a very great year for Corn,Pierius p. 647. Hieroglyph. as Pierius observes out of Virgil, according to our common saying, that a good Nut-year shewes a good year for Wheat. The rind of an Almond is bitter, but the kernel very delicious, and the Oyl exprest out of it very physical, and of much vertue. To shew that cha∣stising and reproving words, though bitter in the present taste, yet yield a pre∣cious and excellent fruit, if well improved.
The shell of the Almond is very hard and not to be broken by the teeth but with great difficulty. Such is the Law, but the Gospel is the sweet ker∣nel within. Though mainly this Rod did decipher and hint at Christ: yet did it also lock at the Ministry,Heb. 13.20. 1 Pet. 2.25. whereof he is head and principal; He is the  the graet Shepheard of the sheep, and Bishop of souls. A flourishing Mini∣stry is an excellent Omen of a fruitful and holy people. Besides, this Rod did denote a continued succession of Gospel-Ministers in the work: Christ the great Aaron hath his successours by his assignation,Cant. 2.13. nay that are begotten by him by the Word of truth as his Children: Some tender buds, growing up in the Spring of Learning and divine know∣ledge: Some sweet blossomes opening into the flower of service, and giving a goodly sent: Some ripe fiuit, able Ministers of the New Testament, that can both divide the truth aright and withstand gainsayets, whose shells are hard for opposition, whose kernels sweet in the food of Doctrine. Or we may understand this Rod, as signifying the Ministry [effectivè] as to the effects it produceth, by the blessing of God, being made effectuall to produce some precious buds of Grace in the hearts of their hearers; some blossomes of hea∣venly joy and assurance; some holy fruits of righteousnesse and new obedi∣ence. There are some Lambs in Christ's fold, some riper, some elder Chri∣stians; some great with young travelling in birth, with Paul,Gal. 4.19. till Christ be formed in others. The Buds nor Blossomes nor Nuts did not perish but miraculously continued on the Rod laid up by the Testimony: so neither shall the Ministry, or the Word of the Gospel, or the work of Grace in the hearts of the faithful, wither away. Every branch in Christ shall not onely be like Aaron's Rod, but shallJoh. 10.10. bring forth more fruit, and have life more abun∣dantly. The colour of the blossomes of the Almond are of a rubens Candor, a whitenesse tinctured with red: white, to shew the purity and innocency of the Doctrine and Life of faithful Ministers, and yet many times discoloured with rednesse by reproach and persecution. They have a fragrant and sweet sent: so, saith the Apostle, that the Gospel-Ministers are a2 Cor. 2.15. sweet savour of Christ in them that are saved and them that perish.Plin. lib. 7. cap. 17. Pliny relates of the Panther, that by his sweet breath he draws and allures the beasts to him; so doth Christ in his Gospel-Ministers draw the souls of sinners to him, and then teacheth them the knowledge of life and salvation. But as to this Rod, further. We do not read expresly of any leaves it brought forth (though I cannot say it did not, yet however by way of allusion) we may thence observe; that as leaves are Emblems of outward profession: so the Ministers ought mainly to take care of bringing forth fruit in themselves and others: No leaves of a bare formal profession onely but a holy, practical, fruitful life attending their flowring doctrines. This Rod was laid up neer the Ark, which was the Embleme of Gods pre∣sence; The Mercy-seat of Christ incarnate, the Cherubins of the holy An∣gels, and the tables of the Law, and all this within the Oracle, the Figure of Heaven. To note that the pastoral or Prophetical Office of Christ is near and dear to God. The only begotten son who lyeth in the bosom of the Father, he hathJoh. 1.18. declared him: and as all the Buds of the Ministry flow from Christs Rod, and lies by and near him: It notes, from whence the Gospel Embassy comes, even out of the Conclaves or secret Chambers of Heaven: and to note that Ministers should study much, converse with God, with Christ, and the holy Angels: and as the Tables of the Law were there, the Compend of Scrip∣ture
So should it be their diligent care to search in it asProv. 2.4. for hidden Trea∣sure; As the Holy of Holies signified Heaven wherein this Rod lay. It admonishes Dispensers of the sacred Oracles, that they should often Ascend the rounds of Jacobs Ladder, be often in the Mount of transfiguration with Christ, and be transformed from the Image of the world, often in the Pisgah of Prayer; often in the Nebo of meditation, and when they come down, O how will their faces (like to Moses's) shine before the people. But alas! many there be, who intrude into that sacred Function, that need Moses's Vail rather to cover their shame, than to hide the strength of their gracious beau∣ty from the people. Did they walk more with God, the reproaches and marks of Christ would be their honour.Pet. 4.14. The Spirit of God and of glory would rest upon them. Though Israel was in the Wildernesse, yet this Rod lay in the Oracle; and though the Israelites murmured against the Priestly Office, yet the Rod falls a blossoming. If thou wouldst prove a blossoming Minister, endeavour to keep company with the Ark of Gods presence. Hence we may infer from the Rods lying near the Ark, that a holy fruitful, flourishing Ministry is of great esteem with God. How then ought the people to cherish, honour, and pray for these Rods of Aaron. Oh pray for a blossoming Ministry. While Za∣chary was praying within the Sanctuary, and conversing with an Angel: we read, thatLuke 1.10. the people were praying without. If the people did pray more fervently for their Ministers, they would feel more blossoming work in and upon their hearts from the Ministry of Christ. While they are meditating and seeing Visions, do you fall a praying. If this Rod were laid up as a token of the persons whom God had cho∣sen: then let all persons beware of prophesying, unless their Rod do bring forth blossoms, unlesse they find a sealing appointment from God. Oh did men but know and understand the weighty work of an Evangelical Minister, how that their Rod ought to bud as did Aarons, with a heavenly prognostick or sign of ministerial fruit, and accordingly to prophesie of Gods mercy or judgement to a Nation. How that it ought to blossom as did Aarons in doctrines of comfort, joy and assurance to broken souls: How that it ought to bear Nuts, for the people to feed upon in spiritual knowledge: surely they would not dare to venture on such holy things. Shall Uzzah be smitten for toucning the Ark? Shall the men of Bethshemech for prying too curiously into it, be dismayed with so sore a slaughter? Shall Dathan, Abiram, and the rest of his company be swallowed up alive for contemning the Ministry instituted of God? Shall Ʋzziah the King be smitten with2 Chro. 26.19, Leprosie for daring to offer Incense, because it did not appertain to him? Nay, shall Na∣dab and Abihu, Priests by Call and Profession be slain upon the place for offering with strange fire,Mat. 4, 20. and yet shall dry stumps to please their vain hu∣mours, puft up with conceit and pride turn blossoming Rods: let them take heed of Divine blasting? We read the Apostles left their nets, their particu∣lar callings, when they were called to the Ministry  The counsel and command of Paul to Timothy, and in him to every Gospel-Minister is.1 Tim. 4,15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. But as to the people: Too delicate and nice are those ears that cannot bear the smiting of Aarons Rods: they love to smell the Blossoms of Rheto∣rick only. But such must remember that Aarons Rod was a Scepter of Rule and Discipline, and btought forth Almonds also of knotty truths. There are sons of Thunder as well as of Consolation: Aarons Bells must some∣times ring the knell of the Law, as well as the marriage peales of Gospel-grace and love to weary souls.
Some would fling all Aarons Rods without the Camp, and wait upon In∣spirations from Heaven in a more immediate way. On how grievously do they tempt God and oppose Christ? who when he ascended up to the Oracle of Heaven, gave Apostles, Teachers, Pastors to the Church; For what?Eph. 4.12. for the work of the Ministry ; For how long? till we all come in the unity of the faith to a perfect man. Ministry is a plant of Gods own right-hand, an  a semper-vive. For such hath God1 Cor. 12.28. set  plac'd, constituted and established in the Church as the Rod of Aaron, al∣wayes to continue in all ages green and blossoming in the Oracle. Whereas some ignorantly object thoseJohn 6.45. Heb. 8.11. 1 Joh. 2.27. places, wherein 'tis promised, that we shall be all taught of God, and that we need not that any man teach us, nor for any to learn of his Neighbour. They consider not of a mediate teaching, wherewith God doth oncur. Ministers are Instruments in the work only,Luke 2.17. and teach but the ear: 'tis God is the principal Efficient, and reacheth the heart. Why did John and others write their Episs else. if this conceit had been the true meaning of the Apostles? We shall observe therefore, even under the new Testament (whereunto those Promises did look) that God was pleased still to use the mediate teaching of his Ministers, but still reserving the grand prerogative of moving the heart to himself, and that in a more copious manner than of ancient times, therein fulfilling the promise more abundantly. Wherefore its observable, that though God himself could have revealed the birth of his Son to the Shepheards by immediate suggesti∣on, yet he uses the Ministry of Angels to them, and of the Shepherds them∣selves to the people of Bethlehem. God hath appointed Shepheards and Pa∣stors in his Church to reveal his mind.Acts 8.29. Philip was sent by the Spirit to expound the Prophet Isaias to the Eunuch.Acts 9.11. Ananias was sent by God to Paul. And the Angel bidActs 10.16, Cornelius send for Peter: All to shew, that God is pleased now to teach mediately and Instrumentally by his Ministers. How happy then is such a people, who have the true and genuine Rods of Aaron alwayes blossoming in their streets? Happy are the people that are in such a case, whose God is the Lord! Thus much concerning the mysterious Things laid up in the Oracle: I shall now descend to the Sanctuary, and view the three famous Utensils therein contained: The Mysterie of the Ʋtensils in the Sanctuary. In the next place the stately Rarities of the Sanctuary or Holy place, com∣mand from us a diligent and humble survey, as to the excellent significations concluded in them. There were in this place, an Altar of Incense, ten tables of Shew-bread, and ten Golden Candlesticks: whereof in their due order. In general, it is conceived of them: that as the three Offices of Christ were exhibited in the Oracle, which we have before-mentioned: so also here in the Sanctuary we find the like, viz. The bread on the Table noting Christs Kingly Office in sustaining his Church. The Candlestick, his Prophetick, in illuminating and teaching of his people: The Altar of Incense, his Priestly in mediating for them. As to the former I shall , suspend at present, only as to the last it will appear very clear, I hope, by what may succeed in the particular handling of it. Dr. Lightf. p. 58.35. Temp.First, I shall endeavour to speak to the golden Altar of Incense, which challenges our first attendment, as standing nearest to the holy Oracle. The Altar of Incense. This golden Utensil was famous in its generation: a Vessel of Honour and Renown. It stood (a) nearest of all to the Oracle, and therefore comes first in order of dignity to be handled.
The Description of this golden Altar we have heard related before. Two things more I would speak to a little before I descend to the Mysterie. 1. The Censer, 2. the Composition of the Incense. As to the Censer; it is thought to be a little pan made of Gold with a handle to it, which as to the brazen Altar is called a fire-pan, Exod. 27.3. and a censer, Lev. 10.1, & 16, 12. As for the Composition of the Incense we read according to our Translati∣on, that it was made of a like quantity of several ingredients; and thereof they burntAins∣worth. Exod. 30. v. 8. 50 drams in the morning; and 50 at night, i.e. one pound of in∣cense every day. What the Hebrew dram is, may be seen page 2. of this Trea∣tise. The Composition was of sweet spices,Exod. 30.24. Stacte Onycha, Galbanum, and sweet Frankincense. They are called in the Hebrew Arias Montanus turns them by Gutta, Onycha, Chalbanum, and Thus. For Gutta the Vulgar reads Stacte, the 70 . The first of these Aromata or sweet spices is Nataph, from the Verb of the same Letters, signifying to distil or drop: intimating that it was some liquid Gum that distills out of a Tree. Dioscorides in his first Book de materia me∣dica, Cap. 62. speaking of Stacte, saies it is the fat juyce of fresh Myrrh, brui∣sed with a little water, and squeezed out by a pressing Instrument. Mattholus, in his Comment upon him, saies, 'Tis his opinion that it was a subtitute for Myrrh. Josephus in his Antiquities speaking of the Present,Pag. 60. which Jacob sent in∣to Egypt by the hands of his Sons, to Joseph (his then unknown Son) the Go∣vernor, being things of the growth of Canaan; calls that Stacte,Lib. 2. c. 3. p. 46. which we in our Translation render by Myrrhe from the Hebrew word  in that place, and that I humbly conceive it to be. Pliny, Lib. 12. c. 15. saith, it flowes from the Myrrh-Tree, of five cubits in height and thorny: and Basil on the fourth Psalm cited in the Notes on Pliny saith, Stacte is a sort of the thinnest Myrrh, which being laid aside is so called,Athen. Dipn. l. 17. Edit. Com∣melin. 1611. p. 688. the thicker being termed Myrrhe. Athenaeus speakes of it in these words . Many unguents (saith he) are prepared with Myrrh, but Stacte so called is made of Myrrh onely: that is, without any other ingredient. To this purpose likewise speaks Theophrastus in his Book ofEdit. Turneb. p. 8. Tem. 2. Opuscul. var. Argentorati. 1600. Odours; . There flowe an Oy from the Myrrhe Tree when incision is made▪ and is called Stacte be∣cause it drops a little (agreeing with the Hebrew word taken from dropping or distiing, as was said before). Which someStuckius in Per pl. Erythr. p. 44. Saies it is Storax. and Tzori. Psal. 40. say is the only Oyntment that is simple and uncompounded, whereas all others are mixed. See Plin. l. 2. c. 15. The next is  and is derived from  a Lion as Avenarius conceits, because it is greedily sought after as a rich prey or booty for the confection of perfumes, or possibly from its extraordinary strong aromatical sent. The word is , but once mentioned in Scripture, but seeing the Chaldee Parap rase doth render it by  Tuphrah from  unguis, and so the 70. Thereby we learn from those antient Versions that it was the unguis odoratus, the sweet-sented Nayle, if I may so english it. Of which Diosco∣rides in the forecited Treatise, saith thus. [The Onyx is the cover of a shel∣fiish (like to that in which the purple-fish is inclosed), which is found in the lakes of India that bring forth, and yield the Nardus; therefore giving a sweet
sent, for that the fish feeds upon Nardus]. It is then gathered, when the wa∣ters of the lakes are dried by Summer's heat. The most excellent is brought from the Red Sea, and is white and unctuous. The Babylonian kind is somewhat dark of colour, and lesse then the other. Both of them are burnt for sweet perfume, but smell something strong like Castor. To thisAntido∣tar. 82. Weckerus adds, that by the Moors it is called Blatta Byzantia, and that it presently dissolves in the fire like Bitumen. Matthiolus acquaints us that those Ungues, Nailes, Hoofes, or Shells, call them what you please, which are usually sold for this ancient rarity, yields an unpleasant smell being impo∣sed upon the ignorant Buyer for the true by the ordinary druggist. The true are very rare, and of a curious sent. The 3d ingredient is  Chelbenah, and is at this day called Galbanum, and is nothing else but the juyce of the ferula or fenel-gyant growing in Syria (saithLib. 3. c. 81, p. 359. Edit. Venet. Dioscorides). The most tenacious and clear is the best; somewhat like to Thus or incense, far (and thence it gained its name from  Che∣lebh fatness.) The best is without sticks, yet retaining somewhat of the seed and plant, of a strong savour: [neither too moist nor too dry]. Thus doth he describe it. Pliny speaks to it in these words, Syria yields also Galbanum in the same mountain of Amana (mentioned, Cant. 4.8.) out of the plant call'd ferula, which is termed Stagonitis, after the manner of rezin of the same name) [for so Frankincense is called, viz. the male or strongest sort by Dio∣scorides.] It seems the plant from whence this Galbanum is taken was by the Greek Physitians called Stagonitis, , from the drops of this gum which it yielded:] The best (saith Pliny) is very thick and firme, pure like Ammoniack, and not wooddy. If you burn that which is pure, itPlin. l. 19. c. 10. drives away Serpents and Gnats. He compares it to Ammoniack, which is supposed to be the juyce or gum of the same plant, but growing in Africa near the Temple of Jupiter Ammon▪ and thence so call'd; or else, as others, from theRenodaei Dispens. p. 547. root of this Ferula by expression. The last is called  an is retain'd by the Septuagint, and ge∣nerally by Greek Authors in , being doubles derived from the He∣brew, and that from  white, the purest whereof being the whitest as we shall see by and by. Some would have the mountain Lebanon called so from the plenty of Thus, which they suppose to have bin taken thence: but they are mistaken, for it grew not there, that any Author of credit doth report; but in Arabia. Whereas the name of that famous mountain is taken from its being white with snow in the hotest seasons. It being so sublime, that the re∣flection of the Sun's heat from the Earth did seldom arise so high as to melt it all away. So Schindler hath noted in that word, applying to this purpose Jer. 18.4. Lib. 1. c. 70. p. 65.Dioscorides in his forecited Book tells us that it growes in that part of Arabia, which is thence called the Thuriferous Country. TheTheophr. de Odor. p. 13. lin. 30. most ex∣cellent in that kind is the masculine Thus called Stagonitis (as was said before), round of its own nature; when broken 'tis white, fat within, presently burns [even like a Candle] when fire is applyed to it, and thence hath its name Thus  a suffitu, from the burning of it as a perfume at the sacred offer∣ings in Temples. Lib. 2. c. 47. p. 93. Edit. Hen. Steph. 1559. Diodorus Siculus relates that in Arabia this excellent rarity grew plentifully. [, &c.] It containes (speaking of Ara∣bia) many various gums or tears dropping from Trees. The utmost Coasts bring forth myrrh and frankincense acceptable to the gods, which is carried from thence into the whole World; & further goes on to tell us that of Costus,
Cassia-lignea, Cinnamou, and of this Thuriferous plant, there is such abundance that, whereas they are but seldome offered up to the gods in other places, here the Trees administer fuel for their Ovens: and whereas other∣where some small parcels of them are to be seen as great rarities, there they make beds of the wood of these Trees for their servants. Furthermore, out ofLib. 12. c. 14. Pliny we understand that no place in the World hath it but Arabia, if we may credit him, and that among the Sabaeans, in the pagus Atramiticus: The exact description of the plant he saies he cannot give us, but that it growes in clay grounds among hills where few springs are and those nitrous. Some report the leaf to be like that of the Pear-Tree, others like the Mastick-Tree. The bark for certain is like the Laurel, some say the leaf also: for in his dayes Embassadors came to Rome with Rods of this Tree in their hands, which were smooth and without knots. The chief time of gathering the Tear, is in the Dog-daies by incision. Then it stands in round drops, and such is held to be the Thus masculum, or the choisest of all, especially (si¦mammosum) if hanging in many drops cleaving together. That which is good may be known by its whiteness, largeness, bitterness, and easie burning; and that it will not bear the tooth, but is presently resolved into crumbles, and such of it as is broken into small parts; in Plinies dayes they called it Manna. In many of these thingsCap. 36. Solinus (The Scapula of Pliny) goes in one path with his master, but with addition. The leaf of the Tree, saith he, is somewhat like the Olive: its trunk growes crooked, and is somewhat rough with prickles, and here gain-saies his Tutor: and further, that it never growes higher then five cubits. But to find out this rare Country exactly where it grew, I would crave leave for a little enlargement. To which end Arrian in his description of the Red Sea will be a firme and sure guide, joyning him in Commission with Ptolomy. Arrian saies, that beyond Cana a Mart-Town of Arabia,P. 9. Edit. Stuck. there is a famous Reach call'd the Sachalitan bay, and there lies the Country yiel∣ding this our precious plant. Now although this be the chief and principal Country where it grew; yet what Pliny said was true, that the Atramitae, or as Ptolomy calls them the Adramitae, had some of it also; who received their de∣nomination from Hatzarmaveth one of the Sons of Joktan, saith Bochartus in his Phaleg, p. 113. Nay, Canah was a port of theirs, to which it was brought from the in land parts saith Arrian, in preceeding lines. For in the Inland Country at Sabota, the chief City of the Saboeans, there was a recep∣tacle or Ware-house for it; which place Ptolomy calls Sabbatha. Be∣sides this place, Syagros a Town near the greatest Promontory in the East, (saith Arrian) was another Storehouse for this rich Commodity. Ptolomy indeed placeth the Frankincense-Country near the Asabaean Mountaines. For in his de∣scription of the more in-land parts of Arabia, the happy, he saies that beyond the Omaritae, Lib. 6. c. 7. p. 178. Edit. Bertii. , more East were the Catabaeni, near the moun∣taines of the Arabi under which lies the Country that yieldeth Frankincense, then next the Sachalitae were the Jobaritae. Which doth well agree with Arrian, for ye see the Sachalitae challenge by both their testimonies, the honour of this precious Shrub. With this, consents Strabol. 16. p. 768. , &c. . A little before he saies that the Royal seat of the Catabaeni was , by others called , and thence is this gum called , and corruptly  and , In Dioscorides fore∣cited, where the translator hath turned it Individuum, by a mistake, , being the corrupted name of the City, near which it was plentifully
gathered. Now that we may know the true place where it is situate at this day, lets observe that Cane of the antients doth yet retain its name, and so directs us to Caien a City of the Kingdome of Fartach in the South of Arabia, as Stuc∣kius, Scaliger and Cardan, have hinted; and the present Maps; such as they be, do fully declare it. But as for Arrians description, take it in short. [, &c.] The Country that brings forth frankin∣cense is hilly and hardly pastable,Bochart Phaleg. l. 2. c. 18. More at large. (The Aire thick and cloudy). The fran∣kincense is gathered from Trees, which are not high nor large, and produce it sticking to the bark, even as some of the Trees with us, saith he, in Egypt, weep out gums. They are called gums from the Greek , and that  from incision. It's gathered by the King's slaves, and such as are con∣demned to punishment. The places are very unhealthy, and somewhat pestilential, even to those that sayl by them, and usually the gathering of it is the cause of death to the labourers. In which assertion Stckius defends the Author out of Strabo, who in his 16 Book p. 778. saies that the extream fragrancy of these gums and Spices produceth a Sopor in their brains, which is very hurtful. To this I shall onely add what two or three of the antient Poets have said, and so conclude, Virgil. Georg. l. 1. India mittit Ebur, molles suae thura Sabai. And Georg. l. 2. —solis est Thurea virga Sabaeis. And near to that place. Tota{que} thuriferis Panchaia pinguis arenis, In his Culex near the beginning. —Illi Panchaica thura. Cap. 36. Indeed Pom∣ponius Sabi∣nus on the Culex, saies that Pancha∣ia is a port of Persia, from whence the incense was brought of old. Isa. 60.8. Jer. 6.20.Solinus speaks further about it, when treating of that rare bird the Phoenix, in that part of Arabia, Regos suos struit cinnamis, quos prope Panchaiam con∣cinnat, in Solis urbem flrue altaribus suppositâ. Which City of the Sun so called i by Ptolomy styled . the sacred promontory's of the Sun, a place among the Nariti, a people situated by him near the Sachalitae, with whom, Arrian told us, this our excellent Tree did grow. Which agrees with the holy Scripture, where we read that Sheba of old brought incense to the Temple. Another place of the antients, is that of Seneca in his Hercules Octaeus v. 790. Splendescat ignis Thure, quod Phoebum colens, Dives Sabaeis colligit truncis Arabs. And not to meddle with Ovid, Propertius, Horace, or any others. Sidonius shall close all, Carm. 5. P. 41. Edit. Paris. 1609.—Ser vellera, Thura Sabaeus, v. 43, And again v. 47. —Arabs guttam, Panchaia Myrrham. Whereby it seems these places were famous for all the chief precious gums in antient times. This of ours which we are now speaking to, retaining the Hebr.Wocker Antidotar p. 375. and others, name in some measure, is at this day called Olibanum in the Shops, and is of great use in Physical Plaisters, as may appear by the writings of our modern Learned Physitians, and their Dispensatories. Thus much of Frankincense.
Now to the Mystery of the Incense which was compounded of these four stately ingredients forementioned, for the golden Altar. As for the Altar it self, that the Gold should signifie Christs Divinity, and that the Cear-wood underneath, should note his humanity; or concerning its quantity and dimen∣sions or figure, that it was square, signifying the firmity or strength of Christ his mediation; or that its Angles or Horns should note the extension of his intercession, through the four parts of the World; these things shew more the curiosity, than the solidity of such Interpreters: neither date I aver that, Its Crown round about the edges, should hold forth Christs Kindly Dignity. But as to the sweet Incense which was burnt upon it, the holy Scripture is a sure guid to us, that it exhibited or shadowed forth as to Christ the fragran∣cy and sweet Savour of his Intercession. The odours were to signifie theRev. 5.8. prayers of Saints. The Lord Jesus Christ himself is represented standing with a golden Censor, there being given to him much incense, that he should offer it with theRev. 8.3, 4. prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar before the Throne, and the smoak of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints ascended up before God, out of the Angels hand. So that as the High-Priest on the expiation day, did go into the holy of holies, and perfume it with incense from this Altar: So is Christ gone into Heaven, and thereCol. 3.1. sitting at the right hand of the Father, ever liveth to makeHeb. 7.25. intercession for us. Nay, the prayers of the Saints themselves are shadowed forth by this, which were offered up by the Priests every day. Let my Prayers saith David, be set before thee asPsal. 141.2. incense; and whereas Zachary was by lot burning incense in the Temple of the Lord; we read, that the whole multitude of the people wereLuk. 1.10. praying without at the same time. The time of this service, wasExod. 30.7, 8. morning and evening, about the time of the lighting of the Lamps. As The Lamps denoted the light of the Word (whereof more by and by): So we see, that the Word and Prayer must go to∣gether. In that it was every morning and evening, it denotes daily and con∣stant prayers, which we ought to powre out before the Throne of grace, even asLuk. 2.37. Anna the Prophetess, departed not from the Temple, but served God with fastings andRom. 12.11. 1 Thes. 5.17. prayers night and day. In which sense, the Apostle Paul is to be understood, when he bids us to pray without ceasing, to continue instant in prayer. Forasmuch also as this Golden Altar was to be sprinkled with the blood of theExod. 30.10. sin-offering of atonements, once in the year by the High-Priest, on theLevit. 16, 18. v. 29. 10th day of the 7th month: it shewes that neither the prayers of Priest or people, can be acceptable with God, unless the impurities thereof be taken a∣way by theJoh. 1.7. & 2, 1. blood of Christ, and his all-sufficient Mediation with the Fa∣ther, or else he thatIsa. 66.3. offereth incense is all one in the sight of God, as if he blessed an Idoll. To add a little by way of allusion: As these precious gums in this fragrant Incense, came naturally and freely dropping out of the Trees which bare them, & that was counted the best and purest; or else the Trees did yield it by inclusion and cutting of the Bark: So is that prayer most acceptable, that comes with the freeest breathings of the soul; or else, that we ought to ap∣ply the launcings of the Law, or cutting-considerations of Repentance, to work upon the soul in its ardent drawings near to Heaven in prayer. As we have said before, that the odours of these gums when burnt, did drive away Serpents, and perfume the Air from all noxious sents: So is it with heavenly and ardent prayers, whereby the soul is enabled through faith, to resist the Devil, and the contagious Air of his temptations; and of all cor∣rupt
lusts and affections; forMat. 21.17. this kind goeth not out but by prayers and fasting. As these ingredients were to beExod. 30.36. beaten very small into fine dust or powder, before they were put into the censers: so is the heart by humbling meditations, to be brought into a low and self-abhorring frame, when it ap∣peares before God in prayer. APsal. 51.17. broken and a contrite heart the Lord will not despise. Such as with Abraham esteem themselves but dust and ashes: Then he whose name is holy, who dwelleth in the high and holy place of the Heavenly Temple, will dwell also with him that is of aIsa. 57.17. humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the con∣trite ones, with gracious answers to their prayers. Furthermore, the burning of this incense, shewed the ardency and the hea∣venly inflammation of the heart in prayer,Rom. 12, 11. servent in spirit, serving the Lord: We ought to be so. Last of all, as the sweet and fragrant smell came from these incensed or fired ingredients upon Gods Altar: so it shewes how sweet∣ly pleasing to Gods Majesty it is for the soul to draw nigh to him with a hum∣ble, holy, ardent frame of spirit, through the mediation and intercession of Jesus Christ. The Golden Tables of Shewbread. HErein I shall desire leave to speak somewhat to the four urensils descri∣bed Exod. 25.29. because omitted in the preceding History, viz. the Dishes, Spoons, Covers, and Bowls: the Hebrew hath these words,  which Arias Montanus renders Scutellas: the 2d is  Arias & Coclearia: the third  & medios Calamos: the last  & Cyathos ejus. The first word is translated, a Charger, Numb. 7.84, 85. and was no other then a golden Dish or Charger wherein the Cakes were placed: The next is derived from  signifying hollow, and was a little Vessel, wherein the In∣cense was put, which we translate a Spoon. The 3d is from  which some translate by scutella; others explain it by a Vessel to cover, and seems to be a Golden Vessel that was laid as a covering on the top of the Bread: whereas Arias hath turned it by Medius Calamus, it is in favour of the Jewish relati∣ons mentioned by Ainsworth at large, out of the Rabbies on that place, and Dr. Lightfoot, p. 83. of his second Temple, as if they had bin golden Canes slit in the midst, and laid between each Cake to preserve them from touching each other, and thereby contracting any mustiness. This word in Numb. 4.7. is joyned with  to cover withall, which Buxtorf sayes, when used with things that are dry, signifies obtegere, obducere, to cover or overwhelm; for what liquid thing was there here, for any effusion or libation? and there∣fore he translates them Scutellas tegminis, the covering dishes. The last terme comes from  to be pure and clean; and thence some have translated them Scopulae, as if they were brushes; but were such made of gold? The Septuagint in Exod, 37.16. Numb. 4.7. and Jer. 52.19. translate this word by , and we, in that last place of the Prophet, by Cups. They are call∣ed by that name in the Hebrew from purity. 1. Conserving or keeping pure or clean, as the covers of Goblets or great Cups, are therefore laid to keep the inside of the Vessel pure and clean, or the liquor or any other matter within from dust. So then the two first are the Vessels that stand underneath the bread and the incense: the two last, the covers on the top of each. So that on the top of the Covering Vessel that
was whelmed or laid upon the bread, stood the Spoon, as we call it, or the container of the Incense, with its Cover or Bowl, as we translate it, to preserve it from dust, or any thing falling into it all the week long: till it was taken up, and offered to the Lord by fire at that time, as is conceived, when the bread was taken off. Now, because that Incense doth (as it were) melt in the fire:Lev. 24.7. therefore possibly might the 70 call these Vessels , which are the common terms for receivers of liquids: and that which we Numb. 4.7. render to cover withall, they render  in which libation, or pow∣ring out, is used. So much then, for what was omitted formerly in the Historical part: I shall now descend to the signification thereof. As for the Tables themselvs, their Rings, Crowns, Staves, matter or out∣ward form, I shall leave as niceties for others to pry into, that please; Taking them to be all but attendants, and accessaries of what was the principal thing, viz. the Bread upon it, and Incense. The number of the Tables were 10, being increased in Solomon's daies. We read in Scripture of thePsal. 105.16. staff and stay of bread, as on which, man's temporal life doth lean: it being thePsal. 104.15. strengthner of his heart. It is the principal of all food,Isa. 3.1. and therefore all our refreshments are prayed for under that name in our Lord's prayer. ButMat. 4.4. man doth not live by Bread alone but by every Word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Therefore was this part of the whole Masse of the Corn of Israel, presented before the Lord, as an homage-testimony unto God, that the Harvest was blessed by God, and that he givethHos. 2.9. his Corn to his people in the season thereof. We see here, that God's Majesty was pleased by this shadow, to hint forth his Commission with his Inheritance. The people of God do enjoy a , a fellowship with him, they are entertained by God who spreads their Tables, whoIsa. 55.10. sendeth his Rain from Heaven, that the Earth may give Seed to the Sower, and Bread to the Eater. The Word of God is often compared to bread in Scripture, for the nourish∣ment which Souls receive by it. The famine of Bread for the body, is not so sore a punishment, as thatAmos 8.11. Mat. 16.12. of the hearing the Word of the Lord. Our bles∣sed Saviour admonishing his Disciples to beware of the leavened Bread of the Pharisees, expounds it of their corrupt Doctrine, that was unsound food for souls: for such as attended to themIsa. 55.2. laid out their mony for that which was not true Bread. The Sanctuary signified the Church of God, (as hath bin declared) where∣in the Priests were to set forth bread every Sabbath-day: to shew that on that day, the bread of life, the Doctrine of the Gospel should be administred to the people of God, by such as are able Ministers of the New Testament, workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the2 Tim. 2.15. word of truth; and as the bread, set on the Table that day, did continue all the week there, so we ought all the week long to live upon the spiritual food of the Sabbath. Now, as the Incense-Altar signified prayer; and the Candlestick, the light of a shining Minister, to illuminate the understanding in all things that accompany salva∣tion, (of which more by and by): So the Table of Shew-bread signified the feeding Doctrines: the former concerns the head, the other the heart. To shew, that Ministers are not onely to set up Candlesticks in their Congregati∣ons, and to prepare the Lamps of knowledge; but to administer the solid food of soul-saving and soul nourishing Doctrines. The Manna within the Vail was the Type of Christ Essentiall: This Bread on the Table without the Vail, of Christ Doctrinall; or Christ explained, opened, and applyed to the hearts of all hungry souls, that come with a heavenly appetite to the feast of the Gospel.
Ribera p. 130.To let passe the conceit of Ribera, that this bread noted Charity: as the Papists are alwayes harping on that string, tuning and straining all places pos∣sibly they can to that lesson, which is most excellent and melodious in it self, but when played upon to the tune of merit: such persons do transgress for aProv. 28.11. Luk. 14.15. piece of bread that it may fall into their Basket: like crafty Gibeonites, that insnare the Israel of God with such leavened Doctrines. I will not say neither, that this did signifie eating bread in the Kingdom of God: that place being only one by spiritual accommodation of the present bread that he was eating at a Pharisees House, as our Lord was alwayes ready in a most heavenly way to apply every present providence to some spiritual benefit and improvement. Though its certain, that they shall be blessed that come to that Table of glory which Christ shall spread in Heaven, where shall be no fastidium, no glutting Satiety, the Table there shall never be uncovered: At his right hand, are pleasures that excel for evermore. Yet I cannot say, this was a Type of it, but rather of the food of the Church here, before we come within Heaven, the Holy of Holies: yet cer∣tainly, it is the breakfast of grace to prepare our stomacks, and whet our ap∣petites for the Manna within the Vail: on which we shall feed for evermore. Lord evermore give us of thisJoh. 6.34. bread, that we may never hunger more; but as Adam in innocency, whose inclination to eat, is conceived to be with∣out any corrosions of pain, he had no Latrans Stomachus. So and much more excellent shall it be with Saints in Heaven, when we shallLuk. 22.30. eat and drink at his Table, in his Kingdom. If we let in Christ to sup with us in the Ban∣quet of Grace, he will open the Gates of the New Jerusalem, that we mayRev. 3.20. sup with him at the Table of Glory. This bread was set in order before the Lord continually, being taken from the Children of Israel, by an everlasting,Lev. 24.8. Covenant. For as Laban and Jacob did make a Covenant of peace by eating ofGen. 31.54. bread together. So Jethro, Moses Father in Law, the Elders of Israel, and Aaron, etaExod. 18.12. bread together in token possibly of a Covenant; for Saul, when he was sent to destroy Amalek, bids the Levites to depart from among them, that he might remember the kindness which they shewed to the Israelites, when they1 Sam. 15.6. came up out of Egypt. This custom of making a Covenant by eating of bread, is noted by Alex∣ander ab Alex. Gentil. l. 2. c. 5. Stuck. Antiq. Conviv. lib. 1. c. 30. m. 6. Coelius Rhodig. Lect. Antiq. l. 28. c. 15. and many others: to recite whose words, would fill up too much time and room. Sufficient is it to note, that hereby there was a Covenant made between God and his people, that if they did obey him, he wouldPsal. 81.16. feed them with the finest of the Wheat, and with Honey out of the Rock would he satisfie them. This Temple-bread was made into 12 Cakes, denoting probably the 12 Tribes of Israel, and therein the Church of God, under the conduct of the 12 Apostles of the New Testament. Jerusalem we read, to have been built uponRev. 21.14. 12 Foundations. Now as in the Temple there were 10 Tables, and each Table had in it 12 Cakes in the dayes of Solomon, arising in the whole to 120. I will not affirm, that it reflects upon theAct. 1.15. 120 Disciples, that were assembled at Jerusalem: (then I should consent to the inventing niceties, which are justly condemned by sober men.) But I conceive rather, that as Solomon was a singular Type of Christ: so this might signifie the great increase of the Congregations of the faithful, after the dayes of that Prince of peace, who was greater then Solomon in all his glory. In each of which, as the Masse of each Cake was made up of many grains: So the Saints, though many, yet are one bread and one body, if they are all
In the last place it is to be observed, that the Priests were toLev. 24.9. eat of this holy Bread, who were the Lords [ or] portion: to shew that they are to have their livelyhood from the Church of Christ in the dayes of the Gospel, in which they minister. And further, it notes in a spiritual way, that the Priests were to feed upon, and live up to, the same truths which they held forth to others. The Incense that was on the top of the Cakes was to be burnt on the Sab∣bath, to shew, that prayer was to be joyned with the word, as before was men∣tioned. The Golden Candlesticks. The last things within the Sanctuary, were the Golden Candlesticks.pag. 262. Concerning the constnt burning of their Lamps, Josephus affirms, that they were enlightned  every day. In theExod. 13.7. morning Aaron was to burn Incense when he dressed the Lamps, and when he lighted the lamps atverse 8. even, he was to burn Incense: the Text thereby implying, that they were to burn day and night,Lev. 24.3. from even to morning. And so Josephus, ci∣ting Hecataeus, without any di-relish of his relation in this particular,p. 10.49. tells us that the golden Candlestick had , light unextinguished night and day. For the Lamps, there was provided some matter to help the conception or accension of flame, which was made of twisted flax: To this possibly the Prophet alludes when he speaks of our Saviour, that he shall notIsa. 42.3. quench the smoaking flax, which Text our LordMat. 12.20. Martinii lexic. in li∣num fumig. applyeth to himself. For as the Priest when he came in the morning to dress the Lamps, and found any of them to glimmer and be obscure, he snuffed them, pull'd up or ap∣plyed more wick to them gve new and fresh oyl: so will Christ not put out, butPsalm 18.23. enlighten our darkness. As darknesse is put for sorrow, grief, ob∣scurity, and affliction: So light is rhe Emblem of joy and comfort, which Christ will bring to every poor afflicted soul: sending out hisPs. 43.3. light and truth, thereby to guide us. OylExod. 27.20. Lev. 24.2. Olive beaten was also provided for the Lamps.Plut. in Alexandr. pag. 587. Oyl is the Emblem of joy as well as light. The purest also and sweetest Oyl, was enjoyned. In Za∣chary there wereEzek. 4.3. See Pemble. Olive-trees that emptied their Golden oyl, so called for preciousness, because passing through golden-pipes: We see there were no Tapers of wax in the Sanctuary, as no hony in Offerings.Jerome ad Gauden∣tium. p. 100. or 104. Cerâ contempt, quae melis hospitium est: oleum accenditur in Templo Dei quod de amatritudine exprimitur olivarum. The oyl noted the Spirit of God,1 John 2.21. the Ʋnction of the holy One. In vain doth any man light the Lamp of Doctrine without the oyl of the Spirit: they must go together. With his assistance must Mini∣sters shine in the Doctrines of truth. Of each Candlestick there seemsExod. 25.31 to be six parts: Its shaft, branches, bowls, knops, flowers, and lamps. That which we translate shaft, is in the Hebrew  Arias femur ejus, its thigh. Junius, Scapus, the body of a pillar: the 70 , its stalk, that part which arose out of the Basis. The next is  Arias & calamus, its reed or cane: the 70  its small reeds: Junius, rami ejus, its branches, and so our transla∣tion: by which we are to understand the 6 lesser parts or branches that rose out of the main stalk or shaft of the Candlestick, 3 on the one side, and 3 on the other. The third is  Junius [& lauces] its little hollow plates, like scales of a Ballance: which word, unlesse in this story of the Candlestick here, and in the 37th. Chapter of this book, is not found, that
I have observed any where but in the story ofGen. 44.2, 12, 16, 17. Joseph in Genesis, and of the Rechabites in the ProphetJer. 35.5. from v. 34. Jeremy: In which places we have translated it by Cups, but in this present story by Bowls. The fashion is conceived to have been like half an Almond-shell, as sometimes drinking-cups were made in that form: and therefore the 70 turn it by , drinking-cups for wine. The vulgar Lat. by Scyphi, others Calices, to the same import, and so they seem to have been cups, through the middle whereof the shaft and the bran∣ches did passe, (as the stalk of the Dipsacus, the teazle or Venus Bason. the Cup being hollow, and encompassing each of the stalks to receive any filth that should fall from the Lamps. Three of these Bowles like Almonds be∣ing in each Branch. The next word is  Arias, & poma ejus, and its Apples: the Vulgar, Sphaerulae, its little Spheres: and so the 70 by . Junius, by mala oblonga, its knops like long apples, which doubt∣lesse were for meer Ornament. The 5th. word  Arias and Pagnine, & flores, from  germinare, to bud forth. The 70 and the vulgar Lat. Lillies. Junius, & caliculi, Flowers blown out, which were also for Orna∣ment. The sixth and last isExo. 25. pag. 33.  Arias, & lucernas. The 70  we render it, its Lamps: which Arias MontanusAntiq. Judaic. pag. 82. Edit. 1593. conceives to have been in form and shape like a mans eye, at the one end a little ear or handle to hold it by: at the other end a hole to put in the oyl and wick, a lit∣tle higher then the former. This Lamp he conceives was fastened on the up∣permost Lilly or flower of each Branch. In brief, the whole Candlestick with all it Appendancies was thus for∣med. First a Basis or foot, which though not described is to be supposed: whether a solid massy piece or with three or four feet; its left to conjecture. Then issued upward the body or main Stalk of the Candlestick, called for its great∣nesse,Ar. Mont. ibid. pag. 81. a lin. 40. The Candlestick, pag. 34. &c. 37. v. 20. Every Bowl had a knop and a Flower, which seems to be the true meaning of the 34 verse, where its said, that in the Candlestick, that is, (by a Synech∣doche) the shaft or chief part of the Candlestick, there were to be 4 Bowles with their Knops and Flowers: that is, to each Bowl one. Verse 33.So then at some convenient distance from the foot began in the shaft its first Bowl, then a Knop and a Flower, and out of that first Flower issued forth two Branches: then in the shaft was made another Bowl, a knop and a flow∣er,Verse 35. ch. 37. v. 21. and then issued forth the second pair of Branches, one on the one side, and another on the further side. After that another Bowl knop and flower, and thence ascended the two last Branches on each side. And lastly, a Bowl, knop and flower at the top of the shaft; in which last flower stood the Lamp, as Arias conceives. For we read of four of each in the body or main upright. Part of the Candlestick, whereas the bending branches which arose up equal∣ly to the height of the main shaft had but 3 of each a piece, in the same Or∣der with their Lamps at the top. Rivet sayes in Exod. p. 1122. a. Ita ut unus∣quisque calamus haberet tres Scyphos quorum unicui{que} adderetur Sphaerula cum flore, line 38. This with submission I humbly conceive to have been the form of the golden Candlesticks, which I have here added, because omitted in the former Description. There belonged likewise to the Candlesticks oyl-Vessels: wherein the Priests did bring oyl to supply the Lamps with, tearmedNum. 4.9.  and cal∣led  by the 70, Vessels to carry Oyl in. The very same word which is used in the Parable of theMat. 25, 4. ten Virgins: It being not sufficient to shine in profession, but there must be supplyes of Oyl from Vessels, or the Lamps will go out.
There were alsoExod. 25.38. Ver. 37.23. 1 King. 49.50, 51. 2 Chron. 4.21. Tongs and Snuffers of Gold, the former to put in or pull up the wick, the latter to take away the coal of the wick, or the burnt-part, serving for cleansing and purifying work. In the 37 of Exod. The word for the Tongs in the former place is rendred, Snuffers, but to the same sense. Most certain it is, that this rare Utensil did signifie and typifie some Evan∣gelical Excellency, especially the Lamps thereof. We read that Christ did walk among theRev. 1.20. and 2.1. 7 Golden Candlesticks:  properly is the golden Lamp; wherein the  or the Lychnus, the int or wick is set and enflamed, to give light by the supply of Oyl: As there were seven Lamp-vessels of Gold in the one Candlestick in Moses's Tabernacle: So our Lord, who wasHeb. 3.5.6. figu∣red by Moses, had in the first body mystical of his Church, 7 famous Churches of Asia: for the Candlesticks or the Lamp-vessels are the Churches. The seven Stars or shining Lamps (bright as Stars) were theprov. 1.21. Angels of Ministers of those Churches. Wherewith do these Angels shine, but with the light of true Doctrine? John was aIohn 5.35. shining light. The Dispensation of the Gospel by the Ministry is called theRev. 2.2. Candlestick. They are the light of the World: our LordMat. 5.14. enjoyns them to study to shine in truth and Holinesse of life; Nay, those that walk by the light, are said toPhil. 2.15 shine as lights in the world, holding forth the Word of life, the Commandment is aProv. 6.23. Lamp, and the Law is a Light, saies Solomon. Thy word is aPsalm. 119.105. Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my path, saith holy David. And in another place, The entrance of thy Words givethVer. 130. Light. The word in the two former places  is the same radically with that which is for the Lamp of each of the Branches of the golden Candlestick. The word of Prophesie is also by the Apostle Peter compared to a2 Pet. 1.19. Light shining in a dak place: and 2 Cor. 4.6. a light shining. The Candlestick was of pureSee Riv. amply, pag. 1122. Gold, which our Lord parallels to the Churches: to shew how golden and pure their lives should be, who live under the shining Rayes of the Gospel: Such a life according to the word, is more to be desired thenPsalm 19.10. much fine Gold. TheRev. 4.5. seven Lamps signifie the various gifts of the Spirit: many are the Sevens in Scripture, of which CyprianCypr. adv. Jud. pag. 265. speaks at large; and so likewise the Account of this Number was of great value among theAlexand. Tab. Hiae. p. 13. 24, 42. Heathen An∣cients. The trimming of the Lamps might hint the purity of Doctrine, or the great care that Ministers should take in their Dispensation of the Word: that it be not dim or fuliginous and dark: men are led away by dark and smoaky preaching. Snuffers & Tongs say some,Ribera, p. 136. did note, Disputations & Explications about the Word: Nay, the Snuffers must be of Gold, to shew, that those who cor∣rect and Discipline the Church in truth; must be very pure: and therefore those who reprove others, must be pure and holy themselves. There were ten Candlesticks, wherein as to the number I cannot conceive any Pythagorean mysterie: such as Plutarch explains by that Number as a Number of perfection in hisDe Ei apud. Del∣phos. Morals, and Meursius in his Denarius Pythagoricus. But rather the multiplying of light and knowledge in the lat∣ter dayes, which should not only cover the earth as waters do the Sea: but as Lamps did fill the Sanctuary: Here were ten times seven. I will not say, it hinted the 70 Disciples whom Christ sent forth by two and two. It would be to draw nigh to a nicety: but rather, the fulnesse of Light and Grace in the Churches in Christ, might be thereby denoted.
In the Porch. The two Brazen Pillars. IN ancient times, Pillars were erected for the bounds of Countries: as Hercules his Pillars (one in Spain and another on the opposite shoar of Africa) for the boundary of his Labours and Empire: and so, near the River Euphrates we read of Pillars set up, for the limits of the Eastern part of the Roman Empire. A custome likewise there was of setting up Pillars on the Tombs and other Monuments of famous Heroes: as those of Trajan and Ha∣drian, to remember their glory and honour to posterity. In Temples the body of the building rested upon Pillars, for security and firmity. In warr, when they erected Trophies, they set up Pillars, as Hero∣dotus relates of Sesostris King of Egypt setting up some in Palestine:Lib. 2. c. 106 Suidas relates in the word , of a Pillar set up by Alexander in an Isle of the Indian Seas among the Brachmans: Some Monuments of Alexander in India,Pag. 121. lib 5. Ed. Hen. Step. 1575. Lib. 5. c. 9. Tab. 2 Asia. Arrian calls His twelve Altars, near the River Hypasis. The like whereof (if they be not mistaken for those of India) are mentioned by Ptolomy to have been fixed by Alexander in the Asiatick Sarmatia, and called , the Pillars of Alexander, in the Longitude of 80 Degrees and La∣titude of 51 30. Nay, that this was a frequent custome for limits, is asserted by Strabo, who mentions severall of the same kind, lib. 3. pag. 171. in his discourse of Spain. But to come nearer home: The Seventy doe inscribe the 16th Psalm, (where the Hebrew hath Micktam) , The E∣rection of David's Golden Pillar upon the conquest of his enemies. When therefore the People of God had their Territories most inlarged, as in the daies of Solomon, from the1 King. 4.21.24. 2 Chr. 9.26. Deut. 1.7. River, &c. unto the border of Egypt; evenDeut. 11.24. Josh. 1.4. from the River Euphrates, to the great Sea, or the Mediterranean. Now then, (when he built the Temple) at such a time was it fit and proper to erect the Pillars, as Monuments of God's praise in the , in the Mountain of his chief City. But why in the Temple? To note that it was God that gave him the power and dominion over all those Nations, and had fulfilled his promise made to Moses and to his people Israel. But to what are these to be resembled under the Gospel? Some would have the Apostles to be thereby signified, as the Primipili, and the Defensores fidei; The first magnanimous assertors of the Faith of Christ: They stood in the Porch or entrance of the Temple; the Apostles lived in the beginning of the Church.Gal. 2.9. Jer. 1.18. James, Cephas, and John , they seemed to be Pillars in the Church: and the Prophet Jeremy God promised to make as an Iron Pillar against Judah. Ministers, for their gifts and eminent site, are Pillars. Absalom,2 Sam. 18.18. being without Male Children, erected himself a Pillar in the King's Dale, to keep his name in remembrance. Saul is mentioned to have made himself  a Hand,1 Sam. 15.12. the Vulg. fornicem triumphalem, a triumphant Arch: We translate it a Place, and so the word being taken for monumental Trophy or Pillar, is mentioned in Isaiah as a promise to such as please God, that they shall have a Place and a name within his house;Isa. 56.5. the word is  a Pillar erected for same. To which possibly the Spirit of God may allude in some measure in the Revetions; though both that and this may princi∣pally referr to Solomon's Temple:Rev. 3.12. For he that overcometh shall be a Pillar in the Temple, and shall go no more out, as these did into Babylon: Brazen Pil∣lars
may be broken in pieces, but Saints, as Sons, shall abide in the House for ever, Joh. 8.35. they shall endure against all weathers: Every Saint is Mo∣nimentum aere perennius; no eating showers, no blustering winds,Hor. Carm. l. 3. Od. 30. Psal. 74.6. Jch. 10.28, 29. nor length of years shall impair him: Axes and Hammers may break down the carved work of the Temple, but Saints are Pillars in the hand of Christ, and of the Fa∣ther: no man can pluck them down. Pillars are Emblems of permanency and stability, of Ornament, of Victory, of strength and service, patience, fortitude and perseverance: in all respects Saints are thereby set forth. There were two Pillars in the Temple, which some resemble to the two states of the Church of God, Jewish and Christian: I shall therein suspend. The one signified present strength, Boaz: the other Jachin, He will fortify; the promise of the Gentiles. They had no names written on them, but were called onely by these names; and so Rev. 3. The Saints shall be called by the name of God's strength. Others understand thereby the two standing Ordinances, Magistracy and Ministry: or the two witnesses, in allusion to Moses and Aaron, Joshua and Eleazar, Elijah and Elisha,Zech. 9. Zerubbabel and Jeshua; and so in the Revelation-prophecies. Christ sent out his Disciples by two and two. But this were ,Luk. 10 1. to hunt after too much ni∣cety. The Tops of the Pillars were curiously adorned:2 Tim. 4.8. to shew that those who persist to the last constantly shall be crowned. The Lilly work, the Emblem of Innocency: Pomegranates, of Fruitfulnesse, there being many grains in one Apple: their Crown shall declare their Glory: As Crowns did vary ac∣cording to the nature of the Service among the Romans; so shall every one be rewarded according to his works. The Vessels in the open Court. IN this place there are these things considerable, The Altar of burnt Sacrifice, The Sea of Brasse, and the ten Lavers: of each in their order. 1. The Altar of Brasse. The Brazen Altar stood in the Priests Court in the open ayre, that so the nidor & fuligo, the sent and smoak of the Sacrifices might be the lesse offen∣sive. This Altar had its several implements fit for service, as Censers or Ash-pans,Num. 4.14. Flesh-hooks, Shovels, Basons, &c. of which we must not speak particularly, they being but proper appurtenances of the work of Sacrifice. What the Altar signified, we need not much trouble our selves or haesitate about it: having so sure a guide, as the Apostle by the dictate of the Spirit of God, who saies We have an Altar,Heb. 13.10. Molin. de Altar. p. 79. Rivet in Ex∣od. p. 1132. Heb. 10.10, 14. whereof they have no right to eat who serve the Tabernacle. Those that continued enslaved and yoked to their Jewish Ceremonies had no right to the Altar of which we are to feed on, which Christ offered himself. We are to eat of the Altar, i. e. the Sacrifice offe∣red on the Altar by a frequent Metonymy: so then, the Sacrifices signified Christ, and the Altar his Crosse. For Christ was offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9.28. As the Altar was set without the Temple,
the Emblem of the Church or new Jerusalem,Ver. 12. so Christ's Crosse was without the Gate of the old Jerusalem. And as on the expiation-day the Priest officia∣ted without the limits of the Tabernacle,Lev. 17.11. See Essnius de sacrificiis p. 220. or Courts of the Temple; so the blood of Christ that maketh atonement, was shed without the Camp in Gol∣gotha, where he had the place of his burial. Christ crucified is the food of Souls, as the Sacrifices were of old for the Priests. The name of the Altar in the Hebrew is sometimes  from Macta∣tion, or killing and offering of the Sacrifice: sometimes  from ascend∣ing up to it, whence  among the Greeks, Altare among the Latines, is derived ab Alto, from its being built up high above the earth, or because in high places, as mountains and hills: and Ara from  Preces, prayers or imprecations, made to the Gods at their Sacrifices. There be who would by no means have the Altar to signify the Crosse of Christ (because the Papists do so highly idolize it; and besides, do count their Tables on which their unbloody Sacrifice is offered to be signified thereby): and therefore understand that place by a Metonymy, Habemus Altare, we have an Altar, i. e. A Sacrifie offered upon the Crosse, viz. Christ himself. But I know no reason, why there should be so much flying to Tropes and such curiosity, in evading this designation, because Papists commit folly about it. Whereas no doubt, they will all affirm, that Christ is the Gospel-Sacrifice; For he is our Pascha Lamb,1 Cor. 5.7. saith the Apostle. Molin. de altare p. 79.The Fathers, for 200 years, called the Table of our Lord, The Altar, as Molineus witnesseth; and that onely by allusion and accommodation: and in this figurative sense, the Church may say still, that we have an Altar: though Christ's Crosse were destroyed, before the Apostle wrote to the He∣brews. But yet if we shall joyn both Sacrifice and Altar in one signification of Christ: I shall not gainsay, though I see no such grand inconvenience in ap∣plying it more distinctly, especially since we do it onely by accommodation: For on the contrary side, by applying the Altar to Christ, there's more dan∣ger of the inference of Popish adoration,Psal. 118.27. if any be inferred. The Sacrifice of old was to be bound to the Horns of the Altar. Some, by the Horns of the Altar, expound the strength of Christ; but if the Altar might prelude to the Crosse, these might note Christ's nailing to the Crosse. Whether this Altar were underneath framed of stone is not certain: if it were, to be sure not of hewn stone.Cont. A∣pion lib. 1. p. 1049. Josephus relates of the Altar at Jeru∣salem out of Hecataeus (and doth not oradict it) thus; A four square Altar not of hewn, but unwrought impolished stones, according to theExod. 20.25. Deut. 27.6. Jos. 8.3. command of God. Instruments did pollute it. The hearts of Saints are compared to Altars by the Ancients, in the Primitive Church. Humane skill, Art, and Reason can∣not polish stones fit for an Altar to offer up to God,Clem. A∣lex. strom. 7.  The whole Church is a grand Altar for holy Sacrifices. Impolisht stones, Saints differing in Judgment, may lye together in one Altar, on which God may have hisIsa. 31.9. fire in Zion, and hearth in new Jerusalem. None but fire from heaven, no culinary fire ought to inflame the Sacrifi∣ces of the Altar. Aaron's Sons smarted in that case. No strange fire of our Passions ought to be admitted in any service of God: For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousnesse of God. Let us in few words mention the New Testament Sacrifices, that through Christ are offered up unto God: whereof more in the 5th Section. Ps. 51.17. A broken Heart is a Sacrifice which God will not despise. The heart that's wounded by the knife of Repentance, is acceptable to God.
In Cratfying of our lusts, offering them up on the Altar of the Crosse of Christ is a Sacrifice well pleasing in the sight of God. The offering up of Christ in prayer to God, as of a Lamb without spot, morn∣ing & evening is another. Let thePsal. 141.2. Mat. 27.46. lifting up of my hands, sayes David, be like an evening Sacrifice. Christ died on the Crosse toward the evening, about the 9th hour: (according to 12 unequal houres counted about the time of Easter, from Sun-rise to Sun-set) falls between 3 and 4, afternoon. The service of our very bodies to God, is another reasonable Sacrifice. Of old,  unreasonable Creatures were sacrificed: now we may offer our selvesRom. 12.1. rational Creatures in this way of sacrifice.Psal. 4, 5. The Sacrifice of righteousness is another. Praysing of God is another. He thatPsal. 50. ult. 23. offereth prayse glorifieth me. TheHos. 14.2. Calves of our lips may be given to God. By him i. e. Christ let us offer theHeb. 13.15. Sacrifice of prayse continually, i. e. the fruit of our lips: giving thanks to his name. Such are the free-will-offerings of holy Davids mouth, breathing toward Heaven. Alms-deeds, and giving to the indigencies of the poor Saints, is anotherHeb. 13.16. Sacrifice, wherewith God is well pleased. The most famous of all is Martyrdom, and thereforeSee, his Life. Cyprian at his suffering calls himself a Sacrifice. So the Martyrs Souls say under the Altar, even as the blood of the Sacrifice was of old, powred out at the foot of the Altar, and the blood is said to be the life or soul of the Creature; there∣fore is that elegant allusion mentioned of the Martyrs:Psal. 119.108. whoe blood was powred out for the Testimony of Christ: Their souls are said to lie under the Altar, crying, how long, &c. and Paul sayes , I am ready to be of∣fered up upon the account of your Faith.Heb. 13.16. But so much as to the Altar, briefly. The Brazen-Sea. Another rare and admirable Vessel, call'd a Sea for its greatness, stood in this Court of the Priests: the end of it was for the Priests to wash in, or else in the water drawn out by Cocks or Syphons into lesse Vessels, before they did go about their services. Which way soever, it noted the purity and clean∣ness of their persons, who were to officiate in sacred services; to which pos∣sibly David might allude, when he said,Ps. 16.6. He would wash his hands in innocen∣cy, and so would he compass the Altar of God. Oh how ought they to prepare, even after the preparation of the Sanctuary, that draw nigh to God? They were to wash their hands and their feet, in this water of the Mosai∣call Laver. Their hands for working and service, their feet for walking, Mi∣nisters must walk cleanly as well as teach.Heb. 10.23: Holy things are not to be toucght in unholy manner; besides,p. 146. Ribera would have it to shadow one of their in∣vented Sacraments, viz. repentance and penitent teares: others the blood of Christ, as Mr. Cotton upon the Revelations on the 2d Viall, p. 18.1643. Seeing Christ hath washed us in his blood,Rev. 1.6. and made us Priests unto his Father. It was made of the Looking-glasses of women, i.e. of the polished Brasse,Exod. 38.8. which they used for the reflection of their faces, as the manner was of old: so that the Priests might look into it; and when they washt their faces, dis∣cern whether the spots were fully cleansed. But as to this of Solomon's, when there was more plenty of Brasse: we do not read of any such  used for this end: But surely it was made of1 King. 7.45. bright polisht Brasse in a larger form, and greater beauty then that of Moses. I shall adhere to holy Paul's allusion, when he compares washings to the Laver of regeneration, and the renewing of the spirit, which purgeth our conscience from dead works, as in Baptism.Tit. 3.5. 'Tis
the answer of a good conscience:1 Pet. 3.21. setting its seal within, to the outward wash∣ing. Therefore was it placed in the Court, noting admission: before we en∣ter the Sanctuary to sit at the Table to eat of the feast of fat things in the Mountain of the House of the Lord. Rev. 4.6.We read of a Sea of Glasse like Crystal standing before the Throne, it be∣ing an allusion to the Sea of Solomon, made of bright polished Brasse, then used to reflect the face in; the Text looking back on that of Moses and Solomon. We read it was mingled with fire,Rev. 15.2. . i. e. mixed or tempered together into that form by fire; for the materiall was of Brasse, but brought into that shape by the use of fire. But because the phrase is some∣what uncouth in the Greek, to hold out the way of its artificial Composition, seeing the Sea did note Baptism, there is added fire, possibly to reflect upon the baptism of fire as well as of water,Mat. 3.11. which must be joyned together, to make Saints pure. When Christ doth it, he baptizes with the Holy Ghost and fire. Under this great Vessel, stood twelve Oxen to support it, which some ap∣prehend to be meant of theRibera p. 149. Potter in 666. p. 41. Sheringham in Jona. p. 49. twelve Apostles, who first of all carried the Doctrine of regeneration and of Baptism, in the name of the infinite Trini∣ty throughout the whole World: upon this account, because the Apostle Paul compares the Ministers to Oxen. But it may seem, the Apostle doth, for their industry and laboriousness, compare them to Oxen, arguing à Minori, out of the Judicial Law of Moses. Doth God take care of Oxen, that tread out the Bread-Corn? how much more then of those that tread out the Corn of the Gospel,1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Tim. 5.18. Tab Heleac. p. 39. for the Children of the Kingdom? Oxen are the emblem of fertility, because they are used for tillage of the ground: as Aleander notes out of the Aegyptian Mysteries. But I leave it to others application. The 10 Lavers. These were for the washing of the Sacrifices, and that briefly doth note: that in all the works, services, and duties, wherein we make our addresses to God, we must be sure to wash and cleanse them by holy preparation before∣hand: prayers, prayse and alms, are all to be washed; our very teares need washing in the Layer of Christ's purification. But so much of the Ʋ∣tensils. Lightfoot, Temple 2d. p. 240. Psal. 133. 1 Iohn 2.27. Exod. 30, 23. Rivet. p. 1168.We read of sundry things laid up in the Chambers of the Courts, as Salt, Wood, &c. and the Oyl of Unction, wherewith the Priests and Kings were an∣nointed: which signified the Oyl of Joy, wherewith Christ our High-Priest was annointed: It ran down upon his Beard and Garments, and so to his feet. We have receiv'd an Unction of the Holy One, whereby he hath taught us all things. Of the Composition of this Oyntment, I might speak particu∣larly, viz. pure Myrrh, Cinnamon, Calamus Aromaticus, Cassia-lignea, and Oyl-Olive: But it shall suffice to have mentioned it at present, because I have been too long, and shall have a more convenient place in the next Section: it being high time to invite the Temple-Officers to our Discourse.
SECT. IV. Of the Officers. THe Principal Officers of the Temple were these, 1. The High-Priest. 2. The ordinary Priests. 3. The Levites, who were divided into four sorts, Singers, Porters, Judges, and Treasurers. 4. The Nethinims, or the hewers of Wood, and drawers of water for the Sanctuary. Here I shall begin with the High-Priest, who was an undoubted. Type of the Lord Jesus Christ: as may be clearly and expresly noted almost in every Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. His Unction, and many of his rare en∣dowments being there mentioned, Cap. 1.9.2.17.3.1.4.14, 15. 5.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10.6.20.7.1, 3, 17, 21, 26, 28.8.1, 3, 9.7, 11, 24, 25.10.12, 21.12.24. 13.11, 12. We shall then consider our blessed Lord, as shadowed by the Type of the High-Priest in three things, 1 His Election: 2 His Rayments or Vestures: and 3dly, his Consecra∣tion. 1. As to the Election or choice of the High-Priest; and therein, we are to look upon the Tribe, out of which he was to be extracted: and 2dly, the Com∣pleatness and comliness of his body, wherewith he was to be quali∣fied. 1. As to the Tribe: Its known that the Jewish High-Priest was alwayes taken from the Tribe of Levi: of old, the eldest of the Family was the High-Priest. But Reuben had forfeited the right of primogeniture, by going up to his Fathers Couch; and therefore Jacob prophesied of him, that he should notGen. 49.4. excell. Simeon and Levi had bin Brethren in iniquity in the matter of slaying the Shechemites, and lost their dignity; and therefore great was JacobsGen. 34.30. anger against them, and sad hisGen. 49.7. doom upon them. But Levi re∣covered in some measure his priviledge, when the people of that TribeExo. 32.26, 27, 28. slew 3000 of their Brethren upon the account of their worshipping the Gol∣den Calf while Moses was in the Mount with God. For heDeut. 33.9. said to his Father and Mother, I have not known thee; neither did he acknowledge his Bre∣thren, &c. Therefore they shall teach Jacob thy Judgements, and Israel thy Law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine Altar. God was pleased to set themNumb. 3.12, 13. Exod. 12.29.13.2. instead of the first-born of Israel, whom God had hallowed to himself, in the day when he smote all the first born in the Land of Egypt: Christ the first-born of every Creature was our High-Priest. Now out of the Tribe of Levi, God appointed Aaron and his sonnes in a direct line, to be High-Priests. But you'l say, Our Lord cameHeb. 7.14. See Pareus in Mat. and Suidas, In voce  edit. Aurel. Allobr. p. 1228. 1619. of Ju∣dah. I answer with the Apostle: This was to shew the change of the Priesthood; and that our Lord was a royal High-Priest, not after the Order of Aaron, but of Melchizedeck, the King of righteousness and Prince of Peace. As for the story produced by Suidas, concerning our Lord and Saviour, that he was de∣scended of the Tribes both of Judah and Levi, they being sometimes mixed by Marriage into the High-Priests Family: and what he further recites of his being actually admitted into the number of the 22 Priests, in the room of one deceased at that time, I shall leave as a futilous and idle story: seeing Scripture in the preceding Prophesies all along mention him, as coming of the
royall House, he being theRev. 5.5. Lion of the Tribe of Judah and springing out of the Root of David. 2. To speak a little to the comliness and excellency of his body: as to which because all the other Priests were to have the same compleat perfecti∣ons, therefore I shall conjoyn them both together. To this purpose the Lord gives instruction unto Moses, in the 21 Chapter of Levit. beginning at the 16th Verse, and so forward. Now because all these things which hapned to them as Types or Examples, were1 Cor. 10, 11. written for our admonition: Give leave to resemble them to those rare endowments and perfections wherewith Christ the Evangelical High-Priest is fully accom∣plished, and Gospel-Ministers should be qualified in a spiritual manner, ac∣cording to their degree and measure: wherefore the spots and blemishes to be avoided in Priests are, by Jerom compared to spiritual infirmities, Precipitur Sacerdotibus, &c. ne truncis auribus, laeso oculo, simis naribus, claudo pede, cutis colore mutato, quae omnia referuntur ad animae vitia. Jerom. Fabiolae de vest. Sacerd. Tom. 3. p. 58. It is injoyned concerning Priests, that they should not be cropeard, blemisht in the eye, flat-nos'd, lame-footed, or the skin discoloured, all which are to be referred to the vices of the minde. The first blemish mentioned isLev. 21.18. blindness; with which, if any person of the line of Aaron was afflicted, he was not admitted to perform the Functions of a Priest. As to this, it is sufficiently known that ignorance is set forth in Scripture by blindness. His Watchmen areIsa. 56.10. blind, (saith the Prophet Isay) they are all ignorant. Our Lord calls the Scribes and PhariseesMat. 23.16. blind Guides; and the Apostle Paul sayes, that the God of this World hath2 Cor. 4, 4. blinded the eyes of unbelievers, that the light of the truth should not shine upon them. But of all, it is the greatest shame for a Minister to be blind: such a one God would have to beHos. 4.6. rejected. A second imperfection was lameness, a very unseemly thing in a Priest, who was to be a Guid to others in the wayes of God. Ministers must []Gal. 2.14. walk uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel. They must teach with their feet as well as their mouths, being1 Pet. 5.3. examples to the flock; and above all others, to1 Joh. 2.6. walk even as Christ the great High-Priest hath walked before them in the dayes of his flesh. As theEccles. 5.1. feet in Scripture sometime note the affections of the soul, and sometimes the ordeing the conversation aright; in both these respects they ought to makeHeb. 12, 13. straight paths for their feet, lest that which is lame, be turned out of the way. Another blemish is aLevit. 21.18. flat nose: whereof, as well as of the rest,Dr. Gell. on the Pen∣tateuch. p. 315. a learn∣ed Authour hath lately treated, who, out of Gregory, interprets it of folly, im∣prudence and stupidity, or dulness of spirit, such as are calledHorat. Epod. 12. naris obesae, one of a thick nose, it being a note of hebetude and flatness of parts, as Physio∣gnomists have observed. The God of nature hath placed this member over the mouth, to be a censor of what things are taken into the body, whether putrid or sweet, and fit for ali∣ment: It fits between the eyes as a Judge of what is proper nourishment. The eye may deem that good, which when brought to this discerning faculty, may prove offensive. So should Ministers study for acuteness of judgement, and to exercise their senses, to judge betwixt good and evil, and to discern the spi∣rits. An instructor of others out of the Law, should have skillHeb. 5.14. [] to prove and make trial of, and give a sound judge∣ment upon things that1 Cor. 12, 10. Rom. 2.18. Phil. 1.10. differ. Besides, he must not be broken-footed, or broken-handed. The feet are for walking, the hands for working. Gospel-Priests must not cease and leave off walking in holy wayes, or performing of holy works. If others must not beGal. 6.9. 2 Thes. 3.13. weary of well doing, how much lesse they? No, nor walk or work by halfs, not
having fit Organs or Instruments for service. Many and great are the incon∣veniences of the defect in these members, but far sadder, when those that are imployed in sacred functions tread awry, and halt between God and Baal, or put forth their hands to any iniquity. He must not beRev. 21.20. Crook-backt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy or scabbed, or unfit for Generation; and one word in the Hebrew signifieth crooked and deceitful. The crookedness of the body is an usual In∣dex of a perverse spirit. They are aDeut. 32.5. perverse and a crooked generation, as Moses complained of the Jews. Therefore Paul exhorts the people of God to be blameless and harmeless in the midst of aPhil. 2.15. crooked and perverse Nati∣on. There is an old saying: Take heed of them whom God hath marked; which may be heeded in a sober and serious sense. It's observable that Homer brings in crookedIliad. 2. v. 212. Thersites yet alone did un∣measureably brawle. Thersites, as one full of uncomely Garrulity, and as a mover of Sedition in the Army, . And afterwards giving in his description of him, saies thus—, &c. He was the most deformed man tat came to Troy, goggle-eye ame of one foot, crook-shouldered, his breast bending forward. Besides this natural deformity which some bring along with them into the World, there is another cause of it, that's accidental; viz. a spirit of infirmity and weaknesse, through some diseases: as the poor woman in the Gospel that had binLuk. 13.11. bowed together 18 years. Sometimes through con∣stant bearing of weighty burdens. AsGen. 49.15. Issachar is represented couching down between two burthens, and bending down his shoulders to impositi∣ons. Hence is it that sorrow, and mourning, and oppression of spirit is re∣sembled toPsal. 44.25, & 145, 14. &c. bowing or bending down to the Earth. In all which respects, such as serve at God's Altar should be persons of generous erect spirit, calme,2 Tim. 2.24. gentle, easie to be intreated: full of kindnesse, overcoming by meekness, those that oppose themselves. Neither should yield their shoulders to the weight of worldly cares, which depresse the mind down to the Earth, and hinder the soul's contemplation of divine Mysteries. Neither must he be aHorat. Serm. l. 2. Sat. 3. v. 309. Dwarf: such as by way of contempt were called by the ancients, moduli bipedalis, pigmies of two-foot high. Although it be a great sin for any to mock and jeer at natural imperfections, for suchProv. 17.5. re∣proach the Maker, more then those who contemn the poor: yet because that Dwarfs in stature more low then ordinary, are usually taunted at by wicked and profane spirits; The wisdome of God thought fit that no such should be exercised in Temple-services. Though God might sometimes order it in the course of nature that such deformed persons might proceed from the line of Aaron: yet they were not to be advanced to the dignity of service. Our Lord may invite little Zacheus to the Gospel-feast, yet we read not of his being sent into the work of the Ministery. The Children of Aaron though afflicted wich any of these deformities, were yet admitted to enjoy, sustenance toLev. 21.22. eat of the most holy things. But certainly the in∣tention of his was to signifie of what spiritual growth the Ministers of the2 Pet. 3.18. Gospel are required to be; Men well grown in grace, and in the know∣ledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Further, he was to be void of any blemish in his eye. Many are the Ble∣mishes, Distempers, Diseases of the eyes, reckoned up by the LearnedRiolani System. part. 2. p. 119. Edit. Basil. 1629. Physitians. The word in the Hebrew for blemish is usually translated Suf∣fusio, from  to confound, or mixe confusedly; and it signifies either that disease which is called , Suffusion or a Cataract vulgarly, being a humour ingendred betwixt the two coats or membrans of the eye, the Cornea and the Uvea, so called by Anatomists; or that which is calledId, Anat. p. 281. Iudg. Bat. 1649. ,
Albugo, a white spot or Cicatrice after the cure of an Ulcer, which is seen in the black of the eye, or in the Iris; that little fibrous circumference about the Pupil. We see what great care there is taken about the eyes of the Priests. As they must not be blind, so neither have any imper∣fections in their eyes. Seers ought to be qualified with acutenesse of eye-sight, spiritual watchmen have need of clear and bright knowledge. Ordi∣nary Christians may perhaps make shift to get to heaven, though with con∣fused knowledge: but Ministers must beg for a distinct and choise visive fa∣culty; The eye that's blood-shot can't see clearly: The mind that's vexed with Cholerick suffusions cannot discern in Judgment. IfAct. 9.18. Paul be sent of the Gospel-messages, behold scales do fall from his eyes. If any be An∣gels of Churches, let them pray toRev. 3.18. Christ for a , an oyntment for their eyes, that they may understand the truths of God fully and clearly. Again, the Priests of old were not to be tainted withLev. 21.21. scurvy or scab. The Hebrew is  and  Arias turns them by purulenta scabies, and scabies perpetua. The Vulg. jugis scabies & impetigo, the 70 by : The first is translated aDeut. 28.35. sore botch, If the 70 have rightly expounded it by , then it is the dry Itch; asP. 269.6. Riolanus ex∣plaines it, and so Buxtorf out of Rab. Solomon calls it the Malignant-Scab, dry within and without. The other is the foul creeping Scab, which the last expounds to be the Scab that cannot be healed, of near kind to the Leprosie. But the matter is not great about terms: The meaning seems to be, that Priests ought not to be infected either with the ordinary Itch, or the incura∣ble Scab, which is seldom-healed. Now as Itching-eares are2 Tim. 4.3. tokens of men of corrupt lusts, and full of novel fancies; every day new itches and lustings after strange things, and new doctrines: So a Priest that is itchy, is much more abominable, who is defiled with this pruritus novitatis, an itch∣ing desire of venting new high-flown follies. This disease proceedsMedici∣nal exposit. ex Hippoer. Gal. &c. p. 516. Edit. H. Steph. 1564. , as one hath noted out of Galen, from a sharp corroding humor, a thin erous matter not fit for nourishment? If mens blood were sound, and their digestive faculty good, this Psora or scabbed-disease would not so importunately afflict them. If the blood-royal of truth ran pure in such a one's veines, he would not be so fouly corrupred with this itchy tem∣per of error. The last thing mentioned is, perfection as to generation, the Vulg. translate the text by herniosus, the 70 by . Gospel-Ministers are to be spiritu∣ally qualified for the bringing in Sons and Daughters to Christ: Paul had his Children of theCor. 4.15. Corinthians & Galathiaus. John had his of the AsianGal. 4.19. 1 Joh. 2.12. Churches: That Christ may see of theIsa. 53. travel of his soul and be satisfied, Let us all pray that quickening and enlivening virtue may never depart from the Gospel in England. That Ministers may indeed be1 Pet. 1.3. Fathers in God and beget thousands to a lively hope of glory. From all this preceeding discourse, (although spiritually to be interpre∣ted in the main; yet) we cannot but deem it a most lovely and decent thing for Gospel-Ministers to have even bodily perfections, especially such as may give a convenient capacity for the work of the Ministry, as in the case of eye-sight: without which many Church-matters cannot be well transacted. Al∣though its true, the perfections of the soul are the main and principal qua∣lifications of a Minister: yet it were well it might not be said by any scoffing Ismael, as was once of Socrates, Anima [praeconis Evangelici] malò habitat. But certainly, greatly to blame are such Parents, who will offer theMal. 1.8. blind, and the lame of their Children to Gods Sanctuary. The Person thus qualified with such external bodily perfections, and de∣scending from the loins of Aaron, might be admitted into this sacred Colledge
termed a Priest, and put on the holy garments and officiate in the significant services of the Sanctuary, of all which in their due place and order. First I shall speak a word or two of the name, the common Hebrew term is Cohen, which some derive from  to fit and dispose and order, viz. the rites and ceremonies of Sacrifice. But as to the English term, Priest, which is derived from the Saxon word Priester, and that from the Greek , Presbyter, it signifies, as to the origination of the word, an Elder onely: and in this sense Priest may be given as a denomination to a Gospel-Minister, very honourably according to the new testament Style in many places, as in the Acts of the Apostles, where in oneAct. 20.17. verse the Ministers of the Church of Ephesus are called Elders, and in anotherV. 28. verse Overseers, in the Greek , Bishops, there being it seems in the Primitive time several Bishops or Elders in one City, and so at Philippi, where the Apostle in the inscription of his Epistle, dedicates it to the Saints,Phil. 1.1. Bishops, and Deacons, in that City: and therefore our famous Dr. Whitaker concludes with the generality of the Divines of the reformed Religion in these words. Calvinus no∣stri{que} omnes hanc Metropolitanorum & Primatum hierarchiam, non à Christo vel Apostolis institutam, sed Ecclesiae authoritate introductam esse scribunt. Calvin, and all ours, do write that this hierarchy of Metropolitans and Primates, was not instituted by Christ or his Apostles, but introduced by the authority of the Church. And again, out of Novellus,Dr. Whitaker. Tom. 2. operum p. 525. Col. 2. Archiepiscopus authoritatem omnem, non Divino, sed Ecclesiastico jure tenet. An Archbishop holds all his authority by Ecclesistical, not by Divine right. AndIbid. p. 526. Col. 2. afterward, clearing this out of Jerom that Bishops and Presbyters were the same in antient times; he produces a testimony of that learned Father, out of hisIbid. p. 540. Col. 1. Comment upon Titus. Noverint Episcopi, se magis consuetudine, quàm Dispositionis domi∣nicae veritate presbyteris esse majores. Let Bishops know (saith Jerom) that they are greater then presbyters by custome, rather then the true institution of our Lord: where he is shewing that the same person who is called anTom. 9. Fol. 153. b. Edit. 1530. Lugd. Tit. 1.5. Elder in the 5th verse, is termed a Bishop in the 7th. So that Elder or Pres∣byter is the proper Scripture-name of a Gospel-Minister, or else Bishop, Over∣seer, &c. but by no meanes to be called Priest in any other sense then according to the origination of the word before spoken of. For as the term Priest is now detorted from its primitive notation, to signifie one that offers sacrifice: So 'tis a word of indignity, scorn and contempt, which wicked and profane spirits do cast upon the faithful Servants of Christ, who disown any sacrifice under the new Testament, save that one onely, which our High Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck did offer upHeb. 7.27, & 9, 12, 25, 26, 28, & 10, 10. 1 Pet. 3.18. once for all. Wherefore in the whole Testament (for what ever yet I could observe) we shall not find the Gospel-Ministers directly called , that is, Sacrificing Priests, but by other termes. Although the Jews had one High Priest over all the rest: yet it followes not that we must under the Gospel have such a one, unlesse it be Christ himself, who ever lives to make intercession for us. But to discharge this point, it is high time to proceed, and not to suffer the Priests to stand so long unclothed: and here I shall delay no longer by recital of various opinions, concerning the differences of the garments, wherewith the High Priest and his inferior attendants were adorned: but speak to that in each particular Vestment. In the first place we read of linnen Breeches, which were common both toExod. 28.43. Levit. 6.10.16.4. Aaron the High-Priest, and to his Sonnes the or∣dinary Priests: They were made ofExod. 39.28. fine twined linnen. But why of linnen? I shall not say for the same reason, whichDe Iside & Osiride Tom. 1. Mo∣ral. gr. H. Steph. 80. p. 528. Plutarch mentions, wherefore the Priests of Isis wore pure white linnen: , &c.] For the colour sake, which the flower of flax doth
put forth like the brightness of the Heaven compassing the world. The true cause of all these things is (saith he), It is a wicked thing for that which is pure to be defiled by an impure, as Plato speaketh. But the excrements and reffuse of the alment are not chaste and pure. But all wool and hair are bred and en∣creased by excrements: and therefore it was ridiculous for them that cut off their own haire as a token of chastity, to be covered with the wooll of cattel. Besides, flaxe grows out of the earth-which is immortal, &c. and yields matter for thin, and clean Vestments, which press not with their weight, and is fit for all seasons of the year, and doth least of all breed smal vermine in the body, as they say. Now I shall not apply this of the Garments (which the superstitious Priests of an Idol did wear) to the Holy Priests of the most High God: only thus far we may take notice, that as in hundreds of other things; so likewise in this of Vestments, Satan did endeavour to ape out the solemnities of the Wor∣ship of the true and living God at the Temple. And therefore as Truth and true Worship is elder then Errour and false worship: so the grounds of some exterior circumstances might be the same; As in this, Linnen being a most cleanly, light, and convenient wearing for the Priests: nay, God himself ex∣presly commands the use of Linnen in the Priests, and forbids Woollen by name, that so their garments might not cause Sweat. But let's rather consider the end of their garments, which was, saith the text toExod. 28.42. cover their nakedness, and that theyVers. 43. bear not iniquity and dye. The former declaring what comely and decent addresses should be made, when the Priests drew nigh to the service of the Altar: the other, that they bear not, that is,Rivet. in Exod. pag. 1551. a. that they commit not iniquity; For so did any of the Priests who pre∣sumed to minister without them. And as to the Gospel-Ministry, they might signifie that Reverence which ought to be upon their hearts who deal in the things of God: It signifies our nature, defilement, and impurity, and what need we have of a Covering when we draw nigh to God. The chastity and purity of the mind is required in the administration of sacred affairs. Secondly, The next garment was aExod. 28.40. Coat , which,Jerome Tab. Tom. 3. p. 60. Jerome sayes, was  talaris down to the ancle or foot, and was fitted to the body with close sleeves, and had no plaits. This Coat was made ofExod. 39.27. fine linnen for all the inferiour Priests: but for Aaron, or the successive High-Priest, it was embroidered, as we read in the 39th. verse, where the Coat for Aaron is mentioned as distinct from the common one for the ordinary Priests, verse 40. So that it differed not from the other as to form, or fashion, and use; but as to the curiosity: being made of linnen and embroidered. And that we should not mistake it for the Robe of the Ephod; it is mentioned di∣stinct from that in the 4th verse: where Moses was commanded to make Vestments for Aaron, an Ephod, and a Robe, and aExod. 28.4. broidered Coat. The learned Ainsworth on Exod. 28.4. would have the word  to note only the working of the linnen-coat, opere ocellato with eylet-holes, and not embroidered. Yet Buxtorf, & Pagnine, do turn it also by tesellatum and inter∣textum checquer'd or inter-woven-work: possibly the Gold or any other thred might be woven in the form of Eyes: but however, it seems it had a different work. Now then, as the High Priest had a broidered or curious straight Coat, when the inferiours had onely a bare linnen-coat: we may thence note the super-excellency of Christ our High Priest in the curious Embroidery of his Graces above all his Ministers and servants in the work of the Gospel: As Joseph, a great type of Christ, had aGen. 37.3. parti-coloured Coat, above all his Brethren. We may take notice of Christ represented to St. John in a Vision, cloathed with a garment (c) down to his feet: that is, his pure, spotlesse Righteous∣nesse;
it was  down to the feet, i.e. Perfect and compleat Righteous∣nesse. Of him the Angels of the Churches should buy theirRev. 3.18. white Ray∣ment, that they may be cloathed, that the shame of their nakedness do not ap∣pear. That these linnen garments, which were to cover the bodies of the Priests, did signifie the Righteousnesse of Christ to cover the soul, seems to be hinted by that allusion of the Psalmist, when he prayes, that thePsalm 132.9. Priests might be cloathed with Righteousnesse. So the people of God who are madeRev. 1.6. priests to the Father, shall walk with Christ inRev. 3, 4, 5. white rayment: Yea, the wife of the Lamb is to be arrayed in fine linnen, clean and white. For theRev. 19.8. fine linnen is the Righteousnesse of the Saints:: O blessed is that man, whose nakednesse (by reason of sin) is covered with these pure Robes of Christ's imputed Righteousnesse; and Happy is he that watcheth andRev. 16.15. keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame, who havingRom. 13.13. put on the Lord Jesus ChristEph. 4.24. Gal. 3.27. in righteousness and true holiness,Psalm. 32.1. do hateJud. 23. the gar∣ments spotted by the flesh. The third thing mentioned in the Array of the Priests, was a Girdle: and was common both to the High Priest and the inferiours: That the ordinary Priest had thisExod. 28.40. & 29, 39, 29. Lev. 8.13. girdle, is frequently mentioned. That the High Priest had the like girdle to gird his forementioned-coat close to him, is clearly recited, and that in contradistinction to another girdle, viz. that of the E∣phod, which was peculiar to him alone: as may be observed, when he was orderly cloathed by Moses with all the Holy Vestments: First ye have a coat put upon him, and that girded to him with aLev. 8.7. Hieronym. de vest. Sa∣cerdot. Tom. 3. pag. 60. girdle. In the next place, Moses puts the Ephod upon him, and girded him with the curious girdle of the Ephod. This Girdle which we are now speaking of, was called  Abhnet; by the 70. , which Jerome in the forecited place describes thus: It was like the skin of a Snake, with which she puts off her old age; it was woven in a round shape, that you would take it to be a long purse (in those kind of girdles the Ancients used to put their money.) The woofe of it was made of threds of Scarlet, purple and blew colours, and the warp with Byssus; silk, as some, but rather a fine sort of flaxe: or as we translate itExod. 29.39. fine twined linnen. For strength and beauty: It was so elegantly distinguisht with embroi∣dered work, that you would think various Flowers and Gemms were added to it, and not weaved in it by the hand of an Artizan. They were to bind the linnen Coat before-mentioned, with this Belt or Girdle, between the Navel and the Breast: It was of the breadth of four fin∣gers: and hung down to the legs on one side: [When there was need of haste for Sacrifices, they cast it over their left shoulder]. I know there be that hold there were two sorts of these Girdles; the one of white linnen only, mentio∣ned inLev. 16.41 Leviticus: when the High Priest was to lay down his own costly and beautiful Garments on the great Humiliation or Expiation-day, and to en∣ter into the Holy place with the garments only of an ordinary Priest, to sig∣nifie his humility and lowlinesse of spirit. The other, that girdle, which was even now described and used by the High Priest only. Indeed, where Moses relates the making of the Vestments, he mentions Coats, Bonnets, Breeches in the plural, being for Aaron and his sons:Exod. 39.27, 28, 29. but of the Mitre and Girdle in the singular only: as if there were but one of those made, viz. for Aaron: where the Make of the Girdle is mentioned, as before described; But I shall leave this nicety to others determination, & only propose my conjecture as to that place of Levit. where it is to be observed, that the Text doth not say, the girdle was all of white linnen, but barely linnen & so it doth not distinguish: for the various-coloured girdle mentioned often before in Exod. was all made of linnen; only of threds of four various and different colours: For the fine-twined
linnen, I take to be white and untinctured with any colour. But to proceed to a more material enquiry: and that is, What was signifi∣ed by the Girdle; and herein we shall consider the various ends or uses of a Girdle. 1. A girdle is of use toIs. 5.27. & 22, 21, strengthen the body, and preserve it in hard labour and straining-services: and therefore when the Apostle exhorts Chri∣stians to stand to the truth manfully,Eph. 6.14. he bids them to stand having their loyns (c) girt about with truth. As a girdle strengthens the body, so doth truth the mind:Acts 12.8. It signifies activity and promptnesse in business. Prov. 1.9.2. A girdle is for ornament and beauty: in which sense we may apply what Solomon speaks concerning instruction: that it should be an Ornament of Grace, and as Chains (viz. of Gold) about the neck. 3. As the Girdle served of old for a purse to put the money in, Take no money in your girdles, in the Greek Mat. 3.1, 9.Dr. Ar∣rowswith. Tact. Sacr. l. 2. c. 1. §. 6. pag. 104. Rich are they, who are well fraught with Truth; I know thy poverty (said our Lord to the Angel of Smyrna, Rev. 2.9.) but thou art rich, In truth, the chiefest Riches. We mustProv. 23.23. buy the truth at any rate, and never sell it: we must trade for the truth laid up in Scripture, dig for it as for hid Treasures; Gospel-ministers especi∣ally as they must be girt about with the girdle of truth; so they must alwayes walk with the precious pieces of truth about them. 4. A Girdle binds-on the Garments, and keeps them from loosnesse: from unhandsome and uncomely flying out, that the nakednesse be not discovered: Errour and Sin make men naked; When the Israelites had worshipt the gol∣den Calf, they unloosed the girdle of truth and sincere worship: When Aa∣ron made themExod. 32.25. naked to their shame. Those that are shaken from the truths of the Gospel, their garments flye looseOvid. met. 1. Sinuantur flamine vestes) by the winds of corrupt and perniciousEph. 4.14. Doctrines: and when once this Golden girdle is let fall from about their heart, usually men turn oft to loose and extravagant courses; and once being ungirt from the girdle off Truth, at length prove unblest. It is an Emblem of chastity: as, Solvere Zonam was used of old for married persons. 5. A Girdle keeping the garments close to the body, is a means of warmth in cold seasons: Truth well setled to a mans heart, makes him zealous for God in stormy-times. 6. A Girdle helps a man to continue and persist in his labours, and may therefore hold forth perseverance and constancy. Gird up the loyns of your minds, be sober and hope to the1 Pet. 1.13. end, sayes holy Peter. Let your loyns be girt about, and wait for the Lords coming, Luke 12.35. But to conclude: The variety of colours mentioned in the Girdle, signifie, saithRibera pag. 188. Ribera, all the various Vertues, which tye the life of a good man together. I shall not be so curious, as to think that the white noted Innocency, and the blew Heavenlinesse the Scarlet persecution, the purple, a holy mai∣ty of Spirit; as that was an Emperial colour. But rather as the Girdle in ge∣neral noted Truth; So the variety of colours, that Saints, especially Mini∣sters, must be sound and Orthodox in all points of truth, they must hold fast2 Tim. 1.3. the whole form, or Synopsis, the Encyclopoedia, the enriching Girdle of wholsome words, in faith and love in Christ Jesus. 4. The fourth parcel of Array mentioned in order, Leviticus 8. was the Robe of the Ephod, and this was peculiar to the High-Priest only, which had hanging at the bottom of it, the Bells and Pomgranates: It was made all ofExod. 28.31. blew or sky-colour, to note, say some, the Heavenliness of Christ our High-priest. Some think this garment noted ChristsExod. 28.31. personall Righteous∣nesse. [The threds thereof were twelve-times double, asRom. 10.17. Ainsworth
notes out of Maimondes) the hole thereof (through which the head was put) was woven at the beginning of the weaving; It had no sleeves, but was divided into two skirts from the end of the neck unto beneath, after the man∣ner of all Robes, and was not joyned together, but about the neck, only.] And so he observes the garment of Christ to be a CoatJohn 19.23. without seam, wo∣ven from the top throughout, [which though not a Priestly garment, yet, says he, it was mystical,] and is usually applyed to unity. Jerome saiesƲbi su∣pra, pag. 63. Sig∣nificat rationem sublimius patere non omnibus, sed majoribus atque perfectis]. It signifies that the reason of Heavenly and sublime things, is not known to all, but to those that are of the high form and perfect. At the bottom were the Pomgranates: The juyce of which fruit isDiosco∣rid. cum Mathiola. l. 1. c. 137. cooling and binding. So we read of but a touch of the hem of Christs gar∣ment, cooling and refreshing the heart, when scorched with the burning wrath of God for sin, and of a binding nature to stop theMat. 9.20. bloody issue of the soul. As it contains within its shell or rind, multitudes of grains or kernels: so doth theCant. 6.7, 11. Church contain many members who are drawn into a body by the Prophetical Office of Christ or his saving Doctrine. And as there were many Pomgranates at the hemme of Christs garment: so there be many instituted Churches in the World: but all depend and hang upon the garment of Christ, and are taught by him. The fruit is sweet and pleasant: the smell is fragrant and delightful. The teachings of Christ have mixed, in them, utile dulci: not only beauty and sweet scent, but as in flow∣ers there is hony-likenesse. We must draw nigh to Christ, not only for the pleasantnesse, but the profitablenesse, not only for the smell, but the food of Truth. Betwixt each Pomgranate (which some say were 72 in number) but o∣thers that the Bells and Pomgranates both put together were 72. Prideaux, pag. 14.) did hang a golden Bell, which seems further to clear up the accom∣modation of this garment to Christs Prophetical Office. For the Bells were to sound when Aaron went into theExod. 28.31. Sanctuary. So when Christ comes into his Church in teaching-work, the sound of the Gospel Bells is most me∣lodious, converting our brutish natures into mild and ingenuous tempers: For by our hearing of this Gospel-sound isRom. 10.17. Exo. 30.10. Faith ingendred in the heart to believe on the Son of God. The High Priest never went into the Holy of Holies with this and the o∣ther sumptuous garments: For he went into that most sacred placeRev. 16.34. Heb. 9.7. but once in the year. And at that time he is expresly charged to vest himself with theLev. 16.4. common garments of ordinary Priests: but when come out, toVer. 23. lay them down, and to wash himself, and put on his own proper pontifical Orna∣ments. In the like manner our Lord Jesus when he went into Heaven, sig∣nified by the Oracle, He laid down his pontifical garments as to his Prophe∣tical or Teaching Office in his own person to the outward man. For when he ascended into Heaven, he gavePsalm 68.18. Eph. 4.8. gifts to men, instituting Teachers for his Church to supply his bodily absence: although he never ceases Teaching the heart, and helping them toIsa. 48.17, & 57.12. profit by the outward Ministry of the Word. The sound of the golden Bells ringing the glad tidings of peace is gone forth to the end of the World.Psalm 19.3, 4. There is no Speech nor Language, where their Voyce is not heard by the Ministry of his faithful Embassadors: who do2 Cor. 5.20. pray us in Christs stead to be reconciled to God. To conclude, as there were Pomgranates joyned with the Bells at the hem of Christs garments: so ought there to be joyned the savoury fruits of righ∣eousness in life and walking, with the melodious and pleasant sound of the Gospel, in every Ministers preaching of the truths of Christ to the Church.
It is observable that in the Book of Leviticus, there is one thing omitted, and that is the Breeches which were first put on, as hath been manifested in the first Paragraph of this Discourse of Vestments. The reason whereof, the Learned Jerome conjectures at, in these following words:Jerom ad Fabiolam de vest. Sacerd. Tom. 3. pag. 64. Desolis faemina∣bus nihil diciur, hac (ut arbitror) causa, quod ad genitalia nostra & veren∣da Lex non mittit manum, &c. Which with the rest I shall render in Eng∣lish.) Of the Breeches only there is nothing spoken, for this cause (as I conceive, saith Jerom) because the Law doth not intermedle with the more secret parts: but we our selves ought to cover and vail our more hidden members, wor∣thy of confusion: and to reserve the conscience of the purity of the thighes to be judged of God. Of other Vertues, (as for example) Wisdome, Forti∣tude, Justice, Temperance, Humility-Meekness, Liberality; even other men may give a judgement. The conscience only knows our chastity, and humane eyes cannot be certain judges of these things, without which they are ex∣posed to lust even as brute beasts: Wherefore the Apostle saith, Concerning Virgins I have no Precept from the Lord; as if so be Moses should say, I cloathe you not with Breeches, neither impose I necessity on any, he that will be a Priest let him cloath himself]: Thus far Jerom. A little different from that is the fancy ofOrigen, Homil. 7. in Levit. cap. 8. pag. 148. edit. Froben. 1545. Origen, which he that pleases may consult. I shall not med∣dle with any censure: but ctave leave to interpose this as my thought in this matter, why it is left out in Leviticus, because in that 7th. verse he is dis∣coursing of and putting upon Aaron all the High-Priests garments, distinct from the others: whereas the linnen-Breeches only were common to both: or rather, because it was not so convenient for Moses to put on these more secret Vestments: but both Aaron and his sons put them on apart,Dr. Pri∣deaux, Orat. and privately by themselves. Now having spoken a little by insertion of that which was before omit∣ted: I come to the Ephod it self. The 5th. part of Array, mentioned in that orderly Method in the Book ofLev. 8.7. Leviticus, where Moses did cloathe Aaron the HighPriest, accor∣ding to Gods Institution, was the Ephod it self. pag. 14.The Description whereof, together with its various and curious Ornaments we have at large recited in the Book ofLev. 8.7. Exodus. The word  Ephod comes from  Aphad, cinxit, superinduit, amicivit: To cloathe, cover, and compasse with a garment; And thence the Greeks had their word  to fit and make compleat. The 70 do render this wordExod. 29.5. by  to fit or close together. The 70 turn it by  a garment for the shoulders: Aquilae , assumentum & vestis sutilis, a garment sowed together of two or more pieces, asUt su∣pra. p. 61. Jerome relates. Some translate it by Pallium, a cloak or little vest for the shoulders, and thence came both the name of Pall, and the ground of its donation by the Pope, at the consecration of an Arch-Bishop or High-Priest of a Province. The matter whereof this Ephod (for the Jewish High-Priest) was made, we read to have been of five things: Of Gold, Blew, Purple, Scarlet, and fine twi∣ned Linnen. Of the Gold, Jerome in the forcited place, saies thus: Aurila∣minae id est, bracteae mirâ tenuitate tenduntur ex quibus secta fila torquentur. Little lamens, plates or small leaves of Gold, are stretched-out of a wonderful thinnesse: out of which threds (being cut out) are wreathed into wire. The blew is called  the 70 turn it by , the colour which we see in the common blew field-Hyacinth. Some expound it of the Violet co∣lour: but generally they agree that it was blew, although one taketh it to be yellow, but that seems not to be true, because of the gold were of the same co∣lour. Some think it was made of the bloud of a certain fish: but how the
Jews did dye or give the blew tincture to wool or thred, I have not read any certain relation. As for the manner of performing it among the Romanes, Vitruvius hath lest upon it record in his Architecture, l. 7. c. 11. The other is Purple in the Hebrew  which some derive from  to wear, the 70 turn it by , and others generally consenting with the Vulgar Lat. render by Purpura, purple. The colour was anciently made by these means. In the Tyrian seas there is a kind of shell-fish,Pancirol de∣perdi. Tit. 1. page 61. that hath a very white vein in the midst of its jawes, which being cut, there issues out a pre∣cious liquor, with which they did tincture wool and silk of old. This bloud mixt with a little water they put into leaden Vessels, and placed them in a Furnace moderately heated, and thence did arise that beautiful colour, like to a deep Clove-gilly-flower, mixt of red and black. The cause of the losse of this ancient curiosity, Pancirollus takes to be, because Syria and those neigh∣bouring places have come into the hands of the Turks and other barbarous Nations: I shall not need to mention what Salmuth upon him,Pliny, c. 36. Pliny,Vitruv. l. 7. c. 14. Vitruvius and others have written copiously on this Subject. The fourth colour mentioned, is in the Hebrew  Tolagnath Hashani, which Arias Montanus turns, Vermiculum cocci, the worm of Scar∣let: and from thence all deep red-colours, are call'd by the name of Vermi∣lion. The 70 render it by , The Scarlet colour.Exod. 25.5, 6. It was of a deep red, as is evident by the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of sins  red as Crimson, as we render it: the word is the same with this here in Exodus tran∣slated Scarlet. Indeed the former word in Esay, translated Scarlet, is,Isa. 1.18.  and by the vulgar Lat. here in Exodus turn'd, bis tinctum twice dy'd: and by some . As for the story we have it in Dioscorides. That there is a small shrub growing in Galatia, Armenia, and other places,Dioscor. l. 4. c. 43. to which there sticks little grains or seeds, which are of a red colour, and contain a reddish li∣quor or moisture in them, and abound with little red worms: and therefore Mathiolus notes out ofLi. 24. cap. 4. Pliny, that it is called Scolecion from the little worm, with which cloathes were coloured in ancient times: And he further notes out of Serapio, that it is the very same thing which the Arabians call Chermes, of which as the principal ingredient, that noble Confection of Al∣kermes is made, so famous among the learned Physitians for its cordial vertue. Some call them in their Dispensatorie,s grains of Paradise, for their excellent use and benefit; and it is observable,2 Chron. 2.7, & 3, 14. that where mention is made of the like preparations of Materials as to the Temple, in the Book of Chronicles, that which we read Crimson, is in the Hebrew  Carmeil,Cant. 7.5. and being menti∣oned in the Canticles, is in the Marginal notes translated Crimson. Schindler hinting a likeness in the word to the Arab.. Kermes saies,Schindl. col. 912. Scaliger Contr. Car∣dan. exercit. 325. § 13. p. 997. E∣dit. Hanov. 1620. it was a sort of co∣lour, which he turnsEzek. 27.7. Carmesinus, and Pagnine, in the word sayes, it signi∣fies that colour which is commonly call'd grains, or died in grain. The last thing is call'd by our Translators, fine linnen, and fine twined-lin∣nen: in the Hebr.  Shesh, which the 70 turn by  Byssus, fine flaxe, or as some, silk. In the Prophesie of Ezekiel, we find the Markets of Tyre did trade in this Commodity brought from Egypt, a place famous for flaxe, as is noted other where in Scripture, and by our modern Travellers in those parts: Thence also we may note, that the blew and purple was brought into Syria from the Isles of Elisha, that is, of the Aegaean sea: and therefore Amorgus, one of the Sporades is very famous for these colours: as Bochartus at large,Exod. 9.31. 1 Chron. 15.29. part. 2. l. 1. c. 14. pag. 449. where Argaman the former word for purple, and Amorgus the name of the Isle, are by him deduced from the same Origi∣nal before-mentioned. The Chaldee paraphrase on the 25 of Exodus, v. 5.6. renders this word by  Buza, and thence probably the word  was derived; and where, in the Hebrew, David is said to be cloathed
Megmil Buz, in a Pal or Robe of Byssus. We turn it, a Robe of fine linnen. Now in that the Scripture mentions it as coming from Egypt, which was not famous for silk, but for linnen; therefore we conceive that linnen is the pro∣per meaning of the word. Besides, the word Shesh is used for the purest sort of white Marble, where David relates his preparation of1 Chron. 29.3. Marble-stones in abundance, the 70 turn it , Marble of the Isle Paros, which was the purest and whitest in account of the whole world: and hence we may conceive that the word is truly turn'd by Linnen, for its pure whitenesse: whereas the silk of the Seres among the Indians (as we know by the wormes, brought thence by degrees, at length to Naples and at last to us) is twined from webbs or round balls generally very yellow, and none pure white at all: Hitherto have we enquired of the several colours, and the materials of the woven work of this Vestment before us. Now it rests to speak in a word how the Gold-wires, the twined-lin∣nen, and the blew purple and Scarlet-threds were woven together. The cunning workman, (so call'd in Exodus,) Exod. 35.35.took one thred of pure gold, and joyned it withAins∣worth in Exod. 28.6. 6 threds of blew, and twisted these seven threds in∣to one. In like manner he did with one of gold and six of purple, and one with six of Scarlet, and one with six of fine white linnen. Thus were there employ∣ed 4 threds of gold, 24 of the rest, and 28 in all: but were reduced into 4 great threds of a twisted line, with which he wove the Breast-plate and the E∣phod, asAins∣worth in Exod. 28.6. Ainsworth hath observed out of Maimonides. The colours of these several threds representing bloud of all sorts, did sig∣nifie (saith the samePag. 99. Author) that the Church and all her actions should be washed and dyed in the Bloud of Christ, into whose death they areRev. 1.5, 7.14. Baptized. Nay, Christ himself warring against his enemies, appears in gar∣ments dy'dIsa. 63.1, 2. Rev. 19.13. red in bloud from Bozrah;Dr. Taylor of Types, p. 103. A Reverend man hath applyed this garment of the Ephod to that Holy flesh of Christ, which veiled his De∣ity as a garment; and that it was taken not from Heaven, but from his Mo∣ther on earth: as the matter of that garment grew imediately out of the earth: which is therefore so spoken, because he mentions it to have been made only of linnen, and so to signifie the purity and unspotted innocency of his person. The Robe of the Ephod is termed Megnil in the Hebr. and the very same word is used of Christ, that he was clad with a Megnil or cloake of Zeal.Is. 59.17. 2 Sam. 6.14. Zeal properly & strictly taken, is the Ardor and boiling fervency of all the affections, when alarm'd by the superiour Faculties to perform some noble design: though indeed its usually taken for a quick and warm mixture of love and anger, to revenge a friend upon an enemy. But as it is the E∣bullition or incensed keenness and sprightliness of all the affections: so might the various colours in this Pall or cloake of the Ephod, signifie the great and ardent love that Christ bears to his Church in undertaking the great work of the Priestly Office on her behalf. Some thought there is, that it might hold out his Prophetical Office: for in all these garments there was some special note, and the same thing might be hinted by various Symbols to teach the dull spirits of the Jews: But why the Prophetical Office is hence gathered, because King David, who was a Holy Prophet, wore a linnen (a) Ephod, and Samuel,2 Sam. 6.14. who was no Priest by extract, but a Levite, and constituted a Prophet and Priest extraordinary upon the death of Eli, had, when a little one, a linnen Ephod; I shall leave to the Authors of that opinion. But generally it was the note of a Priest, as is observed from the stories of Gideon, Micah, Samuel, Abiah, Doog and Abiathar; and therefore when we find Priests with Ephods, its thought it was a Badge and Cognizance of that part of their Office which lay in teaching and instructing of the people, when they put on an Ephod of linnen.
But to lay all these Conjectures aside about Common Priests, Levites, or Kings, their wearing of Ephods: when as we know by Gods appointment, there were but four garments which the Priests themselves might wear, the Breeches, Coats, Girdles, and Bonnets: this of the Ephod was peculiar to the High Priest alone; and therefore who ever used it without particular dispensation, did presume against God's Command: or else, which is the more soft solution of it, that the Jews had a small light and short garment,Dr. Prideaux Orat. 2. p. 14. which they cast over their shoulders, and was common amongst them, being called an Ephod, a term for a garment that's very common, as was spoken to, at the beginning in its Etymology. Whereas the High-Priest's Ephod was thus curiously wrought as hath bin declared: none daring to have one of the like work; whereas of linnen or wollen, or any other matter possibly they might commonly weare garments of that name and shape in ma∣king. Besides, this Ephod was very different from all others in that curious and significant Ornament, of the two Onyx stones engraven with the names of the 12 Tribes of Israel,Exod. 28.10. Casaub. ad Annal. Ba∣ron. p. 169. six of their Names on one Stone, and the six other Names of the rest upon the other stone according to their birth. Each stone was set in gold, and placed on the shoulder pieces of the Ephod. The Onyx stone is called in the Hebrew  Shoham. The 70 calls it , the Smaragd. The Vulgar lapis Onychinus, the Chaldee-paraphrase  the Beryl. Others, Crystal. ByJerom ub suprà. p. 61. Aquila, Symmachus, and Theo∣dotion, the Onyx. By Josephus and Junius, the Sardonyx; and further Jerom adds that the names of the six elder sons were engraven on the stone of the right shoulder, and of the six younger on the left. But Ainsworth observes out of the Rabbins, that they were graven in this order: the name of Reuben the eldest in the first place, on the right shoulder, and Simeon the second son in the first place on the left shoulder; Levi, the third son, in the second place 1. Reuben. 2. Simeon. 3. Levi. 4. Judah. 9. Issachar. 10. Zebulon. 6. Naphthali. 5. Dan. 7. Gad. 8. Asher. 11. Joseph. 12. Benjamin. on the right; and so on in this se∣ries, according to their birth. But to enquire a little into this stone: I reade that there was a famous Castle called Du-Sohaim, in for∣mer times in the land of Chaulan or Havilah in Arabia, menti∣oned byBochart. Phaleg. l. 2. c. 28. Bochartus out of the Arabian Geographer: which had its name from the plenty of these stones in that place, or the stones from the name of the City, for they are found in that Land, asGen. 2.12. Moses hath asserted in the description of Paradise, where the 70 translate it ; The stone called Prasinus, because its greennesse was like the leaves of Leeks, and is a kind of Smaragd. In the Book ofJob 28.16. Job where the Shoham is turned by us the Onyx, and called pre∣cious, the 70 render it , it cannot be compared to the precious Oynx. In threeExod. 28.9. & 35, 25. & 39, 5. places of Exodus they turn it by the Smaragd. InEzek. 28.13. Ezekiel they translate it Sapphire, In otherExod. 28.20, & 39, 11. places, by the Beryl, by theExod. 35.9. Sardius. And lastly, in 1 Chron, 29.2. they translate, and the stones Soham, expressing the very Hebrew word. So that the incertainty of their version being so great, we cannot fix upon any thing from them. But the general current of interpreters runs for the Onyx, so called from its likenesse in colour to the Nayle of a mans hand; although there want not varieties of colours in them: But as to the Arabian kind,Pliny. lib. 37. Cap. 6. Pliny writes that it is black with white circles. AndSolinus. Cap. 36. ad finem. Solinus of the Sardonyx, found near a bay of the Arabian Sea, speaks largely. So that the plenty of these stones in Arabia, not onely mentioned there to be found by Moses, but by Pliny
and Solinus do somewhat fortifie our Translation. Besides, it was requisite that those stones should be somewhat large as the Onyx is, to engrave the six names orderly in them; and accordingly it is related concerning them, that beyond many other sorts they are of the largest cize. For atBoëtius de gemmis lib. 2. c. 92. p. 243. Edit. Lugd. Bat. Rome there be six small Pillars made of this Onyx stone in the Church of St. Peter. And at Collen in Germany, in the Cathedral Church, in the Chappel of the three Kings of the East, there is one exceeding a palme or a hand-breath. Mithridates King of Pontus had two thousand Cups made of this stone, in his Treasury.Panci∣rollus de Myrrhinis. Tit. 7. p. 23. Pompey brought thence a paire of Tables three foot broad, and four foot long, made of this stone. Wherefore being induced by these three proba∣ble grounds, the place of its Original, the quantity, and the common con∣sent of many learned Authors; It will do well to rest in the version of our Reverend Translators, as to this gemme of the Onyx.Placaeus de Typis p. 96. Placaeus would derive it from  the gift of the multitude, for its worth and price; or, from  to make equal, even, or to polish. Of all precious stones this was chosen by God to be placed upon the shoulders of the High-Priest: In which all the Children of Israel were represented and equalized among themselves in the same stone, and therefore was most convenient to repre∣sent that precious stone, in which bothRom. 10.12. Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians, bond and free, male and femaleGal. 3.28. Col. 3.11. are all one, even in Christ Jesus. As Aaron was the Type of Christ, so the Children of Israel the Types of all Believers; the New Testament Saints being called the Israël of God. AsRom. 9.6. Gal. 6:16. John 1.12. Aaron carried their names into the Sanctuary before God: so doth Christ bear his people before the Father in his intercession for them. As the stones were of equal bignesse, and each of the Tribes had the same portion of place in the signature or graving: So, whoever believe on his name have the same prividedge to become the Sons of God, and all have a share in the like precious2 Pet. 1.1. faith, and a Joynt-stock in the sameJude 3. com∣mon salvation: Wherefore it is observed byExod. 28. v. 13. Mr. Ainsworth that this Shoham or Onyx, (which he, following the Chaldee, calls the Beryl) being the last save one in the twelve stones, and second of the fourth row in the breast-plate, on which the name of Joseph (the youngest Son of Jacob but one) was engraven, was therefore taken for the stone of the Ephod; for that Jo∣seph in supporting the Church of God, the Patriarchs in Egypt, was a principal Type of Christ, on whose shoulders theIsa. 9.6. Government is laid, who pre∣sents his People pure and holy unto God in his glorious Meditation and in∣tercession for a perpetualExod. 28.12. John 17.20. memorial through all generation: According∣ly, every Gospel-Minister is to bear in mind the requests and petitions of the people, and present them to God, always making1 Thes. 1.2. mention of them in their prayers. They ought likewise to bear them on theirLuk. 15.5. shoulders, as the good Shepheard doth his sheep; to nurse them, as a Nurse that carries her1 Thes. 2.7. Children in her arms:Gal. 6.2, 6. bearing their burthens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. I shall now proceed to the 6th part or parcel of the Priestly Ornaments, which is called the Girdle of the Ephod. Here some stumble to admit of two girdles: but Origen of old was for it, as may be seen in his Homilies uponOrigen. Hom. 6. in Levit. p. 146. Leviticus, andAins∣worth. in Exod. 28. v. 8. p. 112. Ainsworth andRibera p. 220. Ribera of our modern Commen∣tators. But what need Testimonies: seeing both the name and the materials are something distinct? The name is in the Hebrew  Cheshebh, and it is called theExod. 28.27. Lev. 8.7. curious girdle of the Ephod. The materials of this wereExod. 2.8. Gold, Blew, Purple, Scarlet, and fine twined linnen: even as the Ephod it self was, whereas the other underneath-girdle wanted the gold-wire. Be∣sides, if we will believe the Rabbies, as cited by the fore-expressed Author, the very make and fashion of this was very different from the former. For the
Ephod (as they say) was woven with two hands, slips or pieces going out from it, one on this side, and another on that, with which they girded the Ephod together close to the High-Priest's body: which seems to be hinted in the words of the Text, which Arias Montanus hath turned thus. Et artificium superhumeralis ejus, quod super illud, sicut opus ipsius ex ipso erit. And the workman-ship of the Ephod, which is upon it, like the work of it, shall be out of it, and the 70 to the same purpose, implying some pieces wrought in the same manner of work, and coming out of it like slips or ribands to tye it together. So that though it might receive the name of a girdle, because of its girding or tying the vestment together: yet I suppose it was not like to the other, nor a di∣stinct piece, to be loosed from the Ephod at pleasure, but was of the same piece and constantly annexed to it. But for that it perform'd the office of a girdle, therefore is it generally so styled and called the golden girdle in distinction from the former. Accordingly we have Jesus Christ our glori∣ous High-Priest girt about the paps with aRev. 1.13. Golden girdle, and in a vision represented to the Prophet Daniel, with his loyns girded with fineDan. 10.5. Gold of Ʋphaz. The Prophet Isaiah hath expounded the Mystery of Christs girdle to us, when treating of his glorious Kingdom, he saies, thatIsa. 11.5. righteousnesse shall be the girdle of his loines, and faithfulness, the girdle of his reines: which aCramer. Schol. Pro∣phet. Clas. 4. p. 13. Ed. 8o. German Divine interprets of righteous and faithful persons who should stare in Corona, Encircle and surround him in the dayes of the Gospel. But surely it is rather to be construed of his personal justice and equity, in judging the cause of his people. And as persons that do prepare and make themselves ready for some service, do gird up their garments close to their bodies, and fit them for service, asActs 12.8. Peter was bid by the Angel to gird up himself and follow him: and as our Lord in two GospelLuk. 12.37, 17. & 8. parables sets forth persons girt, and so fitted for their work and service: Even so our bless∣ed High-Priest is alwayes in procinctu, girt about with his golden girdle in a readinesse to help and assist his people that cry unto him. Lastly, as we read that the girdle did compasse his breast, it was about his loines and reines. To shew his Chastity, purity, holinesse, and unspotted integrity; his constant care, diligence toward, and love unto, his Church. 7. I now come to the 7th piece of the High-Priests glorious attire, and the most eminent of all the rest, calledExod. 28.15. the Breast-plate of Judgment. As to which, I shall omit any discourse upon the smaller attendants of this Sa∣cred piece,Ver. 22. the Chaines,Ver. 23. Rings,Ver. 25. the Ouches, Aperturae, the Holes in which the ends of the Chaines were fastned, itsVer. 28. blew lace: its beingVer. 16. four square & double, of the extent of a span on each 4 sides of the square or of the 12 severalVer. 17. seats, or hollow places, or Ouches (call'd so, v. 11.) made of Gold, wherein each of the 12 Stones were placed and fastned. I shall rather spend the succeeding lines, first upon the stones themselves, and then speak to the Mysterious meaning of the Ʋrim and Thummim, and so go off to the Mitre, the last thing to be treated on in the Pontifical habit. As to the stones; first I shall speak to their names, and then apply them to the 12 Tribes. The first Stone mentioned to have bin in this Breast-plate according to our translation is theExod. 28.17. Sardius,1. Sardius. though in the margin we read instead of it The Ruby. It's called in the Hebrew  Odem, from  Rubere, to be red, and thence is the reason why many have bin deceived in the expli∣cation of this Stone, and applyed to this name, many others that are of vari∣ous
mixtures of redness. It was first found at Sardis in lesser; Asia, as many Authors write out of Pliny; ButAnselm. Boetius de gemm. & la∣pid. l. 2. c. 80. 83. p. 230. & 233. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1647. Boetius, whom I shall name principally in this businesse of the 12 stones, one who hath written accu∣rately on this Subject, affirms that the stone which the Lapidaries call the Carneolus or the Cornelian from his colour like bloody flesh, is the true Sar∣dius of this place; the most excellent of which kind (he saies) are brought from the Iland Sardinia. Many medicinall vertues are by him and other Authors ascribed to it, onePrideaux ut suprà. p. 18. saies that Reuben's name was ingraven therein, to note humility: Another,Ains∣worth. that it foreshewed the warlike State of that Tribe, which lay upon the enemies frontiers, they went armed before theirJosh. 4.12. Brethren into Canaan, and in the dayes of Saul1 Chron. 5.10. conquered the Ha∣garites, and dwelt in their Tents. Those that are pleased with such curiosities, may trace the life of Reuben, and the Story of his Posterity: and, having examined the virtues ascribed to this stone, by the most Eminent and Judicious Writers, accordingly try what successe may be had in the application. I dare not say peremptorily, there is no mystery in these things, and yet I much fear, unlesse we have some special guidance of the holy Spirit, that mens nice and over curious-fancies may shoot a hundred times before they hit the mark. Wherefore I shall speak but briefly, and rather recite the opinions of others in these matters, than vent any private Conjectures. This Odhem here in this present Text of Exodus before us, as it is here turned , by the Septuagint, so also by the same Translators in two otherExod. 39.8. Septuagint. Edit. Fran∣cof. 1597. Ezek. 28.13. places of Scripture. I know Josephus calls the first a Sardonyx, the same which he had before placed on the High-Priest's shoulder. But the He∣brew word, doth by its signification of rednesse, the Septuagint and Jerom in the forecite placed, concerning the vestments of Priests, and other good Authors, confirme it to be the same which we have pitcht upon, viz. the Cornelian. The same is mentioned under the name of , in oneRev. 4.3. of the Revelation-Visions, and in another theRev. 21.20. 6th stone of the 12 foun∣dations of the wall is called by this name, and distinguisht from the Sardonyx, which is the 15th and is no other then an Onyx, and therefore so called, as Jerom notes;Jerom de vest. sacerd. p. 61. 2. Topaz. ut vel colorem, vel patriam demonstraret, either to shew the colour, (from , being like a mans naile) or its Country (from Sardis a City of Asia the lesse). The 2d Stone is in the Hebrew, is  Pitdah; by the 70, . It's mentioned in these following Scriptures, Exod. 39.10. In Job its native place is recited to have bin in Cush or Aethiopia, Job 28.19. The King of Tyre we read to have bin adorned with it, in Ezek. 28.13. Some think that the Greeks derive theirAins∣worth in Exod. 28.27. Rivet in eund. loc. Topaz or Topad from the inversion of the Let∣ters of the Hebrew name Pitdah.Pliny l. 37. c. 8. p. 738. b. Edit. Genev. 1631. Pliny relates that the Arabian Trog∣lodytes, being prest with hunger and tempests, in digging up of herbs and roots met with this stone, this he relates out of Archelaus: and further, that Juba writes of an Iland in the Red-Sea about 300 furlongs from the Continent, which being much troubled with mists and fogs, and therefore seldome hit upon by Sea-men, is called Topazion, which in the Language of those wild Arabs he saies signifies to seek and search out, and hence is the name of this precious gem, being much sought after for its refreshing colour and beauty. Wherein the Author doth agree with Job. For the Aethiopi∣ans or Cushites in Scripture, are those which dwelt in Arabia of antient times, and afterward propagated into Africa: whereof I have spoken before. As to our present stone the Topaz. It is of a green colour and Diapha∣nous, which if mixed with golden rayes is called by the name of a Chrysolite, and its difference from the Smaragd lies, in that it is of a more dilute and wa∣terish
greennesse) and tends a little toBoet. c. 92. l. 2. p. 207. yellowish green. It cures, say au∣thors, Lunacy and (b) Phrenzy, and signifies Clemency: and on it was graven the name of Simeon, whose Tribe performed no great Atchievements that we read of; the greatest was that in the dayes of Hezekiah,Pride∣aux pag. 18. 1 Chron. 4.42. 3. Emerald. when he took Geda, smote the Amalekites, and possessed their habitations. The third stone in the Breast-plate was the  Bareketh from  to lighten or shine bright. The 70 here and in the 29 of Exodus, . and so Jerome & Josephus here notes that Symmachus translates it by , the Thunder-stone: Others turn it by the Carbuncle, as our Translators but the general current of Expositors hold it to be the Smaragd. In Ezekiel that which is here in the Hebrew Bareketh, and is the last of the stones in the Otnaments of the King of Tyre; the Septuagint (as our Coppy is) not being constant to themselves have there turn'd it by  the Onyx, and we the Carbuncle, as in this place: translating Nophec, the first of the second row by Emerald or Smaragd. But with the 70, Josephus and Jerome agree; of our modern Authors, Ainsworth, Prideaux, Rivet, &c. that it is the Smaragd, and the name doth not very much dissent: although the Greek derive it  to shine, and thence  & . Among all the precious Stones, none so lovely as this for the admirable refreshing greennesse that is in it, called by Jerome Virens Smaragdi Gemma, from its grass-green colour, in his Epistle to Pammachius. Tom. 1. It doth comfort the eye-sight beyond all the Herbs and green Fields, by its pleasantnesse. It is a Pellucid or clear Stone, there is neither blewnesse in it as in the Turcois, nor yellownesse as in the Topaz, of the Ancients. Its counted good for an Amulet, to hang about little children for the Epilpesie, and was the stone on which Levi's name was graven: So the Covenant of Grace which is opened by the Gospel-Mini∣sters is compared to an Emerald-Rainebow round about the Throne in the Book of theRev. 4.3. 4. Car∣buncle. Revelations. The fourth Stone in number, and the first of the second Row in the Hebr. is called  Nphec, which we translate by the Emerald: but we shall see the generality of Writers hold it to have been the Carbuncle, and that one sort of them being the Chalcedony, is mentioned in the Revelations in stead of this,Rev. 21.19. in the third place, where Judah is set in the room of Levi, because of the e∣verlasting Priesthood of Christ; The Emerald of Levi, being set in there in the fourth place. Now the Chalcedony or Carchedony is but a dark or blacker sort of Carbun∣cle, asBoet. l. 2. c. 9. p. 141. &c. 87. p. 238. Boetius hath observed. The word in the Hebr. some hold to have affinity with  fucus, a paint or dye of red for the face, and therefore some∣times taken for the Carbuncle it self, being of a fiery red colour: so that what the Hebrew styles1 Chron. 29.2.  and were glistering stones, some translate Carbuncles: In another place its rendred byIsa. 54.11. stones of fair colours. Arias Montanus by the Carbuncle: the 70 in this place of Exodus do call it  the common name of a Carbuncle: because 'tis like a Coal red-hot with fire, and such is its colour, shining like fire and is the true and proper stone of Judah, the Progenitor of the royal Race: Of which Tribe came Caleb, Oth∣niel, David, Solomon, and all the Kingly posterity of that Noble House, and above all, the Lord Jesus Christ, who appeared in a Vision in a humane shape; in the likenesse ofEzek. 1.27. fire, his eyes like aProv. 1.14, 15. & 2.18. & 19.12. flame of fire, his feet like fine Brasse burning in a Furnace. This stone, the Carbuncle or true Rubine resisteth poyson and hath many excellent qualities: it shines in the dark most radiantly, and is a most proper resemblance of the war-like Tribe of Judah. The fifth stone is calledExod. 20.18.  by Arias Montanus, the 70, the vulgar Lat. Josephus (though mis-placed) and by Jerome, nay by general consent is termed the Sapphire, following the Hebrew in express words; some hold the
word to have affinity with  to be fair and beautiful; It comes from  to number,Rivet. in Exod. 24. p. 1103: 6 E∣dit. Tol. and because of the excellent and rare blew tincture wherewith it is adorned, resembling the colour of the Firmament; therefore Rivet says, it hath its denomination from the multitude of Stars which shine in the Hea∣vens: and because of its Heavenly colour, is usually brought to resemble the Throne of God who sits in the Heavens.Exod. 24.10. Ezek. 1.26. & 10.11. It is, saithpag. 133. Ainsworth Rivet. Boetius of an azure or bright blew colour, clear and transparent, and much resembles the delicate colour'd Flower of the little plant called Mous-ear-Scorpion-grass: There is no rednesse at all in them, as is found in the Amethyst. But some are of a little paler blew and are call'd the females: Others of a more illustrious and deep tincture, & are called Masculine Sapphires. Some, following the Rabins, put the name of Issachar upon this stone, but Dr. Prideaux the name of Dan the fifth son of Jacob according to the order of his birth, I suppose upon this apprehension that the same order was observed in these stones, which was commanded expresly to be in the two shoulder-stones of the Ephod. This in∣deed seems more probable than that of the Rabbies, who place all the six children of Leah first, and then those of the two hand-maids before the chil∣dren of Rachel, the free woman; I am sure Josephus, being himself a Priest, and one surely well acquainted with these matters, sayes, they were engravenIoseph. Antiq. l. 3. c. 8. p. 85. [.] according to the order, in which it happened every one of them to be born. And so Jerom, who lived in the Holy Land, [In singulis lapidibus secundum aetates duodecim tribuum sculpta sunt nomina.]Ierome, pag. 61. Tom. 3. The names of the 12 Tribes were graven in each of the stones, ac∣cording to their ages. Accordingly, I shall crave leave to place the name of Dan upon this excel∣lent stone of the Sapphire. For that his posterity were Sea-faring men, & had their coasts upon the Mediterranean-sea, where EkronIosh. 19.43, 46. Judg. 5. Japha or Joppa the chief port of Judea with others were their Cities, and therefore that Expostulation may take place of Dan's not coming up to help the Lord against the mighty: but remaining in Ships, when the Battel went against Sisera.Ezek. 27.19. Dan and Ja∣van, i. e. the Grecians, did go to and fro for precious Commodities; The Sapphire is reckoned by Dioscorides.Gen. 49.17. l. 5. c. 114. an Antidote against the stings of Scorpions, and Adders: and seeing Dan is compared to a Serpent, this stone for Dan might hint at Sampsons's stinging of the Philistins, & being the cure of Israel, according to the Talisman Signatures of the Oriental Nations. Against those of Dan the Prophet Zephany denouncing judgements, among other Cities mentions Ashdod and Ekron two Cities of Dan:Zeph. 2.5. He cries out woe to the Inhabitants (d) of the Sea-coast, which the Targum of Jonathan reads  Bissephar Jamma. In the Sapphar or port of the Sea; Lend∣ing possibly a reflection upon this Sapphire of Dan, which might be a blew co∣lour inclining to a Sea-green. They that toss in Ships upon the Ocean, can see nothing, when out of sight of Land, but Sea and Ayre, whose colours are much resembled by this stone. Besides, as the Sapphire stone is mentioned for the pavement of the Throne of God in Prophetical Visions, wherein he sits as Judge of the earth: So was Dan declaredGen. 49.16. Judge of his people by the good old Patriarch, his Father Jacob: which was verified in Sampson, who was born atIudg. 13.2. Zorah in this Tribe; and much more in Christ the Anti-type of Sampson, into whose hands all judgement is committed by the Father. Iohn 5.22.The sixth Stone in this glorious Breast-plare of judgement, is in the HebrewExod. 28.18.  Arias turns it by Adamas, the Adamant or Diamond and so do we in our translation. The 70 by  and in the same Track treads the vul∣gar Lat. Josephus, and Jerome, I suppose, eying their Translation: But Pag∣nine had learned from a great Hebrew Doctor of Spain, that it is the same which we call the Diamond, & hath its name from  to break in pieces:
it being the strongest of all precious stones, & is used in the cutting of others, and boring of Pearls: His powder also is useful in the polishing of other stones: Ainsworth renders it by the Sardonyx, and yet sayes, that it is like the Adamant. But Junius, Buxtorfe, Arias, Pagnine, Schindler, Ave∣narius, do all count it to be the Diamond from the notation of its Name, which if truly derived, doth very properly fit its nature. This stone is known to all, and being cut by a skilful Lapidary is exceeding radiant: some rare vir∣tues are ascribed to it by Boetius and others: but the principal thing hinted by it, is the Emblem ofBoet. l. 2. c. 6. p. 138. Fortitude, Constancy, Innocency, and hath been used to that end in Devices by Cosmus de Medices the great Duke of Tuscany, Borsus Duke of Modena, Frederick Duke of Mantua, and other of the pet∣ty Italian Princes. On this Stone was graven the name of Napthali the sixth son of Jacob according to the order of birth.Pride∣aux, p. 18. Fortitudinem exantlantem difficultates invenias, In him you may find Fortitude over-coming difficul∣ties. Napthali was a forward Tribe under BarakIudg. 4.6. (one of the same gene∣ration) in theIudg. 5.18. jeoparding his life unto death in the High-places of the field. Of this Tribe came 35000 with1 Chro. 12.34. shield and spear, commanded by 1000 Captains for the service of King David at Hebron, that great and gloriousHos. 3.5. Type of Christ. The seventh in the general number, and first of the third row, is called in the Hebrew  Leshem, by Arias Lyncurius, the Vulg. Ligurius. The 70 , by Josephus and Jerom, Lyncurius: Junius Cyanus, a blew stone, and by Ainsworth, the Jacinth or Hyacinth, induced by the consideration of the Jacinct in the Revelations: But the generality of the Hebrew Lexicographers, and most of the Ancients: whom we find reckoned up in a very learned Dis∣course upon this stone inMartius Lexicon in voce Lyncu∣rius. Martinius. The general Harmony induces me to believe it to be that stone which is called Ligure, from its native place Li∣guria a Country in Italy neer the Alpes, and not from the urine of the Lynx, a story not incredible. It is of the colour of Amber, which the ancient Ger∣manes called Glesse, and doth not abhor from the Hebrew word Leshem,Boetius, l. 2. c. 158. pag. 321. as Rivet observes. Boetius hath noted that the Ligure is a Species of the Ja∣cinth; and so like Amber, that it cannot well be discerned from it by the colour, butMartius Lexicon in voce Lyncu∣rius. either by its hardnesse, or not drawing of strawes to it, as that will. Those yellow Jacinths he takes to be the Ligures of the Ancients:Id. l. 2. c. 30. Stones that are not very clear and perspicuous. Some think the name of Dan was graven thereon, and fortifie the conjecture byIosh. 19.46. Leshem, a City which Dan conquered: But when the whole story is mentioned at large of that War which the 600 Danites made upon the secure City of the Zidonians, it is there constantly calledIudg. 18. Laish, and signifies an old (f) Lion, as is well known: and thence possibly may be the name of this stone Leshem, the co∣lour thereof being somewhat like to that of a Lions-hair. But I shall rather follow the former order according to the birth, and apply it to Gad, of whomDeut. 33.20. Moses speaks thus: Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad, he dwelleth as a Li∣on, and teareth the arm with the Crown of the Head.Gen. 49.18. Though a Troop should worst him at first, when he set down in his Lot, yet was he to overcome at last. The people moreover of this Tribe, that came to David at Ziglag,1 Chron. 12.8. men of Might and men of War fit for the Battel, that could handle Shield and Buck∣ler, their Faces were like Faces of Lions. The eighth Stone is in Hebr.  Schebho, and is by general consent tran∣slated Agate, from Achates, a River in Sicily, neer which plenty of them are related to have been first found; Some take it to be called from Shebah, & the Sabai in Arabia, from Shabah to lead captive. For among the Sabaeans the Kingly dignity it self was but a kind ofBochart. Plaleg. l. 2. c. 26. p. 150. captivity: for when once he was inaugurated into his Office, it was by an old Oracle, forbidden him to
come out of his Pallace into publike view, under the pain of stoning. The Sabaeans themselves, what were they generally but a stock and generation of Robbers? who lay in wait to take men captive, and to dispoyle them of their goods: This Stone possibly might have its Hebrew name from this Countrey whence they received it. For the Merchants ofEzek. 27.22.  Shebah brought to the Market of Tyre all precious Stones and Gold. The Greek name is deduced from Heb.Bochart. Canaan. l. 1. cap. 29. pag. 606. Varium maculosum, various or spotted: there being no stone of such multitude of various spotted colours as this, giving an admira∣ble resemblance of things in nature. In some ye may behold with great de∣light, the Images ofPliny, l. 37. c. 10. pag. 741. Rivers, Woods, Cattel, Chariots harnesse, and Orna∣ments of Horses:Boet. l. 3. c. 95. p. 246. Sometimes Trees, living Creatures, Fruits, Flowers, Herbs, Clouds and Cities, and almost whatever may be thought upon:Solinus. c. 20. p. 228. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1646. King Pyrrhus had a Ring made of this Stone, in which sat the nine Muses, with their distinct symbols or devices: and Apollo holding a Harp.Boet. ibid. Camillus Leonardus reports, that he saw one pleasantly resembling seven trees standing together in a Plain. Boetius relates that he himself had one, that in the midst of a circle had the shape of a Bishop adorned with a Mitre, which being turned upside down represented two shapes; one of a man, ano∣ther of a woman. Many of the like nature are seen every where, and parti∣cularly in the famous Library, as I remember, at St. Johns Colledge in Cam∣bridge. Some are mixt withAins∣worth in Exod. 28.19. green lists, andSolin. ibid. spotted with Gold, and these are termed therefore by the name of Chrysoprasus, one of the stones an∣swering to this in the Revelations. The AgateBoet. ibid. differs from the Jasper in hardnesse and smoothnesse. For although the Jasper have all the colours which the Agate hath, yet is it softer and more dark, and consists of more terrene matter, and cannot therefore be so exactly polished. Sometimes the Agate is semi-pellucid or half-transparent, which is very rare. The chief excellency of this stone is, that it is useful against the wounds of Vipers and Scorpions, as some affirm. As it is the 8th. in order of nomination: so it did signifie, and had engraven upon it the name of Asher, the 8th. son of Jacob according to his birth.Pride∣aux. p. 18. Dr. Prideaux applyes Tolerantia or patience to Ashers's Agate. But the variety of colours and resemblances in the Agate, seem to reflect upon Asher, whose name is happy, and he blessed with all the varieties that Sea and Earth could afford. Jacob prophesied of him, that hisGen. 49.20. bread should be fat, and he should yield royal dainties. Moses in his Swan-like song foretold of Asher, that he shouldDeut. 33.24, &c. be blessed with children, accept∣able to his brethren, and dip his feet in oyl; his shoes should be iron and brasse, and as his dayes, so should his strength be. His habitation was byIudg. 5.17. the Sea∣shore, and his abiding place by the breaches thereof. The ninth Stone, and last of the third Row, is called  Achlamah coming from  Chalam, to dream: it being reported by some, that those who carry this stone about them, shall be happy in Prophetick Dreames and Visions of things to come. Arias, The vulgar Lat. The 70. Josephus (though he misplace it, and set it before the Agate) Jerome, Buxtorf, Junius, Rivet, Ainsworth, our translation, and generally all, consent in the translating this by the Amethyst: which name it obtained of the Greeks, from another proper∣ty which they relate concerning it, that it hinders drunkennesse, or the ascen∣ding of intoxicating fumes of wine into the Brain from the Stomack, and say that there is a tacite indication of this quality in the colour, which it retaineth like to wine: othersBoetius l. 2. cap. 34. pag. 166. & Racus, l. 1. c. 11. p. 125. add that it hinders evil thoughs, renders a man of a hap∣py wit, makes him watchful and industrious and gracious with Princes, which somewhat accords with the Fancies of the Hebrews, that it purifies the Brain, & makes it fit for Visions. But 'tis derided by Pliny as a Magick vanity, l. 37. cap. 9. It is of a Violet-colour, which proceeds from a rare mixture of red
and blew, and yet there are several varieties: for the Indian kinds have aId. c. 32. pag. 162. tincture of yellow, upon which account they are reckoned among the sorts of Carbuncles, and are near-a-kind to the Jacinths: and therefore the Hyacinth orBoet. l. 2. Jacinth of Pliny, is in these days counted among the Amethysts. Even as the Amethysts of the Antients are at this day called Granates from the co∣lour of the pulp of a Pomegranate, and are properly referred as a speciesid. l. 2. c. 23. p. 152. to the Carbuncle. This gemme is transparent, only somewhat dark, considering the colour of it. According to the Heb. Notation, as it is the ninth in number; so it may be referred to the ninth son of Jacob, according to the order of birth, and the fifth by his wife Leah, called Issachar. This Stone, as some hold did occasion Visions in dreams: so the men of1 Chron. 12.32. Issachar are related to be such who had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do. Besides, the Amethyst is by Theophrastus in these words []Theo∣phrast. de Lapid. p. 23. edit. Lug. Bat. 1647. cum Joh. de Laet. de La∣pid. ] related to be of the colour of Wine, which I conceive to be of the dark red Wine of Palestine and Greece: but the red Grape, when ripe, is of a purplish colour between red and blew, as Tertullian (de Pallio) calls the neck of a Peacock, Purple-colour'd: So Vines are by Ovid, Et de pur∣pureis collectae vitibus nvae.1 Chron. 12.32. Martianus Capella calls the Amethyst Flucticolor, Wave-colour'd imitating Homer, who of old calls the Sea by the former Epithet which Theophrastus gave to this StoneIliad. α ver. 350. β 613. ε. 771. η 88.  The Wine-coloured sea, andIliad. ψ. χ. 316. &c.  otherwhere;Alean∣dri. Tab. Heliac, pag. 69. the same which one of his Scholiasts turns  the black or dark, and he him∣self in other places  the Purple-colour'd wave. Ac∣cordingly Issachar who was planted by the sea-shores may be set forth by this Stone: and is prophesied of by Moses that he shouldDeut. 33.19. suck of the abundance of the seas, and of Treasures hid in the sands. The tenth Stone, andExod. 28.10. first of the 4th. or last Row in the Breastplate, is called  Tarshish which Arias, the Vulg. and the 70. Ainsworth turn by the Chrysolite, and so do many others: Buxtorf, Junius, Rivet, by the Beryll, and so do our Translators in this place, and Exod. 39.13. Ezek. 1.16. & 10.9. & 28.13. Some deduce the Etymoligie of the word from  which is a Syno∣mous term with  to make poor,Iliud. α. ver 482. φ 326. &c.  by way of contraries (a usual figure, as bellum, q. minimè bellum, & lucus q. minimè lucens.) Be¦cause Tarsus was a rich Countrey, and this precious stone is of great value. Others from  the exploration or trial of Marble. Upon what grounds either are founded I leave to the Grammarian. But seeing in Scripture this word is sometimes put for the Sea; Psalm 48.7. and Isa. 2.16.Gregor. Lex. Sanct. p. 270. therefore learned Authors do conceive that the precious stone of the same name is so called from its sea-green colour, such as the Beryll is, resembling a colour mixt of blew and green. If it have any golden Rayes in it, it is called a Chryso-beryll which some do refer to the Chrysoprase. But this is a gene∣ral Note, that different stones of several colours, if they have any streakes or spots resembling Gold, are by some Authors presently call'd Chrysolites. But of that stone which bears the name of the Chrysolite,Boet. l. 2. c. 65. p. 210. I made mention be∣fore in the Discourse about the Topaz. Hereby we may see the reason why so many have read the Hebr. Tarshish in this place by the Chrysolite: and that the Chrysolite properly so called is not the Beryl, is evident, in that these two are distinctly reckoned in the Revelations, Rev. 21.20. All Beryls are trans∣parent, but of a dilute or waterish colour; but if they be deep tinctured, they are taken for other gemmes. As for the origination of the word Beryl,Isodorus, l. 16. c. 27. Isi∣dore of Sevil hath noted it to be from the Indian-tongue and our word pearl is thought to be thence deduced, of which those that are skilful may give an account; whilest we considering its colour and name in relation to the sea,
may very aptly referre it to the 10th Son of Jacob, whose name Zebulun was engraven thereon. Which agrees with the Marine habitation of this Tribe according to the Prophecy of Jacob.Gen. 49.13. Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the Sea, and he shall be for an haven of ships, and his border shall be unto Zidon. To which purpose Moses tunes his dying song when joyning him with Issa∣char in the Book of Deuternomy. Accordingly in the partition of the Land of Canaan, we have recited the Towns of his Province, bordering upon the Mediterranean and the Galilean Seas; the former on the West, and the other on the East. This Tribe and tract was famous for the birth of Jonah the Pro∣phet, who was born at2 King. 14.25. Gathhepher, orJosh. 19.13. Mat. 12.41. Gittah-Hepher, in the Land of Zebulun, He that fled from the Tarshish of Canaan, the presence of God, to the Tarshish of the Gentiles. But behold (c) a greater then Jonah is here, who was conceived here, often crossed this Sea of Galilee, and taught in these parts. The Beryll of his doctrine shone most gloriously in theEsay 9.1, 2. Math. 4.13, 15. the bor∣ders of Zebulun and Napthali, by the way of the Sea. The people that sate in dark∣nesse saw great light, and to them which sate in the Region and shadow of Death light is sprung up. To conclude: As Zebulun was a great Traveller and Merchant by Sea; so had he often occasions of sending orders and ac∣counts in writing, and therefore he is recited to be good at the Pen.Judg. 5.14. Those that handle the pen of the writer came out of Zebulun to the War against Siserah. 11. The 11th Stone in order is  the Onyx, whereof before. On this was graven the name of Joseph. Which exprest, (asDr. Prideaux. one speaks) his humanity. Sure we are, he was the kindest Brother that ever we reade of; and therefore the two Stones of the shoulder had all the names of the Chil∣dren of Israel in them, to shew as was noted before, that kindness, love and compassion, which Joseph manifested to his Brethren, in providing a habi∣tation, and nourishing them in the Land of Egypt. This is a stone of great variety, and moderately transparent. Oh howGen. 49.22. Deut. 33.13. manifold are the bles∣sings of Joseph: He hadDeut. 21.17. two portions in the Land of Canaan, which was the right of the first-born. For good Jacob adoptedGen. 48.5. his two sons for his own, and made them to bear equal share in all the priviledges of his immediate sons, and that Joseph might not lose the blessing of theGen. 49.24. Stone of Israel; we have Joseph himself in one Stone among the 12 tribes on the Breast-plate, and two Onyxes on the two shoulders of the High-Priest for Ephraim and Manasseh, whom the Holy Patriarch brought into a relation of immediate filiation to him. The twelfth and last is called in the Hebrew  Jashpheh. Wherein all consent for the Jasper: A stone well known, whereof some are of various colours, spots, rings, and streaks: some are very dark and opacous, those are the worst; some are clearer, but none fully transparent. Its difference from the Agate I mentioned before. The word some do derive from  to be eminent,Buxtorf. and according to the Chaldee signification to break in pieces: how appositely,Rev. 4.3. let others judge. We read in the Revelations, that he who sate upon a visionary Throne, was to look upon, like Jasper: signifying the admi∣rable, stupendious, and various excellencies of the divine attributes: and as this stone is not transparent, so neither is it possible for any mortal eye to dive into the bottome of those unspeakable Mysteries. The Learned Paraeus con∣ceivs, that the person sitting on the throne wasParaeus in Rev. 4.3. p. 662. b. edit. Francof. 1647. Col. 3.1. Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever, into whose hands the Father hath cowmitted all judgment. Then doth it properly fit Benjamin whose name was engraven on the Jasper in Ex∣odus. The Lord Jesus being the true Benjamin of the Father, the Son of his right hand, who sitteth * on the right hand of God. In the 21 of the Reve∣lations, the Jasper of Benjamin is named first, well suiting with our spirituall
Benjamin, who is the head of the body, the Church; who is the beginning, the first-born from the dead,Col. 1.18. that in all things he might have the prehemi∣nence. Accordingly, in the portion of the Tribe of Benjamin stood the glo∣rious Temple at Jerusalem, the Type and Figure of Christ, according to the Prophecy of Moses: The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him,Deut. 33.12. and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders. His ravening like a Wolf, noted (say some) the Altar's devouring & consuming multitudes of Sacrifices: Paul, the chief and first of the Apostles, was of Benjamin, the Jasper first mentioned in the New-Testament. So much for the several stones, with the engravings of the names of the Children of Israel according to their birth, on the breast-plate of Judgment, I shall now represent them in this following Scheme. אודם Sardius Reuben פטדה Topaz Simeon ברקת Emerald Levi The first Row. נופך Carbuncle Judah ספיר Sapphire Dan יהלום Diamond Napthali The second Row. לשם Ligure Gad שבו Agate Asher אחלמה Amethyst Issachar The third Row. ישפה Beryl Zebulun שוהם Onyx Joseph תרשיש Jasper Benjamin The fourth Row. Now it will not be amisse, to see how variously the names of the Tribes are disposed in the reckonings of them up in several places of Scripture, which I shall exhibit by the 12 first figures or Ziphres. The first place after the narration of their births is that, wherein we have recited their descent intoGen. 46.8. Egypt, and then they are reckoned thus. 1.2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 7, 8, 11, 12, 5, 6. When in Egypt they areExod. 1.2, 3, &c. thus varied. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 12, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11. In the blessing of their Father Jacob, we find themGen. 49.3, &c. thus disposed. 1, 2, 3, 4, 10 9, 5, 7, 8, 6, 11, 12. After their Exodus or coming out of Egypt, when God commanded the numbring of the Congregation of Israel; we reade the heads of the tribes to beMum. 1.5. &c. thus placed, Levi being left out, and the two sons of Joseph adopted in the room of their Father, both which shall be noted with the figure 11, 1, 2, 4, 9, 10, 11, 11, 12, 5, 8, 7, 6.
But the tribes themselves to beNum. 1.20. &c. thus set down with some variation. 1. 2, 7, 4, 9, 10, 11, 11, 12, 5, 8, 6. When the orders of the Tribes in their Tents, and encampings in the wil∣dernesse are mentioned, then are they placed in thisNum. 2.3. &c. Method, 4.9, 10, 1, 2, 7, 11, 11, 12, 4, 8, 6. When the Princes of the tribes presented their offerings at the dedication of the Tabernacle, the series of their namesNum. 7.12. &c. is managed in this order, 4.9, 10, 1, 2, 7, 11, 11, 12, 5, 8, 6. according to the former. When Moses sent persons of every tribe to search the Land of Canaan, they areNum. 13.4. &c. recited in this manner, 1.2, 7, 4, 9, 10, 11, 11, 12, 5, 8, 6. At another time when near their entrance into the Land of Canaan, the sum of the Congregation being taken, they are set inNum. 26.5. this posture, 1.2, 7, 4, 9, 10, 11, 11, 12.5, 8, 6. When mention is made of their inheritance, then some of them who dwelt on the East of Jordan were thusNum. 32.33. placed, 7.1. and half Manasseh the 11th, and when the recital is made of them according to the division of the Land,Num. 34.19. thus 4.2, 12, 5, 11, 11, 10, 9, 8, 6. when they were to stand on mount Gerizim and Ebal, to blesse and curse, they were thus ranked, 2.3, 4, 9, 11, 12, 1, 7, 8, 10, 5, 6. When Moses the servant of the Lord who was King in Jeshurun, drew nigh to his dissolution, he blessed the 12 Tribes of Israel in thisDeut. 33.6. &c. Deut. 27.21. order, 1.4, 3, 12, 11, 10, 9, 7, 5, 6, 8. and leaves out Simeon wholly. When Joshuah the Captain of the Lords Hosts, settles the Tribes in their habitations, they are computed after this order in several Chapters, begin∣ning at theJosh. 13. &c. 13th, and ending with the 19th of that Book, 1.7, 11, 4, 11, 12, 2, 10, 9, 8, 6, 5. In the Book of Chronicles, supposed by some to be written by Ezra the Scribe after the Captivity of Babylon; when there was a Catalogue made of the Genealogies of the Israelites, we find them first in general thus, 1 Chron. 2.1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 5.11, 12, 6, 7, 8. and then placed thus,1 Chron. 4.1. &c. 4.2, 1, 7, 11, 3, 9, 12, 6, 11, 11, 8. and there Dan is omitted. In the dayes of David when the Rulers or Princes of the Tribes are men∣tioned, they stand1 Chron. 27.16. thus, 1.2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 6, 11, 11, 12, 5. and there Gad is omitted. The portions of the 12 Tribes in the visionary Land of the Prophet Eze∣kiel, are recitedEzek. 48.1. in this method, 5.8, 6, 11, 11, 1, 4, 3, 12, 2, 9, 10 7. Further, in the sameEzek. 48.31. Chapter when the Gates of the City Jerusalem (presented in that glorious vision to the same Prophet) are recited according to the names of the Tribes of Israel, they are thus ordered, 1.4, 3, 11, 12, 5, 2, 10, 7, 8, 6. When the sealed ones of all the Tribes of Israel are computed, behold theRev. 7.5. method, 4.1.7, 8, 6, 11.2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 12. Where 'tis observable, that there is no mention of Dan. The last place where they are marshalled, is in the 21. of the Revelations, without the annexion of names according to the 12 Stones in the Breast-plate, but varying in order according to the good pleasure of the Spirit of God. 1. TheRev. 21.19. Jasper , which plainly presents Benjamin in the first place, who was the last in the story of the Breast-plate. To such dignity and honour doth God raise the lowest and meanest of his people some times,Mat. 9.30. Many that are last here below shall be first in the Kingdom of Heaven, & in the new Jerusalem. When ChristPsal. 68.18. ascended up on high, then we find littleVer. 27. Benjamin, with his Ruler mentioned in the first place before all others. Some think because Paul the1 Cor. 15.0, chief Apostle was of this Tribe, therefore
is it first mentioned. For as the names of the 12 Tribes were graven of old on the Breast plate; so now the names of the 12 Apostles of the Lamb, are graven on the 12 Foundations of the new Jerusalem. 2. Sapphire, for Dan the 5th. 3. Calcedony a sort of Carbuncle, for Iudah the 4th. 4. Smaragd or Emerald, for Levi the 3d. 5. Sardonyx, being one kind of the Onyx, for Joseph the 11th. 6. Sardius for Reuben the first. 7. Chrysolite, which indeed is the name of any Stone that hath the mix∣ture of a golden colour. And forasmuch as some Adamants or Diamonds are somewhat tinctured with this colour; and for that the adulteration of the Adamant is sometimes performed by the Chrysolite as BoetiusBoet. l. 2. cap. 1. p. 118. lin. 1. notes, it be∣ing a Stone of admirable hardnesse; and seeing that all the other Stones in this Chapter seem aptly fitted to the several Tribes, I shall, till clearer light arise, referre the Chrysolite to a kind of Adamant, and set the name of Nap∣thal upon it, which was ingraven of old on the 6th Stone of the Breast-plate. 8. The Beryl, for Zebulun the 10th. 9. The Topaz, for Simeon the 2d. 10. The Chrysoprase or Agate, for Asher the 8th son: whereof before in the 8th precious stone of the Breast-plate. 11. The Jacinch or Ligure, for Gad the 7th; according to Ierom, as before recited. 12. The Amethyst, for Issachar the 9th. So that the order in this last place stands thus at one view, 12.5, 4, 3, 11, 1, 6, 10, 2, 8, 7, 9. All these do con∣cern and relate to 12 Gates, 12 Angels, 12 Tribes, 12 Foundations, and 12 Apostles mentioned in the 12 and 14 verses of the same Chapter of holy John's Revelations. But upon all this discourse of the various Situation of the names of the Tribes of Israel in several places of Scripture, which we have collected to∣gether, What may be observed? seeing in above 20 places of holy page reci∣ted in the Margin, there are but two that agree with one another in the or∣derly recitation. Shall we think that these things have nothing of the contri∣vance of the Spirit of God in them? and that nothing worth noting can be thence educed according to the various times, wherein the alterations are made? which might possibly respect either some eminent sins of those Tribes, for which they were afterward in their enumeration set behind others in dig∣nity; or that some more eminent services for God and his worship, and some notable opposition against the enemies of his truth might occasion the Spi∣rit of God in the next dictates of Holy Writ, to leave a memorial of such ser∣vices upon such Tribes, by stating their praecedencies accordingly. But this Province I shall at present freely resigne to such as have more ability, and are at better leisure to digest their observations upon this enquiry, and content myself at present with this, that we hence take notice that God is no  no respecter of persons, but as in every Nation, so in every Tribe,Act. 10.35. He that feareth him and worketh righteousnesse, is accepted of him. From what hath bin spoken about these stones, I would crave leave to adde a word or two for explanation of a dark place in the Prophet Ezekiel, Where judgments are denounced against Tyre that Lady of the Nations. When God there comes to reckon with her, He recounts her mercies, that her King had binEzek. 28.13. in Eden the Garden of God, and that every precious stone was his covering, and then names many of them in order,
אודם פטדה יהלום תרשיש שוהם ישפה ספיר נופך ברקת The Sardius, Topaz, Diamond, Beryl; The Onyx, Iasper, Sapphire, Car∣buncle and the Emerald; which are all of them such as are mentioned to have had the names of the Tribes engraven in them, and according to our expla∣nation stood for—Reuben, Simeon, Napthali, Zebulun, Ioseph, Benjamin, Dan, Iudah, and Levi. Here we have seven Principal Tribes mentioned under the names of those stones, and of Napthali and Zebulun the borderers of Tyre. Thou art the annointed Cherub that covereth (saith the Prophet) &c. v. 14. Thou wast upon the holy monatain of God, thou hast walkt up and down in the midst of the stones of fire. That is, thy habitation and dwelling hath been among the Tribes of Israel, so often represented by precious stones, which by reason of their radiant and refulgent beams, are called Stones of fire. It was his happinesse to have been so nigh in-habitation to Gods presence a∣mong his people in his worship and Ordinances: but his misery was, that he did not improve those glorious opportunities and advantages. Hiram the King of Tyre, assisted David and Solomon with Cedar and Firre from Leba∣non, and was upon the Mountain of God (as may seeme probable from this place) to view that stately structure which was prepared at Jerusalem for the sacred solemnities. To speak a few words about the radiancy of Stones, and the various co∣lours which they represent, taking our hint from the expression of Ezekiel, terming them stones of fire; Let us observe that common notion, that co∣lour is nothing but the various reflection of Light upon Bodies: as Alha∣zen a great Master in Opticks hath fully notedAlhazen Optic. l. 1 c. 3. [Color variatur pro lucis qualitate] Colour is varied according to the quality of Light. To this purpose speaksBartho∣linus de lu∣ce. Animal. c. 2. p. 5. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1647. Bartholinus in his second Chapter, concerning the light of Living Creatures, spending a whole Section upon this point in hand. Besides it is very manifest from the various cuttings of precious stones: Of Crystal and Venice-glasse, and the like, which reflect the Light from one side to another, and cause those pleasant varieties of Rain-bow-co∣lours in them: as Solinus of old hath observed, speaking of Sex-angular Cry∣stal [quaeBartho∣linus de lu∣ce. Animal. c. 2. p. 5. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1647. radiis icta solis, rutilo aeris repercussu, coelestis arcus ex sese jacit spectem.] Which being illustrated with the Sun-beams, yields the species, or representation,Solinus cap. 36. p. 97. Edit. praefat. of the Rain-bow, by the shining repercussions of Light.Bartho∣linus de lu∣ce. Animal. c. 2. p. 5. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1647. In like manner of the cutting of Beryls by the Indians in a sexangular-form: ut hebetem coloris lenitatem angulorum repercussu excitent ad vigorem, cap. 55. To conclude, 'tis mentioned also by Boetius concerning the Beryl in these words:Boetius, . 2. c. 69. [Sculpuntur Berylli pluribus angulis, ut illorum repercussu vivaciores siant magisque fulgeant] Beryls are oftentimes cut in many angles: that by their repercussion (of light) they may prove more lively, and shine more oriently. The story of these Stones in the Breast-plate of the Jewish High-priest did dart such glorious and glittering Rayes throughout the world, that the Priests of false gods did at length endeavour to imitate these excellent and radiant Ornaments. For so dothAlean∣der, Tab. Heliac. p. 13. Aleander in his Heliack Table, declare out of Albricus, that they pictured Apollo of old, with a Crown of 12 precious stones: and out of Matianus Capella applyes it to the Sun, affixing 3 to each quarter of the year.Id. p. 67. Diodorus Siculus relates that the chief Judge, ] did carry about his neck an Image (or Zodiack) of pre∣cious stones hanging on a golden Chain, which was called Truth.] As this of the High-Priest, was called the Ʋrim and Thummim, Light and Perfecti∣on: whereof more anon. The same story is amplified byDiodor. Sic. l. 1. c. 75. p. 48. Edit. H. Steph. Aelian. var. Hist. l. 14. c. 34. p. 288. Edit. Ar∣gentorati. 1647. Aelian, who telling
that the Judges among the Egyptians were the same with their Priests, sayes thus: . The chief Priest wore an Image about his neck of the Sapphire-stone, which was called Truth.] Thus was the Ʋrim and Thummim called by the Septuagint and Philo Iudaeus, , Manifestation and Truth. But to leave these stories of the Heathens apish imitation, and descend to the signification of these Stones in the general: Wherein we may observe, that as the High-priest carried the 12 Tribes on two stones upon his shoul∣der: so it might denote the Government and imperial Rule of Christ over his Church, on whose shoulders the Government is laid. And whereas the same Names are engraven on stones which were placed on his Breast:Isa. 9.6. so might they denote how near the Church is to the heart of Christ; He being a most compassionate High-priest, a Shepheard thatIsa. 40.11. carries his Lambs in his Bosom. His love is so strong and ardent that the Church his Spouse is set as aCan. 8.6. seal upon his heart: Even as the gravings of the Names of the chil∣dren of Israel on the precious stones is related in the Scripture, to have been after the manner of a SealExod. 28.21. or Signet. With these stones he entred into the Sanctuary, and bore them upon his heart before God in prayer. So that as Christ was the Exemplar and pattern of every Gospel-Minister to follow: In like manner must they alwayes mind the spiritual state of their flock be∣fore God in their supplications. Besides, as these stones were not only pre∣cious for value and worth but radiant and shining also: So must the vertues and graces of a Minister be manifestative and resplendent before others: wherefore the stones of the new Jerusalem, (which as we have observed, do hold an allusion to, and a parallelism with those of the Breastplate) were gra∣en with the names of the 12 Apostles of the Lamb,Gerhard loc. Com∣mun. Tom. 9. p. 546. Edit. Genev. 1639. & are by a learned Ger∣man Divine interpreted, to hold forth so many rare and excellent gracious endowments of his soul: whereof I cannot stand to recite the particulars. But now I shall descend to the difficultest point of my whole Task; and that is to endeavour the opening of the meaning of the Ʋrim and Thummim, which Moses was commanded to put into the Breastplate. The words are these  Arias Montanus turnes it, Et dabis in pectorali judicii, Ʋrim & Thummim.Exod. 28.30. And thou shalt give on the Breastplate of Judgement the Urim and Thummim. The 70  and thou shalt adde or put to, or place upon, &c. Now if we take the Hebrew word  strictly in his first and primitive signification, it is, to give: though it must be acknowledged, that it often signifies to set, fix, place, or apply to any thing. To this end I speak it, because it is the judgement of many learned Authors, that there was no material added, but a consecrated blessing given to it by Moses from God, that when the High Priest did with Reverence, holy and humble submission appear before God, to crave the manifestation of his Will, in a dubious point enquired after, that God would then declare his blessed mind to the people by the High Priest standing before him with this Breast-plate of Urim and Thummim. The answers being for clearnesse and perspicuity like Urim, lights: and for truth and integrity like Thummim, most perfect and unerring. Here I might tire my kind and ingenuous Reader as well as my self, if I should take the pains to transcribe the multitudes of various opinions upon this point: which I have collected together in my observations. But I shall not be so bold with his patience, not conceiving that it would redound to much profit in conclusion, when all the opinions are marshalled in their parti-coloured garments before them, which would but confound the wea∣ker judgements: and give occasion to the Learned, either to scorn or pitty so needlesse a labour. Therefore I shall only mention some of the Authors,
where those that please may consult the varieties, and take what likes him best. Philo Judaeus, Josephus, Origen, Jerome, do all go in one Tract in the several places before cited. Dr. Rivet on Exodus, p. 11.46. Mr. Shecingham on Jima p. 181. Amama in his Antibarbar Biblic. p. 566. Edit. prior. Dr. Prideaux,Cunaeus de Rep. Hebr. p. 130. Sckickard Jur. Reg. Hebr. p. 11. 12. &c. Harphius in Myst. Theo∣log. Gregor. Pholos Ni∣col. Fuller. &c. of the Aaronical Vestments. Mr. Ainsworth on the place. Dr. Gell on the Pentateuch, p. 259. Ribera of the Temple, p. 210. &c. Dr. Mo∣lin in his Vates, l. 1. c. 22. Mr. Mede, Vol. 1. p. 372. &c. Dr. Taylor of Types, p. 106. Besides many others, who have either  by the way in other Tracts, or else as Commentators have written directly on the place. I am not willing to insist any longer on the very nomination of them. Herein I shall not presume to infringe upon the limits of modesty, so far as to determine: I am sure it is most safe and sober, , to haesi∣tate in this point. But if I may without offence, and that with all humble submission declare onely that which likes me best, and savours to me most probable; It is the Judgment of Molin and Rivet much to the same purpose, with that whereof I spake before the recitation of the Authors, viz. That there were no stones, names, words, or any new ma∣terials added to the Breast-plate by this Urim and Thummim: But that, for as much as in the former part of that 28th Chapter of Exodus we have related to us, the forme and fashion of the Breast-plate, its materials, woven work, Golden Ouches and precious stones; so here in the addition of these two termes, the Lord was pleased to signifie the end for which it was assigned and appointed, that when Aaron or the successive High-PriestExod. 28.30. should go in be∣fore the Lord he should bear upon his heart the Judgment of the Children of Israel continually. The meaning whereof may possibly be this, that when the Priest did enquire of God concerning Warre or Peace, and all matters of great concern∣ment, he should stand before his Majesty in the Sanctuary, with this glorious Breast-plate upon him; that the Lord either vivâ voce, by a lively voice, or by immediate suggestions upon his Spirit, would give a clear distinct answer, illuminating his mind with the Urim, or the light of the knowledge of the di∣vine will in such particulars, and satisfying his dubious & perplexed thoughts with the Thummim of a perfect and compleate determination of the difficult matter in question before the Throne of God. If it were for the revealing of some unknown truth, or the predicting and foretelling of some future event or issue, it was a most infallible and unerring Oracle which God gave forth by the Priest unto his people, whereof they might rest so perfectly assu∣red, as if it were fulfilled already. I am somewhat the more confirmed in this conception, because after the praecept of making all the curious vestments of Aaron, when Moses is com∣manded to put them on in the nextExod. 29.5. &c. Chapter, There is no mention made of this Ʋrim and Thummim. Again, when the ingenious Artificers Bezaleel and Aholiah are mentioned to be atExod. 39.21. &c. work upon these choise vestments of the High-Priest, we have no recital at all of the making of any such thing as Urim and Thummim. True it is, (which I must not omit) that in Leviticus when Moses brings his brother Aaron, and clothes him with all his Gorge∣ous attire, that there is mention made of hisLev. 8.8. putting on the Breast-plate, the Urim and Thummim. But yet we must remember that the word there in the Hebrew, is no other radically then what was spoken to before, in the first place of Exodus, and it is  & dedit, and he gave, or affixed to it this excellent qualification by the Commandement of God, that it should be for the manifestation of the decisive and determinate mind and will of God in all controversies, and enquiries which they might lawfully bring before his Majesty. Besides in that place there is no mention at all of the 12 Stones, but in room thereof, the Ʋrim and Thummim, whereas the Breast-plate it self
was particularly described, Exod. 29.15. distinct from the stones that were set in it. To conclude then: this signified Typically the Revelation of the mind of God unto his Church, by Jesus Christ the great High-Priest of our inter∣cession, unto whom all the Prophets and Apostles do give witnesse. For the stones did cease to shine, and give forth any radiant lustre in the dayes of Jose∣phus, when Christ the true High-Priest was manifest in the flesh, as he him∣self doth testifie, l. 3. Antiq. So much may then suffice to have spoken to this excellent and mysterious Piece. I shall now come to the last Ornament of the Priests, and the High-Priest, which was to be about their heads, and is the 8th in number. 8th, The 8th and last parcel of Priestly-aray respecting the Sons of Aaron, and the inferiour Priests is called aExod. 28.40. Bonnet for Glory and for Beauty: The matter of it wasExod. 39.28. fine linnen, The form or fashion of it seems to be hinted in the Hebrew word  which is derived from  Scyphus, a great cup or goblet that's round with a copped Cover,Ains∣worth. p. 117. as Mr. Ainsworth observes out of the Hebrew records, that the Bonnets were of linnen Cloth wrapped about the head in a round and high crown'd fashion, according to the manner of the East. The High-Priest's covering is called by a different name (though of the same matter,Exod. 29.28. fine linnen)  Cidaris from Circumvolvere, to rowle about; the difference being onely this, as the former Author hath recited out of Jewish writers, that, whereas the former for the common and ordinary Priest was round and copped, this was more flat and close to he head. Much to the same purpose dothHottin∣geri jus He∣braeene. Hottinger speak out of the Hebrew records, that the former was like a Head piece; this last for the High-Priest was like the headgeare of a woman, somewhat long behind, and closer on the crown of the head. Besides, he had a holyEzod. 29.6. Crown upon the Mitre, and in theVer. 39.30. plate of the crown (for so it is called) was graven Holinesse to the Lord. The word is  a flowre, that is, a flowred plate of gold bound to the mitre with a blew lace, and reached but from ear to ear, on the fore part of the head, in the fashion of the Crowns of some of the Roman Emperors in their coines, being indented Diadems of Gold. Here I might shew how the Papists have received the attire of their Bishops and Priests from the Jews; and particularly their Mitres, which they have ap∣pointed to be made with two hornes, asPolydor. Virg. de in∣ventoribus rerum l. 4. c. 7. p. 285. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1644. Polydor Virgil, one of their own Authors hath attested. [Adduntur duo Cornua, quoniam Moses acceptis ta∣bulis quibus mandata Dei inscripta erant, visus est suis cornutus.] Two horns are added, because Moses appeared horned to the people when he received the Tables, in which the Commandements of God were written.] When alas, the Hebrew Text is miserably wrested, which tells us that the skin ofExod. 34.30. Moses his face shined in these words  The skin of his face shined the word being indeed deduced from a horn, that is, it was clear like a horn. But to leave this discourse: let us see what these Ornamens of the Head did signifie, and herein we have no great task to undertake, seeing the covering of the head among most Ntions, is a token of Liberty and Dignity, and when adorned with a Crown, usually denotes Kingly and Princely Authori∣ty. In which respect we may apply it to the Regal and Kingly Office of Christ; and therefore it is, that in one of St. Johns Visions, we find one like unto the Son of Man sitting upon a Cloud,Rev. 14.14. having a Golden Crown upon his head. But now wherefore the High-Priest appeared before God with this Gol∣den Crown inscribed with Holinesse to the Lord, the reasons are given at large which we shall, in 3 particulars, briefly apply to the Lord Jesus.
1. TheExod. 28.38. Text saies, that this excellent Ornament was commanded for the High-Priest to use for this end, that he should bear the iniquity of the holy things of the Childen of Israel. It is not said, the iniquity of their grosse and more scandalous sins, (such were to be expiated by Sacrifice, whereof there is no doubt that they cannot be pardoned without Christ's appearance before God on the behalf of his People. ForHeb. 9.22. without blood there is no re∣mission, and Christ in his mediation doth impetrate and obtain the pardon of all their sins for which his blood did satisfie:) But to shew that the Saints contract impurities even in their most holy services. There are no sins so small as to be, in their own nature, venial, No! all sins are mortal, if God should vindicate his Justice upon us according to the guilt of them, and our merit of wrath. But to mind the people of God, even of the least sins, wan∣dring thoughts in duty, want of zeal, warmth and fervency in their holy ap∣proaches. We want a High-Priest even to deprecate God's wrath in behalf of such; For as his death did work out mercy and pardon, for all the sins of the Elect: So likewise doth he continually interpell, and intermediate at the Throne of Grace, for the constant issuing out of pardons for our daylie weak∣nesses and infirmities. 2dly, Another end of the Priest's [appearing with his gorgeous Or∣nament before God, was, saith the forecited Text, To take away the sin of their holy gifts, which they hallowed and consecrated unto God: To shew that in our most free will-offerings of Praise and Gratitude, there is a mixture of the old leaven of sin, which must be purged out by Christ's in∣tercession. When the soul of a Saint is upon the wing of heavenly influence mounting up to God in its choisest ravishments of spirit, there is a tincture of the flesh that must be expiated by Christ's appearance before God. 3dly, This Ornament was to be alwayes upon his forefront, especially on the expiation-day (unlesse when he went into the Holy of Holyes) that the Lord's people may be alwayes accepted of his Majesty. Thereby noting as the continuance of our sins and imperfections, while we remain in this Earthly Tabernacle, so likewise the constancy of his Mediation. Now forasmuch as our Lord the eternal Priest of the most High God, hath a Crown of Gold upon his head when he mediates, it shewes thatGen. 22.38. Hos. 12.3. like a Prince he hath power with God. He doth it not in a low and precarious way, but with Majesty and Authority,Phil. 2.6. counting it no robbery to be equal with God. And therefore (although upon the Earth) in the State of his exina∣nition and poverty, we see He prayes like a Prince.John 17.24. Father I WILL, that they also whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou hast given me, &c. Oh then, how triumphantly and victoriously doth he now intercede, when sitting at the right hand of his Father: having subdued Principalities and Powers, and led them Captive at his Chariot Wheels. For if the FatherJoh. 11.22, & 42. heard him alwayes when in the dayes of his flesh, nay, he was answered in the thingsHeb. 5.7. that he feared, having divine support, a hand from Heaven to carry him through his agonies: How then may our souls rejoyce in hope, nay, in the full assurance of Faith, that whatever we ask in his name, Christ hath promised, thatJohn. 14.13, 14. he will do it. In the conclusion of this discourse, I might speak a word to that common error, that the High-Priest did go into the Oracle or Holy of Holyes, with these his stately Garments before God on the expiation-day. For the Text inLev. 16.4. Ribera p. 223. Leviticus expresly mentions but four Vestments, and all of linnen, wherewith he was to be arraied on that day. But the manner of his service on that solemnity, is to be handled in next Section. Here likewise, if time would admit, we might discusse that question, Whether Gospel-Ministers are
to use distinct Garments or not? I confesse the Enquiry is of no great mo∣ment and weight; but for that the Pontificians, and others too much addicted to external Pomp in worship, have raised such a dust in the Christian World about these and other niceties, imposing insupportable yokes upon their weak Brethren, forRom. 14.15. whom Christ dyed. The small difficulty of this point lies upon the right stating of this Quaery, Whether Church-Rulers have power to take away the indifferency of rhings (which are such in their own nature) by a positive Ecclesiastical Ordinance? and then it comes to be discussed under the notion of a Caeremony: But I shall forbear, and at present onely recite some passages out of Dr. Rivet, that Learned and Judicious divine, treating upon this very businesse.Rivet in Exod. p. 11. 38. Edie. Fol. [In spiritu & veritate Deus vult à nobis coli; nec hoc tempore requirit, quae rudi & carnali populo convenerunt, aut pueris sub tutelâ detentis, &c. Which with the rest following I shall give in the following translate. God will be worship∣ped by us in Spirit and in Truth; neither doth he at this day require those things which please the rude and carnal People, or Children detained under pupillage. Wherefore we must argue otherwise, if the outward Ornament of Priests under the old Law were so great, how much greater were the in∣ternal and spiritual accomplishments of Christ Jesus our High-Priest. If the Spouse of Solomon under the old Law was so gloriously adorned with Gold and Jewels; how much more should the Spouse of Christ, (Psal. 45. who is all glorious within) be beautified with all manner of virtues. If the Priests un∣der the old Law were clothed with known Garments: how much more should the Ministers of God under the Gospel, be adorned with a holy conversation (becoming Godliness) and with the knowledge of divine things. Let the Jesuites hearken to their Pope Coelestine in his 2d Epistle to the Bishops of France, Chapter the first: We are to be distinguisht from the people or others by Doctrine, not Garments; by conversation, not habit; by the purity of the mind, not clothing. For if we once begin to study Novelty we shall trample under foot our order delivered to us from our Fathers, that we may make room for superstitions: This is now done in the Popish Dominions. But certain∣ly this manner of arguing from the Vestments of the Aaronical Priest-hood either the Apostles were ignorant of, or they provided very ill for the Church; when as they themselves did not Minister holy things, being clothed in Gar∣ments dedicated to that use onely: neither have they instituted or commen∣ded it to be so done by others, &c. But we (saith Rivet) do commend an honest and convenient habit for Pastours; and, where the Church may meet freely, do think it comely that the Ministers of God do use that kind of Gar∣ment with modesty, which becomes Learned Men. Neither do we ap∣prove of their scrupulosity or rusticity that cannot bear it, that a Minister should ascend the Pulpit with a long Cloak, or Gowne. No doubt but Garments that are grave and sober, are most proper for persons engaged in so serious an employment as is the Gospel-Ministery. But when as Gideon's linnen Ephod (as he speaks) shall be imposed with mulcts and censures in case of neglect, though the conscience be never so weak and sincerely-tender of sinning against God: certainly such Impositions will become aJudg. 8.27. snare to all their house, that dare to bring in the reliques of Judaism; or for con∣ceited and affixed Mysteries to such kind of Vestments beyond others, will take away that Christian Liberty, which Christ hath purchased. Happy is the people that agree in the fundamental Principles of Doctrine; and hap∣py is that Church where the civil Magistrate shall put to his Sanction, like Asa,2 Chron. 14.4. Commanding Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law and the Commandment. When they shall, like2 Chron. 19.9. Johosaphat charge the Officers of Church and State, to act in the fear of the Lord faithful∣ly,
and with a perfect heart: or, like godly Hezekiah, Command the People to give a portion to the Priests and Levites, that they may be2 Chron. 31.4. encouraged in the Law of the Lord. Or lastly, like tender Josiah,2 Chron. 34.33. make all that are in their Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. That Magistrates may be like fencedIsa. 5.5. Walls round about the Vineyard of the Church. That Church shall never want errors, and those dangerous, that wants the fence of Discipline, and the wall of a godly, faithful, and zealous Magistracy: and that Church shall never want Rents and Schisms, breaches and disorders where Circumstantials are rigidly pressed, and where external niceties (wherein Saints thatCol. 2.19. hold the head may safely differ without breach of communion) are, with too warme and self-conceited a spirit, imperi∣ously urged upon the consciences of meek Brethren, who desire to walk in all the wayes of Holinesse,Psal. 35.20. Soberly, Righteously and Godlily, and to rest quiet in the Land: Yet doubtless union in externals is very beautiful, if it may be had. But that I may draw to a period of this discourse concerning the Priestly Vestments, on which I have so long insisted: It is sure somewhat worth our notice that there is no mention made of any shoos or sandals, or any such kind of covering for the feet of the Priests, who, in the cold of Winter, and heat of Summer, performed all their services barefoot. Indeed the Winter's cold was seldom vehement in that Climate: but the Summer's heat might be somewhat more offensive by reason of the stone-pavements, which might be very hot by the reflection of the Sun-beams. However it were, they were to officiate in this manner. The feet when covered are subject to contract filth by sweat: but possibly that of Moses his being unshod becauseExod. 3.5. the place was holy, may suit this our observation concerning the Temple. As the feet are sometimes in Scripture putEccles. 5.1. for the affections: sometimes for holy walking in the life and conversation: So ought the Gospel-Ministery to walk unblameably,Psal. 119.59. to have a conversation naked and open before the World, in all simplicity and godly sincerity; and thenRom. 10.15. Oh! how beauti∣ful are the feet of them that Preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tydings of good things. Having treated thus largely of the Vestures of the High-Priest, and the In∣feriors under him: It is high time to remove to the 3d and last thing hinted in the beginning of this Section, concerning the Consecration of this prime Officer of the Temple, together with the rest, his attendants, which con∣sisted principally in these 3 Ceremonial performances; Washing, Anointing, and Sacrificing; all distinctly laid down in the 8th Chapter of Leviticus: and thereof I shall treat very briefly in their order. First, We reade that theLev. 8.6. Priest was to be washed with water. So was Christ baptized with water,Mat. 3.16. and the Holy Spirit descended upon him, when he was initiated into this great work of his Ministry. So ought the sons of Aaron likewise, the Children of Christ (as he is sometimes pleased to call his Apostles and Disciples) they must be washed with the water of Re∣generation, if ever they expect to do great services for Christ. A Ministry baptized with the spirit of fire in their hearts, may through God be inabled to cast down the strong holds of Satan. 2dly, We read of the Priests Unction, first of the chief Priest,Lev. 8.12. verse the 12th, and after of the inferiors, vers. 30. Now here before I proceed, I would beg leave to speak a little to the ma∣terialls, and the composition of the holy anointing Oyl, because formerly o∣mitted in the History of the Temple. The ingredients and their quantities we read to be these:Exod. 30.23. Of pure myrrhe, 500 shekels, sweet Cinnamon 250, sweet Calamus 250. Cassia 500, and of Oyl-Olive
an Hin. Concerning the measures we have spoken before at large. As for these materials, there is no great difference among Expositors, worth the noting. All of them are designed to set forth the graces of the Spirit. But first a word of the several Species, or, as we translate them, Spices, in their order. 1.  mor derir, The myrrhe of liberty or freedom, that is, the Gumm which sweats freely out of the Tree of the same name: whereof Pliny treating in his 12th Book and 15th Chapter, tels us that the Gumm which comes naturally out of that Tree without incision, is called Stacte: whereof formerly. 2. The second is  Kinnemon, the name whereof is retained at this day, and commonly known. Concerning which the cited Authour speaks at large in the 19th Chapter of the same book, which I shall not transcribe at present. 3. The third is  Kene-Boshem, Calamus Aromaticus; The Seventy,  the sweet-scented Cane. I cannot say, 'tis the same which is called in shops, at this day, Acorus, the root whereof is used in aromatical mixtures. Of this, speaketh Matthiolus upon Dioscorides lib. 1. cap. 17. out of Pliny, Theophrastus, and others, manifesting its principal native place to be in Arabia, and that it is a sort of Reed of a very fragrant scent. The Prophet Jeremy speaking of Incense brought from Sheba adds, And the sweet Cane from a far Country;Jer. 6.20. which seems to be meant of the same place, being but an additional expression to Shebah. For so that Queen, who is related to have governed Sheba,1 Kin. 10.1. is by the Evan∣gelists reported to have come from a farr Country indeed, evenMat. 12.42. Luk. 11.31. the utter∣most parts of the Earth. 4. The fourth Ingredient is called  Kiddah: The Seventy translate it by , the Iris or sweet scented Flower de lice of Florence, whereof the Orice powder is made. But the general harmony of Interpreters carries it for the Cassia, a wood now in use, and easily wrested from Kiddah, seeing the Chaldee version turns the ד into צ in that word which they use for this Aroma,  it being counted but a Chaldaean deorsion of the same word: although now found from another root by Lexicographers. The Plant groweth in the same Countries where Cinnamon, saith Pliny in the forecited place, and is but three Cubits high, usually: It is called with us Cassia-lignea, being brought into our Country by our Asian Merhants, and and is indeed, when burned, of a most Aromaticall and fragrant Sa∣vour. 5. The last is Oyl-Olive, known to every one. But here it may seem somewhat strange that Balsame, (the peculiar rarity of Judaea, no other Country affording it besides, as many Authors write), the Prince of Oyles or Unguents (as the name imports) should be left out in this choise composition. Wherefore some have apprehended it to be concluded in the first words: for that which we translate, Principal Spices, the Hebrew terms  Beshamim Rosh, Aromata capitis, the spices of the head, that is the chief and most eminent. But because these words seem to be onely general terms, comprehensive of the particulars presently enume∣rated, therefore others have thought that the Balsame is couched under the name of free and pure Mirrhe. However it be this is evident, that the choi∣sest ingredients for such a composition are commanded by God, wherewith the Priests were to be anointed. But as to the spiritual signification of this Unction, we have the guidance of the Holy Spirit him self to direct us: who in the New Testament doth fre∣quently intimate, that the participation of his Gifts and Graces, is thereby
shadowed forth to us. The High Priest upon the account of this legal Un∣ction is called  the Messiah:Lev. 8.3, 5. and by the Seventy in the 3d verse , and in the 5th , Christus, the anointed: clearly hinting to us our Gospel-High-Priest, the Lord Jesus Christ, the true Messiah or A∣nointed of the Father, with thePs. 45.7. Oyl of gladnesse above his fellowes; which place is , distinctly and expresly applied unto our Lord and Saviour, in theHeb. 1.9. Epistle to the Hebrews. The glorious Antitype of David, beingPsal. 89.20. anointed King as well as Priest of his Church: The same person, the A∣postle Peter asserts to have beenAct. 10.38. anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power. Nay, all the people of God, who areRev. 1.6. Priests and Kings unto God, are2 Cor. 1.21. anointed with the same Spirit. The ancient Unction was externalPs. 133.2. upon the head of Aaron, and ran down upon the beard, and went down to the skirts of his Garments. The Gospel Unction is internal, which we1 Joh. 2.20, 27. have received from the holy One, and abideth in us; the same anointing teacheth us all things, and is truth. Precious and excellent were the mixtures of that ancient Oyl: What par∣ticular Gifts or Graces each might signify, I leave to others; being certain of this, thatIsa. 11.2. the Spirit of the Lord did rest upon Christ, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowedge, and of the fear of the Lord: and it is of this HisJoh. 1.16. fulnesse that we have re∣ceived, even Grace for Grace. This Unction was administred by measure to Aaron in a certain weight of sweets and a Hin of Oyl Olive:Exod. 30.24. Joh. 3.34. but God gave not the Spirit by measure un∣to Christ. But unto every one of us is given Grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Eph. 4.7. And when all the Graces of the Spirit do hold communion together in a Saint's duty, as the several Ingredients of this Unction in one composition, then are duties most fragrant. With this Unction were all the Vessels of the Sanctuary to be anointed, to signify to us, that all religious exercises and Ordinances under the Gospel, are no further useful and beneficial then as they are perfumed with the secret and most precious operation of the Holy Spirit, through whom we are made par∣takers of Christ's holinesse, and haveEph. 2.18. accesse with holy boldnesse to the Throne of Grace. The last thing in the consecration of Priests was Sacrificing, whereof may be read at large in the 8th Chapter of Leviticus. The blood of the Sacrifice being sprinkled upon them; To note, that the Office, Calling, and Executi∣on of the service of Gospel-Ministers are all sanctified by the blood of Christ. The Lord Jesus died to purchase a Gospel-Ministry; his precious blood consecrates and sets them apart to that excellent function. Oh how dreadful a sin is it, for vile wretches to trample upon and scorn that Office which was dedicated by the blood of Christ? who, when ascended up on high,Ps. 68.18. received Gifts for men. He gave not onelyEph. 4.8, 12. Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists; but Pastors and Teachers also, for the perfecting of Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. For how long time? Till we all come in the unity of the Faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the ful∣nesse of Christ. The Gospel-Ministry, anointed by God, and consecrated by the blood of Christ, and receiving gifts by the benefit of Christ's ascension, is (we hence learn) to continue till all the Members of Christ's mystical body are gathered into one, which work will not be compleatly finished till the end of the world. For some Saints shall remain alive at the second coming of our Lord,1 Thes. 4.15. &c. when he himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, &c. Then those which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together, &c. in the Clouds
to meet the Lord in the aire, and so shall they ever be with the Lord, who had promised at his ascension to be with his Ministers alwayes,Mat. 28.20 even unto the end of the World. The High-Priest among the Jews was consecrated with blood, he needed Sacrifice for his sins: but our High-Priest is holy, harmlesse, undefiled,Heb. 7.26. Ver. 24. sepa∣rate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens; he continueth for ever, and hath an unchangeable Priest-hood. He was without sin, and there∣fore the Sacrifice of himself, whereby he was consecrated to all his glorious Offices, was to make entrance for others into the holiest, by his blood, in a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us.Heb. 10.20. Joh. 17.19. Heb. 10.14. For their sakes he did [] dedicate and sanctify himself, that they might be sanctified through the Truth: For by one Offering hath he perfect∣ed for ever them that are sanctified. On this excellent subject I might enlarge amply: but considering there are yet several things behind in the two last Sections of this Chapter, which refer somewhat to this point: I shall speak but a word or two of the other Temple-Officers, and come to the close of this 4th Section. Having spoken thus much concerning the Priests, Let me in brief hint at the rest, and I shall conclude. They were the Levites and Nethinims, whereof at large in the former sto∣ry of the Temple. The Levites according to four distinct charges were divided into Singers, Porters, Judges, and Treasurers, Here some might expect possibly, that I should assigne to each of these some distinct Church-Offices under the Gospel. But I shall not loe time and offend the sober with such niceties. I know that several of the Ancients, as Jerom,Prudent. . hymn. 3. p. edit. Hanov. 1613. Rein. adv. Hart. 84. p. 463. Prudentius, and others, do assign the Deacons Office, under the Gospel, to the Levites of old. I confesse, the work of the Gospel-Deacon mentioned by Luke, in the first designation of their Office, is toAct. 6.1, 2. serve Ta∣bles, and to look after the daily ministration to the poor: as there were a∣mong the Levites anciently Treasurers, that managed the disbursements of the Temple. But of these and other inferiour Officers, as Hewers, and Drawers, though some may conceit a parallel betwixt them and inferiour ser∣vants of the Church: yet I rather referr them to the Grandeur and Pomp of the ancient Temple, which needed many servitors and attendants, in respect to the great and arduous imployments of Sacrifices, and all the  and services of that ancient Worship. If any shall bring more light into the world concerning these things, con∣formable to Scripture, and the dictates of the holy Spirit, I shall rejoyce to light my dimm Lamp at their more splendid and radiant Luminaries: being desirous in the mean while to be a Door-keeper of the House of God, rather then to dwell in the Tents of wickednesse.
SECT. V. The Services of the Temple spiri∣tualized. THis Section I shall divide into two Paragraphs, according to the preceding History, and speak very briefly to each: because this would require a large Volume of it self, if compleatly and fully handled: and therefore I shall but succinctly touch at things in this following method and order. 1. Of the several Services and Solemnities according to stated times. 2. Of the various Sacrifices, with several attendant Rites and Ceremo∣nies. As to the first particular, the Services may be distinguished into such as were constant without intermission, or such as fell out in their several appoin∣ted stations and periods. The constant Service was that of the Porters in watching at the Temple-gates, night and day. Blessed is the man (saith Wisdom)Prov. 8.34. that heareth me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors. Happy are they that, like holy Anna, depart not from the TempleLuke 2.37. but serve God with fast∣ing and prayer, night and day. Such as wait for the consolation of Israel and look for Redemption in Jerusalem, shall have their expectations satisfied with the marrow and fatnesse of his House. The daily Service of the Temple was the Juge Sacrificium, the daily Sa∣crifice of a Lamb, morning and evening. Which hinted at the constant and daily approaches of the People of God to the Throne of Grace, night and day. The Lamb signified Christ,Joh 1.29. taking away the sins of the World, who is re∣presented in the Revelation-Visions as aRev. 5.6, 12. slain Lamb, slain fromRev. 13.8. Tertull. de pudiciti p. 475. Edit. Par. Tom. 2. 1566. Heb. 13.20. the foundation of the World, in all the Sacrifices of the ancient Patriarchs and of the Jewish Paedagogy. To note, that all our prayers and addresses to God must be put up in the name of this holy Lamb of God, if ever we expect to find acceptation at the door of heaven. Tertullian mentions the ingraving on the Cups of the Primitive Christians, the figure of a Shepheard carrying a Lamb on his shoulders; He that was the Lamb of God was slain, that he might rise from the dead [an ] a Chief-Shepheard to carry his poor Lambs, some in his bosome, some on his shoulders, to heaven. We in our daily Sacrifices must look up to this Lamb, as onely able to carry a∣way all the defilement of our prayers, and reader us as unspotted before the Father through his mediation.
The weekly service was on the Sabbath or seventh day; and therein the Sacrifices were doubled, to set forth a more extraordinary service unto God in the publick Ordinances on that day under the Christian dispensation. As for the change of the day from the seventh to the first day of the week, it is not my work to handle that controversy here: But whoso pleaseth to be set∣led and confirmed in the truth about this matter, may consult that Learned and Judicious Treatise of Mr. Herbert Palmer, and Mr. Daniel Cawdry, who have given a Supersedeas to other mens labours in that particular, where they may receive abundant satisfaction, who are capable of rational arguments and clear proofs from Scripture, and the practise of all the primitive Churches. Besides, this Sabbath, we are now upon,Heb. 4.9. might shadow the eternal Sabba∣tism of rest, which our spiritual Joshua or Jesus will bring his people to, at the great day. The Monthly service was performed on every New-Moon; which might signify the Churches renovation and reformation. The Church hath her spots and vicissitudes, Eclipses, and various Aspects, while here below. Yet, when at the full of her Glory, all is but by a bor∣rowed light from Christ the Gospel-Sun, she being fair as the Moon,Cant. 6.10. and per∣fect through his comlinesse, Ezek. 16.14. Under the Gospel she is clo∣thedRev. 12.1. with the Sun, and hath the Moon (all the Jewish festivals) under her feet. The Annual Festivities follow, and none must come to them empty hand∣ed, but bring Vitulum petulantiae; Bovem superbiae, Arietem luxuriae, Tho. A-kemp. par. 1. pag. 119. The Calfe of Petulancy, the Oxe of Pride, the Ram of Luxury. First, The Passeover, which signified God's passing us over for the sake of Christ, and bringing us out of spiritual Egypt. Christ1 Cor. 5.7. Cloppenb. p. 142. & 144. our Passeover be∣ing sacrificed for us. For as it was in the Paschal Lamb, so in Christ was it verified, () a bone of his was not broken. As the Paschal Lamb was slain in the Evening; so Christ died in the Evening,Joh. 19.36. Mat. 27.46. about the ninth hour of the day. If we divide the day ofJoh. 11.9. twelve hours (according to the compu∣tation of those times, they being unequal houres according to the various length of daies throughout the year) into four parts, then our Lord's death falling out about the ninth hour of the day, his passion was finished about the end of three fourths, or in the Evening, answering about Easter, (in that year when as the Sun was in a vernal signe, past the Equinoxe) to our After∣noon between three and four of the clock, as we terme it. Furthermore, ac∣cording to the Rabbinical account of the World's duration, for the space of 6000 years (whereof I have given a hint before): Our Lord dying in the 4000th year of the World, by the computation of Bishop Ʋsher, and other exact Computators; as he finished his life by dying for sinners in the end of the Jewish Paedagogy, so came it to passe also in the approaching Evening of the World. Nay, in the times presently succeeding, James told them thatJam. 5.9. the Judge was then at the door, and generally throughout the Epistles, Gospel-daies are called theHeb. 1.2. last daies: The1 Cor. 10.11. Dr. Whita∣ker de Sacra∣mentis pag. 109. Edit. Francof. 1654. ends of the World being come upon us. Some there be who conceived that the Passeover did typify and praefigure the Sacrament of our Lord's Supper, wherein the soul of a Believer feeds upon Christ, the Lamb of God. But doubtlesse, in the main the Scripture doth therein point at Christ.
The Sacraments of both Testaments do hold forth the Lord Jesus: the for∣mer look forward upon him, as being not yet come, the latter look backward upon him, as being already come: For hereby we1 Cor. 11.26. shew forth the Lord's death till he come, that is, in his last and most glorious Advent, to deliver his people and to judge the World of the ungodly. The next Annual festivity was the Feast of first-fruits, or Feast of weeks, being celebrated fifty daies after the Israelites coming out of Egypt, and therefore is called in the New-Testament,Act. 20, 16. Pentecost. At the first Pente∣cost in the wildernesse, was the Law given by Moses. In the last Jewish Pen∣tecost was theAct. 2.1. Holy Ghost given to the Apostles at Jerusalem: and then the first-fruits of the Gospel were offered up to God through Jesus Christ by that miraculous conversion ofAct. 2.41. 3000 souls by the Sermon of Peter. Which was the earnest of the great Harvest to follow in the whole world. The Feasts of the seventh moneth were these: 1. The blowing ofLev. 23.24. Trumpets on the first day of the seventh moneth, and might hint at the preaching of the Gospel most clearly in the latter end of the world, as some apprehend. The Fast of Expiation on the tenth day of the seventh moneth, was a most clear presignification of our blessed Lord'sCrames. expiating for sin.Ribera, p. 339. Some appre∣hend that this and other Fasts among the Jews, might denote the solemn fa∣stings for sin under the Gospel, the denial of our selves, taking up the Cross of Christ, and the constant study of the mortification ofGal. 5.24. the flesh and all the lusts thereof. The Feast of Tabernacles, as it reflected backward on the JewsLev. 23.42. dwel∣ling in Booths in the Wildernesse; so it looked forward likewise on the state and condition of Christians, while travelling thorough the wilderness of this World, that we are but strangers in this Earth,1 Chron. 29.15. as all our Fathers were. Our dayes flee away like a shadow, we have here no abiding City. The Lord himself alone isJerom. Tom. 6. in Zach. p. 347. cum solice. Psalm 90.1. the dwelling place of Saints in all generations, as holy Moses speaks of himself and the children of Israel, while wandring in the howling Desart of Sinai. Wherefore Abraham and all the Blessed Patri∣archs dwelt in Tents,Heb. 11.14, 15, 16. plainly declaring, that they sought a Country which is Heavenly. To which God of his infinite mercy bring us through the pro∣pitiatory blood of theHeb. 13.20. Great Shepheard of the sheep, the Lord Jesus whom he raised from the dead. On the seventh day of this great Feast of Tabernacles, there was offered the smallest number of Sacrifices: to note the declining of that antient legal and Ceremonial Worship,Shering∣ham in Co∣dicem Jo∣ma. p. 39. and that a more perfect sacrifice was ready to be in∣troduced in their room. Besides the presignification of some Gospel-Excellencies by these Feasts; It is noted by a learned Man, that there was a reason for their celebration among the Jews, referring to the impetration of some particular blessings upon the Earth, according to the several seasons of the Year wherein they were solem∣nized. There was an offering of the quantity of a Homer given up at the Pass∣over to beg a blessing on the Harvest. The first-fruits they offered up at Pente∣cost to obtain a blessing on the fruits of their trees: at the Feast of Taberna∣cles they1 Sam. 7.6. powred out water to beg the blessing of Rain upon the Earth, it being then the seed-time in the land of Judea. These Waters were drawn out of the Fountain of Shiloah. Whence it is that the Evangelical Prophet
complains of the Jews that they refused theIsa. 8.6. waters of Shiloah, that go soft∣ly, not trusting in Gods gracious promise that he made to King Ahaz of the true Shiloah, He that was to be sent to them, the Messiah:Isa. 7.14. which was given as a firm word for him to rest upon against the Kings of Israel and Syria. For it was plain, that the Race of David should continue till the coming of that Immanuel, who was to be born of a Virgin; and therefore the enemies should not prevail to extinguish the Royal Race of Judah. Hence is it, that our blessed Lord alluding to this Libation or powring out of Waters at the Feast of the Tabernacles, cryes out, in the last and great day of the Feast,John 7.37. that they should come to him as the true Fountain of Shiloah that gives forth living waters: which thing he spake concerning the Spirit. For he that believeth on him, as the Scripture saith, (that is, he whose Faith is grounded on Scripture-promi∣ses: for we are not to understand that Text of any citation, there being no such place extant), out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living-waters. i. e. There shall be within him a Heavenly spring of Grace, that shall flow into the Ocean of Glory. The Heathen had an apish imitation of this great Festivity,Plut. Thes. gr. p. 19. Edit. 1. Steph. 80. Plut. Romul. p. 66. gr. Aedit. H. Steph. as Plutarch re∣members in the life of Theseus, that the Athenians had their  in me∣mory of the deliverance of their City by Theseus and to implore a blessing on the fruits of the earth, and moreover concerning the Romans at set times dwel∣ling under Fig-trees, as the same Author hath recorded in the life of Romu∣lus, and in the fourth of his Symposiacks, mentioning this Feast, foolishly compares it with the Heathenish Feast of Bacchus, qu. 5. Here, before I conclude, give me leave to treat a while upon the Conje∣cture of some persons, who conceive the 3 solemn Festivals celebrated a∣mong the Christians to have been pre-exemplified in those 3 Eminent Feasts of the Jews. The birth of our Saviour, answering to the Feast of Tabernacles. For so a very Learned man of our Nation, and others, viz. Beroaldus,Mede Vol. 1. p. 618. Scaliger and Calvisius conceive, and seem to prove it by good arguments, that our Saviour was born in September, the time answering to the Feast of Tabernacles. Our blessed Lord when brought forth into the light of this world according to his humane Nature did then, , make his Tabernacle with men. And so for the other, that Easter and Whitsontide did resemble the Passo∣ver and Pentecost. But I shall not lay stress upon these things. That which is somewhat more material for such as do sacredly observe these Festivals, to consider, is this: That at this present day we have utterly lost the true time of the celebration of them; and truly a great part of the devotion is there∣by extinguisht. For as to the usual and common solemnization of the Nativity of Christ: though we should grant (contrary to the sense of Mr. Mede and several learn∣ed Authors) that our Lord was born on the 25 of December, between 1600. and 1700 years ago: yet it may be evident to all that will seriously weigh the Truth, that we are now several dayes distant, from the supposed time and point of his birth. For if so be the motion of the Sun from one fixed point, suppose the first degree of Aries through the Zodiack to the same point again, be comprehen∣ded within this space of time, viz. of 365 dayes, 5 hours, 49. minutes, and 4 seconds: and other odd scruples not worth naming in this Computation, According to Bullialdus, or, as Longomontanus, 365 d. 5 h. 48 min. 55 se∣conds, Long. l. 1. Theor. c. 5. p. 2227. and other eminent Astronomers; Then there will fall out 11 min. (letting passe the 2 seconds) to be reserved every year for a Calculation of certain hours, yea and dayes at last, wherein the Ju∣lian
year will transcend the true state of the Sun's mensuration. For they re∣serve every year 6 compleat hours to make a day for the Bissextile-year being every fourth in order, which doth not precisely agree with the Sun. For it ex∣ceeds by 4 times 11 minutes, which every fourth year arises to 44′. Or to speak more precisely:Buliald. Astronom. Phololaic. ed Par. 1645. l. 2. c. 3. p. 68. The Tropical year according to exact Computation is determined to consist of 365 dayes, 5 hours 49′. 4″. 21‴. 3''''. which fals short of 6 houres by 10′. 55″. 38‴. 57''''. in every year. Now if we com∣pute to the present vulgar year of our Lords Incarnation 1659: These scru∣ples will arise to 11 dayes, 13 hours, 58 min. 40″. 41‴. 3''''. Wherein the celebration of this Festivity ought to anticipate the 25 of December in our common Julian year, and ought to be celebrated almost 12 dayes before our ordinary time. As to which who is so ignorant as not to know that therefore the Pontificians do according to the Gregorian Emendation precede us by 10 dayes, in their account which is called the New Style? But they went no higher than the time of the Nicene Council in the correction of the year, and so fell short in this point of the true time. The reason why they went no higher, I leave for them to give. As for the celebration of Easter, it is not unknown to such as are but mo∣derately versed in Ecclesiastical History, what stirs there have been in the Church in the 5th. 6th. and 7th. Centuries &c. between the Greeks and the Latines: nay, in our Brittain, between the Scots and the Saxons, as appearsBede Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 2. & l. 4. c. 5. & l. 2. c. 22. by the Writings of venerable Bede. The Christians studying to con∣form the time of its celebration to the season of the Jewish Passover. What laborious Tables, Calendars and Canons were framed by Victorius, Hippoly∣tus, Anatolius, Dionysius, Exiguus, and many others. Whereby it comes to passe, that this Festival does so vary every year according to that Sabhath which follows the full Moon next after the vernal-Equinoxe. Whereas seeing the design of the Christians was therein to commemorate the time of our Lords Resurrection: If they would have kept the exact time, they should have considered what day of the year he arose, and what time of the morning of that day as near as may be to Scripture, and by the best Rules have found out the Sun's place exactly in the Zodiack, and when the Sun did Return unto that point in every year, to celebrate it accordingly.Lang. de Annis Christi. p. 415. l. 2. c. 8. Lan∣gius, a learned and laborious Calculator of Scripture-times hath stated the Resurrection of our Lord in the 4746 the year of the Julian period. In the 4th. year of the 202d. Olympiad, the Cycl. ☉ 14, of the ☽ 15. the Indicti∣on 6. and on the 5th. of April according to the Julian Calendar, in the 33d. year from his birth according to our common Computation. The Ae∣quinoxe in those dayes fell out about the 22 of March, and so the Sun will be found in the 14 of Aries upon the 5th. of April at noon in the Meridian of Jerusalem: or, to come nearer the point, having examined it by Calculation out of the late corrected Tables, I find the ☉ to have been in ♈. 13°. 27′. 25″. in the noon of the Resurrection-day, agreeing commonly with the 23 of our March. By which in any good Ephemeris, every one may judge how far the present Celebration of this annual Festivity, errs from the Truth, and consequently that of Pentecost, which depends upon this. But I have insisted too long on these things. I shall concludeRom. 14.6. That he who regardeth the day, saith holy Paul, regardeth it unto the Lord, and he that re∣gardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it. As for these things, as Paul1 Cor. 7.25. said in another case, we have no commandment of the Lord. But of such as endeavour to conform themselves to Jewish Feasts, the Apostle may say as of the Galatians:Gal. 4.10. Ye observe dayes, and times, and months, and years: I am affraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain. But in this point how far Ecclesiastical Sanctions have power and Authority over Chri∣stian
liberty in matters of indifferency, I leave to the decision of able, grave, learned and holy men. But yet however, whoso do incline to keep these times, certainly they cannot but think their devotion and zeal to be much cooled by the false assignation of the time of their celebration. Having thus briefly hinted at the principal Jewish Festivals: I shall come to the second thing proposed in the beginning of this Section touching the va∣rious sacrifices wih their Appendancies. Which, that they did portend and pre∣signifie the great and only satisfactory sacrifice of the Lord Jesus, is granted by all sober persons, any thing versed in the comparison of the two Testa∣ments: For so the Spirit of God testifies expresly concerning him, when he is brought in by an Elegant Prosopopoeia, speaking to the Father on this wise:Psalm 40.6. Heb. 10.5, &c. 1 Pet. 2.24. Burnt offering and sacrifice for sin hast thou not required, but a Body hast thou prepared me. Implying, that all the legal Offerings were in themselves of no validity, only so far as the Offerer did look through them with an eye of Faith upon the Lord our Saviour, who bore our sins in his own Body up∣on the Tree. The chief and principal scope of all those ancient Services, was to bring near to the view of their Faith, the apprehension of Christs meritorious suf∣ferings for penitent sinners. Now as there were various creatures offered: so each of them held forth some excellent quality in our Lord. The Heifer a laborious creature might signifie his labour and constancy in the great work which he undertook for mankind: and, because used for the tillage of the ground withDiod. Sic. Ed. H. Steph. p. 73. incessant and industrious pains, it was con∣secrated by the Heathens to Osiris the Inventor of Fruits and Corn. He was most exceeding laborious and painful in the sowing the seed of the Gos∣pel of the Kingdom. The Lamb noted his meeknesse,1 Pet. 2.23. There being no guile found in his mouth, who when reviled, reviled not again, but committed himself to him who judgeth righteously. As a Lamb he opened not his mouth,Isa. 53.7. but was dumb before the shearer. He was the Lamb slain,Rev. 13.8. from the foundation of the world, not only in respect of the Eternal decree of God, and the vertue of his death, reaching even to the beginning of the world, but in respect also of those Ty∣pical Shadows, wherein among the rest there were Lambs offered up to God. For so we read of Abel, that in the beginning of the world, he offered of theGen. 4.4. firstlings of the flock, and of the fat thereof. The Goat or Kid, a lively and vivacious creature, might hold out to us the alacrity and cheerfulnesse of his Spirit in that great and admirable kindnesse of his to dye for sinners. The Dove his Chastity, Innocency, Purity. Wherefore our Lord bids his Disciples to be innocent orMat. 10.16. harmlesse as Doves. Nay, the eyes of Christ are compared to theCant. 5.12. eyes of Doves. The Turtle; a mourning, lonely, meditating creature, to shew himIsa. 53.3. a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, whoLuke 19.41. wept over the Daughters of Jerusalem, and was grieved for their hardnesse of heart. These Creatures, though so often and in such multitudes offered up to God,Mar. 3.5. were not of themselves in the least measure available to the expiation of
sin, what commensuration can there be stated betwixt the demerit of the sins of rational beings, and the offering up of poor brute Creatures? wherefore some of the wiser Heathens whether they received it by tradition from some of the Families of the faithful, who as Esau, Moab and Ammon, Ishmael, &c. swerved from the true Worship: or whether some of them, as Socrates, Plato, &c. in their travels into Judaea and Egypt, had it by converse with the true Priests of the most high God, or gathering it from the remaining glim∣merings of natural light by speculation and contemplation, I shall not dis∣cusse; have declared to the World, that no sacrifice could expiate for the sin of man, but man himself. For so Caesar treating of the ancient Gauls, affirms, that they used the service of the Druides, to offer up men in sacrifice,Caesar Comment de bell. Gall. l. 6. Quod pro vitâ hominis nisi vita hominis reddatur, non posse aliter Deorum immortalium numen placari arbitrantur. Supposing, unless the life of man were sacrificed for his life, that the Deity of the immortal Gods could not otherwise be ap∣peased. But as touching those horrid heathenish rites in the sacrificing of men, I shall speak no more, referring that discourse to Diodorus Sicul. in his 5th Book, and 32 Section, to Strabo, lib. 4. p. 198. To Pliny, lib. 30. cap. 1. Porphyr. de Abstinent. p. 224. And Homer, whoHomer Il. ψ v. 175. mentions Achilles his slaughtering of twelve Trojan youths at the Funeral of Patroclus and others,Zepper de leg. mos. p. 265. who make mention of several fearful and prodigious actions of the Hea∣thens in these matters. Alas poor Creatures, so miserably tyrannized over by the Devil, through his Serpentine perswasions (when he appeared to them, and spake through the mouths of their Idols) they were put upon the perpe∣tration of such direful murthers, nay even sometimes of their own Children: which Gods Majesty did so highly abominate and detest, as the way of the Heathen, whom the Land of Canaan had spewed out. There is but one sacrifice of a man, which can be acceptable and pleasing to God, even the Man Christ Jesus, who being delivered by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God,Act. 2.23. Act. 7.52. Psal. 40.7. Phil. 2.8. the Jews did take, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. That just one, of whom they were the betrayers and murderers: whom it behoved to come (according as it was written of him in the Volume of the Fathers Book) to do the will of God, being obedient thereunto, even to the death of the Crosse. Of which glorious Sacrifice, the Heathens in those their tremendous rites forementioned might seem to have had some dark and obscure conception, though most horribly corrupted by the subtle and most hellish insinuations of Satan. To which purpose very me∣morable is that discourse of Acinous with his Phaeacians (in Homer) assuring them, that the Gods did meditate some such admirable thing, as the sending down one of their Company from Heaven, and gives this in as a reason of his apprehension. Odys. 11. v. 201. &c. . For the Gods (saith he) do alwayes before hand manifestly appear to us, when we sacrifice splendid Hecatombes: moreover, they do feast with us, sit∣ting by us. Plutarch also in a Book concerning Homer, ascribed by some to him, sayes, that the Gods do not onely confer together about men, but de∣scend also upon the Earth, and converse with them: which assertion he mani∣fests to have bin the opinion of Homer, (whom he there greatly magnifies for his knowledge in all divine and humane speculations) by producing some passages out of his Poems to confirm it.
But to return to the work in hand, I shall conclude this Discourse with that saying of the great Bishop of Hippo:Austin. Contr. Faust. Manicc. l. 20. cap. 21. Col. 376. Edit. Bas. 1569. Tom. 6. [Hoc interest inter Sacrificia Paga∣norum & Hebraeorum, quantum inter imitationem errantem & praefigurationem praenunciantem.] There is as great a difference between the Sacrifices of the Pagans and the Hebrews, as there is betwixt an erroneous imitation and a ty∣pifying prefiguration. But blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, that we are now guided by the infallible dictates of the Spirit of Grace, who hath acquainted us, that the antient Sacrifices did foreshew the grand and un∣speakably glorious Offering of Christ. For they all ceased at the Ascension of Christ, which is the Argument of their being but Shadows, that were to cease at the appearance of the Substance. So doth the blessed Apostle Ar∣gue clearly in his Epistle to the Hebrews, and out of himOrig. p. 125. Homil. 3. in Levitic. Origen, and gene∣rally all both Antient and Modern, that I have as yet had the Happinesse to peruse upon this Subject, unlesse such as have drunk deep of the poysonous dregs of Socinianism. All those carnal Ordinances (for so the Apostle termes them) were to continue onlyHeb. 9.10. , till the season of Reformation, when their obscure conceptions should be cleared, their crooked apprehensions recti∣fied, in the taking away of all those worldly and beggerly Elements, in compari∣son with the Sacrifice of Christ, who was the beginning of the new Heavens, and the new Earth, by the Substitution of a Gospel frame of spiritual Worship in the room of all those antient Ceremonies. So that what was spoken by the Prophet Esay in the Name of God respecting the hypocrisie of the Jews in their worship, may be now spoken positively of the very Worship it self, since the Offering up of Christ to the Father.Isa. 1.13. Bring no more vain Oblati∣ons, Incense is an abomination to him; the new Moons and Sabboths (that is, of the seventh day, seventh year, &c.) the calling of Assemblies he cannot away with, it is iniquity; even the solemn meeting. Their New Moons and appointed Feasts his soul hateth; they are a trouble to him: he is weary to bear them. This is the time, even after the apparition of Christ in the flesh, wherein God will cause toHos. 2.11. cease all the Feast-dayes of Judaes, her New Moons, her Sabboths, and all her Solemn Feasts. When theDan. 9.26. Messiah shall be cut off, not for himself, the City shall be destroyed, and the Sanctuary: and he shall confirm the Covenant with many, and shallVers. 27. cause Sacrifice and Oblation to cease. After the dissolution of the ancient Sanctuary, whenVers. 25. Messiah the Prince shall build the walls of the New, spiritu∣al Jerusalem, Then from the rising of the Sun, even to the going down of the same, the Name of God shall be great even among the Gentiles, and inMal. 1.11. every place Incense shall be offered unto his Name, and a pure Offering, &c. Then shall the people of God in the seven Asian Churches be made Kings and Priests by Christ unto God and his Father.Rev. 1.6. & 5.10. To whom be glory and do∣minion for ever and ever. Now, praier is not the more acceptable, because within the Precincts and limits of a holy Temple: But 'tis the will of God, that men pray h 1 Tim. 2.8.every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubt∣ing. God hath promised to gatherIsa. 66.18. all Nations and Tongues to come and see his glory, and they shall bring the Jews as anVers. 20. Offering to the Lord, even to to his holy mountain at Jerusalem.Isa. 19.19. An Altar shall be erected to the Name of the Lord in the Land of Aegypt, and the Lord of Hosts shall blesse, saying,Vers. 25. Blessed be Aegypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine Inheritance. The Burnt-Offerings ofIsa. 56.7. strangers shall be then accepted upon Gods Altar. For his House shall be called a House of Prayer for all peo∣ple. The Gentiles shall come into the light of the Church, and Kings to the brightness of her rising.Isa. 60.3, 6, 7. The Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah, all they from Shebah shall come, and bringing Gold and Incense, shall shew forth the praises of the Lord. All the Flocks of Kedar, and the Rams of Nebajoh shall
come up with acceptance on Gods Altar.Zeph. 3.10. His Suppliants shall draw nigh to him from beyond the Rivers of Ethiopia (which placeFulgent. 2. lib. ad moni∣mum. p. 85. Bas. 80. 1587. Fulgentius parti∣cularly expounds of spiritual Sacrifices.)Zech. 14.16, 17, 21. All Nations, and all the Families of the earth must go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to keep the Feast of Tabernacles. Every pot shall be holy, and all that come to Sacrifice shall seeth therein. Then shall theMal. 3.4, 1. Offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the daies of old; after the Mes∣senger of the Covenant should be come into the Temple of his body, when the Aaronical PriesthoodHebr. 7.12. should be dissolved, and a change made of the Law. Je∣rusalem the holy City, shall never be more a singular place toJoh. 4.12. worship in: Nor Jewish Feasts, the Seasons, for they shallGal. 4.9, 10 &c. be disannul'd. Neither shall Sacrifice, properly and strictly so called, be ever anyHeb. 10 2 more offered to God as gratefull and acceptable. For weHeb. 13.10. have now an Altar to eat off, which they have no right to, who serve the Tabernacle. The Priests of old offered up the souls of irrational creatures: But now the case is altered (saiesPie. Mi∣rand. Tom. 1. p. 54. Mirandula) For Michael our Prince and Priest doth offer our rational souls to God. His Majesty will not be so served now, as in former times, he expects we should now serve and worship himJoh 4.23. in Spirit and Truth.Col. 2 17. In Spirit without Ceremo∣nies and external typifying Ordinances: In Truth, without Shadows. The Jews presented God carnal Sacrifices, with spiritual significations annexed to them, and couched under them. We must give unto God spiritual services, apart from theAct. 15.10. unsupportable yoke of numerous Ceremonies.Rain. a∣gainst Hart. p 491, 493. They are not to be en∣dured in Gods worship: They savour of a Jewish, carnal, childish spirit. It's commonly observable, that those of a Popish strain and temper, that are highly rigid, and severely tenacious of multitudes of Ceremonies in Gods service, either deduced from some among the Jews, or others among the Heathens, and blend∣ed together with some new inventions, of their own innovation, are usually re∣miss in holy and close walking with God, and are the greatest persecutors of the Saints, as we see at this day in the Popedome. PaulGal. 1.13, 14. when most zealous of the traditions of his Fathers, then persecuted he the Church out of measure, and wasted it. It's a manifest sign of mans departure from uprightness,Eccl. 7.29. when he seeks out many inventions. This being then evident, that after the coming of Christ, and his meritorious Passion, all ceremonial worship annexed to Sacrifices, and other Injunctions of God to the Jews, were absolutely to determine. Let us see then what those Sa∣crifices did principally hold forth. Now here I shall desire first to speak somewhat in general, and then descend to some particular Sacrifices with their appendices, and so conclude this Section. Several Names are given to Sacrifice in Scripture: as first,  Mincha, Gen. 4.4. not only to that ofMat. 5.23. & 23.18, 19. Cains offering of the fruit of the ground, but to that of Abels, which was of the firstlings of his flock. The word is derived from  to bring, and signifies therefore an Offering or Oblation of what kind so∣ever it be; but most generally it is taken for the meat-Offering. This the 70 in the 4 vers. turn by , a gift: and so 'tis frequently rendred in the New Testament, and sometimesHeb. 5.1. & 8.3, 4. & 9.9. distinct from , a Sacrifice. Sometimes the 70 themselves turn it by , as Gen. 4.3. Exo. 29.41. &c. by , Ps. 40 6. Another term among the Hebrews for Sacrifice, is , Zebach, from a verb of the same radicalls, signifying to slay, (whence Avenartus would deduce the Greek word .) The 70 commonly translate it by  and , much to the same purpose. Another word for Offerings is , Korban, and comes from  to draw nigh and is used in the Levitical Law forLev. 1.2. Sacrifices of the Herd and Flock, and is in the New Testament used in very termesMar. 7.11. retaining the word, and adding the signification. Some Sacrifices are , propitiatory, o∣thers , gratulatory. Propitiatory Sacrifices were to obtain pardon and atonement for sin, and they were alwaies to be with blood,Heb. 9.22. for without
blood was no remission; and therefore Cains Sacrifice was not so acceptable, (although the naughtiness of his heart was mainly lookt at) because he offered the fruits of the earth, which were only to be Offered in Peace Offerings and Thanks-givings. But Abel Offered a bloody Sacrifice, looking at Christ byHeb. 11.4. Faith, and so was accepted of God. The blood of those Beasts could not make the Conscience clean: but as the Offerer was received into reconciliati∣on with God by virtue of that Sacrifice of Christ, who Offered up himselfRom. 6.10. Heb. 7.27. & 92.1. & 10.10. , once for all sins, and instead of all the Ancient Sacrifices. In the blood of these Beasts there wasHeb. 10.3. & 9.7. , a constant remembrance of sins, and therefore reiterated, because they could not blot out sin; but God hath nowCol. 2.14. blotted out the hand writing of Ordinances that was against us: The Blood of Christ hath expunged and extinguisht all the terrible cur∣ses of the Law against us for our sinnes. The Blood of Beasts could never do it, but for the time present, during that Oeconomy or dispensation, God was pleased to accept of the remembrance of Christs Death in the Typicall slaying of the Beasts, to all that looked unto him through the Covenant. But now, That all the faithfull among the Jews who wereRev. 7.4. sealed and re∣ceived to Heaven on the account of Christ, had an actuall and clear view of the Messiah, and could pierce through those vailes and shadows, and behold the Saviour to dye for sin, afarre off, I will not assert. But that many of the Ancient Patriarchs did look at Christ in their Sacrifices, seems moderate∣ly clear and evident. AbrahamJoh. 8.56. saw Christs day and rejoyced. The A∣postle also seems to speak pretty generally, when he saies, thatHeb. 11.2, 1. by Faith the Elders obtained a good report: It having bin to them the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; to wit, in the Sacrifi∣ces representing and exhibiting Christ and the Promises of the Covenant of Grace to the eye of their Faith. For they all died in Faith,V. 13. not having re∣ceived the promises, but having seen them afar off, were perswaded of them and embraced them. And in this particular, the Priests were Typicall sure∣ties to the Jewish Saints, acting that work to the eye of their Faith in the Sa∣crifice of the Creature, which was the Arrha and Tessera, the token of the Covenant. For sin was imputed to the Sacrafice by virtue of the sinners im∣posing and laying his hand on the head of the Beast before it was slain, who then confessing his sins over it, had a Typicall expiation, relating to the great Gospell-offering, so often mentioned. Indeed these sacrificing rites of old to such as drew not nigh to God with a holy and fervent mind, were but a1 Tim. 4.8. , a bodily exercise that profited little. The Offering of the bodies of Beasts was of no value in the sight of God meerly in it self, taken without respect and relation to Christ. But to speak unto the Sacrifices themselves, The Creatures chosen out for Sacrifice, were to be without spot and ble∣mish, perfect every way. So the Heathens used to speak of their Sacrifice,Homer Il∣liad. α p. 305. & β p. 306. &c. they were to present (as Homer cals them) , perfect Offerings, without any mutilation. Such a Sacrifice was the Lord Christ,Heb. 7.26. . Holy, harmless, un∣defiled, separate from sinners. The Sacrifice was to be slain, and the blood to be cast at the foot of the Al∣tar.Lev. 17.11, 14. Jer. 2.34. In the blood lies the life and soul of the brute Creature, though it be otherwise in this rationall; and therefore that was to be shed to make a∣tonement.Plutar. de Hom. p. 111. modral. p. 1. Plutarch in his discourse of Homer saith; either 'tis the soul or the vehicle of the soul. I remember Virgil, speaking of one being slain, saies, Purpuream vomit ille animam, he did vomit out his purple soul, meaning his Blood. Thus Christ is said to poure out his blood,Aenead. V. 348. and to make his soul an Offering for sin, after he had bin in an agony heavy unto the death. Now because of these expressions in Scripture concerning blood:Isa. 53.10. and for
that there was a prohibition (pro tempore) given by the Councell against it in the Primitive times: Some good men have bin scrupulous as to eating of blood, or any thing composed of it. But let such remember, that we are not to call any thing common orAct. 10.15. unclean now.1 Cor. 10.25. Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat, asking no Question for Conscience sake. Every thing that is wholesome or nutritive food certainly may be used:1 Tim. 4.4. Every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, If it be received with Thanksgiving. It is evident that things offered to Idols, andAct. 15.29. things strangled, are conjoyned in that place with blood, where abstinence from it is commanded because of the Jews, whose Communion with the believing Gentiles was interrupted by their liberty in those things. As for things Of∣fered to Idols, the Apostle Paul counts it a meere indifferency1 Cor. 8.4, 8. Rom. 14.3, 20. unless in the case of scandall or offence to weak brethren. Then indeed there is an Hy∣poheticall necessity imposed upon our abstinence: for we must not by an unreasonable use of our liberty give occasion of offence unto others. Then indeed we must not eat,1 Cor. 10.28. For his sake that shewed it, and for Conscience sake, The Earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof. But this question is more fully spoken to by Chamier Panstrat. Cathol. Tom. 3. lib. 15. c. 10. p. 528. Hornbeck Sum. Controvers. lib. 11. de graecis, p. 841. &c. and Gro∣sted our Countryman, de cessat. legal. p. 134. &c. with others, who deter∣mine it in the affirmative, that it is lawfull to eat blood: so it be without offence or scandall to weak Brethren. But I shall leave this, and proceed to parallel the effusion of Blood (out of the Sacrifice) with Christs shedding his Blood upon the Cross. He hathRev. 1.5. washed us in his Blood for our sins. The Blood came out of the heart of Christ, our Gospell Sacrifice, to cleanse us from our impurities. The Speare opened a passage into his brest, that we might enter in at the doore of his Wounds, and be healed by him, and u∣nited to him. This is theZech. 13.1. Fountain opened to the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. Besides in every SacrificeLev. 3.16. the fat was the Lords, It is the best of the Crea∣ture, andTheophrast Charact. p. 249. perishes not so soon as the lean. To signifie that we ought to give the choicest and most excellent of our services unto God. The inwards also with the heart and reins were to be washt and then Offered to God by Fire; we must cleanse our hearts, and then dedicate them to God. The Head also and the Taile or Rump were to be offered up to God: the HeadSpelman Tithes. p. 72. as principium, the Taile as finis Actionis. Both the principle and begin∣ning of all our actions and services, as well as the end must be consecrated to God. The dung was to be cast away into an unclean place: to shew that there is impurity in our choicest services, and that we ought to fling it away, when we approach and draw nigh to God. All the filth and defilement of sin is to be removed as possible from all our approaches unto God. But putting an end to Generals, I shall descend to some particular Sacri∣fices, which though they were various, yet they did all in severall waies ei∣ther allude to Christ, or else to somewhat of our Gospell Services. For as our judiciousGrosted de Cessat. Legal p. 167. Grosted, a great light considering the times wherein he lived, doth observe [Ʋt res una multis signis, ita Christus multis Sacrificijs.] the same thing may be noted by many signs, so Christ by many Sacrifices. 1. Of the burnt Offering. 1. The burnt Offering was called  from  to ascend, because be∣ing wholly burnt, it did ascend up to Heaven in smoak and vapour. By the Septuagint it is termed , a whole burnt Offering. There was there∣fore a constant fire maintained upon Gods Altar to this purpose.Lev. 6.13. The Bul∣lock, Lamb, or Kid which was thus Offered upon the account of the sinner did note our corruptibility; even like the bodies of these Beasts obnoxious
to the consuming wrath of God, and the punishment justly due to us, even to be tormented in the fire of his indignation. And as the va∣pour ascended up to Heaven, to cry for propitious mercy; so it shewed the place, from whence alone we can expect redemption and expiation for sin, even from Heaven in the acceptation of Christs offering, who was scorched in the fire of Gods wrath for sin. Hereby likewise the meanes of obtaining par∣don and grace, are signified by the two properties of Fire, Light, and Heat. The Light of Faith, whereby the ancient Jewes did foresee Christ the promised Sa∣crifice, and the Heat of ardent prayers breathed from the Altar of an infla∣med heart, whereby they did in the name of the foreseen and hoped for Sacri∣fice, obtain the remission of sin. Besides these were often reiterated for a con∣stant memorial of theHe. 10.14. great Sacrifice once to be offered for the sins of many: forasmuch as they were of themselves never able to purge the conscience from sin. Fire was used in the consumption of these typical Sacrifices, and what might that signifie? Sometimes in Scripture it signifiesGrost. ibid. p. 123. [Ʋirtutem Divini∣tatis nestrorum vitiorum rubiginem consumentis.] The force and power of the Divinity destroying the rust of our sins and vices, as it is exprest in Deutero∣nomy, (saith our Grosted)Deut. 4.24. The Lord thy God is a consuming fire. Sometimes it signifies Gods indignation; as the Prophet Jeremy expresses it against unjust oppressors.Jer. 21.12. Lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it. Sometimes it signifies the words of God proceeding from the mouth of the Prophets,Jer. 5.14. Behold I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shab devour them. The words of the Law have the force of fire, burn∣ingCramer. Schol. proph. 5ta. par. p. 17. the hearts of men, and stirring up in them the sense of the just wrath and fury of God against sin. Now as the fire consumed the Sacrifices, it noted the justly demerited wrath of God to consume us for our sins, and was a type of the anger of God, that fell upon Christ our Surety on the behalf of sinners.Cloppenb. Schol. Sacri. p. 62. &c. It was anciently the to∣ken of the acceptation of their Sacrifices, when fire came down from Heaven to consume them, as in the Sacrifice ofGen. 15.17. Abraham,Lev. 9.24. Aaron,Judg. 6.21. Gideon,2 Chr. 7.1. Solo∣mon,1 King. 18 38. Elijah. It was unlawfull to use any other fire then celestial, for when once God had answered by fire from Heaven, the Priests office was to con∣serve it perpetually burning upon the Altar, by addition of continual fuel, and therefore all culinary fire is called strange, and that which the Lord will not own in his Sacrifices. This was the reason of the sore punishment of Nadab and Abihu, the Sons of Aaron, because they offeredLev. 10.1. strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not. And therefore excellent is that place in the Psal∣mist according to thePsal. 20.4. Hebrew , Let him remember all thine Offerings, and thy burnt Sacrifice turn to ashes, that is in∣flaming of it with his celestial fire, in token of acceptation. This may hint to us what special care we ought to adhibit, that we draw not nigh to God with the culinary fire of our own corrupt passions; we must not lift up hands to Hea∣ven in1 Tim. 2.8 wrath. If John the meekest of the Apostles, shall desire of Christ to call for fire from Heaven, to eonfume the wretched Gadarenes, who loved their swine better then a Saviour, even he shall meet with a rebuke together with the rest.Luk. 9.55. Ye knew not what manner of spirit ye are of. It is observed byV. ibid. p. 63. Concerning Cain.Cloppenburg, that Jerom's question is not rashly answe∣red out of Theodotio's Translation, in these wordsHieronym. Tom. 3. qu. in Gen. p. 206.. [Ʋnde scrire potuit Cain quod Fatris ejus munera suscepisset Deus, & sua repudiasset: nisi illa Interpre∣tatio vera esset, quam Theodotio posuit. Et inflammavit Dominus super Abel & super Sacrificium ejus, super Cain vero & super Sacrificium ejus non  , inflammavit.] How could Cain know that God had accepted the Offerings of his Brother, and rejected his own, unless that Interpretation were true, which Theodotion hath given. And the Lord sent down fire upon Abel and his Sacrifice, but not on Cain's.
The descent of fire from Heaven upon the Sacrifices of old,Id. p. 65. was a visible token of the presence of the holy Spirit, who is in Scripture compared to fire, and therefore in the day of Pentecost,Act. 2.3. the Spirit did sit upon the Apostles in the shape of fiery tongues. And our Lord is said byMat. 3.11. John Baptist to baptize with the holy Ghost and fire. Hence is that metaphorical expression in the A∣postle Paul, commanding the Saints of1 Thes. 5.19. Thessalonica to take heed of quench∣ing the Spirit, whose warming and inflaming motions are necessary for the of∣fering up of all our spiritual Sacrifices unto God: even as the continual fire upon the Altar was for these of the Jewish Ordinances. Of this Burnt-offering (concerning which we are treating) I shall at pre∣sent observe but one thing more; and that is, that there was nothing of it re∣served from the fire but the skin only, and that was given to theLev. 7.8. Priests. In like manner, when the Heads of Families were Priests before the giving of the Law, the Sacrificer had the skin. AsOrigen Ho. 6. in Levitic. p. 145. Origen observed of old concerning A∣dam, that the skins wherewith he was cloathed, were of the Beasts which were offered in Sacrifice. To signifie that by the clothing of Christs righteousness, the great Sacrifice for sin, our nakedness is hidden from the sight of God. But why must the Priest in following times after the solemn introduction of the se∣veral Rites of the Mosaical Law, have the skin of the Sacrifice? To shew there∣by, that in the first place God would have the pains and labour of his servants in his worship to be alway rewarded. We learn also hereby, that every mans Offering is to have the outward skin of profession pulled off, God looks to the heart and inwards of our duties, what fat and flesh there is upon our services. But the Priest he must have the skin: he is to take care of and look to the very externals of worship, that they be managed according to the prescript forme of Gods will, and is to have recompence for such his service. 'Tis not the skin that will satisfie or please God in our Offerings: He that searches the heart, expects we should worship him in spirit and truth. The performance of the solemnity of this Offering consisted in eight particu∣lars, as you may read pag. 116. of this Treatise, whereupon I shall briefly gloss only by allusion, craving a favourable and candid Interpretation: for I press not my own apprehensions rigidly at any time, and then shall retire to the second, the Sin-offering. 1. We are to confess our sins over the head of the Offering, that God may lay them upon and impute them to Jesus Christ.Prov. 28.13. Confession must go before pardon; Confess and forsake, and ye shall find mercy.Joh. 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithfull to forgive us, and theVerse 7. bloud of Christ his Son shall cleanse us from them. 2. As the person did slay his Offering; so 'tis we that by our sins have cru∣cified the Lord of life. 3. As the Priest sprinkled the bloud round about the Altar; so Christ who offered up himself, sprinkles his meritorious bloud upon the Altar, and makes his Sacrifice acceptable: Nay all our Spiritual Sacrifices are only plea∣sing to God, through the sprinkling of his precious blood. ThisHeb. 12.24. bloud of sprinkling speaks better things then that of Abel. Abel's bloud cried for ven∣geance against his wicked Brother, this bloud of our elder Brother cries for mercy, atonement and pardoning grace, for such as are elect according to the fore-knowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and1 Pet. 1 2. sprinkling of the bloud of Jesus Christ. 4. As the Priest flayed off the skin: So our great Highpriest by the power of his Divinity did lay down his life, he did exuere Tabernaculum, lay aside the thin2 Cor. 5.1, 4. 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. Tabernacle of his body for a while, when he gave up the Ghost to the Father, and commended his Spirit to him.Heb. 10.20. The vail of his flesh was rent insunder in the day, when he made hisIsa. 53.10. Soul an Offering for sin. 5. As the Sacrifice was cut in pieces, Oh how was his blessed Body mangled
by the nails and spear, his head pierced with thorns!Psa. 22.16 They pierced his hands and feet! Oh how was his blessed soul under flaming agonies in that hour, when he cried out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me! 6. Fire was laid upon the Altar, and fuell to preserve it. The wrath of God was the fire and sin the fuel to keep it burning: till this blessed Saviour had fully satisfied for all the sins of the elect. 7. All the parts were laid in order upon the Altar: even as Christ our Lord was stretched out upon the Cross. 8. The inwards and legs were washt in water, and then burnt,Interanea diluit qui conscientiam purgat. Orig. Hom. 1. Lev. p. 116. being an offering made by fire of a sweet favour to the Lord. For Incense was joyn∣ed with Sacrifice to give a sweet perfume. This might allude to the clean∣ness and holiness of Christs heart, he was a most innocent person; The water of the Spirit ran alwayes thorow him, and noted the purity of his walking, the spotlesness of his life, and therefore he couldDan. 9.26. not suffer for himself,Isa. 53.5. 'twas for our transgressions that he was wounded, for our iniquities was he bruised. Up∣on our account was he scorched in the flames of his Fathers wrath, when the ardent ejaculations of his soul in prayer, like inflamed Incense, went up smoak∣ing towards Heaven, and giving a most precious sent and favour to his glorious Sacrifice,Heb. 9.14. when through the eternal Spirit he offered up himself without spot to God. Of the Six-Offering. There is a common name in the Hebrew to all Offerings made by fire, and it is  from  fire, because offered by fire. Sometimes it is applied to theExo. 29.19 Lev. 1.9, 13. burnt-offering, as we translate it, an offering made by fire, toLev. 2.2.23.13. meat-offerings, toLev. 3.3, 9. peace-offerings,Lev. 4.35. and to sin-offerings. And therefore, because they were Sa∣crificia ignita. The proper name of this is taken from the reason or ground whereupon it was offered, and that was for the expiation of some sin commit∣ted, as hath been declared in the Historical part of this Work. This Sin-offering principally referred unto Christ, who was made2 Cor. 5.21 Sin for us, that is, asParisiensis de Legibus cap. 8. Parisiensis expounds the place, an offering for sin on our behalf; ac∣cording to that expression concerning the Priests in the Prophet Hosea, They eat up the sin of my peopleHos. 4.8., which seems to allude to the Priests part and share in the Sacrifice. So likewise when the Apostle declaresRom, 8.3., that God for sin did con∣demn sin in his flesh. For sin, that is (saith he) For the Sin-offering of Christ, God did for the sake, and upon the account of his infinitely precious Sacrifice condemn and destroy sin, that it should never have dominion over the Elect,Rom. 8.34. seeing Christ hath died. The Sin offering was usually a Male, to signifie the strength of Christs me∣rits. Perfect and without spot, to shew the integrity and purity of his Nature. He offer'd himself without spotHeb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 1.19. Jer. 11.19. Heb. 9.14. Lev. 16.14. or blemish, he was a Lamb without spot. As there were Heifers, Goats and Lambs offer'd in this case: so is our Lord in Scri∣pture resembled to them in his blessed Sacrifice. There were several seasons of the presenting Sin-offerings to God: but the principal time was on the Expiation day, to which I would speak somewhat largely. First relating historically the services of the day: and then applying them in a spiritual manner unto Christ. The Services of the solemn Day of Expiation, being the 10th of the 7th Moneth. In the Morning of this solemn day betimes (as usually on other dayes) the ashes were taken off from the Altar, and the wood laid in order. Then the High∣priest (who performed all the solemnities of this day) putting on his golden garments slew the Lamb, the constant Morning Sacrifice, and sprinkled the bloud on the Altar; then he went into the Temple, and burnt the Incense of the Morning, and trimmed the Lamps. After this he comes out and burns the flesh of the daily Sacrifice, and offers its meat-offering and drink-offering with it. Then he proceeds to the extraordinary work of the day, which was the offering of theNumb. 29.8. Bullock, Ramme and seven Lambs mention'd in the Book of Numbers Then he puts off his gorgeous attire, and performs the more solemn work of
that day in the atonement, wherein I shall enlarge by it self. After that work is ended, then he puts on his precious garments again, andNumb. 29.11. offereth the Goat for the sin-offering, mentioned also in Numbers, together with theLev. 16.3, 24. Bullock for a burnt-offering for himself, and theIbid. Ram for the burnt-offering for the people. In the last place he offers theNum. 28.3, 4. Lamb for the daily Evening sacrifice, and when he hath burnt the Incense, and trimmed the Lamps in the Sanctuary, he goes out, puts off his rich array, and invests himself with his own common garments, and goes to his own house. So that on this day, besides the two Lambs for the daily Sacrifice being theNumb. 29.11. continual burnt-offering there were slainIb. ver. 8, 9. one Bullock, one Ram, seven Lambs for a burnt-offering extraordinary, with their attendant meat-offerings and drink-offerings, with a Goat for a sin-offeringNumb. 29.11., besides the sin-offering of Atonement. If this tenth day happened on a Sabbath, then the extraordinaries of the constant Sabbath-offerings were added. So that (as we shall see by and by) in the Atonement work there was one Bullock, two Rams, two Goats, which being added to the former makes fifteen. The several Offerings on the Expiation Day. Burnt-offerings, Numb. 29 8. One Bullock, Besides the Morning and the Evening Sacri∣crifice, and in case a Sabbath fell on the same day, two more, Numb. 28.9, 10 So that here are four Sacrifices of the Expiati∣on, viz. one Bullock, two Rams and one Goat, with their meat-offerings and drink∣ings to be added to the Catalogue, pag. 113. One Ram, Seven Lambs. Sin -offering, Numb. 29.11. One Goat. The Atonement One Bullock, Two Rams, Two Goats, whereof one a scape Goat.   Fifteen .   The solemn work of Atonement performed on the day of Expiation by the Highpriest. In the first place there was preparation made of a youngLev. 16.3. Bullock for a sin-offering, which was appointed for the Highpriest himself, and for hisVer. 6. house (that is) theVer. 33. Priests, which were called the house of Aaron in Scripture. There was likewise to be brought in a RamVer. 31. for a burnt-offering to makeVer. 24. A∣tonement for himself. Besides, there wereVer. 5, 24. two Kids of the Goats to be pro∣vided for a sin-offering for the people, one was to be slain, and the other to escape, and a Ram also for a burnt-offering. The manner of the performance of this solemnity in its orderly method. First of all, the Highpriest was to wash his flesh in water, andVer. 4. to put on the pure white linen garments, and then to slay the BullockVer. 11. which was for a sin-offering for himself. When that was done then he was to take a Censer full of burning coals from off the Altar, and a handfull of sweet Incense, and bring it within the vail, and when he was come thither,Ver. 12, 13. to put the Incense upon the fire, which might cover the Mercy-seat with a cloud of smoke, that he die not. For he might not presume to draw so nigh to the Majesty of God sitting be∣tween the Cherubims without a cloud of Incense to interpose. Then he came forth and received some of the blood of the new-slain Bullock reserved in a gold∣en basin, and carried it within the most holy place, andVer. 14. sprinkled of it with his finger on the Mercy-seat Eastward, and before the Mercy-seat seven times. After this, the lot being cast for which of the two Goats was to be slainVer. 19. for the sin-offering of the people, he took some of the bloud of that likewise, and brought it within the vail, and did with it, as before he had done with the bloud of the Bullock, and this was to make atonement for the most holy place. There was to be no man with him, when he performed this Ceremony. Afterwards he went out to the Altar which was before the Lord, that isVer. 15, 16. the golden Altar of Incense,Exo. 30.10 and took of the bloud of the Bullock and of the Goat mixt toge∣ther,
and put part of itLev. 16.18, 19. upon the horns of the Altar round about, and sprink∣led of the same bloud seven times upon it to cleanse it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel. Thus also was he to cleanse theVers. 16. Tabernacle of the Con∣gregation it self, or in after times the Sanctuary. When he had made an end ofVers. 20, 21. reconciling the most holy place, the Taberna∣cle and the Altar. Then he came to the live Goat, and layed both his hands up∣on his head, and confessed over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, and then sent him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness, that the Goat might bear upon him all their iniquities into a Land not inhabited. When he had sent away the Scape-goat into the Wildernesse, he comes to the Bullock and Goat which had been slain for himself and the people, opens them,Vers, 25. takes away the fat, and burns it upon the Altar; cuts the flesh in pieces, and sends it by the hands of others,Ver. 27. with their skinnes and dung to be burnt in fire without the Camp. Then the High-PriestVers. 23. comes into the Tabernacle, puts off his linnen gar∣ments, and leaves them there, washes his flesh in water, and vests himself with the golden Robes belonging to him as High-Priest, comes to the brazen Altar, andVers. 3, 5, 24. offers up the two Rams for Burnt-Offerings, the one for himself, the o∣ther for the people; and so finishes the great work of Expiation. Two things more are mentioned about this work, That the person who car∣ried away the Scape-Goat, and the other who burnt the Sin-Offering, were toVers. 27, 28. wash their cloaths, and bath their flesh, before they should come into the Camp. Another is, That at the end of every 49 years, on this solemn and glorious day, theLev. 25 8, 9. Trumpet was to sound for the year of Jubilee. The Explanation of the Mysteries of these grand Solemnities. That the supream Officer of the Temple, who was to officiate on this great day, did signifie thePs. 110.4. High-Priest after the order of Melchizedeck, is evident to all that have but lookt on the Epistle to the Hebrews, evenHeb. 4.14. Jesus the Son of God, who is passed into the Heavens, and is the1 Pet. 5.4. chief Shepherd and1 Pet. 2.25. Bishop of our souls. No man taketh this Honour to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron: So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High-Priest: But he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; saith also in another place,Heb. 5.4, 5, 6. Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck, that ancient King of Salem, the great Type of our most glorious High-Priest, who is King of righteousnesse, and Prince of Peace. The first thing observable at his initiation into this great work, was to wash his flesh in water, which possibly might prelude to the Baptism of our Lord,Mat. 3.16. wherewith he was baptized of John, before he entred upon his Ministerial service, of teaching and suffering for his people. But (alas) it was not that thereby he himself should be cleansed, for he was the innocent Lamb of God that took away the sins of the world: but rather that he might (as an Ancient speaks) cleanse the water by the descent of his blessed body into it, and there∣by purify and consecrate the Ordinance of Baptism for the benefit of his Church, which he intended toEph. 5.26. sanctifie and cleanse with the washing of wa∣ter by the Word. The Ancient Priests carrying about them natures defiled with sinne, needed continual washing: but our pure and spotlesse Priest had nothing of impurity in him: yet, when being in the form of man, he submits to this Ordinance, andMat. 3.15. so fulfills all righteousnesse. After washing, the High-Priest was not to put on hisLev. 16.4. gorgeous and rich at∣tire, and to appear in all his splendid Ornaments, 'twas a Fast and Humilia∣tion day: and therefore he was to execute his place and function in mean linen garments, figuring thereby the low estate of our Lord here upon earth, and that he should carry on the work of our Redemption without any external pomp and worldly glory. Isa. 52.14.His visage was marred more then any man, and his
form more then the sons of men. He walked up and down in a mean and obscure manner,Phil. 2.7. making himself of no reputation, and taking upon him the form of a Servant, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross. The first thing that the High-Prist did after he was thus washt and cloathed, and had slain the Bullock for the Sinne-Offering, was his entrance into the most holy placeLev. 16.12. to burn sweet Incense within the Veil. Our blessed Lord, before he shed his most precious blood, did prepare his way to the Crosse by most ardent and heavenly PrayersJoh 17.; and as the Incense was to be beaten small, so did it note the agony of his Spirit in Prayer:Luk 22.44. , he stretched out his heart in Prayer to the Father;Mat. 26.39. If it be possible let this cup passe. When he offered up Prayers and SupplicationsHeb. 5.7. with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared, being glori∣ously raised from death by the right hand of God. In these his Prayers he in∣terceded for us, and by his intercession, hath sanctified our Prayers, that they also may smoak within the Veil, rendring us acceptable to God, when our fer∣vent Prayers arise not from our lips only, but from the Altar of our hearts within, and are inflamed by the holy fire of the Spirit of Grace. After this rare perfume had fragrantly towred about the Oracle, in sweet sented clouds, then did the High-Priest enter this most holy place,Heb. 9 7. not without the blood of Bulls and Goats, which he offered for himself, and the errours of the people, even as Christ being become anVers. 12. High-Priest of good things to come, by his own blood entred into the holy place, having obtained eternal Redempti∣onVers. 24. for us. He is not entred into a holy place, made with hands, but by the virtue of the effusion of his own most precious blood, he is gone into Heaven it self, to appear in the presence of God for us. And in that the blood was to be sprinkled seven times before the Lord, it might signifie the copious and liberall effusion of Christs blood for sinners; it wasMat 26.28. , not only poured, but plentifully poured out: it did not guttatim effluere: It came out as from a fountain, to purge away sinne and uncleannesseZech. 13.8.. The number seven, in Scripture is taken (asParisienfis, de Leg. c. 9. some observe) for a number of perfection: And if so, (though I am not much taken with numbers) then it might point out the perfection and compleatness of our Pur∣gation and Justification in the sight of God, by the blood of Christ. It is observed by some (too curiously I doubt) that our blessed Lord had seven wounds inflicted upon him, which drew blood from his blessed body. (1.) In his scourging; (2.) in the platting of the Crown of sharp thornes upon his head; (3, 4.) the nailing of both his hands, (5▪ 6) and both his feet, and (7) the pier∣cing of his body with the Spear. Leaving these niceties: Oh that our souls could bleed for those sins that drew out the vitall and most precious blood of Jesus Christ!Zech. 12.10. Oh that we did look upon him, whom we have pierced, and mourn for him as one mourneth for his only son, and be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first born! Who by his meritorious sufferings, is become a propitiation for our sins1 Joh 2.2.. Mention is made of the end why the blood of the Bullock was brought into the most holy place, even to expiate for the sins of the High-Priest himself; it was his Offering. Whereby was signified the insufficiency and invalidity of the Jewish Priest-hood of it self, to impetrate from God any pardon for sin, seeing it self did need and require an annuall atonement and reconciliation for its own sins in the sight of God. So that the High Priest was to be full of compassion to the igno∣rant, forHeb. 5.2, 3. that he himself also was compassed wth infirmity; and by reason thereof, ought as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins. But such an high Priest became us, &c.Heb. 7.27. who needeth not daily (as those did) to offer up Sacrifice first for his own sins, and then for the peoples: For this he did once, when he offered up himself. Now although Christ had no sin of his own, where∣upon to expiate for himself, yet he did personally bear all the sinnes of the Elect
upon him by divine imputation; and therefore he did imputatively offer up for himself, but effectively and virtually only for the Elect. And therefore, as the Apostle saies in the last cited place, he did it but once. Besides, as this blood was sprinkled within the Veil to purify it from unclean∣ness, it signified and hinted to us the wonderfull defilement, and contagious na∣ture of sin, that had pierced into the most holy place, thereby intimating that the highest and most eminent services in our worship may be polluted with sinne, and need purification by the blood of Christ. Moreover, as the place within the Veil signified Heaven, so the bringing the blood of Christ thither, shews that Heaven is anCol. 1.12. Inheritance with the Saints in light, and aEphes. 1.14. possession in glory purchased by the bloud of Christ, and therefore the beginning of glory is calledEph. 5.30. the day of Redemption. For we are not fully redeemed from all our sins and miseries, till we set foot within the vail by virtue of the price of Christs bloud.Heb. 6.19. Let us then lay hold upon the hope that is set before us, as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, which entreth into that [most holy place] within the vail, whither the fore-runner even Jesus is entred for us. We may therefore now have a holy and reverentHeb. 10.19, &c. boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh. It is to be observed further, That the Highpriest went into the Oracle with this bloudLev. 16.17 alone, he had none with him. It was his peculiar Office, which none might presume to perform besides himself. So did Christ enter alone, to shew that there is no other Highpriest or Head of his Church, but he alone. There is none of the Saints gone into Heaven with body and soul together, and continue there in so compleat a state of happiness possibly, as they shall be after the Day of Judgment. His glorified body only is in the most holy place, sitting at the right hand of God. Here we might move a Question about Enoch, E∣lijah, Lazarus, and the Saints that rose at Christs death, Mat. 27.52. Whe∣ther they shall receive a further state of perfection at the Resurrection, seeing Christ himself is said to be the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20, 23. Further, as the Priest entred alone with the bloud for purification: So 'twas Christ thatIsa. 63.3. trod the winepress of his Fathers wrath alone, of the people there was none with him. It is recorded also that at his apprehension, his DisciplesMark 14.50 all forsook him and fled. After the Highpriest had reconciled the most holy place, he was to go forth andLev. 16.18. put of the bloud of the Ballock and Goat upon the horns of the golden Altar, and to sprinkle seven times upon it, and do so likewise to the Tabernacle, by which I humbly conceive is meant the holy place or Sanctuary, at the upper end whereof neer the vail stood the golden Altar. What this golden Altar, and its horns signified, I have spoken before. The Incense noted Prayer. Hereby in the first place may be signified, that by virtue of Christs bloud it is, that his prayers and mediations for the Church are heard and accepted before the throne of God. Hs Intercession is built upon his passion, and for all that he suffered, them he prayes for. As to the prayers of the Saints, it is to be noted, that none are effectual but such as proceed through Christs Censer, perfumed with the In∣cense of his intermediation with the Father for us. The bloud put upon it, noted, that the infirmities and sinfulness of our pray∣ers, are to be purged and taken away by the bloud of Christ: As he said, Do∣mine laeva lachrymas, Lord wash my tears; we must say, Wash them in the bloud of Christ, and perfume our sighs with his precious odours. The four horns tipt with bloud signifies the prevalency and vigorous strength of his prayers when he treats with his Father on our behalf upon the account of his precious bloud. As the four horns did look to the four winds of Heaven, and the four quarters of the Earth, which (to allude) possibly might signifie the availableness of Christs
prayers for all believers throughout the world, who put their trust in him, and lift up their prayers to Heaven in his blessed name. The horns of this Altar might set forth the strength of prayer, both for the good of the Church, and for the ruine of her enemies, and therefore is it that we read of odours smoaking at the golden Altar,Revel. 8.3. and immediately upon the Saints prayers the seven Angels prepared their Trumpets to sound warre, desolation and ruine to the adversaries of the Church, and at the sounding of the sixth An∣gel. There was a voice (or return of prayers) that came from the four Horns of the golden Altar,Revel. 9.13. which is before God. Furthermore, as the Tabernacle or Sanctuary was also to be purged with bloud; this might shew to us, that all our holy services wherein we draw nigh to God, must be washed in the bloud of Christ: or else God will find matter enough therein to condemn us, unlesse he take away the iniquity of our holy things, we shall never be able to stand in Gods sight, or to answer him one of a thousand for all the choisest and highest performances which we yeeld to his Majesty, with the most ardent and heavenly frames that our spi∣rits can possibly be in, while we walk here below in Tabernacles of clay. When the Priest had finished this work of Atonement for the Oracle and Sanctuary, he then came out into the Court to the scape Goat, and performs the work before-recited. You heard of two Goats, the one by lot was pitcht upon for a sin-offering, whose bloud we see was carried into the most holy place. Prov. 16.33. Act. 2.23.The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. So was Christ delivered by the determinate counsel of God. But why should our Lord, among other creatures, be set forth by a Goat, a rank and falacious creature, who himself was not touched with the least shadow of sinne? In the ScriptureMat. 25.33. wicked men; and cruel Heathen Kings are set out by Goats, Dan. 8.5. Devils by Satyrs, AEgipans, &c. in many Authors. Pos∣sibly upon this account of that imputed sin and iniquity which he sustained, he being foundRom. 8.3. in the likenesse of sinfull flesh: For the bloud of those beasts was brought into the Sanctuary by the High priestHeb. 13.10. Rainold against Hart. for sin. Some think that the two GoatsParisiens. pag. 39. represented the two Natures of our blessed Saviour; the slain Goat his Humanity, the scape Goat his Divinity. I rather suppose they might exhibit the two States of his Humanity, his Passion, and his Resurrection. For, because the same creature could not both suffer death, and presently live again without a miracle. Therefore one was appointed to death, to represent our blessed Lord his suffering death upon the Cross: The other af∣ter the bloud of the former had been sprinkled, was to escape, signifying his Re∣surrection; He was the slain GoatRom. 4.25. delivered for our offences; and as the living Goat that scaped death, so was he raised again for our Justification. As the slain Goat he was1 Pet. 3.18. put to death in the flesh, as the scape Goat, he was quickned by the Spirit. The scape Goat, although a poor creature in it self, uncapable of sinne, yet had all the sinnes of the people confessed over its head: So Christ1 Cor. 5.2. who knew no sinne, yet was made sinne for us, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him. He laid on him the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. The Rabbies tell a storyK. Shering∣ham. Joma. p. 147. Isa. 1.18., that when the scape goat was sent into the wilder∣ness, there was a scarlet thred tied to the Temple-gate, which when the Goat arrived at the rocks in the wilderness, immediately turned white, and therein do allude to that place, though your sins be as scarlet, yet they shall be as white as snow. Which I leave to their confirmation. The scape Goat being laden with the sins of the people, was carried from Gods presence in the Temple afar off into the wilderness: So hath the Lord Jesus remo∣ved our sins afar off out of the sight of God, and from his vindicative Justice car∣ried them into the Land of forgetfulness, it being for his sake, who bore our sins, that he hath promised to remember them no more. As far as the East is from the West, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us.Isa. 43 25. Ps. 103.25.
Lastly, In that the Scape-Goat went into the Wildernesse, it might denote the influ∣ence of Christs death, to bear the sinnes of the Gentiles, who were out of the pale of the Church then, and aliens at that time from the Covenant of Promise; But now in Christ Jesus,Eph. 2.13. they who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. After the work and service of the Scape-Goat was finished, then the fat of the sin-offerings was laid and burnt upon the Altar. Fatnesse signifies grossenesse and stupidity of spirit, (Make the heart of this people grosse, orIsa. 6.10. fat.) and so it might signifie the consuming of great and grosse sins, by the Sacrifice of Christ offered up for sinne. Or rather, as the fat is counted the choicest of the Sacrifice: So it might denote the giving up to God (as Christ did) the primest, chiefest, choicest of our spirits in holy services. Then we read, that the Bullocks and Goats flesh, with their skin and dung, were all to be burnt without the Camp, or without the precincts and limits of the Temple; which the Apostle explains () in expresse termes, As the bodies of the BeastsHeb. 13.11, 12. were burnt without the Camp, so Jesus also suffered without the gate, even upon Mount Calvary. And therefore those that will stand to the Levitical Law, can have no share in Christ, ac∣cording to the Apostles Argument, drawn from the peoples havingHeb. 13.10. Weem. vol. 3. p 66. no part or share in that Sacrifice which was burnt without the Camp. After the Priest had ended those services, he puts on his linen cloathes, washes his fleshLev. 16.24. in the holy place, and puts on his own gorgeous raiment, and appears to the people in his rich attire. This might signifie the death, buriall, and resurrection of Christ. His death, by the putting off his inconspicuous vestments. His buriall, by the washing and continuing for a while hid and obscured in the holy place.Act. 9 37. To wash the body after death, was the manner of the Jews preparation for its Sepulture. His coming forth with glorious rober, shewed his resurrection, when he rose out of the grave with his glori∣ous body. These things I dare not press, but mention them only allusively with submission. When these Solemnities of expiation were finisht, then theLev. 16.3, 5, 24. High-Priest offered up the two burnt Offerings, one for himself, the other for the people, after sin was fully ex∣piated, then they present their Burnt-Offerings, which were wholly burnt upon the Al∣tar except the skin, whereof I spake before: and signified the dedicating of our souls wholly to God, in the newnesse of life, and holy obedience. Our blessed Lord was a whole Burnt-Offering, he came to do the will of God fully in his compleat obedience. He of∣fered up himself to the Father in all waies of compleat righteousnesse: and so should weRom. 12.1 present our bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service. These are called ; and therefore the Apostle citing the Psalmist, speaks in the name of Christ:Heb. 10.6, &c. Sacrifice and offerings thou wouldst not, but a body hast thou prepared me. In Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure. Then said I, lo I come (in the volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. Above, when he said, Sacrifice and Offering, and Burnt Offerings, and Offering for sin thou wouldst not, neither hadst pleasure therein, which are offered by the Law; then said he, Lo I come to do thy will, O God. Our Lord Jesus saw that the Scribe ans∣weredMark. 12.33, 34. discreetly, when he said, To love God with all the heart, and with all the under∣standing, and with all the soul, and withall the strength, and to love the neighbour as him∣self, is more then all whole Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices. The persons that burnt the two Sin-Offerings without the Camp, and the other who carried the Scape Goat into the Wildernesse, were to wash their cloathes, and bath their flesh in water, before they could be admitted into the Camp again: To shew that though we by our sins are the crucifyers of Christ, yet we may be received into favour, if bap∣tized and washed in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and afterward be admitted into the com∣munion of the faithfull. So the Apostle Peter tels them, whoAct. 2.23. by wicked hands crucifyed and slain the Lord of life: yet if theyVers. 38. did repent, and were baptized in the Name of Je∣sus Christ for the remission of sins, they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Thus was the great work of this reconciling day finisht, the sins of Priest and people pardoned, the Holy place, Altar and Tabernacle purifyed through the blood of sprink∣ling. So God in the day of our Lords most meritorious death, was in and through him,2 Cor. 5.18. reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their transgressions to them. To conclude, It was in this glorious day, (as I mentioned in the fore-going story of this service) that the Trumpets were blown for the year of Jubilee, toIsa. 61.1, 2. signifie that the Spirit of the Lord was upon Christ; the Lord anointed him to preach good tydings to the meek; he sent him to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the cap∣tives, and the opening of the prison to them that were bound: To proclaim the accep∣table year of the Lord,Zech. 9.11. and by the blood of the Covenant, to send forth his Prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water. Behold2 Cor. 6.2, 3. now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation.
3. Of the Trespasse-Offering. Hitherto let it suffice to have spoken of Sin-Offerings, and especially concerning the great and pompous day of expiation. The next that follows is the Trespasse-Offering, of which I shall only say thus much, that as thereby there was an atonement and recon∣ciliation made for more gross and hainous sins, the Law and manner about the Sin-Offering, and the Trespasse-Offerng being all one in the main: we may observe, that the greatest sins, for which God is pleased to grant repentence, are pardonable through the blood of Christ. Only as under the Law, there was no Offering for sins of presum∣ption: such persons must die themselves, and their own blood must lie upon them. So under the Gospel, presuming sinners are under a most dangerous state, especially if they presume to sin against the holy Spirit.Heb. 10 26, 27. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sins, but a cer∣tain fearfull looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall restroy the ad∣versaries, &c. He that despised Moses law, died without mercy under two or three wit∣nesses. Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden underfoot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the the Cove∣nant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spi∣rit of grace?Mat. 12.32. For whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghpst, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Having thus briefly glanced upon this, I come next to speak some words about the Peace-Offering. 4. Of the Peace-Offerings. The Causes of the Peace-Offering are at large recited Chap. 5. of this Treatise. I shall only spiritualize some things about them and so conclude. In this Sacrifice principally were the joyfull Feasts exhibited. For usually they were divided into three parts or Portions: the first part was Gods, who is the great Peace∣maker, and makes aPsal. 50.5. Covenant with his people in this Sacrifice: Another was the Priests, as a reward of his service, and to shew his communion and fellowship with God and his people,1 Joh. 1.3. as John saies, That ye might have fellowship with us, and truly our fel∣lowship is with the Father and his Son. Here I might enlarge concerning the manner of making Covenants in ancient time, by eating together; and especially at Sacrifices: but this hath been copiously and largely handledCloppenb. schl. Sacrif. p. 8. 175. Coccejus de faedere. p. 100. Molin. ad Greg. Nyss p. 71. Mede vol. 1. p. 50. 4. by many Authors, but of all most fully and excellently by the incomparably learned Dr Ralph Cudworth Master of Christs Col. Camb. in his true notion of the Lords Supper: Wherefore I shall retire to some other things. The Priests part in his Offering was the cheeks, the right shoulder, the breast, and the maw.Hierom. ad Fabiolam & Rivet in Ps. 40 p. 186. Mal. 2.7. Jerom in his Treatise of Priestly vestments sent to Fabiola saies, The cheek was given to the Priest to signifie [Elquentem eruditumque,] that he should remem∣ber to be eloquent and learned in the Law of God. The Priests lips are to preserve knowledge, and the people are to enquire the law at his mouth. He goes on [In bra∣chio bona opera & pugnam contra diabolum] By giving the shoulder to the Priest, he was thereby taught to have a care to maintain good works, and to fight against the Devil.Orig. Ho∣mil. 9. in Ex∣od. p. 9. 8. Origen adds, because 'tis commanded to be the right shoulder, that they must be [opera dextra, as well as bona: that is,] good works which a Priest must perform dexterously; with strength and expedition, he must not be a bungler in the waies of holinesse. Besides, the breast was his, and therefore Jerom saies, [Moneri sacerdotes in pectore gestare mundas cogitationes, legis notitiam & dogmatum veritatem.] the Priest was thereby admonished to bear in his breast pure thoughts, knowledge of the law and truth in his opinions. And lastly, the maw, where he adds, [Venter luxuriam, &c.] It denoted his abstinence from luxury and all manner of excels. These I only propose nakedly for them who please to receive or reject these ancient notions. If they held forth any thing, then these two, the breasts and the shoulder, which were Wave-Offerings, given from the people to the Priest, might chiefly be insisted on. 1. He was to have the shoulder, because of his bearing the people, and carrying them and their Sacrifices before God. 2. The breast, the seat of the heart, to note his compassion, tenderness, and bowels to them, bearing them alwaies in his Prayers and and ardent sighs to the throne of Grace. Mede vol. 1. p. 585.The remainder was eaten by the faithfull people (who brought the Sacrifice) to ma∣nifest their incorporation into Christ. For the Saints do not only receive pardon and remission of sin, upon the account of his precious Sacrifice, but they feed upon him, and are united to him by faith.1 Cor. 10.21. Those that did eat of Idol-Sacrifices, are said to sit at the Ta∣ble of Devils, and have communion with them. But such as have a share in the sufferings of Christ, on whom the chastisement of our peace was laid, he being ourIsa. 53.5. Peace-Offer∣ing,
do participate of this Feast of the Lords Table, and are madeIsa. 56.7. joyfull in his house of Prayer. Under the Law, the fat was the Lords, the children of Israel were most severely inter∣dicted the eating of fat, as well as blood: But under the Gospel, he Lord will make un∣to all people a feast ofIsa. 25.6. fat things, of fat things full of marrow. At the Gospel Wedding, the Oxen, and theMat. 22.4. fatlings are slain. The poor Prodigal must feed upon theLuk. 15.23. fatted calf. Our souls shall bePsal. 63.5. satisfied with marrow and fatness. And as for blood, Christ himself most graciously tels us,Joh. 6.53. That except we eat the flesh of the Sun of man, and drink his blood, we have no life in us. This Sacrifice of the Peace-offering was usually added to other fore-recited Sacrifi∣ces: because expiation for sin would be unavailable and unprofitable, unless there were annexed a particular application of mercy, in our communion with him in a way of peace and grace. Our blessed Saviour as a High priest doth not only as offering expia∣tory sacrifice for us , redeem us from sin and misery, but he doth1 Thes. 5.9. , obain salvation for us, and doth yeeld unto us a1 Pet 3.18. , a manuduction to God his Father, in whomEph. 3.12. we have boldness and access with confidence through the faith of him. At these festival Sacrifices there wasDe. 16.15. Judg. 21.21. great rejoycing, joyned with Songs and Dan∣cing: to manifest what Joy and Exultation of spirit the Peace-offering of the Lord Jesus doth procure for reconciled sinners, in the sight of God. To conclude in a word. Gods Majesty had his part in this blessed Offering, as the Remitter of sin and transgression, as being the Author of our mercy and deliverance, thereby shewing that he was infinitely well pleased with this glorious satisfaction given to his Justice, his soul smelling a Savour of rest in the Sacrifice of his Son, will now be∣gin to hold communion with us, who are brought nigh to him by the blood of his Son. The Priest had his part as the instrument of atonement between us and God: If you take it for Christ, we may then here apply that expression of the Evangelist,Luk. 24.46. It behoved him when he had suffered to enter into glory, and the people had their share likewise, to make them gratefull and joyfull for this unspeakable mercy of their deliverance. 5, 6. Of the Meat-offerings and Drink offerings. These I shall put together in their explication, as they usually went hand in hand in their oblation. The common name of the Meat-offering was  a gift or present, from  to bring or offer. The word for Drink-offering was  or  Libamen from  to pour out. Hereby was signified the constant communion that Gods Ma∣jesty held with his people. He had his presence Chamber in the Temple, viz. the San∣ctuary, his privy Chamber in the Oracle. He had his Table, his meat and drink: ac∣cording to that promise that he made of dwelling in the midst of his people Jsrael. The yeelding of these Offerings to God, shewed the great interest he had in all the things which they enjoyed, and that in token of homage, they were to give to him of all their choice enjoyments, as the soveraign Lord of all their Land, and that thereby they might obtain a blessing upon their outward comforts.Mal. 3.10 Bring ye all the Tithes into the store-house, that there may be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord, If I will not open you the windowes of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it: and I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your Vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord of Hosts.Joel 2.14. Who knoweth, if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him, even a Meat-offering and a Drink offering unto the Lord your God, that is, by blessing of the fruits of the Land, that they may yeeld such plenty, as wherewithall you may prepare Offerings for his Al∣tar, which before wasJoel 1.9.13. Verse 10 &c. cut off from the house of the Lord. For the field was wasted, the land mourned, the corn was consumed, the new wine was dried up, and the oyl languished. Several Appendices there were unto Sacrifices, under the legal Administrations. Manifold washings, to denote the purifying of our souls by way of preparation, for our solemn spiritual worship which we are to performe to God under the Gospel. In Meat-offeringsLev. 2.15. oyl was used. It was an Embleme of mercy, saithOrig. Hom. 2. in Levitic. p. 118. Origen, and signi∣fied the great condescending favour and mercy of our God, to hold fellowship and communion with his poor people in Ordinances of his worship. Salt was a constant attendant uponLev. 2.13. Sacrifice, every oblation of thy Meat-offering shalt thou season with Salt, nay, with all thine Offerings thou shalt offer Salt. No Sacrifice is acceptable to God, but what's savoury. Salt resists putrefaction, and is a great digester of crude and raw humours. We must sprinkle Salt upon our Sacrifices, and draw nigh to God in his Worship, with a serious, savoury frame of spirit. If Christian conference must beCol. 4.6. seasoned with Salt, how much more our Prayers wherein we speak to the great and infinite Majesty of Heaven?
In the sacred pages, the word of God is compared to salt, as wherewith the hearts and mouths of Christians are seasoned against the waterish and indigested notions of persons erroneous in principle and practice. Our Lord doth call his DisciplesMat. 5.13. the salt of the earth; by reason of that sound, soul-preserving Doctrine, which they should preach in his name throughout the world, and especially that of repentance from dead works, and re∣morse for sin, which though it be for a time smarting and tedious, while men do chasten their own spirits therewith, yet is it most safe and wholsom, and yeeldeth the peaceableHeb. 12.11. fruit of righteousness to them who are exercised thereby. Every true Christian is an evangelical Sacrifice, and is to be salted in this wholsom man∣ner, that he may become savoury and relishable before God. For with such Gods Maje∣sty will make aPs 50 5. Covenant by Sacrifice, and it shall prove to them a perpetual Cove∣nant,Numb. 18.19. a Covenant of salt for ever before the Lord. To this ancient Levitical custom of salting the Sacrifices, doubtless our Lord doth strongly allude in the evangelical story, when cautioning his Disciples to beware of scan∣dals and offences, he argues à periculo, presenting before them the danger and torments of hell fire, speaks thus,Mark 9.49. Every one shall be salted with fire, and every Sacrifice shall be salt∣ed with salt. Concerning which placeCamerar. in p. 22. Edit Cantabr. 1642. Camerarius in his notes on the New Testament, affirms, that in an ancient Copy, he sound the word  added, thus [] Every loaf or cake shall be salted in the fire; as if there were an Ellipsis of the preposition . According to that copy there seems to be a more manifest allusion made to that place in Leviticus before cited, concerning the salting of meat-offerings. For the meat-offering, which we translateLevit. 7.12, 13. a Cake in Levit. 7.12, 13. according to our division of the Bible into Chapters and verses, & is found in ver. 2, 3. of the said Chapter, as the print∣ed Septuagints are distinguisht and expresly called , loaves. But it is no wayes safe to allow such varieties of readings in the holy Scripture, according to every corrupt and musty manuscript, giving great advantage to the Papists in reference to their Vulgar La∣tine, as is excellently noted by the most learned and judiciousDr Owen on the Bibl. Polyga. Dr Owen in his usefull ani∣madversions concerning the various readings in the late Bibles. And yet farre bolder is the censure and correction ofScalger. 442 Edit. Lug Bat. 1627. Scaliger upon this place of Mark, which is extant in his 442. Letter, sent by him to John de Laet, pag. 806. where he deals with the sacred Scri∣ptures, as if he were criticizing upon Theocritus, Pindar, or some other Heathen Poet, and makes no bones of crying out, here's a fault, and there's another, contra gentes, it must be thus corrected, and nemo praeter me indicaverit, and crows too peremptorily and irre∣verently, Nihil verius esse potest; and all the stir is, that  must be , and  must be expunged: and sayes for certain, the Evangelist wrote thus, , &c. ma∣king at length a Tautology in Scripture, and that very unfit and improper, which clearly appears being englisht thus according to him, Every Sacrifice shall be salted, and every Sa∣crifice shall be salted with salt. But well haveCloppen∣burg. Schol. Sacrif. Pa∣triarch. pag. 200. Cloppenburg and Spanhemius noted, that the word  as it is never used by the Septuagint, or New Testament Pen-men, so nei∣ther is the word  to which the word  should answer, found in that place of Le∣viticus, and besides that the Greek word is never used in any classical Author for a Sacri∣fice offered by fire.Spanhem. dub. Evang. part. 3. pag. 453. Whereas our blessed Lord in that place of Mark, is shewing, that tis better to go to heaven maim'd and halt, or blind of one eye, expressing matters para∣bollcaly, then for a man to go whole to hell, that will not pull out his right eye, and cut off his right hand in the case of scandal. For , every one, or every whol man, as some gloss upon the place, that will not submit to deny himself in the point of scandal, shall be salted with fire, who being made a Sacrifice to the wrath of God in hell, shall be salted with his indignation in that fire that shall never be extinguisht. Others re∣fer  to , every one, that is, every worm, the worm of every sinners conscience in hell that never dieth, shall be salted and inflamed with the fire of Gods wrath, to make it sting and punish the more accurately and feelingly. A reverend Divine of our Nation (whose usefull Comment on Mark is intended for the Press) speaks in this place concern∣ing the fire of affliction, and the fire of the Spirit,Salignis na∣turam sequi∣tur. Isidor. lib 16 c. 2. wherewith every good Christian must be seasoned before he can be a meet Sacrifice for God: and so the sense of the place seems plain and clear, That who ever shall be delivered from the everlasting fire of hell, must be here in this life salted and seasoned with the salt of repentance, and the fire of affliction, that thereby he may be fitted to be offered up as an acceptable Sacrifice unto God. For as every Sacrifice, which God accepted under the ancient Law was seasoned with salt (and hereby the citation of that place in Leviticus comes in properly to good purpose) so every spiritual Sacrifice, that may be well-pleasing in the sight of God under the Gospel must be rendred savoury by some spiritual salt, and offered up in some spiritual fire, that they may prove Sacrifices of mercy and praise, and not of Gods wrath and justice,Jud 7. suffer∣ing the vengeance of eternal fire.
To proceed: As the charge concerning salt was strict, so the prohibition of the use of leaven and honey at Sacrifices was very strong:Lev. 2.11. (b) Ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey in any offering of the Lord made by fire. They are both of a fermenting nature, swelling and puffing up. Corrupt Doctrines are com∣pared to leaven, traditions, inventions of men, false glosses and expositions of Scripture are set forth by it. Beware, says our Lord, of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is there expresly interpreted of their Doctrine;Mat. 16.11, 12. and so when he forbids them to beware of the leaven of Herod, it is to be meant of that false Doctrine of the Herodians, who taught that Herod was the Messiah, Gregor. notes on Scripture, p. 147. on Mat. 22.16. edit Oxo. 1646. because a King in Judea, after the Scepter was departed from Judah. To adde any thing of mans vain conceptions to the pure Doctrine of Scripture, and to interlace Di∣vine Worship with Humane Inventions, is a highly provoking sin in the sight of God, and savours of a monstrous spirit of pride, swelling with corrupt leaven; wherefore the Scripture doth stigmatize erronious persons who cor∣rupt the truth, that they usually speak great swelling words of vanity:2 Pet. 2.18. We must endeavour to purge out this leaven of pride, corrupt Doctrine, o ∣holiness of heart and life, when we draw near to God, to present our Sacri∣fices to him; we must keep Gospel feasts, not with old leaven, which we fed upon in the house of Bondage in the Egyptian state of nature, Exod. 12.15.1 Cor. 5.8. neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth: For hypocrisie is Pharisaical leaven, Luke 12.1. Yet as to this particular of leaven, though it was generally forbidden to be used in Sacrifice, yet it was permitted in one case;Lev. 7.13. Amos 4.5. viz in the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving of Peace-Offerings; and here it may be either taken in a good sense, as sometimes leaven is, where the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to it, for the encreasing and growing nature of the Kingdom of Christ in the world; or of the work of grace in the heart of a Saint, and so it may signifie the exuberancie, dilatation or swelling of the spirits in joy and praise,Mat. 13.33. Luk 13.21. when the soul gives up its thank-offerings to God: or else its taken in a bad sense for sourness of grief and sorrow, mixture of sin and infirmity, to shew that our praises here in this life are imperfect, not onely as to the matter, there being great cause of mourning and heaviness for the relicts and remainders of sin in us, are attended with many griefs and sorrows; no Christian can say of any day in his life (atque ibat sine nube Dies) that there was no cloud of sin, or storm of trouble, to hinder his visions of peace and joy. So neither for the manner of the management of our praises, we cannot be upon the wing in so holy and spirituall a manner, as such a heavenly and Angelical service (as that of praise is) doth require; there will still be a lump of leaven hanging to our feet, and therefore herein the goodness and tenderness of Gods love is seen, that he will yet accept our thank offerings though they have in them some mixtures of flesh, some tinctures of imperfection. Another thing annexed to Sacrifices was the burning of incense. Now this was of two sorts, and accordingly called in our translate by two names, Incense and Frankincense. Incense in the Hebrew is termed  from  suffire, adolere, suffumigare, to burn and make a sweet smelling smoak by fire.Exo. 30.35. This is that which was made of the five ingredients mentioned in the book of Exodus whereof largely before, and is there translated a perfume. This was burnt upon the golden Altar of Incense every morning and every evening in the (a) time of the Sacrifice of the two Lambs every day,Dr. Lightf. Temple ser∣vice. p. 111. Lev. 16.13. and in the Expiation day we read of Incense burnt, before the blood was brought into the most holy place, whether or no this chief and precious Incense were generally burnt in a stated quantity, at the offering of every Sacrifice, I cannot evidently determine from Scripture: In one place its called the Incense of Rams, Psal. 66.15. probably, because
usually annexed to the Sacrifices to perfume the ayr. The other sort termed Frankincense, is in the Hebrew  Lebonah, , whereof fully before; and was gathered of the Frankincense Tree in Arabia; so called, because freely sweating from it as a gum, and of it self, without any other mixture, gives a most fragrant odour.Lev. 2.1, 2, 15, 16. & 6.15, &c. Acts 6.4. This was commanded to be offered with most Meat-offerings, & therefore are they called Offerings of a sweet savour unto the Lord. In a word, the joyning of Incense with Offerings, signified prayer to attend all our sacred services. The word must be joyned with prayer: Our blessed Lord joyned ardent prayers with his own precious offering on the Cross, when he gave himself for us an offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour. Eph. 5.2.I have spoken so much about Frankincense in the foregoing lines, that I shall onely allude to what Porta speaks of it,Porta Phyto. nom. l. 5. c. 13 p. 215. & p. 126. that it cures any corrupt and foul ulcers of the head by fume, and the flux of sore eyes. I cannot experimentally seal the truth of that assertion; but of ardent spiritual prayers, we are sure there is nothing so prevalent and available against spiritual distempers of both head and heart, as breathings of a holy soul towards heaven in prayer. Hannah after she had prayed at the Tabernacle,1 Sam. 1.18. Psal. 116.4. was no more sad; it cured her, and so hath it stopt the tears of many a Saint. After David had called upon the name of the Lord, he findes that rich return of the deliverance of his soul from death, his eyes from tears,Ver. 8. and his feet from falling. The mounting up of these fragrant vapours towards heaven, did signifie with what winged speed, with what towering meditations our souls should soar towards his holy habitation: They must be Preces alatae, winged prayers, intimated by the ascent of the vapours; they must be broken hearted, hinted by the contusion of the gum before it be fired; they must be fragrant, sweetly sented of love, and they must be inflamed, full of ardor, zeal, and fervency of spirit; and yet all will be of no value, God will smell no savour of rest in them, unless the great Angel of the Covenant perfume them in his golden censer:Rev. 8.3. He is the Priest that intercedes for us, and mixeth of the precious odours of his intercessions: Ours at the best are but simply , bare Frankincense, and that mixt with many sticks and straws, as the impure sort of that is; but Christs is the , the compounded incense for the Golden Altar, which the Priest alone was to offer, the former every man brought with his Meat-offering. The Saints have but vials,Rev. 5.8. poor small vessels, stinted measures, though golden, yet but little; but Christ comes (with his ) that he may adde or give it to their prayers, and with them, to make them acceptable: The holiest motions, the most gracious requests of Saints, are not pure without his incense, which he addes as a free gift, to render over his merit and holiness to them, that Gods Majestie may take delight in them through his beloved Son, with whom he is well pleased,Joh. 11.42. and whose requests he heareth alway. Thus we see, the holy Scripture is pleased to shadow forth the spiritual So∣lemnities of the Gospel, by the ancient Ceremonies of the Law. But hence it doth no ways follow, that Jewish Rites must be introduced into the manage∣ment of New-Testament Worship, as the Pontificians do, thereby load∣ing the Church, and imposing a yoke of insupportable ceremonies, derived from Jewish presidents, and mixed with their own carnal inventions, who by their multiplied traditions do even make void the Commandments of God; and particularly in this of Incense,Molin de al∣tar, p. 96, 97. which they have introduced into the Church, that ought not to be used by Christians: But this the Holy Ghost hath fore∣told us should be the merchandize of Rome, in her pompous and garish orna∣ments, to amaze the mindes of the vulgar, and thereby take off the hearts from spiritual service, by their gold, silver, precious stones, and pearls, fine linnen, purple, silk and scarlet, and all Thyine wood, vessels of ivory, and of most precious wood,Rev. 18.13. Cinnamon, odours, oyntments and Frankincense, &c.
whereas now God seeketh such to worship him,Joh. 4.23, 24 that shall wait upon him in Spirit and Truth. To conclude, The last thing which did accompany Sacrifice, was Musick, both Instrumental and Vocal. In the day of your gladness, in your solemn days, and in the beginnings of your moneths,Num. 10.10. ye shall Blow (saith God) with Trumpets over your Burnt-offerings, and over the sacrifices of your Peace-offerings. Blow the Trumpet in Zion, &c. Call the solemn Assembly.Joel 2.15. 2 Chro. 29.27 Accord∣ingly in the days of Hezekiah, when the Burnt-offering began, the Song of the Lord began also with the Trumpets, and with the Instruments ordained by Da∣vid King of Israel. It is recorded, that the Levites sang their Songs on the steps arising up to the great East-gate of the Priests Court; and therefore are they called Songs of Degrees: to intimate, that in our ascent to Duties, our hearts should be prepared for Thanksgiving and Praise. O enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise: Psal. 100.4. On the Sab∣bath day they sang in the morning at the sacrifice of a Lamb (which was added for that day above the ordinary) the Song of Moses, in Deut. 32.D. Lightf. Temple serv. p. 61. and in the evening, the Song of Moses, in Exod. 15. and finish'd them in six Sabbaths, and then began again. Wherefore the New Testament Saints are said to sing the song of Moses, and of the Lamb, in the time of their eternal Sabbath, and rest from all their labours. The Papists have together with many other Jewish Ceremonies, introduced this also into the Church, enjoyning the use of Instrumental Musick in Divine Service. A thing no where commanded in the New Testament, and not practi∣sed in the Primitive time: Nay Clemens Alexandrinus in his days rejected it,Clem. Alex. Paedagog. l. 2. c. 4. p. 121. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1616. and spiritualizes the ancient Musick: , &c. Praise him with the Psaltery; for the Tongue is the Psaltery of the Lord: and praise him with the Harp; by the Harp we are to understand the Mouth, which is plaid upon with the Bowe of the Spirit. In a Book likewise ascribed to Justin Martyr,Just. Martyr Quaest. & Resp. ad Or∣thodox. 107. p. 308. Com∣meli. 1593. though justly suspected not to be his, yet is it ancient; in the answer to one question about Church Musick; the reply is, , &c. . The use of such Instruments is taken away from songs in Churches, and of all others; fit rather for children, or foolish peo∣ple; and there remains only bare singing. Very excellent are the expressions of another most famous Worthy of the Church of Christ on Psal. 150.Chrysostom. in Psal. 150. To. 1. p. 909. Edit. Savil. , &c. As there∣fore the Jews [did praise the Lord] with all Instruments, so we are in like man∣ner commanded to glorifie God with all our Members; by the Eye, by the Tongue, by the Ear, and by the Hand, &c. The Eye praiseth him, when it looks not upon lascivious objects; the Tongue, when it sings; the Ear, when it entertains no filthy songs, nor accusations against our neighbour; the minde or soul, when it muses not upon deceits, but brings forth love; the Feet, when they run not to wickedness, but to the dispensation of good works; and the hands, when they are not stretched out to rapine, covetousness, and fighting; but to Alms, and the patronage of the Injured: Then is man a melodious Harp, yeilding to God most harmonious and spiritual Musick. And then he goes on thus, , &c. Such Instruments were then permitted for this cause, even for their weakness sake, to stir up their mindes to perform their external Worship with some delight. Instruments of Musick were not heard in the Latine Church till the days of Vitalianus the Pope, as 'tis manifest by Volaterrane, Platina,Volaterran. Anthropolog. l. 22. p. 501. Edit Basil. 1559 Pan p. 89. Col Agrip. 1626. Fasc. Temp ad Ann. Chr. 654 p. 60. Edit. Hano. 1613. M. Terry's Voyage to the Indies, in Puch. part 2 p. 1467. Eph. 3.14 21 Phil. 4.6. & the Author of
Fasciculus Temporum, and others; by whom it appears, that till after 650. years, there were no such things in the Service of God, but that these began in the depth of Popish darkness. Nay, 'its observable, that the Turks (great strangers to the Truth) are offended at this custome in the Christian Churches: As a petty King of Socotora near the mouth of the Red Sea, coming to the water side, heard some of the Wind-Instruments of the English; and being a Mahumetan, asked if they played David's Psalms (which he had heard of) and being answered affirmatively, replyed, That it was an ill invention of him that first mingled Musick with Religions for, before God was worshipped in Heart, but by this in Sound. Which may well be applyed to the times of Vitalianus be∣fore spoken of. Let us rather in a few words shew why Temple Musick was of old annexed to Sacrifice: Doubtless for our Instruction, to shew that praise and thanks∣giving ought to accompany our prayers and solemn services. The Apostle Paul did so Bowing his knees (in one verse;) unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: and in another, ascribin glory to him by Jesus Christ: and enjoyns the Philip∣pian Church, in every thing by Prayer, and supplication with thanksgiving, to make their request known unto God. Further, he advises his Colossians, to teach and admonish one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace to the Lord in their hearts.Eph. 5.19. He counsels the Ephesians to speak to them∣selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, making melody in their hearts to the Lord.1 Thes. 5.17, 18 He enjoyns the Thessalonians to joyn Prayer and Praises toge∣ther; Pray without ceasing, in evry thing giving thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you: and exhorts Timothy, That Intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men.1 Tim. 2.1. In like manner we finde the Saints with Harps and Vials full of odours,Pro. 5.8, 9. praying and praising together: and in another place we finde them singing the Song of Moses and the Lamb, saying Great and marvellous are thy works Lord God almighty;Rev. 15.3. just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints, &c. Havng now finished the Interpretation of some of the chief Legal solem∣nities, I shall put a period to this Section with the recital of some Gospel sacri∣fices, which are called so in the holy Scriptures, in allusion to those of the Tem∣ple in former days. Under the Gospel, Saints have their spiritual sacrifices, as well as they un∣der the Law had their carnal: Indeed all theirs had some significancy in them, they were not able of themselves to purge the Conscience. Christ is the great High Priest that presents his whole Church to himself, not having spot or wrin∣kle,Eph. 5.27. or any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish: yea he hath made his people to become a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sa∣crifices; and a royal Priesthood,1 Pet. 2.5. to shew forth the praises of him who hath cal∣led us out of darkness into his marvellous light.v. 9. Singing of God's praises is a most royal and princely service: He hath joyned the Crown to the Mter, and made us Kings as well as Priests to God and his Father,Rev. 1.6.5.10.20.6. to whom be glory and dominion for ever. [Habeat in se (saith an Ancient) defixum & Altare, t in quo orationum hostias & misericordiae victimas offerat Deo. In quo con∣inentia cultro superbiam quasi Taurum immolet, iracundiam quasi Arietm ju∣gulet,Origen in Exod. Hom. 9.98. Psal. 100.3. Luxariam omnemque libidinem tanquam Hircos & Haedos libet.] Let him have an Altar fixed within him, on which he may offer up to God the sa∣crifices of Prayers, and the oblation of Mercy: In which he may slay pride like a Bullock, with the slaughtering knife of abstinence; he may cut the throat of wrath as of a Ram, and may make a burnt sacrifice of luxury, and all lust, as of Goats and Kids When we enter the Courts of his Temple with the voice of joy, being his people, and the sheep of his pasture, let us give up our selves as sacrifices to his
praise. All the sheep of Christs flock (saith our Learned Grosted, alluding to that place in Canticles) bring forth Twins,Grosted de Cessat. Leg. p. 125. Cant. 4.2. and there is not one barren among them; and the twins are (saith he) the love of God and our Neighbour. The first and prime Gospel sacrifice is our heart and soul. Son, give me thy heart, is that which God principally calls for, and expects at our hands. The Inwards of the sacrifice were always to be burnt upon the Altar. God delights in hearty service, when our souls are inflamed with love to him, in communion with him in the Ordinances.Strabo Geog. l. 15. p. 732. Edit. Caus. Concerning the Magi in Persia (so Strabo calls their Priests) it is related by him, that they distributed the parts of the sacri∣fice to be eaten: . Setting apart no share for the Gods; for they say that God requires nothing of the sacrifice save the soul. I am sure, what∣ever superstitious customs were among the Heathens, that the glorious and in∣finite God, that searcheth the heart, and tryeth the reins, expects them prin∣cipally and wholly to be sacrificed in all our approaches to him,1 Pet. 3.15. whom we ought to sanctifie in our hearts. Therefore in Scripture we shall finde, that the actings of the several graces implanted in the soul by the Spirit of God, are called by the name of sacrifices. Contrition and brokenness of heart are the sacrifices of God,Psal. 51.17. which he will not despise. Faith is a sacrifice: If I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith,Phil. 2.17. &c. which some interpret thus, That the Apostle had consecrated and dedicated them as a sacrifice to God by believing; and now drawing nigh his Martyr∣dom,Dutch notes. was to have his blood spilt (as the Drink-offering of Wine anciently was joyned with the Meat-offering) upon the sacrifice of their Faith. Joy is an other sacrifice, alluding to the Peace-offerings: I will offer (says David) in his Tabernacle, sacrifices of joy, I will sing,Psal. 27.6. yea I will sing praises unto the Lord. Thanksgiving is another. Offer unto God Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most High. He that offereth praise, glorifieth me, saith God:Psal. 50.14. v. 23: Ps. 107.22. Hos. 14.2. Let them sacrifice the sacrifices of Thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoy∣cing. The Church in the Prophet Hosea cries unto the Lord, Take away all iniquities, and receive us graciously, so will we render the Calves of our lips.Jer. 33.10, 11. There shall be heard in this place (saith the Prophet Jeremiah) the voice of them that shall say, Praise the Lord of Hosts; for the Lord is good for his mercy endu∣reth for ever; and of them that shall bring the sacrifice of Praise into the house of the Lord. By him, that is, by Christ, (saith the Apostle) let us offer the sa∣crifice of Praise to God continually: that is, the fruit of our lips,Heb. 13.15. giving thanks to his Name. Mercy also is desired of the Lord rather then sacrifice.Hos. 6.6. Good works and alms are a sacrifice likewise. I have all, and abound (says Paul) having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you,Phil. 4.18. an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God. Where∣fore to do good, and communicate, forget not;Heb. 13.16. for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Righteousness is another. Offer the sacrifices of Righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord. Do good in thy good pleasure to Zion,Psal. 4.5. Psal. 51.19. build thou the Walls of Jerusalem. Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of Righteousness. Prayer is another most excellent and sweet smelling sacrifice under the Go∣spel: My house shall be called of all Nations a house of Prayer.Mar. 11.17. Of this we have treated more copiously above, when handling the service of Incense. Not only our souls in their several heavenly breathings at the Throne of Grace, and in all their Divine services presented to God, are represented in Scripture under the ancient shadows of sacrifice: but our Bodies also are to be presented
as a living Sacrifice,Heb. 12.9. holy, acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service. As God is the Father of our spirits, so is he the Creator of our bodies, and expects from both (as is most due from creatures) all manner of homage, obe∣dience, adoration and praise for ever: Wherefore let us draw near wth a true heart,Heb. 10.22. in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil con∣science, and our bodies washed with pure water. Also the vocation of the Gentiles, is represented in the Holy Scripture, as a Sacrifice in the day of the Gospel to be presented to God, when in eve∣ry place incense shall be offered to the name of the Lord, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among the Heathen,Mal. 1.11. saith the Lord of Hosts. The Apo∣stle Paul says, that he was the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, mini∣string the Gospel of God,Rom. 15.16. that the offering up of the Gentiles might be accepta∣ble, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Psa. 116.15.In the last place, Martyrdom is esteemed a Sacrifice, and that which is most precious in the sight of God Paul compares himself to a Sacrifice, when near to his death at Rome:Phil. 2.17. The Souls under the Altar, that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held, are related to cry with a loud voyce,Rev. 6.9. saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth: There being therein a strong allusion to the blood of the Sacrifices of old, which was poured out besides the Altar, the warm vapours whereof went up reaking towards hea∣ven: In which sense Cyprian speaks of the Ministers Exhortations of the god∣ly to suffering in his days,Cypr. Ep. 2. p. 4. edit. Bas. 1530. that thereby they might prepare Sacrifices for God. SECT. VI. The Endowments of the Temple Officers Spiri∣tualized. WHat Priviledges, Possessions and Revenues the Servants of God in the Temple Worship under the Law enjoyed, I have formerly explained in a set Chapter:Hieronym. ad Fabio. loc. Tim, 3. p. 58. The end is set down by Jerome in his Epistle to Fabiola, [Primitiae cibor um, &c. ut habens victum aq vstitum securus & liber serviat Domino. The Firstfruits of meats, &c. were given to the Priests, that having food and raiment, he might with security and freedom give up himself to the service of the Lord: Wherefore such as come up to worship God at the Temple, were charged never to appear empty before the Lord: Nay, God himself,Exod 23.15. & 34.0. Deut. 6.16. Lev. 27.30. Num. 18.21. who challenged the tythes from he people of Israel as his own, did make an act of assignment of them to the Levites in consideration of their service in his worship. From whence it follows by the same rule of Equity, that such as serve God in the great work of the Gospel, should have a compe∣tent and convenient maintenance to encourage them in the work and service of God: Nay, A minori ad majus: By how much more excellent their Dispen∣sation is, and the glad tidings of the Gospel to be preferred before the shadows and ceremonies of the Law; by so much the more ought the Christian people to manifest greater love, countenance, encouragement and obedience to those that watch for their souls.Heb. 13.17. But we shall see that the Apostle Paul doth draw an inference from the an∣cient
legal maintenance in behalf of the Gospel-Ministrey, in these words, Who goeth a warfare at any time of his own charges? who planteth a vineyard,1 Cor. 9.7, &c. and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man, or saith not the Law the same al∣so: For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for Oxen, or saith he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written, That he that ploweth, should plow in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope, should be par∣taker of his hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? Do you not know, they which minister about holy things, liv of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the altar,Vers. 13. are partakers with the altar; even so hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.Dr. Edw. Reynolds on Psal. 110.4 at the end of v 4. p. 479. Phil. 4.17. This place is gloss'd upon and ex∣pounded by a very learned and able hand, who hath discussed this matter clear∣ly and fully. In another Epistle, the great Teacher of the Gentiles commend∣ing the communication of the Church at Philippi to him in necessities, tells them, it was not therefore because he desired a gift; but fruit, that might a∣bound to their account. It was not to be accounted a matter of meer benevo∣lence and favour, which they neded not to do; but it was a piece of justice and equity, thereby demonstrating their obedience to the faith, and laying up in store a treasure in heaven against the great day of account. For it is an in∣junction from God, Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things: Be not deceived, God is not mocked,Gal. 16.6. for whatso∣ever a man soweth, that shall he reap. Again, in his first Epistle to Timothy e exhorts, Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honour,1 Tim. 5.17, 18. espe∣cially they who labour in word and doctrine: For the Scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the Ox. that treadeth out the corn; and, The labourer is worthy of his reward; which brings me to that place of the Evangelist, where, when our Lord was sending out his Disciples to preach the word of the Kingdom; he charges them thus, Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses,Mat. 10.9, 10. Luke 10.5, &c, nor scrip for your journey; neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves: For the workman is worthy of his meat: And into whatsoever house ye enter; fist say, Peace be to this house▪ and if the Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; if not, it shall turn to you again: and in the same house remain eating and drinking such things as they give: For the labourer is worthy of his hire.Vers. 16. He that heareth you, heareth me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth me: and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me. By these places of Divine Authority, we learn, how careful the Lord is of his instituted Ministrey under the Gospel, and what weighty and strong com∣mands do lie upon the consciences of those who participate of their spiritual labours. Besides, as the Priests had their Cities and habitations assigned them;Mat. 21.33. so the vine-dressers are said to have a Tower built in the vineyard for them to dwell in. Now many will say, A maintenance for a Gospel-Ministrey we allow, and that competent and fitting for their estate and condition, that so they may serve the Lord without distraction. But the way of maintenance as it is in our Na∣tion, by Tythe, we allow not of: 1. Because Jewish, and annexed to the Cere∣monial Law. 2. Because brought in under Popery, and is therefore Antichri∣stian: And in the next place they like not a forced and compulsory maintenance of that or any other manner, but that every one should give freely, and this to be counted the Gospel way. Here I shall premise, that it is not my purpose to handle this question, nor to declare my own opinion upon it, onely so far as to cut the nerves of those objections in sunder, it is sufficiently done already by many learned and judi∣cious
persons, Sir Henry Spelman, Sir James Sempill, Doctor Garleten, Doctor Sclater, M. Nettle, and others: I shall only speak a little to the branches of this objection. To the first, That it was a part of the Jewish and Ceremonial law given by Moses, and therefore to be abrogated by the death of Christ. Gen. 14.20. Heb. 7.4 &c. v. 6.I answer, That long before the Law was given, the Patriarch Abraham did pay tythes to Melchisedec, who was a signal Type of Christ, and had not his descent from the loyns of Levi, being yet unborn; and yet received Tythes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the Promises: which Argument the Apo∣stle clearly urgeth against Levitical Ceremonies in the seventh chapter to the Hebrews.v. 9, 10. For Levi who received Tythes, paid Tythes in Abraham; for he was yet in the loyns of his Father when Melchisedec met him. Now whereas 'tis ur∣ged that the Levitical Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law.v. 12. I grant it to be true, that this Law ought to cease, and did so, in respect of the Levitical Priesthood, which was finished at the death of Christ. But the Lord Jesus, who was so eminently typified by Melchise∣dec, the receiver of Tythes before the exhibition of the Law, hath an unchange∣able Priesthood, and therefore the Tythes which he received as due annexed to it,Heb. 7.24. Mar. 9.41. Mat. 10.40, 41, 42, do still continue to be his due by Divine sanction. But now Christ our High Priest being in heaven, counts that done and given to him, which is given to a Prophet in his Name: he having no where repealed or disanulled his right. Gen. 28.22.Besides this, holy Jacob also when he was at Bethel in his journey toward Padan Aram, made this vow, Of all that thou shalt give me, I will surely give the Tenth unto thee; after this being about to depart from his cruel and hard Uncle, and being enriched through the good hand of God, he was by the God of Bethel put in minde of his vow which he made at the anointing of the pillar,Gen. 31.13. Gen. 33.18. Gen. 14.5, 17, 18 which no doubt he fully performed (but whether at Shalem, a City of Shechem, whereof Melchisedeck was King (a place not far from Shaveh Kiriathaim, where he met Abraham) for Shalem was in the Tribe of Ephraim, not far from Jordan, and Kiriathaim in the Tribe of Reuben, not far off on the other side the River) or whether at Bethel it self, for at both places he offered on an Altar: but at the last,Gen. 33.20.35.7. especially where he was blessed of God, probably upon the per∣formance of his Vows: At which of the two places he consecrated his tenths to God, is not much material, seeing that it was done doubtless, and that a great while before the Ceremonial Law was delivered by Moses at Mount Sinai. Exod. 22.29. Exod. 38, 21. Lev. 27.30. Numb. 18.21.Again, God commanded the rendring to him the first fruits, and other offer∣ings, an appendix of Tythes, before ever the Levites were assigned to their service about the Tabernacle: The Tythe, whether of the seed of the Land, or of the fruit of the Tree, is the Lords; it is holy unto the Lord, and was given by God unto the children of Levi for an inheritance. Wherefore we make it not to have been Typical, but as a Moral Duty, grounded upon equity, and the Law of Nature in the main: that is, as maintenance: and the quota pars, or the tenth of mens substance upon a positive Law observed by the Patriarchs before the Law. Now such things as were before the Ceremonial Law, and continued under the Law, though somtimes fortified by the Moral and Judi∣cial Laws, were also to remain after the abrogation of the ceremonies, and not to determine at that time: As for example, the seventh part of our time stands dedicated to God by a moral Institution, being appointed before the Law was given in the Wilderness, even in the state of Innocence, and therefore conti∣nues after the Law, even in the times of the Gospel, although the seventh part part of the week be changed to another day, yet a seventh part still continues; so likewise some acknowledgement of our substance and goods, the encrease
of our grounds, and the fruit of our labours, is to be rendred up to God as a moral duty, as thereby owning him to be our God, and the giver of all our blessings. But now the quota pars, or how much of this is to be dedicated, stands in force by the positive Law of his Declarative Will; which I have shewn to be the tenth: God declaring that the tenth is his, 'tis his portion in the world, which he gives to his servants whom he appoints for the celebration of his worship. Wherefore even Heathens by the light of nature knowing that there is a God, and consequently that this God is to be worshipped, and then, that there must be administrators, or managers of this Worship, who because of their constant attendance thereon, could not, nay might not em∣ploy themselves in any worldly affairs, therefore ought to have some set main∣tenance, whereby their lives might be preserved, according to the dignity of their place: wherefore they generally assigned them the tenths; either dedu∣cing it by tradition from the ancient Patriarchs after the flood, to whom they were allyed in collateral lines, or else by imitation of the Worship of God in Canaan. This I could abundantly testifie out of Plutarch,Plut. in Luc. & alibi. and other grave Authors in this case. But I cannot say that the tantum, or such a quantity de∣dicated to God, could be discerned by the light of Nature. A second branch of the objection is, That this way of maintenance is Popish and Antichristian, being brought into the Church after the defection from the Truth, and the rise of the man of sin. As to this, the want of skill and knowledge in the history of the Church, may be indulged and pardoned: for no man is bound to speak more then he knows; yet to assert it so vehemently, as some have done, that's unhandsom, and not befitting any sober spirit. Let them then know, that after the ten persecutions of the Primitive times were ended, and peace and rest given to the churches of Christ by the great blessing of God under the glorious Reigne of Constantine the great, that godly Emperour, that he made a Decree and Law,Sozom Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8. That the Christian people should give a certain fixed rate of their estates to the maintenance of the Gospel-Ministery about the year 325. after the overthrow of Licinius: which certain rate that it was a Tenth, is attested by some,vid. Zipp. 363. ex Hermanno. and was fully enjoyned by after Empeours. Whence we infer, First, That this work was not done by the Pope; for then there was but a Bishop at Rome, without a super-eminent title or power over others, which is the character the Apostle gives, whereby we should know the rise of Antichrist.2 Thes. 2.4. That it was many years before the clear manifestation of the Man of sin, which was in the year 602, when the cruel Phocas constituted the Bishop of Rome head over all Bishops, and then was he revealed with power: It is true,Whitak. Ope. Theol Tom. 2. cont. de Rom. Pont. praef p 517. 2 Thes 2.7. An 325. Pe∣tav. Doct. Tempor. part. 2. p. 720. an Antichristian spirit catching after superiority, and usurping of the place of Christ, to be Head of the Church, did work even in the Apostles days; and yet no sober person will say (I hope) that those times were Popish. But to clear up all, The Nicene Council manifests the days of Constantine to have shined with great luster of truth, as appears by the Nicene Creed or Confessi∣on of Faith▪ composed by three hundred and thirteen Fathers then met toge∣ther in Council, which is commonly to be seen: for five of the three hundred and eighteen did disagree from it, (Hotting. Eccles. Hist part. 1. p. 174.) They determined also clearly against Arius the Heretick, who opposed the Divinity of Christ. In these times of the Sun-shine of the Gospel was it that the godly Empe∣rour Constantine stated a set rate for the Ministery. Afterwards here in Bri∣tain, the Saxon Kings having expelled the British out of their ancient Seats, being themselves then Pagans, at last were converted to the Faith, and holding possession of the Land by the Title of Conquest, of what Lands they kept to
the Crown, and of what they enfeoffed their great Lords in, to hold under them, they retained nine parts, and made a donation, or deed of gift of the tenth part to the Clergie: so that there is no one person in the land that hath at present any injury, or is oppressed thereby. For if Landlords, they never purchased the tenth: If they be tenants, they never paid for any Hold or Te∣nure of the Tenths, either by Fine or Rent: The tenth part being always re∣served upon the account of the ancient Donation, as the Ministers particular stated portion; unless what is alienate by Impropriation in the days of Henry the eighth: so that all the great men of the Nation holding their lands either by Grant from the Crown, or Patrimonial descent, or purchase, do thereupon still retain the right of Patronage, or presentment to such places, whereof their Ancestors were possessed at the time of the Donation. So that this Tenure and possession proceeds from the free gift of Christian Magistrates, who seeing a necessity of maintaining a godly, learned, and painful Ministry, thought it the highest prudence to fix upon some setled rate and portion annually to be assigned over to that use and behoof; who because of the example of the an∣cient Patriarchs before the Law, and the command and institution of God un∣der the Law, thought no course could be better taken, then to follow those leading examples, and not to give either an eighth, or ninth, or a twelfth, or twentieth part of their estates, but a tenth, which hath since been confirmed by manifold Acts and Decrees of successive Parliaments of this Nation, both before and since the Reformation. But as to the manner and way, I think no sober and serious person will much hesitate, in case there be a fixed rate set and appointed; that so their condition may not fluctuate, and be subject to incon∣stancy; their hopes of supply being else frustrate under some necessities of Pro∣vidences. Hence then, as to the third branch of the objection which lies against forced maintenance. There is no person in this point unjustly and unrighteously for∣ced and compelled, nor in the least measure oppressed; When the godly Ma∣gistrates of the Nation do cause the Laws touching that ancient Free gift and Donation, granted by their Ancestors, to be put in execution: for the Su∣preme Magistrate is Custos utriusque Tabulae, and doubtless may, as godly He∣zekiah did,2 Chro. 31.4. command the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion [of the Lord's Ministers] that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. So that there was not of late, even in the times of the Bishops one pe∣ny but that which was called the Easter-offering that was paid of 2d a piece out of the peoples purses, which is now generally fallen with the late Hierarchy: Insomuch that what people will give freely to such with whom they are in Communion and Church-Fellowship, is wholly left to their Christian love, and zeal to the Ministry and Ordinances. So that if men throughout the Nation generally were left to their own Free-wills, unless it be for such whose hearts the Lord hath touched with ardent affections, and tender love to his Sanctua∣ry; if the godly Civil Magistrate did not interpose for the conservation of the Rights of Ministers, the generality of the carnal, formal, and ungodly people, (who hate a sound soul-searching, and convincing Ministry, and are by the conscientious and faithful dispensers of the Word, by reason of their scanda∣lous sins, justly kept off from ruining their own souls in eating and drinking their own damnation, by receiving unworthily at the Lord's Table) they would be so far from contributing freely and liberally to the mainte∣nance of such a Sound, Holy, and Godly Ministry, as that they would generally deny to render those very Dues, to which the people can never in any Justice lay the least Claim to, as being by a Deed of Gift past over to the Ministry by our Zealous Fore-fathers, in the first Plantation of the Gospel, and since established by so many strong and binding Laws.
But there are still some persons (who I charitably hope) would not foster and cherish in their breasts any obstinacy and opposition against a faithful, holy, able and sincere Ministrey) that yet do fly to the examples of the Apostle Paul, who that he might not be chargeable to the Churches,1 Thes. 2.9. would rather work with his hands, and think it a fit president for Ministers to use some calling whereby to get their livelihoods. To whom I would reply in the spirit of meekness and soberness: First, That the Apostles needed not to study, they had the gift of Tongues and utterance, they had an extraordinary measure of the Spirit of God poured out upon them in the day of Pentecost;Acts 2.4. they had the gifts of mi∣racles to conciliate and gain Authority to their Doctrine where ever they came, and the revelation of the mysterie of grace clearly manifested to them; where∣as now such extraordinary gifts being ceased, Ministers must give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine; they must meditate on these things,1 Tim. 4.13, 15. and give themselves wholly to them, that their profiting may appear to all, which work if they conscionably perform, looking at the injunction of God, and the profit of souls, they will finde little time to spend in outward vocations and businesses of the world, which take off the edge of the affections from spiri∣tual things, and put them out of a prepared frame for Gospel services, unless they were sure to enjoy infallibly the presence and anointing of the Holy Spirit in an extraordinary manner, unto the several emergencies of their duties. I doubt not, but godly Ministers, if they had such eminent and miraculous assi∣stance (which the primitive times enjoyed) for the performance of their in∣cumbent services in the Gospel, they would be content to betake themselves to such moderate imployments in Trade and Merchandize, as whereby possibly they might attain to some good estates, by the blessing of God, as well as others, they being generally no more destitute of parts then other men, if this were the minde of God, and the rule of the Gospel. But secondly, The state of the Churches in the Apostles times was general∣ly poor and mean, and not able to contribute to their necessities. The Apo∣stle doth frequently complain of the poverty of the Saints, and acquaints us, that not many mighty, not many noble were called:Rom. 15, 26. 1 Cor. 19, 1, 3 2 Cor. 9.12. Philem. v. 7. Hebr. 6.10. 1 Cor. 1.26. If any Gospel-Minister should in this case deny to set himself to some labour or work, and still press upon the peoples pure necessities, he would then not walk as he had Paul for an ensam∣ple: But blessed be God, there are thousands that have given their names to Christ in England, who enjoy such splendid and ample patrimonies, that they might easily take off from the poorer sort any burden, and yet sufficiently main∣tain their Teachers, if there were no stated and legal maintenance, and not ne∣cessitate them to work in callings, to the great dishonour both of themselves and the Gospel in these times: Such are to be charged from God, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God,1 Tim. 6.17, 18, 19. who giveth us richly all things to enjoy, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. But alas, it is to be feared, that there are many great ones, (whose case is sadly to be bemoaned and lamented over) that spend far more annually in the maintaining of Faulconers and Huntsmen (to say no worse) then they expend upon pious uses: The Lord lay not their sin unto their charge. How far are such persons from the temper of the primitive Saints in the Apo∣stles days, who mutter and grumble at the present condition of the Ministrey, which at this day is generally so low and mean, that their very Ministrey is al∣most brought into contempt and reproach among the wicked and prophane spi∣rits of the vulgar. The state of the Church of Christ before Constantines days, was generally under persecution, and afflicted in most places with deep pover∣ty, then indeed there was a necessitous duty lying upon the Ministers to take
some care for their Families, or else they would prove worse then Infi∣dels. Such persons who insist so warmly upon this point of Ministers working ac∣cording to the example of some of the Apostles (for it seems all did not; except∣ing Barnabas and Paul,1 Cor. 9.6. others did forbear working) I would wish them to look to their duty likewise, to follow the example of the Primitive Saints: (for the same rule in all equity bindes them on the other side) For,Acts 4.34. there was none among them that lacked: For as many as were possessours of lands or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet. I fear me, those that are rich persons, who press this labour∣ing of Ministers in worldly vocations so much, will come off very dolly and slowly to this work of selling all and laying it down at the Ministers feet. I am sure the poor would not complain so generally as they do, nor the Ministrey be driven from their duties to worldly labours (if this their absurd inference should take place) if such would do their duty in this case, which is inferred upon their own supposition. But thirdly, As to the times of the Apostles, we are to consider likewise, that Christian Religion had not then so fr prevailed, as to get any strong foot∣ing in Princes Courts: So that there were no Christian Magistrates to be a hedge about the Church, and to take care in this particular for the comfortable support of the Ministrey. The Apostles declared the will of God sufficiently, but they had no coercive power in this point, and though doubtless, many might make conscience, who were able to do it, yet there wanted not a De∣mas to forsake even them, and to embrace this present world: No doubt, there were several persons, that being not soundly wrought upon, did pull back, and withdraw;Acts 4. ult. & 5.1, &c. as we read in the case of Ananias and Saphira, else what needed the frequent and fervent exhortations to this duty of communicating. But when once Christian Magistrates arose, they took care for a certain rate or tri∣bute to be imposed on the people for this purpose, as it was in the days of Con∣stantine and Licinius: And why that which is incumbent as a duty upon Chri∣stians, may not be made one of the Topicall or Municipal Laws in any Chri∣stian Kingdom, State, or Commonwealth, I see no reason, since it tends to the preservation of Gods publique Worship under the Gospel. But however, in this case it is very dangerous for any persons who have this worlds goods, to plead poverty, and going behinde hand, to palliate their want of love to the Ministrey, to excuse them from this important work. Possibly the Lord may providentially blast such mens estates ere they are aware: Cer∣tainly whatever is detracted secretly from that use, will make bad portions for their posterity.Pro. 3.9, 10. Hag 2.18, 19. Mal 3 9, 12 D. Edw. Reyn. ib. sup. I am sure God did of old promise particular blessings to such as brought in of their substance, what was enjoyned for the honourable and splendid maintenance of the Temple; and do we think that God hath less care of, and love to his Gospel Ambassadours, who are the Ministers of the New-Testament? No certainly! But let such consider, that the very Heathens dealt more nobly and candidly with their Idolatrous Priests, who helpt on the poor creatures towards hell, Yet because under the sense of some Religions, though false worship, they were most of them very liberal. It is not my design to quote any Humane testimonies at present, I shall content my self with the ci∣tation of one example out of Scripture, which the Spirit of God takes notice of, and that is, of the people of Egypt in the days of Joseph, although they were then exercised under a sore judgement of Famine, when all the other peo∣ple of the Land had sold their goods and possessions to Joseph for the Kings use,Gen, 49.26. yet the lands of the Priests were even then excepted. I heartily wish, that such poor souls as are tainted with disaffection to the maintenance of the Gospel Ministrey (that otherwise possibly some of them
may be honest good meaning people) were a little sensible that the hand of Jo∣ab is in all this: I mean, the Jesuits and persons of other Orders, among the Pa∣pists, many whereof have been in these late years discovered to have been a∣mong those people in their meetings that withdraw from the publique Assem∣blies, and have been known by some of our Nation, that have seen them be∣yond Sea in the proper habits of their Orders, whose great design is to sub∣vert the Universities and the Ministrey, and then they know well enough we must bid farewel to the Protestant Religion, and the game will be theirs: How many Popish opinions have been vented by them, and here cryed up for New Lights, is too sadly known [as, the Doctrine of Perfection, Voluntary Humi∣lity, and neglect of the body, attainable in this life, and that the Ministers of the Reformed Church are no true Ministers, and a number of the like, arising out of the Bottomless Pit] our sad discords, make sweet harmony in Popish ears: So that what on the one side, betwixt poor seduced spirits, and carnal and prophane, who love none but daubers with untempered morter, the faith∣ful Ministers of Christ are objected to great reproach and rebuke this day; so that the spirits of the godly, and such as are stedfast in Gospel-truths are grieved and wounded, the wicked Popish seducers warmed by success, the Devils expecta∣tions raised, and the Papists hopes of a great harvest greatly enlivened, to whom in the Northern parts many have declined already, and more will daily: Nay, in conclusion, they will strike at the Protestant Magistracy as well as Mi∣nistrey, it is their great aim to bring it about: And I doubt not but godly Ma∣gistrates do consider, that there is no one sort of people under their Govern∣ment, that can so effectually promote their interest, as a godly faithful Mini∣strey can, when encouraged by them; since they have so much influence upon the consciences of men: I hope God of his infinite mercy will stir up the wis∣dom and courage of our godly Magistrates that sit at the Helm, to reform what is amiss, to be a terrour to evil works, and an encouragement to the upright in the Land; that so a godly Ministrey may be protected, maintained and che∣rished, to the glory of the Gospel, that the Ark of Gods presence may ever continue among us, in despite of all the gates of Hell, so long as the Ordi∣nances of Heaven shall endure. To which end, it is well worth the conside∣ration of the faithful, to take special care for their preservation, and all due encouragement, since there is a necessity for their costly and chargeable edu∣cation in the famous Seminaries of Learning; seeing now abilities for Ministeri∣al service, are not given in miraculously: The Scriptures being written in the Learned Languages, there is great necessity for them to be well skilled in them. Their preparatory studies, and their actual services, do greatly waste the vi∣tal spirits more then those of the Law did. They are commanded to be wholly in these things , says Paul to Timothy, Be in them, converse in them, make them thy business;1 Tim. 4.15. whence may be inferred, that the Ministrey should not immerse themselves in secular affairs, left thereby their progress and proficiency in the study of the Scriptures, and their own hearts, should be obstructed and hindred, So that unless strong∣ly necessitated by want and poverty, and the wickedness of those that are able, and deny subministration and supply to their wants, they ought not to disturb their spirits with the overwhelming and soul-dividinging cares of this life. Besides, it is necessary for them, as the case now stands, that they should have a well-furnish'd Library, and be well acquainted with the History of the Church all along since the world began, especially since the time of Christ to our days. Nay, there is not one Art or Science in the whole Circle or Com∣pass of Learning, but some way or other may contribute to the capacitating
of a Minister for his work in the explication and applying of Scripture: They ought also to be well versed in controversie; that they may be able to op∣pose gain-sayers, and maintain the Truth. To this purpose speaks a learned and faithful Dispenser of the Gospel in his days, That they ought to have [The skill of Arts,D. Stoughton Preachers Dignity and Duty, p. 87. &c. of Tongues, the ancient Hebrew, the copious Greek, the ele∣gant Latine: (Tongues are necessary for Embassadors, and these Tongues are very necessary for God's Embassadors.) All which must be assisted (as the Orb in his motion, with his Intelligence) or rather informed, as the Body with the Soul in all his operations) with pithy Logick, perswasive Rhetorick, pro∣found Philosophy, that I may not name others; every one of which apart, would make a noble Profession in another; and yet all together make but a small part of the Noble Profession of Theologie; and rather, not a part, but a Porch of this Royal Building: For I have not yet told you of the Scripture, in which not a word not a jot, not a tittle, but hath its weight, and must not be suffered to perish, the depth of the Scripture, left it be said by some scof∣fing Samaritan, The VVell is deep, and thou hast never a Bucket. Lastly, The infiniteness of Divinity (there is no infinity in Philosophy, but here there is) positive, controversal, Ecclesiastical, experimental, for the chair, for the Schools, for the pulpit, for the conscience, &c. All which are necessary for him that would be a worthy Divine.] 5. He must provide for his own Family, or else he will lie under that heavie doom of the Apostle, To be worse then an Infidel, and deny the Faith: which to do as a Man, as a Christian, as a Scholar, as a Minister; that is, not in a sordid, mean, base, and precarious way, lest the Dignity of his Office be ob∣jected to contempt in the eyes of carnal vulgar people, who generally receive the Truth with the more respect and obedience, from such as having some mo∣derate and comfortable estates, and are not obliged to unworthy and pedantick shifts and cringings to every insulting Balak; nor the ensnaring of their Con∣sciences to satisfie corrupt lusts and humours, by intrenching upon their glori∣ous Commissions received from Christ: This being certain, that converting work is the main and principal work of the Ministry, which will be greatly ad∣vanced, when their persons are not obnoxious to scorn by their meanness: which was found fully true in the person of our blessed Lord, and his holy Apo∣stles and Disciples. 1 Tim. 3.2.Lastly, Every Gospel Minister is commanded to maintain Hospitality them∣selves, as well as to preach it; Alas! they may indeed teach it to others while their Lungs and Heart strings crack for want of supply, but are not able (ge∣nerally) themselves to go to the cost to practise it in our Nation, through ina∣bility. They are so far from being capable to perform this Duty, that many have not for their present necessities, much less for their conveniency and re∣freshment. These things being premised and duly considered, viz. The noble Provision which God made for his servants under the Law, the Dispensation whereof was far inferiour to this under the Gospel: Though some will say, that the pomp of those Ordinances consisted much in external splendour; and they say true: but yet, thence can by no means be inferred, that God requires not the service of our Bodies and Estates under the Gospel: for its evident, the whole New Testament teaches the quite contrary. Besides, the necessary and costly provision of all acquired knowledge, the enjoyned seclusion of themselves from worldly occupations, their required su∣stentation of their Families, and provision of a subsistence for them after their departure. The honour and reputation of the Gospel. The occurring and obviating the secret designs and machinations of our Popish adversaries (who like the Spartans of old to the Athenians, did but desire their Orator, and
then) study by all means to ruine Protestant Religion among us, and not find∣ing any directer course to steer then this, the pulling down of Universities, in the which provision is made for able Workmen in the Lord's Vineyard, and for such as manage the controversie against them (as blessed be God hitherto suc∣cessfully by Raynolds, Whitaker, Willet, Abbot, Davenant, and many others) and further, to subvert the stated and fixed maintenance of the Ministers, when come abroad▪ whereby the Divel's ayms will be gratified, the enemy overjoy∣ed, the Gospel ruined, and Ark depart from our Israel. But blessed be the Lord who hath fixed his memorial stone in Eben Ezer;1 Sam. 7.12. hitherto hath the Lord help∣ed them, and we hope the same mercy will yet continue to make them against those subtle insinuating enemies a fenced brazen VVall:Jer. 15.20, 21 They shall fight against them, but they shall not prevail against them; for I am with you to save you, and to deliver you, saith the Lord. And I will delver you out of the hand of the wick∣ed, and I will redeem you out of the hand of the Terrible.Ps. 85.9. &c. Surely his salvation shall be nig them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our Lad; That mercy and truth may mee together, righteousness and peace may kiss each other. Truth shall spring out o the earth, and righteousness shall look down from heaven yea the Lord shall give that which is good, and our Land shall yeild her encrease: Righteousness shall go before him, and shall set us in the way of his steps. Though the Kngs of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel togeher a∣gainst the Lord, and against his anointed, yet hath he set his King upon his holy hill of Zon, and will gve him the heathen for his Inheritance, and the utter∣most parts of the earth for his possession. As for those that break his bands in sunder, and cast away his cords from them: He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision; He shall speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure: He shall break them with a rod of iron, he shall dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel. O then, kiss the Sun lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.
CHAP. X. OF THE Temples Destruction. 2 Chro. 36.12 Ver. 14. Jer. 5.31.WE are now arrived at the fatal and final period of that first and most Magnificent Temple; which by reason of the ma∣nifold and hainous sins of the Kings and Nobles, the Priests and Levites, the lying false Prophets, and the wil∣lingly seduced people of the Land of Judah, was con∣sumed with fire, and utterly laid waste by Nebuzaradan, the Captain of the King of Babylons Guard,2 King. 25.8 Jer. 52.13. Joseph. contr. Apion l. 1. p. 144. Strabo Geog. l. 15 p. 687. Calvis. Isag. Chronol. f. p. 79. Petao-Ra∣tion. Tem. p. 2 l. 4. p. 234. edit. Par. 1656. in the 19th year of the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar his Imperial Master. This great and potent Emperour, who employed his Captain in that dismal design, is called Nabuchodonnosor by Josephus out of Berosus, a Chaldean Writer; by Strabo in the 15th Book of his Geography, Na∣vocodrosor: by Ptolomy in that his most Golden Canon of the Assyrian Mo∣narchs, Nabocolassar, according to a very correct Copy of it communicated by Dr. Overal (sometime Dean of Pauls in London) to Scultetus living at Heydelberg, and since printed by Calvisius, agreeing with another of the same kinde published by Petavius out of the Kings Library at Paris: The same Canon for substance, though different in some letters of the names, and the years of their Reigns, is presented to us by Eusebius in his Chronicle, where this King is called Nabupolasar, or Nabuchodonosor. But to leave the variation of Authors in the several letters of his name, I shall proceed to accommodate the time of the ruine of this once glorious Pile, to the year of the worlds Creation wherein it hapned, according to the best account yet extant. Here, because I am not willing at present to trouble any with that controversie, I shall follow the calculation of the elaborate pen of the late famous Primate of Ireland,Ʋsserii An. Lat. p 1. p. 131 in his Scripture-Annals, accordingly as I have hitherto generally done all along this work. First of all, it is to be noted, that the 19th year of Nebuchadnizzar, was co∣incident with the 160th year current of the Nabonassaraean Aera: for although his Father Napopollasar, died in the 143 year of that Aera, as appeares evi∣dent by Ptolomies forecited Canon, and therefore the Sons 19th year must fall in with the 162 year of Nabonassar;Dan. 1.1. Jer. 25.1.46.2. yet the Scripture doth expresly af∣firm in one place, that the first year of Nebuchadnezzar was the third; and in another, that it was the fourth of Jehoiakims Reign, that is the third ending, or ended compleatly, and in the beginning of the fourth. At what time he went upon an expedition against Pharaoh Necoh at Carchemish, by the River
Euphrates, which Josephus affirms out of Berosus,Joseph. p. 144 Peta. dedoctr. Temp. l. 9. c. 61. p. 143. to have been done by his Fathers direction being then alive; Although I know the learned Petavius dif∣fers in his judgement: Yet there seems to be truth in the Primates assertion, if we compare the current and compleat years of the Kings of Judah diligently together with this present Assyrian Canon, and the Eclypses which confirm it, recited by Ptolomy in his Almagest, which would take up much room, and not tend much to my purpose at present to ampliate in it. There are four Eclypses noted by Ptolomy to have been seen at Babylon before the date of the 160 year of this Aera; yea, before Nebuchadnezzar entred upon Dominion: For the last of the four (which was of the Moon) fell out in the fifth year of Nabopol∣lasar his Father, and the 127 of the Aera,Bulliald. Astron. Phil. l. 3. c. 7. p. 151. and all of them are found by calcu∣lation from our present Tables, to correspond very near with the quantities of the eclypsed digits mentioned by Ptolomy. Hence it is, that Astronomers have esteemed this Epocha to be one of the firmest Basis of all Chrono∣logy. Now then to apply the time of this sad Catastrophe and dissolution of the Temple, to the Julian period: For which purpose, we must at present assume some things (but yet such are now generally agreed on, and demonstrated by able Authors) 1. That the first year of the true time of our Lords Incarnati∣on, was co-incident with 4710 year of that happily-invented Julian Period, and also with the 4000 year of the world. 2. That the first of Nabonassars Aera did correspond with the 3967 year of the forementioned Period. To which if we adde 159 compleat years of Nabonassar's (for it was in the 160 current) the Sum brings us to the 4126 year of the Julian Period; in which the 19 year of Nebuchadnezzar (deduced from his first beginning to reign, while his Fa∣ther was yet alive) doth compleatly fall, If further, we shall substract 4126 from 4710. the year of the Julian Period at our Lords birth; the residue will be 584 years before Christs true birth-time, or 588 before the vulgar computa∣tion, which is four years behinde the truth, when the Temple was destroyed. Lastly, If we deduce those 584 years before Christ, from 4000 the year of the world wherein Christ was born, according to the best computations, the residue points out 3416. for the year of the world wherein the Temple was burnt, according to this calculation of the times. In this deplorable year,2 King. 25.8 on the seventh day of the fifth Moneth (answering to August the 24 of the Julian year, being Wednesday) the Great Commander of the King of Babylons Army, sets fire to the house of the Lord, and the Kings Palace, and to all the houses of Jerusalem, so that every great mans house was burnt with fire; which dismal and flaming consumption continued, till it had fully devoured all those forementioned stately Palaces on the 10 day of the same fifth moneth, answering to the 27 of August, being Saturday,Jer. 52.12. and the Jewish Sabboth, when the City rested in its cinders for the sins of the Inhabitants, who had so greatly polluted the Sabboths of the most High God. After this, they brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about; then they battered in pieces the two famous pillars of Brass, the ten Bases with their la∣vers, together with that admirable Brazen Sea, all to shivers, and carried away all the brass to Babylon, with the Cauldrons, Candlesticks, Cups, Snuffers, Spoons, Shovels, Fire-pans, Bowls, and Basons, and all the Vessels of Gold, Silver and Brass, great and small wherewith they ministred in the house of the Lord; yea, the treasures of the Temple, and of the King and his Princes were conveyed to the Triumphal City: So that now the Lamentations of Jeremy the weeping Prophet, may well suit the subject of this Chapter, seeing the once delicate Daughter of Zion now sits desolate upon the ground, while her dear children,Jer 6.2. hanging up their harps upon the willows by the rivers of Babylon, convert the songs of the Temple into bitter howlings,Amos 8.3. and their Sacrifices into the bread of
mourners,Hos. 94. Psal. 137.1. 2 Kin. 21.13 Hos. 2.11. Mal. 2.3. and swell the rivers they sit by, with floods of tears, and weep un∣speakably while they remember Zion: Alas for Jerusalem, the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab is now stretched over that beautiful City: God had now caused all her mirth to cease, her Feast-days, her New-Moons, her Sabbaths, and all her Solemn Feasts: The dung of her Solemnities was now spread upon her face; nay, the very place where the Temple once stood in full beauty and glory, was in the days of Jerom, an eye witness, after its last ruine,Hieronym. t. 5. in Isa. 64. p 293. c. Job 30.31. Isa. 27.9. Lam. 4.1. Mic. 3.12. Lam. 5.18. turned [in sterquilininum urbis novae] into the dunghil of the new city, called Aeia. Well may the harps of the Temple be now changed in∣to mourning, and the organ into the voyce of them that weep, when the stones of the Altar become as vile as chalk stones, that are beaten in sunder; and the stones of the Sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street, and the fine gold thereof become dim, and the precious Sons of Zion esteemed as earthen pitchers: Zion it self is plowed like a field, Jerusalem laid on heaps, and the Mountain of the House, as the high places of the Forrest, and the Foxes walk upon that mountain without controul. Jer. 7.12.Whece we learn, That as God did to Shiloh, so he dealt with his House at Jerusalem, turning an Eden into a Desart; a pleasant Land into an howling Wilderness, causing stately Palaces to become a throne for bryars and nettles to triumph in,Isa. 13.21.34.14, 15. and their sad ruinous heaps, to be dens of Dragons; for Iim and Ohim, and the wilde Satyrs to dance their measures, for the wickedness of them that dwelt therein: Whereby let us be warned (if we act over their sins) lest God act over us their judgements. If we shall abuse such places (which our devout fore-fathers have erected) by idolatry and Superstition, to the high provocation of the pure eyes of Gods glory to jealousie against us; certainly he will proceed yet further, as he hath in some measure begun in his wrath,Isa. 64.11. to make even our Jerusalem become a desolation, and our beautiful houses, wherein we and our Fathers have praised him, to be burnt with fire, and all our pleasant things to be laid waste. 'Tis not outward glittering pomp that God looks at: The hour is now come, that neither in the Mountain of Samaria,John 4. nor at Jerusalem, will the Father be worshipped; but those that now present their homage to him, must perform it in Spirit and in truth: For the Salvation of Israel hath long since appeared from Zion,Psal. 14.7. and hath abrogated all the ancient Ceremonies, and God hath revealed himself in a spiritual way to such as have waited for the Consolation of Israel:Luke 2.25. They must now expect a Temple (not made with hands) coming down from God out of Heaven, which shall need no Golden Candlestick to enlighten it,Rev. 21.23. no Sun or Moon to shine in∣to it: But the Glory of God and of the Lamb shall be the light thereof, most radiantly beautiful is the place where his Honour dwelleth: From out of whose Throne rivers of Water of Life,Rev. 22.1. clear as Chrystall shall, shall proceed, for the true Worshippers that shall reign with him for ever to bathe themselves in, be∣ing streams of inexpressible pleasure, that flow at his right hand for ever∣more.
The Epilogue. HAving now finish'd the main Design through the merciful conduct of Providence; I might here add a discourse about the Visionary Temple, described by the Prophet Ezekiel exhibited to him in a Divine extasie of spirit, during the Babylonian captivity, and take notice out of the most approved Writers, how far the building of Zorobabel did square with it,Sherringham Jom p. 102. and wherein it dissented; and therein speak of the five memorable things wherein it fell short of the glory of Solomon's Temple, viz. The Ark of the Propitiatory, the Cheru∣bims, and the fire descending from heaven, as at the Dedication in Solomons days, The Oyl of Unction, in the room thereof others place the presence of the ho∣ly Spirit, speaking to the Prophets; and the answer by Urim and Thummim. I know that the Pseudo-Hegesippus relates concerning Pompey,Hegesip. l: 1. c. 17. p. 42. &c. Edit. Colon. 1575. that when enter∣ing this second Temple, he saw therein among other things, the Tables of the Testament, and the Cherubims standing upon the Mercy-seat. But alas, this story is built upon a very sandy foundation; viz. that passage in the Author of the Macchabees, that the Prophet Jeremiah should take with him the Taber∣nacle, the Ark, and the Altar of Incense, and hide them in a Cave in Mount Horeb, .2 Macchab. 2.7. Until the time that God shall gather together the congregation of his people, and be merciful to them. Against which Jewish fiction,Pet. Galat. de Arcan. Ca∣thol. Relig. l. 4. c 9. p. 211 Edit. Franc. 1612. some of their own Rabbies have plainly declared, in that they held the five afore-mentioned things to be utterly wanting in the second Temple, as is attested out of their writings by Ga∣latinus. Nay Josephus, an Author to be brought against the Jews without exception, speaks plainly of it in his time, , treating of that part of the Temple called the Oracle, and by him in that place , the innermost part of the house says it had nothing at all within it. Yet there were many excellent and costly ornaments wherewith it was beau∣tified in a marvellous manner: As particularly it is related,Jos. de Bell. Judaic sec. Gr. l. 5. c. 14. secund. Lat. Ruffin. l. 6. c. 6. p. 918. A. 3 Esd. 8.14. That Artaxerxes the Persian King gave all the gold and sllver which was found in Babylon to it: A strange story, if creditable, but 'tis found in an Apocryphal Writer; , &c. I might mention what gifts Alexander the great, Pto∣lomy Philadelphus, his son Evergetes did bestow upon that Temple, or what was done by Antiochus the great, or his son Seleucus Philopater, by Simon the son of Ouias. I might treat of the restauration of that Temple by Judas Mac∣chabeus, the valiant Captain of the Jews, after the profanation of it by Antio∣chus Epiphanes, or of what Helena the Queen of Adiabene did contribute: Con∣cerning all which things, the Authors of the Apocrypha, and Josephus in many places speak amply, with high commendations: I might lastly, if I would follow Josephus, tell great stories of the building of a Temple from the very foundati∣ons by K. Herod in the space of eight years, But yet says one, he gives in some couchant expressions, whence we may gather, that he did not build all the bo∣dy of the covered Temple anew, but perhaps raised it higher, adorned and beau∣tified it with many rare Porches, and other external buildings. As to this point, at present I shall enter no contest, though to me it seems very evident from cap. ult. Of his 15. book, that Josephus doth directly assert it from these words, . That taking away the foundations, he did substitute others in their room, upon which he raised the Temple] and then in the following words, plainly declares both the length and height of it,  for its length 100 cubits, and in height 20 more, that is above 100, being 120. in all. But how this will stand with the assertion of the Prophet Haggai,Hag. 2.9. that the
glory of this latter house (speaking of Zorobabel's Temple) shall be greater then the former: Why? Because in that house the Lord promised to gve peace, which is plainly spoken of Christ,Luk. 2.14. Hieron. in Hagg. 2. Vol. 6. p. 279. who brought peace upon earth, especially seeing the word in the Hebrew Text is  is by the 70. translated , by Paguine, and the Vulgar Latine as we have it, and the ancienter of Jerome himself in his own works set forth more purely; it is turned by Novissima, the last House;Hag. 2.7. Mal. 3.1. and so the word will bear it. But not to lean upon any versions; the seventh verse speaks plainly, that therein the glory of that House should consist and excel that other of Solomon's; because the desire of all Nations should come and fill that very House with glory; which by the Jews themselves is interpreted of the Messiah: This as it is a most strong Argument against the Jews, to prove that the true Messiah is long since come because that Temple is long since ruin'd; so it seems also to evince, that Zorobabels Temple should not be pull'd down before the coming of Christ: for how could he come into that very Temple, if it were pluckt up by the very foundations, as to its self, and all its Buildings, and another more pompous built by Herod, before Christ ap∣peared in the flesh? Besides, the Jews (who had little reason to maligne the glory of Herod,Joh. 2.20. as a great Benefactor to, and adorner of their land with sum∣ptuous Buildings) do plainly reply to our Lord concerning the Temple then extant in his days, that it was 46. years in Building, whereas Herod's by the te∣stimony of Josephus was but 8.Casaubon in Baron. execr. 13. num. 38. p. 203. This I leave to be solved by others, as Tarnovi∣us and Chemnitius cited by him, who think that the same Temple stood in its entire body, but sumptuously repaired and adorned by Herod with great magni∣ficence. Insomuch that Josephus, and the Jewish Author of the Cod Middoth, do seem to ascribe it wholly to K. Herod. So likewise Tacitus in the fifth book of his Histories,Tarnov. in Joh. p. 223. cited by L. Empereur, seems to manifest, That the Temple which Pompey invaded, and Titus destroyed were the same: Although that learned Author in his Comment on Middoth thinks that Herod did build one anew from the very foundations:Tacit. l. 5. Hist p. 626. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1640. but because it was done with the free consent of the Jews (to whom he makes an Oration extant in Josephus) and for as much as the old materials were used in the frame of the work, they still counted it one and the same Temple with the former of Zorobabels; and with him the learned Primate agrees.Usser. Anna. part. 2. Lat. p. 516. Though the former speaks in conclusion somwhat du∣biously in these words [Non dest tuuntur argumentis, qui asserunt Templum ab Herode non de integro exructum, sed immutatum & auctum, veteri conservao, fuisse] They want not arguments, who do assert the Temple not to have been wholly built anew by Herod,L'Empereur praefat. in Middoth, p. 20. but changed and augmented, the old being con∣served. But leaving this to the fuller disquisition of others, we are sure that the last Temple (by who ever it was built) was destroyed by the Roman Army of Titus, who was that Prince prophesied of by Daniel, that should come and destroy the City, and the Sanctuary, the end whereof should be with a flood, and unto the end of the War desolations were determined;Dan. 9.26. Sacrifice and Ob∣lation was then utterly to cease, when the over-spreading of abominations should make all desolate,v. 27. even till the consummation, and that which was de∣termined should be poured upon the desolate: when the ships of Chittim should afflict Eber,Num. 24.24. and he should perish for ever; when God brought a Na∣tion from far,Deut. 28.49. v. 53. Greg. Thol. Hist. Mir b. Vol. 2. p. 167 ex Babylon Talmud. Ezek. 11.23. from the end of the Earth, as the Eagle flyeth, (even under the Banners of the Roman Eagle) a Nation whose Tongue they knew not, and of a fierce countenance, so that they should eat the fruit of their own bodies, by reason of that strait siege wherewith they should be girt in all their gates. A Prophesie most fully accomplished in the days of Jerusalems final ruine, as is wofully and sadly related by Hegesippus and Josephus, then the ten miracles fi∣nally ceased, such as the Jews usually relate concerning their Temple. Then the glory of the Lord indeed departed fully from the Temple, and stood upon
Mount Olivet on the East side of the City, the place from whence Christ our Lord ascended up into heaven: to shew to us, that upon Christ's Ascension, that all the glory of an external Temple was then consummated and fully ended. Of these and the like matters I might have enlarged copiously; But when I reflect upon the Title of this Treatise, which leads me to speak only of the Temple of Solomon, that being finished [manum de Tabula] my poor labours must also receive their period, which I humbly commit to the blessing of God, whose gracious hand hath enlarged my life through his abundant mercy to ar∣rive at length to the conclusion of this present work, for which, with all ado∣ration of the Divine Majesty, I give most humble and hearty thanks to his ho∣ly name, and freely submit my self, and all my endeavours, to the iudgement of pious, learned, candid, and ingenious breasts. Only for a peroration of the whole work, give me leave to observe the ad∣mirable fulfilling of the Prophesie of our blessed Lord concerning the irrepa∣rable ruine of the last Temple: which although Julian the Apostate Emperour endeavoured with all his might to enervate and invalidate; yet his designe by the most just judgment of God, could never take effect. Two witnesses where∣of I shall alledge, the one of a heathen, the other of an Ecclesiastical Writer. The former, because precedent in time, I shall name first, and it is of Ammi∣anus Marcellinus,Ammian. Marcel. l. 23 ad initium, p. 429. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1632, who relates this story of Julian in these words [Ambitiosum quondam apud Hierosolymam Templum quod post multa & interneciva certami∣na, obsidente Vespasiano, posteaque Tito aegre est expugnatum, instaurare sumti∣bus cogitabat immodicis, negotiumque maturamdam Alypio dederat Antiochensi, qui olim Britannias curaverat pro praefectis. Cum itaque rei idem fortiter instaret Alypius, juvaretque Provincia Rector, metuendi globi flammarum prope funda∣menta crebris assultibus erumpentes, ficere locum exustis aliquoties operantibus in∣accessum: hocque modo elemento destinatius repellente cessarit incoeptum.] He de∣signed with excessive costs and charges to restore the somtime most magnificent Temple at Jerusalem. which after many fatal skirmishes in the siege of Vespa∣sian, and afterwards of Titus, was with great difficulty won by assault. This business he had committed to be hastned by Alypius of Antioch, who had for∣merly ruled Britain in the room of the Praefects. When as then Alypius did strenuously set himself to the work, being assisted by the Ruler of the Province, fearful balls of fire breaking out near the foundations with frequent assaults rendred the place unapproachable, the workmen being several of them con∣sumed; and in this manner the enterprize ceased through the resolute opposi∣tion of that element.] So much from him.Niceph. Cal. list. Eccles. Hist. l. 10. c. 32. p. 74. vol. 2. Paris. 1630. The other testimony of Nicephorus Callistus, is extant in chap. 32. & 33. of his Ecclesiastical History, which for the Press sake I shall not transcribe in Greek, but relate the principal things in English. These are his words. The Jews having got together as many as were skilful in the art of Building, & prepared materials for the structure, and fully cleansed the place, they provided spades made of silver, their charges being allowed out of the publique stock. With such earnestness and alacrity did they labour in the work, that the very wo∣men did carry away the rubbish in their laps, & whatsoever Jewels or other pre∣cious ornaments they had; they expended upon that business, &c. and when as they had dug up the remainders of the old building from the lowest foundations and had cleared the ground,Luk. 21. so that now there was not a stone remaining upon a stone, according to the prophesie. The next day coming to the place to lay the first foundation, they say there was a great earthquake, insomuch that the stones were cast out of the foundation, so that many of the Jews were slain, who either came to see the work, or had the oversight of the Structure. The publike buildings also wch were neerest the Temple were loosned, & falling down with great force,
proved the Sepulchres of those that were in them: Some that at∣tempted to fly away, were found half dead; some lost their legs, hands, and other members, according as the violence of that sudden accident seized upon them, The Earthquake was scarce over, but those that remained fell upon the work again,Cap, 33. &c. But when the second time they attempted it, some fire violently issued out of the foundations, and [other] fire fell down impe∣tuously from Heaven, and consumed more then before. There is (he saith) some variations among Authors of the punctual time and manner of this accident of fire, but the main of the truth is without doubt. Moreover, the fire which came down from Heaven consumed to ashes the hammers, graving tools, saws, hatchets, axes, and all the other instruments which the Workmen had brought for their service, continuing a whole day together, &c, when Cyril, who was at that time Bishop of Jerusalem, saw these things: He considered in his minde the word of the Prophet Daniel, to which Christ also had set his seal in the holy Gospel: He told them all, that now was the time that the Ora∣cle of our Saviour had its accomplishment; which said, That a stone should not remain upon a stone in the Temple. And when he had spoken this, a sore earthquake assailed the foundations, and cast out all the remaining stones, and dispersed them. Upon this, there arose a fearful storm, and whirled into the ayr many thousand bushels of lime and plaister, and sudden flames of fire flashing from beneath, burnt up in a moment an innumerable company of peo∣ple, that were as yet either labouring in the work, or that came to behold it. Thus did Julian fulfil Christs predictions concerning Jerusalem, which he de∣signed to have made void, &c. These prodigies are sufficient to prove the truth of the Oracle: But what shall be now declared, being very wonderful, will further confirm it, which I shall report, as I have found in the Archives, and it is thus: When the foundations were a laying, as I have said, there was a stone among the rest, to which the bottom of the foundation was fastned, that slipt from its place, and discovered the mouth of a cave which had been cut in the rock. Now when they could not see to the bottom by reason of its depth; the Overseers of the building being desirous to have certain know∣ledge of the place, tied a long rope to one of the Labourers, and let him down: He being come to the bottom, found water in it, that took him up to the mid-ancles, and searching every part of that hollow place, he found it to be four square, as far as he could conjecture by feeling. Then returning toward the mouth of it, he hit upon a certain little pillar, not much higher then the wa∣ter, and lighting with his hand upon it, found a book lying there wrapped up in a piece of thin and clean linnen. Having taken it into his hands, he signi∣fied by the rope that they should draw him up. When he was pulled up, he shews the book, which struck them with admiration, especially seeming so fresh and untoucht as it did, being found in so dark and obscure a hole. The Book being unfolded,John 1.1. did amaze not onely the Jews, but the Grecians also, holding forth even at the beginning of it in great Letters [In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.] To speak plainly, that Scripture did manifestly contain the whole Gospel, which the Divine tongue of the Virgin-Disciple had declared. This, together with the other miracles, which at that time were proclaimed from Heaven, did demonstrate, that not any word of our Lord should fall to the ground,Socr. Eccles. hist l. 3. c. 17. Theod. l. 4. c. 20. Sozomen. l. 5 c. 21. which had foretold the utter de∣solation both of City and Temple. For the truth of this story, I am not bound to undertake: yet this I may safely say. that the main substance thereof concerning the miraculous fire, causing the work to cease is true, being attested by grave and sober Authors that lived not far from the times wherein it was acted.
One having declared briefly the sum of the story,Chrys. ser 2. contr. Jud p. 334. vol. 6. edit. Savil. goes on thus,  And now, says he, if you come to Jerusalem, you will see the foundations naked and bare; and if you ask the reason, you shall hear none but this story, and of this matter we are all witnesses,A.C. vulg. 363. for these things hapned in our own age, not very long since. But Julian that great and subtile enemy of the Christians, presently upon this went on his expedition against the Persians, and there felt the direful weight of Gods judgements upon him for those and other his enormous crimes acted against the Truth. Happy were it for the Jews, could they but discern the strong and marvellous actings of Providence against them, when designing the re edification of the Temple, ,P. 337. ibid. saith the former Author in his third Oration against them: For once, twice, and thrice, under Hadrian, Constantine, and Julian they attempted it, but were beaten off the two former times by the Roman Souldiers, the last time, by fire flashing from the founda∣tions. They have formerly talked of a third Temple under the Messiah. Their discourses are accomplished at this day, but in a spiritual way, which they poor souls cannot yet discern, while the vail of Moses is upon their hearts. 'Tis the Temple of the Church wherein Christ delights to walk: Let us who upon their casting away, were reconciled to God, Pray for their resurrection from the dead, that so the blindeness which is hapned unto Israel,Rom. 11.15. Vers. 25: until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, may be visited with the Day-spring from on high, that even to them the Deliverer may come out of Zion,Vers. 26. Hos. 3.4, 5. to turn away ungodliness from Jacob; that they who have continued many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without Sacrifice, &c. may seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days:Rev. 21.1. That so both Jew and Gentile having one Shepherd, and one fold, may wor∣ship him in the New Jerusalem, that cometh down from above,3 Pet. 3.13. wherein dwel∣leth righteousness, when the New Heavens and the New Earth shall be manifest, where there is no Temple to be seen:Rev. 21, 22. For the Lord Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it. Aristot. Rhet. l. 1. c. 9. . FINIS.
The Index. An Alphabetical Index of the chief Matters handled in the foregoing Treatise. A. AAron's Rod. 61 What it noted. 264 &c. Accursed, are dedicated things. 108 Adamant, a precious Stone in the Breast-plate. 302 Adarconim, what Coine. 2 & 4 Aethiophians of Africa mistaken for those of Arabia. 154 241 Agate a precious Stone in the Breast-plate. 303 Alkerms of what made. 294 Almond Rod, what. 265 Almug-Trees. 52 Altar, its name whence. 282 Altar of Brasse. 70 What it noted. 281 Altar of incense. 62. 64 What it noted. 273 Altar to the unknown God. 247 America, discovered of old. 224 Amethyst, a precious Stone in the Breast-plate. 304 Ammoniack-Gumme. 270 Angels noted by Cherubins. 259 Their Communion with Saints. 230 Annual Festivals. 112 Apollo whence derived by Plutarch. 251 Arabia, famous for frankincense. 271 Araunah's threshing flowre, The place of the Temple. 2. 15. 184 What it cost. 3 Arke of the Covenant. 59 Mysteries thereof. 254 Removals from place to place. 252 What wood it was made of. 253 , in Josephus, whence derived, and what measure. 109 Asuppim. Gates, where. 52. 102 B. BAlsame. 317 Bases of the 10 Lavers. 79 Bath, what quantity. 109 &c. Bdellium, what. 261 Beasts 4 (in the Revelations. 5.) are Angels. 258 & 259 Bells on the Robe of the Ephod, 88 What they signified. 293 Beryll, a precious Stone in the Breast-plate. 305 Birth of Christ in September. 323 Bishops and Elders the same. 289 Blew in the Ephod, what 294 Blindness, what Spiritually. 286 Blood, of the eating thereof. 236 Bonnets of the Priests. 88. 313 Book of the Law. 259 Bowls of the Candlestick. 277 Branch in Scripture for Christ. 264 Branches of the Golden Candlestick. 277 Brazen Pillars. 68 Scaffold. 71 Sea. 73. 74 What it denoted. 283 Bread on the Golden Tables. 275 Breast-plate of Judgement. 89 Imitated by Heathens. 310 What it denoted. 299 The Stones in it. 307 Breeches of the Priests. 88 What they noted. 289. 294 Bullocks offered. 114 Burial in Churches, when came up. 246 Burying places of old, without the Walls of Cities. 245 Burning of Sacrifices, what it noted. 114 Burnt-offerings. 114 —Spiritualized. 336 338 , whence. 295 , whence. 284 C. CAkes 1 on the Golden-Table. 276 Cakes Oyled for the meat offerings. 123 Calamus Aromaticus, an ingredient of the Oyntment. 317 Candlesticks of Gold. 66 Their fashion. 278
—What they noted. 277. 279 Carbuncle a precious Stone in the Breast-late. 301 Cassia-lignea, in the Oyntment. 317 Causey to the King's House. 52 Cedar, its excellency. 218 Of what Use. 173 Lepers purified with it. 121 Censer of Gold. 61. 63. 269 Ceremonies of Old, were Types of Gospel-things. 176 Chambers annext to the Temple. 30 In the Courts. 57 what they note. 242 Chemosh the God of Ammon, whence. 152 Cherubins two upon, and two near, the mer∣cy-seat. 60 What they noted. 257 Of what shape. 256 On the inside walls of the Temple. 58 What they signified. 229 Chief-Priests. 91 Christ mediates like a Prince. 314 1 Chron. 6.10. opened. 146 Cinnamon, an ingredient of the Oyntment. 317 Cities of the Priests and Levites. 128 Their Fashion. 130 Cloven tongues sitting on the Apostles. 187 Coats for the Priests. 88 What they signified. 290 Colour varied by light. 310 Compasse of the outward Court. 45 Corner-Stone, Christ. 195. 201 Covers of Gold, for the Incense-Cup. 274 For the Shew-bread. 274 Courses 24 of Priests. 92 Of Singers, &c. 98 Courts of the Temple. 35 &c. What they signified. 238 Crassus his going into the Temple, boded his ruine. 248 Crook-backt, perverse. 287 Crown of Gold on the High-Priests head. 90. 313 What it signified. 314 Of the King of Amalek, what it weigh∣ed. 5 Cubical form of the Oracle, what, 232 Cubit, of what Length. 16 Cymbals, Instruments of musick in the Temple. 96 D. DAvids gifts and preparations for the Temple. 3 Daylie service. 111 Spirituaized. 320 Dedicated gifts to the Temple. 3 Dedication-Solemnity. 136 Destruction of the Temple. 364 Diamond a precious Stone in the Breast-plate. 302 Dishes of Gold for the Shew-bread. 274 Doors of the Oracle what it noted. 233 Of the Sanctuary. 22 What it signified. 315 Dove, what it noted. 325 Drams, Hebrew Coines, how much. 2 Drink-offerings. 126 What they noted. 341 Dwarf, what spiritually. 287 Dyal of Ahaz. 160 E. EArth's roundnesse hinted in Scripture. 225 And known to the Antients 225 Easter, its true time mistaken. 333. 334 Elders and Bishops, the same in Scripture. 289 Elders 24 in the Revelations, reflect upon the 24 courses of Levites. 258 Eleuthero-polis a City where placed. 13 Emerald, a precious Stone in the Breast-plate. 301 Entelechia, what? 170 Ephah, what quantity. 109 Ephod, and what it noted. 89. 294 Exod. 34.30. vindicated from the Vulgar translation. 313 Expiation-day, the 10th of the 7th month, & is Sacrifices spiritualized. 112. 332. 339. Eye blemishes, what spiritually. 287 Ezk. 20.25. opened. 177 —28. 13. opened. 309 Ezekiels Visionary Temple. 49. 241 F. FAces of the Cherubims, what they no∣ted. 258 Fat is the Lords. 121. 336 Feasts of the first-fruits. 112. 332 Seventh month. 112 Temple in general. 111. &c. Fire alwayes burning on the Altar. 116 It must be from Heaven. 282 Strange, what? 337 Noted the Spirit. 338 In the bowels of the Earth. 204 Firr-Tree. 218
First fruits. 112. 332 Fishes, why not offered. 114 Floor of the Oracle. 27 Sanctuary. 23 And what it noted. 231 Flowres of the golden Candlestick. 278 Foot-broken, what spiritually. 286 Foot English of what quantities 45 Greek of what quantities 45 Roman of what quantities 45 Foundation of the Temple. 19 is Christ spiritually. 194 Foundations, how applyed to Apostles. 202. 214 Frankincense. 270 in Meat-Offerings. 123. 125 its difference from Incense. 349 where it grew. 271 Free-will-offerings. 114. 121 G. GAlbanum, a precious Gum. 270 Gate principal of the Temple, why on the East-side. 242 Gates of the Inward Court. 53. 243 Outward Court. 51. 101 what they noted. 244 Genealogists were Levites. 106 Genealogy of the High-Priests 100 Levites 100 Porters 102 Gerah a Coine, how much. 2 Gibeon, its situation. 252 Girdle of the Ephod. 89. 298 Priests. 88 what it signified, 291 with its uses. 292 Girdles used for purses of old. Ibid. Glasse, how ancient. 23 hath direct pores. 230 Goats offered. 116 what they noted. 325 God to have no Image, say some Heathens. 249 God's part in the Peace-Offerings. 122 Gold, its proportion to Silver. 3. 228 of Ophir, whence, 224 what it signifies. 226 Golden Censer. 61. 63 Gospel-Substances typed by the ancient Ce∣remonies. 176 Graces of the Church set out by the inside Ornaments of the Sanctuary. 221, &c. Gratulatory Sacrifices. 334 Gums precious for the Incense. 269 H. HAnd-broken, what spiritually. 286 Harps. 96 Heave-Offerings. 122. 123 Heifer, what it noted. 325 Heifer burnt. 117, 118 High-Priest. 91 Did not go into the Holy of Holies. with his rich attire. 314 His Election. 285 Their severall names under the first Temple. 144 Their Vestments. 88 Under the Gospel, Christ. 289 Hin, of what quantity. 109 Homer, of what quantity. Ibid. Hony forbid in Sacrifice. 349 Horns of the Altar, what noted. 282. 344 Hyssop, how used in the Lepers purgation. 121. 173 I. JAsper, a precious stone on the Breast-plate. 306 Idolatry to kneel before a memorative I∣mage. 251 Jealousy-Offering. 123 in Plutarch, from Ehejeh. 209 Jericho. its situation. 252 Jerusalem's position. 9 Images, none in the Temple by the attesta∣tion of Heathens. 247 Incense Altar of Gold. 62. 64 at Sacrifices. 114 for the Sanctuary, made of four Inge∣dients. 269 Its difference from Frankincense. 349 It noted prayer. 273 Not to be now used in worship. 350 Inner Court. 48 Inscriptions on Temples. 209 Jesephus reconciled to the Rabbins. 47 Isaiah 36.22. explained. 150 Itch, what spiritually. 288 Judges, were Levites. 105 K. Kings 1.7, 39. explained. 76 Kings house nigh the Temple, what it no∣ted. 243 Kings of Judah, during the Temple, a short Chronicle. 152. &c. Kings pillar in the Temple. 72 Kiriath-Jearim where situated. 252 Knops of the Golden Candlestick. 278 Korban, what. 334
L. LAmb, signified Christ. 320. 325 Lambs, two sacrificed daily. 111 Lamps burning continually. 277 drest every day. 111. 278 for the Golden Candlestick. 278 Lamenesse, what spiritually. 286 Lavers ten. 79. 284 Lawyers, were Levites. 106 Leaven forbidden. 349 Leper cleansed. 117. 121 Levites. 94 their Revenues. 133 whom they noted. 319 . Frankincense 270 Light, for Doctrine. 279 Ligure, a precious stone in the Breast-plate. 303 Lillies or Tulips. 223 Linnen, why used by Priests. 289. 291. 295 Living stone, Christ. 203 Log, what quantity. 109 M. MAintenance of a Gospel-Ministry, 277. lin. 3. 354. &c. Male for a Burnt-Offering. 114 Maneh, of what quantity and value. 2 Manna, The derivation of its name. What it signified. Why termed Hidden. 260 Manna-Pot of Gold. 61. 259, 260 Mark 9.49. opened. 348 Math. 23.35. opened. 156 Measures of the Hebrews. 109 Meat-Offerings. 122 what they noted. 347 Men sacrificed by the Heathens. 323 Mercy-Seat of beaten Gold, 60 what it signified. 255 Mincha, what. 334 Ministers not to exercise other Callings. 359 Ministry a distinct function, and to endure to the end of the World. 190. 216. 266, 267, 268. 318 Mitre of the High-Priest. 90. 313 Mitres of Bishops, why horned. Ibid. Monethly Services. 111 Moriah mountain. 15 what it signified. 182 whence derived. Ibid. Moses mentioned in Lucian. 250 Posterity, the Treasurers of the Temple. 103. 164 Mountain of the Lord's House. 182 Musicians of the Temple. 98 Musick at Sacrifice. 111. 351, &c. Instrumental, not to continue in wor∣ship. 351 Myrrhe. 269 an Ingredient of Holy Ointment. 317 Mysteries of the Temple. 106 N. NAbonassar's Aera useful in Scripture Chronology. 364, &c. Nazarites Offerings. 115 Nethinims. 107. 319 New-Moon Festivals 111 Nose flat, what spiritually. 286 Numb. 17.8. opened. 265 Numb. 35.5. explained. 131 O. OBed Edom and his Sons, Porters. 101, 102. 104 Odours noted prayers. 261 Offices of Christ set out of old. 264 Ointment of the Temple how compounded 268 Olibanum in shops is the Ancients Frankin∣cense. 272 Olive Tree, its Excellencies. 219. 223 Significations. 217. 233 Omer, what quantity. 109 Onycha, what. 269 Onyx-stones on the Ephod. 297 Onyx-stone on the Breast-plate. 306 Open-flowers, Lillies. 223 Ophir in East India. 226 is Taprbane. 236 Gold 224. 229 Oracle. 25 what it noted. 232 why at the West-end of the Temple. 174. 208 Oracles of the Heathens silenced. 198 Oxen under the Brazen Sea, what they no∣ted. 284 Oyl for the Lamps. 277
Vessels. 278 What it noted. 284 P. PAll of Metropolitan's, whence. 294 Palme-Tree, what it might denote. 219. 229. 234 Palme-Trees carved on the Walls. 59 Parbar-Gate. 53. 102 Partition-Wall. 25 What it noted. 241 Passeover. 112. 321 Pattern of the Temple given to Solomon. 3 Pavements of the Courts. 54 Paul the Apostle described in Lucian. 249 Peace-offerings, and what they noted. 121. 346 Pentecost. 332 People's part in the peace-offering. 122 Piety the best policy. 243 Pigeons offered. 114 Pillar of the King. 72 Pillars of brasse;. 68 For what Use. 280 Place where the Temple built, what it de∣noted. 182 Pomegranates on the Robe of the Ephod. 88 What they noted. 293 Pomegranates, their nature. 203 Porch of Solomon. 244 The Temple. 21 Why open. 200 What it denoted. 208 Porches round about the Courts. 55 What they signified. 244 Porters of the Temple in 24 courses. 101 111, 320 Pot of Manna. 61. 259. 260 Precious Stones what they noted. 229 Priest, as to its Original, signifies an Elder. 289 Used as a Taunt to Godly Ministers. 289 Priests of the Temple. 92 Court. 48. 50 Portion in offerings. 116. 118. 120 122 What it noted. 346 Vestments. 88 Propitiatory, or Golden mercy-seat, what. 255 Propitiatory Sacrifices. 334 Psalms or Songs of degrees where Sung. 53. 97 Psalteries, what Instruments. 96 Ptolomie's Canon of the Assyrian Kings very useful. 364 Purple of the Ephod. 295 Q. QUantity of the Courts. 44 Oracle. 27 R. RAinbow, its nature. 172 Recorders were Levites. 106 Red Cow or Heifer. 116. 117. 118 Revel. 5.11. explained. 258 Revenues of the Temple. 133 Right hand, the South. 75 Rivers, how generated according to some. 204 Robe of the Ephod. 88 What it signified. 292. 296 Rock-water following the Israelites in the wildernesse. 204 Rod of Aaron. 61 What it noted. 264 Roofe of the Oracle. 28 Sanctuary. 24 What it noted. 231 S. SAbbath-Services. 111 Sacrifices continue till Christ, and no longer. 333 Sacrificing at the consecration of Priests. 318 Spiritualized. 282. 325. 332. 335. 352 Saints are spiritual Priests. 216 Salt in meat-offerings. 123. 126 Sacrifices. 114 And what it noted. 347 Samuel a Benefactor to the Temple. 1 Sanctuary, and what it noted. 22. 212 Sapphire, a precious Stone in the Breast-plate. 301 Sardius, a precious Stone in the Breast-plate. 299 Saxon Kings gave Ministers maintenance. 357 not alwayes signifies circular. 40. 131 Scab, what spiritually. 283 Scaffold of Brasse. 71 Scape-goat, what it noted. 344 Scarlet-colour. 295
Scarlet thred, how used in the Leper's case. 121 Scribes were Levites. 106 Scurvy, what spiritually. 283 Sea of Brasse. 73. 74 Glasse. 284 Services of the Temple in general. 320 Annual 111, 112. 321. Daily 111, 112. 321. Monethly 111, 112. 321. Weekly 111, 112. 321. Seven, a number much used. 234. 279 Shadowes, their nature. 174, 175. 177 Shaft of the Golden Candlestick. 277 Shallecheth-Gate. 102 Sheep offered. 116 Shekel, of what value. 2 Shewbread. 124 Table. 65 Vessels. 274, &c. What it noted. 275 Shiloah fountain. 333 Shiloh, where situated. 252 Shishak King of Egypt, who 153 Shittim-wood. 253, &c. Side-chambers described. 29 What they noted. 237 Singers of the Temple. 95. 152 Sin-Offerings. 116 spiritualized. 339 Smaragd, a precious Stone in the Breast-plate. 301 Solomon his praeparations. 6 Type of Christ. 185 Solomon's Porch. 244 Soul, what it is. 170 Sparrows offered. 116. 121 Spoons for Incense. 274 Stacte, what. 269 Stadium of the Greeks and Romans equall. 42. 44 Statues, none ought to be made of God, confessed by some Heathens. 250 Stature of man probably not decreased. 17 Statutes, what they note. 177 Steps to the Porch and Temple, what they noted. 210 Stones in the Breast-plate. 311 Revelations, what tribes they noted. 308 Stones in the Temple, noted Saints. 214 How generated and increased. 203 Strange fire, what. 282 Subterraneous fire. 204 Summ of mony prepared for the Temple. 6 T. Tabernacle-Feast. 112. 332 Tables of Shew bread. 65 Stone. 50 Talent Hebr. its value. 2 Temple, dedicated, 136 Destroyed. 364 Its duration, 140 Holinesse, what: 207 Length and Measures, 31, &c. Mysteries. 166 Noted Christ's body. 188 Noted Church of Christ. 192 Noted Each Saint. 192 Of Ezekiel, onely visionary. 49. 241 Its State under Kings. 152 Why on a Mountain. 183 Tenth-deal of floure, what quantity. 109 Thank-Offerings. 121, &c. Throne of God visionary, in the first of E∣zekiel. 257 Time of the Temple's erection, what it no∣ted. 181 Tithes, neither Jewish nor Popish in their original constitution. 356, 357 Tooles noise not heard in the Temple's building. 187 Topaz, a precious stone in the Breast-plate. 300 Treasurers of the Temple. 103 Treasures of the dedicate things, and their difference from those of the House of the Lord, so called. 103 Trees high and unfruitful, wicked men. 186 fruitful noted Saints. 221 Trespasse-Offering, wherein it differed from the Sin-Offering. 119 What it denoted spiritually. 346 Tribes of Israel, the order of their names much varied in Scripture. 307, &c. Trinity mentioned in Lucian. 250 Tropical year its quantity. 334 Turtles offered. 114. 325 Type its derivation, 168 Definition 168 Explication in general. 170 Types, many may be of the same thing. 175. 188 What rules to be explained by. 178
V. VAil of the Temple. 28 What it noted. 234 What made of. 235 Vestments of High-Priests. 88 Priests. 88 Vision of a glorious appearance. 257 Unction. 284 Spiritualized. 318. 319 Unguis odoratus, an ingredient of Temple-Incense. 270 Vowed offerings. 115. 121 Urim and Thummim. 89 What they signified. 311 Uzzah's error about the Ark explained. 94 W. WAfers, in meat-offerings. 123 Walls of the Courts. 51 What noted thereby. 241 Of the Oracle. 27 Sanctuary. 22 What it noted. 241 Temple. 19 Washings several. 347 Wave-loaves. 124 Wave-offerings. 122 Waters from under the threshold of the vi∣sionary Temple. 205 Weekly services. 111. 321 Whitenesse noted innocency, &c. 189. 224. &c. 261 Windows of the Sanctuary. 23 What they noted. 230 Womens purification, noted Original sin, say some. 115 Work-men, a vast number employed in the Temple-buildings. 7 World to continue 6000 years according to some. 181 Z. ZAdocks line. 146 Zeal what it is. 296 Zion Mount. 183
Errata. Courteous Reader, be pleased to correct some places in the foregoing Work, according to these Directions; a. After, d. Dele, l. Line, m Margin, p. Page. r. Read. EPistle, line 18. is, read hath, l. 32. this r. the: Preface, p. 2. l. 21. there being, r. and yet there was, l. 31. a. himself r. is. [Page 3. line 16. as in, read, as much in, [p. 15. l. 6. after hundred r. and, [p. 17. l. 39. a. Remember, r. William of Malmsbury. lib. 5. fol. 91. b. l. 19. Edit. Lond. [p. 19. l. 47. are r. is, [21. l. 48. that r. but l. 49. d. built on, [22. l. 27. a. because r. neither, l. 34. a. said, r. in one place that, [25. l. 13. r. Dagobert. l. 4. our, r. that, [27. l. 16. The windows of, r. Q. whether wndows in, [29. l. 5. a. necessarily r. be there∣in also, l. 12. I fall r. if all, [36. l. 22. Ghosts r. Ghost, [37. l. 35. their work were, r. there were, l. 36. a. which, r. proof. [38. l. 13. r. denomination, [49. l. 7. a. Aristaeas, r, pag. 31. l. 9. d. pag. 31. against, r. for, [50 l. 43. a. him r. treating of the 2d. l. 46. Cubits r. Courts, [52. l. 40. d. also, d. so, [53. l, 5. a. watching r. in several stations, [58. Title Chap. 3. r. 4. [59. Title Chap. 3. r. 4. l. 2. a. Arke r. ve, [65. l. 9. and 10. d. from though, to Capacity, [V. 1. pag. 83. r. 73. 84. r. 74. 85. r. 75. 86. r. 76. [p. 74. l. 24. d. it [75. l. 11. 7/1 r. 1/7. [76. l. 45 we. r. I. [87. Title Chap. 5. r. 4. [89 Title Chap. 5. r. 4. [91. l. 35. bekn. r. been, [C c 1. pag. 197. r. 97. p. 198. r. 98. p. 199. r. 99. [97. l. 25. a. Sacrifice r. Numb. 10. 10. [p. 100. l. ult. a. Heman the Singer, r. the Ezrahite Psal. 88. or Izrahite from Izhar the son of Korah, [D d. pag. 111. 112. 113. 114. r. 101. 102. 103. 104. [p: 106. l. 45. a. Chronicles r. and Azariah the Son of Zadok the Priest was the first of Solomon's Princes, 1 King. 4.2. l. 52. they. r. the, [108. l. 19. Incense r. increase, [p. 109. l. 8. a.  r. the word being derived from , dec∣mare to Tithe, because it was the tenth part of an Ephah, [p. 112. l. 24. first r. fifteenth, l. 26. 15th r. first, l. ult. adde, To these in the following Table, must be added 4 Sacrifices more, offered on the expiation-day with their flowre and wine, p. 340, [p. 122. l. 5. a. Egypt r. so Mede Vol. 1. p. 585. &c. [p. 141. 142. 143. 144. Chap. 7. r, 8. in the Title, [P p. pag. 143. 144. 145. 146. r. 145. 146. 147. 148. [R r. pag. 156. 155. 154. 153. r. 153. 154. 155. 156. [153. l. 26. Sesostu r. Sefostris, [156. l. 6. before Joash r. A. M. 3126. [163. l. 23. which r. and, [164. l. 42. Empire r. Kingdom, [197. l. 51. grew r. grow, l. 52. fill'd r. fill, [198. l. 19. now r. near [200. m. l. 29. r. Zech. 3.9. [208. l. 19. Sacred r. faced, [209. l. 28. a. Temple r. of, l. 45. a. whether r. or, [211. l, 26. who though r. yet when, a. communion d. yet, l. 46. might r. may, [212. l. 43. cwell r. dwell, [222. l. 53. riverts r. rivets, [230. l. 27. we that r. that we, [231. l. 26. more r. a. nearer, 241. l. 1. Senes r. Jews, [245. l. 45. r. among the Laws of the anti∣ent Decem virate in the 12 Tables, [S s s. pag. 243. 242. r. 249. 252, [257. l. 47. tion r. foundation, [261. m. l. 26. 27. wicked Antedotarm. r. Wecker Antidotar, m. l. 36. Polon r. Solin, m. l. 42. Marcellus r. Marcellin, 262. l. 6. white r. fiery, l. 9. a. and r. on, l. 17, . [264. m. l. Triphare r. Tryohon, l. ult. its r. his, [269. m. l. 6. 24. r. 34. [A a a a. pag. 267. 266. r. 273. 276. [273. l. 46. inclusion r. incision, [274. l. 46. d. 1. l. 47. a. laid. r. on, [275. l. 26. Commission r. Communion, [276. l. 8. onely one r. being spoken, l. 30. eta r. eat. l. 31. Levites r. Kenites, l. 35. Gentil. r. Genial, l. 48. inventing r. invention of, [277. m. l. 32, d. or 104. [278, l. 8. Verus r. Venus, [279. l. ult. in r. of, [281. l. 42. to feed on, which r. to feed, on which, [287. l. 6. d. and, l. 15. d. of his [290. l. 48. straight r. wrought, [292. l. 14. Mat. 3. 1, 9. r. Mat. 10. 9. l. 28. oft r. off. l. 43. Majty r. Majesty, l. 47. enriching r. encircling, [293. l. 8, Sublimius r. Sublimium, l. 18. or, r. in, l. 24. likenesse r. likewise, [294. l. 53. were r. wire, [295. l. 3. upon it r. it upon, l. 39. Kermes saies, r. Kermes, saies it was, &c. l. 40. (c) r. (b) [299. l. 40. Cnaines r. Chaines, [300. l. 32. 15th r. 5th, l. 36. a. stone. d. is, [301. l. 4. he. r. they, l. 6. , l. 8. set Josephus before Jerom, 303 l. 2. his r. its, l. 26. a. Martinius r. do consent in the Ligure, l. 29. not r. very, l. 52. Sabai r. Sabaei, [304 l. 7. r. Hebr.  [305. l. 19. calls r. called, [309. l. 35. are r. were, [312. l. 1. him r. them, [316 l 42. this. r. the, [323. l. 53. 2. r. 4. [N n n n. pag. 332. 333. r. 322. 323. [332. l. 3. Acious r. Alcinous. [333. l. 46. d. to, [335. l. 49. this. r. the, [336. l. 15. unreasonable r. unseaso∣nable, l. 42. as possible r. as far as possible, [337. l. 23. shab r. shall, [244. l. 29. this. r. the [345. l. 49. a. hands r. had, [347. l. 8. Sun r. Son, l. 15. yield r. procure, [349. l. 17. a. Doctrine r. or unholiness, l. 34. in us, are r. in us, which are. l. 45.  r.  for  [357. l. 37. r. 2dly, before, THAT IT WAS, &c. 358. l. 36. a. piece r. that was paid, [361 l. 10. a. perfecti∣on r. attaineable in this life, l. 20. a. more r. probably, [366. l. 40. d. shall [368. l. 3. d. is [369. l. 13. r. ingenuous l. 28. r. Cessavit. FINIS.
