M1440 99829415 33854
LOVE to the LIFE, Or, some MEDITATIONS UPON LOVING, and WASHING In the Blood of Christ; TOGETHER, With a Tast of Gospel-Promises, as the CHURCHES STOCK, or, BELIEVERS PATRIMONY. By R. M. the Benjamin of his Fathers house. As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my Love, Jo. 15.9. If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me, Jo. 13 8. If ye be Christs, then are ye Abrahams seed, and Heirs, according to the promise, Gal. 3.29. Mala mea, purè mala sunt, & mea sunt; Bona au∣tem mea, nec pure bona sunt, nec mea sunt. London, Printed for B. Harris, at the Stationers Arms in Swithins Alley. Anno 1674.
To the Christian, and Candid Reader. READER, THou mayst wonder to see Me (the Benjamin of my Fathers House) to add to the Heap, and Pile of Books; If (my wickedly-wicked heart, deceive me not) not Glory (unless of God,) nor Gain (unless of Souls) have been the wheels on which I have moved, and the grand Incentives to Mid∣wife the Babe into the World. A Book may preach when the Author dare not; when the Author can∣not; yea (which is more) when the Author is not. I hope I can say (without a Flourish) that this Babe had been stifflled in the womb, and not seen the Light, had not my highest Ambition (notwith∣standing
Brotherly Solicitation) been my Fathers Glory, and my Fellow Creatures Good. Eccl. 12 12 Though, of making Books, there is no end, and much reading is a weariness to the Flesh; Yet, there are some Books, of which I may say, as some Phisicians speak of their Pills, there are Pilula sine quibus; that is, sine quibus esse nolo, without which they would not be: 'Tis true, the Bible, is the Book of Books, for that is Gods Book: yet there are some Libelli sine quibus; some little Books without which I would not be. If this little Tract, have been preached to the Ear, and shall be preented to the Eye, then the strength of Israel imprint it upon the Heart. Reader, If thou findest not in this Book (Much in a Little) yet wonder not, Job 8.9. for I am but of yesterday, and know nothing;
or not, according to the Margent. If any say, why do this Dwarf trouble the World, that's under a Glut of Books already? I shall modestly reply, that, though wordly praise, and profit, be the two Lackeys of most mens La∣bours, yet (through Grace) I have been hunting after neither. The Pen (by far) spreads it self farther, then the Voice can reach, the Pen, is an artificial Tongue, and sheaks to the Ab∣sent, as well as the present; yea, it speaks not to the present Age only, but to the succeeding Ages also: The Pen, is a kind of Image of Eternity, and will make a Man live, when He is dead: Zach. 1.5. Though the Prophets do not live for ever, yet their Labours may; Heb. 11.4. ana Abel (though dead) yet speaketh; or, is spoken off. What Solon saia concerning Laws (that there were many good
Laws made, but there wanted one Law, to make them put all those Laws in Execution;) So, I may ay concerning Books; there are many good Book: writ∣ten, but there wanteth one Book, to make us put those ood Books in practise: O such a Book were worth writing, and worth read∣ing. Augustine, with Cice∣roes Hor∣tensius. I hav read of one, that was much taken with the Book of anothr▪ but not finding the name of Christ in it, he could not cor∣dyally affect it. Reader, I doubt not, but the Name of Christ (who hath a Name above every Name) will be Legible in this little little Book, for 'tis a Narrative (ac∣cording to my Stature) of Christs Loving, and Washing out of Love. I would hope, I shall never have cause to say concerning this Book, as Nero did concerning
a piece of his, (ultinum nescis∣sem Literas) wishing, it had never been written. God hath two Books, his Works, and his Word; the Book of the Creatures, and the Book of the Scriptures; As for this latter Book (the Holy Scriptures of Truth) they are Christs Letters of Credence; that when a poor desponding, doubting, and drooping Souls can∣not see Christ, it may read of a Christ; and hear of a Christ, and so hear from a Christ. Now, (though, for this Book (espe∣cially) we are to bles God for) as there is a different Reading, and what is said of a part, is tre of the whole; Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he (or she) that reaeth, and they that hear the words of this Pro∣phesie, and keep those say∣ings, which are written there∣in; Yet, there are many other good Books, for which I can bless
God especially where there is much of a Christ; most of a Christ, as Saviour, and Soveraign. Reader, Was not that a sad day, when the Apostles (who were so good Preachers) were forbidden preaching? Acts 4.17.18. They cal∣led them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus. So, was not that a sad, and sinful day, in the time of Ju∣stin Martyr? Clarks Ec∣cles. Hist. 7. The Proconsul in Asia forbad, that Christians should read any Books that spake of Christ. In this little little Book, thou mayest read of a Jesus; the Lov∣ing of a Jesus; the Washing of a Jesus; whose Name is Ho∣ney to the Mouth; Melody to the Ear, and Musick to the Heart.
Pauls Epistles, and Peters Epistles, are Ours, though not in their Inscriptions, yet in their Benefit. Words pass away, and are forgotten, when writing re∣main: Every new Tide, blots out a writing in the Sand; and every new Term, shews the former forgotten; but writing deceives even Death it self. If this Book should turn to the Good of None, yet shall I sing but to the same Tune, that others of Gods Servants have done before Me; witness this place among others: Isa. 49.4 Then I said, I have laboured in vain; I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain, yet su∣rely my Judgement is with the Lord, and my work (or re∣ward) with God. Reader, A pretention to sa∣tisfie
every Reader, were as ri∣diculous, as his Attempt, who studied to make a Vestement for the Moon, that might fit her for every Interchange. If (there∣fore) thou beest curious, and critical, I cannot pretend to the least hope of pleasing Thee, for thou wilt (I fear) be find∣ing faults, besides the faults that are to be found. But, least this Epistle should swell, and become tympanious, I will give it a timely Check. As it is true, there is a (so) believing, for there must be a believing with the Heart; yea, Acts 8.37. with the whole Heart; If thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayest: And, as there is a (so) repenting, for there must be sorrowing after a godly manner; or (as the
Greek is) a sorrowing accor∣ding to God: And, 2 Cor. 7.9. as there is a (so) running; So run, 2 Cor. 9.24 that ye may obtain: And, as there is a (so) doing; Matth. 24.46. Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he commeth, shall find so doing; It is as true, there is a (so) reading; Acts 8.30. Un∣derstandest thou what thou readest? Mar. 13.14. And let him that readeth, understand. If, there∣fore, thou wouldest (so) read, look unto Christ; For, Jo. 15.5. with∣out him, thou canst do no∣thing; And to the Spirit; For that searcheth all things, yea, 1 Cor. 2.10 the Depths of God. Now, Isa. 50.4. that (he) who hath the Tongue of the learned, and knows how to speak a word in season to him that is weary, may signally bless thy Reading, unto Receiving,
and Rellishing, and Remembring; humbly, and heartily prayeth, READER, Thy Friend, and Ser∣vant, for Jesus sake, Richard Mayhew. Vox audita perit, sed Litera scripta manebit.
LOVING and WASHING. Rev. 1.5. part thereof. Ʋnto him that loved us, and wash∣ed us from our Sins, in his own Blood. BEloved! As Genesis begins, so the Re∣velation ends, this Book of God, the holy Scriptures of Truth. The ending part of this Book, is called Apocalypse, (which is the revelation of a secret) from a greek word, which signifie to reveal a secret. Though the Old, and New Testament, make but one Book, yet there are many
Books in the Old, and the New Testament, that contribute to the making up of this one Book. Now, this Book of the Revela∣tion, is the last (but not the least) of the New Testament. In the Title of this Book, you have an Account of the matter contained therein: Vers. 1. 'Tis called a Revelation: The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him; that is, which God committed unto him as man, for he had it of himself, as God. In the Context, you have the Person saluting; the Persons sa∣luted; and the Salutation it slf. The Person saluting. That's John. But what John was He? It was that John, that had such intimacy with Jesus; that John that lay so much in the Bosom of Jesus, as if he could not live out of it; that John, that ap∣peared to be an Euangelist in
his Gospel; an Apostle, in his Epistles; and a Prophet in this Book of the Revelation. John, The Persons saluted. These are the seven Asiatick Churches. John, To the seven Churches in Asia. The Salutation it self. Here∣in you have The Matter of it. Grace, and Peace. Grace, be unto you, and Peace. Grace, and then Peace; not Peace, and then Grace; that's the best wear in the World, for it weares not out in wearing; if once, 'tis ever; though it may decay, it cannot dye. Grace, and Peace. Grace, be unto you, and Peace. Grace, and then Peace; the Sun and then the Light. Peace; peace of Conscience, and that's an Anticipation of Glory, a Heaven begun here. Grace, be unto you, and Peace;
the Sun, and the Light too; the Fire, and the Heat too; Grace, and Peace too; that's the subject Matter of the Salu∣tation. The Original of this Matter. Here's Grace, and Peace, but where may they be had? Rev. 1.4. former part whence are they derived? where do they Center? from whom are they communicated? from the Trinity in Unity; and Unity in Trinity, Father, Son, and Spirit. From the Father, Grace be unto you and Peace; but from whom? Rev. 1.4. mid part. from him which is, and which was, and which is to come (i. e.) from the Father; from him, whose name is Je∣hovah; Exod. 6.3. But, by my name Jeho∣vah, was I not made known unto them. Which name Jeho∣vah, signifie no less then this, which was, and is, and will be. From the Spirit. And from
the seven Spirits, Rev. 1.4. later part. which are be∣fore the Throne. That is (if I mistake not) from the Spirit, called seven Spirits, in regard of his manifold graces, which wrought so powerfully in those seven Churches, as if a parti∣cular Spirit had been in each Church. Seven Spirits; seven, is a note of perfection. John (speaking of the Lamb, Rev. 5.6. Christ Jesus) saith, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the Earth. From the Son. And from Jesus Christ; where may this Grace be had? From Jesus Christ; the God of Grace, and the God of Peace. Now follows a Description of Christs person. He is (thee) faithfull witness. One that fully, and truly, re∣vealed Gods will, by himself, and his Apostles.
He is (thee) first begotten of the dead. That is, he is the first that arose from the dead, to go to Heaven. Enoch, and Elias, saw not death; the first death; they made a leap over the Grave, and were translated; they were taken into Heaven, but they dyed not. Others were raised, and lived here, but died after; neither are their Bodies yet in Heaven: Christ, there∣fore, is called the first begotten, because, the bodily life, which we had by Generation, is re∣stored by the Resurrection; And he is called, the first begotten of the dead, because, he had the first corporal Resurrection gi∣ven, as Head of the Body the Church. There are some that dyed, and went to Heaven, as to Soul, but not as to Body; there are two (Enoch, and Elias) that dyed not, and are gone to
Heaven Soul, and Body; but for one that dyed, Christ is that onely one that's gone to Hea∣ven, Soul, and Body. He is (thee) Prince of the Kings of the Earth. Ye have an Emphasis upon every distinct branch of the Description; thee faithfull witness; thee first be∣gotten; and thee Prince; the King of Kings; unto him all the mighty Monarchs of the World shall strike Sail; and at his Feet shall they all cast their Scepters, when he shall personally return from Heaven, to Earth; and be (gloriously) crowned, where he was (ignominiously) crucified. Thus John, speak of Jesus, by way of Emphasis, Eminency, and Excellency, concerning Grace, and Peace; they being both in him formally, Rv. 1.5. as in the Subject of them; and causally, as in the Fountain of them, that
is, in short; Christ is the God, and Giver, of Grace, and Peace; which arrives me at my Text, Ʋnto him who loved us, and wash∣ed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. Beloved! in this Text, you have the Person and the Praedi∣cate. The Person. Him; or, who; that is, Christ. Unto Him. The Praedicate. Who loved us, and washed us from our Sins, in his own Blood. Now, here in you have The great Affection of the Person; that's Loving. Who loved. The greatest Demonstration of this Affection; that's washing. And washed: who loved, and washed: Loved and then wash∣ed; not washed, and then loved. And herein, you have The Persons that are washed.
Us. But who are these? These (properly) are the seven Chur∣ches, for (unto) these do John write; and (of) these do John speak; Us: I say, these (expressi∣vely) but not (exclusively;) that is, Us, and all that have obtain∣ed like precious Faith with us, as the grand Apostle of the Cir∣cumcision wordeth it. 2 Petr. 1.1. That (from which) they are washed. Sin; yea, Sins. Who loved us, and washed us from our Sins. That (by which) they are washed. Blood; not water, but Bood; yea, his Blood; yea, his own Blood; or, the Blood of himself; in his own Blood; or, the Blood of himself. Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. The words (thus) divided, from (them) these Meditations may be deduced.
That Christ hath a peculiar People, Medi∣tati∣ons. and a peculiar love for his peculiar People. Us; Not All, but Us; not Most, but Us; not every Individual, but Us; and these loved, who loved Us. That Christ washeth, whom he loveth, and that from their Sins, in his own Blood. And washed us from our Sins, in his own Blood. That Christ hath a peculiar People, Meditat. 1. and a peculiar Love for this peculiar People. I begin with this, and shall engage it as I am more, or less, under a divine Gale, and Gust. Now, if the most excellent Glory please to smile a Metho∣dical Discourse unto spiritual Advantage, I shall digest my Discourse into this Method; In∣quiring Whether Christ hath a pecu∣liar People?
Whether Christ hath a pecu∣liar Love, for this peculiar People? What use may be made of this, That Christ hath a peculiar Peo∣ple, and a peculiar Love for his peculiar People? Whether Christ hath a pecu∣liar People? That God, and Christ, have a People; a pecu∣liar People; a People, above any other People; a People, a∣bove all other People, is evi∣dent. Thus God, and Christ had, under the Old Testament, wit∣ness these places. Thou art a holy People unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar Peo∣ple unto himself, abve all the Na∣tions that are upon the Earth, Deut. 14.2. The Lord hath avouched thee this day, to be his peculiar Peo∣ple, as he hath promised thee,
and that thou shouldest keep all his Commandements, Deut. 26.18. Thus God, and Christ (also) had under the New Testament, wisness these places. Who gave himself for us, that he might reaeem us from all ini∣quity, and purifie to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar Peo∣ple, that ye should shew forth the praises (or vertues) of him, who hath called you out of darkness, in∣to his marvellous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. But take one place more, which comprehend the peculiar People of God, and Christ, both under the Old, and New Testament. For Jah hath chosen to himself Jacob, and Israel for his inheritance, Psalm. 135.4. So that what was promised un∣der the Old Testament, is per∣formed
by Christ, in redeeming, and purifying his peculiar Peo∣ple under the New. Whether Christ hath a pecu∣liar Love, But, 2. for this peculiar Peo∣ple. Beloved! I shall endeavour an evincement of this Truth, in giving you a Tast of what manner of Love Christ hath to his People. As Christ hath a pe∣culiar People, which I have al∣ready proved, so he hath a pe∣culiar Love to this peculiar People; now, this will appear by the Quantity, or Measure of it; and by the Quality, or Man∣ner of it. In reference to the Measure of it. There's the Af∣fection of Love, which is na∣tural; and the Grace of Love, which is supernatural. There's the Affection of Love, and that's natural, This is, or ought to be in all Men, or Wo∣men. Hath not the Husband a
natural Affection to the Wise, and Children? Hath not the Wife a natural Affection to the Husband, and Children? The Apostle (Rom. 1.31.) reckons, and ranks those among capital, and cardinal Sinners, that are without natural Affection. There's the Grace of Love, and that's supernatural. Now, the Grace of Love, is in Christ formally, and causally. Formally. Love, is in Christ, as the subject of it; 1 Jo. 4.8. he is the God of it. God is Love. Not onely lovely, and loving, but Love in the Abstract. God, is Love. Jo. 1.1. Christ, is God. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. As is the Height of the Lover, so is the Height of the Love. The Moralists judge of the Magnitude of Crimes, by the Persons against whom they
are committed: And, as it was said of Gideon, as the Man is, so is his Strength; Thus, it may be said of Christ, as He is, Isa. 9.6. so is his Love; but he is wonderfull, his name shall be called wonder∣full; so is his Love; as his name is wonderful, so is his Love. Christ is a Bundle of Love; all the dispersed Excellencies, and Loves, that are in the World, meet in him, as all the Lines meet in the Center. Causally. Love, is in Christ, as the Fountain of it. Beloved! As Christ is the God of Love, so he is the Giver of Love, to this my Text speaks, who loved us. In reference to the Manner of it. But 2. As this appears by the Quan∣tity, or Measure of it; so it appears by the Quality, or Man∣ner of it. Now, in a Discussion of the Manner of Christs Love,
to his peculiar People, there will be a Discourry of it to be a peculiar Love. But what Manner of Love, is Christs Love? What manner of Love, is Christs Love, is that the Que∣stion? What man∣ner of Love. Give me leave (then) to say, 'tis much more easie to say, what it is not, then what it is: My Line is too short to sound this Bottom; what's a Muscle∣shel to empty an Ocean! In Christ, there are deep Riches that cannot be sounded; and rich Deeps that cannot be ex∣hausted; I shall therefore, pro∣mise but a Tast of this Love. Christs Love, is attracting Love. Attracting 'Tis no more connatural to the Loadstone, to draw Iron to it; then for the Love of Christ, to draw Love out of the Christian. 'Tis said of Mary Magdalene, Luk. 7.4.7. that much was for∣given
her, for she loved much. Not that her much Loving, was the cause of her much For∣giving; but Christ forgiving her much, she loved much. Hos. 11.4. I drew them with Cords of a man, with bands of Love. As the Banner Christ display, so the Cord by which he draw, is Love. His Love hath a Magnetick vertue. Christs Love, is abounding Love. Abounding. Had David a Cup run∣ning over? Oh what hath Christ then the Lord of David! But, David saith, Psal. 23.5. Thou preparest a Table before me, in the presence of mine Enemies: thou anointest mine head with Oyl; my Cup run∣neth over. Beloved! The Cup of Christs Love, is not only full, but it runs over; This Nilus overflows her Banks in Winter, as well as Summer. Christ, loveth his, as he loveth him∣self; Yea, he seemeth to love
his above himself, for, he lov∣eth them, and out of Love dyeth for them. I lay down my life for the Sheep. Je. 10.15. Now, hath not Christ a peculiar People? and is not this a peculiar Love, that he hath for this peculiar People? Christs Love, is abiding Love. Christ, Abiding. doth not carry it towards a Christian, as Ammon towards Tamar (2 Sam. 13.15.) who seemed to love one day, and hate another, who (seemingly) loved one hour, and (really) hated another. 'Tis said, the Man was sick for her, till he had satisfied his Lust upon her, but then he hated her exceed∣ingly; or (according to the Margent) he hated her with great hatred greatly; So that the htred, wherewith he hated her, was greater then the Love, wherewith he loved her: But
Christs Love, is an abiding Love; Jo. 13.1. Having lovd his own which were in the World, he loved them unto the end; that is, World without end. Christs Love, is a asting, yea, an everlasting Love; this Love will last, as long as the Christian lasteth; as long as Christ lasteth. Semèl & Simùl. ONCE and EVER, is Loves Motto. Christ, (once) loving (ever) loveth; is not this (then) a peculiar Love? Christs Love, is a constrain∣ing Love. Constrain∣ing. 2 Cor. 5.14. The Love of Christ constraineth us, because we thus judge: that if one dyed for all, then were all dead. The Love of Christ constraineth; or, hem∣meth in; keepeth in. The Love of Christ hath a mighty In∣fluence, it hemmeth in; keep∣neth in, as the Greek word sig∣nifieth. It is a Metaphor taken from a Creature that is hemmed in, so that there is no evasion.
Go into the high wayes, Luke 14.23. and hedge and compel them to come in, th my House may be filled. Not i a way of hasty violence, but  a way of gracious Influence: O go, and preach my Love, an this shall have a singular, and  signal Influence! Is not th (then) a peculiar Love? Christs Love, Delight∣ing. is a delightin Love. Love, is Christs Element and he is in his Element whe he is loving, and manifestin his Love. Pro. 8.31. His Delights were wi the Sons of Men There is  Love of pity; thus Christ be held the profound Moralist, an loved him: There is (also)  Love of Complacence, and De light. Mich. ult. 18. He retaineth not his Ange for ever, because he delighted i Mercy. Is not this (now) a pe∣culiar Love? Christs Love, Overcom∣ming. is overcome ming Love. If Christ lay Seige
to a Soul in a way of Mercy; in  way of tender Mercy; in a way f Bowels of tender Mercy, he kes the Soul captive. Belov∣d! Christ hath a better way to ke Souls, then Generals have o take Castles, &c. they lay eige, and are necessitated many imes to storm the Castle; to cals the Walls &c. But Christ, when he lays Siege in a way of iscriminating Love, he pre∣ently works the Souls unto a endition; he makes the Soul willing to give up it self to him y way of Surrender; as it takes Christ for Saviour, so it gives p it self to Christ as Soveraign. A Roman General, besieging a Town, a Friend of his asked n Account of his proceedings; o whom he replied in three words: I came; beheld, Veni; Vidi: Vici. and over∣came. Thus Christ, make a quick Dispatch with the Soul; He
did but speak for Matthew, an he had him: Mathew, was ga∣thering the Emperors Tolls, an Tributs; now Christ did bu say to him, Mat. 9.9. Follow me, but h arose, and followed him. N sooner did Christ lay siege to Zacheus, but he made a Con∣quest upon him, and made him a Captive to his Love; Luke 19.5, 6. Mak hast (saith Christ) and come down, for I must abide at thy house  And he made hast, and came down, and received him joyfully. Christ soon made his way into the house of Zacheus, and into the heart of Zacheus too. Amor om∣nia vincit. The Love of Man may overcome many things, as Hunger, and Thirst, and Nakedness, &c. but the Love of Christ (who is God-Man) overcome all things; this make a Conquest upon the heart, and make that a Cap∣tive to God, and Grace; is
not this (then) a peculiar Love. Christs Love, Prevent∣ing. Psal. 59.10. is preventing Love. The God of my mercy shall prevent me. Mark the expressi∣on; 'Tis the God of Mercy that prevent, and he prevent in a way of Mercy. Beloved! To be delivered out of an evil, is a Mercy; but to be prevented from falling into any evil, is a greater Mercy: To be delivered out of an sickness is good; but to be prevented from falling in∣to sickness, is better: To be delivered in great danger, is a great Mercy; but to be pre∣vented from being endangered, is greater Mercy. Ps. 79.8. Oh remember not against us former Iniquities, let thy tender Mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low. 'Tis the God of Mercy and the Mercy of God, that pre∣vent, and is not this (then) pe∣culiar Mercy?
Christs Love, is preserving Love. Preserving. Christs Love, is preservative Amulet; the best preservative in the World against poysoning; against infecting; against de∣stroying. Neah, and those with him are Arcked. Gen. 7.1. Come thou, and all thy house into the Arke. God, prepared them an Arke, that they rode securely, when the waters covered all the Moun∣tains: Arked, they were, and so preserved they were: Peter, while upon the water, hath his head kept above water: Christ out of Love to Peter, preserve Peter. God (if I may so speak) rains Hell, out of Heaven upon Sodom, but Lot is preserved: Though the lot of Lo, was cast in Soom, Vivus in sepulchro; Basil. the Man is preserved, Zoar opens unto him. As Peter was preserved above water, so Jonah was preserved under wa∣ter; a Whale (the greatest won∣der
in the Deep) houseth him. And, as Lo was preserved from flames, Dan. 3.21.27. so the Three Children were preserved in flames. Oh my Soul, glut thy self with a hoy, and a heavenly wonder∣ment! what, preserved above water, and under water! what, preserved from flames, and un∣der flames! Is not this peculiar Love? Christs Love, is Posing Love. Psing. Beloved! Christs Love, is a∣bove expression; the greatest Cicero, and Demosthens in the World; the greatest Logician, and Rhetorician in the World; the greatest Oracle, and Orator in the World, is not able to ex∣press Christs Love to the Life. Yea Sirs, let me say, Christs Love, is not only above Ex∣pression, but above Apprehen∣sion, and Conception. We use to say, Man is vaster in Con∣ception,
then in Expression; but Christs Love poseth not only Expression, but Conception. Eye hath not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9. nor ear keard, neither hath it entred into the heart, the things that God hath prepared for them that love him. Christs Love, is a Love that passeth knowledge. And to know the Love of Christ, that passeth knowledge, Eph. 3 19. that ye might be filled with all the Fulness of God. The Line of Nature; Yea, the Line of Grace, is not able to sound this Depth; Is not this (then) a peculiar Love? Christs Love, Lastly. Surpassing. is surpassing Love. Oh Souls! Christs Love out-bids, and out-vies all other Loves, and that in a manifold Respect. Suffer me to give you (who have tasted that the Lord is gracious) a Tast of the Incom∣parableness of Christs Love. In respect of the freeness of
it. Wine, and Milk; yea, Grace, and Glory, may be had, Psa 84 11. with out Money, and without price. He giveth Grace, and Glory. Beloved! You have (and that to the Life) the Portraiture of a person in his Naturals (Ezeck 16 6) When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own Blood; or according to the Mar∣gent) troden under Foot in thine own Blood; is not this a sad state, for a man to be tro∣den under Foot? for a man to be tumbling, and wallowing in his own Blood? But what then? Did Christ leave the Man as he found him? No; I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy Blood, live; Yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live. There was no Me∣rit here; nor Motive here; there was nothing but free-grace here; meer Mercy here. Now, was
the time of the Creatures great∣est defilement, Ezeck. 16.8. and deformity; and yet this was the time of Christs Love. Now, when I passed by thee, and looked up∣on thee, behold, thy time was the time of Love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; Yea, I swear unto thee, and entred into a Covenant with thee, saith Jeho∣vah God, and thou becammest Mine; Is not this a peculiar Love? In respect of the firstness of it. Christ, is first in Love. Christ, loves, before he is lov∣ed. 1 Jo. 4.19. We love him; why? be∣cause he first loved us. Christs Love is primary; Ours secun∣dary: His, the cause; Ours, but the effect. Had not Christ fired our hearts with Love, we had never bestowed a spark of spi∣ritual Affection upon him. Had
not Christ (first) loved us, we lived, and dyed, without loving him. Christ loveth before lov∣ed; is not this (then) peculiar Love? In respect of the Sameness of it. Christ, and those that are Christs, have the same Love. Jo. 17.26. I have declared unto them thy name, and I will declare it, that the love where with thou hast loved me, may be in them, and I in them. Is not this (now) pecu∣liar Love? In respect of the Sureness of it. As it is the (same) Love, so it is a (sure) Love. Isa. 55.3. Incline your ears, and come unto me; hear, and your Souls shall live; but what then? and I will make an, even lasting Covenant with you. even the (sure) mercies of David; Thou mayst loose thy Wife∣loose thy Child; loose thy E¦state; yea, loose thy Life, but
thou canst not loose this Love; Is it not (then) a peculiar Love? In respect of the Goodness of it. Psal. 30.5. This Love, is Life; In thy Favour is Life. Yea, Sirs, this Love, is better then Life; better then Lifes; Psa. 63.3. so the Hebrew: Be∣cause thy loving kindness is bet∣ter then Lifes, Mechajim. my lips shall praise Thee. Christs Love, is better then Life; then Lives; that is, 'tis better then Life it self, and all sorts of Life whatsoever: 'Tis better then Life, and all the concerns of Life; 'tis bet∣ter then many; better then all Lives bundled together; bound up together. Is natural Life no∣thing? Is not life the best Mo∣nosyllabe in the World? but, this is a spiritual Life; yea, this is an eternal Life; And, is not this (then) a peculiar Love? In respect of the Greatness of it. All Love may be reduced
to three Heads; Carnal; Moral; Spiritual; And yet Christs Love out-bids any of these; out-vies all these. But, to these distinct∣ly, Carnal. Now this Carnal Love, may fall under three heads; the World; Self; and Sin. The World. Souls! Christs Love to Thee (if thou beest Christs) is greater then thy Love to the World have been. The love of the World, is a great Sin, and looks like a Sin incon∣sistent with the truth of Grace. 1 Jo 2.15. If any Man, (any one, so the Greek) Man or Woman, love the World, the Love of the Fa∣ther is not in him; or her. Tim. 6.10. The love of Money is called the root of all evil. But now, Christs love to Thee, is greater then thy love have been to the world; so say my Text, Who loved us,
and washed us. Here's washing, as well as loving; yea, washing, the Effect, and Consequent of loving; Is not this (then) a pe∣culiar Love? Self. Christs love to Thee (if thou beest Christs) is greater then thy love have been to thy Self. Self-Love is a great Sin, for a Man is to deny himself, not to love himself. Mat. 16.24. If any Man will come after Me let him deny himself. But now, Christs Love to Thee, is greater then thy Love hath been to thy Self; witness my Text: Who loved us, and washed us. Here is loving, and washing out of Love; 'tis (now) a peculiar Love. Sin. Christs love to Thee (if thou beest Christs) is greater then thy love have been to Sin. Thy love; and my love, to sin, have been great; greatly great: Lovers of pleasure, 2 Tim. 3.4. more then
Lovers of God. Thou hast serv∣ed diverse lusts, and pleasures; thy Soul have been a Vessel of Sin, and a Vassal unto Satan; but now Christs love to Thee, is greater then thy love have been to Sin; witness the Text: Who loved us, and washed us, but from what? From our Sins in his own Blood. Is not this (then) a peculiar Love? Moral. As Christs Love is greater then carnal, so then Mo∣ral. Christs Love is greater then the Love of the Master to the Servant. For 1. The Centu∣rions Love, was great to his Servant; 'tis expresly said, that he had a Servant, who was dear unto him, but he was sick, and ready to dye; Now, hear∣ing of Jesus, Luke 7.2, 3. he sent unto him the Elders of the Jews, beseech∣ing him that he would come, and heal his Servant. The Ma∣sters
Love was great, desiring his Servant might be healed; but Christs was greater, Luke 7.10. for he heal∣ed the Servant. They found the Servant whole. Christs Love is greater then the Love of the Father to the Child. Jacob Love to Benjamin was great; the Fathers life, was bound up in the Lads life. Da∣vids love to Absalom was great; 2 Sam. 18.33. if not too great: That I had ayed for thee, oh Absalom, my Son, my Son! But Christs is greater. When my Father, and my Mother forsake me then Je¦hovah will gather me. Psa. 27.10. When my Father cast me out of his Arms, and my Mother cast me off her knees, then Jehovah will gather me into the Arms of be∣ginningless, and endless Mercy. Christs Love is greater then the Love of the Mother to the Child. The Mothers Love, is a
great Love; if not the greatest Love. Isa 49.15. Can a Woman forget her sucking child, from having com∣passion on the child of her womb? Is there such a Women among Women? Yea, they may for∣get, yet will I not forget Thee. Christs Love is greater then the Love of the Husband to the Wife. Conjugl Love, is (at least ought to be) great Love. The Love of Abraham, to Sa∣rah was great; of Isaac to Re∣becca was great; of Jacob to Rackel was great; of Elkanah, to Hannah was great; of Au∣gustus to his Livia was great, who dyed in the Embraceme is of her, with these words: Livia, nostri Conjugii memoresto, vive, & vale; which may thus be Englished: Livia, remember we were one, live, and farewell. Man, and Wife, are one flesh; and (if both be living) one Spirit,
so that this Love must needs be great; but Christs is greater. Husbands, Eph. 5.25. love your Wives, as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Where is there a Husband, that gives himself for his Wife? that gives himself to death for his Wife? Or, if he should, what would it signifie? She could never say (with the Text) who loved me, and washed me, from my Sins in his Blood: This must not be said, of any blood, but Christs; is not this (then) a peculiar Love? Spiritual. Christs Love is greater then the Spiritual Love of Christians. Jonathans love to David was great; and Davids love to Jonathan was great; but Christs is greater: what's a spark to the Furnace? a drop to the Ocean? Such, is the Love of Man, to the Love of Christ, God manifest in the flesh. 'Tis true,
David speaks very honourably of Jonathans Love: 2 Sam. 1.26. Thy Love to me have been wonderfull, pass∣ing the Love of Women: But Christs Love is greater; Christs Love is greatest. Jo. 14.13. Greater Love hath no Man then this, that a Man lay down his life for his Friend. Christ laid down his life for Enemies; as Enemies; when, and while Enemies; Is not this (now) a peculiar Love? What use may be made of this, Lastly. that Christ hath a peculiar Love, for his peculiar People? Hath Christ a peculiar Love for his peculiar People? USE. This (then) may be useful by way of Caution; by way of Comfort; by way of Councel. Is Christs Love, a peculiar Love? By way of Caution. take heed (then) of turn∣ing Love into Lust; and loving kindness, into lasciviousness. To do evil, that good may
come; and to be sinful, because God is merciful; and to be lust∣ful, because Christ is Love-ful, is the Sophistry of the Prince of Darkness. Dost argue from Grace to Sin? from Love to Lust? from Mercy, to Iniquity? from Immunity, unto Impiety? this is the Dialect of Hell, and the Sophistry of the Prince of Darkness. Rom. 3.8. Oh how do the A∣postle thunder against such! we are slanderously reported, and some affirm that we say: Let us do evil, that good may come, whose damnation is just. Art loved: be joyous, Soul, thou art more then a Conque∣rour through him that loveth. By way of Comfort. Oh you that have the Love of Christ, shed abroad in your hearts by the Spirit of Christ, this Text as a Cordial under your fainting Fits: Who loved us. Art tempted, or troubled? pain∣ed,
or panged? distressed, or disserted? yet loved; Me Duce, vinces. Rom. 8.37. who loved us. Nay, in all these things we are more then Conquerors; but how? through him that loved us. Not only Conquerors, but more then Conquerors. It is a com∣pound word, and signifies more then simply to overcome: we greatly overcome; we over, and above overcome; we over∣come above measure, or ex∣ceeding gloriously: we do more then overcome; we do Over-overcome, as the Greek seem to read it: It may well be read thus. But in all these things we Over-overcome through him that loved us. In all these things; but what things were these? These things, ye may run, and read (Rom. 8.35) What shall separate us from the Love of God? shall Tribulation? or Distress? or Persecution? or Famine? or
Nakedness? or Peril? or Sword? Here are seven bitter Dishes, and shall these? No; In all these things we do Over-overcome. Is not any one of these Dishes enough for any pallate in the World? yet, not one of these; not any of these; yea, not all these, shall separate from the Love of God; But, in all these things we do Over-overcome; but how? through him that lov∣ed us. Now, that thy Cup may be filled with Joy, and Peace, like the water pots of Galilee, up to the very Brim; suffer me to tell thee, that Christs Love is the most sutable, and sove∣raign Cordial. Christs Love, is the most su∣table Cordial. Those Cordials, are most efficacious, that are most natural, and most suiting the Spirits. Gal. 2.20. Christs Love, is the Christians Life. I live, yet not
I, but Christ liveth in me. Christs Love, falls in with the Life of a Christian, and therefore most sutable. Christs Love, is the most so∣veraign Cordial. As Gods Love (when he gave Christ) is put for all Causes. Jo. 3.16. So God loved the World, that he gave his only be∣gotten Son. So Christs Love (when Christians get comfort) is put for all Cordials. Is not that a lofty, as well as a lovely Expression, of the great Doctor of the Gentiles? Rom. 8.38, 39. For I am per∣swaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels; nor Principa∣lities, nor Powers, Nor things present, nor things to come, Nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Soul! Christs Love, contain in it the sum of the Gospel, Christ being
the sum of the Gospel, and Love the sum of Christ. God, so lov∣ed the World, that he gave Christ, and Christ so loved the World, that he gave himself, contain in it the Pith, and Mar∣row, of all the Gospel. This little word (Love) written in the golden letters of free-Grace in the blood of Jesus Christ, is an Epitomy of the Gospel. The Life of Christ, was a perfect Mirror of his Love; every acti∣on of it was full of Love; and if we put all the Actions of his life together we may conclude, that he was not born so much to Live, as to Love. Was there a word that dropped from his Lips, but was sull of Love? And, as for his works, they all speak Love so loud, that the deafest ear may hear it. Should we be∣gin at the Temple, where Christ disputed with the Doctors, and
low him to the Mount, where  was crucified by the Soul∣ers, we should see all the way ewed with Love-Reses. Now,  loved? then (this) Christ, is hy) Christ; and (this) Love▪ hy) Love▪ and is not this tter of Joy? Go away (then) d be filled with Joy, and ace, through Believing. Oh but there are Achans with∣! Sauls within! the Sons of erviab within! Oh there are any Blots in my Scutcheon! any Weeds in my Garden! uch Rubbish in my House! any Holes in my Coat! much even in my Heart! Oh no eart like unto Mine! Soul! Christs Lo is greater en thy Lust, and his Mercy, en thine Iniquity. If the Sun, e not fuller of Light, nor the cen fuller of Water, then (thy) eart, and (my) heart, of the
Remains of Sin, yet Chri Love ballanced against this, w weigh it down. Ex. 34.6.7 Thugh God ∣sits Iniquity to the third, a fourth Geeration, yet he ke Mercy for thousands; for the sands of Generations. Oh but if things be so, w am I thus? Oh why am I th responding? and thus doubtin and thus drooping? Endeavour thy Souls Resu rection by a serious Conside∣tion. Consider; Christ (out of Lov gave himself (for) Thee: W loved us; Gal. 2.20. what then? and ga himself for us. Consider; Christ (out of Love gave himself (to) Thee. I giv unto them eternal life. No Christ, in giving eternal life giveth himself, 1 J 5.20. for He is th true God, and eternal life. O how may you sing like Larks
at have been mourning like ves, and groaning like Tur∣ that can (in truth) say, and l this Truth, who loved us! Hath Christ a peculiar Peo∣ple? By way of Counsel. and a peculiar love for this culiar People? suffer then the ords of Exhortation. Now, is use, hath a double Aspect, d looks to those that are not ved; and then to those that are ved. Art not loved? Tremble (then) ou mayst be an Object of di∣ne hatred. Is Christs love, To the Vn∣loved. a eculiar Love? such a Love as ath been preached, and infini∣ly more? and art not thou oncerned in it? Hast not thou  Tast of it? Oh how canst thou at, or drink? Oh how canst hou rest day, or night? I knew he time, when I feared every Drop would poyson me, and every Crum choak me; when
I feared the Earth would op and swallow me up in the D and that my Bea would beco my Grave at Night, and t because I had not a Tast of t peculiar Love. Oh Soul! h may that Scripture (which ∣gins sweetly, Rom. 9.13. but ends sharp ∣ring in thine ears? Jacob,  I loved but Esau have I but It seems all are not loved w the same love; but, as some a Objects of infinite Love,  others are Objects of infini Hatred. Oh how amazing, a amuzing would this be, if Chr should say concerning Thee,  Ahab did concerning the Pre∣phet? There is one Mijab but I hate him. There is such Man, but I hate him; and sud a Woman, but I hate her  There is such a Child, but I hat him; and such a Servant, bu I hate her. No more are loved,
then are washed; at least, shall be washed; which is implied, if not expressed in this Text, and Truth, Who loved us, and washed us from our Sins, in the Blood of Himself. Art loved by Christ? To the loved. Be much more (then) in Love with Christ! Oh Soul, love Christ more! Love Christ most! There can be no excess in Love to Christ; there may be a sinful ex∣cess of Love to a Husband; of Love to a Wife; of love to a Child; but there cannot be a sinful excess in love to a Christ. May not Christ say to Thee, as he did to Peter? Jo. 21.15 Pe∣ter lovest skou me more then these? Lovest thou me more then thou lovest these? Or, lovest thou me more then these love me? Art loved by Christ? Be much more (then) in Love with those
that are Christs. Dost love the Father, and not the Child? Dost love the Head, and not the Bo∣dy? Dost love the Mediator, and not the Member? Dost love Christ, and not those that are Christs. 1 Jo. 4.11. The Apostle (who seem∣eth to me to be as it were) a compound of Love, and whose Love seemed to be his Master-Grace, hath made this use to my hands. Beloved! if God so lov∣ed us, we ought (also) to love one another. Art loved by Christ? Dread (then) a sinning against this Love. Oh who should sin against that Christ, whose Looks are Loves, whose Love, is Life! Yea, better then Life! As this Love cannot be sinned away, so it should not be sinned against. A subject of Love, is most suta∣ble, both to the Hand, and Pen of Christ; he wishes rather to
write in Honey, then in Gall; and to draw golden lines of Love, then to draw bloody lines of wrath; now, shall this Love be sinned against? what Use, therefore, the Apostle makes of the Day of Christ, I may make of the Love of Christ, what manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation, and god∣liness? Art loved by Christ? Ballance (then) the Love of Christ against all thy Sighs, and Sobs; Sor∣rows, and Sufferings. Beloved! those that are loved, with a di∣stinguishing, and peculiar Love, are not exempted from Sigh∣ing, and Sobbings; from Sor∣rowing, and suffering; yet bal∣lance Christs Love under all These. For instance Art afflicted? yet loved. Oh say the Soul, I can look no way, look no day, but I may say,
Gad, a Troop commeth! a Troop of affliction commeth! I am the Man that have seen af∣fliction, Lam. 3.1. by the Rod of his wrath. Well, art afflicted? yet loved. In all their affliction he was af∣flicted, Isa. 69.9. and the Angel of his pre∣sence saved them. In all their af∣fliction, he was afflicted: That is, he was affected with their affliction; and they had his Af∣fection, under their Affliction. Art tempted? yet loved. Oh say the Soul, I am tempted! tempted to Curse God, Job 2.9. and die! Oh my Temptations are wan∣ton, and wicked! brutish, and blasphemous! horrid, and sor∣did! Well, art tempted? yet loved. Christ loveth under Temptation, as well as out of Temptation. Heb. 2.18. For, in that he himself hath suffered being temp∣ted, he is able to succour them that are tempted.
Art reproached? yet loved. Oh say the Soul! I am under reproach, and made the Song of the Drunkard! Oh, I am under great Reproaches, Psa. 35.11. and they lay to my charge, things that I know not. Well, art reproach∣ed? yet loved. Mat. 5.11. Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and speak all manner of evil against you, falsty for my sake. Art persecuted? yet loved. Oh say the Soul, I am perse∣cuted! 1 Sam. 24.11. Saul is in the pursuit of Me, and he hunts after my Soul to take it! Well, art persecuted? yet loved. Persecuted, 2 Cor. 4.9. but not forsaken; cast down, but not de∣stroyed. Art dispossessed? yet loved. Oh say the Soul, I am poor! my barrel is empty! My Cruse empty! I have nothing with∣out doors! nothing within doors! I live in a Cottage! live upon
a Common! and have short Commons! Oh, I am crying concerning Bread, as Rachel cryed concerning Children? Children, Gen. 30.1. or I dye! So, Bread, or I die! Well, art dispossess∣ed? 2 Cor 6.10. yet loved. As having no∣thine, and yet possessing all things. Art unbelieving? yet loved. Oh say the Soul, though I am not an Unbeliever, yet I am unbelieving! Oh, say the Soul, my Faith is weak, and at low ebb? Oh my Fear, seems to take the wall of my Faith, and Christ may say to me, as he did to them: Mat. 6.30. O thou of little Faith! Well, art unbelieving? yet loved. 2 Tim. 2.13. If we believe not, yet he abideth faithful, he cannot de∣ny himself. Art hated? yet loved. Oh say the Soul, 2 Cro. 18.7. I am hated! hated by the World! hated by Neigh∣bours! hated by Relations! Oh
say the Soul, I am hated! hated by these! and one saith con∣cerning Me, as the false King, said concerning the true Pro∣phet! There is yet one Man, by whom we may enquire of the Lord, the same is Mecajah, but I hate him. Well, art hated? yet loved. It is thus with Thee? so it is with Me: Art hated by Man? yet loved by God-Man. Ye shall be hated of all Nations, Mark 13.13. for my names sake: but he that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved Art hardned? yet loved. Oh say the Soul, my Heart is hard! very hard! exceedingly hard! unexpressively hard! Oh say the Soul, as mine Eye is like a Pumice, so my Heart is like an Adamant! Oh my Heart, is hard as a Stone! hard, as an A∣damant-stone, concerning which they say, that nothing but Goats
blood will soften it! Oh, my Heart is hard! hard as a stone! hard as a Mil-stone! hard as a piece of the nether milstone! Well, art hardned? yet loved. I will take away thy stony Heart out of your Flesh, and will give you a Heart of Flesh. I, that (can) do it, (will) do it. Art distressed? yet loved. Oh say the Soul, as my weaknesses are many, so my wants are many! My Corruption is strong, but my Grace is weak; my un∣belief strong, but my Faith weak; my pride strong, but my Humility weak; my Passion strong, but my Patience weak. Oh say the Soul, though I do not want Grace, yet I am want∣ing in Grace! though I am not without Grace (Glory to the God of Grace, for the Grace of God) yet I have but a little Grace! Oh Sir, I am wanting
in Grace! wanting in every Grace! Oh Sir! may not I say concerning any Grace? yea I do say concerning every Grace, as the great Doctor of the Gen∣tiles saith, concerning the Chur∣ches Faith: Night, and Day, 1 Thess. 3.10. praying exceedingly, that we might see your Face, and might perfect that which is lacking in your Faith. Well, art distressed? yet loved: art wanting in Grace? in every Grace? yet loved. My God shall supply all your need, Phil. 4.19 according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. Art disserted? yet loved. Lastly. Oh say the Soul, 'tis Night with Me! I am in the dark! yea, walking in darkness, and have no light! Oh, there's a cloud interposing between my Soul, and my Saviour! The Face of God is eclipsed, and he seems to cover my Soul with a cloud
in his anger! Oh say the Soul, as it is said, Nic. 3 6. the Sun shall go down over the Prophets; so the Sun of righteousness is gone done upon my Soul! Oh Sir, the Lord hath forsaken me, Isa. 49.14. and my God hath forgotten me! Oh, I am not (only) out of the (hand) of God, but (also) out of the heart of God! Oh, I am not (forsaken) only, but (for∣gotten also! Well, Soul art disserted, Isa. 54.7. yet loved. For a smal Moment have I forsaken Thee, but with great Mercies will I gather Thee. Beloved! Disser∣tion, is the lowest Dreg of a Believers Cup: All the Hell that he shall have, he hath here; he shall have Heaven, but no∣thing but Heaven hereafter. Thus Soul, ballance Christs Love, against all thy SOR∣ROWS, under all thy SO∣LITUDES.
But, as I did begin, so I must end; and where I did be∣gin, there I shall end. If Christ hath a peculiar People, and a peculiar Love, for this pecu∣liar People, suffer (then) the words of Exhortation, and hold fast this Truth, this Text, Who loved us. Let the World go, and Sin go; let Self go, and Sa∣tan go: But let not this Text go; this Truth go; Who loved us. Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood.
And washed us from our Sins, i his own Blood. THat Christ Loving his, Medita∣tion. out of Love washeth his, and that from their Sins, in his own Blood. Be∣loved! If the Master of the As∣sembly, please to influence a methodical Discourse to Edifi∣cation, suffer (then) an innocent Inquiry after these six things. 1. What this washing is, that is, by Christs own Blood. 2. What this Sins is, that is washed from, in Christs own Blood. 3. Whether Christ washeth from Sin, in his own Blood. 4. How Christ washeth from Sin, in his own Blood. 5. Why Christ washeth from Sin, in his own Blood.
6. What use may be made of this, that Christ washeth from Sin, in his own Blood. What this washing is, that is, Method. by Christs own Blood. To this Negatively, and then Positively. What this washing is not; Negati∣vely. to this generaly, and then parti∣larly. To wash, is to purge, General∣ly. and make clean. Thus, the Fisher∣men were gone out of their Ships, washing their Nets. Luke 5.2. That is, making clean their Nets; for Nets by washing, are made clean; but thus you are not to understand it here. There's a Natural washing. Par∣ticu∣larly. There's a washing of the hands, and feet; a washing of the Body, and Cloathes for the Body. Thus (Matth. 15.20) To eat with unwashed hands, defileth not a Man. But thus you are not
to understand it here, in the Text, And washed us. There's a Moral washing, Thus (Psa. 26.6.) I will wash my hands in Innocency, so will I compass thine Altar., Jehovah, But, thus, you are not to under∣stand it here; And washed us There's a Ceremonial wash∣ing. Thus (Heb. 9.10.) Which stood only in Meats and Drinks and divers washings, until the time of Reformation. But, thus, you are not to understand it here; And washed us. There's a superstitious wash∣ing. Thus (Matth 15.2.) Why do thy Disciples transgress the Traditions of the Elders: for they wash their Hands, when they eat Bread? But thus, you are not to understand it here; And washed us. There's a Miraculous wash∣ing. Thus (John 9.11) Go,
and wash; and I went, and wash∣ed, and I received sight. But, thus, you are not to understand it here; And washed us. There's a Spiritual washing. Positi∣vely. There's a washing from the Guilt of Sin; and from the Filth of Sin: There's a Deliverance from a Conscience of Sin, and from a Conversation of Sin: There's a washing Sin from off the Soul, and so justifying it; and a washing the Soul from off Sin, and so sanctifying it. To these distinctly. To wash, is to justifie. To wash, is to redeem, and restore, Thus (Revel. 5 9.) Thou art worthy to take the Book, and open the Seals thereof; why? for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. To wash, is to Sanctifie. As
to wash, is to redeem, and re∣store, so, to regenerate, and re∣new; As, to pardon, so to pu∣rifie; As, to deliver from the Guilt, so, from the Filth of Sin, Thus (Tit. 3.5.) Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of Re∣generation, and renewing of the holy Spirit. But, both these (justifying, and Sanctifying) you have connected, and con∣nexed (1 Cor. 6.11.) And such were some of you: but ye are wash∣ed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Now, thus, (if I mis∣take not) you are to under∣stand it in the Text, who wash∣ed us; that is, who justified us from the Guilt, and sanctified us from the Filth of our Sins, in his own Blood. And washed
us from our Sins, in his own Blood. What this Sin is, that is washed from, in Christs own Blood. Sin, in the Nature, and Motion of it, is a Transgression of the Law. Sin, supposeth a Law in being; Rom. 4.15. For where there is no Law, there is no Trans∣gression: But, where there is Sin, there is a Law, and a Trans∣gression of that Law. 1 Jo. 3.4. Whosoever committeth sin, transgresseth the Law; for sin is a Transgression of the Law. Yea, Sin is not on∣ly the Transgression of a Law, but of a good Law; Rom. 7.12. For the Law is holy, and the Commande∣ment holy, and just, and good. Yea, the Transgression not only of a good Law, but of Gods Law. Psa. 89.30, 31. If his Children forsake (my) Law, and walk not in (my) Commandements; If they break (my) Statutes, and keep not (my)
Commandements. Now, the Law, not (only) forbids the doing of evil (whether in thought, word, or deed) but (also) commands the doing of Good; so that to omit the Good commanded, as well as to commit the Sin for∣bidden, is Sin: whatever, there∣fore, doth transgress the Law of God (in whole, or in part) is Sin; whether it break an Affir∣mative, or a Negative precept; that is, whether it be the Omis∣sion of Good, or the Commis∣sion of Evil. From this; all this, Christs blood washeth; And washed us from our Sins, in his own Blood. Whether Christ washeth from Sin, in his own Blood. As it is true, none in Heaven, nor on Earth, nor under the Earth, could open the Book, and un∣loose the seven Seals thereof; it is as true, none in Heaven,
nor on Earth, nor under the Earth, can justify a guilty Soul, and sanctifie a filthy Soul, but Christ; unto this my text speaks, Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. Eze. 16.9. Then washed I thee with water; yea, I throughly washed away thy Blood from thee; thy Bloods from thee, according to the Margent. Then; when? when I passed by thee. Eze. 16 6. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted (or troden under foot) in thine own Blood. I said unto thee. Live; Yea, when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, Live. But what (I) is this? This Jehovah God. Thus saith. Jehovah, Eze. 16.3. God unto Jerusalem &c. Now this Jeo∣vah, is God; or Christ; for the Son hath the same name with the Father; Jer. 23.6. This is the name whereby he shall be called, Jeho∣vah our Righteousness 'Tis Christ
that washeth. Eze. 36.25 26, 27. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new heart, will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my Spi∣rit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgements, and do them. But, in short; If to wash, be to justifie, then Souls are wash∣ed in Christs own Blood. Rom. 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace; but how? through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus And, if to wash, be to sanctifie, then Souls are washed in Christs own Blood. Hb 13.12 Christ, that he might sanctifie the People with his own blood, suffered without the Gate. How Christ washeth from
Sin, in his own Blood. Christ washeth three wayes: by his Word; by his Spirit; and by his Blood. By his Word. Christ, hath ap∣pointed, and approved his word, as a means leading unto this end. Jo. 17.17. Sanctifie them through thy Truth, thy word is Truth. As to wash, is to justifie, so to san∣ctifie; Now, though the word can do nothing without Christ, no more then the Instrument can without the hand; yet, this Instrument, together with the hand, can justifie a condemned Creature, and sanctifie a cont∣minated Creature. By his Spirit The word, that's as the wax; the Spirit, that's as the Seal upon that wax. The Spirit (indeed) is the principal verb in the Sentence; Sanctification (properly) is the work of the Spirit; For, as it is
the proper work of the Fther to elect; and, of the Son to re∣deem; so of the Spirit to san∣ctifie those Elected, and Re∣deemed. 'Tis, therefore, called the Sanctification of the Spirit. Ye are chosen unto Salvation, 2 Thess. 2.13. through Sanctification of the Spi∣rit. By his Blood. As Christ wash∣eth through his Word; and through his Spirit; so through his Blood. But how may Christ be said, to wash from Sin, in his own Blood? There is a virtual, and an actual washing, in Christs blood. That is, there is a Satisaction given to God (for) Man; and a sanctification wrought (in) Man. Virtual. There is a satisfacti∣on given to God, Beloved! There is the Active, and Pas∣sive
Obedience of Christ; con∣cerning his Active, himself speaks: I have finished the work, Jo. 17.4. which thou gavest me to do. Con∣cerning his Passive, himself (al∣so) speaks: It is finished. Jo. 19.30. Here was the Cross, and Crucifixtion of Christ, as the Complement of All. These two, his Active, and Passive Obedience, were (joint∣ly) and (equally) concerned, in giving Satisfaction to infinite Justice: Now, concerning these two, his Action, and Passion (if I mistake not) God saith: Mat. 3.17.  This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Or, (according to the Greek) in whom I ac∣quiesce. God, did acquiesce in him as Son; as Mediator of the promise; as one that did, and dyed, and so satisfied. Christ, himself, did not only arrive at a Satisfaction, by his Action, and Passion; but (if I may speak
it without Levity, and with a holy Reverence) arrived God at a Satisfaction, by his Doing and Dying, and that for All for whom he gave himself: and unto whom he hath given, and shall give himself. Both which (I think) are legible in that o the Prophet: Isa. 53.11. He shall see of th Travel of his Soul, and be atis∣fied; by his knowledge, shall m righteous Servant justifie many for he shall bear their Iniquities. Actual. There is a Sanctifi∣cation wrought in Man. A there is a Satisfaction give (to) God (for) Man, so the is a sanctification wrought (by) God (in) Man. If the Blood o Bulls, and of Goats, and th ashes of an Heffer sprincklin the unclean, sanctified to th purifying of the flesh: Heb. 9.13, 14. Ho much more shall the blood  Christ, who through the etern
Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? Here's purging, and purifying; here's sanctifying, and spiriting unto Service; but how? through blood; That is, through an Application of Christs blood; and this appli∣cation is through Faith; For the Apostle wordeth it; Rom. 3.25. Whom (speaking of Christ) God hath set forth (or so ordained) to be a propitiation (or mercy-seat;) but how? through Faith in the Blood. So that all arrive at a Sa∣tisfaction (with respect to Ju∣stification, and Sanctification) concerning this Blood: Christ, was satisfied, in shedding his Blood; God, was satisfied, in Christs shedding his Blood; And Man, is satisfied, because inte∣ressed in this Blood that was shed; being delivered, not from
a Conscience of Sin (only), but from a Conversation of Sin (al∣so). And washed us from our Sins, in his own Blood. Why Christ washeth from Sin, in his own Blood. Christ washeth from Sin, in a two fold Respect; in respect of the Ne∣cessity (of) it; an in respect of the commodity (by) it. In respect of the Necessity of it. It is expedient that one should dye for the People, and that the whole Nation perish not. There's a Necessity of Christs Blood, and that for these two Reasons, among others. Because Man had sinned. Man, is defiled, and therefore Man must be washed. Every man (in a state of Nature) is a Bartimeus (the Son of the un∣clean) as the word signifieth. Oh Soul, here's thy pedigree, though an Emperor was thy
Father, yet Adam was thy Grand-Father! To this purpose the Apostle speaks: Wherefore, Rom 5.12. as by one Man sin entred into the World, and Death by Sin; and so death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Or, in whom all have sinned; so the Greek. Every Man, and Woman, living in the Region of depraved Na∣ture, is a Nero, (a Sinner) as the word signifie. Man, is de∣filed, and that from Head, A Capite∣ad Calcew. to Foot; that (as the Philosopher saith, concerning the Soul, it is in every part; where there is Life, there is the Soul: Tota in to∣to; & ota in qualibet parte. for the Soul is the Life; so, what ever is in us, and commeth from us, and is acted by us, receive a defilement from us. Sin, is like a Leprosie, over the whole man; like a Gangrene, spreading over the whole Soul. There is, therefore, a necessity
of Christs Blood, in order to Pardon, and in order to Purity. Because God would be satis∣fied. God, is infinite in his At∣tributes, as well as in his Es∣sence; Justice, is one of Gods Attributes, and God will not loose one of his Attributes. If Man sin, God will avenge this sin, upon the Person, or upon the Passover. As Man had sin∣ned, so God would be satisfied; yea, satisfied, the same way he was offended. 1 Cor. 15.21. By Man came Death, by man came (also) the Resurrection of the dead. In respect of the Commodity by it. The Blood of Christ is advan∣tagious in a manisold respect. At this Door of Christs Blood, enters Redemption. Is not Re∣demption a great thing? to be rescued out of the hands of the roaring Lyon, is not this a great
Mercy? This is through Christs Blood. Eph. 1.7. In whom we have Re∣demption; but how? through his Blood. At this Door of Christs Blood, enters Remission. Is not Re∣mission a great thing? Pardon of Sin, is not (only) a singular, but (also) a plural Mercy; Heb. 9.22. this Remission is through Christs blood. Without shedding of blood, no Remission. At this Door of Christs Blood, enters Access to God. Is not Access to God a great thing? Access to a mortal Monarch, is eyed as a great thing; but what is Access to an immortal God then? Sin, had set God, and Man, at an infinite distance, Christs Blood bring these to∣gether. The Apostle speaking of Christs preaching Peace, to them which were asar off, and to them which were nigh, sub∣joins
joins this, Eph. 2.17, 18. For, through him, we both have an Access by one Spirit unto the Father. At this Door of Christs Blood, enters Acceptance with God. There's an Acceptation through Christ, and his Blood, as to Per∣son, and as to Performance. There is (through Christs Blood) an Acceptation as to Person. Man, was indebted, and the Blood of Christ went to pay the Reckoning. Eph. 1.6. Ye are bought with a price: Christs Blood went for pay. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved. There is (through Christs Blood) an Acceptation as to Performance. As God hath re∣spect to the Person of an Abel, so to the Oblation of an Abel; but, respect to both, through Christ. Christ, is a merciful,
and faithful high Priest, Heb. 2.17. in things partaining to God, to make ricon∣ciliation for the Sin of the People. At this Door of Christs Blood, enters Salvation. Is not Salva∣tion a great thing? Is not this worth the hearing? worth the having? Is not Damnation a bitter Pil? a bitter Potion? This Salvation, is through Christs , from Wrath, and from . . If the wrath of a King, be as the Messenger of death,  what's the wrath of a God then! the wrath of the God of Gods then! Christ, by his blood, saveth from wrath. Rom. 4.25. Who was delivered for our offences, and raised again for our Justifi∣cation. From Sin. As the Blood of Christ, saveth from the Guilt of Sin, so from the Filth of Sin. He shall save the People from
their Sins. Mat. 1.21. As Christ is a Sa∣viour (for) Sin, so (from) Sin. What Ʋse may be made of this, Lastly. that Christ washth from Sin, in his own Blood. Here are three uses; USE. Caution; Comfort; Counsel. Now this Use hath a double Aspect, By way of Caution. and looks unto the washed, and unwashed; Now, if so, there must be a distinct discussion, in a way of Caution. Art loved? To the washed. and washed? be cautioned (then) against sinning, for Christs Blood must go for washing. Beloved! what all the water in the Sea cannot do, the Blood of Christ can do. If thou beest washed from Sin, 'tis by Christs Blood. What Man in his wits, will be lavish of his blood! Oh, what Soul, in love with Christ, being loved of Christ, will be lavish of Christs Blood! Soul!
if there be sinning by Thee, and Mee, his Blood must go for washing. Hath not Christ bled enough already, when he hath bled to death, to an accursed death, but must he bleed again? That, as he was pierced again, must he bleed again? Jo. 20.27. Come. Thomas, reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side. I was once pierced, and wilt thou pierce me (by thy unbelief) a second time? So, shall we bleed Christ again? Oh take heed of sinning, for Christs Blood must go for washing! That, as it is said, Take eed to thy self, Diut. 4.9. and keep thy Soul diligently. So, take heed of sinning, for Christs Blood go for washing. Oh Soul! if thou hast any love for thy Sa∣viour, love for thy Soveraign, love for thy Soul, when thou findest any Corruption bubling within, then let this Text ring
i thine ears: Who loved us, ad wshed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. Oh Soul! when thou findest a Temptation presented; A Snare on Mizpah, Hos. 5.1. and a Net spread upon Tabor; then say with Joseph, Gen. 39.9. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Did Christ do? and shall I sin? Did Christ dye? and shall I fin? Is Christ washing? and shall I be sinning? Oh who should sin, and cause Christ to pay so dear for it! Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. Art not washed? be caution∣ed (then) against denying the efficacy of Christs Blood. To the un∣washed. As the Papists lead from the Blood of Christ, to the blood of Hales, and Becket; So, there is a Ge∣neration, of a late Edition, (Cousin-Germans to the Pa∣pists) who lead from the blood
of Christ, to the blood in them∣selves. They say, Haldo's Key, &c. p. 63. that the blood of Christ, is the Life of Christ; that is, the power of the light in them. They say, that Salva∣tion, Purification, and Recon∣niliation, they are not by that Blood of Christ, shed on the Cross, but by that blood of the Spiritual Body of flesh, blood, and bones, which (they say) Christ descended in; and which (they say) is in every one of them, as really, as in (that) Man, who was the Son of Mary. By this (it seems) that Salvation is by no other blood, but what is in themselves: But, let God be true, and every Man (in this matter) a Lyar. The Blood of Christ, must needs be effica∣cious, for 'tis called the Blood of God. Feed the Church of God, Act. 10.28. which he lead purchased with his own Blood. 'Tis not (then) a
blood in themselves, but was a blood in Himself, and this was the Blood which was let out, and trickled down upon the Cross. One little Drop (says Luther) of Christs blood, is of more worth then Heaven, and Earth. What is the blood of a Grape? the blood of a Son? yea, of an only Son, to the blood of the only begotten Son of God? yea, to the blood of that Christ, 1 Tim. 3.16. who is, God mani∣fest in the flesh? The Soul may feel; yea, the Soul must feel himself to stand in excessive need, even of the least drop of Christs blood, for the washing away of his Sins. And washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. Art loved? be joyous (then) thou art universally washed from thy Sins, By way of Comfert. in Christs Blood. Christ saith to every believing
Saint, and sanctified Believer, as he did to Peter: He that is washed, needeth not one to wash his feet, but is clean every whit; and ye are clean, Jo. 13 10. but not all. Is clean every whit; is wholy, or universally clean, according to the Greek. Now, Soul, art loved? and (out of love) washed, and that univer∣sally? go not (then) away with thy Countenance sad. Oh but (as Rebecca said) I may say! If things be so, Gen. 25.12. why am I thus? If I be universally washed, what mean those cor∣rupt Inmates, and cursed make∣bates within? what mean that pride, and passion within? what mean that wantonness, & world∣liness within? what mean that Unbelief, and Misbelief with∣in? Oh Sir! if I be universally washed, what mean these vain, and vile Thoughts within? what
mean those hard, and high Thoughts within? what mean those brutish, and blasphemous Thoughts within? If things be so, why am I thus? A Soul, washed by Christ, may be considered two wayes; in his Justification, and in his Sanctification. In his Justification. Now, Ju∣stification, is formally, inhe∣rently, and materially in Christ. Thus, a loved Soul, stands com∣pleatly, and perfectly washed, in Christs own blood. Thus, a loved Soul, is compared unto the Sun, which is without spots. Thou art all fair, Cant. 4.7. my Love, and there is no spot in thee. Thus, a loved Soul, is presented (by Christ) without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; For this is the Doctrine which the Apostle preacheth, Eph. 5.25. and (I blesse God) that I do believe what he preach.
In his Sanctification. Thus, a loved Soul is black. Cant. 1.5. I am black, but comely, oh Daughters of Jerusalem! Comely, as to Justification; black, as to San∣ctification. Look not upon me, because I am black; Cant. 1.6. because the Sun hath looked upon me. A loved Soul, is compared to the Sun (which is without spots) as to his Justification; but un∣to the Moon (which is full of Spots) as to his Sanctification. Oh, but I cannot believe, that I am washed from all Sin! Though I may be washed from the Sin of my youth, yet not from the Sin of my old age: Oh, though I may be washed from open Sins, yet not from secret Sins! Oh, though I am not so profane as I was! and so polluted as I was! yet, this I find, that when I would do good, evil is present with! Oh,
this lay near my heart! Rom. 7.19.21. The good I would do, I do not; but the evil that I would not do, that do I! Canst not believe an univer∣sal washing? know, that the Author of Faith, is the Actor of Faith. Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus, the Author, and Finisher of our Faith. Here, Faith, being a principal grace, is Synecdochically put for all Grace. Christ, must not only work Faith, but set Faith a work, or thou wilt not be∣lieve an universal washing. When thou wouldest do good, is evil present with thee! So, it is with Me. May not I say, with a holy Reverence, as Christ did to the Scribes, and Pharisees? Joh. 8.7. He that is without Sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. So, that Person, that do not find evil present with him, when he would do
good, let him first cast a stone at Me; and at Thee. Thou art universally washed, if loved, though thou dost not believe it. If washed from one Sin, washed from all Sins; that is, thou art (washed) from all Sin, in point of Justification; and thou art (washing) from all Sin, in point of Sanctification. Christs blood, extend, to the washing away of all Sin. 1 Jo. 1.7. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanseth us from all Sins. Oh, but, though there be si∣lence now, there may be Suf∣fring ere long! Though there he silence here, there's suffering else where! Oh, though there be peace now, there may be∣ware ere long! Though there be prosperity now, there may
be adversity ere long! Oh, though it be Summer now, it may be Winter ere long! Though the Woman be in the Wilderness, yet she shall come out, Cant. 8.5. leaning upon her Be∣loved. Soul, art loved? though thou beest, or shouldest be in Tribulation; yea, in great Tri∣bulation, yet thou mayest come out of that great Tribulation. These are they that came out of great Tribulation, Rev. 7.14. having wash∣ed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Now, wilt thou, that art loved, and universally washed, from thy Sins in Christs own blood, go away with thy countenance sad? Oh Soul! pluck a Cluster from this Vine; and take a Drop from this honey-comb: Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. Doth Christ wash from Sin,
in his own Blood? By way of Counsel. Suffer (then) the words of Exhortation. Now, here, I would speak to the unwashed, and the wash∣ed. Art not washed? Go (then) to Christ for washing. To the un∣washed. No more, shall have a Crown, then have a Christ; shall have Glory, then have Grace; and shall have Happiness, then have Holiness. If, therefore, thou wouldest be justified before God, and san∣ctified before Man, go to Christ. If I wash thee not, Jo. 13 8. (and 'tis Christ that speaks it) thou hast no part with Me. Whether, would ye go? whether should ye go? whether, will ye go? whether, can ye go, but unto Christ, who loveth, and wash∣eth from Sin, in his own Blood? Art unwashed? go (then) to Christ for washing. But, is it Christs will, as well
us Christs work, that I should go to him, to be washed? As it is Christs work to wash, so, it is Christs will that thou shouldest be washed. 1 Thess. 4.7. This is the will of God, even your san∣ctification. Now, God, and Christ will, and nill, the same things. But may those that are un∣washed, go to Christ to be washed. As unto whom, should an un∣washed Soul go, but unto Christ; So, none but unclean Souls (Souls sensible of their Ʋlcers, and Ʋncleanness) will go to Christ to be washed. Mat 9.12. The whole need no Physitian (that is, see no need of a Physician) but those that are sick, But did ever a Soul, so un∣clean as I, go to Christ to be washed? Oh! I am a Gehazi he was no fuller of Leprosie
then I am of Sin; and yet he went out of his Masters pre∣sence, a Leper as white as Snow. A Sinner thou art, and no more thou art; now, though a Sinner be a Subject of misery, yet an object of Mercy. Luk. 19. The Son of Man is come to seek, and to save, that which was lost. If I must go to Christ, to be washed in his Blood, then, what manner of Blood, is Christs Blood. Beloved! My Line, will not sound this Bottom, for it is a bottomless Bottom; but I will let it down, for Christ can make a Feast of a Fragment. Take a Tast, though but a Tast. Christs Blood, is a Heart∣softning blood. The heart of Man is stony; yea, like an Ada∣mant stone, concerning which stone, they say, that nothing
but Goats-blood will soften it. Oh Soul, though thy heart be like an Adamant-stone; yea, like the nether Milstone, yet the blood of Christ can soften it. I will take away the stony heart out of their flesh, Eze. 11.19. and will give them a heart of flesh. Christs Blood, is a justifying blood. Justification, is a great thing, and a gracious thing in∣deed; to be acquitted from  and Death, and accounted righ∣teous unto Life, and Glory; o not this great? greatly great? This, is through Christs blood. That being justified by his blood, Rom. 5.9. we should be saved from wrath through him Christs Blood; is a Sin-mor∣tifying blood. Beloved! ye must look upon your Sin, as that which was the death of your Lord; and ye must look upon the death of your Lord, as that
which is the death of your Sin. Our old Man is crucified with him, Rom. 6.6. that the body of Sin may be destroyed. Christs Blood, is purchasing blood. There was little paid for the Saviour, they sold him for thirty pieces of Silver, but there was much paid for the Sinner. Ye are not redeemed with corrup∣table things; 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. there's the Negative part; but what are these? Sil∣ver, and Gold: But, if Silver; and Gold cannot, what can? the blood of Christ can: but, with the precious blood of Christ. Ye are not redeemed with corruptable things, as Sil∣ver, and Gold, but with the pre∣cious blood of Christ. The blood of Christ, is the price of Re∣demption. Christs Blood, is pardoning blood. Oh what wearisome days, and nights, have many
Souls! but what's the reason? they want a pardon. Do not these say at night, oh that it were morning? And, in the morning, oh that it were night! Oh how can you rest day, or night, that are without a par∣don! Christs blood, is pardon∣ing blood. Col. 1.14. In whom we have Re∣demption through his blood, the forgiveness of Sins. Christ Blood, is pleading blood. Abels blood, did plead against the Offender, but Christs blood plead for the Believer. Abels blood, did cry for ven∣geance, Heb. 12.24 but Christs blood cry for Mercy. 'Tis called the blood of sprinkling, that speak∣eth better things then that of Abel. Christs Blood, is a pacifying blood. Christs blood, is the blood of Atonement. No sooner was Haman executed, but Aha∣suerus
was appeased. No soon∣er was Christ crucified, but God was pacified. And you, Col. 1.21, 22. that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your minds by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled; but how? in the body of the flesh through death. Christs Blood, is a procuring blood. Our Sins, did shut Hea∣vens gate, but the blood of Christ is the Key, that open the gate of Paradise for us. 'Tis Christ that hath the Key of Da∣vid, opening, and no man shut∣ting; shutting, and no man o∣pening Loved ones have bold∣ness to enter into the holiest; Heb. 10.19. but how? by the blood of Jesus. Christs Blood, is pure blood. Beloved! we have our Blots, in our Scutcheons; our Weeds, in our Gardent; our Rubbish, in our Houses; our Leaven, in our Hearts; our Holes, in our Coats;
but Christ, had none in His. Impure blood, run in our veins; but only pure blood run in His. He, Heb. 4.15. was in all points tempted, like as we are, yet without Sin. Christs Blood, Lastly. is purifying blood. As the blood of Christ, is a blood of value, and of Me∣rit; so, 'tis a blood of Vertue, and Spirit. This blood is a Laver, to wash in; it washeth a Crimson Sinner, Milk-white. Now, this is (if I mistake not) a part of the washing in the Text: And washed us, form our Sins, in his own Blood. Doth Christ wash from Sin, To the wash∣ed. in his own Blood? sense (then) thy Heart, with the Nature of Sin. Sin, defileth the Soul, and Christs Blood must go to wash it. Sin, makes man a per∣fect Black, and 'tis Christs Blood must make him perfectly White. Tit. 1.15. Ʋnto the pure, all things
are pure, but unto them that are defiled, and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their Mind, and Cinscience is defiled Doth Christs Blood wash from Sin? Take (then) a view here of mans insufficiency to wash himself. Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethio∣pian change his skin? or the Leo∣pard his spots? Man; any man, must live in his ulcers; lye in his ulcers; dye in his ulcers, and be damned for his ulcers, if Christ (in his own Blood) wash him not from his ulcers. Doth Christs Blood wash from Sin? pray (then) for the Blood of sprinkling upon all thy Sacrifices, and Service. It was the saying of (One) Oh trust not in Man that shall dye, Earl of Strafford. nor in the Son of Man, that shall be made as Grass! There's no Confidence in Princes; the only thing that
stands by a man is the Blood of Christ, and the Testimony of a good Conscience. And, I have read of another, Mr. Herbert whose saying was (when he heard any of his good works mentioned) Ah! it is a good work, if it be washed in the Blood of Christ. 1 Pet. 1.2. Of this blood, the Apo∣postle speaks; And sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ. Doth Christs Blood wash from Sin? wonder (then) the Riches of free-Grace. Wash∣ing, is but an effect, and Con∣sequent of Loving. Here's lov∣ing, and then washing; yea, washing from Sin; from all Sin, and that in Blood; yea, in Christs own Blood. Who loved Me, and gave himself for Me. That is, Gal. 2.20. who loved Me, and (out of love) gave himself to Death for Me. Doth Christ wash from Sin, in
his own Blood? Improve (then) this Text, and Truth, as an An∣tidote to expel Poyson. May not this Text serve, and be im∣proved as a Counter-poyson? And washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. May not this Text, and Truth, be improved, as an Electuary for the Soul? And washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. For instance Art tempted? yet washed. Oh say the Soul, I am tempted! dayly tempted! greatly temp∣ted! tempted to curse God, and die! (Job 2.9) Art temp∣ted? yet washed; here's an An∣tidote for this poyson; And washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. Art troubled? yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, I see all things come alike to all! There's no new thing under the Sun. Oh, I am troubled! troubled on e∣very
side; and my Troubles come like waves (2 Cor. 4.8.) Art troubled? yet washed; And washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. Art reproached? yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, I suffer much in my name; and am accounted an Achan, 1 Cro. 2.7. the Troubler of Is∣rael! Art reproached? yet wash∣ed. And washed us. Art hardned? yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, my heart is like an Adamant, harder then a Flint! (Ezech. 3.9.) Art hardned? yet washed. And wash∣ed us. Art hated? yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, I am hated! hated of Relations! It may be said of them, concerning me, as was of Ammon, concerning Tamar (2 Sam. 13.15.) That the hatred, where with they hate me, is greater then the love
where with they have loved Me. Art hated? yet washed And washed us. Art poor? yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, I am poor! I am like the poor Widow (Mark 12.42.) that had her two Mites, which made but a Farthing? Art poor? yet washed. And washed us. Art persecuted? yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, I am hunted! hunted as a Partridge in the moun∣tains! (1 Sam. 26 20.) Art per∣secuted? yet washed. And wash∣ed us. Art unbelieving? yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, my Faith is at a low Ebb, and like the Noble∣mans Son (Jo. 4, 47.) at the point of death! Art unbelieving? yet washed. And washed us. Art weak? yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, I am weak! the outward man weakens dayly!
weakens greatly! Oh, I may say with the Apostle, the time of my departure is at hand! (2 Tim. 4.6.) Art weak? yet washed. And washed us. Art disserted? Lastly. yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, 'tis Night now! Midnight now! Oh, the Face of God is hid now! not a smile, and a shine now! not a glimps, and a glaunce now! Oh, I may say, as the Psalmist doth (Psal. 30.7.) thou didst hide thy Facc, and I was troubled! Art dissert∣ed? yet washed; And washed us. May not (now) this Text, and Truth, be improved as an Anti∣dote? Christ loving his, wash∣eth his; yea, out of love to his, washeth his, and that from Sin, in his own Blood. Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood.
THE Churches Stock, OR, Believers Patrimony. Gal. 3.16. (former part.) But to Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made. IF there be a Context, I shall humbly take leave of that. In the Text, you have the Persons, and the Predicate. The Persons: Abraham, and his Seed. His Seed; what Seed? His Believing Seed; his Spiri∣tual Seed; his Seed by the free-Woman. And, that this is the
Seed, you may run, and read, in the words following the Text: He saith not, And to Seeds, as of many, but as of one; and to thy Seed, which is Christ. Not Ishmael, and Isaac; but Isaac, and not Ishmael: Not Esau and Jacob; but Jacob, and not Esau: not those born after the Flesh, but those born after the Spirit. And to thy Seed, which is Christ; of whom Isaac was a lively, and a lovely Type. To Abraham, and his Seed; And to thy Seed, which is Christ. Now, in that compleat Genealogy of Christ (Luke the third) you have (a∣mong other things) this, Luke 3 34. who was the Son of Abraham. And to thy Seed, which is Christ; that is, Christ, and all that are Christs; Christ, and all that are chosen, and called, in, and by Christ, both Jews and Gentiles. And, that this is (thee) Seed of
Abraham (who is stiled the Fa∣ther of the Faithful) is evidently evident, Rom. 9. from the sixth to the fourterth Verse. The Predicate. That which is spoken, concerning these, is, that the promises were made unto these: To Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made. The Persons, are Believers, and the Promises are their Patri∣mony Now, to Abraham, and his Seed were the promises made. That those; all those; Meditati∣on. and only those, who are Gospel-Be∣lievers, have a Gospel-right, to Gospel-promises. That Abraham was a Believ∣er, who doubts? And, that (this) Seed, which are called (his) Seed, are Believers, none need to doubt, by what (I think) I have already written. So that what I have made the matter of my Meditation, and pre∣sented
as the Doctrinal-Truth, doth (without straining) arise out of the Text. That Gospel∣believers, have a Gospel-right, to Gospel promises. In the prosecution of this proposition, suffer an innocent inquiry after these six things. What these Gospel-Believers are, Method. 1. that have a Gospel-right to promises. What these promises are, un∣to which Gospel-Believers have a Gospel-right. Whether Gospel. Believers, have a Gospel-right, to Gospel∣promises. How, Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-right, to Gospel-pro∣mises. Why, Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-right, to Gospel-pro∣mises. What use may be made of this, That Gospel-Believers,
have a Gospel-right, to Gospel∣promises. What these Gospel-Believers are, that have a Gospel-right to promises. I would hope to arrive thee at a Discovery of a Gospel-Be∣liever, under a Discussion of a Gospel-Faith. There is the Ha∣bit of Faith, and the Act of Faith. There's the Habit of Faith. There's the Seed of Faith, or Faith in the Seed. The Heart, that's the Soil, and Grace, that's the Seed. Being born again, 1 Petr. 1.23. not of corruptible seed, but of incorrup∣tible. Grace, is the Seed; Faith, is (a) Grace, if no (thee) Grace, for 'tis the leading Grace; the Grace that lead the Van of all other Graces. Grace, is the Seed, and this is incor∣ruptible. As there is no Grace in Sin, so, there is no Sin in Grace.
There's the Act of Faith. As there is the Habit of Faith, so there is the Act of Faith. Gal. 5.6. As there is the work of Faith, so there is a working-Faith. But Faith, which worketh by Love. But what manner of Faith, is this Faith? 'Tis a Faith that hath Christ for Object. That (He) might be just, Rom 3.26. and the justifier of him that believeth in (Jesus.) This Faith, hath Christ (but not the lying vision of the heart) for its Object. 'Tis a Faith of the Operation of God. Faith, is a work, but 'tis Gods work. Col. 2.12. 'Tis (expresly) called a Faith of the Operation of God. As Faith is Gods will, so 'tis Gods work. 'Tis a Faith that's wrought not only by the power of God, but by the exceeding greatness of Gods power. And what is
the super-eminent magnitude of his power to us-ward, Eph. 1.19, 20. who believe, according to the work∣ing of the might of his power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. There is concerned in the working of Faith, a power aequivalent unto, and aequipol∣lent with that power, which gave a Resurrection to Christ Jesus. 'Tis a Faith that hath a Train of good works. Jam. 2 18. Shew me thy Faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my Faith by my works By works, I mean, works from a right Principle, to right Ends; that is, works, from a gracious Principle, to a gracious end; works, from a Principle of the Grace of God, to a promotion of the Glory of God. Now, though such works are not Essential unto Faith,
yet they are Evidential unto Faith; though, they are not the Essence of a lively Faith, yet, they are the Evidence that Faith lives; Jam. 2.26. For, as the Body, without the Spirit is dead; so Faith, with∣out works, is dead also. This, is a Gospel-Faith, and he, or she, that hath this Faith, is a Gospel-Believer. What these promises are, un∣to which Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel right. Promises (they say) are Absolute, or Condi∣tional. Absolute promises, are Spi∣ritual, Absolute. and Caelestial; As Grace, and Glory; Redemption, and Remission; Sanctification, and Salvation. Conditional promises, are temporal, Conditio∣nal. and corporal; As Health, and Honour; Prospe∣rity, and Plenty; Seed, and Sub∣stance, &c.
But in short, there's a three fold promise: Civil, Religious, and Divine. Civil. This is a word passed from Man, to Man. Civil. A Civil promise, is a word passed from Man, to Man, for the perfor∣mance of some lawful thing, as in Contracts, and in other af∣fairs. Thus, Laban, made pro∣mise to Jacob, to give him his Daughters. Thus, Saul, made promise to David, not to hurt him, and hunt his Soul, to take it. Thus (also) Jonathan, made promise to David, 1 Sam. 19.1, 2, 3. Religious. This is a word passed from Man, to God. Religious. A religious promise, is a word passed from Man, to God, con∣cerning some Duty, relating to his Honour. This, is called a Vow. If a Woman (also) vow a vow unto the Lord. Thus,
the Psalmist: Psa 66.13, 14. I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings, I will pay thee my vows, Which my lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in trou∣ble. Divine. This, is a word passed from God to Man. Divine. A di∣vine promise, is a word passed from God, to Man, concerning the fulfilling of some Good, or removing of some Evil, Spiri∣tual, Psa. 119.38, 49, 50. or Temporal. Stablish thy word unto thy Servant, who is de∣voted to thy Fear. Remember thy word unto thy Servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word hath quickened me Now, Gods promises, are Legal, or Evangelical. Legal. Do this, and live. Thus God passed his word, Legal. to give eternal life, and Creature-Com∣forts, upon condition of per∣forming
the Law. Honour thy Father, and thy Mother, which is the first Commandement with promise. But, these, are not the promises, Eph. 6.2. spoken off in the Text: To Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made. Evangelical. Thus, when God passeth his word freely to give; Evangeli∣cal. freely to give Christ, and (to∣gether with Christ) all things freely to give. Whereby are given unto us; but what? pro∣mises; yea, precious promises, yea, great, 2 Pet. 1.4. and precious pro∣mises; yea, exceeding great, and precious promises. Now, these are they; they are Gospel∣promises, unto which Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-Right; Of these my Text speak: To Abraham, and his Seed were the promises mde Whether Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel Right, to Gospel∣promises.
It were no hard Task, to produce a cloud of witnesses. But in the mouth of two, or three, shall every word be esta∣blished. Gal. 3.22. For instance: The Scrip∣ture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by the Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. Gal. 3.29. If ye be Christs, then are ye Abrahams seed, and heirs, according to the promise. Now, Gal. 4.28. we, Brothren, as Isaac was, are the Children of promise. How Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-Right, to Gospel-pro∣mises. Through Grace. Free-Grace, gives a right to the promise. Through Grace. Promises, are Donatives; they are free gifts. Gal. 3.18. If the Inheri∣tance be of the Law, then 'tis no more by promise; but God gave it to Abraham by promise. Here, the Inheritance is given, that is under promise; and the pro∣mise
is given, under which the inheritance is. God gave it to Abraeham by promise. Through Christ. Christ, is he first, and great Heir: Through Christ. he is Heir of all things, and through im Believers inherit the pro∣nise. 'Tis the Prince of life, hat gives a propriety in the promise of life. For this cause, Heb. 9.15. e is the Mediatour of the New Testament, that by means of death, or the Redemption of the Trans∣gressions, that were under the first Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of eter∣nal. Inheritance. Here is an eter∣nal inheritance under promise, but this is through the death of Christ. Through the Spirit. The Spi∣rit, Through the Spirit. Eph. 1.13. is called the Spirit of pro∣mise. After ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise. And, as there is the
Spirit of promise, so there the promise of the Spirit. The we might receive the promis of the Spirit. 'Tis called th promise of the Spirit, not (o∣ly) because a greater efflux the Spirit is under promise, b (also) because the Spirit is th Author, and Applyer of the pro∣mise. Through Faith. Faith, Through Faith. Gal. 3.14. is th Souls hand to receive the pro∣mise. That the blessing of Abra∣ham might come on the Gentile that we might receive the prom of the Spirit; but how? throug Faith. Here is Faith, but 't Faith from Christ; here is Faith but 'tis Faith in Christ; 't Faith that hath Christ for Ob∣ject, as well as Author, an Actor; So that Grace, an Christ; the Spirit, and Faith i Christ, give a Gospel-Right, t Gospel-promises.
Why Gospel-Believers, have Gospel-Right, to Gospel-promises. The Reasons follow. In order to the exercise of a elievers Faith. As the Pre∣ept, is a Rule for Obedience, so e promise, is a Ground for aith. The promises of God, ad of the Gospel, they are f I may speak it without Le∣ity, and with a holy Reve∣ence) the swadling Cloaths of Christ, and they carry a Christ rapped up in them. Gospel-promisses, they are full Breasts, nd God delight that Faith hould draw them. Oh Soul! when Time goes nto Eternity, then Faith will o into Vision; it must there∣fore be conversant about the ruth of the promise here. 'Tis said of Abraham, Rom. 4.20, 21. that he stag∣gered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong
in Faith, giving glory to God being fully perswaded, that wh God hath promised, he was ab also to perform. In order to the Exercise of Believers Hope. As (Faith looks to the (Truth) of the pr∣mise, so (Hope) looks to th (Good) of the promise: A Faith looks to the (Truth)  the promise. Ipse dixit; 'T not Pythagoras, but God tha hath spoken it; And he is not  Man that he should repent, no the Son of Man that he should ly So Hope looks at the (Good) of the promise; at the Goo couched, and lodged in the pro∣mise, whether it be a promise of the life that now is, or o that which is to come. Abou the Good couched, and lodged in the promise, is Hope con∣versant; whether it be the Re∣moving of evil, or the obtain∣ing
of good. 1 Jo. 2 25. This is the pro∣mise which he hath promised us, even eternal life. Eternal life, is under promise, and this is the (Good) of the promise. But let the Apostle (who was a far bet∣ter Orator then my self) speak, as to the Good, and Truth of the promise. In hope of eternal life, Tit. 1.2. which God that cannot lye, pro∣ised before the World began. In hope of Eternal life, there is the (Good) of the promise; which God that cannot lye, promised be∣fore the World began. There's the (Truth) of the promise; Hope, is conversant about the one, and Faith is conversant about the other. Now, Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-right, to Gospel-promises, that Hope may be excercised; for, when Time goes into Eternity, then Hope will go into Possession, as Faith will go into Vision. Is it
not proverbial, were it not for Hope, the heart would break? The Proverb (metaphysically understood) is innocent; for, had Believers hope only in this life, 1 Cor. 15.19. they were of all Crea∣tures the most miserable. Gos∣pel-Believers, have something in Hope, though nothing in Hand; much in the Promise, though little in the Purse Hope (in some sense) excels Faith; for the Devils believe, Jam. 2.19. and trem∣ble; yea, the Devils pray; They besought Jesus, to send them into the Deep. The De∣vils believe, Luke 8.30.31. and tremble, and pray: what want they then? they want Hope, which is a constant, and a confident ex∣pectation of a promised good; this Devils can never have; they are under Torture, and Torment, and that without Hope of re∣demption. Rom. 4.18. A life of Hope, is
the life of Believers; Abraham believed in Hope, against Hope. This Hope, Devils can never have, and do not this want here of make Devils? In order to a Believers Peace, and Pardon, Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-Right to Gospel-promises, that in (them) they may read their Peace, and Par∣don. Now the God of Hope, fill you with Joy, and Peace; but how? through believing (Rom. 15.13.) That is, through believing the Peace, and the Pardon, laid up in the promise. The Gospel, is a golden Mine of gracious Pro∣mises; the least promise (there) is worth a World, a thousand Worlds, if there were so ma∣ny: Gal. 1.7. 'Tis called the Gospel of Christ. 'Tis called the Gospel of God. Rom. 1.1. 'Tis called the Gospel of Grace; and 'tis called the Gospel of Peace. Acts 22.28 Your feet
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. The Gospel, is Christs Letter of Credence, that when a poor drooping, doubting, and desponding Sou cannot see him, it may (in the promises thereof, and therein I read of him, and hear from him. The Wife is in Englaud, the Husband in India; oh how welcome is a Letter from him when she cannot look upon him! Oh what a Lift to the Wife, is a Letter from the Husband under her poreing up on his Absence, and Distance Oh say the Wife, though cannot look upon my Husband yet I have a Letter from m Husband! And, though I can not see him, yet I hear from him, and read of him. 'Ti thus here; to hear of a Christ, and hear from a Christ, whe the Believer cannot see him
is a Believers Mercy, and this is the promises of the Gospel. Now, Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-Right, to Gospel-pro∣mises, in order to their Peace, and Pardon. Whom, 1 Pet. 1.8. having not seen, ye love, in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. In order to a Believers strength, and support. Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-right, to Gospel-promises, that (in the promises) they may read a promised Strength, and Sup∣port. Oh, say the Soul, that Scripture ring in my ears, and follow me whither soever I go! It shall come to pass, 1 Kings 19 17. that him which escapeth the sword of Ha∣zael, shall Jehu slay; and him that escapeth the sword of Jehu, shall Elisha slay. Oh, say the Soul, if I do not fall by the
hands of this Saul, I may by the hands of that Achan! If I do not fall by the hands of this Achan, I may by the hands of that Goliah! Oh! If I do not fall by the hands of this Corrup∣tion, I may fall by the hands of that Temptation; And, if I fall not by the hands of that Temptation, I may fall by the hands of this Corruption. But, Soul, art a Gospel-Believer? then thou hast a Gospel-Right, to Gospel-promises, that (in the promises) thou mayst read a promised Strength, and Sup∣port under Temptation, under Corruption. God (by the Pro∣phet) speaking of Abraham his Friend, and his Seed, makes, and leaves a precious promise: Fear thou not; Isa. 41.8.10. why? for I am with thee: be not dismaid; why? for I am thy God; but what then? I will strengthen Thee; yea, I
will help Thee; yea, I will up∣hold Thee, by the right hand of my righteousness. Here, ye may read (under promise) the presence, and the power of God; Strength, and Support from God; Now, to Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made. Oh, say the Soul, I am weak! weak as water! saith God, I will strengthen. Oh, say the Soul, the work is too hard for me! and too much for me! saith God, I will help. Oh, say the Soul, I may flay by the way! fail by the way! fall by way! No, saith God, I will up∣hold thee, ane that by the right hand of my righteousness. What use may be made of this, that Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-Right, to Gospel-promises. These are three Uses: Ter∣ror; Trial; Triumph.
Art an Unbeliever? tremble (then) for thou (hast at present) no Gospel; By way of Terror. Right, to Gospel-promises. Oh Soul! thou canst never look upon the (promise) of life as thine, until thou canst look upon (Prince) of life as thine. Providential Mercies, fall upon all Creatures, but the pro∣mises of Mercies, and Mercies in the promises, are setled up∣on the Spouse as her proper, and peculiar Dowry. If, there∣fore, to hast no Gospel-proprie∣ty to the Prince, and Saviour; thou hast no Gospel-propriety, to the promise of Life, and Sal∣vation. Art in a state of Unbe∣lief? Oh how may trembling (then) take hold upon thee, for thou hast no Gospel-right, to any Gospel-promise. Whether thou hast a decretive right, I know not, but a declarative right thou hast not, for, to A∣braham,
and his Seed, were the promises made Is not that a sad word? At that time, Eph. 2.12. ye were without Christ; without Christ! what then? Soul, is it nothing to be without Christ? To be without the Prince of Life, is to be without the promise of life: Christ is the first, and grand promise, the seed of the woman; all after promises, are but as so many Comments upon this first, and grand promise, Christ. Is it nothing (then) to be without Christ? But what follows? Being aliens of the Com∣mon-wealth of Israel, and Stran∣gers from the Covenants of pro∣mise, having no hope, and with∣out God in the World. Did Spira say (when his Friends were reading of comfortable pro∣mises, about the death of Christ) read no more; read no more; read no more; they are Cor∣dials
to others, they are Cor∣rasives to me. Oh what mayst thou then say, that art in a state of unbelief! I would have more Charity for him, then for thee, if thou beest an Unbeliever, for, to Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made. Have Gospel-Believers, a Gospel-Right, By way of Tial. to Gospel-pro∣mises? Try (then) whether thou hast a Gospel-right. The Questions (now) will be these. But how shall I know, that I have a Gospel-Right, to Gos∣pel-promises? Hast Christ? then thou hast a Gospel-right, to Gospel-pro∣mises. If Christ be thine, all is thine. What one sid of Anti∣quity: Christus meus, & omnia. Antiqua mea, Christus meus: my Antiquity, is my Christ; I may say of propriety, proprietas mea, Christus meus;
propriety is my Christ. Rom. 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him (also) freely give unto us all things? But how shall I know that Christ is mine? Hast the Spirit? then thou hast Christ. 1 Jo. 3.24. By this we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us. This is an infallible Evidence. But how shall I know that I have the Spirit? Hast the Fruits of the Spirit? then thou hast the Spirit. Though there may be a Tree without Fruit, yet there can∣not be Fruit without a Tree: Now, the Spirit, is not a barren, but a bearing Tree; it bears Variety, and Rarity; it bears Variety; as Love, Joy, Peace, long-suffering, gentleness, Gal. 5.22, 23. good∣ness, Faith, Meekness, Tempe∣rance;
it (also) bears Rarity, Faith, Love, &c. such Fruit as this. I will take but one of the Top-fruits of this Tree, and that's Faith. Hast Faith? a Faith, that hath Christ, for Object? Christ, for Author? Christ for Actor? then thou hast the Spi∣rit, and a Gospel-Right, to Gos∣pel-promises. To Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made. He that believeth on the Son of God, 1 Jo 5 10. hath the witness in himself. Where this Faith is, there is the Spirit; he that hath the Spi∣rit, hath Christ; and he that hath Christ, hath a Gospel-Right, to Gospel-promises. But how shall I know when a promise is given from God? Oh I fear, I take promises, before they are given of God! Then a promise is given of God, lut. 1. when it comes not in
word onely. A promise, from God, comes in word, 1 Ths 1.5 but not in word onely, but in power, and in the hely Spirit. Our Gospel, came not to you in word only, but also in power, and in the holy Spirit, and in much ass∣rance. A promise come in word; there must be a word; yea, this the written word; or, (at least) something aequivalent unto the written Word; yet it comes not in words only, but also in power. Then a promise comes from God, when the Soul is enabled, and influenced, to receive it. That we might receive the pro∣mise of the Spirit. Now, this receiving is believing, for Faith is the Souls hand. J. 1.12. To as many us received him, to them gave he power (or priviledge) to become the Sons of God; but who are these? Even to as many as be∣lieve
to his Name. For the Soul to say, this is the word of God, and (through Grace) I believe it; when the Soul can say, con∣cerning a promise, as Paul said concerning the safety of the Souls, under the loss of the Ship, I believe God, that it shall be as it was told me; So, when the Soul can believe the promise; this promise is mine, &c. then 'tis given from God. Then a promise is given from God, when 'tis engraven upon the heart. 'Tis true, Satan can produce Scriptures, and present promises, but when promises are written upon the heart, then they come from God. When the Soul keep a fresh sense of the promise upon the heart, and can say with the Psalmist: I re∣member the dayes of old, it looks (then) as if it were given from God. 2 Cor. 3.2, 3. Ye are our Epistle written
in our hearts, known, and read read of all Men; For as much as ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministred by us, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart. Are there not some of you here, that remem∣ber the very first promise, wherein Christ, and your Souls met? and you cannot forget that, and other promises, also. Then a promise is given from God, when it sutes the Souls condition. For instance, Art tempted? Oh, say the Soul, my Temptations are wan∣ton, and wicked! horrid, and sordid! brutish, and blasphe∣mous! Blessed, is the Man, Jam. 1.12. that endureth Temptation, for when he is tryed, he shall receive the Crown of life, which God hath promised to them that love him.
Now, this suit is the Souls con∣dition. Art afflicted? Oh, say the Soul, I can look no way, but I may say, Gad, a Troop com∣meth! My afflictions come like waves, no sooner is one affli∣ction over, but another com∣meth. Isa. 63.9. In all their affliction, he was afflicted. He was affected, with their affliction, and they had his Affection, under their Affliction. This word sutes the present Condition. Art persecuted? Oh, say the Soul, 2 Cor. 4.9. Saul hunts after my Soul to take it! Persecuted, but not forsaken. Though persecuted of Man, yet not forsaken by God. This falls in with the Souls condition, and so looks like a word given from God. Art disserted? Oh, say the Soul, the Sun of Righteousness is gone down upon me, and
there's a Cloud interposing be∣tween my Soul, and my Savi∣our! Isa. 54.7. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. Doth not this sute the Condition of the Soul? Art reproached? Oh, say the Soul, they lay to my charge things that I know not! Mat. 5.11. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and speak all manner of evil a∣gainst you (falsly) for my sake. Is not this word sutable? Art impoverished? Oh, say the Soul, my Barrel is empty! and my Cruse empty! Ps. 34.10. The young Lyons do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. They shall not want any thing that is good, that is for their good. Is not this promise su∣table, and seasonale? Art Unbelieving? Oh, say
the Soul, my Faith is at a low Ebb, and I cannot make con∣clusion of Light in Darkness, of Life in Death, which is the true Logick of Faith? 2 Tim 2.12. If we be∣lieve not, yet he abideth faithful, he cannot deny himself. If not this a sutable word? Art mourning? Oh, say the Soul, mine Eye is like a Lim∣beck, continually dropping! I, Isa. 51.12. even I am he that comforteth thee. Not I, and another; not I, or another; but I, even I am he that comforteth thee. This falls in with the present state. Dost want Pardon? Oh, say the Soul, I want a sight, and a Sense of Pardon! There's no Salvation, without Remission, and yet I want a Sight, and a Sense of that. Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy Trans∣gressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy Sins. Is not this proper?
Hast back-sliden? Oh, say the Soul, I have a sliding foot, and a back-sliding Heart! Hos. 15.4. I will heal their back-sliding, I will love them freely. Is not this a proper promise? Dost fear? Oh, say the Soul, Lastly. I fear I shall fall by the strength of this Temptation! or this Corruption! 2 Cor. 12.9. My Grace is suffi∣cient for Thee, for my power is made perfect in weakness. A promise (thus coming) sutes the Souls condition, and seems (to me) to be a promise given from God. Art a Believer? Triumph (then) thy Salvation is under Promise. Soul, By way of Triumph. though Salva∣tion be a great thing; though it be a Soul-Salvation; a Spi∣ritual Salvation; an eternal Salvation, yet, this Salvation is under promise, and is entail∣ed upon believing. 1 Pet. 1 9. Receiving
the End of your Faith, the Sal∣vation of your Souls. As Faith shall have an End, so there is the end of Faith, and that's Sal∣vation; receiving the end of your Faith, even the Salvation of your Souls. There must be believing, till Faith come to an end, if (at the End) you would receive the End of your Faith, even the Salvation of your Souls. When Faith shall have an End, then shall the Soul have the End of Faith, and that's Salva∣tion; Receiving the end of your Faith, even the Salvation of your Souls. Soul, take a Drop into thy Bucket; pluck a Cluster from this Vine, Gos∣pel-Promises, they are (as it were) the Veins of Christ, whereby his Bloud is carried in∣to all his body, the Church. Gospel-promises, they are the
Treasures of Comforts; they are the Churches Stock; they are the Believers Patrimony; To Abraham, and his Seed, were he Promises made. Heb. 6.17. It is the Pri∣viledge and Dignity of true Believers, to be called heirs of the Promise. Oh, but a Cloud seems to be impending! Is not Sin reeling still? Is not Satan raging still? What course shall I now steer, for the bitterness of Death is not yet past? Make Judgment of Gods Faithfulness, not according to his Providences, but according to his Promises. God, hath promised to keep his People, and he will keep his Promise. Providences, may work coun∣ter, but Promises are the same, and are sure. Whatever is un∣certain, the promise is sure. An Estate may be lost; Rela∣tions
may dye, and go to the Grave of Silence, but the Pro∣mise is sure, and the same Therefore it is of Faith, Rom. 4.16. that  might be by Grace; why? to the end the promise might be sure t all the Seed. To all the Seed but what Seed is this? not  that (onely) which is of the Law but to that (also) which is of th Faith of Abraham, who is th Father of us all. Now, that th Soul may be filled (like th water pots of Galilee) up t the very Brim, with Joy, and Peace, through believing, su∣fer me to tell thee, that th promises are sure, and the same For They are hid in the Scripture That the Gentiles should be fe∣low heirs, Eph. 3.6. and of the same body and partakers of his promise; but how? through the Gospel. They are hid in the Heart
With the heart man believeth unto Righteousuess, Rom. 10.12. and with the mouth onfession is made unto Salva∣tion. They are hid in Christ. All e Promises of God, 2 Cor. 1.20 in Him that is, in Christ) are YEA, nd in him AMEN, unto the lory of God by us. But, to end, as I did begin; Divine Promises, they are hid n the Scripture; but should that be made a Sacrifice, then they are hid in the Heart: Gos∣pel-Promises, they are hid in the Heart; but should that be made a Sacrifice, then they are id in Christ, and are they not sure enough there? Oh, Soul!  am sure, there they are sure. Now, Gospel-Believers, have  Gospel-Right, to Gospel-Promises. Art a Believer of he right Stamp? these Promi∣ses (then) are thine, and wilt
thou go away with a Count∣nance sad? Oh Soul! ope thy mouth wide, that it ma be filled with Grace, and Peace For, To Abraham, and his Sec were the Promises made. Luke 2.14 FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT. Books to be Sold by Beniamin Harris, at the Sign of the Stationers Arms, in Swithins Al∣ley, in Corn-hill, near the Royal Exchange. WAr with the Devil, or, The Young Mans Conflict with the Powers of Darkness. By B. K. 8. p. Bound, is. A Parable of the Kingdom of Heaven: Or, An Expositi∣on of the first 13 ver. of the 25th. Chap. of St. Matthew, By Mr. Knowllis, 8. Price bound 1 s. Loving, and Washing; Or some Meditations upon Loving, & Washing in the Blood of Christ, by Richard Mayhew; Price bound 10. d.
