M1654 12409131 61465
THE MEMOIRES OF Sir James Melvil Of HAL-HILL: CONTAINING An Impartial Account Of the most Remarkable AFFAIRS of STATE During the last Age, not mention'd by other Historians: More particularly Relating to the KINGDOMS OF England and Scotland, Under the REIGNS Of Queen Elizabeth, Mary Queen of Scots, AND King IAMES. In all which Transactions the Author was Per∣sonally and Publickly concern'd. Now published from the Original Manuscript. By GEORGE SCOTT, Gent. LONDON, Printed by E. H. for Robert Boulter at the Turks-head in Corn-hill, against the Royal-Exchange, 1683.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. AS there is scarce any kind of Civil Knowledge more neces∣sary or profitable than History; (which is therefore very aptly stiled by the Ancients, The Mistress of Life,) so of all sorts of History there is none so useful as that which unlocking the Cabinet, brings forth the Letters, private Instructions, Consulta∣tions and Negotiations of Ministers of State; for then we see things in a clear light, stript of all their paints and disguisings, and discover those hidden Springs of Affairs, which give moti∣on to all the vast Machines and stupendious Revolutions of Prin∣ces and Kingdoms, that make such a noise on the Theatre of the World, and amaze us with unexpected shiftings of Scenes and daily Vicissitudes. Of this latter kind are those Memoires wherewith we here Oblige the World, being the many Years Transactions and Experi∣ences of an eminent publick Minister in his long and faithful Ser∣vices under, and Negotiations with several Princes, and at as tick∣lish a Iuncture and important Crisis of Affairs as could almost hap∣pen in any Age: for having upon the perusal not only found the same to contain many remarkable passages, not met with in any Histories of those times, and in such Occurrents as they have touched upon, to be much more exact and full in divers considerable Circumstances; But observed it likewise to be furnisht with much excellent, plain, honest advice (delivered by the By) which might be of great ad∣vantage to Princes, and both Examples and Precepts whereby their Councellors and Favourites may be Caution'd what just, free and generous Measures they ought to take, if they would not tread the same Precipices, whereby others have Shipwrackt both their Masters and themselves, I could not but apprehend my self obliged to Communicate such a Treasure to the Publick, as well for a ge∣neral
good, as in some measure to discharge my Devoir to the me∣mory of the worthy Author, from whom I have the honour to be de∣scended. Three things there are Essential to any History, and which chief∣ly recommend it to the esteem of judicious Readers. 1. That the subject matter be real, and of considerable moment. Women and Children may be delighted with, and dote upon Romances, and silly Legends; or listen with attentive Admiration to the Wars of the Pigmies, and Adventures of the Faiery Land. But men of sence always expect solid Transactions, and such substantial Exam∣ples as may be of advantage to improve their judgment in Civil Wis∣dom, and the necessary conduct of Life. 2. That the Author be capable of knowing what he speaks, and have Opportunities to discover the Certainty, and full Circumstan∣ces of those Affairs, whereof he undertakes to Treat. 3, And lastly, His Honesty, That he be a man of impartial Veracity, and firm Resolution to observe inviolable that prime Law of History, Ne quid falsi audeat dicere, ne quid veri non audeat. Not to dare deliver any falshood, nor to conceal any Truth. All which Characters are happily met in these Memoires. The matters contain'd, are both Lofty and Weighty, for they Treat of the Actions and Sufferings of Princes, and persons of the first Rank: Open the close Consultations and Intrigues of several of the ablest Ministers of State at that time in Christendom, and shew on what Hinges the greatest Affairs were turned, and by what Artifices managed, so as to be either accomplisht or Defeated. Nor could any Gentleman have better Advantages to be acquain∣ted with the most private and reserved Scenes of those Passages which here he delivers to the World, since in general of all that he writes, he may properly say, Quorum pars magna fui, They are matters within his own Circle, and declare such as must of necessity fall within his own notice, since through his hands, and he himself had a principal part in the manage and transacting of them; being a person concern'd in the most knotty Affairs (especially relating to Scotland) during his time: And therefore as Ocularis Testis, his work may Challenge that Credit which many other Authors do but begg from the Charity of their Courteous Readers; at least deserves
as much or more esteem as any other Writers of that time, who in respect of him were but Auriti. The Author was descended of one of the most honourable Fami∣lies of the Kingdom of Scotland, as being Third Son to the Lord of Kaeth, and at Fourteen years of Age was sent by the Queen Re∣gent to be Page of Honour to her Daughter Mary married to the Dauphin of France. But by her allowance be entred into the Ser∣vice of the Duke of Montmorance (Great Constable of France, chief Minister to Henry the Second) who earnestly desired him from her Majesty, having a fancy for the Youth's promising parts; he was Nine years Entertain'd and Imploy'd by him, and when he grew up to riper Years and try'd Abilities in matters of greatest Impor∣tance, an honourable Pension for his greater encouragement was set∣led upon him by that King. Then being desirous for his further Accomplishment to Travel, having his Queens leave and his Masters permission for that purpose: But passing through Germany he was detain'd by the persuasion of the Elector Palatine, and at his earnest intreaties necessitated to condescend to attend at his Court, where be Resided Three years, being by him imployed on several Embassies. After which, obtain∣ing his consent to prosecute his former intentions of further Travel, he visited Venice, Rome, and the most famous Cities of Italy. Returning through Switzerland to the Electors Court, he there found a Call from Queen Mary, then returned to her Kingdom of Scotland, after the death of her Husband King Francis, to attend her Service. The Queen Mother of France at the same time had offer'd him a large Pension, and profitable Offices, to engage him to wait upon her Service at the Court of France; she finding it her interest at that Iuncture to keep good Correspondence with the Protestant Prin∣ces in Germany, and knowing him to be most acceptable to all of them. But though it appeared most advantagious to his private Fortunes to have accepted of her noble Offers; yet in this and at all other times he prefer'd his Loyalty to his Interest, and esteem'd him∣self engag'd in Duty to serve his natural Princess rather than a Stranger. Upon his arrival in Scotland he was admitted a Privy Councel∣lor, and Gentleman of her Chamber, being continually imploy'd by her Majesty in matters of her greatest concernments, till her unhappy confinement in Lockleven: All which he discharged with an exact fidelity, and had she taken his sound Advice, many of her misfortunes might have been avoided.
He was afterwards Noticed by all the Four successive Regents in a special manner, and intrusted by them with Negotiations of greatest moment, Though after the Queens imprisonment he had ever owned the King's side. When his Majesty King James came to the Government, he was especially recommended by the Queen, then Prisoner in Eng∣land, to him as one most faithful, and capable of doing him Service. Whereupon he was likewise by his Majesty admitted a Member of his most Honourable Privy Council, and of his Exchequer; as also made Gentleman of his Chamber, continuing ever in favour and Imploy∣ment till his Majesties passage into England, to receive his Heredi∣tary Right, the Crown of that Kingdom, upon the death of Queen Elizabeth. The King would gladly have taken him along with him thither, offering him considerable advancements there: But being now stric∣ken in years, and desirous to Retreat from the troubles of the World to spend the remainder of his days in Contemplation, begged his Ma∣jesties permission thereto. However, after the King's going for London, he found himself in Duty engag'd once to wait upon his Majesty in that Kingdom, and accordingly went thither, and was graciously received; and having attended there some weeks, humbly giving his Majesty his best advice, no Court allurements (whereof he had great store) could prevail with him to alter his former Reso∣lutions of privacy; So that he return'd to his own House, where, as in Harbour, reflecting on the pass'd Voyage of his Life, and all the various Weather, and difficult Storms of Publick Affairs, wherein he had been concern'd; to inform the World of the true State of those Transactions, and to direct others (especially his Children) how to conduct themselves if call'd to such Services, he with his own hand drew up the following Memoires. How far he deduced them I cannot certainly determine; 'tis very probable he had given an Ac∣count of all till the going of the King to England, though this Copy extend not so far: However thou hast all that I have, and nothing more then what is the Author's, for I should esteem it impiety to ob∣trude any thing of my own under his Name. And I hope the Rea∣der will rather accept kindly what is here happily Retriev'd, than be offended at me for not furnishing him with more than the injuries of time and ill men have left us. And indeed I was not a little encouraged to this Publication by Reflecting on the wonderful preservation of so much of it, after so many Years, and its then coming so Providentially to my hand, it
having found the Castle of Edinburgh an Asylum till the Year 1660, which yet had not been able to afford shelter to the Publick Records of the Kingdom, from the hands of Tyrannical Usurpers: Though I have not met with any Information by what way it came thither, far less how secured so long a space, and amidst so many Confusions, being there recommended to no Man's particular Care, but exposed to the mercy of the Rabble: Whence it was wonderfully rescued by Mr. Robert Trail late Minister of the Gray-Fryars Church in Edinburgh, when Imprison'd there, to whom the Author's hand∣writing was exactly known. This Mr. Trail counting it an hap∣piness to have lighted on so great a Rarity, knowing the Worth and Abilities of the Author, remitted it to Sir James Melvil of Hal∣hil, the Author's Grand-Child: From whence it was derived to me, and having perused it, and thought I should be highly injurious to the Publick, if I did not Communicate it to the World; together with the Author's following Epistle to his Son in the nature of a Dedica∣tion, wherein as he shews his deep insight into the Intrigues of Princes Courts, so it likewise gives an evident Demonstration of his sincerity in what he has herein Delivered; and of his firm Affection to ver∣tue and honesty, and detestation of vice, and those flattering Arts whereby evil and Self-seeking Councellors have often abused the best of Princes. This is all I thought necessary to Advertise thee of, touching this Publication, and so leave it to thy Candid perusal. George Scott.
THE AUTHOR TO HIS SON. Dear SON, SEeing thou hast shewn they self so willing to satisfie my expectations of the following, and observing ma∣ny of my former Precepts during thy younger years, I grant now unto thy request the more gladly, to put in wri∣ting for thy better memory, several passages which thou hast heard me rehearse concerning the life I did lead du∣ring my peregrination through the most part of Europe; from the Age of fourteen years till this present hour; to∣gether with the prosperous success, and hard accidents hap∣ned to me, hoping that thou wilt be so wise as to help thy self in time by my faults, and not wait upon the hurtful experience of the common sort, seeing no man can shew the right way better than he who hath oft-times chanced upon By-rodes; assuring thee, that, next unto the special favour of God, nothing stood me in so much stead as the early embracing of unbought experience, by observing the stumbling Errours of others. Neither did I ever find any thing more dangerous then the frequent slighting to no∣tice any seen example, which was always accompanied with over late Repentance. The most part of things which I purpose to set down presently, are certain old written Memorials which were lying beside me in sundry parcels, treating of matters wherein I have been imployed my self by sundry Princes, or which I have seen, or observed being in their Coun∣tries (as the purposes of themselves will declare) to serve for an example of life, and better behaviour to thee and thy Brother, concerning the Service of Princes, and med∣ling
in their Affairs; which I could not eschew, for I sought not them, but they me. I enforced my self to serve them more carefully, diligently and faithfully than any of my Companions, whereby I won greatest favour with those who were Wise, Grave, Aged and Experimented; as with the Prince Elector Pallatine, and the old Duke of Momorancie, Constable of France, who had the whole Rule and Go∣vernment of the Country under King Henry the Second, his Master and mine; who were so constant, that their favour lasted so long as I remained in their Service; not without extream and dangerous Envy of such of my Com∣panions as were naturally inclined to that vile Vice, whom I took great pains by patience, presents and humility to gain; obliging them by that carriage to lay aside part of their malice. But when it chanced me after to serve Princes of Younger Years, and of less Experience, at the first by the like diligence, care and fidelity, I obtained their favour above the rest of their Servants; yet at length they were carried away by the craft and envy of such as could subtilly creep into their favour, by flattery and by joining together in a deceitful bond of fellowship, every one of them setting out the other, as meetest and ablest for the Ser∣vice of their Prince, to the wrack of him and his Coun∣try; craving the Prince to be secret, and not to Commu∣nicate his Secrets to any but their Society. Thus the Prin∣ces good qualities being smother'd with such a Company, were commonly led after the Passions and Particularities of those, who shot only at their own marks: Some of them continually possessing his Ear, and debarring there-from all honest, true and plain speakers; so that no more hope could be left of a gracious Government, nor place for good men to help their Prince and Country, where-through fell out many foul, strange and sad Accidents, as may be af∣terward seen and read: Princes misused, and abused, their Country robbed, their best and truest Servants wracked, and the wicked instruments at last perished with all their high and fine pretences; others, ay such-like, succeeding in their place, never one taking example to become more temperate and discreet, because of the destruction of those who went before them; but as highly and fiercely follow∣ing their greedy, vain and ambitious pretences, obtaining
the like Tragical reward. For my part, albeit I had seen, and oft-times read of the wrack and backward rewards of all such true, faithful Servants and Councellours, as were most careful of the Weal and Safety of their Prince, in resisting and gainstanding the devices of the wicked sort, and sometimes minding the Prince not to suffer himself to be led by those who commit so many wrongs, and errours at their Appetite, yet I left not off from what I thought my Duty, neither for Fear nor Danger, to op∣pose my self continually to the false fetches of such Mi∣nions, until, I must confess rather following the Extremi∣ty than the right Midst, I lost my Credit with the Prince, and Tint my reward, reposing over-much trust upon their constancy and my good Service, which hath been oft an hurtful opinion unto honest Men; with over∣late Repentance I was compelled to lament, as did Mon∣sieur de Boussie when he was left and misliked by his Ma∣ster, crying out, Alas, wherefore should Men be earnest to surpass their Neighbours in worthiness and fidelity, seeing that Princes, who get the fruits of our Labours, like not to hear of plainness, but of pleasant Speeches, and are easily altered without occasion upon their truest Servants? I perceive well that to continue in their favour they should not be served with Uprightness, but with Wyliness; and instead of using free Language for their Honour and Preservation, their Ser∣vants should frame and accommodate themselves to their Pleasure and Will; which may be easily done by the dul∣lest sort of Men; but my daft opinion was, that I might stand by Honesty and Vertue, which I find now to be but a Vain Imagination, and a Scholastical Discourse, unmeet to bring Men to any profitable Preferment: And yet my nature will not suffer me to proceed by any other means, I being of the same Mind and Nature, and by a just Call and Command, first of the Queen his Majesty's Mother, and afterward of himself, having more Matter and grea∣ter Warrant then many others, as well to admonish, ad∣vertise and reprove the Prince to gain-stand all evil In∣struments, took the more freedom, finding my self there∣to in Duty obliged, against the Rule given by Seneca to Lucullus, saying, If thou desirest to be agreeable to Great Prin∣ces, do them many Services, and speak to them few words. Plato
was of the same Opinion, the favour of Princes being obtained with great pain and travel, and retained with great difficulty, therefore should the wise Courtier be careful of offending them, either by gesture, word or deed; for being once in disgrace with them, they may well for∣give, but they shall never be so great with them again do what they will. Sometimes a Man may discreetly put the Prince in remembrance of his long and good Ser∣vice, but cast not up thy Service, nor be importunate in demanding rewards; therefore be not so audacious as to find fault with thy Prince's proceedings, nor to give advice unrequired, or advertisements without good grounds of being credited; for Princes notice not any thing but what is told them by their Favourites and Minions, who com∣monly seem to allow and take pleasure of whatsomever Recreation they find the Prince inclined to, not as by way of flattery, but as by way of yielding, and leaving their own pleasure to take pains to please the Prince; they never appear miscontent although he do not Reward them in due time, they never challenge him of breach of Promise in case he break it. In many of these Rules I confess I have over-shot my self, for too great fervency towards the Prin∣ces Service, having never minded my own particular ad∣vancement and profit: For otherwise I should have at the earnest desire of the House of Guise, my old and great ac∣quaintances while I was residing at the Court of France, titled in the Queens Ear, that her Rebellious Subjects, who had at their own hands, without her Authority, changed Religion, should have been exemplarily puni∣shed as Rebels and Trayters: That if she condescended to acquiesce to the establishing the Reformed Religion, it would be constructed as meanness of Spirit, and that she wanted Authority to curb such a mutinous People: That it was below her at the arrogant desire of her Nobility, and to remove the idle jealousies of her other Subjects, to lay aside Rixio, as being derogatory from her honour, that she could not have liberty to keep about her what Ser∣vants she pleased, seeing hence there might be ground to alledge, there were other bad designs to follow, when in the first place they desired to separate from her, such as they knew would be most trusty to her, and in whom she could
most confide. This kind of Language would probably have most suited her Majesties humour, and would have procured to my self great Bribes, from Rixio and his Po∣pish friends for my reward. But I thought it was more the part of a True Friend to her Majesty, to acquaint her, that seeing her Subjects had now imbraced the Protestant Religion, looking upon the Popish Principles as Dam∣ning, it was not her interest to do any thing that could give them any jealousie that she intended to alter their Religion; that as the Entertaining of Rixio gave to all such, some apparent ground of harbouring such appre∣hensions, he being a known Enemy to their Religion; that having so much of her favour, he would undoubtedly use his endeavours to perswade her to Re-establish that Reli∣gion, which she her self professed; so it gave just ground of discontent to the Nobility, who would look upon any extraordinary honour confer'd by her Majesty upon a Stranger, as highly prejudicial to them, who were as wil∣ling and able to serve her as he could be; and reflecting upon their Loyalty, as if she had more trust to place in a Stranger then in her own native Country-men, and born Subjects. Had I not more regarded my Princess her Interest, then mine own, I should have accepted the large offers made me by the Earl of Bothwel, when he desired me to subscribe with the rest of his flatterers that Paper where∣in they declared it was her Majesties interest to Marry the said Earl, but I chose rather to lay my self open to his hatred and revenge, whereby I was afterward in peril of my life, and tell her Majesty, that those who had so ad∣vised her, were betrayers of her honour for their own sel∣fish ends, seeing her marrying a Man commonly judged her Husbands murtherer, would leave a Tash upon her name, and give too much ground of jealousie, that she had consented to that foul deed. I wanted not fair offers from Randolph and Killegrew, Residents here from the Court of England, if I would have in so far complied with their designs, as not to have divulged what I perceived to be their drifts, which I could not conceal, finding them so destructive to the Kingdom. I had the fair occasion of making a large fortune to my self, if I would have gone along with the Earl of Arran, by Counselling the King's
Majesty to follow his violent advices; but finding them so far contrary to his interest, I did think my self ingaged to warn his Majesty that he was a dangerous man, who gave him such advices; that if he followed the same, he would run himself upon inevitable Precipices, that his Majesty's hearkening to the Duke of Lennox and him, the one a Papist, the other a wicked and ungodly man, would breed jealousies in his Subjects minds, which might pro∣duce dangerous effects. This freedom, and many times the like, I took; which though his Majesty accepted in good part, yet I thereby contracted me store of Enemies: But it was always my Principle, rather to hazard my self by plain speech, when 'twas necessary, than to expose my Master to danger, by silence or base flattery. And though the Common Practice which I mention'd e're while, may seem to thrive best in some Courts for a time, yet under Grave and Wise Princes, and at long-run, the honest Ma∣ximes will prove most acceptable and safe. Therefore I willingly opened these things to thee, that thou mayst as well know what is usually done, as what ought to be. There is a certain discretion to be used, that is free both from Sawcyness and Assentation; and a man may ma∣ny times, if he skill it aright, give his Prince good Coun∣sel, contrary to his inclinations, yet without incurring his displeasure. This thou oughtest to study, if ever thou be called to publique Affairs, and though thou mayst bend with the necessity of some Accidents, and yield to the times in some things, though not going just so as thou would have matters to go; and humour the Prince in an ordinary business, to gain opportunity of doing grea∣ter good to him and thy Country at a more lucky Sea∣son; yet be sure that thou never Engage in any Disloyal∣ty, Cruelty, or Wickedness, nor suffer any thing to pass that thou seest will tend to his Ruine or grand Preju∣dice, without noticing it to him in some humble man∣ner; and though for that time it be dis-relishing or sligh∣ted, yet when he sees the Effects follow that thou ad∣monishedst him of, he will love thee the better, and ra∣ther hearken to honest Advice for time future: And withal thou wilt obtain the Favour and Blessing of Al∣mighty God, whom thou must at all times endeavour
faithfully and uprightly to serve, if ever thou expectest Bliss in this or the other World; To whose Gracious Providence I Commit thee, with the hearty well Wishes and Benison of Thy Dearly Loving Father IAMES MELUIL.
MELVILS MEMOIRS: In reference to MARY Queen of SCOTS AND JAMES VI. KIng Henry VIII. of England being discontent with the Pope, for refusing to grant the Divorce from his wife Queen Katharine of Castile. For revenge he looked through his fingers at the Preachers of the Reformed Religion, who had studied in Dutch-land under Martin Luther; and were lately come to England. In process of time the hatred betwixt the King and the Pope came to so great a length, that he proclaimed himself Head of the Kirk of England, and discharged S. Peters Pennies to be paid from that time forth; with a strict command to all his Subjects, no manner of way to acknowledge the Pope. He obtained the said Divorce from his own Clergy, mar∣rying another, which occasioned to him the hatred of the Pope, Emperour, and King of Spain, and all their Assistants, He again de∣siring to strengthen himself at home, conjecturing the probability of a Combination against him, found it his Interest to entertain a strict Amity with James V. of Scotland his Nephew, For he was determi∣ned to Unite this whole Ifle in one Religion, and in one Empire, fail∣ing of Heirs male procreate of his own body: Having then but one Daughter called Mary with the divorced Queen; which Daughter he declared to be a Bastard. Upon which consideration Ambassadors are sent thither, inviting that King to a Conference at York, whither Henry offered to come and meet him. Alledging by such an Inter∣view, matters might be more effectually condescended upon, condu∣cing for the mutual Interests of both Kingdoms, then could be expe∣cted from the endeavours of Ambassadors to be imployed in that Affair. King James having seriously considered the Overture, and advised thereabout with his Council; upon their deliberation and advice, returns his resolution to attend his Uncle, Time and Place appointed. With which answer the Ambassadors highly satisfied, return to their Master: who rejoiced exceedingly at so happy a Success of that mat∣ter. Whereupon great preparations are made at York, for the Enter∣tainment of his Nephew with the greater Solemnity, The Clergy of Scotland, sworn Clients to the Pope, having had se∣veral Consultations hereanent, were alarm'd with this Proposal, and
the Accompt they had of the Kings resolution to comply therewith: through an apprehension that the Uncles persuasion, might oblige the Nephew to trace his Footsteps in overturning Popery in Scotland, as he had done in England. They therefore resolve to use the utmost of their endeavours for preventing the said intended Interview. They addressed themselves to such as were Minions for the time, who had most of his Majestiesear. These they corrupted with large Bribes, to dissuade the King therefrom. There having joined with such of the Clergy who were most in favour with the King, used many persuasions, telling him how King James I. was reteined in England; Of the old League with France: That upon this consideration it would be pre∣judicial to his Interest to keep that Meeting: seeing the French would not take it well; neither the Emperour, who was highly incensed against Henry. They told him of the Popes interdicting him, and what a great Heresie was lately risen up there, and had infected not only the greatest part of the Kingdom, but the King himself. And also that many of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, were likewise Favourers of the said Heresies: and that it was fit that timously he should prevent the spreading thereof, seeing the same would contri∣bute much for his advantage, while he might enrich himself by their Estates; the names of whom they gave up in a sheet of Paper. Which the King put in his Pocket, thinking it a very profitable Proposition, and therefore with all diligence to be executed. The Laird of Grange had been lately made Treasurer, and was in great favour with the King. He had not yet discovered himself to be a Favourer of the Evangel, but the King esteemed him true; and de∣sirous to advance his profit, and very secret, therefore he thought fit to make him privy to this profitable Overture. He shewed unto him the written Roll of the Noblemen and Barons names, who were given up to be burnt for Heresie, telling him what great advantage he would make thereby▪ Whereat the Laird of Grange began to smile, and the King to enquire whereat he did laugh. The Treasurer desired liberty from his Majesty to tell him the truth. Whereat the King drew out his Sword, saying merrily to him, I shall slay thee if thou speak against my profit. Then he put up his Sword, commanding him to shew him what reasons he could alledge against the Prelats Proposition. The Treasurer declared what troubles his Majesty had been tossed in during his Minority, for the Government, first between the Queen his Mother and the Lords, then betwixt divers Factions of the Lords. How that he had been couped from hand to hand, sometimes kept against his will as Captive, sometimes besieged, sometimes brought to battle against his will by the Duglasses to fight against the Earl of Le∣nox, and his best Friends who were slain coming to relieve him, the Pre∣lates being Partners for their ambition, sometimes with one Faction, sometimes with another: And how that they could never agree among themselves, nor let his Majesty take rest, until the Duke of Albany was chosen Governour, and brought out of France, who had enough to do also. For he would have fain done pleasure to France, and raised a great many Scotchmen to enter into England, who were making Wars in France; but he got a rebuke when he
when he was at the Border, for they would march no further. Alledg∣ing that the King was but young, and Sister Son to King Henry: That they saw no reason to enter into War with England, to endanger their King and Country to serve France, being the King his Father, had to no purpose lost his life in their quarrel, having entered into England with an Army against his good Brother, whereby the whole Country was endangered. After that this Duke retired himself, your Majesty took the Government in your own hands at the Age of 13 years▪ Yet they clapped again about you, and kept you two years as captive. And now you are but lately come to your liberty, and your Country is not yet so well setled as were needful. Albeit your Majesty hath done very much in so short space, as to settle the Highland Islands, and the Borders. It were a dangerous thing if your Nobility should get in∣telligence, that such greedy Fetches should be put in your head, under pretext of Heresie, to spoil them of their Lives, Lands, and Goods. Wherein you may endanger your own Estate at the instance of these whose Estates are in peril, who would hazard you and yours, to save their own. The Prelates I mean, who fear that your Majesty at the example of the King of England, of Denmark and several Princes of the Empire, will make the like reformation among them. Therefore they have no will of your familiarity with the King of England, nor that your Estate should be so setled that your Majesty might put order to the abuses of the Kirk. Did not one of your Predecessors, called S. Da∣vid, give the most part of the Patrimony of the Crown to the Kirk, erecting the same into Bishopricks and rich Abbacies. Whereby your Majesty is presently so poor, and the Prelates so rich, so prodigal, so proud, that they will suffer nothing to be done without them. And are also so sworn to the Pope of Rome, when they get their Benefices confirmed, that they ought not to be credited in any thing that touch∣eth the Popes Profit or Preferment. The Venetians, the wisest people in Europe, will not suffer any Prelate, albeit he be a born man of the Town, to abide or stand in their Council-house, when they are at Council, because they know them to be so strictly sworn to the Pope. Then he declared the gross abuses of the Roman Kirk, and the ungodly lives of the Scots Prelates which the King and whole Country might see. Therefore saith he, if your Majesty would be well and be rich, you may justly take home again to the profit of the Crown all vacan Bene∣fices by little and little, as they may fall by decease of every Pre∣late. He told his Majesty anent his promise to the Ambassador of England, there would come great trouble and Wars if it were not kept. For King Henry VIII. was a couragious Prince, and high conceited, and ap∣peared to have for the Time an upright meaning, his occasions pressing him thereto. Having so great turns in hand, and so many enemies, without succession, saving the foresaid Daughter. Being corpulent and fat, there was small hopes of his having any heirs. That therefore it was his interest to be in a good understanding with him, being his el∣dest Sisters Son, nearest of blood, and ablest to maintain and unite the whole Isle of Britain. As for the retaining King James I. in England, that was a far different case, it was not the like time, he was not the Kings Sisters Son, nor his apparent heir. And what hard success the
King his Father had for making War against the King of England his good Brother, was too manifestly felt by the whole Subjects. And little better to be looked for, in case a new unnecessary War be made, for your Majesties staying away from the intended Meeting at York. The King took such delight in this language, that he determined to follow the advice given therein. And at his first meeting with the Prelates, who had then very great rule in the Country, he could not contain himself any longer, when they came hoping to see their Plots put in execution. After many sore reproofs, that they should have advised him to use such cruelty upon so many Noble men and Barons, to the peril of his own Estate. Wherefore, said he, gave my Predecessors so many Lands and Rents to the Kirk? Was it to maintain Haulks, Dogs, and Whores, to a number of idle Priests? The King of England▪ burns, the King of Denmark beheads you; I shall stick you with this Whingar. And therewith he drew out his Dagger, and they fled from his presence in great fear. The King resolved fully to keep his promise with his Uncle the King of England, thinking it both his honour and advance∣ment so to do. The Prelates of Scotland thinking themselves far out-shot, and there∣by in a dangerous condition, consulted together how to bring the King again to their opinion. They resolved in the first place to offer to pay him yearly out of the Rents of the Kirk, fifty thousand Crowns, to maintain hired Souldiers, beside the ordinary Subjects which obey the Proclamation, in case the King of England should make Wars against Scotland, because of the Kings not keeping the appointment at York. They thought this would be an allurement to the King, who liked well to be rich. Yet they concluded, that unless the matter were propo∣ned and favourably interpreted to his Majesty by such as had his ear, that would not do the business. They bestowed therefore largely of their Gold to his familiar Servants, and further promised unto Oliver Sinclar, that they should cause him to be advanced to great Honours, and to be made Lieutenant of the whole Army against England, in case that King Henry would intend Wars against Scotland. Which they affirmed he would not, nor durst not, having already so many Irons in the Fire. This was communicated by the Prelates to the Minions at Court, and chearfully condescended to by them, who had by flattery gained grea∣test favour. And chiefly by drawing of fair Maidens to the King, and striving to be the first advertisers whose Daughter she was, and how she might be obtained; and likewise of mens Wives. They waited a convenient time when the Treasurer should be absent, who was a stout bold man, therefore they durst not speak in his presence. For he always offered by single combat and at the point of the Sword, to main∣tain what he spoke. At this time he was absent from Court, for the King had given the Ward and Marriage of Kelly in Angus to his second Son; and he was gone there to take possession thereof. In his absence then this was proponed to the King, and so backed by Oliver Sinclare, and such of the Clergy as had been best acquainted with his Majesty, as he was induced to give ear thereto. They having added several other persuasions, at such times as they brought unto him fair Maidens, and mens Wives. Then they took occasion in the next place, to shew his Majesty that the Laird of Grange his Treasurer, was also become a He∣retick,
and that he had always a New Testament in English in his Poutch. And likewise that he was become so proud, and puft up by his Majesties savour that no man might abide him. And that he was so extream greedy, that he was unmeet to be Treasurer: and too bold to have procured for his second Son the rich Ward and Marriage of Kelly worth Twenty thousand pound. The King answered, That he esteemed him to be a plain frank Gentleman, that he loved him so well, that he would give him again the said Ward▪ and Marriage for a word of his mouth. The Prior of Pittenweem replied and said, Sir the heir of Keily is a lusty fair Lass, and I dare pledge my life, that if your Majesty will send for her pre∣sently, that he shall refuse to send her to you. The King affirming still the contrary, there was a Missive written. And the Prelates and their Faction devised, that the said Prior of Pitten∣weem should carry the Letter, and bring over the Maiden-heir of Kelly to the King. But the Treasurer, who knew him to be his deadly enemy, refused to deliver her to him. Alledging the said Prior to have been all his days a vile Whoremaster, having deflowred divers Maidens, therefore he thought him an unfit Messenger. Who was so glad as he, to return with this backward answer. He and his Associates kindled up the King in so great choler against the Treasurer, handling the matter so finely and hotly, that they obtained a Warrant to charge the Treasurer to Ward within the Castle of Edinburgh. Which they forgot not to do at his first coming to Court. He again ghessed that leesings would be made against him, therefore used great diligence to be with the King. And notwithstanding of their charge, past peartly in to his Majesty, who was at his Supper in Edinburg; but the King looked down upon him, and would not speak to him, nor know him. He nevertheless steps forward, and said, Sir, what offence have I done, who had so much of your favour when I parted from you with your permission? The King an∣swered, Why did thou refuse to send me the Maiden whom I wrote for, and gave despiteful language to him I sent for her? Sir, said he, there is none about your Majesty dare avow any such thing in my face. As for the Mai∣den, I said to the Prior of Pittenweem, that I was well enough to be the Messenger my self to convey her to your Majesty; but thought him unmeet, whom I knew to be a forcer of Women, and the greatest deflowrer of Wives, and Maidens in Scotland. The King said, Hast thou then brought the Gentlewoman with thee? Yes Sir, said he. Alass, saith the King, they have set out so many leesings against thee, that they have obtained of me a Warrant to put thee in Ward; but I shall mend it with a contrary com∣mand. Then said the Treasurer lamentingly, My Life, Sir, or Warding is a small matter; but it breaks my heart that the World should hear of your Majesties facility. For he had heard that in his absence they had cau∣sed the King to send to England, and give over the intended Meeting at York. Whereat the King of England was so offended, in that he had been so publickly scorned and affronted, that he sent an Army to Scotland to destroy it with Fire and Sword. Albeit the King liked no∣thing of this War, he was still kept in hope that it should tend to his great honour and advantage. And that England had so much to do; as would busie them elsewhere; so that they would soon repent them, and be compelled to sue for Peace ere it were long. In the mean time their Gold was made ready the more to encourage the King, and large promises of much more, in case the War continued.
The King was engaged to raise an Army to defend his Country and Subjects, who went to that War, to shew their obedience much against their hearts. But when they perceived Oliver Sinclare raised up upon mens shoulders, and proclaimed Lieutenant over the whole Army at Salway Sands; the Lords, in dispight that the Court and Country should be governed by such mean men as were Pensioners to the Pre∣lates, refused to fight under such a Lieutenant, but suffered themselves all to be taken Prisoners. So the whole Army being overthrown, the King took thereat great displeasure. There was great murmurings in the Country, that for pleasuring the Prelates the Kingdom should be thus endangered. The report whereof, and the justness of the com∣plaint, made the King burst out with some language against them who had given him so bad advice. Which was carried over soon to their ears, and they fearing the effects of his displeasure, caused him to be poi∣soned, having learned that Art in Italy, called an Italian Possit. The Car∣dinal David Beaton was with his Majesty in the time of his death, and caused to be written the Form of a Testament at his own pleasure, being dictated by himself, which upon that reason was afterward annulled. The King of England could not forget this injury and displeasure done him, of the Kings breaking of his promise. He was much troubled at his death, his Wars were rather to have moved the Estates of Scot∣land to know that his favour and friendship had been better for them than his feud. He was still in hope to have gained him with consent and advice of the best of his Subjects, to have joined in a Bond Offensive and Defensive. For he had received information of the Kings worthy qualities, and rare natural endowments, and entertained a marvellous great love and liking of him. Thinking he could not have left the Kingdom in a better hand, than to his own Sisters Son, nearest in bloud unto him, and meetest of any to build up a fair Monarchy to be first begun in a manner in his own person. In respect that for his time, which he looked would be but short, his Nephew would have been but his Coadjutor, and Lieutenant under him, and after him pos∣sess the whole under one Religion, one Law, and one Head. And thought that thereby France should never afterward have the occasion of stirring up the one Country against the other; and that the Pope should be secluded from gathering up such sums of Silver from his Subjects, for Confirmation of Benefices, or for Bulls or Dispensations. For his wrath and vengeance against the Pope was exceeding great, who had made him many promises, and had broken them all, fearing as said is, to offend the Emperour, who was so great and mighty a Prince. Therefore the King of England seeing he had now altogether lost the hopes of the Scots alliance and concurrence, he compelled the Gentlemen of England to exchange their Lands, with the Lands of Abbies, Cloisters, and other Temple Lands; giving them more than their own, that so the said Lands should never return to the Kirk, with∣out a manifest Rebellion, or a dangerous subversion of the whole state of the Kingdom. And to be revenged upon the said Cardinal David Beaton, who he thought had disappointed him of all the hope he had of Scotland, he dealt with Sir George Douglass, and the Earl of Angus, who were but lately returned out of England, where they had resided during the time of their banishment, till the death of King James V.
These two Brothers appearing to be of the Reformed Religion, per∣suaded Norman Lesly Master of Rothes, the young Laird of Grange, and John Lesly of Parkhill, who had been persecuted by the said Cardinal for Religion, after he had taken their Preacher, Mr. George Wishard, and burnt him at St. Andrews. These I say were easily stirred up to slay him whom they were persuaded to be an Enemy to the true Religion, to the welfare of the Country, and to themselves in particu∣lar. This proud Cardinal was slain then in his Castle at S. Andrews, and so ended all his practices, having obtained nothing but vain travel for his pretences, and sudden death. Having been the occasion of the death of a worthy King, who was inclined to Justice, and gave no cre∣dit to his Officers in their two special points, to reward and punish. For whoever did him good service, he would see them rewarded, yea albeit they chanced to be absent; and as to punishing of Evil Doers, so soon as he had heard the complaint, he leapt upon his Horse, and did ride to the parties himself, with a few company, ere they could be aware of him, and he would see sharp execution. So that he was de∣servedly both loved and feared. He was very couragious, well favou∣red and shapen, of a middle stature, very able of body. But evil company fell about him, entering out of Child-hood into furious Youth, enticing him to Harlotry, striving who should spie out for him the fairest Maidens, and likewise at length mens Wives; with them he abused his body, to the offence of God and divers good Subjects. For which he was not left unpunished, for he had but two young Sons and they died both within eleven hours; so that at his decease he had but one Daughter called Mary, born when he was upon his Death∣bed. King Henry VIII. of England, having onely one Son called Edward, he and the Estates of both Countries, desiring still this whole Isle of Britain to be united in one Monarchy, made a contract of marriage between the said two, which was afterward broken upon our part, her Majesty being transported unto France by the West Seas. Whereupon ensued great War between the two Kingdoms, which was afterwards agreed upon this condition, that Edward should marry Elizabeth eldest Daughter to Henry II. of France, and Francis his Son should marry our Queen. My Lord Hamilton was advanced to the Government of the Country by the Laird of Grange Treasurer, Mr. Henry Balnears, and others that were of the Reformed Religion, whenas he appeared to be a true Gospeller. But he had been afterward soon altered by the Abbot of Pasly his Bastard-brother, and became a great Persecuter of Gods Word, and had been by the persuasions of the said Abbot and Cardinal easily drawn to break the said Contract of Marriage made between King Edward and our Queen. After that the young Queen came to France, there was great dispu∣ting whether the Marriage with the Dauphine should take effect or not. For at that time there were two Factions in the French Court, first the Brethren to the House of Guise, as the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorrain, brothers to our Queen Dowager, and uncles to our young Queen Mary, pressed earnestly to set forward the said Marriage with France; the old Constable Duke of Montmorancy, was of opinion
that it was meetest to give her in marriage to some Duke or Prince in France, and to send them both home to Scotland to keep that Country in good obedience. Because when Princes are absent, and far from their own, ruling their Countries by Lieutenants, most commonly the Sub∣jects of such Countries use to rebel: which if Scotland should do, it would be hard and costly to get them reduced. And thereby in stead of making France the better of the Marriage with the Dauphin, it might make it to be in a far worse case. The House of Guise again desiring to have their Sisters Daughter Queen of France, to augment their re∣putation and credit, alledged it would be both honourable and profi∣table to the Crown of France to have this addition. And that there were Revenues in abundance to maintain Garrisons within the King∣dom, to hold the Subjects under obedience, building Citadels, and ha∣ving the whole strength in their hands. Herein they prevailed, she being married unto the Dauphine. John de Monluck Bishop of Valence, was sent Ambassador from France to the Governour and Queen mother Sister to the Duke of Guise. And when the said Ambassadour was to return to France, it pleased the Queen mother to send me with him, to be placed Page of Honor to the Queen her Daughter, I being then 14 years of Age. But the said Bishop went first to Ireland, commanded thereto by theK. his Ma∣sters Letter, to know more particularly the motions and likelihood of the Offers made by Oneel, Odoneel, Odocart, and Callock, willing to shake off the Yoke of England, and become subject to the King of France; providing that he would procure the Popes gift of Ireland, and then send to their help 2000 Hacbutiers, 200 Light Horsemen, and 4 Cannon. We shipped for Ireland in the Moneth of January, and were storm∣sted by the way in a little Isle called Sandisle before Kintire, where we were compelled to tarry 17. days, by reason of the Storm. Thence we hoised Sail toward Ireland, but the Storm was yet so extreamly violent, that with great danger of the Ship and our lives, we entered in at the mouth of Loghfeul in Ireland upon Shrove-tuesday in the year 1545. for the Skipper and Mariners had lost all hopes of safety, having left their Anchors behind them the night before. Ere we landed we sent one George Paris who had been sent to Scotland by the great Oneel and his Associates, who landed at the house of a Gentleman who had mar∣ried Odocarts Daughter, dwelling at the side of a Lake, who came to our Ship, and welcomed us, and convoyed us to his house, where we rested that night. The next morning Odocart came there, and convoyed us to his house, which was a great dark Tower, where we had cold chear, as Herring and Bisket, for it was Lent. There finding two English Gray Friars who had fled out of England (for King Edward VI. was yet alive) the said Friars perceiving the Bishop to look very kindly to Odocarts Daughter, who fled from him continually, they brought to him a Woman who spoke English to lie with him. Which Harlot be∣ing keept quietly in his Chamber, found a little Glass within a Case standing in a window, for the Coffers were all wet with the Sea Waves that fell into the Ship during the Storm. She believing it had been ordained to be eaten, because it had an odoriferous smell, therefore she
licked it clean out, which put the Bishop into such a rage, that he cried out for impatience, discovering his harlotry and his choler in such sort as the Friars fled, and the Woman followed. But the Irish men and his own Servants did laugh at the matter, for it was a Viol of the most pretious Balm that grew in Egypt, which Solyman the Great Turk had given in a Present to the said Bishop, after he had been two years Ambassador for the King of France in Turkey, and was esteemed worth 2000 Crowns. In the time that we remained at Odocarts house, his young daughter who fled from the Bishop, came and sought me, where-ever I was, and brought a Priest with her who could speak English, and offered, if I would marry her, to go with me where-ever I pleased. I gave her thanks, but told her that I was but young, and had no Estate, and was bound for France. Now the Ambassadour met in a secret part with Oneel and his Asso∣ciates, and heard their Offers and Overtures. And the Patriarch of Ireland did meet him there, who was a Scotchman born, called Wachop, and was blind of both his eyes, and yet had been divers times at Rome by Post. He did great honour to the Ambassadour, and conveyed him to see S. Patricks Purgatory, which is like an old Coal-pit which had taken fire by reason of the smoke that came out of the hole. From Odocarts house we went to a dwelling place of the Bishop of Roy, not far from the narrow Firth that runs thorough Loghfeul to the Sea. The said Irish Bishop had been also at Rome, and there we rested other three weeks, waiting for a Highland Bark, which James Macho∣nel should have sent from Kintire with his Brother Angus, to carry us back to Dunbarton. Which being come for us, we parted to a Castle which the said Machonel had in Ireland; and from that we imbarked and rested a night in the Isle of Jura, and the next night in the Isle of Bute. But by the way we lost our Rudder, and were in great dan∣ger when we came to Kiltire. Iames Maconel did treat us honourably, and told the Bishop that he was the welcomer for my sake, because he had been kindly used by my Father when he was warded in the Castle of Dumbar, during the time that my Father was Captain thereof, of whom he made an honourable report to the Bishop. Which occasioned him the more kindly to notice me. After he had caused us to be landed at Dumbarton, we went streight to Sterling; where after eight days, the Ambassadour took leave of the Queen, and went again to Dumbarton, where there were two French Ships that had brought Silver to Scotland to pay the French Souldiers in Service, there ready to receive us. So sailing by the Isle of Man along the South Coast of Ireland, we landed at Conquet in Brittany eight days after our Embarking, not without some danger by the way both from English Ships, and a great Storm; so that once at Midnight the Ma∣riners cried that we were all lost. At Brest in Britany the Bishop took Post toward the Court of France, which was in Paris for the time. And because I was young, and he supposed I was not able to endure the toil of riding Post, he directed two Scottish Gentlemen, whose Fathers he had been acquainted with in Scotland, to be careful of me by the way. And we bought three little Nags to ride to Paris. He desired the two Brothers to let me want for nothing by the way,
which he would recompense at the next meeting. He left with me as much money as would buy a Horse and bear my expense upon the Road to Paris. Now we three enquired after other company, and found other three young men, the one a French man, the other a Brittain, and the third a Spaniard, who were to ride the same way. We were all six lodged in one Chamber at the first Inn we did quarter at, in which were three Beds, the two French men had one Bed, the two Scots another, the Spaniard and my self the third. I over-heard the two Scotch men discoursing together, that they were directed by the Bishop to let me want for nothing, therefore says the one to the other, we will pay for his Ordinary all the way, and shall accompt twice as much to his Master as we disburse, when we come to Paris, and so shall gain our own expence. The two French men not thinking that any of us un∣derstood that Language, were saying to themselves, These Strangers are all young, and know not the Fashion of the Hostlaries, therefore we shall reckon with the Host at every Repose, and shall cause the Strangers to pay more than the custom is, and that way shall save our own charges. And accordingly the next day they went to put it in execution; but I could not forbear laughing in my mind, having un∣derstood so much French as to know what they were aiming at, wherewith I acquainted the young Spaniard; and so we were upon our guard: yet the two Scotch men would not consent that I should pay for my self, hoping that way to beguile the Bishop: but the Spa∣niard and I wrote up every days accompt. By the way riding tho∣rough a Wood, the two French men lighted off their Horses, and drew out their Swords, having appointed other two to meet them. But beholding our countenance, and seeing that we were making for our defence, they made a Sport of it, alledging that they had done it to try if we would be afraid, in case we should be assaulted by the way. But these two Rogues that met us, left us at the next Lodging; and when we came to Paris, the two Scotch men never obtained payment of the Bishop, for that they had disbursed, because of their intended fraud. We were 13 days in riding betwixt Brest and Paris, where we arrived in the Moneth of April. Within a Moneth after our arrival at Paris, the Bishop of Valence was sent to Rome; and because he took Post, he left me behind him, having Tabled me in a very good Ordinary, and agreed with Masters to teach me the French Tongue, and to Dance, Fence, and play upon the Lute. I know not why he did not present me to the Queen, as he had engaged; albeit afterward he said that he was minded to make me his Heir. The cause why he was at this time sent to Rome, was this: Pope Paul the Third had exchanged some Lands belonging to the Church, for Parma and Placentia, two Towns appertaining formerly to the Dutchy of Milan, and gave them to his Son Piere Luis Farnes, who married his eldest Son Octavio to the Bastard Daughter of the Empe∣rour Charles the Fifth. The said Piere Luis being murthered for his detestable Vices, the next Pope Julius pretended to bring again the said two Towns to the Church, in stead of the Church Lands that had been exchanged for them; compelling the Duke Octavio (finding him∣self
unable to withstand the Popes forces) to put the said Towns into the King of France his custody: for he was in as great fear of the Em∣perour his Father-in-Law, who had gotten possession of the Dukedom of Millan. And for that effect he sent his Brother the Duke of Casters to France, to whom King Henry of France gave his Bastard Daughter in marriage. The King of France being as earnest to have an Estate in Italy, as the Emperour was to hinder him from it, by reason of Mil∣lan and Naples, to which the King claimed a right, though the Emperour had them in possession. Therefore so soon as he did see the French Gar∣rison within the Town of Parma, he took part with the Pope. Which made the K. of France endeavour to make a Peace with K. Edward VI. of England, by the means of the Duke of Northumberland, who had a strict Friendship with France, having a hidden mark of his own that he shot at, as his Proceedings afterward declared. The Peace with England being concluded, that King Edward should marry Elizabeth Eldest Daughter to Henry the Second of France; and that he should give his consent that the Queen of Scotland, who was betrothed to him, should be married with Francis Dauphin of France, in which Peace Scotland was also comprehended. The Bishop of Valence was sent to Rome to endeavour to obliege the Pope to desert the Emperour, but he returned without obtaining success in his Expedition: which was the cause that the dealing betwixt the King of France and Oneel in Ireland ceased. And in the mean time the King of France emits a Proclama∣tion forbidding his Subjects to send to Rome for any Bulls, or Confir∣mation of Benefices; which together with the agreement with England, put the Pope in great fear that France would become Protestants in de∣spight, as Henry the Eighth had lately done before. He was the more confirmed in this opinion, because an Army was shortly after made ready to pass into Germany, to the aid of the Protestant Princes, where King Henry himself did in person lead thousand men. For then many of the Germans were become Protestants, occasioned at first by the insolent avarice of the Pope, and the shameless proceedings of his selling of Pardons, and by the zeal and boldness of Martin Luther, who being persecuted, was maintained and assisted by the good Duke Frede∣rick of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, and other Princes of the Em∣pire. Whereupon the Emperour Charles the Fifth took occasion under pretext of maintaining the Catholick Roman Religion, to pretend to bring the Empire and all the Dominions thereof, as Patrimony to him and his posterity. And therefore abandoned his Son-in-Law the Duke Octavio to the Popes discretion, for to obtain the greater assistance from him against the Germans. Which design the Emperor had once brought near to pass. For after that he had vanquished the Protestants in Battle, and taken Prisoner Duke John Frederick, he passed thorough the most part of the Provinces and Free Towns of Dutchland, and took from them their Liberties, placing Officers at his pleasure, and receiving from them of Gifts and Ransoms, Sixteen hundred thousand Crowns, and Five hundred Piece of Artillery. Yet he doubted the Landgrave, who was a valiant Prince, and chanced to be absent from the said Battle; therefore he dealt with Duke Maurice, Godson to the said Landgrave, to persuade his Godfather to come in, under assurance and promise, which the Emperour broke, retaining the said Landgrave captive upon the subtlety of a Syllable.
This Duke Maurice was Cousin to the Captive Duke of Saxony, and had obtained the Electorat of Saxony, which the Emperour took from his Cousin and gave to him. Whereupon he, as a fine Courtier assisted the Emperour, helping him greatly in his Victories against his Country and Friends for his own promotion. But when the Landgrave called him Shelm, Pultroon, Traitor, and deceiver of him whose Daughter he had married, he made earnest suit to the Emperour, for the Liberty of his Godfather, though in vain. The Emperour alledging no pro∣mise to have been broken to the said Landgrave, causing the Letter of Promise and Pacification to be read in his presence in the Dutch Tongue, wherein was a written word which admitted of two divers interpretations: to wit, this word Enig was interpreted by the Em∣perour Perpetual, and by the Landgrave and Duke Maurice it was ta∣ken for Null or Nane. But they could not help themselves, for the Landgrave was two years so straitly kept by the Spaniards, that oft in the night they held a light Candle to his face, to be assured that he was sleeping; and vexed him so, that through despight he would spit in their faces, crying out continually against Maurice who was not sleeping: But had sent secretly to the King of France, declaring how not onely his Godfather and he were so abused and deceived by the Emperour; but that he had begun already to rob the Empire of its Liberties, to change the State thereof to a Monarchy, against the Oath and Promise made at the Election and his Coronation. And that un∣der praetext to suppress Heresie, he was so assisted by the Pope, that he was like to prevail. Intreating the King not to suffer them who were his Friends to be so oppressed, seeing it was no ways his Interest that his Competitor should grow so great, seeing thereby he should be the more in a capacity to annoy him at his pleasure. Whereupon the said King took occasion to levy an Army, and to convoy the same into Al∣maign, and appearing to seek their Liberty, he possessed himself in his way of Metz, Towl, and Verdun, three great Imperial Towns and Bi∣shopricks. In the mean time Duke Maurice lying at the Siege of Magdeburg Lieutenant for the Emperour, giving not the least ground of suspecting him discontent for the Landgraves retention, but rather endeavour∣ing to make appear how far he was obliged to the Emperour, who had so highly advanced him, like a fine Courtier, evidencing publickly his resolutions of setting forward his Masters Interest, and executing all his Commands, whether they should be right or wrong. Yet the Duke of Alva alledged in secret Counsel with the Empe∣rour, that Maurice lingred too long at the Siege of the said Town. And that it was to be suspected, that he was offended at the usage his Godfather did meet with. But Granvil Bishop of Arras, on the con∣trary▪ said, that such drunken Dutch heads needed not be suspected, Especially seeing two of the said Dukes Counsellors were Pensioners to his Sacred Majesty; and advertised him continually of all the Dukes most secret deliberations. Yet they thought expedient to send for the Duke, to see if he would presently obey, or pretend some ex∣cuse, But Duke Maurice had as much subtilty as any Spaniard of the Em∣perors Council, having had intelligence that the Emperor had bribed
two of his Secretaries, yet he gave not the least ground to conjecture that he knew any thing thereof, appearing to do nothing without them, deliberating all his Enterprises in their presence, whereby the Em∣perour was deluded so as to expect no harm from him. And when the Duke was sent for, he took Post immediately for the Court, taking in his Company one of the Secretaries whom he knew to be the Em∣perors Pensioner, whom he sent before to shew the Emperor that he was following at leisure, by reason of a pain he had taken in his side occasioned with riding Post. But the Duke had secretly commanded his Lieutenant to bring up the whole Army with all diligence, and to march night and day. So that he surprised the Emperor ere he had received the least notice there∣of: for he was compelled to rise from Supper, and fly forth of Isbrugh with Torch-light; and so clearly out of Dutchland, that he never set foot within it again. This done he sent to the King of France, who was with his Army beside Strasburgh, giving him great thanks for his pains, advertising him of the Emperors flight, intreating him to return home with his Army: for Maurice was dissatisfied that he had taken three of the Im∣perial Towns, and in the mean time he hasted through the whole Country, restoring the Free Towns to their former Liberty and Pri∣viledges. The Emperor again fearing to be compelled, set at liberty the Duke of Saxony, and the Landgrave of Hess. Finding himself frustrate of his expectation, and understanding that Duke Maurice had a great grudge against the King for taking fraudulently the three foresaid Towns from the Empire, he dealt with Maurice secretly, allowing all that he had done. And so both being reconciled, they together laid Siege to the Town of Metz, though in vain. Whereby may be ob∣served how dangerous it is in Civil Dissentions, to bring in great com∣panies of Strangers to support any of the Parties. It may appear im∣pertinent for me, to write thus much of the Affairs of Dutchland, being my self but young for the time, and not present in the French Army. But afterward when I was in Germany, I had this accompt from the good Elector Palatine, so that none could attain to more certain Infor∣mation thereof. The Bishop of Valence was at this time at Paris. He was desirous to have some knowledge in the Mathematicks; and for that effect he found out a great Scholar in divers high Sciences, called Cavatius. This Cavatius took occasion frequently in conference, to tell him of two familiar Spirits that were in Paris waiting upon an old Shepherd, who in his youth had served a Priest, and who at his death left them to him. The Bishop upon the Kings return from Germany, introduced the said Cavatius to the King. Who to verifie what he had said, offered to lose his head, in case he should not shew the two Spirits to his Majesty, or to any he should send, in the form of Men, Dogs, or Cats. But the King would not see them, and caused the Shepherd to be burnt, and imprisoned the said Cavatius. The Bishop had another learned man to his Master, called Taggot, who had been curious in sundry of the said Sciences, and knew by the Art of Palmestry, as he said to me himself, that he should die before he
attained to the age of 28. years. Therefore, said he, I know the true Religion to be exercised at Geneva, there will I go and end my life in Gods service. Whither accordingly he went, and died there, as I was afterwards informed. At this time the Bishop of Valence, being at Court in St. Germans, he was resolved to have presented me to the Queen. But in the inte∣rim, Captain Ninean Cockburn then one of the Scots Guard, had ob∣tained liberty to visit his Friends in Scotland, and was lately returned. This man was a Busie Medler, and had been sometimes entertained about my Fathers house. He finding that I could speak French, told me that he had a matter of consequence to impart to the Constable; and intreated that I would go along with him to be his Interpreter, because he had not the French Tongue. But he would not acquaine me with the matter, till he was in the Constables presence. We attended till one day after dinner, when he was to give au∣dience to divers Ambassadors. He commanded us to wait at his Cham∣ber door till two Afternoon, which hour he failed not to keep, after he had heard the Ambassadors, and made report to the King of their demands, and advised him what to answer. We two were brought in to his Cabinet, where he was alone with a Secretary. Then the Captain began to declare, how that in his late being in Scotland, Bishop John Hamilton, whole Guider of the Governour his Brother, had been dangerously sick, so that his Speech was lost without all hope of reco∣very. That the Queen Dowager of Scotland had taken occasion here∣of, to prevail with the Governour so effectually, that he had resigned the Government to her, she being made Queen Regent, and willing me to shew the same to the Constable. But I required to know what fur∣ther he had to say; Then he proceeded to shew that when the Bishop of S. Andrews had recovered his Speech and health, by the help of Car∣danus an Italian Magician, he cursed, and cried out, that the Gover∣nour was a very Beast, for quitting the Government to her, seeing there was but a Skittering Lass between him and the Crown. But I blushed, when the Captain pulled upon me to tell these very words to the Constable. He perceived how loath I was to rehearse it, at last he pressed me. I told him I did not think it worthy to be communi∣cated to his Lordship. He asked my name, and caused his Secretary to write it up, and enquire if I was of Kin to the Captain. Who said in bad French, that I was his Sisters Son. The Constable enquired of me, if that was truth. I told him I had no relation to him at all. Then he desired to know with whom I was in that Country. I an∣swered his Lordship, that the Bishop of Valence had Commission from the Queen Regent of Scotland, to place me her Daughters Page. He desired to know if I would remain with him, in case he procured the Bishops consent. I answered, that I should think my self much honou∣red, by being in the company of a Person so famous in Europe as he was: but that I believed he durst not dispose of me, in respect of the Promise he had given to the Queen Regent. He answered, that he could pre∣sent me when he pleased to the Queen; but if I would be satisfied to stay with him, he would not fail to advance me. I exprest my self much obliged to his Lordship, that he had so far taken notice of me, and willing, if he procured the Bishops consent.
The Constable failed not at his first rencounter with the Bishop, to enquire concerning me, and expressed his desire to have me in his Service. To which the Bishop acquiesced, and acquainted me there∣with that same night, that the Constable was the best Master in France, and would not fail to promote me. Whereupon I entered into his Service, in the Year 1553. I grant these Trifles are not worthy to be here inserted, were it not to testifie Gods gracious goodness to the posterity of the Faithful. As David observes in his Psalms, I have been young, and now an old, yet did I never see the Iust abandoned. For it was God that moved the Queen Regents heart to take two of my Brothers into her Service, and to send me into France to be placed with her Daughter our Queen. Who also moved the Bishop to be so kind to me, that if I had been his own Son, he could not have had more affection for me: and the same God moved the Constables heart to desire me. In the Year 1553. in the Moneth of May, the Constable of France raised a great Army. And being the Kings Lieutenant, led them first to Amience in Picardy. For when the King of France was in Dutck∣land with his Army, as he gave out, to help the Princes of the Empire, Mary Queen of Hungary then a Widow, Sister to the Emperour, and Regent of Flanders, entered with an Army into Picardy, and burnt the Kings Palace of Fontanbrey, with divers other little Towns and Villages. Thinking thereby to divert the King, that he should have come back to defend his own bounds. Thus they entered into hot Wars, and the King in his return besieged several Towns and took them. Therefore the Emperour in the Spring time of that same Year, en∣tered in person with a great Army into Picardy, and won Turaan, and Sedan, and burnt divers Burghs and Villages: which caused the Con∣stable to go with his Army to resist him. The two Armies being in∣camped seven leagues asunder, the Constable was advertised by a Spie, that all the Emperours Horsemen were to come in the night to assault the French Camp. Therefore he to shun that surprise, marched all night forward toward the Enemy, with all his Forces Horse and Foot, whereby he surprised those who thought to have found him in bed, and gave them the overthrow. Many were killed, and some taken; among the rest the Duke of Arescot, Leader of those designed for that Enterprise, was taken Prisoner. After this Victory, King Henry the Second came to the Camp him∣self. The Emperour retiring toward the Town of Valencien, the Kings Camp following always upon his Wing, making divers days journeys before he came to the said Valencien. where the Emperour had set down his Camp without the Town upon an Hill, making Trenches round about the same. Where the King presented him battle, waiting in vain a whole day, to see if he might be provoked to come forth. And for that effect sent a number of Infantry Perdews to his Trenches, to bring on the Skirmish, where the Emperour sent out some Companies of Horsemen, who were soon beat back within their Foot. In the mean time the Emperour caused his whole Artillery to fire at our Camp, though not much to our prejudice. We were advertised that the Emperour was determined not to hazard Battle, for he began to
believe that Fortune favoured no more his old age. Therefore when night drew near, the King retreated to St. Quintine, where the Con∣stable fell deadly sick, being then in his great Climacterick. Then both the Armies were sent to their Winter Garrisons, the Emperour went for Bruxels, and the King to Paris, and the Constable to his Pa∣lace at Chantilly, to recover his health. During this Winter there was a great Convention between Calis and Ardress, where Cardinal Pool was appointed Mediator by the Pope, to agree the two great Princes, but without any effect. Therefore the next Spring the King went first into the Field with his Army, in the Year 1554. as the Emperour had done the Year before. At which time I was made his Pensioner, by the Constables means. His Majesty besieged and took first Marianbrugh, a gallant Town, and of great strength. He took also Bovineand, and at length Dyvan. But the Castle of Dyvan situated upon a high Rock, was stoutly defended by a Spanish Captain, who at length coming forth to speak with the Consta∣ble about Composition, was retained; and the men of War came forth with their Bag and Baggage. Few or none of the Souldiers who came forth of Dyvan, but were hurt either with shelves of staves, by the force of our Battery, or were burnt with the Fire-brands, that they did roll down the steep hill whereupon the Wall was built. And thrice they repulsed our French Footmen, Eleven Banner-bearers whereof went up to the breach: to wit, First one with the Ensign in his hand, not followed with his Company, who was killed, and fell tumbling down the Hill. Then another Souldier to win the Office▪ took up the Ensign, and went up likewise to the head of the Wall, who was also killed. Then the third, and all the eleven one after another, lost their lives, not at all assisted by their Companies. Notwithstand∣ing that, the Constable, my Master, stood by crying and threatning in vain; for which he degraded their Captains, and brake their Compa∣nies. There was a Scotch-man, Brother to Barnbougle, called Archi∣bald Moubray, who with his drawn Sword ran up to the head of the Wall, and returned safe. But he got no reward, though I used all my endeavours for him. Thus many are readier to punish faults, than to reward good deeds. After this the King entered far in the Low-Countries, burning and carrying away great Booties. But so soon as the Emperour could convene any Forces together, our Army began to retire homeward. Then the Emperour sent five thousand Horsemen, to see if they might perceive any occasion of advantage. Which they frequently assayed, assailing our Rear-guard at the passing over a little Water. At which time the Constable staid behind himself, and turning his face toward them, he withstood their charge stoutly with the French Footmen, and some Light-horsmen, until the whole Army had passed over the said Water, not far from Cambray. So the Emperours Horsemen followed no further at that time: believing that the King was resolved to return to France, and dismiss his Army for that year. But the King drew along the Frontier toward a place of great strength, called Kenty, where he planted his Camp, and besieged the said place: which I heard the Con∣stable promise to deliver to the King in eight days. Which promise was not performed, for the Emperour came in person with his Army
for the relief thereof. Which Army the Constable rode out to meet with the whole French Horsemen, leaving the Foot at the Siege. For he had great intelligence, and had heard where the Emperour was re∣solved to encamp, marching along a great Hight which had a Steep towards the part where our Camp lay. But it was easie to ride up and down at the side thereof. Where our Horsemen did ride, and the Emperour sent down some on Horseback to skirmish. At which time Normand Lesly Master of Rothess won great reputation; for with thirty Scotchmen he rode up the Hill, upon a fair Grey Gelding. He had above his Coat of black Velvet his Coat of Armour, with two broad white Crosses, the one before and the other behind, with Sleeves of Mail, and a red bonnet upon his head, whereby he was known and seen afar off by the Constable, the Duke of Anguion, and Prince of Conde. Where with his 30 he charged upon 60 of their Horse-men with Culverines, followed but with seven of his number. He in our sight struck five of them from their Horses with his Spear before it brake. Then he drew his Sword and ran in among them, not valuing their continual shooting, to the admiration of the beholders. He slew di∣vers of them, and at length when he saw a company of Spear-men com∣ing down against him, he gave his Horse the Spurs, who carried him to the Constable, and there fell down dead: for he had many shots, and worthy Normand was also shot in divers parts, whereof he died fifteen days after. He was first carried to the Kings own Tent, where the Duke of Anguien, and Prince of Conde told his Majesty that Hector of Troy was not more valiant than the said Norman: Whom the said King would see dressed by his own Chirurgions, and made great moan for him. So did the Constable, and all the rest of the Princes, but no man made more lamentation than the Laird of Grange, who came to the Camp the next day after, from a quiet Road whither he had been com∣manded. Now the Emperour set down his Camp two miles from Renty, and in an instant entrenched the whole Camp round about, save onely the face of the steep Hill that looked towards our Camp. All that night there were many upon the Watches of both Armies, for every man looked for a Battle the next day following. And there∣fore the Emperour, like an old experienced Captain, seised upon a Wood in the night time, that lay upon a Hill side between the two Camps; which was not onely a great advantage to him, but compelled the most part of our Army to stand in arms all night; whereby they were rendred the more unable against the next day, wanting the re∣freshment of rest, and then the place of Battle was a plain Valley that lay under the said Wood. The next morning early, after every man had said their prayers, and taken a little refreshment, we placed our Army in good order of Battle, under the said Hill and Wood. The King himself that day commanded the Battle, but he desired the Con∣stable to abide with him, to give Counsel as occasion would fall out. The Duke of Guise led the Vant-guard, and the Marshal of St. Andre the Rearguard. First so many of our French Foot, as are called In∣fant Perdews, were led along the Hill and Wood, beginning to skir∣mish with the Spaniards, who were within the Wood; who had so great advantage, being covered with Bushes and Trees, that they com∣pelled
our Foot to retire fearfully. Which well favoured beginning the Emperour might well perceive from the Hill whereon he was encam∣ped. Therefore like a skilful Captain, he took the occasion to hazard a good part of the Vant-guard with seven Field-pieces, who by his dire∣ction came forward. The Spaniards with their Fire arms through the Wood, a thousand Lance-Knights with bright Corslets, along the Hill side, with long Pikes. The Count of Swertsenburg with all his Reiters at the Hill Foot, and the whole Light-horsemen of the Emperours Army upon his right hand. At which time, our Foot, who were ap∣pointed to skirmish with the Spaniards, retired more and more, as al∣so our Light-horsemen in the alley, drew aside, and gave too great place to the Emperours Vant-guard. Which when it came where Monsieur D' Tavanes, and Monsieur D' Lorge stood with their Com∣panies, seeing them make for defence, they marched more coldly. The Duke of Guise in the mean time said, that he would ride back to the Battle, and obtain the Kings Command before he would charge upon the Enemy. But Monsieur de Lorge who was an old Captain, alledged that there was no time to take Counsel, for the Enemy said he, will be as soon at the King as you. Therefore it was resolved, to charge cou∣ragiously upon the Enemy; which being done, and a little rencounter made, the Reiters shot off all their Pistols, and finding themselves not backed, nor followed with the rest of the Emperours Army, as they al∣ledged was promised unto them, they gave back and fled, being pur∣sued by our Horse, who slew several of the Dutch Foot, and some of the Spaniards, for the Wood was their relief, but the Horse all esca∣ped, within the Ramparts of the Emperours Camp. Their Field-pieces were taken, and many Spaniards made Prisoners. Therefore we cal∣led it a won Battle, and marched forward, possessing the ground where the Fight was, and set down our Camp the same night hard beside the Emperours. Who seemed not that he had lost any thing, but re∣mained stedfastly within his Trenches. All that night the Army for the most part was upon the Watch, and the next day the Armies looked peaceably one upon another. For we would not hazard to charge them within their Foot, and they staid for twelve thousand fresh men that were coming to their aid. But in the Evening, they discharged all their Cannons, which overthrew part of our Tents; and we again discharged all our Cannon at them, and did laugh to see the bullets light and rebound among them. Yet the same night, without Trum∣pet or beating of Drum, we raised our whole Army, and retired home to our own Town of Montreal, and left Renty unwon, alledging that we had won a battle, which was better; and that we wanted Horse∣meat in the beginning of Winter. But the Emperour suffered us pa∣tiently to pass away, not appearing to understand that he knew any thing of our retreat, being content that he had preserved Renty from being taken. After this, the Emperour being aged, and finding himself vexed with the Gout and Gravel, he thought fit to leave the World, and retire himself to a Monastery of Monks in Spain. But first he made means with the Princes of the Empire, to elect his Son Philip to be Emperour, which they altogether refused, thinking him too mighty and the more in a capacity to subdue their Liberties,
as his Father had attempted to do before. But they were content to chuse his Brother Ferdinand, who was King of Bohemia, and Archduke of Austria, which Dominions lay nearest the Turks. The said Ferdi∣nand having also some Lands in Hungary, would be compelled to de fend his own Lands, and that way would be content with less Contri∣bution from the Estates of the Empire. He gave over to his Son Philip his other Kingdoms and Dominions that he had in Spain, Italy, and the Low Countries. And for the establishing his said Sons Estate, he drew on a Treaty of Truce for the space of five years with France. Which was agreed upon, and sworn between the Parties. But the said Truce was soon broken at the persuasion of Pope Paul the Fourth, who intending to bring back again to the Church, some Church Lands that his Predecessors had disposed to their Friends. As the common custom of Popes is, the one Pope dispones to his Bastards or Nephews, the next Pope revokes the Lands, pretending the same to be for the good of the Church, and gives them again to his Kindred and Friends. But those who had the Lands that Pope Paul the Fourth claimed, were a great Clan in Italy, called Collonois, who were dependers upon the King of Spain, and were under his Protection, and would not grant to give over any of their Possessions unto the Pope, neither for his Cursing, Threatning, or Bragging, but stood in their own defence. Whereof the Pope impatient, put on by two of his Nephews, sent the one of them to France called the Cardinal Caraff. The said Legat had born before him a Hat upon the point of a Sword, both Hat and Sword to be presented to the King of France. The Sword as an assured token of Victory, and the Hat as a token of triumph: requiring the King as eldest Son of the Catholick Church of Rome, to send an Army to Italy, to help the Popes Holiness to recover again to the Kirk, such Lands as were wrongfully with-holden from the same, by the said race of the Collonois. And for to take away all scrupulosity from the Kings Conscience, by reason of his Oath and Sacrament at the closing up of the Truce with the King of Spain, he the said Cardinal as Legat from Gods Vicar, having power, would give him full absolution, he having power to bind and loose. Alledging moreover that in doing so duti∣ful an Office for the Kirk, the King should reap a great advantage to himself, seeing he might thereby be put in possession of the Kingdom of Naples by the Forces of the Pope. Who should join with the Kings Army, after he had helped the Kirk to recover her Lands from them, who were maintained in the possession thereof, by his Competitor the King of Spain. The Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorrain his Brother, imbra∣ced this Proposition very earnestly. For the Duke expected to be made Vice-Roy of Naples, whereby he might the more easily sometime make his Brother Pope. But the old Constable my Master, was utter∣ly against the breaking of the Peace. Yet the two ambitious Brothers prevailed, persuading the King, that as the Constables age required rest, so the King being in the flower of his years, ought not to let slip so fair an occasion to recover again the Kingdom of Naples, to the Crown of France. Thus a great Army was prepared and sent into Italy, under the Con∣duct of the Duke of Guise, and likewise the Kings Lieutenant in Pic∣cardy
entered in upon the King of Spains Dominions with Fire and Sword, so unexpected by those of the Low Countries, that some of the French Light-horsemen entered upon Horseback, within one of their Kirks upon a Sunday, and snatched the Chalice out of the Priests hands when he was mumbling his Mass. The King of Spain took this breach of the Peace heavily to heart, and both assisted the Collonois against the Popes Forces more earnestly than he would have done; and also prepared a great Army against the next Spring, to invade the Frontiers of Piccardy in France. In the mean time that the Duke of Guise with his French Army was in Italy, the Pope took occasion hastily to compound with the Col∣lonois; who finding themselves like to be straitned, before the King of Spains Forces could be ready to support them, gave the Pope part of his desire, he securing to them the rest. But the Duke of Guise judged himself greatly disgraced by the Popes guile, and disappointed as to the expectations he had of the preferment to the Kingdom of Naples, when he understood that the Pope was a∣greed without him, and that in stead of concurring and helping him to conquer the Kingdom of Naples, according to his engagement, he plainly refused; pretending that the Winter was near at hand, and that it was, by far more fitting, that all Christian Princes were agreed among themselves, to make War against the Great Turk. So that all the favour the Duke of Guise had, by undertaking this Journey into Ita∣ly, was to get a Kiss of the Popes Foot; which occasioned great anger in the King of France, both at the one and the other. Then for the space of two Moneths, every man at the Court of France had liberty to speak ill of the Pope, who at that instant agreed with the King of Spain by the mediation of that same Cardinal Caraff, who had carried the Sword and Hat a little before to the King of France. Which Cardinal was afterwards strangled by the next Pope Pius IV. for practising to bring the Great Turk into Italy, against the Christians. Which he at his death confessed he had, for his own greatness. This I understood afterward, being at Rome. Now to return to the Duke of Guise his Army, abandoned by the Pope. He returned to France with the loss of the most part dead for hunger, and weakned by sickness, and slain by the Spaniards, who waited at their heels all the way. Before the Duke of Guise his com∣ing home to France, the King of Spain was entered upon the Frontiers of France with a great Army of ...... thousand men. Whom to re∣sist, the Constable, my Master, was sent with sixteen thousand. The day before he took leave of the King at Rhemes in Champaigne, riding to the hunting, there came a man in grave apparel following him on Foot, crying for audience for Gods sake. Whereupon the Constable staid, willing him to speak. Who said, The Lord says, seeing that thou wilt not know me, I shall likewise not know thee, thy glory shall be laid in the dust. This strange language put the Constable in such a rage, that he strook the poor man into the face with the horse rod which was in his hand, and threatned to cause him to be hanged. The man answered, he was willing to suffer what punishment he pleased, seeing he had perfor∣med his commission. The Duke of Nevers perceiving the Constable troubled, drew near, desiring to know the cause. The Constable told
him that such a Knave had been preaching to him of God. Then the Duke did also threaten the poor man. But as they did ride forward after the King, I staid behind, and asked the man what had moved him to use such strange language towards the Constable; he answered, That the Spirit of God gave him no rest till he had discharged his mind of that Commission given him by God. Now the Spanish Army above mentioned, was led by Emanuel Duke of Savoy, along the Frontiers of France,  at last planted his Camp about the Town of St. Quintin. Whithonstable sent the Ad∣miral of Chastillion, his Sisters Son, to dehe same, and lodged his Camp at La Ferr, five Leagues from the Town of St. Quintin: which was not sufficiently furnished with Men and Munition, wherefore he assayed the next day, in vain, to put in it more Companies, under the Conduct of Mounsieur d' Andelot, Brother to the said Admiral. After the preparation of two days, he marched forward with his whole Ar∣my toward St. Quintin, carrying with him eighteen Cannons, with some Boats that are commonly in Camps, to pass the Army over Ri∣vers and Waters. For there was a little Logh upon the South-west side of the Town, in the which the said Boats were set. And Monsieur D' Andelot, first with three hundred, entered the Town that way; but so soon as it was perceived, the Enemy stopped the rest from en∣tering. But so soon as the Duke of Savoy was coming with his whole Army towards us, the Constable alledging that he had furnished St. Quintine sufficiently, drew homewards toward La Ferr in good order, intend∣ing to eschew Battle if he could, the other being more powerful than he. His intention was to pass and besiege Calis, but the whole Horse∣men of the Enemy were hard at us, against the time we had travelled four miles; where the Constable stopped a little time. At length he said, that these Horsmen came to stay us till the Foot were advanced. Therefore he thought best to pass forward to a narrow Post betwixt a Wood and a Village, there to give them Battle, if he could not escape them. In the mean time the Marshal D' St. Andre, a great Man for that time, gave unhappy advice, that all the French Servants who were on Horseback, should retire from among the men at Arms, lest they should be an impediment to them who were to fight, there being as ma∣ny Servants as there were Masters. They were glad to get them out of the Prease, spurring their Horse with speed homewards, intending to stay upon some Hill to behold the Combat. The Enemy perceiving so great a number of Horsemen, as they thought flying, in the very in∣stant, took occasion to charge upon our Light-horsemen. Whereupon the Constable being in a Valley between two Hills, marching toward the strait part where he intended to stay, spurred forward up the little Hill, that he might see how to resist, and put order to the Battle: which gave an hard apprehension to others that he was flying. But when he turned on the top of the Hill to behold the Onset, no man would tarry with him for any command. Though he always cried return, return, their heads were homewards, and their hearts also, as appeared. Then his Master of the Horse bringing him a Turky spee∣dy Horse to run away with the rest, he answered in anger, That it was against his Profession and Occupation to fly; addressing himself fear∣lesly
against the greatest Troop of Enemies, saying, Let all true Ser∣vants to the King follow me: though onely threescore Gentlemen ac∣companied him, who were all overthrown in an instant. The Consta∣ble desired to be killed, but the Master of the Horse cried continually, It is the Constable, kill him not. But before he was known, he was shot through the thigh, and then was taken prisoner. I being hurt by a stroke upon the head, was again mounted by my Servant upon a Scotch Gelding, which ed me through the Enemies, who were all betwixt me and h Two of them struck at my head with Swords, because my ece was strucken off in the first rencoun∣ter. These two were standing betwixt us and home, to catch Priso∣ners in a narrow strait. But my horse ran through them against my will, and through the Village, for the Field between it and the Wood was full of smoke of the Culverins. There most of our Foot were slain. The leaping over a Dike separated me from the two, and so being past the said Village there was room enough to escape. So I came safe to La Ferr, where I did meet with Mr. Henry Killegrew an English Gen∣tleman, my old Friend, who held my horse, till I sate down in a Barbers Booth to be dressed of the hurt in my head. In the mean time a Pro∣clamation was made that no man should remain within the Town, but the ordinary Garrison, because the Governour thereof looked for a Siege. By the loss of this Battle, the Town of St. Quintine and several other Towns were lost. Whereby the King of France found himself reduced to so great straits, that he was compelled to accept of a very hurtful Peace at Cambray; where I was for the time with my Master the Consta∣ble, yet a Captive. With the said Constable, was adjoined in Commission the Cardinals of Lorrain and Chastillion, the Marshal of St. Andre, the Bishop of Or∣leance, and the Secretary Anbapin: For the King of Spain, were the Duke of Alva, Prince of Orange, and Cardinal Granvel: for Queen Mary of England, were Commissioners, William Bishop of Ely, and Do∣ctor Wotton. The Commissioners made peace betwixt France, Spain, England and Scotland. The Constable was much for the Peace, the Cardinal of Lorrain desired the continuance of the Wars. For by the Peace, the Constable would get leave to come home, to guide the King and Court again, as he had formerly done. By the continuance of the Wars, he would remain still Prisoner, leaving the Government of the King and Court of France to the Cardinal and the Duke of Guise, his Bro∣ther. Spain that was victorious, took advantage of their strife and emulation. France and England lost by the said Peace. The King inclined most to the Constables Counsel. England appeared desirous that Calis should be restored, believing that the King of Spain would not agree till they had satisfaction of their demands. Yet they were frustrate of their expectations. At length perceiving the two great Kings careless of their satisfaction, they appeared content with a scorn∣ful mean (albeit it was not) cast in by the Cardinal of Lorrain: to wit, that Calis should be restored to them at the end of eight years, or else five hundred thousand Crowns. And for payment of the said sum, in case the said Town was not rendred unto them at the end of the time specified, that in the mean time they should have three great men of
France, to be kept as Pledges for the restitution of the said Town. Now the English Commissioners knew that nothing of this would be kept, nevertheless they appeared content, finding themselves aban∣doned by Spain. So the Peace being concluded, Spain obtained all their desires, the Constable obtained liberty, the Cardinal of Lor∣rain could not mend himself, no more than the English Commis∣sioners. However the said Cardinal took this advantage of the said Peace, that the first Article of the Peace obliged all of them to leave their partialities, and join together to suppress the great number of Here∣ticks, who were so increased through all their Dominions, that it was thought hard enough to the Pope, the Emperour, the Kings of Spain and France, together with the Queen of Scotland, to reduce them again to the Catholick Faith. The said Cardinal proposed to himself another advantage, wherewith to recompense his losses: for he thought at the end of eight years, when England would look either to get Calice restored again to them, or else the sum above specified, he would cause his Sisters daughter, the Queen of Scotland to be proclai∣med righteous Queen of England, and alledge that Queen Elizabeth was but a Bastard. And that way he thought not onely Calice, but all England should appertain to the Queen of Scotland. As for the Pledges, he resolved such men should be chosen that France would make little account of. After the concluding of this Peace, Ambassadors were sent to Flan∣ders and England. The Cardinal of Lorrain out of France, to take the King of Spains Oath, and to swear for the King of France his ob∣servation thereof. The Secretary Dardois also was sent out of France, to do the like in the name of the Dauphin of France and the Queen of Scotland his Spouse, giving them this new stile, In the name of Francis and Mary King and Queen of Scotland, England, and Ireland, Dauphin and Dauphinois of Viennois. Whereat the Duke D' Alva and Cardinal Granvel smiled, saying this will breed some business ere it be long. The Cardinal of Lorrain shortly after caused to be renewed all the Queen of Scotlands silver Vessels, and engraved thereon the Arms of England. The Marshal Montmorancy my Masters eldest Son, was sent to England to swear the Peace, and to take the Queen of Englands Oath. So soon as Sir Nicholas Throgmorton understood of this new Stile and Arms, usurped by the Queen of Scotland, to which he said she had no right, he being Ambassador from the Queen of Eng∣land to France, complained thereof to the King and Council of France, though he got but Dutch excuses; alledging that in Dutchland all the Princes Brothers, Cousins, or Children, are stiled Princes or Dukes of that same House. The Constable advised the King to Commission me to swear the Peace in Scotland. But the Cardinal of Lorrain alledged Mounsieur Bettancourt Master of the Houshold to the Queen Regent was meeter; because the Instructions tended to declare unto the Queen Regent, how that the first and principal Article of the Peace, was that the Pope, the Emperour, the Kings of Spain and France, should join together to reduce again the most part of Europe to the Roman Catholick Religion, and to pursue and punish with Fire and Sword all Hereticks, who would not condescend to the same; desiring the
Queen Regent to do the same in Scotland; and to begin in time, before the Heresie should spread any further; which was already too far spread by her gentle forbearance, as had been reported to the King of France. Praying her diligently to take course therein without fear, or respect of persons, seeing that no Country of it self was able to withstand the whole Forces of so many confederate Catholick great Princes. It is above declared, that all those Prelats who had great Rule and Authority for the time, had assisted the Queen Regent in breaking the Contract of marriage with England, and transporting the young Queen to France. But the Archbishop of St. Andrews began to think that in case the young Queen died without succession to her body, that the Earl of Arran his Nephew might the easilier be Crowned, the Gover∣nour his Father being already in possession, was against the transporting the Crown matrimonial to France. And he having for the time, the guiding bh of the Governour his Brother, and of the Country, drew easily the most part of the Clergy upon his side. Whereupon the Queen Dowager was compelled to address her self to a contrary faction, to be the more in a capacity of compassing her design; to wit, to the Nobility and Barons, who were become Professors of the Reformed Re ligion, conniving at their secret Preaching, for further ingratiating her self with them, whereby the Protestants so increased, that the most part of the Country became Professors of the Reformed Religion. And such as had upon that accompt been formerly banished, as upon account of the slaughter of the Cardinal, were called home to fortifie the Faction that most furthered her designs. In the mean time the Bishop of St. Andrews fell sick, so that he lost his Speech and was given over for dead. The Queen Dowager looks upon this as a fit opportu∣nity of wresting the Government out of the Lord Hamiltons hands, having the concurrence of the Lords that were Protestants, and their dependents, who were not a little incensed at the said Governour, be∣cause he had been so influenced by his Brother, as by his Council to endeavour the ruine of their Religion. And the ways they took be∣came effectual, he having been at last induced to resign the Govern∣ment into the Queens hands; who thereupon was declared Re∣gent. The Protestants were thus at this time her best friends, and by the diligent preaching of the Preachers, they were increased to so great a number, that she judged it would prove a dangerous and difficult mat∣ter to compel them to desert their Principles. But the instructions which Bettancourt brought to her, and to Monsieur Dosel Lieutenant in Scotland for the King of France, and to all others who had greatest credit about her Majesty were so strict, and mixed with some threat∣nings, that she determined to follow them. She therefore issued out a Proclamation a little before Easter, commanding every man great and small to observe the Roman Catholick Religion, to resort daily to the Mass, that all should make Confession in the ear of a Priest, and re∣ceive the Sacrament. By word of mouth she acquainted several of the Protestant Lords, that they behoved to desert their Principles, she shewed to them the Commission that was sent her out of France, and the danger that would follow thereupon, if not obeyed. When the Nobility and States of the Country perceived her to be in
earnest, finding themselves also threat'ned by Monsieur Dosel, they left the Court: And consulting together what was meetest for them to do, they sent unto her Majesty the Earl of Argile, and Lord James Prior of St. Andrews, to shew her Majesty, in name and behalf of the rest, how that they had been permitted by her Majesty, to keep their own Ministers of a long time, sometimes secretly, and sometimes openly. That by her tolerance, their Religion had taken such root, and the number of the Protestants so increased, that it was a vain hope to believe, they could be put from their Religion, seeing they were resolved, as soon to part with their lives, as to recant. The Queen Regent did as much dis-relish this kind of Language, as they had done her Proclamation, so that she began to persecute, and they to stand to their own defence, binding themselves together, un∣der the name of the Congregation. Therefore they brake down Ima∣ges, Kirks, and Cloisters. The Queen Regent sent to France, advertising her Daughter, and her Husband of these disorders, requiring help and Forces to suppress this in time, or else all would be lost: Declaring that she had ground of fear, that my Lord James Prior of St. Andrews, natural Son to James the Fifth, would under pretext of this new Religion, usurp the Crown of Scotland, and pluck it clean away from the Queen her Daughter, unless sudden remedy were applied thereto. Upon this advertisement, some of the Council of France advised, presently to raise a great Army for reducing of Scotland; but the Constable coun∣selled the King, whose Pensioner I was for the time, to send me unto Scotland. The King first gave me his Commission by word of mouth, and then the Constable his chief Councellor, directed me at length in his Majesty's presence, as followeth. Your Native Queen, saith he, is married here in France unto the Dauphine, and the King is informed by the Cardinal of Lorrain, that a Bastard Son to James fifth, called Prior de St. Andre, pretends under colour of Religion, to usurp the Kingdom unto himself; his Majesty knows that I was ever against the said marriage, fearing thereby to make our old Friends our new Enemies, as is like to come to pass this day. But I gave too great place to the House of Guise, to deal in the affairs of Scotland, because the Queen Regent is their Sister. But now seeing their violent proceedings, are like to occasion the loss of the Kingdom of Scotland, I must needs meddle, and put to my helping hand, as having better experience of the nature of that Nation, then apparently they have. I assure you that the King is resolved to ha∣zard his Crown, and all that he hath, rather then that your Queen be robbed of her right, seeing she is now married unto his Son. And he resolves to send an Army to Scotland for that effect, though he would gladly shun the trouble thereof, if it were possible. For now after his Majesty hath had Wars long enough with his old Enemies, and hath agreed with them upon very rational considerations, he is loath to enter again into a new unnecessary War, with his old Friends. Seeing there is probable ground of conjecture, that it is not their de∣fault, but that the same is occasioned by the harsh usage they meet with. I hear that Monsieur Dosel is cholerick, hasty, and too passio∣nate. Such are not qualified to rule over remote, and form'd Coun∣tries.
I have also intelligence, that the Queen Regent hath not kept all things promised unto them. The King my Master is not so rash, as readily to believe that Scotland, who had kept so long. Friendship with France, would now so slightly break their old band, and aban∣don their duty to their Lawful Prince. The King is well acquainted with the inconveniencies which may arise upon so distant, and beyond-Sea Wars. He knows what charge it is to furnish out Ships; which perchance may be thrice victualled, e're they make Sail, by reason of contrary Winds, and that your Seas are very dangerous. The Mar∣quess de Albuiff was driven upon the Coast of Norway, when he thought to have landed in Scotland, so that his Voyage did no good, though his preparations for the same was very expensive. Though our Army were well landed in Scotland, how oft might they stand in need of supply, when we by reason of these, and several the like difficulties, will not be able to help them, whereof we have too good experience, when Monsieur de Lorge was there. I have brought you up from a Child I understand that you are come of an honourable Family; I have assured the King, that I have had good proof of your honesty, so that his Majesty is well minded toward you, at whose hand I hope you shall deserve a good reward, this is a Commission of a far greater importance, then that which Betancourt carried. For the King will stay, or send his Army, accor∣ding to your report. Give it out, that you are only come home, to visit your Friends. Let neither the Queen Regent, nor Dosel, know of your Commission, wherein you are implored by the King, who is now your best Master. First try diligently and perfectly well, whether the said Prior pre∣tends to usurp the Crown of Scotland to himself, or if he be moved to take Arms only for Conscience sake, in defence of his Religion, him∣self, his dependants, and associates. Next try what promises are bro∣ken to him, and them, by whom, and at whose instance. Thirdly, if they desire another Lieutenant, in place of Dosel. If it be only Religion that moves them, we must commit Scots-mens Souls unto God, for we have difficulty enough to rule the Conscien∣ces of French-men. It is the obedience due unto their Lawful Queen with the Body, that the King desires. If any promise be made to them, and not kept, the King nor I are not to be blamed. If they de∣sire any other Lieutenant in place of Dosel, the King will send one, who I hope shall please them. After that the Constable had ended his instructions, the King laid his hand upon my shoulder, and said, do as may Cousin hath direct∣ed you, and I shall reward you. So I kissed his Majesty's hand, and taking my leave, I went through England, and found the Queen Re∣gent within the old Tower of Falkland: Because that same day, her Army under Duke Hamilton, and Monsieur Dosel, was ranged in bat∣tel upon Couper Moor, against the Lords of the Congregation; at what time her Majesty made a hard complaint unto me of her disobedient Subjects. And even as I was speaking with her, the Duke, and Mon∣sieur Dosel returned from the said Moor, without Battel. Whereat the Queen was much offended, thinking they had lost a very fair oc∣casion.
I laid my self wholly out, to be informed if my Lord James inten∣ded, as was reported of him, to make himself King. Mr. Henry Bal∣neavs was then in great credit with him, and loved me as I had been his own Son, by reason of some acquaintance I had with him in France, and small services I had done him there, during his banishment. He first acquainted me fully so far as he knew, of my Lord James his in∣tention, and encouraged me to be plain with the said Lord James, as∣suring me of secresie and honest and plain dealing. He was a godly, learned, wise and long experimented Councellor. He went with me to the said Lord Prior, having shew'n him my Commission, which was very acceptable to him, he delayed not to advise with any other of his Councel, what answer he should give me, but instantly and plainly told me his mind, in presence of the said Mr. Henry. First he declared, what acceptable service he and his associates had done to the Queen Regent, chiefly of late, when the Bishop of St. Andrews had drawn the most part of the Clergy against the transporting the Crown Matrimonial to France. Albeit he had been mainly instrumental of sending the Queen thither, and in perswading the Governour his Bro∣ther to break the Contract of Marriage with Edward of England. He told what liberty of Conscience her Majesty had granted unto them, until the time that the Master of her Houshold, Monsieur Bet∣tancourt returned from France, with the news of the Peace; and that though since that time, she had changed her behaviour and counte∣nance toward him, and those who had done her best service, he knew well enough that it proceeded not from her own nature, but was oc∣casioned by the perswasions and threat'nings of her Brother, and friends in France. And further he rehearsed unto me, all her and their for∣mer proceedings, whereof mention is made already, affirming still his good will to her Majesty's service. And he further declared, That the more effectually to remove all suspicions from his Sovereign and her Husband, of his design'd Usurpation, he was content to banish himself perpetually out of Scotland, if it would please the Queen, and the King of France, to grant him and his associates, such liberty as the Queen Regent had permitted them, till the home-coming of Bottan∣court. Providing that his rents might come to him to France, or any other Countrey where he should reside. And for security hereof, he offered that sufficient pledges of the Noble-mens Sons in Scotland, should be sent to France. So that no King nor Queen of Scotland, did ever receive more chearful obedience, then her Majesty should do, not∣withstanding of her absence. With this answer, I took my Journey through England to France, and at Newcastle fell in company with an English man, who was one of the Gentlemen of the Queens Chamber; a Man well skill'd in the Mathematicks, Negromancy, Astrology, and was also a good Geogra∣pher. Who had been sent by the Council of England, to the bor∣ders, to draw a Map of such Lands, as lye between England and Scot∣land, which part was alledged to be a fruitful Soil, though at that time it served for no other purpose, but to be a retreat to thieves. For Queen Elizabeth of England was lately come to the Crown, and had been advised by her Council to this course, as tending not only to the enlarging of her bounds, but rendering these parts civil. I
know not the reason why they followed it not, though I conjecture, that the variance which fell out between the Two Kingdoms hinder∣ed it. The English man and I, by the way, entered into great famili∣arity, so that he shewed me sundry secrets of the Country, and of the Court. Among other things he told me, that King Henry the Eighth, had in his life-time been so curious, as to enquire at Men cal∣led Diviners, or Negromancers, what should become of his Son King Edward the Sixth, and of his two Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth. That answer was made unto him again, that Edward should dye, ha∣ving few days, and no Succession; and that his Two Daughters should the one succeed the other. That Mary his eldest Daughter should marry a Spaniard, and that way bring in many strangers to England, which would occasion great strife, and alteration. That Elizabeth should Reign after her, who should marry either a Scottish man, or a French man. Whereupon the King caused to give poison to both his Daughters, but because this had not the effect he desired (for they finding themselves altered by vehement vomitings, and purgings, ha∣ving suspected poison, had taken remedies) he caused to proclaim them both bastards. But the Women that attended about Queen Mary, al∣ledged that her matrix was consumed. For she was several times sup∣posed to be with Child to King Philip of Spain, yet brought forth nothing but dead lumps of flesh. Therefore▪ to be revenged upon her Father, the English man told me, that she had caused, secretly in the night to take up her Father's bones, and burn them. This the ho∣nest Gentleman affirmed to be truth, though not known to many: He was a Man of great gravity, about fifty years of age. When he came to London, he shewed me great kindness, and made me a present of some Books. Upon my return to France I found a great change, King Henry the Second being hurt in the head with a shiver of a Spear, by the Count of Montgomery, at the Triumphal Justings of his Daughter's marriage with the King of Spain, dyed Eight days after at Paris. And the Constable my Master was commanded to retire him from Court, to his House, by the new King, Francis the Second, Husband to our So∣veraign: who was wholly guided by the Duke of Guise, and the Car∣al Lorain, competitors to the said Constable in Court Emulation. Which occasioned, that my Voyage, and the answer I had got, was all in vain: for the House of Guise, were the chief instruments of all the troubles in Scotland. When I did shew the Constable at his House the answer, of my Com∣mission, which was according to his hearts desire, the Tears came over his cheeks, crying alack for the loss of the King my good Master, that he should not have seen before his death, Scotland recovered again, which he esteemed lost: seeing you are thereby also frustrate of a good reward, which this your service merited. Now I have not such in∣terest as I formerly had to advance you, but if you will take such part as I have, you shall be very welcome. I answered, that as I had been with him in his prosperity, I would not desert him in his adver∣sity. Now there was no more appearance of concord betwixt the Queen Regent, and the Congregation in Scotland. For the King of France
was raising Men to send thither: The Congregation again sought help from England, which they obtained, the rather because the Eng∣lish Ambassadour resident in France, had advertised his Mistress, how that the Queen of Scotland, and her Husband had taken the Style of England and Ireland, and also had ingraven the Arms thereof upon their Silver Plate. The Queen Regent, and Monsieur Dosel with his French men; in∣close themselves within Leeth, which they did fortifie to receive the French supply, which was daily expected. At length those who were besieged made a sally, caused the Congregation to fly, and took their Artillery, till an Army from England, came under the conduct of the Duke of Norfolk. At which the Queen Regent being indisposed by the Sea Air at Leeth, retired her self to the Castle of Edinburgh. Where she took sickness and dyed, during the time that Leeth was besieged, both by Scotland and England, regreting that she had occa∣sioned to her self, and the Kingdom, so much unnecessary trouble, by following the advice of her French friends. During the Siege of Leeth, all Scotch men who were in France, were detested; and divers of them upon suspicion made Prisoners. Which obliged me to repair from the Constable's House, to the Court, to re∣quire License from the Queen my Soveraign, to visit other Coun∣tries, whereby I might be rendered more able afterward to do her Majesty agreeable service. Which she granted, and presenting me to the King her Husband, I had a kiss of his hand, and so took my leave. The Constable my good Master, recommended me to the Elector Palatine, advising me to remain at his Court, to learn the Dutch Tongue. I was courteously received by the said Prince Elector, and obtained such favour at his hands, that he obliged me to attend at his Court, as one of his Servants. So soon as he heard of the death of King Francis the Second, King of France, who dyed at Orleance. I was sent to condole for the said King's death, as the custom of Prin∣ces is, and rejoice with the new young King Charles the Ninth, also to comfort our Queen, and the Queen Mother. The King's death made a great change, the Queen Mother was glad at the death of King Francis her Son, because she had no guiding of him, he being wholly councelled by the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his Bro∣ther, the Queen our Mistress, being their Sister Daughter. So that the Queen Mother was much satisfied to be freed of the Government of the House of Guise, and for this cause she entertained a great grudge at our Queen. In the mean time the King of Navarr, and Prince of Conde, who were imprisoned, and should have been executed three days after, the Scaffold being already prepared, were by the Queen Mother set at liberty. The Constable also having been charged to come to Court, expected no better measure; he therefore gave if out that he was sick, being carried in a Horse-Litter, and making little Jour∣neys, he drew out the time so long by the way, that in the mean time the King dyed. Whereof being informed, he leapt on a Horse, and came frankly to Court, and like a Constable commanded the Men of War, who were upon the Guards. The Duke of Guise and his Brother, were commanded out of the Town. The Queen Mother
was glad at the Constable's coming, seeing she found her self by his au∣thority and friendship with the King of Navarr, the more in a capaci∣ty to drive the House of Guise from Court. The Estates were convened at Orleance, and for the time the King of Navarr fell to be Tutor, and Governour to the young King, and the Countrey. But the Queen Mother knowing his faculty, handled the matter so finely by the Constables help, that the King of Navarr procured from the Three Estates, that the Queen Mother should be Regent of the Realm. To whom he rendered up his place, being sa∣tisfied to be but her Lieutenant. She having attained this great point, caused the Estates to require that an accompt should be made to them, by the Duke of Guise, the Marshal de St. Andres, and the Cardinal, of their intermission with the King's Rents, and affairs of the King and Countrey. Whereupon they left the Court, binding themselves to∣gether to defend themselves against the Queen Mother's malice. For, in effect, she was a deadly Enemy to all of them, who had either guided her Husband, or her eldest Son. I was all this time at Orleance, where I might see this change, and had great favour of the King of Navarr, for the Elector Palatine's sake, who was his great friend. The Queen Mother also, highly esteemed the said Prince Elector, dispatching me with great thanks, and a gift worth a Thousand Crowns. Our Queen in the mean tim seeing her friends in disgrace, and knowing her self not to be much liked, she left the Court, and was a sorrowful Widow, when I took leave of her at a Gentleman's House, four miles from Orleance. So I returned to Dutchland, with many in∣structions from the Queen Mother, and King of Navarr. For she ap∣peared to be inclined to profess publickly the reformed Religion, think∣ing it the meetest way to retain the Government, and guiding of the King of Navarr, that being the only Faction, which appeared able to gain-stand the House of Guise, who were banded with the Pope, and King of Spain. The said Queen Mother, likewise, entertained some resolutions of joining with the Protestant Princes in Dutchland, and with the Queen of England, Count Egmont, Prince of Orange, Count Horn, and such as had in the Low Countries embraced the Reformed Religion, or stood up for the liberty of their Coun∣trey. I being returned to Dutchland, received news out of England, from Mr. Killegrew my old friend, that the Peace was concluded in Scot∣land, at the Siege of Lieth, that the French men were to be carried to France, in the Queen of England's Ships: That the Queen of Scot∣land was to lay aside the Arms of England, and the Congregation to have the free Exercise of their Religion. I leave all the proceedings in the Wars in Scotland, to be declared by such as were present, who will probably write that whole History. I shall only touch such things, as I my self was imployed in, which I did see with my Eyes, and hear with my Ears, which may serve for little Parenthesises, to Hi∣storiographers, who had not the occasion of being so well therewith ac∣quainted. Our Queen, then Dowager of France, retired her self by little and little, further and further from the Court of France, that it might
not appear, that she was any way compelled thereto, as of a truth she was by the Queen Mother's rigorous dealing, who alledged that she had been despised by her Daughter-in-law, during the short Reign of King Francis the Second, her Husband, at the resignation of the House of Guise. Monsieur de Martignes, Monsieur Dosel, Labrosse the Bishop of Amience, and such other French-men, as were lately carried out of Scotland in the English Ships, resorted to our Queen, and declared unto her the whole progress of affairs, and the state of the Kingdom. These, as well as the rest of her friends, advised her to return to Scotland, (en∣couraging her with the hopes of succeeding to the Crown of England) rather then to endure the Queen Mother's disdain in France. Desiring her, as most conducing for her interest, to serve the time, to accom∣modate her self discreetly and gently to her own Subjects; to be most familiar with my Lord James, Prior of St. Andrews, her natural Bro∣ther; and with the Earl of Argile, who had married Lady Jane Stu∣art, her natural Sister; and to use the Secretary Lidingtoun, and the Laird of Grange most tenderly in all their affairs, and in summ to re∣pose most upon those of the Reformed Religion. Thus, those who were a little before cruelly persecuted, are now to be esteemed for chiefest and truest friends. Thus can God by his Divine Providence, ranverse the finest practises and pretences of mighty Rulers and Po∣tentates, and turn all to the best, to such as serve him with a sincere heart. As on the other hand God abhorreth such Subjects, as hypo∣critically under pretext of Religion, take occasion to rebel against their native Princes, for ambition, greediness, or any other Worldly respect. The Prior of St. Andrews being advertised of the Queen his Sove∣raign's deliberation, to return to Scotland, and to use his and his friends advice. He goeth himself to France, requesting her Majesty to return to her own, promising to serve her faithfully, to the outmost of his power. And returns again to Scotland, to prepare the hearts of her Subjects against her home-coming. After this, her Majesty went to Janvile, the Duke of Guise his dwelling place, about the marches of Lorrain, and at length went to visit the Duke of Lorrain at Nancy, where I chanced to come shortly after, in company of the Duke Casi∣mir, second Son to the Elector Paline. But the Queen was already parted from the Court of Lorrain, toward Janvile, whither I took occasion to go, to tender to her Majesty the offer of my most humble and dutiful service. And the said Duke Casimir, understanding that I was to ride thither, did write a very kind Letter to her Majesty, com∣forting her the best he could, offering his service in case any in France should wrong or injure her, and that he would bring to her aid, up∣on her Letter, Ten Thousand Men. Her Majesty was much refresh∣ed with this friendly offer, and she was pleased to give me thanks for the demonstrations I had given, of being intirely devoted to her in∣terest, shewing me she had been made acquainted therewith, while I was at the Court of France. She desired me earnestly when I resolved to retire out of Germany, to come home and serve her Majesty, with very friendly and favourable offers. So I returned back to the Duke Casimir, who was about contracting a Marriage with the Duke of Lor∣rain's eldest Sister. Which took not effect, because the old Dutchess
her Mother, who was King Christierns Daughter of Denmark, begotten upon the Emperour Charles his Sister, who also lost the Kingdom of Denmark, pretending to make it Hereditable, whereas it was Elective. The said King Christiernus was kept in Prison, till his death. This Dutchess his Daughter, alledged that the Kingdom of Norway apper∣tained unto her, as Heir unto her Father, and that the said Kingdom was Hereditary unto her Father, albeit Denmark was not, and inten∣ded then to marry her eldest Daughter unto Frederick King of Den∣mark, and to give over with her said Daughter the Kingdom of Nor∣way. But the said Dutchess offered unto Duke Casimir her second Daughter, which he refused, and dealt with his Father to send me unto England, to propose Marriage for him unto the Queen of Eng∣land. But I refused to undertake that Commission, having ground to conjecture that she would never marry, upon the reflection I made upon that story, one of the Gentlemen of her Chamber had told me, seeing she knowing her self unable for succession, I supposed she would never render her self subject to any Man. The said Duke was very much displeased at me, because I refused. About this time the Cardinal of Lorrain being at Trent, took occa∣sion to visit the old Emperour Ferdinand at Isbrack his dwelling place, not far from Trent. And there the said Cardinal proposed two mar∣riages, first the King of France Charles the Ninth, to the eldest Daugh∣ter of Maximilian Son to Ferdinand, lately chosen King of the Romans, and co-adjutor to the Empire. Then he proposed the Queen of Scot∣land Dowager of France, to Charles Arch-duke of Austria, brother to the said Maximilian. The Queen was by this time returned to Scotland, and apparently had been advertised by the said Cardinal, that he had proposed the said marriage, and it seems she had relished the Overture. Her Majesty returning was gladly welcomed by the whole Sub∣jects. For at first, following the counsel of her friends, she behaved her self humanely to them all, committing the chief handling of her affairs unto her Brother the Prior of St. Andrews, whom afterward she made Earl of Murray, and to the Secretary Lidingtoun, as meetest, both to hold the Countrey at her devotion, and also to beget a strict friendship betwen her Majesty, and the Queen of England. For my Lord Murray had great credit with my Lord Robert Dudly, who was afterward made Earl of Leicester. And the Secretary Lidingtoun had great credit with the Secretary Cecil. So that these four made a strict and sisterly friendship, between the two Queens, and their Countries. So that there appeared outwardly no more difference, but that the Queen of England was the Eldest Sister, and the Queen of Scotland the Younger, whom the Queen of England promised to declare second person, according to her good behaviour. So that Letters and corre∣spondence past weekly betwixt them, and at first there appeared no∣thing more desired by either of them, then that they might see one another, by a meeting at a convenient place, whereby they might al∣so declare their hearty and loving minds each to other: For our Queen was so nettled with the hard usage she had met with from the Queen Mother of France, who had likewise hardly used all her friends of the House of Guise, that she was the more earnest to make friend∣ship
with her, and with such whom she knew that Queen liked worst. The two Queens this way keeping on their outward friendship for a while, with the plain and honest meaning of our Queen, as I afterward did perfectly know. There came a Letter to me out of Scotland, from the Secretary Lidingtoun▪ at the Queens command, desiring me to make my self acquainted with the Arch-duke Charles of Austria, youn∣gest Brother to Maximilian, then King of the Romans, and Emperour in effect, for the Emperour Ferdinand his Father had nothing but the Name, by reason of his Age. I was desired to inform my self concer∣ning his Religion, his Rents, and his Qualities, his Age, and Stature, and desired to send home word; and therewith to send his Picture, if it could be done. It was thought I might obtain the occasion thereof, by means of the Elector Palatine my Master, for the time greatest in favour with the Emperour Maximilian. Now my Lord Elector being at an Imperial Convention holden at Ausbrugh, had of his own head inquired of Maximilian, what the Car∣dinal of Lorrain's business had been with his Father Ferdinand, when he came to see him from Trent. For the good Elector was afraid, it had been about some matters of Religion. For Ferdinand was a de∣vout Catholick, and Maximilian appeared to be a zealous Protestant. For he was but lately chosen King of the Romans at Francford, not without difficulty. Being himself one of the Seven Electors as King of Bohemia, he was to sue six Electors for their Votes: To wit, the Elector Palatine, the Duke of Saxony, and the Duke of Brandenburgh, three Protestant Princes; and three Bishops Mentz, Triers, and Collein, Catholicks. Both these Factions were put in hope, that being Empe∣rour he would declare himself of their principles. In the mean time he used secret preachings to please the Protestants, but he went open∣ly to the Mass, whereby the Bishops thought themselves assured of him. But the good Elector Palatine believed firmly, that after his Fathers death, he would declare himself a plain Protestant. Thus he won both parties to make him Emperour. He told the Elector Palatine at the Convention in Ausbrugh, that the Cardinal of Lorrain had pro∣posed two marriages to the Emperour his Father. The one was Charles young King of France, to his own Eldest Daughter; the other was the Queen of Scotland Dowager of France, to his Brother the Arch-Duke Charles. The Elector inquired how he relished these two mar∣riages; he answered he could not but like well of them, seeing he was not to expect a better match to his Daughter then the King of France, nor to his Brother then the Queen of Scotland, who the Car∣dinal also alledged had right to the Crown of England. The Elector said, that since he was pleased with the Overture of marrying his Brother to the Queen of Scotland, that he had a Scottish Gentleman with him, who could be a good instrument to bring forward the said marriage. Whereupon Maximilian desired to speak with me, and because for the time I was in the Countrey of Hess, he desired him to send me to him upon my return. Which the Elector did, and sent with me one of his Councel, called Monsieur Zuleger, joining us in one Com∣mission. When we had given accompt of our said Commission, my companion told the Emperour, that I had a particular with his Ma∣jesty,
and so retired himself, leaving me alone in the Chamber. Where I presented a Letter to him, written with the Elector's own hand, in Dutch, signifying that I was the Scotsman, whom he promised to send unto him. After he had read the writing, he did shew me the part wherein the Elector assured him, that I would shew him the truth of all such things as I knew, which he would ask of me, saying You are much obliged to the Elector Palatine, for he hath given me a very good Character of you. I pray you, says he, tell me how long you have been in his company. I said more then three years: he inquired why I did not answer in Dutch; I answered, because I had the French more familiar, and knew that no Language could come wrong to his Majesty. For he could very promptly speak good La∣tiné, Italian, Spanish, Sclavonian, and French. Then he inquired again in French, how I came to the Elector Palatine. I told him, that being brought up at the Court of France with the Constable, there had fal∣len out some variance between France and Scotland, partly occasioned from difference in Religion, and partly from other particulars, whence proceeded a general dislike at the Court, of all Scots-men at that time in France, some being upon suspicion imprisoned, others lookt down upon. The consideration whereof, hast'ned my prosecuting a former intention I had deliberated upon, of visiting other Countries. That being minded to begin at Dutchland, the Constable of France had by his Letter addressed me to the Elector Palatine. He inquired how long I had remained with the Constable; I answered, nine years. He said I was happy, who had been so long in company with two of the wisest Men in Europe, and was pleased to say, that he was glad of the occasion of being acquainted with me. He began more particularly to shew unto me the cause why he desired to speak with me, inqui∣ring concerning the Estate of Scotland, of the late troubles with France, of the agreement new made, what great Men had the greatest inte∣rest, and all the Noblemens Names who had assisted both parties. He proceeded to inquire further, what help England had made unto Scot∣land, during the troubles with France, if they were bandied toge∣ther, if their friendship continued, and of the Queen's title to Eng∣land, if the Nobility of Scotland would concur to advance her to the Crown of England, if they would think it the interest of Scotland to have the two Kingdoms joined in one: seeing it was to be supposed that the Queen or Prince would certainly chuse to dwell in the best Country, and thereby would be further from them. These, and se∣veral other things he inquired, and I answered as I thought most per∣tinent. When he had heard my returns, he was pleased to say it was not the least good office that my Lord Elector had done him, in send∣ing me to him, and gave me thanks that I had been at the pains to come. If Charles my Brother, says he, were so happy as to obtain your Queen in marriage, no Man shall have more credit with him then you. He desired me to abide with him some time, that he might dis∣course with me at more length. So I tarried with him twenty days, with very favourable entertainment, and discoursing with me several times, he put me in hope that his Brother Charles would be shortly at home: And gave me an accompt of such news as came to him from all Countries. It was he who first told me, of the death
of the Duke of Guise, killed by Poltrot, at the Siege of Orleance. He appeared to he very glad at the death of that gallant Warriour, though I could not conjecture for the time what could move him. By fre∣quent conference with him, I suspected that he would be an Enemy to the marriage of his Brother with our Queen, but to get some fur∣ther tryal thereof, I requested my companion Monsieur Zuliger, to drink himself merry with some of his Secretaries, and then to cast, in the purpose of the marriage of our Queen with Duke Charles, whe∣ther or no it was desired or relished by the Emperour. The said Se∣cretary shew'd him plainly, that he was against any such preferment to his Brother, whereby he might become King both of Scotland, and England, by reason of an Essay that the Emperour Charles the Fifth had made once, to divide his Dominions among the three Sons of Fer∣dinand his Brother, failing Heirs of King Philip his Son, who then had but one Son, Don Carlo, sickly, and of a tender, weak complexi∣on, whom he afterwards himself killed secretly in Prison, suspecting him to be of the Reformed Religion, and to keep intelligence with the Princes of Flanders, who professed the same. And Maximilian hoped to succeed to the whole, failing Heirs of the said King Philip, as having married the said Philip's Sister, and having by her many Children of his own, whom he rather desired to be preferred, then his own Brother. For in case the Arch-duke Charles had been made King of Scotland and England, he thought thereby he would have the fitter occasion, of usurping the Low Countrys, upon the pretext of some old right. Having understood this, I would wait no longer, but pressed daily for my dispatch, that I might return to my Lord Elector: And the Emperour again used great intreaties to oblige me to stay with him, promising to advance me if I would enter into his service, but finding no inclination in me to comply with his desire therein, he at length willed me to stay with him but half a year. But I humbly excused my self, pretending that I behoved to be shortly in Scotland, which moved him the more earnesty to desire me to stay with him, which because I would not grant to do, I found he was discontent. One night late after Supper, he parted in a Boat towards the Town of Lintz; and sent his Secretary unto me, excusing himself, that he did not meet with me before parting, seeing an urgent occasion called for his speedy de∣parture; and seeing I was to return to Scotland, he had written a Let∣ter to the Queen in my favour, which the Secretary delivered unto me. I told the Secretary, that I had not yet seen Italy, and that I was pur∣posed first to visit Rome, Venice, Florence, and the most remarkable Cities there, e're I returned to Scotland, upon which account, at first I refused the said Letter, but he answered, there was no danger how long it was undelivered, seeing there was no thing therein contained, but what concerned my self. The Town of Ausbrugh being the nearest Port of Germany to Ve∣nice, I agreed with Monsieur Euliger to return toward my Lord Ele∣ctor, and thence I took my Journey toward Venice and Rome. And came back through all the fairest Cities of Italy, and through Switzerland, to Heidlberg, where the Prince Elector kept his Court.
I have above declared how that the Duke of Guise was slain by Pol∣trot, at the Siege of Orleance. It was after the battel of Drues, in the which both the chieftains were taken. The Prince of Conde for those of the Religion, and the Constable for the King. The Queen Mother incontinently made the Peace, far against the mind of Madam de Guise, who earnestly requested her, not to make the Peace so suddenly, left it should be thought that the Duke of Guise had only had hand in the Wars. But nevertheless the Queen Mother went forward with the Peace, changing the Prince of Conde for the Constable, making them both good instruments of the agreement. The Peace being made, the Queen Mother began to think upon a Wife for her Son King Charles. For that effect, she sent unto the Prince Palatine, a Secretary called Monsieur Wyllot, shewing unto him, that the King her Son, was very desirous to marry Maximilian's Eldest Daughter, intreating him as a trusty friend, to propose the matter as of his own head, as a steadable Alliance, conducing for the weal of the Empire, and to send her the picture of the Princess, which she thought fit to be done upon some considerations, before she would proceed more publickly. Which affair he went about most diligently, and he was pleased to send me with the answer, and picture, with a congratu∣lation of the late made Peace. At my coming to the Court of France, which was at Paris for the time, the Constable would needs be my convoy, to the young King, and Queen Mother, who had a misliking of the said Constable for the time, because he had brought in the Admiral to Paris against her will, who was accused to have promised reward unto the foresaid Poltrot, to kill the Duke of Guise. The Admiral again desired to come before the Privy Council to purge himself, offering to undergo his tryal. But the Queen Mother desired not these animosities among the great Men to be removed, but rather wished that their hatred might con∣tinue, and their contentions increase, as having laid her Plot to secure her own greatness, by the means of their strife, as was after mani∣festly seen. For during their divisions, the Duke of Guise, King of Navarr, Prince of Conde, the Constable, the Marshal de St. Andre, with the most notable great Men of France were all slain, and because the said Admiral escaped during the Wars, the Peace was made for the third time, and under the covert of marriage of the young King of Navarr, who was afterward King of France, the said Admiral was bar∣barously murdered, with all that remained of the worthiest Noble∣men, and Captains of France. But to return to the purpose, the Con∣stable and Admiral were at Court at that time, against the Queen Mo∣ther's will, where the Admiral was declared innocent of the Duke of Guise his slaughter. And at that time the Constable determined to abide at Court, and to maintain himself in his Office of great Master, by the authority of his great Office of the Constablry, assisted by the force of his friends. For he sufficiently understood the Queen Mo∣ther's Italian tricks, therefore to win credit, he presented me to the young King, and sate down upon a Stool by him, and the Queen his Mother, and held his Bonnet upon his Head, taking upon him the full authority of his great Office, to the Queen Mother's great dis∣content, whereat she was so impatient, that she turned away her
face, when I was declaring my Commission, after the delivery of my Letters of Credence to the King, and her, which the King was very glad to hear, being thereby put in hope, that the marriage would take effect. He was so desirous to see the picture of that young Princess, that he cut the thread himself, that bound on the Wax-cloth about the said picture. In the mean time I retired me forth of the Chamber, and was earnestly fought after the rest of the day, but could not be found untill the Constable and Admiral came to their Chamber, at Even, who inquiring of me the cause of my retiring, I remembred the Constable, in what a rage the Queen Mother was, when I delive∣red my Commission, and that I found my self obliged in honour to stand upon the reputation of my Master, who was a free Prince. Whereupon they appeared well satisfied, approving what I had done, but withal they told me, that they were the cause of that bad hu∣mour, the Queen Mother had been in, and that she had made a Pro∣clamation, that all Ambassadours should Address themselves to the King, and her as Regent. Therefore they advised me, to go the next day to see her at Dinner, assuring me that she would not fail to call for me, and inquire the cause of my absenting, before I had told out my Commission, and he instructed me what I should say in answer. So soon as her Majesty perceived me, she desired me to stay till she had Dined, telling me that she would send for her Son the King, to come to her Chamber, to hear out the rest of my Commis∣sion. The King being come, the Chamber was voided, and her Majesty first inquired, why I told not out the rest of my Commission the day before. I answered, as I had been instructed, how that it appeared to me, for the time, she desired not so many auditors, and that I stayed upon her better opportunity, which answer she appeared much to re∣lish, desiring me when at any other time I should be sent again, to Ad∣dress my self only to the King, and to her, and to no other. I an∣swered, that among all the King's Servants, I was best acquainted with the Constable, and therefore had made him my Convoy to both their Majesties. No, says she, I find no fault that you Addressed your self to him; yet I knew she entertained a mortal hatred against him. So after I had ended the Declaration of my whole Commission, first concern∣ing the Congratulation of the Peace, and then made excuses in Name of the Confederate Princes of the Empire, for sending help to the Prince of Conde, during the Wars for Religion, with a request to keep the said Peace inviolate, and to make such Laws of Oblivion, as were wont to be done among the Greeks and Romans, after such Civil Dis∣sentions. And then I gave a full account, how my Lord Elector had proceeded with Maximilian, and what his answer was. All the time that I spoke, she remembred the King to take good notice, saying he was much obliged to that good Prince, that took such pains for his marriage, and the weal of his Kingdom. Then she drew me aside, entering into a particular discourse with me, telling me that she hoped I would not make too long stay in Dutchland, but resolve to spend some of my time in the Court of France, seeing it was there I had been brought up. For albeit, she said, she had several who could speak Dutch, yet there was none about her, who were so familiar with the Princes
of the Empire as I was, or had such favour and credit, as she under∣stood I had, to do the King and her service. Therefore she offered to make me a Gentleman of the King's Chamber, to provide me with an honourable pension, to advance me to Offices and Honours, as if I had been a French-man born; and that she would imploy me not only to Germany, but also to England and Flanders. I gave her Ma∣jesty many thanks, taking her offer to my consideration. In the mean time that I was waiting upon my dispatch, the Admiral's death was conspired by the Brother and Friends of the Duke of Guise, to be executed by Captain Charry, in great favour with the Queen Mother, as Chief Captain of her Guard, Commanding six hundred Hagbu∣tiers Gascons. The said enterprise being discovered to the Constable by the old Dutchess of Farrara, Daughter to King Lewis the Eleventh, Mother to the Widow Dutchess of Guise. The Constable went to his House, four Leagues from Paris, and the next day after, the said Captain Charry was slain upon the streets of Paris, by Monsieur Chattelier the Admiral's friend. Which put the Queen, and all the Court into a fear, and firm opinion that the deed was done by the Constables's and Admiral's direction. But the Admiral purged himself; the Constable was sent for, and many requests made to him, to settle, and establish quietness in the Court and City. While I was yet at Paris undispatched, I received Letters from the Earl of Murray, and Lidingtoun at the Queens Command, calling me home, to be imployed in her Majesties service, in some of her affairs of consequence; which I presupposed to be concerning her marriage. Whereupon I determined to obey my Queens Commands, and imme∣diately after my return to Germany, to prepare for a Journey to Scot∣land. Though this resolution of mine, was far contrary to the mind of the Constable, Admiral, and Prince Palatine. But his Son Duke Ca∣simir, took occasion to desire me to present his picture to Queen Eli∣zabeth. I have said already that he was very dissatisfied, because I refused to go to England, to propose marriage for him to the Queen, he having been incouraged thereto by the Videm of Charters, lately come hither from the Court of England, who thought himself so fa∣miliar with that Queen, that he sent an Italian Gentleman of his, to propose that marriage, as he alledged, at the instance of the Elector Palatine, to whom the Queen gave a general answer, desiring the young Prince to come unto England, either openly, or privately dis∣guised, and declaring that she would never marry Man, till she might first see him. Notwithstanding hereof, I still disswaded his Father from sending him, alledging that it would be very chargeable to him, and that he would reap nothing but scorn, in recompence. Where∣at the young Prince was so moved, that he left the Court for three days. But the good Prince his Father sent for him, threat'ning to discountenance him, if he became not my friend. Whereupon we agreed, that at this time I should carry with me his picture, and pre∣sent it to the Queen of England in my return to Scotland, seeing I was so averse from his going thither in person. Which I was satisfied to do, providing that I might also carry along with me, the picture of his Father and Mother, and of all the rest of his Brothers and Sisters, together with a familiar Letter from the Elector, whereby I might have
the more easie access, and fitter opportunity to bring in the purpose of the pictures as by accident, hoping that she would desire to see them, especially the picture of the said young Duke. So having obtained my desire, I parted from Heidlberg, where the Elector held his Court for the time, who gave me a Commission to the Queen of England; to wit, an answer to her demanded Alliance, offensive, and defensive, with the Protestant Princes of Germany, which formerly had been but obscurely answered unto her Ambassadour, Sir Henry Knolls, at the Dyet Imperial, holden at Francfort, in the year 1562. Excusing himself, and the rest of the Princes his confede∣rates, who had but lately chosen Maximilian to be King of the Ro∣mans, and Co-adjutor to the Emperour his Father, seeing he had pro∣mised unto them, to declare himself openly a Protestant, so soon as he durst, after the decease of his old Father Ferdinand: and in the mean time had their promise to keep correspondence with him, and to make no League with any forreign Prince, without his consent and know∣ledge. And that if they had done otherwise, he might perchance have taken occasion thereupon, to lay the blame upon them, in case he did not as he had promised. For they began to fear and doubt of his upright meaning in reference to Religion, and yet thought not fit upon their part, to give him any ground to lay the blame upon them; but in case he kept not his promise after the decease of Ferdi∣nand, they should then presently make such Alliance with her, as she had required, which they durst not for the time discover unto her Ambassadour, requesting her Majesty to keep this secret to her self. She appeared satisfied with this excuse, promising to discover it to none of her Council; but she lamented that the Princes of Germany were so slow, and tedious in all their deliberations. Whereupon I be∣gan to praise them for their Truth, Constancy, Religion, Ardour, and quick execution, after they had concluded any weighty matter. But I set out most specially the Elector Palatine's humanity, his treating of strangers, upholding of Universities, and how he was the mouth of his confederates, to deal with all other neighbour Princes. She an∣swered, that I had reason to speak so concerning him, for he had writ∣ten very much in my favour, regretting that the inclinations I had to serve my native Queen, had obliged me to leave him, though he would gladly have retained me with him a longer space. I told her Majesty, what a great trouble it was to me, to resolve to leave the ser∣vice of so worthy a Prince, that no consideration could have engaged me thereunto, other then that duty I owed to my Soveraign, who had commanded me to attend her affairs. That for the better remem∣brance of him, I desired to carry home with me his picture, and the pictures of all his Son, and Daughters. So soon as she heard me men∣tion the pictures, she inquired if I had the picture of the Duke Casimir, desiring to see it. And when I alledged I had left the pictures in Lon∣don, she being then at Hampton Court, and that I was ready to go for∣ward on my Journey, she said I should not part till she had seen all the pictures. So the next day I delivered them all to her Majesty, and she desired to keep them all night, and she called upon my Lord Ro∣bert Dudly to be judge of Duke Casimir's picture, and appointed me to
meet her the next morning in her Garden, where she caused to de∣liver them all unto me, giving me thanks for the sight of them. I again offered unto her Majesty  the pictures, so she would permit me to retain the Electors, and his Ladys, but she would have none of them. I had also sure information, that first and last she despised the said Duke Casimir. Therefore I did write back from London to his Fa∣ther, and him in Cypher, disswading them to meddle any more in that marriage. And received great thanks afterward from the said young Duke, who immediately married the Elector of Saxony's Eldest Daughter. Albeit this may appear something from the purpose of the Queen our Sovereign, yet it brings me home to her Majesty with some proposals of marriage to her self. For the Queen of England en∣tertained me very familiarly, shewing me the Sisterly love that was betwixt her and the Queen our Soveraign, how careful she was of her well-fare, how desirous to see her well setled in her own Country with her Subjects, and also well married. That she was resolved to pro∣pose two persons for fit Husbands unto her, whereby their amity might best stand and increase, hoping that she would not marry with∣out her advice, promising upon her faith to write to me, so soon as I was arrived at Scotland, with her own hand, that I might be a good instrument to move the Queen my Mistress to accept either the one or the other. Now though she forgot to write unto me about it, yet she sent instructions to Mr. Randolph, to propose my Lord Robert Dudley as a very meet Husband for our Queen. I supposed that my Lord Robert, afterward Earl of Leicester, had disswaded her from im∣ploying me in that matter, seeing Mr. Randolph was there already, her Majesties Agent. Now the Queen my Mistress, to keep promise and correspondence with the Queen of England, had sent and advertised her, of the propo∣sal made to her of a marriage with the Arch-duke Charles, requiring her friendly advice and consent therein. The Queen of England answered her by her Agent Mr. Thomas Ran∣dolph, as followeth, for after a little Preface, he declares, and gives in by writing, this to be the Queen his Mistress's mind. The Queen my Soveraign, said he, hath not only deeply advised about that proposal of marriage with your Majesty, but hath also thought it necessary, by me to shew you, what she thinketh both meet and unmeet to be considered, and seemingly to her by way of friendship, to declare as a dear Sister, who intends your Majesties ho∣nour, and as a loving Friend, who is careful of your well-fare. Three special things her Majesty thinks fit to be considered in mar∣riage. First, The mutual contentment betwixt both parties in respect of their private personages, so that their love each towards one another, may continue as well before God as Man. Secondly, That the person may be such as your Majesty, being a Queen of a great Realm, and multitude of People, may be sure of an advantageous Alliance, such as cannot be prejudicial to your Countries interest. Thirdly, She thinks fit that the choise be such, that the amity which is now so strict betwixt the Queens Majesty, and your Highness, not
only for your own persons, but with both your Realms, may be con∣tinued, and not dissolved nor diminished. Then he declares at length, how that he doubts not, but that her Majesty, who was once already married, will know how considerately to ponder the match, that it may be meet for her self, and her Subjects; but as to what belong∣ed unto the Queen his Soveraign, it merited to be well conside∣red. It is true, that the seeking out of a Husband to your Majesty is ho∣nourable, and expedient; a thing that her Majesty rellisheth much in your Highness, albeit hitherto she hath not found such disposition in her self, remitting her heart and mind in that affair to be directed by the Almighty God. But this herein her Majesty considereth, that to seek out such a Husband, as is sought for by your friends, in the Emperours Linage, will certainly procure at last some misunderstanding, and give appa∣rent occasion of dissolving the Concord, that is now betwixt the two Nations, and an interruption of such a course, as otherwise might be taken, to further and advance such a Title as your Highness hath to succeed to her Majesty, to the Crown of England, if she should depart without issue of her Body. Then he useth some unfit perswasions and menaces, threat'ning that some in England were going about with practices to set forward their pretended right, to her Majesties prejudice, which she by her discreet behaviour and conformity to his Mistresses pleasure, might prevent, by moving her thereby, not only to proceed in the inquisition after your Majesties right, and with her power to further the same, but also to hinder that which appears to be to the contrary. And now if your Majesty would know, what kind of marriage would best content her, and her Realm, such a one as would breed no jealousie, nor trouble betwixt your Majesties, and your Countries, as did the the marriage with the French King. But rather it is to be wished, that there might be found out some Nobleman of great birth in England, who might be agreeable to you; with whom her Ma∣jesty would more readily, and more easily declare, that she inclines, that failing of Children of her own Body, you might succeed to her Crown; otherwise I do plainly tell you, that my Soveraign can pro∣mise nothing in that matter, tending to your satisfaction. These were Mr. Randolph's first instructions, and propositions, un∣to the Queen, concerning her marriage with the Arch-duke Charles. But he had a secret Commission to my Lord of Murray, and Secretary Lidingtoun, to propose my Lord Robert Dudley; and he desired me also, to set forward his marriage with the Queen, as meetest of all other. By this kind of procedure it was apparent, that the Queen of Eng∣land did not relish this proposal of marriage, of the Arch-duke Charles to our Queen. She gave a farther, and more clear demonstration thereof a little after, by sending the Earl of Sussex to the Emperour's Court, as well to congratulate his Coronation, as indirectly to draw on the marriage of the Arch-duke Charles with her self. And she was put in hope, that it would take effect: Yet this design was not so secretly managed, but our Queen was thereof advertised, by some
of her friends in England. And from hence arose inward griefs and grudges between the two Queens, which within a little time bursted forth, occasion thereof being given by the Queen of England: For in a familiar Letter to our Queen, she appeared therein to give her, as formerly, a friendly advice: which our Queen thought but double dealing, remembring as well her late disswading answer from the mar∣riage of the Arch-duke Charles, as her late practises in the Emperours Court. The Queen of England's Letter was written at the desire of some of the House of Hamiltoun: For after that Mr. Randolph had spo∣ken, as is above mentioned, against the marriage of the Queen with the Arch-duke Charles, and had alledged that some Noblemen in Eng∣land would be fitter matches for her, he proceeded so far with my Lord of Murray, and Secretary Lidingtoun, as to say, What would you think of my Lord Robert Dudly for your Queen? But finding small account to be made of him, he advertised the Queen his Mistress there∣of. Whereupon liberty was granted to Matthew Earl of Lennox, who dwelt then in England, to go to Scotland, as desirous to see the Queen, and take course in some of his own affairs. Now his Eldest Son, my Lord Darnly, was a lusty young Prince, and apparently was one of the two that the Queen of England had told me she had in her head, to offer unto our Queen, as born within the Realm of England. But to return unto the Letter written by the Queen of England unto our Queen, she would appear therein to be very careful for the Queen her Sisters quiet Estate and Government, desiring her to take heed that in shewing pleasure to the Earl of Lennox, she did not displease the House of Hamiltoun, seeing thereby trouble and strife might arise in her Country. Sundry other such purposes she had, which at some time would not have been taken in ill part; but now all advices gi∣ven by the Queen of England, were misconstructed, partly because of her being instrumental in hindring the marriage with Prince Charles, and partly because David Rixio lately admitted to be her French Se∣cretary, was not very skilful in inditing French Letters, which she did write over again with her own hand. The answer then that our Queen did write unto the said Letter, declared some suspicions and an∣ger to have been taken, and these she manifested in some harsh expres∣sions, which were constructed by the Queen of England, as a violati∣on of their former familiarity, and Sisterly correspondence, which had been ever kept up since the Queens return out of France. Where∣upon ensued so great a coldness, that they left of for a considerable time from writing each to other, as they had formerly done weekly by Post. So that the Queen resolved to send me to England, to re∣new their outward friendship; for in their hearts from that time forth there was nothing but jealousies and suspicions. The Queen my Mi∣stress thought that if their discord continued, it would cut off all cor∣respondence between her and her friends in England: and that Queen had no inclination for War, but by all means possible desired to shun trouble, or any occasion of expences, the King of Spain and she being already entered into controversie. For he judged her a fo∣inenter of the troubles in Flanders, and the Low Countries, and not without reason. For she thought her self abandoned by the King of Spain, at the late Peace made at Cambray, and her chief Councellers
thought it convenient for the interest of England, that Factions should be nourished in France, Flanders, Scotland and Spain. At my home-coming to Scotland, I found the Queen's Majesty at St Johnstoun, in the Year of God 1564, the fifth day of May. I was very favourably received by the Queens Majesty, and presented unto her Letters from the Emperour Maximilian, the Elector Palatine, the Duke of Lorrain, and Cardinal of Lorrain, and Duke of Aumale, all in my favours. After that I had at length informed her, that I found Maximilian was against the marriage of his Brother Charles; she like∣wise understanding the Queen of Englands part therein, as is above specified, she altogether laid aside any further thoughts of the marriage with the Arch-duke Charles. And whereas she had once resolved to have sent me to Germany, she takes another resolution, intending that I should be sent to England. Though I was not yet resolved in set∣ling my self in Scotland, seeing small probability of advantage, and greater appearance of troubles and disorders, then I could ever ima∣gine to find at my home-coming. And I was somewhat loath to lose the occasion and offers of great preserment, that had been made to me in France, and other parts. But I found the Queen my Sovereign, so urgent, and of her self well inclined, and indued with so many Princely vertues, that I could not find in my heart to leave her, re∣quiring so earnestly my help and assistance, to draw the hearts of her Subjects to her, which were alienated upon account of difference in Re∣ligion. I knew she stood in need to gain friends, and that it was much her interest to keep correspondence with the Queen of England; so that I resolved rather to serve her my native Queen for little profit, then any other Prince in Europe for great advantage. I found her naturally more liberal then her Revenues allowed her. For she not only setled upon me in pensions, one thousand Marks yearly, out of her Revenues in France, but she also offered me the heritage of her Lands in Aghtermughtie, which I refused to accept, alledging I could better want it then she. Though another hearing of so liberal an of∣fer, a little after sought and obtained it. Thus I was ingaged to resolve to wait upon her commands, and to lay aside all hope of any other preserment in France, and other Coun∣tries, albeit, for the time, I had no heritage but my service. So with∣in a few weeks I was dispatched to England, with these following In∣structions out of the Queens own mouth, to deal with the Queen of England, with the Spanish Ambassadour, and with my Lady Margaret Douglass, and with sundry friends she had in England of different opi∣nions. The general Instructions were written with the Secretary Li∣dingtoun's own hand, subscribed by her Majesty as follows.
Instructions to our familiar Servitor James Melvil, presently directed to our dearest Sister the Queen of England. Given at Edinbrugh the 28th. of September, 1564. IN the first, after that you have presented our Letters, and our com∣mendations, in most hearty manner, you shall declare unto our good Sister, That having been upon my progress towards the Northmost parts of our Realm this two months, during which time we have had neither Letter nor other Advertisement from our good Sister. There∣fore for continuation of the mutual Intelligence betwixt us, by all good Offices of amity, we resolved to direct you towards her, to visit her on our behalf, to inform her of our health and good estate, that at your return you may be able to report the like of her unto us, she being the person in the World, to whom next our self, we wish most good luck and prosperity. Item, That by Letters of my Lord Robert to Lidingtoun, as also of her Secretary to Our Brother Murray, and to Lidingtoun, We have per∣ceived that Our said good Sister finds some fault with Our Letters written to her in answer of hers in the Earl of Lennox's matter, as if We had taken her motion therein in evil part. We are most sorry that Our Letters have been so interpreted, for of a truth We had no other meaning of her in that matter, then that her Advertisement came from a friendly mind, and was both worthy of thanks, and to be an∣swered with the like good will, as We believe We did in Our Letter, albeit We remember not presently the very words or substance there∣of. For We use not to reserve any Copy of Our familiar Letters written with Our own hand, whereof We now repent because of that Letter. For if We had any Copy thereof, We might now clear Our selves of that doubt, viz. What words therein could give her ground of offence. Therefore you shall pray her in Our Name, to let you see in that Letter, what words they are which have offended her; that you thereupon declaring my meaning, may put her out of any such sus∣picion. It is true, at the receipt of the Letter, We were somewhat offended, and judged We had good cause, seeing it appeared that Our Nobility were grieved with Our License granted to the Earl of Len∣nox, that his coming was like to disturb the peace and quiet of Our Realm. Our Brother and Lidingtoun shew unto Us, that they percei∣ved by their Secretaries Letters, that they were also thought partakers in this matter; and that they mistaking also his coming, desired the stay thereof to be procured by these undecent means. Though they protested the contrary unto Us, and indeed We have better proof of their fidelity toward Us, then that We can suspect any such double dealing from their hands, they being so far obliged to Us, and so much intrusted by us. We thought Our selves little indebted to that per∣son, whosoever he was, that made such report of Our Subjects, that
they would make known their grievances to any other then Our selves. These, and the like considerations, moved Us to great choller, which probably might have occasioned Us to write the more freely, and that We were not curious to cover Our passions, writing to her with whom We esteemed Our Selves so familiar, that We had ground to believe she would take all in good part that proceeded from Us, espe∣cially what was no ways designed for her offence. Therefore you shall pray her to put away all such opinions, if she hath conceived any, and if there be any word in Our Letter having two senses, so that any one may be misconstrued, and so give to her occasion of offence; intreat that she will rather interpret the same to the gentlest significa∣tion, and not take it in the worst sense. And then I doubt not but the whole Letter, shall appear to her as it was by Us conceived and dire∣cted, that is from one dear friend to another. We have further hereupon, imparted Our mind to you by mouth, which you may enlarge as occasion requires. You may desire her to give you an answer conform to the sub∣stance of Lidingtoun's Letters, written to my Lord Robert, and Mr. Cicil. Especially concerning the drawing on another meeting of Men of cre∣dit, fully instructed with both Our minds, and to deal so plainly, and frankly, as all suspicion may have an end. You must also inform your self diligently concerning the proceedings, and intentions of this present Parliament, of all such as can give you any knowledg therein, for what cause it is called, what is to be treated in it, how longit will fit. Endeavour to inform your self, if any thing tou∣ching Us, will be therein handled. You may say to that Queen, as out of your own head, that your Mistress expects that she will suffer nothing to be treated therein, that may directly or indirectly tend to Our preju∣dice, We not being by her forewarned thereof. She knows that as well Our self, as our Ministers, whom We have at any time directed to these parts, have ever depended upon her only advice, and followed the same in all points. And seeing the special matter moved, in the beginning of the last Parliament, was the establishing of the Successi∣on, and that it  probable, that the Subjects would yet be earnest to be at a certainty in that point. And if she omits so good an oc∣casion, of doing something for Us, whereby the World may understand that she useth Us, and esteems Us, as her next Cousin, and only Sister, the World will think that her amity is not so great, as We take it to be. And such as envy our familiarity, and would have it broken, will hence take occasion to speak, that our friendship is rather in words, then deeds. Mary R. Being arrived at London, I lodged near the Court, which was at Westminster. My Host immediately gave advertisment of my coming, and that same night her Majesty sent Mr. Hatton, afterward Gover∣nour of the Isle of Wight, in her name to welcome me, and to shew me, that the next morning she would give me Audience in her Gar∣den at eight of the Clock. She had been advertised by the Earl of Bed∣ford Governour of Berwick, that I was upon the way. That same
night I was visited by Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, one of my old and dearest friends, by long acquaintance. First during his banishment in France, in the Reign of Queen Mary; and afterward while he was Am∣bassadour in France for this Queen, where I was, for the time, Pensio∣ner to King Henry the Second, and Servant to the Constable. This Sir Nicholas was my dear friend, and had procured a Pension for me, from his Mistress, to help to entertain me on my Travels, when I had willingly banished my self the Court of France, so long as there were Civil Wars between France and Scotland. He was a devout friend to the Queen my Mistress, and to her Right and Title to the Succes∣sion to the Crown of England. From him I had full information of affairs, and friendly advice how to proceed with the Queen, and eve∣ry Courtier in particular. For he was a special instrument of helping my Lord of Murray, and Secretary Lidingtoun, to pack up the first friendship betwixt the two Queens; and betwixt the Earl of Murray and Lord Robert; and between the two Secretaries. Albeit he had no great kindness, either for my Lord Robert, or Secretary Cicil, yet he knew that nothing could be done without them. Among other coun∣sels, he gave me advice to use great familiarity with the Ambassadour of Spain, in case I found the Queen his Mistress hard to be dealt with, alledging that it would be a great Spur, to move the Queen of Eng∣land, to give our Queen greater, and more speedy contentment in her desire, then yet she had done. The next morning Mr. Hatton, and Mr. Randolph late Agent for the Queen of England in Scotland, came to my Lodging, to convoy me to her Majesty, who was, as they said, already in the Garden. With them came a Servant of my Lord Robert's, with a Horse and Foot∣mantle of Velvet laced with Gold, for me to ride upon. Which Ser∣vant, with the said Horse, waited upon me all the time that I remai∣ned there. I found her Majesty walking in an Alley. And after I had kissed her hand, and presented my Letter of Credence, I told her Ma∣jesty in French the effect of my Commission, as near to the foresaid In∣structions as I could, and sometimes being interrupted by her demands, I answered as I judged most pertinent. The reason why I spoke French, was, that being but lately come home, I could not speak my own Language so promptly as was requisite. Her first demand was concerning the Letter, that the Queen had written to her with such despiteful Language, that she thence conjectured all friendship and fa∣miliarity to have been given up. Which had made her resolve never to write any more, but another as despiteful, which she took out of her pocket, to give me to read, she having had it ready written to shew it me. She told me she had hitherto delayed to send it, because she thought it too gentle, till she had written another more vehement, for answer to the Queens angry Bill. For my part I appeared to find such hard interpretation to be made upon the Queen's loving and frank dealing, very strange. I told her Majesty that my Mistress could not call to mind, what words they were which had given her such offence. Whereupon she brought forth the Queens Letter, giving it me to read. Which when I had perused, I said I could find therein no offensive word, when I considered the familiarity had formerly been betwixt them. Alledging, that albeit her Majesty could speak as good
French, as any who had not been out of the Country, that yet she was out of use of the French Court Language, which was frank and short, and had frequently two significations, which familiar friends took al∣ways in the best part. Intreating her Majesty to tear the angry Let∣ter, which she thought to have sent in answer. And in revenge of the Queens, I protested that I should never let her Majesty know that her true plain meaning had been so misconstructed. Having tossed some words upon this matter, she being desirous of an honest colour or pre∣text, she appeared the more readyily satisfied in that point. For the fear she had that friendship and correspondence should altogether break off, our Queen being the first seeker to renew and continue the same, by sending me thither, thereby evidencing that she did not stand up∣on Ceremonies with her Eldest Sister, in my presence then she did rent her angry Letter, with promise of such friendly and frank dealing in times coming, as all her good Sister's dealings and proceedings should be interpreted to the best. Thus the old friendship being renewed, she inquired if the Queen had sent any answer to the proposition of marriage made to her by Mr. Randolph. I answered, as I had been instructed, That my Mistress thought little or nothing thereof, but expected the meeting of some Commissioners upon the Borders, with my Lord of Murray, and the Secretary Lidingtoun, to confer and treat upon all such matters of grea∣test importance, as should be judged to concern the quiet of both the Countries, and satisfaction of both their Majesties minds. For seeing your Majesty cannot so soon find the opportunity of meeting betwixt your selves, so much desired, which in it self is not so expedient until all other jealousies be first removed, and all former doubts cleared by your most trusty and familiar Councellors, the Quen my Mistress, as I have said, is minded to send for her part my Lord of Murray, and the Secretary Lidingtoun, and expects that your Majesty will send my Lord of Bedford, and my Lord Robert Dudley. She answered, It ap∣peared that I made but small account of my Lord Robert, seeing that I named the Earl of Bedford before him, but said, that e're long she would make him a far greater Earl, and that I should see it done be∣fore my returning home. For she esteemed him as her Brother, and best friend, whom she would have her self married, had she ever min∣ded to have taken a Husband. But being determined to end her life in Virginity, she wished that the Queen her Sister might marry him, as meetest of all other with whom she could find in her heart to de∣clare her second person. For being matched with him, it would best remove out of her mind all fears and suspicions, to be offended by any usurpation before her death. Being assured that he was so loving and trusty, that he would never permit any such thing to be attemp∣ted during her time. And that the Queen my Mistress might have the higher esteem of him, I was required to stay till I should see him made Earl of Leicester, and Baron of Denbigh; which was done at West∣minster with great solemnity, the Queen her self helping to put on his Ceremonial he sitting upon his knees before her with a great gravity. But she could not refrain from putting her hand in his neck, smilingly tickling him, the French Ambassadour and I stan∣ding by. Then she turned, asking at me, How I liked him? I answer∣ed,
that as he was a worthy Servant, so he was happy who had a Princess, who could discern and reward good Service. Yet, says she, you like better of yonder long Lad, pointing toward my Lord Darn∣ly, who as nearest Prince of the Blood, did bear the Sword of Honour that day before her. My answer was, That no Woman of spirit would make choice of such a Man, who more resembled a Woman then a Man. For he was handsom, beardless, and Lady faced. And I had no will that she should think that I liked him, or had any eye or dealing that way. Albeit I had a secret charge, to deal with my Lady Lennox, to endeavour to procure liberty for him to go to Scotland (where his Father was already) under the pretext of seeing the Countrey, and conveying the Earl his Father back again to England. Now I found the Queen of England was determined to treat with my Sovereign, first concerning her marriage with the Earl of Leicester, and for that effect she promised to send Commissioners unto the Borders. In the mean time, I was very favourably, and familiarly used. For during nine days that I remained at the Court, it pleased her Majesty to con∣fer with me every day, and sometimes thrice in a day, in the morn∣ing, after Dinner, and after Supper. Sometimes she would say, that seeing she could not meet with the Queen her good Sister, to confer with familiarly, that she was resolved to open a good part of her in∣ward mind to me, that I might shew it again unto the Queen. She told me she was not so much offended with the Queens angry Letter, as that she seemed so far to disdain the marriage of my Lord of Leicester, which she had caused Mr. Randolph to propose to her. I answered, That it was probable he had let fall something thereof to my Lord of Murray, and Lidingtoun, but that he had never proposed the matter directly to her self, and that as well her Majesty, as those who were her most familiar Councellors, could conjecture nothing thereupon, but delays and driving off time concerning the declaring of her to be second Person, which would be clearly tryed at the meeting of the Commissioners above specified. She replied, That the tryal and declaration thereof, would be hasted forward according to the Queens good behaviour, and applying her self to follow her pleasure and ad∣vice in her marriage. And seeing the matter concerning the said de∣claration was so weighty, and of so much import, she had ordered some of the best Lawyers in England, diligently to search out who had the best right, and she heartily wisht it might be found to be her dear Sister, rather than any other. I said I was very confident that her Majesty was ingenuous in that Declaration, and that my Mistress ex∣pected no other at her hand. But I lamented, that even the wisest Princes, did not sufficiently pry into the hidden designs of their fa∣miliar Councellors, and Servants, except it were such an honourable and rare Prince as Henry the Eighth, her Majesties Father of happy memory, who of his own head was determined to declare his Sisters Son, King James the Fifth, Heir apparent to the Crown of England, failing Heirs to be gotten of his own Body, while her Majesty was not yet born, but only her Sister Queen Mary, and that for the earnest desire he had to unite this whole Island. She said she was glad he did it not. I said, that then he had but one Daughter, and expected no more Children, and yet he had not so many suspicions in his head
as your Majesty hath, though you are certainly convinced you will never have any Children, seeing your Majesty declares your self resol∣ved to dye a Virgin. Yes, says she, I am resolved never to marry, if I be not thereto necessitated by the Queen my Sister's harsh behavi∣our toward me. I know the truth of that Madam, said I, you need not tell it me. Your Majesty thinks if you were married, you would be but Queen of England, and now you are both King and Queen. I know your spirit cannot endure a Commander. She appeared to be so affectionate to the Queen her good Sister, that she expressed a great desire to see her. And because their so much, by her, desired meeting could not be so hastily brought to pass, she appeared with great delight to look upon her Majesties picture. She took me to her Bed-chamber, and opened a little Cabinet, wherein were divers little pictures wrapped within Paper, and their Names written with her own hand upon the Papers. Upon the first that she took up was written, My Lord's Picture. I held the Candle, and pressed to see that picture so named, she appeared loath to let me see it, yet my impor∣tunity prevailed for a sight thereof, and found it to be the Earl of Leicester's picture. I desired that I might have it to carry home to my Queen, which she refused, alledging that she had but that one picture of his. I said, your Majesty hath here the Original, for I perceived him at the farthest part of the Chamber, speaking with Secretary Ci∣cil. Then she took out the Queens picture and kissed it, and I adven∣tured to kiss her hand, for the great love therein evidenced to my Mistress. Se shewed me also a fair Ruby, as great as a Tenis Ball, I desired that she would either send it, or my Lord of Leicester's picture, as a Token unto the Queen. She said, if the Queen would follow her counsel, that she would in process of time get all she had; that in the mean time she was resolved in a Token to send her with me a fair Diamond. It was at this time late after Supper, she appointed me to be with her the next morning by Eight of the Clock, at which time she used to walk in her Garden. She inquired several things of me relating to this Kingdom, and other Countries wherein I had travel∣led. She caused me to dine with her Dame of Honour, my Lady Strafford (an honourable and godly Lady, who had been at Geneva, banished during the Reign of Queen Mary) that I might be always near her, that she might confer with me. I had formerly been ac∣quainted with my Lady Strafford, as she passed through France. I had good intelligence from her and my Lady Throgmorton. At divers meetings we had divers purposes. The Queen my Mistress had in∣structed me to leave matters of gravity sometimes, and cast in merry purposes, lest otherwise I should be wearied, she being well informed of that Queens natural temper. Therefore in declaring my observati∣ons of the customs of Dutchland, Poland and Italy, the Buskins of the Women was not forgot, and what Countrey Weed I thought best be∣coming Gentlewomen. The Queen said she had Cloths of every sort, which every day thereafter, so long as I was there, she changed. One day she had the English Weed, another the French, and another the Italian, and so forth. She asked me which of them became her best? I answered, in my judgment the Italian dress, which answer I found pleased her well, for she delighted to shew her golden coloured
hair, wearing a Caul and Bonnet as they do in Italy. Her hair was more reddish then yellow, curled in appearance naturally. She de∣sired to know of me, what colour of hair was reputed best, and whe∣ther my Queens hair or hers was best, and which of them two was fairest. I answered, the fairness of them both was not their worst faults. But she was earnest with me to declare, which of them I jud∣ged fairest? I said she was the fairest Queen in England, and mine the fairest Queen in Scotland. Yet she appeared earnest. I answered, they were both the fairest Ladies in their Countries; that her Majesty was whiter, but my Queen was very lovely. She inquired which of them was of highest stature? I said, my Queen: Then, saith she, she is too high, for I my self am neither too high nor too low. Then she asked what kind of exercises she used? I answered, that when I recei∣ved my dispatch, the Queen was lately come from the High-land hun∣ting. That when her more serious affairs permitted, she was taken up with reading of Histories: That sometimes she recreated her self in playing upon the Lute, and Virginals. She asked if she played well? I said reasonably for a Queen. That same day after Dinner my Lord of Hunsdean drew me up to a quiet Gallery, that I might hear some Musick, but he said that he durst not avow it, where I might hear the Queen play upon the Vir∣ginals. After I had hearkned a while, I took by the Tapistry that hung before the door of the Chamber, and seeing her back was to∣ward the door, I entered within the Chamber, and stood a pretty space hearing her play excellently well, but she left off immediately, so soon as she turned her about and saw me. She appeared to be sur∣prized to see me, and came forward, seeming to strike me with her hand, alledging she used not to play before Men, but when she was solitary to shun melancholly. She asked how I came there? I answe∣red, as I was walking with my Lord of Hunsdean, as we past by the Chamber door, I heard such melody as ravished me, whereby I was drawn in e're I knew how, excusing my fault of homeliness, as being brought up in the Court of France, where such freedom was allowed; declaring my self willing to endure what kind of punishment her Ma∣jesty should be pleased to inflict upon me for so great an offence. Then she sate down low upon a Cushion, and I upon my knees by her, but with her own hand she gave me a Cushion, to lay under my knee, which at first I refused, but she compelled me to take it. She then called for my Lady Strafford out of the next Chamber, for the Queen was alone. She inquired whether my Queen or she played best? In that I found my self obliged to give her the praise. She said my French was good, and asked if I could speak Italian, which she spoke reason∣ably well. I told her Majesty I had no time to learn the Language perfectly, not having been above two Months in Italy. Then she spake to me in Dutch, which was not good; and would know what kind of Books I most delighted in, whether Theology, History, or Love matters? I said, I liked well of all the sorts. Here I took occa∣sion to press earnestly my dispatch, she said I was weary sooner of her company, then she was of mine. I told her Majesty, that though I had no reason of being weary, I knew my Mistress her affairs called me home, yet I was stayed two days longer, till I might see her Dance,
as I was afterward informed. Which being over, she inquired of me whether she or my Queen Danced best? I answered, the Queen Dan∣ced not so high, and disposedly as she did. Then again she wished, that she might see the Queen at some convenient place of meeting. I offered to convey her secretly to Scotland by Post, clothed like a Page, that under this disguise she might see the Queen, as James the Fifth had gone in disguise to France with his own Ambassadour, to see the Duke of Vendom's Sister, who should have been his Wife. Telling her that her Chamber might be kept in her absence, as though she were sick; that none needed to be privy thereto except my Lady Strafford, and one of the Grooms of her Chamber: She appeared to like that kind of Language, only answered it with a sigh, saying, alas if I might do it thus. She used all the means she could, to oblige me to per∣swade the Queen of the great love she did bear unto her, and that she was fully minded to put away all jealousies and suspicions, and in times-coming to entertain a stricter friendship then formerly. She promised that my dispatch should be delivered to me very shortly at London, by Secretary Cicil: For now she was at Hampton Court, where she gave me my answer by mouth her self, and her Secretary by wri∣ting. The next day my Lord of Leicester desired me to go down the Ri∣ver in his Barge with him to London. He had in his company Sir Hen∣ry Sidney Deputy of Ireland. By the way my Lord entered familiar∣ly into discourse with me, alledging that he was well acquainted with my Lord of Murry, Lidingtoun, and my Brother Sir Robert, and that he was by report so well acquainted with me, that he durst upon the Character he had heard of me, desire to know what the Queen my Mistress thought of him, and the marriage that Mr. Randolph had pro∣posed. Whereunto I answered very coldly, as I had been by my Queen commanded. Then he began to purge himself of so proud a pretence, as to marry so great a Queen, declaring he did not esteem himself worthy to wipe her Shoes, declaring that the invention of that proposition of marriage proceeded from Mr. Cicil his secret Ene∣my. For if I, says he, should have appeared desirous of that marriage, I should have offended both the Queens, and lost their favour. He intreated me to excuse him at her Majesties hands, and to beg in his Name, that she would not impute that matter to him, but to the ma∣lice of his Enemies. Being landed at London, our Dinner was prepared by the Earl of Pem∣broke, who being great Master, yet humbled himself so far as to serve the said Table, as Master of the Houshold himself. He was a de∣vout friend to my Queens Title of succeeding to the Crown of Eng∣land. After Dinner, I took leave of the French Ambassadour, and the Spanish, having received divers advertisements from them. My Lord of Leicester, beside what he had spoke to me, did write to my Lord of Murray to excuse him at the Queens hands. The day appointed, I received my dispatch from Secretary Cicil, together with a Letter of Credit, and a more ample Declaration of the Queens mind, touching the same answers she had made me her self. He gave me also a Let∣ter to Secretary Lidingtoun. For as is abovesaid, Secretary Cicil, and
Leicester, my Lord of Murray, and Secretary Lidingtoun ruled both Queens, and as yet kept good correspondence together. When I took my leave, Secretary Cicil conveyed me through the Close, to the ou∣ter Gate of the Palace, where he himself put a fair Chain about my Neck. My Lady Lennox, and Sir Nicholas Throgmorten sent many good advices to the Queen, to be followed according as occasion offer∣ed. My Lady Lennox sent also Tokens, to the Queen a Ring with a fair Diamond; she sent an Emerauld to my Lord her Husband, who was yet in Scotland; a Diamond to my Lord of Murray; a Watch set with Diamonds and Rubies to the Secretary Lidingtoun; a Ring with a Ruby to my Brother Sir Robert. For she was still in good hope, that her Son my Lord Darnly, would come better speed concerning the marriage of our Queen, then the Earl of Leicester. She was a ve∣ry wise and discreet Matron, and had many favourers in England for the time. At my return, I found the Queens Majesty still at Edinbrugh. To whom I declared at large my manner of proceeding with the Queen of England, and gave her Majesty her answers to the special heads of my instructions in writing. Her Majesty answered to the first, that whereas the Queen thought the time very long since she received either word or writ from her, whereby she might understand of her good estate, and had sent me thither to visit her in her behalf, that she thought the time as long, albeit she had conceived some displeasure concerning the angry Letter. Which was the greater, in respect it appeared that she disdained the offer of the best good she had to give, to wit, the Man whom she esteemed as her Brother. And whereas she had sent me to visit her, she was more satisfied with my coming, then she would have been with any other, being formerly of her acquaintance, with whom she could the more familiarly declare her inward mind to the Queen my Mistress, seeing she could not meet with her self, so soon as she desired. As I might declare how familiarly she had conferred with me, acquain∣ting me with all her inward griefs and desires, and how well she was satisfied, and how willing to continue all good offices of amity, and that she would for that effect, send shortly down to the Border, Com∣missioners, who were named by her self, to meet with my Lord of Mur∣ray and Lidingtoun. As for the Parliament, it was yet in doubt whether it held or not. If it held, the Queen should get no hurt in her Right, neither directly nor indirectly, but she should be forewarned in due time. Then I shewed her Majesty at length, of all other purposes that fell out occasionally betwixt that Queen and me, together with the opi∣nions and advertisements of divers of her friends in England, as well Catholicks as Protestants. I gave her, at the desire of the Spanish Am∣bassadour, the intimation of his Kings good will toward her. Her Majesty was very glad that matters were brought again to this pass, between her and the Queen of England, having thereby oc∣casion of getting intelligence from a great number of Noblemen, and others her friends in England. For she was also afraid, that the blame of the discord, would have been laid upon her, if it had continu∣ed.
After that her Majesty had at great length understood all my ma∣nagement and proceedings in England, she inquired whether I thought that Queen meant truly toward her inwardly in her heart, as she ap∣peared to do outwardly in her speech. I answered freely, that in my judgment, there was neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning, but great dissimulation, emulation and fear, lest her Princely qualities should over soon chace her from the Kingdom, as having already hin∣dered her marriage with the Arch-duke Charles of Austria. It ap∣peared likewise to me, by her offering unto her with great appearing earnestness my Lord of Leicester, whom I knew at that time she could not want. Shortly after my Lord of Murray and Bedford met near Berwick, to treat concerning the marriage with Leicester, with slenderer offers, and less effectual dealing then was expected. But the said Earl of Lei∣cester had written such discreet and wise Letters unto my Lord of Mur∣ray for his excuses, that the Queen appeared to have so good liking to him, as the Queen of England began to suspect that the said marriage might take effect. Her apprehensions of this, occasioned the Lord Darnly his getting more readily license to come to Scotland, in hope that he being a handsome lusty youth, should rather prevail, being present, then Leicester who was absent. Which license was procured by the means of the Secretary Cicil, not that he was minded that any of the marriages should take effect, but with such shifts to hold the Queen unmarried so long as he could. For he perswaded himself, that my Lord Darnly durst not proceed in the marriage, without consent of the Queen of England first obtained to the said marriage, his Land lying in England, and his Mother remaining there. So that he thought it lay in the Queen his Mistress her own hand, to let that marriage go forward, or to stay the same at her pleasure. And in case my Lord Darnly should disobey the Queen of Englands command, to return upon her call, he intended to cause for fault him whereby he should lose all his Lands, Rights, and Titles that he had in Eng∣land. The Queens Majesty, as I have said before, after her returning out of France to Scotland, behaved her self so Princely, honourably, and discreetly, that her reputation spread it self in all Countries. She was determined, and of her self inclined to continue so unto the end of her life, desiring to entertain none in her company, but such as were of the best conversation, abhorring all vice and vicious persons. In this her resolution, she desired me to assist her by affording her my good counsel, what way was most effectual to ingratiate her self with her Subjects. And in case she (being yet young) might forget her self by any unseemly gesture or mis-behaviour, that I would warn her thereof, by admonishing her to forbear, and timously reform the same. Which Commission I did at first altogether refuse to accept of, saying, That her vertuous actions, her natural judgment, and the experience she had learned in the Court of France, had instructed her so well, and qualified her so abundantly, to be an example to all her Subjects and Servants, that she needed none to admonish her. But she would not leave it so, but said she knew she had committed divers errours, upon no ill meaning, only for want of the admonition of loving and con∣cerned
friends. Because that the greatest part of Courtiers common∣ly flatter Princes, to insinuate for their favll not tell them the truth, fearing thereby to disoblige them. fore she adjured and commanded me to accept that charg said was a very ruinous Commission, begging her Majesty  that burthen upon her Brother my Lord of Murray, and the Secretary Lidingtoun. She answered, she would not take it in so good part from them, as from me. I said, I was afraid that through process of time, it would cause me to lose her favour. She said, it appeared I entertained an ill opi∣nion of her constancy and discretion: which opinion she doubted not but I would alter, after I had undertaken, and practised that friendly and familiar charge. In the mean time she made me privy to all her most urgent affairs, but chiefly to her dealings with any forreign Nation. She shewed unto me all her Letters, those which she recei∣ved from other Princes. She desired me to write in her favour, to such Princes as I had been acquainted with, and to such forreign Coun∣cellors as I knew to be eminent Men. In which Letters, I did not omit to set out her vertues. I used to shew to her their returns; which ordinarily gave me an accompt of the most remarkable occurrences of those Countries, to her Majesties great contentment. For she was of a quick spirit, curious to know and get intelligence of the state of other Princes. She was something sad when solitary, and was glad of the company of such as had travelled to other Kingdoms. Now there came here in company with the Ambassadour of Savoy, one David Rixio of the County of Piedmont, who was a merry fel∣low, and a good Musician. Her Majesty had three Valets of her Chamber, who sung three parts, and wanted a Bass to sing the fourth part. Therefore they told her Majesty of this Man, as one fit to make the fourth in Consort. Thus he was drawn in to sing sometimes with the rest, and after∣ward when her French Secretary retired himself to France, this David obtained the said office. And as he thereby entered in greater credit, so he had not the prudence how to manage the same rightly. For frequently in presence of the Nobility, he would be publickly speak∣ing to her, even when there was greatest Conventions of the States. Which made him to be much envied and hated, especially when he became so great, that he presented all signatours to be subscribed by her Majesty. So that some of the Nobility would frown upon him, others would shoulder and shut him by, when they entered the Queens Chamber, and found him always speaking with her. For these who had great Actions of Law, new infestments to be taken, or who de∣sired to prevail against their Enemies at Court, or in Law Suits before the Session, addressed themselves to him, and depended upon him, whereby in short time he became very rich. Yet he wanted not his own fears, therefore he lamented his estate to me, asking one day my counsel, how to behave himself. I told him that strangers were com∣monly envied, when they medled too much in the affairs of other Countries. He said he being Secretary to her Majesty in the French Tongue, had occasion thereby to be frequently in her Majesties com∣pany, as her former Secretary used to do. I answered again, that it was thought that the greatest part of the affairs of the Countrey past
through his hands, which gave offence to the Nobility. I advised him in their presence to retire from the Queen, giving them place. And that he might desire the Queen to permit him to take that way. I told him for an example, how I had been in so great favour with the Elector Palatine, that he caused me to sit at his own Table, and that he used frequently to confer with me in presence of his whole Court, whereat divers of them took great indignation against me. Which so soon as I perceived, I requested him to permit me to sit from his own Table with the rest of his Gentlemen, and no more to confer with me in their presence, but to call me by a Page to his Chamber, when he had any service to command me. Seeing otherwise he would pre∣judge himself and me, both by giving ground of discontent to his Subjects, in too much noticing a stranger, and so expose me to their fury. Which I obtained, and that way my Master was not hated, nor I any more envied. I advised him to take the like course, if he was resolved to act as a wise Man. Which counsel he said he was resolved to follow, but afterward told me that the Queen would not suffer him, but would needs have him carry himself as formerly. I answer∣ed, that I was sorry for the inconveniencies that might follow there∣upon. And afterward finding the envy against Rixio still to increase, and that by his ruine which I did foresee to be inevitable, her Maje∣sty might incur displeasure, and her affairs be prejudged, seeing I clear∣ly perceived that the extraordinary favour she carried to that Man, did much alienate the hearts of her own Subjects from her. I remem∣bred her Majesties command lately laid upon me, when she particular∣ly injoined me, to forewarn her of any circumstance to be observed in her carriage, which I thought could tend to her prejudice. I had before this time taken some such freedom, in desiring her to desist from some things which I knew were dissatisfactory to her Subjects, and upon my acquainting her Majesty therewith, she had been plea∣sed to reform them. The reflection hereupon, incouraged me the more cheerfully, in hope of the like success, to forewarn her Majesty of the inconveniencies I did clearly foresee would inevitably follow, if she in time did not alter her carriage to Rixio. Therefore upon the first opportunity, I took occasion to enter with her Majesty upon this discourse, in most humble manner representing, what I did upon rational considerations conjecture would be the consequences, of the too publick demonstrations of favour, she gave to Rixio, a stranger, and one suspected by her Subjects to be a pensioner of the Pope. That though they were resolved not to challenge her Majesties Religion, though contrary to theirs, allowing her Liberty of Conscience, yet it was not to be supposed, but the too much owning of Rixio, a known Minion of the Pope, would give ground of suspicion, that some de∣sign to the prejudice of the Established Religion, would be by him contrived. That to prevent this, her Subjects would find themselves obliged, to use all their endeavours to ruine a Man, and a stranger, from whom they could expect no good office, as being a known Enemy to their Religion. For the Nobility would certainly take it as an high affront upon them, to see her so visibly more countenance a stranger, then them her native Subjects. I told her Majesty very freely what advice I had given to Rixio. She answered me, that he
medled no further then in her French writings, and affairs, as her other French Secretary had done formerly. And that whoever found fault therewith, she would not be so far restrained, but that she might dispence her favours to such as she pleased. I remembred her Maje∣sty what displeasure had been procured to her, by the rash mis-be∣haviour of a French Gentleman called Chattellier, who transported to miscarry himself by her affability, had thereby highly injured her Ma∣jesty. I told her Majesty that a grave and comely behaviour toward strangers, not admitting them to too much familiarity, would bring them to a more circumspect and Reverend carriage. I told her, how necessary it was, that she particularly noticed all her actings, seeing those of her Subjects who were not of her Religion, were easily alla∣rumed with any thing which could be therein misrepresented. That if their hearts were once lost, there would be great difficulty of re∣gaining that place in their affections, which yet they found her due as their Sovereign Princess. She thanked me for my continual care, evidenced in this free advice, and ingaged to take such order in refe∣rence thereto, as the case required. I have already told, how that my Lord Darnly was advised to ask License to come unto Scotland. At his first coming he found the Queen at Weems, making her progress through Fiffe. Her Majesty took very well with him, and said, That he was the properest and best proportioned long Man that ever she had seen; for he was of a high Stature, long and small, even and straight. He had been from his Youth well instructed in all honest and comely exercises. After he had haunted Court some time, he proposed marriage to her Ma∣jesty, which proposal she at first appeared to disrelish, as that same day she her self told me, and that she had refused a Ring, which he then offered unto her. I took occasion freely hereupon to speak in his fa∣vours, and to convince her Majesty, that no marriage was more her interest then this, seeing it would render her Title to the Succession to the Crown of England unquestionable. I know not how he came to fall in acquaintance with Rixio, but I found he also was his great friend at the Queens hand, so that she took ay the longer the better liking of him, and at length determined to marry him. This being made known to the Queen of England, she sent and charged him to return. She also sent her Ambassadour Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to Scotland, to disswade the Queen from marrying him, and in case the Queen would not follow her advice; to perswade the Lords, and so many as were of the Protestant Religion, to withstand the said mar∣riage, till the said Lord Darnly should subscribe a Bond to maintain the Reformed Religion, which he had ever professed in England. The Queen again perceiving the Queen of Englands earnest oppo∣sition to all the marriages that offered unto her, resolved to delay no longer. But my Lord Duke of Chattellerault, my Lords of Argile, Rothes, Murray, Glencairr, and divers other Lords, and Barons, with∣stood the said marriage. Who after they had made an Essay to take the Lord Darnly in the Queens company at the Raid of Baith, and as they alledged to have sent him to England. Failing in this their en∣terprise, they took them to the fields to her Majesties great dissatis∣faction, and heart-breaking. Her Majesties Forces were sooner ready
then theirs, so that she persued them here and there, whereby they were so straitned that they could never have the opportunity of draw∣ing together. And at length, they were compelled to flee unto Eng∣land for refuge to her, who by her Ambassadours had promised to ha∣zard her Crown in their defence, in case they were driven to any strait, because of appearing against the said marriage. Though this was expresly denyed them, when coming to demand help. For when they sent up my Lord of Murray to that Queen, the rest abiding at New-castle, he could obtain nothing but disdain and scorn, till at length he and the Abbot of Kilwinning his Companion in that mes∣sage, were perswaded to come and confess unto the Queen upon their knees, and that in presence of the Ambassadours of France and Spain, that her Majesty had never moved them to that opposition and resist∣ance against their Queens marriage. For this she had desired to sa∣tisfie the said Ambassadours, who both alledged in their Masters names, that she had been the cause of the said Rebellion, and that her only delight was to stir up dissention among her Neighbours. Yet by this cunning, she overcame them. For she handled the matter so subtilly, and the other two so cowardly, in granting her desire con∣trary to what was truth, being put in hopes of relief, if they would so far comply with what was judged her interest for the time, that she triumphed over the said Ambassadours for their false allegiance. But unto my Lord of Murray, and his neighbour, she said, now you have told the truth, for neither did I, nor any in my Name stir you up against your Queen. For your abominable Treason, may serve for example to my own Subjects to rebel against me. Therefore get you out of my presence, you are but unworthy Traytors. This was all the reward they procured at her hands, and had not some of the Pro∣testants in her Kingdom, who favoured them upon accompt of their Religion, interposed what they could with her, they would not have been permitted, during their banishment, to have remained within her dominions. Although a little before, she had promised to give them what assistance they demanded to the uttermost of her power, upon condition that they would please her so far, as to sit down upon their knees in presence of the said Ambassadours, and make the fore∣said false confession. And as for secret help, she gave them none, on∣ly they obtained a small contribution among some of their own Re∣ligion there, who were their friends, which was distributed among them at New-castle, where they remained comfortless, and in great trouble. The Queen finding the shifts the Court of England made to delay her marriage with any Man proposed, hasted forward her marriage with my Lord Darnly, which was solemnized in the Palace of Haly∣rood-House, within the Queens Chappel at the Mass, wherein Rixio was no small instrument. Scotland being by this time almost wholly of the Reformed Religion, took a dislike of the King because of this, he having formerly professed the Reformed Religion in England. Hence were occasioned rumours, that there was some design on foot, for planting again in Scotland the Roman Catholick Religion, there being ground of suspicion, that Rixio was a Pensioner of the Popes. And at this same time, the Pope sent Eight Thousand Crowns in Gold
to be delivered to our Queen, which augmented these suspicions. But the Ship wherein the said Gold was, did Ship-wrack upon the Coast of England, within the Earl of Northumberland's bounds, who alledg∣ed the whole to appertain to him by just Law, which he caused his Advocate to read unto me (when I was directed to him for the de∣manding restitution of the said Sum) in the old Norman Language. Which neither he nor I understood well, it was so corrupt. But all my intreaties were ineffectual, he altogether refusing to give any part thereof to the Queen, albeit he was himself a Catholick, and other∣wise professed secretly to be her friend. After that the Queens Majesty had married my Lord Darnly, she did him great honour her self, and desired every one who expected her favour, to do the like, and to wait upon him. So that for a little time, he was well accompanied, and such as sought favour by him, sped best in their Suits. But because he had married without advice of the Queen of England, my Lady Lennox his Mother was commit∣ted to the Tower of London, where she was kept for a long time. All this time I attended still upon the Queen, but with less famili∣arity then formerly. And seeing my service for the time no more needful, humbly begged liberty of the Queen to return to France, and other places, where I had spent the greatest part of my life. But this her Majesty absolutely refused to grant, expressing some desire to know what could move me to desert her service. I said the time was full of suspicions, and that I was confident I could do her more service abroad then at home as matters had fallen out. She answered, that she knew I could do her more service at home, then any Servant she had if I pleased, but that I had left off using my wonted freedom with her in giving her my opinion of her proceedings. I told her Majesty I was somewhat apprehensive that my opinions would be unpleasant to her, but she affirmed the contrary, telling me that I had Enemies, who used their endeavours to imprint a bad Character of me in the King, as if I had been a favourer of the Earl of Murray, which she had put out of the King's head, as being better acquainted with my nature and conditions: Saying, that she knew well that I had a liking to the Earl of Murray, but not to his actings of taking up Arms against her. That she was assured that I loved her ten times better then him. She said moreover, that if any did endeavour to misrepresent her as much to me, that she wisht I should give them no more credit against her, then she had done, or should do against me. She advised me to wait upon the King, who was but young, and give him my best counsel, as I had formerly done to her, which might help him to shun many inconveniencies. And she gave me her hand, that she would take all in good part whatever I did speak, as proceeding from a loving and faithful Servant. Desiring me also to befriend Rixio, who was hated without a cause. The King also told me, who they were who had spoken to him in my prejudice. And said they were known to be such common lyars, as their tongue was no slander. By these and such like means, the Queens Majesty obliged me more and more to be care∣ful, to be serviceable to her. And I judged my self ingaged as the greatest demonstration I could give of my being faithful to her, to give her my opinion, what use she might make for her own advantage,
of the harsh usage the Earl of Murray and his associates had received in England. How uncourteously that Queen had used them before the French and Spanish Ambassadours, she having broken all her fair promi∣ses unto them. First, I told her Majesty that ever since her return to her own Countrey, she had been endeavouring to get her Nobility, and whole Subjects, intirely affected to take part with her in all actions whatso∣ever, and chiefly against England in case she might have occasion of imploying them. Though she could never hitherto obtain her desire, because of the secret bond and promise was made among them, when the English Army was at the Siege of Lieth, helping to put the French∣men out of Scotland. Now, said I, Madam the occasion is offered, whereby your Majesty may bring your desired intention to pass, if you could find in your heart either to pardon the Earl of Murray, and his associates, or at least to prolong the Parliament, wherein they are to be forfaulted, un∣till your Majesty may duly advise, and see whether it will be more your interest to forfault them, or give them ground of hope of obtain∣ing your pardon, according to their carriage for the future. To this she answered, now when they could do no better, they sought her; but when she sought their concurrence, such as Subjects owe to their na∣tive Prince, they would not hear her, no more would she now notice their Suits. I said, whensoever they were to make their Suits, it should not be by me, but this I propose of my self to your Majesty, who can choose the best, and leave the worst in all accidents. Seeing it is no little matter to gain the whole hearts of all your Subjects, and also of a good number in England, who favour them and their Reli∣gion, who would admire such Princely vertues. When they should see so pregnant a proof of your Majesties being able to Master your own passions and affections, all will then conclude, that you were most worthy to reign over Kingdoms, finding you so ready to forgive, and so loath to use vengeance, especially against Subjects already vanquish∣ed, and not worthy of your wrath. If your Majesty consider serious∣ly, clemency at such a time will be found most convenient, and that part of Justice called Equity, more profitable then rigour. For ex∣tremity frequently brings on desperate enterprises. At this her Maje∣sty entred into choller, saying, I defie them, what can they do or what dare they do? Madam, says I, with your Majesties pardon, my proposition is in obedience to your own Commandment, to shew you my opinion at all times for the weal of your affairs. Then she said she thanked me, granting that it was a good advice, and necessary to be done, if she could in so far command her self. But that yet she could not find in her heart to have to do with any of them upon di∣vers considerations, intreating me nevertheless to continue giving her my advice at all occasions. For albeit she did not follow this, she might perchance do better at another time. I answered, that it was only the consideration of her interest, that made me appear so concer∣ned. Many Noblemen being banished, and so near as New-castle, ha∣ving many other Noblemen at home, of their kindred and friends, so malecontent, as I knew them to be for the time, made me fear some attempt towards an alteration. For I told her, I had heard dark spee∣ches,
that we should hear news e're the Parliament was ended. Her Majesty answered, that she likewise wanted not advertisements of the like rumours, but that our Countrey-men were talkative. I vsed the same freedom with Rixio, for then he and I were under great friend∣ship. But he evidenced a disdain at all danger, and despised coun∣sel, so that I was compelled to say, I feared over late Repen∣tance. You have heard that Sir Nicholas Throgmorton was one of the two English Ambassadours, who were sent hither to stay the marriage, and to make many promises in his Mistresses Name, to so many as would re∣sist the same, which promises were afterward denied by the Queen of England, and by Mr. Randolph. But Sir Nicholas Throgmorton stood neither in awe of Queen or Council, to declare the verity, that he had made such promises to them in her Name, whereof the Coun∣cellors and craftiest Courtiers thought strange, and were resolving to punish him for avowing the same promise to be made in his Mistresses Name, had not he wisely and circumspectly obtained an Act of Coun∣cil for his Warrant, which he offered to produce. And the said Sir Nicholas was so angry, that he had been made an instrument to de∣ceive the Scots banished Lords, that he advised them to sue humbly for pardon at their own Queens hand, and to ingage never again to offend her for satisfaction of any Prince alive. And because as they were then stated they had no interest, he penned a perswasive Letter, and sent unto her Majesty as followeth. YOur Majesty hath in England many friends of all degrees, who favour your Title, but for divers respects. Some for very Conscience sake, being perswaded, that in Law your Right is best; some for the good opinion they have conceived, by the honourable report they have heard of your vertues and liberality, the considera∣tion whereof ingageth them to esteem your Majesty most worthy to Govern; some for factions, who favour your Religion; some for the ill will they bear to your competitour, seeing their own danger if Lady Kátharine should come in that place. Of these, some are Papists, some Protestants, and yet however they differ among themselves, in Religion or other particulars, they are both of one mind for the advancement of your Title. Your Ma∣jesty hath also divers Enemies for various respects, not unlike to the other, whose study hath always been, and will be, unless they be made friends, to hinder any thing that may tend to your advantage. In one point all concur, both Friends and Enemies, yea the whole People, that they are most desirous to have the Succession of the Crown declared and assured, that they may be at a certainty, only the Queen her self is of a contrary opinion, and would be glad the matter should always be in suspence. Your un-friends have done what they could, to take the ad∣vantage of the time, to your prejudice. And for that end, pressed the holding of the Parliament, which was before continued till Octo∣ber last. Knowing assuredly, that if the Parliament held, the Suc∣cession of the Crown would be called in question. And they thought the time served well for their purpose, when there was division and
trouble in your own Realm, and no good understanding betwixt you and the Queen of England. And her Subjects your friends, for eschewing that inconvenience and winning of time to give your Majesty place to work, and remove all impediments, so far as wisdom may, have found the means to drive it off till the next spring. Now their advice is, that in the mean time your Majesty indeavour by wisdom to assure your self of the whole Votes, or at least of the best and most considerable of the Parliament, when ever the matter shall be brought in question. Which may be done, by retaining the hearts of those you have gained already, recovering of those who are bran∣gled, winning of the neutrals, and so many of your adversaries as may be gained; for it is not to be supposed that all can be won who are already so far addicted to the contrary Faction, but when the cause of their aversion is removed the effect will cease. Generally your Majesty will do well to forbear any act that will offend the whole people, and use such means as will render your most acceptable to them. Strangers are universally suspected to the whole people, against which your Majesty hath in your marriage wisely ided, by abstaining to match with a forreign Price. So do they  your Majesty to abstain from any League or Confederacy, with  forreign Prince that may offend England, till you have first es∣yed what you can purchase by the benevolence of the born Sub∣jects thereof. Not that they would desire your Majesty to forfeit your friendship with France, and Spain, but rather that you should wisely entertain them both to remain at your devotion, in case af∣terward you have need of their favour. Nevertheless it is their wish, that the same may rather remain in general terms as heretofore, then that you proceed to any special act which may offend England, which you cannot with honour bring back again when you would. As many of your adversaries as are addicted to the contrary Faction for hatred of your Religion, may be gained when they see your Ma∣jesty continue in the temperance and moderation you have hitherto used, within your own Realm in matters of Religion, without inno∣vation or alteration. As many as by misreports have been carried to the contrary Faction, may by true report be brought back again, when they shall hear of your clemency used towards your own Sub∣jects, which vertue in Princes, of all others, most allures the hearts of people to favour, even their common Enemies. As many as can deal warily and discreetly with your friends of both the Religions, and are only addicted for Conscience sake to my Lady Katharine, being perswaded of the preference of your Title in Law, may be gai∣ned to your Majesty by contrary perswasions, and by adducing of such reasons and arguments, as may be alledged for proof of your good cause, whereof there are abundance to be had. Some your Majesty will find in England, who will hazard as far as they dare, to serve your turn in this behalf. But because it is so dangerous to Men to deal in, and may endanger Lives and Lands, if they be seen earnest medlers, travelling in that point so as would be necessary, it will require such instruments of your own when time comes, who may boldly speak without danger, and with whom the Subjects of England dare freely communicate their minds, and enter into con∣ference.
If any be afraid of your Majesty, thinking that you have an ill opinion of them, the assurance by a trusty Minister of your good will, whom they may credit, will quickly put them out of doubt and make them favourable enough. They who are constant∣ly yours, are easily retained at your devotion: Those who hereto∣fore have born any favour, and by the late occurrences are any way brangled, will be brought home again, when they shall see your Majesty, now when it is fallen in your hands to use rigour, or mer∣cy, as you please, rather incline to the most plausible part, in shew∣ing your magnanimity, when you have brought your Subjects to submission and gentleness, as the good Pastour to reduce his Sheep that were gone astray home again to the fold. Those who are yet neutrals, by the same means, and true information of your interest by Law, may all be won to your side. This done, when the mat∣ter comes in question, your friends will earnestly press your interest at this Parliament, and you will without controversie bear it a∣way. This device, in so far as concerns your reconciliation with your Subjects, is not a fetch for their favour, but is thought expedient for your service, by many who have no favour for them, and are dif∣ferent from them in Religion. For it will bring the Queen of Eng∣land greatly to favour you, when she shall see such an Union in your own Kingdom, of the Head and whole Members together. She will not know how to disturb your Majesties estate, especially when the Reconciliation takes effect in the hearts of the Subjects in England, who will think themselves in an happy condition, if they should come under the Government of so benign a Princess, who can so rea∣dily forgive great offences. For albeit it must be acknowledged that my Lord of Murray, hath by his inconsiderate carriage given your Majesty great ground of offence, yet it is hard to perswade the Pro∣testants, that your quarrel against him hath any other foundation, then that he differs from you in Religion. Upon this ground, they find themselves engaged to espouse his quarrel. If then they per∣ceived your Majesty graciously inclined to take him again unto fa∣vour, and forgive what is by-past, the Protestants in England would doubtless declare themselves more affectionate to your interest, when they shall see more of their own Religion so clemently handled. And that your Majesty may have experience, that it is your advance∣ment your friends would by this means procure, and not the advan∣tage of those with whom your Majesty is offended, a middle way may be followed, as is frequently used in such like cases, where not only the multitude is spared, but the chief authors are preserved. It may please your Majesty to cause a Letter to be pen'd in good terms and form, and publish the same by Proclamation, declaring the just cause of your anger against all of them; and that yet for declaring your own good nature above their deservings, you are content to re∣mit the whole, except such principles as you please to reserve and ex∣cept by name from the general Pardon. And that with whom you will not take such severe order as you might in Law, till you have further tryal and experience of their Penitence. The persons so to be nominated and excepted shall depart out of England, to what Coun∣trey
pleaseth your Majesty, there to remain during your pleasure. In this mean time, if your Majesty find that this benign usage of yours, shall produce such fruit as is here spoken, your Majesty may further extend your favour, as you find convenient and profitable for your self. For your Majesty hath still the crimes lying above their heads. In the mean time all who favour them in England, will plead in their cause with your Majesty, so far as their power extends, as if they were Agents for your Majesty. They will in no ways, if they can eschew it, be again in the Queen of Englands debt, neither by obtaining of any favour at your hand by her intervention, nor yet for any support in the time of their banishment. But rather it may please your Majesty, that their charges be allowed them of their own Lands. By following this advice, which in no ways can be prejudi∣cial to your Majesty, but will much conduce for your interest, you may recover the greatest part of the Bishops of England; many of the greatest Nobility and Gentlemen, who are yet Neutral. Their Names were declared to her Majesty in Cypher, by whose means he alledged her Majesty should obtain so great an interest in England, that albeit that Queen would appear against her, she needed not to care. For in sending but one thousand Men of her own, out of four parts of England, a sufficient number should join with them, by whose forces, without any strangers, her Majesty should obtain the thing which is wrongfully refused and retained. When her Majesty had seriously pondered this discourse, it had great influence upon her, to move her to follow the desire thereof, as well for the good opinion she had of him who sent it, as being of her own nature more inclined to mercy then rigour; she being also wise, and being convinced that it tended to the advancement of her affairs in England. She was therefore fully resolved to have followed the advice thereof, and to prolong the Parliament which had been called to forfault the Lords who had fled. Rixio appeared also to have been gained for counselling her hereto. My Lord Murray had sued to him very earnestly, and more humbly then could have been believed, with the present of a fair Diamond inclosed within a Letter, full of repen∣tance and fair promises, from that time forth to be his Friend and Pro∣tector. Which the said Rixio granted to do with the better will, that he perceived the King to bear him little good will, and to frown up∣on him. Following this advice and advertisement given by Sir Nicholas Throg∣morton, the Queens Majesty sent my Brother, Sir Robert Melvil, to re∣main her Ambassadour in Ordinary at the Court of England, to be ready at all occasions in case any thing were treated at the Parliament concerning the Succession, and to pursue the Design laid down by Sir Nicholas, and her other friends in England. In this mean time, there was a French Gentleman sent home here; called Monsieur d' Villamonte, with a Commission to treat with the Queen, that in no wayes she should shew any favour to the protestant banished Lords. Because that all Catholick Princes were bandied to root them out of all Europe. Which was a device of the Cardinal of Lorrain lately returned from the Councel of Trent. He had caused
the King of France, to write earnestly to that effect. Which unhappy Message, occasioned divers tragical accidents. For the Queen was loath to offend her friends in France of the house of Guise, albeit she would have done little at that time by her own pleasure to satisfie the King of France who was but young and only guided by his Mother whom she had no good cause to like well of. But Rixio was thought also not to think fit to offend so many Catholick Princes confederated, and especially the Pope with whom he had secret intelligence. Here∣by the Queen was again induced to hold the Parliament to forfault the banished Lords, against her own intention and her former deliberation. Now there were a number of Lords at home, friends to the Lords who were banished. As the Earl of Mortoun, the Lord Ruthven, the Lord Lindsay, and divers other Gentlemen who favoured them only for their Religion, some of them were discontent, that their friends should be forfaulted, others had special reasons inducing them to fear the Sitting of that Parliament. Especially the Earl of Mortoun, and his dependers feared a revocation that was alledged to be made at the said Parliament, to bring back again to the Crown divers great disposi∣tions given out during the Queens minority, and some benefices which had been taken by Noblemen at their own hands during the Civil-Wars under pretext of Religion. These and such considerations, moved them to consult together how to get the Parliament stayed, and to make a change at Court. The Earl of Mortoun had a crafty head, and had a Cousin called George Deuglass, the natural Son to the Earl of An∣gus, who was Father to Dame Margaret Douglass Countess of Lennox, the King's Mother. The said George was continually about the King, and by his Mother, and Brothers means, put in his head such suspicions against Rixio, that the King was prevailed with to give his consent to his slaughter. This the Lords of Mortoun, Lindsay, Ruthven, and others had devised, to become that way Masters of the Court, and so to stop the Parliament. The King was yet very young, and not well acquainted with the nature of this Nation. It was supposed also, that the Earl of Lennox knew of the said design. For he had his Chamber within the Palace, and so had the Earl of Athol, Bothwel and Huntly, who escaped, by leaping over a Window toward the little Garden where the Lyons were lodged. This vile act was done upon a Saturday at six a-Clock at night, when the Queen was at Supper in her Closet. A number of Armed Men entered within the Court, before the closing of the Gates, and took the Keys from the Porter. One part of them, went up through the Kings Chamber, conducted by the Lord Ruthven and George Douglass; the rest remained without, with drawn Swords in their hands, crying, A Douglass, A Douglass. The King was before gone up to the Queen, and was leaning upon her Chair, when the Lord Ruthven entered with his Helmet upon his Head, and George Douglass, and divers others with them, so rudely and irreverently, that the Table, Candles, Meat and Dishes were overthrown. Rixio took the Queen about the waste, crying for mercy, but George Douglass plucked out the Kings Dagger and stroke Rixio first with it, leaving it sticking in him. He making great shrieks and cryes, was rudely snatcht from the Queen, who could not prevail either with threats or
intreaties, to save him. But he was forcibly drawn forth of the Closet, and slain in the outer Hall, and her Majesty kept as a Captive. That same night the Earl of Athol, the Laird of Tullibardine, and Secretary Lidingtoun, and Sir James Balfour were permitted to retire themselves out of the Palace, and were in great fear of their lives. The next morning being Sunday, I was let forth at the Gate, and passing through the outer Close, the Queen being looking forth at a Window, cryed unto me to help her. I drew near, and assured her of all the help that lay in my power. She desired me with all haste to go to the Provost of Edinbrugh, and desire him to convene the Town to relieve her out of these Traytors hands. But run fast, says she, for they will stay you. As this word was spoken, one Mr. Wisbet, Master of the Houshold to the Earl of Lennox, was sent with a Company to stay me. To whom I gave good words, saying, that I was only going to Ser∣mon at St. Giles's Church. But I went in haste to the Provost, and told him my Commission from the Queen. He answered, That he had another commandment from the King, but that he should draw the people to the Tolbooth, and see what they would do, though he expected no help from their hands, because the most part of them were so discontent with the present Government, that all desired a change. Yet he convened them, though in vain. Which backward∣ness of theirs, I did intimate to her Majesty, by one of her Ladys, whom she sent again unto me, to tell me that she supposed my Lord of Murray and his associates, who were yet banished, remaining at New∣castle, would be sent for by those who were about her. Willing me at his coming, to perswade him not to join with those who had so highly affronted her, but to hold himself free, and be her friend in this strait, which doing should be his great advantage, and purchase her love and favour for ever. Which Commission I did not fail to execute at his coming upon Monday, but he was more moved at his meeting with her Majesty, who imbraced and kissed him, alledging that if he had been at home he would not have suffered her to have been so uncour∣teously handled. Which so much moved him, that the Tears run from his eves. He knew sufficiently well that it was not for his cause, but for their own particular ends, that the greatest part who had made that enterprise had therein ingaged, which made him the less concerned in them. Yet he and his Company resolved to keep the day, against which they were summoned to the Parliament. In the mean time, the King repented himself of his accession to that affair, whereupon her Majesty took occasion to perswade him to aban∣don those Lords, who had committed so odious a crime, as to hazard her life, together with his Child which was in her Belly. That ne∣vertheless she was resolved to forgive them, and give them what secu∣rity thereupon they would demand. The Lords seeing the King drawn from them, and my Lord of Murray not so frank for them as they expected, were necessitated to do the next best, and consented that a pacification should be penned, which was divers times written over, to put in and out certain heads and clauses, to drive time until the writing might appear plausible. Her Majesty caused the King to advise them, to discharge the Guard that kept her, that so the secu∣rity might be subscribed, she being at liberty. Seeing otherwise it
would not avail them in Law, if there were the least appearance of re∣straint upon her, during the time thereof. So upon Tuesday they went all to their rest, but the Queen, King, Traquair and Arthur Areskin Master of the Horse for the time, went out of Halirood-House at mid∣night toward the Castle of Dumbar, and left word with one of her La∣dies to me, that I should be earnest to keep the Earl of Murray from joining with the other Lords. Who the next morning found them∣selves greatly disappointed being left without any appearance of a pa∣cification. In the mean time, I used my endeavours very effectually to keep my Lord Murray from joining with the late offenders. I in∣gaged to him, that in so doing, I should procure a pardon to him, and all his followers. They on this manner being destitute of all assisters, were compelled to flee unto England to Newcastle, where in a manner they might find the other Lords nests yet warm. A few days before, my Lord Duke, my Lords of Glencairn and Ro∣thes had obtained their pardons. For they were divided during their banishment, and her Majesty found it not her interest to have so ma∣ny Lords against her. She had also now again indeavoured to draw the Earl of Murray from the Earl of Mortoun, and his accomplices, be∣cause he had for the time a great friendship and many dependers, that she might be the more easily revenged upon that most detestable deed of murthering her Servant in her presence. For she being big with Child, it appeared to be done to destroy both her and her Child. For they might have killed the said Rixio in any other part, at any time they pleased. My Lord Murray and his dependants, desired me to carry their humble thanks unto her Majesty, and to signifie unto her, how willingly they acquiesced to her Majesties desire, and how they had discharged themselves to such as had committed that vile act. And that they promised her Majesty never any more to have to do with them, or intercede for them. I rencountred her Majesty coming from Dumbar to Hadingtoun, and was very favourably received with great thanks for my care of her honour and wellfare. That night in Hadingtoun she subscribed di∣vers remissions for my Lord Murray and his dependers, lamenting un∣to me the King's folly, ungratitude, and misbehaviour. I excused the same the best I could, imputing it to his youth, which occasioned him to be easily led away by pernicious Councel, laying the blame upon George Duglas and other bad Councellors, praying her Majesty for ma∣ny necessary considerations, to remove out of her mind any preju∣dice against him, seeing that she had chosen him her self, against the opinion of many of her Subjects. But I could perceive nothing from that day forth, but great grudges that she entertained in her heart. That night in Hadingtoun, the King inquired of me, if the Lord of Murray had written to him. I answered, That his Letter to the Queen was written in haste, and that he esteemed the Queen and him but one. He said, he might have also written to me. Then he enquired what was become of Mortoun, Ruthven and the rest of that Company. I told him. I believed they were fled, but I knew not whither. As they have Brewed, says he, so let them drink. It appeared to me that he was troubled he had deserted them, finding the Queens favour but cold. The next day they came to Edinbrugh, and lodged within the Castle,
where some were apprehended and executed, who had been in the Court of the Palace, and had kept the Gates that night wherein Rixio was slain. Her Majesty was now far gone with Child, and went to Sterling, in∣tending to lye in there. Thither the King followed her, and from that to Allway. At length she came back to the Castle of Edinbrugh. It was thought that she fled from the King's company. I travelled earnestly to help matters betwixt them, and was therein so importu∣nate, that I was thought troublesome. So that her Majesty desired my Lord of Murray to reprove me, and charge me not to be any more familiar with the King: Who went up and down all alone, seeing few durst bear him company. He was misliked by the Queen, and by all such as secretly favoured the late banished Lords: So that it was a great pity to see that good young Prince cast off, who failed rather for want of good Counsel and Experience, then from any bad inclinations. It appeared to be fatal to him, to like better of flatterers and ill Com∣pany then plain speakers and good Men: Which hath been the wrack of many Princes, who by frequenting good Company would have pro∣ved gallant Men. About this time the Queen of England was taken with a great Fe∣ver, that none believed she could live: All that Kingdom was thereby in great perplexity. But a strange thing is to be marked, that two contrary Factions there, had both determined, unknown to other, to send for our Queen, and set the Crown of England upon her head. My Brother Sir Robert Melvil was then Ambassadour there resident, and I served in place of Secretary here at home, because Secretary Li∣dingtoun was absent under some suspicion. He sent home continual advertisements how to proceed, and I again returned the answers at her Majesties direction. Now began the Earl of Rothvel to be in great favour, to the great dissatisfaction of many. He and the Earl of Huntly, and the Bishop of Rosse, envied the favour that the Queen shewed unto the Earl of Mur∣ray; for they were upon contrary courses. The Queen on the other hand, knew how generally he was well liked of both in England and Scotland, and that she would be the better liked of in both Kingdoms that she shewed favour to him. And as she resolved to follow the for∣mer advice and information sent her by Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, so she forgat not the late help he had made her at his home-coming. These two Earls with the foresaid Bishop, took occasion when the time of her Majesties delivery drew near, to perswade her to imprison my Lord of Murray; to remain no longer then she should be delivered, al∣ledging that they were assuredly advertised, that he and his dependers were resolved to bring in the banished Lords, even at the very time of her Child-bearing: For they thought, if once he were warded, they should find devices enough to cause him be kept, and disgraced, espe∣cially when he should be absent, and not have opportunity of answe∣ring and resisting their Calumnies. Whereof her Majesty gave me an accompt, desiring me to mind her of their secret designs against Mur∣ray, without any just cause, flowing only from their own hatred who had devised his ruine.
The Earl of Mortoun was now in a hard condition, though many of the Barons of Lauthran were his friends, they could be little sted∣able to him. Among the rest the Laird of Elphingstoun, my Brother∣in-law, whose Mother was a Duglas of the House of Whittengem. Up∣on accompt of this friendship, the Earl of Mortoun caused to write un∣to my Sister the Lady Elphingstoun, desiring her to perswade me to write in his favours to the Elector Palatine, and other Princes of my acquaintance in Germany, to suffer him to live in their Country. For my Brother, by her Majesties direction, pressed the Queen of Eng∣land to put them forth of her Kingdoms. And they durst not go to France, where the Queen had so many friends. This I did shew unto her Majesty that she might be the more confirmed, how ground∣less that report was, made by the foresaid Lords against Murray. Wherewith she appeared well satisfied, resolving to continue her kind∣ness for my Lord Murray, but withal she charged me not to write in favours of Mortoun. In the mean time, Mr. Henry Killegrew was sent hither Ambassadour from the Queen of England, who was in great suspicion of her estate, finding so many of her Subjects favourers of our Queen. The said Ambassadour complained against one Mr. Ruxbie, who was harboured in Scotland, being a Rebel and a Papist: Declaring how that the Queen his Mistress had commanded Mortoun and his Complices forth of her Country: Which was done by open Proclamation, to please the Queen and her Ambassadour, who cryed out continually for her suffering them to abide so long in England: Yet as we afterward understood, they were secretly over-lookt, upon condition that they would keep themselves quiet. Mr. Killegrew alledged also that the Queens Majesty had been practising with Oneel in Ireland, who had his Ambassadour presently in Edinbrugh, in company of the Earl of Arguile. And Third∣ly he complained of some disorders upon the Borders, made by Scotish∣men. But the principal pretext of his Commission, was to comfort the Queen over her late troubles, to congratulate her freedom, and good success over her wicked and rebellious Subjects. It may appear sufficiently by that Queens former proceedings, that all the Sisterly familiarity was ceased, and in place thereof nothing but jealousies, suspicions and hatred. And yet they kept an outward cor∣respondence, for keeping up Neighbourhood and Intelligence. The Scots Ambassadour for the time in England, had so good hap that his credit was great, for he was esteemed sure and secret. Which caused a great number of the Nobility, Protestants and Papists to Communi∣cate their inward minds, and secretest intentions unto him. Mr. Ran∣dolph had not the like credit in Scotland, but only with some of the simplest sort of the Ministers. For this Ruxbie was sent in hither to appear to be a zealous favourer of her Majesties Right and Title to the Crown of England. He was to endeavour to speak with the Queen, and to take an occasion of informing her Majesty of the great friendship divers of the Catholicks had for her, who durst not deal with the Scots Ambassadour being a Protestant; but that he would deal himself betwixt her Majesty and them. All this was to essay what he could draw out of her Majesty, to give advertisement thereof to Secretary Cicil. He addressed himself unto the Queens Majesty
by the Bishop of Ross, who was a Catholick. The said Bishop desire∣ing her Majesty to be secret. What he learned for the time I cannot tell, but he did write sundry intelligences unto the Secretary Cicil, which did prejudice. But this fine contrivance was not so secretly kept, but my Brother Sir Robert had knowledge thereof, and also of a Letter that the Secretary Cicil wrote again unto Scotland, to the said Mr. Ruxbie promising to see him rewarded; and desiring him to con∣tinue in his diligence. Of all which my Brother by his good intel∣ligence was so well advertised, that in due time he gave her Majesty and me information thereof. He gave his advice, how to carry for the future in that affair. So that when Mr. Killegrew made his com∣plaint upon the receit of Mr. Ruxbie, her Majesty incontinently caused him to be apprehended, and all his Cyphers and Writings, among the which was found the Letter written by Secretary Cicil above mentio∣ned. Ruxbie finding himself discovered, fell immediately upon his knees, granting himself worthy of a thousand deaths, humbly craving pardon. Her Majesty caused him to be so secretly and straitly kept, that the English Ambassadour could get no intelligence for what cause he was apprehended, until that the Queen did shew him her self, that upon his complaint to satisfie the Queen her good Sister, she had cau∣sed to apprehend the said Ruxbie, who should be delivered so soon af∣ter his return as it should please her Sister to send for him. But as this Mr. Ruxbie was secured, so was the complaint made against him kept secret. For her Majesty was advised, to appear al∣together ignorant of any of his practises against her devised by Secre∣tary Cicil, it not being thought her interest to put that shame upon one who professed so much to be her friend. Nor was it time to cast of intelligence, so long as it was found profitable to entertain it, as it would have indeed proved, had not such unhappy chances fallen out shortly after. The Queens Majesties reckoning being near run out, she caused me to dispatch for England, to be in readiness to give an accompt of the news of her delivery to that Queen; leaving a Blank in her Letter to be filled up either with a Son or a Daughter, as it should please God to grant unto her. And to require the Queen of England to send hi∣ther in her name, such of hers as she knew to be best instruments for entertaining good love and friendship betwixt them, to be Gossips, as also to satisfie her concerning the most part of Killegrew's demands. All the while I lay within the Castle of Edinbrugh, praying night and day for her Majesties good and happy delivery of a fair Son. This prayer being granted, I was the first who was thereof advertised by the Lady Boin in her Majesties Name to part with dilligence the 19th of June 1555 betwixt Ten and Eleven in the morning. By Twelve of the Clock I took Horse, and was that night at Berwick. The fourth day after, I was at London, and did first meet with my Brother Sir Robert, who that same night sent and advertised Secretary Cicil of my arrival, and of the Birth of the Prince, desiring him to keep it quiet till my coming to Court to shew it my self unto her Maje∣sty, who was for the time at Greenwich, where her Majesty was in great mirth, dancing after Supper. But so soon as the Secretary Ci∣cil whispered in her Ear the news of the Prince's birth, all her mirth
was laid aside for that night. All present marvelling whence proceed∣ed such a change, for the Queen did sit down putting her hand under her Cheek, bursting out to some of her Ladies, That the Queen of Scots was Mother of a fair Son, while she was but a barren stock. The next morning was appointed for me to get Audience, at what time my Brother and I went by Water to Greenwich, and were met by some friends who told us how sorrowful her Majesty was at my news, but that she had been advised to shew a glad and cheerful countenance: Which she did in her best Apparel, saying, That the joyful news of the Queen her Sister's delivery of a fair Son, which I had sent her by Secretary Cicil, had recovered her out of a heavy sickness which she had lyen under for fifteen days. Therefore she welcomed me with a merry volt, and thanked me for the diligence I had used in hasting to give her that welcome intelligence. All this she said, before I had delivered unto her my Letter of Credence. After that she had read it, I declared how that the Queen had hasted me towards her Maje∣sty as one whom she knew of all her friends, would be most joyful of the glad news of her delivery, albeit dear bought with the peril of her life, she being so sore handled that she wished she had never been mar∣ried. This I said by the way to give her a little scare from marriage. For so my Brother had counselled me, because sometimes she boasted to marry the Arch duke Charles of Austria, when any Man pressed her to declare a second person. Then I requested her Majesty to be a Gos∣sip to the Queen, to which she gladly condescended. Your Majesty, said I, will now have a fair occasion to see the Queen, whereof I have heard your Majesty so oft desirous. Whereat she smiled, saying, she wished that her estate and affairs might permit her: In the mean time, she promised to send both honourable Lords and Ladies to supply her room. Then I gave her Majesty, in my Queen's name, most hearty thanks, for her friendly visiting and comforting her by Mr. Henry Killegrew. She inquired if I had left him in Scotland, and what was the cause of his long stay. I answered, That the Queen took her Chamber shortly after his arrival, which was the chief cause of his delay. But I had in Commission to tell her Majesty something thereabout, to sa∣tisfie her mind in the mean time, and to thank her Majesty for the put∣ting away of the Scots Rebels out of her Country, albeit there were some Reports that they were yet secretly entertained by some of her Subjects, though I hardly believed that any of her Subjects durst be so bold, or so disobedient. She affirmed they were out of her Domini∣ons, and if it might be otherwise tryed out, it should not pass with∣out rigorous punishment. I told her Majesty, that upon her desire, and Ambassadours complaint, the Queen had caused to apprehend Mr. Rux∣bie, and had ordered him to be delivered to her Majesty whenever she should please to send for him. And as concerning Oneel, she had no dealing with him, nor knew that there had been any Servant of his sent to my Lord Arguile, until Mr. Killegrew's coming, that she caused to enquire at the said Earl, who acknowledged that Oneel had sent one unto him about private purposes betwixt themselves, but that she did neither see nor speak with that Man, nor had any dealing with any Man in Ireland.
Her Majesty seemed to be well satisfied with the matters of Ireland, and concerning Mr. Ruxbie, but she forgot to send for him. Before I took my farewell in order to my return, I entred with her Majesty concerning the Title. For my Lord of Leicester was become my Queens avowed friend, and had been twice in hand with the Queen of England a little before my coming, desiring her to declare my Mistress next Heir: Alledging it would be her greatest security, and cried out in anger that Cicil would undo all. Likewise the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Pembroke, and several others, shewed themselves openly her friends, after they understood the birth of the Prince. So that her Ma∣jesty's matters in England were hopeful; and therefore I was advised to say unto her Majesty, That I was assured she had formerly delayed the declaring the Queen second person, only till she might see such Suc∣cession of her body as now God had graciously granted: intreating her Majesty to embrace that fair offered opportunity of satisfying the minds of many, as well in England as in Scotland, who desired to see that matter out of doubt. And the rather because that the Queen my Mistress, would never seek any Place or Right in England, but by her Majesties favour and furtherance. She answered, That the birth of the Prince, was a great Spur to cause the most skilful Lawyers in Eng∣land, to use greater diligence in trying out that matter, which she esteemed to belong most justly to her good Sister, and that she wished from her heart that it should be that way decided. I replied, That at my last being with her, I found her Majesty upon the same tearms, but that as I had brought her good news from the Queen, I was very desirous to be so happy as to carry home with me unto her Majesty the good tydings of that so long delayed Declaration. She answered, she was resolved to satisfie the Queen in that matter, by those Noble∣men she was resolved to send unto Scotland, for the Baptism of the Prince. All this I perceived to be but shifts, and so took my leave, be∣cause my Brother was to remain there. The next day her Majesty sent unto me her Letter, with the Present of a fair Chain. My Brother gave me the advice of her Majesties friends, together with his own instructions how to proceed after my coming home as followeth. First, That he is in such suspicion for his handling there, by the ad∣vertisements of Mr. Ruxbie, and practises of her Enemies, that her Ma∣jesty must signifie to Mr. Killegrew that she is minded shortly to call him home, else he fears he shall be commanded to return. Secondly, That her Majesty require the Earl of Leicester and Secre∣tary Cicil to be sent to be her Gossips, as fittest instruments to perfect all Articles and good Offices of Amity betwixt them. Item, That Mr. Killegrew be well treated and rewarded, that he may make good report to hold off discord, that intelligence may continue; and desire him to declare unto the Earl of Leicester, and Secretary Ci∣cil, that it cannot stand with good friendship, to be so long fed with fair words without effect. Item, That her Majesty cast not off the Earl of Northumberland, al∣beit as a fearful and facile man he delivered her Letter to the Queen of England; neither appear to find fault with Sir Henry Pearcie as yet, for his dealing with Mr. Ruxbie, which he doeth to gain favour at
Court, being upon a contrary faction to his Brother the Earl. Item, That Mr. Ruxbie be well kept, and sent far North to some se∣cure part that he give no hasty intelligence, for he hath already written unto Secretary Cicil by Sir Henry Pearcy his convoyance, that he can discover all your practises and secrets. Let my Lord Arguile entertain Oneel as of himself, the Queen not appearing to know thereof. The Secretary Cicil devised strange practises against the meeting, which because my Lord of Leicester discovered unto the Queen his Mistress, Cicil stirred up the Earl of Sussex to forge a quarrel against him, but the Queen took the Earl of Leicester's part, and finally agreed them, and also Leicester and Ormond. Item, That her Majesty should write two Letters with Mr. Kille∣grew to my Brother, the one that he might shew unto the Queen of England, the other that he might shew unto the Secretary Cicil. Item, To advertise my Brother what he should do more for my La∣dy Lennox, whose liberty might do much good. Now to conclude, seeing the great mark which her Majesty shoots at, let her Majesty be more careful and circumspect, that her desires be∣ing so near to be obtained, be not all over-thrown for lack of secrecy, good management, and Princely behaviour, having so many factious Enemies lying in wait to make their advantage of the least appearance that can be made. Shortly after my coming home Mr. Killegrew the English Ambassa∣dour obtained his dispatch, with a friendly answer to his contentment, and a fair Chain; and with him her Majesty sent these two Letters fol∣lowing to my Brother by his own advice that he might take occasion to let the Queen of England see the one, and Mr. Cicil the other, partly to serve to put some doubts out of their minds ingendered by Mr. Rux∣bie's advertisements, for, as I have said, the Bishop of Ross made the said Ruxbie's address to the Queen, for neither he nor the Earl Bothwel desired her Majesties affairs to prosper under my Brother's manage∣ment, because he was not of their Faction, so that by their means Rux∣bie got that intelligence as put all her Majesties affairs once in a ven∣ture, until my Brother's extraordinary intelligence from such as were most intimate with the Queen of England, made him cause to appre∣hend the said Ruxbie with his whole Letters and Memoires; as said is, so are many good Princes handled, and commonly their truest Ser∣vants decourted by the envy and craft of their factious Enemies, for wicked men who have lost their credit by trumpery and tricks, where∣by they get no place to do good service to Princes, essay to creep un∣to their favour by wiles, flattery, and other unlawful means, wherby they may decourt such as surmount them in vertue, and honest repu∣tation, her Majesties Letter to my Brother was as followeth. TRusty and well-beloved, We Greet you well: Whereas your Brother James hath told Us of the friendly and faithful advice given unto you and him, by Mr. Secretary Cicil, toward the conti∣nuation of the amity betwixt the Queen Our good Sister and Us, ten∣ding also to Our own particular advantage; We thought meet to send
these few lines to you, that you may thank him heartily in Our Name, and declare unto him Our meaning and intention, as you find opportunity touching the three Points that he did mention at that time. The first, as we understand, touching our towardliness to them of the Religion. The second touching strict justice to be observed upon the Borders. The third, that we will endeavour by no other means to come to the Succession of the Crown of England, but by the favour and forth-setting of our good Sister. As to the first, you shall answer in Our Name, That since Our return out of France We have neither constrained nor persecuted any for cause of Religion, nor yet minds to do; their credit with Us be∣ing so manifest, that they are intrusted with the principal Offices, and bear the chiefest charges in the Kingdom, and principally imploy∣ed in our most urgent Affairs before all others: Sir Nicholas Throg∣morton can testifie what he hath seen and heard at his being here thereanent, howbeit that contrary Brutes are blown abroad by the malice and practises of our Enemies. To the second, concerning the borders, it is most certain that the principal Officers on both the sides are special instruments of all the disorders, taking occasion up∣on Our late troubles, when as they perceived that we might not so well take order with them, as We were willing; as now when it hath pleased God to grant unto Us more quietness. Desiring him also to procure at the Queen his Sovereign's hands that the like di∣ligence be taken for her part as shall be seen used by Us; and then we doubt not but that both he, she, and all other who complain shall be satisfied. As to the third and last head, you shall shew unto him the tenor of Our other Letter, for satisfaction to the Queen and Our other Friends in these parts. So with my friendly commenda∣tions to him and his wife, I commit you to the protection of the Al∣mighty. From the Castle of Edinburgh this Year 1566. TRusty and Well beloved, We Greet you well. We have recei∣ved great comfort and contentment by the Declaration your Brother hath made to Us, of the Queen Our good Sister's continu∣al affection and constant love towards Us; which she hath now shewn unto you, and your Brother at his coming; as also by her Letters unto Our Self: Likewise for the grant she hath made to be Our Gossip, and promises to send so honourable a Company of Lords and Ladies, for solemnizing the same in her Name; for which in Our behalf you shall give her Majesty most hearty thanks, and shew unto her that We desire nothing to be done therein, but as may conduce best for her advantage, and least to her expence; praying her always that the principal Man, whom it will please her to send, be such a one as We have by long experience known to have been most familiar with her, to whom We may the more freely open Our mind, and signifie divers things which We intended to have spo∣ken by mouth unto her self if God had granted Our desired meeting. As concerning Oneel, Ruxbie and all other matters, We hope that Mr. Killegrew will satisfie her sufficiently, and also how that We desire to
have no advancement in that Country, but by her only means and help, hoping and intending so to direct our course and behaviour toward her, as she shall have cause more and more to procure ear∣nestly and carefully her self, all things that may further Our Weal and Advancement, in this Country, that Kingdom, or any other. In the which hope We will do our best to follow such measures as may please her, and to avoid all things that may offend her; and We give our most strict command unto you to do the like, so long as you remain there; And wherever you be about Our service even as I gave you Commandment of before, nevertheless in the mean time, entertain most kindly and discreetly all those in that Country who profess to bear good will unto Us, and to our Title, yet in such sort as neither you nor they offend the Queen Our good Sister: And if there chance to come to you any hasty or seditious persons, ad∣monish them gently to cease, and if they forbear not, shew unto them, that We have promised to the Queen to declare the Names and Practises of such unto her; and that we will not fail to do it in∣deed if they cease not: So shall it be known, that such as are about to sow discord between the Queen our good Sister and Us, doth it rather upon particular respects and for their own advantage, then for any design to advance her Affairs or Ours. These kind of Writings were for that time devised to overthrow and cast down some intelligences, which were discovered by Ruxbie, and some reports raised by Enemies, that my Brother by his practises and perswasions had kindled a great fire, and had raised a great faction in England; he did not deny but he had dealt with many to win what fa∣vour he could to his Mistress, but that he had done nothing that could offend the Queen of England, and that he had no Command∣ment to enterprise any thing which could be displeasing to her; by this means Ruxbie's intelligence was suppressed, and my Brother suffered to stay still in England, whereby the Queens friends so increased, that many whole Shires were ready to Rebell, and their Captains already named by the Election of the Nobility. About this time her Majesty was advertised by my Brothers Let∣ters, that the Earl of Bedford was upon his journey toward Scotland with an honourable Company: As also the Ambassadour of France and Savoy for the Baptism of the Prince, which moved her Majesty to pass to Sterling with the Prince, for the solemnizing thereof, but she was still sad, and pensive for the late foul act committed in her pre∣sence so irreverently, she being their born Queen, and thereby in ha∣zard of losing the fruit of her Womb, so many great sighs she would give that it was pity to hear her, and few there were to endeavour to comfort her. Sometime she would declare part of her grief to me, which I essay∣ed the best I could to asswage, by telling her that I thought the greater multitude of friends that she had got in England, should cause her to forget in Scotland the lesser number of Enemies and unruly offen∣ders, unworthy of her wrath, and that her excellent qualities in Cle∣mency, Temperance, and Fortitude should not suffer her mind to be
possest or supprest with the remembrance of offences, but that rather she should bend up her spirit by a Princely and Womanly behaviour, whereby she might best gain the hearts of the whole people, both here and in England, humbly requesting her Majesty first to consult with her God, next with her honour, and thirdly with her interest in the establishing of her state, and in joining the two Kingdoms in a happy Monarchy, which she knew to be so near effectuate in her person, see∣ing also the banished estate of the offenders so miserable, they not ha∣ving a hole to hide their head in, nor a peny wherewith to buy their Dinner; that the most noble natures would think them sufficiently punished; that it was a comely thing for a woman to be pitiful, and to want vengeance. I leave it, said I Madam, to your own judgment, whether presently it be more for your honour, and advancement of your interest, to cease from any desire or persuit of any further re∣venge, whereupon may ensue more desperate enterprises, or to give place unto necessity and reason to rule over the beastly passions of the mind. For as Princes are called divine persons, so no Prince can pretend to this Title but he who draws near the nature of God by godliness and good Government, being slow to vengeance and rea∣dy to forgive. It is manifestly known that wise Princes entertain no longer feud at their Enemies, then they see it may be needful for the weal of their Affairs and State; and they change their favour and ha∣tred according to time and occasions. Your Majesty may remember that many things might have been better managed, I speak this with love and reverence. Your Majesty might have been as well obeyed as ever was any King in Scotland, if you had taken such Princely care as was requisite. You know how that by your Majesties own express Commandment, I did shew you long before what inconveniencies were like to fall out upon the grudges I perceived before the slaughter of Rixio, and God is my witness I did what lay in my power to have them eschewed, and prevented. And since that time your Majesty hath repented that my advice was not followed: I pray God that the like repentance fall not out again too late. At my being in England, your adversaries were beginning to vaunt upon vain reports, that our Westerly winds had blown East among them; so that my Brother and I had enough to do to beat it out of the heads of divers, who were devotedly addicted to the advancement of your Title. This communing began at the entry of her Supper in her Ear in French, when she was casting up great sighs, refusing to eat upon any perswasion that my Lord of Murray and Mar could make to her. The Supper being ended her Majesty took me by the hand, and went down through the Park of Sterling, and came up through the Town, ever reasoning with me upon their purposes. And albeit she took hardly with them at the first, she began to alter her mind, thinking fit that my Lord of Bedford should intercede for her Rebels; they to be banished out of England and Scotland during her pleasure, and so to be by time reconciled to them according to their future deportments, and for her part she purposed to proceed with such a gracious Government, as should win the victory over her self, and all her Competitours, and Enemies in time-coming: which she could have done as well as any Prince in Europe. But, alas, she had bad Company about her, for
the Earl of Bothwel who had a mark of his own that he shot at, as soon as he understood of her wife and merciful deliberations, he took occasion to bring in the Earl of Mortoun and his associates, thereby to make them his friends, and by them to fortifie his faction. For ap∣parently he had already in his head the resolution of performing the foul murther of the King, which he afterwards put in execution, that he might marry the Queen. Both which he brought to pass to his own utter wrack and confusion, and thereby great trouble and mis∣chief upon the Country; and was also at last the Queens wrack, and the hinderance of all our hopes in the hasty obtaining of all her desires concerning the Crown of England. The Queens Majesty being advertised that the Earl of Bedford was come to Berwick on his Journey to the Baptism, sent me well accom∣panied with diligence to meet him at Coldingham to be his first Con∣voy, and to inform him rightly of all her proceedings, and to over∣throw all evil brutes invented by the malice of her adversaries. For, as I have said, it was a perverse time, and the more that the number of her friends increased in England, the more practises her Enemies made, and the more lyes were invented against her. But the good Earl gave me more credit, then he did to any wrong report that was made. For he was at this time become one of the surest and most af∣fectionate friends she had in England. There came with him Mr. Cary eldest Son to my Lord of Husdean, Mr. Hattoun greatest in favour with the Queen of England for the time, and one called Mr. Lignish greatest in favour with the Duke of Norfolk, and a good number of Knights and Gentlemen of York-shire, with the most part of the Captains of Berwick. Her Majesty was sufficiently informed by my Brother's writing to her and me, what kind of language and entertainment was most proper for the Earl, and each of them. When all the rest of the Ambassadours were come, they repined to see the English-men more friendly and familiarly used then themselves. For then we had more to do with England then with France. And the French Earl who was sent, was no Courtier, but a simple Man. And Monsieur de Morat the Duke of Savoy his Ambassadour being far of, came after the Baptism. During their abode at Sterling, there was daily Banqueting, Dancing, and Triumph. And at the principal Ban∣quet there fell out a great grudge among the English-men: for a French∣man called Bastien devised a number of Men formed like Satyrs with long Tails, and whips in their hands, running before the meat, which was brought through the great Hall upon a Machine or Engine mar∣ching as appeared alone, with Musicians clothed like Maids, singing and playing upon all sorts of Instruments. But the Satyrs were not content only to make way or room, but put their hands behind them to their Tails, which they wagged with their hands in such sort as the English-men supposed it had been devised and done in derision of them, weakly apprehending that which they should not have appeared to understand: for Mr. Hattoun, Mr. Lignish, and the most part of the Gentlemen desired to Supp before the Queen and great Banquet, that they might see the better the Order and Ceremonies of the Triumph. But so soon as they perceived the Satyrs wagging their Tails, they all
sate down upon the bare floor behind the back of the Table, that they might not see themselves derided as they thought. Mr. Hatton said unto me if it were not in the Queens presence he would put a Dagger to the heart of that French knave Bastien, who he alledged had done it out of despight that the Queen made more of them then of the French∣men. I excused the matter the best I could, but the noise was so great behind the Queen's back, where her Majesty and my Lord of Bedford did sit, that they heard and turned about their faces to enquire what the matter meant. I informed them that it was occasioned by the Satyrs, so that the Queen and my Lord of Bedford had both enough to do to get them appeased. It fell out unhappily at such a time, and the English Gentlemen committed a great over sight to notice it as done against them. But my Lord of Bedford was discreet and in∣terpreted all things to the best. My Lord of Bedford was rewarded with a rich Chain of Diamonds, worth two thousand Crowns; Mr. Cary with a Chain of Pearl, and a Ring with a fair Diamond; Mr. Hattoun had a Chain with her Maje∣sties Picture, and a Ring; Mr. Lignish and five other of Quality had each of them Chains. I was commanded with many others to attend them towards the Road. They parted all very well content and sa∣tisfied with the Queens Majesty, but lamented that they perceived the King so much slighted. My Lord of Bedford desired me to request her Majesty to entertain him as she had done at the beginning, for her own honour and the advancement of her affairs, which I forgot not to do at all occasions. After the Baptism and parting of the Ambassadours, her Majesty desirous to put good order upon the Borders, sent the Earl of Bothwel before, who in the pursuit of Thieves was hurt. Her Majesty past af∣terward to Jedbrugh her self, where the Earls of Bothwel and Huntly enterprised the slaughter of the Earl of Murray, but the Lord Hume came there with forces and prevented that enterprise. Her Majesty returned by the Merse, and desired to see Berwick afar off, where she was honoured with many shots of Artillery, and Sir John Foster War∣den upon the English Border came and conferred with her Majesty for keeping of good order. And the mean time while he was speaking with her Majesty on Horse-back, his Courser did rise up with his formost Legs, to take the Queens Horse by the Neck with his Teeth, but his Feet hurt her Majesties Thigh very ill. Incontinent the War∣den lighted off his Horse and sate down upon his knees craving her Majesties pardon. For then all England did much reverence her; her Majesty made him to rise, and said that she was not hurt, yet it compel∣led her Majesty to tarry two days at the Castle of Hoome untill she re∣covered again. The King followed her about whithersoever she rode, but got no good countenance. So that finding himself flighted, he went to Glascow, where he fell sick, it being alledged that he had got poison from some of his Servants. In the mean time the Earl of Bothwel ruled all at Court, having brought home the banished Lords, and packed up a quiet friendship with the Earl of Mortoun. After her Majesties return to Edinbrugh, she reconciled the Earls of Huntly, Bothwel, Arguile and others. From that her Majesty went to Sterling, to see the Prince, and returned again
to Edinbrugh whither the King was afterward brought, and lodged in the Kirk-field, as a place of good Air, where he might best reco∣ver his health. But many suspected that the Earl of Bothwel had some enterprise against him, few durst advertise him because he told all again to some of his own Servants, who were not all honest. Yet Lord Robert Earl of Orkny told him that if he retired not hastily out of that place, it would cost him his life, which he told again to the Queen; and my Lord Robert denied that ever he spoke it. This advertise∣ment moved the Earl of Bothwel to haste forward his enterprize: he had before laid a train of Powder under the House where the King did lodge, and in the night did blow up the said House with the Pow∣der; but it was spoken that the King was taken forth, and brought down to a Stable, where a Napkin was stopped in his mouth, and he therewith suffocated. Every body suspected the Earl of Bothwel, and those who durst speak freely to others, said plainly that it was he. Whereupon he drew together a number of Lords of his dependers to be an Assize, which cleansed and acquitted him; some for fear, some for favour, and the greatest part in expectation of advantage. This way being assailed, he remained still the greatest favourite at Court. My Lord of Murray was retired from the Court several days before. Her Majesty kept her Chamber for a while. I came to the door the next morning af∣ter the murther, and the Earl of Bothwel said that her Majesty was sorrowful and quiet, which occasioned him to come forth. He said the strangest accident had fallen out which ever was heard of, for Thunder had come out of the sky, and had burnt the King's House, and himself was found dead lying a little distance from the House un∣der a Tree. He desired me to go up and see him, how that there was not a hurt nor a mark on all his Body. But when I went up to see him he had been taken into a Chamber, and kept by one Alexan∣der Durham, but I could not get a sight of him. The bruit began to rise that the Queen would marry the Earl of Bothwel, who had six months before married the Earl of Huntly's Si∣ster, and that for this design he was resolved to part with his own La∣dy. Whereat every good Subject who loved the Queens honour, and the Prince's safety, had sore hearts, thinking thereby her Majesty would be dishonoured, and the Prince in danger to be cut off by him who had slain his Father. But few or none durst speak in the con∣trary; yet my Lord Herreis a worthy Nobleman came to Edinbrugh well accompanied, and told her Majesty what reports were going through the Country, of the Earl of Bothwel's murthering the King, and how that she was to marry him, requesting her Majesty most humbly upon his knees to remember her honour and dignity, and the safety of the Prince, which all would be in danger if she married the said Earl, with many other great perswasions to shew the utter wrack and inconveniencies would be thereby occasioned. Her Ma∣jesty appeared to wonder how these reports could go abroad, seeing, as she said, there was no such thing in her mind. He beg'd her Ma∣jesties pardon, and prayed her to take his honest meaning in a good part. And immediately took his farewell, fearing the Earl of Both∣wel should get notice thereof. He had fifty Horse with him for the
time, and caused each of them to buy a new Spear at Edinbrugh and so rode home. I was resolved to have said as much to her Majesty, but in the mean time there came a Letter to me from one Thomas Bishop a Scottishman, who had been long in England, and was a great perswader of many in England to favour her Majesties Title. He used oft to write unto my Brother and me, informations and advertisements. At this time in his Letter to me, he used even the like Language that my Lord Herreis had spoken, but more freely because he was absent in another Country. He adjured me to shew the said Letter unto her Majesty, declaring how it was bruited in England that her Majesty was to mar∣ry the Earl of Bothwel, who was the murtherer of her Husband, who at present had a Wife of his own, a Man full of all Vice, which reports he could not believe, by reason that he judged her Majesty to be of far greater knowledge, then to commit such a gross oversight, so preju∣dicial every way to her interest, and the noble mark he knew she shot at: Seeing if the married him, she would lose the favour of God, her own reputation, and the hearts of all England, Ireland and Scotland, with many other disswasions and examples of History, which would be tedious to rehearse. I had been some days absent, but upon receipt hereof I went to Court to shew this Letter to her Majesty, protesting that she would take it in good part. After that her Majesty had read the said Letter, she gave it me again without any more speech, but called upon the Secretary Lidingtoun, and told him that I had shewed her a strange Letter, desiring him also to read it. He asked what it could be. She answered, a device of his own tending to the wrack of the Earl of Bothwel. He took me by the hand and drew me aside to see the said Letter, which when he had read he asked, what had been in my mind, for, says he so soon as the Earl Bothwel gets notice hereof, as I fear he will very shortly, he will cause you to be killed. I said it was a sore matter to see that good Princess run to utter wrack, and no body to be so far concerned in her as to forwarn her of her danger. He said I had done more honestly then wisely; and therefore I pray you, says he, retire diligently be∣fore the Earl of Bothwel comes up from his Dinner. Her Majesty told him at her first meeting, having first ingaged him to promise to do me no harm. Notwithstanding whereof, I was inquired after, but was slown and could not be found till his fury was slaked: For I was advertised there was nothing but slaughter in case I had been gotten. Whereat her Majesty was much dissatisfied, telling him that he would cause her be left of all her Servants, whereupon he renewed his ingage∣ments that I should receive no harm, whereof I being advertised I went again unto her Majesty, shewing her that she had never so much injured me as by thinking that I had invented the said Letter, assu∣ring her that it came from the said Thomas Bishop, and that albeit it had not come from him, I thought it my duty to have freely told her Majesty my opinion in all reverence and humility, which was con∣tained in the said Letter, but I found she had no mind to enter upon this subject. Shortly after her Majesty went to Sterling, and in her back-coming betwixt Lithgow and Edinbrugh, the Earl of Bothwel rancountered her
with a great Company, and took her Majesties Horse by the Bridle, his men took the Earl of Huntly, the Secretary Lidingtoun and me, and carried us Captives to Dumbar: All the rest were permitted to go free. There the Earl of Bothwel boasted he would marry the Queen, who would or who would not; yea whether she would her self or not. Captain Blachater who had taken me, alledged that it was with the Queens own consent. The next day in Dumbar I obtained permission to go home. Afterward the Court came to Edinbrugh, and there a number of Noblemen were drawn together in a Chamber within the Palace, where they all subscribed a paper, declaring that they judged it was much the Queens interest to marry Bothwel, he having many friends in Louthian and upon the Borders, which would cause good or∣der to be kept. And then the Queen could not but marry him, seeing he had ravished her and lain with her against her will. I cannot tell how, nor by what Law he parted with his own Wife, Sister to the Earl of Huntly. A little before this the Earl of Murray had desired liberty to go to France; the Secretary Lidingtoun had been long in suspicion absent from Court, and was brought in again by my Brother Sir Robert's per∣swasion, for the great credit and handling he had with many Noblemen in England, favourers of her Majesties Title, albeit that he had as great credit himself, yet he would not follow the custom of ambitious Cour∣tiers, who would ingross all to themselves, unwilling to suffer a Com∣panion. He knew also that he was suspected, because the Earl Both∣wel was not his friend. Thus Lidingtoun was again brought in; but not long after the Earl of Bothwel thought to have slain him in the Queens Chamber, had not her Majesty come betwixt and saved him, but he fled the next day and tarried with the Earl of Athol. As for me I was not oft at Court but now and then, yet I chanced to be there at the marriage. When I came that time to the Court, I found my Lord Duke of Orkny sitting at his Supper, who welcomed me, saying, I had been a great stranger, desiring me to sit down and Sup with him: the Earl of Huntly, the Justice, Clerk and divers others being sitting at Table, with him. I said I had already Supped, then he called for a Cup of Wine and drank to me, saying, you had need grow fatter, for, says he, the zeal of the Common-wealth hath eaten you up, and made you lean. I answered, That every little member should serve for some use, but that the care of the Common-wealth appertained most to him, and the rest of the Nobility, who should be as Fathers of the same. I knew well, says he, he would find a pin for every bore. Then he fell in discoursing with the Gentlewomen, speaking such filthy lan∣guage, that they and I left him, and went up to the Queen who expres∣sed much satisfaction at my coming. The marriage was made at the Palace in Halyrood-house, after Ser∣mon by Adam Bothwel Bishop of Orkny, in the great Hall where the Council useth to sit, according to the order of the Reformed Religi∣on, and not in the Chappel at the Mass as was the King's mar∣riage. After the marriage he who was Earl of Bothwel now Duke of Ork∣ny, was very earnest to get the Prince in his hands, but my Lord of Mar, who was a true Nobleman, would not deliver him out of his custody,
alledging that he could not without consent of the three States: Yet he was so frequently crost by such as had the Authority in their hands, that he was thereby put to a great strait. And after that he had made divers refusals, among others he made his moan to me, praying me to help to save the Prince out of his hands who had slain his Father, and had already made his vaunt among his familiars, that if he could get him once in his hands, he should warrant him from revenging his Father's death. I assured his Lordship he should want no assistance I was capable to give: He desired to know if I could propose any out∣gate: I answered, That I was intimately acquainted with Sir James Balfour, and that I knew how matters stood betwixt Bothwel and him, namely, there were some jealousies arisen betwixt them, which I thought if rightly managed, might be improved for the Prince's safety. I also told him that the Earl intended to have the Castle out of his hands, for the Earl and he had been great Companions; and he was also very great with the Queen, so that the custody of the Castle of Edin∣brugh was committed to him: But afterward he would not consent to be present, nor take part with the murtherers of the King, whereby he came in suspicion with the Earl of Bothwel, who would no more cre∣dit him, so that he would have had the Castle out of his hands, to have committed the charge thereof to the Laird of Beenstoun. I told his Lordship he might make this one of his excuses, That he could not deliver the Prince till he should see a secure place to keep him in. And upon the other hand, when I returned to Edinbrugh, I dealt with Sir James Balfour not to part with the Castle, whereby he might be an instrument to save the Prince and the Queen, who was so disdainfully handled, and with such reproachful language, that in presence of Arthur Aroskine, I heard her ask for a knife to stab her self, or else, said she, I shall drown my self. Now, says I, to Sir James Balfour, there is no security for you to be out of suspicion, but to keep the Ca∣stle in your own hands, and so to be the good instrument both of sa∣ving Queen and Prince, and in assisting the Nobility who are about to Crown the Prince, and to pursue the Earl of Bothwel for the King's murther; I told him that unless he took part with them, he would be holden as guilty of the said murther, by reason of his long familiarity with the Earl of Bothwel: That it was a happy thing for him that the said Earl was in suspicion of him, assuring him that I had intelligence by one who was of the Earl of Bothwel's Councel, to wit, the Laird of Whitlaw, Captain of the Castle of Dumbar, that the Earl of Bothwel was determined to take the Castle of Edinbrugh from him, and make the Laird of Beenstoun one Hepburn Captain thereof, and then to put the Prince there in his keeping. Sir James Balfour gave ear to my proposition, and consented to help to pursue the murtherers, upon condition that the Laird of Grange would ingage upon his honour to be his Protector, in case afterward the Nobility should alter upon him, for he and most of them had for∣merly run contrary courses, so that he durst not credit them. The Earl of Mar being hereof from me advertised, by his Brother Alexander Areskine, who was true and careful of the Prince's safety, coming secretly to me at midnight, for the days were dangerous for all honest Men. Now my Lord of Mar being continually required,
and threat'ned to deliver the Prince out of his hands, at length granted (only to drive off time) upon condition, that an honest responsible Nobleman should be made Captain of the Castle of Edinbrugh, the on∣ly secure place of keeping the Prince in. This answer was thought fit to asswage the present fury, until the Nobility might convene to pur∣sue the murtherers, and to Crown the Prince, as they had already concluded at a secret meeting among themselves, which was not kept so private but that one of the said Lords gave advertisement thereof to the Earl of Bothwel, how that they were minded to inviron the Palace of Halirood-house, and therein to apprehend him: Whereupon he for∣got inquiring after the Prince, being only now concerned how to save himself: therefore he fled out of Edinbrugh to the Castle of Borth∣wick, from that to the Castle of Dumbar, taking always the Queen with him wherever he went. All Scotland cryed out upon the foul murther of the King, but few of them were careful how to revenge it, till they were driven thereto by the crying out of all other Nations, against all Scotishmen wherever they travelled, either by Sea or Land. Among other Princes, the King of France sent hither to his Ambassadour Monsieur de Crook, a grave, aged, discreet Gentleman, advanced by the House of Guise, a Letter, therein expressing his wonder that such a foul murther being com∣mitted upon the person of a King, so few honest Subjects were found to find fault with the same, for less to seek after any tryal, or see the same punished. Whereupon the Lords who had the enterprise in hand, were hasted forward to take Arms, and in the mean time they obliged themselves by a writing under their hands, which they delive∣red to the said Monsieur de Crook to send to the King his Master, that they should do their outmost diligence to try out the Authors of that foul murther of their King; and in the mean time convened to the number of 3000 men, and came to Edinbrugh, and there set out a Pro∣clamation of their just quarrel. Also sundry Libels were set out both in Rhime and Prose, to move the hearts of the whole Subjects to assist and take part in so good a Cause. The Earl of Bothwel having the Queen in his Company, convened a greater number out of the Merse and Lauthian, and out of all parts where he had interest or friendship. Her Majesties Proclamation was not well obeyed, and so many as came, had no hearts to fight in that quarrel. Yet the Earl of Bothwel marched forward out of Dumbar to∣ward Edinbrugh, taking the Queen with him. The Lords again with their Company went out of Edinbrugh on foot, with an earnest desire to fight. Both Armies lay not far from Carberry; the Earl Bothwel's men Camped upon the Hill, in a strength very advantageous, the Lords incamped at the foot of the Hill. And albeit her Majesty was there, I cannot call it her Army: for many of those who were with her, were of opinion that she had intelligence with the Lords, especially such as were informed of the many indignities put upon her by the Earl of Bothwel since their marriage. He was so beastly and suspici∣ous, that he suffered her not to pass one day in patience, without ma∣king her shed abundance of Tears. Thus part of his own Company detested him, other part of them believed that her Majesty would fain have been quit of him, but thought shame to be the doer thereof directly her self.
In the mean time the Laird of Grange did ride about the Hill with two hundred Horse-men, who came there with Drumlanrig, Cesfoord, and Couldinknows, thinking to be betwixt the Earl of Bothwel and Dum∣bar, and was minded to make an onset that way, which was plain, and that in the mean time that the Lords should come up the Hill to the part where their adversaries were Camped. When the Queen understood that the Laird of Grange was chief of that Company of Horse-men, she sent the Laird of Ormistoun to de∣sire him to come and speak with her under surety, which he did after he had acquainted the Lords with her desire, and had obtained their permission. As he was speaking with her Majesty, the Earl of Bothwel had appointed a Soldier to shoot him, until the Queen gave a cry, and said that he would not do her that shame, seeing she had promised that he should come and return safely. He was declaring unto the Queen, that all of them were ready to honour and serve her, upon condition that she would abandon the Earl of Bothwel, who had murthered her Husband, and could not be a Husband unto her, who had but lately married the Earl of Huntly's Sister. The Earl of Bothwel hearkened, and heard part of this language, and offered the Combat to any who would maintain that he had murthered the King. The Laird of Grange promised to send him an answer shortly thereunto. So he took his leave of the Queen, and went down the Hill to the Lords, who were content that the Laird of Grange should fight with him in that quarrel. For he first offered himself, and acquainted Bothwel that he would fight with him upon that quarrel. The Earl of Bothwel answered, That he was neither Earl, nor Lord, but a Baron, and so was not his equal. The like answer made he to Tullibardine. Then my Lord Lindsay offered to fight him, which he could not well refuse, but his heart failed him, and he grew cold in the business. Then the Queen sent again for the Laird of Grange and said to him, that if the Lords would do as he had spoken to her, she should put away the Earl of Bothwel, and come unto them. Where∣upon he asked the Lords, if he might in their name make her Majesty that promise, which they Commissioned him to do. Then he rode up again, and saw the Earl of Bothwel part, and came down again and as∣sured the Lords thereof. They desired him to go up the Hill again, and receive the Queen, who met him, and said Laird of Grange I ren∣der my self unto you, upon the conditions you rehearsed unto me in the name of the Lords. Whereupon she gave him her hand, which he kissed, leading her Majesties Horse by the bridle down the Hill unto the Lords, who came forward and met her. The Noblemen used all dutiful reverence, but some of the Rascals cryed out against her despightfully, till the Laird of Grange and others who knew their duty better, drew their Swords and struck at such as did speak irreverent language, which the Nobility well allowed of. Her Majesty was that night convoyed to Edinbrugh, and lodged in the midst of the Town in the Provosts Lodging. As she came through the Town, the common people cryed out against her Majesty at the Windows and Stairs, which was a pity to hear. Her Majesty again cryed out to all Gentlemen and Others, who passed up and down the streets, declaring how that she was their native Princess, and that she doubted not but all honest Subjects would respect her as they ought to
do, and not suffer her to be abused. Others again evidenced their ma∣lice, in setting up a Banner or Ensign, whereupon the King was pain∣ted, lying dead under a Tree, and the young Prince upon his knees praying, Judge and Revenge my Cause, O Lord. That same night it was alledged that her Majesty did write a Letter unto the Earl of Both∣wel, and promised a reward to one of her keepers to convoy it secure∣ly to Dumbar unto the said Earl, calling him her dear heart whom she should never forget nor abandon, though she was necessitated to be absent from him for a time, saying, that she had sent him away on∣ly for his safety, willing him to be comforted, and be upon his guard. Which Letter the Knave delivered to the Lords, though he had pro∣mised the contrary: Upon which Letter the Lords took occasion to send her to Lockleven to be kept, which she alledged was contrary to promise. They on the other hand affirmed, that by her own hand writing she had declared that she had not, nor would not abandon the Earl of Bothwel. Grange again excused her, alledging she had in ef∣fect abandoned the said Earl, that it was no wonder that she gave him yet a few fair words, not doubting but if she were discreetly handled, and humbly admonished what inconveniencies that Man had brought upon her, she would by degrees be brought, not only to leave him, but e're long to detest him: And therefore he advised to deal gently with her. But they said, that it stood them upon their Lives and Lands, and that therefore in the mean time they behoved to secure her, and when that time came that she should be known to abandon and detest the Earl Bothwel, it would be then time to reason upon the matter. Grange was yet so angry, that had it not been for the Letter, he had instantly left them: and for the next best he used all possible diligence to make her and them both quit of the said Earl, causing to make rea∣dy two Ships to follow after him, who had fled to the Castle of Dum∣bar, and from thence to Sheatland. In the mean time her Majesty sent a Letter to the Laird of Grange lamenting her hard usage, and shewing him that promises had been broken to her. Whereunto he answered, that he had already reproached the Lords for the same, who shewed unto him a Letter sent by her unto the Earl of Bothwel, promi∣sing among many other fair and comfortable words, never to abandon or forget him, which had stopped his mouth, marvelling that her Majesty considered not, that the said Earl could never be her Lawful Husband, being so lately before married with another, whom he had deserted without any just ground, although he had not been so hated for the murther of the King her Husband. And therefore he requested her Majesty to put him clean out of mind, seeing otherwise she could never get the love or respect of her Subjects, nor have that obedience payed her, which otherwise she might expect. It contained many other loving and humble admonitions, which made her bitterly to weep. For she could not do that so hastily which process of time might have accomplished. Now the Laird of Grange his two Ships being in readiness, he made sail toward Orkney, and no man was so frank to accompany him as the Laird of Tullibardin, and Adam Bothwel Bishop of Orkny, but the Earl was fled from Orkny to Sheatland, whither also they followed him, and came in sight of Bothwel's Ship, which moved the Laird of Grange to
cause the Skipper to hoise up all the Sails, which they were loath to do, because they knew the shallow water thereabout, but Grange fear∣ing to miss him, compelled the Marriners, so that for too great haste the Ship wherein Grange was did break upon a Bed of Sand, without loss of a man, but Bothwel had leasure in the mean time to save him∣self in a little Boat, leaving his Ship behind him, which Grange took, and therein the Laird of Fallow, Iohn Hepburn of Bautoun, Dalgleesh, and divers others of the Earl's Servants. Himself fled to Denmark, where he was taken, and kept in wrait Prison, wherein he became mad and dyed miserably. But Grange came back again with Bothwel's Ship and Servants, who were the first who gave information of the manner of the murther, which the Lords thought fit to let the King of France un∣derstand, and of their diligence according to the promise made by them. My Lord of Murray had obtained liberty to pass unto France, shortly after the murther of the King, for he did foresee the great trouble like to ensue. The rest of the Lords enterprisers after they had secured the Queen in Lochleven, began to consult how to get her Majesty counsel∣led to demit the Government to the Prince her Son, and for that ef∣fect they dealt first with my Brother Sir Robert, because he was some∣times allowed access to her Majesty. And after that he had refused flatly to meddle in that matter, they were minded to send the Lord Lindsay, first to use fair perswasions, and in case he could not speed that way, they were resolved to enter in harder tearms. The Earls of Athol, Mar, and Secretary Lidingtoun, and the Laird of Grange who lo∣ved her Majesty, advised my Brother to tell her the verity, and how that any thing she did in Prison could not prejudge her, being once again at liberty. He answered, he would give no such advice as co∣ming from himself, but he should tell it as the opinion of those he knew to be her true friends. But she refused utterly to follow that advice, till she heard that the Lord Lindsay was at the new House at the shore coming in, and in a very boasting humour: And then she yielded to the necessity of the time, and told my Brother that she would not strive with them, seeing it could do her no harm when she was at liberty. So at my Lord Lindsay's coming, she subscribed the signature of Renunciation, and Demission of the Government to the Prince, and certain Lords named in the said signature, to be Regents to the Prince and Country; her Majesty desiring my Lord Murray who was absent in France to be the first Regent. This being past, the Lords concluded to Crown the Prince, and sent Letters to France to the Earl of Murray to come home. In the mean time there were a number of Lords convened at Hamiltoun, as my Lord Hamiltoun, my Lord Pasby, Iohn Hamiltoun Bishop of St. Andrews, my Lord Fleeming, Boid, and divers others, to whom the Lords who were to Crown the Prince would have sent me Commissioner. Which Commission at the first I refused, but afterwards I accepted thereof at the advice of Secretary Lidingtoun, the Laird of Grange, and other se∣cret favourers of the Queen, who judged it very fit that the whole Country should bejoined together in quietness: fearing that in case Civil Wars entred among them, it might endanger her Majesties life: For it was judged that those who were at Hamiltoun appeared to lean to the Queen.
At my coming to Hamiltoun, I told them my Commission, in the name of the other Lords, how that the King being murthered, all neighbour Nations cryed out upon the whole Kingdom, but especial∣ly the King of France, and the Queen of England sollicited them to in∣quire after, and punish the murtherers. How that they had found that it was the Earl of Bothwel, and some of them who had assisted him, who were punished. And what was past since thereupon, was known to the whole Country. That the Queens Majesty had demitted over the Government to the Prince her Son, whom they were minded to Crown shortly, whereof they thought fit to warn all the Nobility, as being resolved to prejudge no Nobleman of his Rights, Titles or Prerogatives, requesting them who were there Convened, to come to Sterling, and be present at the said Coronation, for retaining their own priviledges, the peace and quiet of the whole Country. Some of the younger Lords answered, and said that they would not believe, that the Queens Majesty had demitted the Government, and if she had done it, it would be found for to save her life. But the Bishop who had more experience then they, reproved them, and said that those Noble∣men had dealt very reasonably and discreetly with them, so he drew the rest aside to advise, and then returned and gave me this an∣swer. We are beholden to the Noblemen who have sent you with that friendly and discreet Commission, and following their desire we are ready to concur with them, if they give us sufficient security of that which you have said in their name, and in so doing, they give us oc∣casion to construct the best of all their proceedings, past and to come. So that if they had acquainted us with their first enterprise of puni∣shing the murther, we should heartily have taken part with them. And whereas now we are here convened, it is not to pursue or offend any of them, but to be upon our own guards, understanding of so great a concourse of Noblemen, Barons, Burroughs, and other Subjects. For not being made privy to their enterprise, we thought fit to draw our selves together, till we should see whereto things would turn. When I returned back to Sterling, and declared this answer, it was judged satisfactory by all wise and honest hearted men. But others said, That however they minded to do, I had painted out a fair story for them, and in their favours. So that I perceived them already di∣vided in Factions and Opinions: For so many of our Lords as leaned to England desired not the stability of our state, others had particular prejudices and designs against the Hamiltouns, and expected to get them ruined, to gain advantage to themselves by fishing in troubled waters. So that the Hamiltouns were ill used, for they would fain have agreed with the rest, but their friendship and Society was plainly refused at this time, and they not permitted to come to the Coronation, nor yet to take instruments that they should not be prejudged in any sort, which occasioned great trouble afterward in the Country. For they perceiving themselves cast off, and their friendship and assistance refu∣sed, endeavoured for their own security and defence to draw in other Noblemen, and Barons to join with them, who had not as yet joined with the other Lords, and therefore were the more easily drawn upon that side: and these were afterward called the Queens Lords, when
they were convinced of the bad usage the Hamiltouns had received. I have before related that my Lord Murray was written for, to come home, and so soon as he came to London, the Lords were thereof ad∣vertise'd, who desired me to ride and meet him at Berwick, and shew him, how that the Office of Regent was appointed for him. Which Journey I accepted with the better will, in that some friends who were best inclined, thought meet to give him good counsel in due time. My Commission from the Lords was to inform him of all their pro∣ceedings, and of the present Estate, and to desire him to do nothing without their knowledge with the Queen. For they feared that he might carry himself with that mildness toward her, as to oblige her to believe he intended some time to release her, and that he would not run so hard a course against her, as some of them would had him to do. Another part of the said Lords (that did still bear a great love un∣to the Queen, and had compassion upon her estate, and who had en∣tred upon that enterprise only for safety of the Prince, and punishment of the King's murther, as the Earl of Mar, the Earl of Athol, the Secre∣tary Lidingtoun, the Lairds of Tullibardin, and Grange,) sent their in∣structions with me to my Lord of Murray, praying him, in their name, to behave himself gently and humbly unto the Queen, and to procure so much favour for her as he could. Not that they would advise him to forget any part of honest duty to the Lords, so long as they kept touch with him; but that in case they, or any part of them would be offended at him afterwards, for the refusal of some casuality, benefice, or the like, they would come to themselves again, seeing the Queen and him in so good tearms, lest he should set her at liberty upon accompt of their misbehaviour. And further, That her Majesty being now free of ill company, and of a clear wit, and Princely inclination, was beginning already to repent her of many things past, and time might bring about such occasions as they should all wish her at liberty to Rule over them. And that in that case, he would lose by his discreet and friendly beha∣viour to her. He appeared much to relish this device, but he seemed somewhat refractory of accepting the Government, refusing it plainly at first, albeit I was informed by some of his company, that he was right glad when he understood first that he was to be Regent. There came home with him a French Ambassadour of my acquaintance, who was sent to see how matters past, to comfort the Captive Queen, and to intercede for her, but he did it very slenderly: For he said to the Lords, he came not to offend any of them, alledging that the old Band and League betwixt France and Scotland, was not made with any one Prince, but betwixt the estates of the two Kingdoms, and with those who were Commanders over the Country for the time. After that my Lord of Murray had met with all his friends, he gran∣ted to accept the Government. But when he went to see the Queen in Lockleven, instead of comforting her, and following the good counsel he had gotten, he entred instantly with her Majesty in reproaches, giving her such injurious language, as was like to break her heart. We who found fault with that manner of procedure, lost his favour. The injuries were such, that they cut the thread of love and credit betwixt the Queen and him for ever.
You have heard how that the Lords who were in Hamiltoun were cast off, and refused to be accepted into Society with the rest, against the opinion of the fewest in number, though the wisest men, and least factious. But the worst inclined, and manyest votes obtained their in∣tent. Whereupon the Lords who were refused to be taken into friend∣ship, drew themselves together in Dumbartoun, under the pretext to procure by force of Arms the Queen their Sovereign's liberty, and ban∣ded themselves together against the King's Lords, which they would not have done, if they could have been accepted in Society with the rest. Albeit their publick professing their intentions of spending their lives for the Queens liberty, put her Majesties life in greater danger, so long as she was Captive in the hands of the contrary Party, and was at length her Majesties utter wrack. For the hope that she had to get friends and favourers, caused her to use means to escape out of Lockleven too hastily, e're the time was ripe enough to recover again the hearts of the Subjects, who were yet alienated. For albeit my Lord Regent was rigorous, he was flexible, and might have been won through process of time by her wisdom, and the interest of her friends. The tenour of their Bond was as followeth. FOrasmuch as considering the Queens Majesty our Sovereign, to be de∣tained at yresent at Lockleven in Captivity, wherefore the most part of her Majesties Lieges cannot have free access to her Highness; and see∣ing it becomes us of our duty to seek her liberty and freedom, We Ears, Lords, and Barons under subscribing, promise faithfully to use the oult∣most of our endeavours by all reasonable means, to procure her Majesties liberty and freedom, upon such honest conditions as may stand with her Ma∣jesties honour, the common weal of the whole Realm, and security of the whole Nobility, who at present have her Majesty in keeping. Where∣by this our native Realm may be governed, ruled and guided by her Ma∣jesty and her Nobility, for the common quietness, the administration of Iu∣stice, and weal of the Country. And in case the Noblemen who have her Majesty at present in their hands, refuse to set her at Liberty, upon such reasonable conditions as said is, in that case we shall employ our selves, our kindred, friends, servants, and partakers; our Bodies and Lives to set her Highness at liberty, as said is; and also to concur to the punishment of the murther of the King her Majesties Husband; and for sure preservation of the person of the Prince, as well shall answer to God, and on our honours and credit. And to that effect shall concur every one with other at our utmost power. And if any shall set upon us, or any of us, for the doing as aforesaid in that case, We promise faithfully to espouse one anothers interest under pain of Perjury and Infamy, as we shall answer to God. In witness whereof, We have subscribed these presents with our hand at Dumbartoun, the  day of St. Andrews, Arguile, Huntly, Arbroth, Gallway, Ross, Fleeming, Herris, Skirling, Killwonning, Will. Hamiltoun of Sanchir, Knight.
This small number were the first who banded themselves together, and afterward all those who were Male-contents, or had any particular questions, claims, or seuds with any of the King's Lords, drew to these new Confederates, hoping by time to win their intent against their adversaries, in case their faction might prevail. And some drew to both the factions, who neither desired to see the Kirk nor Country in any stablished estate. The Court of England on the other hand, left nothing undone to kindle the fire, and to furnish both the factions with hope of assistance, in case of need. For oft-times by their Ambassadours ordinary, who were resident here, they upon some new occasion would send in ano∣ther openly to deal with the King's faction, because it was strongest, and greatest, and under-hand to deal with the Queens faction, and al∣ledge that their quarrel was most just and right, and that her Maje∣sties Authority was only lawful. No man can tell this better then I, who was so long well acquainted with all the Ambassadours who were sent to Scotland, during their banishment in France in Queen Mary's time: as with Mr. Randolph, Sir Nicholas Throgmortoun, Mr. Dayson, Mr. Killegrew, and the Marshal of Berwick. Among the which num∣ber, Sir Nicholas Throgmortoun dealt most honestly and plainly, for he shot at the union of the whole Isle in one Monarchy. And thought that it consisted only in the persons of two for the time, to wit, the Queen, and the King her Son. And when he saw Mr. Randolph go about to sow discord, he declared the same to my Brother and me, and detested him for his divilish intent and dealing. Yea he detested the whole Council of England for the time, and told us friendly, what reasoning they held among themselves for that effect: to wit, How that one of their greatest Counsellors proposed openly to the rest, that it was needful for the well-fare of England, to foster and nourish with some help the Civil Wars, as well in France, Flanders, as Scotland, whereby England might have many advantages, and be sought after by all parties, and in the mean time live at rest, and gather great riches themselves. This advice and proposition was well allowed of by most part of the Council, yet one honest Councellor stood up and said, That it was a very worldly advice, and had little or nothing to do with a Christian Common-wealth, nor yet would it be found pro∣fitable in all points. First he said, It is worldly and not godly, for though I grant, said he, that France which is so potent a Kingdom, if it knew its own strength, might suppress all its neighbours, and there∣fore would be so handled, yet even there the fire would dye out incon∣tinent, except the Prince of Conde were better furnished, and helped. As for Flanders he said, That the trouble was prejudicial to England, because by the Wars in Flanders, England's great traffick of merchan∣dize is hindered, whereby they have greatest gain. As for Scotland, he said it was against their weal, to hold them in dissention, so long as my Lord of Murray was Regent, who was their friend, and would be ready to assist them with his power in their necessity. Another Councellor affirmed that to be true, but if my Lord Murray were dead, Scotland behoved likewise to be kept in hot Water. Which conclu∣sion was commonly followed afterward, and was soon discovered by the wisest, who were not factious; but too late by the rest of the ra∣ging
multitude, who through process of time were so battered one against another, e're the play was ended, that they would have eaten one another with their Teeth. Now my Lord of Murray having accepted the Government upon him, pressed to have the strengths in his hands, as the Castles of Edin∣brugh, Dumbar and Dumbartoun. The Castle of Edinbrugh was still in the hands of Sir James Balfour, who had assisted the Noblemen who had pursued the murther, and now took plain part with them, and like∣wise assisted the new made Regent. Yet he desired to have the Ca∣stle out of his hands, which he was content to deliver up upon con∣dition, that the Laird of Grange should be made Captain thereof, up∣on the constancy of whose friendship he reposed most; which was easi∣ly granted by the Regent, and all the rest. After this the other Strengths were also rendred to him. Then he took great pains to steal secret Roads upon the Thieves on the Borders, tending much to the quieting thereof. He likewise held Justice Airs in the In-coun∣try. But was not so diligent as he might have been, in settling the differences among the Nobility, and to draw them by a sweet and di∣screet equitable behaviour to the obedience of the King's Authority. Which might have been easily done, if they had gotten security for their persons and estates. But such as were about him, having their own ambitious and covetous ends, counselled him otherwise, thinking by the wrack of others to make up themselves. They were so blin∣ded by their affections, and greedy appetites, that they thought all would succeed prosperously according to their desires, without any resistance. Thus rushing forward, the Regent's rough proceedings gave occasion to many to draw to the contrary faction. And they to strengthen themselves under the name of Authority, devised how to draw the Queens Majesty out of Lockleven to be their head, before the time was ripe. Whereof the Regent was oft and frequently warned, even by divers who were upon the Council, of her out-taking, who desired that way to win thanks at his hands. But he would credit nothing, but such things as came out of the mouths of those who had crept into his favour by flattery. In the mean time the Queen was convoyed out of Lockleven by George Duglas the Lairds Brother, and the Regents half Brother, who was for the time in some evil tearms with them. The old Lady his Mother, was also thought to be upon the Councel. My Lord Seatoun, and some of the House of Hamiltoun, and divers of their dependers, re∣ceived her Majesty at her landing out of the Logh, and convoyed her to Hamiltoun. The Regent being for the time at Glascow holding Justice Eyrs, Pro∣clamations and Missives were incontinently sent abroad, by both sides, to convene so many as would act for them in the Country. One French Ambassadour was come to Edinbrugh ten days before, called Monsieur de Beumont Knight of the Order of the Cockle, whom I had convoyed to Glascow, and had procured to him a sight of the Queen, while Captive. He said to me, that he never did see so many men so suddenly convened, for he rode to Hamiltoun to the Queen, and dealt between the parties for Peace, but was not heard. Her Majesty was not minded to fight, nor hazard battel, but to go unto the Castle of
Dumbartoun, and endeavour by little and little to draw home again unto her obedience the whole Subjects. But the Bishop of St. An∣drews, and the House of Hamiltoun, and the rest of the Lords there convened, finding themselves in number far beyond the other Party, would needs hazard Battle, thinking thereby to overcome the Regent their great Enemy, and be also masters of the Queen, to Command and Rule all at their pleasure. Some alledged that the Bishop was minded to cause the Queen to marry my Lord Hamiltoun, in case they had obtained the victory. And I was since informed by some who were present, that the Queen her self feared the same, therefore she pressed them still to convoy her to Dumbartoun, and had sent me word with the French Ambassadour, the same morning before the battel, to draw on a meeting for concord, by the means of the Secretary Lidingtoun, and the Laird of Grange: And for her part she would send the Lord Herris and some other. She had also caused my Brother Sir Robert to write a Letter to me that same morning, for that same effect, but the Queen's Army came on so fiercely, that there was no stay. The Regent went out on foot, and all his Company except the Laird of Grange, Alexander Hume of Manderstoun, and some Borderers to the number of 200. The Laird of Grange had already viewed the ground, and with all imaginable diligence caused every Horse-man to take be∣hind him a Foot-man of the Regent's to guard behind them, and rode with speed to the head of the Long'sid'-hill, and set down the said Foot-men with their Culverings at the head of a straight Lane, where there were some Cottage-houses, and Yards of great advantage. Which Soldiers with their continual shot, killed divers of the Vaunt-guard, led by the Hamiltouns, who couragiously and fiercely ascending up the Hill, were already out of breath when the Regents Vaunt-guard join∣ed with them. Where the worthy Lord Hume fought on foot with his Pike in his hand very manfully, well assisted by the Laird of Cesfoord his Brother-in-law, who helped him up again when he was strucken to the ground by many stroaks upon his face, by the throw∣ing Pistols at him, after they had been discharged. He was also wounded with Staves, and had many stroaks of Spears through his Legs; for he and Grange at the joining, cried to let their adversaries first lay down their Spears, to bear up theirs; which Spears were so thick fixed in others Jacks, that some of the Pistols and great Staves, that were thrown by them which were behind, might be seen lying upon the Spears. Upon the Queens side the Earl of Arguile commanded the Battel; and the Lord of Arbroth the Vaunt-guard. On the other part the Regent led the Battle, and the Earl of Mortoun the Vaunt-guard: But the Regent committed to the Laird of Grange the special care, as be∣ing an experimented Captain, to oversee every danger, and to ride to every Wing, to incourage and make help where greatest need was. He perceived at the first joining, the right Wing of the Regent's Vaunt-guard put back, and like to fly, whereof the greatest part were Commons of the Barony of Ranthrow; whereupon he rode to them, and told them that their Enemy was already turning their backs, re∣questing them to stay and debate, till he should bring them fresh Men forth of the Battel. Whither at full speed he did ride alone, and told
the Regent that the Enemy were shaken, and flying away behind the little Village, and desired a few number of fresh Men to go with him. Where he found enough willing, as the Lord Lindsay, the Laird of Lockleven, Sir James Balfour, and all the Regents Servants, who fol∣lowed him with diligence, and reinforced that Wing which was be∣ginning to fly; which fresh Men with their loose Weapons struck the Enemies in their flanks and faces, which forced them incontinent to give place; and turn back, after long fighting and pushing others to and fro with their Spears. There were not many Horse-men to pursue after them, and the Regent cried to save and not to kill, and Grange was never cruel, so that there were but few slain, and taken. And the only slaughter was at the first rancounter, by the shot of the Soldiers which Grange had planted at the Lane-head behind some Dikes. After the loss of the Battel, her Majesty lost all courage, which she had never done before, and took so great fear, that she never rested till she was in England, thinking her self sure of refuge there, in re∣spect of the fair promises formerly made to her by the Queen of Eng∣land by word to her Ambassadours, and by her own hand-writ both before and after she was Captive in Lockleven. But God and the World knows how she was kept and used, for not only she refused to see her, of whom she appeared so oft so desirous of a sight, and a meeting, but also caused to keep her Prisoner, and at length suffered her life to be taken away, or else it was subtilly taken against her intention. This puts me in remembrance of a tale that my Brother Sir Robert told me, The time that he was busiest dealing betwixt the two Queens to enter∣tain their friendship, and draw on their meeting at a place near York, One Bassintoun a Scots-man who had been a Traveller, and was learned in high Sciences, came to him and said; Good Gentleman, I hear so good a report of you, that I love you heartily, and therefore cannot forbear to shew you how that all your upright dealing, and honest travel will be in vain: For whereas you believe to obtain advantage for your Queen at the Queen of England's hands, you do but lose your time and your travel: For first they will never meet together, and next there will never be any thing else but dissembling, and secret ha∣tred for a while, and at length Captivity and utter wrack to our Queen from England. My Brother answered, he liked not to hear of such devilish news, nor yet would he in any sort credit them, as being false, ungodly, and unlawful for Christians to meddle with. Bassintoun an∣swered, good Mr. Melvil entertain not that harsh opinion of me. I am a Christian of your own Religion, and fear God, and purposeth never to cast my self on any of the unlawful Arts that you mean, but so far as Melancthon, who was a godly Theologue, hath declared lawful, and written concerning the natural Sciences which are lawful, and daily read in divers Christian Universities, in the which as in all other Arts, God gives to some less and to others clearer knowledge, by the which knowledge I have attained to understand, that at length the Kingdom of England shall of right fall to the Crown of Scotland, and that at this instant there are some born who shall brook Lands and Heritages in England: But, alas, it will cost many their Lives, and many bloody Battels will be fought e're things be settled or take effect, and by my
knowledge, says he, the Spaniards will be helpers, and will take a part to themselves for their labour, which they will be loath to leave a∣gain. After that the Queens Majesty had demitted the Government, when she was Captive in Lockleven in such manner as is rehearsed, my Lord of Murray being the first of the Regents of whom I have said something already, I intend now to follow forth, and shew a part of his proceed∣ings, and to begin where I left at her Majesties retreat to England. After the Battel of Langside, the Regent went through the Coun∣try, and took up the Escheats and Houses of those who had assisted at the said Battel, and caused to cast down divers of their houses distribu∣ting their Lands to his Servants and dependers. The Council of England being crafty, and in special the Secretary Cicil, they knew what kind of Men had most credit about him for the time, and thereupon took occasion to deal with the least honest, most ambitious and covetous of that number and Society, who had joined and banded themselves together to assist each other, whereby to ad∣vance themselves, and to disgrace all such true and honest men as had assisted, and helped him in all his former troubles. This sort of Men were soon perswaded and corrupted, to move the Regent to pass unto England, and accuse their native Queen before the Queen and Council of England, to the great dishonour of their Country and Prince. For the Queen of England who had no just cause to retain our Queen, who had fled to England in hope of getting shelter, and the assistance which had been so oft promised her both before and after her Captivity in Lockleven, was very desirous to have some colour and pretext where∣by she might make answer to the Ambassadours of sundry Princes who reproached her for her unkindly and unprincely proceedings therein. Because the most part of those who had the Regent's Ear were gain∣ed to this opinion, and the number few who were of a contrary mind, he went forward to England, accompanied with the Earl of Mortoun, the Lord Lindsay, the Laird of Lockleven, the Bishop of Orkny, the Ab∣bot of Dumfarmling, Mr. James Macgil, Mr. Henry Balnears, Mr. George Buchanan, the Laird of Pittarrow, George Duglas Bishop of Murray, Mr. John Wood the Regent's Secretary, a great Ring-leader, Mr. Nicholas Elphinstoun, Secretary Lidingtoun, Alexander Hay, Alexander Hume of North-Berwick, the Laird of Cleesh, with divers other Barons, and Gentlemen, who went there to see the fashion, some to wait upon the Regent and Lords, and some who could not get the Regent disswaded from this extream folly at home, went with him to England to see if by any assistance of such as were friends there to the Union of the Isle, and to the Title of Scotland, he might be stayed from that accusation. For those who were the Queens Lords, who came there to defend the Queens part, had no credit nor familiarity with the chief faction in England concerning the Title, nor durst open their minds but to such as by long acquaintance they were well assured of their honesty and se∣crecy. The names of the Queens Lords were, the Lord Herreis, the Lord Boid, the Lord Fleeming, the Lord Livingstoun, the Bishop of Ross, and some others, with my Brother Sir Robert, who attended to do all the good he could.
The Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Sussex, and several other Councel∣lors were sent down to York, to hear the Regent's Accusation, and to be as Judges between the King and Queen's Lords. The first day of meeting, the Duke of Norfolk required that the Re∣gent should make Homage in the King's Name to the Crown of En∣gland, thinking he had some ground to demand the same, seeing the said Regent there to plead his Cause before the Councel of England. Whereat the Regent grew red, and knew not what to answer; but Secretary Lidingtoun took up the Speech, and said, That in restoring again to Scotland the Lands of Huntingtuon, Cumberland, and Nor∣thumberland, with such other Lands as Scotland did of old possess in En∣gland, that Homage should gladly be made for the said Lands; but as to the Crown and Kingdom of Scotland, it was freer than England had been lately, when it payed St. Peter's Penny to the Poor. It appeared still that the Duke drave off time with us, as having no inclination to enter upon the terrors of Accusation. What was in his head, appeared afterward, but he was long in a suspence with whom to deal. For he thought (as he afterward said) he neither did see ho∣nest men nor wise men. At last he resolved to enter in Conference with Secretary Lidingtoun, to whom he said, That before that time he had ever esteem'd him a Wise man, until that now he came before Strangers to accuse the Queen his Mistress, as if England were Iudge over the Princes of Scotland. How could we find in our hearts to dishonour our Kings Mother, or how could we answer afterward for what we were doing, seeing it tended to hazard the King her Sons Right to England, intending to bring his Mothers honesty in question. It had been rather the Duty of you his Subjects, sayes he, to cover her Imperfections, if she had any, re∣mitting unto God and Time to punish and put Order thereto, who is the Only Iudge over Princes. Lidingtoun, as he might well do, purged him∣self, and declared he came there to endeavour to stop the said Accusa∣tion, which the Laird of Grange, and divers others, had endeavoured to do in vain, before the Regent's coming out of Scotland. And that now he would be glad of any help to hinder that shameful deliberation of the Regents, pushed thereto by a company of greedy, rash, and care∣less Councellors, the most part of them his Enviers and secret. Ene∣mies; praying the Duke not to conceive such an Evil Opinion of him, but requesting him to draw the Regent apart, and enter with him upon those Terms which afterward the Regent would shew him and he should amplifie and set it out the best he could. The Duke asked if the Regent would keep secret? and being thereof assured by Lidingtoun, the next day he took occasion to enter into discourse with the Regent, about their first Friendship and Familiarity contracted at Lieth, during the Siege, and helping to put the Frenchmen out of Scotland. Then after that the Regent had promised Secrecy, and assured him that their first Friendship should stand till the end of his Life, the Duke began to declare, how that he would be a Faithful Subject to the Queen his Mistress so long as she lived; but that she was too careless what might come after her about the well and quiet of her Country: tho it was the Interest of the Kingdom of England, more to notice the same, by determining the Succession to prevent Troubles that might otherwise ensue. That tho they had divers times essayed to do some∣thing
therein at every Parliament, but that their Queen had thereat evidenced a great discontent, and hindred the same, shewing thereby that she cared not what Blood was shed after her for the Right and Title of the Crown of England, which consists only in the Persons of the Queen and King of Scotland her Son, which had been put out of doubt e're then, if matters had not fallen out so unhappily at home, and yet he and other Noblemen of England, as Fathers of the Coun∣try, were minded to be careful thereof, watching their opportunity. But that they wondred what could move him to come there and ac∣cuse his Queen; for albeit she had done, or suffered harm to be done to the King her Husband, yet there was respect to be had to the Prince her Son, upon whom he and many in England had fixed their Eyes, as Mr. Melvil, who had been late Ambassadour there could testifie. He therefore wished that the Queen should not be accused, nor disho∣noured for the King her Sons cause, and for respect to the Right they both had to succeed to the Crown of England. And further the Duke said, I am sent to hear your Accusation, but neither will I, nor the Queen my Mistress, give out any Sentence upon your Accusa∣tion. And that you may understand the verity of this Point more clearly, you shall do well the next time that I require you before the Councel to give in your Accusation in Writing; to demand again my Mistress's Seal and Hand-Writing (before you show your folly) that in case you Accuse, she shall immediately Convict and give out her Sentence according to your Probation; otherwise, that you will not open your Pack: Which if her Majestie shall refuse to grant unto you, which undoubtedly she will do, then assure your self that my Information is true, and take occasion hereupon to stay from further accusation. The Regent took very well with this Advice of the Dukes, and kept it secret from all his Company save Secretary Lidingtoun, and me, to whom that same Night he imparted it, shewing us his inclination to follow the same; in which Resolution we confirmed him. At the next meeting with the Council, when the Duke demanded the Accusa∣tion to be given in, the Regent asked for his Security the Queen of Englands Seal and Hand-Writing, as was before advised; of which the rest of his Faction gave Lidingtoun the full blame, because it drew on a delay until the Post was sent to the Court, and returned the Queens answer. Being come, it was told that she was a true Princess, her Word and Promise would be abundantly sufficient. The Secretary Cicil, and Mr. John Wood Secretary to the Regent, thought strange of this manner of procedure, therefore it was advised to desire the Lords on both sides, to go from York toward the Court, that the matter might thereto be treated, where the Queen was able to give more ready An∣swers and Replies. In the mean time the Regent finding the Information the Duke of Norfolk gave him concerning the Queen of Englands Answer to be true, he entred further into Communication with him, and in presence of Lidingtoun, it was agreed betwixt them as followeth; That he in no wayes should accuse the Queen; That the Duke should obtain to him the Queens Favour with a confirmation of the Regency. The Duke and He were to be as sworn Brothers of one Religion, shooting conti∣nually
at one mark, with the mutual intelligence of one anothers minds, the one to Rule Scotland, the other to Rule England, to the Glory of God, and well of both the Countries, and their Princes, so that Posterity should report them the happiest two Instruments that ever were bred in Brittain. The Duke was then the greatest Subject in Europe, not being a free Prince. For he ruled the Queen, and all those who were most fa∣miliar with her. He also ruled the Councel, and ruled two Facti∣ons in England, both Protestants and Papists, with the City of London, and whole Commons. The Great Men who were Papists, were all his near Kinsmen, whom he entertained with great Wisdom, and Discre∣tion; the Protestants had such proof of his Godly Life and Conversa∣tion, that they loved him intirely. The Regent being arrived at the Court of England, which was for the time at Hampton-Court, he was daily pressed to give in his accusa∣tion, especially by those who were about him, when all thought strange that he was so slow in doing thereof, until they were advertised by one of the Lords of the Queens Faction, of all that had past betwixt the Regent and the Duke of Norfolk. For the Duke by a secret hand had advertised our Queen, and she again shewed it to one of her most Fa∣miliars, who advertised the Earl of Mortoun thereof. He took this very ill, that the Regent had done this without acquainting him, or any of his Society of his design. But e're he, or any of his Company, would seem to understand any thing of the matter, they laid their heads to∣gether, and caused Mr. John Wood to inform Secretary Cicill of all that had past, desiring him to press forward the Accusation, wherein of himself he was abundantly earnest. They again left nothing undone for their part, to effectuate the same, putting him in hope that the Queen would give him her Hand-Writing and Seal, that she should convict the Queen in case he accused her. Others of the finest of them, persuaded him that she would never give her hand-writing or Seal for that end, putting him to a strait to see what he would do in case he obtained his desire. Mr. John Wood said, That it was fit to carry in all the Writs to the Councel, and he would keep the Accusation in his bosom, and would not deliver it till first the thing demanded of the Queen was granted. The rest of the Regents Lords and Councellors had concluded among them, That so soon as the Duke of Norfolk as chief of the Coun∣cel would inquire for the Accusation, they should all with one voice cry and persuade the Regent to go forward with it. Secretary Lidingtoun and I minded the Regent, how far he had ob∣liged himself to the Duke of Norfolk. He said, He would do well enough, and that it would not come to that length. So soon as he with his Coun∣sel were within the Councel-House, the Duke of Norfolk asked for the Accusation; the Regent desired again the assurance of Conviction by Writing and Seal, as is said. It was answered again, That the Queens Majesties Word, being a true Princess, was sufficient. Then all the Coun∣cel cryed out, Would he mistrust the Queen, who had given such proof of her Friendship to Scotland. The Regent's Councel cryed out also in that same manner. Then Secretary Cicil asked if they had the Accu∣sation there? Yes, sayes Mr. John Wood; and with that he plucks it out of his Bosom, but I will not deliver it, sayes he, till her Majesties
Hand-Writing and Seal be delivered to my Lord Regent for what he de∣mands. Then the Bishop of Orkny snatcheth the Writing out of his hand, Let me have it, sayes he, I shall present it. Mr. John Wood run after him, as if he would have taken it again. Forward goes the Bishop to the Council-Table, and gives in the Accusation. Then cryes out the Chamberlain of England, Well done Bishop, thou art the frankest Fel∣low among them all, none of them will make thy leap good; scorning his leaping out of the Laird of Grange's Ship. Mr. Henry Balneavs only had made resistance, and called for Secretary Lidingtoun, who waited without the Councel House. But so soon as Mr. Henry Balneavs had called for him, he came in and whispered in the Regent's Ear, That he had shamed himself, and put his Life in danger, by the loss of so good a Friend as the Duke of Norfolk, and that he had lost his Reputation for ever. The Regent, who by his facility had been brought to break with the Duke of Norfolk, repented himself thereof, so soon as Lidingtoun ac∣quainted him with the danger, and desired the Accusation to be ren∣dred up to him again, alledging he had some more to add thereto. They answered, They would hold what they had, and were ready to receive any addition when he should please to give it in. The Duke of Norfolk had much ado to keep his Countenance. Mr. John Wood winked upon Se∣cretary Cicil, who smiled again upon him. The rest of the Regent's Company were laughing one upon another, only Secretary Lidingtoun had a sad heart. The Regent came forth of the Council-House with Tears in his eyes, and went to his Lodging at Kingstoun, where his fa∣ctious friends had much ado to comfort him. The Queen of England having obtained her intent, received there∣by great contentment through the advantage she thereby received. First, she thought she had matter for her, to shew wherefore she de∣tained the Queen, when she was challenged by the forreign Ambassa∣dours upon that accompt. Then she was glad of the Queens disho∣nour, but in her mind she detested the Regent, and all his Company, and would notice him no more. She sent also incontinent to the Queen to comfort her, praying her to look on her self in a better case, albeit for a while restrained of her liberty, then to be in Scotland, among so unworthy Subjects, who had accused her falsly and wrongfully, as she was assured; and that neither should they be the better, nor she the worse for any thing they had done: For she would neither be Judge, nor give out any Sentence thereupon, nor should any part of the said false Accusation be made known by her, or her Council to any, pray∣ing her to take patience in her gentle Ward, where she was nearer to get the Crown of England set upon her head, in case of her decease, who was but the eldest Sister. Thus the Regent won no other thing for his labour, but to be despi∣sed by the Queen and Council of England, detested by the Duke of Norfolk, and reproached by his best and truest friends, suffered to lye a long time at Kingstoun, in great displeasure and fear, without Mony to spend, and without hope to get any from the Queen. In the mean time, the agreement betwixt him and the Duke of Norfolk, was told the Queen. For the Earl of Mortoun caused a Minister called John Wil∣lock, to declare what had past betwixt the Regent and the Duke of
Norfolk to the Earl of Huntingtoun, who caused my Lord of Leicester to tell it to the Queen. The Duke of Norfolk finding himself disappointed by the Regent, and his purposes discovered to the Queen, began to boast and speak plain language, That he would serve and honour the Queen his Mistress so long as she lived, but after her decease he would set the Crown of Eng∣land upon the Queen of Scotland's head, as lawful Heir. And this he avowed to Secretary Cicil, desiring him to go and prattle that langu∣age again to the Queen. The Secretary Cicil answered, That he would be no Tale-teller to the Queen of him, but would concur with him in any course, and serve him in any thing wherein he would imploy him. He threatned also Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who he supposed would be a true and devoted Servant to the Queen: So that Sir Nicholas was ne∣cessitated to seek after his favour by the means of the Earls of Pembroke and Leicester, who was also his friend, albeit he durst not conceal from the Queen that whereof the Earl of Huntingtoun had advertised him, seeing he had desired him to declare the same to her Maje∣sty. The Duke of Norfolk understanding that his whole purposes were discovered, stood not to acknowledge to the Queen, That during her life-time he would never offend her, but serve and honour her, and after her the Queen of Scotland, as in his opinion truest Heir, and the only means for eschewing of Civil Wars, and great blood-shed that might other∣wise fall out. Now albeit the Queen of England liked not that language, yet she would not appear to find fault with it for the time. Now matters being cast loose in this manner between the Regent and the Duke, and the Regent in great distress; Sir Nicholas Throgmor∣ton being a Man of a deep reach, and great prudence and discretion, who had ever travelled for the Union of this Isle, after that he was agreed with the Duke, and perceived that the Earls of Leicester, Pem∣broke, Secretary Cicil, and the rest of the Court and Commons were all for the Duke, and that the Queen durst not find fault with him, he devised and effectuated a new friendship betwixt the Regent and the Duke, who was unwilling again to enter with the Regent, yet at length he suffered himself to be perswaded. The Lord Regent on the other hand, being destitute of all friendship in England for the time, and indigent of mony, thought he would be very fortunate if again he could obtain the Dukes friendship and pardon, so he was brought easily and secretly unto the Duke by Sir Nicholas. At which time he granted his offence, excusing himself the best he could, by the craft and importunity of some of his Company. The Duke helped him to frame his excuse, alledging, That he knew how his gentle nature was abused by the craft and concurrence of some of the Council of England, who had joined with some about him. That if he would for the future keep touch and be secret, they should take a course with all those who had drawn on that draught. The Regent promised as far as could be devi∣sed, so that a greater friendship was packed up between them then ever. The Duke had before told him, That he was resolved to marry the Queen our Mistress, and that he should never permit her to come to Scotland, nor yet that he should ever Rebell against the Queen of England, during her time. Also that he had a Daughter, who would
be meeter for the King, then any other for many Reasons. Now the Duke took in hand to cause the Queen his Mistress to give unto my Lord Regent Two thousand pound sterling, for the which Sum he became Cautioner, and was afterward compelled to pay it. After that the Regent had got this mony, and had taken his leave of the Queen, he was advised by such as had great credit about him, to tell the Queen all things that had past again betwixt the Duke and him. And to do it the more covertly, it was devised. That the Queen of England should send for him, pretending to give him some admo∣nition about some order to be observed upon the Border. This being done, and all things discovered to the Queen, with a promise so soon as he came to Scotland, and had received any Letters from the Duke, by Cyphers or otherwise, he should send them to England by an Ex∣press. In the mean time the Duke wrote unto our Queen, advertising her again of the new friendship between him and the Regent, who was become very penitent, and had been formerly deceived by craftier men then himself, desiring her to let him pass by without any harm done to him, or any in his company by the way. At that time the Duke commanded over all the North parts of Eng∣land, where the Queen our Mistress was kept, and so might have ta∣ken her out when he pleased. And when he was angry at the Regent, he had appointed the Earl of Westmerland to lye in his way and cut off himself, and so many of his company, as were most bent upon the Queens Accusation. But after the last agreement, the Duke sent and discharged the said Earl from doing us any harm, yet upon our return the Earl came in our way with a great Company of Horse, to signifie to us that we were at his mercy. After the Regents safe return to Scotland, Mr. John Wood his Secre∣tary peocured, upon the first occasion, to be sent to England, with all the Letters that had been sent from the Duke of Norfolk, which could tend to undo him. He desired Mr. Henry Balneavs to cause the Re∣gent to give him the Bishoprick of Murray, void for the time, though he pretended it was neither for ambition nor covetousness of the Rents, but that he might have an honourable Style, to set out the better his Ambassage. The said Mr. Henry being indeed such a man as Mr. John would appeared to have been, was very angry, and never liked him ester that my Lord Lindsay vented himself, That he was one of the number who gave the Regent counsel so to do, alledging, that such promises as were made to the Duke of Norfolk for fear of life, ought not to be kept. A little after that Mr. John was come back to Scotland, well rewar∣ded for his pains, the Duke was sent for by the Queen to come to Court. Whereupon first he posted in haste to Secretary Cicil to demand his counsel, for he reposed much upon him, they being joined in one course. The other made answer, That there was no danger, he might come and go at his pleasure, no man would or durst offend him. Which made the Duke ride up quietly, only with his own train, where∣as otherwise he would have been well accompanied. In the mean time, Secretary Cicil informed the Queen, That the necessity of the time obliged her not to omit this occasion, but to take the matter stoutly upon her self, and incontinent command her Guard to lay hands upon the Duke,
or else no other durst do it, which if she did not at this time, her Crown would be in peril. The Queen following this counsel, the Duke was taken and secured, when he thought all England was at his Devotion, who after long Captivity was Executed, ending his Life devoutly in the Reformed Religion. Shortly after Mr. John Wood's returning out of England, there was a great Convention held at Pearth, where the Regent was resolved to accuse Secretary Lidingtoun, as being of Councel with the Duke of Norfolk, but he had so many friends for the time, that they durst not lay hands on him, albeit from that hour forth, he retired from the Court, and remained with the Earl of Athol, where the Regent enter∣tained him with friendly Letters. And upon a time being at Sterling, he wrote for him to come and make a dispatch for England, whither being come, Captain Crauford was directed to accuse him before the Privy Council of the late King's murther, and being accused of so odi∣ous a Crime, he was committed to Ward. Sir James Balfour was also taken out of his own House, when he expected no such thing. Then my Lord of Doun wrote to the Laird of Grange to be upon his guard, for the Regent was resolved to take the Castle of Edenbrugh from him, and make the Laird of Drumwhasel Captain thereof. Which ad∣vertisement he had formerly given to Grange, as also of the design to take the Secretary, and Sir James Balfour. But at the first he would not give credit thereto, but now when he did see the Advertisement take effect, he began to think that the Regent was strangely missed, he would have been satisfied to have wanted the Castle, and to have left the Court, were it not for the desire he had to save the Lives of Secretary Lidingtoun, and Sir James Balfour, having upon his Honour engaged to protect the said Sir James upon his rendring up the Castle to him. He knew they were wrongfully pursued, only by the Malice and En∣vy of their Enemies for their Offices. Sir James Balfour being taken, sent unto the Laird of Grange, minding him how he had joyned with the Lords and Regent upon the Trust he reposed on his Fidelity, more than on all their Seals and Hand-writings which he had to produce. Whereupon the Laird of Grange sent a Gentleman to the Regent, but the Regent purged himself, and alledged the Councel were so banded together against the Secretary, and Sir James Balfour, That it consisted not in his power to preserve them from Prison, seeing they were accused for the King's Murther against his will, but Grange should know his honest part thereof at meeting; praying him in the mean time to suspend his judgment. Nevertheless the Regent and his Councel were determined to proceed to Process the two Prisoners upon their Lives, till Grange sent again and desired the like Justice to be done upon the Earl of Mor∣toun and Mr. Archibald Douglas. For he offered to fight with Mr. Archibald, and the Lord Herries with the Earl of Mortoun upon that head, That they were upon the Councel, and consequently airt and pairt of the King's Murther. This stayed their Process at that time. And the Regent still alledged, That the Lords had taken them against his will, and that he should send Sir James Balfour to the Castle of St. Andrews, and should bring Secretary Lidingtoun to Edinbrugh, and deliver him unto the Laird of Grange to be kept. So the Regent came to Edin∣brugh, and brought the Secretary with him, intending, as Grange was
informed, to make the Secretary an Instrument to draw Grange out of the Castle to the Town the next morning to receive the Secretary to be carried up to the Castle, and then to retain Grange also till the Castle should be delivered unto the Laird of Drumwhasel to be Keeper thereof, and to send Grange home to his house and reward him with the Priory of Pittenweem. But the Earl of Mortoun had appointed four men to slay Grange at the entry of the Regent's Lodging, without the Regent's knowledg. But Grange was loath yet to believe the worst of the Regent, and being of opinion that the Regent's gentle Nature was forced by the Lords, as he had sent him word, understanding that they intended to carry the Secretary to Tantalloun, he came down out of the Castle with a Company; and took the Secretary out of the hands of his Keepers, and convoyed him up to the Castle. For he thought if it were true that the Regent said, That he was forced by the Lords against his will to let the Secretary be retained after that he was ac∣cused, the Regent would be glad that he had revenged his quarrel upon the Lords, by taking the Secretary out of their hands, whereof he might justly pretend ignorance. And if the Regent would be dissatis∣fied with his carriage therein, it would be a certain token of his dissi∣mulation. In that case Grange thought he did a good deed to save his Friends Life, and so he would have good ground to believe divers In∣telligences which formerly he would not credit, and therefore he would be upon his guard in Time coming. The Regent and his Councellors when they understood that Grange had taken the Secretary to the Castle, were in great perplexity, suppo∣sing all their Counsels to be disclosed. They knew not how to help the matter, but they advised the Regent to cover his anger until a fit opportunity, causing him to go up to the Castle the next morning. For he durst trust Grange, tho Grange would no more trust him. At meeting the Regent gave him more fair words than he was wont to do, which Grange took in evil part. After this there were many devices how to intrap Grange, some∣time in his down-coming to the Regent, but he was ever advertised and upon his guard, so as the Regent lost dayly of his best Friends, and the number of his Enemies increased. For the Duke of Chattellerault (who was agreed with him by the intercession of the Lord Herreis) when the said Duke and the Lord Herreis came to Edinbrugh, as was appointed at the agreement, to concur with the Regent in Councel and otherwise for the quieting of the Country, they were both warded in the Castle, against promise. Which when the Laird of Grange found fault with, Mr. John Wood said, I marvel at you that you will be offend∣ed at this; for how shall we who are my Lords dependers, get Rewards, but by the wrack of such men. Yea, said Grange, is thas your holiness, I see nothing among you but Envy, Greediness, and Ambition, whereby you will wrack a good Regent, and ruine the Country. This was long before the taking of the Secretary, and increased the hatred of a wicked Society against Grange, who upon all occasions evidenced his detesting their selfish Designs, who were dependers upon the Regent; which was one of the faults also they had against the Secretary, as also because his Wit so far excelled theirs. The Captivity of the Duke and my Lord Herreis, made many Enemies to the Regent, who took the greater
boldness to conspire against him, when they perceived him to lose and cast off his best Friends. It was a grievous thing, to see that good Regent, of himself so well inclined to do good offices in Religion and Commonwealth, so led after other mens vain pretences, and affections, to his own wrack, to the wrack of many worthy Persons, and to their ruine at length who led him in these wayes. He grew to give great ear to Flatterers, and would not suffer his true Friends to tell him the verity. The observation hereof, made ma∣ny conjecture that his Ruin was at hand; and I among others devised a present remedy for his preservation, which was this: I knew that the taking Lidingtoun to the Castle, sunk deepest in the Regent's heart; and that the false practises and wrackful fetches of such as had taught him to dissemble, moved Grange, who had been his grea∣test Friend, to be jealous of him; the noticing whereof gave ground to his Enemies to conspire against him. First, I requested the Regent to remember the false Practises, that some about him had sundry times used formerly to his great displea∣sure, and to consider that they occasioned all the jealousies and suspi∣tions that were fallen out between him and his Friends, which might encourage his Enemies to take some wicked enterprise in hand against his Person. To remedy this, I proposed it as fit, That Lidingtoun should go unto France, finding Caution not to return to Scotland un∣der the penalty of Twenty thousand pounds, and withal giving his Son in pledg for further Security, and that he should practise nothing against the Quiet of the Country. And that Sir James Balfour should be set at liberty, or banished after that same manner. For he had already won the Regent's Familiars with great Sums of Gold, which had stanched their wrath against him; which Lidingtoun would not do, albeit Sir James had sent him his advice to do as he had done. These two being freed and out of the way, The Laird of Grange should deliver to him the Castle of Edinbrugh, to make Captain thereof whom he pleased. That so the whole Country might see, that all was in his power, and at his com∣mand. This I thought the best way to reduce again the opinion of the People, and to scare all his Enemies from their desperate enterprises. His answer was, That he did bear no ill will to Lidingtoun, that he would not press him to go out of the Country; as for Sir James Balfour, he would set him at liberty; and for Grange, he had too many Obligations to him, and too great proofs of his Fidelity to mistrust him; That he was never minded to take the Castle from him; and if it were out of his hands, he would give him the Keeping thereof before any other. He denyed that he had any suspition either of Grange, or the Secre∣tary, and thereupon went up to the Castle and conferred Friendly with them of all his affairs, with a merry Countenance, and casting in many merry purposes, minding them of many straits and dangers they had formerly been together engaged in. So far was he instructed to dis∣semble; yet the violence he did himself herein was easily perceived by such, who had been long acquainted with him, and had been his chief advisers under God. The Secretary by his Wisdom, and Grange by his Valour and Fidelity, who had both such notable Qualities as pro∣cured them the Envy of wicked men, who by their continual Flattery
and false Reports put them out of his Favour, and then like a weak House wanting his sustaining Pillars, he fell. Himself was at the first of a gentle Nature, well inclined, good, wise, stout. In his first uprising, his hap was to light upon the best sort of Company; his beginning was full of adversity, true honest men stuck by him, because he was Religiously educated, and devoutly inclined. But when he became Regent, Flatterers for their profit drew near him, and puft him up into too good an opinion of himself. His old true Friends, who would reprove and admonish him, thereby lost his Fa∣vour. I would sometimes say to him, That he was like an unskilful Player in a Tennis Court, running ever after the Ball; whereas an expert Player will discern where the Ball will light, or where it will rebound, and with small travel will let it fall on his hand, or racket. This I said, because he took very great pains in his own Person to small effect. After that he had gotten divers advertisements of his Enemies Conspi∣racies, yet he would credit nothing, but what came from his own Fa∣miliars, who told him nothing but of fair weather, and of the best Government that could be, and so rendred him careless and secure which encouraged the Good man of Bodwelhaugh called Hamil∣toun, to lye in his way as he was passing thorow Lithgow, who shot him, whereof he dyed that same Night; all his Councellors and Familiars, were also well advertised as he was, both of the man, the place, and the time, and yet were so careless of him, that they would not be at the pains to search the house where the man lay to shoot him, but suffered him to escape upon a speedy Horse. I have written thus far of him, because every one knows not the verity how he was led away; and because St. Augustine sayes, That all kind of Ignorance is neither worthy of pardon nor excuse, but only such as have not the means to be instructed, nor to get knowledg. I was sometime compelled to recite divers Sen∣tences of Solomon to this Good Regent; for so he was, and will ever de∣servedly be called: How that an heavy Yoke was ordained for the Sons of Adam, from the day they go out of their Mothers Womb, till the day that they return to the Mother of all things; from him who is clothed in Blew Silk and weareth a Crown, even to him who weareth simple Linnen; wrath, envy, trouble and unquietness, rigor, strife, and fear of death in the time of rest. Again, Be diligent to know the state of thy Flock; for there are some who see but with other mens eyes, who hear but with other mense ars, these must needs be ignorant; such a man is commonly made a wicked In∣strument to fulfil the appetites of envious vengeable and gready Councellors. And Solomon sayes, That for the transgression of such wicked Councellors, the Land changeth many Princes. And again, The Prudent man seeth the Plague and eschews it; but Fools go on still and are punished. Wisdome, Knowledg and Understanding of the Law is of the Lord; Error, Ignorance and Darkness are appointed unto Sinners for Punishments and Plagues. The foolish will believe every thing, and the mouths of fools are fed with foo∣lishness. So the Prudent will consider his paths, and can perceive that some are Councellors for themselves: Therefore sayes Solomon, I Wis∣dome dwell with Prudence, and can find forth the right knowledg of Councellors; as if he would say, Who have Wisdome purified with Prudence, will not be so easily carried away with Flatterers, as a num∣ber of facil Princes, who promote them above faithful Friends and true
Servants, who reprove them for their unseemly proceedings. Against the Rule of Isocrates, who admonisheth the King to love and retain as his truest Friends, such as lovingly and modestly will correct his Faults. And as Plutarch saith unto Trajan, Follow the Counsel of these who loves thee, rather than of those whom thou lovest. And as Thepom∣pus being demanded how a Prince should best Rule? answered, In per∣mitting his best Servants to tell him the verity of his Estate. As the King of the People is, so are his Officers. If the Officers be wicked, so is the Ruler thought to be. How are Flatterers, said I to the Re∣gent, flown away with your wonted humility, and who hath puft you up, so that you will not suffer a Friendly Reproof? Says not Solomon, If thou seest a man wise in his own conceit, there is more hope to be had of a fool than of him? Exalt not thy self in the day of honour, for pride goeth be∣fore destruction, and an high mind before a fall. Yet hear Counsel, and receive Instruction, let Reason go before every enterprise, and counsel be∣fore every action. When you followed the Counsel of your old experimented Friends, your Affairs prospered. Since you left them, to follow the flatter∣ing fetches of your wonted Foes, (who are now become your chiefest Councel∣lors since you have been made Regent) your Credit decayes, and all your Buness goes back. I did shew you lately coming from Dumfries, in what Danger your Estate and Person were; to which you have taken little notice; which Danger appears to me to be ever the longer the greater, without speedy repentance, and the hasty imbracing of such Remedies as I men∣tioned for the time. Therefore take this better to heart, and in good part of his hand of whose Fidelity to you, you have had so good proof in all your adversities. Solomon sayes more, Receive Instruction, that thou mayst be wise in thy latter end; And above all this, pray to the Most High, that he may direct thy way in truth, which I pray God grant you the grace to do. The most part of these Sentences drawn out of the Bible, I used to rehearse to him at several occasions, and he took better with these of my hands, who he knew had no by-end, then if they had proceeded from the most Learned Philosopher. Therefore at his desire I promi∣sed to put them in writing, to give him them to keep in his Pocket; but he was Slain before I could meet with him. After the Decease of the Regent, England sent the Earl of Sussex to Berwick, whither the Earl of Lennox came also at that same time, as being sent for by the Lords of the King's Faction, to be made Regent in place of the Earl of Murray. The Earl of Sussex had with him the Forces of the North, as if he had some enterprise to do, and to take some advantage at this time, when the Country wanted a Regent. About that same time, so many of the Lords as were banded, and professed the Queens Authority, caused to proclaim the same at Lith∣gow. As yet they of the Castle at Edinbrugh professed the King's Au∣thority, albeit there were secret jealousies betwixt them and so many of the rest as had counselled the late Regent to apprehend the Secretary Lidingtoun, and Sir James Balfour, and who would also have ruined Grange, because he appeared concerned in them two, and also because his Vertues were envied, and his Charge coveted by others.
They who were within the said Castle for the time, were my Lord Duke of Chattellerault, and my Lord Herris, warded wrongfully as I have said, therefore the Laird of Grange obtained a Warrant from the rest of the King's Lords to set them at liberty. The Lord Hume was there to assist with those of the Castle, with the Laird of Grange, the Secretary Lidingtoun, his Brother the Prior of Condingham, three of my Brothers Sir Robert, Captain David, and Sir Andrew Melvil, the Lairds of Drylow and Pittadrow, Sir James Balfour, the Lairds of Ferni∣hast, Buccleugh, Wormistoun, Parbroth, and divers other Noblemen and Barons, who came there at all occasions, and were ready at a call when they had to do. This Company directed me to Berwick, toward the Earl of Sussex, to know what he intended to do with his forces; whether to assist any of the two Factions, or to agree them? I was friendly received by him, well lodged, and my expences by him defrayed, wanting nothing. He sent me his own night-Gown, furred with rich furrings, to make use of so long as I abode there. Albeit I knew him to be a great Ene∣my to all Scots-men, he appeared desirous to enter in great familiarity with me, and as if he was desirous I should believe he had communi∣cated to me his most secret thoughts, alledging his plainness to me, was upon the report he had heard by sundry of his Country-men to my advantage. He said, That his coming with his Forces, was not to assist any faction, nor to decide Questions and Titles that were among us, but to serve the Queen his Mistress, in obeying her Commands: That if he did any enterprise at that time against any Scots-man, it would be against his heart. That of all Scots-men, he liked best of of those who were within the Castle of Edinbrugh, and their depen∣ders, especially because he knew them to have been friends to the Duke of Norfolk, his near Cousin, whose part he said he would plain∣ly have taken, if the said Duke had out of his own mouth communi∣cated his enterprise to him, as he had foolishly done by a Gentleman of his, to whose credit he durst not commit the secrecy of that mat∣ter, being of it self of so great concernment, as stood him upon his life and heritage. And that albeit he with his Forces came not to set out, nor to fortifie any Faction in Scotland, yet he durst be plain with me privately, as with a true friend, to declare that he did esteem the Queen of Scotland and the Prince her Son righteous Heirs to the Crown of England, which his judgment he had shown to few of his own Country-men. So I returned with no direct answer, but with a firm opinion, that he was sent to appear to set forward the Earl of Lennox to be Regent, and to send word to the Lords of the King's side, that he would assist them, and send in Mr. Randolph thither with the Earl of Lennox; and yet to deal with the Lords of the Queens Faction, to encourage them to hold forward their factions course, because the said Mr. Randolph had a great dealing with the House of Hamiltoun, as he who convoyed the Earl of Arran, now visited with the hand of God, out of France through England home to Scotland, to assist the Congregation. He knew also what old and long hatred had been betwixt the Houses of Lennox and Hamiltoun; and was deliberately directed, secretly to kindle a fire of discord betwixt two strong Factions in Scotland, which could not be
easily quenched, and to conform the Lord Hume, who was not yet resolved to take part with the Queens Faction, which England thought had not money enough yet to sustain long strife against the King's Fa∣ction. The Earl of Sussex entred the Merse with his Forces, and took the Castle of Hume, and Falhastle, full of riches and precious moveables, that way moving the Lord Hume to take plain part with the Hamil∣touns, and the Queens Faction. Whereby it may be seen, that the con∣clusion was to hold Countries in discord, by the craft of the Council of England for the time, as I have before mentioned; and which was now put in practice, incontinent after the decease of the Earl of Mur∣ray. For albeit the Earl of Lennox had his Lady, Children, and Estate in England, they would not credit him, supposing he would be a true Scots-man, as he proved indeed afterwards. I being in Berwick, when the Earl of Lennox was so far toward Scot∣land to be Regent, I thought it my duty to visit him. For at his first in-coming before the marriage of his Son the Lord Darnly with the Queen, he sent this present Colonel Stuart for my Brother Sir Robert and me, and because my Brother was absent, I went to him alone. At which time he told me, That his long absence out of the Country had made him as a stranger to the condition of the Country, and that his Lady at his parting from her, had desired him to take my Brother's counsel and mine in all his affairs, as her Friends and Kins∣men. So that being familiar enough with him formerly, I visited him at this time, and told him the state of the Country. I disswaded him from taking upon him the Regiment, fearing that it might cost him his life, as matters were like to be handled, as I should inform him more at length, being once at home. As for my self, I promised to serve and assist him, albeit I could not find that same resolution in those of the Castle of Endinbrugh. He thanked me, promising me to be my friend, so far as lay in his power, upon which he gave me his hand. Then he inquired, What was the Cause, that those who were in the Ca∣stle would oppose him? I answered, For no particular prejudice they had against himself, but because the Lords who had sent for him, without ac∣quainting them therewith, were not their friends, and they suspected that in process of time, they would move him to be their Enemy. He said, That the Laird of Grange had been always his great friend, and had done him formerly great kindness. I said, I hoped he should yet be his friend, after that he had setled himself in the Regiment, and might have time to be rightly informed of every mans part. Returning back from Berwick, I met the Abbot of Dumfarmling, sent by the King's Lords to England, to meet with the Earl of Linnox in his passing by. His chief Commission was (so far as I could after∣ward inform my self) to desire the Queen of England, to deliver the Queen of Scotland to be kept by the King's Lords here at home, seeing that she would not proceed otherwise, according to the Accusation given in against her, the time my Lord Murray was there. Where∣to the Queen of England made answer, If they would find her sufficient Pledges for the security of the Queens life, she would deliver her to be kept by them. The Abbot alledged, That would be hard to do, for what in case the Queen dye in the mean time? She answered, My Lord, I believed
you had been a wise man, you would press me to speak what is no ways ne∣cessary: You may know, Taat I cannot but for my honour require Pledges, for that end, I think you may judge also of your self what might be best for me. Her meaning in this, might be easily judged and under∣stood. The Earl of Lennox came to Edinbrugh shortly after me, and after he had accepted the Government, his first enterprise was to take Bree∣chin, which was kept by some Companies of Foot-men, lifted by the Earl of Huntly to assist the Queens faction. These Soldiers being ad∣vertised, that the new Regent was coming to pursue them, fled, ex∣cept a few who kept the Kirk and Steeple, who were all hanged. I had made my self ready to ride with the Regent, but Mr. Randolph the English Ambassadour, who came with the Earl of Lennox, appear∣ing to set him forward with his power, hindred me from prosecuting that intention, fearing that I would be an instrument of perswading the Laird of Grange, and those in the Castle, to come to an amicable agreement with the Regent. For if those of the Castle, and their de∣penders had assisted the Regent, the Queens faction were so few and weak, that they would not have been able to make a party answer∣able to the King's faction, who were greatest in number, and had the hearts of the Subjects on their side. I was very loath to stay be∣hind the Regent, both because I had promised to assist him, and also because I had obtained a promise of the Bishop of St. Andrews, of the Lands of Lethem, given by the Earl of Murray to Mr. Henry Balneavs, whereof I had no Lease, but Possession, by reason that the Bishop was for the time in Dumbartoun, forsaulted, so the said Lands were in the Regent's power to dispose to any other, yet he had promised that I should enjoy it. I told Mr. Randolph that the said Land might be in danger to be disposed, in case I were absent from the Regent. Tush, says he, I am Tutour at this time to the Regent, I shall not only warrant you that, but shall cause you get a better gift. In the mean time, he promised to write a Letter unto the Regent (who had already taken journey) to secure the same to me, and to let him know that he had stayed me, to draw on an agreement between my friends in the Castle and him, therefore desiring him not to dispose the said Lands to any other. But though I knew him to be a double dealer, and a sower of discord, yet I could not believe that he would abuse me in any thing, having received so great obligations from me during his banishment in France, for Religion, during the Reign of Queen Mary. Neither would I blot Paper with this much concerning my particular, were it not to declare the strange practises of Princes in matters of State. Now at Mr. Randolph's desire, I stayed. His first proposition to me, was to desire the Captain of the Castle to agree with, and assist the Regent. I told him, That I supposed he might be brought to that through time, but not so hastily. And that same answer I brought to him from him, with a request from the Laird of Grange, That he would be plain with him: for there had been also great friendship betwixt them in France. After some Ceremonies and Protestations of Secrecy, he said, Tell your friend this from Mr. Randolph, but not from the English Am∣bassadour, That there is no lawful Authority in Scotland but the Queens, she will prevail at length, and therefore it is his interest, as
the safest course, to join himself to her Faction. This was the help he made to the Regent, who believed that his only Ambassage was to advance his Authority. I appeared to be very well satisfied with this wholesom advice, and went up to the Castle, and told the Captain and his associates no more then I assured them of, at my return from Ber∣wick. The Laird of Grange was still resolved to own the King's Authority, seeing to be factious under pretext of owning the Queen, during her absence and captivity, might do her more ill then good, and occasion great bloodshed among the Subjects, by the malice of the Ring-leaders of the Court of England, and partialities of a few in Scotland, and was therefore expecting a fit opportunity of making agreement betwixt the parties. In the mean time, I went up and down betwixt those of the Castle, and Mr. Randolph, who gave me another Commission, to wit, In case the two Queens of England and Scotland agree betwixt themselves, to appoint an English-man Captain of the Castle of Edin∣brugh, and send unto him a Letter subscribed by both their hands to him, to render up the same to him whom they Commissionate him to deliver it, whether he would for great advantage to himself give it to the person who should be appointed. This in great anger he re∣fused to hear: and this was all the good agreement that Mr. Randolph and I made during the Regent's absence. And instead of minding the Regent not to dispose the foresaid Lands, he dealt with the Tutor of Pitcur, that he might seek a gift of the said Lands from the Regent, informing him that I wanted a right thereto. When the Regent was returned to Edinbrugh, I remembred Mr. Randolph of his promise, and informed him a way how I might get them. He answered, That he found the Regent so stubborn, and of so ill a nature, that he could not deal with him. Then I told him, That I was abundantly sensible of his practises, and that whereas it appeared that he would cause me not only to abandon the Regent, but to be instrumental in perswading the Laird of Grange to be upon a contrary Faction, I would not be that instrument, neither would I desert the King's interest, though he should cause all the rest of my Lands to be taken from me. Seeing that Grange could not be moved to join with the Queens Faction, according to the desire of the Court of England (for the rest of that Kingdom was sorry to see this kind of dealing) the English Ambassadour perswaded the Regent to irritate and incense him, by all manuer of slights done to himself, and his dependers. In the mean time my Lord Duke, the Earls of Arguile and Huntly addressed themselves unto him, making their moan, That they being Noble∣men of the Country, of considerable Interest, were refused to be admitted in the Society of the rest, who sought their ruine under pretext of the King's Authority, by the Regent, the Earl of Mortoun, and others, not their friends, requesting him to be their Protector, and to assist them during the King's minority. Telling him how that they at first would gladly have joined with the King's Lords, for maintaining the King's Authority, but could not get place, nor be admitted. Thus Grange finding himself neglected with the King's Lords, and sought after by the Queens, he was compelled to declare with that side at length, having with him the Lord Hume, male-con∣tent.
Also Secretary Lidingtoun, and Sir James Balfour spurring him on to take that course, he was resolved to take that side for his next refuge, he having been among the rest summoned to be forfaul∣ted. Now the two furious Factions being in this manner framed, their hatred and rage grew greater and greater. For Mr. Randolph knew the animosities which were among the Nobility, and the nature of every one in particular, by his frequent coming, and his long resi∣dence in Scotland. And among the Ladies he had a Mother, and a Mistress, to whom he caused his Queen frequently to send Commen∣dations, and Tokens. He also used his craft with the Ministers, offe∣ring Gold to such of them as he thought could be prevailed with to accept of his offer, but such as were honest refused his gifts. He gave largely to all such, as he knew were able to serve him in his design of kindling this fire, and his endeavours were so successful, that the two parties were not only stirred up to fight, and shed one anothers blood, but would revile each other with injurious and blasphemous words, and at length fell to the down-casting of each others Houses, to which England gave no small assistance, having sent in a number of Men of War to throw down Hamiltoun. This was occasioned by some pro∣bability that appeared of a Reconciliation of the two Factions, by the endeavours of some of the most prudent Ministers, who did all they could to prevent the ensuing troubles. And they foresaw that this prejudice was done to the Hamiltouns, to inrage them, so as there might be no hope of agreement when they should see themselves so far injured. Now as Nero stood upon a high part of Rome to see the Town bur∣ning, which he had caused to be set on fire, so Mr. Randolph delighted to see such a fire by his craft kindled in Scotland, which was in all pro∣bability like to burn it up. And in his Letters to some of the Court of England, he gloried that he had kindled a fire in Scotland, which could not be easily extinguished. Which when it came to the know∣ledge of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, he wrote to my Brother Sir Robert, and me, advertising us how we were handled, expressing his detesta∣tion both at Secretary Cicil directer, and Mr. Randolph as executer. All the honest Men in England were sorry at it, of which number there are as many within that Country, as in any other so much bounds in Europe. My Brother and I did shew the Letters we had received from Sir Nicholas, to the Laird of Grange, and so many within the Castle as we knew to be secret, which they easily believed, as being Men of great understanding, who had noticed Mr. Randolph's proceedings. Where∣upon there were some secret meetings drawn on between my Lord Hume, and my Lord Ruthven as near kinsmen. The Lord Ruthven was in greatest favour with the Regent for the time, being also Trea∣surer, he was desired to come and speak with my Lord Hume, during the hottest of the Civil Wars. At which time Secretary Lidingtoun, and my Brother Sir Robert, came into communing with the Lord Ruthven, after that he and the Lord Hume had spoken a space toge∣ther, and did shew him how the Regent was used by England, and how this Kingdom was abused by the tricks of a few, for advancing their
selfish ends, and also how that the Earl of Mortoun had desired secret∣ly to come at midnight, accompanied with Mr. Archibald Douglas to the Castle of Edinbrugh, and had entertained long conference with them, desiring their assistance, and he should chace the Earl of Lennox back to England, if they would accept and acknowledge him for Re∣gent in his stead, which they of the Castle would not grant, looking upon the Earl of Lennox as a true Scots-man. And they declared that their denying to assist him at first, was his being sent for and brought in by them. That therefore they feared at the first, that he would have been too much at the devotion of the Court of England, as being an English-man; and having yet his Lady, Children, and Lands in that Country, and moreover that he should be so led by the Earl of Mor∣toun, and their factious Enemies, that he would seek their utter ruine, both because that Captain Crauford who had accused the Secretary, was for the time Servant to the Earl of Lennox, and alledged that he had a Commission from the said Earl to give in the said Accusation. And that which gave matter enough to my Lord Hume, was the bringing in of the Earl of Lennox, by the Earl of Sussex, and the taking of his two Houses of Hoome and Falcastle all at one time, which he supposed not to have been done without the Earl of Lennox his knowledge and consent. But since they understood that the Earl of Lennox, and the whole Country was abused by England, Mr. Randolph the Agent, and the Earl of Mortoun; they were resolved both to agree themselves, and to cause all Scotland agree with the Regent, if he would grant them reasonable conditions. My Lord Ruthven was very glad of this offer, and said he hoped to bring them a good answer from the Regent; and the rather, because the Earl of Mortoun was absent, being malecontent, for denying to him the grant of the Bishoprick of St. Andrews, which the King's house and the Regent's might ill spare. So he returned with this offer to the Regent, who much rellisht it, and after twice or thrice passing betwixt the Regent with the Lord Ruthven, had concluded a Peace quietly in their minds, none being as yet made privy thereto. But as Ambassa∣dours are great Spies, and commonly suspitious, Mr. Randolph who lay at Lieth, having his own Jealousies of an intention of accommodation, knew the only way to stop it, was to bring again the Earl of Mortoun, who he knew would violently oppose it, and use the utmost of his en∣deavours to render that Design ineffectual. He therefore dealt earn∣estly with the Regent, to give the said Bishoprick of St. Andrews to the Earl of Mortoun, alledging to her, That the Queen his Mistress had writ∣ten to him for that effect, and that she would recompence it to him with greater advantage. That he would cause her hand-writing to come to him thereabout, and that she would be much dissatisfied if he refused that her de∣sire. When the Regent had upon Mr. Randolph's desire granted this, he in∣continently advertised the Earl of Mortoun thereof, who immediately came to Court, and smelling the foresaid design of agreement, he used all the contrary practices he could to hinder it. For as he had fished that Benefice in troubled Waters, he hoped by such means to fish much more. And finding that I was much inclined to draw forward the accommodation, one of his Devices was to cause the Councel to Vote and direct the Earl of Buchan to take me Prisoner out of my own
house. But I was at a Marriage in Fordel, where the said Earl came, with whom I went willingly, tho I had as many Friends there, as offered to chace him back again without his Errand; but I would not prejudge my just Cause. For the Earl of Buchan was of a gentle and discreet Nature, and assured me they had nothing to lay to my charge, but to see if I could be a good Instrument of Concord. He desired me when I was in Lieth, to send up to the Castle of Edinbrugh, and alledg that my Life was in hazard, in case they would not render up the Castle to the Regent. I answered, It was a Childish thing in them, to propose such a thing to me, seeing they could not but know that my Friends in the Castle were angrier at me, than they were, because I did not take part with them. However, the Laird of Grange was dissatisfied, when he heard that I was taken. For he knew how far I was injur'd, seeing I had several times perswaded him to take part with the Regent, and how far I had reasoned against the Secretary and Sir James Balfour in their proceedings with the Queens Faction. For seeing she was Cap∣tive, so that neither could she help them, nor they her, it would but occasion her to be the stronglier guarded, and kept more straitly in England. For hearing that there was a Faction risen up in her Name, it would cause them to suppose that she was in hope of sudden liberty, by some Practices with the Subjects of England. Sir William Balfour alledged, That her Majesty had Friends in France, and other Parts, who would be more encouraged to do for her, if they understood that a number of the Nobility did own her Authority. I said, That her only Friends were in England and France; that those who were in Eng∣land durst not as yet appear, seeing there would be a special Eye held over them, and her French friends would do her no good; the Queen Mother who had the chief Rule of that Country being her great Ene∣my, and the House of Guise neither able to help her, nor yet were they her sure friends, as I shall shew more at length anon. I was de∣claring that the Laird of Grange was angry at my taking, I being so frank for the Regent, and he so willing to join with him. That same night he sent down a Woman from the Castle to Lieth, with a Ticket to me, That he was resolved to come that same night at mid-night, and relieve me out of their hands; that he had sent that Woman to know how I was kept, and where I was lodged. The Regent's Camp lay between Lieth and Edinbrugh, and many of the Noblemen and Barons lodged in Lieth, for every one had not Pavilions to lodge in the Camp. The Laird of Grange had appointed a Boat to lye at Grantoun, and had re∣solved to come sailing up to Lieth Harbour, as if it had been a Boat come from Fiffe, and thought without stroke to come to my Lodg∣ing, and take me out of my Keepers hands, and go up the water again to a part where he had Horsemen in readiness, to carry me up to the Castle with him. But I would upon no accompt condescend there∣to, assuring him, That I was in no danger; and that my Lord Bughan had promised, when I pleased, to let me slip away, which I would not do, but desired daily to come to a Tryal. Many of the Lords marvelled where∣fore I was taken, seeing they knew, That since the Regent's entry to Scotland, I had ever assisted him. The Regent himself was much there∣with dissatisfied; so that after inquiry, it was found, that few of the Councellors knew of my taking. The Earl of Mar, a true Nobleman,
said, That the Earl of Buchan for embracing such a Commission, was mad∣der than the former Earl his Father, who was known not to be very wise. But the Earl of Mortoun sent me word, That nothing should ail me more then his own heart. For the fashion they desired me to find Caution, that I should serve the King's Majesty, and his Regent, and so I was dismissed, and never brought before the Council. Of a truth I could see no reason to set up two Factions to destroy the Country, seeing I knew, That though the one party professed to be for the Queen, it was so far from conducing to her advantage, that I knew it had a quite contrary effect so long as she was Captive, nor yet could I see any out-gate for those who professed her Authority, and who were compelled thereto for their own defence. For whereas they would gladly have assisted the King's Lords, if they would have accepted of them; finding themselves refused; necessity drew them to defend themselves under the name of some Authority, not true love to the Queen. And therefore I thought them the less to be relyed upon. The rest of my reasons, why the Queen could expect no help out of France from her own friends, nor yet from the Queen Mother, were these, The Queen Mother had not been well used, so long as our Queen's Husband Francis the Second lived. The Council and States of France desired not the Union of this Isle. For a proof hereof, af∣ter that my Brother Sir Robert, (when he returned the first time of his Ambassage out of England) brought the hand-writings of twenty five principal Earls and Lords in England, to set the Crown of Eng∣land upon the Queen of Scotland's head. For the Captains in the par∣ticular Shires were already named, and by those Lords set down in that Paper, who were to be in readiness to march forward, whenever they should be charged, only they waited the Queens opportunity, and advertisement when to stir. Upon this intelligence, the Queen incontinently did write to France, to her Uncle the Cardinal of Lor∣rain, desiring him to send to her one of his most secret Servants, to whom she was to Communicate matters of that weight and impor∣tance, that she could not hazard to send them in Writing or Cyphers. And accordingly the said Cardinal sent hither one of his most fami∣liar Secretaries, to whom the Queen caused my Brother and me to declare the state of England, and the great party she had there to es∣pouse her interest, as is above specified, desiring her said Uncle to send his advice what time would be most fit for her to stir, and to send what help he and all his friends could procure. This Secretary being returned to his Master, informed him of the whole matter. The Cardinal again to insinuate upon the Queen Mother, and to appear to be a true French-man, acquainted the Queen Mother how prejudicial to the Crown of France, the Union of this Isle of great Britain would be; that therefore it was her interest all she could to oppose it. He therefore advised her to advertise the Queen of England of the said in∣tended Plot, as the only and most effectual means for preventing it, which the Queen Mother failed not to do. But whatever the Queen of England's thoughts of the truth thereof was, she appeared to give no credit thereto, as if she looked upon it as an Italian fetch to put her in suspicion of her Nobility. This accompt I had from the Queens Ma∣jesty her self, complaining to me one day of the Cardinal's unkind
dealing towards her. Therefore I thought I had good ground to say, There was no help to be looked for out of France. And the Duke of Al∣va who was in Flanders, had plainly refused to give her any help, till the King his Master would command him; Seeing, as he alledged, he had work enough to do to settle his Master's own Subjects in Flan∣ders. These were the arguments which I used to move my friends to agree with the Regent, and my indeavours wanted not success, they having come very near a point by the dealing of the two Lords above∣mentioned, Hume and Ruthven, assisted by Secretary Lidingtoun: For the Lord Hume would then do nothing without his advice. But after that the Earl of Mortoun was returned to the Court, and had by Randolph's means obtained the Bishoprick of St. Andrews, these two suspecting the probability of the apparent agreement, which had been kept secret from them; they fell a plotting some way to hinder the same, and concluded to hold a Parliament, wherein to forfault all the Queens Lords, whereby the Regent should utterly ruine his ancient Enemies the Hamiltouns, and there would be a bait to every one of the King's Lords, seeing they should be made sharers of the spoil, and so each of them get wealth enough. Mr. Randolph, for their en∣couragement, gave them assurance of assistance from England, so that they needed fear no resistance from their adversaries. The Earl of Mortoun had made a great Faction in the Council, partly by represen∣ting the Queens Lords as intending to re-establish Popery (upon which allegiance he knew he would make them odious to the generality of the people) but especially by promising each of his party a share of the forfaulters of the Queens Lords, so that they were easily brought to consent to a Parliament, to be held at Sterling for the foresaid ef∣fect. The Queens Lords to be equal with them, held another Parliament at Edinbrugh both at one time, upon that very same design of forfaul∣ting the King's Lords. The Laird of Grange in the mean time took great displeasure to see Scotsmen so furiously bent against each other, set on by the practises of England, and the extream avarice of some particu∣lar men, for their selfish designs, who intended to augment their Estates, and raise their own Fortunes upon the ruines of their Neighbours. Therefore he sent for the Laird of Fernihast his Son-in-law, the Laird of Buccleugh Father to this present Lord, who loved the Laird of Grange better than any of his own kindred; which Laird of Buccleugh was a man of rare qualities, wise, true, stout, and modest. These two Gen∣tlemen were desired to come well accompanied, and arrived at Edin∣brugh in an Evening late. The Laird of Grange had already devised an enterprise, to wit, That same night after they had Supt themselves, and baited their horses, to ride all night forward with them to Sterling, to be there early in the morning before any of the Lords who held the Par∣liament were out of their Beds, hoping by the intelligence he had recei∣ved, assuredly to surprise them before they could be advertised. All the Lords and Council found the advice exceeding good, but they would in no ways grant that he should ride with them, alledging, That their only comfort, under God, consisted in his preservation. He on the other hand alledged, His presence would be necessary, for he was acquainted with
difficult enterprises, and feared that they would not follow rightly nor carefully his directions. But they ingaged to follow it most strictly, and would not suffer him to ride with them, but the Earl of Huntly, my Lord Arbroth, and divers others went forward with the Forces. These two Gentlemen had brought them, and were at Stirling before Four of the Clock in the Morning, and entred the Town of Stirling at a little passage, led by a Towns-man called George Bell, which entry of theirs was immediately after the Nght-watches had retired to their rest. They divided their Men, and appointed such as they thought meetest to await at every Lord's Lodging, and a Company with Cap∣tain Hackerstoun to wait at the Market-Cross, to cause good order to be kept, and to preserve the Town-houses from being spoiled, only they appointed the Stables to be cleansed by Buccleugh and Fernehast's men, giving them commands not to leave one Horse in Town uncarried away with them, which Commission the South-land Lads forgot not punctually to execute: But because Captain Hackerstoun came not in due time with his Company to stand where he was appointed, a num∣ber of unruly Servants broke up the Merchants Booths, and run here and there in disorder after the spoil, leaving their Masters all alone. After they had taken out all the Lords from their Lodgings, and were leading them Captives down the steep Cassway of Sterling on foot, intending to take their Horses at the nether Port, and ride to Edin∣brugh with their Prisoners. But those within the Castle being alla∣rumed with the noise of the Towns-men, crying out, because of the spoil taken from them, imagining what shame they would indure, if they did not shew themselves Men, and perceiving the disorder of their Enemies, they came down fearlesly upon them, and rescued all the Prisoners save the Regent, whom one came and shot behind his back, commanded as was alledged by my Lord of Pacly. The Laird of Wormistoun was the taker of the Regent, and had been ordained by the Laird of Grange to wait upon him, to save him from his particu∣lar Enemies. For they all had ingaged to him, e're they went from Edinbrugh, not to kill one man, else he would not have left them. Wormistoun was also killed against the Regent's will, who cryed conti∣nually to save him, who had done what he could for his preservation. The Regent dyed not suddenly, but some days after, and made a very godly end. They who had lost this fair enterprise for want of Gran∣ges conduct, had enough to do to save themselves, and had been all taken had not those in Stirling wanted horses to pursue after them. For those who had taken the horses, did ride forward with all possible speed, leaving their Masters in danger to do for themselves. When they were returned back to Edinbrugh, they were very un∣welcome guests to the Laird of Grange, who greatly lamented the Regent's slaughter. He said openly, If he knew who had done that foul deed, or had directed it to be done, his own hand should have revenged it. And whereas before he used to be meek and gentle, he could not now command himself, but bursted out in harsh language, calling them disorderly Beasts. For he knew the Regent was inclined to Peace, and was only ignorantly driven on by the Earl of Mortoun, and Mr. Randolph's practises to hold the said Parliament, to the hinderance of concord and agreement, therefore his intention was to bring all the
Kings Lords to the Castle of Edenbrugh, and to have made an agree∣ment betwixt them and the other faction before they had parted. But God in his providence would not permit this, for further punish∣ment of our wickedness. For the Parliaments held forward, and each one of them forefaulted others, the Kings Lords came and lay at Lieth, and the Queens within the Town and Castle of Edenbrugh. Mr. Randolph would have had Mortoun made Regent instead of Lennox, but the Lords liked better of the Earl of Marr and chose him. For a little time there was hot skirmishing betwixt Lieth and Edinbrugh, and extream hatred betwixt the two Factions, and great cruelties exercised, where they could be Masters of one another. And frequently the Marshal of Berwick came to Lieth to assist Mr. Ran∣dolph privately, tho publickly to find fault with him for his proceed∣ings, which my Lord of Marrs friends perceived, and himself at last, whereupon he began to grow colder in the quarrel, and withdrew himself to Stirling, advising with his friends what was meetest to be done. Alledging that he could see nothing but the wrack of the Country, under pretext of owning the King and Queens Authority, while neither Kings nor Queens was in any of their minds, but only put on by their own partialities of ambition, greediness, and ven∣geance, England kindling up both the Parties, and then laughing them all to scorn. After this Conference, Captain James Cunningham, servant to my Lord of Marr, a discreet Gentleman, desired a secret meeting with my Brother Sir Robert. In the mean time the most part of the Kings Lords went to Stirling, where the Regent was living. My Lord of Mortoun went to Dalkieth, my Lord Lindsay lay in Lieth. When the Wars grew colder, and notice thereof taken by the Court of England, a new Ambassador was hasted to Scotland, to wit, Mr. Henry Killegrew an old acquaintance of mine. For Mr. Randolph was returned home, because he had not such Credit with the Earl of Marr as to do service to these he served, and had lost the favour of both the Factions. For his double dealing was discovered, he having no Credit but with the Earl of Mortoun. This new Ambassador being Arrived at Lieth upon his way to∣ward Stirling, where the Regent remained for the time, he sent up to the Castle of Edenbrugh to see if I was there. For they had told him in Lieth, that I was newly come from Fiffe. He desired that I would come and speak with him, which I did, and convoyed him un∣to Cramond reasoning together all the way upon such matters, as he said he had in Commission, chiefly how he might be a good instru∣ment to agree the differences that were between the two Parties, albeit I knew there was nothing less in his mind, at least in his Commissi∣on. He said, He had the Queen his Mistress commands to deal with both Parties forConcord, but that he was most concerned in these of the Castle, albeit that outwardly he behooved first to go to the Regent, being in civility engaged to give him the prerogative, yet in effect he said my friends in the Castle were these, to them he was chiefly dire∣cted, that they should be preferred both by his first salutation by me to them, and by two familiar Letters, the one from my Lord of Leicester
to the Laird of Grange, and the other from Secretary Cicil to Secreta∣ry Lidingtoun, desiring me to intreat them to follow the good coun∣sel given therein by the said Lords, who loved them intirely for their vertue, and old acquaintance. Hewi led me to tell them, that after he had declared his Commission to the Regent, he would come back again to them and at length declare his Commission to them from Her Majesty. It appeared to me that he had intelligence how that Mr. Randolph's double dealing had been discovered, therefore he seemed to find fault with him in many things, though in general he excused him as far as he could, until I adjured him upon the long and great familiarity that had been betwixt us, to deal plainlier with me. I told him he might serve his Mistress truly enough, without casting me and my friends upon a wrong side, which might be afterwards our ru∣in who deserved better at his hands, then to put us in such dangers as if we were untoward, dishonest, or uncounsellable, as Mr. Randolph had done, forgetting the fraternity of Religion so well grounded a∣mong us during his banishment in France for Religion. There he was compelled to confess to me, that his Commission and his mind went not one way, and that he was imployed against his will, tho as a Servant he durst not disobey his Princess, he said he would give me his loving counsel, and warning very freely. He said that the Council of England neither built their course here upon the late Regent, nor yet upon this, but intirely upon the Earl of Mortoun as well of their own Plot laid down long since, as by the Information of Mr. Randolph, who hath confirmed them in that Opinion, so that they will not alter for no contrary persuasion. Willing my friends and me to joyn our course and band with the Earl of Mortoun, or else to expect no friendship from the Court of Eng∣land, but hurt and ruin so far as they might. For albeit he was not Regent, they knew that he had a great Faction in the Country, which they were resolved what they could to encrease, so that whoever was Regent, he should get little or nothing done without his consent. In this I thought he dealt plainly, my friends of the Castle were of that same Judgment, yet they could not find in their heart to joyn with him, albeit he sought their friendship, offering to hold up the Queens Authority, for they thought his course unsure for the King, and setling of the Estate, he being too much addicted to England. After that this Ambassador had been with the Regent in Stirling, and was come back again to Edinbrugh, he told the rest of his Com∣mission to them of the Castle, to whom he used himself but like an Ambassador as he was directed. He said that he found them more reasonable, then the Regents Party. Then he went to Dalkieth to meet with the Earl of Mortoun, and thereafter returned to Edinbrugh, to wait all fit occasions and informations how to proceed conform to the tenor of his instructions. He had Commandment to stay in Scotland for a time, to see if he could obtain as much Credit, as to serve their turn who sent him. And because I was of his greatest acquaintance, he came with me to my house in Halhil, and stayed a few dayes there to refresh his Spirits, and after that I convoyed him back again to Edinbrugh, he shewed me some Articles of his in∣structions one of the which was.
Item, If the Captain of the Castle will condescend, that all the differences now in question among the Scots, be referred to be de∣cided before us and our Councel, as the rest of the Kings Lords have granted already, we shall be his good friend, maintain him in his Office, and give him an honourable Pension. But he plainly refused to comply with this, saying he would prejudge his Prince, and Country, so that this, and his other former refusals cost him his life afterwards. About this time my Lord Regent sent a Letter to me, with all di∣ligence to come to him. At my coming he made a heavy moan for the civil troubles that were kindled in the Country, by the Craft and Malice of some in England, and some in Scotland, taking the co∣lour of this or that authority, and yet were only moved with their own particularities to the hurt both of King, Queen and Country, de∣siring me that I would go unto the Castle of Edinbrugh, and shew them as of my own head and not as from him, that I understood he perceived albeit too late, how that we were all led upon the Ice, and that it was the Interest of all true Scotsmen to agree, that the State may be setled. And says he, you may desire them to seek to treat with me thereabout which you may assure them they will obtain, if they will seek the same. And offer your self to be the instrument to brng on a good agreement between them and me, which shall by Gods Grace take good effect upon your return with their reasonable offers and answer. Whereupon I went to Edinbrugh, and found them all inclined to peace and quietness, with little need of persuasions there∣to, for they were near a point before with my Lord of Lennox, and some former Conference had been betwixt my Brother and Captain Cunning∣ham thereabouts. At my return to the Regent, he was very glad, saying, he knew that these honest Gentlemen were ever willing to cease from civil dis∣cord, seeing the Queen was Captive, to whom their owning her au∣thority could do no good but evil; but that they had been by crafty practises cast against their wills upon a contrary course. Then he in∣quired upon what conditions the Captain and his friends would agree; I said that the Laird of Grange would not sell his Duty to His Prince and Country for advantage, but would serve the King and his Coun∣try to settle the Estate; so long as the Queen was detained in England, and if God pleased to grant her liberty, they doubted not but she and her Son should agree betwixt themselves, to which all honest and good Subjects would consent. They for their parts desired no Mans Land nor Goods, but only Liberty peaceably to enjoy their own Li∣vings. Only Grange desired that the Regent would cause to pay cer∣tain Debts contracted for repairing of the Castle and Artillery, which conditions the Regent promised to fulfil, and to be an assured friend to Grange, and those in the Castle. And without any other Ceremonies, he called the Laird of Tillibardin, and after he declared unto him how far we had proceeded, he put his hand in mine and did swear the Peace in presence of the said Tillibardin, who had also been a good Instru∣ment in the said agreement, together with Mr. Clement Little after∣wards Provost of Edinbrugh. No man was privy thereto, but my Lady Mar, and Captain James Cuningham.
After this, the Regent went to Edinbrugh, to Convene the Lords of Councel, to shew them the Calamities that the Civil-Wars produ∣ced, and to let them see how necessary an agreement would be to the whole Country. In the mean time, until the appointed Councel-day, he went to Dalkieth, where he was nobly treated by the Lord of Mor∣toun, shortly after which he took a vehement sickness, which caused him to ride suddenly to Stirling, where he dyed regrated by many. Some of his friends, and the vulgar, suspected he had gotten wrong at his Banquet. The Earl of Mortoun, after the decease of the Earl of Marr was made Regent, England helping it with all their might; so soon as he was cho∣sen he sent for me, declaring how that against his mind and inclinations, the Lords had burthened him with that troublesome Office, whereof seeing he behoved to accept, he could wish that he might stand the Country and Common-wealth in some stead. First he would desire the help of all good and honest men, to draw on Peace and Concord to the quieting the State, praying me as one for whom he had ever entertained special favour, to travail with my friends of the Castle for that effect, and to persuade them to go forward with him, as they were minded to do with the Earl of Marr, assuring me that none of the former Regents had at any time been more willing, then he was presently to put an end to the civil troubles, nor that I should re∣member less the partialities past, and that the Regent should not re∣venge the Earl of Mortoun's quarrels. But whoever would serve the King and be his friend, he would embrace them upon what faction so∣ever they had formerly been. And he was willing to give whatever conditions the Earl of Marr had offered, that I should have the Prio∣ry of Pittenweem for my pains, the Laird of Grange the Bishoprick of St. Andrews, and Castle of Blackness, and every one within the Ca∣stle should be restored to their Lands, and Possessions as before. It was very hard to bring on this agreement with the Earl of Mor∣toun, for the evil opinion which was conceived of him, and the hurtful marks they supposed by proofs and appearances that he would shoot at, being by nature covetous and too great with England, and ever Jealous that the King would be his ruine, concerning which a Lady who was his Whore, had shewn him the answers of the Oracles. Yet the Laird of Grange, who was ever willing to see Concord in the Coun∣try, was easily persuaded, the Lord Hume, and Lidingtoun made some resistance at the first, but were also at length content. So that after I had past twice or thrice between them, they appeared to be agreed in their hearts, and the Laird of Grange said, he would cause all the rest of the Queens faction to agree with the Regent, but he refused to take the Bishoprick of St. Andrews and Castle of Blackness, desiring nothing but his own Lands. When I returned to the Regent with this answer conform to his de∣sire, he was marvellously glad; but when I declared that the Laird of Grange would be a good instrument to cause all the rest of the Queens faction agree also with him; he answered, that was not meet. And when I reasoned against him, and shewed him how that I had spoken in his name, that he was resolved to have agreed all Scotland, and that Grange had no quarrel of his own, but to help a number of No∣ble-men
who required his Protection during the Kings Minority, and had requested the Regent once to agree with them altogether, for Granges honour, and afterwards he and all these of the Castle should band with him, and lay aside all other bands. The Regent answered, and said, James I will be plain with you, it is not my Interest to agree with them all, for then their faction will be as strong as ever it was, thereby they may some day circumvent me if they please, therefore it is my game to divide them. And moreover there have been great troubles in this Country this while by-gone, and during them great wrongs and extortions committed, for the which some fashion of punishment must be made, and I would rather that the Crimes should be laid upon the Hamiltouns, the Earl of Huntly, and their Adhe∣rents, then upon your Friends: and by their wrack I will get more profit, then by that of those in the Castle, that have neither so great Lands to escheat to us, as the reward of our labours. There∣fore shew Grange and your friends, that either they must agree without the Hamiltouns, and the Earls of Huntly and Arguile, or the said Lords will agree without him, and these of the Castle. To this I answered, That I understood him, his Speeches being very plain, with this I went again to the Castle, and rehearsed our whole reasoning, Grange said it was neither godly or just dealing, to lay the blame upon those who were richest for their Lands and Goods, and not upon them who were guiltiest, seeing these Noblemen had been ever willing to agree, after that the Queen was kept in England, but could not be admitted. And yet if now they would abandon him, and agree without him, and those in his company, he had deserved better at their hands, yet he had rather that they should leave and de∣ceive him, then that he should do it unto them. When I had given this return to Mortoun, and that he perceived that Grange stood stiff upon his honesty and reputation, he appeared to like him the better, and seemed as if he had been resolved to go forward with these of the Castle. He sent up Carmichael at my desire, to hear out of their own mouths so far as I had spoken in their name; they of the Castle likewise sent Pittadrow to the Regent to hear out of his own mouth, so far about the agreement as I had said to them in his name. This I did for my discharge, whatsoever might come afterwards. The Regent asked at what time the Castle of Edinbrugh should be delivered to him, I said, within half a year. What security said he, shall I have for it? I said, I should be a Pledg if he would accept me. Then he enquired wherefore I sought so long delay? I answer∣ed in the first place, till all Articles and Promises might be perform∣ed, and likewise because though the Laird of Grange was ever esteem∣ed an honest man, yet by wrong Reports and Practices the Ministers have been stirred up to cry out and preach against him, therefore to inable him to serve for the future, it would be some satisfaction to his mind, to let the world see that as well after the agreement as before, he should be esteemed alike honest and worthy to keep the house, and then at the time appointed the Regent should be intreated to receive the Castle out of his hands. He appeared to be very well con∣tent with this manner of dealing, and gave me great thanks for his
travel I had made, desiring me to go home, and he in the mean time would convene the rest of the Noble-men of his side, and acquaint them with his Proceedings, and take their advice and consent to this good work, which he doubted not to procure, and thereafter he said, he would send for me again and put the form of the agreement in Writing. But he took immediately another course, and sent a fit man to the Hamiltouns, the Earls of Huntly, Arguile, and their dependers, and offered an accommodation to them, if they would be satisfied to make an agreement by themselves not including Grange and those in the Castle, which condition they accepted of, without making therein any Ceremonies, whereof they by their Letters instantly from Pearth ad∣vertised the Laird of Grange, lamenting that the straits they were re∣dacted to, had compelled them to accept that agreement which the Re∣gent had offered them, praying him not to take it in evil part, seeing they had no house nor strength to retire themselves to. They gave him many thanks for the help and assistance he had made them, which they said, they would never forget so long as God would lend them their lives. This was the recompence this good Gentleman obtained for the great help he had given the Lords, the hazard he had run upon their account, and the Charges he had been at in aiding them, not imagining that the Regent would be so malitious as to cast him off, and not ex∣cept of his friendship which he incontinently offered, after the rest were agreed: but from that time forth the Regent would hear none of his offers, persuading the rest of his Faction that these of the Castle were so proud and wilful, that they refused to serve the King, or ac∣knowledge him as Regent. And this was Published and Preached, and yet the contrary was true, For they would have taken any rea∣sonable appointment. What rage was in the Regents mind for gree∣diness of their Lands, and Goods, or what should have induced him to bring an Army from England to besiege the Castle of Edinbrugh, I know not, it being to the dishonour of his Prince and Country, seeing a little before the Castle was offered to the Earl of Rothess, to be in∣stantly delivered unto his hands, to be kept to the Regents behoof, which was refused. So that apparently he had some other fetch in his head, then a man esteemed so wise should have had, seeing he might have obtained his intent without the help of England, having all Scot∣land at his Devotion, saving that few number without the Castle, who would likewise have agreed upon any reasonable condition. Thus the Castle of Edinbrugh was straitly besieged with an English Army under the Conduct of the Marshal of Berwick, assisted by all Scotland. These within seeing they could not be received upon any composition, debated so long as they had victuals and water. For their Draw-well dryed by the drouthy Summer, and they had no o∣ther water but what they fetched, letting men with Cords down o're the Walls, and Rock of the Castle to a Well on the west side, which was afterward poysoned, whereby so many as escaped the Shot dyed, and the rest fell deadly sick. Yet the Laird of Grange undertook with Eight persons to keep the Castle untaken by force, of the which num∣ber, were the Lord Hume, my two Brothers, Sir Robert, and Sir Andrew, the Laird of Pittadrow, and his Brother Patrick. This re∣solution being taken the Laird of Chesh, and Matthew Colvil his Bro∣ther
were sent to the Castle, under the pretext of making offers of agreement, but their design was to get intelligence of the State of the House, and to seduce the Soldiers who were yet alive, which they did, so that some fled out over the Walls, and others were shut forth. For the Captain thought the house in a better condition both for Vi∣ctuals and otherwise, when they were forth. The Marshal of Berwick seeing no appearance to succeed, entred into contention with the Ambassador, alledging that the Queen his Mistress would be dishonoured, and said, he would wait no longer, whereupon they without entred on a new Communing, and sent up again the Laird of Cleesh to offer them good conditions to come forth with their Armour and Bag and Baggage, which was agreed to, and that they should be restored to their Lands, and because for the time they were in other mens possession, it was referred to themselves whe∣ther they would go to England with the Marshal of Berwick, or re∣main in Scotland among their friends, until the promise made them of restoring them to their Lands might be fulfilled. The English∣men desired that the Castle should be put in their hands, but Grange sent secretly to Captain Hume, and Captain Crauford, desiring them to come and ly within the Bulwark betwixt the House and the English men, and to those he delivered the Castle, and his person to the Marshal to go with him to England, until all promises might be kept to him, and the rest by the Queen of Englands means. In this man∣ner they came forth, after that George Duglas natural Brother to the Regent, had received the House, they had all their Swords and Wea∣pons about them, and were three dayes at liberty. My Brother Sir Robert lay with me at his own Lodging, the Laird of Grange and the Secretary Lidingtoun remained yet with the Marshal of Berwick at his Lodging for their greater security, because that the people of the Town of Edinbrugh were greatly their Enemies. For except a few that tarried within the Town during the Civil Troubles between the Par∣ties that lay in Edinbrugh and Lieth, the most part of the richest Men and Merchants left the Town and went to Lieth, to take part with the Regent, therefore their houses were spoiled, upon which ac∣count they did bear great hatred to those in the Castle. But at the end of three dayes, they were all laid hands upon, and taken as Prisoners. For some of their most malitious enemies put it easily in the Regents head, and the Ambassadors, that it was well done to move the Queen of England to cause to deliver the whole Pri∣soners to the Regent to be disposed upon at his pleasure, alledging they had no surety but a naked promise which they needed not to keep, and because these of the Castle confided wholy on the Marshals pro∣mise, the Ambassador was advised to prevent the Marshals Writing, so that er'e he did write to the Queen thereabout, her Letter came to him to deliver up the Prisoners who had been in the Castle, to the Regent. And he durst not disobey her Command, the same being so peremptory, tho he obeyed it with much regret, and great re∣luctancy, by reason of his promise, and returned malecontent to Berwick. And they in the Castle were Committed to strait ward, and thereafter new Letters were purchased by the Regent from the Queen, that he might execute them, which she willingly permitted, for she
would gladly have been quit of my Lord Hume, and Grange, as being two true Scotsmen, unwonable to England to do any thing prejudicial to their King or Country, and of the Secretary Lidingtoun, but he dy∣ed at Lieth, after the old Roman fashion as was said, to prevent his coming to the Shambles with the rest. As for the Lord Hume, the Regent durst not meddle with him, he standing in awe of Alexander Hume of Manderstoun, Coildinknows, and the Good man of North Berwick, and the rest of that name, who boasted with very proud Language. He dyed shortly after, being warded in the Castle of Edinbrugh. Mr. Killegrew the English Ambas∣sador desired no other reward for his labour, but the preservation of my Brother Sir Robert's life, for he was obliged formerly to him and me. The Composition was kept to all the rest of the mean Gentlemen. The Priour of Coldingham, and Laird of Drylaw were afterwards set at liberty. Sundry of the Captains of Berwick went up to the Castle by the breach beat down in the fore Wall by the Canons, that they might say that they had won the Maiden Castle. But this was after that the house was delivered over to the Regents Brother, yet he would not suffer them to enter there with any number. On this manner both England and the Regent were revenged upon that worth Champion, whom they had sometimes in great estimati∣on, who had done such notable service in France, being Captain of an hundred light Horsemen, that he was extolled by the Duke of Ven∣dome, Prince of Conde, and Duke of Aumale Governors and Colonels then in Picardy, that I heard Henry the 2d, point unto him and say; yonder is one of the most Valiant Men of our Age. Also the King used him so familiarly, that he chose him commonly upon his side in all pastimes he went to, and because he shot far with a great Shaft at the Butts, the King would have him to shoot two Arrows, one for his pleasure. The great Constable of France would never speak to him uncovered, and that King gave him an honourable Pension, whereof he never sought payment. England had proof of his Valour frequently against them upon the Borders, where he gave them divers ruffles. In a single Combate, he vanquished the Earl of Rivers's Brother between the two Armies of Scotland and England. He afterward Debated manfully the liberty of his Country against the French men, when they intended to erect the Land into a Province. He had lately re∣fused the demands of Mr. Randolph, and Mr. Killegrew, as is before mentioned, and had reproached both the said Ambassadors of false and deceitful dealing. Last of all he had refused to put the Castle into the hands of English men, and therefore because he was true to his Prince and Country, it cost him his life. For they boasted plainly to bring down that Gyants pride, who as they alledged, presumed to be another Wallace. Albeit contrariwise he was humble, gentle, and meek, like a Lamb in the House, but like a Lyon in the Fields. He was a lusty strong and well proportioned personage, hardy and of a magnanimous Courage, secret and prudent in all his enterprises, so that never one that he made or devised misgave where he was present himself. When he was Victorious he was very merciful, and na∣turally liberal, an enemy to greediness and ambition, and a friend to all men in adversity. He fell frequently in trouble in protecting in∣nocent
men from such as would oppress them, so that these his wor∣thy qualifications, were also partly causes and means of his wrack: For they promoted him so in the opinion of many, that some loved him for his Religion, Uprightness, and Manliness; others again de∣pended upon him, for his good fortune and apparent promotion, where∣by divers of them hoped to be advanced and rewarded, supposing that Offices and Honours could not fail to fall to him. All which he wanted through his own default, for he had fled foom Avarice, and abhorred Ambition, and refused sundry great Offices, even to be Re∣gent, which were in his offer, as well as other great Benefices and Pen∣sions. Thus wanting place and subsistance to reward, he was soon abandoned by his greedy and ambitious dependers: for when they saw him at a strait, they drew to others, whom they perceived to aim at more profitable marks. On the other hand he was as much envied by those who were of a vile and unworthy nature, of whom many have made Tragical ends for their too great Avarice and Ambition, as shortly after did the Earl of Mortoun. This gallant Gentleman pe∣rished for being too little ambitious and greedy. But so soon as the King's Majesty came to perfect age, and had understood how matters had gone during his minority, he caused to restore the Heirs of the said Laird of Grange, whom he said was wracked contrary to the ap∣pointment made with the Marshal of Berwick, and also ordered his bones to be taken up and buried honourably in the ancient Burial place of his Predecessors in Kinghorn. After his death the Marshal of Berwick took so heavy displeasure, finding himself so far affronted, because of the breach of his promise, and that the appointment which he had made with the Castle of Edinbrugh was not kept; that he would tarry no longer in his Office at Berwick, seeing he judged he had lost his credit and reputation, for he was a plain Man of War, and loved Grange so dearly, that at his request, he spared to cast down the Houses of Seatoun and Nidrie, when he came in to cast down the House of Hamiltoun. Likewise all the Officers of Berwick lamented the loss of so worthy a Cap∣tain. The Regent triumphed for a while, because of the great assistance that England made to him, which they had never done to any of the former Regents, but rather stirred up factions and parties against them, to keep the Country in discord. The causes that moved them so to assist him, were, That they believed the old jealousies betwixt the Stuarts and Douglasses should by him be brought to an end, the young King being in his hands, to be disposed of at pleasure; the Queen his Mother being already Captive in their hands, which two only could join Scotland and England in one Monarchy. Therefore above all others the guiders of the Court of England for the time, wished them out of the way, as well for the great Offices done by them both to King and Queen, as for the desire they had to destroy that Race and Line, to place some of their own friends to succeed to the Crown of England. So thinking that the Regent's mark in Scotland, and theirs in England was conformable; they established and fortified him in his Regiment, though God in his goodness suffered not their practises to take effect. For the Regent wanting Heirs of his own body, and ha∣ving
no Competitors to stay him from doing any thing that he plea∣sed, when he thought the time meet, he delayed matters, and in the mean time bent his whole study how to gather riches, and how to suck out substance both from England and Scotland, moving England thereby too late to repent, that they had not preserved the Laird of Grange to be an awe over the Regent, as he kept the King to be an aw over them. And as he was crafty, so he was fearful and slow of nature, and thought the Earl of Angus his Brother's Son yet too young, and not capable to comprehend his hidden intention, and therefore he was long of resolving. In the mean time serving his own turn with England, as they did with all the World, when they were like to have any trouble among themselves, or with their Neighbours; then he compelled them to send him mony, which they were neces∣sitated to do, though sore against their heart, with a hidden despight and secret hatred at his slowness on the one part, and covetousness on the other. This Regent held the Country in an established Estate, under great obedience, better then for many years before or since. For there was not another Earl of Mortoun to stir up the factious Subjects, as he used to do against the rest of the Regents, which made him so proud and disdainful, that he despised the rest of the Nobility. And using no Mans counsel but his own, he became ungrateful to all his old Friends and Servants. And being under pretext of Justice, used to commit divers wrongs and extortions, he caused to begin a Process against the Laird of Fentry, because many years before a Thief had made his escape out of his hands, and against the Laird of Seafield for a piece of Land; and against Mr. James Thorntoun for his Benefice. Thus as he had lost the favour of England, so did he by such ways the hearts of all Scotland, but only of George Auflech, and Alexander Gerdan. As for the Laird of Carmichael, he lamented to me grievously of his in∣gratitude toward him, and was minded to leave him, untill I gave him counsel to help himself by the hurtful experience of the Laird of Grange, and Walter Melvil my Brother, who was one of the Gentlemen of the Earl of Murray's Chamber, which two lost his favour so soon as he became Regent. And likewise I told him, that very way I lost him my self, for we had been long familiar with him, and had assist∣ed him in all his troubles, but when he was Regent, we would with our wonted freedom reprove, admonish, and tell him his faults, where∣by we lost his favour. And others who formerly had ever been against him, came in and flattered him in all his proceedings, and stouped very low to him, calling him Your Grace at each word. These men, I said, won him, and we lost him. And apparently, said I, to Carmichael, you follow the like foolish behaviour as we did, therefore you must take up another kind of doing. And seeing your friend is become Regent, imagine that you was never acquainted with him before, but that you are entring to serve a new Master: Cast never up your old and long service, cringe low, Grace him at every word, find no fault with his proceedings, but serve all his affections with great diligence, and continual waiting, and you shall be sure of a reward. Otherwise all your former time spent in his service will be lost, and he will hate you, and take a despight at you, which may bring on afterwards a
greater wrack. Carmichael gave me great thanks and his hand, that he would follow this counsel, which he afterward did very punctually, and so became a greater Courtier then ever, and was employed and rewarded, and had credit to do pleasure to his friends, but I found him not thankful afterwards to me for my counsel. Now the young King was brought up in Sterling, by Alexander Areskine, and my Lady Mar. He had four principal Masters, Mr. George Buchuanan, Mr. Peter Toung, the Abbots of Cambuskenneth and Drybrugh, descended from the House of Areskine. The Laird of Drum∣whasel was Master of his Houshold. Alexander Areskine was a gallant well natur'd Gentleman, loved and honoured by all Men, for his good qualities, and great discretion, no ways factious nor envious, a lover of all honest Men, and desired ever to see Men of good Conversation about the Prince, rather then his own nearer friends, if he found them not so meet. The Laird of Drumwhasel again was ambitious and greedy, his grea∣test care was to advance himself and his friends. The two Abbots were wise and modest. My Lady Mar was wise and sharp, and held the King in great awe; and so did Mr. George Buchuanan. Mr. Peter Toung was more gentle, and was loath to offend the King at any time, carrying himself warily, as a Man who had mind of his own weal, by keeping of his Majesty's favour: But Mr. George was a Stoick Philoso∣pher, who looked not far before him. A man of notable endowments for his learning and knowledge in Latin Poesie, much honoured in other Countries, pleasant in Conversation, rehearsing at all occasions Moralities short and instructive, whereof he had abundance, inventing where he wanted. He was also Religious, but was easily abused, and so facile, that he was led by every Company that he haunted, which made him factious in his old days, for he spoke and wrote as those who were about him informed him: For he was become careless, follow∣ing in many things the vulgar opinion: For he was naturally popu∣lar, and extreamly revengeful against any Man who had offended him, which was his greatest fault. For he did write despightful invectives against the Earl of Monteeth, for some particulars that were between him and the Laird of Buchuanan. He became the Earl of Mortoun's great Enemy, for that a Nagg of his chanced to be taken from his Ser∣vant during the Civil Troubles, and was bought by the Regent, who had no will to part with the said Horse, he was so sore footed and so easie, that albeit Mr. George had oft-times required him again, he could not get him. And therefore though he had been the Regent's great Friend before, he became his mortal Enemy, and from that time forth spoke evil of him in all places, and at all occasions. Drumwhasel also because the Regent kept all the Casualties to himself, and would let no∣thing fall to others who were about the King, became also his great enemy, and so did they all who were about his Majesty. The Regent again Ruling all at his pleasure, made no accompt of any about the King, untill a discreet Gentleman called Mr. Nicho∣las Elphingstoun advertised him, That the King had no kindness for him, advising him, albeit too late, to bestow part of his Gold unto so many of the King's Servants, as were thought to be most wonable, seeing he was envyed of many, and hated of every Man, especially
by those who were in Sterling about the King. He gave to one that was in mean rank Twenty five pieces of Gold, at Twenty Pound the Piece; what he gave to others I cannot tell, but such as had spoken ill of him before, durst not alter their language, because of the King's Wit and good Memory, who could check any that he perceived had first spoken evil, and then began to speak good again. As his Majesty had done to one of the company, alledging, That he had changed his Coat, as I was afterward informed; so that the Regent was too long in dealing part of his Gold to those about his Majesty, who increasing in years and knowledge, sundry Gentlemen began to look after Ser∣vice, and turned On-waiters. Among others James Stuart Son to the Lord Oghiltrie a young Man of a busie Brain, had an aspiring Spirit, and through time won great favour and credit with his Majesty. And though he was not well liked by those of the Castle of Sterling, yet he was the more overseen, because he gave continually evil informa∣tion to his Majesty of the Earl of Mortoun, and so did also my Lord Robert Earl of Orkny, who had been warded, and hardly handled by the Regent for some double dealing with Denmark, as was alledg∣ed. The Regent being in this manner brought in disgrace with his Ma∣jesty; when he was upon the height of the wheel, the Earls of Ar∣guile and Athol were secretly practised, and drawn to Sterling by Drumwhasel with the consent of Alexander Areskine, Master of Mar, and Mr. George Buchuanan; by whose advice and counsel, his Majesty was easily moved to depose the Regent from his Office: who yielded easilier thereto, then any Man would have believed, against the opi∣nion of his friends, retiring himself to the House of Lockleven within the Logh, for the surety of his person, until he might understand what was like to follow thereupon, and what might be the next best for him to do. The King's Majesty having attained unto the Age of years, or∣dained a Council to sit at Edinbrugh for ordering the Affairs of the Realm. The Earl of Athol was made Chancellour, because the Lord Glams was a little before slain in Sterling by the Earl of Grauford as was suspected, though he denied the deed, and purged himself thereof, as far as he could. The Earl of Arguile, and the Master of Mar stayed in Ster∣ling with the King's Majesty. During the time that this new Council sate in Edinbrugh, the Earl of Mortoun who was quiet in Lockleven, making the walks of his Gar∣den even; his mind was in the mean time occupied in crooked paths, plotting how to be brought again to be Master of the Court, which was accomplished upon a night at midnight. When he came to the Gates of the Castle of Sterling, they were opened unto him by the two Abbots, and a Faction that they had drawn in there with them. Al∣beit the Master of Mar, and Earl of Aguile made what resistance they could, where the Master's eldest Son dyed in the throng, yet the en∣terprisers prevailed, and brought in again the Earl of Mortoun, and put out the Earl of Arguile, the Master of Mar, Drumwhasel and such others as they misliked, and so made a new change at Court. Where the Earl of Mortoun handled the matter so discreetly, and moderately as he could, that the alteration should not appear to be over sharp or
violent. The new chosen Council scattered incontinently, some of them retiring home, and some joined with the Earl of Mortoun, hoping never to see a turn again. About this time came out of France my Lord of Aubonie, who was afterward made Duke of Lennox, who was Brother's Son to the Earl of Lennox, and obtained afterward great credit and favour. James Stuart of Oghiltrie, of whom I formerly made mention, assist∣ed him through process of time, to perswade the King's Majesty to de∣sire to ride out of Sterling, and make a progress among the rest of his Subjects, which the Earl of Mortoun could not resist, supposing that it lay in his power to frame the Court at his pleasure. For by his great wealth he was resolved to gain so many as he judged neces∣sary, and so by the multitude of his friends to bear out the business; however the Court was ruled after he had obtained a discharge, and alliance of his intromission. For though during the time that he was Regent, he was always strongest about the King, but my Lord Aubo∣ny and James Stewart were most in favour, who by their continual rounding in the King's Ear against the Earl of Mortoun, ingendered at last a greater dislike in the King of him, then he had before. And as James Stuart was the stirrer up of the other, so afterward, when he found the time convenient, he took occasion to accuse the said Earl before the Council of the late King's murther. Whereupon the Earl of Mortoun was made Prisoner, and sent first to the Castle of Edinbrugh, and afterward to the Castle of Dumbartoun, which was thought strange in respect of his many friends that were in Court for the time, who were then found to be but friends to his fortune. For he was loved by none, and envied and hated by many, so that they all looked through their fingers to see his fall. England was also angry at him for the time, because of his slowness to answer their turns, which they had hoped for at his hands, having put the King and Country in his power. Yet they made some offer to assist him, which occasioned to hasten his ruin. For they sent down Seventeen Companies to the Borders, boasting to send a grea∣ter number, and to declare open War, in case the Earl of Mortoun was not set at liberty, and the Lord Aubony put out of Scotland. Mr. Ran∣dolph was sent in with this Ambassage. His Majesty again having these two young Counsellors about him, who knew of no perils, rai∣sed a Taxation to pay Soldiers, and caused to make a Proclamation for every Man to be in readiness upon a call, which moved the English to retire, and leave off endeavouring any more his assistance, encoura∣ging thereby such as were deadly Enemies to the Earl of Mortoun to ride to Dumbartoun with a thousand raised and hired Men, together with their own friends, to bring the Earl of Mortoun back again to Edinbrugh to undergo an Assize. Some of the Earl's friends convened to take him out of their hands, but found not themselves strong enough. They might have done it, had it not been the Forces which had been newly levied, occasioned by the threat'nings which England had made. Being brought to Edinbrugh, he found few friends to appear or act for him. His Gold and Silver was transported long before, by his Natural Son James Douglas, and one of his Servants called John Mac-Morran. It was first carried in Barrels, and afterward hid in some se∣cret
parts, part whereof was given to be kept by some who were lookt upon as his friends, who made ill accompt of it again, so that the most part thereof lighted in bad hands, and himself was so destitute of mo∣ny, that when he went through the Street to the Tolbooth to undergo his Assize, he was compelled to borrow Twenty shillings to distribute to the Poor, who asked Alms of him for God's sake. The Assize con∣demned him to death, as being Airt and Pairt in the King's murther, and as being of Councel with the Earl of Bothwel, who brought him out of banishment, when he was absent for the slaughter of David Rixio. He granted that he was made privy thereto, but had no hand in devising thereof: And as concerning the young King, he owned that he purposed to send him to England for his weal, that he might the rather obtain his Right to the Crown of England, being within the Country, and brought up among them. He dyed resolutely, and had ended more perfectly, if he had declared and confessed his Worldly practises and fetches to nourish the Civil Troubles, partly at the de∣votion of England, and partly for his own particular profit, during the Government of the first three Regents, which occasioned great blood-sheding that commonly cries to Heaven for vengeance. During the King's young years, the partialities were so great, and the whole Country so disturbed by the two several parties, who alledged to fight and strive for the King and the Queen, being then Captive in England, and the King yet very young; that many perceived them to be but factious, ambitious, avaritious, greedy, worldly, wretched persons. Both parties were craftily stirred up, and kept in trouble by one only Faction in England, who had that Queens Ear, intending the wrack as well of our King as Queen, to advance some of their friends to inherit the Crown of England, which occasioned a great out-cry against our foolish contentions. After that the Earl of Mortoun, the last of the four Regents was depo∣sed, the King's Majesty, being young, took the Government into his own hands, my Lord of Aubony being made Lord Dalkieth, and after∣ward Duke of Lennox, was chief about his Majesty, and James Stuart formerly mentioned; who afterward took unto himself the style, and then the Earldom of Arran, thinking that he had done great Service, and deserved well for accusing and wracking the Earl of Mortoun, he married the Earl of March his Relict. The Duke was of nature upright, just, and gentle, but wanted ex∣perience in the state of the Country. At the first he was wholly gui∣ded by the said James Stuart and his Wife, who both began to envy him, and therefore they endeavoured how they might cast him off, that they might attain to the sole management of Affairs: And for this end they gave him bad advice, and sinister informations against sun∣dry of his best friends. And being likewise Educated a Papist, and suspected to be at the Duke of Guise's devotion, and therefore a dange∣rous Man to be about his Majesty; the whole Country was stirred up against him; England by their Ambassadour helping to kindle the fire. Mr. David Macgil, and Mr. Henry Keer were his chief Councellors, both wise enough for their own profit, but careless of his standing, and therefore not fit to counsel him who was his Majesty's greatest fa∣vourite. At the instigation and mis-information of the Earl of Arran,
and his Lady, he first did cast off his true friend the Master of Mar Captain of the Castle of Edinbrugh, and after that Sir William Stuart Captain of Dumbartoun, and then Alexander Clerk Provost of Edin∣brugh, and the Earl of Gaurie Treasurer. The rest of the Nobility were also dissatisfied, to see these two young Lords only in favour with the King, finding that they both did aim at Noblemens lives, for their Lands. And albeit some of them misliked the Earl of Mortoun's proceedings, yet they judged the taking of his life an hard preparative. They likewise suspected Religion to be in hazard, the one being a Pa∣pist, and the other a scorner of all Religion. They thought that from two such Counsellors, no wholsome advice could proceed for the peace of the Country, and the establishment of Religion. Therefore a num∣ber of them consulted together, to displace both the Duke, and the Earl of Arran, to send the one to France, and to remove the other from Court. In the mean time, they resolved to throng themselves in about the King, and to make a reformation of the abuses, and to inviron his Majesty with their Forces, so soon as he came to Dumfarmling, whi∣ther he had appointed to come at his return out of Athol, where he was for the time ahunting, and to present to him this Supplication. IT may appear strange to your Majesty that we your most hum∣ble and faithful Subjects, are here convened beyond your expecta∣tion, and without your knowledge; but after your Majesty hath heard the urgent occasion that hath pressed us hereto, your Maje∣sty will not marvel at this our honest, lawful and necessary enter∣prise. Sir, For the dutiful Reverence that we owe unto your Majesty, and for that we abhor to attempt any thing that may seem displea∣sing to your Majesty, we have for the space of two years suffered such false Accusations, Calumnies, Oppressions and Persecutions, by means of the Duke of Lennox, and him who is called Earl of Arran, that the like Insolencies and Enormities were never heretofore born with in Scotland. Which wrongs, albeit they were most intolera∣ble, yet when they only touched us in particular we comported with them patiently, ever attending when it should please your Majesty to give a remedy thereto. But seeing the persons aforesaid have plainly designed to trouble the whole Body of the Common-Wealth, as well the Ministers of the blessed Evangel, as the true Professors thereof, but in special, that number of Noblemen, Barrons, Burgesses and Commonalty, who did most worthily behave themselves in your Majesties Service, during your youth; whom principally and only they molest, and against whom they use most extremity and rigour of Laws, oft-times most sinistrously perverting the same for their destruction, so that one part of these your best Subjects are Exiled, another part Tormented, and put to questions, which they are not in Law obliged to answer; and withal execute with partiality and injustice all your Laws: And if any escape their barbarous fury, they can have no access to your Majesty, but are falsly calumniated, and debarred from your presence, and kept out of your favour.
Papists and most notable Murtherers are called home daily, and re∣stored to their former honours and heritages, and oftimes highly re∣warded with the Offices and Possessions of your most faithful Ser∣vants. Finally your Estate Royal is not Governed by the Council of your Nobility, as your most worthy Progenitors used to do, but at the pleasure of the foresaid persons, who enterprise nothing but as they are directed by the Bishops of Glascow and Ross, your denounced Rebels, having with them adjoyned in their ordinary Councels the Popes Nuntio, with the Ambassador of Spain, and such other of the Papists of France as endeavour to subvert the true Religion, and to bring your Majesty in discredit with your Subjects. They travel to cause you negotiate and traffick with your Mother, without the advice of your Estates, perswading your Majesty to be reconciled with her, and to associate her conjunctly with you in the Authority-Royal, meaning nothing other thereby but to Convict us of U∣surpation and Treason. And so having these your best Subjects out of the way, who with the defence of your Authority maintained the true Religion as two things united and inseperable, what else could have followed but the wrack and destruction of both? For conclusion, your whole native Country, for which Sir you must give an account to the Eternal God, as we must be answerable to your Majesty, is so perturbed and altered, and the true Religi∣on, the Commonwealth, your Estate and Person are in no less dan∣ger, then when you were delivered out of the hands of the cruel Murtherers of your Father, who they were we will not insist on at this present. Sir, beholding these great dangers to be eminent and at hand, without speedy help, and perceiving your noble person in such ha∣zard, the preservation whereof is more precious to us then our own lives, finding also no appearance that your Majesty was fore∣warned hereof, but like to perish before you could see the peril, we thought that we could not be answerable to our Eternal God, neither faithful Subjects to your Majesty, if according to our ability we prevented not this present distress, preserving your Majesty from the same. For this effect with all dutiful humility and obedience, we your Majesties true Subjects, are here convened, desiring your Ma∣jesty in the name of God, and for the love you bear to his true Re∣ligion, to your Country, and Commonwealth, and as you would see the tranquillity of your own Estate, to retire your self to some part of the Country, where your Majesties person may be most safe∣ly preserved, and your Nobility secured, who are under hazard of Lands, Life, and Heritages. And then your Majesty shall see the disloyalties, falshoods, and Treasons of the persons aforesaid, evi∣dently proved and declared to their faces, to the glory of God, advancement of his true Religion, your Majesties preservation and honour, and the deliverance of your troubled Commonweal and Country, and to their perpetual ignominy and shame.
At this Highland hunting, His Majesty was very meanly accom∣panied. The Duke of Lennox tarried for the time at Dalkieth, the new Earl of Arran was at Kinneel, many of the Councel were appointed to hold Justice Airs in divers Shires of the Country. I was ordained to hold the Justice Air of West Lauthian at Edinbrugh with my Lord Neu∣bottle, Mr. David Macgill, and Mr. John Sharp. There came to my Bed timely in a morning a Gentleman, alledging that I had former∣ly done him courtesies, which till now he was never able to recom∣pence, that he would make me the instrument of saving the Kings Ma∣jesty my Master, out of the hands of those who were upon an enter∣prize to take and keep him. I said, I could hardly trust that, but I feared that the Duke of Lennox might be in hazard, who was gone to Glascow to hold Justice Airs, because of the hatred which I knew was born him, especially for the maintaining the two Bishops of St. An∣drews and Glascow. He answered, They will lay hands first on the Kings Majesty, and then the Duke and the Earl of Arran dare no more be seen, their insolency and misbehaviour being the cause of all the pre∣sent disorders, for there is an enterprize to present a supplication a∣gainst him to his Majesty. After he had told me this news, he de∣sired me to conceal his name, though to tell the matter to his Majesty. He said, this turn would be done in ten dayes, and as I started up to put on my Cloaths, he slipt to the door with a short farewel. Because the Duke was at Dalkieth, I did ride thither, and shewed him the whole matter, advising him to ride himself to His Majesty with this Advertisement for his own security, but he chose rather to direct a Gentleman with all possible diligence to His Majesty, willing me also to write unto the Earl of Gaurie, for the Gentleman had not named him to me with the rest of the enterprizers, either out of for∣getfulness, or else because he was but lately won to that purpose by the Laird of Drumwhasel, who had assured him that the Duke of Lennox had determined to slay him at the first meeting, persuading the Earl upon this ground to joyn with the rest of the Noblemen, who were determined to reform the Estate. Unto the which invent∣ed Advertisement, he too easily gave Credit, and so joyned with the rest of the Nobility, who were minded to present the forenamed sup∣plication to the King, at his coming to Dumfarmling. It is certain that the Duke of Lennox was led by evil Councel, and wrong Informations, whereby he was moved to meddle in such hurtful and dangerous courses, that the rest of the Nobility became zealous of his intentions, and feared their Estates. As for the Earl of Arran, they detested his Proceedings, and esteemed him the worst and most insolent instrument that could be found out, to wrack King, Kirk, and Country. The Duke had been tolerable, had he hapned upon as honest Councellors as he was well inclined of himself: but he wanted experience, and was no ways versed in the State of the Coun∣try, nor brought up in our Religion, which by time he might have been brought to have imbraced. But the Earl of Arran was a scorner of Religion, presumptuous, ambitious, covetous, careless of the Commonwealth, a dispiser of the Nobility, and of all honest men; so that every man was expecting a suddain Change which should have been made in Dumfarling, in presenting the above specified sup∣plication.
But what moved the Lords to surprise His Majesty within the House of Huntingtoun, I know not. If it was not to imbark the Earl of Gaury, whose House it was more deeply in their bond, or that they fearing their enterprise to be discovered, made the greater hast, and stayed His Majesty in that place, which was afterward cal∣led the Road of Ruthven. After that the Duke of Lennox was advertised of this enterprise, he sent for the Earl of Arran who was peaceably passing his time in Kinweel. He took in hand to ride and save the King, boasting that he would chase all the Lords into Mouse-holes, but he was chased and saved himself in the House of Ruthven, where they had shortly made an end of him, had not the Earl of Gaurie interceeded for his life, whose destiny it was to keep him alive to be his own wrack after∣wards. The Duke of Lennox being advertised that His Majesty was in their hands, retired himself to Dumbartoun, and His Majesty was conveyed to Stirling and there retained. The King of France, and the Queen of England being informed that the King was taken and kept in Custody, sent each of them an Ambassador to this Country to comfort his Majesty, to see what the matter meant, and to offer him their assistance in case he required the same, and declared that he had been taken and kept against his will. But after great thanks given unto the said Ambassadors, the King wil∣led them to declare unto their Princes, that he was very well satisfied with the Lords who were about him, and that they were all his own Subjects, willing to obey him, but that they had conceived some hard apprehensions of the Duke of Lennox, and some others who had been about him before. Albeit his heart was full of sorrow and displeasure as he told himself afterward, and even then likewise to Mr. Cairy Cousin to the Queen of England, who whispered in His Majesties Ear, requesting him to tell the plain verity, which he should keep secret from Mr. Bows his Companion, and also from the Lords, and shall only shew his inward mind privily to his Mistress the Queen, yet it neither appeared by the success to have been kept secret, nor did that Queen make any further instance for his liberty. The Lords in the mean time thought meet to hold a Councel, to resolve what course to take, wherein it was determined that their en∣terprise was good service to his Majesty, the Kirk, and Common∣wealth, which His Majesty granted also to be true; whereupon an Act of Councel was formed. At that same time, the general Assem∣bly of the Kirk was held at Edinbrugh, to the which his Majesty was moved to send two Commissioners, to testify that he had allowed for good service the said Lords enterprise, desiring likewise the Kirk to find it good for their parts, and to ordain the Ministers and Commission∣ers of every Shire to publish the same to their Parishioners, and to get the principal Gentlemens Subscriptions to maintain the same. Not∣withstanding of all this, His Majesty took the matter further to heart then any man would have believed. He lamented his mishand∣ling to sundry Noblemen, and others, and at length acquainted some of them that he intended to relieve himself through time out of their hands who held him as Captive. He desired such as he trusted in, to assist him with their counsel, and help.
The Lords again who were joined together for the Reformation of the State, being rid of the Duke of Lennox, who had past through England to France, where he shortly after dyed of a sickness contra∣cted through displeasure. And being also rid of the Earl of Arran, whom they kept Captive in the custody of the Earl of Gaury, they retired themselves from the Court to their houses, that his Majesty sould not think himself any way deprived of his liberty by them: for hey had got some intelligence of his inward grief, for his taking and retai∣ning. Whereupon his Majesty takes occasion, to appoint a Conven∣tion to be holden in St. Andrews for some English Affairs, after the returning of Mr. John Colvil, and Colonel Steward, who both had been sent thither, and had not agreed well concerning their Commis∣sion, having brought back again different answers. To the which Convention his Majesty by Missives invited some of the Nobility, but he called none of the Lords thereto who had lately left him, supposing that perceiving themselves so far slighted, they would not come un∣written for, and that way he thought he might slip himself out of their hands, and retain about him such Lords as he had written for, to wit, The Earls of Arguile, Huntly, Montrose, Crauford, Rothess, and the Earl of March, who was an indweller in St. Andrews for the time, and the Earl of Gaury of whom he judged himself assured, though for some re∣spects he would not imploy him till afterwards, lest the rest of his asso∣ciates should alledge that he had left them unhandsomly. For the said Earl had repented him, that he had suffered himself to be drawn in by Drumwhasel to join with the rest, after that he had received sure infor∣mation that the Duke of Lennox had not laid for his slaughter, as was alledged. Therefore he repented his folly, and offered at all occasions to help to set him at liberty. So his Majesty thinking himself assured of all these Noblemen, the day appointed for the Convention drawing near, it pleased him to send Colonel Stuart to my house, shewing me that his Majesty having some∣what to do of great concernment, he had directed him unto me as to one of his most faithful Servants, of whose fidelity and foresight he had formerly had sufficient proof, by the true warning I had made him before the alteration. As a sworn Gentleman of his Chamber, he desired that I would help him to his liberty, which he was determined to attain at his being at St. Andrews, whither he was resolved to go shortly to a Convention, to which he desired my assistance and advice, his Majesty being minded, as he said, to follow my counsel so long as he lived, willing me not to refuse any service that his Majesty would demand of me at meeting. This Commission was to me very unplea∣sant, for I had taken my leave of the Court, as being wearied with the many alterations I had seen, both at home, and in forreign Courts, having got great trouble and damage to my self for other mens cau∣ses. Therefore I had determined to be no more concerned in publick affairs, but to lead a quiet, contemplative life the rest of my days. This desire of my Prince and Master, was like to put me from this resolution. In this perplexity I had recourse by humble prayer to God, so to direct my actings as they might tend to his glory, and to the weal of my Prince and Country. And thereafter according to my dutiful obedience, I went unto his Majesty. When I came to
him at Falkland, he told me of his resolution, lamenting his hard state, and mishandling by his own Subjects, and what displeasure he had taken, and that he was thought but a Beast by all neighbour Princes, for suffering so many indignities. I again discoursed unto his Majesty about the common estate of all Countries, during their Prince's minority, the Nobility striving for state, and for the chief handling, whereby to advance themselves and their friends. As did the House of Guise during the young age of King Francis the Second: The Prince of Conde, during the Reign of King Charles the Second of France; and also the King of Navarr: Likewise the Dukes of Somerset and Northumberland during the youth of King Edward the sixth of England. And as well in the Queen his Mothers time, as in his own time, some aiming to advance their own affairs, some to defend and maintain their own Estate, engaged in di∣vers enterprises and strifes, none of the parties bearing any evil will to his Majesty, but every one being in love with him, and desiring to be nearest to his person. And albeit some of them be oft-times trans∣ported, either by ambition, greediness or vengeance, to out-shoot themselves, and forget their duty; yet Princes who are wise and come to perfect age, have ever found it their interest to pardon, and over∣see all such faults, as have been committed at such times by too great a number of Subjects. Now when Charles the Ninth agreed with the Prince of Conde, all his former offences were reckoned for good Service. And as your Majesty hath done in agreeing with so many of your Nobility, as were in fear that the Duke of Lennox, and Earl of Arrań, would wrong both them, and the Country as they did alledge. Now Sir, if your Majesty shall slip from them, they will think their Estate in greater danger then ever, not from your self, but from some of their unfriends, who may fall in again about you. And al∣beit they be presently absent, they have both a guard and some of their friends presently about your Majesty, and so they will not fail to keep the Convention, and be as soon at St. Andrews, as the other Lords whom your Majesty hath invited by Letters. For it stands them up∣on their lives and fortunes, to be still chief about your Majesty. Therefore saving your Majesties own pleasure, I judge you presently in a far better and safer condition, then you will be by abandoning them, in case you get it not well effected, wherein there will be found greater difficulty, then your Majesty hath yet deeply considered, as the importance of the case requires. All their dissuasions had no force to stay his Majesty from his for∣mer deliberation, as having taken up a great displeasure, and a Prince∣ly courage, either to liberate himself fully, or dye in the attempt. But for to follow the example of other wise Princes, as he had begun him∣self to allow for good service, the enterpise called the Read of Ruthven; so he resolved that being at liberty, he would make a general act of Oblivion for all by-gone faults, and errours committed by his Nobi∣lity, and Subjects during his minority, and from that time forth to be as a Father to the Country, and a just and equal Prince to all his Sub∣jects; that no Man's Life, no Man's Land, Goods, nor Office should be taken from them. That as the fittest and most effectual way for set∣ling Peace in the Country, he would give satisfaction to the Church,
in their desires. That he would keep about his Person the most vertu∣ous and discreet of his Nobility, and Gentry, who could be found. His Majesty ingaged also to me, to be secret, constant, and counsel∣able. For the better management then of his Majstey's design, it was thought expedient, that he should be in St. Andrews some few days before the Convention, that being once there, Proclamation might be issued out, to forbid any Nobleman or other, to come to the Conven∣tion without being expresly called by Letter from his Majesty. For this end it was advised, that the Earl of March, should invite his Ma∣jesty to be at St. Andrews two or three days before the Convention, by reason of his preparation of wild meat, and other fleshes, that would spoil in case his Majesty came not to make good chear with him some days before. Whereupon his Majesty went forward, contrary to my opinion, and the judgment of some others about him, who though we were sensible of the inconveniencies which might follow, durst not be so bold as to stay him, though we told his Majesty our opinion, that we judged it was hazardous for him to ride till the Lords, who had been advertised to attend him, might come forward. Neverthe∣less he went on, and advertised the Earl of March, the Provost of St. Andrews, and other Barons to attend him at Darsie. Where meeting them, his Majesty thought himself at liberty, expressing great joy, like a Bird flown out of a Cage, passing his time in Hawking by the way, after his meeting them, thinking himself sure enough, albeit I thought his estate far surer when he was in Falkland. For when he came to St. Andrews, he lodged in an old Inn, a very open part, the yard dikes being his greatest strength, few of the Lords he had written for be∣ing yet come, except only the Earl of Crauford, who was near. In the mean time I perceived the folly, and went to the Provost of the Town, desiring to know what forces he had within the Town at his devotion? He answered, Very few, and those not to be trusted to. I asked who was in the Castle? He told me, the Bishop, with whom I dealt incontinently, to have the Castle in readiness to receive his Majesty, which he promised to do. But when I returned to his Ma∣jesty, believing that the Proclamation had been made, That no Man should come to the Convention, but such as had been written for, I found that the Abbot of Dumfarmling was arrived out of Lockleven, and the Earl of Marshal out of Dundee. The Earl of Mar was still with his Majesty, but all the Lords were advertised with diligence from Falkland, that his Majesty was suddenly gone for St. Andrews, desiring them to make haste to go thither, else they would be late. The said Abbot for his part was soon enough there, and behaved himself with great dissimulation, extolling his Majesties enterprise, so that he gain'd so much credit as to cast down all their devices, who were upon the King's side, though he was a special doer for the contrary party. He said it was not fit by Proclamation to stay the Nobility, but rather to write Missives to them, not to come accompanied with any more then two persons with every Nobleman. When his Majesty told me this, I was very angry, and shewed him that this was the ready way to put him again in their hands, without thanks, from whom he had lately fled, assuring his Majesty that they
were coming forward very strong, and in Arms, and would be sooner there, then those Lords he had written for: adding, that they might come in quietly themselves, and cause their Companies to come in by two's and three's to the Town, whereas it had been better to let them come in all together, that their whole Forces might have been seen. Yet his Majesty was loath to enter within the Castle that night for his greater security, until it was very late after Supper, giving those that were there already time to advise, and to enterprise that same night to take him again, in case he had gone to the Abby yards to walk, as they had perswaded him, till the Castle was prepared. And some were already entred the said yard for that effect in Armour, whereof I had some suspicion, and therefore instantly advertised his Majesty, who thereupon changed his resolution and past by the yard Gate to the Castle. The next day the whole Lords, as well written for, as unwritten for, arrived at St. Andrews; the King's Lords quite without Armour, the other Lords strongly Armed. The Earl of Marshal, and Mar, and the Abbot of Dumfarmling lodged within the Castle with his Majesty, where the crafty Abbot counselled the King to let none of the Lords come within the Castle accompanied with more then twelve persons. He ever appeared to favour the King's intention, and therefore this crafty counsel was followed. The next morning the Castle was full of men, and those of the contrary party being well Armed, had al∣ready taken the Stair-heads and Galleries, resolving again to be Ma∣sters of the King, and all the rest, which being too late preceived, di∣ligence was incontinently used, to bring within the Castle all the Earl of March his Gentlemen, with the Lairds of Dairsy, Balcomy, Segie, Forret, Barns, and others, with so many of the Town as were at the Provosts devotion, which for that night prevented the foresaid de∣sign. The Earl of Gaury was also a great stay in that matter: for albeit he came thither as strong, and as angry as any of the Lords, yet he was advertised of the King's good will towards him, and so was drawn from the rest. That dangerous day being thus past without any harm done, the next day such order was taken, as his Majesty was Master of the Castle, following no more the said Abbot's counsel, but declared his moderate intentions to all the Lords, to the Fiffe Barons, and Towns upon the Coast side, who had been sent for, and likewise to the Mini∣sters and Masters of the Colledge: Namely, That albeit he had been de∣tained against his Will for some time, yet he intended not to impute it as a Crime, nor to remember any thing done in his minority, but that he would pass an Act of Oblivion as to all that was past; satisfie the de∣mands of the Church; agree parties among whom there were differences, and to carry himself to all his Subjects equally, knowing none of them to bear him any evil will, and that they had been driven to enterprise the thing they had done, by the force of their Factious partialities: using many other such words of clemency and discretion, to all their contentments. Thereafter he ordained four Lords, two of every faction, to retire them for a while, to wit, The Earls of Angus, Bothwel, Huntly and Crauford; retaining all the rest about him as indifferent for his ordinary Coun∣cil, by whose advice he was resolved to settle his estate, and thereafter
to bring again to Court the whole Lords above-named. Then his Majesty called for me before a number of the said Lords, and gave me greater commendation and thanks then I had merited, as being the only instrument, under God, of his liberty. His Majesty caused also to make a Proclamation, conform to his former promises, and mode∣rate intentions: But I took no pleasure to be praised in presence of so many, answering to his Majesty, That I had already displeased all those who were upon the purpose of his detention. Now matters being settled in appearance, and this design successful∣ly ended, some of the King's Lords, who had been slow in coming (and when they were come finding the Lords of the contrary Faction strong and in Armour) denyed that they knew any thing of his Maje∣sties enterprise, laying the whole burthen upon Colonel Stuart and me. But when they saw appearance of a prosperous success, they took the matter stoutly upon them and began in plain Council to tell how long they had been upon the counsel of that enterprise with his Majesty, and how long waiting for his advertisement. Of a truth his Majesty was of a merciful mind, and gently inclined toward all the Nobility, intending to win all their hearts by his own discreet behaviour, and to that effect he went first to the House of Ruth∣ven, to let the Country see that he was entirely reconciled with the Earl of Gaury. Where after he had Royally entertained his Majesty, he fell down upon his knees, lamenting that his Majesty should have been retained in that unhappy house at his last being there, which, he said, fell out rather by accident, then deliberation, only for the safety of the Earl of Arran's life. Alledging, that he knew no other thing, then that at his Majesty's being at Dumfarmling, they were minded to present him an humble Supplication, asking pardon for that acci∣dental fault, which his Majesty graciously promised never to impute to him, knowing how blindly he was brought upon it by the pra∣ctises of others. In the mean time James Stuart Earl of Arran, had obtained the fa∣vour to be warded in Kinneal, his own house, and sent and Congra∣tulated his Majesties liberty, begging that he might have access to come and kiss his hand, which was plainly resused. Then he sent daily his opinion, and advices to his Majesty, how to proceed against divers of the Nobility, and others; advising to bring back to Court the Earls of Huntly, and Crauford, which was too easily condescended to by the Earls of Arguile, and Montross, only the Earl of Gaury resisted, alledg∣ing that the Earls of Bothwel and Angus were put in hopes to be brought in with them, or as soon as they. But the equality expect∣ed, was soon forgot, which moved the Earl of Marshal and others to retire to their houses. The Abbot of Dumfarmling remained still at Court, and to curry favour of Colonel Stuart, then Captain of the Guard, he gave him a Purse and thirty pieces of Gold at four pound the piece, which pieces the Colonel distributed to so many of the Guard, who bored them, and set them like Targets upon their Knap∣sacks, and the Purse was born upon a Spear point like an Ensign. The Abbot shortly after was warded in Lockleven; Mr. John Colvil, the Laird of Clesh, and Drumwhasel were also warded by the advice of the Earl of Arran and his Wife, who continually solicited his Majesty,
that they might come to Court. And at length I was requested by his Agent James Stuart, to deal with his Majesty to permit the said Earl to come again to the Court: For he said, that his Majesty was favourable enough, and that the Earls of Arguile, Huntly, Crauford, and Montrose, had not only given their consent, but that the Earls of Ar∣guile and Montrose had said unto his Majesty, that they would ride themselves and fetch him; only the Earl of Gaury resisted; and that the King had shewn him, that he would do nothing therein without my consent and advice. I answered, That his Majesty needed not my consent, if himself and so many Noblemen were content. He replied again, That his Majesty reposed more upon me at that time, then up∣on all his Council, as his Majesty had shewn him; and that he would not bring him without my consent. Whereupon I went unto his Ma∣jesty, and shew'd him what language the Earl of Arran's Servant had to me, concerning his Master's coming to Court, and that his Maje∣sty laid too great a burthen upon me, to say that he would do nothing therein without my consent. Thereupon his Majesty took me to the Gallary of Falkland, lamenting as he had been informed the loss of many of his best friends, as the Earls of Lennox, Athol, and Duke of Len∣nox: And now, says he, They will not permit the Earl of Arran, who hazarded his life to relieve me, to come and see me; he desired me to acquaint him, what might be the occasion they hated him so much. My answer was, That to tell the verity perilled my self, to conceal the truth indangered his Majesty. He would needs know my mean∣ing therein. I said, The Earl of Arran is one of the worst instruments can come about you, whereof your Majesty hath had too sure a proof, his mis-behaviour being the only occasion of the late interprise, and if he ever be again admitted about your Majesty, the like or worse will follow. Thereupon its dangerous to my self to acquaint your Majesty herewith, seeing it will occasion him to be my deadly Enemy, if he ever get notice thereof. Then his Majesty desired only to let him come and kiss his hand, promising he should not tarry, intreating me to deal with my Lord of Gaury; that he would also grant that he might but once come to Court, and he should incontinently return to his house without any stay. I said, I should cause him to yield to his Majesties pleasure. In the mean time I took occasion to declare unto his Majesty, how that many great Princes are wracked by their Ambitious Counsellors, who will rule all alone, taking upon them a greater burthen then they can bear: for remedy whereof his Majesty should spend every day but one hour to hear a chosen number of honest Councellors reason upon his affairs, then himself to give his opinion what he thinks fit∣test to be done, as the King of France used to do. Which his Maje∣sty granted very willingly, and so long as he kept that order, by the ordinary Council days his turns went rightly forward. The whole Lords who assisted his Majesty were of his Council, Sir Robert my Brother, Colonel Stuart, the Laird of Seigie, and my self. But as soon as the Earl of Arran got access to his Majesty, he not only stayed at Court against promise, but also within a short time altered all this way of procedour, with a design to draw the manage∣ment of all publick affairs to himself. At his first entry, he carried
himself very humbly, for after he had kissed his Majesties hand, he em∣braced me and kissed my cheek, giving me many thanks in his Maje∣sties presence, alledging, That the whole name of Stuarts was obli∣ged to me, for the notable service, he alledged, I had done his Majesty: As for him, he said, he should never take any thing in hand, but be therein directed by my Brother and me. But Colonel Stuart and he spoke not together, until his Majesty desired me to agree them, which after much travel I did at length. At first the Colonel swore a great Oath, That if his Majesty suffered that villain to remain at Court, he would yet again undo all. For a little time he kept himself quiet, but there was no appearance of his home-going. Sometimes he would reprove my gentle kind of procedure in his Majesties affairs, and could not endure to see them handled by a number. He insinuated to his Majesty, That he would find it a troublsome business, to be incum∣bred with many contrary opinions. He desired him to recreate him∣self at hunting, and he would attend the Council, and report again at his Majesties return, all our Opinions and Conclusions. This he observed two or three times, and so in a very short space changed the former order laid down to have been followed: So that he gave ac∣compt of no Man's advice but his own; yet he made his Majesty be∣lieve that it was all our Opinions, that it was his interest to follow a violent course. And though the same was directly against his Maje∣sties first Deliberation, Intention, and proclamation of Clemency, yet he caused to make contrary Proclamations against those of the Road of Ruthven, ordaining them all to take remissions for that which be∣fore was allowed for good Service, moving divers Noblemen and others to withdraw from the Court, for fear, to some place of Secu∣rity. When he caused to be read before the Council his new invented Proclamation, I down-right opposed my self to it, saying, That I knew it was directly against his Majesties mind and promise. Whereupon he leapt out of the Council-house in a rage, and said I would wrack the King by my manner of doings. I answered, either you or I, my Lord, with other sharp pricking language, so that for that time it was stayed, Afterward he waited a meet occasion to get it past, having procured a flattering Faction to assist him, in expectation to be made sharers of the spoil he hoped to make, a part whereof he had promised them, to gain their Votes to his desire. And so all things were turned up-side down, a great number of Noblemen and others being put thereby in fear of their Lives and Estates. And when any of us who were desirous of his Majesties quiet and prosperous estate, would ac∣quaint his Majesty with the danger of these proceedings of the Earl, he would be very sorry, saying, The Earl made him believe that he did nothing but by common consent of the Council. And when his Majesty understood the contrary, he was very earnest and willing to amend the disorder, but was still Circumvented by the said Earl, and such as for fear, flattery, or expectation of profit, advanced all his designs. About this time there came a sharp Letter from the Queen of Eng∣land unto his Majesty, who thought the Noblemen who were aimed at, and were absent from Court, fittest instruments to be about his Majesty. And for entertaining of Amity and Concord betwixt their
Majesties and Kingdoms, she was not content to see them so hardly handled. The Copy of which Letter I have here inserted. AMong your many studies, my dear Brother and Cousin, I wish Isocrates's noble Lesson were not forgotten, that wills the Em∣perour his Sovereign, to make his Words of more accompt then other men do their Oaths, as meetest Ensigns to shew the truest Badge of a Prince's Arms. It moveth me much to moan you, when I behold how diversly sundry wicked Spirits abstract your mind, and bend your course to crooked Paths, and evil illusions, wrapt under the Cloak of your best good. How can it be that you can suppose an honourable and satisfactory answer can be made unto me, when all your actings gainsay your former Vows. You deal with one whose experience will not take dross for good payment, and with one who will not be easily beguiled. No, no! I mind to send to School your craftiest Councellors. I am sorry to find you bent to wrong your self, in thinking to enjure others. Yea those, who if they had taken the opportunity in their hands, they might have done you more prejudice, then a thousand such mens lives be worth, who perswade you to avow such deeds; as to oblige the best deser∣ving of your Subjects to demand a faultless Pardon. Why do you forget what you wrote to my self with your own hand, shewing how dangerous a course the Duke was entred in, though you seemed to excuse him, as if he had intended no evil therein; and yet you would not make them guilty who delivered you therefrom. I hope you more esteem your honour, then to give it such a stain, since you have so oft protested, that you was resolved to notice these Lords as your most affectionate Subjects, in the full perswasion, that all they had done was by them intended for your advantage. To con∣clude, I beseech you proceed no further in this course, till you re∣ceive an express Messenger, a trusty Servant of mine, by whom I in∣tend to deal as an affectionate Sister with you, as one from whom you may see you shall receive honour, and contentment, with more surety to your Self and State, then by following the pernicious Coun∣cels of these crafty dissembling Councellours, as knows the Lord, to whose safe keeping I do commit you. Your most Assured and Faithfullest Sister and Cousin, ELIZABETH. Unto this Letter his Majesty commanded me in his name to write an answer, that he might write it over again with his own hand. For the Secretary for the time was in suspicion to have been upon the contrary course, The answer was as followeth. MADAM, I Have received a Letter of yours, containing in the entry, that sentence of Isocrates, which willeth Princes Words to be more in∣tirely observed, then other Mens Oaths; as though some sinister report were made unto you of some forgetfulness in me, or that you
fear that in time coming I fail in keeping such promises unto my friends, as may be made upon just and convenient occasions. For answer unto that head, I remember another saying of Isocrates, where he would not have them repute friends, who allow or praise whatsoever we say or do, but rather such who modestly reprove our faults. So that I take your sharp admonition at this time, as pro∣ceeding from a Sisterly love, albeit upon wrong information, hoping that so soon as you shall truly understand of my hard handling, and patient behaviour, you shall be so well satisfied as to deem me to have done nothing, but that which you would have done your self in the like condition. First, When I was detained Captive under a fair pretext, it plea∣sed you to send your Ambassadours (like as did the King of France) friendly to visit me, offering me great kindness, and help, in case I needed any, for the time, for which I do yet render your Majesty hearty thanks: Which offer I did not think fit to embrace, alledging that I was well content, and had good friends about me, which was very true. For one part of these same Lords, who were then about me, perceiving my grief and miscontent, offered even then to relieve me, whensoever I would desire to be at greater liberty. Whereup∣on I made you then that answer, whereof you make mention in your Letter, as I gave the like answer to the French Ambassadour. Ne∣vertheless I was ever resolved at a fit time to relieve my self, for my honour, as I have done lately; following another saying of Isocrates, willing Princes to hazard rather to dye honestly, then to ring shame∣fully, for how I did ring for the time, you might know by your Cou∣sin Mr. Cairo in whose ear I rounded my familiary inward grief, be∣cause he said you desired him to require it at me apart, promising that it should be secretly kept from all others, albeit I used not such free∣dom with Mr. Bowes. Indeed I subscribed such Writs and Letters as the said Lords presented to me, for the time was unfit to dispute too precisely upon Circumstances, that were determined by these who were Masters of me and the State. This Answer I suppose will satisfie your own reasonable and equita∣ble Judgment, discreetly considering the same with your self apart, I doubt if it will be so interpreted by others of your Councel, who have particular designs of their own, to whom because I impute the whole hard Language contained in your angry Letter, and not to your self, and gentle inclination, I think it not needful now to write an Answer unto every part of the same. So attending patiently upon your better intelligence and information in these matters, I will ra∣ther retain in my memory your former fruitful friendship, then now start at any wrong set Syllable, or sowre sentence placed in your paper at the partial instance of others. As concerning that which toucheth the Duke of Lennox, his godly end hath declared his honest meaning. Whose death I might justly lay upon such as forcibly removed him from my presence; never∣theless I resolve to put all by-gones in Oblivion, neither to com∣pel any man to take a faultless Pardon. Where you desire that I proceed no further, until a trusty Messenger may come from you, I intend to stay from doing any
thing till then, that you may justly be offended with (Albeit Iso∣crates advises Princes speedily to execute such turns, as good Coun∣cel thinks necessary to be done,) wishing that he who shall be sent, may be as willing to work the effects of true love and friendship be∣twixt us, as I am assured it is both our hearts desire, and intention, whereto I pray the Lord to grant increase, continuance, and happi∣ness to his glory, and to the well peace, and quiet of both our Realms. The Secretary Walsingham was he of whom mention is made in her Majesties Letter to be sent in here, but he was long by the way by reason that he was sickly. In the mean time Mr. Bowes who was Am∣bassador resident at Edinbrugh had received this Letter by the ordina∣ry Post, and returned the Answer. He declared many Commenda∣tions from my Lord Burly, and several of the Council of England to my Brother Sir Robert, and me, alledging that they were glad to hear that such men were about His Majesty that were of their Reli∣gion, and with whom they were long acquainted, wishing many such to be in Court. About this time the Earl of Arran obtained the keeping of the Castle of Stirling, and insinuated himself so far upon His Majesty, that he took upon him the whole management of affairs, and caused sundry Noblemen to be banished, as the Earls of Mar, Angus, and the Master of Glains, and divers others. And by his insolency, he drove the Earl of Gaurie from Court, far against his Majesties intention, who sent me for him to his house to bring him again to Court, which was for the time at Coupar in Fyffe, where His Majesty agreed him and the Earl of Arran. But no conditions promised were kept to Gaurie, so that he was so vex∣ed, that he resolved to leave the Country. I have already declared how loath I was, that either His Majesty should leave the Lords who were about him, or that I should in any wise be a medler again in publick affairs, considering the many alte∣rations I had seen by long and hurtful experience, yet the affection I had for His Majesty, engaged me not to refuse his Commands, being my native Prince and Master, and I his humble Subject, and sworn Servant, first as his domestick as being one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, and a Member of his Privy-Council. But after his Maje∣sty being taken, I was no more admitted by his Keepers, who thought fit for their security, to place such men about him as were intirely at their Devotion. As for my part, as I was sorry that His Majesty should be used any other way then at his own pleasure, so I was much satisfied to be permitted to live quietly at home the rest of my days, yet being called again by His Majesty, I waited upon his Commands. Now again perceiving His Majesties most acceptable Proclamations, slyly and cunningly changed contrary to His Majesties merciful inten∣tions, by issuing out contrary Proclamations, and intending violent persuits against these concerned in the Road of Ruthven, whereby too great a number of Noblemen and Gentlemen despaired of their Safety, and Lives, in a lamenting manner I remembred his Majesty, how he was abused, and what great inconveniencies were like to ensue. Thereupon His Majesty upon my relation, appeared very sorrowful:
and assured me of his resolutions to amend these disorders, but it was his misfortune to advise thereabouts with these who underhand were chief instruments therein. Believing that because he loved them, they also loved him and the well of his affairs. They again making some appearance of intentions of satisfying his expectation, indirect∣ly by means of too many who depended upon the Earl of Arrans ex∣traordinary Credit, and Favour the contrary to his Majesties princely and upright meaning was brought about, so that many Noblemen left the Country, and all honest men left the Court, to the great satisfaction of the Earl of Arran and his Wife, who had the greater opportunity of gui∣ding all. And that they might the easier set forward this course, they per∣swaded His Majesty to pass to Stirling, whither they knew few or none durst repair, who were not at his Devotion, he being Captain of the said Castle, and Provost of the Town; after I had frequently warned His Majesty, of the storm I did foresee coming, I retired my self from Court. His Majesty being at Stirling asked frequently for me, regretting that I was not continually with him. Whereupon the Earl of Arran ad∣vised that I should be sent ambassador to the Queen of England upon some pretended affair, as well to absent me from His Majesty, who he perceived had some favour for me, as to take occasion upon my re∣turn, to bring me in disgrace, as if I had been guilty of some mis-ma∣nagement, because he knew that as matters stood I could do no good at that time. And commonly when Mens Commissions take no good effect, they are calumniated by their Enemies, and envyers, as unfit instruments, unskilful, and undiscreet. Which Calumnies get oft∣times too much Credit, when matters succeed not conform to the de∣sire of the Master. For this end he had engaged His Majesty to write for me, but before his Letter came to my hands for the said Voyage, I had indited a long Letter to have sent unto His Majesty, as a remem∣brancer of his former promises, intentions, and Proclamations; shew∣ing what inconveniencies were like to ensue the setting forward of a contrary course, together with such remedies as I could judge meetest for the time. The tenour of His Majesties Letter unto me was, That he had some matters to communicate to me, wherein he resolved to imploy both my advice and pains, and therefore he desired me to come to Stirling with all convenient expedition after the sight of the said Letter, where I should understand more amply the occasion of my being sent for, as I would do him accomptible pleasure and good service. Written from the Castle of Stirling the 22d of Octob. 1583. After the receipt of this Letter, I did ride unto His Majesty and took with me the Letter which I had penned before, whereof the Copy followeth, Sir, as it hath pleased your Majesty heretofore to accept of my will for agreeable service, even so I hope that your Highness's con∣stant favour shall continue toward me now, and in time coming, not∣withstanding my present absence. For albeit that during your Maje∣sties young Age, I was suffered to live happily at home, from the handling of publick affairs, yet I found my self obliged to bear my
proportionable burthen in your Service, so soon as it should please your Majesty to lay your Commands on me for that effect, being then most assured, to walk in a just and lawful vocation, which to give continual testimony of my dutiful obedience, not presuming to give your Majesty Counsel, I have only taken the boldness to present to you in these few lines, my simple opinion of things that are appa∣rently to fall out upon your Majesties late proceedings. For when it pleased your Majesty at your first going to St. An∣drews, to take upon your self the free Government of your Affairs, your Majesties Gracious intention and proposition then, was not only most agreeable to all the Lords, Barons, and Ministers there present for the time, but also to the rest of your good Subjects, when as they understood of your merciful inclinations. Which being now otherwise overturned, then was either first intended, or determined, is able to breed cumber and disorder, unless your Majesty by wisdom and dexterity prevent the apparent inconveniencies. For it pleased your Majesty then openly to declare, how that you only sought with your own reputation, and safety, the well and safety of your whole Subjects, as being willing to give satisfaction to the demands of the Church, to agree all parties, to blot out of memory the name of Factions, and put in perpetual Oblivion all Crimes committed in your Majesties Minority, acknowledging all such as chanced to be done during the same, but to have fallen out betwixt Subject and Subject, for such particular respects as your Majesty never purposed to impute to any of their Charges, but to Reign over them all in times coming, as a Gracious Father, and that by the advice of the least Facti∣ous, and best affected of the Nobility, Barons and other sufficient Sub∣jects. No man to be placed about or proscribed from your Majesty by favour or surname, kin, friend, or allye, but for sufficiencie, ver∣tue, and loyalty. As also if any were to be absented, or sent home for a time, it should not be done at the instance of any envious suiter of his Office, or particular Party, but for your Majesties honour and safety, during your pleasure, leaving them still in hope through good behaviour to obtain again familiar access about your Majesty as formerly. If this Calm Course had been followed, there was appearance of a quiet State. But the altering and changing this gentle kind of dealing to a sharp and violent persuit of sundry, by seeking out over many faults in the persons of so many Great and Active Men, hath bred such discontent and so furious a Faction, that if sudden remedy be not provided, civil dissention and despaired interprises ought to be looked for by all such as have sufficient experience of the nature of Scotsmen, and seemly intelligence of the deportment of divers, which the necessity of their unsure Estate may well drive them honestly to take in hand. It is true, that the flourishing of Commonwealths, consists much in the rewarding of the good, and punishing of the wicked. No doubt but faults enough have been done during your nonage, but to seek them out narrowly, and to punish them severely in such ca∣ses, and at such times, in matters wherein many have dipped, is no safe Course. Yea, though your Majesty were willing, as I know
you are not, I cannot see how you can get it done against so great a number, having so small substance and few Forces, and so potent and mighty Neighbours lying still at wait upon all such controver∣sies, and occasions, to take advantage thereof, whereby to serve their own turn. This Consideration also ought presently to be no∣ticed, that the wonted reverence born by the Subjects unto the Princely Authority of their Soveraigns, is much decayed in this Kingdom, by reason of the Queens Youth and long absence, and e∣ven so in your Majesties time for the like causes, but chiefly because that your Majesty being yet young) have been accompanied this time past with the youngest, and meanest sort of your Nobility. Who albeit they may be faithful and honest, to set forward your service, yet the rest of your Subjects alledging them to be factious, ignorant and covetous, doubt of their discreet behaviour, seeing their intentions are to Rule by force; hardly may a Prince assure himself at all occasions, to choose a sure course wherein there shall be no peril. For commonly men thinking to escape out of one in∣conveniency fall oft-times into an other. Therefore prudence consists in understanding the quality of dangers, and in choosing the least evil for the best. Some Kingdoms and Countries are Governed by force, some by fairness, on the other part Subjects obey either for awe, or love. That Prince is reputed of no value, who cannot win the hearts of his Subjects by one of these two. For either must the means be ta∣ken at once from such as are suspected deservedly, whereby they may do harm, or else they must be satisfied in such sort as in reason they may be content, and so serve for love, and not for awe. So that it is easie to judge which of these two Governments may be meetest for your Majesty. The Emperor Trajan being demanded, wherefore his Subjects loved and honoured him above his Predecessors answered, because I forgive them who offend me, and never forget any who have done me service. Julius Pollux Master to Caesar points out a true Prince to be of Divine Countenance, Godly, Merciful, Just, Equitable, Care∣ful of his Affairs, Constant in his Deeds, true in his Promises, Sub∣ject unto reason, Master over his Affections, fatherly towards his Subjects, of easie Access, gentle to be spoken to, ready to forgive, slow to punish, princely, liberal, subtil, secret, and sharp of in∣geny. Now because it appeareth your Majesty in youth hath been suffi∣ciently versed in many of these vertuous precepts, I wish from my heart that such impressions may be as well taken of them that are presently about you, seeing that Princes are commonly deemed to be like those whom they make most their familiars. Therefore Sir, for eschewing all those evils, and to put the near∣est Remedy unto all the appearing inconveniencies, it is fit so soon as it may please your Majesty to pass to Edinbrugh, to convene the most ancient of your Nobility, and Barons of best reputation, by whose advice together with those that are already in Court, your Country may be quieted, and your Subjects satisfied. For now as matters are handled, to speak of Clemency by causing them to take
remissions, it will want Credit, and be ill interpreted, as not con∣form to your Majesties first Declaration. The Emperor Adrian inquired after men of great age and expe∣rience, and helped himself by their many perils. Alexander Severus would perform no matter of importance, but with advice of the most ancient and best experimented. He never went out of Rome, unaccompanied with four or five of the most ho∣nourable, ancient, and grave personages, that none should need to fear that he would commit any Error. He never suffered the Se∣nate to conclude any weighty purpose, unless Fifty of them had been present. He caused all his Counsellors to put their Opinions in writing, to see if any were possest with passions, or partialities. He changed oft his familiarity with sundry of the Senate, lest he who had alwayes his ear, might be overcome with importunate pursuits, or partiality. The urgent necessity of the time, most Noble and Excellent Prince, causeth me to be so tedious. Humbly craving pardon, and heartily kissing your Majesties hands, I pray the Eternal God grant you long and happy life. From Halhil this 15th of October 1583. Your Majesties most Humble, And Obedient Servitour, James Melvil. When I came to Stirling, and shewed his Majesty this Letter, he not only liked well of it, but ingaged to follow the advice therein contained. He lamented to me the partial dealing of those about him. Only he said, that my Brother Sir Robert was upon a sound course for quieting of the Estate, and that some Noblemen, against whose partialities he had opposed himself, had discorded with him in his Majesties presence. It pleased his Majesty also to tell me that the cause why I was written for, was to be sent to England, to travel with the Queen there for entertainment of mutual Amity, and en∣crease of her favour, and good will, concerning the Title and Succes∣sion to the Crown of England, and assistance to help to establish his troubled Estate, perturbed by the insolence and partialities of his Sub∣jects, bred and ingendred among them during his minority. I answered, that I judged it was a very unmeet time, seeing I knew as matters stood in Scotland, that England would make no account of him, nor of any that would be sent from him, until first he would let it be seen and heard, that he could settle his own Estate, and by his wise and prudent management, render his own Subjects obedient to his Commands, this being done they would honour and esteem him. And that the best and readiest way to obtain also one day the Crown of England, was to guide Scotland so well, that they might find ground some day to wish to be under the Government of such a Prince. By this kind of Language, and his Majesty pondering what ground I had to use the same, he was satisfied that my Voyage should be stayed till a more convenient time. So I returned from Court, to my own house.
It is mentioned here above in the Queen of Englands Letter, how that she was minded to send a Trusty Servant unto his Majesty, wil∣ling him to stay from any strict proceeding against the Lords, who were pickt at for the Road of Ruthven, until the Arriving of the said Ambassador, who was the Secretary Walsingham, a Counsellor of worthy qualities, who had great Credit with the Queen of England. But he was of a sickly Complexion, and was not able to endure riding Post, therefore he was long by the way, being carried in a Charriot. So that during his longsome Voyage, the Earl of Arran went ay for∣ward, forgetting the tenour of the Queen of Englands Letter. So soon as his Majesty was advertised of the Arrival of Sir Franers Walsingham, I was sent for to come to Court, and directed to ride and welcome him in his Majesties name, to bear him company, and Convoy him about by Stirling to St. Iohnstoun where his Majesty thought fit to give him Audience. Desiring me also to say unto him, that his Majesty was very glad of the coming of such a notable Personage, who was known to be indued with Religion, and Wisdom, whom he had ever esteemed as his special friend, being assured that his tedious travel in his long Voyage, (being diseased as he was) tended to more substantial points for the confirmation of the amity between the Queen his Sister and him, then had been performed at any time before. The Secretary Walsingham answered me again, that the great desire he had to establish an assured Amity betwixt the two Princes, and Coun∣tries, moved him to undertake the Embassage himself, his Majesty be∣ing the Prince in the World, that he loved next unto the Queen his Mistress, and wished most to see and be acquainted with. And that he hoped his Commission should succeed the better, that he had met first with me his old friend, and only acquaintance in Scotland. For we had been Companions abroad upon our Travels, and divers times when I was sent to or passed thorow England, he would have me to lodge and lye with himself at London, which occasioned that we had more familiar Conferences. Whereupon I did write two several Let∣ters, that his Majesty might be the better provided to make answer to such heads as I knew he would propose. Then we took our Journey thorow Lithgow to Stirling, and from that to Pearth. He had heard that my Lord Seatoun and Livingstoun were written unto to Convoy him, but he requested me to stay them, that he might have the more Confer∣ence by the way with me, otherwise he would be compelled to enter∣tain the Noblemen. I judged it probable that his design in this, was to let see his own Train; For he was Sevenscore Horse in Company. Being near the Court, his Majesty sent out two of the Council to meet him, to wit, my Lord of Doun and my Brother Sir Robert. The next day his Majesty gave him Audience, accompanied with Mr. Bowes Ambassador Resident in Scotland. Their first reasoning was upon his Majesties Liberty, and wherefore he had left the Com∣pany who were about him, being the best and most religious sort of the Nobility, and of his Majesties best acquaintance, and by whom she would deal in her affairs more friendly, then she could do with others, whom she could not so well Credit. Whereunto his Majesty made an∣swer, so gravely and directly, that Walsingham wondred. The next day his Majesty appointed four of the Council, and my self to be with
them, to reason with him, and to sound what he would be at. But he refused to deal with any, but with his Majesty who heard him a∣gain without Mr. Bowes. Where he discoursed long with his Majesty, and when he came forth from his Majesty he took me by the hand, and said, that he was the best content man that could be, for he had spoken with a notable young Prince, ignorant of nothing, and of so great expectation, that he thought his Travel well bestowed. The Earl of Arran desired to enter into familiar Conference with him, but he refused to speak with him. Making no longer stay, but took leave of his Majesty who commanded me to accompany him to the Ferry. At our parting, he promised at all occasions to write to me, and much lamented that the Earl of Arran was again in Court, and in such Credit with his Majesty. Which he said if he had understood before he took his Journey, he would have shifted the same, and suf∣fered some other to have been sent. For he could see no sure course could be taken between their Majesties, so long as such instruments had such Credit about him. For he esteemed the said Earl a scorner of Religion, a sower of discord, and a despiser of true and honest men, and therefore he refused to speak with him, or enter into ac∣quaintance. For he was of a contrary nature, religious, true, and a lover of all honest men. Therefore Arran to be revenged upon him, spared not to do a great dishonour to his Majesty. First for despite, that he refused to speak with him, he caused refuse to permit the Cap∣tains of Berwick, and divers other honest Gentlemen, who came to Con∣voy the Secretary Walsingham, the entry of his Majesties Chamber door. And then he caused to prepare a scornful Present for him at his depar∣ture, to wit, a Ring with a stone of Crystal, instead of a rich Dia∣mond which his Majesty had appointed for him, valued at 700 Crowns which he was oftimes minded to send back again unto his Majesty, rather to let him see how he was abused, then how he was used. Some promise was also made unto him, about the repairing some wrongs done by Scotsmen upon the borders, which he alledged was not kept. For Arran did what he could to displease him, and to render his Commission in all points ineffectual, and his Travel in vain. Nevertheless he made so good report of his Majesties vertues, and qualities, that it put him in some suspition at his return to the Court of England, where shortly after he took sickness and dyed. My opi∣nion is, that if God had granted him longer life, he would have been found a great friend to his Majesty, who marvelled that the chief Secretary of England, burthened with so many great affairs, sickly, and aged, should have enterprised so painful a Voyage without any purpose. For it could not be yet perceived, what was his Errand, save only that he gave his Majesty good Counsel. But he being religi∣ous, and of a good conscience, was desirous to see and understand assured∣ly such qualifications to be in his Majesty, whereof he had frequently been informed. He returned with great contentment in his mind for that part, but very sorrowful for the company that he found in great∣est favour and credit about his Majesty. Which was the more unex∣pected, by reason of a Letter that his Majesty had sent unto the Queen his Mistress, promising not to bring in again to Court the Earl of Arran without her advice, and consent. For my part I never saw
such appearance of a prosperous Estate, for his Majesties honour, sure∣ty, love and obedience of his own Subjects, increase of the number of his friends in England, to the advancement of his Title, neither be∣fore that time nor since; if the said Arran had not been brought a∣again to Court, which I left not undeclared to his Majesty divers times, not without some danger. Indeed his Majesties intention was not that he should stay at Court, but onely to come and kiss his hand. But he again being once entred, won some of the Lords, whose particulars he promised to set for∣ward, if they would concur withhim, and shew his Majesty that his presence about his person was necessary, and that my gentle proceed∣ings would ruin the Kings interest, and them all. Managing thus the matter, he remained at Court, and minded to make himself and his assistors rich, by the wrack and spoil of others, who had taken his Majesty at the Road of Ruthven. And then he and they, were to guide all at their pleasure. So many of them who shot at particular marks, ran a strait Course with him, because they thought by his Credit to make up themselves. They feared to lose his Majesties favour, in case Arran was not their friend. And some of them did what they could, to persuade me todo the like, alledging that other∣wise I should be shut out. Which came to pass shortly after, because I would not yield nor concurr to cast all loose, to the peril of his Ma∣jesties Estate and Reputation, remembring what was intended, promi∣sed, and proclaimed at his Majesties obtaining his Liberty. It is certain, that the Lords who made that interprise had great oc∣casion given them to be discontent, but no sufficient cause to oblige them to compel their Soveraign Prince to remove from him these he so well liked. Which rebellious proceeding, compelled them also for their surety to retain and hold the King as Captive. His Majesty again being advertised; and admonished, that the dangerous proceed∣ings of the Duke of Lennox, and Earl of Arran, were like to breed dis∣order, took too little care to prevent the apparent inconveniencies, and used too little diligence to get sure intelligence and information there∣of, which brought him to that strait of being taken, and kept. For it had been less pains to have taken good notice in due time, how his Country was Governed, then to put order or remedy thereto afterward. For it is no little Error, to render the most part of the Nobility and Subjects malecontent, nor no great wisdome after his Majesty was in their hands, to slip from them without their consents. The interpri∣sers, assisters and allowers of the deed, being so considerable a number, as could not be overcome, but by patience, nor punished but by sub∣version of the State, and endangering of the Prince his own person. Yet it pleased God to guide his Majesty to his liberty (albeit not without some peril) with honour at the first, and with the universal contentment of all his Subjects so soon as they understood his honest meaning, and gracious deliberation as well by Promise, as by Procla∣mation, as is already specified. For my part, I forget not at all occasi∣ons, to remember his Majesty I refused the Office of Secretary when offered by his Majesty in reward of my service, because it was pro∣mised that no man should want his Offices, Benefits, Lands or Es∣cheats. I opposed my self in full Council against the Earl of Arran,
because he had formed a Proclamation against the Lords of the Road of Ruthven, contrary to His Majesty's former Proclamation of Grace and Oblivion: For which he leapt out of the house in a great rage at me, and for despight he made a List of the Names of so many as should be upon the Privy Council, and left out my name. Likewise he named so many of his dependers, as should serve in every Office, which his Majesty was resolved not to acquiesce to, without my advice. Yet he prevailed with His Majesty to subscribe the same, assisted by the foresaid Lords, who took plain part with him. So I was shut out of door, and had no more place to do good. His Majesty graciously excused the matter, and said, That the Lords had no will of two Bro∣thers being upon the Council. But when he should get a Wife, I should be her Councellour, and chief about her. So that if they were glad to be quit of me, I was as glad to be free of them, and not to be partakers with them in advices tending directly to indanger the Prince and the Country. Yet his Majesty assured me, That he would go to Edinbrugh, ac∣cording to the advice I had given in my forementioned Letter, and Convene the Nobility, Barons, and others whom I had named, in or∣der to the settling of the Country. And in the mean time he told me, That the Earl of Arran thought fit to send to England the Bishop of St. Andrews, alledging, That he was passing to the Spaw for reco∣very of his health: Who passing through England, might have Com∣mission to deal with that Queen in his Majesties affairs. And in case he found her willing to discourse friendly and freely, he should then shew her, that his Majesty would send me thither, to satisfie her more sufficiently in such things as she would require. And to that effect, the said Bishop should send back word by a Gentleman, Captain Robert Melvil, who went thither expresly to be sent back with the said answer. I was commanded to write in the Bishop's favour, but he was too well known in England. For Mr. Bowes who remained long in this Country, had informed them sufficiently of the said Bishop's qualities, who was disdained in England, and dishonoured his Country by borrow∣ing of Gold and pretious Furniture from the Bishop of London, and divers others, which was never restored, nor payed for. His Majesty never∣theless would have me to grant to go to England, and to be in ready∣ness. He desired me to make my own Instructions, alledging, That I knew what was meetest for him to require at that time. I would not take upon me to make my own Instructions, but I pro∣mised to pen the Speech that I would think most proper to recite to her Majesty, in case I went thither, and which I would judge to be the fittest language that any sent thither could speak for the time. After his Majesty had perused the same, he much relished it, and declared it was fully conform to his own intentions. It was in these words. MADAM, ALbeit that your Majesty be as sufficiently certified of the King my Sovereign's conformable mind to satisfie your Majesty, as well by Sir Francis Walsingham your Secretary, as by the Bishop of St. Andrews his Ambassadour, granting the one his whole desires by mouth, and declaring by the other how strictly he hath obser∣ved,
and performed the same; in effect more to satisfie your mo∣therly mind, by shewing the tokens of a thankful and obedient Son, then for any great advantage he perceives you thereby seek for your self. So that it is his Majesty's intention, chiefly seeing he hath ta∣ken the Rudder into his own hand, to discover to you ay the lon∣ger the more the perfect fruits of his hearty affection. For now having attained unto some years of knowledge, and dear bought experience (by that which hath been oft beat in his Ears) he is not ignorant how that your Majesties favour and assistance will be more contributive for his advantage and advancement, then can be any, or that he can obtain from all the other Princes in Europe. Your Majesty being to him so dear a Mother, and so near a Neighbour, both your Subjects appearing to be but one People. Especially since your prudent Government began, the effects whereof hath not only been found by your own, but by your neighbours. The same having extended it self to the advantage of other Kingdoms, especially over∣shadowing this whole Island to your Majesties everlasting honour. For never in any Princes days, hath been seen so much rest, so great riches and felicity in England, which likewise might have been in Scotland, if the particularities of some of the Subjects had suffered them to have followed your Sage, Charitable and Loving admoniti∣ons. As the consideration thereof is the reason which induced his Majesty, whom the matter most toucheth, to direct me to your Ma∣jesty, after ripe deliberation, and upon the sure ground of the good information of such as are best inclined, and have greatest experi∣ence, to seek the assistance which he hath so oft seen sent unto him, help and wholsom advice where he hath so oft found it, and salutary Plaisters to be laid unto the Sores, that yet daily breed and arise in his Realm as remains of the Canker, and disorder ingendred during his Minority. Seeing then the thing that he craves, is your accustomed Kindness and Counsel, which because the strength of your constancy will compel you to continue towards him, he is the more humbly to suit the same as most seemly for his neerness of Kin, Age, and Estate to do. Perswading himself, that such friendly Offices might be used between you, as may tend to both your contentments, and weal of your Kingdoms, which for lack of sure intelligence of others minds, by secret and mutual conference, of devotious and discreet instru∣ments, might otherwise turn to the contrary. The King my Master knows that a mighty Man cannot stand upon one side, he grants that he hath now greater need of your help, then you of his in many things. But he thinks himself as able, and is as willing to deserve favour at your hand, as any who can contend with him for the same, or would presume to sound the Bell of Suc∣cession in your Ears. For his part, he requires no instant Declara∣tion thereof, but will continually crave by his behaviour all such pre∣ferment, as an humble Son ought to seek at the hands of a loving and hearty Mother. Because he believes, that a word of your Ma∣jesties mouth, at a convenient time will sufficiently serve his turn, being yet young enough to await upon any benefit you shall be pleased to bestow upon him. Acknowledging the Prorogation of
your Years, most profitable to supply his Youth. And considering the necessity he hath now of your assistance, in the ruling of this his troubled Estate, he believes that he would have double need of your help, if over-early he had any greater handling. Therefore, Madam, he desires as yet to recreate himself with hun∣ting and pastime, until he be of greater ripeness and maturity. Wi∣shing in the mean time unto your Majesty a long Life, a prosperous Reign, and as good success in your proceedings hereafter, as you have had hitherto, that having so happily and so honourably in a manner ruled both the Realms, these many years by-gone, you may be as able to leave them so joined together in a cordial and sta∣ble Monarchy. And that the blest and perfect end of your prudent project may Confirm and Crown the worthiness of your Reputation, in finishing the work which so many had so ost in vain enterprised, as the only Prince that ever obtained the whole handling, and hearts of all Britain without Blood. The first thereof begun and appro∣priate in your person, so pleasantly and peaceably ruled in your time; and so justly and righteously distribute and left after you, not only to the worthiest, as did Alexander, but also to the nearest of your friends and kinsfolk, as did Caesar to avoid blood shedding; then as before, like a kindly Mother to the King, the Country, and Com∣mon-wealth, to the great pleasure of God, the perpetual praise of your memory, and to the universal weal and pleasure of this whole Island. If the Queen of England could have credited His Majesty, she might have had an assured friendship and concurrence of him for the time. Certainly his Majesty was ever minded to keep this kind of friendly and discreet Correspondence with her. For he was informed how little speed the Queen his Mother had, for suiting continually to be de∣clared Second Person of England, as may be seen in that which I have written before, touching her proceedings with the Queen of England, who I knew would never grant to declare a Second Person, but with force and compulsion, which was never in the power of Scotland to do, during the rich and peaceable Reign of that Queen. Yet fair and discreet language and behaviour, gave place and access to His Maje∣sty's Ambassadours, to pass to and fro, to gain friends, and get intelli∣gence. Now the Earl of Arran perceiving that by no perswasion he could get His Majesty stayed from executing the resolution he had laid down of going for Edinbrugh, and calling a Convention of such Noble∣men, Barons, Burgesses and Ministers, as were meetest to settle the troubled Estate of the Country, by taking up again, and following forth his former gracious intention and promise, both by Proclamation and Speeches unto divers Noblemen, Barons and Ministers. The said Earl perceiving that he could not directly stay that good purpose, so contrary to his intentions, he first made his interest to be made Chan∣cellour, and then Captain of the Castle of Edinbrugh, that by his great Offices, besides his credit with His Majesty, he might terrifie all such as durst oppose themselves to his Courses, or Propositions. Then he used his craft, to pervert and draw the effect of the Convention, clear
contrary to His Majesty's intention. For he dealt and spoke with eve∣ry Lord and Baron apart at their coming, shewing them how graci∣ously his Majesty was minded toward such as had taken him at the Road of Ruthven; that he was resolved to grant every one of them a particu∣lar remission, some of them to be a while absent out of the Country, and others to remain at home in their own houses absent from Court. Al∣ledging, that whoever would say that this form of punishment was not great clemency, they would lose His Majesties favour, and be reputed as Men who have no respect to his honour, and surety, it having been so odious a Crime to have laid hands forcibly upon their native Prince. This matter being so set out, and declared by him, who it was thought knew most of His Majesty's mind, and had most of his favour, evidenced by his having the greatest Offices of the Kingdom in his hand; it was Voted by them all, To be great Clemency used by his Ma∣jesty towards those who had committed so odious a Crime. His Majesty not conjecturing the trick hereby put upon him, in rendering his gra∣cious intention ineffectual, was very glad to hear them all conclude in one Opinion, not imagining they had been preoccupied by the Earl of Arran, part for fear, part for ignorance, others for flattery, to obtain favour of him who they saw guided both King and Country. Few or none of them, for the time, considered the apparent danger of rendering these plainly desperate, who were ordained to take Remis∣sions, for that which before was allowed for good Service, in respect of their great number who could not yet be punished, nor quashed with∣out hazarding His Majesty's own Princely Estate and Credit, which all discreet and wise Princes are loath to bring into Question. This allowance of good Service hath been oft practised in France, during the time of their Civil Wars, when their late Princes were but yet young, and where the Malecontents and Pretenders to Reform the Estate were so many and mighty, as to make a party answerable to that of their King. Because I was not yet come to the first day of the said Convention, His Majesty told me that same night at my coming, what had been Voted at their first meeting, which he thought would be to my great contentment, desiring me the next day to be present. I answered, I was sorry from my heart for what had been concluded, seeing it was in effect clean contrary to his intention. For whereas he thought to have settled his Estate, it was cast loose, the Die was now cast, and the Dissention so increased to the kindling of new enterprises, that chance would bear away the Mastery and Victory. For those who were compelled to take Remissions, would take it as their ditty, and that finding their former securities altered, there was not any more place left for any sort of agreement. This language of mine being contrary to the Opinion of so many, did not a little displease his Majesty. He asked me, if I thought not the Road of Ruthven Treason? I answered, That I thought it so indeed, yet since not only His Majesty himself and his Council, had not only wisely and circumspectly allowed it for good Service, but had writ∣ten the same to the Queen of England, and had sent his Commissio∣ners to the General Assembly holden for the time at Edinbrugh, wil∣ling the Ministers at their return to their Parishes to cause the princi∣pal
Gentlemen of each Shire to subscribe a Signature, or the Copy wherein the Road of Ruthven was allowed for good Service, and to be ready to defend the same. I declared also unto His Majesty, that there was a common Clause contained in all Remissions; to wit, Except the laying hands upon the King's person; so that how little secured they were by their present Remissions, His Majesty might easily judge. He answered, That seldom or never was any Remission seen broken, and wondered what made me think or speak contrary to the rest of the Council. I said, If I had always spoken as the rest, I had not been put off the Council by the Earl of Arran, whose qualities I had before de∣scribed unto His Majesty, and what inseparable inconveniencies would attend his being again brought into Court. I requested His Majesty for his own weal, to send him home to his own House. For by his underhand dealing, I understood that this Convention would shortly bring on new desperate enterprises. His Majesty said, That I was in the wrong to the Earl of Arran, and that there would never be more desperate enterprises. I affirmed that there would be continually, ay and while the Lords who were in despair might mend themselves, or find themselves in a better security. I said moreover to His Majesty, that the Earl of Arran would yet again put his Person and Crown in hazard, so that His Majesty left me in anger. And yet he turned about again, and asked who shall then remain about me, if I put away the Earl of Arran? I answered, Who but your ancient Nobility, the Earls of March, Arguile, Eglintoun, Montrose, Marshal, Rothess, Huntly, and Crauford, with some Ministers and Barons, known not to be factious. But so many of the Noblemen, and of their Friends, as were yet re∣maining within the Country, after they had heard of their Remissi∣ons, they Combin'd together and gained divers Lords, who were about His Majesty to make a new enterprise, and were minded to slay the Earl of Arran, Colonel Stuart, and some others that were about His Majesty, whom they knew to have been most instrumental in carry∣ing on this design, though it should be in His Majesty's presence, and that way to become Masters again of the Court. Whereof I not on∣ly was advertised by some, to whom I had formerly done kindnesses, but I was advised to absent my self from Court four or five days, till the first fury of the alteration was over: For the Earl of Arran's ha∣tred to me, procured me many friends. I again to save his Majesty from peril, and dishonour, thought it my duty to advertise him, in∣treating him to send home the said Earl. I cannot tell what moved the Earl, but that same night he invited me to Supper, which I refu∣sed. The next day again he took me by the hand before His Maje∣sty, saying, That I should Dine with him in his Majesty's presence. He shewed me a very favourable countenance, for the King had for∣bidden him to offend me in any sort, as he would retain his favour. If he had got any word of my contrary Opinion to his, I cannot tell, or that I had desired him to be sent home, but there was some appear∣ance of this by his behaviour and passionate Speeches unto me, soon after that I had told my judgment unto his Majesty, as men may judge, for leading me by the hand to dine with him in His Majesty's presence, which I could not evite. Before we did sit down to Dinner, he askt me how all would be? I told him very freely, all I had spoken unto
His Majesty. Then, said he, you would place about His Majesty the Earl of March, who is a Fool guided by the Laird of Compte and Ro∣bert Sives. I said, he behoved to be one with the rest of the Noble∣men already named. He said it should pass my power, or any Man's, to cause him leave His Majesty, so long as he was in such danger. I answered, That the King was in danger for no other cause, but because he was with him. I perceived he entertained a great discontent at me in his heart, which burst out afterward, Threatning to put me out of the Gates, if I fished any more in his Waters. I answered, if I plea∣sed to tarry, it would pass his power, seeing I would get more honest Men to take my part, then he would get Throat-cutters to assist him. So soon as His Majesty heard of this language, he sent the Earl's Un∣cle, the Laird of Caprintoun to reprove him very sharply. Where∣upon he retired in great discontent to the Castle of Edinbrugh, where∣of he was Captain, declaring he would not come near his Majesty, till I was sent home, to give him place, which I perceived His Maje∣sty was satisfied I should do to please him. For his Wife came daily to His Majesty, and said, That her Husband was highly discontent, finding His Majesty to take my part against him. Whereupon I re∣solved to retire. At my leave-taking, His Majesty said, he doubted not but I would return when called for. By which I understood, that I should not come back, till sent for. Which suited very well with my former intentions, being resolved to attend no longer then the fore∣said Convention was ended. Now the Earl of Arran triumphed, being Chancellour, and Captain of the Castles of Edinbrugh and Sterling. He made the whole Subjects to tremble under him, and every Man to depend upon him, daily in∣venting and seeking out new faults against divers, to get the gift of their Escheats, Lands, Benefices. And to procure Bribes, he vexed the whole Writers, to make sure his gifts. Those of the Nobility who were now unsure of their Estates fled, others were banished; he shot directly at the Life and Lands of the Earl of Gaury. For the Highland Oracles had shewn unto his Wife, that Gaury would be ruined, as she told to some of her familiars. But she helped that Prophesie forward, as well as she could. For Gaury had been his first Master, and de∣spighted his insolent Pride, Oppression, and Misbehaviour plainly in Council, which few others durst do, therefore he hated his Person, and loved his Lands, which at length he obtained. For Gaury being unable to be a Witness of the Oppression of his Country, obtained His Majesties consent to go out of the Country. But as he was making his preparations too longsomly, and slowly in Dundie (as he was of Nature over slow) where his Ship was to re∣ceive him, he was advertised by some Factioners that the Earls of An∣gus, Mar, and Master of Glams, had an enterprise in hand, viz. To come out of Ireland, and take the Town and Castle of Sterling. Having correspondence with divers Nobles, and others their Friends, who were in the Country Malecontents, so that they were in hope to make a party sufficient against the Earl of Arran. The despight the Earl of Gaury had against the Earl of Arran, mo∣ved him to stay to take part with them. There was at this time an universal miscontent in the Country, and great bruits of an alterati∣on.
Whereupon a Letter was written to me by Colonel Stuart, at His Majesty's Command, ordaining me with all diligence to repair to Court; or in case I was not recovered of my Ague, whereof I had been long sick, that I might write my Mind and Opinion to His Ma∣jesty in a Letter, what was like to fall out concerning the great Ru∣mour and Bruits of an apparent alteration. And being by reason of my foresaid Distemper, unable for Travel, I sent my return in Writing, shewing His Majesty, that there was an universal miscontent, with great bruits, not without appearance of probability of a sudden change, occasioned by the misbehaviour of such as were managers at Court, and by the great straits, and desperate Estate of those who were pur∣sued, being men of Quality, Active and Experienced. And a greater number then could be born down or mastered, as I had frequently shewn His Majesty before, without respect of feud or favour, but sim∣ply for His Majesty's Service. Intreating His Majesty again to set for∣ward his former acceptable intentions, which he had resolved to do when he went to St. Andrews. Seeing there was no other course ad∣visable, for setling his troubled Estate. This kind of language was the better liked, because of so many Advertisments that came daily to His Majesty's Ears. These bruits made His Majesty be upon his Guard, and to use means to get intelligence. The lingring of the Earl of Gaury in Dundie gave ground of suspicion. His Majesty had also been advertised, That he had laid aside his intentions of going abroad according to his former resolutions, and that he was designing to wait upon the in-coming of the banished Lords. His Majesty also dreamed a Dream, that he saw the Earl of Gaury taken, and brought in Prisoner before him by Colonel Stuart. And he thought his Estate was thereby settled, which indeed for that time came true, because the Lords who had taken Sterling, so soon as they understood of the taking of the Earl of Gau∣ry, fled incontinently out of Sterling, and at last out of the Country. Believing that the said Earl had been taken willingly, supposing his affection to have been so great to His Majesty, as being his near kins∣man, come of the House of Angus, his Mother being a Natural Daugh∣ter of the said House, that he would be thereby induced to discover the whole design. He not having been upon the first design of any enterprise, but drawn in afterwards by the craftiness of others. Up∣on these considerations, His Majesty had compassion upon him, and had no intentions of taking his Life. But the Earl of Arran was ful∣ly resolved to have his Lands, and therefore to make a Party to assist him in that design, he ingaged to divide them with several others, upon condition that they would assist him in the design of ruining him. Which afterwards he did, having by this means procured their Consent, and Votes. At his death upon the Scaffold, he shewed him∣self a devout Christian, and a resolute Roman, much regrated by all who heard his grave Harangue, and did see his constant End. After his death, there was quietness for a while, though without appearance of long continuance to such as took up matters right. Du∣ring this little while of fair Weather, there was a Parliament held to forfault the banished Lords, wherein these were chiefly instrumental, who hoped to raise their particular Fortunes upon the ruine of their Neighbours.
Among others, it pleased His Majesty to write for me. I was by him graciously received, and remembring some of my Speeches, he took me into his Cabinet, and inquired how I now relished his pro∣ceedings. I answered, That he had reason to thank God, and no good management, and that I was assured there would be yet more enter∣prises: That they who took Sterling, and had retired again, would ne∣ver cease to make enterprise upon enterprise, till they might see them∣selves in a better security. His Majesty replied, That they had gain∣ed so little by their last in-coming, that he believed they would ne∣ver commit such a folly again. I answered, That had not the acciden∣tal taking of the Earl of Gaury fallen out, their enterprise would have been more successful: For they suspected, he was taken by his own desire to bewray their enterprise: That otherwise they had gained their intent, seeing some who were then about His Majesty would have concurred with them, to lay aside the Earl of Arran, whom they as∣sisted for aw, and not for love, they hating his insolency, and seeing no Outgate how to stand by him. And that there had for that effect been secret promises made to them, by instruments who went betwixt them. But seeing the Earl of Gaury in hands, and the said Lords there∣by so discouraged as to fly away, such as had made the said secret pro∣mises, took up a new deliberation, shewing themselves their greatest Enemies. While in the mean time, they but waited an opportunity of advancing their intentions. About this time the Lord Burleigh chief Ruler in England, caused send in one Mr. Davison to be an Agent here, to see what business he could brew, who was afterward made Secretary: For after the de∣cease of Walsingham, Secretary Cicil being advanced to be Lord Bur∣leigh, and great Treasurer of England, two Secretaries were chosen, one called Mr. Smith, and this Davison, whose Predecessor was a Scotsman. Upon which consideration, he was thought more able to conquer cre∣dit here. He had been in Scotland before, and was at my house, in company with Sir Henry Killegrew my old friend, when he was Re∣sident in Scotland. At which time, he acknowledged to me that he was come of Scotsmen, and was a Scotsman in his heart, and a favourer of the King's Right, and Title to the Crown of England. He desired me to keep all secret from Mr. Killegrew, promising if he could find the means to be employed here, that he would do good Offices. His Majesty was for the time at Falkland, and wrote for me, to be directed to ride and meet the said Davison. Whom I was comman∣ded to Convoy to Coupar, there to remain till his Majesty had time to give him Audience. Afterward I Convoyed him to my own house, and from that to Falkland, where His Majesty found his Commission to small avail. But because Walsingham had refused at his being here, to speak with the Earl of Arran, albeit the said Earl had offered by me to give satisfaction to him in all his desires, so that he would con∣fer with him. Which Walsingham still refused, but Mr. Davison was directed at this time to deal with the Earl of Arran, to see what ad∣vantage might be had at his hand. For my Lord Burleigh was not content that Walsingham was so precise; therefore Davison entred into familiarity with him, and was made his Gossip, and heard his frank offers, and liked well of them. For after that the Lords were fled to
England, and forfaulted, the Council of England thought they had some ground to build a new faction upon, to trouble the King, and his Estate. And whereas the said Davison had promised before to shew himself a kind Scotsman, I perceived him clean altered, and a perfect practiser against the quiet of this State, whereof I advertised His Ma∣jesty. After his return, England appeared not to have such a fear, as it had formerly had at the Earl of Arran. For there was a meeting drawn on at the Borders, betwixt the Earl of Hunsdon and the Earl of Arran. Who had long and privy conference together, to keep a great friend∣ship betwixt the two Princes and Countries; with a secret Plot, That the Earl of Arran should keep the King unmarried for three years; un∣der this pretext, That there was a young Maid of the blood in Eng∣land, who about that time would be ready for marriage, whereupon the Queen would declare His Majesty Second Person. This was a deceitful Traffique, and kept secret from every Body, the design thereof being to hinder the King to deal for any other honour∣able and profitable Match. The Earl of Arran thinking himself setled, being now in friendship with the Queen of Englond as he supposed, moved His Majesty to send thither the Master of Gray, who was en∣tred in great favour and familiarity with His Majesty, by some secret dealing and intelligence he had with the Queen his Mother in Eng∣land, by means of some of her friends in France. For being there at his Travels, and but lately returned, he brought some Letters directed from Her Majesty to the King her Son, and conveyed the answers back again, by an interest he had in England, with some who favoured Her Majesty. He was a great dealer also, between Her Majesty and some Catholicks in England. He was a proper Gentleman, of a No∣ble Spirit, and fair Speech, and so well esteemed by His Majesty, that Arran thought fit to absent him from Court by this Ambassage. Ne∣vertheless he employed him also in the Course begun betwixt him and the Earl of Hunsdean. And yet when he was at the Court of England, so well esteemed and treated as was reported by such as were sent back, it was alledged by some of the Master of Gray's friends, that the Earl of Arran began to envy him, and misrepresent him unto His Majesty, as if he had discovered unto the Queen of England, a great part of the Queen of Scotlands purposes, and proceedings. However the said Master returned again well rewarded, and commended for his behaviour, qualities, and discretion unto the King's Majesty, to the great increase of his Credit with the King. Not long after his return, he was informed what misreports had been made of him in his absence. Which he recompensed the best he could with Court Charity at con∣venient times, so that by little and little he began to Eclipse Ar∣ran. The Master of Gray also forewarned His Majesty of a notable Per∣son who was upon the way, sent unto His Majesty by the Queen of England, to do him honour, and to bear him company, to entertain a stricter friendship between that Queen and Him, then any had ever been intended before. And that the said Ambassadour called Mr. Wot∣ton would not trouble His Majesty with Business, or Country Affairs, but would bear him company in his Pastimes of Hunting, Hauking,
and Horse-riding; and entertain him with friendly and merry Discour∣ses, as one come lately from Italy, and Spain, expert in Languages and Customs of Countries; and a great lover of His Majesty's Title, and Right to the Crown of England. So that His Majesty was ingaged to love him before he did see him, and caused with diligence to write to me to come and entertain the said Ambassadour. At my return to Court, I was the better taken with, that Arran was under some Cloud. The Master of Gray was then my great friend: For His Majesty had told him, that I had ever resisted the Earl of Arran's furious proceedings. His Majesty desired me, as I would do him acceptable Service, to bear good company to the said Ambassadour, declaring unto me all his properties, and qualifications above specified; willing me also to Banquet him at my house. But after I had conversed certain days with him, I remembred I had for∣merly seen him in France with Doctor Wotton, who was there Ambas∣sadour Resident for Queen Mary of England, the time that she was married with King Philip of Spain. During which time, there were great suspicions and jealousies betwixt France and England. For tho there was hot War between France and Spain, yet the Peace continu∣ed still with the Queen of England, who was lately married by the King of Spain. She appeared still to keep the Peace with France, though in the mean time she sent over to Flanders both Men and Mo∣ny to the help of the King her Husband. The old Constable of France, my Master, who for the time had the whole management of the Coun∣try Affairs, under King Henry the Second, reproached the English Am∣bassadour, for that the Queen his Mistress was doing her endeavour to break the Peace. The Ambassadour excused his Mistress, alledging, That if any of his Country-men served in the Wars under the King of Spain, that they would be found but Soldiers of Fortune, ready to serve any Man for Mony. She denied that she knew of their passing into Flanders, or that she disbursed any Mony for the Wars. Albet that there was ground enough ministred unto her, by reciving and re∣taining in France all her Rebels and Fugitives, giving them Pensions and Intertainment, and stirring them up to enterprises against her Life, and Estate. This the Constable flatly denyed, only he said, That out of a general good will which was born to English-men in time of Peace, they were suffered to live in the Country, which bears the name of France, because there should be Freedom and Franchise to every Christian. The Ambassadour being wise and subtil, perceiving this answer to be but a shift, and that Wars would inevitably follow these kind of suspicions; he intended by some subtilty to Circumvent the Constable, and for that effect had sent to England for his Brother's Son, being One and Twenty years of Age, as well to employ him, as to teach him the French and Italian Languages. This youth being arrived in France with an Irish Boy to be his Interpreter, who could speak French, both apparelled in mean array, to be the less suspect∣ed to have any practice or policy in their minds. Like a Forreign young Man he addressed himself to some of the King of France his Courtiers, desiring Audience of His Majesty secretly, as having a matter of great importance to propose. The King again divers times directed him to deal first with the Constable. At last when he came
to the Constable, he desired also of him, that he might first declare unto the King his Errand, which was of great importance, although he knew that the King spoke with no Man in such matters, until the Constable had first sounded him, and then told his Opinion to the King, what answer were fittest to make. At length he said, he would de∣clare the matter unto the Constable, under promise of great secrecy, causing the Constable by this niceness to suspect some practice. When he gave him Audience, he caused me to be present beside him. At their meeting in the Constable's Cabinet; his Irish Interpreter was put forth, against his will, as appeared. But he was so instructed by the Ambassadour his Uncle, to use such forreign and rude fashions. Yet again e're he began to propose his Errand, he desired secrecy. The Constable being an old, wise, experimented Councellor, put him a lit∣tle aside, and rounded in my Ear, to know if ever I had seen this young Man before. I answered, That I had observed him the preceding day at long conference with one Mr. Sommer Secretary to the English Ambassadour. Then the Constable thought, that he should handle the matter well enough: for he instantly conjectured that all this niceness proceeded from the Ambassadour, to intrap him. So calling the young Man again, he desired him to shew what he had to say. Mr. Wotton began to declare the great miscontentment that was in England, not only for bringing in the proud Spaniard to Rule over them, but also for the alteration of Religion made by Queen Mary, moving many to Rebel, and others to remove off the Country, who nevertheless were all well received and treated by the King's Majesty of France. Whereby he had gained the hearts of the third part of England so devoutly towards him, that they would gladly put the Crown of England on his head, (getting liberty in Religion) to be quit of the Spanish Tyranny, and terrible Inquisition, which was fear∣ed would also be established in England. And for the first proof of their good will and gratitude, a number of Lords and Knights, who durst not write, had sent him secretly with an Overture to put the strong Town of Calis into his hands, with the whole Earldom of Oye. At this the Constable made a start, and said, Know you not my friend, that there is a sworn Peace betwixt your Queen and my Master? The other replied again, how that the Queen of England aided se∣cretly, whith Mony and Men the King of Spain her Husband, in his Wars of Flanders against France. Which the Constable alledged that she denied by her Ambassadour, willing him however to tell out the rest of his Commission. Then, said he, My Lord, the means how you may get Calis, is this, First, The most part of the Town is of the Re∣formed Religion, and are Malecontents, having refused to receive a Garison of Spaniards. And they are friends to those who have sent me, and keep correspondence with them; only the Towns Ship keeps the Town, keeping Watch and Ward, being unskilful in handling their Arms. Therefore the King shall cause Monsieur Senarpon his Lieutenant in Normandy, to lye in ambuscade at such a Wood within a mile and an half of the Town, at an appointed day, then a Ship well furnished with Armed Men shall lye at Anchor half a mile from the Town. And some of them clothed like Marriners, shall come on Land, and have Swords and Pistols under their Cloaths, and shall
wait about two of the Afternoon, at which time the Ports of the Town are opened to let Men in, and out. Part of those who attend the Ports, will be at their Dinner, when one or two will come before the rest to open the Gates. Thus the Gates being easily seised upon, let one of the Company shoot off a Culverin, that the Ship may hear, and shoot a Cannon to cause Monsieur de Senarpon with his Company advance. In the mean time, there shall be a mutiny raised in the Town by our friends, and partners, so that the Town shall be obtained without stroke. After that the Constable had heard all this long discourse, he said, That it was a very probable design, and he doubted not but it might be easily effectuated, but in respect of the sworn Peace, the King his Master would not, nor should never have his consent to break it. But that he was much ingaged to the Noblemen who did bear him so much good will, and as for him who had taken so great pains, the King should reward him, willing me to remember to cause give mony to the young Gentleman. So he gained nothing at the Constable's hand, and never came again to seek his reward; but was afterward mani∣festly known to be Brother's Son to Doctor Wotton Ambassadour, as said is. This is he now who was sent hither to bear His Majesty company, as one who will not meddle with Practises, but with Pastimes. But when I forewarned His Majesty to beware of him, and told how that he being little above Twenty years old, was imployed to beguile the wise old Constable: Now he was Fifty years, and His Majesty but Twenty, it was to be feared he would endeavour to beguile him. Yet His Majesty would not believe me, but believed the said Mr. Wotton to have a great kindness for him, and so he became one of his most fa∣miliar Minions, waiting upon him at all Field-pastimes; and in ap∣pearance he despised all busie Councellors, and medlers in matters of State; as he was instructed by such as said, he would please His Maje∣sty best to appear such. But he had more hurtful fetches in his head against His Majesty, then any English-man that ever came in hither had at any time before. You have heard before of a meeting that was drawn on at the Bor∣ders, betwixt the Earl of Hunsdean and Arran; where at their secret conference Arran was required by the craft of the Lord Burleigh, and his faction in the English Council, to stop the King from any marriage for three years, upon many fair counterfeited promises; One where∣of was, That he should be declared Second Person, upon his marriage of the forenamed English Lady of the Blood. At which Arran gran∣ted all that was desired, he was so glad to procure the Queen of Eng∣land's friendship. About that time the Queen of England, by her in∣telligence from Denmark, was advertised of a great and magnifick Am∣bassage, to be sent from Denmark to Scotland, viz. Three Ambassa∣dours, with Sixscore Persons, in Two gallant Ships. Whether she suspected, or had heard, that it was to draw on a marriage, I cannot tell. But this far I learned, that her Council judged it was to confirm at least a greater friendship betwixt the two Kings, and their Coun∣tries, which was one of the Causes that moved them to send this Mr. Wotton to Scotland, to use all his wiles to disturb and hinder any grea∣ter
Amity, that might proceed from the said Commission, and Nego∣tiation between their two Kings, and their Countries. For England trusted nothing to the Earl of Arran's promise, for they esteemed him as an inconstant Man, as is already declared. So soon as the Danish Ambassadours arrived by Ship in this Coun∣try, His Majesty ordered me to entertain them, and bear them compa∣ny. And because they were three joined in Commission, he willed me to choose any other two whom I thought meetest, to bear them company with me. I named unto His Majesty the Laird of Segie, and William Shaw Master of Wark. First, At Dumfarmling they Congratulated His Majesty in the King their Master's Name, with a long Discourse of the old Amity, Bond, and mutual Friendship between the two Kings, and their Kingdoms. And last of all they required the Isles of Orkny to be restored again to the Crown of Denmark, alledging they were mortgaged, to be redeem∣ed again for the Sum of Fifty Thousand Florins. Their coming and demand was diversly scanned, some supposing Wars would ensue, unless the said Isles were rendred, others thought that their intention was to bring on a marriage with the King of Den∣mark's Daughter. Now albeit His Majesty was determined to treat them well, and honourably, they were nevertheless mishandled, rufled, and delayed here the space of Months, to their great charge and discontent: for they lived upon their own expences, and were not defrayed by His Majesty, as all other Ambassadours of that Nation have been since. When they were appointed to part out of Dumfarmling toward St. An∣drews, there to get their dispatch, His Majesty ordered to tell them, That he would send them Horses out of his own Stable, to ride upon. The day of their parting being come, they sent away their Baggage and Officers before them, and were booted themselves, waiting upon His Majesty's Horses, and because they came not in due time, they went forward on foot. The King was much dissatisfied when he un∣derstood how they were handled, and caused his Horses to follow fast after them, and overtake them. When they came to St. Andrews, divers appointed days of Council and Covention were broken unto them, which were promised to be kept for their dispatch, for obtain∣ing whereof they were very earnest. Then Men were appointed to deride them at their Lodgings, and before their Windows when they lookt out to the street. So that nothing was left undone, which could enrage them, or stir them up to choller. Only Mr. Wotton the English Ambassadour visited them frequently, and did well and favou∣rably entertain them, comforting them at all occasions, appearing to be sorry that they were so abused. He offered to lend them Gold and Silver largely, for the great friendship that he knew to be be∣tween the Queen his Mistress, and the King of Denmark. For he was assured of good payment, and thought to purchase credit at their hands, by his apparent friendly dealing. At length under great se∣crecy he said he would not conceal from them, that he had heard the King speak disdainful language of their Country and Customs; and also, That some of his Gentlemen had heard the King speak evil of their King, undervaluing him as being descended of a Race of Mer∣chants.
And he further assured them, That he and his Council were resolved to keep them long here, without any dispatch, to affront and weary them. Then again the said Ambassadour, and two of his Gentlemen in∣formed his Majesty of these hard Speeches, of the reproachful dealing they had met with from King and Council, reflecting upon their Ma∣ster. He informed him also of the rude manners, and drunkenness of those that were about His Majesty, who had the like scornful lan∣guage of the King of Denmark, his Country, and Ambassadours, mo∣ving His Majesty to make the less of them. Whereby they were stir∣red up to such a rage, that I had much to do to keep them two or three several times from going to their Ships, to have returned to their King without any answer, and to have given him an accompt of the disdainful usage they had met with, and the injury thereby done to him. The Earl of Arran was also their great Enemy, because they made no court to him, but rather slighted, some of their Company having known him in Sweden a Common Soldier. So that he was as ready as the rest to mock and deride them; albeit at that same time the Ring-leaders about the Court were Combined together with the English Ambassadour against him. The principal of the three Ambassadours was a wise, grave, and an∣cient Councellor. The second was furious in his Speeches. The third cried out, The King our Master is affronted, we must be reven∣ged. I took the first apart, requesting him to hear me patiently, for he spoke good Dutch, but mine was not so good. Therefore I desired that he would more notice my meaning, then my words, and be more careful to cause his friendly Commission to take effect, that he might return home with happy success, then to withdraw abruptly, to be called unhappy Instruments of discord at the pleasure of a few scorn∣ful Factioners, who had laid their heads together to cause them part dissatisfied, and to be as instrumental in doing evil, as they were min∣ded at their coming to do good. I told him, how that the Queens Majesty of England was a wise, well inclined, and politick Princess, and that there were as many ho∣nest and good Men in England, as in so much bounds in the whole World; abeit there was in it divers Opinions, and Factions, shooting at sundry marks, as is done in all other parts. And because that their Queen would never marry to have Succession of her own Body, they were all very desirous to know who after her should Reign over them. The most part of the Country, expects that it shall be our King, and wisheth his welfare and prosperity, as being righteous Heir to the Crown of England, both by the Father and Mother's side. But those who at present have the chief management of the Court, shoot at other particular marks of their own, minding to set forward some of themselves, or of their friends, to brook the Kingdom. And for that cause, they make all the opposition they can to our King, because of their unmerciful dealing to his Mother, for the which they fear some day to be punished, when he comes to be King of England. For all these respects, they endeavour to keep him from marriage, and
from all forreign Friendship and Alliance. This Ambassadour of Eng∣land, is a very ill Instrument, both himself, and his Gentlemen, and hunting daily with His Majesty, makes the worst reports they can. The Ambassadour of Denmark answered to that, marvelling that Mr. Wotton should make such report of them, he offering them so great friendship, and giving them daily intelligence how they were scorn∣ed and mocked, both by the King and his Council, to his great regret, offering to lend them mony, and to do all other pleasures to them that lay in his power. I replied, He knew well enough, that he would get good payment, and great thanks. For the King of Den∣mark was esteemed a worthy Prince, and his Ambassadours worthy to be honoured; but the guiders of the Court of England desire not that our King should think or esteem so of them, wishing him to have but few Friends, and many Enemies. Then I assured him, That the King's Majesty and all his Subjects, except some who were corrupted by England, were determined to entertain and increase a continual friendship with the King and Country of Denmark: Praying their wis∣doms-couragiously to resist, and not feebly and foolishly to give place to the said crafty practices of their scornful enviers, by retiring ab∣ruptly, thereby suffering themselves to be made evil Instruments, di∣rectly against their own Intention and Commission, and they should shortly see good success to follow thereupon, to their great content∣ment. Promising unto them for my part, That I should go instantly unto his Majesty, and with all hazard that might be, should discover unto him, how both he and they were deceitfully abused by the dou∣ble dealing of the English Ambassadour, and such Courtiers as assisted him. Upon this discourse and promise, they went to councel all three to∣gether, as their custom was. And after long conference, they gave me answer, That their coming was for to do good Offices. And al∣beit they had suffered sundry injuries, they would be sorry to be made Instruments of discord, so far against their Commission and Intention, and therefore would yet stay upon hope of better handling, and upon my promise, albeit to that hour few or none had been kept to them. After this, I shewed unto His Majesty what great inconveniencies might ensue upon the long delaying, and ill handling of the Danish Ambassadours. And yet that I marvelled not that he made so little accompt of them, in respect of the great care, and fine practices, that were used to make him undervalue them, by the English Ambassa∣dour and his Assistants, who had His Majesty's Ear for the time. At the first His Majesty was impatient to hear this language spoken of Persons he had so good liking of, and said, that he was informed, That the King of Denmark was descended but of Merchants, and that few made accompt of him or his Country, but such as spoke the Dutch Tongue. For this was put in his head to prevent any of my perswa∣sions in their favour, lest they should get place or credit. I answer∣ed, That neither could the King of France, or Queen of England speak Dutch, and yet they made great accompt of the King and Country of Denmark. France having their Ambassadour lying there, and paying yearly to the King of Denmark a great Sum of Gold, to the value of
Twenty Thousand Crowns. His Majesty said. The more shame was his. I said, Rather to the King of France, who must buy his kindness. Neither could the Queen of England, said I, speak Dutch, yet she made much accompt of the King and Country of Denmark, and durst not offend him, nor none of his Ships, both by reason of the straight pas∣sage at Elsoonure, and also because he had great Ships to make himself amends, in case she did him or his any wrong. I said, moreover, That whereas it hath been reported to Your Majesty, the Race of their Kings not to be of Noble and Royal Blood; I shall shew Your Majesty that it is but manifest invention to cause you to despise them. For this, late King Frederick is descended of an Old and Royal stock, to wit, Chri∣stianus of Denmark, the first of that name, who had two Sons, and one Daughter called Margaret, married into Scotland to James the Third his Eldest Son. John was King after him; his second Son Frederick was King of Norway, and Duke of Holstein. Iohn had a Son called Christianus the Second, also King of Denmark, who married Charles the Fifth his Sister, who did bear him two Daughters: Whereof the Eldest was given in marriage to Frederick Elector Palatine; the Se∣cond to the Duke of Millain, and afterward, being a Widow, married the Duke of Lorrain. Himself was taken and kept in Prison by his Subjects, for some rigorous Execution upon his Barons, and his Father's Brother Frederick was made King. After this Frederick, the Earl of Altenbourg was chosen by assistance of the Town of Lubeck, but Chri∣stianus the Third, Son to the said Frederick, put him out, and conque∣red the Kingdom. Nevertheless this Christianus being a good Prince, would not change their old Priviledges, but caused himself to be cho∣sen, and likewise his Son Frederick in his time, to Reign after him; who is now present King, and hath sent this honourable Ambassage to Your Majesty, as to his good friend, and kinsman, descended of the Kingly Race of Denmark. And whereas he requires again the Isles of Orkny, it is for the discharge of his Oath, because every King of Den∣mark at his Election; is sworn to claim again the said Isles, which he hath done for the fashion, and for no other effect, but to draw on a greater familiarity, and friendship. Or else he had not sent so honourable a Company, but rather an Herauld of Arms, if he had been earnestly bent either to get the said Isles, or to quarrel about them. After that His Majesty had heard this Discourse far different to his former Informations, he was exceeding glad, and said, he would not for his head, but that I had shewn the verity unto him; and that same afternoon he sent for the said Ambassadours, and acquainted them how near Allied he was to the King of Denmark. He excused their long delay, and promised instantly to see them dispatched himself, and that within three or four days. He called for Wine, and did drink to them, and sent them home very well content, and satisfied to their Lodg∣ings. He commanded a Banket to be prepared for them, which His Majesty's Controller and Officers were quietly forbidden to do, al∣ledging the scantness of Provisions. Which the Laird of Segie and I perceiving, we dealt with the Earl of March, who prepared a great Ban∣quet for them in His Majesty's Name, to the great dissatisfaction of Mr. Wotton, and his Partisans, who durst not appear. And though they would not suffer His Majesty to be present at the Banquet, but
to Dine in his own Chamber, yet His Majesty being informed by me how matters went, he rose from his own Dinner, and went to the Banquet-house, and drank to the King, Queen, and Ambassadours of Denmark, and so contented them. And he caused their dispatch to be in readiness, conform to his promise. But when I advertised His Majesty, That there was no Present prepared for to reward them withal, he was wonderfully troubled, saying. They who had the ma∣nagement of his affairs, were resolved to affront him. Now at this time was the Earl at Court, not so much in favour as formerly. During the which time, there chanced a strange misrule to fall out at a day of meeting upon the Borders, which was set between the two Wardens: where Sir Francis Russel upon the English side was killed. Whereupon the English Ambassadour took occasion to lay the blame upon the Earl of Arran, alledging, That the Laird of Fernthast who was Warden upon the Scots side had married the Earl of Ar∣ran's Brother's Daughter. And that the said Earl had caused the slaughter to be made, that the Borders might break loose. In this complaint, the said Ambassadour was well assisted by the Master of Gray and his Companions. So that the Earl of Arran was Com∣manded to Ward within the Castle of St. Andrews, and was kept strict∣ly there three or four days. So that being in fear of his life, he sent for Colonel Stuart, the Laird of Segie, and me, and lamented to us his hard handling, purging himself, as he might justly do, of that acci∣dent that fell out upon the Borders, requesting us to intercede for his liberty. He declared unto us a secret to be shewn unto His Majesty, in case his life was taken from him, which was a promise made unto the Queen of England, That the King should not marry with any for the space of three years, whereof I have formerly made some men∣tion. Nevertheless he forgot not to travel for himself, for he sent his Brother Sir William to the Master of Gray at midnight, promising to get unto him the Abbey of Dumfarmling, so that he would obtain his liberty at His Majesty's hand. Which was incontinently granted, and also the said Benefice disposed unto the said Master. Whereup∣on the English Ambassadour was in a great rage at the Master, but their discord was afterward agreed. Only Mr. John Maitland Secre∣tary, and the Justice Clerk, and the Earl of Arran, were ordered to retire home to their houses. But before Arran's journey, His Majesty was informed to desire him, with all possible diligence, to lend him a great Gold Chain, which he had got from Sir James Balfour, which weighed Fifty-seven Crowns, to be given unto the Danish Ambassa∣dours. Which if he had refused to do, he would have lost His Maje∣sty, and in delivering it he lost the Chain. In the mean time, the Ambassadours understanding that their dis∣patch was in a readiness, took their leave of His Majesty, who was al∣so ready to part from St. Andrews. I informed His Majesty not to deliver them the Dispatch, because the Chain was not yet come: For they were minded incontinently to make Sail, having stayed so long, and that the Winter Season was at hand. Albeit that I had shewn to one of their familiar Servants, that certain rewards were to come within two days, praying them to stay so long. Which they
would not grant to do, but went to their Ships: Whither I promised to bring their dispatch, which I requested His Majesty to cause deliver into my hand, to be kept till the Chain should come; which was di∣vided in three parts, for it was large. When I came to their Ships, they were going to Supper. Which being done, I delivered to them their answer in writing, with the Chains, and some excuses for their long stay, and small reward. So they parted well satisfied, assuring me that they would be good instruments of Amity. Albeit by the harsh usage they had first met with they had once resolved otherwise. They were not commanded to speak of marriage, whereof there was some groundless bruit. The King their Master had fair Daughters, with any whereof it was supposed the claim of Orkny would go. They thanked me for the good Offices they had received from me, seeing my staying them from parting discontent, had preserved the two Countries from being ingaged in War. Which, they said, they would not fail to declare unto the King their Master, with whom they would not fail to make me acquainted, not doubting but that the King my Master would one day say, That I had done him good Service. So I did take leave, having rewarded the Gunners, Trumpeters and Mu∣sicians. At my return to Court, I acquainted His Majesty, that the Danish Ambassadours had set Sail for their own Country very well conten∣ted. I gave him a particular accompt of all Speeches, that past be∣twixt them and me at their parting. Whereupon His Majesty took occasion shortly after to send one to Denmark, offering that Commis∣sion to me; which I shifted, perceiving those who had His Majesty's Ear, and had most Credit with him, to be altogether averse from his marriage that way, holding still one course with England. I named Mr. Peter Young Almoner, as very fit for that Errand: who was sent to Denmark, to thank that King, and to see his Daughters, that he might make report again of his liking of them, with a promise, That e're long His Majesty would send a more honourable Ambas∣sage. The Earl of Arran being sent home, as said is, the English Ambassador and his Scotch friends (as the Master of Gray, Secretary Maitland, and the Justice Clark) had chief credit and handling of His Majesty's Af∣fairs. The said Ambassadour had procured such favour and familiar access about His Majesty at all times, that he was upon an enterprise to have brought in secretly the banished Lords, to have fallen down upon their knees in the Park of Sterling before His Majesty, at such a time as they should have so many friends in Court, as that His Ma∣jesty should have remained in their hands as Masters of the Court for the time. But this enterprise failed him, for they durst not yet take such hazardous course, till they might lay their Plots more substan∣tially. Then the said English Ambassadour interprised to transport His Majesty out of the Park of Sterling, unto England. And failing there∣of, His Majesty was to be detained by force within the Castle of Ster∣ling. Whither Companies of Men were sent to be there at an appoin∣ted day, of which design my Brother Sir Robert got intelligence, and told it incontinently to the King's Majesty, giving him the Names of
the chief enterprisers. And because it came to one of their Ears; who stoutly affirmed the contrary, my Brother offered to maintain the truth thereof by Combat. Which His Majesty would not permit, be∣cause at last the person granted it to His Majesty. Whereupon my Brother perswaded His Majesty with great difficulty, to depart out of Sterling for ten or fifteen days, and hunt at Kincairdin, before the enterprise were ripe. Which so soon as the Ambassadour understood, he fled in great fear and haste, without Good night, or leave-taking of His Majesty: Well instructed, and furnished with the promises of such, as had assisted him in our Court, to perswade the Noblemen who were banished in England to come home, where they should find friends enough before them at Court, to put His Majesty in their hands. The Master of Gray also absented himself, and went to Dun∣kel, and there remained with the Earl of Athol. And upon some bruits of enterprises, there was a Proclamation set out in His Majesty's Name, by such as had his Ear, to purchase to themselves the more Credit, to be true and careful Councellors to His Majesty. Which Proclamation was afterward delayed by craft, that the banished might prevent the day, and come in and get the King in their hands, where∣by they might discharge the Proclamation at their pleasure. In the mean time I received a Letter to be at His Majesty with all possible diligence, and another from the Earl of Arran, intreating me to accompany him from Kinneal to the Court. But I went to His Ma∣jesty strait, whither also the said Earl came that same night. For he had procured liberty to return again to Court, and remain about His Majesty. At my coming to Sterling, I had intelligence from a very sure hand, That the said Lords were already at the entry of the Borders, assist∣ed by my Lord Hamiltoun, my Lord Maxwel, my Lord Both∣wel, my Lord Hume, and sundry others, who had not formerly joined with them. Also the Earl of Athol, the Laird of Tillibar∣dine, Buccleugh, Cesfoord, Coudingknows, Drumlanrick, and others, who were in greatest credit about His Majesty, were to join with them at their in-coming. Whereof I advertised His Majesty, and Colonel Stu∣art, who undertook to ride unto the Borders, and overthrow them, before they were wholly Convened together; which might very pro∣bably have been effectuated, if the design had not been craftily dis∣appointed by such as were about His Majesty, who appeared to set forward the Colonel's enterprise to please His Majesty, and to conquer credit, saying, They would write to Coudinknows, Buccleugh, Cesfoord, and such others to assist him. Whom they knew to be upon the con∣trary Faction already, so that the design of scattering them was ren∣dered by that Craft ineffectual. And because I perceived the crasty intention, and that they feared I would therewith acquaint His Ma∣jesty, they caused His Majesty to send me a forged Errand to Dunkel, that they might the better bring their purpose to pass without any contradiction. The pretext of my Commission was to cause the Earl of Athol to stay at home, and not to join with the Lords who were to come shortly to Sterling. And by the way I was to deliver a Let∣ter to the Baylies of St. Johnstoun, to be upon their Guards, and not to suffer any of the King's Enemies to come within their Town. The
Bayliffs inquired of me, what if the Earl of Athol, and Master of Gray would desire to come within their Town? I said, They might let themselves enter with Ten in Company, but no more. They al∣ledged, That their Letter specified not that. I told them, That was committed to me by mouth, the Conclusion of my Letter willing them to credit me. When I came to Dunkel, I knew that the Earl of Athol would not stay for me, who had a Thousand Men in readiness to take the Town of St. Johnstoun, and to come thence to Sterling, with the Master of Gray, who was yet with him. But however I told him that the Col∣lonel Stuart was gone with Forces, to defeat the Lords at their en∣try into the Country, before they might be joined together. And that therefore he would do well to lye at home, till he might under∣stand the issue of the said enterprise. If that took effect, it would be folly to him to march forward, and if it did not succeed, he might do as his heart served him. He thought this Counsel good, desiring me to write unto His Majesty for a License to him, and his, to remain at home; which I did. In the mean time, the Master of Gray was sent for to Court, the Ports of the Town of Pearth being refused to his Men, who were come out of Angus to assist him. At his return∣ing to Court, he was as great with His Majesty as ever he was, re∣maining with him within the Castle of Sterling. Where there were two Factions, who discovered themselves so soon as they saw the Male∣contents, and banished Lords draw near unto the Town of Sterling. Whither they came to the number of Three Thousand, and entred unto the Town without stop. His Majesty inclined most to the Fa∣ction, who brought in the said Lords, who advised His Majesty to send some down to the Town, to Commune and Compound matters. Which was at length Agreed upon, and Concluded, That His Majesty should remain in their hands, that no rigour should be used to those who were about him. So that those who were mediators, appeared to be good Instruments, and stayers of Blood-shed. For Arran was escaped, and fled at their first entry. But Colonel Stuart only with Ten or Twelve, gave them such a charge in the midst of the narrow part of the Town, that a little more help might have put them in great disorder. For the most part of their South-land Men were busie, spoiling Horse and Goods. The Lords, when they came into His Majesty's presence, fell down upon their knees, humbly begging pardon. Adding, That the hard handling by Arran, and other partial Persons about His Majesty, had compelled them upon plain necessity, and for their last refuge to take the boldness to come in Arms, for the surety of their Lives, and Lands, being ever humbly minded to serve His Majesty, and obey him. The King again like a Prince full of Courage and Magnanimity, spoke unto them pertly, and boastingly, as though he had been Vi∣ctorious over them, calling them Traitours, and their enterprise plain Treason, Yet, said he, in respect of your necessity, and in hope of your good behaviour in time-coming, he should remit their faults. And the rather, because they had used no vengeance, nor cruelty, at their in-coming.
In the mean time, His Majesty committed and recommended the keeping of the Earls of Montrose, and Crauford, unto my Lord Hamil∣toun. And the keeping of Colonel Stuart unto my Lord Maxwel. These three were for a time in some danger, because they had too vio∣lently espoused Arran's interest. The rest of His Majesty's Servants, were over-lookt. Sir Robert my Brother, and his Son, were both courteously used. This moderate behaviour of the Lords, conquered daily more and more favour from His Majesty. They pressing him in nothing, but by humble Intercession of such as formerly had his Ear. A Parliament was proclaimed at Lithgow for their restitution, whither His Majesty was convoyed to pass his time at Hunting, there∣by to Recreat his Spirits. Many Noblemen, and others, were written for, to come unto the said Parliament. Among the rest, the Earl of Athol, to whom I had been sent, and with whom I was, at the Lords coming to Sterling. Where I was waiting upon an answer from His Majesty, of the Letter which the Earl of Athol had desired me to write, as said is. When I came to kiss His Majesty's hand, I was gladly made welcome. His Majesty alledging, That I was Corbie's Messenger. I answered, That my absence with the Earl of Athol had saved all my own Horse, and the Town of St. Iohnstoun untaken, and had kept the said Earl from assisting with the rest. So that if those who had remained at Sterling with him, had kept the South, as well as I had done the North, their Horse had been safe as well as mine was. His Majesty said, That God had turned all to the best: For he had been before made believe, that he would be in danger of his life, in case these Noblemen had ever any more power about him. And yet though they had both Him, and his Servants in their power, they had used no rigour nor ven∣geance. His Majesty remembred how frequently I had forewarned him of this, and the like accidents, that I said would follow upon the Earl of Arran's rash proceedings. He acknowledged, he had been a bad Instrument, and declared that he should never have more Place, or Credit about him. He desired me to wait at Court, and help to do all good Offices betwixt him and his Nobility. And to tell them the truth, who was to blame for their trouble, as having occasioned the same; seeing he had great prejudice, and no advantage thereby; it being far from his inclination to seek any Man's Life, Lands or Goods, but only the peace and quiet of the Country, and the settling of the Subjects among themselves. Which I could testifie for a truth, the verity thereof consisting within my knowledge. His Majesty told me also, how he had shewn unto the Noblemen my honest and friendly advices toward them, and that I opposed my self continually to the Earl of Arran's proceedings. He desired me also to help to satisfie the Ministers, who were seeking to be restored unto their for∣mer free Assemblies, which he had forbidden them at the advice of the Earl of Arran. The same being one of the occasions of all the following troubles, which were chiefly grounded upon the dissatisfa∣ction of the Ministers, by whom the Country was influenced. So that I tarried a while at Court, till matters began to take some set∣ling. Divers of the Lords also were earnest with me to stay, offering me great kindness: saying, That His Majesty had told them, every
Man's part, and behaviour in relation to their Banishment and Per∣secution. And that I was ever for a moderate Course, desiring; and pressing, as His Majesty's interest, an Act of Oblivion to be Past for all by-gones during his Minority. The said Lords therefore caused me to propose some of their suits to His Majesty, whom in nothing they would press beyond his own pleasure. But the Council was of different opinions concerning the restoring of the Ministers to their former Priviledges, and Freedoms, where I was brought in to give my Opinion. The greatest part thought fit to delay them for a time, chiefly such as had remained about His Majesty, and had said too much before to the contrary. But they had yet some private designs hatching in their heads, which could not be brought about, if the Country were wholly in Peace. Which they knew would be, were the Ministers satisfied. My Opinion was, That His Majesty was not to be blamed, that the Noblemen were ba∣nished, or the Ministers Priviledges taken from them, seeing all these insolencies were committed by evil Instruments, who ruled over His Majesty's good mind, to satisfie their own Ambition. Who now be∣ing fled and absent, I knew no reason why the Ministers should not be restored to their former Priviledges, as well as the Noblemen to their Lands, and Honours; the one being no less contributive to the setling of the Kingdom, as the other. Seeing if this were omitted, the blame would still lye upon His Majesty, and the Country would be still in trouble. The Secretary Maitland, was against this Opini∣on; for he had formerly spoken too much on the contrary. But the rest of the Noblemen, and the Council, thought my Opinion best. But yet at that time it was not followed, nor granted at that Parlia∣ment. Yet shortly after, it was found His Majesty's interest, and con∣ducing for fully Establishing Peace in the Country, that the Ministers should be restored to all their former Priviledges. It is above-mentioned, That the Mr. Almoner was sent to Denmark. Shortly after, Colonel Stuart took occasion to go thither about his own affairs; for he had a Pension of the King of Denmark. He ob∣tained also some writing, whereby he was Commissioned to speak of the King's marriage with the King of Denmark's Eldest Daughter. And they both returned with so good and friendly answers, that there was little more mention made of the restitution of the Isles of Orkny. The King of Denmark was also put in hope by them, that His Majesty would send the next Summer an honourable Ambassage to Denmark, to deal further in these matters. I have shewed already the dangerous practices of the English Ambassadour Mr. Wotton, and a part of their effects, but the principal is yet behind. The Council of England having concluded to take the Life from the Queens Majesty his Highnesses Mother, after she had been many years kept Captive in England, thought first to get the King her Son in their hands, and to put him in hope that he should obtain the Crown of England, the rather that he was within their Country. And in the mean time to be sure, that he should not be able to revenge his Mother's death, but might be as a pledge among them, in case his Country-men, or his Forreign and French friends, would pretend to
menace them, or to make War for his Liberty, or in revenge of her death. For in that case they might threaten to cut him off, if for his Cause they should be troubled. And however it were, through time it was suspected that they intended to take his life also, after that they had laid their Plots how to make him odious to the People by false counterfeit Letters, and alledged practices, (as they had craftily and deceitfully alledged upon his Mother) against the State. But finding this their design of carrying him to England, discovered by my Bro∣ther's intelligence, the said Ambassadour fled as said is. And for the next best, thought fit to see His Majesty put in the hands of the most part of the Nobility, who were banished for the time, and during their banishment had been sheltered in England, who they thought by fit∣ted Instruments might be stirred up to take his Life, at least to keep him in perpetual Prison, in revenge of the injury had been done them. But herein they were disappointed: For they used themselves so mo∣derately, and discreetly, that they sought nothing but their own na∣tive Country, and Lands, and that they might have access to serve and obey their Prince, without any further vengeance, or rigour against their particular Enemies. As their actions and proceed∣ings have sufficiently declared since, to the great increase of their fa∣vour with His Majesty, and estimation of the whole Country. It hath been rarely or never seen in any Country, that there have been so great alterations, with so little bloodshed, as hath been in Scotland in this Kings time. Now those who were Enemies to our Queen, and King's Title to the Crown of England, seeing some of their fetches to fail them, entred in deliberation what way to proceed to take the Queen's life. The Council of England, a great part of the Nobility, and States, fell down upon their knees, humbly requesting Her Majesty to have compassion upon their unsure Estate, albeit she should slight her own. Alledging, That her life was in hazard by the practices of the Queen of Scotland, and their Lives and Fortunes. She alledged, That her heart would not suffer her to let any Sentence be given forth against the Queen her dear Sister, and Cousin, so near of her Royal Blood. Yet she was at last moved for very pity of their conditions, to let Sentence of Death pass against her, upon this express condition, That it should rather serve to be a Terrour to her, to oblige her to cease from making any more practises, then that she really in∣tended to see the Blood of so Noble a Princess shed. And in the mean time, the written Sentence was given to be kept to Mr. Davison one of her Secretaries, not to be delivered without her Majesties express Command. Nevertheless the said Davison being deceived by the Council, delivered unto them the said written Sentence of Death. Whereupon they gave the Queen warning a night before, to prepare her for God. Which short warning she took very patiently, and lay not down that night to sleep, but wrote some Letters unto the King her Son, the King of France, and some other Princes, her friends. And after she had made her Testament, she put the Gold she had, in as ma∣ny little Purses as she had Servants, more or less in every Purse, con∣form to their qualities, and deservings. The rest of the night she em∣ployed in Prayer, and being in the morning conveyed out of her Chamber to the great Hall where the Scaffold was prepared, she took
her death patiently, and constantly, couragiously ending her life, be∣ing cruelly handled by the Executioner, having received divers stroaks of the Ax. Which execution was the boldlier performed, because that some Scotsmen assured them, that the King her Son would soon forget it. Albeit His Majesty when he understood this sorrowful news, took heavy displeasure, and Convened a Parliament, wherein lamenting the mishandling of his Mother by his Enemies, who were in England, he desired the assistance of his Subjects to be revenged. Where all the Estates in one voice cryed out in a great rage to set for∣ward: Promising that they should all hazard their Lives, and spend their Goods and Estates largely to that effect, to revenge that unkind∣ly, and unlawful murther. Which put the Council of England in great fear for a while, but some of our Country-men comforted them, and so did some English that haunted our Court, alledging it would be soon forgot. Others said, That the Blood was already fallen from His Majesty's heart, and if it were not, they doubted not but to cause the matter fall out to their satisfaction. First when the King's Majesty heard that they were about to Ac∣cuse and Convict his Mother, he sent the Master of Gray, and Sir Ro∣bert my Brother, to deal for her Majesty. Where my Brother spoke brave and stout language to the Council of England. So that the Queen her self threatned his life, and afterward he would have been retained Captive, had not the Master of Gray's Credit prevented it, and the promises he made, whereby they were both suffered to come home together. Four Months before His Majesty caused send for me, that I might prepare my self for England, to confirm a Band of Alliance Offensive and Defensive with the Queen and Crown of England; and to take the Queen of Englands Oath for observing the said Bond. And Mr. Randolph who was here, was to take the King's Oath, and use the like Ceremonies here. At my coming to Court, I did what I could to be shifted of the said Commission, being a matter of so great consequence, as an indi∣rect breaking of the Bond with France. Yet His Majesty would take no excuse, but thought fit to send me thither, that I might get him sure knowledge of sundry things, which His Majesty supposed an other would not get. By reason that all his Mothers friends, and his own that were in that Court and Country, were best and longest ac∣quainted with my Brother and me. But so soon as Mr. Randolph had heard that I was to be sent to England, he desired Audience of His Ma∣jesty, and used all the perswasions he could, to get me stayed, and another sent that might be found meeter for the time. After that His Majesty had reasoned long with him thereabout, he called upon me, and told me how that Mr. Randolph had spoken so much good of me, whom he loved better then any Scots Subject, upon accompt of our old acquaintance, but had said that I would not be acceptable to the Queen his Mistress at that time, because Sir Robert my Brother had been always, and was yet upon his Mothers Faction, and also that my Brother Sir Andrew of Garvock was for the present in England her Ma∣jesties Master of the Houshold. His Majesty said, he replied again, That I was never esteemed a Factious Person, and so would not yield
at the first. But I requested His Majesty to grant him his desire. For I had no will of that Commission, knowing that there was no∣thing meant, but fraudful dealing by England with him at that time. It is for that cause, said he, that I would have you there. And it is for that same cause, Sir, said I, that I would gladly shun the same with Your Majesty's favour. His Majesty said, he wondered that Randolph should seem to like so well of me, and yet desire another to be sent. I answered His Majesty that in France and Italy we liked each other very well, but in the handling His Majesty's affairs we shot at sundry marks. His Majesty would still have me to accept that Commission, and asked whom I believed that Mr. Randolph would desire to be sent. I answered, ei∣ther the Master of Gray, or Mr. Archibald Douglas. For the Master of Gray had made moyan for Mr. Archibald, and had brought him home out of England, and had summoned an Assize of his own friends to cleanse him of the late King's Murther. And being cleansed, he haun∣ted the Court familiarly with His Majesty. It was he indeed whom Mr. Randolph desired to be sent, or the Master of Gray, or both in a Commission. But His Majesty would not consent thereto. Then the Laird of Coudinknows Captain of the Castle of Edinbrugh desired the Commission. But Mr. Randolph would have none other, causing the Queen his Mistress to write back, that it was unnecessary to send any Ambassadour for that Errand at that time. Only desiring that the King would write with his own hand, that one should be sent when she thought time, assuring by his said Letter that it was in effect al∣ready concluded in his mind, as if the Ceremony were performed. Which Letter was sent to the English Ambassadour, who was resident in France for the time, to be produced before the King of France, and the Queen Mother, to let them know that albeit the King of Scotland was suiting her Majesty for an Alliance Offensive and Defensive (which would be a clear breach of the old Bond with France) yet she would not put them in suspicion and jealousie of her in consenting thereto, as not much valuing the Scottish King's fickle friendship, or feud, so long as France and she kept their Peace and Friendship together. Which was done only to disgrace, and discredit the King with the King of France. So that there proceeded no more from the said intended Bond. And I was not a little satisfied that my hands had been free thereof. Likewise when the bruit was of the Spanish Navy in the year 1587, that they were coming to these parts, I was ordered to be sent to Spain, which Voyage I happily also eschewed. Now to return again to Mr. Archibald Douglas, he returned back to England, to remain Ambassadour there for His Majesty. By the which means, he obtained the greater Credit with the Queen His Ma∣jesties Mother, to her no small prejudice; the same contributary to her ruine, he having discovered several passages betwixt her and himself, and other Catholicks of England, tending to her liberation. Which were made use of against Her Majesty, for taking her life. So soon as my Brother Sir Robert was sent there to use sharp and boasting Lan∣guage to see if that might save the Queens life, he discharged Mr. Ar∣chibald of the Office of Ambassadour. This I set down in a parenthesis,
to shew how far a good King was abused, and misled, by minions, whom he liked well to his great hurt and dishonour. In the mean time for some disorder upon the West Border, betwixt the Maxwels and Johnstouns, His Majesty went there to reform their disobedience. But some Houses were kept out, and would not render unto him. Where∣upon, Mr. John Martland being made Chancellor, the Master of Gray, and other Favourers of the English Faction, did counsel His Majesty to send to Berwick, because it was alledged to be nearest, to borrow Cannons to besiege the said house. Which Guns were readily and gladly lent by the Governour of Berwick. Which apparently he durst not have done, without knowledg and consent of the Queen and Councel, who judged thereby that His Majesty had forgot the great boast that was made at the fore-named Parliament concerning the revenge of His Mo∣ther's death. For after His Majesty had riply considered the best and worst of that deed, remembred himself of the many Friends he had in England, who had no hand in his Mother's Death, he thought it not just to trouble the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom for the deed of a few who guided the Queen and Court, he being thereof himself appa∣rent Heir. And also because the Queen was of good years, and not like to live long, he was resolved to abide his time to be revenged upon his Enemies. As for the Queen his good Sister, she had sworn and pur∣ged herself of the death of his Mother, being deceived by her Councel, and Secretary Davison, whom she committed to the Tower of London. This was the way of conveyance of that ugly unkindly Murther. Shortly after this, there was a great Bruit of the Spanish Navy bound to land in England, Scotland or Ireland. And then also were entred a∣bout His Majesty a new Faction, whereof the Earl of Huntly was chief, who had lately married the Duke of Lennox's Sister. This new Facti∣on aspired by little and little to shoot out the Master of Gray, the Chan∣cellour, and others their dependers, and to retain part of those who were in Court before, where there were divers conspiracies to kill the Chancellour. And such as had assisted him, were to be removed, be∣cause they did stick too long by the Court. The Earls of Huntly, Both∣wel, and others, thought to have taken the King and kept him. And albeit two of their Enterprises had failed, yet they were desirous to be nearest His Majesty at the in-coming of the Spaniards. And in the mean time they resolved to cause the King send Sir John Seatoun to Spain. But His Majesty would have none to be sent but me. Where∣upon the Chancellor, and my Brother Sir Robert, did write to me, de∣siring me not to refuse the imployment, because they said his Majesty would have one there of his own Religion, who would not be corrup∣ted, in whom he could trust. Yet His Majesty had no inclination to deal with Spain, and I had as little desire to undertake the Voyage, al∣beit Sir George Douglas desired the said Commission, as one who had assisted His Majesty's Mother, yet it took no effect. The Earl of Hunt∣ly in the mean time procured a Gift of the Benefice of Dumfarmling, which was lately taken from the Master of Gray now decourted, and given to him. How that the Spanish great Navy was three years in ma∣king their preparations, and were sufficiently and substantially furnished with Men, Ammunition and all sorts of necessaries, is now manifest to all Europe. What was their intent and purpose was so secret, that the
Chieftams of the Army knew no more, but as they should understand by the opening of their stamped instructions at every appointed landing Place. Many were of opinion, that they were first disappointed by the Duke of Parma Governour of Flanders, who had behaved himself in his Charge so circumspectly, in his promises so truly, in his enterpri∣ses so stoutly, that he won the hearts of his Soldiers, and the favour of his Enemies, so that he was suspected by the King of Spain to entertain designs of Usurping the Estate of Flanders. And therefore he was mind∣ed to remove him out of that great and rich Government. He being hereupon discontent, as was alledged, neither furnished the said Army Victuals, nor assisted them with Ships, nor would he suffer them to land in his bounds. At least they were so jealous of him, that they landed not, but were lying at Anchor, where Sir Francis Drake by a stratagem subtilly devised of a Ship full of Powder with a burning Link, which kindled up the Powder so soon as the English Ship was driven by a direct vehement Wind within the midst of the Spanish Ships, bur∣ning thereby several of the greatest of them, and causing the rest to cut the Cables of their Anchors for hast, to eschew the fury of the fire. And in the mean time God sent such a vehement storm of Wind, that the whole Navy was blown and broken upon divers Coasts of our Isles, and of Ireland, and their Wreck was the greater, that they wanted their Anchors. It is before mentioned, That Mr. Peter Toung Almoner to His Maje∣sty, and Colonel Stuart were returned from Denmark well rewarded, and contented with every thing that they had seen, and chiefly with the fair young Princess; and also how they had put the King of Den∣mark in hope, that the King should the next Summer send thither an honourable Ambassage, to deal further to the increase of a greater Ami∣ty. And for this effect, the Bishop of St. Andrews, the Laird of Segie, and I were named to be sent: But I was retired, and had no will to medle, perceiving His Majesty's affairs so retarded by such as had greatest handling about him. Therefore upon my refusal, the Chan∣cellour advised the Laird of Barnbarrow, and the said Mr. Peter, to be again employed in that matter, with uncertain and irresolute Instructi∣ons to propose marriage, and with divers fair allegiances concerning His Majesty's sufficient Right to the. Isles of Orkny, which the King of Denmark was minded to sue for more sharply, but for the hope he was put in, of the apparent marriage of the King's Majesty with his Eldest Daughter. These Ambassadours were not well imbarked, when Monsieur Du∣bartus arrived here to visit the King's Majesty, who, he heard, had him in great esteem, for his rare Poesie set out in the French Tongue. He would not say that he had a secret Commission to propose the Princess of Navarre as a fit marriage for His Majesty, but that the King of Na∣varre's Secretary willed him, seeing he was to come this way, as on his own head, to propose the said marriage. Monsieur Dubartus's Quali∣ties were so good, and his Credit so great with his Majesty, that it ap∣peared if the Ambassadours had not already made Sail, that their Voy∣age should have been stayed for that Season. The Chancellour assured Monsieur Dubartus, (as he shewed me) that the marriage of Denmark should not take effect. For our Ambassadours had indeed such strait
Instructions, and so slender a Commission, that it was enough to have caused the King of Denmark to start, and to quarrel with our King, were it not that they dealt above their Commission. Which kept that King in some Temper, albeit they returned without fruit, full of displeasure, thinking themselves scorned, as they were indeed. In the mean time that they were in Denmark, Monsieur Dubartus being in Falkland with His Majesty, came to my house, to perswade me to take a Commission in hand, which he said His Majesty would lay to my charge, which was to be sent unto the King of Navarre, and to be acquainted with Madam the Princess, his Sister. And because His Majesty knew that I would be loath to go, he named also my Lord Tungland, my Brother, who undertook the journey, and became well acquainted with the said Princess, and was well treated and rewarded by the King her Brother, now King of France, and brought with him the Picture of the Princess, with a good report of her rare quali∣ties. The Laird of Barnbarrow, and Mr. Peter Young, being returned back from Denmark, declared that the King of Denmark thought nothing of their Commission, judging it but fruitless dealing, and delaying of time, and fair language, without any power to conclude. I am un∣certain, whether he got intelligence of His Majesties sending my Bro∣ther to the King of Navarre. But the marrying of his Eldest Daugh∣ter with the Duke of Brunswick, gave some appearance that he had got some notice thereof from the Court of England, who were abundantly well informed of all our proceedings. After this, Colonel Stuart desirous to see the marriage with the King of Denmark's Daughter take effect, went thither upon his own expences divers times. And seeing the Eldest Daughter already married, he excused the King's Majesty, and laid the blame upon those who had the handling of his affairs. So that the King of Denmark promised yet to give his second Daughter unto the King, upon conditions that Ambassadours should be sent there the next year, before the first day of May. In the mean time, the King of Denmark took sickness, and departed this life, leaving the same Commission with his Council, and such as were appointed for Regents of the Realm. Now the King being suited in marriage by many great Princes, and his Ambassadours being come back both out of Denmark, and Navarre, with the Pictures of the young Princesses; His Majesty determined first to ask counsel of God by earnest Prayer, to direct him where it would be meetest for the weal of himself, and his Country. So that after fifteen days advisement, and devout Prayer, as said is, he called his Council together in his Cabinet, and told them how he had been advising about that matter of so great concernment to himself, and his Country, the space of fifteen days, and that he was now resolute to marry in Denmark. The Council appeared all to relish his resolution, requiring meet Instruments to be imployed to compleat the marriage, and to make the Contract. Then His Majesty said, That he had already chosen me in his mind for one, desiring the Council to choose another; which they did, to wit, The Lord of Atry, Uncle to the Earl of Marshal. We two being written for, and come to Court, found not such earnestness
with the Council as with the King: Which my Lord of Atry percei∣ving, he drew home again, excusing himself upon his Age, and sick∣liness. His Majesty used many perswasions, and reasons, to induce me to undertake the Voyage, declaring how he had many times sent for me to be employed in Ambassages, and could never tell why I went not. I answered, That His Majesty would have done me that honour many times above my deserving, which he would not have done, if he had known my insufficiency for such matters of so great import, as I did my self. His Majesty said, That this business concerning his mar∣riage, was the greatest matter that ever he had to do, and that he would take no refusal. I said, That my Lord Tuangland, my Brother, was far meeter then my self, being a good Scholar, who could perfect∣ly speak the High Dutch, the Latine, and the Flemming Languages, with the French Tongue. But His Majesty would still repose upon me in that Errand, but at my desire was satisfie that my Brother should be put in Commission with me. Then His Majesty said, Albeit the Council will form your Instru∣ctions, yet you shall receive mine out of my own mouth. First, If the King of Denmark had been alive, he would not have stood to have given a great Portion with his Daughter, wherein it is pro∣bable the Regent and his Council will be as sparing as they can. I doubt not therefore but you will endeavour to draw from them as much as can be had, but at length stand not upon mony to conclude the marriage. Secondly, Know what friendship and assistance they will make me, when it may please God to place me by Right in the Kingdom of England, by decease of this Queen, in case any Country man, or other, would wrong∣ously pretend to usurp and debarr me from the same. Thirdly, Concerning the Isles of Orkny, you may chuse any Man of Law that you please, for that head must be answered, and debated by Form of Law. Alwise if the marriage take effect, that purpose would not be over, precisely handled. It may be that my Council will give you straiter Conditions, but this Instruction of mine you shall follow, let them say what they please. I told His Majesty, That I would chuse to take with me for a Law∣yer Mr. John Skeen. His Majesty said, he judged there were many better Lawyers. I said, he was best acquainted with the German Cu∣stoms, and could make them long Harangues in Latine; that he was a good, true, stout Man, like a Dutch-man. Then His Majesty was content, that he should go with me. After that I had tarried long at Court, and could see no preparation for our Dispatch, neither Mony, nor Ship making ready; the appoin∣ted time wherein we should have been in Denmark being past, to wit, before the first of May. For it was so ordered by the King of Denmark e're he dyed, that in case that day was not kept, that they might think themselves but scoffed. This moved me to employ my friends at Court, to cause another be named in my place, seeing so many suiting to get the said Commission. And the Chancellour gave me such ter∣rors as he could for his part. Now the Farl of Marshal was desirous to supply the place of his Uncle my Lord of Atry, and His Majesty was content that he should be sent thither. Whereupon I took occasion to represent to His Ma∣jesty,
That the said Earl was very well qualified for that imployment, and that he would go the better contented, if he might have in Com∣mission with him, some of his own friends and acquaintance. His Majesty answered, That it was his part to chuse his own Ambassa∣dours; that the Earl of Marshal should have the first place as a No∣bleman, but that he would repose the chief handling with the Regent, and Council of Denmark upon me. Then I declared, That the ap∣pointed time was past, and that yet there was no appearance of any preparation of Mony or Ship, wherewith His Majesty was very an∣gry. I named the Laird of Barnbarrow, or Mr. Peter Toung, as very fit to be imployed in the Commission with the Earl of Marshal, be∣cause they had been there already. But he would not hear thereof, for the blame had been wrongously laid upon their insufficiency, it be∣ing alledged, That their mismanagement, was the occasion that mat∣ters formerly took not the desired success. Would not this kind of Court dealing, scare any man from medling in such weighty mat∣ters, where such men are preferred to have the special credit about a Prince, who mind only their own designs, and not the Prince's advantage? Those who at present ordered Affairs, counselled His Majesty first to send to the Queen of England, and require her advice and consent to the said marriage with Denmark, who they knew would not only disswade him from the said marriage, but also stay him from any mar∣riage, as she and her Council had ever done, and dealt, both with his Mother and himself. When I understood of this new delay, I obtain∣ed license to go home to my house, and make me ready against the next warning. In the mean time, the season of the year was well spent. The Queen of England's answer returned, not to marry with Denmark. She said, That she had credit with the King and Princess of Navarre, that she would imploy the same for effectuating that mar∣riage, which was much more His Majesty's interest. In the mean time she did write to the King of Navarre, to hold back the marriage of his Sister three years, for such frivolous pretexts as carried no rea∣son. Upon this answer of England, our Council was Convened, and inticed to Vote against the marriage of Denmark. Whereat His Ma∣jesty took such a despight, that he caused one of his most familiar Ser∣vants to deal secretly with some of the Deacons of the Craftsmen of Edinbrugh, to make a mutiny against the Chancellour and Council, threat'ning to slay him in case the marriage with the King of Den∣mark's Daughter were hindered, or longer delayed. This boasting and fear caused a new resolution to be taken, that the Earl of Marshal should be dispatched with diligence, with the Constable of Dundie, and the Lord Andrew Kieth, whom the said Earl requested His Majesty to send with him. Which His Majesty granted the more easily, because he found so many difficulties in the matter, and some of my friends had informed him, that it would be very satisfactory to me that some other were imployed. Now it was yet a long time, before the Earl of Marshal could be ready, and dispatched. Then as to his dealing with the Council of Denmark, his power to conclude was so limited, and his Commission so slender, that he was compelled to send back again my Lord Dingual, either for a License to come home, or for a sufficient
power to conclude. Where it chanced that he found His Majesty at Aberdeen, and the Chancellour and most part of the Council absent. Which was a great furtherance to get a full power to conclude the Contract, and Ceremony of the marriage, by the Earl of Marshal, who was incontinently dispatched by the Regent and Council of Denmark, and the Queen sent home with him well accompanied. But the tem∣pestuous winds drave them upon the Coast of Norway, where they Landed and stayed a long time for fair Winds and Weather. Which storm of Wind was alledged to be raised by the Witches of Denmark, as by sundry of them was acknowledged, when they were for that cause burnt. That which moved them thereto, was, as they said, a blow which the Admiral of Denmark gave to one of the Bayliffs of Copenhaven, whose Wife consulting with her associates in that Art, rai∣sed the Storm to be revenged upon the said Admiral. His Majesty had heard that they were upon the Sea, and left no∣thing undone to make all in a readiness to receive the Queen, and her Company honourably. But in the mean time, was very impatient, and sorrowful, for her long delay, laying the blame thereof upon the Chancellour, and such others of his Council as had plainly Voted against the said marriage, and thereby had delayed the dispatch of the Ambas∣sadours so long, untill the Season of Sailing upon the Seas was near past. The storms were also so great here, that a Passage-Boat perish∣ed betwixt Bruntland and Lieth, wherein was a Gentlewoman called Jean Kennedie, who had been long in England with the Queen His Ma∣jesty's Mother, and was since married to Sir Andrew Melvil of Garvock, my Brother, Master of His Majesty's Houshold. Which Gentlewo∣man being discreet and grave, was sent for by His Majesty to be about the Queen his Bed-fellow. She being desirous to make diligence, would not by the storm be stopped the Sailing of the Ferry, where the vehement storm drave a Ship forcibly upon the said Boat and drowned the Gentlewoman, and all the Persons, except two. This the Scotish Witches confessed to His Majesty was procured by them. In that Boat also, I lost two Servants. Now His Majesty remained quietly in the Castle of Craigmillar, dissatisfied, as said is, with the greatest part of his Council. He could neither sleep, nor rest. In the mean time, he directed Colonel Stuart to my Brother Sir Robert, and me, charging us to take care of his mis∣handled Estate in time-coming, lamenting that he had been abused by such as formerly he had too much trusted to, and that he had al∣ways found us faithful and careful of his welfare. He therefore de∣sired us to sit down, and advise how he might best put remedy to things by-past, and prevent such inconveniencies in time coming, see∣ing he had determined hereafter to repose most upon our Council. Our answer to His Majesty was, That we had great reason to render His Majesty most humble thanks for the favourable opinion he enter∣tained of us, which we should endeavour to deserve, and were very sorry for the displeasure His Majesty had taken, praying His Majesty to take patience, seeing that as he had always reposed upon God and not Man, that the same God would mend his Estate, as he had oft∣times done before. That our care should be presently, how to re∣ceive the Queen honourably, who was upon the Sea (we daily look∣ing
for her landing) and next how to treat and reward the Noble∣men of Denmark, Her Majesties Convey. That being done, and they returned back to their Country, it would be best time to take order with the Affairs of the Kingdom, conform to His Majesty's desire, with the concurrence of so many of the Council, as His Majesty had found most faithful, and least factious. But we did not think fit to take upon us the whole burthen, in respect that hath been always the chief cause of the wrack of Scots Kings, especially of all His Majesty's own troubles, in laying the whole burthen of his Affairs upon any one, or two, who most commonly for greediness and ambition abuse good Princes, and few or none dare controul them, for fear of their great Authority and Credit. The Chancellour being advertised of His Majesty's discontent, and displeasure, as said is, made preparation to go off the Country, and caused it come to His Majesty's Ears, that he would Sail himself and bring home the Queen with him: And that they were all but Trif∣lers who were with her. He forgot not to Anoint the hands of some who were most familiar with His Majesty, to interpret this his design so favourably, that it made the King forget all by-gones, and by little and little he informed him so well of the said Voyage, and the great charges he had bestowed upon a fair and swift sailing Ship, that His Majesty was moved to take the Voyage himself, and to sail in the same Ship with the Chancellour, with great secrecy, and short preparati∣on, making no Man privy thereto, but such as the Chancellour plea∣sed, and such as formerly had all been upon his Faction. He had also heard an incling of a word, That His Majesty, in the time of his high displeasure, had said, That he would lay the burthen of his Af∣fairs upon my Brother, and me; whereat he had a great envy and despight, and was the cause why His Majesty made me not privy to his Voyage. He was very discontent, when His Majesty had appoin∣ted my said Brother Robert to be left Vice-Chancellour, and Convene the Council in His Majesty's absence, to hold hand with the Duke of Lennox, my Lord Hamiltoun, Bothwel and other Noblemen, with the Officers of the Crown, and to Rule the Country in His Majesty's absence. Three other Ships sailed with His Majesty, wherein was the Justice Clerk; Carmichal the Provost of Lincludin, Sir William Kieth, George Hume, Iames Sandiland, with all His Majesty's Ordinary Servants. The weather was rough enough, for it was in the beginning of Win∣ter. But the last day was so extream stormy, that they were all in great hazard, but His Majesty landed that same night at in Norway, where the Queen was abiding the turning of the Wind, and where he accomplished his marriage in person. But he could not be perswaded to return to Scotland that Wiuter, by reason of the ra∣ging Seas and storm he had sustained a little before. The Queen and Council of Denmark, being advertised that His Majesty was resolved to abide all that Winter, sent and requested him to come to Denmark. Whither he went by Land with the Queen his new bride, and behaved himself honourably and liberally by the way, and at the Court of Denmark, where he tarried during his abode there.
But the Company who were with His Majesty put him to great trouble to agree their continual janglings, strife, pride and partialities. The Earl of Marshal by reason that he was an ancient Earl, and had been employed in this honourable Commission, thought to have the first place next unto His Majesty, so long as he was there. The Chan∣cellour by reason of his Office, would needs have the preheminence. There were also contentions betwixt him and the Justice Clark. The Constable of Dundie and my Lord Dingwal could not agree about place. George Hume did quietly shoot out William Kieth from his Office of Master of the Wardrobe. At length they were all divided in∣to two Factions. The one for the Earl of Marshal, the other for the Chancellour, who was the stronger, because the King took his part: So that the Chancellour triumphed, and being yet in Denmark, devi∣sed many Reformations to be made, and new Forms and Customs to be set forward at His Majesty's return: As to have no Privy Council but the Exchequer, and the Nobility to be debarred from it: Sundry of the Lords of the Session to be put out, who he judged had no de∣pendence upon him, and others his Creatures put in their room. He caused a Proclamation to be pen'd, which was sent home to be pro∣claim'd before His Majesty's return, That none of the Nobility should come to Court not being sent for, and then to bring with them six per∣sons and no more: Likewise every Baron to bring but four. Like∣wise he resolved to cause Ward such as had been unruly, and disobe∣dient during His Majesty's absence, as the Earl Bothwel, the Lord Hume, and divers Borderers and Highland Men. The next Spring His Majesty came home, and Landed at Lieth, well accompanied with the Admiral of Denmark, and divers of the Council, and many other Gentlemen. All whom His Majesty trea∣ted honourably, and after the Queens Coronation they were magni∣ficently rewarded with more then twelve Golden Chains, and many Medals of Gold with His Majesties Picture. His Majesty at his landing was pleased to send to me to bear them company, which I did until their parting, to His Majesty's great con∣tentment. In the mean time, the Earl of Worcester was sent Ambassadour from England, to Welcome and Congratulate both their Majesties, with some Presents unto the Queens Majesty. Upon whom I was com∣manded by His Majesty to attend diligently all the time of his being here, and at his parting he was presented with a Ring of seven great Diamonds. He parted well satisfied, and so did all his Com∣pany. His Majesty was pleased at leasure to declare unto me his whole Voyage, and proceedings during his absence. He said that he wished that I had been sent alone Ambassadour to Denmark, in place of the Earl of Marshal, and the two who were joined with him, he was so ill informed of the said Earl. I answered, That I understood that the Earl for his part had behaved himself very honourably, and discreetly, as the Admiral of Denmark, and divers of the company, had informed me. But His Majesty had been so possessed with the Chancellour's misinformation, that for the time he believed it. He said further to me, That he had greater trouble to keep good order among the few
company that was in Denmark, than my Brother Sir Robert had to keep quiet all Scotland, during his absence. Which praise my Brother indeed deserved, for he had such favour and credit among the Nobili∣ty, Barons, and Burroughs, that they followed his advice, believing that he would not say but the truth in His Majesty's Name, and that he would give no misinformation against them at his home coming. But the Chancellour envied my Brother for the great opinion His Ma∣jesty had of him, though he had been the greatest instrument of bring∣ing the Chancellour into Court with His Majesty first, when His Majesty past to his Liberty at St. Andrews; and afterward of getting him the keeping of the great Seal, and in effect of making him Chan∣cellour since. The Chancellour remembred also of His Majesty's de∣liberation before his going to Denmark, and the direction he had sent by Colonel Stuart to my Brother and me. Which the Chancellour now went about to prevent, by taking occasion to Calumniate my Brother in his absence, because he was not present in the time, when there was to do with his Office to furnish some little necessaries to the strangers. He having been sent for to visit his Wise lying at the point of Death in Bruntland. The Chancellour told His Majesty, that during his Majesty's absence he used every Saturday so to do, tarrying three or four days, neglecting the common Affairs of the Country. And that it was the Clerk-Register, Alexander Hay, who had done all the good Offices, which were alledged to have been done by Sir Robert. Whereby he kindled up so the King's anger against him, that he threat'ned to Ward him, and take his Office from him, six days after he was so much praised for the great and faithful Service he had done. So ill handled oft-times are good Princes, and faithful Servants, by crafty Calumnies. But his Majesty being thereafter ful∣ly informed of the matter soon repented his anger, and converted the same against the said Chancellour upon another occasion. There was Emulation betwixt the Council and the Chancellour. The Council complaining, That the Chancellour was the deviser of all the wrongs that were done, by causing His Majesty to subscribe sun∣dry hurtful Signatures, and Commissions, getting them past for him∣self and his friends, taking thus the best and most profitable Casuali∣ties to himself, and his dependers. The Chancellour again endeavoured, to have the most part of the Council at his devotion, or such who would not be in all things ruled by him changed, and others placed in their room, who would have more dependance upon him. Whereupon the Council consulted, and concluded together, to cast the Chancellour. Yet one of the Coun∣cil, who had a matter of great moment to be dispatched, to curry fa∣vour with the Chancellour, discovers the design to him, who having that knowledge thereof before-hand, had the opportunity of prevent∣ing the enterprise, as to the effect designed. Yet at his first coming to speak with His Majesty, he rebuked him very sorely. And leaving him, he took me by the hand, saying, I am the worst handled Prince in the World, as I shall shew you To-morrow; for now when I go to Bed, I desire not to enter upon so Melancholly Subjects so late. Therefore send for your Brother, and at his coming, I shall declare unto you both, more of my mind. I cannot forget an expression of
yours, That it is the greatest Art in the World to be true. At my Brother's coming, we found that the only cause was, That the Chancellour; and some with him, would have ruined those who were His Majesty's truest friends. Yet my Brother, finding it His Majesty's interest, took up the matter betwixt the Council and the Chancellour, to His Majesty's great contentment. After the Coronation of the Queens Majesty, and Banquetting, and rewarding the strangers, and that they returned home well content∣ed: There was another Convention appointed, for taking order with the Affairs of the Country. To the which, many Noblemen, and Ba∣rons were written for; but very few obeyed the said Letters, or would come near the Court. Because when they were first written for to the Queens Coronation, they judged themselves slighted: For Hall, Chamber, and all doors were so straitly shut, and undiscreetly kept, that they could get no entry. Therefore many of them re∣turned discontent to their houses, for there was no man appointed to welcome them, or to direct them, except so many as were made Knights. Which was the cause that so few came again to Court, the next time, when they were written for. Those who had been lately in Denmark with His Majesty, thought to retain him and the whole Government in their hands, and had given His Majesty counsel not to be over familiar, nor of too easie access. That none should be per∣mitted to enter his Chamber, but such as were Gentlemen of his Cham∣ber, with the Chancellour, and some of the Council. They were not content to have the whole access, and only handling at all other times, but even also at the Conventions, they continually occupied His Majesty's Ear in presence of the whole Assembly, thereby to let their great credit be seen, that they might be Courted, by such as had to do with the King. None of them all had more occasion of oc∣cupying His Majesty's Ear, then I had at that time. Yet when it would please him to call upon me, to know how every stranger was treated, and satisfied, and to be informed about other thing; I would give him a short answer, and instantly retire. Which was perceived by many of the Nobility, and Barons, who were come to the Conven∣tion. In the which sundry necessary Reformations were intended, though nothing was performed: Which was the more complained of, because every man was in expectation to see a settled Estate at His Majesty's home-coming, by reason of His Majesty's promise made publickly in the high Kirk of Edinbrugh, to be a new Man, and to take up another kind of care and doing in his own person, then ever had been seen, or used before. Which certainly His Majesty was very willing to have put in execution, but alas he lacked help and assistance. For such as he reposed most upon, had no further care of his affairs, then as they found could best serve their own particular profit, and advancement to such ambitious aims as they shot at: ma∣king His Majesty in the mean time believe, that all was well ruled and ordered. The contrary being too manifest, moved me to pre∣sent unto His Majesty some Memorials, and Informations concerning his Estate and Government. The most part whereof I had set down in writing, after that Colonel Stuart had brought Commission from His Majesty to my Brother Sir Robert, and me, before His Majesty's
Voyage to bring home the Queen, during the time that he was in great vexation in Craigmillar, and discontent with the Chancellour, and such as were his dependers in the Council, who had been hinderers of his marriage. For at that time, he had desired my said Brother, and me, to sit down, and advise upon some good Rules, for the establishing of some good order in his Country, the Copy whereof was as followeth. SIR, your Majesty's happy return hath greatly rejoiced your whole Subjects. The expectation they have had of you ever since your Birth, hath been great, both far and near. Your publick pro∣mise to take upon you a more Kingly care since your home-coming through greater experience, hath augmented a good hope of a gracious Government. Your Religion pure and clean, your zeal to Godliness and Justice, your chast and sincere Life; your promptitude to suppress Rebellions when they arise, ravisheth the hearts of most part of your Subjects to love you, and esteem you the best King that hath been these many years in this Realm. And yet they all marvel with stu∣pified minds, to see your Affairs so unluckily handled, complaining that your Country was never in greater disorder, the Kirk never worse contented, their dissatisfaction influencing the whole Kingdom; Your house so evil at a point; The Nobility so divided; The Barons were never in greater Poverty; The Commons never more Oppressed; Never more Taxations raised, mostly applied to the utility of private persons: Never more Parliaments holden; Never more Laws broken; your Proclamations and Missives no ways obeyed; Never was Mur∣ther and Blood-shed more increased, then since your home-coming, and publick promise of better Government. Therefore, Sir, as in a perillous storm upon the Sea, or to quench sudden kindled fire on the Land, every Man's help is requisite, and acceptable; so I hope Your Majesty's clemency will consider, and your prudence will take in good part, this my dutiful Declaration and Ad∣monition, the boldlier interprised under the Warrant of your favour∣able Alliance, following your Commandment before Your Majesty's going to Denmark, that my Brother and I should set down the Causes of the evil and disorders that have been, and yet are in the Kingdom, with the meetest Remedies for Reforming and Amending the same. There be Three chief Causes of all these Evils and Disorders. The First is concerning God's Service. The Second is concerning your own Estate, and the Provision of your House. The Third, Concerning the policy and right management of the Country. As concerning the Service of God neglected by our sins, and care∣lessness in setting forth his Glory, it should be redressed and amended by humble Repentance, and amendment of Life, and good Example first in your own person, upon whose carriage, every Man's Eye is fixed, as the Head to Rule the rest of the Members, with Religion, Justice, Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude. Chiefly by Religion and Justice, have all Common-wealths been Ruled. So that such Countries as wanted the knowledge of the True Religion, seeing the great works that God brought to pass by his
own peculiar people observing his Religion, they invented Religions. Thus thinking to imitate the Jews, they fell into Idolatry, and Super∣stition: yet they straitly observed their said invented Religions, and caused to punish with death such as despised or spoke against the same. Far more should your Majesty be careful to advance the True Religi∣on, and to see the same Reverenced and Observed. And for that ef∣fect, should devout and discreet Ministers be chosen, whose Christian Lives may preach, as well as their Doctrine. And such ought to be provided with sufficient local stipends, neither too much to entice them to Avarice, nor too little to make them Indigent, and give them ground in their preachings to cry out of Poverty, in such sort as they may have no occasion yearly to leave their flocks, to come and make suit for their living, with great pain and expences as they do presently. Divers are the causes of the disorders in your Court, and House-Of∣ficers, and Servants. For they are not chosen for their Qualities, but at the instance of this and that Friend, or Courtier. Then the number of all sorts of Servants are not limited, by placing about your Majesty so many as are needful, but an extraordinary number, whereas two in every Office are enough. And then your prudence will be best known, when you shall be seen to make good Elections of fit persons for every occupation. For the Prince is ever esteemed to be like unto those sort of Servants, he likes best to be about him. Much consists in this, to have in Court, discreet, modest Courtiers, such as are not Covetous, nor unmeasurably Ambitious. Nothing wins more the hearts of the People to the Prince: for so long as they see about him such persons, they are out of fear of being unmeasurably burthened: When they see men, who are not greedy, nor prodigal spenders of the Princes Estate, nor their own, nor stirrers up of the Prince, to take Men's Lives for their Lands; they are in hope that every Man may live upon his own, and the Prince also upon his proper Patrimony. Therefore should the Officers of the Exchequer be true and honest Men. And the Prince should be frequently present himself, and hear his own compts: for few dare controul, or find fault with the wrong compts of his Officers, or great Courtiers. Which I have oft-times found fault with, when upon the Exchequer, though afterward to my great prejudice. The causes why the Patrimony of the Crown is so diminished, is be∣cause your Majesty disposed much to the Church, for Devotion; and to the Noblemen, and Barons, for good Service. And when Princes were careless to prevent Rebellions, occasioned by their mis-govern∣ment, they were compelled to buy the assistance of some, by dispositi∣on of Lands, to help to suppress their unnatural Subjects. Which in∣convenience, their careful and provident Government, might have pre∣vented and eschewed. Your Majesty also out of your Noble and Princely disposition, dis∣posed liberally unto divers greedy and importunate persons, during your minority, divers Lands, and Rents, which would have stood in great stead, to the entertainment of your House. And you heaped gift upon gift to a sort of greedy cravers, and that by the perswasions of such as had your Ear, and not to those who deserved best at your
hands. Now the Officers of the Chequer being well chosen, as said is, the Rent-Masters, and their Officers, who are accomptable, must be responsible Men; neither too mean, nor too great Men, or Courtiers, but such as dare be controuled, and whom people will not fear to of∣fend. All vacant Benefices, and Casualities, should be retained in your own hands, till you see what you may spare. Then the best part of the property lies in the High-lands, where neither God, nor the King is served or obeyed. Your Rents may be redoubled, if the High-lands, and the Islands were reduced, as was done by your King James the Fifth: For the Kings of Scotland were never rich, since they left the High-lands and the Isles, to dwell in the Low-lands: For since that, their Rents have been diminished, and their superfluous expences increased, at the unruly example of other neighbour Nations. Then your Majesties Parks would be put to profit, and replenished, which will be found a necessary help to the keeping of your House. The rest of your store Grounds, lying in the far South parts, are in such hands, as it is not fit medle with them yet; but some yearly num∣ber of Weathers will be easily granted by them who possess presently the said store grounds. Also the forbidden Goods that go yearly out of Scotland, if they were stayed and taken according to Acts of Parliament, would be very profitable. The best means to bring these good purposes to pass, is a Princely, Prudent and Gracious Government: Which is easiest brought to pass, when the Prince corrects himself, before he correct his Subjects: For they will be soon subdued to his Will, when they see the same made subject unto Reason: For being subject unto Reason, the Prince hath conquered himself, the readiest means to conquer the hearts of all his Subjects. Their hearts being conquered, the Country is easily conquered. The Country being conquered, the Prince may Plant and Establish good order there at his pleasure. Theopompus being demanded, what way a King might best rule his Realm; Answered, In giving liberty to those who love to tell him the truth. The Senate of Rome writing unto Trajan, excuseth Princes to be negligent in many things, not so much for that they have not desire to foresee, as because few or none dare warn them of the truth; and says moreover, That it belongs to good Princes rather to have regard to the benefit of their Country, then to the delights of their Person, and rather to follow such Exercises as will increase their Reputation, then only to be taken up with their Pastime, that they should be sparing in Speeches, and prodigal in Deeds. Plutarch saith to the same Trajan, If thy Government answer not the expectation of thy People, thou must necessarily be subject to ma∣ny dangers. He said further, That Princes should Rule well, if they be thankful to the great God, and if they should be patient in chances of fortune, and diligent in Execution, careful of their Affairs in dan∣gers, mild to the people, tractable to strangers, not covetous of riches, nor lovers of their own opinions, and desires. For then the burthen of their Office, will be easie unto them. As God is the Ruler and Spirit
of the World, so ought Princes to Rule and be the Spirit of their Coun∣try. The Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, and all the Elements, obey God's Ordinance by the strength of his continual Motion and Providence; so should the Prince who is God's place-holder, by continual Care, Pro∣vidence, and Motion, cause every Lieutenant, Minister, Magistrate, Judge, Officer, and Sheriffs to keep their due course in their Vocation. For the which effect, it may please your Majesty to consider the na∣ture, and wrong kind of Scottish Government, by a continual long cor∣rupted Custom. Scotland is indeed Hereditary, and a Monarchy, yet among all other Monarchical Kingdoms, it is oftest out of Tune, by the sloth and care∣lesness of Princes, the unruliness and sturdiness of the Subjects, and the great number of the Nobility; as also by reason of the great cumber∣som Clanns, so ready to concur together, and to Rebell for the defence of any of their name, or to revenge the just Execution of some of them for Murther, Slaughter, Theft, or such other Crimes. For our King wanting hired Soldiers remaining in Garisons, as other Monarchs have, may not at all occasions punish and redress such wrongs, and disorders; except they have by Wisdom and Vertue conquered their own passions, opinions, and desires, and by the same means ravished the hearts of the most and best part of the Subjects, to assist them with heart and hand to suppress the Rebels, and to punish the offen∣ders. Such Kings again as endeavour to command absolutely, not ca∣ring for the hearts of their Subjects; their Proclamations may well be outwardly obeyed with their Bodies, but they will never help the Prince in time of need, save only to help to ruine him. There is no∣thing more dangerous for a Scots King, that hath not the love of his Subjects, then when a great number are Convened together. For at such times, they use to take sudden consultations to put order to the Prince, and his familiar Minions. Of these two sort of Kings, the first is more then a Monarch, and the last less then Elective. Of the first, in Scotland too few have Reign'd, and of the last too many. Which is the cause, that the Country is not conquered to the lawful King. Which is also the cause, that the corrupt Customs and Disorders, have lasted so long, and are not to be remedied, until it please God to send three such Kings as I have named of the best sort, granting them long life, each one to succeed after other. I pray God grant that your Majesty be the first of the three. But it appears your Majesty is not well ad∣vised, while you are creating more Noblemen, making them thereby the stronger, whereas divers other Princes endeavour to make them lower and fewer: By reason of the old Emulation which hath lasted between the Kings of Scotland, and their Nobility, the Kings to Com∣mand absolutely as Sovereign Monarchs; the Nobles to withstand their absolute power, sometime by secret and indirect means, and oft∣times by plain resistance and force. Hence but few Wise, Vertuous, and Potent Kings, or Sovereign Monarchs who have obtained the Ma∣stery; whereas there have been many careless, slothful, and simple Princes, that have Ruled by wicked Councellors, and have commonly been brought to ignominious ends. The good and worthy Prince, took upon him more or less absolute Power and Authority, as he found himself able by Assistance, Substance, and Alliance, or as he found his Nobility feeble, foolish, and divided.
England believes it self to be in the better Estate by shedding the blood of their Nobility, and debarring them from the Council, and handling of the Princes Affairs; Scotland contrariwise, by sparing the blood of the Nobility, and Barons, and by making them partakers of Honours, and Offices. For the way of taking the life of a Nobleman or Baron, breeds an hundred Enemies more or less, according to the greatness of the Clan, or Surname. Of which some will lye at wait to be revenged, albeit long after, as they can find their opportunity. For the Nobility being so numerous by long evil custom, they esteem themselves to be born Councellors. And yet will not remain at Court, nor upon the Council, unless it be at Conventions, or for some par∣ticular profit. And if the Prince intend to Rule without them, they use to make sudden enterprises against him, and his familiars, with the which Tragedies, the Chronicles are filled. Then after such a violent alteration, they find themselves odious to the Prince, so that they com∣monly seek to be Masters over him from that time forth, lest he should when he sees a fit time take his revenge for their contempt. It is not best then to debar your Nobility from being upon your Council, but grant place to a number of the wisest of them, whereof they will soon be weary, and retire when their Purses begin to grow empty. Thus they will want occasion to grudge or rebel. It is meet also to gain by good deeds, part of the worthiest of your Nobility, which may be a means to keep the rest from Rebellion, when they see so many of their number daily about you, and in your favour. Princes are by Homer called Pastors, by the Romans, Fathers of the Country. None can be answerable to such honourable Names, without extream diligence, and fatherly care, to see every Officer about his duty, and streight accompt taken how they discharge the same, re∣warding Well-doers, and punishing Offenders; reward and punish∣ment being the Pillars, whereupon the Common-wealth stands. Espe∣cially take care, the first year of your marriage, for the reputation ob∣tained the first year will last long afterward, whether it be good or evil. Be earnest and liberal to get good intelligence, as well of your neigh∣bours Estate, as your own. Of the grievances of your Subjects, and their partialities, and feuds; which will open your Eyes to see sundry out-gates in matters of State. Give samiliar access to your Nobility and Barons, when they come: Chiefly to all such, who are written for to your Conventions. Give open Audience once every week at least, to Rich and Poor, receiving their Supplications, and Complaints, with strict Command to the Coun∣cil, and Master of Requests, to give them answer with sudden dis∣patch. Cause to reform the superfluity of Clothing and Banqueting, as well by your Example as Commandment. Now supposing your Majesty to be ripe fruit, and no more green, I hope your dear bought experience hath made you apt enough to re∣ceive all profitable impressions, presented to your Majesty by your faith∣ful proved Servants, and not to commit so easily the weighty charge of your Affairs to any one, or two, or three, seeing the same may have
been clearly observed, to tend highly to the prejudice of such, who have been, through flattery, or otherwise, induced to follow such courses. Such Minions having been always observed to shoot at their own marks, not valuing the endangering the Estate of the Prince, so that they gain their own ends, by enriching themselves, and their de∣penders. No Man will think strange that, during your younger years, you have been pressed and perswaded to lay the burthen of Affairs of your self upon others, who greedily courted that weighty charge above their capacity, wanting care, knowledge, and ability to bear it. But now every Man will marvel, if you should commit such a gross Error in your perfect age, thinking that your pregnant ingeny, excellent memory, and hurtful experience, may compel you to exercise the Of∣fice of a King in your own person. For whence hath proceeded so many attempts, so many enterprises, so many times the taking of your Majesties person, so many alterations and changes of Court-Servants, Councellors, and Laws; but by committing the charge and keeping of your Sheep, and Subjects, to certain ambitious and ravenous Wolfs, who chose to bring into Court for their assistance, such as they knew to be of their own qualities, that they might concur together, first how to put out of your favour, and debar from your Ear, all such ho∣nest true persons, as would oppose their pernicious proceedings, that so your Majesty might neigher see nor understand, but by their Eyes and Ears. Your Majesty can well enough remember, how oft for my part I have forewarned you of the storms which were to fall out, through the misbehaviour of such insolent, such inconstant, such scorn∣ful, and such partial persons, as have oftest possest your Ear, and carried the vogue in your Court. And what I thereby gained to my self, your Majesty knows. Yet however disadvantagious to my own particular interest, was that manner of procedure, I had this comfort, that your Majesty confessed that I had shewn you the verity, but the said con∣fession was ay behind the time, with over late Repentance. Here your Majesty may reproach me of inconstant Councils; be∣cause one year after your returning from Denmark, I told you that your Subjects were not satisfied of their expectations, nor of your pub∣lick promises, praying your Majesty yet to begin, and either be at that pains which is requisite to a right governing King, or else to sub∣mit the whole burthen of your affairs to such a number as I should name, only for one year. In doing of any of these two, I ingaged that you should find your Estate sufficiently setled at the years end. Then it pleased your Majesty to demand of me the manner that I would wish you to Rule after. Whereunto I made answer, that it did not become me, or any in Scotland to shew you the duty of a King, which you could declare better then any of your Council, seeing you could exercise the said Office as well as any King in Europe, if you were pleased only for one year to take the pains to do it your self. In so doing, I supposed that before the end of it, there should ensue such profitable effects, as you should find the Government pleasant, and no more painful, by the which means your Majesty should eschew the re∣proach of the Poet, in one of his sayings in French.
Ie hay; dit il entre les homes ceux Qui sont espris dun vouloir pansheux Et tonsiours semblet sor fy fye Practiquer lart de la Philosophie. Italian. Chi non fa quel che deue, quel haspetta non receue. Spanish. Si fueras regido par razon amuchos regiras. In four things a Prince soonest wracks himself, to be careless and slothful in his Affairs, to forsake the Counsel of his true Servants, to give ear unto unthankful flatteren, and to spend above his Rents. To return again to the purpose, it pleased Your Majesty to require for the second part, viz. What might best settle your Estate within the year? I said, todevolve the management for a year upon such as I should name, joined to the best inclined of your own Council. To that your Majesty once agreed, but when I came more to particulars, your Majesty judged it not your interest, as having been otherwise advised. Then I requested your Majesty to exercise the Office your self. Yet not long after, your Majesty submitted your self wholly and intirely to eight persons, called Octavians, and told me that you had followed my Opinion therein, and had submitted simpliciter for your time to these Eight Persons. I replied, that I spoke but for one year, and that I would have named some of the said number but not all. They were Wise Men, Learned and Politick; but the unmeeter, that they were chusers of themselves. Yet they began to do better than any had done before them, but they continued not, but divided among themselves, after they had divided the Offices of the Crown to every man one: Whereas at the first, they had given forth that they should plant mean responsible men in the said Offices, and they all too but Controulers of the said Officers. So that many began to grudge against them, seeing them become in a sudden rich. And perceiving their great backs, the whole Subjects, and His Majesty's own Domesticks to follow and depend upon them, and His Majesty to pass through the Streets with three or four as forsaken; because none hoped any more for reward at his hands, but so much as might be had for serving and depending upon the said Eight Lords. They became also hated and envied, partly for the Causes specified; as also there was great ground of jealousie, that they were intending the establishment of Popery. So that there was a Rebellion raised in Edinburgh against them, in His Majesty's presence; upon which they fled out of the Town, and since durst never take upon them the whole Government, but were content to be joined with a number of No∣blemen, and others of the Council, to the number of twenty four. But the greatest part of the Noblemen did not attend, but came when they were written for to the Conventions, as formerly they used. So all this new device turned to the old sicut antea.
You have heard how that His Majesty was advised at his return∣ing from Denmark, to imprison such as were given up to have been most unruly during his absence. But being returned, even some of those who had advised the said Warding, were the first who gave advertisement to those who were to be Warded, not without some profit for their reward, to the great discontentment of some of their Associates. Which loosed the bond which was made at Denmark by the Chancellour and his Faction, and caused every one of that number to go sundry, and to do for themselves. So that all their Plots and devices turned to change some of the Session, but there was no con∣currence, and so it stopped of it self. The Officers of the Exchequer continued a while to be the only Council. And the Nobility when they came, were kept at the door. I having at that time the honour to be one of the Exchequer, took the freedom to acquaint His Majesty that the Nobility would be of∣fended at such usage, which was so manifest a slight. I said it would do no prejudice to cause them come in, they being great men, as my L. Hamil∣toun, my L. Maxwel, and others of principal note. But His Majesty of his own nature was not changeable from the order laid down by them he liked, and reposed upon. Yet of my own accord I went forth of the Chamber, and told the Noblemen, That His Majesty was upon the ordering of his Accompts and Rents, and the daily Expences of his House; that he was asham'd they should see the Estate thereof, which was the cause they were suffered to stand without. This lit∣tle excuse was somewhat satisfactory to them. But that Order was also soon altered. Concerning the reducing of the Highlands and Isles, three of the Principals, as Maclean, Macdonel and Donald Gorin were subtilly drawn to the Court by the Chancellour, who understood of the differences among them. Every one of them being by him put in hope to get his hand above his Enemy. But at their coming, they were all three Warded in the Castle of Edinburgh, to their great astonishment. For they had each of them committed such foul murthers under trust, that it was horrible to rehearse. Being therefore apprehensive of their Lives, they dealt largely of their ill won Gold to those who had most Credit, nevertheless to terrifie them the more, to draw more from them, they were put to an Assize, and Convict of Treason. Which caused them to redouble their gifts to the Guiders, but not to the King. In such sort that there was an agreement betwixt His Majesty and them, that they should give pledges that they should pay year∣ly unto His Majesty twenty thousand marks for the Lands, of the property whereof they had no security. Of the which they had of yearly Rent, as was given in to the Exchequer, two hundred and fifty thousand Marks. This was all given them for twenty thousand Marks. And whereas before they had no right, nor security, but a forcible possession, they obtained sure infeosments by Charter, Seisin, and the Great Seal, and a remission of their foul Crimes. But short∣ly after their Pledges, who were kept in the Blackness for giving a small Sum, were released, and so the twenty thousand Marks was lost and never payed.
Here was a good Prince ill used, and abused; and the half of his Rents robbed from him; his God offended by sparing to do justice upon such bloody Tyrants, who acknowledged neither God nor the King. I had advised His Majesty to go himself to the Isles to build a Fort there, and to remain two years till all things were order'd; shewing His Majesty that the Kings of Scotland were never rich, since they left the High-lands to dwell in the Low-lands; but have ever since diminished their Rents, and increased their superfluous expences in Dyet and Clothing, following the Customs of other Nations: Which His Majesty, after inquiry, found to be most true, and His Majesty was resolved to follow the said advice, and I had promised to go with him, but all was altered by the former misrule. Matters thus car∣ried on, many began to lose hope of amendment, or to see the Re∣formation promised and expected, lamenting to see a good King so ill Councelled. Yet this time His Majesty sent for me, and at my coming to Falk∣land, where the Court remained for the Summer Season; it pleased His Majesty to tell me, how that at his coming out of Denmark, he had promised to the Queen and Council there, to place about the Queens Majesty, his Bed-fellow, good and discreet Company, which he had left too long undone. That at length having advised with himself, he thought me the fittest man to commit that charge to, de∣siring me not to refuse the just calling of my Prince, wherein I might serve as in a lawful Vocation; hecause such as ordinarily suit for Ser∣vice at Court, or for any Office, do it for their own profit; but they are more profitable for Pinces that are sought after, and are chosen for their qualities. I know, says he, That you would gladly live at home in your own house, with contentment of mind, which you think is not to be had in the troublesome alterations in Court. But you know that a man is not born for himself only, but also for the weal of his Prince and Country. And whereas your continual on∣waiting will be chargeable and expensive to you, and hindersome to your own Affairs at home, I shall ordain sufficient entertainment for your present relief, and recompence for this and your former faithful Service. I answered, That as His Majesty's most humble Servant and Sub∣ject, I never refused to obey his Commandment, however prejudi∣cial to my own interest the same should have appeared to me, and contrary to my natural inclinations: That I should resolve in that His Majesty's desire, to satisfie his expectations. Then it pleased him to tell me, That none of his Council or Chamber were privy to this his design of giving me that charge, but only one man, and that the Queen notwithstanding had got notice thereof, and supposed that I was to be put there, to inform her rightly of the Estate of the Country, and concerning her behaviour to His Majesty, and to every Nobleman and Lady, conform to their Ranks and Conditions, and to be her keeper. His Majesty the next day took occasion openly at the Table, to shew unto the Queen how that she and all her Nation were obliged to me, for the continual good report I had made of them, and the
good will I carried toward the whole Nation; and also how I had travelled many Countries, and had so great experience that both he and she might learn of me several things for their advantage, and for the well and standing of their Estate: And that the Queen his Mother found her self much relieved by my Conversation, and Ser∣vice of importance, as well here at home, as when I was imployed by her abroad. Thus far his Majesty said above my deservings, to recommend me to her Majesty, to oblige her to like me the better. Notwithstanding whereof, the Queen did shew me no great coun∣tenance, but took coldly with me, when after Dinner it pleased his Majesty to present me unto her, to be her Highness's Councellour, and Gentleman of her Chamber. Some days afterward her Maje∣sty asked me, if I was set to be her Keeper? I answered, That her Majesty was known to be descended of so noble and Princely Parents, and so well brought up, that she needed no Keeper; albeit her dig∣nity required to be honourably served with Men and Women, both young and old, in sundry occupations. She replied that I had been ill used, shewing me that at the first, when she was yet ignorant of every mans qualities, some indiscreet enviers endeavoured to give her a bad Character of me. I answered, That I was put in her Ser∣vice to instruct such indiscreet persons, and also to give them good example, how to behave themselves dutifully, and reverently unto her Majesty, to hold them aback, and that way to keep her from their rashness, and importunity. At length her Majesty appeared to be well satisfied with my Service, in which I spent years, keep∣ing sometimes the Council days, and sometime waiting upon the Exchequer, when their Majesties were together; but when they were asunder, I waited only upon the Queen. About this time, many Witches were taken in Lauthian, who de∣posed concerning some design of the Earl of Bothwel's against his Ma∣jesty's Person. Which coming to the said Earl's Ears, he entred in Ward within the Castle of Edinburgh, desiring to be tryed: Al∣ledging that the Devil, who was a lyar from the beginning, ought not to be credited, nor yet the Witches his sworn Servants. Espe∣cially a renowned Midwife called Amy Simpson affirmed, That she in company with nine other Witches, being Convened in the night be∣side Prestoun Pans, the Devil their Master being present, standing in the midst of them, a Body of Wax shapen and made by the said Amy Simpson, wrapped within a Linnen Cloth, was first delivered to the De∣vil, who after he had pronounced his Verdict, delivered the said Pi∣cture to Amy Simpson, and she to her next Neighbour, and so every one round about, saying, This is King James the Sixth, ordered to be consumed at the instance of a Nobleman Francis Earl Bothwel. Af∣terward again at their meeting by night in the Kirk of North-Berwick, where the Devil clad in a Black Gown, with a Black Hat upon his Head, preached unto a great number of them out of the Pulpit, ha∣ving like light Candles round about him. The effect of his language was to know what hurt they had done; how many they had gained to their Opinion since the last meeting; what success the melting of the Picture had, and such other vain things. And because an old silly poor Plough-man, called Gray Meilt chanced
to say, That nothing ailed the King yet, God be thanked, the Devil gave him a great blow. Thus divers among them entred in reason∣ing, marvelling that all their Devilry could do no harm to the King, as it had done to divers others. The Devil answered, Il est un home de dieu, Certainly he is a man of God, and does no wrong wittingly, but he is inclined to all Godliness, Justice and Vertue, therefore God hath preserved him in the midst of many dangers. Now after that the Devil had ended his admonitions, he came down out of the Pulpit, and caused all the company come kiss his Arse: Which they said was cold like Ice, his body hard like Iron, as they thought who hand∣led him; his Face was terrible, his Nose like the Beek of an Eagle, great burning Eyes, his Hands, and his Legs were hoary, with Claws upon his Hands and Feet like the Gryphon, he spoke with a low Voice. The Tricks and Tragedies he played then among so many men and women in this Country, will hardly get credit by posterity. The History whereof with their whole Depositions, was written by Mr. James Carmichael Minister of Hadingtoun. Among other things, some of them did shew that there was a West-land man called Richard Graham, who had a familiar Spirit, the which Richard they said could both do and tell many things, chiefly against the Earl of Bothwel. Whereupon the said Richard Graham was apprehended, and brought to Edinburgh, and being examined before his Majesty, I being pre∣sent, he granted that he had a familiar Spirit, which shewed him sun∣dry things; but he denyed that he was a Witch, or had any frequen∣tation with them. But when it was answered again, how that Amy Simpson had declared, that he caused the Earl of Bothwel address him to her: He granted that to be true, and that the Earl of Bothwel had knowledge of him by Effe Machalloun, and Barbary Naper, Edinburgh Women. Whereupon he was sent for by the Earl Bothwel, who re∣quired his help to cause the King's Majesty his Master to like well of him. And to that effect he gave the said Earl some Drug, or Herb, willing him at some convenient time to touch therewith His Maje∣sties face. Which being done by the said Earl ineffectually, he dealt again with the said Richard, to get his Majesty wracked, as Richard alledged. Who said, he could not do such things himself, but that a notable Midwife who was a Witch called Amy Simpson, could bring any such purpose to pass. Thus far the said Richard Graham affir∣med divers times before the Council; nevertheless he was burnt with the said Simpson, and many other Witches. This Richard alledged, That it was certain what is reported of the Fairies, and that Spirits may take a form and be seen though not felt. The Earl of Bothwel, as I said, was entred to Ward within the Ca∣stle of Edinburgh, his Majesty not willing to credit his Devilish Ac∣cusers, but the Council thought fit that for a while he should pass his time in other Countries, and so to be set free upon some Articles, and Conditions. But some of those who were appointed to deal with him endeavoured to make advantage of him to be his friends. Others who were desirous to have the State troubled, made him false adver∣tisements, as if his life had been in danger. Which caused him resolve to save himself over the Castle Wall, and retire himself to Caithness;
whence he was shortly after sent for by such as were malecontents, and others who were desirous to fish in troubled waters, alledging they had made him friends enough in Court, and that there was a fair enterprise devised, to take the King, and kill the Chancellour. Upon which information, he was easily perswaded to come, and make him∣self head of that enterprise. He therefore not long after accompanied with James Douglas some∣time Laird of Spott, the Laird of Nidrie, Mr. John Colvil, and some others, entred into the Kings Palace late, about supper time, by the passage of an old Stable, not without secret intelligence of some about his Majesty. So soon as they were all within the Close of the Palace, they cryed Justice, Justice, a Bothwel, a Bothwel, and had been Masters of the whole, were it not that James Douglas of Spot after that he had taken the Keys from the Porters, entred within the Porters Lodge to relieve some of his Servants, who were kept there in Prison, and had been examined upon suspicion of the slaughter of his good Father the old Laird of Spott, where he met with some resistance from the Porters, the noise whereof did rise sooner then was the intention of the enterprisers. Which allarmed his Majesty, the Chancellour and others, to shut and fortifie their Chamber-doors, and to make resi∣stance till some relief came from the Cannon-gate, conducted by my Brother Sir Andrew Melvil of Garvock, Master of his Majesty's Hous∣hold, who knew a secret passage through the Abby Church, and en∣tred by the same in Armour. Whereof the Earl of Bothwel and his Company being advertised, they stole quietly through the Galleries unto the part where they entred the Palace, and fled without any great harm, as God would have it. In his out-going, he chanced to meet with John Shaw Master Stabler to his Majesty, whom he slew, together with his Brother, being in a rage that the enterprise had failed. But divers of his Company were apprehended by my said Brother, and by others, who were all Executed the next day. Their manner of proceeding was, first the Laird of Spott with a Company took the Keys, and made themselves Masters of the Gates of the Palace; another Company was directed to the Chancellour, who was sitting at his Supper, and my Brother Sir Robert with him, and they had been taken, had it not been for the Laird of Spot's earnest∣ness to relieve his Servants. The bruit whereof caused the Chan∣cellour to flee out of his Hall to his Chamber, and shut the Door af∣ter him. So that my said Brother got no entry, but retired himself to another void house, whither none pursued him, neither was he in any fear for himself. The Earl of Bothwel accompanied with Mr. John Colvil and others, addressed themselves unto the Queens Chamber door, where he sup∣posed the King would be found. But the door was defended well by Hary Lindsay of Kilfans, Master of her Houshold. In the mean time, his Majesty was conveyed up to that Tower above the said Chamber, after the door of her Majesties Chamber had been broken with Hammers in divers parts, and that Mr. John Colvil had caused bring fire to burn it. The door of the Chancellour's Chamber was manfully defended by himself. He caused his men to shoot out of the Windows continually, and through doors. Where Robert Scot,
Brother to the Laird of Balweary was shot through the thigh. The Chancellour took courage when he heard my Brothers voice, and then the enterprisers fled as said is. At their first entry within the Palace, I was sitting at Supper with my Lord Duke of Lennox, who incontinently took his Sword, and pressed forth. But he had no company, and the place already was full of Enemies: We were compelled to fortifie the Doors and Stairs, with Tables, Forms and Stools, and be spectators of that strange hurly burly for the space of an hour, beholding with Torch-light forth of the Duke's Gallery their reeling, their rumbling with Halberts, the clacking of their Culverins, and Pistols, the dunting of Mells and Hammers, and their crying for Justice. Now there was a passage be∣twixt the Chancellour's Chamber and my Lord Duke's by a Stair, and during this fray the Chancellour came up the said Stair, and desired entry into my Lord Duke's Chamber. My Lord Duke by my ad∣vice, desired him to cause his men debate at the nether door so long as they might, and offered to receive himself within the Chamber. Which the Chancellour took in an evil part, and suspected my Lord Duke: And so returned back again to his own Chamber, and deba∣ted the best he could, as said is. So soon as my Lord Duke saw a company of friends within the Close, he went forth to pursue the Earl of Bothwel and his Company, but the night was dark, and they took them speedily to their horses and escaped. They being retired, we got entry to her Majesties Chamber, whi∣ther the King was for the time come down. Where His Majesty discoursed with me a good space, concerning this terrible attempt, and of his many hard misfortunes. Where I left not to tell his Majesty some of the special Causes of the said enterprises, and how that many of them might have been prevented by a prudent and careful Government, as may be sufficiently marked and considered by the many admonitions, and former advertisements made unto his Majesty before all the accidents that chanced unto him, and also in this. For two days before this enterprise, my Brother Sir Robert and I had got intelligence, that some such design was shortly to be put in execution by the Earl of Bothwel, and his Complices against his Majesty, and the guiders of Court. Whereof His Majesty made no accompt, though thereof advertised. But was the next day going to hunting, which coming to my Brother's Ears, he rose out of his Bed in his Shirt, only in his Night-Gown; and came forth to the utter Close of the Abby, and took his Majesty by the Bridle, (for he was already upon Horse-back) using many perswasions to have stayed him, though all in vain: For we were in doubt whether the enter∣prise would be executed in the Fields, or in the Palace. After this attempt, his Majesty went up to the Town of Edin∣burgh for his greater security; where there were divers new enter∣prises made, whereof my Brother Sir Robert getting frequent adver∣tisements, sometimes to keep his Lodging such a night, sometimes to be well accompanied such a night, as being one who had done plea∣sures to many, and was not hated, nor would never have been in dan∣ger, so that he could but save himself from the first fury of the at∣tempters.
This hath been the hard estate of this good King, occasioned by his laying the burthen of his Affairs upon a few hated and envied for their Ambition, Covetousness, and Partialities, who so soon as they had attained so weighty a charge, took only care how to make them∣selves soon rich, most commonly by the wrack of others. So blind∣ly transported by ambition and greediness, that they neglected both King and Common-Wealth, satisfying the King with fair language, though displeasing the Country with foul deeds; caring only how to discredit and bear down so many honest men, as they knew would discover their misbehaviour, or who would oppose them in their pernicious designs, which I may justly testifie for my part. Not long after this, a new enterprise was made, to make a great alteration in Court, by some Courtiers among themselves. When as the Master of Glams was Treasurer, Sir George Hume Master of the Wardrobe, my Lord of Spinze Gentleman of the Chamber, and young Logie; also Sir John Maitland, Lord Thirlstane Chancellour, Sir Ro∣bert my Brother Treasurer depute, had the principal handling of the Office by disbursing and receiving; the Provost of Lincludin Col∣lector, and Seatoun of Parbroth Controller, Sir Richard Cockburn of Clarkingtoun Secretary, and I was one of the Privy Council, and Gentleman of her Majesties Chamber; my Lord Duke of Lennox, my Lord Hume, and my Lord of Mar were drawn upon this course, to reform the abuses at Court as was alledged. There was no good liking between the Master of Glams, and my Lord of Spiny, chiefly for the feud between the Houses of Crauford and Glams. At that time my Lord Spiny was in great favour with his Majesty, and some∣time his Bed-fellow: And upon that accompt he was envied. And besides the foresaid feud, he was accused to have been a dealer with the Earl of Bothwel, and upon that was for a time decourted. Young Logie was also thought to have had much dealing with the said Earl and was accused, taken and warded for the same. But he escaped out of a Window in Dalkieth, by the help of a Danish Gentlewoman, whom he afterward married. There was great hatred betwixt my Lord Duke and the Chancel∣lour. For after the late enterprise in the Abby, the Chancellour caused close up the passage with Stone and Lime that was betwixt their Lodgings, whereby he gave the Duke to understand that he suspected him, which was too rashly done by the said Chancellour. For after that, the new alteration was intended, and called the enterprise made at Dalkieth, my Lord Duke, and my Lord Hume riding from Dal∣kieth to Edinburgh, met the Chancellour well accompanied riding to Court, where the said Lords made a mint to set upon him to slay him; yet the matter was at that time taken up by Alexander Hoom of North-Berwick, and my Brother Sir Robert, who were in company with the Chancellour for the time. But shortly after that the Chan∣cellour left the Court, retiring himself to his House, and in his absence a great number of faults were charged upon him, and among the rest, how he had so long hindered the King's marriage, whereby the Queens Majesty was made his great Enemy. The Master of Glams also would fain have had my Brother out of his Office, to brook the whole Office of Treasurer alone. Therefore the Laird of Carmichall
Captain of the Guard, was easily perswaded to cause a number of the Guard, who stood with Culverins at the Gates of the House of Dalkieth, to boast to slay my said Brother divers times in his passing in and out of the same house, supposing that my Brother should fear his Life, and leave the Court, as the Chancellour had done. But my Brother made no accompt of their boasts; for he knew the Duke was his friend, and that he had but few enemies: Therefore he frequen∣ted the Court more frequently then formerly, but came always well accompanied; for they could get nothing to lay to his charge, but said to his Majesty that he was too lavish in his Office to be a Trea∣surer, over easie in his Compositions, and over gentle to such as were denounced to the horn. The Queens Majesty according to her cu∣stom, whenever she understands that his Majesty by wrong informa∣tion is stirred up against any honest Servant, or Subject, she inconti∣nently intercedes for them, and useth great diligence to get sure knowledge of the verity, that she may the boldlier speak in their sa∣vour. Therefore so soon as her Majesty understood that they were dealing against Sir Robert my Brother, it pleased her to speak far in his favour, declaring how that at her first Landing in this Country his Majesty had presented him to her, praising him as one who had been a true and faithful Servant to the Queen Regent his Grand-mo∣ther, to the Queen his Mother, and to himself, willing her to look upon him as such, and to follow his advice. Also many of the Lords took my Brother's part in such sort, as he still kept the Court and his Office. When this alteration was made I was absent, and at my coming again to Court, his Majesty told me of the Chancellour's fearful re∣treat, and that he was in no danger in his company. I answered again, that the Prince's presence should be a safeguard, albeit it was not always so in Scotland. It appeared that his Majesty was some∣what altered upon the Chancellour, my Lord Spiny, and my Brother. For as the Master of Glams would have had his Office, so others mis∣liked him, because he haunted the Chancellour's company, and was lookt upon as his great friend, who was generally hated. So that his Majesty was moved to think and say that he was not meet for his Office. I being present, answered, That it grieved me to the heart, to hear and see so good a Prince always invironed with bad company, causing him so oft without reason or offence to cast off his most faithful Servants; and that it would be seen, let men serve ne∣ver so well, if they were misrepresented by such as had his Ear, it availed nothing. To this His Majesty replied, That he knew my Brother to be a true Servant, but too gentle, liberal, and easie in his Compositions: he declared that he would never alter upon him nor me, so that he continued constant against the intentions of those who were about him. Here it may be seen how necessary it is to have good friends about the Prince, and how hurtful and dangerous it is for a Courtier, when such as have the Prince's Ear are his Enemies. For in that case, whatsoever his good Service hath been, he is in hazard of being cou∣ped and wracked.
About this time the Earl of Arran, who had been absent ever since the Road of Sterling, came to Court, and spoke with his Majesty, and pretended to have obtained again his Office of Chancellour. His Majesty had still some favour for him, and would have been con∣tent of his company. But others held him back, and shortly after that he was surprised, and slain by James Douglas of Park-head, in revenge of the death of the Earl of Mortoun his Uncle. Little dili∣gence was made to revenge the same, many thinking strange that he was permitted so long to live, in respect of his arrogant and in∣solent behaviour, when he had the Court at his will. Now the Chancellour, who was decourted at the alteration made in Dalkieth, did what he could to procure his Majesties favour, which at last he obtained, and was again introduced. But at first, the Queen would not see him; yet at length by the moyan of Sir Robert Ker of Cesfoord, who had married his Brother's Daughter, his peace was also made with her Majesty. About this time there did arise great strife and disorders in the Country, between the Earls of Huntly and Murray; between the Earls of Caithness and Sunderland; between my Lords Hamiltoun and An∣gus: for divers of them had made suits, and obtained Commissions with ample Priviledges over others Lands, as well as over their own, which ingendred many discords. Whereof I advertised his Majesty, that order might be taken therewith. Whereupon the Council be∣ing Convened, they ordered Letters to be directed in his Majesties name, charging them all to desist from Hostility, and to compear before the Privy-Council at prefixed days. First the Earls of Mur∣ray and Huntly compeared, there being a Gentleman of the name of Gordoun killed with a shot out of the house of Tarnua by the Earl of Murray. Both the parties being come strong to Court, were com∣manded to keep their Lodgings, for preventing of trouble before their compearing. When his Majesty was advised by the Chancel∣lour what to do in reference to that matter, then his Majesty pro∣posed the same to the Council; to wit, three points, either present Agreement to be made, or Warding both the Earls, or Caution to be taken of both; then to send home the one, and hold the other still at Court for a while. His Majesty following forth this propo∣sition, declared first, That the parties could not be agreed, because of the hot blood of the Laird of Cluny, Gordoun's Brother lately slain. Concerning Warding, he alledged, That the Castle of Edinburgh had enough of Prisoners already; that the Abby was not a fit Prison for No∣blemen. So that it would be fittest to take Caution of them both, and to hold them sundry, to send home the one, and retain the other at Court for a season. The Chancellour was of that opinion, and sundry others who used to depend upon such who had the chief handling. Then his Majesty commanded me to tell my Opinion, which was different from this: I advised present agreement, supposing that the Earl of Huntly for his Majesties pleasure, and in obedience to his command, would not refuse to compound the matter by a present up-taking, seeing he was come so great a journy with his Lady and whole Houshold, to remain all Winter at Edinburgh. At this the Chancellour took me up tantingly, saying, that the Earl of Huntly would tarry at Court all
that day till to morrow, and would part no sooner; for he had pro∣mised to the said Earl that advantage over his Enemy, albeit I knew the Earl's intention was to tarry all Winter at Court. The Justice Clark was of my judgment, but said, that it appeared his Majesty with the Chancellour had already concluded to send Huntly home, and keep the other at Court. So soon as Huntly went home, wanting his competitor, he triumphed and took sundry advantages upon the Earl of Murray's Land, giving the Earl just occasion of complaint, and getting no redress, he retired himself from the Court, and became so malecontent, that he took plain part with the Earl of Bothwel, who was still upon his enterprises. The Earl of Huntly being advertised that his Adversary was an Out-law with the Earl of Bothwel, he returned again to Court, to get yet some advantage upon him. But in the mean time the Lord Ochiltrie endeavoured to agree them by consent of his Majesty. He drew the Earl of Murray to Dunibirsil to be near hand, that Condi∣tions and Articles might be added, and paired at the pleasure of their friends. The Earl of Huntly being also made privy to his coming to Dunibirsil, obtained incontinently a Commission (appearing therein to do his Majesty acceptable Service) to pursue by Fire and Sword the Earl of Bothwel, and all his partakers. Little knew his Majesty that under this general, he was minded to assail the Earl of Murray at his own house, to kill him, as he did to the regret of many. But the Lord Ochiltrie took such a despight that his friend was so slain, under communing, as he alledged, that he took plain part with the Earl of Bothwel, and so did divers others in revenge of his quarrel, incouraging the said Earl to assail his Majesty within his Palace of Falkland, having divers in Court familiar enough with his Majesty upon the said conspiracy with him, whose Council his Majesty fol∣lowed most. So that they drew him into a Net, to abide still in Falkland, notwithstanding of the many sure advertisements that had been made unto him. Such hath been his Majesty's hard fortune in many such straits. The few number who were faithful to, and careful of his Majesty, counselled him after the first advertisement, to pass the Coupar, and Convene with all possible diligence the Barons of Fiffe for his defence. But such as sought his wrack, persuaded him to tarry and delay, al∣ledging that they had sure advertisement, that the Earl of Lauthian would not come out of Lauthian, till such a day, which would have been two days longer and behind the day which he kept; for he came to Falkland two days sooner. This advice was given, that his Majesty might be surprised before he could either enter within the Tower of Falkland, or be provided with any forces to defend him. And because they knew my Brother and me to be careful for him, they advised his Majesty to send us home to our houses that same night, that we understood the Earl of Bothwel would be there, and had so told his Majesty, but he believed his abusers better. We gave his Majesty counsel to ride quietly to Bambrigh, that there he might when he pleased take a Boat and go over to Angus, where he would have leisure to Convene the Towns of Pearth and Dundie, and the Country thereabouts. But this advice was also overthrown, by those who were upon the contrary part.
Thus we being commanded by his Majesty to ride home, and to warn the Country in case he were besieged within the Tower, we obeyed. My Brother that same night, by the way, was advertised by one of the Earl of Bothwel's company, that he was already in Fiffe, and would be in Falkland against Supper-time. Upon which adver∣tisement he sent his Gentleman called Robert Auflock, to acquaint his Majesty therewith, and to request him to enter within the Tower in due time. When the said Robert declared the matter unto his Maje∣sty, they all laughed him to scorn, calling him a fool. The said Robert returning malecontent to be so mocked, met the Earl of Both∣wel and his Company upon the highth of the Lummonds, when it was already dark night, and turned incontinently, as if he had been one of their Company. He used great diligence to be first at his Maje∣sty. Entring within the Palace of Falkland, he closed the Gates him∣self, and cryed continually to cause his Majesty enter within the Tow∣er, who at length believed him, and mocked him no more. The Earl of Bothwel at his coming had Potards to break up Gates, and Doors. It was not without ground alledged, That some of those who shot out of the Tower for his Majesties defence, charged their Culverins with Paper. But some of his Majesties Houshold Officers shot out Bullets, which gave the Earl and his Company a great scare; as also his being within the Tower before he was surprised. And supposing that the Country would gather together, the said Earl and his Company retired, and fled, none pursuing them: Whereas a few might easily have overtaken, and overthrown them. That same night I lay in my Boots upon my Bed, expecting word from Falk∣land, where there was one left to be ready for that effect. At whose back-coming, I with other friends and neighbours, did ride to Con∣vene the Country about Coupar, to have rescued his Majesty. But the King immediately sent me advertisement, that the Earl was fled, yet he desired me to bring these forward, whom he knew I would Convene for his relief, as they did to the number of 3000 that af∣ternoon. Thus God miraculously delivered his Majesty as he had done divers times before. About this time came to his Majesty an honest Gentleman from Ireland, called who made offers of consequence to his Majesty. Whereof the Queen of England was incontinently adver∣tised, and desired to require the said Gentleman to be delivered to her. Which the most part of the Council, councelled his Majesty to do. But the Justice Clark, my Borther, and I, were of a contrary opinion. Which deed did great harm to the settlement of his Majesty's Af∣fairs in England and Ireland. This I speak with great regrate, be∣cause it was so far against his Majesties own mind, and yet he suffe∣red it to be done, because the chief Ring-leaders advised it, who have been always won to the devotion of England. Now the Prince being born at Sterling, the day of in the year his Majesty thought fit to send Ambassadours to England, Denmark, France and Flanders, to require their Ambassa∣dours to be sent to the Baptism of the Prince his first-born Son. The Council were commanded to nominate such as were meetest to be sent on that message, as they did. Yet some obtained that Com∣mission,
who were very unmeet for that Errand, as Sir William Keeth, for he could neither speak Latine, French nor Flemings. The Laird of Easter Weems procured to carry the Commission to France, and also to England, because he was to go thither about his own Affairs, being the King of France his Servant. But Mr. Peter Young sped best, who sent to Denmark, and to the Dukes of Mecklburg, and Brunswick, for he got three fair chains. But the King of France, nor the Queen of England gave nothing; which they would have been ingaged to do, if Ambassadours had been sent to them express. Neither sent the King any Ambassadours here at that time. The Queen of England was once resolved to have done the same, till she was advertised by her own Ambassadour in France, that the King was resolved to send none. Then very late she sent the Earl of Sussex, to let us see that she would ever be a ready friend, when France would refuse and lye back. On the other part the Dukes of Mecklburg and Brunswick were discontent that they were so far slighted, as not each of them to be thought worthy of an Express. A special day was appointed for So∣lemnizing the said Baptism. The Ambassadors of Denmark and Dutch∣land arrived almost together. His Majesty had sent for me to be there at their coming, to receive them, and to entertain them. But the Ambassadours of Mecklburg and Brunswick, would not ride out of Leeth in company with the Danish Ambassadour, when they were Convoyed up to Edinburgh, but desired a Convoy apart. A few days after them, arrived the Ambassadours of the Estates of the Low-Countries, to wit, Monsieur de Broderod, and Monsieur Fulk great Treasurer of Holland and Zeland, who landed at New-haven; where I was well accompanied to receive them, having Horse and Footmantles in readiness to carry them up to Edinburgh to their Lodg∣ings. A little before the landing of the said Ambassadours the day of the Baptism was delayed, because there was neither word of an Ambas∣sadour from France, or Ireland, and the King's Chappel in the Castle of Sterling which was cast down to be built again in a better form, was not yet compleated. So that the Ambassadours were ordered to re∣main in Edinburgh till all might be put in good order. Therefore his Majesty appointed the Master of his Houshold, and my Lord Tung∣land, my Brother, together with me, to entertain them upon his char∣ges, and also to bear them company. After that they had tarried longer in Edinburgh (there being no appearance of any Ambassadours from France or England) we were commanded with some others of the Council to Convoy them to Sterling, where his Majesty made his excuse that they were so long delayed at Edinburgh. But they alledged, they had great contentment in our company. Which his Majesty forgot not to declare before the whole Council, giving me thanks, alledging, that I had done him good Offices, and this among the rest, which he would never forget, and that he had three other of my Bothers all fit for such matters, and for forreign Affairs. Now being in doubt of the English Ambassadour's, the Ceremony was to be Solemnized without longer delay. In the mean time, there came word that the Earl of Sussex was upon his journey toward Scot∣land, for the Queen his Mistress, on whom the action stayed. The
day of the Solemnity, there was great business for their Honours and Seats, that being agreed, there was an empty Chair set before the rest for the King of France his Ambassadour. The order of the Banquet and Triumph I leave to others to set out. When the Ambassadours had Audience of the Queens Majesty, I was appointed to stand a little behind, and next unto her Majesty. To the English, Danish, and Dutch Ambassadours, her Majesty made answer her self. But though she could speak seemingly French, yet she rounded in my Ear, to declare her answer to the Ambassadour of the States of Holland. Then every one of them by order, gave their Presents. The Jewels of Perecious Stones the Queen received in her own hand, and then delivered them unto me to put them again in their Cases, and lay them upon a Table which was prepa∣red in the mids of the Chamber to set them upon. The Queen of England's had a great show, being a fair Cupboard of Silver over∣guilt, cunningly wrought, and some Cups of massy Gold. The Am∣bassadour of the States presented a Golden Box, wherein was written in Parchment in Letters of Gold, A gift of a yearly Pension to the Prince of five thousand  by year, with great Cups of massy Gold, two especially, which were so weighty, that it was all that I could lift them, and set them down upon the said Table. I leave it to others to set down the weight and value. But I say these which were of Gold, which should have been kept in store to posterity, were soon melted, and disposed: But if they had been preserved, as they ought to have been, those who advised to break them would have wanted their part. All these Ambassadours being dispatched, and well rewarded, those of Denmark were advised by John Lindsay of Monmuire to cause with all diligence send new Ambassadours, to require the Contract of mar∣riage made in Denmark to be fulfilled: Alledging that the Chancel∣lour who had made it, had left out the Rents of the Abby of Dum∣farmling fraudfully, and had taken in fee to himself, all the Lord∣ship of Mussilburgh. For this end two Ambassadours were sent from Denmark, upon whom I was appointed to attend, to see them well entertained. As they were well instructed, so they happened upon a meet time, for the Chancellour was for the time decourted, and my Brother was Ambassadour for his Majesty in England. So the Chan∣cellour was caused to renounce his part. And because my Brother Sir Robert was absent, young Sir Robert his Son, and I, obliged us that his part, which was 13 Chalders of Victual should be also renounced at his return, which was accordingly done. His Majesty promised to him as much heritage in an other part, in respect that his gift was obtained long before the Contract of marriage. Divers others who had portions of these Lands, were likewise compelled to renounce, ei∣ther voluntarily, or by a new Law made for that effect. FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table OF THE Principal MATTER contained in this BOOK. A ABot of Dumfarmling is sent by the King's Lords to meet the Earl of Lennox in his passage to England, p. 106. His Message to the Queen, and her Answer thereun∣to, ibid. Hastens to the King at St. Andrews, where he behaves himself with great dissimulation, 135. En∣deavours by Gold to curry favour with Colonel Stuart, 137. Is after Imprisoned in Lockleven, ibid. Admiral of France his death con∣spired by Captain Charry, p. 38. but being discovered is killed by Monsieur Chattelier, ibid. Ambassadors sent from Denmark, three joined together in Commission to King James, arrive in Scotland, p. 162. Their Commission and De∣mands, ill usage and delays, visited by Mr. Wotton, who was very kind to them, ibid. Upon his instigation they inform his Majesty of Reflecti∣ons upon their Master by his Sub∣jects, and of their rudeness, p. 163. The Ambassadours slight the Earl of Arran, having known him in Den∣mark but a private Soldier, ibid. Are Banquetted in his Majesties name, 165. Take leave of his Maje∣sty, 166. Part well satisfied after they had received their Presents on Ship-board from the hands of the Author James Melvil, p. 167. Pro∣mising to be good instruments of A∣mity, ibid. Ambassadours arrive in Scot∣land from several parts upon the birth of Prince Henry, p. 202. Their several rich Presents to the Queen at that time, p. 204. Are all dis∣patcht and well rewarded, ibid. Areskine Alexander, the Gover∣nour of King James during his Mi∣nority, p. 125. Is made Master of Mar. p. 126. Arran Earl, see James Stuart. Athol Earl, made Chancellour, p. 126. Hath 1000 men ready to take St. Johnstoun, but being dis∣suaded from it by the Author, de∣sires him to write to his Majesty for a License for him and his to remain at home, p. 169. Which he did, and procur'd for him, ibid. Is written unto to come to the Parliament at Lithgow, p. 170. Atry Lord, Uncle to the Earl of Marshal nominated by the King's Council to go Ambassadour to Den∣mark with the Author to Treat a∣bout the King's Marriage, p. 177. Comes to Court, but finds the Coun∣cil not so earnest as his Majesty, p. 177, and 178. Returns home, ex∣cusing himself as sickly and Aged, p. 178. Aubonie Lord, returns from France, p. 127. Being the King's Favourite, ibid. is made Lord Dal∣kieth, and after Duke of Lennox, 128. A short Character of him, ibid. led by evil Counsel to dangerous
courses, p. 131. Understanding that his Majesty was in the hands of the other Lords he retires to Dumbar∣toun, p. 132. Passeth through Eng∣land to France, p. 133. And dies shortly after, ibid. B BAlfour Sir James, Captain of Edinburgh Castle, p. 81. de∣livers the Castle of Edinburgh to the Laird of Grange, p. 90. Is ta∣ken out of his own House, and com∣mitted by the Regent's order, p. 100. Wins the Regent's familiars with Gold, p. 102. Balnears Henry turns from the Protestant to the Popish Religion, p. 7. And by the perswasion of Ab∣bot Pally breaks the intended Match between Prince Edward and Mary Queen of Scots, ibid. Barnbarrow Laird, sent Ambas∣sadour to Denmark upon the Au∣thor's refusal, p. 176. Returns with his Fellow-Commissioner, their Pow∣er being insufficient, having no Com∣mission to conclude, ibid. Bassingtoun, a Learned Scots∣man and Travellour, his Story con∣cerning the Affairs of England and Scotland, p. 92. Bastien, a French-man, at the Banquet after the Baptism of King James, devised a Machine that gave great distate and disturbance, p. 76, and 77. Beaton David, Cardinal, makes King James the Fifth's Will when dying, which he dictated, which was therefore annulled, p. 6. is slain in his Castle at St. Andrews, p. 7. by the complotting of Sir George Dou∣glas, &c. ibid. Bedford Earl, one of Queen Ma∣ry's surest Friends in England, p. 76. Arrives in Scotland with several other Persons of Quality, ibid. de∣parts, and they are all rewarded, 77. desires the Author to beseech the Queen to entertain the King as formerly, and not to slight him, ibid. Bettancourt Master of the Hous∣hold to the Queen Regent of Scot∣land, brings instructions to destroy Hereticks, p. 24. which she observes being menaced, ibid. Bishop of St. Andrews designed Ambassadour for England, p. 194. Disdained and dishonoured in Eng∣land, p. 150. The reason, ibid. Is no∣minated to be sent Ambassadour to Denmark, p. 176. Bishop Thomas, a Scotsman, sends a Letter from England to the Authour about the report of the Queen's marriage with her Hus∣band's Murtherer, together with his Character, disswading her from it, p. 79. Which he shew'd the Queen, and was forced to flie for't, ibid. Bothwel Adam, Bishop of Ork∣ny, p. 84. Bothwel Earl, is sent by the Queen to clear the Borders of Thieves upon the departure of those that at∣tended the Prince's Baptism, p. 77. He and Earl Huntly attempt the slaughter of the Earl of Murray, but were prevented, ibid. Is suspe∣cted of some enterprise against the King, p. 78. The Earl of Orkny tells him, it would cost him his life if he stayed at Edinburgh, ibid. Lays a Train of Powder and blows up the King's Lodgings, ibid. Upon a rumour of his murthering the King he calls an Assize of Lords, and is acquitted, ibid. He with a great company seizeth the Queen, p. 80. A number of Noblemen meet at Edin∣burgh, and declare it is the Queen's interest to marry him, which he did, having at that time the Lord Hunt∣ly's Sister to Wife, ibid. Intends to kill Secretary Lidington in the Queen's Chamber, which had been effected, had not the Queen inter∣posed, being married, he was very earnest to get the young Prince into his hands, ibid. Flies from Edin∣burgh,
and takes the Queen with him wherever he goes, p. 82. Con∣venes a great number of his Friends against the Lords, resolving to fight them, ibid. Challengeth to fight any one that would maintain he mur∣thered the King, but refuseth the Lord Grange and Tallibardine, be∣cause but Barons, p. 83. Then the Lord Lindsay offered the Combat, but he coldly declin'd it, ibid. Flies to the Castle of Dunbar, and from thence to Sheatland, p. 84. Is pur∣sued by two Ships of the Lord Grange's, and he saved himself in a little Boat, p. 85. Flies to Den∣mark, is kept there close Prisoner, and dies mad and miserable, ibid. Bothwel and others endeavour to take the King and keep him, p. 175. but fail in their Enterprise, ibid. Labour with the-King to send Sir John Seatoun to Spain, ibid. Bothwel Francis, accused of a de∣sign against his Majesty, Wards him∣self in the Castle of Edinburgh, p. 194. Desiring to be Tried for the same, ibid. Escapes over the Castle∣wall, and retires to Caithnesse, p. 195. Is sent for by some Male-con∣tents, who design'd to take the King and kill the Chancellour, p. 196. With whom he joyn'd and headed them, ibid. He with others enters into the King's Palace by night, ibid. Their proceedings therein, p. 197. Steals away quietly, but kills John Shaw Master Stabler to his Maje∣sty, and his Brother, ibid. He and his Party makes a second attempt on his Majesty in Falkland, p. 202. but finding resistance, he and his Company fled, ibid. Bowes Mr. Ambassadour Resi∣dent at Edinburgh from Queen Eli∣zabeth, p. 142. Attends upon Wal∣singham, when he first received Au∣dience, p. 147. A long time Resident in Scotland, p. 150. Informs the English of the Bishop of St. An∣drews Qualities, when he was sent Ambassadour to Queen Elizabeth, ibid. Broderade Monsieur, and Mon∣sieur Fulke sent Ambassadours to Scotland, from the States of Hol∣land, and arrives there upon the birth of the Prince, p. 203. Buchanan Master to King James, p. 125. His Character, ibid. Buccleugh Laird, Wise, True, Stout and Modest, p. 113. Burleigh Lord, see Cecil. C CAiro Mr. Queen Elizabeths Cousin, P. 141. Calis promised to be restored to England after the loss of St. Quin∣tins, p. 22, and 23. Caraffe Cardinal, sent Legat to France from the Pope, p. 19. The ground of his Embassy, ibid. Is strangled by Pope Pius the 4th, p. 20. And why, ibid. Cardanus an Italian Magician, Cures the Bishop of St. Andrews of his Distemper, p. 14. Caprintoun Laird, the Earl of Arran's Uncle, is sent by his Maje∣sty to reprove the Earl, p. 155. Carmichael James Minist. of Hadingtoun writes the History of those Tricks the Devil play'd in Scotland, p. 195. And the whole deposition of the Witnesses upon the account of the Earl of Bothwel, ibid. Carmichael Laird, laments to the Author, the ingratitude of the Re∣gent of Scotland, Mortoun, p. 124. Follows the Authors Counsel, and becomes a great Courtier, p. 125. But proves afterwards ingrateful to the Author, who promoted him, ibid. Is made Captain of the Guards to King James, p. 199. Boasts that he would kill Sir Robert Melvil, ibid. Casimire Duke, Second Son to the Elector Palatine, is about the
Contracting a Marriage with the Duke of Lorrain's Eldest Sister, p. 31. But prov'd ineffectual, ibid. The reason thereof, p. 32. Finding no probability of a Match with Queen Elizabeth, he Marries the Elector of Saxonies Eldest Daught∣er, p. 40. Cavatius the Learned Mathematical Tutor of the Bishop of Valence, is imprisoned by the French King, p. 13. The reason why, ibid. Cecil Secretary, promiseth re∣wards to Ruxby by Letter, but it was discovered to the Queen, p. 69. Pretends to be her friend, is the first person that whispered to her the News of the Birth of the Prince, ibid. Informes the Queen that the Duke of Norfolk was come to Court, and that she should seize him which was done accordingly, p. 99, and 100. Created afterward Lord Bur∣leigh, and causeth Dallison to be sent Agent into Scotland, p. 157. Is discontented that Walsingham was too precise and would not confer with the Earl of Arran, ibid. Charles the 9th of France suc∣ceeds Francis the Second, p. 29. Chattellerault imprisoned in E∣dinbrugh Castle, p. 101. Set at li∣berty through the mediation of the Lord Grange. Clergy of Scotland use their utmost endeavours to prevent the interview of Henry the 8, and his Nephew King James the 5th of Scotland, p. 2. Clark Alexander, Povost of E∣dingbrugh, p. 129. Cockburne Sir Richard, Secre∣tary to King James, p. 198, Colvil John, and Colonel Steward are sent to the Convention at St. An∣drews, and return, p. 133. Disa∣gree in their Commission, ibid. Colvil and others imprisoned, p. 137. Constable of France entertains the Author with design to promote him, p. 15. Is sent with 16000 Men to keep the Spaniard from entring upon the Frontiers of France, p. 20. His Discourse and Passion with an En∣thusiast who Fore-told his Mis-for∣tune, ibid. His Noble and Resolute Answer to the Master of his Horse, who advised him to fly, p. 21. He being overthrown by a Party of Spaniards, and his Men all slain de∣sired to be kill'd, but was shot in the Thigh and taken Prisoner, p. 22. Is Commanded by Francis the Second, King of France to retire, p. 28. Yet still offers to retain the Author in his Service, which he accepts, ibid. Is sent for to Court, but delays coming, and in the mean time the French King dies, and then he Posts to Court like the Constable of France, Com∣manding all the Guards, p. 29. The Duke of Guise and the Cardinal his Brother are Commanded out of Town, and the Constable is kindly received by the Queen-Mother, p. 29, and 30. A Convention is appointed for or∣dering his Majesties Affairs after his return from Denmark, p. 184. But few of the Nobility appear there, being slighted at the Queens Corona∣tion as they supposed, ibid. Refor∣mation is designed by this Conven∣tion, but nothing performed, ibid. Condingknows Laird, is made Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh, p. 174. Desires a Commission to go Ambassador for England, but is de∣nied, ibid. The Council of England conclude to take away the life of Mary Queen of Scotland, Prisoner in England, p. 171. Falsly alledging that She practiced against the State, p. 172. Think fit to secure his Majesty in Scotland, in the hands of the Banish∣ed Lords, that so they might seek his life, or keep him a perpetual Pri∣soner, but herein prove defeated, ibid. Fall down upon their knees with many of the Nobility, Alledg∣ing that her life as well as their lives and fortunes was in hazard, by rea∣son
of the practises of Queen Mary, ibid. Received the Summons from Secretary Davison, and give her warning to prepare for Death the Night before, ibid. A Council Conven'd about the dis∣sention of several Lords, p. 200. De Crook Monsieur, is sent Am∣bassador to the French King from Scotland, with a Letter about the foulness of the Murther of their King, p. 82. Receives an Answer from the Lords with a resolution to use all di∣ligence to detect the Murtherers, ibid. Crauford Captain, Accuseth Se∣cretary Lidington of the Murther of the late King of Scots, p. 100. He being at that time Servant to the Earl of Lennox, Alledging his Com∣mission for so doing from the said Earl his Master, p. 110. Crauford Lord, is Committed to the Custody of the Lord Hamiltoun, p. 170. Cunningham James Captain, a discreet Man, Servant to the Lord of Marr then Regent in Scotland, p. 115. D DArnly, Son to the Earl of Lennox, a Handsom, Beard∣less, Lady-fac'd Man, p. 48. Pro∣cures a License from the Queen of England to go to Scotland, p. 53. His intention therein, ibid. Propo∣seth a Marriage to Queen Mary, who refuseth a Ring he presented to her, p. 56. Which the Queen seems to disrelish, ibid. Becomes ac∣quainted with Rixio, who was his great Friend to the Queen of Scots, ibid. Finds the Queen cold in her favours, after her confinement upon the murther of Rixio, p. 66. Fol∣lows the Queen (though slighted) whithersoever she went, p. 77. Goes to Glascow, falls sick, being suspect∣ed to, have poison given him by a Servant of his own, ibid. Is brought from thence to Edinburgh to reco∣ver his health, p. 78. Dies, and how, ibid. Davison is sent Agent into Scot∣land, and afterward made Secreta∣ry to Queen Elizabeth, p. 157. Pro∣fesseth himself a Scot, ibid. Re∣mains at Coupar till he had Au∣dience, which he had at Falkland, ibid. But proves deceitful, p. 158. Returns to England, ibid. Receives the written Summons for the Exe∣cution of Queen Mary, with a strict charge not to, deliver it without her express Command, p. 172. But being deceived by the Council of England delivers it, ibid. For which he is Committed to the Tower by Queen Elizabeth, for disobeying her orders upon that account, p. 175. Dingual Lord, is sent to King James for a License to return, or a Commission to conclude the Match with Denmark, p. 179. Finds his Majesty at Aberdeen, the Chancel∣lour and most part of the Council being absent, p. 180. So that he ob∣tained a full power to conclude the said Match, ibid. Dosel Monsieur, Lieutenant in Scotland for the French King, p. 24. a passionate Man, p. 25. Douglas Archibald, is cleansed of the late King's murther in Scot∣land, p. 174. Frequents the Court familiarly, ibid. returns to England to remain Ambassadour there, ibid. Hath great reputation with Mary Queen of Scotland, yet injureth her Cause in England, and is dischar∣ged of his Embassy upon the Ar∣rival of Sir Robert Melvil in Eng∣land, ibid. Douglas George, the Natural Son of the Lord Angus enters the King's Closet with the Lord Ruth∣ven, the Queen being present, and with the King's Dagger struck him, p. 64. And afterwards drew him in∣to the outer Hall and kill'd him,
p. 65. Conveys the Queen to Lock∣leven as a Captive to the King's Lords, p. 90. Hath the House of the Castle delivered to him, p. 121. Douglas Sir George, desires to have the Commission for Ambassa∣dour to Spain, p. 175. But is denied, ibid. Douglas James, the Natural Son of the Earl of Mortoun, p. 127. Kills the Earl of Arran in Revenge of his Uncle's death the Earl of Mortoun, 200. Drake Sir Francis, by a stratagem of a Ship full of Powder with a bur∣ning Link, fires the Spanish Navy, and discomfits them, p. 176. Drumhafel Laird, Master of King James his Houshold when young, p. 125. Draws the Earl of Arguile and Athol to Sterling, p. 126. Is discharged out of Court, ibid. As∣sures the Earl of Grange that the Duke of Lennox designed to kill him, p. 131. though it prov'd false, p. 133. Is imprison'd by the pro∣curement of the Earl of Arran and his Lady, p. 137. Du Bartas Monsieur, famous for his French Poesie, arrives in Scot∣land, p. 176. Proposeth a marriage with the King of Scots and the Prin∣cess of Navarre, ibid. Resides at Falkland with the King, p. 177. Dundee Earl, is sent one of the Ambassadours to Denmark about the King's marriage, p. 179. Dudly, Lord Robert, afterward made Earl of Leicester, is proposed by Mr. Randolph, as a fit Match for Mary Queen of Scotland, p. 40. E EAster Weems, Laird, goes with a Commission to England and France, p. 203. Is a Pensioner to the French King, ibid. Elizabeth Queen of England sends Instructions to Mr. Randolph, her Ambassadour in Scotland, to pro∣pose the Lord Robert Dudly as a fit Match for Mary Queen of Scot∣land, p. 40. Disrelisheth the propo∣sal of a Match between Queen Ma∣ry and Charles the Arch-Duke of Austria, p. 41. Which appears by her sending: the Earl of Sussex to the Emperor's Court to draw on the marriage of the Arch-Duke with her self, ibid. This occasion'd grud∣ges between the Two Queens of Eng∣land and Scotland, p. 42. She de∣signs Darnly for Queen Mary's Hus∣band, ibid. Creates the Lord Ro∣bert Dudly Earl of Leicester, and Baron of Denbigh, p. 47. Is distem∣per'd with a Fever, insomuch that her life is question'd, p. 67. Distur∣bed at the Birth of the Prince, Queen Mary's Son, p. 69. Yet pro∣miseth to be Gossip to him by proxy of Lords and Ladies, p. 70. Upon her fair promises Queen Mary flies. to England, but she would not see her, though she often desired it, p. 92. Causeth her to be kept Priso∣ner till she lost her life, after a te∣dious confinement, ibid. Is Reproach∣ed by the Ambassadours of Foreign Princes, for her unprincely dealing with Queen Mary, p. 93. Having obtained her desires upon the Ac∣cusation of Queen Mary received great content, having now matter sufficient to shew Foreign Ambassa∣dours why she detained the Queen, p. 97. Is glad of the Queen's disho∣nour, yet sends privately to comfort her upon her false Accusation, ibid. Her Answer to the Abbot of Dum∣farmling upon his Propositions, p. 106. Sends an Ambassadour to the King of Scots, when confin'd, offer∣ing him her Assistance, p. 132. Sends a sharp Letter to King James, p. 139. The Contents thereof, p. 140. Receives intelligence of a Magnifi∣cent Embassy from Denmark to Scotland, p. 161. by Three Ambas∣sadours with a splendid Train, ibid. Upon which she sends Wotton to
land to disturb the Affairs of that Kingdom, ibid. Is intreated by the Council and Nobility to take away the life of Queen Mary, p. 172. Which at first she refuseth, but af∣terwards condescends to, ibid. Purg∣eth her self of the Death of Queen Mary as being deceived by her Coun∣cil and Mr. Secretary Davison, p. 175. Is sent to for consent to the Marriage of King James with the Daughter of the King of Denmark, and returns her Answer, p. 179. Say∣ing, She would employ her Credit with the King and Princess of Navarre, to bring his Marriage with that Prin∣cess to pass, ibid. Sends the Earl of Sussex Ambassador to Scotland, and upon what account, p. 203. Elphingstoun Nicholas, adviseth the Regent Mortoun that he was in disfavour with the King, and ought by Gold to purchase friends, p. 125. Emanuel Duke of Savoy, leads the Spanish Army that Invades France, p. 201. Emperor of Germany retires to a Monastery of Monks in Spain, p. 18. Endeavours to get his Son Phi∣lip Elected Emperor, but is denyed, ibid. Gives him all the Dominions he had in Spain, Italy, and the Low-Countries, p. 19. Labours for a Trea∣ty with France for 5 years, which was agreed and sworn to, but broken by the Popes persuasion, ibid. Enig, the Dutch word, admits of Two divers interpretations, which was disputed by the Emperor, &c. p. 12. F FErdinand King of Bohemia, Bro∣ther to the Emperor Philip and Arch-Duke of Austria, Elected Em∣peror by the Princes, p. 19. Fernthast Laird, Warden of the Borders on the Scots side, p. 166. Marries to the Earl of Arran's Brothers Daughter, ibid. Foster Sir John, Warden, a strange trick of his Steed, that mounted and hurt Mary Queen of Scots, when discoursing with him, p. 77. Francis the 2d Dauphin of France Married to Queen Mary of Scotland, p. 8. Succeeds his Father Henry the 2d, p. 28. Is wholly guided by the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal Lor∣rain, ibid. Raiseth Men to send into Scotland, p. 29. Dies at Orleans in France, ibid. Frederick King of Denmark, his Genealogie related by the Author to King James, when he had Three Ambassadors joyned in one Commissi∣on in Scotland, p. 165. Hath seve∣ral fair Daughters, p. 167. G GAury Earl, Treasurer of E∣dinburgh, p. 129. Intercedes for the life of the Duke of Lennox, p. 132. Keeps the Earl of Arran in Custody, p. 133. Repents his be∣ing drawn in by Drumhasel to joyn with the Lords that were against the King, ibid. But at St. Andrews he turns to the Lords of the Kings Party, p. 136. Treats his Majesty Royally at the House of Ruthven, p. 137. Begs his Majesties Pardon and obtains it, ibid. Is driven from Court by the Earl of Arran, but re∣conciled to him, p. 142. Yet condi∣tions being unperform'd, he resolves to leave the Country, ibid. Obtains his Majesties consent to depart, the said Earl of Arran proving his mortal E∣nemy, p. 155. Before he goes takes part with the Earl of Angus and others in their design to take Ster∣ling in despight of the said Earl, ibid. Is taken Prisoner in that en∣terprize, p. 156. Is near of Kin to his Majesty, hath his Lands seized; and is Executed on the Scaffold, dy∣ing a devout Christian, ibid.
Gordoun a Gentleman of that name, is kill'd by the Earl of Mur∣ray, p. 200. Graham Richard, hath a famili∣ar Spirit, p. 195. Is brought to E∣dinburgh and examined before his Majesty about the Earl of Bothwel, and burnt with other Malefactors, ibid. Grange Laird, is Lord Treasur∣er and Favourite to King James, upon the Kings Command alledgeth reasons against the Prelates Proposi∣tions, p. 2, 3, and 4. A stout, bold Man, p. 4. Pursues with two Ships Bothwell, p. 184. But he escapes, and his Servants were taken and the first discoverers of the King's Mur∣ther, p. 185. Is made Chief of a Company of Horsemen, who came to fight against Bothwel, which the Queen understanding, sends for him under surety, p. 83. Was like to be kill'd by a Souldier appointed by Bothwel for that purpose, but was saved by the Queens crying out, ibid. Offers to Combat Bothwel upon his Challenge, but is coldly refused, ibid. Promiseth upon his honour to protect Sir James Balfour upon his delive∣ry of Edinburgh Castle to him, p. 100. Offers to fight with Mr. Ar∣chibald Douglas being guiltless of the Kings Murther, ibid. Takes Se∣cretary Lidington into the Castle of Edinburgh, p. 101. His vertues are envied by some, and his Charge co∣veted by others, p. 104. Obtains a Warrant from the King's Lords to set the Duke of Chattellerault and the Lord Herreis at liberty, p. 105. Sticks close to the Kings Authority, p. 108. Sides at last with the Queens Lords, ibid. Sends for the Laird of Fernihast and Buccleugh, who resolved to seize on the Lords at Sterling, p. 113. Which they at∣tempted but failed, p. 114. La∣ments the slaughter of the Earl of Lennox Regent of Scotland, ibid. Was ever esteemed honest, p. 119. Is taken Prisoner after the delivery of Edinburgh Castle with Sir Ro∣bert Melvil and Lidington, p. 121. Is wracked to death, p. 123. His Character, ibid. Guise Duke, goes with a great Army into Italy, after the breach of the Truce between the Emperor and French by the Popes persuasion, p. 19. He and the Lieutenant of Picar∣dy unexpectedly enters on the King of Spain's Dominions, p. 19, and 20. Is killed by Poltrot at the Siege of Orleans, p, 35. For which the Ad∣miral of France is Accused, p. 36. But cleared, ibid. H HAmiltoun Laird, is advan∣ced to be Governour of Scot∣land, p. 7. Induced to resign the Go∣vernment to the Queen, p. 2. Shoots the Regent Murray in his passage to Lithgow, p. 203. And Escapes, ibid. Henry the 8th King of England, is discontented at the Popes denial of his Divorce from Queen Kathe∣rine, and thereupon proclaims him∣self Head of the Kirk, discharging St. Peter's Pennies here, and the Popes Authority, p. 1. Declares his Daughter Mary a Bastard, ibid. Obtains a Divorce from his own Clergy, and seeks amity with his Nephew James the 5th, King of Scot∣land, desiring an interview with him at York, ibid. A short Chara∣cter of him, p. 3. Is highly offended at the disappointment and affront put upon him by King James his not meeting him at York, that he sent an Army to Scotland to destroy it, p. 5. Is much afflicted at the death of the King of Scotland, and lays down the reasons of his Warring with that Nation, p. 6. His wrath against the Pope is great, ibid. He demolish∣eth Abbeys, and compells the Nobi∣lity to exchange their Lands for
them, that might never return to the Kirk, ibid. Endeavours a Match between Edward the Sixth his Son, and Mary of Scotland, though it brake off, and caused War between the Two Kingdoms, p. 7. But it was at last agreed, ibid. Henry the Second of France had hot Wars with the Emperour, the occasion and management thereof from p. 15, to p. 18. Is hurt by the shiver of a Spear, engaging with the Earl of Montegomery at the Iu∣stings of his Daughter's Marriage with the King of Spain, p. 28. And dies Eight days after, ibid. Henry Prince, King James his first Son, born at Sterling, 202. Herreis Lord, is Imprisoned in the Castle of Edinburgh, p. 101. Hume George, turns William Kieth out of his place of Master of the Wardrobe, when King James was in Denmark, p. 182. Being Knighted is made Master of the Wardrobe, p. 198. Hume Lord, takes part with the Hamiltouns and Queens Faction, p. 106. With whom the Regent Mortoun durst not meddle, standing in awe of his Party, p. 122. Dies shortly after, being a Prisoner in Edinburgh Castle, ibid. Hunsdon Earl, hath a Confer∣ence on the Borders with the Earl of Arran, p. 158. Contrives a secret Plot, ibid. Huntley Earl, is Chief of the new Faction about his Majesty, p. 175. Endeavours to turn out the Master of Gray, and Martland the Chancellor, ibid. Procures the Gift of the Benefice of Dumfarmling, ibid. Great disorders occasioned by the Dissention between him and o∣ther Earls, p. 200. Is sent home hereupon, p. 201. Triumphs, and takes advantage of the Earl of Mur∣ray's Lands, giving him just cause of Complaint, ibid. Kills the Earl of Murray, ibid. I JAmes the Fifth of Scotland his resolute Speech to the Prelates, p. 4. Gives the Ward and Marriage of Kelly in Angus to the Second Son of the Lord Grange, ibid. Gives ear to the Clergy to put off the Con∣vention with King Henry the 8th at York, ibid. Is forced to raise an Army to defend his Country upon that account, p. 6. Is much troubled at the Defeat of his Army, and useth severe Language against the Prelates, who fearing his displea∣sure, poison him with an Italian Pos∣set, ibid. His Character, p. 7. James Lord Prior of St. An∣drews, the Natural Son of James the Fifth, p. 25. Hears of Queen Mary's Resolution to return to Scot∣land, and goes to France to request it, p. 31. Returns to Scotland to prepare them for her Reception. ibid. James the Sixth, King, born, p. 69. When of Age he causeth the Heirs of the Lord Grange to be restored, p. 123. Orders his bones to be ta∣ken up and honourably buried at Killingborn, ibid. Is brought up at Sterling by Alexander Areskine, and the Layd Mar, p. 125. Hath Four Masters, their Character, ibid. The Earl of Mortoun being depo∣sed, he takes the Government into his own hands, p. 128. Is surprised by the Lords in the House of Hun∣tingtoun, p. 132. Is conveyed after∣ward to Sterling, and there retai∣ned, ibid. Laments his mishandling during that Captivity, ibid. Invites by Letters some of the Nobility to a Convention, p. 133. Goes from Falkland to St. Andrews, some few days before the Convention, to the Earl of March, p. 135. Thinks him∣self there at liberty, ibid. Lodgeth in an old Inn there, ibid. Becomes Master of the Castle, p. 136. And
declares his moderate intentions to∣ward all the Lords, ibid. Orders 4 Lords to retire, and retains the rest as his Council, ibid. Causeth, a Proclamation to be made according to his moderate intentions, p. 137. Returns the Author thanks, as the only instrument of procuring his li∣berty, ibid. Is gently inclined to all the Nobility, and Treated particu∣larly by the Earl of Gaury, ibid. Solicits the Author to prevail with the Lord Gaury, that the Earl of Arran might come to Court and kifs his hand, p. 138. Promising he should not stay there, ibid. Sends a Letter in Answer to Queen Elizabeth's, p. 140. The Contents thereof, p. 140, 141, and 142. His Majesty is ta∣ken again, p. 142. Gives Secretary Walsingham Audience, p. 147. Sends a Letter to Queen Elizabeth, pro∣mising not to bring again the Earl of Arran into Court, p. 148. Is ta∣ken at the Road of Ruthven, p. 149. And retain'd Captive, ibid. Takes little care to prevent inconvenien∣ces, yet obtains his liberty. ibid. Assures the Author that he would Convene a Council of Lords at Edin∣burgh, p. 150. His Dream concer∣ning the Earl of Gaury, p. 156. Writes for Melvil the Author to come and advise him, p. 157. As also to come and entertain Wotton, being sent to him by the Queen of Eng∣land, p. 159. Whom he loved be∣fore he saw, by reason of the ad∣vantageous Character, which the Master of Gray gave him, ibid. Or∣ders the Author to entertain the Danish Ambassadours, 162. And because they were three in Commis∣sion wisheth him to choose two more to accompany him, which he did, ibid. Gives them Audience at Dumfarmling, and is much dis∣satisfied at their ill handling, ibid. Grows impatient to hear the Author speak against Wotton, p. 164. Ac∣quaints the Author that he was in∣formed the King of Denmark's De∣scent was from Merchants, ibid. But after he was informed of the truth, he sends for the said Ambassadors, p. 165. Promiseth them a speedy dispatch to their satisfaction, ibid. Orders a Banquet for them, is hin∣dred from being present at it, but being informed how matters stood, goes thither and drinks to the King, Queen and Ambassadors of Denmark to their great content, p. 166. cau∣seth their dispatch to be ready ac∣cording to promise, ibid. Sends to the Earl of Arran for a great Gold Chain which he got from Sir James Balfour, to present it to the Three Ambassadors, which was done accord∣ingly, ibid. Sends to agree with the Banished Lords at their coming to Sterling, p. 169. Where it was a∣greed his Majesty should be in their hands, and no rigour used to those about him, ibid. Calls them Traytors at first, but after grants them, a Pardon, ibid. Acknowledgeth the Earl of Arran to have been a bad Minister of State, and that he should never be readmitted to Court, p. 170. Hears the news of his Mothers Execution, which highly displeas'd him, p. 173. Convenes a Parliament desiring the Assistance of his Subjects, ibid. When he at first hears they were about the Con∣viction of his Mother, he sent Two Ambassadors on her behalf, ibid. Sends for the Author to prepare him to go Ambassador to England, ibid. Goes to the Western Borders to reform some disorders between the Maxwels and Johnstouns, p. 175. Resolves to wait an opportunity to revenge his Mothers Death, rather then trouble the Peace of the King∣dom of England, ibid. Is Courted in Marriage by many great Princes, p. 177. Asks Council of God by Prayer Fifteen days, and then re∣solves to Marry the King of Den∣mark's Daughter, ibid. Makes
choice of the Author to go Ambas∣sador to Denmark, ibid. Perswades him to undertake that Embassy, p. 178. Consents that his Brother, the Lord Yungland should be joyned in Commission with him, and gives him Commission by word of mouth, ibid. Is angry-with the Author, p. 179. Is advised to send to Queen Elizabeth to desire her Consent to his Marriage with Denmark, ibid. Her Answer thereunto, ibid. Is incensed with his Council for Voting against that Mar∣riage, ibid. Deals privately with those at Edinburgh, to threaten the Council and Chancellor, menacing him with Death, if that Marriage was hindred, upon which he sends the Earl Marshal with 2 other Persons to Den∣mark, ibid. Hears of their being at Sea with the Queen, and makes pre∣parations for her Reception, and being impatient at their long delay, lays the fault on his Council, p. 180. Directs Colonel Stuart to Sir Robert Melvil and the Author, charging them to take care of his Estate in his absence, p. 180, and 181. Is perswaded to go in person to Denmark, p. 181. Sails to Denmark in person to fetch the Queen, and leaves Sir Robert Vice-Chancellor, ibid. Three Ships went with him besides his own, he lauds at Norway, where the Queen waited for a Wind, and there Celebrates the Marriage, ibid. Returns not that Winter, is sent for to Denmark, whi∣ther he went by Land with his new Queen, where he behaves himself libe rally and honourably by the way, and at the Court of Denmark, ibid. Is much troubled to make those Officers of State agree that were with him there, p. 182. Returns the next Spring with the Admiral of Den∣mark and other Persons of Quality, ibid. Treats them all honourably, and after the Queens Coronation dismiss∣eth them Magnificently Rewarded, ibid. Sends for the Author at his Landing, ibid. Repents his anger with Sir Robert Melvil, and turns it against the Chancellor, who incensed him against Sir Robert, p. 183. Rewards the Strangers nly after the Queens Coronation and Banquet∣ing to their great satisfaction, p. 184. Desires Sir Robert Melvil and the Author to advise upon some good Rules for the establishing Affairs be∣fore his going to Denmark, p. 185. Is abused upon the account of Mac∣lean and other Highlanders. p. 192, and 193. Sends for Melvil the Au∣thor to wait upon the Queen, promi∣sing him rewards, p. 193. takes oc∣casion at Table to discourse advanta∣geously of the Author to his Queen, p. 193, and 194. Secures himself in Edinburgh after Bothwel's Attempt on the Palace, p. 197. Thinks Sir Robert Melvil not fit for his Office, yet continues him still, p. 199. Is design'd to be seized at Falkland by Bothwel and his Party, p. 201. And miraculously delivered by God from that Conspiracy, p. 202. Deter∣mines to send Ambassadors to Eng∣land, Denmark, France and Flanders about the Birth of his Son Prince Henry, p. 203. Requiring them to send Ambassadors to solemnize the Baptism of his first born Son, ibid. The Ambassadors are sent, p. 203. Jane Kennedie, the Wife of Sir Andrew Melvil was a long time in England with his Majesties Mother, p. 180. Is sent for by him to wait upon the young Queen, who making hast, was drowned in the Passage-Boat in a great Storm, which was raised by the Witches of Scotland, as appears by their own Confession to his Majesty, ibid. John de Monluck, Bishop of Va∣lence, is sent Ambassador from France to the Queen-Mother of Scotland, p. 8. Goes first to Ireland by his Ma∣sters Command, and why, ibid. A pleasant story of his Harlot, ibid. Was formerly Ambassador from the French King, to the great Turk
Solyman, p. 9. After his Arrival at Paris is sent to Rome, p. 10. And wherefore, p. 10, 11, 12, and 13. But to no effect, p. 11. Learns the Mathema∣ticks of Cavatius & other Sciences by Taggot another knowing Man, p. 13. K KEer Henry, one of the Coun∣sellors of the Duke of Len∣nox, p. 128. Keeth Sir William, is sent Am∣bassador to Flanders, upon the Birth of Prince Henry, p. 203. Kieth Andrew Lord, is sent Am∣bassador with the Earl of Marshal to Denmark, at the request of the said Earl, p. 179. Killegrew Henry, is sent Am∣bassador from England to Scotland, p. 68. Complains against Mr. Raxby as a Rebel and Papist harboured there, ibid. Upon which he was se∣cured, p. 69. Is dispatch't with a friendly Answer some time after, p. 72. He carries two Letters from Queen Mary to Sir Robert Melvil in England, and to what intent, p. 72, 73, and 74. Is hasted Ambassador to Scotland after Mr. Randolphs return to England, p. 115. Desires the preservation of Sir Robert Melvil's Life as a reward for his la∣bour, p. 122. King of Denmark marrieth his eldest Daughter to the Duke of Brunswick, p. 177. Excuseth to King James, laying the blame upon his Ministers, ibid. But promiseth to dispose of his Second Daughter to him, if he would send his Ambassa∣dors thither, but in the interim dies, leaving the same Commission with the Council and Regents, ibid. King of Navarre, is Governour for the time of the young French King, Charles the 9th, p. 30. Procures of the Three Estates assembled at Or∣leans, that the Queen-Mother should be Regent of the Realm, ibid. King of Spain enters the Fronti∣ers of France with a great Army, p. 20. Kings of Scotland never grew rich since they left the High-Lands to dwell in the Low-Lands, p. 193. But ever since diminished, which his Majesty found true, ibid. Knolls Sir Henry, is sent Ambas∣sador from Queen Elizabeth at the Dyet Imperial held at Franckfort, Anno 1562, p. 39. L LEicester Earl, Queen Mary's avowed Friend, p. 71. And se∣veral other Persons of Quality, ibid. Lennox Duke, endeavours to free the King of Scots, but is chased into the House of Ruthven, and saved by the intercession of the Earl of Gaury, p. 132. Retires to Dum∣bartoun, ibid. Afterward goes to France and dies, p. 133. Lennox Earl, is sent for to be made Regent of Scotland in the room of the Earl of Murray, p. 104. Proves a true Scotsman, p. 106. After he had accepted of the Regency, he takes Breechin, and hangs the Soldiers found in the Kirk and Stee∣ple, p. 107. Is shot in the Back in the Enterprize of taking the Lords Prisoners at Sterling, p, 114. Dies in few days after, and makes a godly end, ibid. Lennox Lady, the Mother of Darnly King of Scotland, is Com∣mitted to the Tower and kept there a long time, because he Married the Queen of Scots without Queen Eliza∣beth's advice, p. 58. Lidingtoun, Secretary to Queen Mary, and of great Credit with Secretary Cecil, p. 32. He with the Prior of St. Andrews procures a fair Correspondence between the 2 Queens of England and Scotland, ibid. And p. 33. He retires with other per∣sons, being in danger of their lives,
p. 65. Goes from Court, p. 100. Is Accused of the late King's murther, and Imprisoned, ibid. Is brought by the Regent to Edinburgh, and de∣livered to the Lord Grange to be a Prisoner, ibid. Is set at liberty by the King's Lords, p. 105. Taken Prisoner after the surrender of Edinburgh Castle, p. 121. dies at Lieth to prevent his coming to the Shambles with the rest, p. 122. Logie, a young man, Gentleman of the Chamber to King James, p. 198. Is Accused and Imprisoned for dea∣ling with Earl Bothwel, ibid. Lords (called the Queen's Lords, as the other the King's) meet toge∣ther at Dumbartoun to procure their Soveraign's liberty, being a∣gainst the King's Lords, p. 88. Bin∣ding themselves in a Bond, ibid. They issue out proclamation on both sides to Convene their friends, p. 90. Meet and fight, but the Queen's Lords are Routed, p. 91. The King's Lords send for the Earl of Lennox, to make him Regent in the room of Murray, p. 104. They hold a Par∣liament at Sterling, and the Queen's at Edinburgh, p. 113. Lords all written and unwritten for arrive at St. Andrew's, to attend the Con∣vention intended there by the King, p. 136. Design to have the King in custody, ibid. Lords met at Edin∣burgh, pass a Vote unanimously; being preoccupied by the Earl of Arran, p. 153. Those Lords who de∣signed the attempt on Sterling fly to England, p. 157. Are forefaulted, p. 158. They return and come to the Borders with Assistance, p. 168. 3000 of the banished Lords enter Sterling, fall on their knees, and beg his Majesty's pardon, p. 169. Which is granted, ibid. The Lords gain great credit by their mode∣rate behaviour, p. 170. Lorrain Cardinal, designs to pro∣mote Queen Mary to the Crown of England, by alledging Queen Eliza∣beth to be Illegitimate, p. 23. Cau∣seth all Queen Mary's Silver Ves∣sels to be engraven with the Arms of England, ibid. After the conclu∣sion of Peace is sent Ambassadour to Spain to take that King's Oath, and to swear for his Master's observing the same, ibid. Proposeth two Mat∣ches to the Emperour of Germany, p. 33. M MAcclean and others, chief of the Highlands is subtilly brought to Court by the Chancellour, p. 192. Are imprisoned in Edin∣burgh Castle; accused of foul mur∣ther, but get off, ibid. Maitland Secretary, is confin'd to his house with others, p. 166. Oppo∣seth the Author in Council, p. 171. Mar Earl, keeps the young Prince, and will not deliver him to Both∣wel, p. 80. Is made Regent in the room of Lennox, p. 111. Goes to Edinburgh to Convene the Lords in order to an Accommodation, p. 118. In the mean time goes to Dalkieth, and shortly after dies at Sterling, ibid. Margil David, one of the Duke of Lennox his Councellors, p. 128. Marshal of Berwick besiegeth Edinburgh assisted by an English Army, and all Scotland, p. 120. Contends with the Ambassadour, p. 121. Is forced to deliver up the Prisoners in Edinburgh Castle to the Regent, being commanded by the Queen of England to do it, ibid. Which he doth with much regret, and returns to Berwick disconten∣ted, ibid. The Laird of Cleesh ha∣ving before offered them good Con∣ditions to quit the Castle, ibid. Takes the death of the Laird of Grange very much to heart, by rea∣son of the breach of his promise, and thereupon quits his Employment of Marshal; whose loss is much lamen∣ted,
being a worthy Captain, ibid. Marshal Earl, and others, lodge within the Castle with his Majesty of Scotland, p. 136. He and others retire to their Houses, p. 137. De∣sires to supply the place of the Lord Atry as Ambassadour to Denmark, p. 178. Which is granted, ibid. But his Commission is so slender that he sends the Lord Dingual for a Li∣cense to return, or a power to con∣clude the Match with Denmark, ibid. Which he receives, and is pre∣sently dispatcht for Scotland by the Regent and Council, and the Queen sent home with him well attended, p. 180. But are driven by Tempest upon the Coast of Norway, the winds being raised by the Witches of Denmark, and the reason why, ibid. Is not well thought of by the King upon the account of his Embas∣by to Denmark, occasioned by the Chancellour's misrepresentation of him to his Majesty, p. 182. Martland is made Chancellour in Scotland, p. 175. Threatned to be kill'd, p. 179. Hears of his Maje∣sties discontent at the Queens de∣lay of coming from Denmark, and adviseth him to sail thither in per∣son to fetch her home, p. 181. Who goes with him privately, ibid. Be∣ing at Denmark, he deviseth many Reformations to be made at his Ma∣jesties return, p. 182. Causeth the Lord Hume, Earl Bothwel, and di∣vers others to be imprisoned for their disobedience, during the ab∣sence of the King, ibid. Misrepre∣sents Sir Robert Melvil, and envies him, though a great friend to his promotion, ibid. Emulation between the Council and him, who design to turn him out, p. 183. But prevents it being discovered, ibid. Great ha∣tred between him and the Duke of Lennox, p. 198. He retires to his own House, and is accused of seve∣ral Crimes, ibid. Procures again his Majesties favour, and is re-introdu∣ced at Court, p. 200. And at length reconciled to the Queen, ibid. Mary Queen of Scotland, the on∣ly Child left of King James the 5th. p. 7. Born when he lay on his death∣bed, p. 7. After her Arrival in France great disputes arise about her Marriage between the two Fa∣ctions in France, but is at last wed∣ded to the Dauphin, p. 8. Proves a sorrowful Widdow after the death of her Husband, p. 30. By degrees leaves the Court upon dislike, ibid. Occasion'd by the Queen-Mother's rigorous dealing with her, p. 31. Is advised to return to Scotland, and behave her self moderately, ibid. At length arrives in her own Coun∣try, p. 32. Seems to approve of the Match proposed by Cardinal Lor∣rain, between her and the Arch-Duke of Austria, ibid. Advertiseth the Queen of England of this propo∣sal, desiring her advice, p. 40. Which she Answers by Mr. Ran∣dolph, ibid. and p. 41. Lays aside the thoughts of that Match, p. 43. And the Reasons why, ibid. Behaves her self very discreetly, and gains great reputation in all Countries, p. 53. Her Character, p. 54. Is much taken with the Lord Darnly, p. 56. Determines to marry him tho opposed by several Lords, ibid. And is married to him accordingly, p. 57. Is kept Prisoner by Douglas and his Party upon the murther of Rixio, p. 65. Causeth the King to advise them to withdraw the Guards they had upon her, ibid. So they went all to their home, but the Queen, King and some in their Retinue went at mid∣night to Dunbar, p. 66. Subscribes Remissions for the Lord Murray and his Dependers, lamenting the young King's folly, ibid. Goes to Sterling to Ly In, her time approaching, p. 67. She mislikes the King, who grows melancholick thereupon, ibid. She is much troubled at that foul fact committed in her presence, by kil∣ling
her Servant Rixio to the en∣dangering of her self, and the Child in her Womb, p. 74. Keeps her Chamber some time after the mur∣ther of her Husband Darnly, p. 78. She wonders at the reports of her marriage with Bothwel, but denies it, ibid. Is forced to marry him, the Nobility approving it, and he ha∣ving first Ravished her, p. 80. Is married by Adam Bothwel after the Reformed Religion, ibid. Re∣signs her self to the Lord of Grange, and conveyed to Edinburgh, p. 83. where she is respected by the Nobles, but reviled by the vulgar, ibid. Writes a Letter, wherein she calls Bothwel her dear heart, promising never to forsake him, p. 84. Which being brought to the Lords by the Treachery of one of her Keepers, they sent her to be secured in Lockleven, ibid. Upon the Lord Lindsay's co∣ming she subscribed to the Demission of the Government to the Prince, and certain Lords named as Re∣gents, p. 85. Is conveyed from Lock∣leven to Hamiltoun, p. 90. After the loss of the Battle of Langside she quite loseth her courage, never thinks her self secure till she arrives in England, p. 92. Is kept Prisoner in the North parts here, p. 99. En∣deavours to get her self declared se∣cond person of England, p. 152. but it proves ineffectual, ibid. Receives warning of her death from the Coun∣cil the night before, p. 172. Her carriage and deportment thereupon, ibid. Takes her death patiently, and dies couragiously, p. 173. Re∣ceives divers strokes with the Ax through the Executioner's cruelty, ibid. Master of Glams is Treasurer of Scotland, p. 198. Designes to get the Office from Sir Robert Melvil, and manage the Treasury solely, ibid. Master of Gray is in great favour with the King of Scots, and why, p. 158. His Character, ibid. Is sent Ambassadour to England, and re∣turns with great Credit and Appro∣bation, notwithstanding he is misre∣presented by the Earl of Arran, whom he begins by degrees to E∣clipse, ibid. Acquaints his Majesty that Mr. Wotton, a Man of great Parts, is upon his journy from the Queen of England, and upon what account, p. 158, & 159. Procures the Earl of Arran's liberty, p. 166. Is rewarded for it with the Abby of Dumfarmling, ibid. At which the English Ambassadour is enra∣ged, but afterward reconciled to him, ibid. He retires to Dunkel, p. 168. Is sent for again to Court, p. 169. And in as great favour as ever, ibid. Is deprived of his Be∣nefice of Dumfarmling, p. 175. And discharged from the Court, ibid. Maurice Duke, God-son to the Landgrave of Hesse, p. 11. per∣swades his God-father to come to the Emperor, who retains him Cap∣tive, ibid. Is Cousin to the Duke of Saxony, and obtains the Electorate as a gift from the Emperor, p. 12. Sollicits the Emperor for the liber∣ty of his God-father, but in vain, ibid. Lays Siege to Magdeburgh, being the Emperor's Lieutenant, ibid. A subtile man, ibid. Surpri∣seth the Emperor at Isburgh, com∣pels him to fly so clearly out of Dutchland, that he never set foot in it again, p. 13. Yet he and the Emperor is after reconciled, and lay Siege to the Town of Metz, tho to no purpose, ibid. Maximilian, King of the Romans, by his Politick carriage between Protestant and Catholick obtains the Empire, p. 33. Is skill'd in several Languages, p. 34. Proves an enemy to the Match with his Brother Charles, the Arch-Duke of Austria, and the Queen of Scots, though seem∣ingly a friend, p. 35.
Melvil Sir Andrew, one of the undertakers to keep the Castle of E∣dinburgh, p. 120. Is Master of the Houshold to Queen Elizabeth, p. 173. After Master of the Houshold to King James, p. 180. Marries Jane Kennedy, who had been a long time in England with Queen Mary, ibid. Melvil Sir James, the Author and Brother to Sir Andrew Melvil, is sent by the Queen-Mother with the Bishop of Valence to be Page of Ho∣nour to her Daughter there Married to the Dauphin, p. 8. The kindness of Odocart's Daughter to him, pro∣mising him Marriage, p. 9. His pleasant Discovery of the Two Scots∣mens Deceit, to whose care he was committed in their Iourney to Paris, p. 10. Is design'd to be promoted by the Bishop, but prevented and by what means, p. 14. Is entertain'd in the Service of the Constable of France, by the consent of the Bishop of Va∣lence, p. 15. Is Commissionated by the French King, and afterward by the Constable to go into Scotland, and the purport of his Commission, p. 25, and 26. Endeavours to be inform'd of the Prior of St. Andrews inten∣tions, who declares his mind to him at large, p. 27. In his return to France meets with an English Ma∣thematician, and the Discourse be∣tween them, p. 27, and 28. Gets li∣cence of the Queen of France to Tra∣vel, the reason thereof, he takes his leave, p. 29. Is recommended to the Elector Palatine by the Constable his Master, and entertain'd as one of his Servants, ibid. And is thereupon sent by the Elector to Condole the death of Francis the 2d French King, ibid. Receives great Favour from the King of Navarre and Queen Re∣gent, dispatching him back with thanks and a gift, p. 30. Returns, visits the Queen of Scotland, Mary, in her return home at Janvile, with a comfortable Letter from Duke Casi∣mire, p. 31. Receives thanks from the Queen for it with favourable of∣fers when return'd from Travel, ibid. Is desired by the Duke and his Father to go into England about a Match with that Queen and the Duke, but refuseth, p. 32. And why, ibid. Re∣ceives a Letter from Scotland to in∣quire about the Arch-Duke of Au∣stria, p. 33. Is sent for by Maximi∣lian, and goes with a Letter from the Elector to him, p. 34. The passages between them, ibid. Finds the propo∣sition of a Match with the Arch-Duke would prove ineffectual, and therefore presseth for a dispatch, which at length he obtains, p. 35. Receives a Letter from Maximilian to the Queen of Scots, ibid. Is sent by the Prince Elector to the Queen-Mother of France, with an Answer and Picture to her Propositions of a Match between her Son Charles the 9th, and Maximian's eldest Daught∣er, p. 36. Is introduced into her Presence by the Constable, ibid. Is profer'd very large offers of Prefer∣ment by the Queen Mother, if he would reside there, p. 38. Receives Letters from Queen Mary to return home, ibid. Parts with a Commissi∣on to the Queen of England, p. 39. Presents the Pictures of Casimire and his Relations to the Queen, ibid. Which she returns next day, p. 40. Refusing to accept of them, ibid. Writes back to his Father, and him∣self a disswasive from that Marriage and receives thanks, ibid. Returns into Scotland and presents the Queen with Letters from Forraign Princes, p. 43. Receives great prof∣fers from the Queen, but refuseth them, and upon what ground, ibid. Is sent with instructions to Queen Elizabeth and her Friends to procure a Reconciliation, ibid. The instructi∣ons at large, p. the 44th, and 45th. Being Arrived at London, he next morning receives his Answer from the Queen, p. 46. Perswades her Majesty to tear the angry Letter she
intended to send to Queen Mary in answer to hers, p. 47. Which she did, ibid. The private Conference be∣tween the Queen of England and Melvil, being a Character of the Two Queens full of diversion, p. 47, 48, and 49. Takes his leave and returns to Scotland with many Presents, p. 52. Acquaints his Queen with Queen Elizabeth's Answer, ibid. After the Queens Marriage begs leave to Tra∣vel, which she refuseth, p. 58. Up∣on her promises stayes and adviseth her, p. 59. Officiates as her Secreta∣ry, Lidington being absent upon some suspicion, p. 67. Rides Post to Lon∣don to give an account to the Queen of the Birth of a Son in Scotland, p. 69. Has a satisfactory Audience, p. 70. Shews a Letter to her Ma∣jesty from Tho. Bishop against her Marriage with Bothwel, and is for∣ced to fly for it, p. 79. But returns, Bothwel's rage being allayed, ibid. Is afterward taken Prisoner when Bothwel seized the Queen, p. 80. Refuseth at first to be sent Commissi∣oner by the Lords who concluded to Crown the Prince, to the Lords As∣sembled at Hamiltoun, but at last accepts, p. 85. Declares their An∣swer at Sterling, p. 86. Is sent to meet the Lord Murray at Berwick upon his return from France, to ad∣vise him, p. 87. Is sent by another Party with contrary Instructions, ibid. Deviseth with others a remedy for his preservation and brings into a good opinion with the People, p. 102. Is sent to Berwick to the Earl of Sussex, and why, p. 105. Receives an Answer, ibid. Visits the Regent the Earl of Lennox there, p. 106. Disswades him from the Regency as dangerous, ibid. Is taken Prisoner by the Earl of Bughan, p. 111. Whom the Laird Grange would have released by force but he disap∣proves of it, ibid. Finds Bail to serve his Majesty and the Regent, and is discharged, p. 112. Is sent by the Regent Marr to Edinburgh to make an Accommodation between them and him, p. 117. Which they were all inclinable to, ibid. And after Marr's death by the Regent Mor∣toun, p. 118. Proferreth himself a Pledge that the Castle of Edinburgh should be delivered by the Laird Grange to the Regent, p. 119. Loseth the Regents favuor by telling his faults freely, p. 124. Is ordained to hold the Iustice-Eyre of West Lauthi∣an with other persons at Edinburgh, p 1. 31. Is sent for by his Majesty, p. 133. Goes to wait upon him, though resolved to lead a contemplative life, ibid. Discourseth with his Majesty about the State of all Countries. p. 134. Prevails with the Bishop of St. Andrews to entertain his Maje∣sty in the Castle, p. 135. Adviseth him to go into the Castle for his secu∣rity, p. 136. Is acknowledged by his Majesty to be the sole Procurer of his liberty, p. 137. His Council is much depended upon by the King, p. 138. Is made one of his Council, ibid. Op∣poseth the Earl of Arran's new inven∣ted Proclamation in the Council-House, p. 139. Is made Gentleman of his Chamber, and a Member of the Privy-Council, p. 142. Is writ to by his Majesty to attend him, and o∣beys, p. 143. Takes a long Letter with him to put him in mind of his Promises, the Contents thereof, p. 143, 144, 145, and 146. Arrives at Sterling and disswades his Maje∣sty from sending Ambassadors to Eng∣land for that present, p. 146. Which his Majesty condescends to and he retires, ibid. Is sent for again to conduct Secretary Walsingham to his Audience, p. 147. Is appointed with four more to endeavour the under∣standing his intentions, p. 147, and 148. Refuseth the Office of Secretary offered him, p. 149. Is deprived of all employment by the Earl of Ar∣ran's means, though contrary to his Majesties promise, p. 150. Yet is
ordered to prepare for an Embassy to England, and Pens the Speech he in∣tends to pronounce to the Queen, ibid. The Contents, p. 150, 151, and 152. A large Conference is held be∣tween King James and him about his Affairs, p. 153, and 154. Is left by his Majesties manager. p. 154. He entertains a smart discourse with the Earl of Arran, p. 155, Is resolv'd upon that account to attend no longer then the end of the Convention, ibid. Is sent for by his Majesty, and graci∣ously receiv'd, p. 157. Conducts Da∣vison the English Agent to his Au∣dience at Falkland, ibid. Adviseth his Majesty that Davison endeavours the disturbance of that Kingdom, p. 158. Is sent for to entertain Mr. Wotton, p. 159. Gives an account of his carriage and designs in France at the age of 21, p, 159, 160, and 161. Gives his Majesty caution to be wary of him, but is not taken notice of, p. 161. Is appointed with Two more to entertain the three Danish Ambassa∣dors, p. 162. Pacifies the first of the 3 with discourse for Indignities offered them, p. 163, and 164. Gives an account of the King of Denmark's Genealogy, p. 165. Which undeceives the King of Scotland and satisfies him, ibid. Goes on Board of the Ambassadors from Denmark, being upon their departure, with Presents, p. 167. Takes leave of them, re∣wards the Officers, declaring the par∣ticulars to his Majesty, ibid. Shifts off his going Ambassador to Den∣mark, ibid. Is sent for to Court, p. 168. Is sent upon a framed Errand to Dunkel and his Commission, p, 168, and 169. At his return fore∣warns his Majesty of what would fol∣low the Earl of Arran's rash proceed∣ings, p. 170. Is for an Act of Obli∣vion and restoring the Banished Lords, but Opposed, p. 171. Is sent for to go to England to confirm the League with Queen Elizabeth, p. 173. But endeavours to avoid it, ibid. Is discharged of that Embassy, p. 174. And design'd Ambassador to Spain, p. 175. but has no desire for that Voyage, ibid. Is nominated to go to Denmark, which he likewise declines, p. 176. Is desired by Du Bartas the French Poet to go with a Commission to the King of Navarre, p. 177. But refuseth it, ibid. See∣ing no preparations for his dispatch to Denmark, he obtains licence and prepares himself for the next Order, p. 179. Is sent for by his Majesty at his landing in Scotland, p. 182. Is Commanded to attend the Earl of Worcester Ambassador from Eng∣land, sent to Congratulate both their Majesties at their Arrival, ibid. Is acquainted with his Majesties pro∣ceedings in his Voyage, p. 182, and 183. He and Sir Robert Melvil set down some Rules for the management of his Affairs by his order, from p. 185, to p. 192. Is sent for to Falkland and ac∣quaint him that he is design'd to wait upon the young Queen, p. 193. Which he did several years, p. 194. He and his Brother Sir Robert adver∣tised his Majesty of a design against him by Bothwel and his Complices, p. 197. Which was slighted, ibid. Is one of the Privy Council and Gentleman of her Majesties Cham∣ber, p. 198. Is appointed with others, to entertain Ambassadors from For∣raign Parts upon the British of Prince Henry, p. 203. Is also appointed to attend the Two Ambassadors from Denmark about the performance of the Contract of Marriage, p. 204. Melvil Sir Robert, is sent Am∣bassador in Ordinary into England by Queen Mary, p. 63. And upon what account, ibid. Is taken Prisoner with others after the Surrender of Edinburgh Castle, p. 121. Is made one of the King's Council, p. 138. Gets intelligence of the English Am∣bassadors designs against King James, p. 167. Acquaints his Majesty there∣with,
ibid. Offers by Combat to ju∣stifie it, p. 168. But is prevented by his Majesty, ibid. Is sent Am∣bassadour with another to treat a∣bout the Accusation of the Queen of Scots, p. 173. Speaks boldly, and had been detained Prisoner but for the interest of the Master of Gray in England, ibid. Is left Vice-Chan∣cellor of Scotland, during his Ma∣jesties absence at Denmark, p. 181. Though calumniated and threatned to be imprisoned, and have his Of∣fice taken through the Chancellour's means, p. 183. Gives his Majesty notice of Bothwel's design against him, p. 197. Is made Deputy-Trea∣surer, p. 198. Is threatned with death by the Captain of the Guards, p. 199. But the Queen stood his Friend, ibid. Sends his Servant to acquaint the King with Bothwel's Conspiracy against him in Falkland, for which he is derided, p. 202. Sir Robert is sent Ambassadour to England from King James, p. 204. Mortoun Earl, is challenged to fight by Lord Herreis upon the ac∣count, of the King's death, p. 100. Appoints 4 men to kill Grange at the entrance of the Regent's Lodg∣ings, without the Regent's privity, p. 101. Has a great Faction in the Country, though disappointed of the Regency, p. 116. But is made Re∣gent after the decease of the Earl of Mar by the assistance of England, p. 118. Promiseth to the Agree∣ment with the Lords of the Castle of Edinburgh, but steers another course, p. 120. Anticipates the Mar∣shal of Berwick, and gets an An∣swer from the Queen of England to have the Prisoners taken at Edin∣burgh Castle, and a Commission for their Execution, before he could send, p. 121. Triumphs a while, be∣ing with great Assistance from Eng∣land, p. 123. His whole study is to gain riches from England and Scot∣land, p. 123. Of which England too late repented, ibid. Holds the Coun∣try in a more setled Estate then it had been in for many years, p. 124. Grows proud, despiseth the Nobili∣ty; commits several wrongs, and pro∣secutes several Lords, ibid. expo∣seth the Earl of Orkny to great hardship, p. 126. Yields easily to his deposition from the Regency, re∣tiring to Lockleven, ibid. But by his designs gets in again to be Ma∣ster of the Court, ibid. Is Accused by James Stuart of the late King's Murther, p. 127. Is condemned at the Assize for it, 128. And dies re∣solutely, ibid. Murray Earl, takes part with Bothwel, p. 201. And is kill'd at his own House. Murray Lord, and Bedford meet at Berwick about the marriage of Queen Mary with Leicester, p. 53. With slenderer offers then expected from him, ibid. Murray being one of the bani∣shed Lords is sent for from New∣castle, and re-entertain'd by the Queen, p. 65. Retires from Court, p. 78. Obtains leave to go to France before the Queen married Bothwel, p. 80. Is appointed by the Queen first Regent of the young Prince, p. 85. Whereupon he is sent for from France by the Lords, ibid. Accepts the Regency of the Prince, after a Refusal, p. 87. Enters at first sight upon such injurious Reproaches of her Majesty, as were like to break her heart, ibid. Takes the Forts and Castles into his hands, p. 90. Clears the Borders of Thieves, and holds Iustice in Evre, ibid. Goes to England, accompanied with many Lords, to accuse Queen Mary, p. 93. Is privately dissuaded from it by the Duke of Norfolk, p. 94, and 95. 'Tis agreed that he shall by no means proceed in that Accusation, p. 95. Breaks his word with the Duke, and comes from the Council-House with Tears in his Eyes, p. 97. Is despi∣sed
by the Queen of England for his intention to Accuse her, detest∣ed by the Duke, reproached by his Friends, living at Kingston peny∣less and unregarded, p. 97. Is re∣conciled to the Duke, p. 98. Has 2000 l. of the Queen, for which the Duke becomes surety, and after∣ward paid it, 99. Takes leave of the Queen, but discovers again all that ever past between the Duke and himself, p. 99. Promising to send the Queen those Letters he should receive in Scotland from him, ibid. Sends for Secretary Li∣dingtoun, as being of Council with the Duke of Norfolk, resolving to accuse him, and writes for him to come to make a dispatch for Eng∣land, p. 100. Being come is Accused before the Privy Council of the late King's Murder, and Imprisoned, ib. Is misled, though well inclined, by vain pretences to his own and the ruine of others, p. 102. Gives ear to flatterers, ibid. Dissembles with Grange and Lidingtoun, ibid. His Character, p. 103. Is shot by Ha∣miltoun, and dies the same night, ibid. N NOrfolk Duke, sent with an Army out of England to help the Congregationists, p. 29. He and several other Councellors sent down to York to hear the Regent's Accu∣sation of his Queen, and be Iudges thereof, p. 94. Privately dissuades the Regent from Accusing the Queen for the King her Son's sake, p. 95. Is the greatest Subject in Europe, not being a free-born Prince, p. 96. Ruling the Queen and all, ibid. His purposes discovered to the Queen, whereby the Regent lost the Duke's favour, yet speaks boldly to her Ma∣jesty, p. 98. Is prevailed with to enter into friendship again with the Regent, upon promise of his future secresie, ibid. Acquaints the Regent with his resolution to marry the Queen of Scots, and that he had a Daughter fitter for the King then any other, p. 98, and 99. Becomes Security for 2000 l. which Murray the Regent of Scotland received from the Queen of England, which he after paid, p. 99. Is sent for by the Queen to come to Court (being again deceived by the Regent then in Scotland) applies himself to Se∣cretary Cecil, who told him there was no danger, so that he rode with his Train only, ibid. Is seized by the Treachery of Cecil, and after a tedious Captivity, dies of the Re∣formed Religion, p. 100. Normand Lesly, gains great ho∣nour in the Wars, between Henry the Second of France, and the Em∣perour, p. 17. O OChiltrie Lord, and divers o∣thers, in revenge of the death of the Earl of Murray, takes part with Earl Bothwel, p. 201. Adviseth him to Seize on his Ma∣jesty in his Palace at Falkland, ibid. Octavians in Scotland, who, and why so called, p. 191. Octavio Duke, Son-in-law to the Emperour Charles the Fifth, is left to the Pope's discretion, and why, p. 11. P PArliament Proclaimed at Lith∣gow for the restitution of the banished Lords, p. 170. Parma Duke, Governour of Flan∣ders, wins the hearts of his Soldi∣ers, and Enemies, by his prudent be∣haviour, p. 166. Is suspected by the Spanish King to have a design on Flanders, which caused him to deny the Spaniard Victuals, Ships, and
landing in his Territories, ibid. Paul the Fourth, Pope, breaks off the five years Truce between the French King and the Emperour, p. 19. Peace concluded between Scot∣land and England, and upon what Terms, p. 30. Pool Cardinal, appointed to be Mediator between the Two Princes, p. 16. Prelates of Scotland endeavour to win King James by large proffers and perswasions to their Opinion, p. 4. They exasperate his Majesty a∣gainst the Treasurer by their insi∣nuations, p. 5. But he gets well off, ibid. Prior of St. Andrews, the Lord James, Natural Son to James the Fifth, King of Scotland, p. 25. Af∣terwards Earl of Murray, p. 32. Prior of Pittenweem, a great de∣baucher of Women and Maidens, p. 5. Protestants grown very numerous in Scotland, p. 24. Q QUeen Mother of France is glad at the death of Francis the Second her Son, he being wholly ruled by the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his Brother, p. 29. Whereupon she dischargeth the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde, who had a Scaffold erected for their Execution, ibid. Is made Regent by the Three Estates, during the mi∣nority of Charles the Ninth, p. 30. Seems inclinable to the Protestant Religion, intending to joyn with the Protestant Princes, ibid. Makes a Peace after the battle of Drues, p. 36. Queen Regent of Scotland re∣ceives the Government from Hamil∣toun, p. 24. Issues out a severe Pro∣clamation against Protestants, ibid. Is disturbed at the discourse of the Prior of St. Andrew's and others, and resolves to persecute the more, p. 25. Sends to France about the disorders in her Country for help, ibid. She, during the Controversie with the Congregation, retires with Monsieur Dosel and other French-men to Lieth, which is fortified ex∣pecting French supplies, p. 29. But being indisposed, retires to the Ca∣stle of Edinburgh, atd dies with regret that she followed the advice of her French friends, ibid. Queen of Scotland married to King James from Denmark, is Crow∣ned, p. 184. Shews Melvil no great countenance at first, p. 194. But at length seems well satisfied with his Service, ibid. Is offended with the Chancellour for delaying her Mar∣riage with the King of Scots, p. 198. Usually speaks in favour of those Officers that are misrepresented to the King, p. 199. Is offended with the Chancellour, but reconciled, p. 200. Gives the English, Danish, and Dutch Ambassadours Audience, p. 204. St. Quintin, and several other Towns lost by the French to the Spa∣niard, p. 22. R RAndolph, Thomas, Queen Eli∣zabeth's Agent in Scotland, p. 40. Denies the Queen of England made any promises to those who would oppose the Marriage of the Queen of Scots, p. 60. Is sent with the Earl of Lennox Ambassadour unto Scotland to set him forward with his power, p. 107. Is a double dealer, and Sower of Sedition, ibid. Glories that he had kindled such a fire in Scotland as would not easily be extinguished, p. 109. Designs to have Mortoun Regent in the lieu of Lennox, but failed, p. 115. Re∣turns home, and why, ibid. Is sent again Ambassadour to Scotland, p.
127. Hears that the Author was designed to be sent Ambassador into England and opposeth it, proposing o∣ther persons in that juncture of time, p. 173. Rixio David, a mean fellow, who came to Scotland with the Ambas∣sador of Savoy, is made Secretary to the Queen of Scots, p. 54. A Musician perswaded to sing with o∣thers, the occasion of his promotion, ibid. Is suspected to be Pensioner and Favourite to the Pope, p. 55. Is kill'd in the Queens Presence to her great regret, she being with Child, by consent of the King, p. 64. Russel Sir Francis, Warden of the English Borders, p. 166. Is kill'd at a meeting between the two Wardens, ib. Ruxbie sent to sift what he could get out of Mary Queen of Scots, as to her right to the Crown of Eng∣land, p. 68. Which he is to send to Mr. Secretary Cecil, p. 68. Addres∣seth himself to the Scots Queen, ibid. Writes to Cecil in her prejudice, p. 69. Is promised a reward but his intrigues are discovered and he secu∣red, ibid. S SEatoun Comptroller to King James of Scotland, p. 198. Segie Lord, made one of the Kings Council, p. 138. Chosen to accompa∣ny Melvil in the entertainment of the Danish Ambassador, p. 162. Senarpon Monsieur, Lieutenant in Normandy for the French King, p. 160. Shaw William, Master of Wark, is chosen to accompany Melvil in his entertainment of the Danish Ambas∣sadors with the Lord of Segie, p. 162. Skeen a Lawyer, chosen to go to Denmark with the Author, p. 178. Sinclare Oliver, promised by the Clergy to be made Lieutenant of the Army against England, if King Hen∣ry the 8th should War against Scot∣land, p. 4. Is proclaimed Lieutenant over the whole Army, yet the Lords disdaining so mean a person would not fight under him, but suffered them∣selves to be taken Prisoners, p. 6. Simson Amy, a Midwife and Witch, p. 194 Is burnt with others, p. 195. Smith is made Secretary to Queen Elizabeth, p. 157. Sommer, Secretary to the English Ambassador in France, p. 160. Spanish Navy is rumour'd to be bound for England, Scotland, and Ireland, p. 175. Is three years pre∣paring, ibid. The Commanders knew nothing of the Design but what they understood by the opening of their instructions at every Landing place, p. 175, and 176. A violent storm of Wind dissipates the whole Navy, and many of their Vessels suffer'd Ship∣wrack, ibid. Spiny Lord, and the Master of Glams at variance, p. 198. Spiny is in great favour with his Majesty, ibid. For which he is envied and ac∣cused as a dealer with Bothwel, for which he is displaced and imprison∣ed, ibid. But escapes out of a Win∣dow in Dalkieth by the help of a Da∣nish Gentlewoman whom he after∣ward married, ibid. Is in disfavour with the King, p. 199. Spinze Lord, is Gentleman of the Chamber to King James, p. 198. Stuart Colonel, is sent to St. An∣drews with Mr. John Colvil, p. 133. Is made Captain of King James his Guards, p. 137. Writes to the Au∣thor to repair to Court, p. 156. Is one of the Kings Council, p. 138. Rides to overthrow the Banished Lords at their entry upon the Bor∣ders, p. 168. But his design is fru∣strated, ibid. Is committed to the care of the Lord Maxwel, being in danger for espousing too violently the Earl of Arran's Interest, p. 170. Obtains leave to go to Denmark a∣bout his own Affairs being that Kings
Pensioner, p. 171. Has a Commission to treat about the Marriage of King James with the Eldest Daughter of the King of Denmark, ibid. Goes to Denmark several times at his own charge to complete his Masters Mar∣riage with the King of Denmark's Daughter, p. 177. Stuart James, Son to the Lord Oghiltrie a Favourite in Scotland, p. 126. Perswades the King to a Progress, p. 127. Accuses the Earl of Mortoun of the late Kings Mur∣ther, ibid. Takes upon himself the Title of Earl of Arran, p. 128. Marries the Earl of March his Re∣lict, ibid. Casts off his true friends, p. 129. His Character, p. 131. Is kept Prisoner by the Lords in the Custody of the Earl of Gaury, p. 133. Obtains the favour of being confin'd to his own House at Kinneal, p. 137. adviseth the King, but is opposed by Gaury, ibid. Gets access to Court, and stays there contrary to promise, ibid. Is reconciled to Colonel Stuart by the Authors means, p. 139. He and Melvil the Author clash in Coun∣cil, p. 139. His insolent carriage, p. 142. He and Gaury are reconci∣led by his Majesty, ibid. He and his Wife ruling all, perswades his Majesty to go to Sterling, p. 143. He is Captain of the Castle and Pro∣vost of the Town, ibid. Adviseth his Majesty to send the Author Am∣bassador to Queen Elizabeth, intend∣ing thereby to ensnare him, ibid. De∣sires a familiar Conference with Se∣cretary Walsingham, who refuseth it, p. 148. At which being incensed he puts several Indignities upon him, ibid. Endeavours to be made Chan∣cellor and Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh, p. 152. Useth his Craft to pervert the effect of the Conventi∣on, ibid. Retires discontented to the Castles of Edinburgh and Sterling, p. 155. His unworthy Carriage with many other particulars, ibid. Seizeth on Gaury's Lands, and divideth them among several others, upon con∣dition they would assist him in the ruin of the said Gaury, p. 156. Confers with the Earl of Hunsdon, on the Borders, and Plots with him secretly, p. 158. Grants all that is desired at the Conference with the Earl of Hunsdon to procure Queen Elizabeth's friendship, p. 161. Is not courted by the Danish Ambassa∣dors, p. 163. Whereupon he becomes their Enemy, ibid. Is in disfavour at Court, p. 166. Imprisoned in St. Andrews Castle, ibid. Sends his Brother to the Master of Gray, pro∣mising a reward to procure his liberty, p. 166. Which he soon did, ibid. Is ordered to retire to his House, ibid. Obtains liberty to return to Court, p. 168. Flies, p. 169. Comes again to Court, p. 200. Is shortly af∣ter kill'd by James Douglas, ibid. Stuart Sir William, is Captain of Dumbartoun, p. 129. Sussex Earl, is sent from Eng∣land to Berwick, p. 104. Enters the Merse with his Forces and takes the Castle of Hume and , p. 106. Is sent to Scotland upon the Birth of Prince Henry from Queen Elizabeth, p. 203. T TAggot, a Scientifical Man who prognosticated the year of his own Death by Palmestry, p. 13. And dies at Geneva accordingly, p. 14. Throgmorton Sir Nicholas, Am∣bassador from England to France, complains to the King and Council of the Queen of Scotland's new Usurped Style and Arms, p. 23. But without success, ibid. Acquaints Queen Eli∣zabeth with it, p. 29. Is sent Am∣bassador to Scotland to disswade Queen Mary from the Marriage with Darnly, p. 56. Owns, when re∣turn'd, the promises he had made to those who would stop those proceed∣ings
without fear of Queen or Council, p. 60. And comes off well, ibid. Is incensed that he was an instrument to deceive the Banished Lords, there∣fore adviseth them to beg their Queens Pardon, and penn's a perswa∣sive Letter to her Majesty of Scot∣land, p. 60, 61, 62 and 63. A man of a deep reach, and great prudence, studying the Union of both King∣doms, p. 98. Reconcileth the Duke and the Regent, ibid. Tulke Monsieur, see Brode∣rode. U VIllamonte, a French Gentleman sent to Mary Queen of Scot∣land to shew no favour to the Prote∣stant Banished Lords, p. 63. A De vice of Cardinal Lorrains, larely re∣turn'd from the Council of Trent, ibid. W WAchop, Patriarch of Ire∣land, p. 9. Went several times to Rome by Post tho blind, ibid. Walsingham Sir Francis, is sent to Scotland, p. 147. His Character, ibid. Is conveyed by the Author to St. Johnstoun, ibid. Refuseth to discourse with any person about his Embassy, but his Majesty, p. 148. Is much troubled at the Earl of Arran's Court favour, ibid. Returns to England and dies, ibid. William Bishop of Ely and Dr. Wotton sent Commissioners for Queen Mary in the Treaty of Peace at Cambray between France and Spain, p. 22. Wood John, Secretary to Mur∣ray the Regent of Scotland, p. 95. Is desired to press forward the Ac∣cusation of the Queen of Scotland, p. 96. Produceth the Accusation of Queen Mary, upon the desire of Ce∣cil, who delivered it upon conditions, p. 96, and 97. Which was snatcht from him by the bishop of Orkny, who gave it in to the Council, p. 97. Procures all the Letters sent from the Duke of Norfolk to his Master, which might tend to his ruin, p. 99. Is well rewarded for his pains, ibid. Worcester Earl, is sent Ambassa∣dor from England to congratulate both their Majesties of Scotland, p. 182. Norminstoun, kill'd at the sei∣sure of the Lords at Sterling, p. 114. Witches taken in Lauthian who depose against the Earl Bothwel, p. 194. They discourse with the De∣vil, his form and shape described, and are burnt, ibid. Wotton Mr. sent by Queen Eli∣zabeth to King James as Ambassa∣dor, p, 158. His parts and qualifi∣cations, p. 159. His carriage in France, when very young, p. 159, 160, and 161. Brothers Son to Dr. Wotton Ambassador from England to Spain, p. 161. Fifty years old when he came into Scotland, ibid. Becomes one of his Majesties Fa∣vourites, tho he did more prejudice to his Majesty, as to his affairs, then any Englishman that arrived there before him, ibid. Is sent thither to use all his wiles to disturb the two Kings (namely of Denmark and Scotland) and their Countries, p. 161, and 162. Visits the Danish Ambassadors making large profers to lend them Gold and Silver, p. 162. But secretly incenseth them with the Kings mean Opinion of their Master, ibid. Acquaints them that King James designed to affront them with delays, p. 163. Notwithstanding his double dealing with the King, he gains his Majesties Ear, p. 164. Makes a complaint to the King of the killing of Sir Francis Russel on the Borders, p. 166. Which occasioned the Earl of Arran's Imprisonment,
ibid. Obtains with the assistance of his Scotch friends, the chief ma∣nagement of King James's Affairs, p. 167. His designs against the King defeated, ibid. Flies to England without taking leave of his Majesty, p. 168. Perswades the Noblemen of that Nation, who were banished in∣to England, to return to their Na∣tive Country, ibid. His dangerous and circumventing Practices, p. 171. Wotton Doctor, Ambassador from Mary the Queen of England, who was Resident there, when she was married to Philip King of Spain, p. 159. Y YOung Peter, King James's Al∣moner, sent Ambassadour to Denmark, p. 167. His Commission, ibid. Returns with a friendly Ans∣wer, p. 171. Being very well conten∣ted mith all Transactions there, and as well rewarded, p. 176. Is sent a∣gain to Denmark with the Laird of Barnbarrow in Commission, ibid. Re∣turns, his Commission being lookt upon by the King of Denmark as in∣sufficient, 177. Sent a third time with an Embassy to the Danish King, and the Dukes of Mecklen∣burgh and Brunswick, upon the birth of Prince Henry, p. 203. Re∣turns with the reward of three fair Chains, ibid. Yungland Laird, the Author's Brother undertakes the Embassie to the King and Princess of Navarre, 177. Is well treated and rewarded, ibid. A Scholar and Linguist, p. 178.
A N Alphabetical Interpretation OF ALL THE Scotish WORDS and PHRASES Contained in this HISTORY. A Aback, to hold or keep back. Accession, Condescention. Alwise, although. Anent, about, concerning, as there∣anent, concerning the same. Assize, a Suit or Trial. Ay, still or ever. B Banded, joyned together, combining, Best, as the next best way or course. Bond of Alliance, a League or Truce. Brangled, Turmoiled, Involv'd in Trouble. Burroughs, Burghers or Burgesses. By-gones, all that is past. C Caution or Cautioner, Bail or Surety. Clan, a Tribe or Family. Compear, Appear. Comported, Patiently, bore Pati∣ently. Compts, Accompts. Conform, Agreeable or Suitable to. Conquer, Credit, to gain Credit. Convoyance, Conveyance. Counselable, one that is or will be Advised. D Decourted, discharged from the Court. Demission, laying down, or trans∣ferring to another. Devilry, Devilishness or Devilish Tricks. Devotious, addicted to, very fa∣vourable to. Ditty, Doom or Damage. Down-casting, pulling down, or de∣molishing Houses. Dunting, the stunning of Hammers, &c. E Effectuate, effected or done. Emit, send forth. Evangel, the Gospel. Evite, Avoid. F Factioners, People of a Faction. Fashion, as done for the fashion, that is, done as usual and customary. Forefault, to find guilty in the ab∣sence of a person. Forth-setting, Advancement, Pro∣motion. Fraudful, Fraudulent, Deceitful. G Gain-stand, Withstand. H Hand-writ, hand-writing. Home-going, returning home. Hostlaries, Inns.
I Indwellers, Inhabitants. Insestments, Inheritance, Estate or Tenure. Ingeny, Ingenuity or Wit. Justice Eyrs, Iustice Itinerant. L Leave-taking, bidding farewel. Leesings, Lyes or Lying Tricks. Liberate, free, at liberty. Logh, a watry sloughy place. Longsom, Tedious. M Manyest, the major part, the most. Miscontent, Discontent. Misconstructed, Mis-interpreted. Misgave, miscarried. Missives, Letters. Mostly, for the most part. Moyen, Means or Course. N Noticed, Manifested. O Octavians, Eight Lords appointed to govern Scotland. Onwaiter, an Attendant. Oultmost last or utmost. Outgate, a Way or Means. Out-taking, freeing from Prison. P Practised, dealt or laboured with to be brought over to a Party. Perilled, Endangered. Perturbed disturbed. Prejudged, Forejudged. Procedure, Proceedings. To Process, to Sue. Proponed, Proposed. R Refuse, as he caused refuse, i. e. he made them deny it. Regrated, regretted, inwardly la∣mented or grieved for. Righteous Heir, True Heir. S Salutary, wholesom, healthful, hea∣ling. Skittering, skittish, sinical, silly. Signatures, written Instruments to be signed. Steadable, firm, that will stand one in stead, available. Stormsted, driven by Tempest into a Port or Harbour. To Suit, to beg or request. T Time-coming, for the future or time to come. Timously, in good or due time. Tolerance, Toleration, Permission. V Vengeable, Revengeful. Volt, as a merry volt, a merry plea∣sant countenance. Unfriends, Enemies. Unwonable, not to be won or cour∣ted to side with a Party. Uptaking, composing, or taking up a business or difference. W Ward or Warding, Imprisonment. Wel of Affairs, the Good or Promo∣tion of business. While by-gone, a long or conside∣rable time since or past. Whingar, a Scottish Sword, common∣ly called Whinyard. Wrongously, injuriously or wrong∣fully.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and to be Sold by Robert Boulter at the Turk's-Head in Corn-hill, 1683. Folio. BIshop Reynolds's Works. Calderwood's History of the Reformation of the Church of Scot∣land, from 1560 to 1625. Rushworth's Collections, First Vol. —His Second Volume. Pharmacopoea Londinensis. Sturmy's Magazine. Curia Politiae— Rea's Flora. Quarto. Durham on the Revelations. Baxter's Saints Rest. Owen of Justification. Origen contra Marchionet. Charles the Eighth, A Play. Lesley Historia Scotorum. Man of Sin. Lightfoot on Lucan. Dr. Charleton's Anatom. Lectures. Flavel's Husbandry. Boys's Sermons. Pryun's Power of Parliaments. Burnet's Thesaurus. Behin's Remains. Manley of Usury. Brown against Quakers. Seamans Calendar. Mariners Calendar. Seamans Practise. Norwood's Trigonometria. Large Octavo. Pool's Nullity. Wilson's Scriptures. Durham of Scandal. Dr. Trapham's Treatise of Jamaica. Cloud of Witnesses. Rutherford's Examen. Sclater of Grace. Bayfield De Capitis. Danvers of Baptism. Flavel's Two Treatises. —His Preparation for Sufferings. Small Octavo. Wars of Hungary. History of Jewels. Moral Gallantry. Flavel's Saint Indeed. —Token for Mourners. Roma Restituta. Curious Distillatory. History of Japan and Siam. Looking-Glass for Children. Hugh's Disputations. Religio Stoici. Petton on the Covenant. Queens Wells. Moreland of Interest. Miltoni Logica. Grey of Faith. Sydenham's Works. Rushworth's Solomons Remembrance Gale's Idea. Binning's Miscellanies. Kirkwood's Grammatica. Norwood's Epitomy. Gellibrand's Epitomy. FINIS.
