M548 12006293 52338
THE BASTARD: A TRAGEDY. DVM PREMOR ATTOLLO LONDON, Printed for M. M. T. Collins, and Gabriell Bedell, and are to be sold at their shop at the Middle-Temple-gate in Fleetstreet, 1652.
Prologue. NO Comick Scene shall here salute your eye, Whose scoffing Vein may tickle, till you lye Half breathless in your mirth, and so at best Bribe your applause with some new minted jest. The Tragick Buskin traverses our stage In bloody Fillets, fitter for this Age, Where Treason, Murder, Lust, and ev'ry Vice Grows impudent, and rifles for the Dice. Translation is no crime; We here impresse A Spanish BASTARD in an English dresse; And lay him at your Doores, that some of You Mov'd with a milder Genius might bestow Some favour on our Out-Cast; by your hand Our Brat must dye or live, must fall or stand. We crave your Charitable smile, the rather Because he's not so Wise to know's own Father. And Pallas-like (if w' are not too profane!) He had no Mother but his Father's brain. Thus Fatherless and Motherless! We sue For him in humble flexures unto you: My Faith assures me, many of you have known To make some Bastards which you durst not own For shame or fear; and some of you may be Mistaken in your Fathers Pedigree; Your favour cannot shame you; may h' invite Your bounty, though but in a smile or mite. Some Childless Signior, take him to his feet; 'Twere Cruelty to let him lie i'th' street: A sin! alas! a shame! a sin! that He Should beg upon the Parish-Charity.
He's born, and must be kept! faith! think upon't, And stand his God-Fathers once at the Font: His boon is not ambitious; since 'tis such, Deign him your Patronage, h'wo'nt cost you much. True Charity should feel no stomach qualms; Know, Sirs, a BASTARD may deserve your Alms: We crave your serious Thoughts, if any Crime Render him odious, blame his Fate, not him; He scorns Censorious Criticks; and don't fear To stand the Barre to a judicious Ear; For though to be a BASTARD be his Fate; His Wit is sterling, and legitimate. Exit. Enter GASPAR. The world so swarms with Bastards now, that I Need not despair for want of Company; I'me in among the Throng, although you say, I came through the back-Doore, or by th'wrong-way, I care not; if I may some Portion merit, I am content, I beg not to inherit; Though Bastardisme can make no Title good, Yet know a BASTARD may have Noble blood; And challenge Kindred with the best: my Name Would not be made the White for squint-ey'd Fame To dart her Arrows at, had every Front Its Lineage and Descent well drawn upon't; Nor would the world need Spectacles: 'tis known Though I'm a BASTARD, not a common one; Yet, that my Name is in my fore-head plac'd, Blame th'Printer, 'twas he made me brazen-fac'd: Perhaps he fear'd, lest I should stray, so some (Reading my Name) might eas'ly bring me home. Well! this poor favor sue I from your breath, That, since I must be prest, 'tmay n't be to Death, And that the Ballads may not rack my Fame, A BASTARD craves this Portion, a good Name.
Drammatis Personae. ALONZO, A Merchant, Father to Mariana. ALVAREZ, An indebted Merchant, Father to Picarro. FREDERICK, A rich old Humorist, Father to Balthazar. ALVARADO, Uncle to Don Praepontio. PRaePONTIO, A foolish Gallant, contracted to Varina. CHAVES, A Florentine, Mariana's Paramour, for∣merly Contracted to Eugenia. RODERIGVEZ Brother to Eugenia. BALTHAZAR, Contracted to Mariana. PICARRO, Husband to Mariana. GASPAR, A Bastard, Servant to Alonzo. THOMASO, Servant to Chaves. RVBIO, HEBES, Servants to Praepontio. MARIANA, Daughter to Alonzo. VARINA, An Orphan in the Guardianship of Alonzo. EVGENIA, Sister to Roderiguez, and deserted by Chaves. CATALINA, Mariana's Maid. CORINNA, Variana's Maid. PRIEST. TAYLOR, FIDLERS, MASQUERS, 2. VARLOTS, 3. BOYES, GUARDS. The Scene SIVILL.
THE BASTARD. ACT. 1. SCENE 1. Enter Alonso and Gaspar. Alonso. ARt sure hee'l come? Gasp. I'm sure he promis'd me. But Debtors words are like to whirl-winds, here And ev'ry where when they should pay. This money Is worse then bird-lime, or a Tertian Feaver, And will stick close to their possession That have it; specially to pay. Alon. Then thou Beleev'st he will not come? Gasp. 'Ts no point of Faith, Sir, But I doe think so: send for him to Trucks, To Passage, or Primero, and hee'l find Ryals of eight, and Pistolets to play, Or pawn his plate for't; but to pay your debt, Tush! 'tis a trifle. Alo. What? six thousand Duccats? Gas. Faith! were it seven, the Hollanders (hee'l tell you) This year surpris'd the Flota; and the ships From th'Indies by the inauspitious blasts Of the ill-boding North, are still kept off; And then hee'l kisse away his hand in kindnesse, With Beso las manos, criado de vuestra merced, And for these terms expect forbearance. Alo. What Shall I do then? I need my mony, and Must have it immediatly.
Gas. Faith get it then Which way you can; For on my conscience▪ He will not pay you, lesse you fairly set An Agill on' shoulders; clap him up, And then ne're fear your money. Alo. That were base; Unworthy in me, who have still profess'd My self his friend, to be the first that should Shipwrack his Credit, which ith' Cities eye Shines bright; the chiefest glory of us Merchants Is Alvarez: no! I do know him honest, And sure hee'l pay; if not, the sum's not great, I can forbear't. Gas. Six thousand Duccats is A sum of money, many an honest man Would wish his patrimony. Alo. Say it be, It is too little to o'repoize the worth Of Alvarez: For should I once begin, His other Creditors by my example Would lay their Actions on him, keep him fast For ever comming forth. Gas. Faith! not much matter, There let him lie, and keep the pavement warm, Tell to the silent Walls how he hath wasted His wealth in riot, and by Drabs contracted A foul consumption both to corps and purse; Make the dumb stones his Confessors, they'l melt Perchance into contrition, and weep To see him made their Captive. Alo. Thou'rt too cruell; I must not be so, lest that Widows prayers Whom he hath cherisht, should draw vengeance on me, And Orphans tears shed for his loss, rise up In swelling Cataracts to overwhelm me. Gas. Consult with reason, Sir: this childish pitie Is an effeminate passion, shake it off: Say he hath spent his own rich patrimony, And others wealth in purchasing a Name To his posterity; pray tell me Signior, Will that Name pay his debts? Or will those men That have been better for his wealth, afford Him so much kindnesse; 'twere but gratitude As to content you and an hundred more He stands engag'd to: Let me rule you, give me Leave, I'll arrest him in my own Name, so You may passe blamelesse: pray you do, when others Have seiz'd on all, you'l wish perchance you'd ta'ne
My foolish counsell. Alo. Hold your tongue, I will not Injure my friend so, I'll first lose it; tell me What Cash affords your Desk? Gas. Ten thousand Duccas. Alo. See it told out with expedition; My daughter's to be married, and must have That as a part of portion. Gas. Married, Cousin? You'l not be so ignoble to infringe Your promise to me? Alo. 'Twas an ill one, better Broken then kept. Gas. Did I for this, when you Deplum'd of your Estate, to shun the frown Of envious Fortune, was constrain'd to crosse The surly Ocean, and so steere your slight Into the Indies, with a little remnant Of your left wealth, content your Creditors, Bring up your daughter only upon hopes To have her for my pains, as then you know You did oblige your self, that now another Must reap my harvest: Let me tell you, Sir, It is not honest in you: Alo. How now Bastard? Dare you be muttring? Is't not more then I Am any way oblig'd to, to maintain Thee in the fashion of a Gentleman, Make thoe my fellow, but thy tainted blood Thinks to pollute mine? Urge me with a promise Unjust as that was? You may passe, the doore Stands open for you, and your Pasport's writ, Take your course, Bastard. Gas. You're my Fate, your tongue Hath power to transform my thoughts, create Anew my resolutions; I confesse From you I have my meat; my life depends On your beneficent Genius: I offend Ev'n to damnation, should I be ingrate In my respect to you: I've left my hopes, Your promise Let he now hath quite washt out, No print of it remains within my breast: Joyn her in Hymeneall rites with whom, And when you please; my worst desires shall be, Heav'ns give her joy. Alo. Now thou art honest, Gaspar. I see thou dost affect me, I'll provide To solemnize thy nuptials with some One
To thy advancement. Gas. Sir, Your bounteous hand (I know's) too liberall: may I have his name That must enjoy my Mistress? Alo. Balthasar! Don Frederiques heire! But stay 's Varina's portion Already told and ticketed? Gas. Yes, Sir, and set apart. Enter Praepontio and Rubio. Prae. Save you Sir; or rather as we say in French, Bon jour: Is my illustrious Mistress stirring yet? Alo. She's none of the earliest risers: please you walk in and eat an Olive, tast a cup of Alicant, and by that time she'l come. Prae. I thank you, Sir; but my stomack hath not yet digested the crudities of last nights Symbolum Rub. It might have done, I'm sure you fasted. Gas. And has not left picking his teeth yet. Prae. Yet if you please, my renowned Uncle, that must be, we will vouchsafe to warm our palats with a jar of your Monturkie. Rub. He means to Fox himself, that he may have Rhethorick to Court his Mistress: For, Facundi calices quem non fecere disertum, Dull Cups make men eloquent. Prae. My diminutive and defective knave, seal your lips. Rub. He's afeard I should cozen him of some of the Monturkie he hopes for. Alo. How fares your Uncle? Prae. Well, very well; he hath sent my Mistress a copy of his coun∣tenance, and here she come. Enter Varina. Strike me not dead with those bright eyes, retort Those splendent Sun-beams on your selfe, who only Can bear such piercing clearnesse. Gas. Mark his postures, he'l kisse her shoo-strings. Rub. Nay, eat the Rushes she treads on: look how Pythagorically he gapes? he's turn'd Astronomer! Gas. Have you measured the length of hen physnomy, or taken the height of her forehead yet? Rub. But Master, you must salute her. Prae. Divine, ambiguous, and transparent creature, I salute you with this b—b—bus: my complements were not cut out according to the garb of the time; but my words are sufficient interpreters of my inter∣nall affections, and so sweet-heart I love you by this b—b—bus. Var. A little of this, Sir, is sufficient. Prae. Nay! thou shalt have thy belly full of it, my little Duck. Gas. I never heard of a belly full of kisses before. Prae. Lend me your hand to feed on! Rub. Beware, Mistress, he eat it not, he is sharp set I assure you, he had nothing but an Eringo root and a clove of Garlick for his colla∣tion.
Alo. Sir, Praepontio, My Necce deserves none of these complement. Prae: How, Sir? you are her Uncle, and so your tongue is privileged; but if another had presum'd to speak so prophane a syllable upon her merit, mark me, if thunder-thumping Jove had said it, mark me, I would have pulled him by the fore-top, or lug'd him by the ears. Alo. I doubt not of your valour; but my businesse Urges my hast. Prae. And so doth mine. (He untrusses himself.) Rub. He's ready to bewray himselfe. Alo. Say, will your Uncle make her a Joynture? Prae. Will he? A man of your reverend complexion to demand that question? Will he? He shall, in spite of his nose, old dotard! or else I would, as we say in Italian, prove him, Al stulti loco, that is to say, wholly a fool: But he has done it already, Sir, Look here, Sir. (Pulls out a sealed parchment.) Alo. Why then we will contract you. You are content, Varina, to have this Gentleman. Var. Since you command it. Alo. You'll use her kindly, Sir. Prae. Curse upon this magnificent corpse else; she shall have her Moletto's in green Jackets to stoop to her, when she pleases to per∣fume the aire with her odoriferous countenance; and her Negro's to lay their heads for her to tread on. Rub. And if you, Master, be not able for night work, and so forth, send for me, I can do that. Alo. Well, I'll trust you with her: Gaspar, let's go. Prae. Farewell. Exeunt Alo. and Gasp. Come Gentlewoman, me thinks I am as lusty as Nestor in his second Age. Rub. You may believe him, Mistress. Prae. It seems to me that your beauty operates with my body, as the Sun with the year; which makes the year throw off its russet mantle, and becoming young, to take on its green coat: Now methinkes my bones, frozen with Age, are dissolved, and distill into my Cod∣peece. Rub. These words are in you, as the Primrose in the midst of Win∣ter, but the Primrose stinketh not so bad as your breath. Prae. Now my former vigours return to my vitals; Atlas was but a weak Boy, which could not scarce beare up that with his Shoulders, which with my little finger I am able to sustain: Now could I with a kick of my heele, strike a Lane through the Alps, and so make an in-road for dusky Neptune, I tell thee my sweeting, Adonis, when he was beloved of Venus, was not so beautifull as I am. Troth thou art supereminently beautifull too: Jove would think it no disparagement to be a Cuckow, a Swan, a Bull, on any thing, to enjoy the beatitude of thy sweet society; Great Hercules would to schoole, and learn to spin again for thy enjoyment, In briefe, Lady, I love you.
Var. In brief Sir, though my Uncle pleas to think me worthy of no bet∣ter a spouse then your ridiculous self, in serious terms I cannot affect you it is not the quaintness of your language that can charm me. If Cu∣pid have no more powerful darts then what drops from your tongue, he can wound but little. Sir, it will argue your prudence to desist from this your enterprise, for my part I had rather be of the society of Danaus daughters, and torment me in the abissive Hogsheads, then be your bed∣fellow. But we poore Orphans being shuffled out of our own estates, must be disposed of at the pleasure of our Guardians, even to any one. But, Sir, in short, I shall esteem more highly of a wise man in his shirt, then of a foole in his richest Trappings: and for my own part, I can∣not love you. Rub. Never marry her then, Master: for if you doe, you may chance be a kinsman to the great Turk, and blazon the Horns for your Arms. Prae. You doe but jest, you speak not heartily? Var. You'l finde I am in earnest. Farewell, you know my reso∣lution. Exit. Prae. O Rubio, call her back. Rub. Will she come when I call her? Prae. Conjure her then. Rub. I am no Negromancer, I never studied the black Art in all my life: But d'you hear Dona Varina I call you, I conjure you to come unto my Master Don Praepontio. Sure, Master, she's no Devill, for if she were, she would have risen at my conjuration. Prae. But what shall we doe to get her? Rub. Faith, Sir, you and I and half a dozen more good fellows will rifle for her, you shall have Dice will run nothing but sixes. Exeunt. Scena secunda. Enter Varina sola. THis doting Don thinks that his years have made Him wise, in fishing with a golden bait, And doth presume his gold hath power so farre For renovation of his aged Corps, As had Medea's inchanting spels to Aeson: He thinks that womens aims are fixt on lands, And that they frame their love on Silver-mines. Treasure's no loadstone for a maids affection. Alas! He doth mistake our Sex in this, Though Gold be welcome to enrich our train, Yet not so far as that we should neglect The chief of all, the person of a man: Should we permit the flowers of our youth Thus to be nipt by Ages snowy Winter, And so bereave our selves of all those joyes Which Nature hath conferred on our Sex,
While blooming in our youth, for earth and dirt? No! 'tis not so, this is my resolution; Gold with a Man is good, but if I chuse, I'll take the Man, and will the Gold refuse. Exit. Scena tertia. Enter Roderiguez solus. VNhappy eye! which didst attract those beams, To set my heart on fire! Unhappy eare! Which didst with such a greedinesse suck in The charmings of her lips! and then convey Them through thy winding palace to my brain, Which works and beats, as if the Cyclops held Their Forge within my head: Unhappy man! Thus to become a slave unto thy passion! Confine these love-sick thoughts, or drive them out, Lodge not such enemies within thy breast, They'l be thy ruine! But (alas!) my power Is transmigrated to anothers breast; Yet would it were, so might I hope at length My love might crowned be with good successe. Dry up thy eyes. Enter Chaves. Cha. Good morrow to you, Sir! What passion hath surpriz'd you, that you seem Another man? Eugenia's well, I hope. Discover, friend, what strikes thee in these dumps; Your eye betrayes you, somewhat is amisse, Prithee what is't? Rod. Chaves, thou art my friend, And 'twere a sin not to impart it to thee. Here lately was a Lady, which my eye No sooner did discover, but my heart Was all involv'd in flames, a sudden ague Seiz'd upon all my limbs, that to approach Neerer, or speak I could not: in this extasie I stood awhile unmoveable, till she Quitted the place. Cha. What is she? ne're despair, Have her thou shalt, though she were made of gold. Rod. Varina is her name, she's well endow'd With all that Art or Nature can bestow; That — Cha. Feed not thy self with these; prithee what is she? Where lives she? Pray reveale it. Rod. Sir, her Father Was a rich Merchant of this famous Citie,
Who dying in the Indies, left this his Orphan Sole heir to his estate; which he bequeath'd Unto Alonza's care; he hath betroth'd her Unto a foolish Lord, one Don Praepontio, Cha. Expel these clouds of sorrow, wee'l make our wits Outreach his wealth! Come! let us write a letter, I'll have it safe convey'd; once get admittance, And she's thine own. Enter Varina. Var. Most sacred Goddesse, to whose sacred shrine The greatest Kings, nay Jove himselfe hath bow'd, Contain my passions, keep my sudden Love Within the bounds of maiden modesty, Sweet Roderiguez! now me thinks I see Majesty couched in thy serene brow, Upon thy tongue enthroniz'd Eloquence Within thy looks Cupid in's best array; And when thou goest, the humble ground doth sinke, As if submissive to thy stately Port; But Stay! my Passions, stay; let's pawse awhile, My affections must not leade me in a maze; Discretion doth advise that Pallas rule, And Cupid serve; she will me best direct To my terrene Elysium, Pause awhile, Listen to Judgments dictates; they are best. The Carthaginian Princess lost her life, And credit too by her too quick affection; Phillis confiding in Demophoöns vowes Did lay her Bridall pallet in the grave: Repentance soone made Oenoës angry tongue Condemn the rash credulity of her eares. And so may I Varina, if I yeeld To Passions hair-brain'd, wild instructions: Then set a bay unto thy loves swift Current; See his affections first, and if he prove Loving to thee, Varina, do thou Love. See, see the Object of my best respect; Oh! did my heart enjoy that happinesse As doth that Gentleman, whose subject ears Such musick entertain, as hovering spheares Yeild in their proper motions, his breath Falls on his shoulders as doth Zephyrus On Flora's party color'd vestments, ah! Why doe I languish thus? I'll speake to him, It is as fit for maids to court, as men; If that the truth were rightly scann'd; but nicenesse And Custome do forbid it; its no sinne
If well we weigh it in its proper ballance; Then set the better foot before, and try, (She goes forward, but slies back) Oh! what exploit began I to attempt? What, casting off the weed of modesty To cloath my self with impudence? O fie! Should it be said, Varina did disrobe Her selfe of grace, and virgin-purity, And turned masculine, to court a stranger? No! back, base Cupid! thy Rhet'rick I scorn Now in my second rumination, 't may be That time will quench this burning Aetna in me, Or heav'ns inspire him for to know my love: Grant one of these ye Gods, and pitie me, Afford your help in this extremitie. Exit. Cha. Be it so, I'll send the letter. Rod. I hold the mission of a letter best, One line, one sentence with premeditation, Quickens, doth bear a greater prevalence Then words extemporary can expect: Words are like infants, whose unwelcome birth (If premature) bring death unto their mother. Cha. Let it be so. — Rod. It shall be so, Apollo guide my pen, And let thy Heliconian Fountains yeeld Liquor unto it, that the thing I write May there prevail, where rests my souls delight. Exeunt. Scena quarta. Enter Chaves and Picarro drawing. PIc. Come, come Sir, draw, or by this hand and sword I'll be your Priest. Cha. Sure you mistake, I am not The man you look for. Pic. You shall find, my eyes Have their true object: Coward, prate not, draw, Let s view thy weapon. Cha. Sir, your habit speaks you A man, and noble, I admire your judgment Should be so rash to quarrel with me, who Ne're injur'd you, and to my knowledge, till This time, ne're saw you. Pic. All your Rhetorick Shall not excuse your carcasse, turn and fight, Or perish. Cha. Tell me why, and then you'll find I am no Coward.
Pic. Hear my reason, You Have offred me an injury; I must not Put up, while you do walk with that same nose: Make hast and draw; Draw, or this slave shall beat Courage into thee, Coward. Cha. Well, perforce Since you will tempt a danger from my arm, Receiv't. Picarro falls. So now, I hope, you'l yeeld the cause Made you so valiant. Enter Mariana. Mar. Stay, for pitie save Picarro's life, take mine, as you're a man, Bridle your fury. Cha. Doe I dream? who speak? Mar. A haplesse Virgin! let the prayers and tears Of one that never sued before, redeem His lifes dire forfeit: if you be so cruell, That nought but blood will suit your anger, here Sheath your bright weapon in my breast, my blood Will sooner quench your irefull heat; kill me, And let him live. Cha. Sure she has stoln from heav'n An Angels utterance; had Ʋlysses heard This Syren minurize, the mast had been Too weak to hold him; Orpheus might have learnt New notes to fit's harp; had a salvage Scythe, Or untam'd re, when manacled they drive Whole flocks of men before them, on whose flesh Death strait should riot, hear her speak, their fiercenesse Would soon relent, they would forget the sweetnesse Of their inhuman banquet, and let loose Those they had markt for slaughter. Mar. Pray you Sir. Cha. Historians truly may relate how stones Follow'd Amphion to the Theban walls; How lofty Ossa and Banchaia danc'd At overhearing the Odrysian Lyre; That Dolphins at Arions Harp grew tame, And coucht their scaly backs to beare him out Of Neptunes foamy surges; likely 'tis And possible, since one Accent from her lips Can work far greater miracles, I would raise A man that long had bedrid lain; nay, were he Witherd with feeble age, should she smile on him He well might laugh at sage Meden's charms: Tell Aeson then, that her blest look had made him Fuller of youthfull vigours, then the force Of her inchanted hearbs infus'd into him. Mar. Then you wil save him? —
Cha. Look, how dark sorrow's beautified? how comely She's in her tears? they sit upon her cheeks Like Erythraean pearls enchas'd on grounds Of true Vermilion: Foolish Lapidaries! What need you borrow of the frozen Zone Congealed Ice? catch these drops, they're more pretious Then most transparent Crystall; I would fain Grant thy request, but that I should too soon Be exil'd from that blessing which your presence Fully affoords me; yet 'tis too unholy That she should kneel, I'll raise her. Mar. Here I'll lie. (He offers to raise her.) Prostrate for ever, lesse you please to save Picarro's forfeit life. Cha. How happy, Heav'ns! Is he in being vanquished, to have So fair a saver? would my life had been Put at his mercy: For your sake I'll grant Him life on this condition, That he tell What made him be my enemy. Mar. This morning If I mistake not, passing by our coach As we were coming from our Vineyard, you Pull'd up the Curtains, drawn before, to see Who were within, which he in heat of blood, Took as a wrong, and followed you. Cha. I'm sorry I was discourteous. Mar. Come Picarro, Signior, I am your worths true servant. Exeunt Mar. and Picarro. Enter Roderiguez and Boy. Rod. How now Chaves? What drawn so neer the Citie? pray heav'ns! my stay Has not endanger'd you: met you with theeves? Cha. With one hath stoln my best of Jewels; Sir, I am undone; lost friend for ever. Rod. Why? Cha. Look I not strangely o're I did? My looks — Rod. Why? What should aile you? Are you frighted, Sir? Cha. Doe not my eyes speak my hearts falshood? Ha! Rod. Chaves, dear friend, how fare you? Is all well? Cha. I prithee be my Priest, and sacrifice My treacherous carcasse to Eugenia, doe it, And when I yeeld the Ghost, I'll tell thee friend, That I fare well: ne're stare on me, my life Is a worse torture then the rack, or wheele, Ixions plague is but a play-game to't Nor his that rolls the revoluble stone, Nor that of proud Prometheus, on whose heart,
Th'insulting Vulture preyes. Rod. Alas! he raves! What cursed Friend tempts you to be thus desperate? Cha. Desperate? Kill me, let thy Rapier doe it, Ne're muse upon it, I deserve to die: Do justice on me. Rod. Tell me why, and then Perchance I'll do it. Cha. Hear me then, Suppose I had a beauteous sister, you Roderiguez Should vow her service, proffer her your love, Get my consent, her fathers, and her heart too, And aster fool both him and her, and me. Should I not kill you, think you? Rod. Yes, I deserv'd it. Cha. Then here's my sword, I've done all this and more, The vow's I made to your Eugenia's nothing, A dream, an airy shadow, you are fool'd, Your father's cousned by my hopes; 'tis true, I love another. Rod. 'Tis impossible; Your fury makes you utter this. Cha. By the hopes I have that thou wilt kill me, I have spoke No more but truth, by all that's good I have not: I love another. — I stole her countenance, but she my heart. Rod You're a treacherous man, Base and unworthy, take your weapon back, Defend your selfe. Cha. I will not, I confesse I have deserv'd death, but it grieves me, that By thy hands I must suffer; but my fate Is irresistable: Dispatch me. Rod. Stay, E're I doe kill thee, think how ominous Thy crime is: young men will abhor thee, virgins Hearing thy fault, will with their imprecations Heap tortures on thee: Poore Eugenia! Sister! I grieve for thee most: Are you ready? Cha. Yes! Not to resist, but to be sacrific'd. Rod. I'll not become his Butcher: for the name Of Friend, so often vowd between us, holds My arms, I cannot strike him; live to see Heav'n work thy ruine: I'll not be thy Priest. Farwell, false man, and look who e're thou wed, Shee'l be a faithless strumpet to thy bed! Cha. Thou lyest, return, I'll fight: —
She, I now love, is one, thou oughtst not mention Less on thy knees with reverence: one, whose looks Would e'en allure a Hermit, who had spent His years in solitude, to leave his Cell, And heav'nly contemplations, to admire Her perfect essence, dar'st thou prophecy Her for a strumpet? wert thou arm'd with thunder This arm should reach thee, Clouds of lightning shal not Secure thee: Know Sir, she is one, whom Angels Would to enjoy, desert their bliss, and vote No less then adoration due unto Her heav'nly vertues — Rod. Hee's past hopes! more sisters I have, more friends so worthy as himself I ne're can hope for: Sir, I pitty you And can my service help you ought in gaining Your Love, command it. Cha. Mean'st thou thus? Rod. You use not To finde me faithless: not my sisters wrong Shall make me prove disloyall: may I know her Is your new Mistriss? Cha. There's my misery, I know her notmy self, but 'tis the same Was in the Coach we overtook. Rod. Is't she? That's Mariana, Daughter to Alonzo The Indian Merchant, I am well acquainted With Garspar, noble Chaves: he, who is Her Fathers Cash-keeper, him wee'll use as means To win her for you: Our Varina lives In the same house: come! let's about it. Cha. Heav'ns prosper our designes, and may our fate Make us in them, them in us fortunate. Exeunt. Scaena quinta. Enter Varina Sola. THose Sulphurous flames, which Aetna's fiery panch Assidually into the air doth vomit, Bear not such force as doth this Paphian fire: Unconstant supposition never taught me This instant lesson, but experience: That poyson'd token in the Centaures blood, Which made Alcides burn in living flames, Had not such vigour, as these parching fires: Which, while I fan with sighs, and think by groans To puff them out; the more (alas) they flame: If not extinguisht by some timely showers My heart must turn an Aethiop: Come! sweet Boy! Enter Boy
And sing à Lachrymae unto my woes A mournfull Lachrymae, that from my eyes Whole Seas of brinish liquor may arise To drench this heat; I cannot now admire That Cupids Father was the God of Fire. Boy sings. 1. Sweet Cupid hear A Maiden vow; Though thou art blind, thou hast an ear; Let him, whom I love, know What pain and smart Lies burning in my heart, To this my humble boon dispence Thy sacred influence; And (though to cure thy eyes:) Let not a Virgin full thy Sacrifice. 2. Sweet Venus, see, And make me blest Visit me in this misery, Connive at my request: Assist thy Son Till he hath done. His mystick rites, and with new fires Fulfill a Maids desires: Else here I'll prostrate lie For ever, and will Swan-like, singing die. 3. Lendme a quill, &c. Var. Enough! this yeilds but nutrimental food Unto my dumpish humours; go, begon, Exit Boy Poor soul! how art thou tortur'd in distraction, And discompos'd in various resolutions: Sometimes to speak is countenanc'd as good; But modesty steps in, and checks my impudence: Then silence is thought best, but that would wrong That noble Person that deserves my Love: Thus while I practise for to quench the fire, I doe increase it, and it flames the higher. Enter Thomaso (Chave's man) Tho. Save you, sweet Mistriss, th' noble Roderiguez Desires but so much favour at your hands As to peruse this his most humble missive. Var. He may command a greater thing then this. (She reads it) Tho. I hope the Heavens do prosper our Atchievements; Her countenance warrants a good acceptande. Var. You may for this time depart, and tell your Master, That matters of such weight, desire some pawse: Before we make an answer: Friend, too morrow
About this time you may expect it here: Tho. All humble thanks, sweet Lady: at that time I shall attend your pleasure: all sweet happiness That can be wisht, attend you. Exit. Var. Friend! Farewell! See how my storm is turn'd into a calm, My clouded night into a sun-shine day, My heart but now deprest almost to death, Revives, and growes too ample for my breast, My fears are banisht, and my joyes become Redundant and superlative: to you O heavens! my duty doth return her thanks! And testifies it by her gratefull hands. (holds them up to heaven.) He, for whose sake I would exchange the world, Now throwes himself a servant at my feet: But let me guide me in my bliss, and wear My fortunes wisely in a formall fashion: I must not countenance his suit too soon, But bridling up my Love with judgements reynes: Keep at a distance, counterfeit my minde To be so far estrang'd from Venus Court, That 'twere as hard to make a Proselite, As me a Souldier in the Paphian field: Should I be prone and facile to his will, In some few days my kindness would grow stale: The shadow, when pursued doth fly, but turn Your back, and it in duty followes you: Should I concede too soon, and not deny, I should infringe the custom of us maids, Who in the things we most of all desire, Must feigne neglect, or else a meer dislike: Well then, how e're I'll play a maidens part, And make me stubborn, though I breake my heart. Exit. Scaena Sexta. Enter Gaspar, Mariana, Catalina. Gasp. FAith! you're a cunning Lover, I had thought I had deserv'd more interest in your trust, Then that you thus should steal your nuptials, and Ne'r let me know on't, where's my gloves? Mar. Why Gaspar? Why should'st thou think I should be married? Gas. Cause I know 'tis truth; your Father has disclosed The party to me. Mar. Party? prithee speak; And do not rest; what's that thou prat'st of? husband?
And Hymenaean rites? Gas. As if you knew not! Mar. Not I truly. Gas. Nor shall you know it then for me, I might Incurre much danger, should I be but seen To kisse your hand thus, discourse with you, in brief 'Tis to the jealousest, most ignoble man In all the City: so farewell, there's all That I dare stay to tell you. Cata. Blesse you, Mistress. Mar. Cousin, good cousin, leave me not, before You have explain'd this riddle, on my life I'll not disclose you told me. Gas. May I trust you? Mark then your fate, Your father hath decreed You for Don Balthasar old Frederiques heire, They are agreed. Mar. Save me Saints, I'd rather Be wedded to a Leaper; one halfe bedrid, Laden with gout, and all diseases, would not Be halfe so odious to me: is't not he That should have had Varina? Gas. Th' same. Mar. Sweet Gaspar, Make some obstructions, and doe thou, sweet Jove, Be an impediment to that decree. Gas. Cousin, alas! I have quite wearied him With my petitions, but he's deafe as Nereus Is to the shipwrackt Mariners, or rocks Unto the bellowing surges of the Sea. Mar. Thou hast been always honest, Gaspar, and A Friend, a Father to me: in this strait I'll try thy love; advise which way I shall Escape these nuptials; say, is't possible? Gas. I shall be proud to doe that office, Kings Would glory in; to doe you service, Saints Would sure disert their blisse: Do you but speak, Breath but one accent from those lips, the winds Will all contend, which shall be first made blest With its conveyance; your sweet voyce can charm The Syrens silent, force the Crocodile To leave his feigned weeping; at your looks Palms would renew their freshnesse; aged hearts Grow young again, Scythians be mild; if ever Rash Phaetons sisters had beheld those drops, They never more would boast their Amber tears To be more pretious. Mar. Push! you flatter me!
What means this ceremony? Gas. And had those creatures Book-blinded men, that dream of other worlds, Tell of Elysian blessings, known the joyes Are in your love, they would have lost themselves, As I have done, in contemplation Of this surpassing happinesse, you blesse With its enjoying. Mar. You are tedious, tell me How to evade this mischiefe. Gas. Pradon me, I'm in a labyrinth, subtler then the cave That held the Cretan Minotaure; 'tis easier To catch wild Boreas, make Neptune calm When he most rageth, then to give your worth Its just Encomiums. I'm so farre transported With rumination on't beyond my selfe, That I have quite forgot your first demand. Mar. Pray tell me Cousin, How may I delude Balthasars nuptials? Gas. 'Tis difficult, There is but one way left, and that's to wed Another, e're you come unto his bed. Mar. Faith! any body, honest Gaspar, bring Some aged Lazar from the Hospitall, Or towing Galliego, and I'll love Him rather then the other, let me see Whom thou wouldst wish me to. Gas. An honest man, One I dare swear that loves you. Mar. Nominate him: By all that's good, I'll love him. Gas. She's my own. I'll take you at your word — (aside.) Behold the man, the true Idolater Of thy perfections, one whose every thought Is on thy vertues, how to give them reverence Due to their merits. Mar. This is brave, proceed, You're Courtly grown, what spirit has infus'd This unaccustom'd phrase into you? Gas. Your Love which hath power to give a dumb man utt'rance, Make Ideots Orators to fill the world With new inventions; consecrate this Age Onely to Poets, whose immortall lines May celebrate thy praises. Though thy Father Could be so perjur'd after a thousand oaths,
To seek to rob me of my interest in thee, Yet the known goodnesse of thy Nature tells me, Thou'lt not be perjur'd too, I'm sure thou'lt love me. Mar. Reason good, base man! Did all this painted processe tend to this? Were Balthasar a man compos'd of vices, Il'd sooner cast my self away on him, Then on thy basenesse: Loving'Coz. farewell! You may go meditate to get a wife, And ruminate on your most base desires In the Grand-Placa. Walk, Sir. Exeunt Mar. and Cat. Gas. Is there no thunder left in heav'n? Has earth Left all it's fear, it shakes not at the hearing Of such inhuman perjuries, untill It have a rupture vast enough to swallow At once the world, that it may ne're produce Again such treach'rous animals, as my fate, My cursed fate torments me with: I am A proper man, I've limbs enough▪ because I have a blemish in my blood, my Mistress Rejects me; Thus should I in open Court Sue for her as my wife: I have no means To stand against her Father, and 'tis gold That rules the Law now. Well! since all will be Villains, why should I practise honesty? I've brains as well as other men, my spirit Tells me, there's means to right the wrong. Who's this? Enter Roderiguez. Rod. Gaspar? the man I look't for. Gas. Don Roderiguez! What drew you hither? Rod. Sir, my businesse is Now with your selfe; Your Master has a daughter I have a most deserving friend affects Her dearly, wilt thou be a means to gain Her favour for him? Gas. I did take you Sir, T'have been a person of more reall worth Then thus t'assay a servants loyalty; Think you my Masters daughter shall become A prostitute? If this be all your businesse, I must not stay to hear it. Rod. Thou mistak'st, I have no such intention, thou shalt raise His daughter with a marrige to a man Of noble Blood and Fortunes. Gas. But her Father Has promis'd her to one he will not break with.
You cannot have her. Rod. Hold! there's gold, thou shalt (Gives him money.) Perswade her love my friend, I know thou canst, My honest Gaspar.— Gas. Sir, I am a man whom stepdame Fortune made To eat my bread in servitude, my Master Is all the hopes I live by, and my trust Hath gain'd me some respect above a servant; Should I undoe his purpose, crosse this match, For your sakes, I should win the execrations Of all true servants; and perchance your selves Seeing me false to him, would fear t'impose Confidence in me: pray receive your gold, I must not do it. Rod. Come! thou shalt, the man Thou dost it for will raise thee farre beyond Thy expectation, Gaspar. Gas. May I trust you? Rod. What needs these doubts? Gas. Then know my Mistress hates The person whom her Father would bestow Her on in marriage; would your friend, or you, Or any one, there's in the Citie you may hire To kill him, then admission will be easie. Rod. Most excellent! his name? he's seal'd for death. Gas. Balthazar, Frederiques heire, to morrow night Your friend and you come to the window, and Bring somthing that may please her, and ne're doubt You shall have gentle audience. Rod. I'll about it. Exit. Gas. Doe, on your shoulders I my selfe will rise To quit my Masters monstrous perjuries. Exit. ACT. 2. SCENE 1. Enter Varina sola. THus have I fram'd, though long first, my rescript, As well as th' poor Minerva of my brain Enabled me; 'tis tart enough, I'm sure, To vulnerate and pierce a heart of steel: If his affection's byassed with vertue, He'l re-addresse to me to work the cure, What Pelias wounded, it alone could heal; The limb that's burnt we hold unto the fire, Loves wounds must have their Balsam from that hand
That made the Ulcer. Stay! th'Times Clock doth prompt me This houre Thomaso promis'd to be here, To bear my answer back. He comes: Your actions Enter Thomas Are comments to your words, and what your tongue Of late exprest, your diligence performs. Tho. Right worthy Lady, should I vilifie My faith by misperformance, I should think My selfe degenerate from what I was. Var. Your words engage my faith; friend, there's my answer. Tho. Thanks worthy Lady, this shall surely have Acceptance far more gracious from your servant, Then such a Jewell which th' Aegyptian Queen (To add a complement to sumptuousness) Dissolved drank unto her Anthony. Var. Then beare it to him instant, it may be His expectation may be harrass'd out: For what desire commands us to expect, Time, if protracted, maketh us disgust; Haste therefore, and farewell. Exit. Tho. Adieu! sweet Lady! Now if this Letter bear a gentle sense, And gives a Fiat to Rod'riguez suit, His heart will mount so high with joy, that it Enter Roderiguez. Outstrips imagination. Noble Sir — Rod. What newes Thomaso? come and glut my ears With comfortable tidings. Tho. Whether such As you expect, Sir, or the contrary, Resides not in the confines of my knowledge. Rod. Spake you not with her at the time prefixt? Tho. Yes! and her mind salutes you in this paper. Rod. Came this from her? Tho. I had it from her hands. Rod. Hadst thou encompast all this Universe, Especially the East and Western India, And ransackt either of them for their pearls: Or hadst thou ript the bowels of the earth, And laid her hidden treasure at my feet, It could not have procur'd the hundredth part Of that content, as doth this piece of paper. Tho. Still may't be multiplyed, and augment Your wisht beatitude a thousand fold. (He reads it.) Rod. What have we here? A slat deniall? Ha? Hard-hearted Lady! hadst thou spectacles Which might so help thy optitick faculties, As to behold my bleeding heart, thou couldst not
Choose but relent, and love me for my love. Tho. Patience, noble Sir — Rod. Tis cruelty! alas sh'ad courteous been Had she procur'd my death, or my proscription: But thus to charact'rize my torments, and To dally with my flames, doth argue she Studies the Art of inhumanity. Tho. Let not such thoughts finde harbour in your breast, Exile them thence. Rod. They took possession: And cannot easily be extruded thence. Tho. Why then encounter her your self, and speak: Let not a Letter daunt you, storm again: Your parts do speak you man, and you may win her: It may be she observes formality, In these her actions: and for fashion sake Her tongue saies no (as maidens use to do) When as her minde thinks yea: good Sir, about it. Tho. Thy Councel's prevalent, and I'll observe, Next time I'll try her: and my reasons shall Triumph victorious, or in th'Duell fall. Exeunt. Scena secunda. Enter Hebes Solus. OH! my decaied panch! is't not a miserable case that a mans belly should ne're see a piece of roast beef, nor ones guts feel one drop of double drink in two years? There's one Mr. Want, a lean Gentleman of our Parish, hath so debarred me from sustenance, that I scarce weigh threescore on each side, besides feet, head, leggs, and offall. There's an old shaver they call Don Praepontio, that lives hereabouts, that maintains his men every day in holyday bellies, and their chaps strut, as if they were created for nothing but to blow bagpipes: now, if I could scrue into his service, my spiny Car∣cass would begin to whine as a dog after flesh, when his chaps run over. But soft, sure this is he. Enter Praepontio & Rubio. Heb. I'll make as if I knew him not, and praise him to's very face, and then I'll warrant you. Prae. Thus perambulating all alone, I ruminate on the multiplicity of those joyes, that my Varina might afford me. Heb. Save thee honest friend. Prae. Why? what art thou? Heb. What am I? Thou seest I am neither horse nor mare, bull nor cow, hog nor pig, dog nor rat, mouse nor cat, fish nor flesh, nor good red herring: but as I may say, a meere man.
Prae. My Mistriss will be well taken, Rubio, to hear this fellow talk; but say, art a meer man, canst thou keep thy money, and not grease the ale-wifes fingers with it? Heb. How? grease the ale-wifes fingers with it; nay I should prove a very fool then: for she might then grease my face with her talons, for not paying my reck'ning. Prae. Well spoken of a fool. Heb. I, by my faith, Master, was it. Prae. I mean, canst thou keep thy money from spending? Heb. I, Master, if I had it. Prae. Wilt thou live with me? Heb. I, Sir, an't please you, I'm dissolved on that point already. Prae. Go, stand at the Curtains, and seal your lips. Didst thou invite her, Rubio? you must wait very attentively at her elbow, and if perchance a drop fall from her mouth, you must be sure to catch it, I'll have it put in a reliquary: but does not my great ruff become me admirably? will she not like me, thinkst thou, in this suit? I will coyne words shall make her in love with me. Rub. You will bewitch her with your very looks, ne're doubt it; you look now more compleatly then the great Mogull, or the Arch-Duke. Prae. I have a Lions Countenance. Rub. Nay, a Bears rather, or a Baboons, you look so smug on't, Master. Prae. But didst thou see what an admirable piece of Poetry I con∣sarcinated in my bed; nay, in my sleep, Rubio? Rub. Some drowsie Poem. Prae. Ovid de Arte Amandi was never like it: Hold my Cloke Ru∣bio, doe you see? Rub. I see your back-side, Sir. Prae. But mark my Verses, how melodiously they run upon their feet. Rub. They gallop. Prae. Mark. Hem—hem—hem. If you would old Natures wonder See, list while I her praise out-thunder: Her head a Cedar over-growes, Her rosie Cheeks, and radiant Nose, Her hands Lillies, for eyes behold Amber or Barbary Gold: From her middle to her knees, Guesse what monstrous rarities Lye hid: the Tropick Zone cannot Burn, or cast forth flames so hot, As does my heart, 'tis she must heale me, Or Death will with his paws bemeale me.
How lik'st thou it? Rub. Horribly, beyond expression. Prae. I wil write a whole volume of such Elegies, and put down Lope de vega, or Gacilasso's Poems. Rub. You must get tunes to them, they will passe for excellent new Ballads. Prae. O! my Uncle! Alv. O! my wise kinsman, what sayes your Mistress? Prae. O Uncle! she is the noblest, wittiest woman that ever I en∣countred with since I gallopt or'e the Alps; she surpasses me in inge∣niosity for all my travels. Rub. And my Master, God blesse his worships Coxcomb, told her, you would give her Holland Cheese, Parmasane, and Calves-head to breakfast if she would have him. Prae. Nay, Uncle, she askt me if you would give her your land at Granada. Alv. And what didst thou answer? Prae. Peace, sirrah, Uncle, aspect my judgement in being responsible: I sayd, I, that he will, if I thought the old dotard would not, I would dash out his brains. Alv. Thank you Nephew! How then? Prae. For, quoth I, although he were hang'd, or drownd, or dead a∣ny way, though the Divel should carry him away in a Harricane, I should have his land, being as I am, eldest son to his eldest sister; is't not so Uncle? I know my Pedigree. Rub. Master, you need no Herald to blaze your worth, you can doe it sufficiently your selfe. Prae. True! very true; but Uncle, shall I dance with my Mistress anon, I long to meet her in a measure, I can so caper it. Enter Alonzo, Varina, and Servant. Alv. Here comes your Mistress, and her Uncle. Prae. Pray let me accost them. Alv. Welcome noble friends. Prae. For your part, Sir, à posteriore I salute you thus; and your Sir, thus, with this Italian Frisco: But as for you, my superabundant Mi∣stress, accept the Foet of my Minerva for your congratulatory wel∣come. Var. 'Tis pitie, servant, you are not pictur'd with a Laurell wreath in your forehead. Rub. Or rather with a Coxcombs Crest, Mistress. (Aside. Prae. But my most inestimable Mistress, I must dictate to you, That you vilifie my brains fecundity, in not applauding my ingenious con∣ceptions, since sure you love me. Rub. Better then she loves Plum-porredge, or Minc't-pyes, I dare protest. Prae. Tell me then, thou Master-piece of Nature. Rub. Mistress-piece, Sir, she is a woman. Prae. Does not the superficies of my countenance demonstrate as
much love as Don Quixot's, or Gerardo's, the unfortunate and ominous Spaniard? am not I kin to the Family of the Guzmans, think you? Rub. Alias, Goosman; alias, Goodman Goose. (aside.) Prae. And am I not the most acute, compleat, polite Itinerator that ever caper'd over the Alps, and the Pyrenaean mountains, and the most sublime and ingenious Poet that ever drank of the Heliconian, Castali∣an, and Pierian Fountains: Have not I sixteen languages exactly, per∣fectly, and perspicuously. Rub. Sixscore, Master. Prae. Come, my supereminent Mistress, let us expatiate to refresh our palats with our delicious banquets, the minc't pies, and the Plum∣pudding which my English Cook made me, will be cold else. Come, sirrah, follow. Exeunt. Heb. Now my sweet guts and garbege, my Fathers old Boots were never so liquor'd and greas'd as you shall be. Exit. Scaena tertia. Enter Chaves, Roderiguez, and Boy. Cha. HAst thou the Song? Boy? Boy. Yes, Sir. Cha. Are the Musitians ready? Boy. They expect behind you pillar. Cha. But art thou sure this is her window? Rod. The same, ne're feare, we shall have audience. Boy sings. 1 Hail Mariana! let thine eyes From their sable Clouds arise, And dart their fire (At our desire) To re-illuminate the skies. 2 The Moon is down, the Stars doe hide] Their lustre, and our zeal deride, Ʋnveil thy beams, Those goldenst eams Will vye them in their greatest pride. 3 Shine forth sweet light! one gentle ray Will drive, our dismall night away; And make us deem Sol mounts his Team; Our zeal shall swear 'tis break of day. 4 Let us, sweet Saint, thy vertues know, How great a brightnesse they can show, Tell us the Sun Is backward run, And that he hath reverst his Plough. 5 Shine out sweet Venus, thou canst soon Transcend the Taper of the Moon,
And with thy light Quicken the night, Turning our Morning into Noon. 6. Hail! Mariana, cast an eye With a relenting sympathy; Ʋnvail the books Of thy sweet looks, And let me read my Destinie. Rod. So now depart, and charge the Musitians they say nothing. Boy. I will Signior. Exit. Rod. The window is opened, friend, list who speaks. Mariana and Catalina, out at the window Mar. I marvail, Catalina, who bestowed This Musick on us; it was good and sweet. Cat. Some one, that dog'd you home from Alvarado's, Some Amorado. Rod. Speak Sir, now or never. Cha. All peace content and joy attend you Ladies. Mar. What man art thou, that when Nights Curtain's drawn, And with her sable mantle vails the skies, Dar'st venture on our secrets? Cha, One, you promis'd When for your sake I sav'd Picarro's life, To keep in memory. Mar. Sir, if you are he, I am obliged, I confess, to honour Your nobleness, but these untimely houres Admit no conference: for your Musick, Sir, We give you thanks; so much I love you, that I'll not endanger you, if you be seen, You run your lifes dire hazard, Sir, good night, Fair thoughts attend you. Cha. Stay! for Loves sake, were there Dangers as thick here, as there's stars above us, I would contemn them all; if death it self Should here incounter me, l'ld scorn the fury: Tell him his hand had here no power; your presence Makes men immortall. Mar. Cause you shall not, Sir, Condemn me of discourtesie; I'll stay, But to your purpose, let me know it briefly; Or I must be unmannerly. Cha. Why then, In brief I love you, and desire your love. Mar. And is this all, good night! — Cat. Hear him out, Mistress, he's an honest Gentleman, I know by's words; Cha. My zeal could tell you, Lady, That your are fair; you know it; that your eyes
Clothe night in days robes, and eclipse the stars With their bright lustre; that you are the modell Of Natures artifice, her true Idea, In whose brow Art and Beauty wedded meet, But these, dear Mariana, and the like Pedantick terms, I leave to those whose loves Are in their lips; I'll be as plain in speech, As zealous in respects; my deeds shall speak My Love no Changeling Mar. But I cannot, Sir, Nor must not love you many one would feed Your flames with frustrate species to deride Your passions, but I do carty with me More honest thoughts: as you have been, I'll be Brief: save your labour Signior, they are fruitless, You sing to th' deaf, and plough the sandy shore, I must not love you. Cha. I'm oblig'd to you! 'Tis well and nobly done to put an end To my hot tortures, view this blade, the same Which for your sake I did restrain from shedding Picarro's blood for better ends; shall now (goes to stab himself.) In bloody Characters write me thy Martyr. Rod. Hold! hold! for heav'ns sake; hold! — What mean you Chaves? Cha. Nothing, but to open A vein that's stopt; 'tis good for me to bleed: My sword will be a good Phlebotomist, I'm sick of th' Plurisy; a burning feaver! 'Tis better once to die, then thus to live In lingring flames; and piece-meal crumble: ha! Be thou my friend; and since my Life cannot, Let death now make me pittied: Let me die! Mar. You're a faint hearted Soldier; what dasht At first repulse? admit I could afford You heart-room in my breast: you might well think Me very light, should I at once be wonn Without experience of your Loyalty: Besides, our Countries use permits not Children To choose their husbands: 'Tis my Fathers care, Get his consent, and peradventure I May yeild to love you. Cat. Do sweet Mistress, he's A very honest man: I'd take his word. Cha. Look! how the enamour'd air hangs o're her lips To suck a blessing from them? I can think Now 'twas no fable, that bold Boreas Rapt fair Orithya, since I see him haste To ravish thee of that too pretious breath,
Thy words expire with; it will make his own Sweeter then Syrian winds, when nought but Myrrhe And Bysse perfume them. Mar. You're too hasty Sir. It is impossible that I should love you, I am contracted. Cha. Yet 'tis in your power To love your servant. Mar. If Anatomists Tell truth, that say, I'th' Center of our hearts There is a little Concave, where resides, Our best affections; then your Augury Must needs be truth, for all the love lies there, Is to anothers worth engag'd. Cha. Make me But of your privy Councell, pray reveal him. Mar. Then know, since first I saw you, I have been (The night will hide my blushing to your face) A true devotarist to your lovely vertues; Deride me not, dear Signior. Cha. I am Ravisht beyond my hopes, my heart's too narrow, Too strait-lac'd for th'exuberance of my joy. Enter Balthasar. Balt. This is the house: now Gaspar I shall see Thy truth, I heare some mutt'ring. — Mar. Walk round the house, my maid shall let you in. Bal. 'Tis she, I hear her voyce, and here he comes. Sir, stay, you must not passe so. Rod. What art thou? That thus presum'st to over-hear our secrets, And rashly tempt thy death. Bal. I am a man, Thy equall every way. Rod. About your businesse, Cha. Sirrah, be packing, or I'll send you hence. Balt. Were you encompass'd with hot lightning, arm'd With Corslets made of Dragons maile, your breath As poysonous as a Vipers, or a Toads, Yet I alone would dare t'encounter you. Rod. You're very valiant: Frenzy prompts you thus, Or else tis some fat Fleming, who being drunk, Hath lost his way to th'Brothell, and doth think To find his drab here: Friend, you've lost your way: Be wise, and save your carcasse by a retreat: You I walk, nay make a leg, and thank me too For letting you to passe, or I shall teach Your noll more manners. Bal. Teach thy selfe, false man,
More honesty: which of you is it, that Thus Courts my Mariana? cause to him I only speak. Cha. 'Tis I. Bal. Then let me tell you: You injure one, that never injur'd you: She's mine, betroth'd to me: Cha. I'm sorry 'twas My hapless fate to meet you in this place, I shall but poast you through the Avernal Lakes On Ambassy to Pluto: and desire Those Deities to fit you with a Mistress: You'll have her forcibly, although you see She cannot love you? gentle friend, put up! This is a glorious quarrel, every drop Of blood, that's spilt, will have a Crown beyond The palm of Martyrs▪ For my Mistress? come! Address your self to prayers first. (Drawes.) Balt. Prithee stay: Thou seem'st a person qualifi'd, before We fight and die (for that one of's must do) Think what unworthy and inhuman cause You stand to justifie with blood: her Father Hath giv'n her me, before whole Quires of Saints, (Heav'ns hierarchy) we were contracted: do not, Blinded with lust, run headlong to a sin, So foul and horrid: hazard not your souls Lasting salvation in a quarrel, so Unjust on thy part: say, 't should be my fate (As it may be) to kill you: what a mass Of endless woe thou pluckst upon thy head? Hadst thou no other crimes to charge thy soul, Think what a monstrous, and ignoble sin Is supplantation in this kind of wrong: Above Astraea's Laws? A Christian, Sir, (As you should be) at naming this would have A frigid palzy in his veins: pray, tell me, Feel you no Earthquake in you? Cha. Thus, and thus I'll Catechize you. (Stabs him) Bal. Oh! (falls) Rod. So preach in hell: We have full entrance now, but least the noyse Disturb the house, we'd best depart, and come When the next night in favour to us shrowds Sleeping Olympus in her dusky clouds. Cha. I do approve your counsell: — Exeunt. Balthazar rises up. Bal. So! they are gon: I'm hurt, my loss of blood
Makes my legs falter: Fool, to shed a drop In an effeminate quarrel: can the name Of woman pass without fell execrations Through these parcht lips? henceforth I will evade them, As the infectious scum of pestilence: To Troy once famous one base Helen brought A finall ruine: fair Persepolis Had still stood Asia's glory, had not Thais (That obscaene Thaiuml;s) by her witchcraft made Fond Alexander to consume't by fire: Each woman is a plague: I justly may Curse their whole sex, since Mariana's false. I must be silent. Enter Gaspar. Gasp. Balthazar? Bal. Who art thou? Gasp. 'Tis I, your servant Gaspar! are my words Not truth: have you not met with them: Alas! I fear you're wounded: Sir, base villains! — Bal. Yes doubly Gaspar, for my bodies harms Surgeons may cure them: but the wounds my mind Suffers, 's past help of plaisters: Oh! I bleed: These are but scratches, here's a wound indeed. Gasp. Faith! think not on it, Sir, she may be honest, Though she hath suitors: women will delight In the plurality of servants. Bal. But That she whostood the Goddess of my love, Whose truth should Angels with me 've sought to blast, I should have judg'd them lyars: should be thus Inconstant, false: this puts me quite beyond The confines of all reason! Gasp. Good Sir! patience. Bal. Patience! what's that? pray carry me to some Infected Pesthouse, or foul Hospitall, Where all diseases flourish: where no sound Person can enter, but he must return Full fraught with all contagions: there I'll steal From one a plague-sore; rob another of His purple spots, this of a feaver, till I have ingross'd all maladies, that carrie A spreading rancour with them, and that have Death in their bosomes: then I'll straitway come, And keep society with none, but women: Til the whole sex have shar'd of death, and those (For some will live) that do remain to keep Earths store alive, be so infected, that Their future issue be all monstrous: Tell me, Should I not fit her then for this, and all That bear the name of women?
Gas. Sir, you grow Outragious in your passion; your blood Carries a fervor, that won't let this passe Without revenge; I'll work the means, if you Have heart to act it. Bal. Wilt thou doe't? Gas. Ne're fear't: Go to your lodging, dress your wounds, you may Inform her Father at your leasure. Bal. Well, I'll rest upon thy care, and make my hand In thanks retaliate thy just deserts. Gas. O! that I could but borrow for this instant, A vipers breath to blast thee, but 'tis well, Vines clip not Elms for nothing, I must twine About them subtly, till they kiss the earth, Or else my ends will have abortive birth. Exit. Scena quarta. Enter Varina. Var. NOw should I be intrapt in my own Gin, Whom should I blame, but only my false heart? Should that unkindnesse dropping from my pen, Extinguish quite poor Roderiguez flame, On whom should I disgorge my troubled stomach, But on my selfe? 'tis pretty to consider How I expose my selfe unto a wound, To make another bleed. — Enter Roderiguez. Rod. Pardon, sweet Damsell, this my bold intrusion, Urg'd not by rude behaviour, but by love. Var. Sir, you're a stranger; but if it be void Of ill intent, your pardon's quickly seal'd. Rod. If that to evidence the true affection I alwayes bare unto your noble self, Be ill intent, then my accesse is conscious. Var. To court me with your love, Sir, it is strange, I'm a poor Orphan, one whom Fate decreed To hang my Fortunes on anothers girdle, Time sure hath prov'd himselfe a cunning Artist, That in so short a space could frame a subject For your affection; 'tis not long a goe My eyes tooke their first notice of you. Rod. Time. Is not that cunning Artist, but your vertues, Which through the winding convex of my ears, Convey'd this winding admiration to my heart, 'Tis not your means, sweet Lady, but your love
That I now covet: For your guardians favour, I weigh it little, so you'l grant me yours: Throw not those angry fire-balls of thy eyes Upon me who am Touch-wood, lest I here Moulder to ashes; bid them that they keep Fast their Artillery; 'tis your milder beams, Those rayes of favour that we now request. Var. Though I am conscious of no demerits Residing in me, that might claim these praises, These pick-thanks of your tongue, I think my selfe Too good to entertain a scornfull jeer; For honours sake forbear't. Rod. Wretched mistake! That you should once conceive my heart could lodge The least base thought that's Traytor to your honor! Var. But hear me, Sir, Once walking with my Nurse For recreation in our shady groves, She told me her prophetick spirit fear'd Some false One would betray me to his love, And to my ruine. Rod. If 'twas me she meant, The Sibyll lyed. Var. Howe're, it breeds suspition. Rod. What demonstration of my zealous faith Can this your incredulity exact? Shall I contend in combat with the Lion? Or else affront the ugly foaming Boar? What is't that I shall doe? Speak, and 'tis done: Shall I betake my self to th' Russian Fields Ith' midst of Winter, where my faithfull blood May freeze to Corall, and my sad laments, Congeal with th'aire? Shall I devote my selfe A sactifice to Aetna, or to Neptune? Shall I atchieve to fetch the golden fruit From th'scaly Dragon? pluck fell Cerberus out From's stinking den? These, or a thousand more, I'll doe at your command. Var. To promise, Sir, Is easie, when performance lags behind. Rod. 'S your heart so prepossest, that there's no room, No corner left to hold one grain of faith? Var. I'll try your love; here, take this, drink it off. (gives him wine) Leave not one drop i'th' bottom of the cup. Rod. What e're it be, I'll banish feare and do't. (drinks.) Var. Is't off? Rod. It is. Var. Then know that thou art poyson'd. This is that draught which to Ʋlysses mates,
In stead of drink sage Circe did extend; 'Tis venoms quintessence, rank poyson. Rod. Poyson? Var. Yea, poyson! not the ugly Toad includes Worse venome then that potion. Rod. Methinks, I feel no alteration in my blood. Var. I know that too. Th'time for its operation Is not yet come; some sev'n hours hence, and then A deadly fire raging within thy breast, Shall make thy Arteries crack, and tear thy nerves: An Iron girdle shall not hold thy body It shall so swell with this envenom'd draught. Rod. Alas! good Lady, you much fail i'th' end For which you practise this; you plot my torture By fear of death, alas! you doe mistake, My love shall own you for her greatest friend: For thus to live, deprived of your love, Is worse ten thousand times then death it selfe. Then, thank you for this cruell courtesie, I will not stile you cruel, or hard hearted, But pitifull, a kind and loving Lady, And so will limb your vertues to the life: This kindness chalenges my best respects; First, that you fix a period to my flames: Next, that I dye a sacrifice to you: Var. What? Art thou glad to die, and proud to fall A victime by my hands? Rod. Your victime, Lady! Var. Do not dissemble, in the heav'nly Quire There's no permission for an hypocrite To be a Chorister; do not palliate Th'internall thoughts with such Hypocrisie. Rod. I scorn the Title of an Hypocrite, I liv'd your Lover, and will dye your Martyr. Var. Then am I sorry for my cruel act. There, take thou that, and work thine own revenge (gives a bodkin.) While time permits. Rod. It shall not be, sweet Lady. First, should these eyes behold these wretched hands Pluck forth my entrals: should my harmlesse soul When 'tis transported over Charons passage, But have intelligence that you were injur'd. It would return, and kill your enemy. Var. What needs a further triall of thy love? Then know, that draught I gave thee was not poyson, But is as cordiall as th'Hyblaean neclar. Rod. This is beyond the fadome of my weak
Conception's, that you durst expose your life To one, whom you (for ought he knew) had injur'd. Var. I durst expos't to thee, I knew thy heart, Forgive me now the rude assault I made Upon thy patience: here accept my hand, My heart, my love, 'tis all thine own. Rod. This gift Is more to me then th' Orientall Empire, Which lies embroider'd with earths chiefest treasure, Pactolus, nor proud Tagus cannot bring So rich a Present to their native Prince, As is Varina's love: Alas! one kisse Stoln from her lips, is worth th'Grand-Signiors bliss. Exeunt. Scaena quinta. Enter Gaspar, solus. I'll be an Argus, for no other name Will better sit me; I will watch this Io, I'll dive into her secrets, and her maids; I'll look with Eagles eyes into her wayes, And went she through her actions as the snakes Glide o're the stones, yet would I find their tract. Exit. Scena sexta. Enter Alonzo, Frederique, Picarro. Alo. LEt me perswade you, Brother, to surcease This endlesse suit, what wilt advantage you To keep his carcasse? Fred. Why ran he in debt? I could have kept my money. Pic. Sir, my Father Doth not deny to pay you, all he asks Is time of payment. Alo. Can he offer fairer? He owes me money, yet I so respect Alvarez credit, that I'll take his word Without security. Fred. And because you Will play the fool, and lose your money, must I doe so too; let me then have his land. Pic. Sir, if you'l take my bond, I will oblige My selfe, and all the land my Father leaves me, To give you satisfaction. Fred. Keep your land, Sow garlick on't, I will have nought but money▪ Give me my money.
Alo. You're the strangest man That e're I dealt with, had not you farre better Take that then loose all▪ say, he die in prison, What will you get then? Fred. 'S body, that I'll sell To the Dice-makers, they shall put his bones To the same use they were at while he liv'd, He may thank's gaming for't, the Dice, and s Drabs. Pic. My patience will not hear this▪ Covetous man, Were't not for th'reverence I ow, this house, Thou shouldst not thus abuse thy betters — Fre. He Threatens, bear witnesse, Sir, I'll have your tongue Bound to the peace. Enter Balthazar. Alo. Balthazar, pray perswade Your Fathers patience. Bal. Where's your daughter, Sir? Not stirring? Alo. Yes! — Mariana! Enter Mariana Ma. Did you call? Bal. My business, Sir, is private. Alo. We'll withdraw. Exeunt Alonzo, Frederique, Picarro. Bal. Good morrow, Mistress, slept you well last night? Your eyes look red, I doubt you slept not well. Ma. What makes you look so ghastly? Bal. Faith! I dream'd Last night, that being underneath your window, I heard men talk there, and you answer. Ma. Dreams Are foolish fancies, and 'tis witchcraft, Sir, To credit them. Bal. Nay more, I heard you vow Love unto one, and bid him come and enter Into your Conclave; you doe understand me? Ma. Yes! that you dream'd so. Bal. And as he was going, I staid his passage, and he wounded me. And when I wak't, blushing Aurora told me That I was wounded. Ma. Sir, You did but dream, Beleeve it not. Bal. Yes, Mariana, see This Crimson livery which your servants bounty Last night bestow'd upon me, 'tis a brave one, Does't not become me finely? Ma. Saints protect me! How came you hurt, my dearest Balthazar? You are not wounded?
Bal. This is brave, she will Perswade me she is innocent. O woman! How various are thy humours? thy devices? How sly thy projects? Men with ease can find Natures obscurest reaches, over-reach The craft of Serpents, tame wild beasts, and bring All things to their subjection, onely woman With her deceit, surpasses man, confounds His best capacity. But tell me, Mistress, Did you not see me wounded? Ma. I? These eyes Would have turn'd blind at such a sight; let's see! Is your wound dangerous? Bal. Heav'ns! I think deceit Has left its room in Hell, and built its mansion Within thy breast: Is't possible your face Can be so full of impudence, to sweare A thing so false? Ma. He raves! I'll call for help! Bal. Yet more Maeanders! tell me hypocrite, My fine dissembler, who it was you set To be my Butcher? I'll not seek revenge; But (as my duty is) go kiss his hands, Prostrate my neck unto his honor'd feet, Because my Mistress loves him. Ma. Las! he's frantick! Bal. True! you have made me, Mariana, were there Any evasion to excuse thy crime, I should be ready to believe thou mightst Be blamelesse yet! But I have proofs that banish All probabilities, my ears can tell That thou'rt turn'd Harpy; Oh! there is no trust, No faith in woman left! Mar. Yet in this fury? Dear Balthasar, what have your jealous eyes Observ'd in my behaviour? You should think That when my Fathers will hath made me yours. I should fall off and take another. Bal. Nothing! My eyes and feeling faile me, all my senses Were wrapt in extasies of endlesse pleasure, To think you were my Mistress: I do know That you are vertuous, your affection's wholly Bent to my love; let me but kisse your hand, But touch it onely, and you'l soon perceive With what an equall temper I can doe it; I'm none of those who carry hot-houses, Stoves in their blood, I've been too cold a Lover,
Too modest with you, therefore you reject me. Mar. Yet more outragious? Bal. And have taken one Some strange-backt monster, whom perchance you've seen Out of your window in the Placa, take The quick Strapado nimbly, or have born Some massy burden, and his big-made joynts Ne're crack beneath his ponderous weight, that promis'd An abler body to content your lust, More raging then a Goats; be briefe, who is't? Some slavish Galliego, that has stoln My int'rest in thee? Ma. You're a foul mouth'd man! Come you to rail? you shall find fuell friend To feed your fire with, till its hear has burn'd Thy intrails out; I love another, goe, And tell my father on't, nor you nor he Shall know his name: it was the same that hurt you, You may goe tell, Sir. Bal. Impudence, declare (draws his sword.) Or perish. Mar. Murder! Enter Alonze, Frederique, Gaspar. Alo. How now Balthazar? What drawn upon my daughter? 'tis not fair. Mar. Pray give an ear unto my short request; As you're my Father, kill me, e're my name Be blasted thus by this ignoble man, Whose head hath forg'd a crime against me; Fiends Would ne're have dream't of. Bal. Strumpet! Alo. Sir, desist. You have done more already then you'l answer. Mar. He charges me, that underneath my window Last night some people hurt him; that he heard Men talk to me: which how 'tis possible, And you not heare it, judge your selfe: but malice Ne're wants a subject to defame. Bal. Your servant Can verifie my words as truth. Gas. Who I? Did not the rev'rence which I ow this house, With-hold me from the fury which the lie (You call me as a witness to) had stir'd? In these hot veins, you should be taught, base man, How to create such Fabricks. Bal. Slave! we will Have vengeance. Gas. Yes! we mean to have it, Sir. You'l walk, or by this Rapier
Bal. Walk awhile, I shall Live to dissect thy treacherous Corps, as small As crums or Atomes. Exeunt Balth. Fred. Mariana. Gas. Heark you, Signior, The goodness that your goodness makes me owe Your Family, obliges me to be Nice in a point, that does so near concern Your houses reputation: Balthasar Said nought but truth, for Mariana has Assiduall suitors. Alo. Hadst th' a Devils spleen, Or Serpents breath, thou could'st not blast her goodness? Gas. First should this weapon rip my entrals out, E're I would be so impious as to seek To blast her fame: honest? her sex may raise After her death Mausolaean monuments, Or some tall Pyramid, as to the chastest, E're crown'd the name of women Nature first Would go awry, the Ocean lose its course; E're she her vertue. Lass! Sir, I do only Tell, she's frequented. Alo. Why did you deny this? When he did charge you with it? Gas. Though to you In privat I give notice; think not, Patron, I am so careless of your Daughters honour, Or your good name: (although in things of truth) To back her foes. I do believe, her spirit Flowing with noble thoughts rejected him Only to place her love upon another, Of higher merit. Alo. Then it seems you know Whom she's frequented by? Gas. Your'e pleas'd to call My faith in question, Sir. Alo. Next time he comes, Be sure you give me notice; that's your charge Gas. I'll loose this worthless breath else, when you see, You will believe it, mean time what you please, Do Sir: Be sure you shall behold that she Shall miss her match by my fine treachery. (Aside) Exeunt. ACT 3. SCENE 1. Enter Roderiguez, Varina, and Corinna. Rod. THy Uncle, Love, holds still a jealous eye On all my actions: and I am advis'd
By my friend Gaspar, that's suspicious ears Are still behind the hangings: that the servants Have from him in commands to watch who visits Your self, or Mariana, 'twill be best, And safest in my judgement, in his presence That thou forbear to cast a smile upon me: And that like old December I should look, With an unpleasant and contracted brow: Var. Why? canst thou change thy heart, my Dear, that heart Of flesh (thou gav'st me) into Adamant, Or rigid Marble? canst thou frown on me? Rod. You do mistake me, sweet, I mean not so To change my heart: I'll change my countenance, But keep my heart as loyal, as before. Var. In troth I cannot credit it, that thou Canst cast a frown on me: I prithee try. Rod. Then thus! — (He tries and cannot, they smile on each other.) Var. I prithee, sweet, betake thy self to schoole, This Lesson thou must learn, in troth thou'rt out. Rod. Well! I must learn and practise it, or we Shall blast our budding hopes. Var. Come! try again! Rod. But if I try, and prove a good proficient: If I do act my part discreetly, you Must take it as a Play, not as a truth, Think it a formall, not a reall frown? Var. I shall. Rod. Then once more thus, (He frowns, and saith, I' faith Mynion I'll look to you: she swounds.) Cor. My Mistress hath The falling-sickness of us maids! help Sir! Rod. Why how now, sweet? I did distrust thy weakness: Now I have learnt my part, you are to seek. Var. Faith! 'twas my weakness, when I did perceive A cloud of rage condensed on thy brow, My heart began to melt: but pardon, sweet! 'Twas an effeminate infirmity. Rod. This must be left: the world must be deluded, With outward species; we must blind their eyes With mists and shadows: Faith! thou must disclaim Thy childishness, and arm thy self with valour: Grow masculine my dear▪ an El'zabeth, An English Eliz'beth, whose grave aspect Though woman may decline thee almost man. Var. It must be so, or my effeminat heart Will prove our ruine. Enter Gastper.
Gas. What? you're always billing? Measuring your lips together? All the house Is in an uproar: and your Uncles eye Rolls up and down in every corner: haste, Or you'll be taken: Don Praepontio came To visit you, Varina: is enraged To finde you absent: all your nuptiall robes (He saies) are fitted, and your bridall bed: Next Thursday is design'd to knit your hands: The Priest will then in readiness attend: This was the substance of his errand. Var. Gaspar! I've thought thee still my friend: and thy advise (I know) is sound: Contrive, which way I may Shun Don Praepontio's bed; and keep my honour Reserv'd for Roderiguez. Rod. Honest Gaspar! Modell some way: 'tis not an armed Legion Shall stop my passage, till I do efect it: Gaspar, thy Counsell. Gas. Sir, your obligations Have beam'd so freely on me, that my brain Is wholly at your service: and this Lady May likewise challenge, as her just desert, What lies within the verge of my small power. My counsell deems it best, that when the Church Expects their near approach, in some disguise You Roderiguez with some other blades, Lay Don Praepontio breathless, and in haste Convey your prize, Varina, to some Cottage Which lies sequestred from the Cities eye: There's the best safety, till the Inquisition Is out of breath: and smiling fortune offer A time, when you may marry her in peace. Rod. Your policy is orthodox, my hand Shall ratifie it with a bloudy seal. Exeunt. Scena secunda. Enter Praepontio, Alvarado, Rubio. Alv. Nephew! you now are entring into th' world, Let me advise you, who am well experienc'd, Be not too credulous, trust none without A good assurance: try before you trust. Prae. I warrant you, Vncle, your wealth link'd with my wit, will make me an unparallell'd Gentleman, they will elect me Alcalde Ma∣jor, next year, or else I say there is no prudence in the gray-beards of the City.
Rub. Very pathetically spoken, when you are Governour of the Ci∣ty, I hope you will give me a good Office. Prae. Yes! thou shalt have the honourable function of hangman: how lik'st thou it? Rub. Marry Sir, I do not like hanging very well. Prae. Who art thou? (Enter Taylor) Tay. Your worships Taylor, Sir. Prae. That is to say my worships thief, alias theif to my worship. Are my wifes nuptiall Vestments ready? Tay. To the putting on Sir. Prae. Hast thou perfum'd the clasps and keepers? Tay. They will take no perfume, Sir. Prae. Hast thou made her petticoat to the behind or before? Tay. On the side, Sir, according to the French Fash'on. Pra. Yes! that's best. We Spaniards must now tout ala mode France. Tay. And her gown needs no fardingale Sir. Prae. Well, very well: give your attendance to morrow, and you shal have a quarter of a chicken and a leman for your dinner. Rub. Afford 6 panvilos, he may chance eat your dishes else. Prae. What's that? Tay. A busque. Prae. Must she wear it behind or before, or between her legs to keep them from interferring! Tay. No! Sir, but on her breast, to hide her great belly. Prae. Are the Fidlers bespoken? has the shoo-makers brought home my embroidered pantofles, I mean to dance in them: bid the Millai∣ner put ambergrease enough on my shirt, I shall stir till I stink else. Rub. Of sweat Sir? Prae. I, what else? Alv. Come, Nephew, you had best go visit her to night. Prae. I'll go before you Sir. Exeunt. Scena Tertia. Enter Alonzo, Mariana, Gaspar. Alo. Come you egregious strumpet (Drags her, his sword drawn) Abstract of impudence! what has my patience Made thee presume of my connivency: So much vile, Mynion, that your wanton lust Durst gallop like a posthorse: run at base In sin, and fearless meet lasciviousness: As if that Saints and men had been as deep Involv'd in sleep, as you in sin: and now To see Your lust dance Anticks? must my house Be made the stewes, the sinfull receptacle Of you and your Adulterers? you could laugh
At me, contemn my age; Alas! poor man! The Gout doth hold him captive in his Couch, We need not fear him: I did hear you Mistress, And would have entred then, but that I thought It more revenge, I held it greater Justice To send thy soul (grown filthy) unto hell Glutted with pleasures. Come, you'll tell me, Mistress, Who 'twas, was with you. Gas. Thus outragious? Fye! Patron! such a passion would befit A husband better then a father: Age Should furnish you with better temper, Cousin: Sweet, wipe thy eyes: in troth 'tis but a trick Common to such young folks, to have a servant, A friend in privat to supply their wants: Be not so passionate, you must forgive her. Pardon, good Sir. (Holds him) Alo. Stand by, or I shall turn My rage on you! Insatiate Strumpet! was not The man I destin'd for your husband, good: (Too good for thee) but that thy wanton eyes Must choose another? Must the Patrimony I thought to leave thee, the estate I purchas'd With such a care become a salary To your hot sin: your Bastards shortly will Call Grandfather, and look for portions Out of my wealth, but I'll prevent it, Mynion: Speak briefly! (Mar. kneels down) Ma. What? that I have sinn'd? O Sir! Remember I'm your daughter, let that name Move you to pitty of my fact, which youth, Unbridled youth occasion'd: though my crime May challenge death, as it's desert: your hands Ought not to be deaths messengers: 't suffices That I have sinn'd, add not to my delict By making you a parricide: dear father, Forgive me. Alo. No! Thou'st laid a stain upon Our houses honour, which thy wanton blood, Nought else can wash away. Ma. O! rob not Heav'ns Of their prerogatives; let them revenge Your quarrell, for my mothers sake, whom oft You said my feature represented, spare me: For her sake do it. Alo. Nay, for her sake rather I must be mov'd to butcher thee, who fear'st not So to profane her image, which remains
Better decipherd in thy perfect essence, Then in her monument: Thoud'st better 've pull'd Her sacred reliques from their Urne, defil'd them, Cast out her ashes on a dunghill, then Committed this, for which her glorious soul (If Saints can weep) makes heav'n a sea: O Girle! Shame! that thou art my issue: I conceited If there had ought been good in Nature, then Thou had'st been Mistress of it: now I see (Grief to my age!) I was too fond: Affection Made me adore an Idol: I was cozen'd: There is no trust in mortals. Gas. Pray you, Sir! You are too much distemper'd: faith! her fault Is not worth half this anger: take her up, Let not the earth pollute those limbs, the pride Of Natures workmanship, you may behold In those fair Orbs true penitence, those tears Were of sufficient vertue to restore A person damn'd to paradise: forgive her: Or you're too cruel, Signior. Alo. Let her then Reveal her Partner. Gas. That demand's unjust, If she should do it, men should fear hereafter To preasure women, when they see that threats Can force Discoveries: good Sir, ask it not, 'Tis too unreas' nable. Ma. What said my Father? Alo. Marry, ungratious minyon: I would know Whom you have chosen for your stallion, To glut your never-sated Orke withlust. Ma. Is't me you mean Sir? slack your passion, Sir. — Gas. Conceal him, if you do affect his life. (Whispers to her) Ma. These lips yet tepid with his frequent kisses, Before they utter ought to hurt him, shall Be clos'd for ever, rather rot with Cankers. Gas. Noble Virago! Alo. Then resolve to die. Ma. I care not, here's my bosome, rip it up, And steal an acute Eagles eye to pry Into my hearts small caverns, and explore His name, that writ there, yet it will remain Hid in some little Concave, that your fury Shall never know it: kill me, I shall smile On ugly death: embrace her with a soul Triumphant as a Martyrs, I will perish A thousand times, e're once I wil disclose
That pretious secret. (Gaspar holds him) Alo. Do you brave me? do you? Let go my hands. Gas. I must not, will not let you Draw mischief on your self: go in sweet Coz! Let me alone with him. Exit Mariana Alo. Stand off: Let go, And let me follow her. Gas. For what? your rage Shall not have way to do an act: which done, You'ld wail in tears for ever, should you kill her, Think what a crime you onerate your soul wich, Next, what a scandall would ensue: a man Of your known worth at this age to become A Parricide on such a daughter, only For keeping close her friend: Why should you be Inquisitive to know him? Alo. T' have revenge. Gas. Why so I did imagin: banish rage, And hear with reasons ears: be sure your daughter Has plac'd her love on some base one, she dares not Make privy to your ear, should she disclose him, You would, she thinks, have vengeance for her fault: Were he a person noble, she would haste To tell his name, boast of her choice: how say you? Is not this reason? (Lets go his hands) Alo. Very true! Gas. He being A man so worthless, 't would disgrace you more In seeking vengeance, for the humourous world Apt to suspect the worse, would judge the Cause Of your revenge to be, as 'tis: and so You lay your own dishonour, and your daughters, Open, which else might sleep unmention'd, none But you and I are privy to't, and e're A syllable should pass in your disgrace Out of my mouth, I vvould be dumb. Alo. But Gaspar! What shall I do vvith her? For Balthasar Will publish her disgrace, so all vvill shun Her hated Nuptials: I'll go make her enter 'Mong barefoot Nuns into some Monastery, Spend the long remnant of her blooming youth In holy prayers and penitence: I'll make The poor my heirs, found sacred Hospitals, Build Colledges vvith my revenues.
Gas. Madness! Religious madness! that's the ready way To sell her to damnation: will her spirit, (Can you conceive) which now doth pass the limits Of Liberty, endure a Cloister? Balthasar? Fear not his clamours; wise men will impute Them to his passion; 'cause h'as lost her, rather Then to her merit: Patron, you may finde Some younger Brother noble as her self To be her husband; Gold will make her seem A virgin, though a Mother. Alo. Honest Gaspar! I know thou lov'st me. Gas. As I doe the bliss I hope for. Alo. And, alas! ungratefull I Have been too negligent of thy worth, but thou Hast inurn'd all those acts. Gas. 'Ts my Duty. Alo. Once I promis'd thee her marriage, and in Justice She is thy wife; and sure Astraea's angry For th' injury I did thee, and imposeth This heavy cross upon me; wilt thou now Solemnize with her Hymens sacred rites? Be not dismaid; although her hair-brain'd youth Hath run into an errour, rather due To heat of blood, then her condition, She may be honest. Gas. Honest! I dare swear She will be truly vertuous, but the meanness Of my poor fortunes makes me worthless, I Have a spot in my blood, which would dishonour Your family, reserve that, Sir, for one Of noble and illustrious Parentage; Whose worth and quality may add a title Unto your houses fame; for my part, I Nourish no such thoughts; all the height my poor Ambition soars at, is to be esteem'd Your humble slave still. Alo. Thou'rt too humble, Gaspar, Erect thy Spirit, man, thou hadst a Father Had fire in's veins; come, thou shalt marry her; I doe command you. Gas. Your commands are laws, As sacred to me as are Oracles, I must not break them. Alo. Thou wilt wed her then?
Gas. Since you command it. Alo. Now I see thou lov'st me. Call me no more thy Patron, but thy Father. I will acquaint my daughter with my will. Exit. Gas. Have I not labour'd finely? has my brain Not won the Laurell wreath? She is my own, And what care I now what the envious world Can say of me? They'l call me Cuckold, that's In my esteem, as much as they should call Me Signior: Let her take her pleasure, she, Not I, doth sin: I'm sure she will afford me My fill at night too. Happy Age! when all Were common, when old Natures lawes were read Without a Comment: every man was free For every woman: then none fear'd the stab For kissing. Enter Picarro. Pic. Save you Gaspar. Gas. And you too: Sir, what's your businesse? Pic. 'Tis not, Sir, with you, 'Tis with your Master. Exit. Gas. With your Master? Hem! How scornfully this youth demeans himselfe? E're long, when I am married, I shall be Sir Don, or any thing. Enter Alonzo and Picarro. Pic. Good Sir, my Father Commends him to you, and intreats you would For satisfaction of the debt he owes you, Accept his land at Cordova in mortgage, And pay old Frederiques debt. Alo. I grieve, Picarro, That he should com to this; but 'tis his fate, I'll doe him any courtesie, return This as my answer. Pic. Honor'd Sir, I shall. (is going out.) Alo. A handsome man, and an observant son. Call back Picarro, Gaspar! Gas. Sir, Picarro. My Father doth request you to return. Alo. Signior Picarro, I so much lament Your noble Fathers case, that will you truly Resolve me one thing, I will pay his debts Without your mortgage. Pic. 'Tshould be difficult That I would not doe for his liberty. Alo. Are you in love Pic. Not to my knowledge. Alo. Could
You be content to have a Wife? Gas. Corinna Were a fit match for him. Pic. Yes, of your choosing. Alo. You've seen my daughter Mariana, what Say you to her? Gas. She is contracted, Sir, Surely he will not break his promise with me. Pic. Your daughters worth's beyond my hopes. Alo. But say, That you should have her, could you her affect? Gas. Sure! sure he jests. Pic. Nothing but heav'n and bliss, I should desire more then her love. Alo. Picarro; I doe so much commiserate thy Father, And thy own sufferings, that I am resolv'd To give her to thee; and thy land shall be Her Joynture. Gas. Do I dream? Ha! ha! I hope I shall not be deluded, Patron, Father, What doe you mean? Alo. Peace! slave! I'll tell her of it. Exit. Gas. But surely, Patron, you will not deale thus? Heark, Sir, you mean to marry her? Pic. I doe. Gas. You see this sword? Pic. I, what of that? Gas. Nay nothing. It is a pure Toledo blade, it cost As it is really worth, twelve Duccats, Sir. But if you marry her, you have a woman. Pic. I hope she's no Hermaphrodite. Gas. No, but She's something else, a Whore. Pic. Out slave! thou'rt frantick. Exit. Gas. O! that I were but valiant, had but heart Great as my wrongs are, or but so much power As would suffice to right them; I could pull The Crystall Axell that supports the Spheares, Down to the earth, that all the world might perish Together with my selfe, since all have sworn To be stark villains with me: I'm resolv'd Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movere. To Hell, I'll now address me. Enter Balthazar. Bal. Thou art come. Now to thy period, Bastard! 'twas your plot To bring me 'mong my enemies, on purpose
To have me slain, but I have scap't to be Thy ruine. Say thy Prayers. — (drawes his Sword) Gasp, What mean you, Sir? Bal. To kill thee, slave, and so set free the earth From bearing such an execrable monster, Such an inhumane villain. Gas. As your're noble, Lend me a little utterance, till I cloath in vocall sounds, a businesse that concerns Your honour neerly. Bal. But be brief, thy breath Will blast me els. Gas. You come, you say, to kill me? I'm glad that Nature has afforded life To such a wretch as I am, till my blood May doe a person of your worth a pleasure. Bal. And is this all? Gas. Forbeare a little, heare me; You doe suppose it was my plot to bring You to your death, I do confesse. Bal. What? Speak! Gas. That won with gifts, I did entice you thither To your destruction: But, hear me, Sir, There's none so vile, but may repent; and since Your Fate afforded you a happier lot, Then to be slain, forgive me: if the blood Of such a miscreant, can ought avail you, I'll give it you my selfe, you shall not stain Your noble hands with my poore homicide. Bal. Rare! excellent villain: But methinks those tears. And looks, spring out of feigned penitence; Disclose the man that hurt me, and I'll pardon Thy horrid fact, and raise thee. Gas. Willingly: 'Twas he must be her husband. Bal. Picarro. Gas. Picarro. Bal. May I beleeve you? Is this truth? Gas. Else kill me. Bal. Farewell! there's gold. Gas. But stay, if one so vile As I may give you counsell? Bal. Any thing That tends to his destruction. Gas. Your hot breast Thirsts for revenge; let it be noble, he Off'red you publick wrong, let your revenge Be publick too!
Bal. As how? Gasp. As thus, to morrow When he returns from's wisht-for Nuptials, Meet him, and kill him, then escape into The Church, 'twill be your Castle and Asylum; 'Tis brave and safe. Bal. Ingenious Gaspar, think He's dead already. Exit. Gas. This hits right, let all Perish; I care not, if I rise, who fall. Exit. Scena quarta. Enter Roderiguez, Chaves, Engenia disguised. Rod. TIs strange, my Father, Sir, should come to hear on't Cha. It was that knavish Boy that did betray us. Eug. Pray, Sir, be pleased to return your answer. Rod. Friend, you may walk, I've nothing to return. Eug. Then without bashfull feare, or flatrery, You are a noble villain. Rod. How now, Sirrah! Eug. Is not your Fathers love to be esteem'd Before your friends? Does not your naturall duty, You ow him, stirre a fury in your blood Against that traytor? Poore Eugenia! she Wearies with tears, ev'n griefe it self to think Of this curst perjury, and her brothers Spirit, Which either doth for fear, or fond affection To that ignoble perjurer, permit Him breath without revenge; but were it mine, As 'tis your case, I would devoure him up Like some wild Anthropophagus: Let Nature Convince you, kill him. Rod. Hold your peace, and walk, Be gone, or I — Eug. What dar'st thou, noble villain! Thy Father on his blessing charges thee To take revenge; and dost thou onely not Contemne his will, but keep society With his curst Enemy; marke his cursings, Sir, Thinke on his blessings. Rod. Honest friend! the love I beare your noble quality assayes Me to detain still with you, but my duty Commands me not t'incurre my fathers curse. I must desert you. Cha. Prithee doc, kind Coxcombe! I'm glad I'm rid of thee.
Rod. Yet e're we part, Thinke on my sisters merit, how, her virtues Transcend your Mistris qualities; next view The perill that you are in; Should it come To Balthazar, that you did wound him, death Would sure ensue; but for our former love Let me entreat you be reclaim'd. Cha: Imust not, Nor will not, you may: Rod. Sure! I am bewitchd, To love him, when I offer to relinquish His Company; there's something loads my feete With lead, I cannot leave him, fellow, goe, Return this answer to my Father, that When I come home, I'll satisfy him, why I did not doe his pleasure, so be gone — Without reply: Eug. Well Sir. Exit. Enter Catalina. Cat. O! Sir Chaves! what shall we doe Sir Chaves? my Mistris— Rod. What of his love? are we discovered? Cat. O! worse! she's to be married. Rod. Married? Cat, I marry, married too morrow at Saint Saviours Church. Rod. Alas! poore man! to whom? Cat. I know not; oh! I know not! (wrings her hands.) Hold him. (Chaves sinks down.) Rod. Good Sir cheere your selfe. Cha. Some lucklesse serene blast me, may a damp Thick as Thyestes serene blast me, may a damp Thick as Thyestes darkness spring from Dis, And muffle up the world in endless night; That none may see those nuptialls, which I'll make Fatall as Jasons; tell your faithless Mistris In stead of pines, I'll send her tapers, Yew, And deadly Cypresse to make green her bed, Where virgin Laurell and such harmsess boughes Dare not approach for fear of blasting; Fiends Will be her Bridemaids; surely I was borne With all good stars my Opposites. Is't too morrow? Rod: Yes Sir too morrow? pray, why rave you thus? Cha. I pray Sir tell me, may we not, e're then Borrow some toylsome woodnetts, and invite The gallant youth o'th' City to goe hunt In yonder desarts? Rod. Why? what then? Cha. To take The salvage walkers of the wilderness, Bulls, Wolves and Tygers, and manure them up In yonder spatious Amphitheater:
And then set fire on't; till their flaming throats Roare, howle, and raise a Clamour, which may rend, Like some huge thunderclap the trembling Earth, That all, e're then, might sink to hell, ha! is't not Brave? lett's about it, friend. Rod. Why should you be Thus cruell? Sir, your rage transports you. Cha. Whither? Now I know, maid, when she hath seen her own, She'll view my nuptialls. Cat. 'Ll you be married too? Cha. Married? I'll study to surpasse her falshood, Her curious eyes, I make no doubt, have chosen A handsome Bridegroome? Cat. Yes! indeed. Cha. To let Her see how much I scorn her and her beauty, I'll wed me to a Creature, in whose looks Foulnesse is truly character'd, whose eyes Are poysonous as a Basilicks, and scarse Afford their Owner light enough to see Her bodies horrid edifice, whose frame Is the true substance, which Anatomists Aime to decipher in their strange dissections Of livelesse Mortalls; tell her 'tis to death I'll wed my selfe; the grave shall be our bed. Rod. 'Tis none of hers, it is her fathers fault; Study prevention, or you lose her. Cha. Did you Not, tell me she was to be married? Rod. Yes! but I hope we shall finde means to hinder't. (Whisper) Cha. I'll take your Counsell. Exeunt. Scaena quinta. Enter Balthasar and Boy with a pistoll. Bal. BRing th' pistoll hither? is it charg'd? Boy. It is sir: Exit. Bal. Begon, then quickly. Now Picarro breath Till 9. a Clock, no longer; hug thy Mistris Suck poyson form her lips till then, and glory That thou bereav'dst me of her. Enter Eugenia Eug. Is your name Balthazar? sonne to Frederique? Bal. Yes! friend. Eug. I come to tell you, that you have been wrong'd, Sold to destruction. Bal. All the Town knowes that,
Thou needst not come to tell me on't, perchance My wounders sent you to explore my secrets; Prithee about thy business. Eug. Can that front, Those limbs of yours which stile you man, endure Such an abuse without revenge? I come T'informe who 'twas that hurt you. Bal. Pish! I know them. Eug. And can they live unstigmatiz'd for villains? Surely you know them not, they're strangers here. Bal. Did not Picarro hurt me? Eug, He poor man! Is injur'd to be wedded to a strumpet. Chaves, one Chaves wounded you. Bal. What's he? What is that Chaves? Eug. A base villain, Sir. Bal. How know'st thou this? Eug. By's own confession, Sir, 'Tis he that wounded you, and gratious Themis Has you decipherd for her instrument Of vengeance; Chaves is his name, on forfeit Of all the lives I have, I'll make good what I told you, and conduct you to the person That injur'd you. Bal. Picarro then is guiltlesse? Eug. As is my selfe. Bal. Chaves! well let him walk Till I can meet him, then 'tis odds, this Arme Shall pay his falshood; but Picarro must not Passe thus, depart not from me, friend. Exit. Eug. No Sir Now perjur'd Chaves is thy Fate at hand, And if Eugenia lives, thou shalt not stand. Exit. Scena sexta. Enter Alvarado. Varina. Praepontio. Alonzo. Rubio. Hebes. Fidlers. Prae. PLay louder Picroes, that string's made of an Usurers gut, it sounds like the jyngling of a mony-bag. Fy! on these Git∣terns and Treble-base viols, they are not comparable to an Italian bar∣biton; march on my deare Colloquintida, Uncle, you are not so merry as the solemnity of my presence deserves. March on fidlers, the fur∣mitee my English Cooke promised to make me, will be burnt too else: but what's that Rubio? Rub. O Sir! a peece too rare for vulgar eyes, And worthy only your perspicuous judgment:
An Epithalamium I composed on your wedding, you'll allow my Mistris Bride to kiss me for't? Alv. Nephew, it will serve better at home then here. Var. Good Huband! Without Ceremony. Prae. Good Husband? How sweetly her throat utters it? All the Pricksong in St. Saviours is not like those two words; but lead the way while I support my magnificent Corps, with my Mistrisses fain. Arm through this dark Entry; they say it is haunted with spirits; but if they come, we'll conjure them. (Going in he is stab'd by Ro∣deriguez and Chaves, who in disguise snatcht away Varina privily) Oh! The Cramp, the Spavins, the Yellow Janders, the Grincoms, the wambling Trot, or some such Belly vengeance has put my guts out of joynt. I tell you, Rubio, untruss my points. Rub. So you may chance contaminate my fingers. Alas! You bleed. Prae. Is my blood red or yellow? Rub. 'Tis white, Sir. Prae. Oh! Dismal, dismal! Don Praepontio's guts are too big for his belly. Alv. Alas! My Nephew's wounded! Look about who hurt him? Rub. 'S life, here's nothing but the walls, unless they be invisible. Master, you do but dream, you are not wounded. Prae. I am neither Husband, nor Master now, but I must die; I leave my body to be buried; and good Uncle, sweet Wife, and honest Ru∣bio, put a musket, powder and shot into the Coffin with me. Rub. Look how those Rosy cheekes convert to Dazies! Prae. On my blessing do as I bid you, or my furious Ghost will haunt you; for since it was some Spirit of the Buttery; because I lo∣ved wine well; or Hobgoblin, because I used to lick the Cream bowls, that has done me this injury to kill me; I will when I come among them be revenged; for sure it is, I must go whisper two or three words with Pluto and his Fraternity; bury me in a Coletta, or Buffe jacket, that Rapiers may no more hurt me. How rawbon'd Death's with his black dart Ready to pierce my Lions heart? Alv. Alas! Poor Nephew, he bleeds? Prae. Yet, Uncle, I will spite of his nose bequeath my moveables; First, to my seet Wise Varina I give all my Plate and Jewels; and to my Uncle all that I have in my Closet. viz. Two Holland Cheeses, three pound of Raisins Solis, &c. And to thee my servant Rubio, all that I have in my Pockets, as also the Handkercher wrought with Co∣ventry blew, and my Needle-case and Thimble, &c. But good Rubio, pup my sneezing box with me into the Tomb, it will clear my eies. Oh! I can speak no more, for now to Heav'n doth go The Valiant soul of Don Praepontio. (dies.) Alo. But where's my Neece? Varina! Oh! She's gone; This is some cursed plot; let's in, and send oasts to way-lay them, e'er they take to Sea,
Dispatch out Hew and Cries; that may arrest them, And bring them back to judgements bar. Hard fate! What plagues of grief hang on my aged head, And drop their vengeance on my hoary haires In showers of blood? Was't not enough my daughter Defam'd my Family by her goat-like lust; But now my Neece, Varina must conspire With Villaines to disgrace me? Could her baseness No safety finde, but by her Husbands blood? Rebellious Children! Know a Fathers hand Provok'd, strikes hard; and though I do endure Your faults a while, my vengeance shall strike sure. Exeunt. Heb. Oh! My sweet Master. I am undone, I am undone, many an Ashwednesday and Goodfriday nights supper must my belly make; I was no sooner come from being an under-Scullion to be an under-Cooke; but now I must Crab-like crawle backward from being an under-Cooke to be an under-Scullion, or any thing! Oh, miserable! Well, I will go in, and fill my belly now, though I fast the longer afterwards; if fate has decreed that all the fat must be in the fire, it must be so; my belly must pray patience; I fear this next year will be nothing but Ember weeks. Exit. ACT. IV. Scaen. 1. Enter Chaves, Roderiguez, without disguise and swords drawn. Cha. CUrse on my fate! Rod. Have patience, Sir, we shall Remove your grief too; or in streams of blood We'll swim to our desires. Enter Gaspar. Cha. O! Signior, Gaspar! Why had not we your notice of this wedding? Gas. It was so closely carried, that my ears Could ne'er be privy to't; what ailes my Master? Why, Sir, so pensive? Fear not, Sir, my Mistris Will love you still; but I do sound you come To Butcher her new Bridegroom; Is't not so? Cha. Thy augury's most true; these swords but now Reak'd in the streams of Don Praepontio's blood; To help my Friend Rod'riguez to his Love. Gas. In troth the World's well rid of such a fool! Cha. And yet are thirsty; we must sail through blood To our desired port; tell her 'll drink
A health unto her in Picarro's gore; I once did in obedience to her will, Spare it, but 'twas by Fate reserv'd to be Drawn empty now, and this enraged hand Shall break the Conduit up; 'twill do me good: In expectation here Ile wait, untill I finde and kill him — Gas. No! don't kill him now: Twere too unholy to prophane those rites, Besides, he's arm'd with th'choisest of his friends, That should you kill him, 'twere impossible You should escape the aestrum of their fury, Patience awhile, bridle your wrath, Ile plot To do't more easie: Pray be pleasd. Cha. Thou wer't Hatcht in a Pigeons nest, thou art so timerous Tell us of murther, not of safety, rather Let's study to create new ways to kill Though to destroy the world; and so to be Earths common Executioners; then that He should enjoy and crop those blessed Roses. Gasp. What if he do? he has but what you left, Hee'll prick his Fingers ere he pluck that rose; Before to morrow night his Glass is run. Pray, Sir, with draw, be sure on't. Rod. Good Sir, doe. Cha. Your counsell shall prevail. Exeunt. Gas. So let them go, had this fresh Gamester entred And kild Picarro; and her Father known Twas he enjoy'd her, he would have procur'd A pardon for him, and have giv'n him her, So I'd been cozen'd, but I'm rid of all: Balthazar kils Picarro, then himself Suffers; Praepontio's kild by Chaves, whom The Law for that fact strait shall apprehend, And soon condemn as guilty; so not one Is left to be an obstacle. Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, my Master bids you not expect him, he'll not come. Exit. Gas. He will not come? how now? He call them back: Oh! that I were but registred the first In Coxcombes catalogue, to place my hopes On One, when others offerd to effect them. Villains had need to see with Argus eyes, They'll be most fools else, when they seem most wise. Exit.
Scena secunda. Enter Mariana and Catalina. Cat. FAith! Mistris do not grieve so, you do wrong The beauty of your face; should your new husband See this, he'ld grow suspitious; dry your eyes For shame, 'ts a sin to weep in wedding shooes. Ma. Denude me of these gawdy garments, get Funestal vestments for my new attire: Lend me a book to pray on, and intreat The Priest that married me; to com again; I'd speak with him. Cat. Still in this moestfull tune; You will not dye I'm sure? Ma. Pray, keep those flowers To straw my Coffin with, and tell the Virgins That came to grace my nuptials, I invite Them to my Obsequies. Cat. Bless me! Mistris, better Chaves were hang'd, then you should kill your self For him, your husband is a proper man, And for Sir Chaves, you may have him too, Dye, quoth you, faith! that were a trick indeed; Be merry, Mistris, come, you shall; this is Your wedding day. Ma: My day of buriall call it; For so it will be, I have lost the May, The flower of Brides, my Virgin glory, and I know, my husband hearing what has past Twixt Balthasar and me, will be most curious In searching; when as needs he must, he finds Me for a Virgin thrust on him, to be Not so, hee'll kill me. Cat. Is this all your fear? Mercury water, or som Cypress berries Will cozen th'cunningst searcher of them all. Ma. I must not trust it. Catalina, thou Hast always lov'd me! Cat. Yes truly, Mistris. Ma. Thou wouldst be loath to see me murdered? Cat. Bless you, good Mistris! Ma. Thou art fair and young — Cat. Faith, reasonable; I've seen many a worse Face in a Ladies habit, I'll assure you. Ma. And I dare say a Virgin— Cat. Yes, in truth, The more's my grief. Ma. Wilt thou supply my room?
And be the Bride to my new husband? Cat. I Would not, forsooth, lose my Virginity. Ma: Come, be not squeamish, when he is in bed And th'Candle's out, then Ile frame an excuse To rise, and thou shalt com into my place; And after he's asleep, Ile come again. Cat. For your sake, Mistris, I will do't, and get A drug to make him sleep. Mar. Doe, prithee doe. 'Tis late, about it. Exit Catalina. Enter Alonzo, Alvarez, Picarro. Alo. Son! you're beholding to the youth o'th' City, In the solemnity of these your Nuptials, They have procur'd a Masque, they stand without. Enter Masque. Balthazar sings, I. False and foolish are the toyes Of Worldly joyes, The Paphian Goddesse onely rules Frantastick Fools: Then why should I (simplicity!) Thus doat upon her Deity. Rursus: 2. Woman is light as a feather, Or the Weather: More inconstant then the wind Is her base mind: Fickle still, can only be Constant in inconstancy. Rursus. 3. The rose which pluckt I have refus'd, Another choos'd: Mars did hug Venus, Sir, yet she Could satisfie Black Mulciber. Your wife doth know To draw Actaeon on your brow, And make your Cornu-copia be Triumphant to Eternitie. Dance. Pic. This is a strange Epithalamium? Alo. 'Tis a strange Song! and a far stranger dance! Alv. 'Tis rare and new! it carries mystery with it. Pic. Who is the chief to whom we owe our thanks? (Balthazar discovers himself.) Bal. 'Tis I, Picarro! Sir, 'tis I, your Mistris Knows me, I did provide this Masque on purpose That you might know, how you are injured. Pic. Explain your Riddle, be our Oedipus, W' are yet in darkness.
Bal. Thus, Sir, That old man That led the woman, represents Deceit, And she his daughter Lust; the next pair, he On the right hand is Treachery, who lead In me deciphering True Affection: And the last couple which came after us, The first of them is Wantonnesse, who pulls. Lust from me, and doth give her to that person Who signifies a Cuckold and a Fool. You understand me! Pic. Tis a Paradox. Bal. Then know, your wife's a hatefull prostitute, Her Father is a Villain, you a Cuckold. I'll say no more. Pic. You've said enough already To seale you to damnation. (Drawes) Ma. O Sir, stay, Give Losers leave to speak: his fury moves him To be thus passionate. Pic. But that I will not Stain with your blood my Nuptials, you should know How false your tale is: but there's other times To meet with you. Bal. I shall be ready when You please to call me. Exit Masque. Alv. It is strange me thinks That Balthazar should be so spitefull, Brother: This must not passe thus. Pic. No! I shall hereafter Have vengeance. Ma. He deserves ten thousand deaths For such a wrong. Alo. What muse you on, Sir; Ha! Pic. Balthazar, Sir, has always been a man Of good esteem, I marvell he should raise Without occasion, such a calumny. (Mariana swouns) Alo. O! help my daughter! Alv. Hold her, else she falls! Pic. Heav'ns showre down Balm to cure her, or let loose Some blasting lightning, that may seare me up Till I convert to ashes: see, her breath In little streaks flies from her, to make sweet Death with its pretious flavor; send for hither Those curious men that strive to give new life To Carcasses, those that do spend their studies In Image-making; let them here receive A perfect patern, afterwards to cut All womens Marbles by.
Alo. There's life! there's life! Pic. She beautifies uncomly death! Might she Remain thus uncorrupted, she would make A Statue passing all the Alabasters We can erect, in memory of her name. Ma. Oh! Oh! Pic. That breaks her heart-strings! Blessed Saint! Fly not so fast, sweet soul; I'll rob the Turtle Of his swift wings, but I'll o'retake thee, that In thy society I may mount to yonder Celestiall region, for thy sake they will not Deny admission; the Saints are rimerous To lose their mansions; for her merit asks A Crown above a Martyrs. Alo. Sonne! Pic. Behold! Her spotlesse soul attir'd in white, ascends In a clear Chariot, drawn by virgins: strait I come, stand off. He offers to make unready) Alv. She will recover: Pic. Yes! When she's among her fellow-Angels, then She may recover life, a glorious essence Due to her goodness; Earth was too unworthy To beare so rare a jewell, fitter farre For Heav'ns rich wearing; yet you have done well A while to stay me, while I steale a blessing From those pure lips; though they are cold, one kisse From them will glut me; which delight hath equall To that she's gone to. (he kisses her) Alo. Her eyes open. Pic. Look, The Torches fade at such a brightnesse, surely In this short trance sh'as lost that little remnant She had of human essence; and 's become Wholly immortall, and deserves our knees. (he kneels) Why gaze you on me? is't not just? A saint Merits this honor. Ma. You all hate me; why Did you recall my spirits from the blisse They almost had attain'd to? Pic. I'll support thee, And if thou fall'st, my arm shall keep the earth From touching thee; 'twill grow too proud to bear So rich a burden. Ma. O Picarro! I Had thought you'd had a better faith in me, Then to grow jealous at the false report
Of a base man; I will not live to have you Deem so ignobly of me. Pic. Were this breast Arm'd with th'obdurate shels of Tortoyses; Or mal'd with sles of Dolphins, I would force A passage into't, that you might behold Each thought that's there, if any one but savour Of jealousie, then utterly detest me; But I will make this slave an expiation, A very Anathema for this injury Which he hath with such impudence aver'd Against thy honor. (Enter Catalina with bottles and glasses.) Ma. I believe you, Sir. Fill me a bowle of water, I'll begin Your Nuptiall health. Pic. Let it be wine I'll drink't. Wer't liquid metall. Mar. Father-in-law, to you. Alv. Brother, to you. Alo. Son, to you; and may she Be made a mother by you. Ma. Catalina. (Whispers. Cat. I've done. Pic. Come! Fill it till it over-flow, Or bring a bigger glasse. Ma. 'Tis needlesse, Sir. Pic. He that denies to pledge't, I'll flit his wezand. Alv. Alonzo, it growes late, 'tis time the Bride Had put the Torches out; we'll see her bedded. Pic. I doe preferre the pleasures of this night Before all treasures, or the earths delight. Exeunt. Scaena tertia. Enter Chaves, Roderiguez, Gaspar, with a Torch. Cha. Is't possible he should be gone so soon To bed? 'Tis yet scarce ten a clock. Rod. O Gaspar! Lend me thy Torch, by heav'ns me thinks 'twere easie To set the House on fire, and burn the villain In her embraces. Gas. So you'ld burn her too! Cha. Faith! not much matter, since I left her, all My Ice is turn'd to Marble, could I not Borrow yon star for one halfe houre, and cast it Like to a ball of wild-fire through yon hole, To make the chamber hotter? Were't not pretty If from the top of yonder Pyramid
I could embrace the Moon, and pull her from Her watry sphears, to sindge their plumes? Say friend, May I not doe it? Rod. What strange temper's this? His mind runs on the Moon, What? Lunatick? Cha. Look where the death-full Owle flies: Heark, her wings Flask in the aire, t'invite the Dawes that nest In yon tall steeple to deride me: is there No heat in nature left? Am I converted So soon to water? Yet my eyes are dry. They cannot weep a flood, sufficient For a new generall Deluge: Look! I quake Like to a frosty Polander, when wrapt In Iron sheets, he layes him down a man, O're night in th'Field, and in the morning rises A Cake of Ice, or Snow-ball. Is't not cold? My limbs do play on th'Organs. Gas. 'Tis your fancy: You're passionatly mad. Cha. I do not vvalk yet — Bare, vvith a long Horn arm'd, nor kisse the dust With naked feet; but I vvill learn, these garments Are very ponderous: vvhen I've rent them off, I shall begin to be a Bedlam. Rod. Gaspar, Prithee perswade him. Gas. Sir, you do conceit Because your project mist to night, your love Is lost for ever; do not so, to morrow We'l have a night as opportune as this, To kill her husband. Cha. Yes, if he vvould die, When vve do vvish him dead, or could our eyes Kill him, and never look upon him; so I doe believe he might be slain, but else — Gas. Heare me a little, if I do not show A vvay to kill him — Cha. That's an easie thing: Levell a Canon at him, blow him up With Gunpowder. Gas. But heare me, Sir, to morrow You and your friend, vvith others I'll procure, In strange disguises shall present your selves There in a Masque; I'll tell you are my friends, And in the Dance one of the men I'll hire Shall kill him; you shall not be touch't in this. How like you't, Sir, is't not a good conceit? Cha. Good, very good, could my deeds but effect
What you have spoken— but I fear he has Some charms about him, steele nor poyson will Enter his body: so 'ts impossible; That what you here advise can e're be done. Gas. Yes! fear not, Sir, I'll visit you to morrow. Cha. Do, and forget not what you promise now. Rod. His care and vigilance is far beyond Our thoughts. Cha. Then let him glut himself to night. Gas. It surely, Sir, shall be his last good night: Men may shun publick, but not privat spight: Exeunt. Scena Quarta. Enter Mariana, Catalina. Ma. Come! thou'rt a wily strumpet; faith! thou didst Excellent well! but not one word: I'll goe And dress me; — Exit. Enter Picarro. Pic. Sure I have drunk the blood of scorpions, Suckt mandrakes juice or henbane seed, my heart Is almost hurnt to ashes: Catalina, Fetch me some water. Cat. Here's some ready Sir. Pic. Give me another cup, I hate that bowle: 'Twas that I drank last night in: was't not you Fill'd me the wine? Cat. It was. Pic. Was nothing in't? Cat. Nothing, but wine and sugar, Sir. Pic. What's this? Cat. Some of the sugar spilt on th' side of th' cup: I'll wipe it off. Pic. Stay, is this sugar, minion? I've found you out, you're hir'd to poyson me: This is a drug, speak quickly, say by whom Or perish. Cat. O good Sir! if I had thought I should have had no better a requitall, I'ld not have been so kinde. Pic. So kinde? as how? Be brief, or this shall spoile your utterance. Cat. A Maidenhead deserves more favour, Sir. Pic. Impudent divell! who'd to do with that? Cat. Last night you had it, Sir. Pic. Dye, Monster! (goes to kill her) Cat. Hold, Sir, for Heav'ns sake! I confess, my Mistress — Pic. What of my Love?
Cat. To say truth, Sir, she hir'd me To give y' a sleepy potion, having lost The blossome of her honour, she procur'd Me to supply her place, and laid me by you. Pic. But is this truth? ha! whore! (Pulls out Mariana) Egregious strumpet, was it not sufficient To make me be the pack horse of thy lust; The common father to thy odious fry: The loathsome compound of laciviousness Thou hast within thee? but thou must betray My chaste embraces to the sinfull arms Of a foul harlot, on that sacred night When I was full with hopes of the reward Of my true love: ask mercy quickly; pray, For I will kill thee. Ma. Holy Angels guard me! What mean you dear Picarro? Heav'ns and Saints Help, as I'm guiltless. Pic. Guiltless? so's the Devil; A plague upon this curst effeminate sex! Would curses wound as doth the Mandrakes groan, I would invent as bitter searching tearms, As curst, as harsh, as horrible to hear As lean-fac'd envy in her loathsome Cave; My tongue should stumble in my earnest words, My eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint, My hair be fixt an end, as one distract, Yea, every joynt should seem to curse and ban; Oh! I could thunder out a Volley of Curses, A rapsody of banefull execrations! (He turns aside) Ma. What? dost thou turn away, and hide thy face; I am no loathsome Leaper, look on me; What? art thou like the Adder waxen deaf? Be poys'nous too, and kill thy forlorn spouse. Pic. Thou hast a place about thee, where the furies Take up their mansion; I do know, thy eyes Can with false tears outvy the Crocodile: Thy tongue can altercate more several notes, Then the Hyaena's, and can sweetly charm As doth a Syren, warble forth as sweet Notes as a Philomel: 'tis bootless now To seeke to palliate thy Crimes, thy partner Reveal'd it all: repent, and do it quickly: Or  damn'd, I care not. Ma. Must I die? Pic. ould, though Queens upon their knees in tears pardon, Saints implore thy life, ot save it: canst thou nourish hopes
Of ought but death, when thy inhumane Acts Tell thee thou hast deserv'd to suffer for them More then eternall tortures? Ma. O Picarro! Remember what I am, not what I have been, I'm now your wife; Sir, if I have been tempted To that Venerean sin: 'twas e're religion Had made me yours: you were not injur'd by it, And though for fear of being discover'd, I Did thrust this hapless maid into your bed, Though't be a fault, that well might merit death, Damne me not for it: give me leave to make My peace with Heav'n, and then I'll yeild to die: Thank you to kill me. Pic. If I let her talk A little longer, she'll perswade me: come, Hold up your hands for mercy, make short praiers, And this shall say Amen unto them, pray — (Holds up his Sword) Ma. Since your stern rage will not permit you hear A word of mercy: for your own sake do not Draw double vengeance on your self: poor Girl, 'Twas I that caus'd her sin: a twofold murder Will lie too heavy on you. Pic. Sure my hand Has got the Palsey: yet before thou dy'st, Discharge thy conscience of one crime: thy soul Will be the lighter: tell me this, what Fiend? What Devill in humane shape? for man would never Have tempted thee to sin, 'twas that betraid, Thee to his Lust? Ma. I'm sure you've heard my Father Contracted me to Balthasar. Pic. What then? Ma. Thinking that he should have been married to me, I let him have my honour, little dreaming Of what has happened since: remember once I sav'd your life, for that good turn afford A little Leisure. Pic. Mariana, since Thou art dishonest, 'tis impossible Vertue should rest in women: sure some Saint Of your deceitfull sex has fled to Heav'n With all your women-vertues: otherwise Thou'dst had a share in't. (Offers to strike) Ma. E're you strike, one word E're I be silent ever: there must come A day, when you must dye too, when your faults Must be ript up, as mine are now: and then
You'll finde it written in your Conscience-book, As first and greatest of your sins, that you Not only were a parricide, but that You damn'd a soul too, which will be requir'd Of your poor Ghost: then that will quake to see Me wrapt in flames, when it remembers how Your anger caus'd it: rather shut us up Poor Recluses in some strict Monastery, Where we may weep, till in our tears we swim To mercy, with our praiers beg heav'ns to showre Their blessings on you. Pic. I will have a Cave, A darksome Spelunk in some Wilderness, Where never grass grew, where the balefull tops Of Yew and Cypress banish Titans light, Where never harmless bird nor beast doth live For the foul Airs infection, where the howles Of wolves and goats (such as your selves are) shall Joyn'd with the screech owles and the ravens notes Make but harsh Musick to you, all that's there Shall be an Emblem of that Stygian Grove You both deserve to enter. Mar. Ought but death So ne're so horrid. Enter Gaspar. Gas. How now? is the wind In this doore? what? is she discovered? Pic. Fly hence, who e're thou art, if thou wilt save Thy soul from spilling, but yet stay, thou art (If any good be on the earth) an honest Plain-dealing man, thou told'st me that, which now I finde too true: but I rejected thee, Now to my woe I rue it. Gas. Las! Sir! I (Aside with Picarro) Was griev'd to see a man of your true worth So basely cozen'd, to be cast away On such a Mammet: why? that very hour, That luckless hour you came here, I had found Her whoredome out: she was but thrust on you, When all refus'd her: Me(poor man!) her Father Tempted with gold, did vow her, and when I, (Because I knevv she vvas a vvhore) rejected His urged proffer: he resolv'd to vail her A Nun, but that your coming did prevent it: To your undoing, Pic. Knevv her father then, That she vvas false? Gas. Knevv he? it vvas his plot — 'Gainst my persvvasions (Heav'ns they knovv) to vvrong
Your noble self, and I for love to vertue Would then have told you, what you know not, but You deem'd me frantick: I could weep an Ocean To think how you, Sir, are by them deluded, But 'twas your fortune, 'tis past help. Pic. I prithee Go to the sacred Church, and bid the Sexton Evacuate the vaults and monuments Of the old bones that many years have kept Their rotten habitation there; and bid him Make the Church-yard one sepulchre: I'll bring Bodies enough to fill them; not the plague Shall be more pestilent, then my vengeance. Gas. Sir, You've found me true to you, and since my Master Could be ignoble, Justice and the zeal I ow to goodness, urges me to aid You in revenge: Let it be thus. Pic. As how? Gas. I came to you now to crave license, that At night I might have brought a masque to grace Your Festivall: Let it go on, I'll hire Men in the Masque to kill her, force her Father That he may see his errour. Pic. Kill him too. Gas. I, Sir, what else! Pic. 'Twas Balthasar she serv'd. What time of day is't Gaspar? Gas. Early yet, Near seaven a clock. Pic. My business calls away; You will not fail at night. Gas. Question't no more. Pic. Mean time be sure that none, good Gaspar, speak With these base strumpets, let none have access. Exit. Gas. No! not the wind, Cousin, poor Cousin, had you Not better have had me then these rude Ruffions? There s no way now but death. Ma. O! Cousin, yet When I behold thee, I can fear no peril: I know thou'lt save me. Gas. 'T may be so, but what Would you do for him, that should save you? Ma. Any thing. Gas. Though many that receive such injuries As I have done, would be more prone to vengeance, Then mercy: yet if you will love me, Cousin, I'll save your life, and kill this same Picarro. Mar. Do it, and by this hand I'll marry thee.
Gas. By this same kiss I will, before your maid! Gas. I, Gaspar, save our lives, and marry us both. Gas. Keep close your Conclave, stir not out, I'll plot A means to save you: th' plot is in my brain. Exit. Ma. We are alive yet, Catalina, Women May sometimes overreach the archest villains: Gaspar, I'll fit you: you may chance expire Before us: Scorcht men use to shun the fire. Exeunt. ACT 5. SCENE 1. Enter Roderiguez and Priest. Pri. SO smile the Heav'ns upon this holy Act, That future houres with sorrow chides us not: Rod. Amen! Amen! but come what sorrow can, It cannot countervail the exchange of Joy, Do then but close our hands with sacred words: Then Love-devouring death do what he dare: It is enough, that I but call her mine. Pri. These violent delights have violent ends: And in their triumph die like fire and powder, Which, as they kiss, consume: the sweetest honey Is loathsome in its own deliciousness, And in the taste, confounds the appetite: Therefore love moderately, long love doth so, Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow. Enter Varina. Is this the Lady? Oh! so light a foot Will ne're wear out the flint, or bruise the street, A Lover may bestride the Gossameres, That idle in the wanton Summer-air: And yet not fall: so light is vanity. Var. Good even to my Ghostly Father! Pri. Daughter, Thy spouse shall give thee thanks here for us both. Var. As much to him, else is his thanks too much. Rod. Varina, if the measure of thy joy Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more To blason it, then sweeten with thy breath This neighbour Aire, and let rich Musicks tongue Unfold th' imagin'd happiness, that both Receive in either by this dear encounter. (Kisses her) Var. Conceit more rich in matter, then in words
Brags of his substance, not of Ornament, They are but beggers that can count their worth: But my true Love is grown to such excess, I cannot sum the sum of half my wealth. Pri. Come! come with me, and holy rites shall give A fiat to your Love: I'll joyne those hands (As you have done your hearts) in Hymens bands. Exeunt. Scena Secunda. Enter Eugenia, Balthasar. Eug. This is his lodging, I believe, he's scarse Out of his bed yet: walk, Sir, down the lane, While I go in, and train him out: but then Be sure you do dispatch him: least he wound you, And grown enraged with some petty scratch Shread your subdued Carcass into mamocks: You know his voice? Ill go. Exit. Bal. Be expedite. Enter Picarro, drawn. Pic. This way he went, they told me: Well o'retaken: Were you at prayers, or at confession lately? Bal. Why Sir, I hope you are no Priest, Picarro? Pic. I must be yours, I come to shread your corps: And send it minc'd to Pluto's balefull table: Bal. You're welcome, Sir, but say, I play the Butcher, (Drawes) Strike you down first, and ripping up your offall, Should throw them to Diana's yelping troops? I know your quarrel. (Picarro runs at him, Balth. falls) Pic. Gramercy hand! I've plaid the Butcher now: And fell'd the Beast: procumbit humi bos! While thou hast sense left, cry for mercy, think, Think what a horrid, sacrilegious sin Thou hast committed: doth not thy soul tell thee (Now when thy faults appear) that thou art damn'd? Without redemption? Bal. I hope not, as yet Can't I remember what I've injured you in: That you should take my life; my last nights act Was nought but truth. Pic. I know that, but 'twas thou That hadst her honour, that bereav'dst her of Her virgin purity: and when thou shedst For all thy Crimes one drop, for this weep seas: They'll scarse wash white thy spotted soul again. Bal. Did Mariana tell you this? Pic. Thy conscience Tells thee that this is truth.
Bal. It is not truth. Trust me now dying, she's as chast, as she Was born for me, it is one Chaves, that I did stand here to kill; he whor'd her: O! (dies) Pic. Some Angel keep thy soul in, till, thy tongue Reveal that villain, Chaves? he's a stranger, I know him not: you'll glory, faithless Mistress! That you have made me kill your enemy: My friend, that stood to right me: but that Chaves, I'll finde him out, though he were hid in mists, And quarter'd in the Clouds, my searching eye Shall make a quick discovery, and inroll Him in the list of my engaged foes; But in this labyrinth I'll have a Clue To guide my steps unto his finall fall. Enter Catalina as a Mistress Disguised. Mariana as a Servant. Disguised. Some friendly whirlwind hurle me hence with speed, Into some desart wilderness, which woman Yet ne're polluted with her steps; — they fly me: Good creatures, stay! forgive me: sure this tongue Has injur'd you: good? (can that adjunct be Fit for a woman): if you know your selves Bankrupt of female vices, to be heirs Of your lost sexes goodness: pray, you tell me, And I'll adore you with that reverence, I would do Saints, be proud to say hereafter, I met two virtuous women. Cat. Surely Sir, You have receiv'd some monstrous injury From woman; makes you out of charity With all that sex; yet be not so, your mother Was but a woman. Pic. Very true, you seem Indu'd with sense; had you but known the wrong I have receiv'd from one, that should have been More honest: you will then, I know, confess, I speak not without cause. Cat. You're married, Sir? Pic. Yes! Cat. And it is your wife has injur'd you? But tell me, did you love her? Pic, Just as you've seen the Ivy cleave to th' Oak, Or hony-bearing Woodbine to the Thorns, So dear she was to me. Cat. And can that fact, How foul soever, change that love into
So dire a hatred? Look but on the King Of beasts, the Lion, when his Lioness Sins with the Leopard; though he storm, yet when Sh'as washt her self, he strait forgets it: sure Your wife has washt her spotted soul in tears For her delict, take pitty on her: I, Although a stranger, must perswade you. Pic. Sooner To set the world on fire, then to forget Her faults. Cat. I knew a damosel once, both young And beauteous, that offended, she was wed, And e'er her Nuptials had been false. Pic. My wife: Sure't was my wife. Cat. Nay, more: to cloke her fault She got another to supply her room On th' wedding night. Pic. You know our story: sure't Could be none else but she. Cat. And yet her husband, Pittying her youth, did pardon her. Pic. A man, Moulded of patience, or of baseness, but What did she then? Cat. Why? He immur'd her up In an observant Nunnery, to pay The tribute of her sin with Penitence; And she's a convert now: do so, when next You see your wife, take that good course, and do not Damn her and your self too! Pic. Alas! My wife Committed more then this, for when her throat Was underneath my sword; she fear'd not then To irritate Heav'ns vengeance with a lie, A wond'rous lie, you see yon Gentleman. Cat. Yes, what of him? Pic. That injur'd man, she told me Was he, that had enjoy'd her, made me kill him, And yet Heav'ns justice, gave his dying lips Leave to reveal her partner. Cat. Know you him? Pic. His name is Chaves! Cat. Chaves? Pic. Judge you Mistris: Merits she not a Chiliad of deaths? Mar. Her own tongue, Sir, shall be her judge; she does. (discovers) Pic. What's Pluto's gates blown ope, and Cerberus gone?
How came these Harpies? Mar. I have run, Picarro, A weary race in sin, and the last post Being almost mine, I falter; I have stoln Forth of my Chamber, with intent to leave Your loathed sight for ever: to have fled With my lov'd Chaves hence; but that your words, Thought of my sin, the fear of Dis and vengeance Has made a convert of me; kill me now: I die repentant. Pic. Since thou ask'st thy death, I will not be so cruel, thou shalt live To be my pitties Trophee: could I pardon Thy fault, would you be honest? Mar. O, Sir, do not Make a poore contrite, now more miserable, My life's to me grown odious: Sir, your thoughts Run on my slaughter, but my minde's on Heav'n: Aver it not, one word of life may hinder My resolution: you have seen the palm (That sweet date-bearing tree) hang down its head (As't were to beg an Ax) toward the Earth, To cut it up, when void of fruit and moisture It seems a scorn unto its neighbour trees: Of me 'tis a true Embleme, I have lost My fruit of Vertue, am become the shame Of womanhood: do justice, rid the Earth Of such an impious burden. Pic. Wretched soul! Thou shalt not die. Mar. I do desire it. Pic. Come! Take up your vail, and follow me. Mar. To death. Pic. Yes! Mariana, die upon his Course (brings her to Balthazar:) Thou mad'st me murther. (stabs her.) Mar. One stab more: so now Methinks I'm well, lend we your praiers, and shed A tear for me, Picarro! Pic. Yes! I'll help T'imbalm thy Corps with my salt drops: but now Since thou art dying, for the love I bore thee While I did think thee virtuous: discharge Thy soul of such a Ponderous crime, reveal That Chaves to me. Mar. No, I must not, Jove Will be incenst against me more in peace With all I'll yeeld this little puff of breath;
This flash of air, my life, to th' hands of death: Him I forgive that most hath wrong'd you, yet That you shall know, you are beholding to him; 'Tis he that saved your life at my request: My blood converts to jelly, I am cold As Mrable-dew within: my minute comes, Close my poor eies, Picarro, say I die A penitent, that's all. Oh! (begins to die) Pic. Receive her, Saints, To your society: how sweet she looks? She's yet alive. Cat. O no! Her breath is gone (weeps) Pic. Surely she is, it cannot be such beauty Should rest in a cold Carcass: I could wish It were undone; or that my hand had been Blasted, e'er it had struck her: hadst thou carried Vertue in this fair mansion, thou hadst made me Too happy! — (Offers to kill Catalina.) Cat. Sir, you will not kill me too? Pic. No! I have done enough, yet more blood must Follow: help, take her off the sordid Earth, Too good to bear her, and then bear her in: Be private as the night is. Exit. Cat. I will, Sir. Mar. So, is he gone? This Catalina I Have done to purchase my enfranchisement: Infuse some balsame to my bleeding wounds, Distill'd by some divine Paeonian hand: And now, Picarro, will I seek thy death, And unto Chaves plot a quick escape: Then to the Church or Chappel we will hit To make compleat our wisht felicity. Exeunt. Scena Tertia. Enter Eugenia: Chaves. Eug. A little further, Sir, I left him: Master, Here's Signior Chaves. Heav'ns protect me, see My Master's slain. Cha. By whom? Eug. I know not, Sir: I'm by this reason destitute of means To helpe me, here a stranger: please you, Sir, To grace me with employment: I should study To do you faithful service. Cha. Friend, I care no, And if I do. Enter Roderiguez.
Rod: Sir, I am now arriv'd At my long wisht for port of bliss and wealth; The holy rites are done; she is my own; It is the greatest now of my misfortune, That yours laggs still behinde. Cha: Our love returns Thanks to your wish: Heav'ns crown your love with joy; Long live in peace and bliss; and may your issue Puzzle Arithmetick to number them; Accept my thoughts, good friend, they're good, though they Tumble from my distracted brain; if ought Can add unto thy happiness, but wish it, And my affection shall cry Amen! Rod. Your love commands my duty to return Whole Floods of thanks; your wish is so compleat 'T needs no addition. Sir, what fellow's that? May he be conscious to our secrecies? Cha. Yes! He is trusty, 'tis an honest fellow. Rod. Gaspar has been with me, and full of tears Told me, since last night w'are discovered; Your Mistriss had run her lives hazard, had not Gaspar— Cha. Reliev'd her, is't not so? That fellow Was born to do me good. Rod. Her jealous spouse Perceiving that she did affect some other, Had slain her, had not she begg'd life till night, And then we in our Masque must kill him. Cha. Brave! Excellent! 'Tis beyond imagination; Come, let us in and make us ready. Exeunt. Eug. Well! I'll wing my feet, until my zeal can finde Picarro out, and unto him reveal My Masters secrets; save his life, and then He will kill Chaves; so I shall revenge His (slighted) perjury; and if I live Chaves shall die, my brother I'll forgive. Exeunt. Scena Quarta. Enter Gaspar and Varlots. Gas. Come, come! My noble Lads! The time grows on, The Masquers will come by and by; here hold! There's 40. Duckets; spare you no mans life I bid you kill. Var. I warrant you, Sir, we are old dog at it, they die if they had Cats lives. Cas. Well said my Trojans! I shall live to make You walk the streets in Velvet, Plush, and Scarlet;
Fye! on th' Dutch serges and these fustian doublets; Men of your quality to walk in such Vulgar accoutrements? Varl. We are Souldiers, Sir. Gas. I'll have you all made Captains, go behind: And when I hem, be nimble as the Eeles: Away my bullies. Enter Picarro. Pic. tell me treach'rous Gaspar! What evil have I merited of you, That you should be so perjur'd as to plot My ruine purposely to free that Strumpet? Should it be true, I might well stile thee villain: I scarce believe it. Gas. 'Tis a lye beyond The Devils forging, think Sir, had my heart Been so malitious, I would have appear'd Again before you? you may easily see The motive of their feigning this in hopes By blaming me to save themselves, to make you Beholding to them for the dear engagement Of freeing you from danger, more for spite That I love you and hate them: they imagin'd Thus to betray me to your rage: receive Dear Sir, my weapon, if you can conceit That I can be so impious, kill me, do it I do beseech you. Pic. I should first conceive All false and base before thy loyalty: Thou hast been alwaies honest true, to me. Gas. Villany't selfe would not deceive your goodnesse: Enter Engenia. Eug. Is not one Signior Gaspar here? Gas. He's here; What would you friend? Eug. My Master, Signior Chaves Commends him greatly to you, and desires To speake one word with you. Pic. Chaves? what's he? Gas. One of the Masquers. Eug. Though a stranger to you, Because I see you are a Gentleman; I'll save your life: know Cozen'd man, the masque Is nothing but a dance unto your death: That Gaspar has betraid you to that Chaves That whor'd your wife: he doth expect without, To kill you: 'tis enough, farewel, be wise Exit. Pic. Thou now art grown to that vast height in sin, That Dis would gape and swallow thee, but that
The prime Fiends feare that thy vile treachery (Shouldst thou come thither) would so farre out-shine As doth Hyperion in his fullest Orb, The smallest Pleiad; so they should not be Respected 'mong th'infernal Regiments. Thy crafts are now disclos'd thy faults ript up. I'll send thee strait with a deserved doom, To keep society with the Harpyan troops, And Fiends of that Tartarian Republick. Gas. Still you're so credulous; just Judges use E're they condemne, to heare both parties speak; I understanding Chaves to have wrong'd You in your wife, that you might vendicate The highest stile in vengeance-book, I went And told him all, he has related, promised You should be slain: but this was my intent, Onely to train him hither to his death, That as they both had sin'd, they both might suffer Vengeance together. Pic. Why knew I not this? Gas. 'Twas my intent you should have known't, he only Anticipated my relation. That you should know, I lie not—hem! hem! (varlets appear) Pic. What are these? Gas. Why these are they I hir'd to do the act, To send them both to hell: tell me, my lads Of steele, did I not swear you to decide One Chaves into Atoms? Var. Yes! sound truth! Gas. And whom 't should please Picarro to command? Var. Yes! on our honest words! Gas. Lo! here comes Chaves masqued-hem! Enter Chaves masqued There stand the men Picarro, that must kill him. (varlets wound) Cha. Treason! I'm murdred, yet scorn to perish. Unvengeanc'd, you shall know I have a spirit. (offers to draw.) Eugenia's curses hang upon my arm, Or Virgins teares have glu'd my sword so fast, I can't unsheath it: Oh! my strength decays. (falls) Tremble not earth that thou must bear me, see Engenia waited on by glorious Troops Of constant lovers, comes t'upbraid me with My perjury, but I'll not hear it. Oh! (dies.) Gas. O Sir, you thought you could defloure our virgins Without revenge, in Balthasar's destruction You did triumph; and you have slain Picarro; Look! he lies weltring in his gore; I hope You'll pay me nobly for betraying him? You shall enjoy your Mistress I she expects
Within your presence! Enter Roderiguez masqued. Rod. Ha! Picarro slain? (stumbles at Chaves.) My zeale has been too tardy; I have lost My share of honor in this noble act. (looks and sees 'tis Chaves) Heav'ns blesse me, where's that villain that durst draw This noble blood? villain this hand shal be (draws & running at Gas∣par is stabd by varlets) Thy Executioner! Treason! 's hell broke loose? Has Pluto sent these Bandogs out? yet take (runs at Gaspar.) One thrust from my revengefull arm, 'twill make Some expiation for my noble friend, And these my wounds! Alas! my hand's grown weak, Yet will I lay me by his noble corps, (he falls) We'll brethren be in death: and know our Ghosts Shall make you run distracted! poore Varina! As my last pledge of love, in streams of blood Dropt from my own veins, will I drink thy health: Farewell my Deare; may heav'n commiserate Thy sadnesse, and protect thee. Oh! (Dies) Pic. 'S This he That stole Varina to his lust? Gas. 'Tis he, 'Tis Roderiguez, Chaves his Comrade In all his villanies; 'tis he that slew Praepontio at his wedding, and convey'd Varina to her ruine, and his lust. This Lady is a stranger Enter Eugenia in her own dresse, finds Eug. May mine eye Chaves dead, goes to his corps. Now see the ruine of this perjur'd villain! Now my disguise is uselesse, Heav'n hath own'd My cause at length, and its due vengeance showr'd Upon his perjur'd head; Heav'ns plagues are sure. Perfidious Chaves, That curst hand that helpt Thee to fulfill thy lust, now work't thy fall: Balthasar's death, Picarro's wrong is now Retaliate in this thy ruine: but stay, Some vengeance fall from my provoked hand; stabs him with a bod∣kin, Eugenia gives thee this, and this; nay take One more for her account, perfidious slave! As if thy perjury could not wrong enough Eugenia, and the honor of our house; Thou must seduce my brother to thy part, Make him copartner in thy crimes; for him, For Roderiguez sake, I'll give thee this: (stabs him) Nor shall my Fathers griefe unpunisht goe; One stab for him: me thinks my rage now sits Triumphant in her element; while I Feed it with wounds, and make his blood repay
Both principall and Interest of my tears! We thank you Gaspar, and Picarro both, For this our bloudy banquet. He! who's this? (Sees her brother) My brother! Cursed villains! who durst be So cruel a Phlebotomist, to strike One vein of his? dear brother! might I fetch Prometheus-like, new fire from th' heav'nly axell To put in this pure Carcass: could my breath Infuse new life into thee, I would lay My self upon thy lips, and kiss, till all My vigours transmigrated into thee: But since the heav'ns are deaf, and death will deigne No audience to my wish, thy sister shall (tabs her self) Lay her thy Bedfellow: and with one stroke In Crimson-streams swim with thee unto bliss. Oh! (dies) Gas. More objects still of ruine? this will be A bloudy Poppet-play: — Enter Varina Vari. This way he went. Now fortune do thy worst, I scorn thy frown, Deride at those contractions on thy brow: Speak louder with thy threats, and spare not me, Varina now will live in spight of thee. Gas. Varina! welcome home, Ged give you joy: Faith! 'tis not handsome thus to steal a wedding: When shall I have my Gloves? Picarro, see! Varina bids you joy. Pic. She claims my thanks. Var. Saw you my husband lately, Cousin? Gas. There! There he's in bed with Chaves. (She swounds and dies) Pic. Help, she falls! Gas. Faith 'tis no matter: this is she, whose skill Helpt Chaves to his Mistress; and so fool'd Balthasar of his hopes: it was her Counsell Betraid poor Mariana; 'twas her head That forged all the plots against your honour. Pic. Excellent Gaspar! do see thou'rt honest! Above all malice, thou shalt share estates With me, thou dost deserve it, friend. Gas. All this I've done for you, illustrious Sir, and now Reward me how you please: would I have been False, Sir, I could have had that mans estate, But your love is more worth then all the worlds: What doom must Mariana, Sir, expect? Pic. She had escap'd, and I by chance did find her, Stealing to Chaves tabern, and in rage I sent her to the Devill for a pawn. Gas. Ha! Am I couzen'd? you did well, 'twas Justice, The Law does free you, for you only slew.
Your wife, and her Adulterer. Pic. O Gaspar! What means this murderer? Gas. Hem! shallow fool! (They stab Picarro) Glory in Mariana's death? you may Get a new wife so beautifull. Pic. Slave! Bastard! Hast thou no spark, or jot of goodness left? The salvyge Arab, or the horn-foot Satyre May but commence thy pupils, cruel slave! Who e're begot thee, sure thy mother drew Her blood from the Bassarides, or was Of near allyance to that cursed Hag, That into fritters slic'd her only son: Hell was thy Cradle, and some Harpy did Perform the office of a wretched nurse: Thy heart can study nought but treachery, But! Oh! I feel the angry hand of death, Gripe my small arteries, and Atropos Hath bit my thread of life. Forgive me Heav'ns! Treason! Oh! Treason! (dies) Gas. Look me dead, fond man To vex thee more, 'twas I that first betraid Thy wife to Chaves: I that did procure Balthasar to have murdered thee, and now At last, when I was all disclos'd, came over Thy stupid brain, only in one thing crost, (In Mariana's death) my plots has hit, They're all o're-reach'd by one poor Bastards wit. Enter Mariana and Catalina. Is not this Mariana? sure it is. Ma. O horrid spectacle! what wretched hand Durst to attempt this execrable fact!? Chaves, Picarro, and Balthasar slain? Poor Roderiguez, and Varina too? What unknown Lady's this? (methinks her face Speaks her ally'd to Roderiguez!) Oh! Let me but kiss those lips, and send my soul (goes to Chaves) With thine into Elysium to dwell: Lo! in these windows that let forth thy life, I powre the helpless balm of my poor eyes: Avant! thou dreadfull minister of hell! Thy power could touch but their mortality: Their souls thou could'st not hurt: Avant, begone: If heav'n have any grievous plague in store, Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee, O! let them keep it till thy sins be ripe, And then hurl down their indignation In showers of fiery Vengeance on thy head.
Behold, the pattern of thy Butcheries! See! Villain! See! how my Poore Chaves wounds Open their congeald mouths, and bleed a fresh: Blush! blush! thou lumpe of basenesse! Bastard! blush! Within whose breast more snakes and Hydra's dwell Then in the Stygian and Lernaean Dens; For 'tis thy presence that exhales the blood From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells; May Heaven with lightning fry thee into death, Or let the inhiant Earth Devour thee quick, As it doth swallow up mp Chaves blood. Gas. Cousin, you know no Rules of Charity. Ma. Villain! thou knowst no Law of God or Man. No beast so fierce, but knows some touch of pity. Gas. I slew them not. Ma. Then say they were not slain. But dead they are, and Devilish Slave by thee. Gas. I did not kill your Chaves, Mar. Then he lives. Gas. Nay, he is dead, and by Picarro slain. Mar. Take heed, that monstrous lye will choak you; did Not you kill my dear Chaves? Gas. I grant; yes! Mar. Dost grant me? he was only fit for Heav'n. And thou unfit for any place, but hell, Gasp. He lives that loves you better; then he could. Ma. Name him. Gas. Your friend and servant, faithfull Gaspar. Ma. Where is he? Gas. Here. (She spits at him) What? dost thou spit at me? Ma. Would it were mortall poyson for thy sake: Out of my sight thou dost infect mine eyes. Gas. Thy eyes sweet Cousin, have infected mine. Ma. Would they were Basiliscks to strike thee dead. Gas. That you may know, how little I respect Your love; receive this token from my arme. (Kills her, Catalina runs out.) Varl. What shall we doe now, Signior? Gas. You must sweare Balthazar killed Mariana, Chaves Balthazar; Chaves and Varina fell By mad Picarro's arme; then in revenge Roderigvez kill'd Picarro: this is brave, 'Twill hold out water well; but where's this wench? This devill Catalina? heav'ns! she's gone! W'are all betraid, undone.
Enter Alonzo, Alvarez, Frederique, Catalina with guards. Gas. O noble Patron! Behold the ruin of the stateliest structure, Dame Nature, ever built by those curst villains Alo. My daughter! (Swounds) Gas. Comfort Signior! Let your reason Put reins unto your passion! Courage! Alo. What? cometh Gaspar now to comfort me? Came he right now to sing a ravens note, Whose dismall tune bereft my vitall powers, And thinks he that the chirping of a wren By crying comfort from a hollow brest, Can chase away the first conceived sounds? Hide not thy poyson with such sugred words; Lay not thy hands on me, forbeare I say, Their touch affrights me with a serpents sting; Thou balefull messenger! out of my sight; Upon thy eye-balles murderous Tyranny Sits in grim majesty to fright the world: Look not upon me, for thy eyes are wounding; Yet doe not goe a way; come Basilicks, And kill the innocent Gazer with thy sight; For in the shade of death I shall find joy? In life, but double death, now she is dead; Come hither, Alvarez, and fright thy soule With a new Gorgon; see! see! where thy sonne Lies weltring in his gore! Alv. Who did this murder? Gas. He, that foule monster, and this cursed villain With that, came rushing in and slue your daughter— First, then Picarro killing him, was slain By these two varlotts: Alo. Quick, lay hold on them! First with strong ropes wee'll bind them to the rack; And with hott Irons extort their sparkling Eyes. Cat. Sir, credit not this villaine! by his means Chaves enjoy'd your daughter; 'twas his brain That hammer'd all this mischiefe; and at length When Mariana would not own his love, With his own hand he stabd her! is't not so? Bastard! Gas. Confide not in these feigned Comments! — Fred. Confesse you varlots, or I'll rack you! 1. Varl. He Hir'd us unto it; and first by his Command Fell this man Chaves by our impious hands: And after, Roderiguez: then this Lady
Seeing her Brother slain, did with her bodkin Open her veins and laid her by his side; Next this Varina, whose young spouse was lately Massacred here, now swouns into her death; Then by this mans command Picarro fell, And by his own hand Mariana, thus Ended this Tragick Scene. Cat. 'Tis doubtlesse true; But 'twas Picarro that slew Balthasar. Gas. Am I betraid? clap, thunder at my fall, For Fame shall speak me for as slye a Bastard, As Sin e're view'd; you'll laugh when you doe see My limbs distended on the torturing Rack: But you shall lose your aim; since I must die, I'll please my self in chusing of my death. But know, Alonzo, 'twas your baseness, that Urg'd me to this revenge; which you must feele A little nearer; you your self shall fall. (stabs him.) Curse on you all! this hand shall now set free My self from your intended tyrannie. stabs himself. Alv. Hold! hold his hands! we'll him in piecemeal tear, And throw his carcasse for the Dogs to feed on; The earth ne're bore a monster like him. Fred. Hold! Keep life in him, till we compleat his torments, That his black eyes may see the vengeance due To his deserts; which plagues shall studied be. Gas. 'Tis past, I'm going now, my blood is pale, It comes thin from my heart-strings: may you all Perish, alone the Bastard doth not fall. (Dies.) Alv. Convey these bodies in, our grief shall swell, And study torments that may equall Hell. Exeunt: ERRATA. Pag. 4. line 21. for Dull read Full. P. 9. l. 18. for with r. which P. 16. l. 37. for disert r. desert. P. 20. l. 46. for optitick r. optick. P. 21 l. 10. for they r. they've. P. 30. l. 12. Exit. and penult. for this winding, r. their. P. 33. l. 21. for wilt r. will't. P. 40. l. 19. for panvillos, r. panuillos. P. 64. l. 33. r. Las! Sir, I. FINIS.
EPILOGVE. NOw we have done, 'ts the greatest of our Fears, You'll say, W'ave led you hither by the Ears To see some strange Conceipt: But when you came You found our 'Spitall-wits, both Blind and Lame: Faith! if w'ave made you Fools! 'twere best you be Silent, that you may have more Company. If any injury be done, We doe Acknowledge, it is onely done to you: We cook'd it for your Palats, if the Meat Disrelish, don't indict us for a Cheat: We hop'd to please: if ought disgust, We wish You'ld think it but an ill-cookt Spanish Dish. Your Patience claims our Thanks: Let GASPAR have Your Favours hang like Scutcheons o're his Grave: His Death hath Justice satisfied: from you We doe (on his behalf) for Mercy sue. Let not your hasty Censures raise those stones Which doe Inurn him, or disturb his Bones, And throw his Ashes in the air, be wise, Lest his proud Dust rise, and put out your eyes. Bridle your Passion: 'twere sin, your breath Should sting his Name, and blast him after Death. My Fancy prompts Me, that your Votes will give (Attested by your hands) a large Reprieve 'Gainst Envie's doom, and that his Genius shall Not be condemn'd as quite Apocryphall: If any strain's unsav'ry, or don't fit Your Humour, say it is a Bastard-Wit: It is our hopes in Country, Court, and City, If not your Love, We shall deserve your Pity. FINIS.
