N981 19604020 109181
News from Morefields: Or, The Wanton Wag: Or, Ione go to't. Her Name was Jone, and she'd go to't she swore, She'l exercise each part e're she'd live poor; She reckons up her Lovers one by one, Now from the Park, she to Morefields is gone. To the Tune of Stearing my coast one night. &c. Now trading grows dead and i've nothing to do, Some part of my Lovers i le reckon to you: VVho seldom came to me unless it were dark. their aim it was good, for they ne'r miss'd my Mark. I first a young Girl did come up to the town, Then I thought my self fine in a Paragon Gown; A Service I got, and a good Master too, For he was a joyner and taught me to do. Then twenty wéeks after my belly did swell, And what I should do poor I could not tell: He gave me some Money, and bid me be gone, Thus I with my Maiden-head went all alone. Then next did I méet with a hectoring Spark, VVho told me I had best get into the Park, I took his advice and thither I went, But of my great belly I did me repent. But after the Midwife her Office had done She told me I was Mother to a very fine son: But quickly that dy'd, and I was easd of my pain, And now for a Maid I may pass for again. Twas next a young Lawyer that did me espy, He swore I was right by the cast of my eye: He briskly makes at me I askt what he meant, He gave me a Guinny, then told his intent. His man partly guest what his master did do, He long'd for to taste of a little bit too: On the Morrow he comes with a whole Quarters pay, And proffers it all if with him I would play. An Old Miser asks me if that I was willing, To turn up my Scut he would give me a Shilling: Then fumbling he came, but I put him quite by, But he dropt me an Angel, then down I did lye. The next was a barber who swore he would trim me He had that would please if the devil wan't in me: He with his Half-crown gave the Porter a fée, The Gates straight flew open, then entred he. The second part, to the same tune THen next comes a taylor with needle & thimble, VVhose hands at my Placket begun to be nimble I bid him forbear, for unless he had coyn, He should not take measure of that Coney of mine. From highest to lowest I know I had my part, Twas their Money, not they, that rejoyced my heart: The next that came to me was a Cobler I tell ye, VVho for his half-crown would fain féel of my belly Then in comes a Courtier who hustl'd Al-a-mode, VVhose hands to crack did know the right road: Pish, pray sir forbear, then I softly did cry, But a yellow broad piece made me quietly lye. A blustering Captain came puffing in haste, And eagerly clasps his strong arms round my waste then backwards he hrows me, a pound was his price But the rogue was so lusty that he swore hed do't twice. A Surgeon that newly was come out of Spain, VVith his instruments would fain open a vein, But to part with his Coyn he could not endure, But if e're I was Clapt he would give me the cure Then next a stout Souldier to my Lodging did run, He of me did beg to make use of my Gun: I said if that bullets of silver he had store, he might shoot till his heart ak'd and never give o're. A Merchant that newly was come from the Seas. took a view of my body, which did very well please: He seldom was from me, for he lov'd well the game, And he gave me two pieces e'ry time that he came. A VVine-cooper treated me with the best Sack, And all to persade me to lye on my back, Some VVine and some Money together did do, Then he of my Firkin must néeds take a view. A Cook that had roasted himself in the fire, To give me a joynt it was his desire: But I quickly perceiv'd what it was he'd be at, He pray'd me to lend him a bit for his Cat. Too tedious tould be if all I should name, That with me hath frolickt since hither I came: Of all sorts of tradesmen i've try'd one or more, Besides those brave Gallants i've reckon'd before. But since that the Park begins to be poor, I'le flye to Morefields, there's Cullies good store: nd if that I thrive there, hereafter i'le tell. And so my dear Bullies and Cullies farewel. FINIS. Printed for J. Hose, over-against Staples-Inn, in Houlbourn, neer Grays-Inn-Lane.
