P2272 R220529 99831925 36392
OCCASIONALL DISCOVRSES 1. Of Worship and prayer to Angells and Saints. 2. Of Purgatorie. 3. Of the Popes Supremacie. 4. Of the succession of the Church. Had with Doctor Cosens, by word of mouth, or by writing from him. By THOMAS CARRE Confessour of the English Nunnerie at Paris. AS ALSO, An answer to a libell written by the said Doctor Cosens against the great Generall Councell of Lateran vnder Innocentius the third, in the yeere of our Lord 1215. By THOMAS VANE Doctor in Diuinity of Cambridge. Printed at PARIS Anno Dom. 1646. With Permission & Approbation.
A LETTER TO A Gentleman at S. Germains. HONORED SIR, As by many other iust titles, so I am yours by this in particular of the last of Octob. for that you haue bene pleased thereby to signifie what passes at S. Germains, and that you so truly resent the wrong which is done to Truth in the proclaiming of victories (especially by such, as you expresse it, as are not guiltie of too much vnderstanding) gayned by the Lord of London-Derrie, D. Cosens (and who not?) ouer all the Papist Priests they meete withall: bearing all downe before them, as they please to tearme it. Sir, I am easily persuaded to beleeue, that the brui∣ters of such vntruths were not verie vnderstanding indeed, and that they spake accordingly. For I my selfe am wit∣nesse,
that the Lord of London-Derrie ho∣nestly and fairely denyed that there were any such reports occasioned by him, or that indeed there was any such cause: and I am much mistaken, if D. Cosens be found so little ingenuous, as to abett so absolute an vntruth. For sure, he mett with none weaker then my selfe, and yet, to speake sparingly, he bore no aduantage away; as I hope this scātling Of prayers to Angels, which I haue vnder his owne hād (& some other occasionall discourses which he will not deny) will partly make good. At least I most willingly leaue it to the indifferent reader to iudge of the Lion, ex illo vngue, rather then to haue Truth suffer through my silence, where my weake endeauours might be able to contribute any thing to its libertie and luster. Certainly my labour therein was not so much to answer diffi∣culties, as to discouer corruptions, mista∣kings of, and violence made against the Authours genuine sense, which being once discouered, the former seeming difficulties vanished of themselues, Sir, if you doe me that right, (which I easily promise my selfe from your friēdship, yea euen your iustice)
as to conceiue I vse candor herein, and speake but a measured truth; you will ad∣mire with me, how this could be made a subiect of triumph and glorie. Thus farre to my friend then. Now to euery courteous Reader, I haue this humble suite to make, that, while he heares corruptions, mis∣takings of, and violēces made against the genuine sense of the Authours, he permit not his iudgement to be forestalled with a preiudicate opinion, that these words are but the effects of passion: but cō∣trarily that without passion or preoccupa∣tion, he would haue patience to reade and iudge: and if he finde thē not reall truthes, no false aspersiōs, let me passe for an impos∣tour: But if truthes indeede; let truth be published, vindicated and knowen; let mē be our friends, but let Truth be incompa∣rably more our friend; let the Fathers be heard speaking their owne sense without force, that streames of honie may be con∣uayed from them into the hearts of the vn∣learned, not straynes of poyson; And let such as vse violence against it know, that Truth for a tyme may be clouded, but cannot be ouercome: That ini∣quitie
for a tyme may flourish, but cannot be permanent; Finally, that no victorie is more glorious, then to be sub∣dued by Truth. Superet igitur Veritas volentem, nam & inuitum ipsa supe∣rabit. The ensuing discourse of Prayer to Angels &c. I purposed fairely and friēd∣ly to haue examined be∣twixt Mr. Cos. and me, and therefore I addressed it to himselfe in the tearmes following.
APPROBATIO. PErlegimus nos infra scripti in sa∣crâ Theologiae facultate Parisiensi Magistri, duos hosce tractatus, Angli∣cano scriptos idiomate, quorum titu∣lus est, Occasionall discourses of worship & prayer to Angels and Saints &c. had with D. Cosens by word of mouth, or by writing from him, by THOMAS CARRE Con∣fessour of the English Nunnerie at Paris. As also an Answer to a libell written by the said D. Cosens against the great Gene∣rall Councell of Lateran vnder Innocen∣tius the third, Anno Domini 1215. by THOMAS VANE &c. quibus & fidei Catholicae elucescit veritas & hominis haeretici deteguntur imposturae: cuius in hac parte an praeualeat inscitia, an audacia, haud facile est iudicare. Hos itaque tractatus vtiliter posse typis mandari, in bonum scilicet tùm fidei tùm pietatis Christianae, nostris hîc testamur chirographis. Datum Pari∣siis 4. Maij, 1646. H. HOLDEN. IAC. DVLAEVS.
The same in English. VVEe whose names are vnderwrittē, Doctors in Diuinity of the sacred faculty of Paris, haue perused these two treatises written in the English tongue, entituled, Occasionall Discourses of wor∣ship & prayer to Angels & Saints &c. had with D. Cosens by word of mouth or by writing frō him, by THOMAS CARRE Confessour of the English Nunnery at Pa∣ris: As also an answer to a libell written by the said D. Cosens against the great Generall Councell of Lateran vnder In∣nocentius the third, An. Dom. 1215. by THOMAS VANE &c. wherein as well the trueth of Catholique beliefe is mainely illustrated, as the cosening wiles of an hereticall man are plainely discouered: whose whether ignorance, or boldnesse be more preualent in this behalfe, is hard to iudge. Where∣fore wee testifie by these our hand∣writings, that the said treatises may profitably be giuen to the Presse, for the furtherance of Christian faith & piety. Giuen at Paris this 4. day of May, in the yeere of our Lord 1646. H. HOLDEN. I. DVLEE.
NOBLE Sr. After a sincere protesta∣tion, that I as much loue and honour your person, as I hate what Catho∣like beleife oblidges me to iudge errour in you; let me vse freedome, without of∣fence, to tell you in all Christian Chari∣tie, that of 14. obiections which you haue made out of the holy Fathers against worship and prayer to Angels and Saints, There are sixe corrupted, the words, or sentences, most important and euen decisiue of the controuersie, being absolutely left out, though they were in the verie midst of the passages cited or immediatly following, as 1. That of the Councell of Laodi∣cea. 2. That of S. Augustine Conf. 10. c. 42. 3. That of the same Saint contra
epist. Parmeniani. 4. That of Irenaeus. 5. That of S. Ambrose. 6. That of S. Bede. Fiue either forced to speake against themselues, or els nothing at al for you: as 1. That of Theodoret twice. 2. That of Origene against Celsus. 3. That of Athanasius. 4. That of Epiphanius. And finally three brought in for wit∣nesses which speake not of the worship, or prayer to Angels or Saints at all, and therefore not to the present purpose; as 1. That of S. Austine. 2. That of Tertullian twice. 3. That of S Chrysostome. Now that I may not onely say this, but make it appeare in effect, I will obserue this order, fairely to put downe your seue∣rall obiections, seuerally, and in as many, and the same words without changing or omitting one syllable produced by you, and attend each of them in particular with my answers, apprehending that the most perspicuous, and satisfactorie way, to
the readers or hearers, and least subiect to be misconstrued or misconceaued. Of the worshipping and praying to Angels. COSENS THat this was forbidden by S. Paul, and condem∣ned by the ancient fathers of the Church is manifest, both from the testimonie of Theodoret and others, and from the Ca∣non made against it in the Councell of Laodicea. CARRE. That the worship and prayer to Angells, as it is practised in the Catholike Apostolike and Ro∣mane Church (which is the thing in question) is not forbidden by S. Paul, or condemned by the ancient Fa∣thers, &c. which you pretend to make good by sundrie passages of the Fa∣thers here puttdowne, I hope to make as cleare, as the said Fathers owne plaine words can make it. COS. Let no man seduce you through hu∣militie and the Religion or worshiping
of Angels. They that maintaynd the law, induced the Colossians to worship An∣gels, telling them, that the law was giuen by Angells and therfore that they ought to be worshipped. And this vice continued a great while among them both in Phry∣gia and Pisidia. Therfore the Councell which was gathered together at Laodicea, which is the Metropolitan Citie of Phry∣gia, forbad it by a law, and commanded them, that they should not pray to An∣gels. To this day are to be seene the ora∣tories which they and their neighbours made, to the Angel S. Michael. And this they did (praying to them) out of humilitie, saying that the God of Heauen and earth was inuisible and incomprehen∣sible, to whom they could not come; and that therfore it behoued them to procure his fauour by the Angels. And this was it which S. Paul meant when he said, Let no man seduce you through humilitie, and the worshipping of Angels. CAR. We answere that that passage of S. Paul is to be vnderstood of such as are so seduced as that they giue away to creatures, soueraigne worship
which is due to God alone. And in this sense we with S. Paul crye out Let no man seduce you, &c. And that this is not said gratis, but is indeed the true sense of S. Paul, appeares first out of S. Chrysostome vpon the same place saying. There are some who say that we are to be brought to God by Angels and not by Christ. 2. by the cōtext or sequell of words in the verie next verse, and not holding the head, to witt Christ, but in lieu of Christ sub∣stituting Angels, as saith the said Theodoret and S. Anselme. 3. by the Councell of Laodicea it selfe, to which wee haue Theodoret wholly alluding and referring to it, and therfore is to be interpreted by it. Let vs heare then what it saith, and consequently what Theodoret would and must say.
COS. The words of the Canon made by the Councell of Laodicea about 1300. yeares since be these. CAnon 35. That Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God and goe to the Angels, ma∣keing priuate meetings for that pur∣pose which are wholly forbidden: therfore if any one shall be found, to follow this secret and priuate Ido∣latrie let him be accursed. Car. Here is somewhat not rightly putt downe, some thing quite left out. Take it as followes. That we ought not to relinquish the Church of God, and depart thence, and nominate Angels, and to make assem∣blies which are knowen to be forbidden. Therfore if any shall be found, to follow this secret Idolatrie, Let him be accur∣sed. Because he forsooke our Lord Iesus Christ the son of God, and abandoned himselfe to Idolatrie, or went to Idols. These words (because he forsooke our Lord Iesus Christ the son of God and
abandoned himselfe to Idolatrie, or went to Idols) are quite left out, being yet the most important to decide the dif∣ficultie betwixt vs, though imme∣diatly following, and clearely deli∣uering the reason, or cause of what preceeded. Is there now any need of further answere? Doe Catholikes hold that they ought to forsake the Church of God and to depart thence to name, call, or (if you please) inuocate Angells? Doe they to that purpose, make any secret assem∣blies which are publikely forbidden? Doe they finally forsaking our Lord Iesus Christ the son of God giue themselues ouer to Idolatrie, and thereby draw the cur∣se vpō their shoulders, it being impo∣sed for no other cause, as the Coun∣cell it selse expounds it selfe, desi∣gning the particular reason of the curse saying Because he forsooke our Lord, &c. why did you then deale so spareingly with your friends, as by leauing out what was most important, to leaue them with some apparent doubt quaking vnder the feare of a
curse if they should worship or pray to a Saint, wheras the words, being produced, made most cleare, that there was indeed no cause of feare at all. In a word that this Canon cannot be meant of the Religious worship which the Catholike Church payes to Angels and Saints, is further mani∣fest both by the Canon 34. imme∣diatly preceeding in the same Coun∣cell where the Religious worship of a true Martir is approued in these words. A Christian ought not to forsake the Martirs of Christ, and goe to false Martirs. And also by the 51. art. fol∣lowing. We ought not to celebrate the birthdayes of Martirs in Lent, but onely to make a memorie. (which we call now a cōmemoration) of them vpon satur∣day and sonday. Iudge then whether it were likely that the holy Councel would with one breath, both establish and destroye the worship due to Angels or Saints, the difficultie equal∣ly vrgeing against them both. Againe the phrase of the Councell
being nominare Angelos I would fayne know by what rule it is rather en∣glished to goe to the Angells, then as the words vsually signifie by the cō∣mon consent of men, to nominate or name the Angels, which is wont to be done in coniurations and enchante∣ments, &c. which sense the canon 36. immediately following seemes parti∣cularly to fauour and cōfirme, as ren∣dring the reason of the precedent ca∣non: because (saith it) the ministers of the Altar or Clarkes, ought not to be Magicians or enchanters, or to make cer∣taine scrolls (Phylacteria) wherin things are written, &c. in such were the Pharisies accustomed to write the Commandements, and to weare them about their heads or armes in a superstitious manner as appeares by Hierome Oleaster vpon Deut. c 6. Nor doth this passage of Theodo∣ret any whit preiudice the Catholike cause, all things being well ballan∣ced. First, because his sense herein is the sense of the Councell, which you see toucheth vs not. Secondly his
words being duely considered, they figh not with a Catholike procee∣ding; for he imputes onely the wor∣ship of Angels as a vice to those who did it vpon this motiue, that they deliuered the law (telling them that the law was giuen by Angels, and ther∣fore they ought to be worshipped) which is no Catholike ground of that wor∣ship: and againe in that they said the God of heauen and earth was inuisible and in∣comprehensible, to whom they could not come, and therfore they ought to procure his fauour by the Angels. As though, forsouth, Gods inuisibil∣tie and incomprehensibilitie were the true reason concluding that man can∣not approach him, and that therfore we were necessitated to procure ac∣cesse by the Angells fauour: which is a dreame falling into no Catholike heart: For though we willingly pro∣fesse that the mediation of Angels and Saints is good, holy, vsefull, and alwayes vsuall in the Church of God, yet is it not vpon a mistaken ground, that there is no other way to gett ac∣cesse
to him. We know that by the feete of heauenly Loue we are able to walke home to that inuisible and incomprehensible Deitie; which Loue is heard, though the Angels were euen silent, and is not refused entrie. So that the mediation of Angels is neither necessarie for that reason, nor indeed (for any thing I haue yet bene taught) necessarie at all, by an abso∣lute necessitie obliging euery one in particular. The words of the Coun∣cell of Trent being these: that it is good and profitable humbly to call vpon them, &c. and to flie to their prayers helpe and assistance, &c. not that that is the onely meanes to approach vnto God, &c. COS. Againe; Theodorets words (vpon the 3. Coloss.) are these and to the same purpose. FOr in as much as they willed men to worship Angels, the Apostle forbid∣deth it, and commandeth the contrarie, that so all their words and workes might
beset forth by the remembrance of Christ. And giue thankes (saith S. Paul) to God the Father by Christ not by the An∣gels. Which rule the Councell of Laodicea held. and for a salue to that old sore, made alaw, that Angels should not be prayd to. Car. This place requires no new answere. The solution of the former cleares this too. for in as much as they willed men to worship Angels, in the manner about declared, the A postle most iustly orbiddeth it, and so doth the Councell of Laodicea af∣ter him, and all Catholikes say A∣men. Whether according to the said Councell,Vbisupra, because they forsooke our Lord Iesus Christ the son of God, and abando∣ned themselues to I dolatrie. Or accor∣ding to S. Paul in the same place, be∣cause they held not the Head, which is Christ, Non tenens caput. Or following S. Chrysostome for that the Colos∣sians which made their approaches to God by the Angels,Vpon the firstch to the Coless Vpon he 2 th to the Co loss. had many Iudai∣call, Grecian or Ethnicall obseruations. Or following Theophylact, because by
the apparances and shadow of humilitie you (the Colossians) were sett vpon, tempted and deceaued: for these seducers affirmed it a thing vnworthy the Mate∣stte of the onelybegotten (Christ) that you (Colossians) should be brought to God by his guidance, and that this is a worke, farre outstriping man's po∣uertie (litlenes) whence they also say it is more aggreeable to reason, to auerre that this office, of conducting to God, is performed by the Angels: Whervpon doubtlesly they introduced a worship, pro∣fessed a Religion, and persuaded the vn∣learned, that they should applye them∣selues to them, and, in their accesse to God, vse them (who had brought vs saluatiō) for their Guides. And againe in the same Chapter ver. 10. Why therfore, saith he, he (Christ) being omitted or left (omisso) Doe you betake your selues to the Angels, as Guides to conduct to the Father. Finally the same Theop in the beginning, or argumēt of the said Epistle, in discouering the scope of it, or the reason mouing S. Paul to write to them, discouers also
what kind of worship of Angels he reprehends in them And this did in∣duce him (S. Paul) to write to the Colos∣sians because a wicked tenet was of late receaued among them: for they apprehen∣ded that there was no accesse to God and the Father by the son, but by the Angels; esteeming it an absurd thing to beleeue that the son of God should come in these last ages, since in the old Testament all things were done by the Ministerie of the Angels. They further obserued diuers Iudaicall institutions, and customes of the Gentils, &c. And had M. Cos. read on one lyne further (for it immediately followed in the same place) he had found the solution. Nor ought our Lord Iesius Christ to be relinquished. Behold how all of them concurre in this, to condemne the worship. inuo∣cation, or religion of Angels, which excludes the Mediatiō of Iesus Christ, which Catholikes doe as much de∣test as any, and consequently heere is nothing against Catholike doctrine. Cos. Cardinal Bellarmine and some others answere, That the old Heretikes
said, no man could come to God by Christ, but by the Angels; and therefore that they ought to be prnyed to, and worshipped, not Christ. Car. Card. Bellarmine, for as much as I am able to discouer, hath neither the words, nor the sense heero put downe for his owne replie: how beit such an an swere had not bene without good ground: for he brings in S. Chry so∣stome saying no lesse, in his 7. Hom. vpon the Epist. to the Colossians, who affirme that we are not to be reconci∣led and come vnto God by Christ; but by the Angels. And hath not Theophy∣lacte the same in tearmes, as I haue newly cited him in his argument vpon the Epistle to the Collossians. They thought, saith he, there was no coming to God the Father, by the son (Christ) but by the Angels? Yea doth not euen Theodoret himselfe say as much too in effect, about, where he is alleadged against vs, when he affir∣mes they said that the God of heauen and earth was inuisible and incomprehensible to whom they could not come, and there∣fore
they ought toprocure his fauour by the Angels? How doe you then M. Co∣sens forgett your selfe, and goe on saying? Cos. But neither doth the Councell of Laodicea, nor Theodoret, nor S. Paul, at∣tribute any such opinion to them. Car. Yes Sir, Theodoret you haue newly heard speake; and the Councell and S. Paul aboue, both which doe in formall wordes repre∣hend and accurse such abominable Religion to Angels, as causeth vsto forsake the onely begotten son of God, &c. so the Councell: & not to hold the head: so S. Paul. How vnduely there∣fore doe you thence affitme that they (the Councell, Theoph. S. Paul) con∣demned them onely for giuing religious worship to Angels, in praying to them, that they would become Mediatours for them to God. And with all, forsouth, that that should be it, which they call a secret kind of Idolatrie, and a forsaking of Christ and his Church. For further satisfaction, and the absolute clearing of the place, and
discouering Theodorets sense in point of honoring and praying to the Saints or Angels let himselfe be heard speake, where he discourses more plainely and fully vpon that subiect. In his Epitome of Diuine dccrees. De Angelis, c. 7. THe diuine Daniel the Prophcte did also affirme, that some (to witt Angels wherof he spake) were Prin∣ces of Nations, &c. And added withall, that no other did helpe him, while he made intercession to God for the liber∣tie of the I ewes, then Michael their Prince. The 8. booke of the cure of the Grecian affections. THe generous soules of the tryumphant Martyrs walke now in heauen, and are present amidst the Quires of Angells. Marrie euen their bodyes are not
contaynd in their particular monu∣mets:The ancient deuotion to reliques which is neuer heard of amingst the prote∣stants. but the citties and villages ha∣uing deuided them amongst them instile thē conseruers of their soules and Phisitians of their bodyes, and worship them as Presidents, and keepers of their citties; and making vse of their intercession to God, they obtayne diuine gifts through their fauour.Their inter∣cession made vse of. Their bodyes being cuttin pieces, the vertue of them remay∣nes entire and vndeuided. And those so litle and diminutiue reli∣ques haue an equall vertue to the whole Martyr,Fauours and cures obtayned at and by mea∣nes of their reliques. while vndeuided, and vncutt into pieces. For the ver∣tue present distributes fauours and proportions its liberalitie to the faith of the suppliants. And euen these things moue not you to pray∣se their God, but you deride and scoffe at the honour, which all eue∣ry where exhibite to them, and re∣pute it an abominable crime to draw neere their graues.
In the same booke about à leafe after. VVhy are you offended with vs, who make not Gods,Their honour. but honour Martyrs, as witnesses of God and most louing seruants. Againe in the same booke. BVt the faire and famours Tem∣ples of the victorious Mar∣tyrs appeare illustrious for great∣nes,Temples built to God in their name, and honor. excellencie, and all kind of or∣nament, and streames out the splen∣dour of their beauteousnes on euery side. Nor doe we frequent them once twice of fiue times a yeare, but we celebrate frequent assem∣blies, nay oftē we sing prayses euerie day to their Lord and Master. And those that are in good health, begge the conseruation of it, such as are afflicted with any disease, intreate to be freed of it. They also demand children who want them, and such as are sterill desire to become mo∣thers,
&c. Trauellers sue to them to be companions, and guides of their iourney: who returne safe, render thankes.Prayer to them. Nor doe they goe to them as to Gods but pray to them as hea∣uenly men, and deseech them to be pleased to be intercessours for them. Now that such as faithfully demand obtayne their desires, their Donaries speaking their cures, openly publish. For some hang vp resmblances of eyes, others of hands and feete, made of siluer or gold. To witt their Master accepts of small things and of litle value, measuring the gift by the abilitie of the giuer. And a litle after. NAy further they are carefull to call their newborne children by their names, procureing to them therby securitie, and safe custodie. Is it possible that this Authours te∣stimonie should euer be vsed against honour and prayer to Saints? Did euer
or could euer any Catholike speake more aduantagiously in his owne be∣halfe? Could the Authour euer more clearely expresse himselfe a Catho∣like, or euen more fully, and freely and euidently deliuer Catholike dutie, and practise in this behalfe? Which he himselfe also obserued in his Religious Historie c. 3. of Maca∣rius his life, saying in the end of the same. I making an end of this narration, pray and beseech that by the intercession of all these (of whom he spake) I may ob∣tayne the diuine assistance. And c. 18 of Eusebius, And I pray that I may obtayne that intercession, which hitherto I haue enioyed while he was yet aliue, &c. And finally in c. 27. of Baradatus. Grant that by the assistance of their prayers I may approach to that Mountaine, &c. COSENS.Saint Augustin in his 10. booke of Confessions chap. 42. hath these words. Whom should I find, that might reconcile me to thee ô my God? Must
I goe to the Angels? With what prayer? with what Sacrament should I doe it? I heare that many desireing to re∣turne to thee, and being not able to doe it by themselues haue made tryall of this way, and haue bene very deseruedly delu∣ded by it. CARRE. There is some thing in that Passage, which is most materiall, omitted, some what also false transla∣ted. Take therfore the passage word for word as it lyes. Whom could I find, that might recon∣cile me to thee? Was I to goe to Angels? With what prayer? with what Sacra∣mēts? (was I to doe it, is not in the text, howbeit that much imports not) Many desiring to returne to thee, and not being able to doe it by themselues, as I heare, haue tryed these things (haec) can not, at least be referred to the An∣gels alone) and haue fallen into a desire of curious visions (this clause of curious visions is quite left out, though most materiall (and were held worthy of illu∣sions or to be illuded by it, these words, byit, are added to the text, because
they may seeme to referre to the going to the Angels, as though that were the cause of their being illuded, which serues the better to patch up the Doctors sense wheras indeed their being illuded, might either be imputed to their going to the Angels: Prayer: Sa∣cramēts: or els more immediately and apparently, to the desire they had to haue curious visions, which can neuer be deuoyd of fault. But if he will needs haue all the mischeife be putt vpon their going to the Angels, Let him please either to looke vpon the marginall notes in what impression so euer of his whole workes where he will find remedia vitiorum à Daemo∣nibus: the remedies of vices from the Diuells: or els take the paynes to read on fiue or sixe lynes further, and he will discouer what Angels S. Augu∣stine spake of, who saith. For they being highminded, sought thee in the pride of their learning, and did rather exalt their hearts then kenecke their breasts. And so they drew the Princes of the ayre towards them, who conspired and
were companions with them in the same pride, and by them they were deluded through magicall powers, &c. For the diuell was transforming himselfe into an Angell of light. Behold how, and by what Angell they were deluded; and consequently how this apparent difficultie falls all in pieces. If any desire a clearer prospect vpō S. Augustins mynde herein, by knowing of whom he had heard this opinion of being purged and reconciled to God by the mediation of the Angels, &c. Les him take the paynes to read what the same Saint saith in his 9. and tenth booke of the citie of God all ouer, and he will plainely discouer to what he there alludes, to witt, to the opinions of Trismegistus, the Platoniques (and after them, it may be, to the Symo∣neans who were sicke of the same disease) as saith Tertullian in these tearmes. The discipline of the Magi∣calart of the Symoneans ser uing the Angels, is counted among the idola∣tries. Who held that men were to goe to the supreme God by the lesser
Gods or Angells, hauing first vsed holy purifications or purgations As l. 10. c. 9. speaking against Porphy∣rius a Platonique. For Forphyrius doth promise a certaine purgation, as it were of the soule, by him called Theurgia, yet he doth it with a certaine hesitation and (as one would say) with a blushing kind of dis∣putation and denyes that any by this Art is helped to returne to God: so that one may discouer him wauering betwixt the vice of sacrilegious curiositie, and a Philosophicall profession now putting one opinton, now another. For now he warnes vs to beware of this Art as deceiptfull, and dangerous in the deed doing, and prohibited by the law. And soone after, as giuing way to such as prayse it, affirmes it conducible to the cleansing a part of the soule, not the intellectuall part, where∣in the Truth of intelligible things which haue no corporeall similitudes are disco∣uered, but the spirituall part capable of corporeall images (or resemblances) for this part saith he, is adapted and fitted by certaine Theurgicall consecrations, which are called (Teletae) to the receipt
of spirits and Angels, wherby to see the Gods. And ibid. ch. 16. wheras therfore some Angells doe excite men to wor∣ship this one (God) and some againe excite them by working wonders to honor themselues with soueraigne worship (Latriâ) and so too, that those, forbid that these should be wor∣shipped, let the Platonique say to whom we should rather giue credit, yea let what Philosophers soeuer say, let the Theurgi or rather the Perurgi, &c. Nay lastly let euen men say, if there be yet any sense of humane nature, wherby they are created reasonable creatures, in any measure left in them, whether we ought rather to sacrifice to those Gods, or Angells who com∣mand that sacrifice should be offe∣red to them, or to him alone, to whom these command it, who for∣bidd that sacrifice be offered either to themselues or to those others. The 9. booke of the Cittie. LEast any should East any should thinks he ought to follow them as good (Daemones)
Angells, by whose meanes or mediation, as it were, while he doth desire and studiously en deauour to be reconciled, to the Gods, which euery one beleeuees to be good, &c. he may wander far from the true God But that which I most admire is that you Mr. Cos. whom reports haue alwayes deliuered to vs for a learned, moderate, and ingenuous man, should picke out such abstruse passa∣ges (which being well looked into make nothing at all for you) and en∣deauour amidst such darknes to wrest your will from a Father by for∣ceing him to speake against what he hath dogmatically and clearly deli∣uered in so many other passages, which you might, with as much faci∣litie, haue met withall, as In the II. booke of the Cittie of God Chap. 31. BVt the holy Angels, after whose societie and companie we grone in this most perilous pilgrimage, as they haue an eternall permanencic,
so haue they a facilitie in knowing,We are a¦sted by them. and a felicitie in reposing: for without difficultie they helpe vs, because they labour not in their spirituall, pure, and free motions. Epistle 121. chap. 9. OR happily let them (to witt our prayers) be knowen to the An∣gels who are with God, that in what manner they are to offer them to God: and what counsell they are to vse therm.Ty offer our praters to God. And what by his comand (to witt Gods) they know ought to be fulfilled, &c. they may bring vnto vs either openly or couertly: for the Angel said to the man (Tobic.) And now when thou and Sara didst pray, I offered your prayer in the sight of Gods claritie. In his 6. Chap. of his Annotations vpon Iob. HAue mercy on me haue mercy on me (o friends) heseemes toWelairfully pray to them.
bescech the Angels, that they would become intercessours for him, or at least the Saints, that they would pray for a penitent. The Cittie of God the 22. booke. Chap. 8. I Had begun to dispute more dili∣gently of the whole cause: and be∣hold while I disputed, other voyces of new gratulations are heard frō the Martyrs shrine.The publique practise of praying at the shrines of the Mar∣tyrs My Auditours tur∣ned and began to run that way: for she (to witt Palladia Pauls Sister) as soone as the was downe the staires (where she had stood) she was gone to pray to the holy Martyr: (ad sanctum Martyrem orare to pray to the Martyr, or at the shrine of the Martyr to witt S. Stephen as is plaine by these words following. What was in the hearts of those that exulted, but the faith of Christ, for which Ste∣phens bloud was powred out?) who as soone as she had touched the rayles, falling as it were downe into a sleepe,
she rose sound.A mirucle Wrought in S Augu∣gustins sight. While therfore we made inquirie what had befallen, which had caused that ioyfull noyse, they brought her sound into that part of the Church where we were, frō the place where the Martyr lay. Then both men and women made so great an admiting noyse, that the bruite continuing with teares seemed to find no periode. She was lead to that place where a litle before she had stood trembling, &c. The 7. booke and 1. Chap. against the Donatists. LEt him (S. Syprian of whom he spake) helpe vs by his prayers in the mortalitie of this flesh,A saint prayd to in particular. as per∣sons labouring in a darke cloude, &c. Vpon Psalme the 83. ALl the Martyrs which are with him (Christ) doe intercede for vs:The Saints interceede for vs. Their intercessions are not ended saue with the end of our sobbings.
The 1. Sermon on the feast of S. Stephen. SAint Stephen was heard that by his prayers Sauls sinne might be blotted out.We counsel∣led to pray to S. Ste∣phen. Let vs therfore cōmend our selues to his prayers: For much more is he now heard for those that pray rightly to him? In Psalm. 88. Sermon 2. LEt vs celebrate the birthdayes of Saints with sobrietie,Their birth∣dayes cele∣brated. that we may imitate them who went before vs; and let them reioyce in vs, who pray for vs, that the blessing of our Lord, may for euer remayne with vs. In the Citie of God. 10. booke the 12. chap. When his Angels doe heare,The Angels heare vs. he (God) doth heare in them, as in his true temple, not made by the hands of men.
Against Faustus. the 20. booke the Chap. 21. CHristiā people doe celebrate to∣gether the Memories of Mar∣tyrs with a religious solemnitie;Religious worship both to excite imitation,Sacrifice to be made fel∣low partners in their merits, and to be helped by their prayers: yet so as we offer sacrifice to none of the Mar∣tyrs, but to the verie God of Mar∣tyrs,Altars. though we erect Altars in the Memories of Martyrs, &c. If then saint Augustins mynde be made good by so many and so mani∣fest places; To what end should the D. come yet coldly dropping another seeming place out of the said saint? or to what purpose should I answere it? Howbeit lets yet heare him speake for euery ones full satisfaction.
S. Augustin. l. 2. contra Ep. Parm. chap. 8. Cos. IF the Apostle had said, you shall haue one for your Aduocate, and I will pray the Father for your sinnes, what good or faithfull Christian would haue endured it, or accompted him one of Christs Apostles? and not rather haue looked vpon him, as vpon an Anti∣christ. Car. I answer first that by Aduocate (which is indeed in the text Media∣tour) the D. will either haue S. Augu∣stine after the Apostle to meane the Principall and immediate Media∣tour,Mediatour. which if the Apostle had assumed to himselfe, he had iustly bene looked vpon by all good Christians, not as an Apostle of Christ, but rather as an Antichrist: or els the mediate, lesse principall, and impropre Mediatour (which he must meane if he would haue the pla∣ce to make any thing against a Catho∣like and to his purpose.) And such certainly the Apostle both might be
and was, and yet is farre from incur∣ring the censure of an Antichrist, sith S. Iohn was doubtlessy a Bishop, and euery Bishop if we beleeue S. Paul Heb. 5. is taken from among men and is ordayned for men in things pertayning to God that he may offer both guifts and sacrifices for sinne, which is to be some kind of Mediatour or Aduocate re∣presenting their miseries, pleading their cause, and mediating their re∣concilement to God by Christ the onely properly true Mediatour of Redemptiō. In this kind of Mediation are the Priests employed saith Ioel c. 2. Betweene the porch and the Altar, shall the Priests, the Ministers of our Lord weepe, and shall say, spare ô Lord, spare thy people, and giue not thyne inhe∣ritance into reproach, that the heathens should rule ouer them, and thus finally (concludes S. Aug. in this place) doe all Christiā men commend themselues mu∣tually to one anothers prayers. So farre is he from speaking against mediating in this second sense, or consequently from apprehending that derogatorie
to Christ our prime Mediatour. I answere secondly that here againe is a whole clause left out, whence the clearing of the difficultie was to be demanded to witt, (As Parmenianus in a certaine place put a Bishop Media∣tour betwixt the people and God.) And how did Parmenianus put Bishops Mediatours &c? marrie, as purifiers and iustifiers of men by their owne vertue and iustice, since they (the Do∣natists) allowed vertue and effect to the Sacraments and Sacrifice onely according to the qualitie of the Mi∣nister or offerer, which was indeed to assume to themselues the proper Me∣diation of Christ Iesus who onely of himselfe is able to appease Gods wrath against sinne, as being our principal, immediate, primarie Mediatour and indeed our onely Mediatour of Re∣demption, who by the right of his owne merits obtaynes grace forvs: the others onely by him and by his me∣rits. Such a Mediatour it is manifest S. Aug. spake of in this place (and such we admitt none but Christ alone) who
spake against the pride of the Dona∣tists, which forsoothe would haue no spott or vice to be amongst them or their fellowes, as saith S. Augustine in the chap. immediately before, which was a prerogatiue due to Christ alone, who was that one and true Mediatour for whō none prayed, & he prayed for all, as saith the said St. in this 8. chap. In fine one of S. Augustines principall designes in this place was to proue against the Donatists that they iniustly se∣parated themselues from the Ca∣tholike Church vpon pretence of the wickednes of the Bishops and priests in the Church: for, dato that it were so indeed, yet were that no iust cause of a diuision or schisme; since (be the Bishops and priests what they will) we ought alwayes to be secure of one Mediatour, Iesus Christ the iust, whom we haue an Aduocate with the Fa∣ther, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes. Hence I beleeue the weakest may obserue, that it is not fairely done of Mr. Cos. to make vse of the mistaken sense of an obscure passage
in an Authour, to stagger the vnlet∣tered, who are not able to examine him, while being examined he beares no shew of difficultie along with him. COSENS.S. Irenaeus against Heresies 2. booke chap. 57. THe Church Catholike doth not in∣uocate Angels, bnt purely calleth vpon God and Christ. CARRE. Still something is left out most important to the clearing of the difficultie. S. Irenaeus his words are these. Neither doth it (to witt the vni∣uersall Church) doc any thing by Angeli∣call inuocations nor by incantations, nor by any other wicked curiositie, (these words by incantations nor by any other wicked curiositie, are omitted) but cleanely, purely, and manifestly directing prayers to God, &c. Now what doe these words incantations, and wicked curiosi∣ties, lead vs to, but the old heretiques to witt the Symonians, the Marcites, Meandriās, and Carpocratiās, against whom he had spoken, shewing here
that the Catholike Church in wor∣king her true miracles did not vse their proceeding in working false ones (which they did by the inuoca∣tion and superstitious naming of An∣gels, to whom they ascribed the crea∣tion of the world) by incantations and spells whereby they deluded ma∣ny, especially poore women, robbing them of fortunes and honour, with the exercise of innumerable villanies (as is to be seene in the 9. 20. 22. and and 24. chapters of his first booke) but by fasting and prayer performed chastely, purely, openly, and without hope of lucre. His words are: That vniuerfall Church which is in euery place, demanding by fasting and much prayer, the spirit os life returned to the dead man, who was giuen to the Saints prayers. What is here yet I pray, against the in∣uocation of Saints? Cos. Origene against Celsus l. 5. ALl prayers are to be sent and offered vp vnto God by our Angel and high
Priest, who is the Prince and Lord of all Angels. Nor will our Religion permitt vs, to supplicate or pray to any other whom so euer. Car. Answer. First your choyce here∣in is not verie happie, if you should make him stand vp alone against all antiquitie, ingenous men would not esteeme his word were sufficient cau∣tion after his so many errours, yea euen in this place where he destroyes Christs Diuinitie making him infe∣riour to his heauenly Father. How∣beit if you admitt his authoritie vpon this matter, so doe I: and thus I pro∣duce him speaking of the Angels in the same place. O Angels receiue man cō∣uerted from his old errour againe: they (the Angels, holy soules, and blessed spirits) endeauour, saith he, to recon∣cile God to such as shall serue him, and pray iointly with vs, contra Cel∣sum l. 8. pag. 432. Againe infinite mil∣lions of Angels make intercession for maukind. Againe, who doubts but all the holy Fathers assiste vs with their prayers in Num. c. 32. hom. 26.
Now make him blow hot and cold with the same breath, and speake for you saying, all prayers are to be offered to God, &c. nor will our religion permitt vs to supplicate or pray to any other whom∣soeuer. Loe you haue made him quar∣rell with himselfe, but what haue you gotten? saue onely by contradicting himselfe you haue destroyed the cre∣dit of the Authour you depend vpon, while you hurt not vs who want not a number of others to relye vpon. Were it not better to saue his credit saying with S. Hierome, Origene, Me∣thodius, Euscbius, and Apollinaris write against Celsus and Porphyrius. Consider with what arguments and with how many gliding problemes they dissolue the things which were wouen by the spirit of the Diuel, and because sometymes they are compelled to speake, they speake not what they thinke, but what they are forced by necessitie to oppose to the Doctrine of the Gentils. For saith he not in the same booke that had he discourered that Celsus had by Angells vnder∣stood true Angells as Gab. Mich. &c. he
would then according to his abilitie haue said something to the matter by reiecting the word Adoration, and the actions of the Adorer, that is offerings and Sacrifices, and the giuing of the worship of Latria, so that it is manifest that he denies not the prayer to the Saints absolutely, but onely in the sense in which they held their false Gods were to be prayed to and ado∣red, which according to Plato they tearmed Angells, and gaue them so∣ueraigne honour, as is cleare from S. Aug. in his 10. booke of the Gitty and is partly cited aboue, where they are tear∣med lesser Gods. For saith he of the Angells in the same place, though they doe descend, &c. and offer the prayers of men, yet are they not at all so called Gods as that we are commanded to adore them, or to worship them with di∣uine honour. And to this we all say; so be it, contenting our selues to afford them an inferiour honour, sortable to seruants, which beares no propor∣tion to that soueraigne and diuine honour, which we reserue for the Great Master alone.
Cos. Tertullian in his booke of Prayer chap. 12. THese prayers are vaine, and deser∣uedly farelted, which are made without the authoritie and precept of Christ or his Apostles. For such prayers be not for religion, but superstition. Car. Sinceritie is still desired: The authours words are still either so indi∣rectly, or sparingly put downe, that it is impossible they should beare out his sense and make it intelligible to the Reader. Tertull. in this place speakes not one word of Prayer to Angels or Saints, either in expresse tearmes, or can the exigencie or scope of his meaning be wrested to it. He speakes onely of certaine friuolous formes (which he points out in parti∣cular leauing no place to mistake what he meant) or obseruations in prayer, which he saith rather conduce to superstition then to religion, as is, saith he, the custome of some to put of their cloakes to pray, &c. Marke his
owne words as they lye, and then indge what reason you haue to make vse of them. Hauing described some manner of praying, he goes on saying. But sith we haue touched one cer∣taine point (or part) of an idle obserua∣tion, I will not fayle to marke out the rest (caetera) to which vanitie is deseruedly exprobrated, because they are done with∣out the authoritie of any precept either of our Lord, or his Apostles. What was it then which was reputed vaine, as being done without authoritie, &c. what but the rest (caetera.) And what was the rest? was it happily prayer to Saints? No, not any syllable intima∣ting that; but the rest was such as was the vnum aliquod, to witt emptie ob∣seruation, such then, (and not prayer to Saints) must the rest be in good consequence, nor dare any deny it, since not I but the Authour himselfe a lyne after concludes it saying: as is that of certaine persons putting of their cloakes to pray (this clause cleares the doubt and yet is left out and not loo∣ked vpon.) Let vs now examine whe∣ther
any fairer dealing, or more sin∣ceritie be vsed in the next allegation out of the same Authour. In his Apologet. ch. 30. Cos. THese things I can aske and pray for of no other, but of him who I know is able alone to giue them to me, and whom alone I serue. Car. Nor here againe is there any mention made of Angels in tearmes, nor doth the subiect oblige to any thought of them. Nor are indeed the Authours words putt downe fairely as they lye, though the sense is almost the same. These things (saith he) I can pray for of no other, then of whom I know I shall obtayne them, because euen he it is who alone doth giue, and I am he whose part it is to impetrate, being his ser∣uant who obserue him alone. Marke one∣ly what these things were which he prayed for, in whose person he spake, and to whom; and you will easily dis∣couer this place conteynes no diffi∣culty at all. The things he prays for
are (as himselfe declares in the prece∣dent lyne.) Long life to all Emperours, asecure raigne, a safe Pallace, stronge ar∣mies, a faithfull Senate, an honest people, a peaceable world, &c. He speakes it in the person of Christians, who were accused by the Ethnicks that they prayed not to their Gods for the Em∣perour. Where vpō he makes an Apo∣logie for them to the Emperour, shewing that though they pray not to their false Gods, who were but indeed dead men, and therfore lesse powerfull then himselfe, yet he retorts vpon the Ethnicks in these tearmes, but you are irreligious who seeke safetie (to witt by the meanes of false Gods) where it is not; you demand it of those that are not able to giue it, ouerpassing him in whose power it is, and so con∣cludes that Christians haue not re∣course to their Gods as they haue, but to the true God, in these words. But we call vpon the eternall God, the true God, the liuing God, because he alone is able to giue it. He, I say, not the false Gods, whom alone he excludes from
that power of helping the Emperour, without hauing any thought, or ma∣king any relation to the Angels or Saints at all, which yet he should haue done to haue made this place vsefull for your purpose, as you must needs confesse. Cos. S. Athanasius l. 4. against the Arrians. NO man should pray to God and the Angels to receaue any thing, but ought to petition the Father and the sonne, &c. Car. Still is the Authour surprised, as it were, and forced to speake what he meanes not, and what the subiect doth not acte, as shall be showne by the context and the scope of the Authour In the interim take his words as they lye. For neuer would any pray to receiue any thing of God, and the Angels, or of any created things: nor did any conceiue this forme of words, GOD AND THE AN∣GELS GIVE it THEE, but contrarily of the Father and the sonne, for their
vnitie, and vniforme reason of giuing. Nor doth the Cathol. Church vse any such forme of prayer, as ioyning the Angells with God, by reason of their vnitie and vniforme reason of giuing, which is the holy Fathers sense. Which that it may plainely appeare to be so indeed, let vs onely reflect against whom he speakes, and what argument he vseth. He is here dispu∣ting against the Arrians, vpon this passage of S. Iohn, Ego & Pater vnum sumus. The Arrians would haue that place to be vnderstood of one in will; S. Athanas. of one in substance: and thus he argues a litle before the place in question. If, saith he, for that rea∣son (to witt because they will and nill the same) the Father and the sonne were to be held to be the same thing, and by that meanes the Word were esteemed to be like the Father: then were it necessarie too that Angels, and other things more ex∣cellent then wee, the Principalities, Powers, Thrones, Dominations, and the rest which appeare in heauen, the sun moone and starrs should be so esteemed the
sonnes of God as Christ is his sonne, and this speech also should be pronounced of them, they and the Father are one, sith what God wills they also will. Which if it were true, they also would be ad∣mitted into the same power of giuing with the sōne: but that is false, therfore and that too which preceeded. That that is false, he goes on prouing out of S. Paul, grace and peace be to you from God our F. and from Iesus Christ, &c. admitting none of the creatures into his fellowship, in the power of giuing (ratione, in that behalfe or respect.) Now, saith he, the verie manner of giuing, doth conuince the vnitie of the Fa∣ther and the sonne; for neuer doth any pray to receaue any thing in this forme of words, God and the Angells giue me such a thing, as we say, God the father and the sōne giue me, &c. with S. Paul  that this passage doth not at all speaake of prayer to Angels in the sense we defend it in, that is, as they make intercession to God for vs in qualitie of faithfull seruants of his; as being his creatures, infinitely infe∣riour
to him, &c. not by reason of their vnitie with him, and vniforme power of giuing, as aboue, which alone is the sense reiected by S. Athanasius: not the honour and prayer to the Angels and Saints, which was the practise of that Age, as may partly appeare by these few passages. In a Sermon of our Blessed Lady, to∣wards the end which is among his workes, and verie ancient, if not his owne. ANd now giue eare, ô thou daughter of Dauid and Abraham, and in∣cline thine eares to our prayers, forgett not thy people, nor vs, who are of thy fa∣milie and of thy Fathers house. Againe in the same place. Where vpon all the rich among the people pray to thee, as being enriched with these goods and spirituall contemplations. We cry vnto thee, be myndfull of vs, Most holy Vir∣gin, &c. A litle after. We exalte thee with shrill and resounding voyces, saying:
I salute thee Lady full of grace, our Lord is with thee, make intercession for vs, ô Mistresse, Lady, Queene, and Mother of God. And the same is made good more fully by the Fathers of the same Age. First by S. Hilarie. The Angels of the litle ones are ouer the prayers of the faithfull.In Mattheū 18. And againe. The Angels doe dayly offer vp to God, the prayers of those which are saued through Christ. S. Ephraem. O my most clement God, haue mercy on thy creature,In fine ora∣tionis de laudibus sanctae Dei matris. by the inter∣cession of the mother of God alwayes a Virgin; and of the Hostes of Heauenly spirits, and companies of Angels, of Che∣rubim, Seraphim, Prophets, Martyrs, &c. S. Basile. By the intercession of the Holy Mother of God and all these who haue fore glorifyed thee,Basil. in his Litur∣gie. sanctifie our soules and bodies, and grant that we may serue thee in sanctitie all the dayes of our life. Againe. Who is in tribulation flies to the fortie Martyrs:In Homilia in 40. Mar∣tyres. prope finem. such as are in pros∣peritie
betake themselues to them too: the one to be deliuered from his affliction: the other to be continued in his prosperous condition. This good woman is heard to pray for children: and to sue for a safe re∣turne to her husband abroade; and for his health while he is infirme. S. Gregorie Nyssene. He (to witt Meletius deceased) makes intercession for vs, and for the sinnes of the people.In oratione De obitu Meletij Episcopi. Againe. We stand in need of many benefits: interceede,In oratione de Theodoro Martyre. and make earnest en∣treatie for our countrie to our common king and Lord. Againe. As a soldier pray for vs; as a Martyr vse the libertie of speech for thy fellow seruants, &c. Begge for peace that these publike assemblies may not be inter∣rupted;Ibidē paulo post. least the cruell and wicked Bar∣barian may rage and make violence against the temples and Altars; least the profane and impious tread ly things vnder their feete: for euen we who are conserued fafe and sound, aseribe that be∣nefit to thee: and petition for safe guarde and securitie for the tyme to come, &c. S. Gregorie Nazianzene. But thou
ô sacred and dinine man, looke downe vpon vs from aboue,In fine ora∣tionis in ldm S. Basilij. and either stoppe the sting of the flesh which God hath giuen vs for our exercise, or preuayle that we may en∣dure it with courage, &c. Saint Ambrose also followed in in this age, and gaue restimonie to this Truth, as you will see in my answer to the ensuing obiection. COSENS.S. Ambrose in 1. cap. ad Rom. THey that neglect to come vnto God himselfe, and goe to him by others, vse to make this miserable excuse, that by the helpe of others they can come to God, as by the helpe of noble men they can come to the king. Goe to, It is treason to take the honour or Maiestie of a king, and to giue it to a Lord. And doe these men thinke to escape, if they giue the honour of God to a creature and worship it? For therfore doe men goe to a king by great and noble personages, because the king is no more then a man himselfe. But to come to God (who knowes euery thing) and to procure his fauour there is no such need of a helper or suffragator. For where euer any one will speake (or pray) vnto him,
he will himselfe be readie to heare and answere him. CARRE. This place vpon the first sight may seeme both liuely to ex∣presse, and at once to improue the Ca∣tholike custome of making vse of the Saints intercession to God. But truely were S. Ambrose the Authour of it, as he is not by any scholler beleeued to be, euen Caluin himselfe affir∣ming of those Commentaries, that they haue nothing worthy of S. Am∣brose, yet if I make it not appeare to any scholler that it was neither spokē nor meant to that purpose, I will be content to loose the small credit I owne. The Authours discourse then, (be he who he will) was vpō this verse of S. Paul. Saying they were wise men they were made fooles. Vpon which he. For they thinke themselues wise men, be∣cause they thinke to finde out Philosophicall reasons, searching the courses  the starrs, and the qualities of the elements, but des∣pising the Lord of them; therfore they are made fooles, seeing if these things ought to be praysed, how much more their Crea∣tour?
yet being ashamed of their neglect of God, they are wont to vse this misera∣ble excuse, saying, that by those, (to witt, fellow seruants or creatures whereof the speech was before, and are after named conserui) they are able to goe to God, as by the Countes they come to the king. Goe to, is any one so madd, or so vnmyndfull of his saluation, as that he would chalenge the honour of a king to a Count, sith if euen any be but found to treate of his matter, they are iustly con∣demned guiltie of treason? And these thinke not themselues guiltie, who giue away the honour of Gods name to a crea∣ture, and forsaking the Lord and Master adore their fellow seruants, as though there were yet some further thing reserued for God. For euen therfore it is that we goe to the king by the meanes of the Tri∣bunes or Counts, because indeed the king himselfe is a man, and he knowes not in whose hands to intrust the Cōmon wealth. But to procure fauour with God from vhom nothing lyes hid (for he knowes all mens merits) there is no neede of a saf∣fragator but a deuoute mynde. For where
euer such a one shall speake vnto him, he will answere him. Obserue hereupon, that Mr. Cos. in his translation of this passage, 1. In steed of (ipsos those) which must needs haue relation to some persons or things goeing before wherby the sense is cleared, he puts, others, which quite obscures and changes the sense. 2. He leaues out this clause most im∣portant and decisiue, Forsaking the Lord, adore their fellow seruants. 3. He puts any one where as indeed it is such an one (talis) referring to one mentioned before, deuoute in mynde: such an one indeed will be heard without a suffragator, that is without needing any to suggest their merits, as though God were ignorant of them: wherevpon he saith, for he knowes all mens merits. In a word, this Authour is here re∣prehending the pagan Philosophers, who knowing God did not worship him accordingly, but gaue away the honour due to him alone, to crea∣tures, to stockes, stones, and statuaes, whō they called and honored as their
gods, as is euident all through the chapter. In particular, where he saith. So was their heart blinded, that they changed the Maiestie of the inuisible God, whō by these his workes they did acknow∣ledge, not into men, but (which is worse, and euen a crime not to be excused) into the similitude of men, that the forme of a corruptible man, that is the picture of man is by them tearmed their God, that so they may receaue the pictures of them being dead into the glorie of a God, to whom being aliue they durst not ascribe Deitie. And a little after. Changing the trueth of God into a lye, that they gaue the name of the true God, to those wuich are not Gods: for taking from stones, wood, and other mettall, what they are indeed; they attribute to them what they are not, &c. for they are not now called wood or stone, but God, and this is rather to serue the creature, (which is called aboue, their fellow seruant, and in that name con∣demned) then the Creatour. So that it is manifest, that the Authour doth not at all in this passage, touch or point at, much lesse reprehend or con∣dēne
the Catholike practise of giuing an inferiour honour to the Saints; and praying to them to become interces∣sours for vs: which will yet more clearely appeare to such as will take the paynes to reade his booke de vi∣duis after the middest, where he saith. Peter and Andrew therfore prayed for the widow, I wish to God there were any so readie to pray for vs, at least he who prayed for his mother in law, Peter, and Andrew his brother, They could then im∣petrate for affinities sake, now they are able to doe it for vs and all men. You see that one subiect to a great sinne, is lesse fitt to pray, at least to obtuyne for her selfe: Let her therfore imploye others to pray to the Physitian. For the sicke are not able to pray for themselues, vnles the Physitian by the intreatie of others be inuited to come to them. Flesh is infirme, the myned is sicke, and hindred with the chaynes of sinnes. It is not able to make one weake stepp towards the seate of that Physitiā. We must therfore heartely beseech the Angels in our behalfe, who are giuen for our helpe, we must pray to the Martyrs, of whom we
seeme to chalenge à certaine kind of patro∣nage by the priuiledge of flesh and bloud. They haue abilitie to pray for our sinnes, who if they had any sinnes of their owne, washed them with their bloud; For they are Gods Martyrs, our Prelates, the ouer∣seers of our life and actions: Let vs not blush to make vse of them for interces∣sours of our infirmitie; since they them∣selues experienced the infirmitie of flesh and bloud, euen while they were victo∣rious. As for that sentence, to witt: To pro∣cure fauour with God, there is no need of a suffragator, which may seeme most to vrge against a Catholike sense. I answere first;Psal. 129. according to that of S. Hilarie. The nature of God hath no neede of their intercession (to witt of the An∣gels) but our infirmitie. And this in case a suffragator signified a helper or intercessour, which yet is neuer in proper speech but onely by metaphore, much lesse here the true sense of the word. For suffragator will be found another thing if we take Tullie for our Master in finding out the true
sense of a latine word: suffragatio, saith he, est ipsa voluntatum & animorum de∣claratio quae fit suffragiis, the act of suffra∣gating is the verie declaration of mens wills and mynds which is done by suffrage: (he calls it not a helping or praying for) so that it truly imports as much as informer, giuer of aduise, or one hauing a deliberatiue voyce, the word suffrage haueing bene primarily instituted to signifie the voyce which the Citizens of Rome gaue in the election of any Magistrate, or in the resolution of any other import̄at affaire of the Cōmon wealth, put to the peoples delibera∣tion. Whence we are wont to say that Bishops onely haue right of suffrage, or deliberatiue voyces in the Coun∣cells, &c. Hence, such towards the Emperours, as had the credit to giue their voyces, aduice or opinion tou∣ching the capacities or incapacities of persons pretending preferments, were called suffragators, that is informers, helping to supplie the Emperours want of knowledge, of the merits or demerits of particular persons ay∣ming
to beare office in the common wealth. And such suffragators, saith the Authour and we with him, God needs none, sith as is said in the same place, For be knowes all mens merits: from whom nothing lyes hid, and so needs not any to informe him of the worth and abilities of his subiects, as the Em∣perours needed the aduice of the Tri∣bunes or Gouernours of Prouinces, of the sufficiencie of persons within their precincts, and was inabled ther∣by to discerne who, were fitt to be im∣ployed. Now that it is not a meere imagina∣tion of myne, for the clearing of this place but a certaine trueth that it was conceaued by some heathen Philoso∣phers, that the greater God or Gods stood in need of aduice from the lesser Gods, Angels, or deuils let S. Aug. speake:Cittie of God l 8. c. 28. Some heathē Philosophers thinke (saith he that the celestiall Gods who haue care of humane affaires, would not know what men doe, if the deuils of the ayre did not announce it to them, be∣cause heauen is farre distant from earth,
and suspended on high,In his book de Mundo. wheras the ayre is contiguous (or toucheth) to Heauen and earth. And Aristotle seemes to say no lesse, where he compares God with the great king of Persia, &c. S. Chrysostome Hom. de Profectu Euang. Cos. We are more preualent with God, when we pray to him by our selues, then when others pray for vs, You haue no need of a Patron with God. Car. Here are two things affirmed, and both true being well vnderstood, and make nothing at all against vs, The first that a man is more preualent praying alone for him selfe, thē whē others pray for him. That is, it is a surer way to be heard, for a man to pray for himselfe, then onely to depend vpon another mans prayers, he not praying himselfe. The second. That a man hath no need of a Patron with od. Absolute∣ly, as that God would not heare him without a Patron, I grant, And what is this against a Catholike, And thus or to this effect, must as well the
D. as we, interpret him, vnlesse we will haue him to make head against common sense, S. Paul, and himselfe, where he speakes, (and that more plainly) of the intercession of Saints, for here indeed despeakes not of it at all, (vnlesse in cōsequence) and ther∣fore, this is not the fittest place to de∣cide a controuersie. That he Should oppose common sense, it is euident; because at least if anothers prayers helpe not, no rea∣son can be suggested, why they should hurt, and therfore we should be more preualent praying alone. That he should contradict S. Pauls counsell is no lesse manifest, who in the 5. Thess. 25. verse saith, Brethren pray for vs. Heb. 13. ver. 18. Pray for vs, and the 5. of S. lames ver. 16. Pray for one another that you may be saued. And that he should quarrell with himselfe. is as cleare if we reade what he saith, in his 28. Homilie to the people of Antioche, touching the intercession of the Angels in the tyme of the Sacrifice. The Angels doe
then in lieu of olie branches propose the verie body of our Lord, pray for mankind, as though they should say, We pray ô Lord for these whom thou hast loued in so large measure, that for their loue thou incurredst death, and gauest vp thy spirit vpon the Crosse, we beseech thee for these, for whom thou freely gauest thy blood, we pray to thee for those, for whom thou diddest Sacrifice this body. Giue therfore this flood of elo∣quence leaue to speake for himselfe, and he will sweepe away all hints for cauills to catch hold on. If we be ne∣gligent saith he, and slouthfull, we cannot be saued euen by the merits of others, &c. But these things we say, not to deny that one may pray to the Saints for sinners,In Math. Hom. 8. but least we our selues might fall into slouth and idlenes, and leaue the care of our owne affaires to others while we our selues sleepe. Againe. The prayers and supplications of Saints, haue force for vs,in Matt. Hom 5. yea and that most great: Marry then it is, when we our selues too demande the same thing by Pennance. Againe. Wherfore let vs frequently
visite them, lets touch their shrines, and with great faith embrace their reliques, to the end we may re∣ceiue some benediction: for as soldiers shew the wounds which they receiue in battell to the king speaking with confi∣dence; so these bearing their heads which were cutt of,Hom. 40. to the people of Antioche. and proposing them; are able to obtayne of the king of heauen what ere they please S: Epiphanius haer. 79. Cos. LEt no body worship the Virgin Marie, nor any man or woman besides. To God is this holines or religion due. Car. Let no man worship her as à Goddesse, by giuing her soueraigne honour testified by sacrifice: I grant it. Let no man worship her by ascri∣bing to her inferiour honour, I deny it. And that both the parts of this di∣stinction is saint Epiphan. not my ne, and consequently that it was his true sense, is euident to any, who will please to looke vpon the place. For first the
title is against the Collyridians, wo∣mē who sacrificed a loafe, a bunne, or cake (whence they take their name) to our B. Lady, and the whole dis∣course is spent vpon the same subiect all through, distinguishing betwixt so∣ueraigne worship, expressed by ado∣ration, and subordinate worship, by the word honour. As let Marie be hono∣red, but let the Father, Sonne and holy Gh. be adored. And againe, Though Marie be most beautifull, holy and bonored, yet not so farre forth as to be adored. In fine, he concludes in these words. Let Marie be honoured. Let Christ be adored. fiat, fiat. Bede in Prouerb. Cos. We ought to inuocate (that is by prayer to call vpon) none for helpe but God alone: Car. The answer is easie, adde onely two litle monosyllables which you haue left out (to witt in nos, into vs, and leaue out as many for helpe) and read, We ought to inuocate, that is, by prayer to call into vs, none but God
alone, and you will perceiue the diffi∣cultie insensibly and without force vanished away. For the rest, if you desire indeed to know S. Bedes sense vpon this subiect, be pleased to read him vpō the 4th. of S. Luke, where writing vpon these words, It is written, thou shalt adore the Lord thy God and serue him alone; he speakes both exactly and amply with all: some (saith he) perad∣uenture will demand, how these two be re∣conciled together, to wit what is here commanded to sErue God alone; and that of the Apostle, scrue one another mu∣tually out of Charitie. But this findes an easie solution out of the originall Greeke text, whence the Scripture was trans∣lated, where the seruice is named in two different manners, bearing withall a di∣uers signification, for it is called both La∣tria and Dulia: true it is that Dulia is taken for a common seruice, that is à ser∣uice which of its owne nature, is indiffe∣rently exhibited to God, or any other thing whatsoeuer. Whence also we haue the word seruant which the Grecians call
. Latria contrarily is taken for that seruice alone which belongs to the worship of the Diuinitie; which is communicable to noe creature at all. Wherevpon they are pronounced Idolaters who offer vowes prayers and Sacrifices to Idols, which they owe to God alone. Wherfore we are commanded to serue one another through Charitie; which the Grecians call . And we are commanded to serue God alone: with that worship which the Grecians call . Againe. Let vs alwayes serue such a Queene, who forsakes them not who hope in her. Iesus Christ, being pleased in, and hearing the prayers of the Saints, doth much more heare his mother, when she prayes for sinners. In one of his Ser∣mons of our Blessed Lady in his 7. Tome. Againe. Let vs demand for vs the frequent intercessions of the Saints be they Angels or men, to the mercy of our gracious Creatour. Vpon the Cant. l. 4. c. 24. Againe. Let vs pray to all the Saints to make intercession for vs to God. In a
Serm. vpon the great Litanics, To∣me 7. Hauing now giuen full satisfaction, as I presume, to any impartiall reader, not onely that all these specious pas∣sages alleadged out of the Holy Fa∣thers against vs, conclude nothing at all (many of them being manifestly corrupted: others forced, others mi∣staken (but contrarily, hauing eui∣dently made good by positiue and plaine allegations out of the said Fa∣thers, (others I would not in this short discourse, though with great fa∣cilitie I could haue alleadged) that they are wholly for vs: I will passe on to another of his assertions spoken, and put downe vnder his hand, with an admirable confidence against Purgatorie, in these tearmes.
OF PVRGATORIE. Cos. THAT none of the Greeke Fathers holds Purga∣torie in the sense, in which the Councell of Trent holds it. Car. I beleeue, Mr. Cosens, were you obliged to make alwayes good the propositions, which vpon all oc∣casions, you aduance, with such an absolute boldnes, and in such a gene∣ralitie, as this is now asseuered, you would fall as farre short in your proo∣fes, as you ouerlash in your positions. The Councell of Trent consisted (if we should euen abstract from the assistance of the holy Ghost, which I dare not thinke was wanting, not haue I any reason for it, no more then for the first foure Generall Councels,
that assistance being promised to the Church in generall, in what tyme, or place soeuer, that the spirit of trueths hall be with you for euer, in aeternum, S. Iohn cap, 14. And shall teach you all trueth, ibid, cap. 16.) of such a companie of learned and pious Prelates, and other Ecclesiasticall persons, as it ought, in common sense, to be exēp∣ted from the rash censure of euery single opponēt, whilest it is generally admitted in all matters of Faith by all the symbolicall Church spread ouer all the world, and in com∣munitie with the Church of Rome: and was reiected by none, saue onely by a diminutiue part of the least part of the world, Europe; which actually then made a schisme from it, which was then confessedly the onely vi∣sible Church of Christ. Howbeit for euery ones satisfaction we will heare what the greeke Fathers haue sad vpon this subiect. S. Denis. And then the diuine Pre∣late drawing neere,Ecclesiast. Hier. c. 7. he finisheth his holy prayer ouer the deceased, and after the
prayer the same Prelate salutes him, and withall all the assistants euery one in their ranke. This prayer petitions the di∣uine mercy to pardon all the sinnes, which the deceased had committed through hu∣mane frailitie, and that he would place them in light, and in the Land of the liuing, and in the bosome of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, in the place where for∣row, sadnes and wailling is banished, &c. Origene.l. 8. in Rom. 11. He alone to whom the Fa∣ther hath giuen all iudgement, is able to know, for how long a tyme, or what ages sinners may be tormented in this purga∣tion which is made by fire. Euseb. Alexandrinus. Memento, &c.Hem. de Dominica. Be myndfull in the oblation (or as we now say, put them into your Memento) of your parents and brethren, who are al∣ready departed this life; for by this mea∣nes you procure great rest to the dead. Accomplish thy prayers. S. Zenon.Serm. de Resur. extat to. 2. . b. PP. By her (he speakes of a widow lamenting the death of her hus∣band) profane wailing, she interrupted the diuine solemnities, wherin the Priests were accustomed to commend the deceased
to God. Eusebius Caesariensis.In vita Constan. l. 4 cap. 71. A great mul∣titude of people together with the Priests, not without teares, and truly with great expression of sorrow, powred out prayers to God for the soule of the Emperour, &c. Athanasius.Quaestione 34. Why then? doe euen the soules of sinners perceiue any benefit, when assemblies are made for them, exhibi∣tions of good workes and oblations? If they did participate no benefit therby, there would be no commemoration made in the care taken, and in their funeralls. But as the vine doth flourish abroad in the fields, and the wine shut vp in the vessell resents its odour, and flourisheth together with it: so we vnderstand that the soules of sinners doe partake some bene∣fit by the vnbloudie sacrifice, and good workes done for them, as our God alone doth order and command, who hath power ouer the liuing and the dead. OBSERVATION. Behold the soules of sinners haue
benefit by the vnbloudie sacrifice, and good workes done for them. Cyrillus Hierol.Catechesi Myag 5 And then as soone as that spirituall sacrifice, and that vnbloudie worship ouer that propiiiatorie host (propitiationis Hostia) is perfor∣med, we beseech God for the cōmon peace of the Churches, for the quiet of the world, forkings, for soldiers. And then we make mention of such as dyed before vs. First of the Patriarches, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, that God by their prayers would receiue ours. Then for the deceased Fa∣thers and Bishops. Finally we pray for all those who dyed from amongst vs: beleeuing that it is a great helpe to their soules, for whom the obsecration (or prayer) of that holy and dreadfull sacrifice which is put vpon the altar, is offered. Which I will demonstrate vnto you by an example; for I know many doe say, what doth it profit a soule departing out of this world in sinne, that mention is made of him in this sacri∣fice? for if any king should send such into banishment as offend him, and after their kindred making a crowne; should present it to the same king for those
banished men who suffer punishment, whether would he not bestow vpon them some part of the remission of their sinnes? in the same manner vsing prayers for the dead, though otherwise sinners, we plaite not indeed a crowne, but we offer God sa∣crificed for our sinnes, that we might make him who is most mylde, propitious both to our selues and them. OBSERVATION. Marke here an vnbloudie worship: and a propitiatorie hoste, ouer which me∣morie was made, of such as departed this life before vs, &c. intreating that by their prayer, ours might be heard. In fine prayer for all in common: out of a beliefe that it is a great helpe to their soules. A dreadfull sacrifice put vpon the Altar, and offered for our sinnes. What Church, but the Rom. Catholike doth still obserue this ancient custome? Gregorie Nazianzene.In his ora∣tion in cō∣mendations of his deceased brother Cae∣sarius. Anno 380. And such things they are which we offer, which if small and vnanswerable to deserts, yet while we doe according to our possibilitie
they are acceptable to God. And some (to witt things or duties) we haue alreadie payed, and other we will pay, offering anniuersarie honors, and comemorations, &c. OBSERVATION. Anniuersaries and commemorations for the dead, which we in commu∣nion with the Church of Rome, still obserue, and none but we. At least the booke of common Prayer expresseth not such practice. Gregorie Nyssene.In his ora∣tion, That we are not to lament their death who dyed in faith. Lib. de ani∣ma & Re∣sur. That either being purged in this life, by prayers, and the studie of wisdome; or expiated after death by the furnace of a purging fire, &c. Againe. It is altogether necessarie that while that which is faultie is consumed in purging fire, the soule also which is vnited with the same faultines, should remayne in the fire, till that ba∣stard, materiall, forged, and corrupt mix∣ture, be entirely abolished, being consu∣med by fire, &c.
OBSERVATION. Expiation after death by purging fire. The soule relayned in fire, till what is vicious and corrupt in it, be purged by fire. S Chrysostome.Hom 12. in Matt. Why doest thou after the death of thy friends call the poore to∣gether? why doest thou beseech the priests, to pray for him? I am not ignorant that your replie will be, to the end the deceased may attayne to repose, and that he may finde his Iudge more propitious (or fa∣uourable) &c. Againe.Hom 21. vpon the Acts. Then shall his wife with con∣fidence pray to or petition him (God) putting downe the price of our Redemp∣tion for him, By how much he was more subiect to sinne, by so much more stood be in need of almes deeds. Call the widowes, and tell his name. Order euery one to make supplications and prayer for him. This will appease God, though it be not performed by himselfe, but another for his sake be the Authour of the Almes. And this is a doctrine of the dinine Mercy. God hath
giuen vs many wayes of saluation, &c. Oblations, prayers and almes are not made in vaine for the dead. The holy Ghost disposed all these things, willing that we should helpe one another. Againe.Oration  1. vpon the first to the Corinth. supplications, almes, oblations, which he mentioned immediatly before) were not rashly inuented, nor doe we in vaine make memorie in the diuine mysteries of the de∣ceased, and approaching, we beseech the proposed lambe who tooke away the sinne of the world, in their behalfe, but that they might haue some consolation thereby. Neither doth he who is present at the Al∣tar while the venerable mysteries are per∣formed, crye in vaine, For all those who haue reposed in our Lord, and those also who celebrate their memories, &c. for what we doe are not stage-playes, God defend; but these things are done by the ordinance of the Holy Ghost. Againe.In his Epist. to the Phi∣lipp. the 3. serm. moral. These things were not esta∣blisbed in vaine by the Apostolicall lawes (or Constitutions) that a memorie should be made of those who haue departed this life, in the venerable and dreadfull my∣steries,
OBSERVATION. The priest makes prayer to God for propitiation to the sinnes of the dead. For their repose. The price of our Re∣demptiō, is put downe for them. Vse of the name of the deceased, which the Catholike Church obserues yet in the Collect of the Masse of the dead, as Peter, Paul, &c. Prayer and supplica∣tions, though performed by others, appease Gods wrath, is a doctrine of the diuine mercy: disposed by the holy Gh. An Apostolicall constitution, that me∣morie should be made in the diuine mysteries (or Masse) of the soules de∣parted. Theodoret.In the 5. booke of his Ecclesiasti∣call historie . 36. The Emperour Theo∣dosius, hauing placed his eyes and aspect vpon the biere (wherein were the reli∣ques) of that holy man (S. Chryso∣stome) he powred out prayers for his pa∣rents, and intreated that they might be pardoned the iniuries which they had done through ignorance. Now his parents were deceased long before, &c. Againe. He offered prayers to God
for the deceased, beseeching him to remitt,In the Hi∣storie of the holy Fathers of Iames Nisibit. what he had offended in his life tyme, and that he would daigne to receiue him into the Quire of Angels. OBSERVATION. Prayers at, or ouer the Reliques of Saints (a thing neuer heard of in our English Protestant Church) for the soules departed that the iniuries which they had done might be pardoned: not that the number of the elect be shortly actomplished, &c. which onely was the custome of the English Pro∣testants in their Forme of Buriall. Basilius Seleucius.In his serm. of Lazarus his being raysed to life. If he who dyed were a sinner and had much offended God, we must not onely weepe but giue almes also, offer the Sacrifice of the Altar, and performe such other things, as may afford some consolation to the soule departed. OBSERVATION. Almes giuen, and the Sacrifice of the Altar offered for the soules departed. This practice is not found in the Or∣der for the buriall of the dead in the booke of Cōmon prayer: but is pecu∣liar to the Catholike Rom. Church.
Procopius Gazaeus vpon the sixt chapter of Isaye, makes mention of a purging fire. Gregorius Presbyter.In Theodoro Archiman drita. Where some said to him that his mother was dead, thou art deceiued, quoth he, she is not dead, but liues. He powred out prayers to our Lord for her fasting for the space of a weeke, that our Lord would pardon her. Leontius.In the life of Iohn the Almner. A certaine man was lead captiue to the Persians and was shut vp in prison. But some flying thence, and coming in to Cyprus, and being asked by his parents whether they had seene him there, they made an∣swer and said, we buried him with our owne hands (It was not indeed the man where of they were asked, but another not vnlike to him) and withall they signi∣fied the moneth and day of his death. And they (his parents) as if he had bene de∣ceased indeed, made three Collects be made for him euery yeare. But after three yeares, making a scape from the Persians, he returned into Cyprus whre upon his friends said to him: truly brother we
heard you were dead, and we made à memorie of you thrice a yeare. When he heard they had made memories of him thrice a yeare: he asked them in what moneth they celebrated thē; and they an∣swering, &c. he said, that in those three tymes a yeare, there came one as bright as the sun, and freed me from my iron chaynes and prison, &c. OBSERVATION. The custome of praying for the dead in the beginning of the 7•h. Age proued, and approued from heauen by miracle. Maximus. The prayers of the iust doe onely profit those who are worthy of mercy, whether they be aliue or dead, &c. From this place he begins to expound, that prayers doe profit the dead and de∣clares that this question had bene agitated before that tyme. S. Damascene. And who is able to declare the multitude of restimonies tou∣ching these things, in order as they are put in the liues, and diuine reuelations of Saints, wherby it is euidently showen, that those prayers, Masses, and Almes
which are offered for them, doe greatly profit the dead, euen after death. This is the will of that mercifull Lord, and it is acceptable to him, that all of vs, as well in our life tyme, as after the end of our la∣bours, should one helpe another: nor had he otherwise afforded vs this occasion, that in the vnbloudie sacrifice memorie should be made of those that are departed this life: Nor that we should celebrate Masse (sacra) in memorie of them in the third, ninth, and fortieth day, or at the yeares end (which yet the Catholike and Apostolike Church constantly obserues, without all controuersie) vnlesse it were aggreable in his sight. OBSERVATION. That it is an vndoubted custome in the Catholike and Apostolicall Church to make memorie of the dead in the vnbloudie sacrifice, as a thing which doth greatly profit them. No such me∣morie is made at all in the Protestant Church of England. Theophylact.c. 12. vpon S. Luke. The sinners which dye are not alwayes sent into Hell (Gehen∣nam) but they are in Gods power to be
dismissed: and this I affirme in respect of the oblations and distributions which are made for the dead, which doe not a little conduce euen to such as dyed in great sinnes. He doth not therefore hauing killed, alwayes send into Hell, he hath power indeed to send, yet makes not still vse of this power, &c. but remittes cer∣taine sinnes &c. Will you rather heare the sense of the later and present Greeke Church vpon this subiect, to see if they contra∣dict their ancient Fathers, as you doe? Heare it then speake, first as it is put downe in the Councell of Florence in the 3. Decree in these tearmes. Item we define, that if persons truly penitent departed this life in the loue of God, before they had yet done satisfaction for commissions and omissions by worthy fruites of repentance, their soules shall be purged with purging paynes. And that they are helped to be freed from such paynes, by the suffrages of the faithfull yet liuing; to witt, by the Sacrifices of Masses, prayers, Almes, and other offices of pietie, which are wont to be performed
by the faithfull for the faithfull, according to the Churches institutions. OBSERVATION. Behold a generall Councell (a∣boue 200. yeares agoe) consisting of 141. Bishops, as well of the Greeke as Latine Church, called by Pope Euge∣nius the 4. (at the instance of the Em∣perour of the East) who presided in person (the Patriarke of Constanti∣nople being also present) Defines, that soules departing this life without doing full satisfaction for their sinnes, suffer purging paynes: and are thence released by Masses &c. according to the custome and Institution of the Church. Secondly, as it is deliuered by Hie∣remi: Patriarke of Constantinople in his answers to the Diuines of Wirtem∣berg about the yeare 1578. as fol∣lowes: It is not in vaine established by the Apostles,Taken out of Chry∣sost. hom. 69. ad pop. Ant. & 3. vpon the Philip. that in the dreadfull mysteries mention should be made of the Dead. They know that hēce great prosit and great vtilitie doth accrue vnto them: for when all the people doth stand with hands lifted
vp, and all the companie of the Priests: and the dreadfull Sacrifice is proposed, how is it possible that we should not worke their Lord to take pittie on them (or be mercifull vnto them) by praying for thē. OBSERVATION. Loe mention or commemoration made of the dead in the dreadfull my∣steries (or Masse) and that with much profit: as being the meanes whereby God is moued to mercy. And marke, that we haue not this from a priuate man, or a man of small note, or vpon some light, and slight accompt: but euen from the great Patriarke of Constantinople, the se∣cond or new Rome, vpon an occa∣sion most pregnant to produce a pre∣cise profession of the faith of the Greeke Church, since it was sent to another part of the world, where it was not like to passe in priuate, but was lyable and likely to be discussed to the full; by a people (to witt the Diuines of Wittemberg) who in lieu
of being admitted into their commu∣nion, found their expectatiōs folely frustrated, their profession of faith, which they sent to be approued, op∣posed, and affronted, and their Do∣ctrine reiected, as not aggreeing with the Greeke Church. Thirdly, as it is expressed in the Sy∣nodicall Decree of Parthenius present Patriarke of Cōstantinople, vpon the renets of Caluin printed in Paris 1643 Lastly (saith he) to find a pretext, to reiect the fire of Purgatorie, he (Caluin) goes about to repudiate (or reproue) our ordinarie and lawfull Cōmemorations for the dead, whereby we hope that God will grant rest to them, and a refreshing (or tyme of breathing) from the vexations or torments (acerbitates) which doe afflict them. The same is deliuered by the Li∣turgies or Masses of S. Basile the great, and S. Iohn Chrysostome. The first in these tearmes. The Priest with a loude voyce be∣seeches God to be myndfull of all who haue departed this life. Let him recreate them
in his Tabernacle, let him lead them through horrid Mansions, and place them in lightsome Tabernacles: Let him deliuer them out of most thicke darknesses, tribulatiō, and dolour, least he should enter into iudgement with them. Let him par∣don them, what euer, as men, they may haue offended, while they were yet cloathed with a fleshly garment. The seconde in these. Further we offer vnto thee this rea∣sonable obseruance for the faithfull de∣parted, for our brethren and sisters, by the interuention of the Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessours and all the Saints. Againe. Remember ô Lord, as being good, thy seruants, and pardon what euer they trespassed in their life. OBSERVATION. Loe a Memento Domine, pronounced aloude, Prayer made for the dead that they might be deliuered from darknes, tribulation and sorrow: pardoned what in this life they might haue offended.
oblation made for them: The interces∣sions of the Patriarkes, Prophets, A∣postles &c. employed. Iudge whe∣ther it is the Catholike or Protostant practice which is here expressed: and whether of these doeth more emu∣late the primitiue customes of their forefathers. By these more then sufficient testi∣monies of the Greeke Fathers, in their writings, Councell, Liturgies &c. it is most manifest that it was, and is the practice of the Greeke Church, to offer Sacrifice, to giue Almes, to pray for the soules departed, that their sinnes might be pardoned, and they de∣liuered from their purging paynes, their purging fire, wherby what is vicious and corrupt might be purged. It rests onely that we shew that it is in the sense, in which the Councell of Trent holds it: which is that which Mr. Cosens denies. Heare the Councell of Trent. Whereas the Catholike Church in∣structed by the holy Ghost,Sess. 25. by holy Writt, and the ancient Tradition of Fathers, hath taught in holy Councells, and lastly
in this vniuersall Synode, that there is a Purgatorie, and that the soules there detayned are helped by the suffrages of the faithfull, but especially by the Sacrifice of the acceptable Altar; the holy Synode commands the Bishops to vse a diligent endeauour, that the wholsome doctrine of Purgatorie, deliuered by the holy Fathers and Councells, be beleeued, held, taught, and preached euery where, by the Faith∣full of Christ. Againe. If any affirme, that after the receipt of iustifying grace, the fault is so remitted, and the guilt of eternall paines so blotted out to any penitent sinner,Sess. 6. can. 30. that there remaynes no guilt of tempor all pu∣nishment to be payed, either in this life, or the next in Purgatorie, before we can get entrie into the kingdome of heauen, let him be accursed. What I pray, is here, which sounds not the verie same, & beares not the same sense with the precedent passages of the Greeke Fa∣thers?
The Councell of Trent saith, There is a Purgaterie. The Grecian Fathers say, A Fur∣nace of purging fire. The Councell of Trent affirmes, that the Catholique Church instructed by the Holy Gh. &c. was taught this do∣ctrine by holy Scripture, and the ancient Tradition of Fathers. The Grecian Fath. The holy Ghost disposed all these things. They were not rashly inuented. They were not esta∣blished in vaine by the Apostolicall lawes. The Councell of Trent auerres, That the soules there detayned (to witt in Purgatorie) are helped by the suffrages of the faithfull, especially by the Sacri∣fice of the Altar. The Grecian Fath. That the soules of sinners partake some benefit by the vn∣bloudie Sacrifice, and good workes done for them. That they prayed for all those who dyed from among them, beleeuing that it is a great helpe to their soules, for whom the obsecration of the holy and dreadfull
Sacrifice which is put vpon the Altar, is offered, and the price of our Redemption is put downe. That Oblations, Prayers, Almes, are not made in vaine for the dead. The Priest prayes that the de∣ceased may find his Iudge more propitious: That God would become propitious to the sinnes, not onely of the liuing, but also of the dead, That it is an vndoubted custome in the Catholike, and Apostolicall Church. The Councell of Trent commands, That the wholsome doctrine of Purga∣torie should be beleeued, held, taught, preached &c. The Grecian Fath. beleeue, hold, teach, and preach it. The Councell of Trent accurses such as deny, that after we haue receiued ius∣tifying grace, there remaynes any guilt of tempor all punishment either to be payed in this life, or in the next in Purgatorie &c. The Grecian Fath. affirme that such as are in purging paynes, are helped to be freed from them by the suffrages of the faithfull yet liuing, to witt, by the Sacri∣fices of Masses, prayers, almes, and other
workes of pietie. That the sinners which dye are not alwayes sent to hell. That the oblations and distributions which are per∣formed for the dead, doc not à litle con∣duce euen to such as dyed in great sinnes. Was there euer, or euen could there euer be imagined, a greater and swee∣ter harmonie vpon any point of do∣ctrine, betwixt the East and the west the Greeke and the Latine Church? Is ouum ouo similius? Is it not then a boldnes without the warrantie of all reason, to affirme the contrarie point blank? to witt, forsooth, that they held it not in the sense the Councell of Trent held it! Did they at least hold it in the sense it is held by the Prot. Church of England in her 39. Articles? Where she saith: The Romish doctrine concerning Purgatorie &c. is a fond thing, vainely inuented, and grounded vpon no warrantie of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God.
Obserue the contrariety betwixt the Greeke, and English Protestant Church. Origene. Sinners are tormented in a purgation made by fire. The Prot. Church of England. It is a fond thing.Article 22. Eusebius Alexand. By the meanes of prayers great rest is procured to the dead. The Prot. Church of England. It is a thing vainely inuented.Art. 22. S. Athanasius. The soules of sinners haue benefit by the vnbloudie Sacrifice, and good workes done for them. The Prot. Church of Eng. The Sacrifices of Masses in the which it was comonly said,Art. 31. that the Priests did offer Christ for the quicke and the dead, to haue remission of payne or guilt were blasphe∣mous fables, and dangerous deceipts. Cyrillus Hier. A dreadfull Sacrifice put vpon the Al∣tar,
and offered for our sinnes. The Prot. Church of Eng. Blasphemous fables, dangerous deceipts. Cyrillus Hier. He beleeued that it (to witt prayer for the dead) was a great helpe to their soules. The Prot.Art. 22. Church of Eng. A fond thing vainely inuented. S. Greg. Nyssenus. Expiation after death by purging fire. The Prot. Church of Eng. There is no other satisfaction for sinne but that alone,Art. 31. (to witt the bloudie obla∣tion finished once vpon the Crosse.) S. Chrysostome. A Doctrine of the diuine mercy. The Prot. Church of Eng. A fond thing.Art. 22. S. Chrys. A thing not rashly inuented. The Prot. Church of Eng. A thing Vainely inuented. S. Chrys. Disposed by the Holy Ghost. The Prot.Art. 31. Church of Eng. A dangerous deceipt.
S. Chrys. An Apostolicall Constitution that me∣morie should be made of the soules depar∣ted in the diuine mysteries. The Prot. Church of Eng.Art. 22. Grounded vpon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. In fine. S. Damascene Deliuers it for an vndoubted custome in the Catholike and Apostolike Church to make memorie of the Dead in the vn∣dloudie Sacrifice. But the Prot. Church of England, will haue it to be a fond thing, vaine∣ly inuented; and the Sacrifice of the Masse ablasphemous fable, a dāgerous de∣ceipt, rather repugnant to the word of God. See what a goodly accord there is betweene the ancient Greeke Fathers and our new Reformers! or rather behold their apparently iarring and irreconcileable discord which the smoothest witt is not able, euen spe∣ciously to appease, or to tune it vp to any their least aduantage. Their
stale and cold replies drawen from the diuersitie which they pretend to be amongst Catholikes themselues vpon this subiect, gaine no credit, nor are of any moment with rationall men; As, That they agree not about the place where Purgatorie should be. Nor about the Tormentors, whe∣ther Angels or Deuills. Nor about the torments; whether by fire or water, or neither. Nor about the causes of the tor∣ments of Purgatorie; whether veniall sinnes onely; or mortall sinnes also, for which full satisfaction hath not bene made in this life. Nor about the tyme which the soules tormented may remayne in Purgatorie &c. Nor about their state &c. For all these things swarue from the purpose, as not coming home to the state of the question betwixt vs and the English Protestants: which is, Whether there be a Purgatorie; not where the place of Purgatorie is; who
are the Tormenters; what torments there be: whether pure and true fire, or some other thing equiualent &c. of all which we pronounce with S. Basile, Superua∣cua in Ecclesia sileant, Let not super∣fluous and vnnecessarie questions be heard of in the Church: especially so farre as to confound matter of Faith with matter of opinion. Now these things, touching the place of Pur∣gatorie &c. passe among Catholikes for matters of opinion, not of Faith; and are with amitie, humilitie, and submission disputed in our schooles, but haue not yet bene defined in our Councells, whence the beleife or not beleife of them, are of free choyce amongst vs; we being neither made of the number of the faithfull by that, nor miscreants by this. We are not of those presumptuous soules who thinke to haue accesse to all the di∣uine secrets, while we know by Saint Paul that we are none of his Counsel∣lours. We are willingly persuaded by S. Basile to prayse what we haue receiued vpon the accompt of faith, and what hath
bene deliuered ouer in trust to vs, but doe not curiously sound hidden mysteries. We finally receiue of the Catholique Ro∣mane Church, that there is A Purga∣torie; and of that we dare not doubt: but where and what it is &c. (she hauing of that deliuered no Decree) in all humilitie we dispute; nor doe our doubts therin, violate, touch or call in question the beleife of Purga∣torie, that stands still vndoubted and inuiolable. Since therefore all the Easterne Bishops and Fathers, as we haue seene, deliuer the same doctrine with one heart, one mouth, one faith, tou∣ching purging fire &c. Prayer, Almes, Sacrifice for the dead &c. wherby great rest is procured to their soules: may not I iustly admire to heare one man stand vp, and affirme the cōtrarie and that with so much confidence as that he feared not to passe his word to yeald himselfe à Catholike vpon the proof of it;Contra Iu∣lianum l. 2. s. 2. and may I not with iust offence speake to him in S. Aug. words saying, To what purpose doc these your words
serue, but to make euident to the world, either how negligent you haue bene to ac∣quaint your selfe with the words and sence of Catholike Doctors in this behalfe; or hauing vsed diligence to know them, with what fraude you goe about to circumuent the ignorant &c.? Si nesciens hoc fecisti cur non miseram respuis imperitiam? si sciens, cur non sacrilegam deponis auda∣ciam? si cernis cerne, & tandem tace. Pe∣lagianam (Lutheranam) linguam tot linguis Catholicis deprime; tot veneran∣dis oribus, proterua ora submitte. Hitherto I haue insisted vpon the productions of the Greeke Fathers authoritie onely, because the chal∣lenge called thither alone, though I could haue vsed a more sure and satis∣factorie way (the Scriptures as they are vnderstood both by the Greeke and Latine Fathers together with the prac∣tice of the whole Church of God) and haue said with S. Augustine;Vbisupra. I con∣ceiue that part of the world ought to suffice you, in which it pleased our Lord to crowne the first of his Apostles with a most glo∣rious Martyrdome: if you would haue giuen
care to Blessed Innocentius, presiding ouer that Church, you had forthwith freed your perilous youth from the Pelagian (Luthe∣ran) snares. For what could that holy man haue answered to the African Coun∣cells (Anglicanis conuicijs) but what the Apostolicall and Romane sea holds with the rest of the Churches &c. There is no reason therefore to prouoke to the Bishops of the East, because they two are Christians, and that faith of both the parts of the world, is one and the same, be∣cause faith it selfe is Christian; and certes the Westerne part brought you out, the westerne Church did regenerate you &c.) It rest that I make the great Saint Augustine alone speake for the prac∣tice of the Latine Church and him∣selfe, because I perceiued by a paper which M Cosens himselfe presented me with, that he had vsed some en∣deauour to drawe him to his side, or at least, if he could preuayle no fur∣ther, to render his testimonie doubt∣full: to the end that he or others might build wood, hay, stubble or worse (vpon that mistaken foundation) which he doth most clearely in these ensuing passages.
S. AVGVSTIN. CONF. lib. 9. cap. 12. The Sacrifice of our price is offered for her.Sacrifice of∣fered for her soule. And. c. 13. booke the same. Now I beseech thee heare me for the sinnes of my Mother.He prayes for her sinnes. Againe a little after. She desired onlie that à Memorie should be made of her at thy Altar,She desired to be re∣membred at the Altar. at which she serued without intermitting any day, where she knew the holie victime was dispensed, wherby the hand-writing was blotted out, which was contrarie to vs. To these passages some haue made answer, that they doe admitt prayer for the Dead; a Commemoration to be made for them at the Altar; yea, and Sacrifice to be offered also. Howbeit not as we meane, to deliuer them from their paines, but for diuers other ef∣fects. And that thereby, we cannot enforce a Purgatorie; nor did S. Au∣gustine speake of purging fire. Let the
holy Father therefore answere for himselfe. S. Augustine li. 2. c. 20. de Genesi against the Manichees. After this life he shall haue either pur∣ging fire,Purging fire or eternall punishment: So farre are anie from escaping this sen∣tence. Againe vpon the 37. Psalme. They would be secure, &c. not onlie from that eternall fire which shall tor∣ment the wicked for euer; but also from that too, wich shall purge (emendabit) those, who shall be safe by fire. And a little aster. That fire shall be more grieuous, then any thing a man can suffer in this life. Now we haue found in the Fathers formall tearmes, (not in our owne forced consequences, which were not in question) Prayer made at the Altar; Sacrisice for the Dead; yea, and Fire too, wherein their soules are tormen∣ted: and yet some will not be satisfied, but will haue that fire to be vnder∣stood of the Fire of Conflagration at the day of Doome. Let vs therefore
yet heare saint Augustine wipe awaie this scruple. De Ciu. Dei, l. 21. c. 23.Paines suf∣fered before the day of Iudgement. And it is manifest that such are pur∣ged by temporall paines (which their spirits suffer) before the day of iudgement. Againe in the same booke, chap. 13. Some suffer temporall paines in this life onlie; others after death; some both now and then; yet before that most seuere, and last Iudgement. And the same againe the 21 booke, chapter the first. So that now out of S. Augustine, we haue found Prayer, Memorie at the Altar, Sacrifice, Fire which is tem∣porall, and that too punishing the spirit, or ghost of the dead, euen be∣fore the day of Generall Conslagra∣tion at the day of Doome. To thinke to answer all that hath benesaid, by opposing some few obscure places cull'd out of the same Father: and so, (were it possible) to force him to contradict himselfe, were in my iudgment, but verie bad payment. For first, this is not to
produce euidences; but doubts; not to cleare, but to obscure difficulties; and consequently, ought to haue no force at all to thrust a man out of his pos∣session. Possideo, quia possideo, still dasheth such weake opposition vpon the head. Secondly, it is but a poore shift, to make a Father seeme to stand up against himselfe, to the end he may stand with them. Thirdly it is to treate a holy Father vnworthily, to endeauour to draw his sense from his words,In his booke de Doctrina Christiana against his owne rule, and the Rule of Reason, which is, that clearer places should illustrate obscure pla∣ces; not that obscure places should be industriously employed to clowde cleare places. That is but to put out the light, to see better; or rather to hate and flye the light, least it might lay them naked, and they be disco∣uered by it. The worst of arguments was wōt to be, to ayme to proue an ob∣scure thing, by a thing more obscure; and yet it is farre worse to darken a cleare thing by an obscure, and yet (forsooth) thinke to haue so prepo∣sterous
a proceeding passe for an ar∣gument. Our proceeding is not such: our Catholike custome is to pray for; to make Commemoration of; to Sacrifice at the Altar for the soules departed that they may be releeued, or freed from their paines which are caused by fire, before the day of iudgement. And we bring in our iudge saint Augustine, to whom we haue both appealed, pronouncing sentence for vs in tearmes, in the verie same wordes the Church doth beleeue and practise it. We doe not make his sentence for him, but take from him, such as he pleaseth to de∣liuer it. We vse no violence to him to make him speake what we please, but we are well pleased with what he speakes. we goe not about to surprise him, and wrest a word from him, and then force it to our purpose, which was spoken only by the bye, while he was treating vpon another subiect. But wee take his iudgement from places, where, on sett purpose, he is handling that subiect which is in
question betwixt vs. In fine, wee take it not from one or a fewe (which is another Rule of reason, to vnderstand a fewe places by many places) but from abundance of places, all cleare and consonant, and to the life expressing the present prac∣tice of the Catholike Church. Heare him againe and againe in these en∣suing passages, which I will here pro∣miscuously putt downe as they shall occurre; omitting yet a manie more. S. Aug. de Ciu. Dei, l. 21. c. 16. He speakes of Children soone after their infancie, and saies: If he haue receiued the Sacraments of our Media∣tour, though he end his life euen in these yeares, that is, being translated out of the power of darknes, into the kingdome of Christ, he is not only not prepared for paines eternall, but shall not euen suffer anie purging torments after this life. De Ciu. Dei, l. 21. c. 24. The prayer of the Church, or of certaine pious people, are heard for those, who being regenerated in Christ, neither ledd se verie ill a life in this mortalitie, as they
should be iudged vnworthie of such mer∣cie; nor yet so verie well, as that they should be found not to neede such mer∣cie. De verb. Apost. Ser. 32. It is not to be doubted, but the Dead are helped by the prayers of the holy Church, and the sauing Sacrifice, and almes, which are employed for their soules, that our Lord may deale more mercifully with them then their sinnes deserued; for the Vniuersall Church obserues this, de∣liuered by their forefathers, that prayers should be made for those who died in the communion of the bodie and bloud of Christ, when at the Sacrifice they are re∣membred in their place, and memorie is made that it is offered euen for them too. And againe in the same place. But let them employ these things (to witt) Oblations, Prayers, and guifts, or Almes-deeds, which helpe the soules de∣parted, more obseruantly, instanly, and abundantly for them, to witt. the dead.
Enchir. c. 110. It ought not to be denied that the soules of the dead are releeued by the pietie of their suruiuing friends, when the Sacri∣fice of our Mediatour is offered for them, or almes are giuen in the Church. And againe, in the same place. When therefore the sacrifices, either of the altar, or what almes-deedes soeuer, are offered for all the dead which are bap∣tised; they are thankesguings for such as are verie good: they are propitations for those who are not verie euill: and though to such as are verie euill, they be no helpes to the dead, yet are they some kind of com∣forts to the liuing. De verbis Apostoli, Serm. 17. Therefore doth ecclesiasticall discipline obserue that which the faithfull know, when the Martyrs in that place are reci∣ted at the Altar of God, where we pray not for them, (the Martyrs) but we pray for the rest of the departed, whereof comme∣moration is made. For it is an iniurie to pray for a martyr, to whose prayers we our-selues ought to be commended.
De cura pro mortuis. Cap. 18. Which being so, let vs not esteeme that the dead haue anie aduantage (by being buried in this or that part of the Church whereof he had spoken) saue only by the solemne supplications which we make for them, either in the Sacrifices of the Altar, or of praier, or almes-deedes. Though yet they profit not euerie one they are made for, but those alone who obtaine in their life time, that they may profit them. De Haeresibus: haer. 53. The Aerians tooke their names for à certaine Aerius, who being Priest, was said to be troubled he could not be made Bishop, and falling into the Arrians heresie, added some of his owne tenets, affirming that it was not lawfull to pray or offer Sacrifice for the Dead. De cura pro mortuis c. 1. In the bookes of the Machabees we reade that a sacrifice was offered for the dead. Howbeit though it were not at all read in the ancient Scriptures, the autho∣ritie
of the vniuersall Church which is euident in point of this custome, is uo small matter; where the commendation of the dead hath its proper place in the prayers of the priest, which are powred out to God at his Altar. Here you will marke two things. The first is that saint Augustine es∣teemed the Machabees to be Scrip∣ture, since he argues for Purgatorie from it: and indeed he confirmes the same both in his seconde booke of Christian Doctrine, the eight Chap∣ter; and also in his 18. booke of the Cittie of God 36. Chap. in these words. The bookes (to witt two) of the Macha∣bees are held to be Canonicall, not by the Iewes, but by the Church. The seconde, that though there were no scripture for it, yet ought the authoritie of the vniuersall Church to preuayle, at it doth in many other things of greater cō se∣sequence. Witnesse the said Saint in di∣uers passages, which both the Catho∣like and Protestant doe admitt of. For first,Epist fun∣damen. moued by the authoritie of the Church we beleeue the Gos∣pell
it selfe, which without it we should not beleeue. I would not, saith he beleeue the Gospell vnlesse the autho∣ritie of the Catholike Church did moue me to it. Secondly, we beleeue many things which are not in the Scripture, as that the sonne is consubstantiall with the Father: It is not found written in holy writt, saith he, and yet that it is said, is defended in the assertion of faith. That the Father is vnbegotten. We read not in those bookes (the scrip∣tures) that the Father is vnbegotten:Epist. 174. and yet we make good that we ought to say so: in the same place. That the Holy Ghost is to be adored: Giue me say you (he meanes Maximinus an Arrian) some testimonies where the Holy Ghost is adored: as though, forsooth, (replyes saint Augustine) out of these things which we reade, we vnderstoode not also some things which we reade not. That it was written when the Apostle saint Paul was baptised, no mention being made of the rest of the Apostles: It is written when the Apostle saint Paul
was baptised: and it is not written when the rest of the Apostles were baptised: and yet we must vnderstand that they also were baptised. Finally, that a child which cannot yet speake, is said to beleeue, and may be baptised. Be it farre from me to affirme that children beleeue not &c. he beleeues in another, who offended in another. It is answered (dicitur) he beleeues: and it is of force: and he is numbred among the faithfull baptised. See what a necessitie is imposed vpon all Christians to haue some other infallible ground besides Scrip∣ture, to stand vpon, both to make good Scripture it selfe (to witt that it is the true word of God: that there are so many bookes of it and no more: that we haue the true sense of it &c.) and many other maine grounds of Christianitie, which, you see, we dare not denye, while yet we can produce no formall scripture for them. Now what ground that is, let the same Saint Augustine deliuer. Saint Cyprian, faith he, doth admonish
vs that we should run backe to the foun∣taine, that is to the Apostolicall Tradi∣tion, and so bring downe the chanells to our tymes. It is the best way,l 5. cap 26. contra Do∣natistas. and to be done, without doubt. And againe it is manifest, that in a thing doubtfull, the authoritie of the Catholike Church confir∣med by the order of Bishops succeeding one another, and the consent of people,Ex libro cō∣tra Mani∣chaos Dist. 11.6. Palam. from the verie foundation of the seas of the Apostles, till this present tyme, is of force to faith (valet ad fidem.) And to know which is an Apostolicall Tradi∣tion, which not,De Bap. con. Don. l. 4. c. 24. and l. 2. c 7. and Epist. 118. c. 1. the same saint Augus∣tine leaues vs another Rule thrice ouer for fayling. What the VNIVER∣SALL CHVRCH holds, and is not yet established in Councells, but is alwayes obserued, is most rightly beleeued to haue bene deliuered by no other then by Apos∣tolicall authoritie. Whence he con∣cludes that it is a most insolent madnesse to dispute whether that ought to be done, which the whole Church frequents all ouer the world. But the whole Church all ouer the world, in the yeare 1517. frequented (as all our ad∣uersaries
confesse, and condemne in vs) an vnblouddy sacrifice, prayer, almes, &c. for the dead, that they might be freed from their sinnes, &c. therfore it was (following saint Au∣gustins phrase) and is, a most inso∣lent madnesse to deny it. In conclusion, either hath the pro∣position and practice of the VNIVER∣SALL CHVRCH auhoritie, to conuince the beleife of a thing not otherwise written, yea or no? If not: It were but meete that the simpler sorte should be instructed clearely and fairely vpon what infallible warranty they beleeue these ensuing points, which they meete not with in their Bible. 1. That Christians haue indeed the whole reuealed word of God. 2. That it is contayned in so many bookes, neither more nor fewer. 3. That the Epistle to the Hebrewes is a part of it, how euer it was some tymes doubted of. 4. That there is a certaine number of Sacraments, &c. as aboue out of saint Augustine.
BVt if you graunt me that the vni∣versall Church hath such an in∣fallible authoritie, and that vpon it you depend for the certaintie of the precedent articles, I may say with S. Augustine, you obserue by this of what importance the authoritie of the Cathol. Church is: but you must also answer me, why Catholikes may not with equall confidence depend vpon the same authoritie, in point of assurance of purgatorie? I am not able to discouer a disparitie, or apprehend how being held credible in the deli∣uerie of those, she should not also be credible in this, since both are e∣qually proposed: both relye vpon the same veracitie or credit. Be pleased to ponder this part well, and afford the world a cleare and satisfactorie answer. The grounds of Christianitie seeme to me to be shaken, if the Churches veracitie herein beviolated, and great pittie it were, that the animo∣sitie to make good our priuate opi∣nions,
should betray Gods knowen truthes. An erring Disputant, saith saint Augustine, is pardonable in other questions, which are not yet maturely di∣gested,De verbis Apost. Serm. 14. nor confirmed by the full authori∣tie of the Church, their errour is to be borne with: but it must not aduance so farre, as to endeauour to shake the verie foundation of the Church. Of the Popes supremacie. Against the Popes supremacie Mr Cosens vsed 4. or fiue arguments which I will put downe as they past. The first. Cos. S. Gregorie being demanded certaine questiōs of Augustine Achb. of Canterburie, answered him that he was to learne of neighbour Churches how he was to behaue himselfe, seeming thereby to say in effect, why doest thou aske me, who haue noe such authoritie, learne of
the neerest Churches, &c. Carre. To this it was answered, that this obiection was nothing to the pur∣pose: because S. Augustins demaund was in matter of ceremonie, not of Faith: of particular obseruance of a small part of the Church, not of the generall gouernment of the whole, wherein the Popes supreme power is especially and properly exercised and knowne. For these are the words of his third demaund. Why, there being but one faith, are the customes of Churches so diuers? And there is one custome of Masses in the Romane Church, and another is obserued in the Churches of France. So that it appeares euidently that saint Augustins demand to saint Gregorie was onely about the diuers customes of saying Masse (the verie word will hardly now be welcome) and was indeed like to that of Ianua∣rius to the great saint Augustine Doc∣tor of the Church:Epist. 209. and saint Grego∣ries answer againe entirely consonant to the great S. Augustines, speaking of an indifferent, no necessarie obser∣uation.
Lets heare them both. Saint Gregory. Your brotherhood is acquainted with the custome of the Church, wherein you will remember you were bred. But it pleaseth me, that if you haue found any thing, either in the holy Romane Church, that of France, or in what other soeuer, which may be more agreeable to Almightie God, you care∣fully make choyce of it, and powre out by speciall institution, in the English Church (which is as yet young in faith) the choycest things which you can cull out of diuers Churches: for the things ought not to be loued in respect of the places, but the places by reason of good things. Cull therfore what is religious, pious, and right, out of what Church soeuer, and hauing gathered them, as it were into a bundle, settle them as a cus∣tome in the heart of the English. Saint Augustine vpon the like occa∣sion. But other things which are diuer∣sified in diuers places and regions: as is that, that some fast saturday, some not: some dayly communicate the body and bloud of our Lord, others receiue certaine
dayes onely: in some place no day is omitted, wherein it is not offered: in others, on saturday and sunday onely, in others againe, on sunday alone: or what euer may be obserued of this nature, the whole kind of them haue free obseruances: nor can a graue and prudent Christian obserue any better rule or discipline herein, then to behaue himselfe according to the Church where he chanceth for the time to light: for what is neither enioyned against faith, nor good manners, may be indiffe∣rently obserued, and may be kept for their societie amongst whom we liue. Now, how out of these premises of Saint Gregorie, this conclusion which was in question (Ergo saint Gre∣gorie did not acknowledge himselfe the Head of the Church) can be inferred, I confesse I am not able to diuine. It will belong to him who made vse of it, to make it appeare, or els to cease with his, to bragge of a victorie, when the weakest may discouer he falls so farre short of all shew of a proofe: and consequenly (as was re∣plyed in his presence) that passage
alleadged, made nothing at all to the purpose pretended, which was to conclude against the Popes supre∣macie. For the rest, how truly saint Gre∣gorie did acknowledge, vindicate and exercise the supreme authoritie of the Church of Rome, shall be made manifestly and plentifully appeare vpon occasions of answer to Mr Doc∣tors other obiections as they occurre. Though the same might be partly ob∣serued too, euen out of his said replyes to saint Augustins questions, as when he saith to the 9th quest. We giue thee no authoritie ouer the Bishops of France: because the Bishop of Arles re∣ceiued the Pall from ancient tymes of my predecessours, whom we ought not to depriue of the authoritie receiued. Againe in the same place. But we committ the care of all the Brittain Bi∣shops to thy brotherhood: that the vn∣learned may be taught; the infirme strengthened by persuasion; the peruerse corrected by authoritie. Againe in the answer to the 8. quest.
We will haue thy Brotherhood so to or∣der Bishops in England, &c. OBSERVATION. Marke how he giues him authoritie ouer the Bishops of Britanie; denyes him authoritie ouer the Bishops of France as hauing formerly receiued authoritie from the same sea by the gift of a pall which is practised by the Romane Church till this day, finally how he expresses himselfe by Volumus, we will &c. all which are the words of a master, and speake his power to the life, at least, if we make him the iudge of the Controuersie, as Mr Co∣sens his argument will haue it. Cos. Againe the same saint Grego∣rie cryed out against Iohn Patriar. of Constantinople, for proudly assu∣ming to himselfe the pompous name of vniuersall Bishop &c. ergo, he did not allow the supremacie of Rome. Carre. This was his seconde medium, and I confesse it were specious enough had it neuer before bene
heard of, but being too obuious and euen worne thread-bare with euery ones frequent handling, it is transpa∣rent to vulgar eyes, and he walkes but in a nett, who makes vse of it for a cloke. To this my answer was, that therfore saint Gregorie exclaimed against the proud and pompous title of VNIVER∣SALL BISHOP vhich Iohn Patriarke of Constantinople assumed to him∣selfe, because he apprchended that thereby all the office or dignitie of Bishop was absorpt or exhausted, so as none should be Bishop but him∣selfe. Now whether this apprehension was true we labour not, it is sufficiēt to shew that saint Gregorie at least made such a conceipt, or feared so much. Which is euident by these passages drawen out of his owne Epistles. 1.l. 4. Epist. 32. If therfore (saith he) that name (of vniuersall Bishop) be assumed by any to himselfe in that Church &c. the vniuersall Church therfore (which God forbid) doth fall from its state when he falls which is
called vniuersall. But may that name of blasphemy be farre from the hearts of Christians, wherein the honour of all priests is taken away, while one doth mad∣ly arrogate it wholly to himselfe. 2. And it is very hard to be patiently endured; in so much as despising all,Epist. 34. l. 4. Indict. 13. my said Brother & fellow Bishop should only endeauour to be called The Bishop. 3 Because if one be called an vniuersall Patriarch,Epist. 36. ibid. the name of Patriarch is taken from the rest. 4. Least some priuate thing being giuen to one,l. 4. Epist. 32. all the priests might be depriued of their due honour. Hence it is manifest that sainct Gre∣gorie vnderstood Iohn the Patriarch of Constantinople so to arrogate the name of vniuersall Bishop, as that he did derogate thereby frō all other Bishops; that he did madly arrogate that power wholly to himselfe; that with the contempt of his brethren, he alone would be called Bishop; that the name of Patriarch would be taken from the rest, &c. As though, forsooth, he alone were properly the only true Bishop; all the rest being but as his
Deputyes or Delegates. Which were indeed an intolerable, sacrilegious, abominable attempt, & altogether re∣pugnant to the sense & practice of the Catholike, Apostolike & Roman Church, which holds the least & lowest of Bishops, to be as absolute, proper, & perfect, in genere Episcopi, as the greatest in place & dignitie. For the rest, it is so euident that vniuersall Bishop, or vniuersall Pa∣triarch, may be taken in some other tolerable (though not in this pompous & odious) sense, that none cā with any apparāce of reason deny it. For reade we not in the 1. Act. of the Councell of Constantinople vnder Menas, an addresse to Pope Agapetus in these words? To our most holy & most blessed Lord, Archbishop of the Ancient Rome, & Oecumenicall (or vniuersall) Bishop, Agapetus. Yea doth not euen saint Gregorie himselfe often deliuer,In his Epist. 32 & 34. of his 4. book, & 30. of his 7. that the same Title of vniuersall Bishop was giuen to his Predecessours (how∣euer out of humility or feare of scan∣dall they refused it) in the Councell
of Chalcedon, one of those 4. Ge∣nerall Councells which he professed to receiue & honour as the 4. Gos∣pells; affirming in particular of that of Chalcedon, that he embraced it with his whole heart, & obserued it with a most entire approbation; and therfore could not conceiue that any thing was there attributed to the Sea Apos∣tolike which had no good sense at all. So farre must he needes be from cry∣ing against it in all senses! But to loose no more time about a Title, or in a question de nomine (the worst of questions) which I discouer not to be so important to the Catho∣lique cause, that it should stand or fall by the Presence or Absence of it; Seruus Seruorum Dei being without controuersy the most Christian & most vsuall with all our Popes (ha∣uing been left them by the same saint Gregorie l. 12. Ep. 32. I thus answer M Cosens his Argument in forme. Saint Gregorie cryed out against the proud title of vniuersal Bishop, &c. In that odious sense, whereby he con∣ceiued,
or feared, that Iohn of Con∣stantinople so pretended to be Bishop as that he would not be content to be vnus è multis, one amongst many; but, vnus solus, the onely one (vt despectis fratribus Episcopus appetas solus vocari) excluding all others from that digni∣tie (which out of his words I haue shewed to be his doubt aboue, Page 123.) I graunt it most willingly, as he did it most worthily. He cryed out a∣gainst it in all senses imaginable; in particular, as it signifies Bishop & Head of the vniuersall Church, or imports the Supremacy (which is the only thing now in question) I deny it, & vndertake to conuince the said De∣nyall to be rationall & good out of the same Saint, by many euident titles, omitting for breuities sake the multi∣tude of authorities out of others, which with ease I could produce.
THE FIRST TITLE BY WHICH Saint Gregorie makes good the Supremacie, is his owne words. FIRST,l. 11.6.54. by his owne formall words in many places of his wor∣kes: As in the 11th booke 54. Chapt. where he saith, If answer be made that there was neither Metropolitane nor Pa∣triarch, one must reply that the cause ought to be heard and iudged by the Sea Apostolike, which is the head of all the Churches. 2.l. 7. Ep. 63. Whereas he (to witt the Primate of Bizacium in Afrique) saith, he is subiect to the Sea Apostolique; if any fault be found in a Bishop, I know not what Bishop is not subiect to it. Marry when faults exact it not, all are equall in the way of humility. 3.Hom. 21. vpon the Gospell. Why God all mighty permitted him (Peter) whom he had appointed to be ouer all the Church, to be affrayd at the word of à maide, & to deny himselfe.
4.5. Pauit. Psalm. v. 9. And the temerity of his madnesse (he speakes of a certain Heretique) goes so farre, that he does challenge to himselfe the Roman Church, the head of all the Churches. 5.l. 6. Ep. 48. When I knew that Maximus was made Bishop, against reason & custome, I dispatched away letters that he should not presume to celebrate the solemnity of Masses. Which letters of mine being pub∣lished in the Citty, &c. he caused pub∣likely to be torne, & did publikely insult in contempt of the Sea Apostolike; which how I endure you know, who am readyer to dye then that the Church of Blessed Peter the Apostle, should degenerate in my dayes. 6.l. 6. Ep. 48. I earnestly beseech & exhort you with the affection of a Father, that eue∣ry one would suspend himselfe from an vnlawfull communion; and that he would vtterly auoid such as the Sea Apostolique admitts not into the fellowship of her Communion, least that he thence stand guiltie in the sight of the eternall iudge, whence he might haue been saued. 7.l. 4. Ep. 34. Though Gregory's sinnes (saith he
himselfe to Constantina Augusta) be so great as to deserue to suffer such things; yet the sinnes of Peter the Apostle are none, that he should merit to endure them in your reigne. Therfore I beseech you again & again, for God Allmighty's sake, that as the precedent Princes your Parents, sought for the fauour of saint Peter the Apostle, so also you would endeauour to seeke & conserue the same, not permitting that his honour may in any sort be dimi∣nished with you (by reason of our Sinnes who serue him vnworthily) who may both now be a helper to you in all things, & hereafter may be able to absolue your sinnes. 8.l 7. Ep. 64 Whence haue they (the Grecians) till this day, that the subdeacons goe in Linnen-Coates (tunicis) but that they receiued it from their mother the Roman Church? 9.Ibid. As for that which they say of the Church of Constantinople, who doubts but it is subiect to the Sea Aposto∣lique. 10.l. 7 Ep 54 Peruerse men &c. will not be subiect to the precepts of the Sea Apostolique;
& they reprehend vs, as it were, in point of faith,l. 4. Ep. 32. which they know not. Lastly, in his Epistle to Mauritius the Emperour, (being the very place, which is worthy to be obserued, where he exclaimes against that pompous title of vniuersall) saying: It is euident to all who know the Gospell that the care of the whole Church is committed by our Lords voyce to S. Peter the Apostle the Prince of all the Apostles: for to him it was said, Peter doest thou loue me? feede my sheepe, &c. beholde he receiues the keyes of the kingdome of heauen: the power of binding ad loosing is giuen to him: the care and principalitie (prin∣cipatus, soueraigntie or dominion) of the whole Church is committed to him, and yet he is not called vniuersall Apostle. OBSERVATION. Receiue from saint Gregories owne mouth then, that the Sea Apostolique is the head of all the Churches: That all Bishops found in fault, are subiect to it:
That Peter was placed ouer all the Churches: That the Roman Church is the head of all the Churches: That it is knowne to all that know the Gospell, that the Care of the whole Church is com∣mitted by our Lord himselfe to Peter the Prince of all the Apostles: and that yet, he is not called vniuersall Apostle. What other thing is this, I pray, then to crye out with a lowde voyce, and to make open demon∣stration to all the world, that while he exclaymes against the title of vniuer∣sall Bishop; he refuses not the head∣ship of all the Churches, but professeth to haue iurisdiction, and superinten∣dencie ouer all the other Bishops. Archbishops, and Patriarkes; as doth partly appeare by what I haue alrea∣die cited out of him: and more fully shall yet appeare in my ensuing dis∣course.
THE II. TITLE WHEREBY saint Gregorie makes good the supre∣macie, is, The exercice of such power all ouer the Christian world. FIRST ouer the Bishops of Eu∣rope;l. 12. Ep. 15. to s. Aug. in particular, ouer the Bi∣shops of England, Let the Bishop of Yorke order 12. Bishops, and enioy the honour of a Metropolitane: but let all the Bishops of England be subiect to thy bro∣therhood. Secondly,l. 7. Ep. 112. ouer the Bishops of France. Granting the vse of the Pall to the Bishop of Auston, he saith: And withall we perceiued we were to grant, that the Church of the cittie of Auston should be after the Church of Lions, and to challenge to it selfe this place and rancke, by the fauour (indulgentia) of our Authoritie. Thirdly ouer the Bishops of Spayne, saying. Let him, who presumed, while the innocent Bishop was yet aliue, to be or∣dered
in his Church against the Canons, being depriued of priesthood, be cast out of all Church-ministerie: and withall let him be kept in safe custodie, or els be sent vnto vs. Let the Bishops who ordered him, being depriued of the Communion of the body and bloud of our Lord for the space of six monthes, be appointed to doe pennance in a Monasterie. Fourthly.l. 7. Ep. 32. Ouer the Bishops of Africa. In particular, thus to the Bi∣shop of Carthage. By louing the Sea Apostolique, you baue recourse to the source of your office or dignitie, knowing whence priestly ordination had its be∣ginning in Africa. Againe.l. 10. Ep. 2. Writing to Columbus a Bishop of Numidie &c. he saith: You are diligently to examine all the contents of his Petition (to witt Donadeus Dea∣con degraded by Victor a Bishop of Numidie) and if his complaint be ac∣companied with truth, let canonicall ri∣gour be vsed against his Bishop Vic∣tor. Fiftly.l. 2. Ep. 6. Ouer the Bishops of Greece. In particular, ouer Iohn Bi∣shop
of Iustiniana prima, in these words. As for the present, hauing first disannulled, and made of no effect the Decrees of thy sentence, we decree, by the authoritie of Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, that for thirtie dayes space thou shalt be depriued of the holy Communion, that with verie great pen∣nance and teares, thou mayst preuayle with Almightie God to pardon thy so great an excesse. And if we shall come to perceiue that thou doest coldly performe our sentence, know that then, not barely thy iniustice, but the contumacie also of thy brotherhood, shall be more seuerely punished. Againe.l. 5. Ep. 7. Writing to the Bishops of Epirus, he saith: Know that we haue sent a Pall to Andrew our brother and fellow-Bishop; and haue graunted (or confirmed) him all the priuiledges, which our predecessours conferred vpon his. Againe. Writing to Iohn Bishop of Corinth,l. 4. Ep. 51. touching Secūdinus a Bishop whom he had deputed to examine and depose one Anastasius Bishop, quam (causam) ei examinandam iniunxi∣mus,
he saith: And because, in that sentence (whereby it is euident that the fore named Anastasius was iustly condem∣ned, and deposed) our fore-mentioned brother and fellow Bishop so punished cer∣taine persons, that he reserued them to our arbitrimēet. And a litle after speaking of another, we pardō him this fault, and we appoint that he should be receiued in his rancke and place. Againe. We will haue them, to witt, Euphemius and Thomas, to remayne deposed as they are: and we decree that they shall neuer more be recei∣ued into holy orders, vnder what pretext of excuse soeuer. Sixtly.l. 5. Ep. 14. Writing to Marinianus Bishop of Rauenna vpō the difference which was betweene his Church and Clau∣dius the Abbot, he saith: And doe not you your selfe know, that in the cause which was agitated by Iohn Priest, a∣gainst Iohn of Constantinople (our brother and fellow Bishop) recourse was made to the Sea Apostolique, following the Ca∣nons, and the cause was ended (definita) by our Sentence. And thence saint Gre∣gorie frames an argument a fortiori
in these words which immediatly follow: If therfore the cause be deuolued to our knowledge euen from the Cittie where the Prince (to witt the Emperour) resides; how much more is the busines which is against you, to be determined, or iudged here, the trueth being knowne. The like speeches bearing a face of authoritie with them, are all his Epis∣tles so full of (as may with ease be seene in Dr. Sander's visible Monar∣chie) that who would take the paines, could hardly light vpon an Epistle, where he should not meete with thē. If he should looke vpon the 11. booke and 10. Epistle he would finde him instile the kings his sonnes, saying: according to the writing of our sonnes the most excellent kings &c. And in the end of the same Ep. And we command that all these things shall be obserued for euer, which are contayned in this our Decree, as well by thy selfe (he speakes to a cer∣taine Abbot) as by all those who shall succeede in thy place and rancke, or whom it may otherwise concerne. And if any king, Priest, Iudge or secular person,
hauing knowledge of this our Constitu∣tion, shall offer to oppose it, let him be depriued of his honour and dignitie, and acknowledge that he stands guiltie of the iniquitie committed in the sight of the diuine iudgement. And vnlesse he doe either restore the things which he wickedly tooke away, or expiate his ini∣quitie with the teares of worthy repen∣tance; let him be kept from the most sacred body and bloud of our Lord God, Iesus Christ our Redeemer, and be lyable to a strict punishment at the day of Doome, If vpon the 4. booke, 34. Chap. there he excommunicates or suspends from Masse the Bishop of Salonitane, who was made without his knowledge against custome as he complaynes: The Bishop of the Cittie of Salonitane was ordered without my owne, or my Nuncius his knowledge, wherein a thing was done, which neuer happened vnder the reigne of any the preceeding Princes. And concludes with a couered reflec∣tion, or reprehension against the Em∣perours themselues. And, saith he, if
the causes of Bishops who are committed to me, are carried with my most pious Lords, by syding and the supportation of others, what doe I, vnhappie man, in this Church? But, I giue thankes to God, and impute it to myne owne sinnes, that my Bishops should contemne me, and flie to secular Iudges for refuge a∣gainst me. In conclusion, fearing to trespasse vpon the patience of my gentle Rea∣der, I omitt a number of other cleare passages, and appeale to euery Chris∣tian heart, whether it be not euen in∣dustriously to endeauour ones owne losse, to dwell vpon the words of an Authour, which manifestly contayne some doubtfull and odious sense, and thence force the conclusion to what our passion aymes at, without going on with the same Authour to heare him out, and to take along with vs what he plainely, positiuely and fre∣quently deliuers vpon the same sub∣iect. It is true sainct Gregorie cryes out against the proud title of vniuer∣sall Bishop, yet speakes he not in a
limited sense, and points he not par∣ticularly at what he feares in it? say∣ing: Least all priests should be thereby depriued of due honour: Least he should endeauour to be called Bishop alone &c. as I haue intimated from himselfe aboue. pag. 123. But is it not also true, that he more then any (such is God's prouidence) preaches, proclaimes, practises the power of supreme Head of the vniuersall Church? Tearming the Sea of Rome, THE HEAD OF ALL THE CHVRCHES. NOT KNOWING WHAT BISHOP IS NOT SVBIECT TO IT. WHERE PETER WAS APPOINTED BY ALMIGHTY GOD TO BE OVER ALL THE CHVRCH: THAT NO COMMVNION IS LAW∣FVLL WHICH THAT CHVRCH ADMITTS NOT. THAT IT IS THE MOTHER CHVRCH: THAT THEY ARE PERVERSE MEN WHO WILL NOT BE SVBIECT TO IT. Will you heare these propositions secōded and confirmed by his publique prac∣tices,
which suffer no glosse? Is it not he who gouernes and giues lawes to Europe, Afrique and Asia? Doth he not order all the Bishops of England to be vnder saint Augustine? Doth he not sende the Pall to Auston in France, and by the fauour of his autho∣ritie rancke it next to Lions? Doth he not in Spayne, depriue a Bishop (ordered against the Canons) of Priesthoode and all Ecclesiasticall mi∣nisterie, depriuing the Bishops too who consecrated him of the body and blood of Christ, &c. Doth he not in Afrique command Columbus to vse canonicall rigour against Bishop Victor, if Donadeus Deacon whom he (Victor) had degraded, had right on his side. Doth he not in Greece, by the autho∣ritie of Blessed Peter prince of the Apostles, disannulle what the Bishop of Iustiniana Prima had done, and depriue him of the holy Communion for thirtie dayes? Doth he not professe openly, that the cause of the Patriarch of Constantinople (though the Emperour resided there) was, according to the Canons, deuolued to
the Sea of Rome, and was ended by his SENTENCE? If we will then heare Gregorie, lets heare him throughly: If we fly to his authoritie, let vs stand to his verdict. Let not his word be taken where it pleases you, and reiected where it displeases you, for so I shall haue cause to make vse of a passage of saint Augustine against the Manichees in in Ep. Fundam. and say: Doe you con∣ceiue me a foole in such a measure, that without giuing any reason at all, I should beleeue what you please, and what you please not, I should not beleeue? Noe, that were not to deale fairely and inge∣nuously: If Gregorie must be our vmpire, LET ROME BE TEAR∣MED THE HEAD OF ALL THE CHVRCHES, as he stiles it: and exercise iurisdiction ouer all the Churches, as we haue seene him prac∣tise, and let not VNIVERSALL BISHOP which we cannot, or will not vnderstand aright, stand betwixt vs as a wall of diuision, a seed-plott of irreconcileable discorde: The
fortunes of Greece depend not vpon it; nor Christian Beatitude. If it signi∣fie head or chiefe-bishop of the VNIVERSALL CHVRCH, it is but ROMES DVE: if it would entayle the whole right, power, and dignitie of Bishop vpon Rome alone, Rome reiects it as sacrilegious and blasphemous, and so doe we. Mr Cosens his third Mediū or argu∣ment was, that appeales to Rome were prohibited in the Mileuitane and 6th. Carthaginean Councell; and that vnder paine of excommunication. Ergo the Africans did not acknow∣ledge the Supremacie of Rome. Carre. My answer was, that for mi∣nor or lesser persons, or minor and lesser causes, appeales were prohibited; I granted it: That Appeales were for∣bidden for Maior or greater persons, at least in maior or greater Causes, I de∣nyed it. And consequently I denyed the Conclusion intended, to witt, Ergo the Africans did not acknowledge the Supremacie of Rome. And the rea∣son is; because the Supremacie of
Rome is discerned, and exercised in greater causes, as in matter of faith, or the generall gouernment of the vni∣uersall Church. For such they precisely are which Rome did alwayes challenge, as pro∣perly belonging to her owne iuris∣diction. Heare in confirmation of this, what saint Gregorie writes to the Bishop of Iustiniana prima l. 2. ep. 46. If any cause of faith, or crime, or Money-matter, be commenced against our fellow-Bishop Adrian Bishop of Thebes, if it be a thing of little impor∣tance, let it be iudged by our Nuncio'es (Responsales) who are, or shall be in the Royall Cittie (Constantinople) but if it be a matter of weight, let it be referred hither, to the Sea Apostolique. And such Africa neuer denyed to Rome, to witt, aknowledgment of iurisdic∣tion, and subiection in GREATER CAVSES, but contrarily, had fre∣quent recourse to the Popes of Rome with due submission and aknowledg∣ment. Yea the verie Fathers (to the nūber of 61.) of the Mileuitane Coun∣cell
wrote to Pope Innocētius in these tearmes. Wheras God by his speciall grace hath placed thee in the Sea Apostolique, and hath giuen vs thee such an one (talē, one so qualified, or so good) in our dayes, that it would rather be imputed to our negligence, if we should conceale from thy veneration, what we iudge ought to be represented for the Churches aduantage; then that we neede to apprehend, that thou wouldst esteeme it importune or otherwise slight the same: we beseech thee daigne to employe thy pastorall care in the great dangers of the infirme members of Christ: for a new and most pernicious heresie, &c. Againe in the same place; while we intimate these things to thy Apostolicall heart, we neede not vse ma∣ny words to exaggerate so great an im∣pietie, which we doubt not thou wilt so deeply resent, that thou wilt not be able to contayne thy selfe from correcting them &c. Againe, But we conceiue (by the mercy of our Lord God Christ Iesus, who daignes both to direct thy counsells, and to heare thy prayers) that they who hold those peruerse and pernicious tenets,
will easily yeeld to the authoritie of thy Holinesse which is drawne from the au∣thoritie of the holy Scriptures. And in the end of the same Epistle, We addressed these writings to your Holinesse from the Councell of Numidia (to witt from Mileui) imitating our fellow-Bi∣shops of the Prouince of Carthage, who we perceiue haue written vpon this subiect to the sea Apostolike, which (sea Apostolike) thou a blessed man dost illu∣strate, (or which your holinesse doth gouerne, quam Beatus illustras.) Thus did the whole Councell de∣ferre to the Sea Apostolike. Heare now how this respect is receiued by Pope Innocentius. With care, saith he, and congruitie did you exhibite respect to the Apostolicall honour, (to his honour, I say, who besides what was without, had the solicitude of all the Churches) in see∣king what sentence you are to hold in points of great difficultie, following there∣in the forme of the ancient rule, which you know the whole world obserues with me. Behold how Pope Innocentius as∣cribes the honour done to himselfe,
to S. Peter: as to one who had the care of all the Churches, and declares, that in hauing recourse to him, to know what they should hold in points of GREAT DIFFICVLTIE, they doe but follow the ancient forme of proceeding, which (as he saith they knew) all the world obserues. Heare againe, S. Augustine confirming the same: What answer could that holy man returne to the Africane Councells, but that which the Apostolicall Sea and Ro∣mane Church holds of old perseuerantly with the rest? And what forme of pro∣ceeding did they (amongst the rest) expresse? Marrie that they were to betake themselues to his Pastorall care in the great dangers of the infirme mem∣bers of Christ, as to condemne Heresie, &c. That they were to intimate such things to his Apostolicall heart to haue them corrected: That the authoritie of his Holinesse, is drawne out of the autho∣ritie of holy Scripture. Is this to misac∣knowledge or deny the supremacie of Rome? No: let onely this forme of proceeding be obserued; this cor∣rection
endured; this authoritie be acknowledged, and we shall thus farre most willingly ioyne hands, and make the verie Councells which are alleadged against vs, the modell of our practice. So farre falls Mr. C. short in his proofes drawen from the Councell of Mileui: Will you heare how much better he speeds in the 6. Councell of Carthage, where it is pretended, that appeales to Rome were prohibited, yea euen in Maior persons too, as in Bishops, Metropo∣litans &c? Certes, if that Councell be well looked into, and with an indiffe∣rent eye, it will be found so farre from concluding against the supremacie, that it doth absolutely conuince the truth of it. for First, what was there said, was said against the manner, and frequencie, not against the right of Appeales; as manifestly appeares by the Epist. of the Africane Bishops to Pope Cele∣stine in these tearmes.Conc. Ari c. 15. The office of a due salutation being premised, we beseech you with our whole affection, that you doe
not easily admitt such as come from hence to your eares, and that you would no more receiue to Communion such as we may haue excommunicated, &c. let not then those who were barred from Communion in their owne Prouinces, appeare to be restored to Communion by your Holinesse, with precipitation, and otherwise then is meete. Behold the companie of the Bi∣shops of Afrike become humble suitors to the Bishop of Rome (and consequently acknowledge his iuris∣diction, otherwise it were a most sillie part to sue to him in those tearmes) not that he would not admitt any ap∣peales at all, but not easily admitt them &c? Not that he would restore none at all to Communion &c. (which yet they should haue done, and haue de∣nyed he had any such authoritie, had they opposed the supremacie) but onely that it should not appeare that they were reslored with preoipitation, and otherwise then was meete, alwayes pre∣supposing such a power. Secondly, what was said, was said in
point of Minor causes, as in ciuill, pecu∣niarie, scandalous and criminall mat∣ters &c. (such as was that of Apiarius an Africane Priest, and that of An∣thonie Bishop of Fussal: both which appealed to Rome, and their Ap∣peales were there admitted) to proue or disproue which, productions of witnesses would often be necessa∣rie, to witt, people of diuers sexes and ages, litle fitt to vndergoe the difficulties of such a voyage: to say nothing of the charges, or other im∣pediments, as is expressed in the Epist 105. of the Africane Councell to the Pope of Rome, Celestine. Thirdly, whatsoeuer was said, no∣thing was done; what euer was pro∣posed, nothing was enacted or de∣creed against the right of Maior per∣sons, to witt Bishops, in their appeales to Rome, who kept their priuileges, according to that of S. Augustin, speaking of Ceoilianus Archbishop of Carthage deposed by a Councell of seauentie Bishops, saying: He might haue contemned the conspiring multitude
of his enemyes, because he saw himselfe in communion with the Church of Rome by Communicatory letters, wherin the Principality (or soueraigntie) of the Sea Apost. did alwayes flourish, where he was prepared to pleade his cause. Nay what was euen proposed too, was done dependently of what should be dis∣couered in the Councell of Nice, which they had sent for to the Patri∣archall Churches in the East; and that with all possible submission to the Church of Rome the while: wit∣nesse their owne words as they are put downe in the said 6. Councell,In Ep. ab omni Con∣cilio Afri∣cano ad Bo∣nifacium Vrbis Ro∣mae Episco∣pum. in answer to the propositions contay∣ned in the Monitorie sent to them frō Pope Zozimus, by Faustinus Bishop his Legate &c. Wherein he recom∣mended to them the obseruance of the 7. canon of the Councell of Sar∣dis indeede,Conc. Sar∣dis. cap. 7. but vnder the name of the Councell of Nice, it being estee∣med an appendix of this, touching Appeales to Rome, as followes. But if he (to witt a Bishop iudged and de∣posed by the Assemblie of Bishops of
the same Countrie) who demands to haue a new hearing of his cause, haue by petition moued the Bishop of Rome, to send a Priest (è latere suo, commonly called Legatus à latere) it shall be in the Bishops power to doe what he will and what he iudges fitt: And if he decree to send some, endowed with his authoritie from whom they are sent, who being pre∣sent with the Bishops, should iudge, it is in his free disposition. And if he beleeue the Bishops sufficient to put a period to the affaire, he shall doe what in his owne most wise counsell, he iudges behoofull. Now the Africane Bishops, not finding this in the Councell of Nice, and not otherwise being acquainted with the Councell of Sardis, saue onely whith a spurious one, (made neere Sardis by the Arrians) as S. Aug. giues testimonie, and fauoured by the Donatists: And on the other side, being wearied out with frequent, costly and disorderly appeales (as in the present with that of Apiarius a simple priest) for the second tyme, were willing doubtlesse to haue ligh∣ted
vpon some lawfull redresse in that behalfe: yet marke, I beseech you, with what humilitie and respect to the Sea of Rome, it is sought for. They sue, they supplicate, they protest in the in∣terim, to obserue what was enjoyned them by the Popes Legates, which certainly they had had no reason to doe, had they apprehended no autho∣ritie in the Pope to command. We professe (saith Alypius Bishop of Tagaste) that we are willing to ob∣serue what is established in the Councell of Nice,In the 6. Councell of Carthage. and a little after, but we finde it not as our brother Faustinus brought it. And therevpon he applyes himselfe to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, that the Acts of the Councell of Nice should be sent for into Greece, that all ambiguitie might be remoued, saith he, and concludes, Howbeit We professe, as I said before, that in the meane while we will obserue these things, till the entire Coppies (exemplaria concilij Niceni) shall come. With which the Popes Legate Fau∣stinus was so fully satisfied, that he
pronounced vpō it, Nor doth your sanc∣titie fore-iudge or doe a preiudice to the Church of Rome &c. in that our brother and fellow-Bishop Alypius daigned to say the Canons were doubtfull: but onely please to write these verie things to our holy and most Blessed Pope &c. To which Aurelius Archb. of Carth. replyed. Besides these things which we haue promised in the Acts, we must of ne∣cessitie withall, most fully intimate by the letters of our Townes, euery thing we treate of, to our holy brother, and fellow Priest Boniface. Which the whole Councell seconded with, Placet. And we professe, adds Aug. Bishop of Hippon, we will obserue this, sauing a more diligent inquisition about the Coun∣cell of Nice. Finally, the whole Councell re∣solues to expect the Actes of the Councell of Nice, authenticated vn∣der the three Patriarches hands whereby, say they, the chapters (which are contayned in the present instru∣ctions (commonitorio) of Faustinus &c.) being there found, shall be streng∣thened
by vs, or not being found, shall be more fully handled in a subsequent Synode collected to that effect. Let now indifferent persons iudge what could euer be spoken with more submission and indifferencie, and lesse entrench vpon the Popes knowen au∣thoritie, which euen by this their pro∣ceeding, clearely discouers it selfe, and shines, as it were, through this seeming miste of the Africane oppo∣sition. Otherwise 1.In Ep ad Celst. Gone. Afric. c. 15. Why is a Councell expressely called in obedience to Pope Cele∣stine. 2. And why doth the same Pope giue this honorable testimonie of S. Aug. who was one of the cheife supposed Antiappellants, that for his life and merits they alwayes had him in their communion, and that he was neuer tou∣hed with so much as a rumour of any sinister suspition? 3. Why did the same S. August. in cause of an Appeale made by Bishop Anthonie of Fussal, to Pope Cele∣stine, haue free recourse to him as to
caompetent Iudge, instructing and commending the cause vnto him, ac∣knowledging that some for certaine faults, the verie Sea Apostolike (as he saith ep. 261.) iudging, or confirming the iudgements (or sentences) of others, were neither depriued of Episcopall digni∣tie, nor yet left altogether vnpunished: desiring him to command all the things directed to him (to wit the Processe) to be read before &c. It was neither for want of witt, vertue nor learning sure, for in that qualitie what Pope might not rather haue had recourse to him? 4. Why is Faustinus admitted into their Councell, and permitted to pro∣pose the Popes pleasure which they promise to obserue till farther inqui∣rie be made in a matter ministring iust cause of doubt? 5. Why is Apiarius (a turbulent and wicked priest) in vertue of the Popes release, (by prouision as it is called) and by his order, admitted to a second hearing in Afrike, after he had bene twice cast out by the votes of the Bi∣shops there?
6. Why doth Faustinus himselfe pronounce in the full assembly, that by this their proceeding no preiudice was done to the Sea of Rome? 7. Why did Aurelius esteeme it a point of necessitie to impart all the particulars of their treatie to Pope Boniface? 8. Finally, why is it concluded by the vnanimous consent of the whole Councell, that if the things which Faustinus had in his instructions, be found in the Actes of Nice, they will confirme it, If not (they doe not say they will forthwith cast of obedience to the Church of Rome) they will call another Councell, and treate the busines more fully? But I will yet goe on and say, Fourthly, put case I would giue what can neuer be proued, nay what is con∣trarie to the knowen truth of the Fact: That the Africans opposition had bene against the right of Ap∣peales to Rome, not against the māner onely: and that in maior persons, and causes too; in a word, that what they
proposed onely, had bene decreed also: and that conciliariter too, yet how would this conclusion be made good by Mr. C. Ergo the Pope of Rome is not supreame head of the Church? Certainely in a Protestant sense it could not, sith they affirme that euen Generall Coun∣cells &c. both may erre, and haue somtymes erred, in the 21. article of the 39. Ergo a fortiori, this of Africa which was but a Prouinciall Councell, may haue erred, and consequently one should be conuinced of rashnes, to conclude any thing out of it (especially in mat∣ter of faith) till mens consciences were assured, that though it might, yet indeede it did not erre here in which how it should he made good I am not wise enough to guesse. Nor yet can it be made an argument ad hominem, and conclude against a Catholike, for he doth not place the infallibilitie of the Church in the decree of a prouinciall, but in the Definition of a Generall Councell. Ergo nothing followes hence neither. Ergo (to be short) I will conclude this part with these fewe tes∣timonies
of the African Fathers, as well before as after this 6. Councell of Carth. in point of the Popes Supre∣macie; omitting a number of most pregnant places out of other Fathers: partly for breuities sake, and pratly because the Africans are most concer∣ned herein. Tertull. l. de Pudicitia c. 1. n. 5. He styles the Pope of Rome the High priest and Bishop of Bishops, and tearmes the Church of Rome,In Praesc. . 36. n. 212. Happie Church, to whom the Apostles powred out all their doctrine together with their bloud. S. Cyprian. The Primacie (or chiefe place, rule and authoritie,In l de vni∣tate Eccle∣siae. the word Primatus being so Englished by the best Gram∣marians) is giuen to Peter &c. They dare sayle to the Chaire of Peter and to the Principall or chiefe Church.Epis. 55. ad Cornelium Papam. And writing to Stephen Pope of Rome, he saith, Let thy letters be dis∣patched into the Prouince of Arles, and to the people there residing, whereby Mar∣ciane (who being Bishop of Arles fa∣uoured the Nouatian heresie) being
excommunicated, another may be substi∣tuted in his place and the flocke of Christ may be gathered together, which to this day is contemned, being dispersed and wounded by him. Optatus Mileuitanus. A Bishops chaire was first conferred vpon Peter in the Cittie of Rome:In l. 2. cont. Parmenia∣num. wherein the HEAD of all the Apostles, Peter, sate &c. Victor Vticensis. And especially the Romane Church which is the HEAD of all the Churches.In l. 2. de Persec. Van. S. Augustine l. 2. de Bap. contra Donat. Peter the Apostle, in whom the Pri∣macie of the Apostles, had the preemi∣nencie, with so exceellent a grace, (or ad∣uantage.) Againe. Like as all the causes of Mas∣tership were in our Sauiour,In quaest. Noui Test. q. 75. so after our Sauiour they are all conteyned in Peter; for he constituted him to be the HEAD of them (the Apostles) that he might be the Pastor of our Lords flocke,
Eugenius who was one of Aurelius his Successours in the Archbisho∣pricke of Carthage. The Roman Church is the HEAD of all the Churches. Fulgentius de Incarn. & Gratia c. 11. That which the Roman Church (which is the HEAD or toppe of the world, holds) and teaches, and which the whole Christian world, together with it, both beleeues without hesitation to Iustice, and doubts not to confesse to faluation. I conclude then, that since it is most euident, that the Africans were for vs Catholikes both in their words and practices, as well before and in the fore said Councells, as after the same, it is altogether in vaine for the Pro∣testants, thence to hope for any helpe or support to their Cause. Now Mr. C. hauing returned you a faire, full, and satisfactorie answer to each of your obiectiōs: permit me the fauour of one of your setled answers, to that one onely demand which I then made, and often iterated, and still iterate, as being the verie summe
and abridgement of all controuersies to witt, where was your Church in the yeare 1500. &c. till the yeare 1517. when Luther began to storme? This is the rule I haue bene taught by the ancient Fathers First by Ire∣naeus, who had the happinesse to haue seene Policarpe S Iohns scholler. We, saith he, can number those, who were in∣stituted Bishops in the Churches by the Apostles, and their successurs euen vnto vs, who taught, or knew noe such thing as these doe madly fancie to themselues. And a little after, But whereas it is too long to nūber the successions of all the Churches in such a volume as this, we cōfound all those who by any meanes gather more then they ought, either by their wicked self-compla∣cencie, or vaine glorie, or els by their owne blindnes, and erroneous sense, by pointing out that tradition which that greatest, most ancient and most knowne Church to all men, founded and established at Rome by the two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul, and by faith announced to men, brought downe euen vnto vs, by the suc∣cessions of Bishops; for vnto this Church
by reason of its more powerfull principa∣litie, euery Church ought to resort, that is, all the faithfull all ouer the world, wherein that Traditiō which is from the Apostles, is conserued by those which are all ouer (vndique.) And so names the Popes from Linus who succeeded S. Peter &c. till Eleutherius, who was in his tyme of whome he saith, Now Eleutherius in the twelueth place hath the Bishopricke from the Apostles, and he adds: By this ordination and succession the TRADITION which is in the Church from the Apostles and the pro∣clamation of Truth is brought downe vnto vs: And this is a most absolute demon∣stration (plenissima ostensio) that it is conserued in the Church from the Apostles till this day, and is deliuered ouer in truth. Behold the succession of Bishops, is esteemed by him, and deliuered vnto vs, for a certaine demonstration, that those who haue it on their side, haue the same liuely faith conserued euen from the Apostles tyme till this day.
Secondly, by the learned Tertul∣lian in the same age, saying:In Prae∣scri p. c. 32. Let them produce the origin's of their Churches; let them declare the row or processe of their Bishops, so running downe from the be∣ginning by successiōs, that that first Bishop may haue had some one of the Apostles, or Apostolicall men, which yet perseuered with the Apostles, for his Authour and Predecessour. Let the Heretikes, saith he a little after, euen forge any such thing if they can. And he counts, Peter, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Anacetus, Auarestus, Alexander, Sixtus &c. Thirdly, Optatus Mileuitanus,In 4 Tom. carm contra Marcion. saying: In that singular (vnica) Chaire, Peter first sate, to whom Linus did succeede &c. to Iulius Liberius, to Liberius Da∣masus, to Damasus Siricius at this day, who is our fellow; with whom (or in whom) all the world agrees with vs in one societie of Communion, by the com∣merce of letters formed (to witt a kind of circular or communicatorie letters vsed in those tymes to discouer them to be of the same cōmanion) Produce the origine of your chaire, you who will
needs challenge the Holy Church to your selues. Fourthly S. Augustine,In his Ep. 165. thus: If the order or processe of Bishops who succeede one another be considerable, how much more certainly, and indeed sauingly, doe we count from Peter himselfe &c. For Linus succeeded Peter &c. and so coun∣ting downe to Anastasius, who then was Pope, he cōcludes in these words: in this ranke or lyne of succession, no Do∣natist (Protestant) Bishop is found &c. Now to know of what considera∣tion and weight the succession is with the same S. Augustine, lets take it from himselfe in his Ep. Fundamenti cap 4. where he professeth, that the succession of priests, from the verie Sea of Peter the Apostle till this present Bishop-pricke, most iustly retaynes him in the bo∣some of the Catholike Church. That this is a reasonable demand in it selfe, I am most confident, be∣cause Fathers so learned and able, prouoked to it in their tymes, with so much confidence, and taught others to doe the same. It is necessarie, saith
Tertullian,Praescrip. c. 20. that euery familie should be brought backe and reduced to its origine. And that it is reasonable in particular from vs, it seemes no lesse euident, because what we demand we are rea∣die to exhibite: to discerne whether you or we are true successours to S. Peter, we name our men immediatly from him, who haue succeeded one another till this day, till this present Popedome of Innocentius: and we desire you, fairely to produce the like euidence, or els cease vniustly to pre∣tende the succession which you can shew no right to. Finally that it is the onely short and sure way to discerne trueth from falshood which is the onely thing we ought to ayme at, the great Tertull. testifies and makes ma∣nifest. What the Apostles preached, saith he, that is, what Iesus Christ re∣uealed vnto them, ought not to be tryed,Praescrip. c. 21. nor proued, saue onely by the same Churches which the Apostles founded, by preaching vnto them by word of mouth, or after∣wards by their Epistles. Which things being so, it is euident thence, that all
doctrine which doth conspire or agree with those Apostolicall Churches which are the Mothers (matrices) and sources of faith, is to be esteemed true, as holding without all controuersie, what the Churches receiued of the Apostles, the Apostles of Christ, Christ of God. Marrie all other doctrine ought to be preiudged of falsitie, which sauours against the Truth of the Churches, Apostles, Christ, and God &c. But we Catholikes (miscalled Papists) communicate for the present and did communicate with the Apostolicall Church of Rome in her Pastour Alexander the VI. in the yeere 1500. as holding no doctrine contrarie to it, but conspiring with it; therefore our Doctrine is to be iudged true, the contrarie to be preiudged false: This (concludes Tertullian) is an EVIDENCE of Truth: or accor∣din to Irenaeus, plenissima ostensio, a most full DEMONSTRATION. Such a Demonstration it is which we demand of you in the hehalfe of your Protestant Church from the yeere 1500. downeward: of your Church, I
say, whether you define it as in the 39. Art. The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithfull men,Art. 19. in which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duely ministred &c. Or as you describe it by oppositiō to ours, tearming it a Congregation of men &c. which opposeth Masses vnbloudie Sacrifice, adoration of the consecrated hoste, worship of Angels and Saints, and prayer to them, Purgatorie, the Supremacie, the infallibilitie of the Church &c. Assigne the place where this Con∣gregation appeared, giue vp the names, at least of some of their chiefe Bishops, or Pastours, or Doctors, or Elders. Verifie that they preached against the Masse, vnbloudie Sacrifice &c. Rationall and modest men, will iudge I am spareing enough in these my demands, sith it is to goe no fur∣ther then a Definitione ad definitum, to know where this Cōgregation &c. then was, yea euen your owne men con∣fesse it: For will notFulke against Fulke say that Pastors and Doctors haue alwayes
bene in the Church,Heskins and Sanders p. 69 and that they haue continually from Christ to Luthers tyme, resisted false doctrine? will not others maintaineBācroft in Recognitio∣ne pag. 441.: That the administration of the word and Sacraments, is absolutely necessarie to saluation.Willet in his synopsis pag. 71. That the Church continues no longer then it hath these markesHiper in his common places l 3. p. 548.. That these markes ought to be externall and visible, to the end men may know where the Church is, and to what societie euery one of the faithfull ought to ioyne himselfe. FinallyWhitgift in Def. p. 465., that the Church of God is not to be shut vp in one king∣dome &c. My demand is sparing enough then, I say, for I might well require further (according to the Ancient Fathers Rules aboue) to haue it euidently proued, that such a Church or Con∣gregation had alwayes bene, in all tymes and places, one and the same, and that too made good by continuall, and vninterrupted, succession: that so it might appeare to haue descended from some of the Apostles, and con∣sequētly be indeed, as the true Church is defined in the Nicene Creede
one, holy, Catholike, Apostolique. Howbeit knowing well that neuer yet any Protestant hath returned a faire answer, euen to these few demands, I will presume you will find it worke enough for the present, to point vs out, within the tyme prefixed, The place where the Congrega∣tion was assembled. The names of the Preachers, or Preacher at least, with euidence that he preached or held the Doctrine of the thirtienyne Art. or what els may be meant by the pure word of God: or, op∣posed that which is contayned in the Councell of Trent. And that they, or he, duely admi∣nistred the Sacraments, (and that but two onely) according to Christs ordi∣nance &c. Doe not, I beseech you, as you some∣tymes did, name S. Ignatius. That is too prodigious a leape, at once to skippe aboue 1400. yeares back∣wards, and yet not proue your affir∣mation neither, to which euery dis∣putant is lyable. I could with like faci∣litie
name him too, and yet you would not admitt that for good payment. You will please to remem∣ber, the thing I demand is, that you would acquaint vs with the names of some of your Bishops, or Pastours &c. in the beginning of the 16. Age not in the end of the first. As S. Igna∣tius passed too tymely for our present purpose, so Bishop Tunstall and B. Gardner came too sate (though you made no bones to name them too) but sure you were not serious with your friends in a subiect which exacted it; or els your poore answer is a plaine conuiction how desperate your cause is. They haue both left learned workes behind them which will euer speake them Roman Catholikes.Tunstall. pag 47. de verit. Corp. Christi. Ed. Parisianae 1554. The Transubstantiation, and theIdem in codem lib. pag. 93. Sacrifice of the Masse, are not tenets of the Protestant Church, to name no more.Et Gard. in Confu∣tatione &c. pag. 73. Nor did Bishop Tunstall sure dye a Prisoner in Lambeth, in Queene Elisabeths tyme, for being a Protestant.Idem in codem lib. p. 5. If this assertion then (to witt, that Bishop Tunstall and
Bishop Gardner helped to continue the succession of the Protestant Church) which came accompanied with noe countenance or apparence of Truth, were tearmed impudent, what wrong were done to it? since it could not fall from a man, as hauing any thing of satisfaction, any face of reason, but as a Mercurie of euery wood, to stand in the light, and to stoppe the course of Truth; which S. Augustine might haue haply tear∣med inanissimam vocem temeritatisque plenissimam l. de moribus Ecclesiae Cath. c. 29. For was it euer written, euer affirmed, euer called in question by any? By any! I doe not say by Catho∣likes, but euen by Protestants them∣selues? Nay doe not euenIn l. de Praesulibus Anglia in vita Tun∣stalli Good man andIn Elisa∣betha pag. 37. Camden deliuer the contrarie and put it out of all doubt? Doe not flie to the Catholike Ro∣mane Church neither: that were too poore a shift, to begge a succession of her, against whose Idolatrie you dayly crye out. Nor is it that Church we enquire after, we know that that
Cittie placed vpon a hill neuer lay hidd: that Tabernacle seated in the sunne, was alwayes illustrious, constant, perma∣nent: we can bring in, reum confitentem vpon that subiect, we haue conui∣ctions from our Aduersaries owne mouthes.The sur∣ueyer of the pretended discipline 6.8. Priests of all sorts, together with the people, frō the topp to the toe were drowned in the puddles (or dregges) of poperie, saith one. Euen 1260. yeares the Pope and his Clergie possessed the out∣ward and visible Church of Christians raygning without any debatable contradi∣ction, saith another.Luther de Capt. Bab. de Bap. The Popes tyrānie for many ages hath extinguished Faith &c. saith a third. This Idolatrous Ro∣mane Harlot then, this chaire of pes∣tilence, this whore of Babylon (for thus yours please to qualifie the Spouse of Christ, his wholly faire, in whom there is found no spott or blemish) was easily found, by such as euen sought her not; she liued, she raigned, soueraignely too, without contradiction; entirely without limita∣tion or reserue, ouer priest and people; perseuerantly, euen for the space of 1260.
yeares. But we desire (Remember I pray) to haue the obligation to be ledd to the Protestants Church within the tyme prefixed: to heare their ser∣mons: to see the administration of their two Sacraments onely: let this be shewen and we are readie to com∣municate with them vnder what kinde or kinds they please. But if, as it in∣deed neuer was, so it be impossible it should be proued; nay if the same be publikely professed by your owne Au∣thours, saying, In the ages past there was no face of a true Church: for some ages the pure preaching of the word vanished,Inst. l. 4. c. 1. § 11. so Caluin. From 400. yeares and more the Religion of Christ was wholly turned into Idolatrie, addsin his Acts pag. 767. Fox. The Church was at that tyme inuisible and could not be shewen, confesseth Regiuslib. Apol. pag. 176.: The Truth was then vn∣knowne and vnheard of, when Martin Luther, &c. openly pronouncethIn Apo. p. 4. c. 4. Diuis. 2. I uell: We say that for many ages before Luthers tyme, a generall Apostasie ouer∣spred the face of the earth, nor was our Church in that tyme conspicuous (or vi∣sible)
to the world, concludesIn exposit. symb. p. 400. Perkins) permitt me to aske by what iniqui∣tie are poore soules fedd, or rather starued, with falsitie? and to conclude with that strongly reasoning Tertul∣lian, in the person of the Catholike Church, saying: who are you? when, and whence came you? what doe you doe in my possession, being none of myne? By what right dost thou (ô Marcion, ô Protestant) cutt downe my wood? By what preroga∣tiue dost thou (ô Valentine) diuerte my fountaines? By what authoritie dost thou, ô Apelles, transport my bounds? THIS POSSESSION IS MYNE, why presume you being strangers, to feede and sowe herein at your pleasure? THE POSSESSION IS MYNE. I POSSESSE IT OF OLD. I POSSESSE IT FIRST. I HAVE SVRE RECORDS (OR EVI∣DENCES) FROM THE OWNERS, TO WHOM THE THINGS BELONG. I AM THE HEIRE OF THE A∣POSTLES. And this, by best right; (may the Catholike Ro∣mane
Church affirme) because she alone is able, by her neuer interrup∣ted succession of her Bishops, to de∣riue her pedigree from the same Apostles. Counting confidently (without fearing to be contradicted by any, though her verie enemyes) In the first Age. Petrus, Linus, Cletus, Clemens. The 2 Age. Anacletus, Euaristus. Alexander, sixtus I. Ye'esphorus, Hyginus, Pius, Anicetus, Soter, Ileutherius, Victor. The 3. Age. Zephyrinus, Calistus, Vrbanus, Pontianus, Anterus, Fabianus, Cornelius, Lucius, Stephanus, Sixtus II. Dionysius, Felix, Eutychianus, Caius. Marcellinus The 4. Age. Marcellus, Eusebius, Miltiades, Syluester, Marcus, Iulius, Liberius, Felix II. Damasus, Siricius, Anastasins. The 5. Age Innocentius I. Zozymus, Bonifacius, Celestinus I. Sixtus III. Leo magnus, Hilarius, Simplicius, Felix III. Celasius I. Anastafius II. Symmachus. The 6. Age. Hormisdas, Ioan. I. Felix IV. Bonifacius II. Ioannes II. Agapitus, Syluer. us, Vigilius, Pelagius, Ioanues III. Benedictus I. Pelagius II. Gregorius magnus. The 7. Age. Sabinianus, Bonifacius III. Bonifacius IV. Deusdedit. Bonifacius V. Honorius I. Seuerinus. Ioan. IV. Theodorus, Martinus I. Eugenius, Vitatianus, Adeodatus, Donatus, Agatho, Leo, Benedictus II. Ioan. V. Conon, Sergius. The 8. Age. Ioannes VI. Ioannes VII. Sisinnius, Constantinus, Gregorius II. Gregorius III. Zacharias. Stephanus II. Stephanus III. Paulus I. Stephanus IV. Adrianus, Leo III. The 9. Age. Steph. V. paschalis, Eugenius II. Valentinus, Gregorius IV. Sergius II. Leo IV. Benedictus III. Nicol. I. Hadrian. II. Ioan. VIII. Martinus, Hadrianus III. Stephanus VI. Formosus, Bonifacius VI. Stephanus VII. The 10. Age. Ioan IX. Benedict Leo, Christoph.
Sergius, Anast. Lando, Ioan X Leo VI. Stephanus, Ioannes, Leo VII. Stephanus, Martinus, Agapitus, Ioannes, Leo, Bene∣dictus, Ioannes, Donus, Benedictus, Benedictus, Ioannes, Ioannes, Ioannes, Gregorius V. Syluester II. The 11. Age. Ioannes XVII. Ioannes XVIII. Sergius. V. Benedictus VIII. Ioannes XX. Benedictus IX. Gregorius VII. Clem. Damas. Leo, Vict. Steph. IX. Nicol. Alexand. Greg VII. Vict. Vrban. Paschas. The 12. Age. Gelas, Calixtus, Honorius II. Innocentius II. Gelestinus II. Lucius, Eugenius, Anastasius IV. Hadrlanus, Alexand. Lucius, Vrbanus, Gregorius VIII. Clemens III. Celestinus III. Innocentius III. The 13. Age. Honorius III. Gregorius IX Celestinus IV. Innocentius IV. Alexander IV. Vrbanus IV. Clemens, Gregorius, Innocent. Hadrian. Nicol. Martinus, Honorius IV. Nicol. Celestinus, Bonifacius VIII. The 14. Age. Benedictus X Clemens V. Ioannes XXI. Benedictus XI. Clemens VI. Innocentius VI. Vrbanus V. Gregorius XI. Vrbanus VI. Bonifacius IX. The 15. Age. Innocentius VII. Gregorius XI. Alexander V. Ioannes XXII. Martinus III. Eugenius IV. Nicolaus V. Cailistus III. Pius II. Paulus II. Sixtus, Innocēt. VII. Alexander VI. The 16. Age. Pius III. Iulius, Leo, Hadrianus, Clemens, Paulus, Iulius, Mar∣cellus, Paulus IV. Pius IV. Pius V. Gregorius. XIII. Sixtus V. Vrban. VII. Gregorius XIV. Innocentius IX. Clemens VIII. The 17. Age. Leo XI. Paulus V. Gregorius XV. Vrbanus VIII. Innocentius X. Thus did S. Irenaeus bring downe the suc∣cessiō of the Church, by naming the Bi∣shops of Rome, who immediatly succee∣ded one another, from S. Peter to his tyme. And he iudges it a most ABSO∣LVTE DEMONSRATION. Thus did Tertullian &c. And he puts
it downe for an EVIDENCE of TRVTH. Thus did Optatus, &c. And he con∣cludes, that in Pope Siricius, who then sate, all the world agreed with them (Africans) in one Communion. Thus did S. Augustine &c. And he cōfesses it retaynes him in the bosome of the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH. Thus finally doe we Catholikes to this day. And we instantly demand, 1. Why the like proceeding should not be held an absolute Demonstration; an Euidence of Truth, as well from vs, as from them. 2. Why we English Catholikes may not by as good right be said to agree with all the world in one Communion in Pope INNOCENTIVS, who sitts at this day, as the Africans in Si∣ricius who then sate? 3. Why it should not retayne vs without all he sitation or staggerring, as it did Saint Augustine, in the bo∣some of the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH? Et hic murus aheneus esto.
AN ANSVVER TO A LIBELL, WRITTEN BY D. COSENS AGAINST THE GREAT Generall Councell of Laterane under Pope Innocent the third. Wherein the many and great errors of the said D. Cosens, are manifested to the world. By THOMAS VANE Doctor in Diuinity of Cambridge. 2. Tim. 3.13. But euill men and seducers shall waxe worse and worse, deceiuing, and being deceiued. Printed at PARIS Anno Dom. 1646. With Permission & Approbation.
TO THE MOST NOBLE AND MOST ACCOMPLISHED Gentleman, Sr KENELME DIGBY KNIGHT &c. SIR, I doe not dedicate this, crauing your protection thereof against calumny, and censure; the greatest Princes (I know) cannot doe it; yea their owne persons are not censure-proofe against the meanest varlets. Nor hereby to engage you to any fauour or defence thereof, beyond the direction of your owne iudg∣ment; your free minde (I know) disdaynes to stoope to such a lure, and mine to cast it out. Let the booke suffer its owne fate, for so it will; hee that finds fault with it, let him tell mee so and if I cannot defend it, I will ac∣knowledge the error. Nor to take occa∣sion
to flatter you; you are aboue it: and impossible attempts vanish euen in the vndertaking. Nor yet to pay you your due prayse, I am below it; and Fame her selfe dischargeth that debt, borrowing the tongues of all men for her helpe: But to testifie the honour I beare you, for your transcendent worth in your selfe; and the gratitude, for your great fauours to mee. It wants proportion (I confesse) to either; which proceeds from my pouer∣ty of materialls: but as small pictures compar'd with greater tables, so this (being all I haue to offer) may present mee as liuely, though not so largely SIR, Your most humble and obliged seruant, THO. VANE.
TO THE READER. READER, Doctor Cosens (since his coming into these parts) hath writtē diuers pa∣pers against the Catholique doctrine and beliefe; and hath shewed them, or deliuered the sub∣stance of thē in discourse to diuers persons, thereby to draw them, or keepe them from the Catholique Communion; who not ha∣uing ability or leisure to examine their truth, I beleeue, thought better of them than they deserued. These papers of his came afterwards into the hands of se∣uerall Catholiques, and each one answered that which hee hapned on, or which was (if any was) more particularly addressed to him; which is the reason that hee hath more answerers than one, though to them all, any one was more than enough. A∣mongst his papers, this against the fowrth Councell of Lateran came to my hands, to which I soone after returned a briefe an∣swer,
and so the matter rested; but hearing since that hee, and some that thinke well of him, haue triumphed in these his wor∣kes, as though hee had gayned great victo∣ries; that I might vndeceiue them, for so much as I vndertooke, (if at least they will suffer it,) and to informe all others, that please to reade, I thought good à little to enlarge my former answer, and to print it with Mr. Carres. And others there are, at least one other, that I know, who if hee thought fit to print what hee hath written in answer to Doctor Cosens, could perhaps discouer more corruptions of his than we haue done. But heere are more than enough to warrant vs to say of him, as1. kings 25.25. Abigal said of Nabal; for by his deeds he makes true the significatiō of his name: and that they that rely on him, will bee like those that leane on a broken reedy staffe, which will run into their hands, and wound insteed of supporting them.
D. C. OF THE GREAT GENE∣rall Councell of Lateran vnder Innocentius the third; said to bee Maximum & celeberrimum Concilium, Anno Domini 1215. MAXIMVM, for the number of eight hundred Priors and Abbots (who had no voyces in Councells but by priui∣ledge from the Pope) was as great againe as the number of the Bishops. Celeberrimum, for it was euery where famous for this one thing of speciall note in it, that so many men met together to no purpose; met, but did nothing. Therfore of this so Great and so famous a Councell, these be the words of Platina, (who was the Popes owne Secretary,) in vita Inno∣cent.
III. Venere multa tum quidem in consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam apertè potuit, quòd & Pisa∣ni & Genuenses maritimo, & Cisalpi∣ni terrestri bello interse certarent. Eò itaque proficiscens tollendae discordiae causa Pontifex, Perusii moritur. And to the same purpose are the words of Matth. Paris (in Historia minori) who liued in the same time when this Councell was called together. Concilium illud Generale, quod more papali, grandia prima fronte prae se tulit, in risum & scomma desiit, quo Archie∣piscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Deca∣nos, Archidiaconos, omnesque adid Concilium accedentes ludificatus est. (For after the Pope was gone to ap∣pease the tumults betweene the Genuenses and them of Pisa, there was nothing done) Et cum nihil geri in tanto negotio cer∣nerent, redeundi ad su a cupidi, ve∣niam sigillatim petierunt. Quibus Papa non concessit, antequam sibi grandem pecuniam promisissent, quam a mercatoribus Romanis prius accipere mutuò, Papaeque soluere coa∣cti
sunt, antequam discedere Roma potuissent. Papa iam accepta pecunia, quaestu osum Concilium dissoluit gra∣tis, tot usque Clerus abiit tristis. ANSWER. It was called, Maximum, you say, for the number of eight hundred Priors and Abbots, (who had no voyce in Councell but by priuiledge from the Pope) was as great againe as the number of the Bishops. Tis true that it was iustly called maximum partly for this reason, though not for this only, for the number of voyces, not only of Bishops who haue their suffrages by common right, but euen of Abbots and Priors, who haue theirs by the Popes grant, doth main∣ly contribute to the greatnesse of a Coūcell. Yet suppose the greatnesse of this Councell be to be measured by the nūber of Bishops only, how many can there be named greater? but very few in the world; and therfore it may well be called, Maximum. And Cele∣berrimum
also; not, that so many met together, but did nothing, (as you say;) but because there were present the Pope in person, two Patriarchs in person, and the other two by their Legats, the Greeke and Roman Em∣perours by their Legats, the Ambas∣sadours of the kings of France, Spaine, England, Hierusalem and Cyprus, with others; as I shall proue anon. But if to be famous for doing nothing, and for being to no purpose deserue the title of Celeberrimum, these goodly obiections, when they are well knowne, will iustly beare that title on their brow. You further tell vs, that Platina (whose words you cite) was the Popes owne Secretary: and you doe it either to no purpose, or else to insinuate, that therfore hee was more knowing in the truth of the story, or the more faithfull historian, or both. For the former, it had indeed beene likely, if hee had beene Secretary to the Pope, vnder whom this Councell assem∣bled, as any one would thinke you
meant, when you added this note in such a weighty parenthesis. But cer∣taine it is, that Platina was borne ma∣ny yeares after the celebration of this Councell, and died in the yeare 1481. which was aboue 260. yeares after this Councell; as saith Trithemius de scriptorib. Eccles as hee is cited in the workes of Platina, the page before the Epistle. This therfore is but a de∣ceiptfull insinuation of yours. Or if you did not say this with intent to de∣ceiue others, but were your selfe de∣ceiued; surely your care to informe your selfe well before you write, is very small. Besides if it were true, that hee had beene the Popes owne Secre∣tary, as for greater emphasis you ex∣presse it, yet his authority cannot counterpoyse the authority of all that are of a contrary mind, (to that you thinke Platina was of,) whom I shall by and by produce. And lastly Platina doth not affirme to the pre∣iudice of this Councell, that which you erroneously imagine hee doth, as I shall presently shew. As for his
faithfullnesse, I doe not thinke you will make his being the Popes owne Secretary an argument therof; men of your coate are not such honourers of the Pope. Now for the words themselues of Platina, you misvnderstand them; for you apply those words, nec decerni ta∣men quicquam aperte potuit, generally, to the whole businesse of the Coun∣cell, whereas the intent of them, at the most, is but particular concerning the Holy Land, as the fore-going words doe shew, which are these: At Pontifex vbi videret Saracenorum po∣tentiam in Asia concrescere, apud Late∣ranum, maximum Concilium celebrat. Venere multa tum quidem in consultatio∣nem, nec decerni tamen quicquam apertè potuit, quod & Pisani & Genuenses ma∣ritimo, & Cisalpini terrestri bello interse certabant. These words then, nec decer∣ni tamen quicquam apertè potuit, are at the most to bee referred to the bui∣sinesse of the Holy Land, of sending ayde thither, and making resistance against the Turkes in Asia, and to
nothing else. And the reason why nothing could bee decreed in that matter, was the warres hee mentions, which could not bee a hindrance from their making of other Canons in that Councell. And as it is apparent enough, that this at most, was the meàning of Pla∣tina, to wit, that nothing was decreed concerning the Holy warre; and that therfore this place makes nothing to your purpose, who hereby would make voyde all the Canons of this Councell; soe it is also apparent that Platina (if soe much was his meaning) was deceiued euen in that; and that there was something decreed con∣cerning the sending of assistance to the Holy Land, as appeareth by the decree of the Expedition, which is at the end of the Canons, whose truth I shall further proue by and by. Yea, and that Platina did not soe much as deny the decree of the Expedition, in his words, nec decerni quicquam apertè potuit, is very probable; for then hee would rather haue said, nec decerni
quicquam potuit, absolutely; but his qualisication of it by the word apertè, seemes to grant that something was done, though not apertè. And that something was decreed, is manifest by that which I shall say hereafter; what then hee meanes by these words, nec apertè, in that which was decreed, is not manifest. Perhaps by Decree, hee meanes the execution of the Decree, in actuall warring against the Turkes, wherein there was nothing openly done, whatsoeuer might bee secretly done rending to their preiu∣dice. If this bee his meaning, (as no other can bee with truth in the thing) then, though his words bee obscure, and improper to signifie thus much, yet his meaning is true, but nothing to your purpose. But Nauclerus doth open this ob∣scurity, and makes it cleere against you; for hee speaking of the same bui∣sinesse, and vsing the same words with Platina, in the rest, insteed of Platina's apertè, hee saith aptè;Vel. 2. p. 914. nec de∣cerni tamen quicquam aptè potuit, quod & Pisani & Genuenses &c. There could
nothing bee fitly, conueniently, and to the purpose decreed in regard of the tyme because of the warres in Eu∣rope. And immediatly after hee saith, (to confute that which you say, that there was nothing done heere) Editae tamen nonnullae constitutiones re∣feruntur, but there are diuers constitu∣tions declared to bee made. As for Matthew Paris his Historia minor, I cannot meet with it, and in the volume of his whole workes both maior and minor, set forth lately by Dr Wats of London: I can finde no such words as you cite. And if you had beene willing that your quotation should haue beene examined, you would haue giuen a man a neerer ayme than a whole history, whether maior or minor, to finde it in, especially in a quotation so important to your mayne designe; vnlesse you meant to giue a man more trouble than is faire in one that writes a controuersie. The like you haue also done in some of your following authorities. But if these words, Et cum nihil geri in tanto
negotio cernerent, which are all that concerne your purpose, bee to bee found in him, hee speakes of the same expedition of the Holy Land, and of the execution therof, not of the Decree it selfe, as the word geri will aswell beare in its signification: and if hee meāt otherwise hee had no good intelligence in the buisinesse, (as I shall presently proue;) for though hee liued in the same time of this Councell, yet hee liued in a farre di∣stāt place. And his words, in tāto nego∣tio, doe surely poynt at some one par∣ticular matter, which though it haue beene the occasion of calling many Councells, yet when the Prelats were met, they discussed and decreed many other things for the good of the Church. Soe that though it bee true that nothing was executed in the great businesse of the Holy warres, by reasō of the warres in christēdome, yet it is farre frō prouing that which you soe boldly affirme, that neither the De∣cree of the expedition for the Holy Land, nor any one Canon was made in this Councell. They met (say you)
but did nothing; nor haue you (I am sure) done any thing against them. And that you may further see the in∣tegrity of this your Author, in matters concerning the person of this Pope, (which is the purport of all the other words by you all eadged out of him,) readec Baronius in his last tome, anno 1197. who telleth vs, that this Mat∣thew Paris seemeth to haue writ his history of purpose to take occa∣sion to sclander the Popes; and then reciting a story, concludeth thus. Vi∣disti Lector Paris ingenium, animique male compositi malam sententiam, res fin∣gere, verbáque formare indigna Romano Pontifice, & ab hoc vno tampatenti men∣dacio caetera discas, & caueas videasque qua tunc sit homo fide dignus, cū totus sit in carpendis Rom. Eccles. Pontificibus. And therfore his accusation of the Pope for exacting a great summe of mony of the Councell, first as it is imperti∣nent to your buisinesse, (for his couetounsesse could not nullifie the Canons of the Councell) so also is it most vnlikely to be true, because Paris
is recorded for a slanderer, and Pope Innocent III. for a worthy and ex∣cellent man.Naucle∣rus vol. 2. p. 876. Nauclerus calleth him, vir doctrina & moribus insignis. And Platina, in his life, saith, constat cum in quouis genere vitae probatissimum fuisse, dignumque qui inter Sanctos Pontifices censeatur. And againe in the next words to those you cite, cuius vita adeo probata fuit, vt post eius mortem, nihil eorum quae in vita egerit, laudauerit, im∣probaueritque, immutatum est. The same also saith Nauclerus; and adds, quin & religionis apprimè studiosus. But you are glad to cite any thing to the dis∣paragement of à Pope, though there be no colour of truth for it. Now that nothing at all was done in this Councell, which is the mayne matter you driue at,Vol. 2. p. 15. & for which you haue misinterpreted the meaning of Platina and Paris, is very vntrue. Which I proue, first by the authority of Gregory IX. who liued in the time of this Councell, and was created Pope but about eleuen yeares after, and commanded the Decrees should
be put in the body of the Canon law, wherein hee vsed the seruice of Ray∣mundus, of whom Platina thus wri∣teth,In vita Greg. IX. fine. Raymundum autem Barchino nensem, quo adiutore in compilando libro Decretalium, Gregorius vsus est, ita qui∣dam tàm laudant, vt maiori commenda∣tione laudari nemo possit.So say the Annal Ee∣lEs post Ba∣son tom 13. p 459 XV. And Binius in the life of the sayd Gregory IX saith that this Raymundus was Canonized by Clement VIII. Secondly,S Thom. 4. sent. dist. 17. q 3. art. 1 ad tertiam. I proue it by the testi∣mony of the greatest DIuines of that age, S. Thomas, and S. Bonauenture, who speaking of the precept of yearly confession,S Bonau. 4. sent dist. 17. q. 2. arg. 3. say that the Church did institute it, and the Fathers command it in this Councell. Thirdly, by the testimony of the Councell of Trent, which speaking of the same Decree, calls it,Conc Trid, sess. 14 can, 8. the consti∣tution of the great Lateran Councell. And that the Acts of this Councell were alwayes extant, and are not counter∣fait, appeares, in that they now are, and haue beene in the body of the Ca∣non law, euer since the time of Greg.
IX. who commanded them to be in∣serted; andAnnal. Eecles. post Baron. tom. 13. anno 1234. XV. anno 1234. which were but nineteene yeares after the Coun∣cell, approued the collection. Neither could any man haue meanes to know the truth of the Canons better than hee, the Councell hauing beene held not long before, by his vncle, in that citty, where hee being Pope could command the sight of all the monu∣ments; and many were still aliue who had beene present in the Councell ce∣lebrated but nineteene yeares before the publishing of these Canons, & knew therfore what was done in it, better than those who were further remoued, either in time as Platina was, or in place as was Matthew Paris, if they had (as you suppose) said any thing against it. Nor was it likely that Pope Gregory either would or could haue obtruded them before the eyes of such great Prelats and Princes, for decrees made in Councell, had they not beene so indeed. Nor would the Church (the things there determined soe much concerning her) nor they
who did soe much emulate her pro∣ceedings, haue beene silent, had such a thing beene attempted. Lastly I proue that there were Ca∣nons made in this Councell, yea and that those Canons were receiued in England, (a thing which you deny towards the end of your discourse) by aMatth. Paris. hist. ma. anno 1222. generall Coūcell (so it is stiled) of England, held at Oxford, by Ste∣phen Archbishop of Canterbury, in the yeare 1222. which was but seuen yeares after this of Lateran, and about 12. yeares before the Canons therof were put into the Decretalls by Gre∣gory IX. where towards the end it is said,Binij Cō∣oil. tom. 7. part. 2.2. fol. 833. Vt autem omnia fine bono conclu∣dantur, Lateranense Concilium sub san∣ctae recordationis Papa Innocentio cele∣bratum, in praestatione decimarum in aliis capitulis praecipimus obseruari. But this is not all you haue to say against this Councell; C. There be many things besides, which may make vs iustly to suspect the autho∣rity of this pretended great Councell. For
first, before Cochlaeus put  forth, it was neuer extant; and it was but lately neither that hee put it forth, in the yeare 1538. Three yeares before, whē Merlin put forth the Councells, there was no such Councell, that hee met withall, to set out; it is not in his edition. But Cochlaeus (a man not so well to be trusted, & who feigned many things in writing Luthers life) tells vs, that hee had the Decrees of this Coun∣cell out of an antient booke; but where hee got that booke, or who first compiled it, or of what authority it was, hee tells vs no∣thing at all. It is most likely, that antient booke was no other but the booke of the Popes Decretalls, where those things that are said by him to be decreed in this Coun∣cell, are heere and there scattered in seue∣rall places. Those scatterings (I belieue) did Cochlaeus, or some other, collect to∣gether, and made vp one body of them in manner and forme of a Councell. But so ill∣fauored a forme hath hee giuen it, that often it betrayeth it selfe not to be ge∣nuine, and taken out of any authenticke coppy.
ANSWER. You further say, that there are many things besides, which may make you iustly suspect the authority of this pretended great Councell, as you are pleased to call it. I easily be∣lieue that there are many things that make you not only to suspect, but flatly to reiect the authority of this and many other Generall Councells, but none iustly. But it is not the au∣thority of this Generall Councell, (which is the same in all,) but the verity of the Canons and Decrees therof (you would haue sayd) and the authority of thē that affirme those De∣crees, that you with so much sagacity suspect. And if you thinke the Councell and the Canons thereof but pretended, which are acknowledged true by the voyce of all the Catholi∣ques of the world, what shall make them to be accounted reall? or shall the voyce, of one pretended Deane di∣minish their reality? And if you thinke this Councell but pretendedly Great, which consisted of the great est num∣ber,
of the greatest persons both Ec∣clesiasticall and secular, that euer met together in the world, I must needs thinke that the common sence and vnderstanding of a man, is in you but pretended. Doth not Platina the Popes owne Secretary, close by the words cited by you, say, Pontifex apud Late∣ranum, maximum Concilium celebrat? And doth not your owne Mathew Paris, in the words by you cited, say Concilium illud Generale? besides many more and better witnesses. And can you after all this, call it soe scornefully a pretended Great Councell? yea no Generall Councell, no Councell at all? as you doe in the latter end of your pamphlet. Surely you are Go∣liath that defie the whole hoste of Is∣raël, yet euery one, though as little as Dauid, is able to cut of your head, with your owne sword. Now the grounds of your suspi∣tion, wherby you would dismount the Canons of this great Councell, are so feeble, that they shew you are no skilfull enginier. Wherof one is, be∣cause
Merlin hath it not in his edition, hee could not meet with it, to set it forth. But this is a poore argument; for first wee know that there were many other Councells which Merlin could not meet with, which haue since beene put forth, and Protestants I thinke will not deny, that there were such, as the second of Nice, fower of Lateran, two of Lions, one of Vienne, and one of Florence; and this of Flo∣rence was celebrated later than any that hee sets downe, and was the last Generall one, that was held before his publishing of his booke, about fower∣score yeares before it. And yet it seemes that hee could not meet with the Records of this Councell, or else hee did purposely omit it, which is not likely, how much more easy then was it for him to misse this of Late∣ran, which was held about 300. yeares before. Besides, it is manifest that nei∣ther the world at that time, nor hee himselfe did belieue, that hee had set forth all the Councells; as appeares by the king of France his Priuiledge at the beginning of his worke, and
his owne words at the end of his Epistle before the second volume. The words of the kings Priuiledge are these, Coneilia quae in Ecclesia à tempo∣ribus Apostolorum vsque ad concessum Basiliensem celebrata potuerunt coacer∣uart, by which it appeares that as they were all that they could then get, so they were not absolutely and certainly all that were. The words of Merlin himselfe are these. Nam si authentica, integra, solida, & à mēdis expertia fue∣rint exēplaria, vndehaec fideliter excerp∣ta sunt, apprime castigata sunt, pura, vera, & sincera quae profero, suorū Archetyporū quidem germanam conditionem prae se fe∣rentia, quae si grato animo tuleris, prope∣diem (conside) ampliora nostris te sudori∣bus assecuturum: by which it likewise appeares that hee did belieue that there were diuers others which hee had not set downe. Now for you to inferre that because hee could not meet with this Councell of Lateran, therefore there was none such, is a very vniust consequence, and is as strong against the eight other aboue named, as against this.
Another ground of your shrewd suspition is, because Cochlaeus first put it forth, and because hee put it forth but lately; soe that you obiect both against the person, and against the time. For the person of Cochlaeus, you say, hee was not a man so well to bee trusted; and to make that pro∣bable, you say, that hee feigned ma∣ny things in writing Luthers life. Against the time of Cochlaeus his edition you obiect, because it was late∣ly set forth, to wit, in the yeare 1538. three yeares after Merlin set forth his edition of the Councells. I will first consider the truth of what you say, and then the force therof. Concer∣ning Cochlaeus his edition of this or any other Councell, I can find no∣thing, but that Bellarmine in his con∣trouersies reckons him amongst such as haue writ of the Councells, yet hee doth not reckon it amongst the cata∣logue of his workes, in his booke de Script. Eccles. nor can I find it heere in Paris. Yet taking what you say in this for granted, I doe not find that
hee was a man lesse to be trusted than Merlin, or any other; for Bell: calleth him, Vir doctissimus, & fidei Catholicae propugnator eximius; and therfore you who traduce a man without any proofe, are much lesse to be trusted than he yea than any man I know, for your many falsifications, proued both in this and your other writings. As for your saying that hee faigned many things in writing Luthers life, that is but a new slander which as you doe not offer to proue, so it is impossible you should; for how can you know the heart of another mā from whence his faigning must proceed Hee may indeed write that which is false, but that hee did so by his owne fiction, and not by others misinformation, you cannot be assured, vnlesse hee himselfe had confessed it, which you doe not proue that hee hath Nor doe you proue so much as that hee hath written any thing false of Luther. You also suspect Cochlaeus his edi∣tion of the Councells in regard of the time, because hee set it forth lately.
And what I pray, is lately? you say, the yeare 1538. which is a hundred and eight yeares agoe. Indeed in compa∣rison of the Apostles times it is but lately, but in comparison of the inuention of printing, which was but about two hundred yeares agoe, and according to the ordinary ac∣count of schollers in editions of bookes, I belieue none will ac∣count a booke set forth a hundred and eight yeares agoe, a thing lately set forth. Much lesse haue you reason to accoūt it so, seing you doe not account Merlins so, which yet (as you say) was set out but three yeares before. It is a paradox to say, Merlin an antient writer in the yeare 1535. Cochlaeus a late writer in the yeare 1538. Can three yeares odds in a hundred and eleuen make one to be called late, and therfore to be (as you say) suspected, and not the other? Surely if this your argument of latenesse be good against one, it is so against both; wherby you may, according to your prudence, suspect all the Councells set forth by
Merlin. But I will giue your suspition yet more scope; for Merlin published the Councells in the yeare 1524. as appeares by the last words of the whole worke; so that Cochlaeus his edition was full fourteene yeares after Merlins, according to your com∣putation of Cochlaeus. And now to turne the poynt of your argument vpon your selfe, this laternesse of Co∣chlaeus is so farre frō being a ground of suspitiō, that it is (by iust so much) a stronger confirmation of the truth and exactnesse of his worke. It was but by accident that the Councells were printed at any time; they might haue beene let alone till this present yeare, or not printed at all, would that haue made you suspect the truth of them all? it would then haue made the world suspect you for à very weake man, or rather haue put you below all suspi∣tion. But it so falling out that the Councells were printed at senerall times, by the care of seuerall men, the later they were printed, the more mea∣nes had the publisher to make further
search, and to enforme himselfe out of the Manuscripts more fully; as wee find, that in all editions of bookes, the latest (if the publisher apply due dili∣gence) are most full, most pure, and most correct. I hope you will not say that the late edition of S. Chryso∣stome by Sr. Henry Sauill, is ther∣fore the more suspitious. So that heere is neither truth in the grounds of your suspition, nor reason that this last should be any ground, though it were true. You say moreouer, that Cochlaeus sayes, that hee had the Decrees of this Councell out of an antient booke, but where hee got that booke, or who first compiled it, or of what authority it was, hee tells vs nothing at all. And you adde your coniecture, as weake as your former suspition, that it is most likely, that that booke was the Popes Decretalls, where the supposed Ca∣nons of This Councell are scattered in seuerall places. Concerning Coch∣laeus I can say nothing, seeing I cannot meet (as I said before) with this his
worke that you cite, but I will fauour you so farre as to suppose you say true, & thē cōsider the purpose of it, which indeed is none at all. But for that hee had it out of an ancient booke is much to his purpose, which booke (I will be bold to coniecture, seeing you are so for your liking) was the very Originall of the Councell it selfe; and where hee got it, is impertinent for you to demand. And for this my con∣iecture I will giue you good ground, this, that in Crabs edition of the Councells I finde an Epistle to the Reader before the beginning of this Councell, the title wherof is this; Bartholomens Laurens Nouimagensis, Lectorl; the beginning of the Epistle this. Haec sunt quae ex Archetypo illo cuius supra mentio sit, lectu adeo difficili, sum∣mo labore descripsimus; quae sicui grata & vtilia fuerint, primum gratias agat Deo, qui horum qualecunque exemplar hucus∣que seruauit; deinde F. Petro Crab, qui hoc ipsum vt inter Cōcilia ederetur, procu∣rauit And this perhaps is the preface which you mention hereafter and as∣cribe
to Cochlaeus, for other I finde not. But whose soeuer it was, it proues thus much, that this Councell (which was first published (that I can find) by Peter Crab) was taken out of the Original Record, than which there can be no better authority; and so hee saith againe in the body of his Epistle, certè in editione hac scdulo curatum est, ne quicquam ei ab Archetypo alienum ingeri possei. And in this edition is the De∣cree of the expeditiō, and the others, which in particular you hereafter seeke to nullifie, wherby those obie∣ctions are before hand answered; yet I will say more when I come to them. But suppose the Decrees of this Coun∣cell had beene taken out of the Popes Decretalls (the originall being lost, as were the Canons of the first Coun∣cell of Nice, which makes so much vncertainty about the number of thē) into which they were inserted (as I shewed before) by Gregory the ninth, but a few year es after they were made; in seuerall places, according to the seuerall titles to which they were
to be referred (which you disgrace∣fully call scattering) what impeach∣ment is this vnto their credit? The Popes Decretalls are a testimony of no small reputation amongst all learned Christians. And why I pray scatterings? the Decretalls are not a collection of the Councells, that so you should expect euery Canon in his order, but à digestion of the Ca∣nons of all the Councells that per∣tayne to one matter vnder one head; like the collection of the Statutes of England by Rastall and others; (out of which if one would vndertake to extract all the lawes made in Queene Elizabeths raigne, hee must looke perhaps in a hundred seuerall places) which yet I thinke you will not call scattering, but methodicall digestion. But these are the reproaches throwne vpon the chiefe spirituall father of the Christian world, by those whom God hath (like Symeon and Leui) for the cruell schisme they haue made in the Church, diuided in Iaacob and scattered in Israel. But from whence
soeuer the first publisher of this Coun∣cell tooke the Canōs thereof, certaine it is that they were acknowledged, and ascribed to this Councell, by a testi∣mony aboue all exception, namely, of the whole clergy of England in a Councell at Oxford, as I haue shewed before, & that, 12. yeares before the booke of the Decretalls was compi∣led. So that from the Decretalls is not the first view that wee haue of the Canons of this Councell. You againe repeat, and say, Those scatterings (you belieue) Cochlaeus or some other did collect together, and made vp one body of them in manner and forme of a Councell. But so ill fauoured a forme hee hath giuen it, that it often betrayeth it selfe not to be genuine, and taken out of any au∣thentique coppie. Euen now you sayd (without doubt) that it was Cochlaeus that set forth this Councell, now, it was hee or some other; and this I must needs grant is very true; for if it be set forth, certainly it was either by one or another. And if it were not Coch∣laeus,
then haue you lost much la∣bour in seeking to poyson his credit herein. And if it were some other, then is your decrying this Councell by reason of this edition of Cochlaeus, of no force, for then I affirme, that this some other, was a man of the greatest credit of all other, and so the case is cleere against you, out of your owne words, and you say no∣thing heere to impeach the credit of this other; which I wonder at, for you may aswell speake against you know not whom, as say you know not what, as you doe in all this discourse. You tooke it ill of Cochlaeus that hee did not tell you where hee had that an∣tient booke; and haue not wee much more reason to take it ill of you, that will not tell vs who it was that first put forth this Coūcell you so much finde fault with, nor giue vs any ayme to finde out this editiō you meane (writ∣ten by you know not whom) from any other? but although you heere fayle vs, yet you thinke you come home to vs in that which followes;
and although you know not who first put forth this Councell, and that wee know that both first and last haue done it in the same manner; yet with∣out relation to the publisher, the very forme of this Councell, you say is so ill fauouted, that it often be∣trayeth it selfe not to be genuine, and taken out of any authentique coppy. Which deepe charge of yours against this Councell will recoyle vpon your selfe, and by the ill fauoured forme therof, betray it selfe not to be schol∣lerly, nor taken out of any authenti∣que coppy, either of reason or autho∣rity. C. For secondly, who will belieue? who can persuade himselfe, that this Councell of Lateran should cite the Councell of Late∣ran in the Decrees and Canons which were there compiled? that is, that it should cite it selfe, as à Councell not now sitting, but passed and held a long time (or some time at least) before it? The stile of other Councells vseth to be, Haec sancta Syno∣dus decernit, or placuit huic Sanctae
Synodo, as asession now in being, when they make their Decree. But this Coun∣cell of Lateran speakes of it selfe, as of some other Lateran Councell, then was at that time sitting, Fuit, & noscitur fuisse, as of some decrees made before, six seuerall times together; once in the 11. chapt. twice in the 29. three times more in the 33.46. and 61. Chapters. In Latera∣nensi Cōcilio pia fuit institutione pro∣uisum. De multa prouidētia fuit in La∣teranēsi Cōcilio prohibitū. Deuola∣tur collatio secundum statutum La∣teranensis Concilii. Et in Lateranensi Concilio noscitur fuisse prohibitum. Will any man thinke these be the words of the Councell of Lateran itselfe? ANSWER. Will any man thinke these be the words of a man that considers what hee sayes? who will belieue, who can persuade himselfe, that a pillar of his sect, should frame an accusation against a Councell, which (to phrase it most gently,) is (I belieue) the greatest ouersight that euer was yet committed in this kinde. You say that
this Councell while it was sitting, doeth cite it selfe, as a Councell that had sitten some while before; and to proue it you alleadge six places, wherein there is mentiō of the Coun∣cell of Lateran; and you most weakly imagine, that the Councell of La∣teran there spoken of, is this Councell of Lateran that speaketh. Know then (and a great shame it is that you should be guilty of such an ignorance, as not to know it before you framed this terrible obiection) that there were foure Councells of Lateran, (according to the most re∣ceiued opinion concerning the place) of which three were before this; and the Councell of Lateran cited in this, was that which was celebrated next before this, vnder Pope Alexander the third, in the yeare 1180, wherein all those places you (more punctually than any other) doe alleadge, are to be found. And is it possible that you (who talke sometimes, as if you had beene Secretary to all the Councells) could be so ignorant, as neuer to haue
read or heard of any Councell of La∣terā but this, so that finding in this the Councell of Lateran cited, you should thinke this Councell cited it selfe? for if you had but read this Councell in Binius, you should haue found all these places by you cited, re∣ferred in the margēt to their particular chapters, in the former Councell of Lateran, vnder Alexander the third. Or if any man had forged this Coun∣cell (as you iniuriously to vs imagine) could you thinke him so silly a fel∣low, as to conceiue such a grosse ab∣surdity as this, should steale away vn∣obserued? And if hee did not belieue hee should alwayes escape vndisco∣uered, (as to his eternall vnhappi∣nesse, by your seuerer inquisition, hee hath not,) could you thinke him so foolish asto doe a thing in it selfe most absurd and impertinent, which had no end in it, (for it was all one whe∣ther this Councell cited the Coun∣cell of Lateran or no,) and which could arriue at no other end, but the ruine of that which was his maine
designe, namely, the begetting of the worlds beliefe to this his edi∣tion of this Councell; to which he must needs foresee, that this would be the vndoubted ouerthrow? But howeuer, you make bold to slight and traduce some particular Catholiques, though most learned and vertuous, yet (to vse a frequent word of your owne, but much more seasonably) I wonder how you dare, so easily to condemne all Catholiques in generall; as to suppose that all the Popes, Catholique Bishops, Diuines, Canonists, and other learned men in∣numerable of the Catholique Church, yea those whose interest is mightily concerned in this Councell, euen all temporall Princes, whose Lay-depen∣dants are not few in number, nor faint in courage, nor all defectiue in lear∣ning, but some of them very eminent therein, were all so blind to this grand absurdity as not to see it, if they were Clergy, not one amongst so many millions not to haue so much feare of the God of heauen nor honesty
as to discouer it; if they were of the Laity, not to haue so much regard to the God of this world, proper in∣terest and to humane prudence, as to publish this prodigious forgery; but to suffer these Canons to be blanched ouer with the title of a great Generall Councell, and by that meanes cur∣rant through the world, vntill you with much industry and art, come and discouer this long hidden secret, and mystery of iniquity, to Catholiques eternall shame (as you surely thinke) and your owne eternall honour. But now you may see, that when men with pride and obstinacy fight against the truth, they fall into that pit of shame and folly, that they pre∣par'd for others. Yea you goe on with more courage than foresight, thus; C. Therfore thirdly, Cochlaeus is faine to excuse the matter by a coniecture, (in his preface to this Councell set forth by Crab) that these decrees were collected and brought into this forme, wherein hee pre∣sents them, by Pope Innocentius himselfe,
some while after the Councell was done. He cites three chap. of the Councell to that purpose, (three of those six that are named afore) and sayes, the Reader will easily deprehend asmuch. But what reader will like it well, that the decrees of a Councell should be written some while after the Coūcell is ended? It was alwayes the vse of Councells to write their owne decrees, and to signe them too, before they went away. And Innocent the Pope was not so weake a Scribe, as to make the Synode it selfe speake after such a manner, In Lateranēsi Concilio noscitur fuisse prohibitum; or, fiat hoc, secundum quod prouisum est in Lateranensi Concilio &c. which certainly is not the stile of the same Coun∣cell concerning it selfe; Innocent the third knew well enough what belonged to it. ANSWER. First you made Cochlaeus guilty of a fowle fault, and now you bring him in making an excuse, and both falsely. First, I can finde no such coniecture as you speake of, and secondly if it were to be found, it is no excuse. You say
it is to be found in his preface to this Councell set forth by Crab; but wee may sooner gather the Sibylls leaues than finde it, for there is no such thing. There is indeed an epistle of Bartholomaeus Laurens, which I haue mentioned before, & by which you were confuted, it being thereby pro∣ued that that edition was taken out of the originall, for which there needs no excuse. Besides, it is a thing in it selfe improbable, that Cochlaeus who (as you say) wrote this Councell himselfe, should afterwards write a preface to another mans edition of the same Councell. But suppose this coniecture you mention (to wit, that these decrees were collected and brought into this forme he presents them, by Pope Innocent him∣selfe, some while after the Councell was done) be some where to be found; what excuse is this I pray, or what doth it excuse? If the coniecture be true, it confimes the whole cause against you: namely, that all these decrees were made in the Councell; if it be false, it is nothing. But you draw cōsequences
from hence which are certainly most pittifull and inconsequent, with which while you thinke to strengthen your cause, you doe weaken the credit of your owne vnderstanding. You say, what reader will like it well; that the decrees of a Councell should be written some while after the Coun∣cell is ended? And I say, what reader (but your captious selfe) will dislike it? Indeed if the decrees of the Councell had beene written some while before the Councell began, you might iustly haue asked, who would haue liked it; but to aske who will like, that they should be written afterwards, is most ridiculous. But you suppose, because it is sayd in the coniecture you al∣leadge, that they were collected and digested into the forme they are in, after the Councell was done, that therfore they were not written in any forme, no not at all in the Councell it selfe; to which purpose you say, that it was alwayes the vse of Councells to write their owne decrees, and to signe them too, (as very pertinently you
adde) before they went away; intima∣ting hereby, that they did not so in this Councell; and your reason is, be∣cause Pope Innocent did collect them into the forme they now are in, some while after the Councell was done. Surely you did not consider what all impartiall men would conceiue of your ability, seeing you make such an inference as this; so poore, that few in the world would haue made them∣selues guilty of the like. And I de∣mand of all theworld, whether the de∣crees of the Councell could not be written, and signed too, by, and in the Councell, and yet be brought into this forme, or method, wherein they now are, by Pope Innocent some while after? euery one that hath but common sense will conclude against you. Yea his collecting and putting them into a forme some while after, is à proofe (cleane contrary to what you inferre, namely) that they were written some where, and in some forme or other before. For otherwise from whence should Pope Innocent
collect these decrees? out of his me∣mory? that is most improbable. Col∣lection imports not the inuenting or making them, but the gathering of them out of some Records or other; and out of the originall it is most likely (if he gathered them at all) that he tooke his collection, seeing he li∣ued in the time and place of this Councell, and was present and presi∣dent therein. Your argument then is no better than this, The Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles were col∣lected and brought into a forme writ∣ten and printed, againe and againe, after the first writers were dead and gone; therfore they were not at first written by themselues or their as∣signes. You further labour to assoyle Pope Innocent from the guilt of forging these Decrees, (for you take it for graunted that they were forged, and Cochlaeus you are most constant to, for the man that forged them,) be∣cause Pope Innocent was not so weake ascribe (you say) to make the Synode
quote it selfe; Wherein you might well haue spared your paynes, for Quis (quaeso) vnquam vituperauit Hercu∣lem? who, I pray, euer accused Pope Innocent hereof? you thinke Coch∣laeus doth, because he coniectures (as you say) that these Decrees were col∣lected and brought into this forme by Pope Innocent, after the Councell was dissolued; as if to collect decrees, and bring them into some or other forme after the dissolution of the Councell, were all one as to forge them? A conceipt surely vnworthy of any iudicious man. Innocēt the Pope (you say, and truly,) was not so weake a Scribe as to make the Synod quote it selfe, he knew well enough what be∣longed to it. Yet so vnhappy are you, that you cannot support this truth, (which no body puts you to, by de∣nying) but by affirming a greater falshood, namely, that this Councell doth cite it selfe. But if you had beene so good a Scribe, as to haue knowne aswell what belongeth to the making of obiections against a Councell, as
Pope Innocent did the stile of Coun∣cells, you would I thinke haue kept your owne counsell, and beene more silent in this matter. But you goe on, and say. C. Wee had best therfore belieue Platina, non est decretum ibi quicquam; non potuit ibi decerni quicquam. Impro∣bauit Innocentius ipse Abbatis loa∣chim libellum, damnauit ipse Alme∣ricum. He sayes, It was not the Councell of Lateran that made any decrees to con∣demne them; but that Pope Innocent con∣demned them himselfe. And wee may well conclude, That both these and other things, de quibus nihil decerni potuit in Concilio, were by the Pope set downe in his owne Decretalls; out of which he tooke those Canons, whoeuer he was that compiled them into the forme of a Councell. ANSWER. You say, wee had best therfore be∣lieue Platina; which I graunt wee may doe, but not your sense of his words, which I haue already refuted. But
what degree of trust soeuer wee yeeld vnto Platina himselfe, I am sure wee had best giue none vnto you, in your citation of Platina, who haue wronged both him and vs, in all that you haue heere alleadged. All that he sayes, is what you brought, and is answered in the beginning, nec decerni tamen quic∣quā apertè potuit; insteed whereof you make him say, non est decretum ibi quic∣quā; nō potuit ibi decerni quicquā; where∣in besides the explicatiō and chāge of the words, you leaue out the mayne word apertè, which changeth the whole sense. Platina saith, nothing could be decreed openly, you alleadge him saying, there was not, nor could be any thing at all decreed, whereas the de∣creeing of nothing openly, doth im∣ply that something was decreed, though not openly; and for the mea∣ning of Platina's words, I referre the reader to the first paragraph, where I shew, that these words of Platina were spoken with relation to the busi∣nesse of the Holy warres, and not con∣cerning the decrees of this Councell.
And as heere you leaue out a word to the corrupting of the sense, so in the following words which you al∣leadge, (as if they were placed in Pla∣tina as they are in you, and were a further proofe of the same assertion, whereas they haue no connexion to∣gether in sense, and are aboue a dozen lines asunder,) you put in a word, which is the very hindge on which the sense is turned, and turned contrary to the assured truth thereof; and that is the word, Ipse, he himselfe, as if the condemnation of Almericus and the booke of Ioachim had beene the Popes act without the Councell, that so you might proue the Councell fal∣sified, wherein the sayd acts are recor∣ded to haue passed. And then you adde as another saying of Platina, or as your construction of the former words of Platina, He sayes, it was not the Councell of Lateran that made any decrees to condemne them, but that Pope Innocent condemned them himselfe. But Platina hath neither any such formall words, nor are they the meaning of
the words he hath; for his saying the Pope did condemne them, doth not necessarily imply that the Councell of Lateran did not condemne them, for it might be done by both, either seuerally or together, and this latter way it was done, as I haue already proued, and doe now againe by the testimony of Beluacensis,a Beluac l 30 hist. cap. 64. who spea∣king of this Councell saith, that the Abbot Ioachim and Almericus were condemned therein. So that you are Ipse, He himselfe, that haue falsified Platina, layd vniust obiections against the Councell of Lateran, and (apertè) manifestly condemned your selfe of fowle play by the euidence of the fact, For a close to this section you say, wee may well conclude, that both these and other things de quibus nihil decerni potuit in Concilio, were by the Pope set downe in his owne Decre∣talls; out of which he tooke these Ca∣nons, whoeuer he was that compiled them into the forme of a Councell. Your conclusion is like your premis∣ses,
there is no truth in either of them both; you say, that both these and other things, (I suppose you meane all the Canons ascribed to this Coun∣cell,) were set downe by the Pope in his owne Decretalls, that is, accor∣ding to your meaning, inuented by the Pope, and put first into his Decre∣talls; for if they were first decreed in Councell, and afterwards put into the Decretalls, it is not for your purpose, but against you; and that it was so, I haue already sufficiently proued; and doe yet againe by the title of these constitutions, as they are set downe in the Decretalls; which are not barely ascribed to the Pope, as many others are; but to him in a generall Coun∣cell; thus, Innocentius tertius in Concilio generali. Wee may therefore well con∣clude; that your conclusion built on your extreme corruption of Platina, hauing so rotten a foundation must needs fall to the ground. Lastly you say, that he tooke them out of the Popes owne Decretalls, whoeuer he was that compiled the
Canons into the forme of a Coun∣cell. But I haue proued before, that he tooke them out of the originall Records of the Councell; and if he had taken them out the Popes De∣cretalls, it had bene well enough; those Decretalls not being the Popes owne, singly, as you haue sayd, but the Popes and Councells of Late∣ran together, as I haue many wayes proued. So that of all that you haue hitherto sayd, there is not one word but is either vntrue, or impertinent; and to vse your owne words, de qui∣bus nihil decerni potest. Yet as if you had not sayd enough of this nature, you goe on to make faults, in steed of finding them (as you suppose) in others. C. For the third Canon of this Councell (concerning the excommunication of temporall Princes, and the Popes power to free their subiects from all obedience to them, and to giue away their king∣domes) is indeed one of the Extraua∣gants;, cap. 13. de Haereticis, that is, Pope Innocents owne Decree, and not the Councells of Lateran, vbi nihil de∣cerni
potuit. So in the 71. Canon, con∣cerning the recouery of the Holy Land from the Saracens (for which this Councell was chiefly called, and met together) the compiler hath made the words to run in a Popes stile, and not in the stile of a Councell, Ad liberan∣dam terram sanctam de manibus im∣piorum, sacro Concilio approbante definimus, &c. neither in the Councell was there any such Decree made; as both Card. Bellarmine (against king Iames's Apologie,) and Eudaemon Ci∣donius (in his Parall. Torti & Tortur.) doe confesse out of Platina. He therfore that made these two decrees, of absol∣uing subiects from obedience to their Princes, and of recouering the land of promise from the Saracens, may well be thought to haue made that decree also of Transubstantiation, which hath made such a noyse in the world, and for which this Councell is so often quoted vnder the name of Maximum omnium, Ge∣nerale, & celeberrimum Concilium. Answer. The third Canon of this Coun∣cell,
concerning the excommunica∣tion of temporall Princes, you say, is one of the Extrauagants, cap. 13. de Haereticis, but you are very Extra∣uagant in saying so; for there is no such matter in the place by you cited, nor indeed any such place as you haue here rashly set downe. All that is to be found is this; that in the fifth booke of the Extraua∣gants, there is a Title de Haereticis, vnder which title are only three chapters, and in them not a word of this matter. And this for the truth of your quotation; I will now con∣sider the sense of what you say, and the truth thereof. The third Canon (say you) is one of the Extraua∣gants, that is, Pope Innocents owne Decree. By which it seemes, that it is the same thing with you, to be one of the Extrauagants, and to be Pope Innocēts owne Decree; as if the Extrauagāts were Pope Innocēts owne decrees; whereas it is apparāt by the ti∣tles to whom they are ascribed, that not one of them was made by Pope In∣nocent; so mightily are you mis∣taken
in this matter. This Decree then is not Pope Innocents owne, and not the Councells of Lateran, as you say, but Pope Innocents owne, and the Councells of Lateran; his, in and with the Councell of Late∣ran, as I haue proued. You also cite your selfe (for it is to be found in no authour else) against the Coun∣cell of Lateran, saying, vbi nihil de∣cerni potuit, where nothing could be decreed; against which I oppose (besides all that I haue sayd before) a man of much better authority, Al∣bertus Crantzius, who saithCrantz. Metrop. l. 9. cap. 1. sect. Innoc. 3. Con∣cilium maximum congregauit Latera∣num; ibi multa constituta, quae hodie ex∣tant in corpore iuris, there many things were decreed, which are at this day ex∣tant in the body of the law. Moreouer the sense of this Canon you doe lamely, and with change of the tearmes set downe; for there is no mention of kings nor king∣domes; and then the Popes ab∣soluing of the vassalls of temporall Lords (for those are the words of
the Canon) from their fidelity to them, and exposing their land to be occupied by Catholiques, exprest to be but in the case of neglect to purge their land of heresy, and con∣tinuance therein after excommuni∣cation by the Bishops, and after a yeeres contempt of making satisfa∣ction; and then there is added this reseruation also, Saluo iure Do∣mini principalis, &c. sauing the right of the principall Lord, so that he giue no obstacle hereunto, nor oppose any impdiment. Now this power of the Pope, whatsoeuer it be, is farre from that which your confused words in∣sinuate, which to your weaker readers (I suppose) will sound, as if the Pope had power to absolue the subiects of any kings from their fidelity, and dispose of their kingdomes when, to whom, and for what cause so euer they pleas'd; which is nothing so. Yet if this power of the Popes were so vast as you belieue it, or would haue others to belieue it, why should it trouble you? And why should you
be more tender of the interest of Princes than they themselues, and all their courts about them, who either receiued this Canon imme∣diatly from the Councell, as I haue sayd and proued, or else suffered it to be coseningly thrust vpon them, as you haue sayd, but not proued. And I wonder that you a Prote∣stant, should fasten vpon this decree of deposing of Princes by the Pope, (to make the decrees of this Coun∣cell odious and incredible,) when as it is well knowne, that the Popes in sixteene hundred yeeres, haue not de∣posed so many, as Protestants in one hundred; for almost whersoere the gangrene of that heresy hath spread it selfe, they haue either actually depo∣sed and expelled their Princes, as in Swede, Denmarke, Scotland, Nether∣lands, Geneua; or diuers times attēp∣ted by violence to doe it, as in France often, in Bohemia, in Poland, and now it is feared in England. And if you say, that though these Puritane Prote∣stants haue both taught and done
these things, yet the true Protestant of the Church of England, he neuer taught such doctrine, he cānot thinke such a thought without horror; surely wee haue nothing but your bare and often broken word for our security. For what experience hath the king, or his few predecessors of your religion had, that in case they should haue de∣priued you of your desires, as they denyed to graunt the desires of the Puritanes, if they should haue turned you out of your Bishoppricks and Deaneries, taken from you the Church vsurped Liuings, set vp a reli∣gion that would not haue endured wiuing preachers, what experience haue they had, that in these or the like cases, your Protestants of the Church of England would not attempt their destruction, and if they were able, lay the axe on their necks, as your Su∣preme Gouuernour of your Church of England Queene Elizabeth and her instruments did, on the necke of the renowned Mary Queene of Scot∣land, and Dowager of France.
Can you then thinke much that the Pope, a person of an other quality, and more dis-interessed than the sub∣iects of Princes, should haue some kinde of power, by all conuenient wayes to reduce and correct hereticall Princes? Especially seeing the Empe∣rours, Kings, and Princes gaue their votes vnto this Decree, and were, for so much as concerned themselues, the makers thereof. But you will not belieue that this decree was made in the Councell, but thinke that you haue proued the contrary. My aduice then is that you acquaint the Kings and Princes on this side the seas, with this strange cheat that is put vpon them; it is like to be a matter of high acceptation to them, of great re∣proach to their vnfaithfull seruants, that would not discouer that which you haue done, and of great prayse and preferment to your selfe. You further obiect against the Act of the expedition for the recouery of the Holy Land, (which you call the 71. Canon, but no body else doth so
that I know) because it runnes, say you, in a Popes stile not in the stile of à Councell By which I perceiue, that though you are one of the Court yet you are none of the Councell, for you are not skild in the stiles of Popes and Councells. Otherwise you would haue knowne, that it is the manner in those Coun∣cells where the Pope himselfe is pre∣sent, to decree things in his name, with this addition, sacro approbante Con∣cilio, as in the Councell of Florence inlueris vnionis, euen as Acts of Par∣liament of England, are made in the kings name, with the aduice or consent of the two houses. You say moreouer, that Card. Bel∣la mine and Eudaemon Cidonius doe confesse out of Platina, that there was no such decree made. Your Eudae∣mon Cidonius I cannot meet with heere, nor is it much materiall, for that answer which serues your quota∣tion of Bell: will serue him also, seeing (as you say) it is both their confessions out of Platina. For the finding of your citatiōs out of Bell: you vse vs very ill,
giuing vs no direction, but a booke of perhaps twenty leaues in folio to finde out twēty words, which whē wee haue found, to recōpence our paynes, we finde your mistake and falshood. For Bellarm. doth not speake directly of the particular chapter of the expe∣dition, whether that were made in the Councell or no, but of the buisinesse of the Holy Warre in generall, de hoc articulo, cū multa disputata fuissent, nihil certi definiri potuit; and there is a diffe∣rence sure betwixt nihil certi, and nihil omnino, nothing certaine, and no∣thing at all, as you would haue it. And I suppose this nihil certi is meant in re∣gard of the further and more parti∣cular managing of the warre, from which they were hindred by the pre∣sent warre in Christēdome, and which is no denyall of the Decree of the ex∣pedition, which consists of a few ge∣nerall heads concerning the raysing of contributions to this great worke from the clergy, (wherein the Pope himselfe gaue a great example) of pu∣nishments on those that hindred it
and indulgence to them that aduan∣ced it, with the like. All which though they were vndoubtedly decreed, yet it may be sayd with Bell: out of Pla∣tina, that after much disputation there was nothing certaine defined, in re∣gard of the neerer and more particu∣lar articles for the managing of the warre, being put frō it by the present warre in Christendo me. Yea it might be sayd nihil certi in regard of this de∣cree it selfe, not of the letter and in∣tention of it, but of the wars at home, yea rather the contrary was certaine, namely, that it was not executed. And if Platina (or Bellarmine out of him) had intended to exclude this Decree of the expedition (which is all that wee affirme to be done in that kinde) why did they expresse it with these reseruations, of apertè and certi, and not say directly and without limita∣tion nihil as you doe? which had beene more plaine, and agreeable to the gra∣uity of those writers. Therfore by these reseruations they must needs intend some thing, which (as I con∣ceiue)
is that which I haue expressed. Howsoeuer, certaine wee are, that this Decree was made in the Councell, by all that proofe whereby wee haue pro∣ued the whole Councell, of which this is a part; and particularly (because you heere make a particular obiectiō against it) by Matth. Paris, who inti∣mateth so much, by repeatingMatth. Paris. hist∣ma. p. 189. the substance of this very Decree, in al∣most as many words as they are in the Councell, which are too long to set downe heere. Your further say, that he that made these two decrees, of absoluing sub∣iects from obedience to their Princes, and of recouering the land of Promise from the Saracens, may well be thought to haue made the decree of Transubstantiation also. And you say truth in that, but it will not helpe you; for Pope Innocent made them all, but, sacro approbante Concilio, that is, the whole Councell, consisting of the Pope and the rest of the Prelats, de∣creed them. Nor haue you reason so to boggle at the word Transubstan∣tiation,
or at this Councell for the word; seeing the thing knew no begin∣ning since our Sauiour, as our Catho∣lique bookes doe sufficiently proue; and euen the word it selfe was in vse before this Councell, as appeareth by Roger Houenden in Henrico 2. where he hath these words.Annul. p. 576. Confessi sunt etiam, quod Sacerdos noster, bonus siue malus, iustus vel iniustus, corpus & sanguinem Christi posset conficere, & perministerium huiusmodi Sacerdotis, & virtutem diui∣norum verborum, quae à Dominoprolata sunt, panis & vinum in corpus & sangui∣nem Christi verè transubstantiantur. Also by Blesensis, who was king Henry the second his Chaplayne, who saithBlesens. Ep. 140. Et vt gratia exempli, in vno Sa∣cramentorum vide as abyssum profundissi∣mam, & humano sensui imperceptibilem, pane & vino transubstantiatis virtute verborum caelestium in corpus & sangui∣nem Christi &c. Both these wrote in the dayes of Henry the second, and the Councell of Lat. was held in the dayes of king Iohn, who raigned the second after him. And in both these good
English authors, doe wee finde the word transubstantiated, applyed to the bread & wine chāged into the body & bloud of Christ; nor doe wee finde in any story, that these men were que∣stioned for the vse of these words, as if they did import any thing more in their sense, than that which was the generall beliefe of that and the fore∣going ages. It is not therfore the De∣cree of transubstantiation made in this Councell afterwards, which hath made such a noyse in the world, as you say it hath, but the heretiques and Schismatiques that haue opposed it. Nor was this Coūcell for this decrees sake called Maximū omniū, generale, & celeberrimum, but because it was sum∣moned by the Pope frō all parts of the Christian world, and there met toge∣ther the greatest and most renowned assembly both of Clergy and Laity, that euer was in the world: which therfore it ill becomes you to deride. In fine, the three particular decrees you heere oppose, but haue proued
nothing against them, are first inser∣ted into the Decretalls, which was done by Pope Gregory IX. not many yeeres after the Councell was held; who therein vsed the seruice of one of the best men of the world, as I haue proued before. Secondly, they are put into the number of the Canons of this Councell by Crab: who (as I haue also proued) tooke them out of the Originall Records. Thirdly, they are also reckoned amongst the rest of the Canons, by all others that haue made edition of this Councell, as Su∣rius, Binius, and whosoeuer else. Lastly, they are receiued and allowed by the Catholique Church, the stron∣gest testimony of all others; and doe you thinke to ouerthrow them? who is sufficient for this? he therfore that attempts it, deserues the name of hae∣reticorum maximus omnium, generalis & celeberrimus. In the next place, you inuade vs with an Arithmeticall ar∣gument; but when I haue reckoned with you, it will appeare that you are not a man of good account; for thus you cast it;
C. But as it should seeme, he that first composed it, and stiled it so, or afterwards set it forth, and entituled it a Generall Councell, had not his lesson perfect. For betweene the seuenth and the eighth Gene∣rall Councell, I trow there cannot another Generall Councell interueene, as this not∣withstanding is made to doe, if it were so Great and so Generall, as they say it is. They count the second of Nice for the se∣uenth Generall, which was held in the yeare 787. and the Councell of Florence (held in the yeare 1449.) for the eighth Generall, as is there, in the last session of it, expressly set downe; Finis octaui Con∣cilii Generalis factus est 21. Iulii &c. So that vnlesse they will make two eight generall Councells, this of Lateran could be none. ANSWER. You passe from the matter of this Councell, to disproue the title therof; and say, he that entituled it a ge∣nerall Councell had not his lesson perfect, and that because (as you say) they count the second of Nice for the seuenth generall Councell, and the
Councell of Florence for the eighth, & betweene th seuēth and the eighth there cannot another interueene, as this is made to doe, if it were so great and so generall, as they say it is. Truly if he that published this Councell, had had his lesson no perfecter than he that made these obiections, he de∣serued to be whipt for a trewant, for neuer were there such idle obiections made. I pray who are these, they, that account the Councell of Florēce the eighth generall Councell? your reader cannot but thinke you meane vs Roman Catholiques, against whom you heere dispute, and whom you would make to appeare so sim∣ple, that they cannot tell eight. But it is not the Roman account, I trow, that you heere follow, but the schis∣maticall Grecian, who yet will giue you no more thankes for it, nor no more admitt you a member of their Church, than will the Catholiques. You must know thn, if you did not before, that the eighth generall Coun∣cell was celebrated in Constantinople
against Photius, who made a schisme betweene the Latin and Greeke Church, they of the schisme reiected this eighth, and many other generall Councells, which were celebrated in the west; amōgst which this fourth of Lateran (you so strongly and weakly fight against) was one; vntill the Grecians meeting againe with the Latins in the Councell of Floren∣ce, the Grecians called that the eighth generall Councell; which yet soone after they reiected, and so at this day allow but seuen. But if men may re∣ceiue and reiect Councells at their pleasure, then you may with the Lutherans allow but six; with the Eutychians which are yet in Asia, but the first three; with the Nesto∣rians which are yet in the East, but the first two; with the Arrians and Trinitarians which are in Hungary and Poland, none at all. And this you and yours may doe with as good reason, as they doe reiect and reuile this of Lateran, and aboue all, the sacred Oecumenicall Councell of Trent.
And that you may againe fall into the fault, of which you falsely accuse others; you are out in your com∣putation of the yeeres of the hol∣ding of the Councell of Florence; but this I doe not mention as a matter of moment, it being brought in but on the by. But I cannot omitt a weighty passage that you haue a little before, where you say, that betweene the seuenth and the eighth generall Councell you trow, there cannot come another, if it were so great and so generall, as this is sayd to be. Wherby you intimate, that the great∣nesse of this Councell was the hinde∣rāce that it could not come betweene the seuenth and the eighth, and by consequence, that if it had beene a little one, it might haue come be∣tweene; which is a very new and pretty fancy. A little generall Coun∣cell it seemes might haue crowded in betweene the seuenth and the eighth as an appendix to the former, or otherwise haue found place and vnion with it vnder the same name and
number of the seuenth, but this being so great and so generall, could not possibly finde a roome betwixt them, but that it must make two eights, as you say, rather than an eighth and a ninth, which ninth (if it had beene so, in this case) might yet haue beene called the eighth in some other re∣spect, as I haue shewed. But I had thought that Councells in regard of number being of discrete quantity, did not require any place by reason of their greatnesse, (as if they were in this regard, of continued quantity also,) more than if they had beene little: the abstract number of eight, (I trow) can no more come in, betweene seuen and eight, in a small subiect thā in a great, and therfore the great∣nesse of this Councell was no more hinderance to its coming in be∣tweene the seuenth and the eighth, without chāging the name and order of the number, than if it had beene neuer so little. You tell vs also, that in the last session of the Councell of Florence
it is expressely set downe, Finis octa∣ui Concilij generalis, &c. yet the words more expressely than you haue set thē downe are, Finis generalis octauae Synodi, which though not different in substance, yet the difference of the words Concilium and Synodus if you had vnderstood the reason thereof, had beene enough to preuent your obiection. For it appeares hy an epistle of Bartholomaeus Abramus to the Archbishop of Rauenna, set downe by Crab at the beginning of this Councell, and by Binius at the end, that the Latin Originall of this Councell was lost, and that this that is now extant, was translated by the sayd Abramus out of the Greeke, for which reason he vseth the word Synodus according to the Greeke, & not Concilium; and it is called octaua because it was so in the greeke which hee translated; and the Greekes set it downe so, because (as I sayd before) they accounted no Councells gene∣rall, but where they themselues were present and which they did receiue,
of which this was indeed the eighth. But this account is (for very good reasons) reiected byPraefat. huic Synod. Surius andNotis in Concil. Flo∣rent. Bi∣nius, and by all Catholiques. And Crab though hee haue no caueat vp∣pon this place, yet that you may see he spake according to the letter of the greeke coppy, and not his owne minde, he calleth all the Councells betwixt the 2. of Nice, and Floren∣ce, Generall Councells; all that the Church accounteth so; and particu∣larly of this Councell of Lateran he sayth, Instituta generalis Concilij Late∣ranensis tempore Innocentij Papae tertij. In the end of this section you make this notable conclusion; So that vn∣lesse they will make two eight generall Councells, this of Lateran could be none; which out of your discourse may as iustly be inferred thus, so that vnlesse they will make two, or nine eight generall Councells, that of Constan∣tinople the fourth, the fower of La∣teran, the two of Lions, that of Vienne, that of Pisa, that of Flo∣rence, or some one of these could be
none. Could be none, is a false con∣sequence, could not be the eighth, is true; nor is that of Florence or La∣teran numbred for the eighth by any Catholiques at this day, but this is reckoned the twelfth, that most com∣monly the sixteenth. But that the number of eight, which you so hunt heere, may come in (because nos nu∣meri sumus) he that first made this ob∣iection (which I belieue was not you) shall by my consent be reckoned Sa∣pientum octauus, the eighth wise man, which he shall be without a riuall, there shall not be two of them; espe∣cially if he that next aspires to it be a great one, for then (I trow) he can∣not interueene in the order of number, betweene the eighth and the ninth, as you haue taught vs for our learning. C. Besides, if it were a generall Councell, how came it to passe, that the Canons of it were neuer generally receiued? as a∣mongst vs in the Church and kingdome of England they were not, and as without doubt they would haue beene, had the
Councell in those dayes beene accounted generall, and the Decrees of it vnder that stile and title sent abroad into the world. But with vs in England euer since that time, and contrary to the 46. pre∣tended Canon of it, subsidies haue beene payd to the king, inconsulto Pontifice; and against the 41. Canon, with vs Currit praescriptio, though oftentimes ex bona fide ortum non habeat; and yet againe contrary to the third Canon there, with vs, Clericorum bona qui de haeresi conuicti sunt, they goe not to the vse of the Church, but are alwayes brought into the kings Exchequer. ANSWER. The generality of this Councell you further goe about to disproue, because the Canons thereof were not (as you say) generally receiued; and this you proue, because they were not receiued in England; but that they were not receiued in England you doe not proue, but by three instances, which you doe not proue; and if you had, they had proued nothing. For it is not properly the generall receiuing
that makes a Councell to be generall, but the generall calling thereof from all parts of the Christian world, and such was this. Otherwise no Councell could be stiled generall in the calling of it, or while it was sitting, or when it was concluded, vntill it did appeare that all the world had receiued it, which is a condition that neuer hap∣pened to any Councell, because some or other heretiques (against whom all generall Councells haue beene commonly called) or perhaps all, did refuse to receiue it. So that by this your character of a generall Councell, you haue plainly casheired all the generall Councells that euer were; for euen the first fower, which you seeme to magnifie, and grant them the title of Generall, were the Canons of them generally receiued? It is manifest that they were not, but were reiected by all those sorts of he∣retiques who were the occasion of their calling. Moreouer, your reason to proue that the canons of this Councell of
Lateran were not generally receiued to wit, because they were not recei∣ued in England; if it were true, yet it is inconsequent, and your deceipt or mistake lyeth in the indistinction of the word Canons, whereof some be of faith, some of manners and discipline. Now that a Councell be accounted to be generally receiued, it is not required that the Canons of discipline and practise be receiued in all kingdomes, but it is sufficient that the Canons concerning mat∣ters of faith be generally re∣ceiued, to stile the reception gene∣rall, and the Councell generall, for so much as the generality of recep∣tion can contribute to the title of its being generall. As for example, the kingdome of France doth not re∣ceiue the decrees of the Councell of Trent concerning gouernment, but of faith it doth, as doe all other Catholique Countries, for which reason, euen this kingdome which denies to receiue the Councell of Trent in matters of gouernment,
doth notwithstanding acknowledge it generall. By which it appeares, that you are not so well versed in Gene∣rall Councells and their reception, as to know distinctly the meaning of the words according to their Catho∣lique vse. Now there is no doubt that the kingdome of England did receiue this Councell for the matters of faith, otherwise it would haue beene noted hereticall as now it is, and for its not receiuing the Canons of discipline and gouernment, you proue not but by your owne bare word, which I may most iustly deny; yet I haue other proofes against you. But first I will take notice of your mistake (if not vnfaithfullnesse) in your description of the 46. pretended Canon (as you call it) contrary to which, you say, subsidies haue beene payd to the king, inconsulto Pontifice; as if that Canon had sayd, that no subsidies at all should be payd to the king but by the aduice of the Pope, whereas the Canon speakes only of
the subsidies of the Clergy, as requi∣ring the Popes aduice. As for the practise of England contrary to these three Canons you mention, if it be true (which I doe not belieue, because I haue heard good lawyers in Eng∣land say the contrary in one, which concernes prescription) yet it doth not proue that these Canons were not receiued; for these crossings of the Canons may happen, either through indulgence of the Pope granted to the kings, or the kings vsurpation contrary to the Canōs receiued; or in your instāce of prescription, through the headstrong impiety of the people, who will not obserue the good lawes they receiue, being contrary to their euill customes. If England had ob∣serued all the Canōs they haue heere∣tofore receiued, when they were as wise, as learned, as pious, as iudi∣cious (at the least) as now they are, you and I (I belieue) should not haue beene at this bay, that now we are. Now contrary to your proofelesse assertion, I proue that the Canons of
this Councell were receiued in Eng∣land, as well those of manners as of faith; first by the testimony of Linwood, and the municipall lawes of the land, as they are affirmed by Franciscus à sancta Clara, in his article of transubstantiation. Secōdly by the Councell of Oxford before cited, held by the then Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, but seuen yeeres after this of Lateran, (which was the very first Councell in the world, that was held after this) where it is sayd,Binij tom. 7. part. 2. pag. 233. That all things may be con∣cluded wich a good end, wee enioyne that the Lateran Councell celebrated vnder Pope Innocent of holy memory, in the paying of tithes, and in the other chapters be obserued. By which it appeares, how much you are deceiued, in saying that in England the Canons of this Coun∣cell were not receiued: as you also are in saying. C. Lastly, I belieue no good story can be shewed to confirme the pretended title of this Councell, that the Patriarch of Ie∣rusalem
and Constantinople were present at it, and 70. Metropolitans besides; though that will not make it generall nei∣ther, for want of the two other Patriarchs of Antioche and Alexandria, who are not mentioned to haue beene among them. Howsoeuer, nihil ibi actum quod qui∣dem constet; and so was it neither any Generall Councell, nor so much as any Councell at all. ANSWER. What you belieue imports not, for I know you belieue many heresies and errors, amongst which errors this is one, That no good story can be shew∣ed that the Patriarchs of Ierusalem and Constantinople were present at this Councell &c. One is sayd to be present either in person or by deputy; that those two Patriarchs which you first mention, were there in person, is affirmed by Platina, Paris, and Vrs∣pergensis; and that the other two were there by their deputies, with aboue 70. Metropolitanes, besides a very great number of Archbishops, Bi∣shops, Abbots, and Priors, some in
person, and some by Proxy; and with these the Legats and deputies of the two Emperours, of all (or almost all) the Kings, Princes, citties and other places of the Christian world, is recorded by Paris, and Vrspergen∣sis. And I suppose you will not deny any of them to be good historians, es∣pecially Paris and Platina, whom you called in, in the beginning of this your worke, as witnesses (as you thought) against the Canons of this Councell.Matth. Paris. hist. mai. p. 188. i.e. Paris and Vrspergēsis speake almost in the same words;Vrsper∣gens. Chro∣nic. p. 320. thus: Anno ab In∣carnatione Verbi 1215. celebrataest sancta vniuersalis Synodus Romae, in Ecclesia Saluatoris, quae Constantiniana vocatur, mense Nouembri, praesidente Domino In∣nocentio Papa tertio, Pontificatus eius anno 18. in quo fuerunt Episcopi 412. in∣ter quos extiterunt de praecipuis Patriar∣chis duo, videlicet, Constant: & Hiero∣sol: Antiochenus autem graui languore detentus, venire non potuit, sed mifit pro se Vicarium, Anthedarensem Episco∣pum: Alexandrinus vero sub Saraceno∣rum dominio constitutus, fecit quod po∣tuit,
mittens prose Diaconum suum Ger∣manum; Primates autem & Metropoli∣tani 71. Caeterùm Abbates & Priores vl∣tra octingentos; Archiepiscoporum vero & Episcoporum, Abbatum, & Priorum, & Capitulorum absentium Procuratorum non fuit certus numerus comprehensus. Legatorum vero Regis Siciliae in Roma∣norum Imperatorem electi, Imperatoris Constantinopolitani, Regis Franciae, Re∣gis Angliae, Regis Vngariae, Regis Hie∣rosolymitani, Regis Cypri, Regis Arra∣goniae, necnon & aliorum Principum, & Magnatum ciuitatum, aliorumque loco∣rum ingēs fuit multitudo. Heere is your erroneous beliefe plainly and am∣ply confuted. I wonder what histories you haue read concerning this Coun∣cell, that these should escape you; es∣pecially Paris the Popes deare friend, and Platina the Popes owne Secretary. I haue therfore reason to belieue that you tooke vp these obiections vpon trust, and of men that were not faith∣full, who haue greatly deceiued you. And therfore the title of this Coun∣cell which you againe so scornefully
and boldly call pretnded, shall be really accounted Generall, by the best and noblest part of the world, the Ca∣tholique Church, when all other pre∣tended Churches, Councells, and their Canons, their Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters shall haue no being, nor memory but of dishonour. You further say, (according to your manner, without proofe,) that this Councell vas not Generall, for want of the personall presence of two of the Patriarchs; wherein you are much mistaken: for otherwise the first fower commonly stiled Generall, and for such acknowledged by very many Protestants, cannot be truly such, be∣cause the Chiefe Patriarch, the Bi∣shop of Rome, was not present in any of them, but by his Legats. Vnlesse you will say, that though two may not be absent, yet one may, especially when that one is the Pope, a man whō you (I know) can very well spare, not only out of the Councell, but out of the world. And yet I wonder that you that haue had the fortune to be
the pretended Deane of S. Peters Bo∣rough and the pretended Master of S. Peters house, should yet be such an enemy to S. Peters chayre. But if you desire to know what makes a Councell generall, and what are the insufficiencies thereof, which you ought to haue expressed and proued, before you had shot your hasty bolt of condemnation against this Coun∣cell, reade Turrecremata, and Canus vpon this subiect. You at last conclude thus, How∣soeuer nihil ibi actum quod quidem con∣stet, and so was it neither any generall Councell, nor so much as any Coun∣cell at all Wherein first your proposi∣tion is false and hath no authority (that I know of) but the worst in the world, your owne. Yet you set it downe in Latin, as if they were the words of some author, but neither ex∣presse the place, nor so much as his name, and therfore I take it for yours, and reiect it. Secondly if it were true that nothing as done there, yet your inference from thence is incōsequent,
to wit, that therfore it was neither any generall Councell, nor so much as any Councell at all; concerning the nullities of a Councell, or of the generality therof, I need say no more than I haue done, seeing it rests on you to proue, that doing nothing is one. And for your affirmation that nothing was done, I haue fully dispro∣ued it through this whole discourse. I will therfore only adde the testi∣mony of Matth. Paris, who though he were no friend to this Pope, as I haue shewed before, yet speaking of this Councell in the place aboue cited, saith thus: His omnibus congre∣gatis in suo loco praefato, & iuxta mo∣rem Conciliorum Generalium in suis or∣dinibus singulis collocatis, facto prius ab ipso Papa exhortationis sermone, recitata sunt in pleno Concilio capitula 60. (Where∣in is a mistake in the figure, it should be 70.) quae aliis placabilia, aliis vide∣bantur onerosa. Tandem de negotio Cruci∣fixi & subiectione terrae sanctae verbum praedicationis exorsus, subiunxit di∣cens, Ad haec ne quid in negotio Ie∣su
Christi de contingentibus omitta∣tatur, volumus & mandamus, &c. And so repeats at large the substance of the Decree of the Expedition for the recouery of the Holy land. So that it is manifest by this, and that which hath beene sayd before, that there were many things done in this Councell, yea all that are affirmed to bee. And it is called a Councell, and a generall Councell, by Vrspergensis, Paris, Platina, Grantzius, Nauclerus, Beluacēsis, and all that I can finde that haue any way written therof, except your vncontrowlable selfe. Besides it hath the allowance of the Holy Catholique Church, the awfull spouse of Christ, more true, more wise, more vigilant, and infinitly more reuerend then all the sects & Synagogues of Schismatiques, & Heretiques; & ther∣fore their obiectiōs against her, whom they ought to belieue and reuerence aboue all things on the earth, espe∣cially when they are propounded peremptorily, as these are, are fitter to be reiected than to be answered.
I conclude with the words of Surius: a Nemo sanae mentis ambigere potest, hanc quae sequitur Synodum Lateranensem cum primis insignem & vere oecumenicam fuisse, quippe in qua de negotiis religionis summa Latinae & Graecae Ecclesiae concor∣diâ tractatum est, cuique interfuere Pa∣triarcha Constantinopolitanus, & Hie∣rosolymitanus, & Archiepiscopi tum La∣ni tum Graeci 70. Episcopi 412. Abbates & Priores plus 800. simul omnes Praelati 1215. aut eo plures. Nec defuere Legati Graeci & Romani Imperatoris, Regum Hierusalem, Galliae, Hispaniae, Angliae, & aliorum. Quodsi verò ea cuiquam prop∣terea minus ponderis habere videatur, quod recentior sit, ille certè Christum mendacem facere velle videtur, qui per∣ennem praesentiam suam promisit Ecclesiae suae, & Spiritum sanctum suum, Spiri∣tum veritatis, qui cum illa maneat in aeternum. Manet sua semper Catholicae Ecclesiae authoritas, quam quisquis con∣temnere ausus est, non ille efficit vt ea minor sit, sed se dignum reddit, qui eius pondere penitus opprimatur. No man well in his wits can doubt,
that this Councell of Lateran was very fa∣mous, and truly generall, because therein were handled the matters of Religiō, with very great agreement of the Greeke and Latine Churches, & wherin were present the Patriarch of Constantinople, and Ie∣rusalem, and 70. Archbishops Greeke and Latin, Bishops 412. Abbots and Priors aboue 800. all the Prelats together were one thousand two hundred and fifteene, or more. Neither were there absent the Ambassadours of the Greeke and Ro∣man Emperours, of the kings of Ieru∣salem, France, Spayne, England, and others. But if this Councell seeme to any to haue lesse weight, because it is later, hee truly seemes to be willing to make Christ a lyar, who hath promised his perpetuall presence to his Church, and his Holy Spirit, the Spirit of truth, which remayneth with her for euer? The autho∣rity of the Catholique Church doth alwayes abide here, which who soeuer presumes to despise, he doth not lessen her, but renders himselfe worthy to be crus∣shed to pieces with her weight. And now insteed of your prouing
the Catholique writers lyars, and for∣gers, and the Catholique Church credulous, negligent, and ignorant (which you endeauoured) you haue proued your selfe, vnwise, vnlear∣ned, and audacious; and I belieue will loose all credit and reputation of in∣tegrity, or capacity, in the iudgement of all prudent men, of what religion soeuer they be, that shall reade these your vnworthy workes. But suppose the thing it selfe were true, that you haue laboured for (abstracting the authority to the contrary) to wit, that there had beene no Canons made in this Councell, yea suppose there had neuer beene any such thing as this Councell, what is it to your purpose? What article of our Catholique Faith is therby cancelled? how is your inuisible Church of England, or your Chappell in France (where God hath his Church) defended? Not at all, by ought that you haue sayd. No nor by your Mimique acting of the priest in hearing of confessions, (which wee perhaps shall heare too, at the third
or fourth hand, for as you haue no character of priesthood for the hea∣ring of Confessions, so neither haue you any sealevpō your lippes) wherby though like the asinus apud Cumanos in the liōs skin, you bray & keepe some in awe, yet it may be they will be in∣structed to discouer you, and make your vayne aspiring the obiect of their contempt and laughter, as it is of ours, and euen of all your fellow reformadoes. Your one conclusion therfore which you discharge against us, recoyles vpon your selfe, nihil ibi actum, quod quidē constet; in all that you haue done, it is certaine that you haue done nothing. And your obiections and discourse haue in them neither any generall counsell, nor (except the Counsell of the vngodly) so much as any counsell at all. And now let mee tell you, that it were much more for your credit, to forbeare such bold brauing of the whole Catholique Church, especially in a Catholique Country, and in the Court of a Catholique Queene, and
that with such feeble and vn∣schollerly arguments; of which, (were not your iudgment ecclipsed by partiality, and your passion swelld by opposition, and your ouerweening conceipt of your selfe the producer of extraordinary confidence and in∣solence in you) you could not render your selfe guilty. Also your pre∣sumptuous and offensiue language, euen to the Masters of those schooles wherein you are not worthy to be a disciple, is sufficiently obserued; though coered with that patience which you haue not deserued; Otherwise, your weakenesse, or ma∣lice, or both, would ere this haue beene characterd on your brow, had not the hands of our Catho∣lique Priests beene bound vp with mo∣desty, and charity, and respect to those, who see, suffer, but (I belieue approue not your boysterous beha∣uiour. And in this buisinesse of writing your shame is layd open with the bookes you cite, wherein your quotations are not sooner examined,
than your corruptions are discouered. If therfore you haue not grace e∣nough to become a vertuous Roman Catholique, of which you made shew (as there is good proofe) when you came first into these parts, yet learne at least to be rationall in your dis∣course, honest in your allegations, and ciuill in your language, both to particular reuerend and learned men, and especially towards the whole Catholique Church. And then if you haue a disposition to say or write any more, you shall be answered with so∣lidity, and equall ciuility. And whereas one Mr Crowder hath reported, that I haue renounced the booke I lately set forth, and will not stand to it; and that Doctor Holden who approued it for Catho∣lique, hath also refused to iustify it; or words to this purpose; and giueth this for his reason, why hee doth not publish the answer which he and his Coadiutors (as it is sayd) haue framed thereunto: which is indeed but a retreate for their inability to answer
it; I say, it is false in him whosoeuer saith it, and malicious in him that inuented it. And I further professe to him and to the world, that (notwith∣standing the slanders to the contrary) I doe auow the sayd booke for mine, and for Catholique, and so doth Do∣ctor Holden. And if he, or any, or all his fellow Ministers, will publish any thing that they will call an answer thervnto, they shall not loose their labour, they shall haue a reply; wherein I make no question their weaknesse shall be made to appeare, as herein appeareth the weaknesse of D. Cosens. FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT. IF D. Cosens, or any one on his behalfe, shall say that I haue not heere, set downe truly what he wrote; whosoeuer desires to be sa∣tisfied therein, may if he please see the originall vnder his owne hand, which is in my keeping. And although his name be not set to it, yet euery one that knowes his hand, will grant he wrote it, and the Countesse of Denbigh by whose order I receiued it, sayd that it was deliuered to her by Doctor Cosens. Which paper, and others of his also (he inwardly shrinking at his owne guilt) hath mightily laboured to recall into his owne hands, that soe there might re∣mayne no handwriting of his owne against him; but it was not fit that one of his temper should finde so much fauour, but that they should remayne vpon the perpetuall registry of time, by being committed to the presse; seeing he hath deserued to haue part of the diuine handwriting against
him, that was against the blasphe∣mous Baltazar; THEKEL, Thou art weighed in a ballance, and art found too light.
