P3914 12242378 56822
A Brief Necessary VINDICATION Of the Old and New SECLUDED MEMBERS, from the false malicious CALVMNIES; AND Of the Fundamental Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Go∣vernment, Interest of the Freemen, Parliaments, People of England, from the late avowed Subversions 1. Of John Rogers, in his Un-christian Concertation with Mr. Prynne, and others. 2. Of M: Nedham, in his Interest will not lie. Wherein the true Good Old Cause is asserted, the false routed; The old secluded Members cleared from all pretended breach of trust; The old Parliament proved to be totally dissolved by the Kings death; The sitting Juncto to be no Parlia∣ment and speedily to be dissolved by the Army-Officers; The Oathes of Suprema∣cy, Allegiance, Fealty to the King, his Heirs and Successors, to be still binding, continu∣ing: The New Commonwealth to be the Iesuites Project; Ch. Stewart not sworn to Popery, as Nedham slanders him; The restitution of our Hereditary King and Kingly Government, not an Vtopian Republike, evidenced beyond contradiction to be Eng∣lands true Interest both as Men and Christians; and the only way to peace, safety, settlement. By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Swainswick Esq a Bencher of Lincolns-Inne. The Second Edition. Jer. 51. 9, 10. We would have healed (ENGLISH) BABYLON, but she would not be healed; forsake her, and let us go every one to his own Country; for her judgement reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies: The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness; come and let us declare in Zion, the work of the Lord our God. Ps. 63. 11. But the mouth of them that speak Lies shall be stopped. London, Printed, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1659.
A brief necessary Vindication, of the Old and New secluded Members, &c. ON the 17. of this instant September, (during my private retirement in the Country for my health and quiet;) I received 2. Books, fraught with malicious calumnies, bitter scoffs, insufferable Reproaches, against my Self and other secluded Members; yea destructive to the very fundamental Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Govern∣ment, Interest of the Freemen, Parliaments and Realm of Eng∣land, for which we have so many years contested. The 1. of these thus intituled, A Christian Concertation, with M. Prynne, M. Baxter, M. Harrington: for the true Cause of the Commonwealth, &c. by J. Rogers. A most scurrilous fraught with absurd impertinercies, conjuring, canting, new coyned2 Pet. 2. 18. Jude 16. swelling words of vanity, odious comparisons, bit∣ter scoffs, raysing Epethites;In his, p. 35. to 41. loathsom, stinking obscene Queres, defiling the very air;Page 4. 119. boyish tricks, playing with mens names and reputations, (which hep. 20 21, 22, 24, 98, 57. severely censures in o∣thers, yet is most guilty of himself) displaying him to be, rather aHis own phrases, p. 3, 4. conjuring Sorcerer, than Gospel-Minister, an A∣postate scoffing Lucian, than sober real Christian, standing
much in need of thep. 59, 65, 26. several Pills he prescribes Mr. Bax∣ster, to purge his filthy stomack, spleen, brain, heart, pen, from such rotten stinking humors for the future; almost every page in his book, being eitherp. 24, 25. Scandalum Magnum, or Scandalum Magnatum, to use his own expressions against all dissenting from him; but anp. 10, 17, 18, 19, &c. egregious flattery of his own faction. The 2. Interest will not lie: Or, a View of Englands True Interest, by Mar Nedham; which had he intituled, Inte∣rest will lie: Or, a View of Englands False Interest, by Mar.—England; it had been a true Character of it. The first, most furiously chargeth me; and my secluded companions in the Van, the later in the Rear: The one with whole Vollies of fired squibs, more like a Whiffler, than a Mskateer; shooting nothing but wild-fire, andPsal. 64. 3. bitter words, without bullets. The other like a Trumpeter, rather than a Trooper, sounding a fierce charge against us with his Trumpet, without wounding us with his Lance or Sword, which are very obtuse. To avoid prolixity, impertinence, and repetitions, I shall reduce all the material Differences between us into 6. distinct Questions, wherin I shall refute what they have pub∣lished, relating to my self, the other secluded Members, the Rights, Privileges, Interest of our Parliaments and Nation, with all possible Brevity; omitting their personal scoffs, and scurrilities. The 1. Question, between J. Rogers and Mr. Prynne, (wherein Nedham hath no share) is but this. Whether the Defence, maintenance of the true Protestant Religion; the Kings royal person, authority, government, posterity, the privileges and rights of Parliament, consisting of King, Lords and Commons, the Laws, Statutes of the Land, the Liberty, Property of the Subject, and peace, safety of the Kingdom, were the only True and Good Old Cause, for which the long Parliament, and their Armies, first took up Arms in 1642. and continued them till the Treaty with the King, 1648. as Mr. Prynne asserts and proves (likeRogers, p. 2. a Lawyer, by punctual Evidences, Witnsses, Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances, Ordinances of both Houses; yea of the Army-Officers, Generals, Council, during all the
wars) in his Good Old Cause rightly stated; his True and per∣fect Narrative; The Re-publicans and others spurious Good Old cause briefly and truly anatomized; and in his Concordia Dis∣cors: Or, whether the erecting of a New Commonwealth, and Parliament without a King and House of Lords, and Majority of the Commons House upon the ruines of the late King, Kingdom, Parliament, since 1648. to 1653. and the reviving of it May 7. 1659. by some swaying Army-Officers, and the farr Minor part of the old Commons House confederating with them, by meer armed power secluding the greatest Number of the sur∣viving Members, and whole House of Lords; Which J. Ro∣gers endeavors to prove like a Logician, without any evi∣dence, witness, but his own Ipse scripsit; thoughSee my Speech, Dec. 4. 1648. p. 79, to 94. profes∣sedly disclamed by both Houses of Parliament, and the Army too, in sundry printed Declarations, as the highest scandal, never once entring into their loyal thoughts? When this Lo∣gician with all his Sophistry, Anatomy, Pills, Physick, can make that which was never in being, but since 1648. as we all know, and himself asserts in his Concertation, p. 7, 9. to be the Good Old Cause (in beingAs himself proves Con∣certation, p. 43, 44. long before the last Parlia∣ment of King Charles) for whose defence they first took up arms, in 1642. Or, that cause which never once entred in∣to their thoughts, and was professedly disclamed till 1648. to be the cause they proclamed and fought for, from the wars beginning; he must yeeld up his Spurious Good Old Cause, as desperate; his scurrillous Goos-quils (to use his page 1. own words) dashing the GALL of his ink upon Mr. Prynnes former papers to little purpose, in this particular; but to blot them a little, not to answer them a line, nor the Argument of them in the least. The 2. Question is this, Whether Mr. Prynne, with the Majority of the Commons House, and whole House of Peers, were forcibly secluded the Parliament by the Army, for any real breach and forfeiture of their trusts, in 1648. or ever legally impeached, convicted thereof either then, or since, before any lawfull Judi∣cature? This Rogers briefly and not very positively affirms, p. 7. but Nedham averrs and makes it his Masterpiece, insisting on it at large from p. 28, to 37. (wherein his Interest doth
nought else, But Lie;) as the basis whereon his preeve Parliament, and Rep blike are bottomed; which fast or stand upon the truth or falshood of it: wherein he is so pe∣remptory, as not only to proclame us  (to the pre∣sent and succeeding Generations) in the Highest Degree▪ without heaing or ial, but to pronounce this perempto∣ry Sentence against us;Page 36, 3. That not only by the Law of Ne∣cessity (which they pleaded that acted it but)  by theRecorded in the Statute Books of to∣pia or his ly∣ing Mercuries, but no where else. Law of the Land, they might have been called to account for their lives in a Capital manner: But were Favourably, as well as Iustly dealt with, in being depried only of their In∣terest in the House, when as their  might have been required. So this impudent, insolent Headsman, ex Tripode, magisterially determines. This Question, so highly concerning us in our present and future reputations; and the right, Freedom of Parlia∣ments and their Members in all generations, I shall more largely debate; and for ever acquit my self and fellow-se∣cluded Members, from this Scandalum Magnum t Mag∣natum, long sinceIn my Epi∣stle before my speech, Dec. 4. 1648. And Vindication of the secured and secluded Members. cleared, refuted by us, yet now revi∣ved afresh against us, in the highest degree. I shall desire the Readers to consider; 1. That those who full accused us breakers of our Parlia∣mentary Trusts reposed in us, were neither the respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs, who elected, authorized, return∣ed, trusted us for their Knights, Citizens, Burgesses in Parlia∣ment, the only fit accusers and judges of us out of Parlia∣ment, who all absolve and justifie us against this Calumny; nor yet our fellow-Members, or House of Lords, the onely meet impeachers, judges of us in Parliament, if guilty; But meerly the General Council of Officers in the Army; who neither elected nor intrusted us; were but our mercinary, sworn Servants, not our supream Iudges; yet most notoriously, trai∣terously, perfidiously violated both their trusts, faith, du∣ties, by waging war against us, and forcibly seising, seclu∣ding us, contrary to their Commissions, the Protestation, S∣lemn League and Covenant they had all subscribed. And were these fit persons to accuse us then or now of breach of trust, who are such Grand Trust-breakers, Traytors themselves?
2▪ That this breach of trust, was not so much as objected against us by them, before, nor at their treasonable sodain secluding and securing us, Decem. 6. & 7. 1648. therefore it could not be the true cause of our seclusion, but a subsequent pretence: For these Officers to mutiny, the common Souldiers against us, told them; That the Members▪ they  at the House door, were those who pursed up and kept away their pay from them; and that was the only cause the com∣mon soldiers asisted them to secure us, else they would not have medled with any of us; as they told me and Col: Birch in the Court the day we were seised. Whereupon I assu∣ring them, it was a grosse untruth; for neither of us then secured, was a Treasurer or Receiver of monyes; they answe∣red, They were informed the contrary their Officers, and we were thus abused, and  out of the House upon such a false suggestion. 3. That they never charged us with breaking our trusts, till ear a full month after our seclusion and securing; and that upon this occasion, as Nedham himself relates, p. 31. Upon the Armies seising us Decemb. 6. the Mmbers then sitting in the House, sent out the Serjeant into the Queens Court, where we were detained, to command our attendance in the House; but the Soldiers detaining us Prisoners, would not permit us to go to the House: Thereupon he was sent the second time, with the  to fetch us in; but the Officers staid him at the House door, and would not permit him to pass: which was  in the ournal Book, as a Contempt. Being startled with this sodain force on the House, they concluded not to procéed in Business till their Members should be (Therefore they judged them no breakers, but performers of their trust, when seised and secluded by the Army;) and in the mean time ordered, that the General should be sent  of the Armies proceedings in seising the Members▪ Upon this, The General Council of Officers not before anuary 3. 1648. (when they had not left 50 Mem∣bers in it) returned their Answer to them, That they were , (upon meer forged pretences) and that these Members  which occasioned their to  and seise them. A pretty excuse and cloak for see transcendent a Treason.
4. That in this Answer, they most falsly scandalized, tra∣duced the secluded and secured Members, as Nedham doth in their terms, with some additions of his own, which I shall briefly refute: 1. He saith, that Mr. Prynne and his party heretofore and now secluded, did seclude and separate themselves from the Publike Interest before they were secluded, p. 28. But wherein he tells us not. And is this either evidence or conviction to seclude us?Tertull. A∣pologia pro Christianis. Quis insons erit si accusasse sufficiat? 2ly. He addes, our seclusion is justifiable by Lex talionis, because We had some time before secluded the honest party of the House, by encouraging the Apprentices who came to the House door, draveaway the faithful party (of which the Members now sitting are principal) hat the Speaker and they were forced to fly out of Town for  to the Army, &c. And Mr. Prynne and all his party approved this Procéeding. Here Inte∣rest lies for the whetstone: For 1. Mr. Prynne sate not at all as a Member in the House, till Novemb: 7. 1648. being elected but in August before, without his privity, and much against his will: This tumult was in July, 1647. above a year and quarter before; yet Mr. Prynne must then assent to it, as a Member, and be guilty of it and all his charges, p. 30, 31, 32. before he was a Member, and be for ever convicted and silenced thereby. 2ly. There was never the least colour1 of truth or proof, that any of the secluded Members raised, or encouraged this tumult of the Apprentices. 3ly. Most of them, to my knowledge, did then both in publike and private, declare their dislike thereof as much as any now sitting. 4ly. These Apprentices secluded not one Member out of the House, much lesse secured any, as the Army did; but only kept most of them in the House, till their petition was answered by them; upon which they all departed without any future force: After which the House adjour∣ned from Monday night till Thursday morning, because of the general Fast the Wednesday following. 3ly. The Mem∣bers pretended to be forced out of Town by this tumult, and to fly for protection to the Army, departed not thence, till some Army-Officers sollicited them by perswasions and menaces to repair to the Army and leave the House, against
their judgements, as divers of them have confessed. Par∣ticularly Mr: Lenthall the Speaker being at the Fast in Mar∣garet Church the Wednesday following, discoursing with Sir Ralph Ashton, Sir Benjamin Rudyer and 4 more Members sitting with him, between the two Sermons; told them of his own accord That there was a scandalous report raised in Town, that he meant to leave the House and run away to the Army: but for his own part, he seriously protested he had not any such thought or intention, but resolved to continue in Town, and to live and die with the other Members in the House, if there were cause. On Thurs∣day morning most of the Members appeared at the House, expecting the Speakers coming till near 11 of the clock, and sent 2 or 3 Messengers for him. At last they were informed, that he was sent for, and gone that  to the Army. Whereupon Sir Ralph Ashton and those who sat with him at the Fast, related his words in my hearing (being then casually in the House) to the other Members, and sundry times since to the House and to my self; Hereupon the Members present were necessitated to chuse another Speaker pro tempore, (as they had oft times done in case of sickness or absence, both before and since) to supply his place, ad∣journ▪ and dispatch the businesse of the House: So as the Speaker and Members then departing to the Army, with∣out the Houses leave or privity, voluntarily secluded them∣selves, and were neither secluded by the Apprentices, nor their fellow-members; who were so farr from secluding, that they sent sundry Messengers to call them to the House, and were highly discontented at this their causless departure from it. 5ly. These Apprentices came without any arms at all to the House, only with a Petition (occasioned by the Army-Officers encroachments upon the Cities Militia, and Privi∣leges,) without any intention to seclude or secure any one Member, departing from the House that day, and ne∣ver returning to disturb them after. But the undutifull Army-Officers, who so much declame against this unarmed force as Treasonable; against both Houses Votes, Orders, Letters to them, not only brought up the Army to West∣minster, placed whole Regiments of them in arms at their
very doors, who secluded the whole House of Peers, and above two parts of three of the Commons House; giving the Captains of the guards a particular list whom to se∣cure, whom to seclude, and whom only to admit; but likewise continued their forcible great armed guards up∣on the Houses, several weeks, yea moneths, and detained me with other Members Prisoners under them two or three moneths; and that after this pretended force of the Apprentices, (no wayes parallel to theirs, who were pur∣posely raised to guard us, not seclude us) which they so much condemned; and the Speaker himself in his printed Letter of July 29. with the rest upon their return to the House in their Ordinance of August 20. 1647. so far brand∣ed, as to make and declare all proceedings during their absence voyd, by reason o  Therefore what ever other men may do, Nedham (to use his own words, p. 29.) and his now sitting party, the Army-Officers and all their adherents, must hence∣forth be silent, and for shame lay their mouthes in the dust for e∣ver, as to this particular. For, if our falsly pretended en∣couraging, conniving at this unarmed sodain tumult of the Apprentices in July, 1647. were a sufficient ground for our seclusion from the House as infringers of our trusts; then their evident, apparent fore-plotted encouraging, conni∣ving at and justifying the Armies force upon the House it self and the XI. Members twice or thrice, Anno 1647. and on the Majority of the Commons, and whole House of Lords, 1648. and now again on Mr: P: and others of them May 7. & 9. 1659. must for ever disable and seclude them to sit or act as Members in the House, by their own Law and Plea. 3ly. All the rest of his Objections, p: 29, 30. (taken out of the Officers Answer, Jan: 3.) as they concern not Mr: Prynne, being then no Member; so they were so satisfacto∣rily answered, refelled as most false and scandalous, by the secured and secluded Members themselves, in their Vindicati∣on in answer thereunto, printed 1649: p. 7, to 22. that im∣pudency it self might blush to revive them now: to which I referr the Reader for satisfaction. Only whereas the Offi∣cers then, and Nedham now Object, That the Malignant and
Neutral party in the Hose to gain the Major Vote, upon new elections, by indirect means, brought in a floud of Malignants or Neuters into the House; I shall adde to what the secluded Members then replied unto this forged Aspersion in their Vindication, p. 7, 8. First, That all the secluded Members came in upon fair and unquestionable elections, upon the new recruit; but many of those who sate both before, at, and after our seclusion, uponCol. Rich, his election at Cyrencester as foul as any. most foul ones, voted voyd long before by the Committee of Privileges, as Humfry Edwards, & Fryes elections were, who yet continued sitting. 2. That most of these new Members were brought in by the force, pow∣er, and menaces of the Army, and solicitation of their So∣licitor General and Chaplain, Hugh Peters; who like an Ʋ∣biquitary, was present at the elections for most Counties, Cities and Boroughs throughout England, and well bribed for his pains, to canvas for voices for the Armies Instru∣ments. 3ly. That 22 of those 42 Members called in by the Army-Officers, May 7. 1659. andAnd 8 of them, by writs after the Kings death; as Mr. Cycil. that self-degraded Earl of Salis∣bury and others. above half of those who sat with them since, came in upon this new Recruit of Ma∣lignants and Neuters. 4ly. Col. Ireton, Harrison, Skippon, Rich, Ludlow, Ingoldesby, Mountague, White, Sydenham, Bing∣ham, Jones, yea Fleetwood himself, the swaying Army-mem∣bers when we were secluded, and chief Actors in it) came all in upon these New elections; some of them being prime Authors, Members of this New Convention invited in Fleet∣woods name and Army-Officers to sit, and authors of our new seclusion: Therefore the Armies and Nedhams slander of our pretended filling the house upon the new recruit with Malignants (as these have proved to us at least) must recoyl wholly upon themselves, as such, and be a real ground for their, not our seclusions. Lastly, if our filling the House by New Elections to get a Major Vote, were a Crime de∣meriting seclusion from it: Certainly their emptying the House then and now to get a Major vote by secluding most of the Members, must be a Crime and practice, de∣meriting an expulsion. 5. The Army-Officers themselves in their very answer, waved all these Calumnies, as no ground of our seclusion; declaring to the sitting Members; That the sole cause of
our seclusion, was, The Vote we passed upon the long nights de∣bate: That the Answers of the King to the Propositions of both Houses, was a ground for the House to procéed upon for the settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom: Which Vote being passedSee the E∣pistle & Ap∣pendix to my Speech, 1648. after 3 dayes and one whole nights solemn debate, without dividing the House, notwithstan∣ding the Armies march to the very doors. Hereupon the Army-Officers (to wrest both the Regal and Parliamental power, & Kings Revenues into their own hands, prevent all hopes of future peace, settlement, and involve us in endless wars, changes, revolutions, as visible sad experience hath e∣videnced ever since) mutinying the common soldiers a∣gainst us by misreports, the very next morning Dec: 6. mar∣ching with several Regiments of horse and foot to the doors of both Houses, uarding all accesses to them; where they seised my Self, with above 40 Members more at the House door going to discharge their trusts, pulled two Members out of the House it self; secluded and chased a∣way above 200 Members more, besides the Lords whole House. And whether the passing of this vote alone after 6. years intestine wars, at the earnest desire of our whole 3 Kingdoms, almost ruined by them, according to our judgements, consciences, Oaths, Protestation, Covenant, Duty, and the trust reposed in us, by our electors, upon such ample Concessions of Liberty, benefit to the Subjects, se∣curity to Religion, and safety to our 3: Kingdoms, the Ar∣my, Parliament, all adhering to them, as our ancestors, selves never formerly possessed, expected, desired; and we never since enjoyed, nor can expect under any New Repub∣like, or Parliamentary Conventicle whatsoever; was a breach of our Parliamentary trusts, and a closing with the King upon his own terms, and such as within a short time would (of necessity) have yeelded up & betrayed our lives, liberties, and whole cause contested for into the Kings tyrannical power, as these Army-Officers, and this impudent Mountebank most scandalously affirm, let their own consciences and our whole 3 Nations judge; the secured and secluded Members in their Vindicati∣on, and I, in My Speech in Parliament, and Epistle before it, having so largely refuted it, that the Devil himself (the
John 8. 44. Father of lies) would blush to revive such a Lie and Slander as this: And how destructive it is and hath been not only to the privileges and freedom, but being of Par∣liaments, for Soldiers and those who are no Members, without hearing or accusation, to pull the Major part of the Members out of the House, only for voting according to their consciences, after free and full debates, against the votes or designs of the lesser, inconsiderabler part confe∣derating with the Army; let all wise men, and the sad ef∣fects thereof ever since, determin. 6ly. These Army-Officers never impeached any of the then secluded Members for breach of their trusts, to those few sitting Members they left behind of their own party, by way of Charge or Article, to which they might give a legal answer, and be brought to a publike trial; and when they were pressed to charge some of them they secured as the greatest Delinquents in this kind, with particular breaches of their trusts, they answered, They had yet no charge at all ready against any of them, but hoped to provide one in due time; which they never did to this day. As for their scanda∣lous Answer, Jan: 3. being no legal Charge against the Mem∣bers, but a pittiful false excuse of their own breach of trust, faith, duty in seising and secluding them; Mr. Prynne in par∣ticular in his Epistle to his Speech, and the other Members in their Vindication, gave such a satisfactory Answer to all the Calumnies in it, as they never yet replyed to: And there∣fore must stand clear from this Scandalum Magnum & Mag∣natum in the sight of God and Man. 7ly. Sundry of the Members sitting since our seclusion, and now again, have confessed to me; that our seclusion was most unjust; and that their forcible seclusions since, April 20. 1653. and in 1654. was but a just retaliation and punish∣ment of God upon them, for consenting to our unjust seclusion in December 1648. yea, a means to deprive us from all future hopes of a free Parliament, so long as we had any standing Army in England. And yet must we be guilty of breach of trust? 8ly. Major acker himself (an Anabaptist) then and now again a Member of the Army, in the last Convention at West∣minster, publikely acknowledged in the House, in a long
Speech, that he and others of the Army who had a hand in securing and secluding us, were seduced and instigated thereunto by Cromwels (and Iretons) suggestions; that wee were dishonest men, who pursued our own private interests and the Kings, to the prejudice of the publike: But afterwards he clearly discerned, That we were very honest Gentlemen, pursuing nothing but the publike Interest; acting accor∣ding to our consciences; and that he had often cryed God mer∣cy in private; and did there again and again cry them mercy in publike; and hoped they would all forgive him, for ha∣ving a hand in secluding us: which he oft repeated. And others have acknowledged, they were knaved and fooled into this Action, by slanderous Misinformations. Where∣fore malice it self must needs acquit us from this forged Calumny. 9ly. Those principal Officers of the Army, who accused, and secluded us as Trust-breakers in Dec. 1648. both accu∣sed those who sate from 1648. till April 20. 1653. turned them all out of doors, and declared them actually dissol∣ved, for sundry years, as farr greater Infringers of their Parliamentary trusts than we; stiling them inThe Armies Declaration, Apr. 20 1653. August 22. 1653. And a true state of the Common∣wealth of England, p. 8, 10. two prin∣ted Declarations, A Corrupt party, carrying on their own Designs to perpetuate themselves in the Parliamentary and Supreme Authority; never answering the ends which God, his People, and the whole Nation expected from them, &c. Therefore if their single accusation of us alone by way of Answer (which we refuted in print) dis∣abled us for ever to sit in the House since 1648. and now a∣gain since May 7: 1659. by Nedhams and Rogers resolutions and the Army-Officers who secluded us; Then much more this their doubled and trebled Accusation against all sitting after our seclusion, and now resitting, by way of Declara∣tion (which they never yet answered) must much more disable them now to sit and act again as a House, especial∣ly without us, as Members of that Parliament, if continu∣ing still in being. 10ly. The trust reposed in all Members of the Com∣mons House secluded or unsecluded in the last Parliament of King Charles, is punctually expressed, comprised in the
Writs and Indentures by which they were chosen, return∣ed, empowred, trusted, to fit and act as Members by the Commonalties who elected them; and in the Oathes of Su∣premacy and Allegiance, which they all took, and ought to take, by the Statutes of 5 Eliz. c. 1. & 7 Jac. c. 6. before they could sit or vote as Members. Now this trust was wholly and solely, to do and consent to those things which should hap∣pen to be ordained by Common Consent of the King, Lords and Commons, by Common counsel of the Realm, concerning certain arduous and urgent affairs, touching the Defence, State, Crown of the King and his Kingdom, and of the Church of England: to bear faith and true Allegiance to the King, his heirs and successors; and him and them to defend, with all rights, jurisdictions annexed and belonging to the Imperial Crown of England, against all attempts and conspiracies whatsoever: As the Writs and Returns themselves, (yea allSee the se∣cond Part of my Register, & Kalendar of all Parliamen∣tary Writs. antient Writs of this kinde, and their returns,) and the expresse words of these Oathes resolve; with the Prote∣station, League, Covenant, and manifold Declarations, Votes, Remonstrances of both Houses, to which those sitting from 48. to 53. and now met again, gave their full, free consents and subscriptions, as well as the secluded Mem∣bers. Let heaven, earth, our whole 3. Kingdoms, and our Accusers themselves then, now resolve, whether I and my secluded Companions, who constantly, loyally, strenu∣ously in the forecited vote, and all other our proceedings, pursued those Trusts, Oathes, Duties, in despite of all Op∣positions; or those unsecluded sitting, re-sitting Members and Army-Officers, who have most apparently, perfidiously violated them in every branch, by and since our seclu∣sions, to the destruction of our King, Kingdoms, Kingship, Parliament, Church, all rights and Jurisdictions of the Crown, and subversion of the Liberty, Property, Privile∣ges of their fellow Members and all other subjects; be the Greatest Trust-breakers, Traytors; and which of us best de∣serve to lose not only our right of sitting any more in the House, but our very lives, heads, liberties, estates, in point of justice, and conscience. All that is or can be objected against us,Objection. with any sha∣dow
of reflection, is theNedham, p. 31. Vote of January 11. 1648. made upon the Armies Answer touching our securing, Jan: 3. That the House doth approve of the Substance of the of the General  of the Officers of the to the Demands of this House touching the securing secluding of some Members thereof: And doth appoint a Committee (of 24.) or any 5. of them, to consider what is fur∣ther to be done upon the said Answer, and present the same to the House. But doth this Vote fix any breach of trust upon us for which we deserved perpetual seclusion, without any hearing, impeachment, trial? Surely not in the least de∣gree. For 1. it approves only the substance of the Armies Answer, which is general and indefinite: 2ly, It is not tou∣ching the securing and secluding of all the Members then se∣cured, or secluded by the Officers; but only of some of those Members who were secured, as well as secluded; without naming any one of them in particular, most of them being released before this vote: Therefore it can fix no guilt or crime upon any one particular Member of us, unlesse those some had been nominated: 3ly, This Vote was past behind our backs, without hearing any of us be∣fore it passed: 4ly, A special Committee was appointed to consider further of their answer, and report what was further to be done therein; which they never did: 5ly, This Vote was made above a full Month after our secluding and secu∣ring, when all the Members but 42. were secluded or dri∣ven thence; and the rest sitting under the Force, Guards, of the Army; and so by their own Votes and Ordinance of August 20. 1647. this Vote, with all their other pro∣ceedings were mere Nullities. 6ly, Ten of those who pas∣sed this Vote, were the very Army-Officers who made the Answer, the chief Contrivers, Authors of our seising, secu∣ring, and chief Accusers; Therefore most unfit to be our Judges, or passe any Vote against us behind our backs: especially since they promised to conferr with us at Waing∣ford House the Evening they seised us; and yet lodged us all night on the bare boards in Hell. After which they pro∣mised to confer with us the next morning 9. a clock at Whitehall; & there kept us fasting, waiting in the cold till 7. at night,
without once vouchsafing to see us, sending us away thence through the dirt, guarded on every side like Rogue to the Kings head, and Swan in the Strand; where they pro∣mised several times to conferr with us, but never came to do it. Now, whether there can be any credit given to their Votes or Answer, who so frequently brake both their trusts, words, faiths, promises to us and others, before this their Answer, let the world, and our greatest Enemies determin. Finally, the chief Authors of and instruments in this our Accusation and seclusion, were the very self∣same Army-Officers and Members who in April 1653, dis∣housed, As they have done now again, Octob. 13. since this was first printed. dissolved those now sitting, and then accused, branded them twice or thrice in print, as farr greater In∣fringes o their trusts than we: as for the House of Lords, secluded, suppressed by them,See their Declaration &c Votes, M. 17. for suppres∣sing the Lords House. there was never the least breach of trust objected against them; Neither had the Army, See my plea for the Lords. or smaller Garbled remainder of the Commons house, the least right or jurisdiction to seclude or eject the Majority of their fellow Members, much lesse the whole House of Peers. Upon all which premies, I here appeal to all the Tribunals of Men on Earth, and Gods, Christs Tribunals in Heaven (before which I summon all our Old and New Accusers whatsoe∣ver) to judge; Whether this Great Charge of breach of our trusts, ever justly could, or henceforth can be objected a∣gainst us civilly or criminally, without the greatest scandal; and whether this could be a lawfull ground for any to ju∣stifie our first or last seclusion? The 3d Question is this; Whether the last Parliament sum∣nened by King Charles his Writ, assembled at Westminster, 3. Nov: 1640. was not totally and finally dissolved by his behead∣ing, January 30. 1648. notwithstanding the statute of 17 Ca∣roli c. 7? In this my 2. new Antagonists are divided. Rogers, p. 7. confsseth it to be dissolved; and that I have learnedly proved it in my Narrative, p. 24, to 34. Adding, How Néedlesse that long Discourse is, to prove what we never denied. But though he, and his wee, denied it not; yet those who sate from 1648. till 163. by pretext of their first writs, electi∣ons, and of this Act, as they then affirmed in and by their Speeches, Declarations; Mr. Abbot and Purefoye, in their
Prynne against Prynne, (both of them Members, and one of them now sitting) with their President J. Bradshaw, who condemned the King, and sundry others denyed it; yea most now sitting denyed it by words and action; whereupon I un∣answerably refelled them, and satisfied most others by that long Discourse: Therefore it was not needless, as this Cri∣tick rashly censures it. Nedham, p. 35, 36, 37. though he confesseth; That ac∣cording to Law the Parliament was dssolved by the Kings death; and that whiles the old Constitution of Parlia∣ments remained without disturbance it is reason this Law should be retained, for the reasons I have rendered: Yet in this particular case, by reason of the warr between King and Parliament, he will by no means yeeld the Parliament to be dissolved by the Kings death, but to remain intirely in the Members sitting at his death; and that it is now again re∣vived in them, after above 6. years interruption: to prove which strange Chymara, by stranger Mediums, hePag. 35. to 42. spends some pages, to convince and satisfie all Contradictors. I shall a little examin his absurd and most dangerous Principles from whence he draws his Conclusion. His main Princi∣ple to prove it, i this. That the King by his actual war against the Parliament, did thereupon forfeit his Kingship and Crown, and became a private person and enemy; dissolved the Constitution both of the Kingdom and Parliament; and not only violated all Law in the branches, but plucked up she very roof of it, in destroy∣ing the Parliamentary Establishment. as much as in him lay, and thereby introduced another Law of Arms. From whence he deduceth 3. Conclusions: 1 The Justice of seclu∣ding the Members: 2ly, The Sufficiency of the authority that condemned and executed the King: 3ly, The Legality of the re∣maining Members continuing and sitting as the Parliament, and Supreme Authority of England, which after the Kings behead∣ing, and other Mmbers and Lords seclusion, descended and was transmitted to them by the Law of war, for the people. This he determines to be Law and Reason too, sufficient to con∣vince both, Royalists and Presbyterians of the Lawfulnes of the Power, and present sitting, acting as a Parliament, by those few Members at Westminster, secluding all the rest.
To which I answer: 1. That if the Kings death by Law, Reason, dissolved the Parliament in an orderly course, be∣cause his writs of summons abated by his death, & they could not treat with him concerning his and his Kingdoms affairs, nor he consent to any Bills after his decease: Which he freely grants: Then by the self-same Reason, Law, his violent death must dissolve this Parliament, as I have largely pro∣ved. 2ly, If the Kings levying war against the Parliament, did actually dissolve the very Constitution, Law of the Parliament and Kingdom, and made him no King at all, but ai private person; which he layes for his foundation; then it must necessarily dissolve the Parliament and King∣dom too, and make them no Parliament, no Kingdom at all, as well as himself no King. For how can the Par∣liament continue, when its very Constitution is desolved? 3ly, By this Position it inevitably follows, that we had nei∣ther King, Parliament, Kingdom, nor any Laws at all but only of Warr, from the beginning of the Wars or first bat∣tel at least, between the Kings and Parliaments forces many years before his death; But this the King, Kingdom, Parliament, the sitting as well as secluded Members, both Armies, and our whole 3. Kingdoms ever denied in all their Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Declarations, Remon∣strances, Petitions, Treaties, Propositions whatsoever from 1641. till December 1648. and Nedham himself in his Di∣urnais and Mercuries; In all which the Parliament, both Houses, and Army-Officers stiled him their KING, and the King and his party ever stiled them the Houses of Parlia∣ment. Therefore this position must be a most Notorious Falthood, wherein Interest doth grosly lie. 4ly. Those he stiles the honest faithfull Members, in their very Votes of Non addresses (passed by force and fraud) in their Knack for the Kings tryal, Impeachment, Proceedings, Sentence of con∣demnation against him, after our seclusion, in their Dcla∣ration of 17 Martii 1648. after his death, and sundry other Papers, ever stiled and acknowledged him TO BE KING, and ENGLAND HIS KINGDOM, notwithstanding the wars between him and the Parliament: Therefore the ve∣ry war did not Ʋnking, nor make him a Private person, no dissolve the Constitutiō of the Kingdom & Pat during his life,
else there could not be a war against or between the King or Parliament, if the war it self unkinged him, unparliamen∣ted them, and dissolved all their constitutions. 5ly. No person by theDeut. 17. 8 c. 19. 15. John 7. 51. Acts 19. 38. c. 25. 17. Magna Carta, c. 29. & Cook ibidem. Law of God, Nature, Nations, the Great Charter, Laws, Statutes of England, and Votes of Parliament, ought actually to forfeit, or to be ipso facto deprived of his Office, Freebold, Liberties, Estate, Life, without a legal procee∣ding, tryal, conviction, judgement, attainder: Much less then the King himself, the Supreme Magistrate, and Governor of the Realm (in whom all have a common interest) un∣kinged and made a private person, or publike Enemy, and totally deprived of his Crown and Soveraignty: There∣fore his actual levying war against the Parliament, with∣out, before any legal impeachment, conviction, or sentence of deposition, could not unking nor make him a private person, as the cases of Edward the 2. and Richard the 2. and thesee my Plea for the Lords, p 424 to 460. Parliaments which deprived them of their Kingships after their resignations, clearly resolved, against this Jesuitical new Doctrine. 6ly. If the King by his bare le∣vying war against the Parliament, actually lost his Kingship and became a meer private person before any sentence of deprivation, then by the self-ame reason, law, his old and new revived Parliament, by its manifold old & new brea∣ches of trust is actually dissolved & become no Paul. at all; yea every Traitor levying war, conspiring against the King, every Murderer, Theef, Felon, corrupt Judg, Justice, Mayor, Sherif, Inferior Office, by the very committing of Treason, Murder, Felony, Adultery, Bribery, Injustice, and breach of their respective trusts, should be actually attainted of those offences, their Lands, Offices presently confiscated, without my Indictment, trial, verdict, judgement against them: yea every act of Adultery by any Husband or Wise should actually dissolve the bond of marriage for ever, without and before any Sentence of divorce between them: whichIn his Bride∣bush. Mr. Wheatly publikely recanted as a dange∣rous error. And how destructive such new Nedham, Inte∣rest Low would prove to all mens lives, liberties, estates, yea to every mans soul (since every act of sinne by like con∣sequence should actually damn, and make even Saints themselves to  totally and finally from Grace and Gods
favor) let all judicious men resolve. 7ly. If this be Law, then had the King and Parliament upon any Treaty after the wars, accorded; he ought to have been new proclamed, installed, crowned King again; and the Parliament resum∣moned by new writs. 8ly. He confesseth this to be the very principle of Barclay theHe dyed a Jesuit, in the Jesuits Col∣lege at Rome. Jesuit, from whom he borrows it, p. 34. Therefore his present Parliament and Republike built thereon, are purely Jesuitical by his own confessi∣on. 9ly. This Jesuits position is not so bad as his; He speaks not of every Civil war made by a King upon his Subjects, for which there may be just occasions; but only of a King warring upon his people of purpose to extirpate and destroy them: which he saith, it seems almost impossible any King should be so mad as ever to attempt. Which the King in his war against the Parliament, by his victories, proceedings against the Prisoners, Members, Towns he took during he wars, in sparing all their lives actually, really, and oft times verbal∣ly and professedly disclamed in all his Proclamations, Speeches, Remonstrances, Messages to, and Treaties with the Houses. Therefore his war against them, did neither unking him, nor make him a private person and publike Ene∣my, by this Jesuites resolution. 10ly. If the Kings war a∣gainst the Parliament did really unking him; then certain∣ly the Generals, ArmyOfficers, and Armies actual levying war upon both Houses of Parliament, by secluding, secu∣ring the Members and King, did really uncommission and my them, and made them no Officers, no Army at all, but a rebellious rout; and all Members concurring with them therein, no Members, no Parliament at all. The sequel is infallible. Therefore Nedham must either now disclaim this desperate Jesuitical position, with all his 3. Treasonable Conclusions from it; or else henceforth disclame the Army-Officers, Army, and their formerly suppressed, now revived Parliament. 11ly. Admit his Paradox true, that the King by his war against the Parliament, actually ceased to be a King, &c. yet his Inference thence, that the Parliament was not dissolved by his death, but continued after it, is most false; yea the contrary thence inevitably follows, that it was wholly dissolved long before his death, so soon as he cea∣sed
to be a King and became a private person; and that by the expresse resolution of the whole Parliaments of 22 R. 2. and 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 1, 2, 3. in a case most like to ours. See Speed, Tussel, Ho∣linshed, Wal¦singham, Hall, Stow, and o∣thers in R. 2. & H. 4. My Plea for the Lords, p. 424▪ to 456. Henry Duke of Lancastér, raising a great Army to lay Title to the Crown, King Richard the 2d. bringing an Army to suppresse him; the King finding his forces over-weak, and the Dukes too potent for him, having seised Bristol, and other forts; thereupon a Parlee was had between them, and agreed, King Richard should summon a Parliament at Westminster, wherein he should resign his Crown, renounce his Kingship, and the Duke to succeed him. Upon this he accor∣dingly summoned a Parliament, where he formally resign∣ed, renounced his Kingship, and was actually deposed of it by sentence, and Henry the 4. who claimed the Crown upon his resignation, declared King. Which done, it was resolved, declared both by the Parliament, King, Lords, Com∣mons, Judges, that this Parliament was actually dissolved by King Richards deposing to all intents; and a new Parliament ordered to be summoned by King Henry in his own name, wherein he was declared, crowned King, and the resignation, deposing of Richard the 2. ratified, and recorded. Therefore by the resolution of both these Parliaments, (by Nedhams own position, if true) the last Parliament of King Charles, was so farr from being continued only by his wars, even after his death, which else would have dissolved it without dispute, that it actually dissolved it in his life time, six years before his death, by degrading him from his King∣ship, and making him a private person. And then his West∣minster Juncto sitting from 1648. to 1653. and now again, cannot have the least shadow of right, law, reason, to fit, act as any part of theEspecially the Members sitting by writs issued by the Keep∣ers of the Li∣berties of England after the Kings be∣heading. last Parliament summoned by the King, neither could the whole Parliamentary and supreme power descend or be transferred to them alone by any Law or colour of right whatsoever, by the Kings war, death, or our seclusions, as he most absurdly concludes. 12ly. The sum of all Nedhams discourse to support his present Par∣liaments and Republikes right, title, is but this: That in civil wars and commotions the conquering or prevailing party gains a legal Supreme Authority and Parliamentary power over
over the whole: That the Kings royal authority devolved by con∣quest to the Parliament: the whole Parliamentary Authority to his Juncto by their forcible seclusion of the Majority of the Com∣mons, and suppression of the House of Lords. And if so, then by the self-same consequence; the whole Kingly and Par∣liamental Authority was lawfully devolved on the Lord Gen: Fairfax and Army-Officers when they seised the King, secluded the Members, suppressed the Lords, and placed Guards on those that sat in 1648. Or at least to such of the Officers as were then Members of the Commons House not to the Juncto since or now sitting; That afterwards it de∣scended, devolved to Gen. Cromwell (a principal Member) when he conquered and turned the Juncto out of doors, Apr. 20, 1653. as he and the Army-Officers then argued; who thereupon (after some Moneths exercise thereof by ma∣king New Laws, and imposing ‖ New Taxes at Whitchall,Of 120, & 00 thousand pounds a Month, by a Whitehall Or∣dinance. An∣no 1653.) afterwards transferred it by deed to their Litle Conventicle elected by them in September, part of which re∣signing back their Supreme power to Cromwell, he thereup∣on claimed it as wholly and absolutely vested in himself, with∣out any limits (as he declared in his printed Speeches 1654. and 1657.) whereupon he retained it under the Title of A ROYAL PROTECTOR, till his death, then delega∣ting it to his Son Richard, who by this original Title en∣joyed it; till overpowred by his Brother Fleetwood and o∣ther Army-Officers, who by this right of the Long Sword a∣lone, unprotectored him, and then called in the remainder of the Old Juncto to sit and act as awhich by the fame Law, reason, they have since thrust out of dores, & usur∣ped the Su∣preme Legis∣lative power to their Gene∣ral Council of Army Officers, & Committee of Safety, re∣pealing, nul∣ling their Junctos, Acts Orders, Pro∣ceedings, to all intents whatsoever, in their Decla∣ration, Oct. 27. 1659. Parliament under them. So that by Nedhams Doctrine, the Supreme Regal and Par∣liamental power is legally residing in those Army-Officers who have conquered all the rest, till some other greater, stron∣ger power shall be able to conquer them; and his West∣minster Conventicle is but their Substitute to act, vote what they shall prescribe. And by the self-same principle, as the Army-Officers by rebelling against and suppressing the Parliament and their Masters, who raised, waged them for their defence, contrary to all Laws of God, man, their own Oathes, Commissions, thereby gained a just and legal Title (as he argues) to the Supreme Regal and Parliamen∣tal
Authority of the Nation (not the people in whom they pretended it to be vested) to any Traytor by killing or dispossessing his lawfull Soveraign, any Son by killing or disseising his Father, any Servant by imprisoning, kil∣ling, or tuining, keeping his Master out of doers, every Theef, plunderer in the world, able by force to take away any persons purse, goods, house, lands, or shall by power make himself a Judge, Justice, Magistrate, or take away a∣nother mans wife, shall have a just and legal Title against the owners and all others: and Nedhams Parliament and new Republike can neither condemn nor execute any Thief, Pirate, Murderer, Plunderer, Adulterer, Ravisher, nor punish any disseiser or wrong-doer whatsoever that a stronger than the party injured; since they all may ju∣stifie their force, actions, to be lawfull against the letter of the 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 Commandements by the self-same Law, Divinity, Saintlike Title of the longest Sword, the greatest might, and prevailing party. I hope by this time, he and all others clearly discern the desperate fatal conse∣quences of his Jesuitical position, and that his Interest will not lie, is but a meer sink of Lies, and destructive paradoxes. If all this will not help to prop up the legal Soveraign Authority of his present Parliament and Republike, he hath 3. other Pillars to support them, p. 37. 1. The Law of Ne∣cessy, a pretty bull, when as the old proverb resolves, Ne∣cessitas non habet legem; I am sure it will now admit of no Law, Justice, Conscience, Equity. . Did not the beheaded King plead this Law for Ship-money, Excise, and other ille∣gal projects? yet the longSee the Acts Votes, De∣clarations a∣gainst them. Parliament adjudged necessi∣ty in these cases, to be no Law, nor Plea at all. And shall those very Members plead it in their own case now, who then judged it no Law nor Plea in his? 3ly. This Law was pleaded by Cromwel and the Army-Officers in April 1653. for the dissolution of those now sitting, who together with Ndham, p. 40. resolve it no Law or Plea at all; and can it be justly urged now for their restitution? 4ly. It is a pretext for all villany, treachery, impiety, violence ever acted in the world, as I have proved in my Epistle to my Speech, and the secluded  in their Vindication, when
the Officers pretended it for our seclusion; and can it then be made the foundation of Commonwealths and its Junctoes constitution? 5ly. He addes out of Grotius, l. 2. de Jure Belli, cap. 6. Necessitas summa reduoit res ad merum jus natu∣rae. If so, and we are now reduced to such a necessity, as he argues: then it followes, 1. That this extreme necessity which exempts any part of a Kingdom, Republike, City from the power, jurisdiction of the whole, as Grotius there resolves, hath much more exempted our whole three Kingdoms, the in∣tire Lords House and Nobility, the Majority of the old Commons House yet surviving, with all Counties, Cities, Boroughs for which they served; from the power, juris∣diction of the present usurping Juncto, Army, so that they have no right, authority, colour at all to impose any new Laws, Taxes, Militiaes, Excises on all or any of them; nor yet to imprison, sequester, punish any of them for defend∣ing themselves by force of arms against their unjust usur∣pations over them. 2ly. That they canAs the Ge∣neral Council of Officers of the Army, in their Declara∣tion, Octo. 27. 1659. p. 18, 19. intend to do. impose no new Government or Republike on all or any of them, without their own free voluntary elections, consents; because all politick Governments and Corporations are and ought to be made by voluntary contract and free consent of all the parts, ac propterea ju ejus, in partes ex primva voluntate me∣tiendum est, as Grotius there resolves. 3ly. That all the integral parts of any politick body, when the first agree∣ment and Government which united them into a Kingdom or Republike is dissolved (as Nedham asserts our Kingdom and Parliament are) by the meer right and Law of Nature have as inseparable, inherent a right, vote to cast them∣selves into another new form of Government, as any one prevailing party of that body, being all equally men, Eng∣lishmen, free-men by Nature, and having no superiority o∣ver each other. Therefore the Supreme authority and Parliamentary power in our present condition and extreme necessity by Grotius his decision is not devolved to the West∣minster Juncto, or Army-Officers, as Nedham absurdly con∣cludes, against his Oracle Grotius, but to the generality of the people, as this very Juncto voted Jan: 6. 1648. and the Army-Officers declared, in their Agreement of the people pre∣sented
to them November 20. 1648. and Jan. 20. 1649. Therefore by their own Votes, resolutions, practices, the generality of the people, not the Juncto, are now the Su∣preme authoritie; and those 50 or 60 Members of the old Parliament &Much lesse their General Council of the Army-Officers, and New Com∣mittee of Safe∣ty. Army, have not the least pretext of Right, Law, Reason, power to domineer over all the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, Freemen of the Nation, and the secluded Members, nor totally to seclude them all from their Coun∣cils, Company; much lesse to secure, disarm, plunder them at their pleasures, to double, treble their Taxes, to use them not like their fellow freemen, but their Aegyptian bond∣slaves, as now they do. What such an Extremity, Necessity then may now put our whole three Nations justly upon by Grotius and Nedhams Law too, let them wisely and timely consider for their own and the publike safety. His 2. Pillar is this of Grotius, That In a civil warr, the written and established Laws of Nations are of no force; (In∣deed we now finde it true by sad experience under our New Legifers and Tax-masters) and then that only is to be admitted Law, which shall be setled by the prevailing party. How this new doctrine will suit with all our late Parliamentary Votes, Ordinances, Declarations, Remon∣strances, Protestations, League, Covenant, Soldiers Com∣missions, and Army-Remonstrances; or with our Civil war, which was only for the preservation and defence of our antient fundamental Laws, Statutes, and Great Charter of our Liberties, against all arbitrary encroachments, alterations, vio∣lations of them; Or with the Junctoes Declaration, March 17. 1648. for turning our Kingdom into a Free State; wherein they promise over and over, inviolably to defend and maintain these antient Laws, The Badges of our Frée∣dom, and the most excellent of all other Laws in the world, by violation, alteration, or abrogation whereof greater mischiefs would inevitably befall us, than ever we suffered under our Kings and Kingly Government: Or how it will accord with their Proclamation, May 7. 1659. to like purpose; let Nedham, and that power for which he pleads resolve us: To whose arbitrary wills and tyranny (if this monstrous paradox be Oracle) he prostrates all our Laws and Liberties; after
full 17 years bloody contests, and most cruel Concertati∣ons for their Defence, against this his position and prac∣tice. His 3. pillar is this, which he applies to the particular case of the secluded Members, p. 37. Si qui jure suo uti non possunt, orum jus acerescit praesentibus: Grotius l. 2. c. 5. His meaning is, that if any Members of a Senate, Court or Par∣liament be absent through sickness, or any other voluntary or necessary occasions, the rest may sit and act: will it thence follow, as this Mountebank argues, Ergo, the Minor part of the Commons House (yea less than 40 of them) may fit and act now & heretofore, not only as a Commons House, but absolute Parl. because they and the Army for∣cibly secluded the Major part, the whole House of Lords, and beheaded King. Such a grosse Nonsequitur as this, is no better justified from Grotius words, than this; The Army may forcibly seclude all but 5 or 6 of those now sitting, or leave Fleetwood, and Sir H. Vane alone: Ergo, in such a case the whole right and power of the Parliament accrues to them alone, and they may sit, vote as a Parliament, and make what Laws, Acts, and impose what Taxes, Excises they please, asAnd Fleet∣wood, with his New Com∣mittee of Safety now. Cromwell and his Council did at Whitehall up∣on the self-same ground. Ʋno absurdo dato mille sequun∣tur. You see now by this time the falshood, absurdity, and dangerous consequences of Nedhams Atheistical, Jesuitical Principles, whereon he would bottom the continuance, re∣vival, justice, legality of his pretended Parliament, and Re∣publike, laying a ground for, and encouraging all disorders, confusions, violences, treacheries and villanies whatsoever by the Law of Necessity and the longest sword: and what a necessary Tool he is for the party, because he can say or print any thing for them, though never so false, absurd, mischievous, and yet not be in danger of his head: (they are his own expressions, p. 32. 37.) I shall inform him of some other Principles prescri∣bed to all Saints, Christians, and Souldiers, by God and Christ himself, which they ought to follow under pain of damnation. The first is Mat. 7. 12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets. The 2, is Mat. 22. 21. Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Gods. The 3. is Luke 3. 14. Do vio∣lence to no man, neither accuse any falsly, and be content with your wages. The 4. 1 Rom. 13. 7, 8. Render therefore to all their dues, &c. Owe nothing to any man, but love one another. The 5. is Prov. 24. 21. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with those who are given to change. The 6. is Ps. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, do. And▪ if he can found his present or former Parliament, Republike, or Interest will not lie, and forecited Conclusions on these Principles, I shall be his Proselyte; till then I cannot, I dare not but re∣nounce them, as Jesuitical, Atheistical, Diabolical. I shall not follow him in his Wild-goose chase any further, to prove the old Parliament undissolved, and now revi∣ved: what he writes ofPage 40, 41. Cromwels Parliaments and Conven∣tions, during the preternatural dead Interval from April 53. to May 59. That they had not the legal force and vertue of Par∣liaments: That they were nothing in Law of themselves, being creatures of another extraction: (though he writ the quite contrary in his life-time) That the Members of this revived Parliament itting in them, did not own them for legal Parlia∣ments: That their sitting in them as Parliaments, could not prejudice nor conclude the Body now sitting, because a body of men in equal power and right, cannot be concluded by particular acts done by their own Members without consent of the rest; And that though they did not own those Parliaments, nor the power that called them, yet their many and great complaints of their being secluded from them (by force, or new Oathes) as an infringe∣ment of the Peoples right in Parliament, were just, and they might well complain, because their complaint of violation was grounded only upon the General Right inherent in the People, will fully manifest the Parliament of King Charles to be totally dissolved by his death, notwithstanding any private Members sitting in it afterwards, his pretended Parliament of Commonsg then and now sitting, to be no Parliament at all, nor yet revived in Law or verity; that yet M. Prynne and other Members, might justly complain of their
forcible seclusion from it, in the peoples general inherent right, as themselves did when secluded from Cromwels Parlia∣ments, which they held void and null. And that if it be still in being, and was only suspended by Cromwels 6. years force, in respect only of the actual exercise of their power, not their inherent right, which is now revived: All the se∣cluded Members, Lords, and Charls Stewart too, ought in right and justice to be recalled and remitted to their rights, from which they were forcibly interrupted, as well as those now sitting, having no legal power, ground, nor colour to seclude them, as I have already proved. To cloze up this Question, I shall propose this Dilemma to my dissenting Opponents. If the old Parliament were totally and finally dissolved by the Kings death, as Rogers confesseth, and Nedham grants in point of Law and Reason: Then those few Commons sitting after his death, and now again, cannot possibly be a Parliament, nor Committe of Parliament in any sence. 1. Because never summoned by any writ to any such Parl. as this. 2. Because never elected; intrusted by the people, who elected th in the old Parlia∣ment, to sit in this, or any other Parliament, without a King and House of Lords. 3ly. Because not new elected by their old electors, or any other Counties, Cities, Bo∣roughs since the Kings death to sit alone, as then or now they do. 4ly. Because permitted, desired to sit at first only by the Army-Officers, their former mercenary Ser∣vants; and now invited to sit again only upon some of their motions; having no pretence of Law or right to e∣lect or create them a Parliament, or Representative of the People of England: much lesse then of Scot∣land and Ireland. 5ly. Because they are not the fifth part of a Commons House for number or quality, by our old Laws, Statutes, or the new Instrument or Advice, most Counties, Cities, Boroughs of the Nation having not so much as one Knight, Citizen or Burgesse in it to represent them, and Scotland, Ireland none at all: and so by the Ar∣mies own Declaration at St. Albans, their own Agreement of the People, and own Votes for An Equal Representative, can be no Parliament at all, but the highest archest Traitors to, usurpers over the whole Kingdoms Rights and Privi∣leges.
In theTotles Mag∣na Carta, f. 52. Hen. de Knyghton de Event. Angl. l. 3. c. 14. My Plea for the Lords p. 268, 269, 278, 279, 280, 193. Ex∣act Abridge∣ment, p. 53. 195, 368, 376, to 385. Parliament of 15 E. 2. in the Act for the Exile of the two Spencers, Cl. 15 E. 3. m. 32. dorso, the Parlia∣ments of 4 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 1. 28 E. 3. n. 9, 10. 21 E. 3. rot. Parl. 11. 21. 21 R. 2. rot. Par. n. 15, 16. 22. R. 2. rot. Par. n. 3. & Plac. Coronae n. 7, to 16. it was' adjuded, resol∣ved, declared by the King and Parliament, that the accroach∣ing and usurping of REGAL POWER, by the two Spencers, Roger Mortymer Earl of March, the Duke of Glocester, Arundel Archbishop of York, the Earls of Arundel and others; by keep∣ing the Lords, Great Men and Counsel of the King from his pre∣sence, the Parliament and Council: by placing and displacing pub∣like Officers at their pleasures; By condemning, executing Lords and others of the Kings Subjects without his privity by might and power both in and out of Parliament: By not permitting the King to hear the petitions and complaints of his Nobles and People, and to do them justice against these usurpers oppressions to their own and the Kings disinheriting: By compelling the King to grant pardons to Rebells and others who slew his faithfull Lords and Subjects: By seising, disposing of the Kings Treasure and Reve∣nues at their pleasures; and enforcing the King to grant them a Commission to manage his Royal affairs, trust and revenues, in restraint and derogation of his royal power and prerogative: was no lesse than High Treason by Law: For some of which encroachments of Regality, some of them were Banishen, others of them Beheaded and Executed as Traytors, and their Estates confiscated by Iudgements and Acts of Parlia∣ment. If then the encroaching and usurping of REGAL POWER in any of these particulars, be no lesse than HIGH TREASON by the resolution of these Parliaments, then questionlesse the usurpation, exercise, not only of Regal power in the highest degree, in calling, creating, dissolving Parliaments, giving the royal assents to Bils, Pardons, exe∣cuting Lords, Commons, creating publike Officers, ma∣king new Seals, issuing out Writs, Commissions, making Warr and Peace, coyning Money, &c. but also of Parlia∣mental power too, in making new Laws, Acts, Treasons, repealing, altering old Lawes, and forms of Processe, im∣posing new Taxes, Excises, Forfeitures, Militiaes, erecting new Courts, Judicatures, neither of all which the King
can do by his regal Power, but in and by the Parliament only, wherein both the Power of the King in its highest orb, and of all the Lords, Commons are united, concen∣tred, must needs be the highest Treason that possibly can be committed, both against the King, Kingdom, Parlia∣ment, Lords, Commons, People; all injured, usurped on, tyrannized over, dishonored, and oppressed thereby in the highest degree. Which should discourage, deterr the Anti-Parliamentary Juncto, and all those who have any dread of God, Men, or love to Parliaments, and their Native Coun∣try, from usurping such a power, as well for their own, as the publick weal. If the long Parliament be still in being and now revived, (as Nedham pleads, but proves not at all, his own princi∣ples evincing the contrary) then all the Lords and secluded Members ought in right and Justice to be freely admitted to sit, vote therein, for the premised reasons; else those now sitting and acting without them, will incurr the guilt of Highest Treason for Usurping both Regal and Parliamental power, by meer force, without any Act of Parl. which an express Act of Parlament made by assent of all the 3. E∣states cannot transfer unto them, as the Statute of 1 H. 4. c. 3. and Parliament of 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 25. expresly re∣solve, and I have proved in my Narrative, p. 22, 23, 24. since the Highest regal and Parliamentary trusts for the pub∣like good, safety, reposed in many by the people, cannot be trans∣ferred nor delegated unto a few, nor the Parliament power, trust, assigned over, any more than theHobards Re∣ports. p. 155. 183. Regal. Having dispatched these grand questions, I shall be brie∣fer in the 4th. being only this. Whether the Oathes of Supremacy, Allegiance, and Homage to be late King, his Heirs and Successors; were finally de∣termined by, and expired at his death? Nedham, p. 41, 42 and Rogers, p. 33. affirm they are; because the old form of Kingly Government is lawfully (as they say) extinguished, and a new form introduced, and so the Oath impossible, because the persons and things to whom they were made are at an end: Which opinion having largely refuted, in my Concordia Discors, proving those Oathes to be still ob∣ligatory and binding, by unanswerable Scripture-presidents
and authorities, to which neither of these Antagonists reply one syllable; I shall briefly reply to what they object. 1. That the frame of our Kingly Government was not le∣gally dissolved, but violently and trayterously interrupted only, as he saith this Parliament and Republike were by Crom∣wels intrusion. 2ly. That by the resolution of our Statutes, Judges, Laws, which admit no Interregnum, we have still a Kingdom, a King, an Heir and Successor to the Crown in actual being, (though out of actual, not legal possession) to whom we may and ought to make good our Oathes. 3ly. That our fellow-members and subjects who took these Oathes as well as we, can neither absolve themselves nor us by their perjury or treachery in violating them, by their late forcible, illegal proceedings, and new Ingagement a∣gainst the King, his Heirs and successors. 4ly. That it is both possible, just, necessary, safe, honourable, Christian, for them and us, and our 3. Kingdoms, Churches, Reli∣gion, to call in the right heir and successor to the Crown, upon honorable Terms; there being no obstacle to it but only want of will, or the covetousness, rapine, ambition, guilt or fear of punishment in some particular persons in present power, against the general desire and interest of our 3. whole Kingdoms, Nations, endangered, embroyled, op∣pressed, and well-nigh totally ruined, exhausted by his long seclusion. 5. That these Objectors and others sligh∣ting, neglecting, violating, absolving themselves and others from the conscientious obligation, legal performance of these sacred Oathes, obliging themselves in particular and the whole Kingdom in general, to the late King his Heirs and Successors in perpetuity, is no argument of their piety, saintship, religion, fear of God, honesty, truth, justice, but of their avowed Atheism, Impiety, Injustice, contempt of God, and all his threats, judgments denounced, inflicted upon Perjured infringers of their Oathes, Covenants to their King and others. 6ly. That for the violation of these Oathes, the whole three Kingdoms have deeply mourn∣ed, suffred in sundry kinds ever since 1648. and are now likely to be ruined by Taxes, Contributions, Oppressions of all sorts, losse of trade, unseasonable weather, diseases
epidemically reigning, and other judgements. 7ly. That Abraham himself the father of all the faithfull; swearing by God, that he would not deal falsly with Abimelech, nor with his Son, nor with his Sons son, but according to the kindness he had done to Abraham, Gen. 21. 23, 24, &c. and his care to perform his Oath; hath justified not only the lawfulness of all our Oathes to the King, his heirs and successors, but con∣firmed our Obligation to them all, and how conscienti∣ously we ought to perform them without fraud or falshood, yea▪ disowed all those from being of his faith or spiritual seed, who make little conscience to perform them. 8ly. That as the Apostle resolves, Gal. 3. 16, 17. That the Covenant made by God to Abraham and his seed in Christ be∣fore, the Law which was made 430, years after cannot disan∣null, that it should make the Promise of no effect: So the New Ingagement de, taken after these two Oathes to our New Governors, and their late Oath so be Constant, as well as True and Faithfull to their new Republike, without King, or Single person, or House of Lords (obliging those who take it, if binding, not only to sundry Prejuries, Trea∣sons, but constant perseverance in them without repen∣tance) cannot disannul these former Oathes to the King, his heirs and successors, and make them of no effect, as Rogers, & Nedham tell us, which I have elswhere proved. 9ly. John Ro∣gers, p. 9. informs us, that Cleomines the Lacedemonian, sware to his friend Archonides, that he would do all things joynt∣ly with him, and Act nothing without his HEAD were in it. After which watching his time, he cut off his Com∣panions head; and to keep his Covenant, after he had par∣boyled it, he kept it by him, honored and preserved it; and upon every weighty matter or consultation would set his Scull by him, and tell it what he purposed; saying that he did not vio∣late his Ingagement, or break his Oath in the least, see∣ing he did ever take counsel with the head of Archoni∣des, and did nothing without it. Verily my Antagonists and those Members they plead for, have dealt more falsly with the late King, Lords, and their fellow Members, than Cleomines with Archonides; they twice Swore, Protested,
Vowed and Covenanted too over and over, to be true and faithfull to the King, and to act all things Ioyntly with him, the Lords, and their fellow Commons in Parliament, and transact nothing without their heads and advice were in it. But though afterwards watching their opportunity, they cut off the Kings head, and some of the Lords, as he did his Friends; suppressed the whole House of Lords, and secluded most of their fellow Commoners; yet they do not set either their heads, sculls, or any of their surviving persons before them in the House when they consult upon every or any weighty matter, nor tell them what they pur∣pose: And yet they and these their Advocates tell us and others; They do not violate their Protestations, Vows, Covenants, nor yet break their Oathes. Whether of them are the greatest Hypocrites, Impostors, let the world now judge. The 5. Question between John Rogers▪ and me alone, is this. Whether the Jesuites and our forein Spanish, French and other Common Popish Adversaries, were the Original Plotters, and Ʋnder-hand fomentors, of the change of our antient He∣reditary Kingship and Kingdom into a NEW COMMON∣WEALTH, and of the late Exorbitant violent Proceedings against the King, Parliament, and secluded Members, to accom∣plish this their design? Mr. Prynne hath abundantly proved the affirmative by punctual Testimonies out of Parsons, Campanella, Watson, Clerke, Richelieu's Instructions, Conte Galeazzo, the Lord Dig∣bies and others Letters, Mutatus Polemo, and other Evidences; by pregnant Reasons and Demonstrations, both à priori et po∣steriori, in his Speech, Memento, Epistles to his New Discove∣ry of Free-State Tyranny, Jus Patronatus, Seasonable Vindicati∣on; The Republicans Good Old Cause anatomized, and in his Narrative, p. 18, 19, 20. 40, to 64. 85, to 89. These E∣vidences P, 27, to 36. J. Rogers neither doth, nor can deny in any par∣ticular; only he contradicts the Conclusion, as not suffi∣ciently warranted by the premises; when as most judicious Protestants of all professions and degrees who have seri∣ously
perused them, are abundantly satisfied, and conclude the contrary, to this Johannis ad oppositum; who bestows whole sheets and vollies of rayling Epithites, Scurrilous scoffs, unchristianP. 34, to 41. obscene Quaeres and sarcasmes upon me, only upon this accompt, that I have translated the Odium and guilt of the contriving, someting the late Gunpowder Treason which blew up our King, Kingdom Parliament, Lords House, and Kingly Government, to erect a New Republike, from the Protestants, to the Jesuits and those of their reli∣gion, who plotted the old one, and would have fathered it on the Puritans, had it taken the like effect as this hath done; which I thought would have deserved thanks, ra∣ther than such reproachfull usage from such a Zealot as he pretends to be. But since he will needs appropriate the glory and honour of this last Powder-Plot, (transcending the former) to those worthies for whom he pleads, and to himself and his disciples, and allow the Jesuits (a many of whom he confesseth are doubtlesse in England under dis∣guises and folding-dores, p. 35.) no share at all in its pro∣jection, or execution; I shall no waies envy them this new Garland, wherewith he Crowns their Temples; let them wear it in triumph to their graves, or Tyburn; I shall not envy them this new Crown of glory, of which they are so am∣bitious, that Rogers spends many leaves, p. 27, to 37. to evade the Authors I quote to prove the Commonwealth a spurious issue of the Jesuits projection, by his impertinent answers to them. 1. He endeavours to evade my quotations of Parsons and Campanella, the first projectors of turning our English King∣dom, into an Holland Commonwealth, by the agency of the Jesuits, confederating with Anabaptists and other Secta∣riet agreeing with them in Antimonarchical principles, by the help of a prevalent seduced party in the Parliament house, when purged, reformed after Parsons new models; and by raising wars, tumults, in the Realm, and then infusing this Principle into the Common Soldiers, people and every Pre∣cape, or factious multitude, getting the Title of a Publique State, or Helvetian Commonwealth, to examin their So∣veraigns
by what Title they hold their Crowns, and to alter, change the course, inheritance and succession of the Crown and publike Go∣vernment at their pleasures, and disscise the right heirs general to the Crown, and put them to their Formedon to recover them. To which he answers, 1. That these their Politicks were cal∣culated to the State of the Nation as it was in Queen Eli∣zabeths time when they writ, to divide us with factions, and divisions at home, stir up the seeds of an inexplicable, irreconcilable war between England and Scotland, to de∣prive King James of the Crown of England; to promote the Spaniards interest, and hinder the English from infesting his Fleet, and Indies: Ergo the Jesuites were not the ori∣ginal projectors of turning our Kingdom into a Common∣wealth, though he produceth none else before or besides them; nor yet prosecuted this design (so long since laid) afresh (as I have proved they did) in 1647. and 1648. for the self-same ends, in substance, by the self-same means and instruments. 2ly. He saith, I should prove that This, this is the same Commonwealth they plotted then in every cir∣cumstance: I prove it produced by the same instruments, means, pattern they prescribed, and that it pursued the same ends, designs, which is sufficient and punctua. The rather, because himself and those he pleads for, are not yet agreed what form or kinde of creature their new Common∣wealth shall be; they being much divided about it, as him∣self attests: who spends some sheets against Mr. Harring∣tons and others Models of it. 3ly. He adds, their design proved abortive in Qu. Elizebeths reign, and in the pow∣der-plot against King James; What then? Ergo, they pursued it not since, as I prove by late pregnant Testimo∣nies, and more than probable arguments, is a meer incon∣sequent. 4ly. He objects, the Jesuits Commonwealth admits no toleration of Religions; never was against Kingship and the Office of it, as theirs is, nor hath any similitude with Jesui∣tism. All false; the Jesuits pleaded alwayes forSee their printed Peti∣tions to that effect to King James. Mr. Ed∣wards Gan∣graenaes and Treatise a∣gainst Tolera∣tion. a free toleration of religion in England, that themselves might be tole∣rated, though they deny it elsewhere: they areSee my E∣pistle before my Historical and Legal Vindicaion. professed enemies to the office, as well as persons of all Protestant, yea and
most Popish Kings, and projected to make us a Common∣wealth upon this account in opposition to Kingship: it hath similitude with Iesuitism both in its principles, wit∣ness those of Barclay and Mariana, cited by Nedham, where∣on he founds it; and in its practices of murdering Prote∣stant Kings, blowing up Parliaments, absolving Subjects from their Oath and Allegiance, &c. by which it was founded, sup∣ported, revived. What else he allegeth, is but meer Froth of his wanton brain, and scurrillous pen, unworthy reply. Only because he calls upon me for more evidence, if I have it, to prove his Good Old Cause and Commonwealth a Plot of the Iesuites, I shal gratify him herein. 1. Hugh Peters himself, very well acquainted of late years with the Jesuits persons, plots, principles, practices, in his Letter to a great Army-Officer (quoted by himself, p. 12.) stiles it, A Cheat of the Iesuites put upon the Army; and that with much re∣gret of heart and spirit. 2ly. A grave Protestant Gentle∣man of the Temple last Trinity Term riding up to London, meeting with a Popish Gent. of his acquaintance on the way, they discoursing of these last Revolutions and changes of Government, the Protestant told him, that these alterations were but the Plots and productions of the Jesuites and those of his Religion, who did but laugh at us in their sleeves, to see what fools they made us. At which the Papist growing somwhat angry; He desired him to be patient, since they were antient friends, and what he spake was not in jeast or scoff, as he took it, but in sober sadness; desiring him (having great acquaintance amongst the Papists) to inquire out the truth of what he spake, when he came to London, where most Papists in England were then assembled, for both their satisfactions, and to give him an account thereof; which he promised to do. About 5. or 6. dayes after, this Papist told him. That according to his request, he had made diligent inquiry of the truth of what he spake on the way; and that he found, all or most of the Iesuites were Knaves, they and most of the Iesuited Papists being against the King, and wholly for a Commonwealth, as being most advantagious for the King of Spains Interest; using more words to the same effect. Which the Protestant (be∣ing
my old familiar acquaintace) about two dayes after related to me in Westminster-hall, as a concurrent testimony with that I had published to this effect in my True and per∣fect Narrative, and the Republicans Spurious good old Cause truly Anatomized. 3ly. Lilly (a zealous Republican) in his Almanack, Anno 1651. prognosticated; That the Stars did then promise Acts of Grace and Favor to Popish Recu∣sants, who in their Zeal and Loyalty to the New Re∣publike exceeded most Presbyterians. An argument it was a creature of the Jesuites and their projection, to pro∣cure them more grace and favor than before, and promote their designs against us. 4ly. Nedham (Rogers his Conse∣derate and fellow Champion against me) makes use of the Jesuit Barclay his forecited Iesuitical Principle, as the chief corner-stone of our New Parliaments and Republikes stru∣cture whereon they are both built: And not only so, but he useth the very Arguments of Campanella, which he pre∣scribed the King of Spain to suggest to the English Nobi∣lity, Protestants and Clergy, to hinder and keep out King James from the Crown of England upon Queen Elizabeths death; to disswade and draw them all of from King Charls; and oppose his restitution now. Campanellaes words are these, cap. 25. De Mon. Hispanica, p. 207, 208. Praeterea suspitionem incutiat amicis Elizabethae, saepius iis in∣culcando fore ut Jacobus in amicis Elizabethae caedem mater∣nam vindicaturus sit, &c. praesertim cum Maria ipsius mater moriens ei Religionem Catholicam, et sue caedis vindictam serio commendaverit. Exasperandi etiam sunt mimi Episcopo∣rum & Ministrorum Anglicorum, proponendo illis, Regem Sco∣tiae Calvinimum amplexum esse spe et cupiditate Regni, adactumique vi a Baronibus haereticis: Quod it vero Regnum Angliae etiam obtineat, tum illum cito priorem Religionem revocaturum esse, quanddquidem non solum Mater defuncta verum etiam ex ipse Galliarum sum∣mopere et illam commendarint. Quibus modis fier ut se∣mina belli inextricabilis inter Angliam & Scotiam acian∣tur, &c. to keep King James from the Crown. Which Nedham thus imitates and pursues, with a little variation,
in his Interest, Sect. 3. of the Presbyterians, p. 12, 13. The Royal party will never leave buzzing in C. Stuarts ears to quicken his memory, that the interest of your party was in its in∣fancy founded upon the ruin of HIS GRAND-MOTHER, con∣tinued and improved by the perpetual vexation of his GRAND-FATHER, and at length prosecuted TO THE DECAPI∣TATION OF HIS FATHER. Be not so weak as to fool your selves that you shall fare better than others. It is the com∣mon sence of the Cavaliers, that you prepared his FATHER for the block, and are incensed at others because they took from you the honour of the execution. Dr. Creiton told him, That the Presbyterians pulled his FATHER Down and held him by the hair, while the Independents cut off his head. And after him it was more elegantly expressed by Salmatius, Presbyteriani Sacrificium ligarunt, Independentes jugu∣larunt, &c. And p. 5, 6. The PAPISTS having had so fair a Creature of the Father, for many reasons they have no cause to fear foul dealing from the Son. As for HIS RELIGION (if any) it is at best, but a devotion to Prelacy, which was bequea∣thed to him by Legacy. All his other pretences of Religion in Scotland, he forfeited before ever he left that Countrey. What profession he hath since owned abroad, hath (for reasons of State) been kept very close, yet not so close but he discovered it. But if this be not evident, let us have recourse to reason, and then consider, HOW LONG HE WAS UNDER THE WING OF HIS MOTHERS INSTRUCTIONS IN FRANCE, and what a Nursery Flanders hath been for him since, which IS THE MOST JESUITED PLACE IN THE WORLD: consider also the urgency of his necessities, disposing him to imbrace any thing, or take any course to get a Crown, being un∣der the same influence of the wandring Starre, called Reason of State, as was his GRAND-FATHER H. the 4th of France, who shifted his Religion to secure a Crown, &c. These put all together into the ballance, are ground enough to believe him sufficiently affected, if not sworn to Popery. Here we have Ned∣ham plowing with Campanella his heifer, using his very policy, words, arguments in substance to exasperate the Presbyterians, Independents, and Protestant party against
Charles Stuart, and keep him from the Crown, as Campa∣nella suggested to the King of Spain, and the English Pro∣testants and Prelates, to exasperate them against his Grand∣father King James for the self-same end, by traducing both in their Religion, and meditation of revenge of their respective Mothers and Fathers decollations. Here I shall desire the Readers to take special Notice of 4. particulars. 1. Of Campanellaes, the Jesuites, forein Po∣pish Princes and their Instruments Machiavilian practice▪ secretly, seriously, frequently to suggest to Protestant Sub∣jects, that their most Orthodox Protestant Kings, and right heirs to the Crown, are inwardly inclined and well-affected to Popery, that they profess themselves Protestants, only for politick ends, to gain or retain the Crown; that when they are setled in their thrones, they will either profess, or introduce Popery (which would be the Jesuits and Papists greatest advantage who thus sug∣gest it, if true) purposly to exasperate their Protestan Subjects against, and alienate their affections from them; yea make them the visible instruments to keep them from their hereditary Crowns, to the scandal, prejudice of the Protestant Religion, though they be most real, cordial, constant Professors of it. And whence such scandalous suggestions originally spring 2ly. Of the inexcusable malice of Nedham, professing him∣self a Protestant, not only in imitating this Jesuitical Ro∣mish practice against his own hereditary Protestant Sove∣raign Ch. Stuart, but transcending it many degrees; First, by pretermitting his beheaded Fathers long education of him in the Protestant Religion whiles he lived; and this charge unto him in, p. 235. to 251. Writing a little before his death, viz, Above all, I would have you, as I hope you are already, well-grounded and setled in your Religion: the best professi∣on of which I have ever esteemed that of the Church of England, in which you have been educated: Yet I would have your own Judgement and Reason now seal to that sacred Bond which education hath written, that it may be judici∣ously your own Religion, and not other mens Custome or Tra∣dition, which you profess. In this I charge you to perse∣vere, as coming nearest to Gods word for Doctrine, and
to the Primitive examples for Government, with some little amend∣ment, &c. Your fixation in matters of Religion will not be more necessary for your Souls, that your Kingdoms peace, when God shall bring you to them, &c. If you ne∣ver see my face again, I do require and intreat you, as your Father and your King, that you never suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection from the Religion established in the Church of England. I tell you, I have tried it, and after much search and many dis∣putes, have concluded it to be the best in the world, not only in the community, as Christian, but also in the spe∣cial notion, as Reformed, keeping the middle way between the Pomp of superstitious Tyranny, and the meanness of fantastique Anarchy. The scandal of the late Troubles, which some may object and urge to you, against the Protestant Religion established in England, is easily answered to them and to your own thoughts Keep you to true principles of Pi∣ety, Vertue and Honour, you shall never want a King∣dom. For those who repent of any defects in their duty towards me, as I freely forgive them, in the word of a Christian King: so I believe, you will find them truly zealous to re∣pay with Interest that Loyalty and Love to you, which was due to me. In summe, What good I intended, do you perform, when God shall give you power. Next, in urging, how long he was under the wing of his Mothers instructi∣ons in France (but a few Moneths space at most) and what a Nursery) Flanders hath been for him since, which is the most Ie∣suited place in the world; as his principal reason, to perswade both Papists and Protestants, to believe him sufficiently affected, if not sworn to Popery, as if he had been there educated by his own voluntary election; and not necessitated, yea forced thi∣ther by the Army Officers, and those in late and present power (professing themselves the most zealous Protestants, and eminentest Saints) full sore against his will. The Gene∣ral Council of Army Officers, in their Remonstrance of Nov. 20. 1648. presented to the Commons House, as they de∣manded the King to be brought to speedy Iustice; so they propounded, That the Prince, and Duke of York, his Sons,
might be declared uncapable of any trust or government in this Kingdom, or any Dominions thereunto belonging; and thence to stand Exiled for ever, as Enemies and Traytors, and to die without mercy, if ever taken or found within the same. After his Fathers beheading, when he was called in and crowned King by his Protestant Subjects in Scotland (where he took the Solemn League and Covenant) according to their Oaths, Covenant, Duty, Laws and principles of the reformed Religion: our Republican Grandees and their Gen. Cromwel, by a bloudy, unchristian, unbrotherly, invasive war, expelled and kept him out thence, yea out of England too, and all his other Dominions, by force of arms after the battel of Worcester, Septemb. 3. 1651. From whence he was forced to fly disguised, to save his life, into France; where he landed at Newhaven, Octob. 2. and some weeks after departed into Holland to the Princess of Orange his Sister (a Protestant) residing with her, and other Prote∣stants there, remote from the company and seducements of his Mother, and all Jesuites, Papists that might any wayes seduce him in his religion; living wholly upon the charity of foreign Protestants; his own Protestant Subjects then and since swaying, being so stupendiously unjust, un∣charitable, as not to allow him or his Brothers one far∣thing, out of all the Lands and Revenues of his 3. King∣doms, for their necessary support in forein parts, and ma∣king it High Treason for any of his Protestant Subjects to contribute any thing towards their support in this their distressed condition; so conscientiously did they practise these Gospel precepes, Mat. 5. 44, 45. c. 22. 21. Rom. 12. 13, 19, 20, 21. c. 13. 1, to 12. c. 15. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 16, 1. Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36, 37. for which they may justly expect that fatal sentence, v. 40, to 46. Yet not content herewith, to deprive Him, his Brethren, and followers, both of the re∣lief, company, comfort of all their Protestant Friends and Allies in the Netherlands, and force them thence into Popish Quarters, to the hazard of their Souls as well as Lives, ex∣asperate them all against the protestant Religion, and enforce them (if possible) unto popery, they engaged themselves
and the English Nation not only in a most unchristian, bloudy, costly, destructive war with our antient Protestant Brethren of Scotland till they had totally subdued them, but also with our old Protestant allies of the Netherlands, which war continued from Jan. 1651. till April 1654▪ al∣most to the ruin of both Nations, and then Oliver Cromwel concluded a Peace with the Dutch on these terms, (suffi∣ciently evidencing the true ground and end of that bloudy war) That Charls Stuart, with his Brothers, followers, and adhe∣rents, should be forthwith banished out of the Low Countries, and none of them permitted to reside there, or return thither again. Upon which, by command from the States, these distressed Exiles were forced to remove into France, much against their wills, having no other place of safety to retire them∣selves to: where they enjoyed the company of their Mo∣ther, and relief of their Popish allies; as likewise the com∣fortable Christian Society, Charity, assistance of their French Protestant Friends, Churches, Ministers, Ministry, to confirm, edifie them in the Reformed Religion: which Cromwel and their English inveterate Enemies maligning, endeavoured to expell them thence, and by quarrelling with the French, and atring into an intimate League with Cardinal Maarine, (by the agency of Sir Kenelm Digby a Jesuited Papist) concluded a Peace with France in Novemb. 1655. upon this condition; That Ch. Stuart, with all his brothers, followers, adherents, should be forthwith re∣moved out of France, and all the French Kings Dominious, and not permitted to return or reside therein. Being thus driven out of Holland and France from the Society of all Prote∣stants, they were necessitated sore against their wills, to cast themselves upon the protection and charity of the Spani∣ard, and fly into Flanders, having no place else to rest their heads, and there to sojourn among Papists, and Jesuites in great danger, and extreme necessity; where to their im∣mortal Honour, the Admiration of all true Protestants and Papists too, and the Envy of their Protestant mali∣cious persecutors who forced them thither, they con∣stantly adhere to, and publikely profess the Protestant Religion,
and will not be seduced from it to Popery, notwithstanding the manifold affronts, injuries, provocations, reproaches, persecutions of some of their own Protestant Subjects; their exile from their Protestant Kingdoms, their Protestant Friends in France, Holland, their extreme pressing necessi∣ties, and the frequent sollicitations, arguments, perswasions, promises, temptations of Priests, Jesuites, Papists and Popish Princes,See Militiere his victory of truth, dedica∣ted to him: & Mutatus Po∣lemo, P. 32, 33. to turn Papists, as the only means to regain their rights, and restore Ch. Stuart to his Crowns and Kingdoms. Now that this his forced Exile into France and Flanders by a prevailing party of his own Protestant Subjects, (against all their Oathes, Protestations, Vowes, Covenants, Remonstran∣ces, Declarations, Allegiancos, Duties, our Known Laws, the practice of all the primitive Christians, and other Protestant Churches, the principle of Christian Religion, and of our own Protestant Church, both in our Articles, Homilies, Ca∣nons, Writers, Liturgies,) and his forced sojourning there amongst Jesuites, Papists, with his grand necessities, of which they have been the only Authors, (to their own eternal infamy, and intollerable scandal, dishonour, shame, re∣proach of our Protestant Kingdoms, Churches, Religion) enforcing him to cry out with holy King David, (when forced by Saul, and his rebellious Son Absolom out of his Kingdom from Gods Ordinances, among Pagan Idolaters) Ps. 120. 5. Wo is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. My soul hath long dwelt with them that hate peace, &c. should be thus objected against him by this ray∣ling Shimel, and the Authors of it, over and over, as a con∣vincing evidence, that he is sufficiently affected, if not sworn to Popery; notwithstanding his open constant avowed pro∣fession of the Protestant Religion, to the admiration of the world, the joy of all true Protestants, and Gods great glory as well as his own; and made now a motive to ex∣cite his Protestant Subjects (in this juncture of time and revolution of affairs) to take up arms afresh against him, to keep him still in exile amidst Jesuits, Papists, and hin∣der his restitution to his hereditary Kingdoms, and the benefit of Gods Ordinances among his own Protestant
Subjects for his and their preservation, and of the reformed Religion, now much endangered by intestin wars, the poli∣cies of Jesuits, and combination of the Pope, and Popish Princes, to be totally extirpated throughout the World; is not only a most unparalleld piece of malice and calumny, but the very quintessence of Jesuitism, and Jesuitical policy. The rather, because all our Protestant Bishops, Ministers, Martyrs in Queen Maries daies, when imprisoned by her for their Religion (though restored to her Crown, against the usurpations of Queen Jane, a Protestant, by their assist∣ance, and theRerum Ang∣licarum, An∣nales, Lond: 1616. p. 3. p. 116. & Mr. Fox, Vol. 3. Suffolk Protestants, quorum propter Religioni causam propensissimus favor Janae adsuturum inde sperabatur;) by their joynt Letter to all their Protestant Brethren, (recorded inActs and Monuments, Vol. 3. p. 101, 102. Mr. Fox,) not only declared Queen Maries open obsti∣nate profession of Popery, to be no just cause in Law or Con∣science, to keep her from her hereditary Right to the Crown; but likewise humbly required, and in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ beseeched all that feared God, to behave themselves as obedient Subjects to Her Highness, and the Supreme powers ordained under Her; and rather after their example to give their Heads to the block, than in any wise to rebell against the Lords Anointed, Queen MARY, in no point consenting to any Rebellion or Sedition a∣gainst Her Highness. Much less then ought his slight suggestions of Ch. Stuarts secret inclination to Popery, a∣gainst his constant avowed profession of Protestantism in the very midst of the most Jesuited Papists, to be any ar∣gument at all for his Protestant Subjects not to assist, but to rise up and rebell against him, to keep him from the Crown. 3ly. The extraordinary sottishness and infa∣tuation of those Protestants, who will be cheated, seduced by such Jesuitical suggestions, calumnies, as Nedham and others have published of him, touching his inclination to Popery, to withdraw their affections, assistance from him, either to supply his necessities, or restore him, if not to his hereditary Civil Rights, yet at least to the comfortable fruition of Gods Ordinances and Christian Society in our Protestant Churches and Kingdom, for his spiritual Con∣solation
and Salvation. 4ly. The most barbarous infer∣nal matchless malice of those degenerated Republican and Army-Saints, professing themselves Stars of the greatest Magnitude in the Protestant Orb, in expelling their un∣doubted natural hereditary Protestant King, not only out of all his own Protestant Realms and Dominions, but like∣wise out of Holland and France, where he lived in exile, and had the relief and society of Protestants, into Flanders, the most Jesuited place in the world (as Nedham prints) where are none but Papists; enforcing him there to live upon their alms alone, and keep him there in Exile; on purpose to necessitate him, with his Brothers, followers, adherents, to renounce the Protestant Religion and party, and become professed Papists; to destroy, murder his and their souls and bodies at once; and deprive him of his eternal Crown in heaven, as well as of his temporal Crowns on earth. Jer. 2. 12. Be astonished, O heaven, and be ye horribly afraid, at this un∣presidented Tyranny and Treachery; the highest Maligni∣ty of Jesuitism, and express revived Image of the Jesuites design, against his Grandfather King Henry the 4. of France; who shifting his Religion, by the Jesuites perswasion to se∣cure his Crown and Life against their malicious designs; was soon after,See the Ge∣neral History of France. Hospinian, & Ludovicus Lucius, Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. c. 2. Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 75. 80. by their instigation, deprived of both, if not of his eternal Crown; by a stab through his heart, by one of their disciples, though he had bequeathed his heart to them by will, and built them a magnificent College, richly indowed by him with lands and plate. If thenMat. 7. 16, 20. the tree (as Christ himself re∣solves) may be certainly known by its fruits, we may easily judge, from whence these rotten bitter fruits of Jesuitism originally sprung, and who were the planters of those trees which bear them. But if they cannot effect this infernal de∣sign to destroy his Soul and body together; yet they will make use of it to murder his reputation, and render him a suspected; if not a devoted proselyte to Popery, to debar his re∣turn to his Protestant Kingdoms.Jer. 5. 9, 29. And shall not God visit for these sins? Shall not his Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? I shall add a 4th Evidence, (I only pointed atTrue & per∣fect Narrative p. 62. before) worthy special observation; which will fully answer the late printed Sheet, intituled, A clear Vindication of Roman
Catholicks from a foul aspersion cast on them by Mr. Prynne, and Mr. Baxster; as if they made and headed Sects, had a pow∣erful influence upon the Army, in relation to their proceedings a∣gainst the late King, and Changes, to reduce us under the power of ROME; which the nameless Author, saith, the chiefest of their Clergy and Laity (with whom he hath spoken) protest to be a black Calumny. Mr. P. and Mr. B. do neither of them charge the Roman Catholicks in general, but only the Je∣suites, some of their Priests, Friers, and Jesuitial faction, with these and other like practices, fully charged and proved against them, in Iesuitarum per Ʋnitas Belgii provincias ne∣gotiatio, printed 1616. Hospinian, and Ludovicus Lucius, Historia Jesuitica, Speculum Jesuiticum, and others, as well Papists as Protestants. For their heading Sects and the late Quakers, I have divers instances, besides those pub∣lished, to evidence it; and for their deportment in relati∣on to the Kings death, and the change of our Govern∣ment, this one instance may satisfie them and others. When the King was executed before Whitehall, Jan. 30. 1648. Mr. Henry Spottesworth riding casually that way just as his head was cut off, espied the Queens Confessor there on Horseback in the habit of a Trooper, drawing forth his sword, and flourishing it over his head in triumph, (as others there did) at this spectacle. At which being much amazed, and being familiarly acquainted with the Confessor, he rode up to him, and said 3. O Father! I little thought to have found you here, or any of your profession at such a sad spectacle. To which he answered, There were at least forty or more Priests and Iesuites there present on Horseback besides himself; which being afterwards objected by a Protestant friend of his to a Romish Priest, he had no excuse to make for it, but this, that one end of his & their coming thither, was. That if the King had died a Roman Catholick he might not want a Con∣fessor, had he desired one. This the Gentleman (now dead) and his Sister (whom the Confessor oft sollicited to turn Papists) within few daies after, and at other times se∣riously related to a Bencher of Lincolns Inne his familiar ac∣quaintance (who oft reported it to me and others) using it
as one chief reason, Why thy refused to turn Papists; and because they also found the Jesuits and Popish Priests both before and after the Kings death, had divers meetings about London, to alter the Government, and disinherit the Kings posterity. Which compared with their releases from Imprisonment, and free liberty they enjoyed, ever since the Kings death till now under the New Republike, whiles divers Protestant Mini∣sters, Gentlemen, Noblemen, and some Members were un∣der close restraints, With the late proviso in the Proclama∣tion of Iuly last (occasioned by my Narrative) for Banishing Iesuits, Priests, and such Cavaliers of the Kings party who had not compounded, (the principal parties aimed at) by the 1. of August, under pain of High Treason: Provided, that if any of them, (Jesuits or Popish Priests,23 Eliz. c. 1. 27 Eliz. c. 2. 1 Jac. c. 4. 3 Jac. c. 5. Traytors by sundry Laws yet in force, as well as Protestant Cavaliers, made Traytors only by this New proclamation, equally ranged with Ie∣suits, Priests, and only inquired after) should submit themselves to the present Government, and give security for their obedience and peaceable deportment; that this proclamation should not extend unto them; but that they might still continue amongst us. Since which I hear of sundry Protestant Ministers, Gentle∣men, Noblemen, and some secluded Members, secured, imprisoned, prosecuted in most Counties, which every Diurnal is fraught with, but not with one Iesuit or Popish Priest yet apprehended, though there be multitudes of them in England. Which New Evidences, compared with those in my Narrative and other publications, will I trust fully satisfie all disinteressed persons in this grand Question, till time shall discover further proofs (as it doth each year) to re∣solve this controversie, if these be not sufficient. As for I. Rogers and his Disciples, they deny the Jesuits and Po∣pish party to have any share in our late Changes, because they would monopolize the honor and reward thereof to themselves alone: witness this querulous passage to his revived High Court of Parliament, p. 96. We can tell you, that no men in England did more (if so much move, run, write, meet, counsel, pray, sit up night and day to effect your return into the place of Trust where you
now are, than those whom you grieve, light, frown upon, and do least for, in point of justice, conscience, or encouragement, This is grievous, and must needs prove dangerous to the whole at the last. And p. 119. We have suffered Bonds, banishment, plunderings, perils of life, liberty, estates, 5, of 6. years together, in many prisons one after another; and yet no re∣paration, restitution, provision, or encouragement, for holding ou like Fortresses, against so hard a siege. All this for the Cause, and Commonwealth: worthy of thanks at least, who have been Instruments of your Restitution: but these are sligh∣ted by friends and foes: the Pipers, Dancers, and Devisers of New Forms to trouble us with: that are rather the Incu∣bus than Incumbents of a Frée-State. If this his Com∣plaint be true, it is either a just punishment of God upon him and them for their Innovations, Prov. 24. 21, 22. or an Evidence, the Jesuits and Romanists had a greater share and activity in the Cause, and our Changes, than He and his Wee, which makes them so much slighted, and them in greater favor than before. The last Question, professedly handled by Nedham, ob∣liquely by Rogers, (the substance of both their Pamphlets) is this, which concerns me as an English Freeman briefly to debate▪ that the World may judge, whether I and other secluded Members be soRogers, p. 6 10, 37, 38. 119. Nedham, p. 32, &c. Beblam-mad, or such Brea∣kers of our Trusts, and Enemies to the publike, as they scanda∣lously report us. Whether our  hereditary Kingly Government, and restitution thereof to the Right Heir; or late, yet unformed, revived Com∣monwealth, and future establishment thereof, to prevent a Relapse to Kingship and Kingly Government, be Englands true publike Interest, as Men or Christians? What I formerly alleged in my Speech and Memento 1648. Anatomy and Narrative 1659. in defence of Kings and Kingly Government, and the mischiefs of a Republike, (to which these Antagnists have not answered one syllable) is sufficient to resolve this Question: I shall only adde thereto by way of Supplement, 1. In the affirmative▪ That the restitution and preservation
of our old hereditary Kingly Government by Common consent (es∣pecially upon the substance of the late Kings large Con∣cessions in the Isle of Wight) is the only true publike Interest of England, both as Men and Christians: As Men, 1. Because it is that form of Government which all our Predecessors in this Island, whether Brions, Saxens, Danes, Normans, English have constantly embraced, continued, maintained, (as all ourSee Gildas, Be∣da, Aetheled, , Mat. Westminster, Geoffry Mon∣mouth, Wigorni∣ensis, Malmsbury, Huntingdon, Hoveden, Matt. Paris, Walsing∣ham, Simeon D∣nelmensis, Bromp∣ton, Knyghton, Holinshed, Graf∣ton, Speed, Fox, Baker, Cambdens Britannia. Historians assert) from its first plantation by Brute, till 1648. (except during their sore bondage under the Roman Emperors and their Deputies) in all publique changes, revolutions, as the best, safest, freest, happiest, universallest, antientest, honourablest, du∣rablest, diinest, least inconvenient, least oppressive, and most agreeable to the temper, weflare, desires, liberties of the people, of all other forms of Government whatsoever. 2. Because all our Great Councils, Parliaments, in all ages (as their proceedings, Acts, Canons, and Writs of Summons attest) have constantly maintained, continued, established, defended Kings and Kingly Government, as their only publike Interest, wherin the unity, peace, wealth, welfare, safety, liberty, property and hereditary successi∣on of all the Subjects and their posterity in their Lands and Inheritances25 H. . c. 22. 1 Eliz. c. 1, 3, 4. 5 Jac. c. 1, 2. with the Acts in the Narrative,  most principally and specially, above all other worldly things, consist and rest: whereupon they have most carefully and vigilantlySee Rastal Trea∣son, Crown, Pro∣vision, & Praemu∣nire, Rome, Re∣cusants. provided for the security of the Kings royal person, succession, heirs, successors, the rights, privileges, jurisdictions, prerogatives, lands, revenues of the Crown, and Kingly Government, against all Treasons, con∣spiracies, insurrections, rebellions, attempts whatsoever to destroy, disinherit, suppresse, alter, subvert, impair them, or any of them, by sundry successive Acts of Parliament, sacred Solemn Oathes, Obligations, Securities of all kinds, in all ages, till 1648. and the last Parliament of King Charls (whereof most now sit∣ting were Members) by more solemnSee An Exact Collection, and Collection Of them, My Speech, Memento, Prynne the Member re∣conciled to Prynne the Barrester, The Good Old Cause truly stated. printed Oaths, Pro∣testations, Vows, National Leagues, Covenants, Petitions, Votes, Remonstrances, Declarations, Ordinances, than any or all pre∣cedent Parliaments whatsoever, as I have elsewhere proved at large, and the imprisoned and secluded Members too in their Vindication.
3ly. Because the manifold incessant intestine and forein Wars, Insurrections, Tumults, Divisions, Factions, Revo∣lutions, Alterations, Subversions of Governments, Parli∣aments, Republikes, Legal Processe, proceedings; the un∣constant fluctuating condition of our State and Civil af∣fairs, the intollerable doubled, trobled, quadrupled Taxes, Excises, Imposts, Militiaes, and other Exactions (amoun∣ting under our former and present Free State to one intire subsidy every week in the year, when as our former publike Taxes under our Kings, exceeded not usually one subsidy or fifteen in 2. or 3. years space) the infinite unspeakable Oppressions, Rapines, Plunders, Sequestrations, Confisca∣tions, Forfeitures of our Offices, Lands, Estates; Impri∣sonments, close Imprisonments, Confinements, Banish∣ments, illegal Restraints, executions of our person, ran∣sacking of our Houses, Studies, Writings, and other grie∣vances, outrages, violences we have suffred by Unparlia∣mentary Convinticles, arbitrary tyrannical Committees, new High Courts of Injustice, Army Officers, Souldiers, Sequestrators, Excisemen, and other instruments of Op∣pression; the Sales, dissipations of all the Crown Lands, Rents, and standing publick Revenues of our 3 kingdoms, which should defray the ordinary expences of the Govern∣ment; of Bishops, Deans, Chapters, and many thousands of Delinquents lands, estates, woods, timber, without any abatement of publike Taxes; the impoverishment, de∣struction of most of the antient Nobility, Gentry, Corpo∣rations throughout our 3. Realms; the infinite decay of all sorts of Trade by Land and Sea, of publick and private justice, truth, honesty, integrity, charity, amity, civil so∣ciety, hospitality, neighbourhood, friendship; the inun∣dation of all sorts of vices, treachery, perjury, hypocrisie, cheating, lying, dissimulation, subornation of perjury, false accusations, forcible ejectments, detainers, robberies, murders, treasons, destruction of Houses, Timber, Parks, Woods, Ponds, Forests, with other miseries tending to pub∣like desolation, we have , suffered, groaned under, with∣out intermission, or any hopes or probability of redresse;
with sundry other incroachments upon the City and Country in the Freedom of their Elections of Mayos, Al∣dermen, Officers, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses; and the fre∣quent securing, secluding of Parliament Members, & forces upon Parliaments themselves to interrupt, dissolve them ever since the abolishing of our Kings, Kingly Government, the erection of a pretended Free State, or Commonwealth, and prologues thereunto; compared with Judges 17. 6, &c. c. 18. 1, &c. c. 21. 25. Ezech. 19. 12, 13, 14. c. 21. 27. c. 29. 14, 15. Hos. 3. 4. c. 10. 3, 7, 15. Are an in∣fallible, experimental, sensible evidence, and demonstrati∣on, that Kings and Kingly Government are Englands true, only publike interest, as Men. That it is so, as Christians, is apparent: 1. By Gods own promise to his Church and people un∣der the Gospel:Isay 49. 23. c. 60. 3, 10, 11. That KINGS shall be their nursing Fa∣thers, and QUEENS their nursing Mothers; more parti∣cularly Ps. 72. 10, 11. Isa. 42. 4, 12. c. 51. 5. c. 60. 3, 9, 10. c. 66. 19. KINGS OF THE ISLES, (chiefly ve∣rified of our Island, as I have evidenced in my Narrative, p. 84. and Sir Henry Spelman in his Councils, and Epistle to them) and none other kinde of Governors expressed by name, but they, in sacred Writ. 2. By the 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2, 3. I exhort therefore, that First of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all men; for KINGS, and for all in eminent places (under them) that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; for this is good, and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour: Compared with Ezra 6. 10. c. 7. 23. Jer. 9. 7. Which duty of making Supplications, prayers, intercessions for Kings and Emperors, whether Pagan or Christian, Heterodox or Orthodox, Protectors or Persecu∣tors, the Churches, Christians & Saints of God in all ages, places, kingdoms have constantly & conscientiously practi∣sed, as their Interest, and the principal mean prescribed by God himself, for their quiet, peace, good, welfare, safey, pros∣perity, increase in godlinesse, honesty, and well-pleasing unto God their Saviour (whosePs. 63. 3. loving kindnesse is better to them than life, and their greatest felicity) as I intend to evidence in a par∣ticular
Treatise. Neither hath the Church and people of England been inferior to any others in this duty, as I could abundantly evidence by ancient Canons, Missals, Processio∣nals, Liturgies, theCl. 22 E. 1. dors. 10, 11. Cl. 24 E. 1. d. 8. 10. Cl. 27 E. 1. d. 7. Cl. 32 E. 1. d. 7. 16. Cl. 34 E. 1. d. 9. 16. Cl. 35 E. 1. d. 9. 15, 17. Clause Rolls in the Tower, and other testimonies, with the praiers used at our Kings Coronati∣ons before the Reformation of Religion, which I preter∣it, and shall give you only a brief touch of their loyalty and practice since we became Protestants. At the respec∣tive Coronations of King Edward the 6. King James, and King Charles, there were sundry excellent fervent Prayers and supplications powred out to God with ardent affecti∣ons on their behalfs: wherein all the Prelates, Clergy, No∣bility, Gentry, people present at this solemnity prayed fre∣quently for the KINGS long life, health, wealth, bonor, safety, prosperous reign, victory over all his Enemies, increase of all roy∣al graces,b Liber Rega∣lis. Ms. The Breef of the Rites & Pray∣ers used at the Kings Coro∣nation Ms. vertues, for all temporal, spiritual blessings, and eternal glory in heaven, &c. to be abundantly powred forth upon his own royal person; and likewise for the increase and succession of his royal posterity in the throne in all ages, in these ensu∣ing words in 3. several praiers. Establish him in the Throne of this Realm, Visit him with increase of children, that his children may be Kings to rule this Kingdom by successi∣on of all Ages. Let the Blessings of him that appeared in the bush descend upon his head, and the fulness of his bles∣sings fall upon his children and posterity. Let his horn e exalted as the horn of a Ʋnicorn, by which he may scatter his enemies from the face of the earth. The Lord which sit∣teth in heaven be his Defender for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. After sundry such prayers and his Coronation, all the Spiritual & Temporal Lords present kneel down and do their Homage to him in these words. I become your Man, and shall be faithfull and true, and troth bear unto you our Soveraign Lord, and to your heirs Kings of England, of life and limb, and of earthly worship, against all men that now live and die. And I shall do and truly knowledge the service of the Lands which I claim to hold of you. So God help me. All of them kissing the Kings left cheek.
The Homage being ended, they all touch the Crown with their hands, by way of Ceremony, as promising to support it with all their power. Which done, they All holding up their hands together, in token of their Fide∣lity, with one voyce on their knees say, We offer to sustein and defend you and your Crown with our Lives, lands and goods against all the world: and with one voyce cry, God save King CHARLES. Which all the people follow with reiterated shouts and acclamations. After the Coronation of every King, and of our last King Charles, in all Churches, Chapels, and religious Families throughout his Domini∣ons, and in both Houses of Parliament every day they sate (as well after as before the wars) constant publique and private prayers, were continually made to like effect for Him and His royal posterity, as the Liturgy, Collects in the Book of Common Prayer, the Directory it self, the Practice of Piety, & other Prayer-books prescribing forms of Prayer for private persons and Families morning and evening, and e∣very mans experience attest; yea such was our zeal and de∣votion in this kinde, that most persons concluded all their Graces before and after meat, with this prayer, or the like in effect, God save his Church, our King, Prince, the Roy∣al issue and Realms; God send us peace in Christ our Lord, Amen. As being Englands true Interest both as Men and Christians. How can, how dare we then unpray, re∣nounce, abjure, engage, subscribe, vote, fight against all those publike, private prayers, Graces we thus constantly, fervently made to God for sundry years together, and the Oathes, Homage, Fealty, Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant we successively swore in the name, presence of Almighty God, with hands and hearts lifted up to him, by praying, engaging, subscribing, voting, fighting against the Kings right Heir, Successor, and Royal Issue, and banishing, dishinheriting, renouncig, abjuring, se∣cluding them out of all our Churches, Prayers, Realms for ever, to set up an Ʋtopian Republike, withoutGal. 6. 7. mocking God himself to his very face, willfully violating this Evangeli∣cal precept, contradicting the practice of all the Churches,
Saints of God in all ages, places, yea disclaiming Englands publike with our own private Interest, and forfeiting our own eternal Interest in Heaven, as we are Saints and Chri∣stians? I beseech all Christian Englishmen in the name and fear of God, most seriously to consider and lay it close to their consciences, without delay; and examine how they can justifie, excuse it either to God or Man. 3ly. By the extraordinary inundation, growth, increase of all sorts of Blasphemies, Heresies, Errors, Religions, Sects, Atheism, Irreligion, prophanesse, contempt, rejecti∣on, denial of Gods word, Sacraments, Ministers, Ordi∣nances, Prayer, singing of Psalms, Catechising, repetition of Sermons, Apostacy, Lukewarmnesse, Hypocrisie, Per∣jury, Spiritual and outward pride, effeminacy, luxury, whoredom, incest, hypocrisie, formality, envy, hatred, ma∣lice, back-biting, slandering, sacrilege, libertinism, cove∣tousnesse, oppression, cruelty, all sorts of ins and wicked∣nesses whatsoever. The strange decay, decrease of true real Christian zeal, piety, devotion, faith, love, charity, bro∣therly kindnesse, heavenly mindednesse, contempt of the world, fear of Gods threatnings, judgements, and all other Christian graces, virtues: substractions of Ministers Tithes, Dues, Glebes, Rewards, Pensions, Benefices, Augmenta∣tions; scorned, reviled, railed against, disturbed, persecu∣ted by Sectaries, Quakers; sequestred, suspended, ejected, si∣lenced by Arbitrary Committees, as meer Tenants at will of their Ministry and Freeholds, ever since the abolishing of Kings, their Nursing-Fathers, by those various Step Fa∣thers, and Plunderers of the Church and Ministers who have hitherto succeeded them, and given publike tolerati∣on, protection to all Religions, Sects, Seducers, almost to the total extirpation of the true Orthodox Reformed Re∣ligion throughout our Dominions. To this I shall adde, that as there neither is nor can be any possible ease, or cure of dislocated, fractured joynts, bones, limbs in the natural body, nor restitution of health and soundnesse to it by any unguents, cerots, balms, bol∣sters or artifices whatsoever, but only by the timely, spee∣dy
restitution of every bone, joynt, member to its proper place, and keeping them therein by strong astringent medi∣caments and ligaments: So all our new State-physicians, Chirurgions,See their De∣claration, May 6. 1659. Politicians, Councils at Westminster, White-hall, or in the Army, with all their ar, skill, for near 12. year space together, by all their New-projected models of Republikes, Parliaments, Governments since the abolish∣ing KingS and Kingship, could not hitherto ease, cure, or restore to health, the inverted, broken bodies of our Church, State, (which have grown every year more and more consumptive, convulsive, decrepit, incurable, disquie∣ted, tormented, and lie now at the very point of death, under all their several applications, as we feel by sad expe∣rience) because they have not endeavoured to restore the fractured, dislocated chief Members, bones, joynts there of to their proper places, but laboured all they could to keep and put them further out; When as there neither is nor can be any probable or possible way of restoring ease, health, soundnesse, safety, prosperity to them, but by a speedy restauration of their lawfull hereditary Head, and Noblest Members to their due places, offices in them. This consideration, not only the secured and secluded Members made the ground-work of their premised Vote, Decemb. 5. 1648. upon the long Debate; but likewise both Houses, Kingdoms, and those now sitting together with them, the basis of their Protestation, League, Covenant, Petitions to, and Treaties with the late King, and of these two Memo∣rable Protestations, Passages in theirExact Collec∣tion, p. 663, 664, 695, 696, See p. 631, 632 633. 641, to 645, 657, 658. Declarations of October 22. and Novemb. 2. 1642. worthy consideration. We the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do in the presence of Almighty God, for the satisfaction of our Conscien∣ces, and the Discharge of that great trust which lies upon us, make this Protestation and Declaration to the Kingdom and Nation, and the whole World; That no private passion or respect, no evil intention to his Majesties person, no de∣sign to the prejudice of his Just Honor and Authority, en∣gaged us to raise forces, or take take up Arms against the Authors of this war, wherewith the Kingdom is now enflamed, and We
have alwaies desired from our hearts and souls, manifest∣ed in our ations and proceedings, and in several humble Petitions and Remnstrances to his Majesty, professed our Loyalty and obedience to his Crown, readiness and resolution to de∣fend his Person and support his Estate with our lives and fortunes to the uttermost of our power: And by our loyal affections, actions and advice lay a sure and lasting foundation of the greatness and prosperity of his Maje∣sty, and his royal posterity in future time. Mark their reason: For though the happiness of this and all other Kingdoms dependeth chiefly upon God; Yet we acknowledge that it doth so mainly depend upon His Majesty and the Royal Branches of that Root, that as we have heretofore, so we shall hereafter esteem no hazard too great, no reproach too vile, but that we shall willingly go through the one, and undergo the other, that we and the whole Kingdom may enjoy that happiness, which we cannot in an ordinary way of providence expect from any other Fountain or Streams than those from whence (were the poyson of evil Counsels once removed from about them) we doubt not but we and the whole Kingdom should be satisfied most abundantly. The PhilosopherDe Clemen∣tia, l. 1. c. 3, 4. Seneca asserts, That all Nations are most rea∣dy not only to guard and defend their King, though old or decrepit, but to preserve his life with the hazard of thou∣sands of their own; not out of any basenesse or frenzie, but be∣cause it is their own interest and safety. Ille est enim vinculum per quod Respublica cohaeret; ille spiritus vitalis, quem haec tot millia traunt, nihil ipsa per se futura, nisi onus & praeda, si mens illa imperii subtrabatur. —Virgil. Ge∣org. l. 2. Rege incolumi mens omnibus una; Amisso rupêre fidem: Hic casus Romanae (I may add Anglicae) paci exitium erit, hic tanti fortunam populi in ruinas aget. Tamdiu ab illo periculo aberit hic populus, quamdiu sciat ferre fraenos: quos si aliquando ab∣ruperit, vel aliquo casu discussos reponi sibi passus non erit, haec unitas, et hic maximi Imperii contextus i partes multas dis∣siliet, idemque huic urbi Dominandi finis erit, qui pa∣rendi
fuerit (which we have found true by sad experience) Ideo Principes, Regésque non est mirum amari ultra privatas st∣am necessitudines. Nam si sanis hominibus publica privatis po∣tiora sunt; sequitur, ut  quoque carior sit, in quem se Respub∣lica convertit. Olim enim ita se induit Reip: Caesar ut diduci alterom non possit sine utriusque pernicie: nam ut illi viribus opus est, ita et huic capite. Therefore let Nedham, Rogers, or other Pseudo politicians scrible what they please, to flatter any prevalent, ambitious, covetous facti∣on or Grandees whatsoever, yet if all our antient Parlia∣ments, Lords, Commons, Seneca, our own experience, God himself, or Solomn the wisest of men, of Kings, may be cre∣dited (Prov. 24. 21. c. 28. 2. Eccles 8 2, 3. c. 12, 13. Hos. 10. 3, 7. Hab. 1. 10, 14, 15. Ezech. 37. 19. to 28. Zach 9. 9. Lam 4. 20) there is no other probable, safe, speedy way to prevent our ruine, cloze up our breaches, settle our Church, State up∣on lasting foundations, and recover their pristine honor, wealth, peace, unity, prosperity, but by restoring our he∣reditary King and Kingship, the real Interest of all Eng∣land, and of Scotland and Ireland too, both as Men and Christians: which we ought in prudence, justice, consci∣ence, dutie, pietie, loyaltie, now zealously, constantly, unanimously to pursue against all contradictions, opposi∣tions of any private persons, parties self interests whatsoe∣ver: who if they had any true fear of God, any conscience of their former Oathes, Protestations, Vows, Covenants, Declarations, Remonstrances, any Loyaltie to their he∣reditarie King, any bowels of compassion or cordial affec∣tion to their Native Countries peace, safety, ease, settle∣ment, or zeal to the Reformed Religion, would like that heroick publike spirited Pagan Roman Emperoruetonius, Tacitus, Eu∣tropius, plu∣tarch, & Grim∣ston in his life. Otho, chuse rather to make a voluntary sacrifice of themselves and all their usurped power (as he did, against all the dissuasions of his Army, Soldiers, Friends, relinquishing the Empire to Vitellius his competitor) than imbroil the Empire and Ro∣mans any longer in bloudy destructive wars, not against Hanni∣bal, Pyrrhus, or any other common Enemies  ome,  a∣gainst the Romans themselves, wherein both the  and
conquered did but weaken, ruine and destroy their own Country, Nation by their contests, and make themselves a derision, prey to their forein Enemies: as our Grandees do now. For the Negative; That the late revived yet unformed Com∣monwealth, and its future establishment, to prevent a Relapse to Kingly Government, neither is, nor can be Englands true interest as men or Christian, is evident by the premises: and these ensuing Reasons. 1. It never was once in imagination or projection of the Parliament or Army, before the year 1648. but only of the Jesuites, Campanella, and our Spanish, French, Popish adver∣saries, purposely to ruine our Protestant Kings, Kingdom, Religion. 2. It was professedly disclaimed,Exact Col∣lection. p. 657, 658, 695, 696 See my Speech, p. 80, 81, 101, 102, 103. voted, declared against, as Treasonable, and destructive to the being of Parliaments and fundamental Government of the Kingdom (when objected by the Kings party, 1642. and propounded to the House by the Levellers and Agitators) by both Houses of Parliament and the General Council of Officers in the Army: in June, July, August, November 1647. 3. The Commonwealth contested for as Englands Inte∣rest, is as yet but only Ens in potentia, or meer Chaos, Ovid Meta∣morph. lib. 1. rudis indigestaque moles;Gen. 1. 2. without form and void, and dark∣ness is upon the face of it; the chief Sticklers for it, being not yet accorded what kinde of creature it shall be; and much divided both in their debates, judgements, affections, opini∣ons concerning it: Some would have it to be anRogers Con∣certation, p. 62, 70, &c. Aristo∣craty, others a Democraty, many a Theocraty, some an Oli∣garchy; Many are for a Roman, some for an Athenian, o∣thers for a Lacedemonian, not a few for a Venetian, another partie for a Helvetian, or Dutch Commonwealth. Some for a vast body with two heads; others for a head with two bodies; a third sort, for a body without any head: printing against each others models with much eagerness. Now that such an Individuum vagum, rude Chaos, and Commonwealth as this, not yet agreed upon, should be Englands Interest, and THE GOOD OLD CAUSE, a Rogers, Nedham, Harrington, and others would make men believe, is not only a Fancy,
but Frenzy to airm; seeing Englands Interest was ever in being since it was a Kingdom, and their Ʋtopian Republike like the Chymists Philosophersstone, never yet in esse, but in fieri, or fancy at the most, and a meer NEW NOTHING, as their Mercuries inform us. 4ly▪ The late unshaped, revived Commonwealth and pre∣tended Free State, at its first erection, like a prodigious All devouring, unsatiable Monster, raied our monethly con∣tributions, from 3. to one hundred, and sixscore thou∣sand pounds contribution each moneth, and since its new revival hath raised a whole years tax upon our exhausted purses in 3. Months space, and then imposed no lesse than one hundred thousand pounds each Moneth, in lieu of the former 35 thousand; besides Excises, Customs, New in∣tollerable Militiaes, amounting to thrice as much more: Besides it consumed all the Crown-lands, Church-lands, & publike Revenues of our 3. Kingdoms, with thousands of Delinquents estates, all alienated, dissipated, being more expensive, oppressive, wastefull to our Nation in ten years space, than all our Kings since the Norman Conquest, or Sax∣on line; only to make us greater slaves to our late Mercinary Army, Servants, & Fellow Subjects, than ever we were to our beheaded King, or any of his roial predecessors, whose 2 Chron. 0. 10. loyns were nothing so heavy, as their little finger; chastising us with Scorpions in new arbitrary, tyrannical Committees, High Courts of Justice, and other exorbitant Judicatures; when as our Kings corrected us but with rods. It hath subverted our Kings, Parliaments, Peers, Laws, Liberties, Properties, Great Charters, legal Courts, Writs, Seals, Commissions, Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Officers, Coyn, Government, destroyed our publike and private wealth, Trade, Unitie, Amitie, Peace, Timber, Palaces, Woods, Shipping, and many thousands of our gallantest Sea-men, Land-men, by bloudy wars with our Protestant Brethren, Allies, and brought us to the very brink of ruin in all our Civil Con∣cernments, as Men. As Christians, by its toleration, fo∣mentation of Sects, Heresies of all sorts, it hath shaken, un∣dermined in a great measure, the very Deitie of God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, the Trini∣tie of Persons and Unitie in the Godhead; the Authori∣tie, Divinitie of the Scriptures; all the Artiles of the Creed, the Sacraments, Ministers and Ministrie of the Gos∣pel; the Fabricks of many, the Freeholds of all; the main∣tenance of most of our Churches, Ministers, all now meer Tenants at sufferance, and removable, sequestrable, taxable at our Republican Grandees pleasures, yea their new He∣ralds, Baylifs to proclame in Churches whatever they pre∣scribe, under pain of ejectment or their heaviest indignati∣on. In brief, the introduction of our unshaped Repub∣like by Perjurie, Treacherie, Violence, bloud, fraud, Injustice, destruction of our Protestant Kings, Lords, Parliaments, hath made many zealous professors of Religion Jesuites in their policies, principles, practises,Titus 1. 16. 2  1. 1. Jude 4. Atheists in their works; Christ himself and the Gospel (as the Atheistical Pope estee∣med them) a meer Fable, in the repute of many, yea the Protestant Religion, a meer seminary of Treason, Rebellion, Sedition, Hypocrisie, Perjury, Disloyalty, Villany, Ataxy, An∣timonarchy; and the zealous Professors of it, the meer fire∣brands of Rebellion, Sedition, high Treason against their Sove∣raigns, in the estimation ofCornelius Cornelii Prae∣fatio in Mino∣res Prophetas. Militiere his Victory of Truth. See my Narrative, p. 55. Foreign Jesuits, Papists, and Popish Princes; who endeavour their total extirpation through∣out the world as such. And can it be then Englands true In∣terest, as Men or Christians? 5. J. Rogers himself (the Grand Champion for the Good Old Cause and Commonwealth) in his Concertation, p. 100, 103, 104, 116, 117. informs us; That Commonwealths are alwayes subject to frequent changes and alterations; every one more oppressive, tyrannical, cruel, bloudy, prejudicial, destructive to the peoples Liberties, properties, lives, than the other; instan∣cing in the Romans, and Athenians, which committed the grea∣test outrages upon the people, being little better than a daily Massa∣cre of the most eminent Worthies, and Hangmen, Tormentors of the Commons; Which Vicissitudes, Alterations, proved the Athenians utter destruction, and may be a fair warning to us; be∣cause the Causes of such mutations, are the most dangerous Com∣motions, which tend to the Ruine of All; as he proves but
of Aristotle Polit. l. 5. c. 1. for prevention whereof he pre∣scribi 12 Considerations, unable to cure the fluctuatinge un∣certain state and mischief of a Commonwealth; of which we have already had, and shall sodenly have again sufficient experience. And can a Commonwealth then be Englands present or future Interest in any sence? In brief, as it is the beautie, safety, interest of every natural living body, whether of men, beasts, fowls, fishes, or creeping things to have only one head to govern, one Soul to ani∣mate it by Gods own most divine and wise institution; a two-headed bodie being an unnatural uselesse Monster, and a double-souled man, creature, unstable in all his wayes, Jam. 1. 8. So it is the safetie, beautie, interest, ligament of every Poli∣tick bodie whatsoever. Hence we find not only in all Mo∣narchies, but in all Republikes themselves, one Master over every Family, one Mayor over every City, one Rector over every College, School, Hospital, Fraternitie; one Sheriff over every County, one Governor over every Province, one Rector over every Parish Church and Congregation, as there is butEzech. 37. 23. Ephes. 4. 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 8. 4, 6. one King, Lord, Head, Mediator Jesus Christ, over the Catholike Church; one Pilot over every ship, one Admiral in chief over every Fleet; and in Armies them∣selves, one General and Chief Commander over every Ar∣my, Brigade, Partie; one Colonel over every Regiment, one Captain over every Companie, Troop, one Gover∣nor over every Fort, Garison both abroad and at home; a Pluralitie of Lords, Masters, Generals, Governours, Rec∣tors, &c. being alwaies in all and every of these not only dangerous, troublesom, inconvenient, chargable, but distrac∣tive and destructive too, as all Ages, Nations have conclu∣ded from reason and experience. Therefore, a Monarchi∣cal, hereditarie Kingly Government (let Rogers, Nedham, and our Innovating frantick Republicans prate what they will) must be Englands true and only Interest, honor, safety, felicity, both as Men and Christians, so long as there shall be butGen. 1. 16. Psalm 136. 8. one Sun in the heavens to rule the day, and one Moon the night. Monarchy and One-nesse being the only Ground, ligament of Peace, Unity, Safety both in Church &
State; but Polarchie the cause of ruin, confusion; as God only wise resolves against all brain sick Novellers, Ephes. 4. 3, 4, 5. 6, 1 Cor. 8. 6. c.. 12. 4, 5, 6, 11, to 31. Pro. 28. 2. Isay 19. 2, 3. c. 9. 19, 20, 21. Ezech. 37. 22, to 28. 1 Kings 14. 30. c. 15. 7. 16. Let this last Question be now put to all the Freemen of the English Nation (and of Scotland, Ireland too) whom it all alike concerns, and theIn their Agreement of the people, & Declaration 20. Nov. 1648. Army with thoseJan. 6. 1648. now sit∣ting, have formerly voted, TO BE THE ONLY SU∣PREME AUTHORITY OF THE NATION, and themselves to be but their Servants, not their Sove∣raigns, and therefore cannot in reason, justice, conscience deny them, or any of them the freedom of their voices here∣in, in the present juncture of our affairs; and then I dare pawn my reputation, life, against my Antagonists. I shall have above a thousand voices concurring with me, to one, consenting with them: And having both Vox Populi, and Vox Dei too, thus suffragating with me, in the Supreme u∣niversal Parliament of all English Freemen without the House, I hope no private Persons, not commissioned by the peoples free elections, will presume to contradict or repeal their Major Vote, within the Commons House, though they have thrice secluded me out of it by armed guards, before any legal Accusation, trial or conviction whatsoever, from pleading of this their publike cause therein: which I wholly submit to their Universal Censure and Decisi∣on, till we can gain a full and free, much-desired legal Par∣liament in both houses, to resolve this doubt, which Gods wonderworking Providence, I trust will ere long effect, by dashing the Army and their new Juncto sudainly in pieces against each other, and turning them all out of dores, with greater contempt, violence, hatred, dissipation than before, April 20. 163.  being a principle in Law, Policy, Nature; Eodem modo quo quid constituitur, dissolvi∣tur, and a just Judgement of God, to cast them out of the House, for their most treasonable Ʋsurpation of a Regal and Parliamental power over the whole three Kingdoms, and seclud∣ing the majority of their fellow Members against all Rules
of Law, Justice, Conscience, the Rights, Privileges of Par∣liament, and their former Protestation, League, Cove∣nant, Remonstrances, by the self-same ArmyOfficers, who▪ secluded them by their confederacie; and now have called them in again, for the ends recited in my Narrative; Which if they refuse to prosecute▪ at the Armies and Secta∣ries instigation, John Rogers his scurrilous Passages and Queres, against the old secluded Members, p. 7, 38, 39, &c. and Nehams large Justification of their former seclusion, upon false, irrational, Jesuitical Principles, will sufficient∣ly animate them to thrust their Masters out of doors, up∣pon the self-same reasons and false pretences he allegeth for that seclusion, with their approbation; yea Rogers his discontented Passages forecited, (p. 46, 47.) threaten some sudden approaching storm and ejection to them which they shall not escape; —Nec enim Lex justior ulla Quam necis artifices ari perire suâ. So that all the surviving re-secluded Members, and our op∣pressed wearied Nations shae ere long once more have cause to say and sing with the Kingly Prophet, Ps. 9. 15, 16. The Heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made; in the net which they id, is their own foot taken. The Lord is known by the judgement which be executeth, the wicked is snared in the works of his own hands. Haggaion. Slah. , Sept. 23. 60. FINIS.
