P4293 11734023 48451
THE SPEECH OR DECLARATION OF JOHN PYM, Esquire: After the Recapitulation or summing up of the Charge of High-Treason, AGAINST THOMAS, EARLE OF STRAFFORD, 12. APRIL, 1641. Published by Order of the COMMONS HOUSE. LONDON, Printed for JOHN BARTLET, 1641.
THE SPEECH OR DECLARATION OF JOHN PYM, Esq &c. MY LORDS, MAny dayes have been spent in maintenance of the Impeach∣ment of the Earle of Strafford, by the House of Commons, whereby he stands charged with High Treason: And your Lordships have heard his Defence with Patience, and with as much favour as Iustice would allow: We have passed through our
Evidence, and the Result of all this is, that it remaines clearly proved, That the Earle of Strafford hath indeavoured by his words, actions, and counsels, to subvert the Fundamentall Lawes of England and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannicall Government. This is the envenomed Arrow for which he inquired in the beginning of his Replication this day, which hath infected all his Bloud: This is that Intoxicating Cup, (to use his owne Metaphor) which hath tainted his Iudgement, and poisoned his Heart: From hence was infused that Specificall Difference which tur∣ned his Speeches, his Actions, his Counsels into Treason; Not Cumulative, as he exprest it, as if many Misdemeanours could make one Treason; but Formally and Essentially. It is the End that doth informe Actions, and doth specificate the nature of them, making not onely criminall, but even indifferent words and actions to be Treason, being done and spoken with a Trea∣sonable intention. That which is given me in charge, is, to
shew the quality of the offence, how hainous it is in the nature, how mischievous in the effect of it; which will best appeare if it be exami∣ned by that Law, to which he himselfe appea∣led, that universall, that supreme Law, Salus po∣puli: This is the Element of all Laws, out of which they are derived; the End of all Laws, to which they are designed, and in which they are perfected. How far it stands in op∣position to this Law, I shall endeavour to shew in some Considerations which I shal pre∣sent to your Lordships, all arising out of the Evidence which hath been opened. The first is this: It is an offence comprehen∣ding all other offences; here you shall finde severall Treasons, Murders, Rapines, Oppressions, Perjuries. The Earth hath a Seminarie vertue, where∣by it doth produce all Hearbs, and Plants, and other Vegetables: There is in this Crime, a Se∣minarie of all evils hurtfull to a State; and if you consider the reasons of it, it must needs be so: The Law is that which puts a difference
betwixt good and evill, betwixt just and unjust; If you take away the Law, all things will fall into a confusion, every man will become a Law to himselfe, which in the depraved condition of humane nature, must needs produce many great enormities: Lust will become a Law, and Envie will become a Law, Covetousnesse and Ambiti∣on will become Lawes; and what dictates, what decisions such Laws will produce, may easily be discerned in the late Government of Ireland: The Law hath a power to prevent, to restraine, to repaire evils; without this all kind of mischiefs and distempers will break in upon a State. It is the Law that doth intitle the King to the Allegeance and service of his people; it intitles the people to the protection and justice of the King. It is God alone who subsists by himselfe, all other things subsist in a mutuall dependence and relati∣on. He was a wise man that said, that the King subsisted by the field that is tilled: It is the labour of the people that supports the Crowne: If you take away the protection of the King, the vigour and cheerfulness of Allegeance will be ta∣ken away, though the Obligation remaine.
The Law is the Boundarie, the Measure be∣twixt the Kings Prerogative, and the Peoples Li∣berty: Whiles these move in their owne Orbe, they are a support and security to one another; The Prerogative a cover and defence to the Li∣berty of the people, and the people by their liberty are enabled to be a foundation to the Preroga∣tive; but if these bounds be so removed, that they enter into contestation and conflict, one of these mischiefes must needs ensue: If the Pre∣rogative of the King overwhelm the liberty of the people, it will be turned into Tyrannie; if liberty undermine the Prerogative, it will grow into Anarchie. The Law is the safeguard, the custody of all private interest: Your Honours, your Lives, your Liberties and Estates are all in the keeping of the Law; without this, every man hath a like right to any thing, and this is the condition into which the Irish were brought by the E. of Strafford: And the reason which he gave for it, hath more mischiefe in it then the thing it selfe, They were a Conquered Nation. There can∣not be a word more pregnant, and fruitfull
in Treason, then that word is: There are few Nations in the world that have not been con∣quered; and no doubt but the Conquerour may give what Lawes he please to those that are conquered: But if the succeeding Pacts and Agreements doe not limit and restraine that Right, what people can be secure? England hath been conquered, and Wales hath been con∣quered, and by this reason will be in little bet∣ter case then Ireland. If the King by the Right of a Conquerour gives Lawes to his People, shall not the people by the same reason be restored to the Right of the conquered, to recover their liberty if they can? What can be more hurtfull, more pernicious to both, then such Propositions as these? And in these particulars is determi∣ned the first Consideration. The second Consideration is this: This Arbi∣trary  power is dangerous to the Kings Person, and dangerous to his Crown: It is apt to cherish Am∣bition, usurpation, and oppression in great men, and to beget sedition and discontent in the Peo∣ple; and both these have beene, and in rea∣son must ever be causes of great trouble and
alteration to Princes and States. If the Histories of those Easterne Countries be perused, where Princes order their affaires ac∣cording to the mischievous principles of the E. of Strafford, loose and absolved from all Rules of Go∣vernment, they will be found to be frequent in combustions, full of Massacres, and of the tragicall ends of Princes. If any man shall look into our owne Stories, in the times when the Laws were most neglected, he shall find them full of Commotions, of Civill distempers; whereby the Kings that then reigned, were alwayes kept in want and distresse; the people consumed with Civill wars: and by such wicked counsels as these, some of our Princes have beene brought to such miserable ends, as no ho∣nest heart can remember without horrour, and earnest Prayer, that it may never be so againe. The third Consideration is this, The subver∣sion  of the Lawes; And this Arbitrary power, as it is dangerous to the Kings Person and to his Crowne, so is it in other respects very prejudiciall
to his Majesty in his Honour, Profit, and Great∣nesse; and yet these are the gildings and paintings that are put upon such counsels; These are for your Honour, for your service; whereas in truth they are contrary to both: But if I shall take off this varnish, I hope they shall then appeare in their owne native deformity, and therefore I desire to consider them by these Rules. It cannot be for the Honour of a King, that his sacred Authority should be used in the pra∣ctise of injustice and oppression; that his Name should be applyed to patronize such horrid crimes, as have beene represented in Evidence against the Earle of Strafford; and yet how fre∣quently, how presumptuously his Commands, his Letters have been vouched throughout the course of this Defence, your Lordships have heard. When the Iudges doe justice, it is the Kings justice, and this is for his honour, be∣cause he is the Fountaine of justice; but when they doe injustice, the offence is their owne: But those Officers and Ministers of the King, who are most officious in the exercise of this
Arbitrarie power, they doe it commonly for their advantage; and when they are questio∣ned for it, then they fly to the Kings interest, to his Direction: And truly my Lords, this is a very unequall distribution for the King, that the dishonour of evill courses should be cast up∣on him, and they to have the advantage. The prejudice which it brings to him in re∣gard of his profit, is no lesse apparent: It de∣prives him of the most beneficiall, and most certaine Revenue of his Crowne, that is, the vo∣luntary aids and supplies of his people; his other Revenues, consisting of goodly Demeanes, and great Manors, have by Grants been alienated from the Crowne, and are now exceedingly di∣minished and impaired: But this Revenue it can∣not be sold, it cannot be burdned with any Pen∣sions or Annuities, but comes intirely to the Crowne. It is now almost fifteene years since his Majesty had any assistance from his people; and these illegall wayes of supplying the King were never prest with more violence, and art, then they have been in this time; and yet I may upon very good grounds affirm, that
in the last fifteene years of Queen Elizabeth, she received more by the Bounty and Affection of her Subjects, then hath come to His Maje∣sties Coffers by all the inordinate and rigorous courses which have beene taken. And as those Supplies were more beneficiall in the Receipt of them, so were they like in the use and im∣ployment of them. Another way of prejudice to his Majesties profit, is this: Such Arbitrary courses exhaust the people, and disable them, when there shall be occasion, to give such plentifull supplies, as otherwise they would doe. I shall need no other proofe of this, then the Irish Government under my L. of Strafford, where the wealth of the Kingdome is so consumed by those horrible exactions and burdens, that it is thought the Subsidies lately granted will amount to little more then halfe the proportion of the last Sub∣sidies. The two former wayes are hurtfull to the Kings profit, in that respect which they call Lucrum Cessans, by diminishing his re∣ceipts; But there is a third, fuller of mischiefe, and it is in that respect which they call
Damnum emergens, by increasing his Disburse∣ments: Such irregular and exorbitant attempts upon the Libertie of the people, are apt to pro∣duce such miserable distractions and distem∣pers, as will put the King and Kingdome to such vast expences and losses in a short time, as will not be recovered in many yeares: Wee need not goe farre to seeke a proofe of this, these two last yeares will be a sufficient evi∣dence, within which time I assure my selfe, it may be proved, that more Treasure hath beene wasted, more losse sustained by his Majesty and his Subjects, then was spent by Queene Elizabeth in all the War of Tyrone, and in those many brave Attempts against the King of Spaine, and the royall assistance which she gave to France, and the Low-Countries, du∣ring all her Reigne. As for Greatnesse, this Arbitrary power is apt to hinder and impaire it, not onely at home, but abroad. A Kingdome is a society of men conjoyned under one Government, for the common good: The world is a society of Kingdomes and States. The Kings greatnesse
consists not onely in his Dominion over his Subjects at home, but in the influence which he hath upon States abroad; That he should be great even among Kings, and by his wisdome and authority so to incline and dispose the af∣faires of other States and Nations, and those great events which fall out in the world, as shall be for the good of Mankind, and for the peculiar advantage of his owne people. This is the most glorious, and magnificent greatness, to be able to relieve distressed Princes, to sup∣port his owne friends and Allies, to prevent the ambitious designes of other Kings; and how much this Kingdome hath been im∣paired in this kinde, by the late mischievous counsels your Lordships best know, who at a neerer distance, and with a more cleare sight, doe apprehend these publique and great affaires, then I can doe. Yet thus much I dare boldly say, that if his Maiestie had not with great wisdome and goodness forsaken that way wherein the Earle of Strafford had put him, we should within a short time have been brought into that miserable conditi∣on, as to have been uselesse to our friends, con∣temptible
to our enemies, and uncapable of undertaking any great designe either at home or abroad. A fourth Consideration is, That this Ar∣bitrary, and Tyrannicall Power, which the E. of Strafford did exercise in his own person, and to which he did advise his Majesty, is inconsistent with the Peace, the Wealth, the Prosperity of a Nation; It is destructive to Justice, the Mother of Peace; to Industry, the spring of Wealth; to Valour, which is the active vertue whereby the prosperity of a Nation can onely be procured, confirmed, and inlarged. It is not only apt to take away Peace, and so intangle the Nation with Warres, but doth corrupt Peace, and puts such a malignity into it, as produceth the Effects of warre. We need seek no other proofe of this, but the E. of Straffords Government, where the Irish, both Nobility and others, had as little security of their Persons or Estates in this peaceable time, as if the Kingdome had been under the rage and fury of warre.
And as for Industrie, and Valour, who will take pains for that, which when he hath got∣ten, is not his own? Or who fight for that wherein he hath no other interest, but such as is subject to the will of another? The Anci∣ent encouragement to men that were to defend their Countries was this, That they were to hazard their Persons, pro Aris & Focis, for their Religion, and for their Houses; But by this Arbitrary way which was practised in Ireland, and counselled here, no man had any certainty, either of Religion, or of his House, or any thing else to be his own; But besides this, such Arbitrary courses have an ill ope∣ration upon the courage of a Nation, by em∣basing the hearts of the people: A servile con∣dition doth for the most part beget in men a slavish temper and disposition. Those that live so much under the Whip and the Pillory, and such ser∣vile Engines, as were frequently used by the E. of Strafford, they may have the dregges of valour, sullennesse, & stubbornnesse, which may make them prone to Mutinies, and discontents; but those Noble and gallant affections, which put men on brave Designes and Attempts for
the preservation or inlargement of a Kingdome, they are hardly capable of. Shall it be Treason to embase the Kings Coyne, though but a piece of twelve-pence, or sixe-pence, and must it not needs be the effect of a greater Treason, to em∣base the spirits of his Subjects, and to set a stamp and Character of servitude upon them, whereby they shall be disabled to doe any thing for the service of the King or Common-wealth? The fift Consideration is this, That the exer∣cise  of this Arbitrary Government, in times of sudden danger, by the invasion of an enemy, will disable his Majesty to preserve himselfe and his Subjects from that danger. This is the onely pretence by which the E. of Strafford, and such other mischievous Counsellors would induce his Majesty to make use of it; and if it be unfit for such an occasion, I know nothing that can be alledged in maintenance of it. When warre threatens a Kingdome by the comming of a forrain Enemy, it is no time then to discontent the people, to make them weary of the present Government, and more inclinable
to a Change; The supplies which are to come in this way, will be unready, uncertain; there can be no assurance of them, no dependence upon them, either for time or proportion: And if some money be gotten in such a way, the Distractions, Divisions, Distempers, which this course is apt to produce, will be more prejudici∣all to the publique safety, then the supply can be advantagious to it; and of this we have had sufficient experience the last Summer. The sixt, That this crime of subverting the Laws, and introducing an Arbitrary and Ty∣rannicall Government, is contrary to the Pact and Covenant betwixt the King and his people. That which was spoken of before, was the legall union of Allegeance and Protection; this is a personall union by mutuall agreement and stipu∣lation, confirmed by oath on both sides: The King and his people are obliged to one another in the nearest relations; He is a Father, and a childe is called in Law, Pars Patris: Hee is the Husband of the Common-wealth, they have the same interests, they are inseparable in their condition, be it good or evill; He is the
Head, they are the Body; there is such an incor∣poration as cannot be dissolved without the destruction of both. When Iustice Thorpe, in Edw. the thirds time, was by the Parliament condemned to death for Bribery, the reason of that Judgement is given, because he had broken the Kings Oath, not that he had broken his own oath, but that he had broken the Kings oath, that solemne and great obligation, which is the security of the whole Kingdome: If for a Judge to take a small summe in a private cause, was adjudged Capi∣tall, how much greater was this offence, whereby the E. of Strafford hath broken the Kings Oath in the whole course of his Govern∣ment in Ireland, to the prejudice of so many of his Majesties Subjects, in their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and to the danger of all the rest? The Doctrine of the Papists, Fides non est ser∣vanda cum Haereticis, is an abominable Doctrine: yet that other Tenet more peculiar to the Iesu∣ites is more pernicious, whereby Subjects are discharged from their Oath of Allegeance to
their Prince whensoever the Pope pleaseth; This may be added to make the third no lesse mischievous and destructive to humane society, then either of the rest; That the King is not bound by that Oath which he hath taken to observe the Laws of the Kingdome, but may when he sees cause, lay Taxes and burdens up∣on them without their consent, contrary to the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdome. This hath been preached and published by divers; And this is that which hath been practised in Ireland by the E. of Strafford, in his Govern∣ment there, and indeavoured to be brought into England, by his Counsell here. The seventh is this; It is an offence that is contrary to the end of Government; The end of Government was to prevent oppressions, to limit and restrain the excessive power and violence of great men, to open the passages of Iustice with indifferency towards all; This Arbitrary power is apt to induce and incourage all kind of insolencies. Another end of Government is to preserve men in their estates, to secure them in their
Lives and Liberties; but if this Designe had taken effect, and could have been setled in England, as it was practised in Ireland, no man would have had more certainty in his own, then power would have allowed him: But these two have been spoken of before, there are two behind more important, which have not yet been touched. It is the end of Government, that vertue should be cherisht, vice supprest; but where this Arbitrary and unlimited power is set up, a way is open not onely for the security, but for the advancement and incouragement of evill; Such men as are aptest for the execution and maintenance of this Power, are onely capa∣ble of preferment; and others who will not be instruments of any unjust commands, who make a conscience to doe nothing against the Laws of the Kingdome, and Liberties of the Sub∣ject, are not onely not passable for imployment, but subject to much jealousie and danger. It is the end of Government, that all accidents and events, all Counsels and Designes should be improved to the publique good: But this Arbi∣trary
Power is apt to dispose all to the mainte∣nance of it self. The wisdome of the Councell-Table, the Authority of the Courts of Justice, the industry of all the Officers of the Crown have been most carefully exercised in this; the Learning of our Divines, the Iurisdiction of our Bishops have been moulded and disposed to the same effect, which though it were begun before the E. of Straffords Imployment, yet it hath beene exceedingly furthered and ad∣vanced by him. Under this colour and pretence of maintai∣ning the Kings Power and Prerogative many dangerous practises against the peace and safety of this Kingdome have been undertaken and promoted. The increase of Popery, and the favours and incouragement of Papists have been, and still are a great grievance and dan∣ger to the Kingdome: The Innovations in mat∣ters of Religion, the usurpations of the Clergie, the manifold burdens and taxations upon the people, have been a great cause of our present distempers and disorders; and yet those who have been chiefe Furtherers and Actors of
such Mischiefes, have had their Credit and Authority from this, That they were for∣ward to maintain this Power. The E. of Strafford had the first rise of his greatnesse from this, and in his Apologie and Defence, as your Lordships have heard, this hath had a maine part. The Royall Power, and Majesty of Kings, is most glorious in the prosperity and happi∣nesse of the people; The perfection of all things consists in the end for which they were ordained, God onely is his own end, all other things have a further end beyond themselves, in attaining whereof their own happinesse consists: If the means and the end be set in opposition to one another, it must needs cause an impotency and defect of both. The eight Consideration is, The vanity and absurdity of those excuses and justifications which he made for himself, whereof divers particulars have been mentioned in the course of his Defence.
1. That he is a Counsellor, and might not be questioned for any thing which he advised according to his conscience; The ground is true, there is a liberty belongs to Counsellors, and nothing corrupts Counsels more then fear; He that will have the priviledge of a Counsellor, must keep within the iust bounds of a Counsellor; those matters are the proper subjects of Counsell, which in their times and occasions, may be good or beneficiall to the King or Common-wealth; But such Treasons as these, the subversion of the Laws, violation of Liberties, they can never be good, or justifi∣able by any circumstance, or occasion; and therefore his being a Counsellor, makes his fault much more hainous, as being commit∣ted against a greater Trust, and in a way of much mischiefe and danger, lest his Majesties conscience and judgement (upon which the whole course and frame of his Government do much depend) should be poysoned and infected with such wicked principles and de∣signes: And this he hath endeavoured to doe, which by all Lawes, and in all times hath in this Kingdome beene reckoned
a Crime of an high Nature. 2. He labours to interest your Lordships in his cause, by alledging, It may be dangerous to your selves, and your Posterity, who by your birth are fittest to be near his Majesty, in places of Trust and Authority, if you should be subject to be questioned for matters delive∣red in Counsell. To this was answered, that it was hoped their Lordships would rather la∣bour to secure themselves, and their posterity, in the exercise of their vertues, then of their vices, that so they might together with their own honour and greatnesse, preserve the honour and greatnesse, both of the King and Kingdome. 3. Another excuse was this, that whatso∣ever he hath spoken was out of a good intenti∣on; Sometimes good and evill, truth and fal∣shood lie so near together, that they are hardly to be distinguished: Matters hurtfull and dan∣gerous may be accompanied with such cir∣cumstances as may make it appeare usefull and convenient, and in all such cases, good intenti∣ons will justifie evill Counsell; But where the
matters propounded are evill in their own na∣ture, such as the matters are wherewith the E. of Strafford is charged, to break a publique faith, to subvert Laws and Government, they can never be justified by any intentions, how specious, or good soever they be pretended. 4. He alledgeth it was a time of great necessity and danger, when such counsels were necessary for preservation of the State. Ne∣cessity hath been spoken of before, as it relates to the Cause; now it is considered as it relates to the Person; if there were any necessity, it was of his own making; he by his evil coun∣sell had brought the King into a necessity, and by no Rules of Iustice, can be allowed to gain this advantage by his own fault, as to make that a ground of his justification, which is a great part of his offence. 5. He hath often insinuated this, That it was for his Majesties service in maintenance of that Soveraign Power with which he is in∣trusted by God for the good of his people. The Answer is this, No doubt but that Soveraign
Power wherewith his Majesty is intrusted for the publique good, hath many glorious effects, the better to inable him thereunto; But without doubt this is none of them, That by his own will he may lay any Taxe or Imposi∣tion upon his people without their consent in Parliament. This hath now been five times adjudged by both Houses: In the Case of the Loanes, In condemning the Commission of Excise, In the Resolution upon the Sa∣ving offered to be added to the Petition of Right, In the sentence against Manwaring, and now lately, In condemning the Ship-money; And if the Soveraigne Power of the King can produce no such effect as this, the Allegation of it is an Aggravation, and no Diminution of his offence, because thereby he doth labour to interest the King against the just grievance and complaint of the People. 6. This Counsell was propounded with divers limitations, and Provisions; for secu∣ring and repairing the liberty of the people. This implies a contradiction to maintain an Arbitrary & absolute Power, and yet to restrain it with
limitations, and provisions; for even those limi∣tations and provisions will be subject to the same absolute Power, and to be dispensed in such manner, and at such time, as it self shall determine; let the grievances and oppressions be never so heavy, the Subject is left without all remedy, but at his Majesties own pleasure. 7. He alledgeth, they were but words, and no effect followed: This needs no answer, but that the miserable distempers into which he hath brought all the three Kingdomes, will be evidence sufficient that his wicked Coun∣sels have had such mischievous effects within these two or three last years, that many years peace will hardly repaire those losses, and other great mischiefes which the Common-wealth hath sustained. These excuses have been collected out of the severall parts of his Defence; perchance some others are omitted, which I doubt not have been answered by some of my Col∣legues, and are of no importance, either to perplex or to hinder your Lordships judge∣ment,
touching the hainousnesse of this Crime. The ninth Consideration is this, That if this be Treason, in the nature of it, it doth ex∣ceed all other Treasons in this, That in the Design, and endeavour of the Author, it was to be a constant and a permanent Treason; other Treasons are transient, as being confinde within those particular actions and proportions wherein they did consist, and those being past, the Treason ceaseth. The Powder-Treason was full of horror and malignity, yet it is past many years since; The murder of that Magnanimous and glorious King, Henry the fourth of France, was a great and horrid Treason; And so were those manifold attempts against Qu. Elizabeth of blessed me∣mory; but they are long since past, the Dete∣station of them only remains in Histories, and in the minds of men; and will ever remain; But this Treason, if it had taken effect, was to be a standing, perpetuall Treason, which would have been in continuall act, not determi∣ned within one time or age, but transmitted to Posterity, even from generation to generation.
The tenth Consideration is this, That as it is  a Crime odious in the nature of it, so it is odi∣ous in the judgement and estimation of the Law; To alter the setled frame and constitution of Government, is Treason in any estate; The Laws whereby all other parts of a Kingdome are preserved, should be very vain and defe∣ctive, if they had not a power to secure and pre∣serve themselves. The forfeitures inflicted for Treason by our Law, are of Life, Honour, and Estate, even all that can be forfeited, and this Prisoner having committed so many Treasons, al∣though he should pay all these forfeitures, will be still a Debtor to the Common-wealth: Nothing can be more equall then that he should perish by the Justice of that Law which he would have subverted; Neither wil this be a new way of bloud; There are marks enough to trace this Law to the very origi∣nall of this Kingdome: And if it hath not been put in execution, as he alledgeth, this 240. years, it was not for want of Law, but that all that time hath not bred a man bold enough to commit such Crimes as these;
which is a circumstance much aggravating his offence, and making him no whit lesse liable to punishment, because he is the onely man that in so long a time hath ventured upon such a Treason as this. It belongs to the charge of another to make it appear to your Lordships, that the Crimes and Offences proved against the Earle of Strafford, are High Treason by the Lawes and Statutes of this Realm, whose learning and other abilities are much better for that service. But for the time and manner of performing this, we are to resort to the Direction of the House of Commons, having in this which is al∣ready done, dispatched all those instructions which wee have received; and concerning further proceedings, for clearing all Questi∣ons and Objections in Law, your Lordships will hear from the House of Commons in con∣venient time. FINIS.
