P549 99828668 33099
A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF That Faithful Servant of Christ, ROBERT BRETON, D.D. Pastor of Deptford in the County of Kent, Febr. 20. 1671/2. By RICHARD PARR, D.D. of Camerwel in the County of Surrey. LONDON: Printed by W. Godbid, for N Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil. M.DC.LXX.II.
To the Gentry, and all other the Inhabitants of DEPTFORD, Who love the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Publick Ministery. SIRS, 'TIS not to revive your grief at the remem∣brance of your late de∣ceased Pastor, that I have offered to your Eye what lately I spake to the Ear, but that you might have a Memorial with you of his Person, of his Piety, and of his Sayings while he was once yours in the
Lord. I profess 'twas not any opi∣nion I had of the Discourse, which as it was sudden, so it is plain; the things which may make it acceptable, are, that it was of honest design and wholesom admonition, in such loose and careless times as we live in: But that which will chiefly take with you, it was grounded on the saying of our Lord Jesus, and aimed to make men wise concerning their latter end, and to shew their happiness that are preparing for it in well doing. But if this should not find reception with you, yet when any good thing and worthy is said of Doctor BRETON, the people of Dept∣ford cannot choose but make much of it. I know of none that could give him a trivial Character, his Enemies (if he had any) must confess, that he was
blameless in his life, an able Minister, apt to teach, diligent and frequent; and those that knew him well, and loved him cordially, can say many more good things of him. And I have this advantage in my report of him, that I had no occasion for an Apology or Excuse for him, to answer any one Ob∣jection against him in all his Capacities, as a Pastor, as a Christian, as a Friend; only what I then said, came short of what might have been said better and more fully; which perhaps I could, if his Funeral were again to be attended on. But 'tis enough that 'tis sent to you, who had so great value for him, and so general affection to him, that the meanest gift for his sake will be ac∣cepted. It may be, God hath regarded your
many tears for your loss in so good a Man, and sees how heartily you lov'd him, because your Pastor, and a faithful one. — And it may be, God will pro∣vide another such Blessing for you, be∣cause you will esteem him highly for his Work sake, for which ye ought to pray; and when you have such another Guide for your Souls, to give God thanks, and treat him kindly; which if you be so happy to enjoy, I doubt not you will do: for I never yet saw so great a lamentation at once, as at the Funerals of Dr. BRETON: And when you have another like him, I wish he may not by a speedy remove put you again to a second sorrow; and my Prayers for you are, That as he taught you how to live, that you might dye happily, so, that you would observe Practically what I have
offered in the Discourse; that you would so order your affairs, that you may be found of him in peace and well doing, that you may be for ever Blessed, as I make no question He did, and is; and I hope he will be found so doing, who was his, and is Your very affectionate friend in Christ, R. PARR.
A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Doctor ROBERT BRETON, at Deptford, Febr. 20. 1671/2 Text. Matth. XXIV. 36. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so doing. OUR blessed Lord and Savi∣our, a little before his de∣parture out of the World by the gate of Death, enter∣tains his Disciples with a Sermon, long, full, and weighty; the Contents of that serious Dis∣course
are comprehended in this and the next Chapter after. Wherein he foretells them, 1. What should happen to that renowned City Jerusalem and dwellers therein, viz. That it should be layd in heaps, utterly destroyed, —and its Inhabitants scattered; which after∣ward came to pass as he said. 2. He acquaints them also what would be the previous notices of that downfal; There will be false Christs and false Prophets, making great shews, doing strange feats, deceiving very many, there will be Wars and there will be wickedness, Charity among men will be very rare, but Iniquity will abound, and deep Security will possess men, so that their misery will come as a furprize all at once, and unavoidable. And when he had told them of these things, which would infallibly come to pass, he warns them, charging them to be watch∣ful, bidding them not to give heed or credit to delusions, nor be tamely betrayed into their sinful security, nor yield complyance either to false impostuers, or corrupt morals; but they should immoveably keep the Faith, and do their duty as Christ had given and commanded.
And he is not careful to answer the curio∣sity of his Disciples, about the time, year, day, or hour these things should be thus finished; —this was not fit for them to know. But he commands them to watch, and always to be prepared for every change. This was to them at that time. Yet still as to us, there are two Events of things and change of states which every one is concerned in, which will without perad∣venture come upon us most certain. 1. The one is the final dissolution and con∣sumption of this material visible World; and though this was then a great way off, yet the Apostle Peter said 'twas hastening, stealing on, and as it were at the door; and he calls it the day of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3.10. Coming to Judg∣ment, 1 Thess. The day of the Lord will come, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fer∣vent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein: and then see the Application he makes, vers. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness? And our Lord said to them much after
this manner, Matth. 24. vers. 42. Watch there∣fore, for you know not what hour your Lord doth come; Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as you think not the Son of man cometh, vers. 44. 2. The other Event infallible is the death and dissolution of every Man living, this is de∣termined, there is a Law which makes Death necessary, Heb. 9.27. 'Tis appointed for all men once to dye; and the universal slaughter death hath made by the appointment of God since the World began, makes it most evi∣dent; Psal. 89.49. What man is he that liveth and shall not see death? shall be de∣liver himself from the hand of the grave? Eccles. 8.8. no discharge in this. But though this change by Death be ever certain, yet the day and hour is concealed from us, that we may wait and make ready, and be every day prepared, for we know not the day wherein we shall be taken. One dyeth in his non-age, another at full growth, one in his bed, another in the field; the wise and the fool, the King and the Subject, the Pastor and his Flock, &c. all must taste of Death, and be layn up in the grave.
Now the improvement wise men and good make of these notices of the end of the World altogether at once, and of the end of every particular Mans being in this World, is this, That every man while he hath the space, and the warning, should especially look after his great concernment, how he may be fit and pre∣pared for such a change, such an encounter; that so Death may not spoil him for ever: —So to order our conversation, and discharge our duty, and dispatch our work which our Lord hath given us to do, that so we may give up our ac∣counts with joy, alwayes doing what faithful servants of our Lord and Master Christ should be doing, that may expect the blessing here promised to such who are faithful, and diligent, and constant in the work of the Lord, and finish your course so doing: And for this the Text is a mighty motive, when it saith, Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Sirs, the Affair I would (at this time) in∣vite you to, and engage you in, is the business and exercise of those Religious duties as our Lord and Master Christ hath appointed for us in this present life, in order to our eternal
happiness in the other World, to which this Text gives a direction and an encourage∣ment. 1. How are the parties assigned to this excellent employment under the title of Servant, and in a peculiar manner, the servant of the Lord; in what place or condition the man be in for externals, provided he be the Lords servant? 2. And then, how is the Blessedness de∣signed for this servant, or these servants; — , which term is compre∣hensive, including all felicity. — This stock spreads it self into many branches, every one bearing fruit of its kind, to make the man compleatly happy; the favour of God, the riches of the Promises, the vision of God, the fulness of Joy. — The servant that is blessed of the Lord thus, shall be admitted into the joy of the Lord, and the inheritance of the Saints in glory; Matth. 25.34. Come ye bles∣sed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you: and Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City.
3. The persons for whom this Blessedness is designed; such servants as are doing ser∣vants, but well doing; actively obedient to the Commandments of our Lord, faithful and diligent, constant to the end; the ser∣vant doing so, shall be blessed in so doing, when the servant shall have finished his course, and called home to the blessed pay, and to receive from his Lord (whom he hath served) that bountiful reward and full blessing of Eternal felicities: Well done thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Matth. 25.21. There is such a connexion between the duties of Christianity performed aright and in obedience to our Lord, — and the blessings promised to such, that nothing can cut asun∣der or disjoyn them; yea, there is such a blessing that waits upon the faithful, constant, diligent service of Christ, that 'tis reward enough in its performance to encourage any man to the service and employment. And when these things are seriously consi∣dered, this Position will be easily granted: That 'tis a blessed thing,Doct. to spend and to end our dayes in doing the will of our
Lord in his service; — Blessed he when found so doing. This needs no more proof than the proba∣tion, our Lord hath said it in the Text, and those who have done so have found it by experience, and have given in their Testi∣mony to it. S. Paul, 2 Tim. 4.6, 7, 8. I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith, I am now ready, the time of my departure is at hand: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, &c. And the Exhortation he gives to such of the believing Galatians, Gal. 6.9. for en∣couragement, is to this purpose also, Let us not be weary of well doing, for in due season we shall reap if we faint not. And Rom. 2.7. To them, who by patient con∣tinuing in well doing, seek for glory, and honour, eternal life. — and lastly, observe what you find, 1 Cor. 15.58. Wherefore my beloved bre∣thren, be stedfast and unmoveable, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as your labour is not in vain in the Lord. The man who renounceth ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and lives soberly, righteously and piously in this present World, may look for that blessed Hope, (i. e.) may hope for that Blessing promised at the appearing of our Lord, Tit. 2.12, 13. and shall never be dis∣appointed of his hope. Thus you see what assurance the Gospel gives, and how fully it confirms, by fre∣quent repetitions, — That 'tis a blessed thing to do the will of God, to spend and end our days in so doing. 2. There is another account to be given, why it will prove so to the faithful servants of our Lord. 1. For, besides the dignity, worth, and content which waits on a constant course of Godliness, that were there nothing else did follow after, yet 'twere enough to encourage any man of reason (that understood the na∣ture of true honour and pleasure) to become Religious, and to continue in that service. How can it but be esteemed a blessed thing, to be employed in the appointed affairs of the Lord of glory in his Court the Church, about such things which conduce to the attainment of the highest advancement any man is capable
of, which the faithful servant may be sure of without disappointment. The attendance on the greatest King that ever was or ever shall be on the earth, is not once to be named with this. The happiness of Solomon's servants was extoll'd by the Queen of Sheba, (with reference to them and their employments) Happy are thy men,1 King. 10.8. happy those thy servants which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom. — Yet this was but a trivial complement, in com∣parison of the servants of the King of glory who stand before him, (as every faithful, obedient servant of his doth) and employed by our Lord in service infinitely more gain∣ful, more honourable, and more grateful. — And David, though a King himself, ac∣counted it his greatest honour to be the ser∣vant of God, and admires the blessed state and happy condition of such who are so, Psal. 84.4. Blessed are they which dwell in thy house, — and a little after, vers. 10. he professeth, That he had rather be a door-keeper in the house of his God, than to dwell in the tents of wicked∣ness; — and he gives the reason of it, v. 11. For the Lord God is a sun and a shield (i. e.)
(Light and Defence:) The Lord will give grace and glory, and will with-hold no good thing from them that walk uprightly. 2. And then secondly, There is another Consideration, which will mightily encou∣rage well doing; because in so doing, that ser∣vant lays a foundation for a spring of Comfort when he is drawing near his end; — when all those evanid Apocryphal Pleasures and Riches of the World are vanishing, and then nothing but the conscience of so doing will stand with me for my refreshment and my testi∣mony. When shortly I must appear before my Lord to give up my account of the ser∣vice I was employed in, — if I am able to say, I have made it my chiefest business and aim to please God, and to do what he hath commanded and given me to do, without wil∣ful neglects or unfaithfulness: How may such a ferious, sincere, holy, devout Soul look back with Comfort, and forward with Joy, in expectation of Acceptation with God his Lord and Saviour? — Methinks S. Paul speaks to this purpose, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoycing is this, the testimony of our conscience; that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in this world. 3. Then thirdly, Let it be considered, when he that servant who hath been faithful and constant in well doing, abiding therein, so doing, to his end, what a blessed state is he in when his Lord shall call him thence to enter into the joy of his Lord?Mat. 25.21. What an hap∣piness it is, that at the same instant he gives out his last breath, he is separated from all his trouble and temptations, and the same Death which puts a period to his life and la∣bour, gives a quick passage to his rest and joy; his Faith ends in vision, his Hope in frui∣tion, his Love removed to a fuller comprehen∣sion; his Labour to Rest, his Sorrow changed into Joy: the hire of a Servant into the inhe∣ritance of a Son, the service on Earth to the pay in Heaven. What a Blessed thing it is to be designed to, and employed in the service of our Lord, to be about the work he hath given us to do! to make Religion ones business, to follow Christ fully, to do his Commands chearfully, and to be found so doing to the end. —Death
temporal, which way soever it comes, or at what time soever it comes,Ecclus. 7.1, 2 cannot be hurt∣ful; The day of such a mans death is better than the day wherein he was born,Rev. 14.13. for 'tis but a going off from trouble, where is little rest, to that rest where there is no trouble; 'tis but a ceasing from being with men and sin,Heb. 12.22, 23. to be with Christ, Angels, and Saints in Hea∣ven; and that which is best of all,1 Thessal. 4.17. to be for ever with the Lord. Oh happy and blessed is that servant whom the Lord finds so doing! who gives him an inlett to immortal immixed Joyes, and eter∣nal never expiring Felicities. The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them;Wisd. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to dye, and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction; but they are in peace, and their hope is full of immortality; for God proved them, and found them prepared for himself. Thus shall every faithful servant of our Lord be Blessed, whom the Lord when he cometh shall find so doing.
The Application. I shall dispatch what I have further to speak of this matter, —when you shall receive I. Instruction, II. The Warning, III. The Invitation; which this whole affair affords for our se∣rious Consideration. I. Instruction. 1. First of all, let every one know and take notice, That he is a Servant, that Christ is our Lord; he hath given us our Work to do, he expects we should be doing. The Work we have to do in reference to the Blessing promised is not Worldly, but Heaven∣ly, the affairs of our Souls in order to Eter∣nity, they must be done in their season, as the Lord hath appointed, and we must be doing them while we live. Our Lord is coming, (though we think he delays) he will be with us quickly, and every one of us shall be called to account in parti∣cular: What hast thou done? What art thou
doing? If he find thee idle, slothful, negligent, he will cast thee off as Unprofita∣ble; if he find thee working evil, doing ini∣quity, thy portion will be the Rebuke and Destruction of evil doers, and Punishments threatned to the workers of iniquity. But if thy doings be good, thy dispositions right, thy intentions holy, thy Faith active, thy Repentance sincere, thy Piety great, thy Duties frequent, thy Lamp furnished, thy Light shining in Good works, thy chief and constant employment be Religion, in those instances where Religion is concern'd; and this be the babitual frame of thy Soul, to be always ready to every good work of Piety, Justice, Charity, and every Christian duty where our Lord calls for Obedience in any instance of Service: — Then when ever our Lord comes, the Blessing comes with him, and that Servant so doing shall be blessed and made happy. But alas! What have we (for the most part) been doing since first we were admit∣ted to, and engaged in our Lords service? hath there a day past wherein we have not done some service to Satan, World, or
Flesh? And how many days have past over our heads wherein we have scarce had a good thought of God, or of our duty? and did nothing at all worthy the name of a servant of Christ? Do not most men live as though they were priviledg'd persons, exempt from Duty and Service? and as if they were never to give account of their Talents and improve∣ment of them? What abundance of industrious Labour do most men lay out themselves in about the affairs of this World? and take more pains to gratisie sensualities and beastly appe∣tites to their undoing, so working out their own Damnation? than in doing the will of God, and working out their Salvation? But with what face can such Servants expect an Enge from their Lord, that either neglect the service, or do things contrary to the In∣junctions of their Lord? And how shall such be able to look our Master in the face at the evening of our Life, who have been loytering or ryoting all the day?
2. Secondly, Let this then be for a Warning and an awakening to us all, lest Death should surprize us e're our work be done, or while we are trifling, speedily to set our selves to practise good things while every mans opportunity lasteth, and no man can tell how long it will last: It may be very shortly our Lord may send for us by Death to meet him, the Lord is at hand, and the Books are opening wherein all our deeds are recorded, and 'tis but a very little time e're we must all appear at the Judgement seat of Christ, that every one may be judged,2 Cor. 5.10. and re∣ceive according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad; — and then, happy the man only that shall be found well doing. Within a few dayes (perhaps hours) it will infallibly be every ones lot to exchange this Life for another, a better or a worse, as this our ex∣cellent Brother hath shewn us; and 'twill be our wisdom, to prepare for it as he did; that though it come in the day or in the night, slowly or swiftly, in our working or in our waiting we may be ready for it, that our change may be for the better, and not for the
worse; That the day of death may be better than the day wherein we were born.Eccles. 7.1. 3. Thirdly, To which Preparation I would (in the last place) invite and exhort you: 1. And first, If thou wouldst be fit to dye, and prepared for thy death, and ready for the coming of our Lord, and desirest to be blessed, then be perswaded to a serious, con∣stant course and exercise of Religion as our Lord hath taught and commanded; for let no man think to be Blessed that is not found in that state to which the Promise is made. Let him therefore give up himself to an holy life according to the will of God; — And let him for ever cast off the works of darkness, and cease from doing evil; let him give over sinning wilfully,Isa. 1.16. Job 11.11, 12. & 34.32 and doing foolishly, and do no more such things; let him deny and renounce with great resolution all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and resolve upon a Sober, Righteous, and Godly Life, as we are taught Tit. 2.12. And let every man be careful,Tit. 2.12. as much as he can, so to order his Conversation, that he be not found either over-charged with the cares of the World, or with surfetting and drunkenness, or wronging our fellow-servants,
as our Lord hath warned,Luke 21.34. Luke 21.34. and so that Day come upon you unawares. And think this with thy self, Would I be found at any time doing that which is sinful in it self, or that may prove of evil example to others when I am gone? 2. And then secondly for Practicals, that thou mayst be at all times prepared. And let no man think that the business of Religion, the service of our Lord can be acceptably done by the bye, or when we have nothing else to do; or to be put off to such a time when we can do nothing but groan under pains, and dye. But if we mean to be prepared, let us do what we have in duty, let us do it now in health, and with our strength, as we are counselled Ecclus. 9.10. That which thy hand findeth to do,Ecclus. 9.10. do it with thy might, for there is no work nor wisdom in the grave whither thou goest; and our Duty is told us, Ecclus. 12.13. To fear God, and to keep his Commandments, this is the whole duty of man. Now this Consideration invites us all to be doing such Duties which are necessary, 1. First, in respect of God, To perform constantly those acts of true and devout
Worship, Obedience, and Love to him, freely, willingly, and with all chearfulness. 2. Secondly, in respect of our selves, ne∣cessary for us to do; To subdue our own evil dispositions, to mortifie our own cor∣ruptions, to Repent to amendment of life, to rectifie the disorders and irregularities of our Passions, and to be fruitful in Good works. 3. Thirdly, in respect of others; To do good to as many as we can, to their Souls, by instructing them, and perswading to Piety and a Religious conversation, by Pre∣cept and Example; and to their Bodies, by relieving them in their necessities, visiting them in their sickness, by delivering them (as we are able) out of bondage and oppres∣sions, and praying to God for them in every condition. And to conclude, let every Christian be doing such things as are True;Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, and whatsoever things are of good report, let every one resolve upon such things, and be doing accordingly all vir∣tuous acts; that when-ever Death comes,
either hastily or gradually, it may find thee in such a frame and disposition, or in some good action, or soon after it: And then how comfortably might Christians live in expectation of Christs speedy coming, and how happy might they be in their End with such preparation! and as Tertullian observed in the Primitive Christians, that they were expeditum morti genus, a people alwayes pre∣pared for Death; so is every Holy man. Of which sort was this Excellent person deceased, this once shining Light now ex∣tinguished, who both as a Divine and a Christian, hath given ample Testimony and left a good Example; who faithfully served his Master, and was found so doing. Concerning whom you may justly expect very Excellent things might be spoken, I may not therefore dismiss this great Convention in this House of great mourning without some Remarques about the subject of this Occa∣sion; and indeed, when we have to speak of Doctor BRETON, no man need rack his Invention for things Worthy to be said, and if a Tongue like His (once) had this em∣ployment, words would flow apt & charming. —But we must do as we can.
1. This Excellent person was Born in London, the great and splendid Metropolis of England, Anno Dom. 1628. — and 'tis no diminution to its Grandeur, when it is said, That this Man was Born there. 2. The University of Cambridge had the good luck to nurse him, to which he carried a prompt Wit and pregnant Parts, improved with what inferiour Schools could furnish him. From thence he came with a stock of Humane Learning and Sacred Knowledge, an excellent Scholar and Learned, to make an able Divine. His Honorary Degrees were not above his Merits, he was as much a grace to his Title, as Doctor to him. When he was called to the Sacred Fun∣ction, he engaged in this Ministry and the Duty too, he had a Commission to Preach the Gospel, and he laboured abundantly and instantly, not of force, but of Choice, he did it willingly, not so much by any other con∣straint as that of love to his Master Christ, and the Souls of men; and yet he remembred also, — Wo unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. He was rarely qualified for an excellent Di∣vine,
Gifts from above, good and perfect, pure and peaceable, sober, just, holy, temperate, and apt to Teach. He alwayes held fast , the model and express form of Sound words in Faith and Charity;2 Tim. 1.3. in oppo∣sition to all growing Heresies and Arts of men of corrupt minds and evil manners, and kept the Depositum as a faithful Steward, and wise Master-Builder, without wavering or shifting, a Workman he was that needed not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. O how would he use the spiritual Sword of Truth! piercing to the quick (as need requi∣red) dividing soul and spirit,Heb. 4.14. joynts and mar∣row; between Reason and Passion, the rational and the animal faculties; chasing Sin in its shifts and retirements, and then forcing it from its strong hold again, and leaving it no place to rest in! How would he by the Word of Grace also, bind up the broken bone, apply Oyl to the Wound, and gently pour it in, so comforting the dejected, and refreshing the wearied faint∣ing Soul, speaking a word in due season, of counsel, comfort, and direction! He had milk for babes, and stronger meat for men grown up to a stature in Religion.
He had his Talents by gift, and improved them by industry. He had the Art of winning Souls, and was successful in his attempts this way. I have reason to hope that many of you can say, he was your spiritual Father, and happy instrument, under God, of your bringing in, and building up in Christ; you are his Epi∣stle (as S. Paul speaks) known and read of all men;2 Cor. 3.2. or rather, the Epistle of Christ mini∣stred by him. He was a Preacher indeed, solid and fre∣quent; he preached every day by Voice or Example, in season, out of season; in the Morning sowing good Seed, and in the Evening slacked not his hand. How dexterously would he evidence the my∣steries of Religion, and deep things of God to the understanding? How sweetly would he insinuate a Duty, and win upon the affection of his hearers? He seemed to have very much the command of the judgements and affections of many, and could turn the Scale, where men were not prepossessed with prejudice, or engaged in a contrary interest.
I have sometime thought, that the People of this place could not be tempted to a Corin∣thian Schism, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas; — for what would men have? If perspicuity, plainness, and powerfulness? if solidity, profoundness, and piercingness? if Eloquence in apt and well ordered words? if variety (with congruity to the Apostolical Faith once delivered to the Saints?) if fre∣quency and constancy every Lords day? If any of these, or all these together might be motives, why then should men be tempted to seek others in other places? while all these might be had here, while this Servant of Christ was in this Mount, here Praying, here Preaching Thus was he called, thus was he qualified for a Minister and a Preacher. And then also, he was constant to his trust and labour, as soon as he was entred on the Office, he kept his station and bore the heat of the day; and his Pulpit (in most dan∣gerous times,) and his Loyalty too, under re∣proaches and menaces from that kind of men then, and weathered it out, keeping a good Conscience, while others hid their heads, and
fled, (leaving their Flocks to the power of Seduction) for shame or for fear: But this man thought, Shall such a man as I flye? and stayed. Well, he was for these things, as a Mini∣ster (let me speak a big word) A man of Re∣nown, highly esteemed in City and Countrey, beloved of good men, one of the chief among the Clergy, so he was. And if this be not so, let malice and envy accuse me if it can. — Let me appeal to you, to you his sorrowful Flock. Was he not a good man? was he not care∣ful of you? was he not courteous and kind to you? was he not charitable and helpful? did he not seek your good, your peace, your safety in very many instances? You have not forgotten the dreadful Sick∣ness, how then he stayed with you in danger enough; how he visited sick Families, and relieved the Poor. — You remember what an Advocate he was, pleading with God in Prayer for you; how he pleaded with men abroad for Relief in your necessities, — and was heard and prevailed; so that you had
supplies abundantly. You cannot but know▪ that he was at daily expences at his own costs for your sakes; how useful, how helpful and industrious in reconciling differences, and making peace among you! And it must not be forgotten, that his great abilities, frequent emergencies, ex∣cellent Charity, and a perfect good nature, were one great invitation of every bodies appli∣cations to him; which gave him constant work, and much business, able to have crush'd a man of ordinary strength under these Affairs. And now, if a stranger should ask me, what Preferments this Worthy man had? I quickly reply, he had as much as per∣haps he desired; he pickeer'd not Advance∣ments, but was as ready to decline, as others are to pursue them. Deptford was his chief, this was his content, here he thought he had Work enough, and Love enough. He would often say no me of his Deptford, so contentedly, that made me think that this (and his full employment here) was his Darling, and he would not change it for
a Chair of Ease & Honour;1 Thesl. 2.19. like that of S. Paul, My crown and rejoycing are ye in the Lord. His Resolution was, (as he told me) never to leave Deptford, and you see he kept his Resolution to his dying day. But alas! Is this good man dead? this emi∣nent, useful Servant of CHRIST dead? Yes! He is Dead to you, and to your great loss, and to all our grief; he is gone to his joy, and hath left us in mourning and tears. I may say with the Prophet so far, that The righteous and merciful man is taken away,Isa. 57.1. but I cannot say (of his departure) that no man layeth it to heart, while I see and hear so many weeping and lamenting the loss of this Man. I confess, that there were Three mens deaths which came near my Heart; my So∣vereign King Charles the First, my Spiritual Father James Archbishop of Armagh, and this my dear Breton. And now, O ye people of Deptford, happy once in such a Pastor, — now unhappy by so great a loss; God sent him a blessing to this place, but think whether his remove from you be not a punishment to you?
His Remove hath left a dear Wife sorrow∣ing, sweet Children weeping, and an aged Fa∣ther lamenting: Ah! my Husband, my Fa∣ther, my Son, and multitudes that put in their claim to partake with their griefs: Ah! our Pastor, our Guide, our Friend! I perceive I need not invite you to tears, your eyes and countenances shew your sorrows. And methinks 'tis with you as once with the Believers, recorded Acts 20. at S. Paul's departure from them, They wept bitterly,Acts 20.37, 38. sor∣rowing most of all, that they should see his face no more. Ah Sirs! you shall see his Face no more here standing, nor hear his Voice more hence speaking, nor in your Families any more Vi∣siting, nor in your Companies any more Conferring, nor in your Distresses any more Comforting or Relieving: — Yet weep no more for him, he is happy; but for your selves, because the Church is deprived of so worthy a Son, and you of so good a Pastor, so good a Friend, so good a Man. If you enquire of his Death, because it seemed to us to be somewhat hasty; 'tis true,
he had but one great Paroxysm of an hour, which ended his Life, a sigh, a groan, and an expiration; yet let no man think this a sur∣prize that fetch'd him away to Heaven with∣out much ado: They dye suddenly that live wickedly, such dye all at once, but he that dyes daily; though he be not sick every day, yet dyes by degrees, and is every day in expecta∣tion of it; perhaps a tedious Sickness may make a man more willing to dye, but not more fit, unless his former life hath been a virtuous, holy preparation both for a bed of Sickness and the gate of Death. Elijah was a man of God,2 King. 2.1. and he was snatcht to Heaven in a whirlwind; Enoch walked with God every day, and in an hour was taken away to Heaven, in a moment as it were. Let no man think that Death to an Holy man, come it when, or where, or how soever; can be a disadvantage; let it come by day or by night, abroad or at home, if a mans habitual frame, intentions and de∣signs be just, holy, heavenly, good, this man dyes well enough: Unhappy we, if a man could not be saved unless he dyed aged or wasted by a tedious sickness, a Consumption
or an Ague. Surely if a good mans Transla∣tion be from perfect health and strength, he hath no wrong done him, a pang of an hour that begins and ends his pain, is rather a mark of favour than displeasure. Tell me, Oh men of sowre Censure! Is it not a desirable posture to be found in, when a servant of Christ is found doing the work of his Master? This Servant of Christ was all that day he dyed (as he was many dayes in the like) fasting and praying, and preparing for Preach∣ing the next day, and the next to that; and, as though he had a sight of the approaching closure of his life with the day, blessed his Children solemnly, and gave them such directions (as they were capable of) charging them to serve God, and be pious, to be obedi∣ent to their Mother, &c. saying withal, It may be I may see you no more after this, and said, I wish I were now in Heaven: Who would not desire to be in such a frame as this, if he thought his appointed time was at hand. Thus he dyed; and I am perswaded, and I think all good people are so too, That the
day of this mans death was better than that wherein he was born, and his Change happy, and of infinite advantage to him, for he is in peace and bliss, and thousands might be well con∣tented to dye as he did, were they so well prepared as he was. And now, if you would shew respects to his Memory, and kindness to your selves, Then, Stand fast in the Faith he taught you, waver not, shift it not; Remember his pious and heavenly Exhortations and Counsels, and reduce them to Practice; for that, and so much of Religion which you practise, will do you good, and no more nor else. — And let every one that would dye happily, let him endeavour every day to be prepared for it, and not deferr because of health; for Death may come at Sun rising, as well as at the setting thereof. To the High and most Glorious GOD, the lover of Souls, and the rewarder of his faithful Servants, be all Praise and Glory for ever. Amen. FINIS.
