R2192 13013064 96509
A SPEECH Delivered in PARLIAMENT, BY Sir Benjamin Rudyard. Being none of those already in print. Printed, 1641. Iuly 2.
A SPEECH delivered IN PARLIAMENT, BY Sir BENIAMIN RUDYARD. M. Speaker, THere is a great door opened unto us of doing good, if we take ad∣vantage thereof: We are here met by the blessing of God and our King, Parliaments of late daie become unfortunate, it is our duty, by our good temper and cariage to shew their ancient lustre. There be some present who can re∣member the breaking up of the last Parliament, a businesse certainly from which the Papists are not exempted, who now by the disconti∣nuance of Parliaments, are come to that arro∣gancy and boldnesse, that they contend with us who are the better Subjects: their emula∣tion I like, but their presumptuousnesse is not to be born: I wish them no harm, but good;
for I desire conversion, and the way to do it, is to set up better lights, who have warmth in them, and are not luke warm in Religion. Surely they that quarrell betwixt preaching and praying, and would have them contend, those never meant well to either, but both must have their due. And yet I know not how it comes to passe, but it happeneth to us, which is in no other Religion in the world, that a man may be two Religious; and many one, by that scandall, is frighted into a deep dissimulation. Heretofore the distemper of this House hath been imputed to the Papists, but the happy suc∣cesse of this Parliament seems to be in the ge∣nerall power of all, and therefore it is wisdom in us to preserve temper and moderation. Breaking of Parliaments, makes dangerous wounds in the Body politique; and if these splinters be not pulled out with a gentle hand, we may hereafter dispair of cure. In anno 14. E. 3. Subsidies were given to the King for expedition into France, but the ill ma∣naging of his Treasure here, he was so low, that he was glad to make Truce with the French King. In anno 15 E. 3. he returned, and summoned a Parliament, wherein there were nothing but jealousies and distempers. In anno 17 E. 3. he called another Parlia∣ment, to procure an Attonement with his sub∣jects,
which took good successe, by their hum∣ble carriage to him, and his willingnesse to ra∣tifie their liberties, whereby all breaches were then made up. A Parliament is the bed of reconciliation betwixt the King and People, and therefore it is fit for us to lay aside all exasperations, and carry our selves with humility. Howbeit the Kings Prerogative may go far, yet if it be swayed with Equanimity, it may be the better born. Princes are, and will be, as jealous of their power, as people can be of their liberties, though both are then best, when they are kept within their own severall bounds. Levying of monyes are a great disturbance to the Subjects, and so will be the scarcity of the Kings Revenues, untill they be supplied: And where the power of a King, and necessity, meets in one hand, he will not long be disap∣pointed. But before the ending of this Parlia∣ment, the untimely breaking whereof would be the breaking of us. I doubt not but his Ma∣jesties Revenewes may be so settled, that he may live plentifully at home and abroad, and without taking any thing from his Majesty, save that which of it self would fall away, and which we desire to restore. Before the Parliament, we thought he would redresse our grievances, and should it be other∣wise now? shal we think better of an imaginary
than of a reall Parliament. In former Parliaments, the carriage of some hath been so haughty, as though a Parliament should last alwayes; And the carriage of othe, as if there would never be any again; And therefore a moderation (if we love our selves) is requisite: The delayes where of are so well known, how dangerous they are, both to the Common wealth and Religion, seeing (during this vacation of Parliaments) so many disor∣ders have been committed, both by innovati∣ons of Religion, violation of Laws, and in∣trenching upon our Liberties. But set all these things arigh, it is now our task. And if in in those tempting provocations we bear tempe∣rate moderation, we shall not misse of our ends, but shall vindicate God in his Religion, the King in his Honour, in its gasping extremity, if these things be respected by us, beware of having the race of Parliaments rooted out. Men and Brethren; what shall we do? If it were for my life, I would desire nothing more than that we proceed with Moderation, that so we may have many happy Parliaments, and that no dismall events may happen to any: For when Parliaments are gone; then we are lost. FINIS.
