R940 07951409 40662
REMARQUE UPON A Late Printed Speech; Under the NAME of Sir CHARLES SIDLEY NOW the King is gone to Holland, out comes this Speech, to bid Him Farewel; and to tell us, what Good Subjects, and how peaceable We are to be in his Absence. A Speech, that it would be very silly to throw away Ink and Paper, in An∣swering it, were it not that there is nothing so absurd, but there are a great many who will greedily swallow it. The Speech begins with telling us, That the Navy is pro¦vided for, and the Army is provided for. It may be conside∣red, That the King is left to find Pay for the great Arrears of the Army; and the Bill for the Forfeited Estates in Ire∣land, being not past; and it may be no opportunity for the Parliaments sitting before the next. Winter; it may also be considered, how well the Navy and for, for the next Summer. Next comes  New Reekaning for the Civil List.—Let it  here considered, That, how much soever the King has deserved of us more than his Predecessours; yet his Reenue for the Maintenance of Himself, and of the Civil Government, is not only far short of theirs, but was incumed the last Year with a Debt of than a Million. Sir  says, The Ki ought to be told, what Pensions are too   at  may be extinguished, during this time of War and Publick Calamities. As if, when Three Kingdoms newly  are in danger to be lost again, and Money hardly   to be had for the Defence of Them, the King wou then be at needless Expenses up∣on his Courtiers and Officrs. But he gives us a Rean, why the King must be told, viz. His Majesty is encomassed with, and sees nothing but plenty, great Tables, Coache and six Horses, and all things suita∣ble; and therefore cannot imagine the want and misery of the rest of his Subjects: He's a Wise and Virtuous Prince, but he is but a Young King, encompssed and hemm'd in among a Com∣pany of Crafty Old Courtiers.— What is the plain En∣glish of this, let every one judge. It seems to our Speech maker, that his Majesties Eyes are so dazled with the Splendour of the Court, that he cannot think of any thing out of it. However, he allows him to be a Wise Prince, but yet a Young King.— Even to this an Answer must be given to prevent the deceiving of those that will heark∣en to any thing. As to his being a Young King, let his wonderful Conduct in the late Revolution, and in Pre∣serving this Nation ever since from Insurrections, and Civil Wars, and what he did when in Ireland, testifie. And for his being unsensible of the Want of his Subjects, let his Voluntary parting with so great a part of his Revenue, as the Chimniy ; his accepting an Incumbra Ten Hundred Thousand Pounds upon the Rem and his continual thankful Acceptance of Suppli short of what is needful for our Common safety Witness. Sir Charles tells us of Courtiers with Places, some of Thousand, some of Six and some of Eleven Thousand But he does not name any of above Three Thousand those only by hear-say. Whatever Sallaries his gives to his Ministers and Officers; this I am sure means to have the Affairs of the Kingdom must provide Encouragement suitable to the Places any to: Otherwise, it will not be so Government so sick at the Heart, as ours  the Face. What? Is he displeas'd, that their Endeavour, as far as their shortned maintainance to live and preferve their Dignity as it become Must they, by neglecting this, bring upon them Contempt—and when they have once That, I not how they will avoid Ruin in this dangerous juncture. There is no man, that makes any tolerable observat the publick Affaris, but may assure himself, Speech-maker so much Questions, viz. That thing managed with all Thrift imaginable; That all is saved he saved; That there are no exorbitant Pentfins, nor Sallaries, That all is applied to the Use for which it was —When these things appear, he says, the Parliament give and the People  chearfully pay, whatever his Maje want (it is the same thing to say, whatever any other want) to keep out the King of France; (is not Majesty now gon out?) Ay and King Iames too: then if Queen Mary can be also got out, we may Common Wealth. But the next words seem to speak a little plainer Charles Observes, That he has not heard King James this Session, whether out of Fear, Respect, or Discretion not tell. Would he have King Iames Voted in again, or a Pretence to raise such a Confussion, as the thereou spring a Common Wealth? Let the Reader guess may mean by out of Fear, Respect, or Discretion. To Conclude with him, If it b possible to the Parliament to save the King what they can than publicans may proceed to give him what they (I hope will) be able. LONDON, Printed by W. Bonny, 1691.
