S2402 12530405 62766
THE Mulberry-Garden, A COMEDY. As it is Acted by His MAJESTIE'S SERVANTS: AT THE THEATRE-ROYAL. Written by the Honourable Sir CHARLES SIDLEY. LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the Lower walk of the New Exchange. 1668.
TO HER GRACE THE DUTCHESSE OF RICHMOND and LENOX. Madam, TIs an unquestion'd Priviledge we Authors have of troubling whomsoever we please with an Epistle Dedicatory, as we call it, when we print a Play; Kings and Princes have never been able to exempt either themselves or their Favourites from our Persecution. I think your Grace (for a Person of so great Eminence, Beauty, Indulgence to Wit, and other Ad∣vantages that mark you out to suffer under Addresses of this Nature) has scap't very well hitherto. For I do not remem∣ber your Name yet made a Sanctuary to any of these Crimi∣nals: But, Madam, your time is come, and you must bear it patiently. All the favour I can shew you, is that of a good Executioner, which is not to prolong your pain. You see, Madam, here the unhappiness of being born in our time, in which to that Vertue and Perfection▪ the Greeks and Ro∣mans would have given Temples , the highest
thing we dare dedicate, is a Play or ame such Tries. that I now offer to your Grace, you were so kind to when it was in loose Sheets, that by degrees you have train'd it up to the confidence of appearing in Print before you: And I hope you will find it no hard matter to pardon a Presumption you have your self been accessory to, especially in one that is in∣tirely, MADAM, Your Graces Devoted and Obedient Servant, CHARLES SIDLEY.
Dramatis Personae. Sir Iohn . Sir Samuel Forecast. Harry Modish. Ned Estridge. Iack Wildish. Snappum. Eugenio. Philander. Horatio. Officer and Assistants. Servant to Sir Samuel Forecast. Musicians and Dancers. Prentices, and Sedan-men. Diana. .
Prologue. NEw Poets (like fresh Beauties come to Town) Have all that are decay  cry 'em down, All that are envious, or that have writ ill: For Wits and Heroes fain wou'd during, kill. Like Statesmen in disgrace, they ill endure A better conduct should our good procure: As an old Sinner, who in's youth has known Most Women bad, dares venture upon none. Our Author, seeing here the Fate of Plays, The dangerous Rocks upon the Coast of Praise, The cruel Critick and malicious Wit, Who think themselves undone if a Play hit: And like those Wretches who on shipwracks thrive, Rage if the Vessel do the Storm out-live, By others loss he , But against tempting hope no man is arm'd: Amongst great Gamesters, when deep play is seen, Few that have money but at last come in: He has known many with a trifling sum, Into vast Fortunes by your favours run: This gives him confidence to try his Fate, And makes him hope he is not come too If you'le undo him quite, like Roos begin▪ And for this once in cunning let him win. He hopes the Ladies at small faults will And a new Poet, a new Servant think.
THE Mulberry Garden. ACT I. SCENE I. Sir John Everyoungs House stands. Enter Sir John Everyoung, and Sir Samuel Forecast. Ever. WEll, for all this heat, let's every one Govern his own Family as he has a mind to't; I never vex my self that your Daughters Live shut up as if they were in Spain or Italy; Nor pray don't you trouble your self that mine See Plays, Balls, and take their innocent Diversion, As the Custom of the Country, and their age requires. Forec. They are my Neeces, as they are your Daughters, And I'le tell you, you spoil 'um with your own Examples: youth may well be allow'd to be Stark mad, when they see age so Extravagant: Is that a Dress for my elder Brother, and a Reverend Justice? Ever. Yes, and a properer than your little Cuffs, Black Cap, and Boots there, for a Gentleman. Forec. Of Eighteen I confess, but not of Fifty. Ever. Yes, though he were as old as any before The Flood; and for my part I'le not bate a Riband For all the whole Tribe of you can say: you know Your self every Fool wou'd fain be thought wise; And why an old man shou'd not desire to be Thought young, I see no Reason: as long as
I am whole at heart, I'm resolv'd my Cloaths Shall n'ere betray me. Forec. There's no need on't, your face does it sufficiently; Come I'm asham'd to see you every day Set out thus powder'd, and trim'd, like an old Player, To act a young Prince; your Periwig I like Very well, it serves to keep your bald pate warm, But that flirting Hat there looks as it were Made rather for your Wit than your Head. Pray which is most a-la-mode, Right Reverend Spark?—Points, or Laces? Girdle, Or Shoulder-Belts? what say your Letters Out of France? Ever. Lord, what pains you take to Quarrel At my Dress and Mirth, as if age were not Tedious enough already, but we Must adde neglect of our selves, and moroseness Toward others: Children now adays are Not so fond of their Parents, that we Need use any Art to make 'um hate us. Fore. Well, go then, and carry your Daughters abroad, And break their Bellies with Sillabub, 'tis the Greatest kindness you can do 'um now; As you have bred 'um, you may e'ne keep 'Um to your self, and save their Portions; I believe no body will be very fond of a Hide-Park Filly for a Wife; nor an old Boy That looks like a Pedlar's Pack for a Father-in-Law. But now I think on't, you are Such a Spark, they'd lose their Reputations With you if they had any. Ever. For ought I see good Brother, they stand As fair in the opinion of the world as yours, And have done nothing but what I like very well. Fore. What do you count it nothing, to be all Day abroad, to live more in their Coach Than at home, and if they chance to keep The House an Afternoon, to have the Yard
Full of Sedans, the Hall full of Footmen And Pages, and their Chambers cover'd all over With Feathers and Ribands, dancing and playing At Cards with 'um till morning. Ever. Why, where's the hurt of all this? Fore. O no hurt at all; but if they were my Daughters I should be looking for Cradles and Nurses, I shou'd be sorry to hear Diana or Althea Went abroad without some discreet body To look after them, or were at home indeed Without imploying their time in some piece Of Huswifry, or at least some good Book. Ever. You and I shall never hit it, for now I Think those women who have been least Us'd to Liberty, most apt to abuse it, when They come to't. Fore. O this fine believing Gentleman, I should Laugh heartily to see him a Grand-father Without a Son-in-Law. Enter to them Victoria and Olivia. Vict. Sir if you don't use the Coach your self, My Sister and I wou'd go abroad this Afternoon. Ever. Take it Children, but don't keep the Horses Out too late. Fore. What! never ask 'um whither they're Going? by your favour I'le put that Question To 'um; Come hither Victoria, what visits Do you intend this Afternoon? Vict. None Sir, we were only going a Rambling. Fore. A Rambling, methinks that word sounds Very prettily i'the mouth of a young Maid; Next time I ask 'um whither they're going, I believe they'I answer me, To drink A Bottle or two: but whither pray? Olivia. For that Sir we shall take counsel of the weather, Either up into the City, or towards the Park.
Fore. What, none but you two? Oliv. We intended to call on my Cousins Althea and Diana. Fore. They took Physick this morning, and Are not well, you'l but lose your labour. Vict. Sir they sent for us but an hour ago. Fore. You had better go without 'um, they Are all undrest, to stay for 'um would But make you lose the sweet of the Evening. Ever. Brother, what are you jealous of them too? I assure you they are no men in womens Cloaths. Fore. I am not jealous of 'um, but since you'd Have it so, I'de as lieve they'd keep away. Ever. And I'de as lieve you'd keep away, till you Understand your self better; what? you Think your Daughters, like your Money, Never safe, but under Lock and Key; who Wou'd you have 'um converse with, if not With their Relations? Fore. With those that are a kin to 'um in manners And behaviour, such as they may learn Some goodness of; I see nothing they can Learn here but vanity. Vict. Sister they begin to be angry, come Let's leave 'um till the storm be over. [Exeunt. Fore. What are they gone? I warrant If we had been reading a Play, or Romance, We shou'd not have been rid of 'um so Soon; but I'le spoil their sport at My House Ever. A precious Design, and worthy of your Gravity! But, if you do Brother, I'le tell. You one thing, you'l go near to spoil A match at cross purposes: farewel. [Exeunt.
SCENE II. Modish his Chamber. Enter Henry Modish and Ned Estridge. Mod. Good morrow, Ned, I thought I had left you Too deep engag'd last night to have been Here thus early. Estr. Why you sneak'd away just as the Sport Began, like a half-bred Cock that strikes A Stroke or two briskly, and then runs. Mod. Faith, I had so many Irons in the fire for To day, I durst not run the hazard of A disorder last night: but you know My Heart was with you. Estr. You wou'd not have repented it, if your Whole Body and Soul had been with us; Iack Wildish sent for a dozen more of Champaigne And a Brace of such Girls, as we shou'd have Made Honourable Love to, in any other Place; and Sir Iohn Everyoung was in the Pleasantest Humour, I'de give a piece I Cou'd repeat the Satyr he made of the Country. Mod. It wou'd be good News to his Daughters, For they say, now and then in a morning He is of another mind. Estr. That's only while his head akes, they need Not fear him; he swears hee'l n'er stir Beyond Hide-Park or Colebys at farthest, As long as he has an Acre left, they shall All come to him: 'tis a pleasant old Fellow, He has given me a hundred pounds for my Gray beard, and is to ride himself this day Month twice round the Park, against a bay Stone-horse of Wildishes, for two hundred more. Mod. Methought Wildish and you were very
Intimate, pray how long have you been Acquainted? Estr. Faith, about a week or so, times a thing only necessary For the Friendship of vulgar Spirits: O here comes The Gentleman we were speaking of; now Iack, Enter Wildish. What small Petticoat do you come from? Wild. E'ne such another as you are going to now With all this Bravery: those Cravats that design The Right Honourable, I'le lay a piece will be Rumpl'd by a worse Woman than they were Washt, yet afore night. Mod. Wou'd all the world were of his mind, we Young men shou'd pass our time well. Wild. O never the better for that; such Mounsieurs As you by your Feathers are known to be Birds Of prey, and though you catch nothing, you Scare all; Besides, every good man is not acquainted With this Principle among you, that you can be In Love with nothing but your selves, and may Be jealous of his Wife, when indeed you come Innocently to take a view of your persons from Head to feet in the great Glass; comb out your Periwig, shake your Garnitures, and be gone. Estr. What, dost think we have no other way Of Entertainment? No Discourse, Iack? Wild. Yes, a little now and then about their dress, Whether their Patches be too many or too few, Too great or too small, whether her Hankerchief Be Point de Venie or Rome; and having left behind You some proof of your ability in the Mode, Return to shew your selves at the last Act. Of a Play. Mod. I dare swear, Iack, thy Acquaintance puts Thee to none of these Critioisins, a plain Gorget. And a black Scarf are all their varieties; and Are you well Mistress? and what Company Have you kept lately? thy most familiar Questions. But Raillery apart. Say it were
A mans Fortune to prevail upon one of these Thou believest so impregnable Forts, and to be Receiv'd where never any but your self came So near as to be deny'd; were not that a Conquest? Wild. As great as that of a place not tenible Can be; the present Plunder indeed is somewhat, But upon the first Siege you must look to be Driven out: a Ladies heart is a kind of Fortification That is easier surpris'd by being well man'd, And makes ever the strongest resistance of it self. Estr. 'Tis true, Modish, for I have still observ'd, That when one of these persons of Honour Does a little forget her self, though at first Through a secret Sympathy, and invincible Inclination (as they call it) for one particular Man, she ever after loves the whole Sex the Better for it. Wild. Right; for these good Creatures, Women, Are like Cats, if once made tame, any one May play with 'um; if not, there's no Coming near 'um. Mod. Thou think'st thou hast maul'd 'um now; Why I tell thee, Iack, a Hector is not readier To pick a Quarrel with a sawcy Creditor, And swear he will never pay the Rascal, Then a man is to have one with his Mistress Towards the latter end of an Amour; especially. If it amount to a handsom occasion of Leaving her, 'tis the kindest thing she can do Then: what think you, Estridge? Estr. Faith, I'm of your mind, yet I have known Some unconscionable Ladies make their Servants wait as long for a just Exception, And almost as impatiently, as they did for the First Favour. Wild. Favour and Exception, Gentlemen, are words I don't meet with in seven years, where
I go, my piece makes my Complement When I come in, and my Excuse when I Go away; and 'tis ever well taken too: I have all the day to bestow upon my business, The night upon my Friends, whilst you are Kissing the Cards at Ombre, or presenting Oranges at a Play-house. Estr. Thou never knew'st it seems what 'twas To be in Love then. Wild. No faith, I never let the Disease run on so far, I always took it in time, and then a Bottle Of Wine or two, and a she Friend is an approv'd Remedy; there are men in the world though, Who in that Distemper prescribe some Serious Employment, continual Exercise, Spare Diet, and the like; but they are Philosophers, And in my opinion make the Remedy worse then The Disease. Estr. I do confess your's is the pleasantest Cure, If it be one; but I doubt it only gives a little Ease for the present, and like small Beer in the Morning after a merry bout over night, Doth but make us the worse afterwards. Mod. I now, you talk to him of what he understands, What you do tell him of Love for? who by His own confession never knew what it was. Wild. No, but I guess this same Love you speak Of, Gentlemen, to be much like Longing in Women, a phantastical appetite to some one Thing above all others, which if they cannot Get, the Lover miscarries of his passion, And the Lady of her little one; or if they do, are Both quickly satisfi'd, and it becomes for Ever after very indifferent, if not loathsom. Estr. Well, Modish, I perceive we shall do no Good on him, let's take him to the Mulberry-Garden, and see what the Ladies can do. Wild. You shall excuse me, I have a small
Ramble of my own for an hour or two This Afternoon: and so your Servant. [Exit. Mod. 'Tis time we were going, I warrant they have walk'd every foot of The Garden, twice over by this time: They are mad to know, whether their Friends in Town have dealt faithfully With 'um of late, concerning the Mode. Est. These Country Ladys for the first month Take up their places in the Mulberry Garden, As early as a Citizens Wife at a new Play. Mod. And for the most part are as easily discover'd; They have always somewhat on, that is Just left off by the Better Sort. Est. They are the Antipodes of the Court; for When a Fashion sets there, it rises Among them. [Exeunt. SCENE III. Enter Victoria and Olivia. Vict. Sister, whatever the We don't see half To meet here anights, In Town. Oliv. 'Tis true, but Walk at home Half a score young Well drest, are a greater A Garden, than a Wildernes Orange, a Lemmon Of rich Vests and Silk Musick than the purling Chirping of Birds, or any of our Country Entertainments: and that Will afford us yet, Ar done.
Vict. Sister, what wou'd you give to see Estridge come in now? Oliv. 'Tis impossible, he wou'd not miss his Devotion to the Park, for all I could give, Such an Evening as this: besides the two Garnitures he brought out of France are Soil'd, his Feather broke, and he has been So out of humour these two days, there's No enduring him; he lost his Money too Last night I hear; and losing Gamesters Are but ill company. Vict. Fye Sister, you make him a saver with A look; and Fine, in but thinking he is so▪ You deserve not so compleat a Servant, But I hope you'le be as obliging to His face, as you are severe to him Behind his back. Oliv. The only way to oblige most men Is to use 'um thus, a little Even to their faces, it gives 'um an Opinion of our wit; A Spur to theirs: the great pleasure Of Gaming were Anothers hands; and Anothers Hearts: there For good Play in the One, nor for Address In the Other Of both. But what would you Vict. To see Horatio, I would all others happiness But he is now anothers▪ and Is not to nourish, I dare not hope my Capti So many Charms contribute to Althea's Slave, let false Whilst I for freedom, Oliv. Fye Sister, leave this
Enter to them Estridge and Modish. Estr. Ladys, it is our wonder to find any body Here at this time of Day, and no less our Happiness to meet with you; all the world Is at the Park, where we had been our Selves, but that we saw your Livery At the Gate. Vict. I pray let us not keep you here Gentlemen, Your Mistresses will curse us, and your Selves too, by and by, if the Garden shou'd Not fill. Est. If we wish any company, Ladies, 'tis for Your sakes, not our own. Mod. For my part I wou'd ne're desire a Garden fuller than this is now; we Are two to two, and may be hand to Hand when you please. Oliv. I don't know what you think ▪ but in My mind the More the Merrler, especially In these places. Est. I, for show, Madam, but it happens in Great Companys, as at Feast, we see Great deal, and fall to heartly of nothing, And for the most part rise hungry: and 'tis With Lovers, Madam, as with great Bellied Women, if they find what they Long for, they care not whether there Be any thing else or no. Vict. What in love This place is a gret softner of mens hearts. Mod. How can it chuse, having so many Lovers sighs daily mixt A much better quality It could incline Ladies to believe, and look With pity on those flames they . Oliv. 'Tis too early to Flames and Pity wou'd In the Evening.
Mod. 'Tis not with love, Madam, as with meaner Arguments; I might entertain you with My passion for an age, and yet have as Much left for anon, as if I had not Spoke one word; the Sea is easier emptied Then a Lovers breast. Oliv. What say you, Sir, is this your opinion too? Est. Yes faith, Madam, and I think a Lover can No more say at once, what he hath to Say to his Mistress, than a man can eat At once for his whole life time▪ Oliv. Nay, if it be so endless, I should beg of My Servant, when ever I have one, E'ne to keep it to himself for altogether. Est. There you betray your ignorance, With your pardon, Madam; to see the Fair Olivia, and not love her, is not More impossible, than to love her, and not Tell her on't. Silent Lovers you may read Of, and in Romances too, but Heavens Forbid you shou'd e're meet with any. Oliv. If they knew how little they were like To get by being otherwise, I'm confident I shou'd meet with none else. Est. Well, Madam, I perceive Love, like Wine, Makes our Discourse seem extravagant To those that are not wound up to The same height: But had you any spark Of what I feel, I should have had Another Answer. Oliv. Why, what Answer, Est. Nay, I know not, but some pretty one, That love wou'd have devis'd for you; No more to be imagin'd by you ow, Than what you shall talk of In your sleep. Will you do us the honour to eat ? Oliv. Sister, let's go, so they'l promise to say
Nothing but what they think to us when We are there. Mod. You may do what you please, Ned, but 'tis A liberty I dare not use my self to, for Fear of an ill habit. Estr. You are very confident of our good opinion; Ladies; I believe there are few women In Town wou'd accept of our Company On these terms. Vict. Faith, Sister, let's bate um that circu Truth is a thing meerly necessary for witnesse▪ And Historians, and in these places doth out Curb invention, and spoil good Company; We will only confine 'um to what's Probable. Mod. Content, and I dare swear 'twill be better For all Parties. [Exeunt. SCENE IV. Sir Samuel Forecasts House. Enter Alth and Diana. Diana. We two, or none, may of our Stars complain, Who afford us nothing to share but pain; Each bears her own, and th' others portion too; This cruel wonder can high friendship do. Alth. To us how Since both had had what they on each bestow'd! But yet thy loss I rate  thy own▪ Fate on thy Love till now did never frown▪ Philander thee above the world did prize, Thy Parents saw him almost with thy Eyes:
This hour that promis'd all, can nothing pay, And Hymen steals his lighted Torch away. Dian. Ah, dear Althea▪ let not thou and I Contend who most exceeds in misery; It is a dismal strife, since were my own Less, I'de share thine till they were equal grown. Curse on Ambition, why shou'd Honour take A present back agen, that Love did make? On thee Eugenio did his Life bestow, To me Phila his Service vow; Yet both for  have those ties despis'd, And now are  must be sacrific'd. Unkind Philan, had Love fill'd thy brest With half those flames thou hast so oft exprest, They had consumed in their purer fires All other thoughts, and thou wou'dst never mind, Who were for Kings, and who for Slaves design'd. Alth. The noble sense they show of the sad Fate Of their dear Country, sets a higher rate Upon their Love; for who that had a grain Of Honour in him, cou'd endure the Reign Of proud Usurpers, whose  will, Is all the Law by which men spare or kill; And his true Prince in Banishment behold, Worthy of more than Fortune can with-hold; These monstrous with the crimes of prosperous Fate, The other shining in his adverse State, So that each stroke of Fortune does but seem A step for his Heroick mind to climb, Till he has got above her reach, and then The Vertue she has try'd she I love agen Though I must truly mouth their ill success, I cou'd not wish Eugenio had done less. Dian. Had their high Vertue the least doubt endur'd, Even with their death it had been cheaply cur'd: But this brave Act is but to me and you, A dangerous proof of what before we knew. Alth. Though their true worth to us before were clear,
This Act has made it to the world appear; None ever with that obstinacy lov'd, But they were pleas'd to see their choice approv'd: No joy compleat to worthy minds can seem, Which is not height'ned by the worlds esteem. Dian. My heart, Althea, does less grieve it has Ventur'd it's treasure in so lov'd a cause, Then that Philander did not let me know The danger he was like to undergo. Alth. Sister, though Laws of Decency We shining Swords and glittering Armour Yet a decision of what's right or wrong, As well as mens, does to our minds belong; And we best show it when we most approve Those men that fight in Quarrels which we love: Though they of Courage have the ruder part, The Vertue may become a womans heart, Though not Expose her Love, sure for her I knew Eugenio must that , Nor could consent he should the danger shun; And had Philander He without Dian. I must confess That he agen shou'd Let me the greatness of your mind admire, Whilst I deplore the greatness of my , A fire which lends To shew how much what I How much he hazards From vent'ring him Whose danger had known, my Eyes, alas! Had wept a Sea, he wou'd have fear'd to pass; But we so long of As if no further mischief did remain, And all the Arrows from her Quiver sent. Alth. When Fate wou'd harm where Vertue does protect,
She does her guilt and impotene detect; She can but rob the Vertuous of that rest, She must restore, again with interest And all the danger of these Heroes past, Must needs consider their high worth at last. Dian. What we ire, how fain we wou'd believe, And wish that Fortune knew not to deceive? But she profusely to  presents makes, And as unju  some others takes. I fear she's  worth in debt, She'l  use the whole's too great: Like  her Bounties still appear, Who give  that they from many tear. Alth. In the mean time I fear our cruel friends Will not consult our liking, but their ends; I know they'l press I should Horatio wed, And promise thee unto some Strangers bed. Dian. They may such Matches as they please provide, But here I vow, I'le never he, a Brid To any but Philander; in that Heart He taught to love, none else shall have apart. Alth. I the like Vow to my Which Fates worst malice As Trees expos'd to Storms Than those that do in peaceful So in all Noble minds, a virtuous Love By opposition does the firmer prove Dian. 'Tis fit, Althes, I now take my leave, Whilst you prepare Hratio to receive, Alth. Farewel, Diana, and be sure you do Nothing unworthy of your Love and Vow. Exeunt Diana and
ACT II. SCENE I. Enter Sir Samuel Forecast, Althea,  Wildish, and Olivia. Fore. DAughter, we are much beholding The Portion I can give with Deserve a man of past half his Fortune; Six thousand pounds a year, an Estate well Wooded, and I am told very improveable, It makes me young again to think on't: Eugenio I never lik't, and as things stand Now, am right glad we had no more to do With him; But that I am one whose Affection and good will to the State has sufficiently Manifested it self, I might be thought To have a hand in their Design, and so have Been put in the Tower, and had my Fortune Seiz'd on: Eugenio shall never call a Child of mine, Wife, as long as I live. Wild. But, Sir, your zeal to the Cause has put You above those apprehensions. Fore. You say right, Mr. Wildish, but we not, Be in this case too secure; and I am resolv'd▪ Althea, to take off all suspition, shall out Of hand marry with Horatio. Alth. Sir, I hope you will allow me some Time to dismiss Eugenio from my thoughts. Wild. And, pray Sir, what prejudice, what Exception have you to Eugenio? Fore. Originally this only, his Father made a Purchase of some Land, that lay next hedge, To mine, and gave a thousand pounds more Than it was worth, only to buy it over my head:
Think no more on him upon my blessing, He is not the man he was; he had an Estate, 'Tis now sequester'd, he dare not show his Head; and besides, I would not have a Son-in- Law of his principles, for six times his fortune; I shou'd be sorry to see any Child of mine Solliciting her Husbands Composition at A Committee. Alth. Had  had the relation of a Wife To Eugenio,  have thought nothing A trouble th  ecome my Duty, and Cou'd as oh  have shar'd an honourable Suffering, as the most flourishing condition. Fore. I charge you never receive visit, or Message from him more, and tell your Sister Diana, 'tis my pleasure she quit all Correspondence with Philander. They are both dangerous persons. [Turns to Wildish. These young Wenches, Mr. Wildish, have less Forecast than Pigeons, so they be billing, they Look no farther; n'ere think of building their Nests, nor what shall become of their little ones. Wild. Sir, I think they're i'th' right, let 'um encrease And multiply, and for the rest, trust him that set 'Um a work. Fore. Mr. Wild ou are a merry Gentleman, but I'le tell you, Mrs. Althea, as I have given you Life, I'le take care you shan't make it miserable. Alth. Sir, the happiness of life lies not in wealth, in Title, or in shew, but in the mind, which is not to Be forc'd, and we are not the less slaves for being Bound in Chains of Gold: A marriage with Horatio may make me appear happy to the Envious world, but like those destructive Arts, which, while they seem to id, consume Our native Beauties, indeed must prey upon My inward peace.
Fore. I'le warrant you peace within, and without too; Horatio is a well natur'd proper Gentleman, And one that loves you. Wild. Now there Sir Samuel I'm on your side, For so the Fan be play'd with, the hand kist; In fine, the passion handsomly discharg'd, 'tis No great matter who does it. As Children Cry after their old Nurses, but 'till they Are acquainted with their new: so young Ladies regret the loss of one Servant, but Till they have got the same familiarity With another; which, by the way, is seldom Long first. Enter a Servant. Serv. Sir, there's a man out of Pater-Noster Row with Stuffs. Fore. Bid him carry 'um into the next Room. Come Althea, let's in and look upon 'um. [Ex. Althea, and Sir Samuel. Manent Wildish and Olivia. Oliv. We Women are ever sure of your good Word, Mr. VVildish; when you have a Mistress, I hope she'le deserve it from you in particular, And have in perfection all those good qualities You so liberally bestow upon the whole Sex, in Your Discourse. VVild. Why, Madam, I thought you had understood Raillery; faith I have so good an opinion of the Sex I am asham'd to own it but to one of them in Private; this is only the way of talking I have Got among my Companions, where when we Meet over a Bottle of Wine, 'tis held as great A part of wit to rallee women handsomly behind Their back, as to flatter 'um to their Faces. Oliv. But why do you make us poor women the Subject of your mirth?
Wild. You are grown of late so uncharitable and Villainous hard-hearted, are incompass'd with so Many difficulties, as decency, honour, and That we men that love our pleasure, begin to Hate you worse than Beggars do a Coach with The Glasses drawn up, despair of Relief, and fall, A Railing. Oliv. And if some kind-hearted wretch do chance To relieve one of you, like Beggars you tell it Presently,  nd more; I warrant y'are fine Fellows, a  is well helpt up, That has  you to her Servant. Wild. Nay don't put me in among 'um, I am a Meer Apostate, though not resolute enough To endure the Martyrdoms of being continually Laught at by half a score of 'um: all that I Have done of late, has been meer compliance, As Papists go to Church for fear of the penalty. Oliv. Pray, Sir, to what fair Saint do we owe your Conversion? Wild. Faith there are many in the World now wou'd Make you guess this half hour, telling you First the colour of her hair, her age, her Country, and perhaps the first Letter of her name; But I hate that way of fooling—'tis your Self—whom I love. Oliv. Impudent fellow! don't you expect I shou'd Forbid you the house, or at least, for punishment Of such rudeness, condemn your guilty passion To eternal silence and despair? what! men Have liv'd years in Desarts for their Mistresses Sake, and yet have trembled when they spoke Of love; which you venture at with as Little Ceremony, as you'd ask me how I Slept last night. Wild. I know not what Romances order in This case, I ere thought it would be mine▪ And so ha'n't much study'd it: but prithee don't
Baulk a young Beginner; 'tis my first fault, and So been't too severe, I shall relapse else Beyond Redemption: Oliv. Well, I'm content for once your ignorance Shou'd plead your pardon. Wild. Nay Mrs. Olivia consider me a little further; I have lost the pleasures of mirth, of Wine, And Company; all things that were before Delightful to me are no longer so; my Life is grown but one continu'd Thought of Your fair self: and is a pardon all that I Must hope for? Oliv. Come, leave your fooling, your old humour does Better with you, a thousand times, then this Whining Love. As there are some Perfumes So strong, that they lose that name with Most: So Complements may be so gross, that They become injurious. Wild. Why here's it now; there are so many cheats In this Trade of Love too, that like Beggars, the The true go unreliev'd, because we meet with now And then a counterfeit; on my life Mrs. Olivia The plenty I have ever liv'd in, puts me As much out of countenance to ask a Charity Of this kind, as I cou'd be, should Fortune constrain Me, to intreat one of the other; and wou'd not Trouble you cou'd my pain admit redress From any but your self. Oliv. Sure, Mr. Wildish, you wou'd think I had An excellent opinion of my self, or an implicite Faith in whatever you say, shou'd I believe All this now. Wild. If I told a Chirurgion, I had broke my leg, Do you think he wou'd not take my word? Oliv. Yes sure. Rild. Why shou'd not you take it then for a wounded Heart? they are neither of 'um matters to Brag on; and I wou'd no more lead the life
Of a Lover if I were free, then I wou'd That of a sick man if I were well. Oliv. Methinks the sick men, as you call 'um, Live so like the well, as one can scarce know One from th'other. Wild. In your Chamber, perhaps; but abroad we Find a thousand differences. Oliv. As how, I pray? Wild. Why, your true Lover leaves all Company When the Sport begins, the Table when the Bottles Are call'd for, the Gaming-house when the Cards come up; is more afraid of an Engagement, Than a Lawyer in Term-time; Wou'd less miss the last Act of a Play, the Park, Or indeed any abominable old Ladies, Where he may hope to see the party, then A young Wench can Grayes-Inn-walks, the First Sunday of her new Gown. Oliv. What is this all? Wild. Not half: ask him to sup, he has business; Or if he promise, 'tis ten to one he fails, and If he sees his Mistress, is so transported, that He forgets to send his Excuse; if he cannot Find her, and so chance to keep his word, Sits in such dismal Dumps, that he spoils The whole Company. Oliv. And will you be such an Animal for my sake? Wild. Faith I'm afraid so, but if not well us'd, I shall find the way home again. Oliv. Whatever you think, Sir, I shall contribute No more to the keeping you my Servant, Then I did to the making you so. Wild. Well, do but use as proper means to keep Me your Servant, as you have done to make Me so, and I am satisfied. Oliv. Why, what means? Wild. As your Beauty bred my Affection, So let your kindness nourish it.
Oliv. Mr. Wildish, you have been so pleasant Upon this new Argument, that I had Almost forgot my Visit to Diana. Wild. I'm upon equal terms with you there; For I have made Ned Estridge and Harry Modish stay this half hour for me At the French House: and so your Servant. [Exeunt: SCENE II. Enter Althea. Alth. Under what Tyranny are Women born! Here we are bid to love, and there to scorn; As if unfit to be allow'd a part In choosing him, that must have all our heart; Or that our liking, like a head-strong beast, Were made for nothing, but to be opprest; And below them, in this regard we are, We may not flye the cruelty we fear. The Horse may shake the Rider from his back, The Dog his hated Master may forsake; Yet nothing of their native worth impair, Nor any conscious sting about them bear. But if a Virgin an Escape contrive, She must for ever in dishonour live, Condemn'd within her self, despis'd of all, Into worse mischiefs then she fled from, fall. Duty commands I shou'd Horatio wed, Love does as strongly for Eugenio plead; My mind, distracted thus, a storm abides Like Seas, when winds blow full against their Tides. Enter Horatio. Hora. Madam, methinks you look not pleas'd; I fear My hapless passion did too late appear For my content; and only now can prove The wretched Triumph of some elder Love.
But, fair Althea, you were much to blame With your own breath to blow a hopeless flame. Ah! had you to its Childhood been severe, As now to its full growth you cruel are, 'Thad dy'd with half that pain it now must bear: Young Plants with ease up by the Roots we tear; But when well grown, the A must be imploy'd, And they with force and labour are destroy'd. Alth. Generous Horatio, forbear to blame Me, as the cruel Author of your pain. How cou'd I know that you my Lover were, Until your self your passion did declare? How had it look'd in me to have complain'd Of thoughts, perhaps, you never entertain'd? How could I check, alas, those hopes in you, Your Heart did never harbour, that I knew? Hora. Not know, Althea! why shou'd the same eyes So slowly see, so suddenly surprize? The very minute I beheld your face, You might in mine my growing passion trace, Now trembling fear did her pale colour spred, Then springing hope brought back the ative red: Joy may be seen, and grief it self unfold, And so may love, though it be never told. In every look my passion was confest, And every action my high flame exprest. As foolish Witnesses them Cause o'rethrow, My Arts to hide it, did it clearer show. Alth. But as fond Parents will not seen to know A fault they needs must punish when they do; So I at first was loth to see a crime In one, I otherwise did so esteem: For know, Horatio, setting Love apart, None then your self is deeper in my Heart; Your worth and honour I can value, though I no requital to your flame allow. Hora. You can give all things else above their due, And yet wrong that which most belongs to you:
Madam, these words, sooth with a cruel art Where I less feel, and wound a mortal part; With friendship and esteem you strive in vain, Kind Maid, to ease a Lover of his pain: For where your Beauty once has rais'd a flame, To offer less, and nothing, are the same. Love and Ambition of their aim deny'd, No other way can e're be satisfi'd. Alth. You that cou'd faithless to Victoria prove, Methinks shou'd blush even at the name of Love. Her numerous Charms your loud accusers are, And call Horatio false, as she is fair. Hora. You shou'd with pity, not displeasure see The change that your own self creates in me. The Roman Senate had their greatness worn Perhaps till now, had Caesar n'er been born. Darius self cou'd not his Persians blame, Because that Alexander overcame. In Love like War, some Victor still there grows, Whose spreading Empire nothing can oppose. Alth. Countries are fix'd, and cannot flye, although They apprehend a certain overthrow. Lovers, the force they can't oppose, might shun, And may with safety and with honour run. Who then would pity him that stays to dye, When Vertue and his Duty bid him flye? Hora. Althea, In Loves wars all Heroes are, Death does less terrible than flight appear; As Gamesters, when they lose, still deeper set, Helping ill Fortune to encrease their debt: So Lovers, when a Nymph gets half their heart, Themselves, alas, betray the other part. Alth. Victoria's wrongs my gratitude deter; Your gifts to me are robberies from her. Hora. I came at first, Althea, 'tis most true With Love to her, and but Respect to you, But, ah! how soon within my tortur'd brest You of each others place are possest.
Alth. Beauty, the wrongs of Beauty shou'd revenge, And the fair punish, when the faithless change. Hora. I change Althea, but (as pious men Become blest Saints) never to change agen. If none your matchless Beauty must adore, But such alone as never lov'd before, You do unjustly, and too high advance In Love th'already too great power of chance: Since that you shou'd their first affection be, Let's you their Fortune, not their passion see. Alth. It lets me see they falshood never knew. And gives me leave to hope they will be true. Hora. Sure none can faithless to such Beauty prove▪ He that's in Heaven, can no higher move. Alth. A Lovers Heaven in his Phansie lyes, Which Beauty oft neglects, and oft supplies. Hora. 'Tis not, Althea, that you question mine, But 'tis Eugenio's faith does brighter shine; 'Tis he that makes Victoria's wrong your pain, My Love a Crime, a Vertue your disdain. These tales of falshood, and of former Love, Reproaches only, where we like not, prove. Alth. Horatio, I am glad your dis-respect Has turn'd so soon to Justice my neglect: You that reproach me with a former Love, Your self unfit but for my anger prove. [Exit Althea. Hora. O stay a while I sure you must joy to see The torture you're so pleas'd to work in me; Not that I hope I shall your pity find, But that the sight may glut your cruel mind. Nature inconstant to her own designs, To a fair form a cruel temper joyns; She makes the heedless Lover kneel in vain, And in Loves Temple, to adore Disdain. [Exit Horatio. Enter Sir Samuel Forecast and Jack Wildish. Fore. When am I to see your fair and wealthy Cousin, Mr. Wildish?
Wild. This minute if you please, Sir. Fore. I doubt you are not stirring in the business, You do not lay the necessity of marrying Home enough to her: I might have got Access ere now else, and our Counsel Have been drawing the Writings. Wild. It must be done by degrees: if I shou'd Have been too forward, it might have Caus'd in her a suspicion of my purpose, And so my worthy Friend Sir Samuel have Come to her upon some prejudice, Which I wou'd not for half her Fortune. Fore. Pray, Mr. Wildish, is she so concern'd for Her late Husband as the world talks? Wild. Ten times more; looks upon his Picture All day long, as earnestly as if she were To copy it; since he dy'd, has us'd no Pocket- Handkerchers, but what was made of his old Shirts, And wets two a day of 'um with her tear; Because he dy'd on a Monday, fasts that day Of the week; takes none into her Service But Thomases, because 'twas his Christian Name, and has now sent into Wales for a Thomas ap Thomas to be her Gentleman-usher. Fore. 'Tis strange she shou'd so affect his name! What think you then, if you call'd me Sir Thomas Forecast? Wild. Faith, Sir, what you please; but I think It will be altogether needless, and if she shou'd, Come to discover, it might spoil all,  light, She might mistrust your particular, if she Shou'd find you put a trick upon her in Your name. Fore. Well, I'le be rul'd by you, Mr. VVildish, You know her humour best. VVild. I can't but think how she'l look upon Me when I talk to her of another Husband; But I'le venture, Sir
Come let's away, her House is here hard by. [They enter the VVidows house VVild. I show the way, Sir. [They find her looking upon her Husbands Picture, and does not see 'um. Fore. Excellent woman, she sees us not! O the Endless treasure of a virtuous Wife! It extends even to our memories, and Pictures. [Wildish goes up, and speaks to her VVild. Madam, here is Sir Samuel Forecast Come to wait on you. VVid. Sir, I hope you'le pardon me, if I have Let my grief employ any part of that time Which was due to my acknowledgment for This favour; you were my Husbands friend, And as such will ever be most welcome to me; And though his too scrupulous kindness allow'd Me not the acquaintance, scarce the sight of Any man; yet I did always place a value Where he gave his esteem; especially, So highly as he did to you. Fore. Madam, I am much bound to you for your Good opinion, and come to condole with you: Your Husband was an honest, prudent, and a Wealthy Gentleman, kept good hours, and even Reckonings, lov'd me well, and we have drank Many a Dish of Coffee together. VVid. Sir, whilst you repeat his vertues, you do But count my loss, and telling me how good He was, makes me but more sensibly want him. Fore. He and I were just of an age, and when We were Boys, of a strength. VVid. And what of that, Sir? VVild. Why, Cousin it makes me think that Sir Samuel wou'd make as loving a Husband To you, as your last was, and Troubles me heartily to see my
Here not yet out of danger of smooth-fact Younger Brothers, such as marry Wives only To keep Wenches, and never bring 'um to Town But to pass away some part of their Estates. Fore. Some such there are; but Heaven bless the Estate, and Widow of my good Friend your Husband out of such hands. Wid. Now I have brought you together, I'le leave you; Cousin, you are not afraid to Be left alone with Sir Samuel? [Exit. Wid. I know his Vertue, and my own too well. Fore. Don't you find, Madam, business very troublesome? Wid. I do indeed, and have the misfortune to be Involv'd in it. Fore. Have you many Law-suits? Wid. But one considerable, which being with A man in power, in these corrupt times, A Woman unfriended and unknown as I am, Must expect to lose. Fore. Of what value? Wid. Five thousand pounds: I shall have enough Left however, to make me happy with a man That loves me. Fore. Enough left! such another word wou'd Make me foreswear, not only thee but thy Whole Sex; five thousand pounds well dispos'd, Why I tell thee, 'tis able to procure us Judgments On half the young Prodigals of this Age▪ thou And I might live comfortably on the forbearance Money, and let the Interest run on. Wid. I did but put the worst, not that I doubt my Title, if I have common Justice. Fore. No, thou shalt secure thy , I am a Near Kinsman to the Judge, and a by way to His favour. Wid. How do you mean? Fore. Why I have many times bought a thousand Pounds worth of other men For a hundred.
Wid. I wou'd not corrupt Justice for a world. Fore. What agen Widow? nay then I perceive Thou do'st it on purpose to lose my heart: But to say truth, it were unreasonable To expect thy tender years shou'd understand The true worth of money, so far, that for its sake To trample on those unprofitable and foolish principles The honourable Beggars of former times Govern'd their Lives by: But thou wilt one day know, that Age hath its beauties too, as well as youth, and More universally ador'd. Wid. Gravity and Wisdom, Sir, I know men may Expect, but our Sex has no pretence to them. Fore. No, wealth and power, Widow, which awe the grave And wise; Gold and Silver are the best red and white; The other, every Milk-Maid may boast equal with A Countess. Enter Sir John Everyoung, Modish, and Estridge, with Fiddles playing. Wid. What rude fellow's that? Ever. Hold, let's parlee first. [To the Musick▪ Faith, Widow, one that loves you but too well. Wid. Love me! upon what acquaintance? I n'ere Saw your face before in my days. Ever. And do'st thou like it now? VVid. Not so well as your self, you may be confident. Ever. All this shan't cross my honest purpose, I Came in meer charity to prevent thy ruine; And if thou be'st not lost to all sence and reason, Nay, even all natural appetite, I'le do't. VVid. I know no ruine neer this is the worst Accident has befaln me a good while. Ever. Hear me but out, and thou shalt bless it; Canst thou be such a Traytor to flesh and blood, As to count it nothing to be join'd to that old Trunk There? if he encrease or multiply it▪
Must be thy Bags; Interest, and Broakage Are his best Instruments. VVid. You don't consider that all this might be As well apply'd to your sweet self. Ever. Yes, most properly, why 'tis that makes me Hate Matrimony, and puts me at distance With, To have and to hold; I confess my Tick Is not good, and I never desire to Game for more than I have about me. Now second me. Mod. The minute you marry, Widow, you are Not worth a Groat, all is your Husbands; And if hereafter you shall come to a sence Of your unequal choice, and endeavour to Repair it in some young and worthy friend; The old Gentleman takes pet, turns you over To a todious sute for Al mony, which your Friend furnishes you with money to follow, For a while, and in times grows weary of it Himself. Estr. Then like an old Gamester, that has lost all He has upon the square, your only way is To turn Rook and play upon advantage. VVid. Why, do you know these Gentlemen? Fore. I, to my shame, the Ring-leader of 'um is my Brother, there is no remedy but patience. VVid. Gentlemen, you talk at a strange rate For the first time; but whom ever I marry My vertue will secure him of my constancy. Mod. Pray Madam, don't prophane that honourable Name; 'tis meer obstinacy to an old man, A fault methinks you have too ingenious a Countenance to be guilty of. Ever. If thou Neglect the comfort of a Gallant, thou'st never 'Scape the scandal, having such a Husband. Mod. If you are precise, Madam, they're give you Your Chaplain; if you love Lawyer; if you
You are undone. Estr. If you take some honest Gentleman (Which by my  I think is your best Course) upon the first hard journey, as the world Goes now, 'tis ten to one he falls lame of an Old bruise. Wid. You are very tender of my credit if you Had been as careful, Gentleman, of your own Sobriety, I fear I had mist all this good Counsel. Ever. O! are you edified? if is good counsel then: And for the warmth that ripen'd us to this care Of thee, be thankful, and enquire no further. But Brother, methinks you are over serious For a man that comes a Sutering. Widd. He does not find your mirth take so well. [Enter Wildish apart. Wild. S'light here's Sir Iohn Everyoung, he'le spoil All, if I don't take him off instantly. [Wild goes out, and brings in three of the Widows Maids. Fore. Brother▪ Brother▪ these frolicks do you No right in the eye of the World. Ever. Hang the world, give me the pretty black-eye Of the Widdow. [A Sog. Wild. Gentlemen, here's work for you, Ever. A muss, a muss▪ You see, Wildish, we found the House, though You wou'd not tell us where it was, 'tis Dangerous to give a hint to men of our parts. Brother, take your Widdow, show her that You are so far qualifie towards a Bridegroom, As to lead a Country Dance. Widd. I'le have no dancing in my House. Fore. You see they are a little merry, humor 'um In this, they VVid. Well, Sir
To serve you. [They Dance, and Forecast steals away. Mod. Sir Samuel gone? Ever. Faith then the sport's at the best, let's all be gone: Farewel Widow, I have done my part, if Thou fallest now, say thou hadst fair warning. [Ex. omnes. ACT III. SCENE I. Enter Eugenio, and Philander. Eug. DEar friend, I am in doubt whether I shall This scape, a blessing, or misfortune, call; Since now I live to hear, Althea must Be to her Duty, or to me unjust. Ye Powers that were so kind, my life to spare, Oh why was not my Loe as much your care? You sav'd my life, that I might live to feel Despair can wound as mortally as Steel. My cause till now my antidote has been, 'Gainst all the mischief it cou'd plunge me in; The strictest Prison, I have freedom thought, And been on Scaffolds without terrour brought. But these few words (Althea is a Bride) More wound my Soul, than can the world beside. Phil. Why does Eugenio Fancies entertain, That are ,  and his own pain Like Boys, who in the dark, strange shapes create In their own brain, themselves to tremble at▪ Despair's the portion of the damn'd below, And in a generous mind shou'd never grow; Trust to Althea's virtue, trust her love▪ And you will safe in either of
Eug. But sure no friend cou'd so my quiet hate, As this Report, of nothing, to create. Phil. Perhaps her Father does no less intend, And she, a while, her Answer may suspend. Not that her vertue doubts, what it shall do, But that she may gain time to speak with you: Every black Cloud does not with Thunder swell, Nor every symptom a Disease foretell. Some storms blow over; though thy Fate appear Thus gloomy now, anon it may be clear. Eug. It may, but who can unconcerned be, A Tempest heard, and his whole wealth at Sea? I with more ease all other harms cou'd bear, Than of Althea's loss but simply hear. Phil. All that we hear, we are not to believe. Eug. Our hopes do oftner, than our fears deceive. Phil. The advantage man He pays with interest in  conceits; They cannot fear misfortune And when 'tis gone remember't not at all: But man 'gainst his own Re in Battel plac'd, Feels mischiefs e're they come, and when they're pas. The smiles of Fortune Methinks, you shou'd not How wou'd Althea's Vertues grieve to find Themselves suspected in  mind Like Princes murder'd on the Royal , Where 'till that Eug. Sure my Althea These fears that spring but from excess of love. Of love and courage none too much can . Phil. But 'tis their use, Courage, when brutal, And love, grown jealous, can no merit have. Eug. A higher mark of love there cannot be, We doubt no Lover, whom we jealous see. Phil. So Fevers are of life sure proofe we know, And yet our lives they
Diseases, though well u'd, our bodies ar, And fears, although remov'd, our loves impair: True love, like health, should no disorder know. Eug. But who, alas such love, or health can show? Our passions, like our selves, are fram'd to dye, And have still something they must perish by; We none (brave friend) for being hapless blame, But all allow, 'tis baseness to be tame; He that has rais'd this Tempest in my mind, Shall in the Billows his own ruine ; I'le fight him instantly, and make him know, I am not more his Rival than his Foe. Phil. Thy life, alas (dear friend)'s no longer thine, Thou hast engag'd it in a brave design: Thy bleeding Country, and thy Princes Right, Are th' only Quarrels that thy Sword shou'd fight, If you into the Tyrant's hands shou'd fall, Twou'd pull a sudden ruine on us all. Which, if you stir, we may have cause to fear, Since Tyrants Eyes and Hands are every where. Eug. Now thou hast touch'd me in the tendrest part, Though Love possess, Honour must rule my heart; My Nation's Fate's too great a Sacrifice For me to make, though to Althea's Eyes; No, I am calm'd, and happy am to have A friend so full of temper when I rave, And hope the gods, whilst I my own neglect, To fight their Quarrel, will my Love protect. [Exeunt. SCENE II. Enter Victoria and Olivia. Vict. Sister, I doubt we are a little too free with Our Servants, this Modish, and his friend Estridge: few Plays gain Audience by being In Print, and ewer women get Husbands by Being too much known.
Oliv. But ours are most accomplish'd Mounsieurs, Must be assaulted on all parts e're they'le yield; Must have their Ears charm'd as well as Eyes: 'Twere ill husbandry in a Mercer to be thirsty In his Patterns, it often disparages a good stuff; And too great reserv'dness in one of us, especially At the first, might give a discouragement to our Further Acquaintance. Vict. Now might I have my wish, I wou'd come All new, nay my voice and name shou'd not Be known; where I wou'd be lik'd, I wou'd have The few Charms I am Mistress of, make their Assault at an instant, all at one time: For sure Horatio did their power subdue, By conquering one, e're he another knew. Oliv. Fye Sister, think no more of him; but to the Matter in hand, who ever caught any thing With a naked hook? nothing venture, nothing Win, and for my part I am resolv'd to allow All innocent liberty; this Matrimony is a Pill will scarce down with a young man Without guilding; let Estridge believe I am In love with him, and when he leaves me, He'll find I am not. Enter to them Wildish. Wild. So he will, when he marrys you, or I am Deceiv'd, Madam. Vict. What, turn'd EavesDropper, Mr. Wildish? Wild. No Ladys, but your heads are so taken up with These Heirs Apparent, that you can't see a Younger Brother when he comes into the Room. Oliv. Not when our backs are towards him; but Otherwise as an elder, any where, but before A Parson. Wild. You are in the right; Jointure, and allowance For Cloaths, have clearly got the better off▪ Dear
Madam, I consider not your Portion, but your Person; give your Estate where you please, So you will but settle your affection upon me, My Fate depends upon your Answer▪ and the like Artillery of unlanded Lovers: But I never Repine at that; for fine Women, like great Tables, though they are maintain'd by men Of Fortunes, are ever open to men of parts. Oliv. Why now, Wildish, you talk like your self Again; ever since I saw you last, I Been in most terrible apprehension Whining Copy of Verses. Wild. Expectation you mean, Madam, but 'tis Not come to that yet; though I talk a little Extravagantly when I see you, I am not so Through pac't a Lover, but I can express My self in Prose. Vict. But you, being a new Convert, can't give Too many marks of your Devotion: and I shou'd Mistrust I were not as I ought to be in my Servants heart, if I did not run sometimes In his head, and then Verses follow infallibly. Wild. Faith, Madam, that's much as the head lyes, There are some you may search every cranny Over, and not find three Rimes; very good Lovers too; and to say truth, 'tis unreasonable A man shou'd be put to seek fresh words To express that to his Mistress, which has Been as well said already by some body else; I think 'tis very fair if he set his hand To't, and that I am ready to do to the most Passionate Copy of Verses you can find. Oliv. How much Love and Constancy Will you engage for then? Wild. As much as you can find in that Paper there. He gives a Paper to Olivia, she gives it to Victoria. Oliv. Sister here read 'um, I shall put the Accen
In the wrong place, stop out of time, or One mischief or other, and so put my poor Servant into an Agony. Vict. To a very young Lady. [Reads the Title. Oliv. That's I, Wildish: come, you have been Dabling; proceed, Sister, I fear 'um not, I have No more pity on a Rhyming Lover, than on A Beggar that begs in a Tone. Vict. Are not these Verses somewhat Too weak to allone? Wild. Faith, Madam, I am your mind, put a Tune to 'um, 'tis an easie Stanza. Victoria singe. Ah Cloris! that I now could sit As unconcern'd, as when Your Infant Beauty cou'd beget No pleasure, nor no pain. 2. When I the Dawn us'd to admire, And prais'd the coming day; I little thought the growing fire Must take my Rest away. 3. Your Charms in harmless Childhood lay, Like metals in the mine, Age from no face took more away, Then Youth conceal'd in thine. 4. But as your Charms insensibly To their perfection prest, Fond Love as unperceiv'd did flye, And in my Bosom rest. 5. My passion with your Beauty grew, And Cupid at my heart, Still as his mother favour'd you, Threw a new flaming Dart.
6. Each glori'd in their manton part To make a Lover e Employ'd the utmost of hi Art, To make a Beauty she. 7. Though now I slowly bend to love Vncertain of my Fate, If your fair self my Chains approve, I shall my freedom hate. 8. Lovers, like dying men, may well At first disorder'd be, Since none alive can truly tell What Fortune they must see. Enter a Servant. Serv. There's an old Gentleman below in a Chair Enquires for Mr. Wildish; as fine as an Emperour, My Master Sir Iohn is no body to him; as he Peep'd through the glass, I thought it was Sir Samuel Forecast. Vict. It is Wild. Yes faith it is Ladies, I am privy to the plot. Oliv. Good Mr. Wildish bring him up, I wou'd give any thing to see him. Wild. Do you step into that Close then for I Must swear the Coast is clear: set the door a Little open, and you may see him perfectly, His Bravery on my word is not design'd For this place, and he is so politick, that He will think your seeing him may be A prejudice to his design. Wildish goes out, and brings in Sir Samuel Forecast. Wild. Sir Samuel, now you shine, indeed▪ my Cousin will be ravish'd to see you transform
Your self thus for her sake. Fore. She is a tender iece, and though her discretion Helps her to conceal it, in her heart cannot But love a little Bravery; I have two Laces In a Seam more than my Brother Everyoung, And a Yard more in my Cravat. Wild. Nay, you are most exact, and in this dress Methinks not unlike Sir Iohn. Fore. I came only to show my self to you, and Am for my Widow presenty; shall I have Your Company? Wild. I have a little business here, but I'le Be with you by that time you are ther, I see You came in a Chair. Fore. Do you think I had a mind to have the Boys Follow me in the streets? pray be secret, Mr. Wildish, for I wou'd have no body know I am In this Dress, but your self, and your fair Cousin, For a world: and therefore I will make haste From hence, do you follow me according To your promise. [Exit. Wild. I shall, Sir Samuel. Oliv. I never saw a City-Bridegroom so friz'd▪ So lac'd, so perfum'd, and so powder'd in my Vict. I think verily he was painted too, I vow I shou'd not have known his Worship, if You had not given us a hint of his Bravery before. Wild. Well, I must recover my old Knight. Farewel Ladies. Oliv. Pray be here anon, and give us an account Of this Adventure. Vict. Certainly it must be very pleasant. Wild. I shall obey you, Ladies. [Exit Wildish. Enter Everyoung, Victoria, and Olivia laughing. Ever. Hey-day ▪ what, are the Girls mad? Vict. No, Sir, but I think my Uncle Forecast's better.
Ever. Why, what of him? Oliv. He is, Sir, at this time the greatest Spark in London, drest so like you, that if his condition Requir'd it, I shou'd think, Sir, he were going To a Scrivener to personate you for a good Sum. Ever. Well, I'le handsel his new Cloaths, and put him As much out of conceit with Bravery as ever He was in his life. Boy, call in the three Prentices were brought before me for breaking Windows last night. Enter three Prentices. I suppose, young men, you wou'd not scruple At a small piece of service to the man that Shou'd procure your Liberties. On. Free us, and command us any thing. Ever. Well then follow me, and when I show You a certain Chair, take the Gentleman Out of it, and cudgel him; I'le be at a little Distance, and if you want help▪ be ready to Assist you: be sure you call him Sir Iohn Everyoung, and tell him of a Lady he afronted. 1 Pren. We shall call him what you please, Sir, And beat him as much as you please. Exit Victoria and Olivia. SCENE changes. Forecast coming by  his Chair. Ever. That's the Chair. They take out Forecast, and cudge him. Fore. If you have humanity, if you had Women To your Mothers, be more merciful, Gentlemen, I never injur'd you, not sawany Of you in my life. Pren. I perceive, Sir Iohn Everyoung, you have Forgot the affront you did a Lady last night. Fore. What affront, Sir, what Lady?
Pren. The affront, Sir, was a great affront, and The Lady, a great Lady, that thinks fit to Have you beaten for't. Fore. You mistake, Gentlemen, you mistake; For as I am a true Servant to the State, I never did kindness or injury to any Lady Since I was in Commission. 2 Pren. A true Servant to the State, and a man in Authority! he shall have three kicks more for that. Enter Estridge and Modish. Estr. What, three upon one! who e're e be, The Cause becomes a Gentleman Let's rescue him at all adventures. They draw, the Prentices run away. Fore. Estridge. and Modish! nay then I am utterly Undone, I have only scap'd a little more Beating, to be laught Estr. Sir, we are very happy that our Led us this way, ince it has given us an Opportunity of serving a Gentleman, Especially oppress'd by odds. Fore. I shall Let me know where to wait on you, to give You thanks for this your seasonable Assistance: now, Gentlemen, my hurts Require a Chirurgion. He Mod. Nay, Sir, take your Hat and Sword along With you; there they be, [He looks a little fo 'um.] I never heard any man speak so Like Sir Samuel Forecast in my life. Estr. But he is drest very like Everyoung, A meer medly between the two Brothers; But we'l see who he is before we go. Mod. Have you receiv'd any hurt in your Face, that you cover it with your Fore. A slight one only.
Estr. I have Sympathy-powder about me, if You will give me your handkercher while The blood is warm, will ure, it immediately. Modish snatches it off, and discovers him. Estr. SirSamuel Forecast, why do you hide your Self thus from your friends? we expected Nothing for our pains, neither is your Hurt so dangerous, but it might endure the Air. Mod. Methinks you shou'd rather have hid Your self from your Enemies▪ but, Sir Samuel, whatever the matter is, I never Saw a man so fine in all my life. Fore. Now the Broakers take all fine Cloaths, And the Gaol all that love um; they have Helpt me to fine beating. Estr. Why do you think the Rogues wou'd have Had more mercy on your high crown'd Hat, Black Cap, and Boots. Fore. No, but they took me for my Brother Everyoung, who it seems, has lately affronted A Lady, and I suffer for it. Mod. The best advice we can give you, is to Go home and shift, for fear of more mishaps. Estr. Farewel, Sir Samuel [Exeunt omnes. ACT IV. SCENE I. The MulberryGarden. Enter Jack Wildish. Wild. I Was to blame no earlier to use my self To these Women of Honour, For now like one that never practis'd swimming, Upon the first occasion I am lost; there are men Would have fool'd with Perhaps by this time,
In one serious thought: your good Fencer always Thrusts in Guard, he's but a Novice that receives Hit for hit: this Modish and Estridge, I know Not what to make of their continual Visits, Methinks Love and Jealousie come too quick Upon a man in one day. Enter. Modish and Estridge. Here come the men▪ they are open enough to Let me know all at large; but I would ain Contrive it, that the Ladies might be witnesses Of their Servants most invincible secrecy: I'le steal off e're I am seen, and think . Enter. Victoria and Olivia, as he goes out he meets 'um. Wild. Slip into that Arbour, Ladies, and trust me For once for a quarter of an hours diversion. Oliv. Pray, Sister, let us go, he has somewhat in His head, I'm confident. He puts them into an Arbour, and meets Modish in a Walk, Wild. Your Servant, Modish. Mod. O your Servant! Estr. Your Servant, Mr. Wildish. Wild. What, is there store of Game iere, Gentlemen? Mod. Troth little, or none, a few Citizens that Have brought their Children out to air 'um, And eat Cheese-cakes. Wild. I thought this place had been so full of Beauties, that like  of  in a Hare Warren, you cou'd not hunt one for another: What think you of an Arbaur and a  of Rhenish. Wildish brings 'um to the next Arbour to the Ladies. Estr. I like the moton . Wild. And how go the Ladies? will they go abroad Alone? are they come to kissing ye? Estr. What Ladies? Wild. Why, Sir Iohns Daughters, the Ladies. Mod. You are .
Wild. I should be so indeed, if it were with me As it is with you, Gentlemen, that have two Such fine Women in love with you, and every Night sitting up together till morning. Mod. I go only to entertain Victoria in meer Friendship to Ned Estridge; 'tis he that is the Happy man. Estr. 'Tis a part of friendship that you discharge Very willingly, and very effectually, for Sometimes we see neither of you in an hour; And then you return, exclaiming against the Heat of the weather, and cruelty of your Mistress. Wild. What, that she kept him a little too hard To't, or so? Mod. Fye, Wildish, they are women of honour. Wild. Well, here's their health, to make 'um amends. And, faith they lose none with me, in being Civil to an honest Gentleman, 'tis the only Wealth is left poor women to exercise Their good nature with: A friend at Court may Get you a place, a General of an Army give You an Employment, a Bishop a Church-Living, And a fair Lady a good turn; every one in their Way, and I hold him ungrateful that burys An obligation of any sort in silence: besides 'Twere meer robbery to your friends, not to Let u'm rejoice in your good fortune. Mod. But say I have made a vow to the contrary; Not that there is, or ever was, any such good Fortune; and womens favours, like the gifts Of Fairies, if once spoke of, vanish. Wild. O your Servant, what say you Estridge? Are you under a vow too, or are the favours You have receiv'd, yet, only such as the hope Of further obliges you to secrecy for a while? But you are so serious, I doubt you intend To commit matrimony. Estr. Not as long as I can have simple forn.
Cation for love or money: I am not for those Ladies that deal by whole-sail, a bit off the Spit serves my turn as well as the whole Joint, And methinks has a prettier relish. Wild. That is, metaphorically saying, you have Sped with your Mrs.—my service [Drinks to him. To you, remembring the Bit off the Spit. And how, is she buxam? does she think happiness Consists in motion, or in rest? what Sect of Philosophers is she of? Estr. A Pythagorean; I, Sir, in all these cases say Nothing. Wild. Nay, you had as good speak out now, and Make me your confident. Modish takes Estridge aside. Mod. Iack Wildish is an honest fellow, 'tis not a Pins matter what we say to him; and they are Two of the prettiest women in Town: it sounds Handsomly, to boast some familiarity, you Understand me: he knows 'um not, and will Never find us out; I'le begin with him— I wonder, Wildish, we could never get you along With us; the Ladies have not vow'd virginity, They are no such Bugbears as you take 'um for. Wild. I take 'um for honest women, or which is E'ne as bad, pretenders to it. Estr. There is no harm in pretending to it, that Like a high price, only serves to keep off I Company. Wild. Yes, yes, I know what kind of cattel they are Well enough, there's no having a simple Kiss Amongst 'um without a journey into the Country; nor getting 'um abroad without a Sister, Or a Cousin at least, and then they must be at Home too by ten a Clock, have the Syllabus, and Tarts, brought into the oach to 'um▪ drink more▪
Sugar than wine, and so foul all the Glasses, put You to four or five pound charge, and let you See nothing but themselves, that's ma's meat For't; I have been once or twice plagu'd With such Animals as these. Mod. Can'st thou imagine, Wildish, we wou'd fool Away our time with such shadows of women As thou describ'st? we have solid and substantial Pleasures. Wild. What? a Riband, or a lock of hair, I warrant. Mod. No, two young juicy Girls, that stick as Glose to us, as the Bark to the tree, and part as Unwillingly from us, as green fruit does from the Stone; and all this through the reputation of sober And discreet Servants to their pleasure: If such A scandalous fellow as thou come into the House Without our introduction, the Ladies wou'd cry out, O my Honour! as far as they cou'd e thee. Wild. Methinks, Sir Iohn Everyoung (an old smell-Smock as he is) shou'd take the alarm, and so Remove these so juicy Girls. Estr. I hope you don't think we mean his Daughters All this while? (that were a trick indeed) We speak of two Ladies that shall be nameless. Wild. Faith, Gentlemen, I can speak of none such, For all my acquaintance have  three Names apiece, I assure you. Mod. Well Iack, to return your civility in The last health you began, here's to all those Incomparable Ladies, that like Roman Conquerors have two or three names Apiece: But if thou wou'dst leave this Rambling, thou wou'dst lose nothing by it▪ There's as hard drinking in Gentlemen Houses Now adays, as at Taverns, and as hot service In many a Lady Chamber, as at Wild. But how Reputation? there are your men of ,
As well as Stuffs, and they go out again no body Knows how. Mod. 'Tis true, in the first place you must shake Hands with your old friends, Hoquemore and Burgundy for a while; leave your Chaste Ling, And La-Fronds, dine with my Lord such a One one day, my Lady what d'you call'um another; And be sure to talk on't in the next Company You come into, drink Wine and Water at Table, A Dish of Tea after Dinner, like nothing but What is French, before the Ladies; lose your money Very much like a Gentleman to 'um in the Afternoon, And the work's done. Wild. This is a hard Chapter. Estr. If thou knew'st once the pleasure of such a Sprightly Girl as Olivia, the kind quarrels, The fondness, the pretty ullenness after a Little absence, which must be charm'd out Of it with Kisses, and those thousand other Devises that make a Lovers happiness; thou Wou'dst think all this as easie, as lying a bed in The Country in a wet morning. Mod. Or, if he cou'd but see Victoria's reserv'dness A little mollifi'd, and brought to hand with a good Supper and the Fidles. Estr. Or Olivia in her morning dress, with her Guittar, Singing to it most enticingly, and then as kind in Her discourse, her little breasts swelling and poting Out, as if they came half way to be Kis. Mod. Or the others haughty look melted into smiles, The pretty combat of pride and pleasure in her Face, at some certain times. Estr. My Mistress is in the very spring of beauty. Mod. And mine in the Midsommer of perfection. Estr. Mine is— Wild. Nay Gentlemen, one at once, and no quarrelling I beseech you; you are happy men both, and have Reason to be in love with your sweet lives, but I
Thought Victoria had so obstinately doted on Her old Servant Horatio, that there had been More hope of winning a Widow at her Husbands Funeral, then of any favour for her now. Mod. People will be talking, but on my word she'l N'er break her heart for Horatio; I and my Fellow-labourer, Time, have done his business. Wild. You are the great Masters of your Art, these Are the two Beauties, that the whole Town runs Mad after. Estr. We know it, we know it, and it is no small part Of our felicity, to have that Lord send his Coach and six to carry 'um to the Park; this Gentleman offering to play at Angel-beast with 'um, Though he scarce know the Cards, and has no more Visible Estate then what he may lose at a sitting: A third begging to give 'um the four and twenty Violins, which his Father in the County hears Of and disinherits for, whilst the Ladies put 'um Off with some slight Excuses, and send the whole Town over after us. Wild. You have 'um it seems in most excellent order. Mod. O there's no true pleasure but in your person Of quality, the others love all men so well, They can love none best: they are indeed (Like your more generous Creatures) somewhat Hard to tame, but I have seen a Lyon as Gentle as an Ox: time and industry will do Any thing. Estr. Come, drink a Glass round. Mod. I can't get down a drop of this Wine more Without a Frolick. Wild. Everyman name the woman that has Oblig'd him last, and drink all their Healths in a Brimmer. Mod. Content, begin Estridge. Estr. Olivia: now▪ Modish, name your. Mod. Victoria, Victoria: we must have
Your person too, Wildish. Wild. Mrs. Betty. Mod. Betty what? Wild. Nay faith, I can go no further, and may Very well be mistaken in that too. Estr. Here's a Lock of Hair, shall I dip it for one Glass more? Wild. Whose is it first? Estr. Olivia's, whose shou'd it be? black as Jet, And shining as her Eyes: here's her Picture Too in little. (Wildish steps a little aside, and looks upon it.) Wild. O Impudence! his Sisters Picture, he forgot He show'd me a month ago; this lock of Hair, produc't so confidently, frighted me A little, till I saw the colour. Enter to them Snappum. Snap. Gentlemen, I beg your pardon for pressing Thus rudely into your Company; but the business Concerns no less then all my Fortunes: I Have been long a Suitor to a rich Widow, and have At last prevail'd with her to marry me suddenly. Estr. What is that to us, Sir? Snap. Wildish, you'l I hope make my Excuse to Your friends: coming into the Garden about Half an hour ago, I lost a Bracelet of her Hair, wrought with her own hands, so that There is no deceiving her with a counterfeit: A Waiter here tells me, he saw one of you Take up such a thing. Wild. Is this it? Estr. That's mine, and compos'd of hair so dear To me, that I would ight with Hector, the top Of your order for least of 'um. Snap. And I with Hercules for mine: but Pray Mr. Wildish, let me see it; if it be that I look: For, no body will quarrel for't, for 'tis full Of gray hairs, I assure you.
Wild. Shall he see it? Estr. No. Wild. I'le make bold for once though. Snap. 'Tis my old Woman's. [Shows it him. Wild. By the mark I'le swear, for 'tis as grizl'd As a Silver-hair'd Rabbet; I may venture to Let him have it, Estridge, I suppose, mayn't I? Estr. Yes, yes, now I remember me, I sent mine To have a new string put to it. Snappum goes off, Wildish follows him a little way. Wild. Adiu, Snappum. Snap. Are any of these Gentlemen good Bubbles, Mr. Wildish? Wild. What do I know, you had best ask 'um. Snap. No, I thank you, Sir, I can be satisfied On easier terms; but you were always a Lover Of ingenuity, pray tell me. Wild. Away, away. [Exit Snap. Wild. returns. I'm sorry your Mistress has gray hairs so young, I doubt you are not kind to her, Estridge. Mod. Nay, Wildish, don't insult upon a mistake. Estridge is out of Countenance, and looking up and down sees the women in the next Arbour. Estr. I think we have neighbours in the next Arbour, and fine women they seem to Be in their Masks. Mod. Let's entertain 'um—what Ladies, come a Padding for Hearts here in your Vizards? A pretty device to make a man in Love With he can't tell who. Estr. What, rob us of our Liberties without one Word? not so much as stand and deliver? Oliv. If we shou'd rob you of your Hearts, Gentlemen, 'twere but petty Larceny; Victoria And Olivia wou'd never send Hue and Cry after us. Mod. You know us, Madam. Oliv. Yes, Gentlemen, somewhat better then
We did this morning, though I always Suppos'd no less. Estr. Then what? Oliv. Then that you were the vainest Coxcombs In the whole Town, Fellows that wou'd hate A woman that were kind to you, because she Takes from you the pleasure of belying her. Estr. Olivia? Oliv. The very same, Sir, whose Picture you have In your Pocket, and about whose Hair you Had like to have quarrell'd so manfully but now; Who sends all the Town after you, and puts Others off with slight Excuses; the obliging Lady, whose health you drank by that name. Estr. 'Twas another Olivia I meant, one I knew abroad. Vict. And another Victoria that you meant, Modish? Mod. Right, right, my Landladies Daughter At the Cheval d'Or, since gone into a Monastery. Oliv. The Daughters of a French Everyoung, I warrant too. Estr. La Ieunesse was their Father, which is All one with Everyoung in English. Mod. On our Honours, Ladies, we were ever most Tender of your dear Credits, and are heartily Sorry our Mistresses light to be of your names. Oliv. Pray will you do me favour to let Me see my Picture, I'm confident 'tis very Like me. Estr. Your French Name-sakes you mean, Madam; That mal adroit Wildish let it fall and broke. The Crystal, and I sent it just now away To have a new one put to it, as I hope to be Sav'd Madam. Mod. But, Madam, cou'd you think me so Senseless, as discourse of you at that rate? Here's Iack Wildish has heard us speak of These Wenches a hundred times.
Wild. 'Slight, these fellows [Wildish apart. Will lye themselves into credit again, if I han't a care of 'um instantly: Gentlemen I understand no winks, the few lyes I'le Venture upon I am resolv'd to keep for my Own use. Estr. Prithee Wildish help us but this once. Wild. No, no, go on, methinks you are in a Very fair way; I am a stranger, the Ladies Won't mind what I say. Oliv. Yes, yes, we'll take your word. Wild. Why then, Ladys, I assure you upon the Honour Of a Gentleman, and by my friendship to those Worthy persons I dare answer, they are too Much Servants, to discourse so long of any Thing but your selves: and for the French women You know as much of 'um as I, having never Heard title of 'um till this minute. Vict. You have brought a very sufficient Witness with you Gentlemen, we do Believe him. Mod. Ours is not the first good cause has been lost By ill Witnesses: but I perceive, Ladys, you Don't know Iack Wildish, he Droll in the whole Town; has a hundred Of these fetches. [To Wildish apart. Estr. Pox on't, thou mayst bring all off yet. Wild. Faith my To deceive a Lady in a friends , [alowd. To do it now, and in my own is all I can Obtain of it. [Estridge coms up to Wildish. Estr. 'S death, Sir Wild. Nay Estridge, Mind it not, and 'tis uncivil Mistresses. Mod. But that we are two to one, and scorn Advantages, you shou'd not carry it off thus▪ Wild. I shou'd be more
Three to one: but some other time for These matters. Oliv. Never blame Wildish, we were all the While in the next Arbour, so that if he had Taken your Cue never so readily, 't had done You little service. Vict. Gentlemen this matter will bear no more Raillery; we are sensible of our Honours, and The injury your extravagant discourse might Have done us, with any but so worthy a Person as Mr. Wildish; but he we are Confident understands himself too well To have any ill thought of us from your Vanity: we can do no less than forbid You our House, and pray forbear it without Further Ceremony. Wildish takes Victoria; Estridge offers to take Olivia, she refuses. Oliv. No, Sir, you'le say I come to pick you up In the Garden one time or other. [Exeunt . Enter. Eugenio like an Officer, and three more▪ Sir. Samuel Forecast above. Enter a Servant. Serv. Sir, there are some Souldiers below, say They must search your House for some Suspitious person. Fore. I warrant they mean Eugenio and Philander, I am utterly undone, suspected for a Traytor, And all long of those Very glad I have got my Christian Cloth On again: go and let 'um in. Euge. Sir, I hope you will excuse us, we do but Follow our Orders, and having search'd your House for some dangerous persons
Leave it you again in peace:  and Philander were your Sons, and therefore Most probably judg'd to have made Your House their Sanctuary. Fore. My House their Sanctuary! I had rather It shou'd be their Grave: since they made The State their Enemy, I have been so too. Euge. Then you have no thoughts of 'um for Your Daughters? Fore. No, Sir, I assure you: and to remove all doubt, Althea's shortly to be marry'd to Horatio (One that will bid you welcome, Sir, if you Please to come to the wedding) and I hope to Dispose of Diana e're long to some honest Gentleman of our party. Enter Althea. Fore. I command you, on my blessing, to answer All things this Gentleman questions you About, precisely, as it were my self. Euge. Sir, you do well, but you must retire A little, whilst we examine your Daughters, A man, though never so well meaning Himself, can't answer for others. [Exit. Forecast. Euge. Lady, your Father here has shew'd Himself a faithful Subject to the Common Wealth; it now remains to know what Correspondence you entertain with Eugenio And Philander, your former Servants. Alth. Upon my honour not the least, we are Too strictly watch'd to have a correspondence With any man, and are too careful of our Selves to hold one with persons so obnoxio. Euge. Are you resolv'd you never will? Alth. As things are now they never shall. Euge. Must you then Alth. My Father tells me so, and I have Been Dutiful.
Euge. Horatio's. an accomplish'd Gentleman. Alth. He is Sir, and worthy of more happiness Than I can bring him to. Euge. By Heaven, she loves him. [aside. You lov'd Eugenio once, and gave vow for vow. Alth. I did perhaps. Euge. A Stranger and an Enemy as he is I pity him. Alth. 'Tis noble in you, Sir, but we must all obey Our Fortunes. [Eugenio lets fall his Disguise. Euge. And curse 'um too, if they be all like mine, That love where beauty, and not virtue, shine. O that the Tyrants knew that I were here! Death does more lovely now than life appear. Since thou art false, 'tis she alone has charms; Neglected love rests only in your arms: When I am dead you may your choice a vow Without reproach, which sure you cannot now: And I shall want the sence of all my wrongs, My death both to my rest, and thine belongs. Alth. Can this Eugenio be, and so unkind, What strange Distemper rages in thy mind? Cou'd once my Soul of a base thought allow, He that believes me false shou'd find me so. Euge. Must you not, Madam, with Horatio wed? 'Tis a belief that your own words have bred. Alth. Forgive my fear, if any word of mine Unto that hateful sound seem'd to encline: Your rude appearance, of a Souldier, made My tender heart, and very love afraid: I durst not speak, what most I did believe, But us'd such words as you wou'd best receive. Euge. Alas, Althea! what you told me here, Did not create, although encrease, my fear: That you must make him happy, is not new, Nor did I learn the killing sounds from you; The Streets are full of it; and every where I can of nothing but this Hymen hear.
Alth. 'Tis true, my Father does a match design 'Twixt me and this Horatio, and does joyn Threats to Commands, urges th' uncertain state Of your affairs, your Party, and the Fate Of such as do a well form'd Power invade; How they are always conquer'd or betray'd. My Beauty fatal to it self the while Inflames Horatio, and discourse (like Oyl) Foments the fire: of such a Love he tells, As would prevail but where your Image dwells; But still in vain the Heart I gave to you, The one does threaten, and the other woo. Euge. An absent Lover ill maintains the field: Does not my Image to his presence yield? Alth. I'm sure it ought; reproaches so severe, They that deserve 'um not will never bear. 'Twere just that Faith which you so ill deserve, For one of nobler thoughts I shou'd reserve. Euge. We oft are made by a too great concern (Like too much light) unable to discern. The leave I gave to your surprise so late, Now for my own distraction I intreat. Where there is much of Love, there will appear Mixt with our boldest hope some little fear. Alth. That fear in a true Lover soon wou'd dye, Which to my Virtue is an Enemy. Euge. Hope is the passion of a calmer brest, But high concernments are with doubt opprest. To few, alas, is such assurance given Not to fear Hell, although they hope for Heaven. I not your Virtue, but my Fate accuse, Which still does me with highest rigour use. Alth. Though Fate, Eugenio, for Misfortune meant, I wou'd refuse to be the Instrument. That dire necessity it seldom gave Of harming them, whom we wou'd only save. Euge. But ark, I think I hear a noise of Swords. Alth. The sound, alas, no room for doubt affords.
You might perhaps be safe in your disguise. Spoke within by Souldiers. Where are the rest of 'um? Down with the doors there. Euge. Their sudden coming all such hope denies, 'Tis me they seek, I am betray'd; but yet Since I can't shun, I'le try to break the net. This Paper will inform your Sister where She may of her unhappy Servant hear, Make him remove, help him to shun that Fate Which does for the unblest Eugenio wait. My Rival in their head! by all the Gods, Horatio, this is an unmanly odds; Yet if on thee I can but fall reveng'd, I life for death most happily have chang'd. Hora. Eugenio. here! I thought of nothing less, But my clear meaning this will best express. He fights on Eugenio's side. Officer. Down with 'um both. The Souldiers prevail, they are taken. Euge. Sir, let my life the cruel forfeit pay, And bear not rashly so much worth away. Horatio. was too far by Vertue led, And sav'd that blood he nobly should have shed: He being my Rival fear'd the world might say, He for my hated life this train did lay. Honour ingag'd his Sword in my defence, And Honour is a kind of Innocence. Hora. Eugenio. leave to intercede for me, I only grieve I cou'd not rescue thee, That so thou might'st thy preservation owe To the same Vertue thou so ill didst know: And I some fitter time might make thee owne The injustice of thy mean aspersion, To think I came thus rudely to invade The place where all that I adore is laid; And then to take my Rival in a snare, Where if I wou'd I knew I cou'd not spare,
Was an affront thou with that life hadst paid, Which I defended: but revenge shows base, Which on our Honour more dependence has. Euge. Some other time for this dispute we'll take, Revenge by threatning we the harder make. Officer. Come, Gentlemen, you must away, my Orders press; you will have time enough to talk Of these things in the Tower. Enter two Souldiers bringing in Sir Samuel. Officer. Sir, you must along. Fore. Who I! for what? Offic. For harbouring Eugenio here, a known Enemy to the State. Fore. You brought him with you for ought I know, I n'er saw his face, I answer'd an Officer, and Two Souldiers tha came to search for him Even now, and as I thought, gave 'um satisfaction. But when I heard the clashing of Swords, because I wou'd not be made accessory to any thing that Might happen, I confess I retir'd into a Corner of my Garret. Offic. Sir, this won't satisfie, the Receiver is as Bad as the Thief; I have found a Traytor In your house, and you shall answer it. Fore. Eugenio, you are an honest Gentleman, Pray speak, did I know any thing of your Being here? Euge. Not in the least, Sir: but my word I fear Will do you little service. Enter Wildish. Wild. What, Sir Samuel, agen under persecution? Nay, faith, I can do you no service now, these Are a sort of Gamesters I dare not meddle withal. Fore. I am undone! here's Eugenio found in my House, and they are carrying him to the Tower. Wild. Come, bear up, Sir, if there come a turn, You'l be a great man.
Fore. I shall be hang'd on that side, and to speak My own Conscience, I have deserv'd it. Wild. No, to lye in Prison for concealing Cavaliers, Will be great merit; and let me tell you as a friend, There's like to be a turn suddenly, 'tis thought the General will declare like an honest man, I say No more; therefore carry your self moderately, This accident may chance to do you good service, If you have the grace to make the right use on't: But how came Eugenio and Horatio of a side? Fore. I came but just now among 'um, and know Nothing; but 'tis a strange thing a man can't be Believ'd in his own defence: carry me to Prison? I'le see what Justices hand they have for't. Offic. We shall find hands enough, ne're fear it. Exeunt omnes. ACT V. SCENE I. Enter Philander Solus. Phil. 'TIs strange I nothing of Eugenio hear, So long an absence may be worth a fear: His friendship was not wont to hide from me Of his most secret thoughts the new Decree. I doubt his Love impatient of delay, Has to Althea found some desperate way, His passion cou'd not my slow cure attend, On which, alas, he did in vain depend. I was to blame, no sooner to provide Against deluded hope's unruly tide; Which now I fear has born him on a shelf, Where he'll unkindly perish by himself. Enter Diana in Man's Cloaths. Ha! a strange face! wou'd I had not been seen; But 'tis too good for Treason to lurk in.
Sure Gentle youth the place you have mistook, I cannot be the man for whom you look. Dian. Philander in your troubled face I read Some apprehensions that you are betray'd: But when you shall my woful story hear, A Juster sorrow will remove your fear. Phil. Thou hast my name, and yet I know thee not, Quickly unty sweet youth this painful knot. Dian. Know you this hand? Phil. Alas it is my own, This from Eugenio cou'd be had or none: Speak, is he dead? is this his Legacy? And has he sent it, gentle youth, by thee? Has he Horatio fought? killing, or slain, He almost equally wou'd breed my pain. Dian. He and Horatio fought, but on a side. Phil. What wonder beyond this can Fate provide. I knew, Eugenio, thou wet always brave, And that thy Love was still thy Honour slave. Dian. On your friends part you have the vertue brought, But 'twas Horatio for Eugenio fought. Phil. Such a prodigious union cou'd not fail. Dian. A Band of Souldiers did o're both prevail. Phil. Is my unhappy friend a Prisoner made? Dian. He is, and close in the White Tower laid: He bad me tell you so, that you might shun The desperate hazard that his life must run. Phil. How came he, gentle youth, thus to expose My life to one whom he so little knows? Dian. I am his near Relation, and have been Privy to all Designs he has been in. He bids you to remove without delay, For y'are endanger'd hourly by your stay: The Souldiers about him a Paper took, Which, though obscurely, of your Lodging spoke. Phil. In vain we to that wretch good counsel give, Resolv'd to perish, and unfit to live: When he is gone, what business have I here?
What can again be worth a hope or fear? The hour he dyes this shall be my relief, pointing to his Sword. If I cou'd need another wound than grief. Dian. How can you hope to please Eugenio's Ghost, In killing him whom he esteems the most? In life our friends we chuse, but those we hate We rather wish Companions of our Fate: If I a present to his shade wou'd send, It shou'd be of his Foe, and not his Friend. But yet I hope Eugenio may escape; Safety has come in an unlookt for shape. Phil. That hope alone makes me consent to live. Dian. Can you for life no other reason give▪ Phil. None that, alas! is fit for thee to hear. Dian. Does then Diana's heart so vile appear? Phil. I hope thou wilt my better Genius prove, Since thus thou know'st my business and my love. Dian. She tells me you have often fill'd her Ears With gentle words, and wet her arms with tears; Vow'd that your hope and fear, grief, and delight, Her frowns or favours only cou'd excite. Phil. Why so I did, sweet youth, and told her true, But I'm amaz'd it shou'd be known by you. Dian. Of late she has worn a face of discontent, That seem'd neglected friendship to lament: Eugenio. to her Sister found a way, Though various hazards in his passage lay. Phil. Unwisely he the short-liv'd pleasure sought, Too soon 'twas paid for, and too dearly bought▪ Like Orpheus for one poor untimely look, He has the hope of all he lov'd forsook. Dian. That haste exprest a passion, though to blame: Impatience is of love the best extream. Phil. That Heir's accurs'd, that for a present sum Resigns the hope of all he has to come. I would Diana to the world prefer, And for her venture any thing but her. But, gentle youth, methinks thou speak'st as though
Thou mad'st a doubt, whether I lov'd or no. Dian. Pray Heaven Diana mayn't: your fault was great, To think of Honour when the day was set For Hymens Rites; when nought else could destroy Your hopes, which then were ripening into joy, You were a Traytor to the State declar'd, And in the glittering toyls of Fate ensnar'd. Phil. Be witness Heaven, and all ye Powers above, That see our infant passions weakly move, E're they have force into the face to climb, Or to one action can our wills encline, If ever, for one moment, in my breast I gave to any (she inspir'd not) rest. Dian. Why did you then such daring projects frame, And danger court that not concern'd your flame? Phil. 'Tis true, before I knew Diana's charms, I courted Fame in danger and in Arms, And thought no Cause cou'd lasting glory bring, Like the just quarrel of our injur'd King. Eugenio's friendship too that Fire improv'd, And made me wed that Cause I ever lov'd: What since I did was on a former score, My Fate she can't condemn, but must deplore. I was in honour pre-engag'd too far, E're to retire, and yet to merit her. But whence could'st thou this hated knowledge gain? He worse than kills, who makes me live in pain: Thy Beauty, Youth, and Words do all perswade, Thou happy in her neerest trust art made. Diana here drops a Ring, pulling out a Handkerchief. Ye Gods! the Ring I to Diana sent! Do not frail man beyond his Nature tempt. The good thou hast done, I thus forget it all, And let my vengeance on my Rival fall. [He draws. Draw, or I'le leave thee dead upon the ground. She pulls off her Perriwig. Dian. I dare not draw—and sure you dare not wound.
Phil. With sudden light I for a while am blind, I sought a Rival, and a Mistress find; Where I thought all my rage, my love is due, So high a pitch my wishes never flew; I am not by degrees to pleasure led, Nor slowly made the doubtful steps to tread, But in an instant, my exalted mind Feels all her hopes set free, and fears confin'd: So Kings in Battels that they gave for gone, Redeem their own and win another Crown. Dian. That Faith, which nothing shou'd in question bring, From a few words you doubt, and from a Ring: How can I hope a lasting friendship, where So light appearance brings so mean a fear? Phil. Such a surprize a jealous pang might give To any breast where so much love does live. But why, Diana, in this strange disguise? Was it to make me happier by surprise? Dian. Cou'd I my fear, as well as love o'recome, You'd been preserv'd, and never known by whom; Such a concern I wou'd not have betray'd, Till I were surer of your passion made. Phil. What accident ill understood, cou'd prove Of that dire force to make you doubt my love? You needs must know how we were all betray'd, And the hard scape I and Eugenio made; And since, it had been fatal to be seen, So that this Chamber my whole world has been. Dian. What made me doubt, it matters not to know, Let it suffice I do no longer so. The dreadful Sword, which at my breast you held, Though with much fear, I with more joy beheld: For he that truly does his Rival hate, Declares he loves his Mistress at that rate. Phil. Look on thy self, and measure thence my love, Think what a flame so bright a form must move: That Knot be confident will ever last, Which Passion ty'd, and Reason has made fast.
Dian. Farewel, Philander, think on what I've said, And kindly judge the weakness of a Maid. Phil. Thou art too cruel in so short a stay; Thus would I gaze my very sight away. Dian. Though for your safety nothing was too dear, Now give me leave for my own self to fear. [Ex. Diana Phil. She has appear'd like Lightning to my sight, Which when 'tis vanisht, leaves a darker night. [Exit Philander. Enter. Estridge and Modish. Estr. 'Twas certainly that Rogue Wildish that betray'd Us; the Arbour and Bottle of Wine, were his motions. Mod. Without all peradventure, you saw the Ladies, when they threw us off, took him home With 'um, nothing could be plainer—what think You if one of us fought him? Estr. Why, faith I think we had e'en as good let That alone; hang him, he'll fight; 'twas only A trick he put upon us, and let's rall it off, And serve him in his own kind. Mod. As how? Estr. Do you remember a certain Cousin of his That Everyoung carry'd us to, the Widow of A rich Alderman, who dy'd suddenly, and left her All he had? this Widow he intends for Sir Samuel Forecast, and I make no question but he is to have A round Sum for his good word. What think you now, if I order it, that one Of us marry this Widow, then I hope We are sufficiently reveng'd? Mod. But how is't possible? Estr. Nothing so easie: her Maid has promis'd me To perswade her to take a walk in the Mulberry▪ Garden; this is a time there is little or no Company there, 'tis but waiting at the door With a trusty Force her whither Her own accord she'll
Mod. Why so? Estr. If for no other, for the same reason that th Eat Horse-flesh in a Siege; because she can come At nothing else. Mod. If it were a foolish Girl, we might do Somewhat with her indeed; but these Widows Are like old Birds not to be tam'd she'll fight and Scratch, and fly about, there will be no enduring her. Estr. Fear nothing: when she considers she has no Other way to save her Reputation, she'll hear reason. Mod. Well; but being equal Adventurers, how Shall we agree about the Prize? Estr. He that marries her, shall give the other a Statute upon his Estate, for two thousand Pounds, a pretty good Sum, and will serve to stop a gap. Mod. Content, and I wish thee joy of her With all my heart. Estr. You shall find me as good a Pay-master As her Husband the old Alderman wou'd Have been: but stand close, here she comes. Enter the Widow and her Maid, they  'um. Wid. Thieves, Murderers, Villains what do you mean? Estr. Nothing, nothing, but lie make bold to stop That pretty mouth of thine, Widow, for once. They carry 'um off. Mod. Whither shall we carry 'um? Estr. To a little house I have taken a quarter of A mile off for that purpose, where no body Could hear 'um, though they had Falconers Or Huntsmens voices. [Exeunt. Enter Sir. John Everyoung, and Sir Samuel Forecast. Ever. Give you joy, Brother, give you joy. Fore. Of what? Ever. Why, of your Lieutenancy, of the Tower Know you can be here upon no other  and Indeed your fidelity to the
Fore. Sir, give you joy of your new suit, and Fair Perriwig there. Ever. Faith, Brother, it site with no Fortune To day, what are's the matter, I was never Worse put together in all my life, and but to Congratulate your advancement, wou'd not Have left the Company I din'd with. Fore. I hope to return your kind Visit in the Fleet, And see your Daughters sell Ale and Cakes there, And your Worship with ewer Trappings on; For thither your extravagant Courses point. Ever. May my Petriwig never know a good day, Nor be taken for my own half again, But come off always with my Hat, if it Cost me above twelve pounds. Fore. Pox on your Hat, and your Perriwig, can you Tell how I shall get out? Ever. No more then how you got in; but you are Wise, and know business: alas, I know nothing But how to sort Ribands, make Horse-matches, Throw away my money at Dice, and keep my Self out of the Tower. Fore. O my ungracious Girls! Ever. What of them? have they broke prison, And taken Sanctuary in the Arms of some sturdy Prentice, Fencing-master, Brother of the Blade, Or any other inferior Rascat? you were So strict to 'um, I never look'd for other. Fore. Not so fast; but if you can be serious for A minute, do: they are vertuous, but Eugenio A former Servant to Althea, since declar'd A Traytor to the State, was taken in my house; I suspected to have been privy to his being There, and so carried along with him hither: I protested my Innocence to the Officers, urg'd My former Service, but all would nor do. Ever. S'light of hope you had more wit, this is The happiest accident that ever
For an old notorious, Round-head to be taken For a Cavalier at this time; why I never Thought it had been in you, this was a Stratagem Might have become Machewile himself▪ Fore. Why, what's the matter? all's well I hope. Ever. Yes, never better, the General has this day to Some persons of quality declar'd for the King; All Cavaliers are immediately to have their Liberty; therefore make haste to reconcile With Eugenio and Philander: I have an order For the delivery of all such Prisoners as are Here upon the account of Loyalty to their Prince. Fore. Philander and Eugenio, on my Daughters Account, will do me all the service they can, and I Hope to make some advantage of this imprisonment, Ever. I'le go and release Eugenio, and bring him To you; Horatio is discharg'd already: though, We fall out now and then about trifles, we are Brothers, and ought to serve one another In matters of concern. [Exeunt. Enter. Victoria, Olivia, and Wildish. Wild. You see now, Ladies, what Fellows you cast Your good opinions on: if I said any thing That was disrespectful to either of you, It ought to go for nothing, I was meerly Your decoy in the business. Oliv. We are very well satisfi'd on all hands. Vict. Sure they'l never have the impudence To trouble us agen. Oliv. Now wou'd I were married to Estridge, That I might plague him soundly. Wild. How can you make that a Plague, Madam? Oliv. A hundred ways: I wou'd never come Home till three a clock in the morning; Tumble my own Handkercher my self, to make Him jealous; break his soundest sleeps in Commendation of his bosom-friend, and neve Leave till I have made 'um quarrel; fold up
All manner of Papers, like Love-Letters, And burn 'um just as he comes into th' Room. Wild. I can tell you how to be reveng'd on him Beyond all this. Oliv. Prithee how, Wildish? Wild. Why, marry me, make a good Wife to me, And let him hang himself for rage. Oliv. I am not so inveterate an Enemy, I'le forgive Him rather: if I were your Wife, I must board Half a year with a Friend in the Country, tumble About the other half in most villainous Hackneys, Lye two pair of Stairs high, and wear black Farrendine the whole year about; see you when You had no Money to play, and then be kist out Of a Ring or a Bracelet. Wild. I wou'd not use a City Widow of five and fifty so, With seven small Children: and am I to suffer Nothing all this while? Oliv. What can you suffer? Wild. Why, the loss of that which is dearer than life, My liberty; be known for a marry'd man, and so Put my self out of all capacity, of breaking Gold, Promising marriage, or any other way of Ensuring my self to scrupulous young Virgins I shall like hereafter. Oliv. That is to be taken from the occasion of Playing the Rascal: is that all? Wild. Not half; if I make but love to a Chamber-maid, I shall be answer'd, you have a sweet Lady of your Own, and why will you wrong her? if I get Acquainted with any young woman, after the fourth Or fifth visit, be look'd upon by her Father and Mother, Worse than the Tax-Gatherers in a Country Village; All this you count nothing. Oliv. Not to a Lover, Wildish, Wild. Well, there is no service so desperate, That a gallant man will shrink at, if he like His reward; and to give his hand thus to a woman,
In him that rightly understands what he does, Is as bold an action as Mutius : yet That I may use it hereafter where and when I please, Upon my dear Olivia I'le venture it. Oliv. Softly, when you please, and where I please. Wild. Content Madam: will you do us the favour to Be a Witness? Vict. Well Mr. Wildish I'le dance bare-foot To serve you. Wildish leads off Olivia. Oliv. Hold, hold Wildish, my heart fails me. Mild. Slight, I had a qualm too, there's certainly A more than ordinary providence attends me; I shall scape yet, I am now in a twitter, Like a Gamester upon a great by, that is Heartily afraid he shall lose it, and yet his Love to the money won't suffer him to draw Stakes. I must have her. Vict. Nay, now you are come thus far, e'e go on, Oliv. Well, Wildish, give me thy hand; the first Time thou anger'st me, I'le have a Gallant; And the next, make thee a Cuckold. [Extunt. Enter. Horatio and Althea. Hora. Madam, you know your Father does command. That you shou'd shortly give me your fair hand Before a Priest; but since find no part Goes along with it of your generous heart, My mind the charming present can refuse, Fearing t'indulge a passion you accuse; My joy with your least trouble weigh'd must still Appear, to my own self the greater ill. Alth. Such words as these, Horatio, but heap more Upon a debt that was too great before; I'm cover'd with confusion when I weigh How much I owe, how little I can pay: You may with ease a fairer Mistress find, And with more ease such worth will make her kind; And if I e're that happy Virgin know, I'le sue to make her pay you what I owe.
Hora. To change your thoughts, I will no longer try, But with the stream I cannot turn, comply I to Victoria will my suit renew, And hope to find an Advocate in you. Alth. You may command me, and Victoria's mind Is of it self to you too well inclin'd. Hora. All this methinks shou'd your belief perswade, I no contrivance with those Villains had, To take my Rival in so mean a way, But only came their sudden rage to stay: All that confusion, and surprize cou'd do, My passion made me apprehend for you. Alth. Horatio's Honour does too brightly shine, To be accus'd of such a low design; Had you within the bounds of friendship staid, Your self and me you had both happy made. Hora. With ease from friendship we to love are led, That slipery path who can securely tread? Enter Sir. Samuel Forecast, Sir John Everyoung, and Eugenio. Alth. I see my Father, and Eugenio here, And in all faces sudden joys appear. Forecast, Everyoung, and Horatio seem to discourse. Euge. Fortune, I pardon thee thy short-liv'd spite, I for thy constant temper took a fit, Th'art kind, and gentle, and 'tis we are blind, Who do mistrust the ways thou hast design'd To make us blest, though better than our own. Alth. Can you have joy, and yet Althea none▪ Euge. May I all misery first undergo, E're joy divided from Althea know. Alth. What is this wonder hangs upon thy tongue Delay does only to ill news belong. Euge. Madam, your Father licenses my flame, And you alone can now oppose my claim; That Cause which Armys did in vain support, And noblest spirits did, successless, court We in a bloodless triumph shining see, Without the dire effects of Victory.
For in the Generals breast (the noblest Scene) The Fate of England has transacted been: On Albion's Throne he will our Monarch place, Our Neighbours terrour, and our Nations grace, Whilst at his blest approach, all factious minds Vanish, like leaves before Autumnal Winds. Alth. Such truth in love and loyalty y'ave shown, What less for both cou'd by just Heaven be done? Euge. This happiness, though great, yet is not all, My dearest friend I soon shall Brother call; Diana must his deathless Flame repay. Alth. Fate, to be pardon'd, had no other way. Euge. See how your Father kindly strives to evade His former promise to Horatio made. Alth. That work's so nobly in his breast begun, That a few words will finish what's undone: Horatio. does all happiness despise, From my obedience, which my love denies. Forecast to Eugenio. Fore. Horatio has releas'd me of my promise to him, And seeing your changeless love to one another, Was resolv'd to have mov'd it to me, if I had Not prevented him. Euge. Such honour, noble youth, I must confess, Gives wonder equal to my happiness. Hora. Althea. I resign, my guilty flame Was too unjust to reach so fair an aim: Victoria's. wrongs did my success oppose, And my lost passion its own penance grows. So some Offenders are their duty taught By th'ill effect and nature of their fault. Eug. My apprehensions by these words are clear'd. And I dare love that Virtue which I fear'd. In love alone this mystery we find, Men best agree when of a different mind. Hor. There now remains but one thing more to do, 'Tis that Philander may be sent for too. But see he comes. [Enter Philander.
Fore. Brother, if your Daughter were here, we Might have a Dance. Sir, you are heartily welcome, I kept my Girl Safe for you, she has not been so much as blown Upon since you saw her; I knew honest men Wou'd not be always kept from their own, There wou'd come a time. Phil. Sir, I was ever most oblig'd to you— Eugenio here! then I am doubly blest, And only fear to be with joy opprest. Euge. The joys of Friendship well prepare our mind For the high raptures we in love shall find: The name of Brothers we shall soon obtain. Phil. Friendship so perfect by no name can gain. Enter Diana. Fate is at length asham'd, or weary grown Upon a Flame you smil'd so long, to frown; As Vessels tost upon the raging Main, With greater joy the wisht-for Port obtain; Our love this short, fierce tempest having past, Will joys more high, since less expected, tast. Dian. But in the Storm did you throw nothing out? Phil. Wrong not my love with so unkind a doubt. Enter Ever. Vict. Oliv. Wild. Ever. Wildish, thou'rt an honest fellow, I'm glad I found thee. Wild. Sir, the honest fellow desires to be known to You by another name, having newly marry'd your Daughter Olivia. Ever. When, pray Mr. Wildish? Wild. Just now, Sir, the words are scarce out of our Mouths. Ever. Well, this is a day I could not have been angry If thou hadst got her with Child upon a Contract; But you might have ask'd my leave, e're you Went about to make me a Grandfather. Wild. If I had had a good Jointure to offer, so I Wou'd, but if I do make you a Grandfather, 'Tis not done maliciously, I'le swear.
Hora. My guilty Cause my self I dare not plead, But beg your innocence will intercede: Since all my fault your matchless beauty made, Your goodness now shou'd my excuse perswade. Alth. I in Victoria will my int'rest try, You, and me both, she hardly shall deny. Hora. Victoria's. mind I cannot hope to move, Unless a Parents power assist my love; Her duty will not your commands withstand, She'll take a worthless Servant from your hand. Ever. I'm sure she can have no exception to so Deserving a person as Horatio; Lovers, like Spaniels, do But show their mettal in a little ranging: though you Had a twittering to Althea, you'le make ne're the Worse Husband to Victoria. Victoria! Vict. Sir, what's your pleasure? Ever. That which will prove yours in the end: I Charge you upon my blessing, give Horatio your Hand, go and be marry'd with your Cousins, And make but one work of it. Vict. Sir, I am all obedience: who e're strove At once against her duty, and her lover. Wild. But Estridge, what fine Lady have you got there Estr. A certain Widow which I have cast my Self away upon: a Kinswoman of yours, Wildish, That you formerly design'd for the Right Worshipful Sir, Formal there: do you know her now?— Sir we made bold with her without your consent. Wild. Old acquaintance, I saith, how is't? I have made As bold, and been as welcome too, as e're you'le be Sir: but why did you steal a marriage thus? Wid. You know I always lov'd stoln pleasures, but This marriage stole me; your old Knight was Uncertain, came on by inches, this Gentleman Leapt into the matter, forc'd me into a Coach, and Marry'd me in an instant: I cou'd have been Content to have been a Lady, that I might have Taken place of my Mistress when she comes to Town. But a Bird in the hand—.
Estr. Why, have you a Mistress? Wid. As sure as you have had a hundred, And now have a Wife. Mod. I doubt as things go, I shall scarce find you As good a Pay-master as the old Alderman. Estridge pulls his hand from her, and looks angry. Wild. Nay, never use her ill now, 'twas none of her Fault, she is a very good Creature, and one That I plac't to personate my Cousin, on purpose To catch Sir Samuel Forecast; you know he Took the forfeiture of a Mortgage that concern'd A very good Friend of mine, and I was resolv'd to Be reveng'd of him; if you will needs run your Head into the Noose that's prepar'd for another, Who can help it? my Cousin is married in Ireland, Whither she went last Summer to look after Some money, due to her last Husband. Wid. I am her House-keeper though, and can bid You welcome till she returns. Oliv. A pretty pert thing, I like her humour, she Carries it off well: but Wildish, you shall visit Her no more now we are married. Wild Fear not, Estridge will take order for that. Horatio to Victoria. Hora. How I do hate my self! that could so long At once such Beauty and such Goodness wrong. Vict. My kindness has forgot you were to blame, You guilt consum'd in your reviving flame. Ever. Now you are all pair'd, let's have a Dance. After the Dance, a great shout within. Euge. I hear the peoples voice in joyful crys, Like conquering Troops o're flying Enemies; They seem to teach us in a ruder way The Honour due to this all-healing day. Phil. Let's part a while, and vye who shall express The highest sense of this great happiness.
Epilogue. POets of all men have the hardest Game, Their best Endeavours can no Favours claim. The Lawyer, if o'rethrown, though by the Laws, He quits himself, and lays it on your Cause. The Souldier is esteem'd a Man of War, And Honour gains, if he but bravely dare. The grave Physitian, if his Patient dye, He shakes his head, and blames Mortality. Only poor Poets their own faults must bear, Therefore grave Iudges be not too severe: Our Author humbly hopes to scape your Rage, Being no known Offender on the Stage, He came by chance, is a meer Traveller; All Countries Civil unto Strangers are: Yet faith he's arm'd how e're your Censures go, And can prevent the harm, though not the blow. No Poet can from this one Comfort fall, The best ne're pleas'd, nor worst displeas'd you all. FINIS.
