S248A R220607 99832003 36471
Sad and Wonderful NEWES FROM THE Faulcon at the Bank Side; BEING A true and perfect Relation of the strange Visions, Ghosts, and Apparitions seen in the House and Garden of Mr. Powel a Baker, lately deceased (a man eminent in the Borough of Southwark.) With the manner of their appearing in several shapes; both at Noon-day, and at Night, since Thurs∣day last: The Discourse between the Ghost of Mr. Powel, Mr. John Sim∣son (formerly Minister of Bishops-Gate) to whom he revealed the cause of his walking. The several Speeches that past between the Spirit of Mr. Powel, his Maid Jone, and divers Learned Men, who went to allay him: And the manner of his appearing to them in the Garden, upon their making of a Circle, and burning of Wax-Candles and Juniper-wood: As also, the speeches that there passed, the manner how it vanished, and the great and lamentable Accident that immediately hapned, both at their digging for hidden Treasure, when the Barrels of Money descended lower and lower, and at his Departure. Likewise, the strange appearance of the Ghost of Mr. Davis, in Long-Alley near Moor-Fields, his Speech to his Daughter, together with her Answer. London, Printed for George Horton. 1661.
Sad and Wonderful NEWES FROM THE Faulcon at the Bank-side. AS touching the Examples of Ap∣paritions and Satanical Delusi∣ons, and that there are many poor Souls who appear again in several shapes after their depar∣ture out of this life, and the dis∣solution of their Mortal bodies; so it is evident, That good men as well as bad, are (through the permission of the most High) divers times tempted, and lie under the state and conditi∣on of Temptation and Affliction, as appears by these worthy Patriots of the Church of Christ; to wit:
On a time as Luther was walking in his Garden, the Devil appeared to him in the likeness of a black Boor; but Luther sleighting and not regarding him, he vanished away. Another of the German Divines in Luthers time, as he was sitting at his Book in his Study, the De∣vil appeared to him, looking over his Shoulder, which the Minister perceiving, took a piece of Pa∣per, and wrote in it, The Son of God came to dissolve the works of the Devil; and so holding up the Paper to the Devil, he also vanished. In allusion hereunto, comparatively we may re∣present the Subject now in hand, to the publick view and consideration of the most Ingenuous and Can∣did Reader, it being a thing worthy of observation; and as it lately hapned near the Faulcon at the Bank∣side, so is the Truth still verified at this instant: For within these few dayes, Master Scot, a Citizen of London, hearing of a Spirit that walked at the house of one Master Powel, deceased (formerly a Baker, living in the Borough of Southwark) immediately went to the said House, and there making enquiry of the Truth thereof, Jone Finchley (a Servant to the said Powel during his life-time) told him, That it was too true, for her Master did walk, and that in several shapes, and at divers seasons; sometimes at Noon∣day, sometimes towards the Evening, and sometimes at Mid-night Therefore true it is, that ever since Mr. Powel departed this Life, (which is about five Mo∣neths ago) there hath been a hideous noise heard in
the House, and a gret ratling out of one Room in∣to another; insomuch that his Son Thomas left the House, but Jone still continued there, to whom her old Master appeared one night as she was making of the Bed in the likeness of a black Catt, which Jone perceiving, took up a Bed-staff and threw at it, whereupon the Spiri vanished down the stairs: But the next night it appeared again in the likeness of a Goat, as the Maid was again making her Bed; which she perceiving, vey confidently said, In the Name of God, avoid Satan; at which words she cast another Bed-staff: The Spirit then vanished, in like manner as before; but here it did not rest, for the next morning as he Maid was making of a fire, the Doors being all shut, she heard a great noise, and a creeking of the Yard-door; which caused her to demand, Who was there? To whom the Spirit an∣swered, 'Tis thy Master Jone, it is thy Master; where is my Son Thomas My Master, (replies the Maid) that cannot be, I am sure my Master was buried long e∣nough ago, to leave speaking now; And thereupon rose up from the fire, and with her former confi∣dence went to look what Voice it was, but she could not discern any thing at present, whereupon she be∣took her self to her labour about the House, and towards the Evening, going into the Garden, under a Pear-Tree, she espied her old Master standing up, with his Fists knit close togethe,
his Eyes half sunk in his Head, his Face extraordina∣ry Black, and in the same Cloaths he used to wear when he was alive. This sudden Apparition, did very much amaze and startle her, putting her into a great trembling, quivering, and shaking; since which time, she hath been very ill, and on Monday last lay dangerous sick in the Borough, having left the Dwelling-house of her old Master, scituated near the Faulcon at the Banck-side: But the troubled Spirit remains there still, and the House is as much haunted as former∣ly; notwithstanding some Artists (by some called Conjurers) remain there day and night, using all possible means they can to lay this troubled Spirit, and are continually reading and making of Circles, burning of Wax Candles, and Juniper-wood; but as yet all proves unfeasible; onely thus far they ef∣fected their work, That some few nights ago, ha∣ving made a great Circle in the Garden, the Spirit of Master Powel appeared, to whom one of them said: We conjure thee to depart to by place of Rest. He answered, Wo be to those that wet he cause of my coming hither. The rest (being eight in number) kept close to their Books, and fain would have broug him into the Circle, but could not; whereupon one of them said, The Son of God appeared to destroy the orks of the Devil: which caused him to vanish away in a flash of Fire, hitting one of them upon the Leg, who hath lain lame ever since, and left such a scent
of Brimstone in the Garden, that all the Juniper-wood they could burn for many hours together, could not take away that sulphurous smell. Many there hath been to enquire of the Truh hereof, who are very well satisfied therein, and some of the Gentlemen (before specified) still remain in the House, to allay the Spirit, if they can; for it is conjectured, there hath been much Money hid, ei∣ther in the Garden or about the House, which as yet cannot be discovered. Since the appearing of Mr. Powel in several Shapes, his Son Thomas being left Executour, and Moneys being supposed to be hid, the Garden was digged in several paces, and at last they dis overed two Fir∣kins of Money; but the more they dug, the lower it sunk, so that their work, at present, proves labour in vain; yet all possible means is still used, both to allay the Spirit, and to gain the hidden Treasure. But as yet he appears at Noon-day, walking in his Garden, and divers eminent Persons (both for Religion, and Piety) have waited several Seasons, and Opportuni∣ties for his appearance, hoping thereby to gain some dis∣course with the troubled Spirit, and by that means to allay it, and to send it to everlasting Rest. Amongst the rest, Mr. John Simpson, formerly Minister of Bishops-Gate, had some discourse with this Spirit, as he stood under a Tree: And asking him, In the Name of God the Fa her, Son, and Holy Ghost, the cause of his appearing, and departing from Rest? A Voice answered, For things unseen; And that the cause of his Rising was, about a Grand-Daughter of his, whom he desired might have satisfaction from the Dead, it having been some way unjustly dealt by before his Departure. And then immediately, after some Sighings, and Groans, it seemed to vanish.
Thus having given you a true Relation of this sad Ap∣parition; in the next place, be pleased to take notice, of another strange Vision appearing in Long-Alley near Moor-fields, in the shape and likeness of Mr. Davis, former∣ly for a sum of Money, conjured down for 7 years; but the time being expired, he again walks; and appearing to his daughter Susan, at Noon-day, took her by the hand, at which she was exceedingly affrighted; and asking her how she did, at last she replyed, Well, I praise God. I wish the like to you. Father, what is your business, would you speak with my Mother? No, no, said he, speaking with a most hideous voice, and in the Night he utters such terrible groans, that the Neighbours are forced to remove to a further distance. He sometimes appears with a Plaister on his face, as if murthered; and on Wednesday night last, many sad groans, and heavy cryes, were heard from this restless Ghost by 4 Doctours, who sat up to see if they could by any means discover the cause of his walking; but to them he was invisible; and the work is difficult to allay him, if blood hath been shed violently; for true it is, that Mur∣ther will certainly cry aloud for Vegeance, till satisfied by Justice. FINIS. depiction of an apparition
