T1019A 09418193 43029
Thompson Tell-lyes. OR An Answer to Titus Tell-troth, To the Tune of, Hail to the Mirtle Shades. [1] HAil to the Devil and Pope. To Lestrange and the rest of the Town, To the Tories who vainly do hope To see Protestants tumbling down; To Lestrange who has cover'd the Plot As much as a Knave could do, All hail to that Scribling Sot, Who doth to the Romans bow; [2] Hail to the Protestant Nat, And hail to his Fulsome Dame, Hail to that Popish Brat That bespatters our Church's same. Hail to that Knave in grain, That never did good in his life, All hail to that Murtherous Cain, Who with Godfre's Ghost is at strife. [3] These Villains do Titus despise, They make him the bane of the Town, They are broaching ten thousand lyes 'Bout his Salamancha Gown; They Curse him for saving the Land, And are plotting his same to destroy, Till Jack Ketch takes such Rascals in hand Our peace we shall never enjoy. [4] They call him a shred of a Loom They call him an Orthodox beast They Stile-him the Curse and the Doom Of the Lay-man as well as the Priest, Both Papist and Presbyter too; Oh how do these lyes agree? Sweet Nat I'le be judged by you, Unfold me this Mistery. [5] Oh Titus how have we abus'd Thy kindness and love to this Land? Our safety how have we refus'd? How naked and bare do we stand? We give way to the Plotters apace Those that save us we go to destroy, Oh! where is our wisdom and grace? How can we our comfort enjoy? [6] Titus the light of the Town They call Thee, (and well they may) But Banks that Papisticall Clown Calls Thee so in a jeering way; He calls Thee, the scorn of the Court, Oh! pity it should be so: What catle do thither resort By abusing of Thee we may know. [7] It galls them toth' heart we perceive That against any Popish Lord Our Nobles should Titus believe, They grieve that he was not abhor'd. They fret because Stafford, did die, And that Shaftsbury yet is a live, See where their Religion doth lie Cramm'd up in a Popish Bee-hive. [8] Titus did swear a pace Against some that he never saw, What man has the brazen face To say he Transgrest the Law? King, Council and Parliament, all Believ'd him we plainly see, Those that do not I wish they may fall By a Rope from the Triple Tree. LONDON Printed for G. Parker.
