T1372A R4735 11957804 51562
To His Most Excellent Maiestie KING CHARLES The Second, our Most Gracious SOVERAIGN. The humble Address of the Offi∣cers of the severall Regiments of Horse under the Command of his Excellency the Lord General MONCK, as it was pre∣sented by them to His Majestie at Dartford Heath in Kent this present Tuesday, May 29. 1660. LONDON: Printed by S. Griffin, for John Playford at his Shop in the Temple, 1660.
Charles Royal blazon C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
TO HIS Most Excellent MAJESTIE KING CHARLES The Second, Our Most Gracious SOVERAIGN. The humble Address of the Officers of the several Regiments, &c. WITH such a Joy as flows from Reverence and Love, We hum∣bly present our selves before your Sacred Majestie: Besides our reflection on the Common good, wch in this happy Change relates to our parti∣cular, intends this joy, and renders it sin∣cere;
For we can now please our selves in our selves, while we are really perform∣ing that Duty for which we were first raised. And with all Thankfulnesse we acknow∣ledge that Care your Majestie in your late Letter and Declaration hath expressed of our Necessary intent. We blesse God to see that day when the serenity of every mans Countenance disco∣vers the tranquility of his minde, for this shewes your Majestie to be the true Soul of the People, since during your absence the whole Nation was cast into such Distracti∣ous, as we have no pleasure to remember, but had rather turn our Thoughts and gratefull Acknowledgements to the happy Conduct of our Noble Generall, who hath thus farre lead us in our Duty to your Royall Person. Yet as we cannot attri∣bute too much to his Merits, so neither can we deprive our selves of that Honour and Comfort which we finde in the accomplish∣ment of his just designe.
Therefore in plain and Souldier like (though humble) Termes, we say your Majestie hath made us and the Nation hap∣py in your Return to this your Native Kingdome; which doubtlesse will, nay we may say, hath produced a settlement upon the foundation of our Ancient Laws; By the due Excution of which, together with your Majesties pious Inclinations, we trust Libertisme and Prophaneness wholly suppressed, the Protestant Cause and true professors of it encouraged, to the com∣fort of all your Religious and Good Peo∣ple. Your Majestie will now have your Great Council about you, who have al∣ready given proof of their Loyalty and Wisdome both to your Majestie and them. We Professe and Declare, That as we have not been altogether uselesse in the Resto∣ration as well of your Sacred Majestie to your Crownes and Kingdomes, as your
People to their just Rights, so we shall in the future cheerfully sacrifice our Lives, or whatsoever can be more dear to us in the Service of your Majestie against all Oppositions whatsoever, and by a ready Obedience to your Majesties Commands, Expresse our selves, Your Majestie smost Loyall Subjects, and obedient Servants. FINIS.
