T1727A 99831575 36039
TO THE Supreame Authority of England the Parliament Assembled. The Humble Petition of divers well-affected people, for themselves and in the behalf of many thousands in this Nation. SHEWETH, THat whereas in reference to their former Petition, humbly presented to your Honours in Decemb. 1650. desiring that all, both Free and Copy-hold Lands in your Dominions, may be made subject to pay all the owners or Inheritors just debts, according to equity and reason, howsoever there be some kind of law yet in full force to the contrary, it hath plea∣sed God so to move your hearts, as that ye have Voted a very happy and hopeful Act for that purpose. That in regard many, both of your Honours truest friends in all these troubles, and other honest Creditors who are Imprisoned, and in great distresse, through want of that long expected Act, shall notwithstand∣ing have no reliefe thereby of their Debtors (whereof most are not on∣ly at liberty, but many of them live richly, and some prodigally) unlesse your honours be pleased likewise, to make the beginning of the time in the afore-mentioned Act, to be according as was humbly desired in their former Petition, viz. either some yeares before, or at least, a∣bout the end of Q. Elizabeths Reign. The premises considered, it is still your Petitioners humble and earnest desires. That as your Honors have been pleased in much compassion to this distressed Nation, to Vote such a just and needfull Act, as that all Free and Copy-hold Lands may be made lyable to pay all the Owners or Inheritors just Debts, so ye will be also pleased, to vouchsafe that just extent of time for the a∣foresaid hopefull Act to begin, which in their former Petition is humbly desired, That both your Honours owne true friends, and all those Creditors, Prisoners and others, may thereby be relieved, who through want thereof are exceedingly impoveri∣shed, and like to be speedily ruined, if either the same Act should begin at a later time then is Petitioned, or otherwise be longer delayed. So shall they have, both new matter, and further cause to pray, and stand for your Honors hap∣pinesse and safety, in all your just Proceed∣ings, whiles they live or breath.
