T2077A 99831590 36054
TREASON Justly Punished: OR, A Full Relation of the Condemnation, and Execution of Mr. William Staley, who was found Guilty of High Treason, at the Kings-bench-barr at Westminster, on Thursday the 21st. of Nov. 1678. For Speaking Dangerous, and Treasonable words against his most Sacred Majesty the King. For which he was sentenced to be Drawn, Hang'd, and Quartered. And was accordingly Executed upon Tuesday the 26th. of this Instant Nov. 1678. at Tyburn. Tune of, The Rich Merchant-Man, &c. With Allowance. O Stay, and lend an Ear, you Loyal Subjects all, And by this Story you shall hear, behold a Traytors fall: Who was by due desert, found guilty of a crime; The like where of hath not been known, in any Age or Time. This William Staley, he by Trade a Gold-smith was, And near to Coven-Garden liv'd, as now it came to pass: Who being void of grace, and blinded with false zeal, Of late spoke Treason at a place, which he could not conceal. A Papist he was bred, one of the Popish Crew, And was by Jesuits Mifled, which he too late did rue: Such Principles he learnt, beyond the Ocean Main, As brought him to a shameful End, with Torture and with Pain. Great Malice in his mind, this wicked wretch did bear, And likewise was to blood inclin'd, as doth too plain appear: Where I shall now relate, how he to Tryal came: Where thousands flocked to the place to hear and see the same. God save the King. UNto the Kings-Bench-Bar, the Prisoner was brought in, Where he Indicted was, for words of Treason, 'gainst our King: Which was by Evidence of witnesses, made clear, By Gentlemen of worth and note, who did the Treason hear. O wicked Bloody wretch, to think of such a thing, He said himself, with his own hands, would kill our Soveraign King: To which he for himself could answer very small, Which did unto the purpose tend, in presence of them all. A learned Jury there impannel'd was that time, Who quickly did consider of the Traytors hamous crime: Which did appear so plain, that in a little space, They quickly gave their verdict in, not moving from the place. Where he was Guilty found of Treason, which he spoke, with Malice and with bloody thoughts when none did him provoke: The judge then Sentence gave, that he should for the same Be Hang'd, and drawn, and quartered being so much to blame. Then was he carried back in Prison to remain, Until the doleful, dismal day of Execution came: Where he had time and space, his faults for to bewail, Unless he was so void of grace, no comfort could prevail. And now the fatal day being come, which was so nigh, Great store of People flocked there to see the Prisoner dye: Who was brought to the place, to undergo his Doom, Which was a great and vile disgrace to all the sons of Rome. His Quarters are to be disposed on each Gate, That every one who see the same, may all such Treason hate: And that the Popish crew may see what they deserve, For seeking to destroy a King, whom God will long preserve. For all such Bloody men shall have a fall, no doubt, And all their Treasons and their Plots in time shall be brought out: That they and all their Friends, their just desert may have, For striving to be high and great, and others to enslave. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, and I. Clarke.
