T2211 99833438 37914
THE TRYAL OF Philip Standsfield, SON TO Sir James Standsfield, OF NEW-MILNS, FOR The Murther of his father, AND OTHER Crimes Libell'd against him Feb. 7. 1688. For which he had Judgment, That on the  the Hours of Two and Four in the Afternoon, To be carri  the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and hang'd on a Gibbet, until he be dead; His Tongue to be cut out and burnt on a Scaffold; And his Right-hand to be cut off, and affixt on the East Gate of Hedington, And his Body to be hung in Chains. Which Doom and Sentence was accordingly put to due Execution upon the said PHILIP STANDSFIELD. Published by Authority. Edinburgh: Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1688. With Allowance to be Reprinted at London; And are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, 1688.
THE Publishers Advertisement TO THE READER. SIR James Standsfield, the Subject of this Tragical Relation, was Born in England, whence in his younger Years he went into Scot∣land, and was Secretary to the Famous Ma∣jor General Morgan, upon His Late Majesties happy Restauration; and the Armies Disbanding, he betook himself to Merchandizing, and very considerably in re∣turning of Monies betwixt the Two Kingdoms: In which he behaved himself with that Honour, Justness and Punctuality, as soon made him Rich and Eminent, and also well known to His Late Majesty, and the Greatest Personages of both Courts, and Kingdoms. He was a Gentleman of a Publick Spirit, and having Mar∣ried a Scotch Lady, and gain'd a considerable Estate in that Kingdom, sought all Ways, Just and Honourable to do it good: And amongst others, at a vast Expence, settled the Linnen and Woollen Manufactures at his own Seat, called New-Milns, near Hadington, a few Miles on this side Edinburgh, where not only great Sums of Money, but Hundreds of poor People were Employ'd, and Conveniences made for their Working, from the Wool to the Draper's Shop, as was generally known in that Kingdom, and also in this. He was a Gentleman of that Sobriety, Temperance, and discreet
Behaviour, as obliged all Persons he had Converse with; and I have heard some Persons of Quality, that knew him Intimately for Thirty Years, say, they neither saw, nor ever heard of so much as one Intemperate, or Im∣morral Act that he was guilty of. Yet this worthy good Gentleman fell by the Hands of his most Cruel and Ʋnnatural Eldest Son, even in his own Bed-Chamber, a Son to whom he had given very Liberal Education, and whose repeated Extravagancies had cost many Hun∣dreds. Still hoping that his Tenderness and Indulgence towards him, together with a Sight of his Errors, would as he grew in Years reclaim him; but instead thereof, as he increased in Years, he increased in Vice, and such a Riotous Course of Living, as rendred a plentiful An∣nual Allowance not sufficient for a Month. Being thus Arrived to a mighty height in all manner of Wickedness, a low Ebb of Fortune, and nothing but his Fathers Life standing betwixt him and a plentiful Estate: The want of Grace, and the Strength of the Tempter put him up∣on perpetrating the Horrid Fact, which notwithstanding all Endeavours was used to bring him to Confess and Re∣pent of, yet he remained Obstinate to his last moment; which some attribute to the Shame that must naturally be the Consequent of so Ʋnnatural and Bloody a Fact.
The Tryal of Philip Standsfield, Son to Sir James Standsfield of New-Milns, for the MURDER of His Father, and other CRIMES Libel'd against Him. Curia Justiciaria S. D. N. Regis, tenta in praetorio Burgi de de Edinbugh. Sexto die Mensis Februarii 1688. per Nobilem & Potentem Comi∣tem Georgium Comitem de Linlithgow, Dominum Livingstoun, &c. Justiciarium Generalem totius Regni Scotiae, & honorabiles viros Dominos Joannem Lockhart de Castle-hill, Davidem Balfour de For∣ret, Rogerum Hodge de Harcase, & Joannem Muray de Drumcairn, Commissionarios Justiciariae dicti, S. D. N. Regis. Curia Legitime affirmata. INTRAN Philip Standsfield, Eldest lawful Son to Ʋmquhile Sir James Standsfield of New-Milns, Prisoner within the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, INdyted and Accused at the Instance of Sir John Dalrymple Younger of Stair, His Majesties Advocate for His Highness's Interest: That where notwithstanding by the Law of GOD, the Common Law, Law of Nations, Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Kingdom, and constant Practice thereof, the expressing of malitious and sediti∣ous Words to the disdain of His Sacred Majesties Person, and con∣tempt of His Royal Government, such as Drinking or Wishing Confusion to His Majesty, is High-Treason, particularly by the 2d. Act 2d. Sess. Par. 1 st. K. Ch. 2d. of ever Glorious Memory: The Plotting, Contriving or Intending Death or Destruction to the King's Majesty, or any bodily harm, tending to Death or Destruction, or who shall by Writing, Printing, or other malitious and advised Speaking, express and declare such their Treasonable Intentions, after such persons, being legally Convicted thereof, they shall be deemed, declared and adjudg'd Traitors: And the Cursing, Beating, Invading, or As∣sassinating of a Parent by a Child, above the Age of sixteen Years, who is not Mad and Furious, is punishable by Death, and Confiscation of Move∣ables: And of all other Murders, Paricide is the most atrocious and unnatu∣ral; and Murder under Trust, is punishable as Treason with forfaulture of Life, Land and Goods, and particularly by the 20 Act, 1st Sess. 2d Par. K. Ch. 2d. the King's Majesty and Estates of Parliament, considering how great and atrocious a Crime it is for Children to Beat or Curse their Parents, and how the Law of God hath pronounced just Sentence of Death against such as shall either of these ways injure either of their Parents; therefore the King and Estates of Parliament did Statute and Ordain, That whosoever Son or Daughter, above the Age of Sixteen Years, not being Distracted, shall Beat or Curse either their Father or their Mother, shall be put to Death without Mercy. And sicklike by the 51 Act, 11 Par. K. Ja. 6th. It is Statuted and Ordain∣ed, That the Murder or Slaughter of whatsomever of the Leidges, where the Party slain is under the trust, credit, assurance, and power of the Slayer, all such
Murder or Slaughter to be committed in time coming, the same being lawfully try∣ed, and the Person dilated found guilty by an Assise thereof shall be Treason, and the Person found culpable shall forfault Life, Land and Goods; as in the saids Laws and Acts of Parliament at more length is contained. Nevertheless it is of Verity, that the said Philip Standsfield shaking off all Fear of God, the Bonds and Ties of Nature, and Christianity, Regard and Obedience to the saids Laws and Acts of Parliament, did dare and presume to commit the saids horrid and detestable Crimes, in swa far as, upon the first, second, third, or one or other of the Days of the Moneths of June, July, August, or Se∣ptember last by past, one or other of them, he did, within the House and Kitchin of New-milns, call for Ale to Drink some Healths, and in the presence of John Robison, then his Fathers Servant, Agnes Bruce, likewise his Fathers Servitrix, and several others, he did, as a most villanous and avowed Traitor, presume and dare to begin a Health to the Confusion of His Sacred Majesty, his native Soveraign, and did drink off the same, and caused others in his Company do the like. And sicklike Sir James Standsfield of New-milns his Father, haveing caused Educat and bring him up Decentlie, and in plenty conform to his Rank and Quality, and having left no means unessayed for his Literature, Education and Subsistence; yet he being a profligate and de∣bauched Person, did commit, and was accessory to several notorious Villa∣nies, for which, both at home and abroad, he was apprehended and detain∣ed Prisoner, as in the Marshal-Sea-Prison in Southwark, in the publick Prisions of Antwerp and Orleance, and several other places; and tho' his Father out of his natural compassion to him, did cause Release him out of these Prisons, in which he was so justly confined, he no sooner had his Liberty, than he of new invented and went about his villanous Practices and Debauches: And his Fa∣ther at last perceiving that nothing could reclaim him from these and the like proceedings, having signified his inclinations to Disherish him, and in order thereto having disponed his Estate in Favours of John Standsfield his second Son; the said Philip did thereupon conceive, harbour and entertain ane Hellish Malice and Prejudice against the said Sir J. S. his Father, and most barbarously did declare, threaten and vow at several times, that he would cut his Throat. And particularly upon the first, second, third, or remanent days of the Months of the Year 1680, within the House of James Smith in Nungate or Hadding∣toun: and upon the first, second, or third, or one or other of the days of the Months of January, February, March, and remnant Months of the Year 1687, within the House of James Baikbie Fermorer in New-milns; and within his Father's own House of New-milns, and in the House of William Scot there; and upon the first, second, third, or one or other of the days of the Month of January, February, March, and remanent Months of the Year of God 1683, 1684, and 1685 Years, when he was both in Brussils and Breda, and seve∣ral other places, both in Holland and Flanders, and in Prisons within which he was detained in the City of London and Southwark, or upon one or o∣ther of the days, of one or other of the Months of the saids Years, or ei∣ther of them most wickedly, unnaturally, and bitterly Rail upon, abuse and Curse the said Sir James Standsfield, his natural and kindly Parent, And being transported with rage and malice, he did, contrary to the light and tyes of Nature, not once, but often, and frequently curse his Father, by bidding, and praying the Devil to take him, and the Devil rive him. God damn him, and swear, if he had a Sword, he would run it through him, and if ever he came to Scotland, he would be avenged upon him. And particularly upon the  day of November last, which was the last time his Father went to Edinburgh; he did most impiously, and un∣naturally
imprecate, God let him never return, and God let him never see his Face. And frequently, when he saw his Fathers Diet taken to him; he used to say, God grant he may choak upon it; and at other occasions, when his Father refused to eat, he was in use to say, God let never more be in his Stomach than was in it then. And upon the first, second, third, or one, or other of the days of the Months of September, October, or No∣vember, last by past, or one or other of them. His Mother being recover∣ed out of a Swond, and having said to him, Philip, ye will shortly want your Mother, which will be a gentle visitation to Sir James your Father. To which he did Answer: By my Soul, my Father shall be dead before you, Mother; and about eight days after, he upon the like occasion did renew the same Words: As also he was in use to declare, that though at present he had neither Cloaths nor Money, yet shortly (and no body did think how soon) he would be Laird of all, and then would use other Per∣sons as they did him now: And at other times declared, that before Christ∣mas he would be Laird of all; which Curses and Imprecations, he the said Philip Stansfield, by a continual Habit, used, and repeited these several Years by past; and lately some few Months, or Weeks, before his Fathers Murder. And not satisfied therewith, the said Philip did proceed to that de∣gree of unnatural Cruelty, and malicious Spite, and Enmity against his Father; that upon the first, second, third, or one or other of the days of the Months of January, February, March, and remanent Months of the years of God, 1680, 1681, 1682, 1683, and 1684 years, or one or other of the Days, of one or other of the Months, of one or other of the saids Years; he did at∣tempt to assassinate, and offered Violence to his Fathers Person, and did chase and pursue him upon the King's High-way at Lothian-burn, and did fire Pistols upon his Father. And likewayes upon one or other of the Days of one or other of the Months, of one or other of the Years of God above specified, he did attempt to assassinat his Father for his Life, at Culterallors; and did fire Pistols upon him: And his Father being afraid of his Life, and under the apprehension of Violence, from the cruel and bloudy Hands of the said Philip, his unnatural Son, He did to several Persons, both of Qua∣lity, and intire Reputation, declare that the said Philip his Son, had both attempted to assassinat, and offered Violence to his Person, and that he was devising, and contriving his Death. And the said Sir James Standsfield his Father, having upon the  day of November last, gone from the City of Edinburgh, to his own House of New-Milns, and about Ten a Clock at Night, or thereby having gone to his own Chamber, in order to his rest, and being alone in the Roum, under the Credit, Trust, and assu∣rance of the said Philip his Son, and his own Servants within his own Fa∣mily; The said Philip did consult, and advise, and correspond with some other Persons, within and about the House for the time, to assassi∣nat and cruelly murder his said Father, and particularly with George Thomson in New-Milns, and Helen Dickson his Spouse, and Janet Johnstoun Spouse to John Nicols, there, in the House of the said George Thomson many times, par∣ticularly the Saturdays Night, immediately preceeding the Murder, where he cursed his Father, and said he should shortly make an end of him, and be Master of all: And accordingly he and they did Murder and Strangle him in his Bed-Chamber, and in the dead time of the night, did carry and transport him from the said Roum, to the Water, near by the House, and laid his Body down upon the Water-side, and tyed a Stone about his Neck, to make him sink in the Water; and before he was throwen therein, he went back with his Accomplices to a little Kiln near by, and consulted and
advised, whether it was more fit to throw him in the Water, with the Stone about his Neck, to make him sink, or to take away the Stone, least when he should be found, it might thereby appear that the Stone had been tyed by some other hand than his own; and at last resolved to take away the Stone, and throw his Body in the Water, which they returning, did accordingly And some Persons being accidentally lying in the House at the time, they did hear a Noise of many Tongues and Voices, to their great Terror and A∣mazement; And the next Morning very early, some of the Servants in the House, having come to the Roum, where his said Father did lye, and having missed him out of the Roum, gave notice thereof, to some others of the Servants. He declared that he had been seeking him about the Water-pools; and a Noise and Cry having arisen, Search and Inquiry was made for his said Father: (and by him seemingly amongst the rest) And after some time his Body was found in the Water hard by his own House, and being dead, and his Neck broken before he was thrown in the Water, his Body did nei∣ther sink to the ground, nor receive Water, (as all drowned Bodies are in use to do) and he knowing where his Fathers Body had been put, went on the Sabbath Morning directly to the place where his Body was in the Water, and stood a considerable space upon the Water-side, directly oppo∣site to the Body, with his Eyes fixed on the same, before his Body was found or knowen to any others than the Murtherers; and when John Top∣ping (a stranger) passing that way, and ignorant of the whole Matter, or that Sir James was amissing, called to him, and asked, who that was in the Water: He made no answer, but went away from that place straight to New-Milns, and gave no intimation to him, or any other Person what he had seen in the Water, but appeared surprised when his Body was found there, by other Persons; and his Fathers Body being taken out of the Water, the same was by his order, carryed to a dark Out-house; and though he was desired by the Friends and Servants present, to suffer his Fathers dead Body to be carryed to his own House, and kept therein, and not to be buried till his Friends in Edinburgh, and elswhere, and Physicians in Haddintoun, or near by, might see the same. Yet he refused so to do, and caused bury the dead Body of his Father privately, and in haste. And the Noise ha∣ving spread abroad, that his Father had been barbarously Murdered by him, and his Accomplices: Order was given by these in Authority, to cause open the Grave that Physicians and expert Chyrurgians might in∣spect his Body, and make Report anent the Truth of the Matter: And accordingly, by the Report of the saids Chirurgians who inspected the Body, it did appear, that his said Father was cruelly strangled and murdered, and not drowned, and that he had been cast in the water of purpose to con∣ceal the same: And when his Father's dead body was sighted and inspected by Chirurgians, and the clear and evident signs of the Murder had appear∣ed, the Body was sewed up, and most carefully cleaned, and his nearest Rela∣tions and Friends were desired to lift up his Body to the Coffin: And ac∣cordingly James Row, Merchand, (who was in Edinburgh in the time of the Murder) having lifted the Left-side of Sir James his Head and Shoulder, and the said Philip the Right-side, his Father's Body, though carefully cleaned, as said is, so as the least Blood was not on it, did (according to God's usual Method of discovering Murders) blood afresh upon him, and defiled all his hands, which struck him with such a terrour, that he immediately let his Father's Head and Body fall with Violence, and fled from the Body, and in consternation and confusion, cryed, Lord, have Mercy upon me, and bowed himself down over a Seat in the Church (where the Corps were in∣spected)
wiping his Father's innocent blood off his own murdering Hands upon his Cloathes. By all which it is manifest, that he did most traito∣rously express his hatred and malice to his Majesties Sacred Person, by wishing and drinking to his confusion, and causing others to do the same. And likewise, that he did not only unnaturally curse, invade, attempt to assas∣sinate or beat his said Father, but under trust and assurance, barbarously and treasonable did strangle, kill, and murder him in manner forsaid, and is actor, art and part of the forsaids Crimes, or one or other of them, which being found by an Assyse, he ought to be punished for the treasonable Crimes above-specified, with forefaulture of Life, Land and Goods, and for the other Crimes above-mentioned, Capitally, and with the pains of Death and Confiscation of Moveables, to the Terror and Example of others to com∣mit the like hereafter. Pursuers. Sir John Dalrymple, younger of Stair, His Majesties Advocat. Sir George Mckenzie, Advocat. Procurators in Defence. Sir David Thoirs. Sir Patrick Hume. Mr. William Moniepenny. Mr. William Dundass. The Pannal's Procurators produced two Warrands of Privy Council, Com∣manding them to compeir and plead the Pannals Defence. SIr Patrick Hume for the Pannal (always denying the Inditement, and whole members and qualifications thereof) alleadges, That as to the first part of the Inditement, in relation to the drinking an Health to the Con∣fusion of his Sacred Majesty, as it is most calumnious, so it is not to be supposed, that any man in his right wits would have been guilty of such a thing; And it is positively offered to be proven, that at or about the time lybel'd, and several times before and after, the Defender did most hear∣tily and chearfully in several Companies drink the King's Health, and upon all occasions he was ready to testifie his Loyalty to the King, and particu∣larly the time of the Invasion by the late Duke of Munmouth in England, where he did enter himself voluntarly a Souldier in the Earl of Dumbarton's Regiment, and continued in the King's Army till the Rebels were defeat, and the Voluntiers dismissed. As to the second part of the Libel, in relation to the Pannal, his alledg∣ed commiting and being guilty of, and accessory to many notour Crimes abroad, and being detained Prisoner in London, Antwerp, Orleance, &c. and that he vented and entertained malice against his Father, and that he declared many times that he would cut his Throat, and that he did rail against and curse his Father, by many Imprecations. It is answered, primo, That it is absolutely deny'd, that the Pannal was guilty of, or accessory to any notorious Crime abroad, or put in Prison upon that account, nor is there so much as any Crime condescended upon. 2o. The Defender could not conceive any prejudice against his Father, upon the account of Disponing his Estate to his second Son; for he knew nothing thereof till after his Father's decease, that one Alexander Ainslie told him that his Father made such a Disposition. 3o. As to the pretended Expressions, that the Defender should have had
of Railing, Cursing, and using Imprecations against his Father, in so far as the samen are lybel'd to have been done abroad, in England, Holland, or other places, he cannot be lyable to the punishment inflicted by the Law of this Kingdom, because when a party commits a Crime in another Nation, he is only to be punished according to the Law of the place where the Crime was committed, and not according to the Law of the Nation where he is a Subject, or has his dwelling: As is clear by the Common Law, Authentick Cod: ubi de criminibus agi oportet, Qua in provincia quis delinquit, ant in qua pecuniarum aut criminum reus sit, sive de terra, sive de terminis, sive de posses∣sione, sive de proprietate, sive de hypotheca, aut de alia qualibet occasione, vel de qualibet re fuerit reus illic jure subjaceat, quod jus est perpetuum. In that Nation where any Person commits a Crime, or is lyable to answer upon any account whatsomever, he is to be judged by the Law of that place, which is established as a perpetual Law, and Mattheus de Criminibus, in his title, de poenis, is express of the same opinion. 4o. As to all those pretended Expressions of railing, cursing, and threat∣ning, lybel'd, that were before March, 1685. The Defender is secured by the Act of Indemnity, by which all Crimes are indemnified, preceeding that time, against the Government and Laws. 5o. As to any pretended Expressions, of railing and cursing, since that time, they being but Injuries alledged done to the Father, he might and did remit the samen, in so far he did not challenge and pursue the same in his own time, and this is clear from the Common Law, Carpzov. Part 2. Quaest. 65. Actio autem injuriarum nec active nec passive in Haeredes tran∣sit, etiamsi mortuus illatas injurias ignoraverit. Institut. lib. 4. tit. 12. par. 1. de perpetuis temporalibus action. Leg. 10. par. 2. ff. si quis cautionibus in ju∣judicio fisten. And leg. 13. ff. de injuriis, injuriarum actio neque haeredi neque in haeredem datur; As also it is a Principle in Law, that dissimulatione tollitur injuria; and if it could be made appear, that the Pannal had any such Expressions, the Father did dissimulat and pass from the same, in so far as by a Letter, dated in June last, written by the Father to the Pannel, he or∣ders him to take in his Chamberlain Accompts of the Rents of his Lands, and of any Money he had received from the Tenements, or for the Corns sold, and that he expects he will do the same exactly, and recommends to him, to be careful of all his Affairs, and subscribes himself to be his Loving Father; By which it is evident, that all former differences (if any were) be∣twixt them were then taken away. As to the third part of the Indytement, in relation to the several Acts and Qualifications insisted upon: To inferr, that the Defender had acces∣sion to his Father's death. It is answered, (primo) That the Indytement, in so far as it is founded upon the 51. Act Par. 11. K. Ja. 6. in relation to the Murder under trust, which is declared to be punishable as Treason, is not relevant: Because the Father cannot in Law be said to be under trust and assurance of the Son, and that Act of Parliament takes only place in Cases where a man is invited to his neighbours House, or of an Traveller being in an Inn, and that he be murdered under that trust, and the same Act of Par∣liament being founded on in the case of Swinton, who killed his Wife, in the year 1666. the Inditement was restricted to simple Slaughter. And in the case of Master James Oliphant, in the year 1665, The Lords of the Session found, that a Son's killing his Mother, was not Murder under trust, and so he was not punishable by that Act of Parliament, as guilty of the Crime of Treason. 2o. The Acts and qualifications condescended on to infer the Defend∣ers
Accession to his Fathers death, are but very remote and uncertain, for as to that expression, That the defender is alledged to have threatned his Fathers death, It is the opinion of all Lawyers, who have written upon the subject, that that is but a very remot Presumption. And as Carpzo∣vius expresses it, Part. 3. Quest. 121. Numb. 51. quod est indicium ad∣modum periculosum quippe cum homines saepe nil minus faciant quam quod minas exequantur et ira cundia agitatus minas de crimine perpetrando saepe jactet ipso tamen animo fervore paulo post disscusso cohibeat manus et abstin∣eat a facinore illo quod forsan ab alio postea committitur. And Paris de puteo gives an instance in his Tractat de syndicatu upon the word Tortura; and Boverius, That a Woman seeing a Person going by her Window, against whom she had a Prejudice, and that another having a hatred against her, and hearing that she had threatned to cut off that Persons Leggs, the party that did hear the Woman use the threatning, did the thing, upon which the Woman that did threaten, being challenged, and put to the Torture, did con∣fess; Yet thereafter it was found, that she was altogether innocent, and that another had done it. 3o. As to the pretended Acts of the Defenders alledged Pursuing, and Invading his Father, and fireing Pistols at him, at Lothian burn and Culter∣allors, in Annis 1683, and 1684. As it is most groundless, so if need were it could be made appear by the Persons who were in company with him at that time, That the Defender, and his Father, were then in intire friendship all alongst the journey, and he was so far from making any such attempt, That it can be made appear, that the Defender did behave himself towards his Father, with all the submission and respect that became a Son to have to his Father; But as to these and all other Acts preceeding March, 1685. the Defender is secured by the Act of Indemnity, and as the Defender cannot be pursued for any Crime preceeding that time; neither in Judgment nor out with the same, they in effect being no Crimes, being taken away by the Act of Indemnity, they cannot be so much as made use of as qualifications or aggravations to infer another Crime posterior thereto. 4o. As to that pretended qualification, that when the Defender did touch his Fathers dead body after it was taken out of the grave, the Corps did bleed. It is answered, that this is but a superstitious observation without any ground either in Law or Reason. And Carpzovius relates, Part 3. Quest. 122. Numb. 31. That several Persons upon that ground had been unjustly challenged, and that he in his own experience, had seen a dead body bleed in presence of a person who was not guilty, as also that he has seen the body not bleed in presence of the Person that was guilty. And Mattheus de Cri∣minibus, is of the same opinion, Tit. 16. de Quaestionibus, Numb. 12. de Sanguine porro de Cadavere profluente quod dicitur id de plurimis experi∣mentis comprobetur tamen cum experimenta falsa sint ratio vero idonea nul∣la reddi possit, non putaverim indicium ad torturam sufficiens esse; non e∣nim sapientis Judicis est incerto experimento credere quod certa ratione di∣rimendum est. And the truth is, the occasion of the dead bodies bleeding, was that the Chirurgions that came out to visit the body, did make an In∣cision about the neck, which might be the occasion of the bleeding, and also the very moving of the dead body when it was taken out of the grave, and out of the Coffin might occasion the bleeding; especially seeing the body did not bleed for some time after, which certainly was made by the motion, and by the incision: As also as a further evidence, that it could not be the Defenders touching the body, the Chirurgions did likeways touch the Body as well as he, and several others present, so that the bleeding could
no more be ascribed to his touching, than the touching of the other persons present. 5o. As to the other Articles Lybel'd, Relating to the pretended Mur∣der, They are but meer stories, and the truth is, and it is offered to be pro∣ven, That the Defender having gone to his Chamber and Bed the night be∣fore his Father's death, He did not stir out of his Bed, nor out of the Roum, till the next morning, that John Robertson his Fathers Servant came to his Chamber, where he was in Bed, and told him that he had been in his Ma∣ster's roum, and that he could not find him; Upon which the Defender im∣mediatly arose, and put on his cloaths, and went out to see where his Father was. And shortly after word being brought him, by some Persons in the Town, that they did see his Father's Body lying in the Water, and it being generally concluded by all, that he had thrown himself in the Water, and the body being taken out, and laid in a Low-Roum; It was thought fit by all the neighbours about, that he should be buried the next day. 6o. The particulars Lybel'd, to infer the Defenders accession to his Fa∣thers Death, being but remot and uncertain conjectures, It is a certain prin∣ciple in Law, that ex praesumptionibus et conjecturis nemo criminaliter condem∣nari potest, especially as to a Capital punishment: As is clear from the com∣mon Law, Leg. 5. digest, de paenis, sed nec de supplicationibus debere aliquem damnare, satius enim est Impunitum relinqui facinus nocentis quam Innocentem damnare. And which is the opinion of all Lawers, writing upon the Sub∣ject; As Bartol, upon the foresaid Law, and Farin. part. 3. oper: Crim. Quaest. 86. and the Lawers by him there cited. And Muscard de prob: Con∣clus: 223. layes it down as a certain conclusion, quod Argumenta quantumcun∣que urgentissima etiamsi essent talia qua mentem indicantis adeo coactarent quod aliud credere non possit, non tamen sufficerent ad condemnationem paenae corporalis sed duntaxat pecuniariae. 7. The presumptions and qualifications Lybel'd, cannot be sustained even to infer an Arbitrary punishment: Because they may and are taken off by other presumptions, That either the Father was not murdered, but that in a Frainzie or melancholy fit he had thrown himself in the Water: Or at least if he was Murdered, that the Defender had no accession there∣to, and the presumptions condescended upon in behalf of the Defender, to eleid the presumptions contained in the Inditement, are these. That it is notourlie known, That his Father was subject to melancholy fits, and that in the year 1679, the time of Bothwell-bridge, It is offered to be proven, that he was in a fit of distraction; And at another time in his house at the Netherbow, he was going to throw himself out over the Window, If one Thomas Lindall had not come in at the time & pulled him back by the Leggs, when his body was half out at the Window: And some few dayes before he went out of Edinburgh last, he came to George Sterling, Chirur∣gion, and desired him to draw blood of him, for a distemper in his head, which he refused, unless he had advice from a Physician. As also a day or two before he went out of the Town, he was seen reading upon the Book of Bur∣touns Melancholy. And that day when he went out of the Town in com∣pany of Mr. Bell the Minister, & Aiton Merchant in Haddingtoun, they obser∣ved him to be melancholy, disordered, and more troubled than ordinary; Or if it could be made appear, that the Father was murdered, Yet it cannot be presumed that the Defender had any accession thereto, or that he would have committed such an Act against the very ties and light of nature: As also it appears by the foresaid letter, written to the Defender by his Father, that they were in intire Friendship; As also when the surmise went abroad,
that his Father had been murdered, if he had been conscious to himself that he had any accession thereto, he would have certainly fled the Countrey, and gone away: But he was so far from that, that upon the first rumor of it he came presently in to Edinburgh, and several days thereafter, it being told him, that he was suspected to have accession to his Fathers Death, he came voluntarly and entered himself in Prison, that he might undergo the strictest and severest Tryal. Which alone is sufficient, if it were no more to take off all the presumptions Lybel'd, and to convince the World of the Defenders innocence; And it being a principle in Law, That una praesumptio tollit ali∣am, The presumptions adduced for the Defender ought to be preponderat, Mascard. Conclus. 1205. is positive, That presumptiones quae stant pro reis prae∣valent. As also that Praesumptio affectionis naturalis praevalet contrariis prae∣sumptionibus. So that upon both these considerations, the presumptions al∣ledged for the Defender ought to be sustained, to take away the presumpti∣ons Lybel'd, and to free him from the Crime. His Majesties Advocat answers, That the Libel consists of three Articles, (Primo) Treason by the Pannal's drinking the King's Confusion, and by the Murder under Trust. 2o. The Cursing of a Parent. 3o. The Qualifica∣tions inferring the Pannal's accession to the Murder of his Father. As to the first, it cannot be denied, but that the drinking or wishing Con∣fusion to his Majesty, is the highest Act of Contempt, Malice, and Disdain to his Royal Person; and as the Relevancy of this Article is not expresly con∣traverted, so the atrocity of the Act, and the forcing others to do the same upon the common grounds of Law, does clearly infer Treason, and it can∣not be expected, that such extravagant words should either be exprest, or particularly provided against by any Law in express terms; but the nature of the words in express terms of our Law discharging all Speeches to the dis∣dain of his Majesty, the contempt of his Authority, do clearly and naturally comprehend the words Libeled, and by the common Law, Ad leg: jul. Maj. crimen laesae Majestatis ad exemplum legis scriptae est vindicandum. And whereas it is pretended, that these words were inadvertantly said, and that it appears by the tract of the Pannal's life, and his readiness to en∣gage in his Majesties Service, that the words could not be deliberate and ma∣litious. It is replyed, That it is offered to be proven, that the drinking Confusion to the King, was openly and plainly proposed; And that the Pan∣nal did deliberately send out for Ale to drink certain Healths, and that this Health to the King's Confusion was the first or second; and that it was no lapse or mistake in the expression; but that he forced others to pledge and drink that same Health: And the malice and disloyalty is evident by the Healths subsequent, viz. Antichrist's, &c. and it is not at all relevant, (af∣ter the reiterate and deliberat expressing of these words) that he had retra∣cted or drank the King's health; for a crime once committed, is not re∣tracted or taken off by such inconsistent and unconsequential Speeches; But to shew the sence the Pannal had of the importance of his own words, the Pannal being informed, that some of the persons present had divulged his ha∣ving drunk the King's Confusion, the Pannal did conjure them to secrecie, and did menace the Witnesses with a great Kane, that he would beat and brain them if ever they told it. Whereas it is answered in general, as to all Crimes committed without the Kingdom, that they cannot be cognosced or punished here. It is reply∣ed, That as to all Crimes against Nature or the Law of Nations, as every party is competent to be an Accuser, so every Judicature is competent, and therefore as to the crimes of Treason, or Cursing of Parents, wherever com∣mitted,
they are punishable by the Justices: But because in relation to the Crimes committed abroad, there is no positive Probation, but Declarations and Testimonies; Therefore as to these Crimes, His Majesties Advocat does not insist on them as distinct Crimes per se, but as Qualifications, Documents and Evidences of the habitual Debauchry, and unnatural Malice exprest by the Pannal against his Father for a Tract of many Years. Whereas it is answered, That as to all Crimes preceeding 1685, they are taken off by the Indemnity. It is replyed, The Indemnity 1685, is no general Indemnity, neither as to Persons nor Crimes, but particular Crimes are Remitted, and particularly enumerat without any general Clause: And as Cursing of Parents is not particularly enumerat, so by the Nature of that Crime, it cannot be included or comprehended in any general Indemnity: And the words of the Act of Parliament, 20. Act. 1. Par. K. Ch. 2d. bears expresly, That the Cursers of Parents shall be put to death without mercy. So that a general Act of Indemnity or Mercy without a special Remission, could not include this Crime, which as the Act of Parliament bears, is ex∣presly against Nature and the Law of God: And by the Opinion of all Lawers, General Indemnities do not extend to all Crimes; but these Crimes which are called in Law Crimina excepta, are never intended to be Indemni∣fied, nor such Crimes, where the Interest of Parties is more than the Inte∣rest of publick Justice, and in all former and General Indemnities, Murther and other Crimes are particularly excepted with a general Clause, excepting all such Crimes as use not to be comprehended in general Acts of Indemni∣ty; So that this so horrid a Crime, wherein the Parent was more interest∣ed than the Publict, neither was nor could be comprehended under a gene∣ral Indemnity: As also that restricted, limited Indemnity, bears expresly an exoneration for all persons below the degree and quality of an Heretor, Wod∣setter or Burgess; and whether the Pannal were an Heretor or not, yet it cannot be said, that he is below the degree and quality of a Wodsetter or Bur∣gess; and therefore the Act of Indemnity is of no use to him. Whereas it is answered, That Sir James was reconciled with the Pannal, and wrote kind Letters to him, whereby dissimulando former Injuries were taken off. It is replyed, That Injuries are only taken off dissimulando, which are not atrocious, but never specifick Crimes, wherein the Discharge or ex∣press Renunciation of the Party injured cannot liberat a vindicta publica, the punishment of Crimes, especially in Capital Punishments, belonging to the Magistrat, and the privat Party has not the sole Interest, nor can dispense with Capital Punishments: But the Letter founded upon, does not in the least infer the Parties forgiveness or dissimulation of the injury: And a Fa∣ther ordering his Son to call in for Chamberlain Accompts, without im∣powering him to Discharge the same, is not the least evidence of confidence in his Son, much less a Remitting of his Crime. And as to the second Article in relation to the Cursing, it is positively offered to be proven, not in single Acts, but by a tract and habit of cursing his Father in the most abominable Termes imaginable. As to the third Article in Relation to the Murder, that this matter may be clear, & ut constet de corpore delicti, these undoubted Qualifications are of∣fered to instruct, that Sir James Standsfield was murdered and strangled, and that he did not drown himself. 1o. It is offered to be proven by the Mini∣ster; that was that night in the House, that long after ten a Clock at night, and that Sir James had retired to the Chamber, where he lay a lone, the Mini∣ster heard the confused Whispers, Murmurs, and Noise of several persons, both Men and Women, which afrighted him, and that he heard the noise go
away by the back-side of the House, which leads directly to that Pool where Sir James his Body was thrown in the Water. 2o. Sir James's Body was found swimming above the Water, and albeit it appeared by the Ice upon the top of his Cloaths, that he had been several hours in the Water, yet there had no Water entred into his Body, which is a demonstration, that he was dead before he was thrown in the Water; for a person thrown alive into Water drawing in of Air and Respiration, being in the Water, he must draw in Water, and if the person drawes in as much Water as fills his concavitie, he becomes heavy, having so much more weight of Wa∣ter, and therefore he sinks; But if a person be thrown dead into the Water, when the Clap of his Throat is shut, the Water cannot enter, and there be∣ing so much emptiness, the Body is light and supported by more parts of Water, than the gravity of the Body can depress. 3o. There being several Chyrurgions and others sent out by order from Authority to take up and in∣spect the Body; to see whether there was any evidence of Strangling, or o∣ther Symptoms of Murder upon the Body: It did appear to all these per∣sons who did depone before a Committee of the Privy Council; That from the one Jugular Vein to the other round the Neck, there was a tumour of congealed black bruised Blood, three inches broad, and that there was con∣gealed Blood in the Throat, upon which matter of Fact, the Colledge of Phy∣sicians have given an unanimous Testimony in writing, that Sir James Stands∣field was Strangled and not Drowned: And the Deaconry of the Chirurgi∣ons being conveened, have emitted a Declaration in Writing, concurring and agreeing with the Report of the Physicians; So that it is as clear as the Light of Day, that Sir James Standsfield was murdered. 2o. For the Qualifications that the Pannal was the Murderer, or accesso∣ry to the Murder of his Father, these clear evidences are offered, which makes his Crime without possibility to be palliat or denyed. 1o. It is notorious that the Pannal is a most debauched, vitious, pernicious Person, and has been Prisoner or condemned to dy in all the places or Societies he ever haunted; He entred a Souldier in the Scots Regiment where he was condemned to die at Treves, but made his escape, and his being in Prison, in the Marshal-Sea-Prisons, Orleance, and Brussels, (which makes the Circuit of his Travels) are not denyed; and his profligat life and constant drunkenness, since he came to the Prison, is offered to be proven by the Keepers: and as it is unnecessar to trace all his Debauches; so there is one material point offered to be pro∣ven, That upon the least provocation either by Man or Woman, the Pan∣nal used to swear by horrid Oaths, that he would take their lives, though he should die in the Grass-mercat for it. 3o. Sir James Standsfield for these Debaucheries having disherished the Pannal, and disponed his Estate to his second Son: It is positively offered to be proven, That in the Ngate of Haddingtoun, in James Smith's House, the Pannal being told, that his Father would disherish him, he with horrible Oaths vowed to cut his Fathers throat. And whereas it is answered to this qualification, That the saying that a Son would cut a Father's throat, is but a remot circumstance. It is reply∣ed, That the Law, and all Lawers do agree, That Minae praecedentes & dam∣num sequutum, is a most pregnant qualification of that party's Crime, especi∣ally where the Threats were to cut a Fathers throat, which of it self was so horrid and unnatural a Villany, that it cannot be doubted he who durst vow it, wanted but an occasion to act it. And it is acknowledged, that though this be the clearest presumption, yet per se, it is not full probation: For though the Son had both vowed it, and resolved it, yet by an accident he
might have been prevented; but the presumption at least lays the burden, that except the Pannal could condescend, and document, that some other Person killed his Father, he must be repute the Murderer. 2o. It is offered to be proven, that Sir James Stansfield who was a Per∣son of eminent sobriety, and veracity, did declare to several persons, that his unnatural Son had attempted his life, and offered violence to his person, and particularly, that he had pursued him on Horse-back, and fired Pistols on him; and that same Friday before Sir James was Murdered, he did de∣clare that it was not his Debts, or any thing under Heaven that troubled him, but that his Son, and Family were plotting and contriving his de∣struction, and the next night he was murdered. 3o. It is offered to be proven, that the Pannals Mother declared, that her Son had vowed to be his Fathers death, and that he was a vindictive Person, and that she did apprehend he had murdered him. So as to this Ar∣ticle, there is a concourse of the Pannals own Oaths, to murder his Father, and of his Father and Mothers Declarations, that he had attempted, and was still plotting the same. The second Qualification is, that that Saturdays- night, Sir James Stans∣field came home: The Pannal would not come where his Father was, either to Supper, or Prayer, and being expresly desired by several Persons, to go to his Father, and speak with him: He declared, (that same night he was murdered) he could not endure to see, or look upon his Father; and he had been all that day closs with Thomson and his Wife, and Janet Johnston. So after ten hours at even after the Family was gone to Bed, he came out to Thomsons House, which is hard by the Gate, and there in presence of Thomson, his Wife, and Jannet Johnston, he declared that his Father would neither give him Money, nor Cloaths, and cursed his Father, and declared that he would shortly make ridd of him, which agrees with what he had several times said in other Companies, that he was to be Laird before Christ∣mas and that he was shortly to be Master of all, and none could think how soon. As also shortly before Sir James's Death, the Pannal's Mother falling in swound, it was said to him, Philip, ye will shortly want your Mother; to which he answered, by God his Father should be dead before her; And eight days after, his Mother falling again Sick, he repeated the same words, whereby it is evident the Murder was deliberate and determi∣ned. 3o. On the Sunday morning, before Sir James's Body was found, Philip came to the Minister's Chamber, and told him that his Father was gone out in the night, and that he had been searching for him about the Pools, and water side; and when the Minister reproved him for making such insinua∣tions against his Father, he laughed at him, and went away to the Pool, and stood looking upon his Father in the water, but made no Discovery; and thereafter a stranger coming by upon the High-way likeways, seeing Sir Jame's body in the water, he came back and discovered the matter; at which Philip seemed surprised, and told that he had seen his Father's Body in the water before, but he did not think fit to be the first discoverer, which shews, that he was conscious of his own guilt; other wayes upon the first sight of his Father in the water, he would have gone to him, but on the con∣trary, he never laid a hand upon his Father's Body, either to pull him out of the water, or to carry him into the House, for the dread of some extraordi∣nary discovery, and did not allow the Corps to be brought within his Fa∣thers gates, but caused carry the Corps to the Wake-miln, where to cover the appearance of Strangling upon his Body, he entrusted Jannet Johnston
with the care of woonding him, who was known to be a person so odious to Sir James, that he could not see her for her baseness with the Pannal, and she did acknowledge, that she had not been for three quarters of a year within the House before; and yet this infamous Strumpet, who has been Tortured by order of the Privy-Council, as Accessory to the Murder, chiefly intrusted to see the naked body, and the cloaths put on. 4o. The Pannal did refuse to send for a Chyrurgion, and to let his Father's Body be sighted, though the Minister, and others did expresly demand it; and the English-men in the Manufactory, who were acquainted with the Crow∣ner-Laws, they made a mutiny anent the Burial, till the Corps were sighted; yet the Pannal caused bury the Corps that same night without shewing them. The Corps being raised by order, and incision being made, whereby the Strangling did clearly appear, and the Corps being dressed clean, and Linen put on, there did appear no blood; but to take off all suspition, the Corps were lifted up, and the Night cap being wrong put on, it was altered and changed, and thereafter the Corps were laid down without any blood upon the Linen; and the Pannal (who to this time had never touched his Father's Corps) being required to assist to lift the Body into the Coffin, having taken his Father by the right side of the Head with his left hand, James Row bear∣ing the left, the Pannal's hand was altogether blooding, as if his Hand had been put in a Vessel of Blood, which notwithstanding of all his Impudent resolution to the contrary, had that horrible impression, and conviction upon him, that he let his Father's Head fall to the ground, and cryed out, O God, and run away and went to a Desk in the Church, where he lay groaning and in confusion, but durst never return to touch the Corps, and as there can no na∣tural reason be given, but an ordinar and wonderful Providence of God, in this kind of discoveries of Murder: So the Fact was never more evident, and sure, though half a dozen of Persons were bearing the Corps, no mans hands were bloody but the Pannals, and the Corps being two intire days in the Grave, in that Weather and Season, the Blood by the course of nature was become stagnat and congeal'd, so that the former tossing, and lifting of the Corps, and even the incision itself had occasioned no such effusion, but only some water or gore; but upon the first touch of the Pannal the Murderer, there appeared abundance of liquid florid Blood, and though this per se might not be sufficient, and as Mattheus is cited, it should not inferr Torture, yet Mattheus acknowledges that most part do sustain this, as a violent pre∣sumption oft times experimented, yet in his opinion it is not sufficient for Torture, Because Torture being in it self a punishment, it cannot be used, except where there is semiplena probatio, or where the Conscience of the Judge is satisfied, as to the truth of the Crime, and therefore uses an extraordinar course, to extort an confession, which proves that this presumption is semi∣plena probatio per se according to their own grounds. And whereas it is alledged, that Capital punishment cannot be infered from conjectures, but from clear and positive testimonies. It is answered, that the Lex. vlt: Cod: de probationibus, clearly states that probation is either, Testibus, tabulis instrumentis documentis & indiciis. And Mattheus states a particular title upon this single question, Cap. 6. Titulo 15 deprobationibus, and does most positively determin that Crimes are to be proven Documentis, Argumentis & Indiciis. And it is most evident, that the probation which arises from the nature of the thing, which is incapable to be soffisticate, or imposed upon, as Witnesses may be, that kind of probation is the surest, be∣cause it is always the same, and admits no variation: It's true, and it is ac∣knowledged that Argumenta & Indicia must be clara & evidentia, and pro∣bation
being Quod facit fidem Judici, every mans experience tells him, that the complication and conjunction of so many evident qualifications, though none of them per se were sufficient, yet being all of them joyned, it induces a greater certainty, than two Witnesses positively deponing upon the Fact. And therefore the evidence of the probation belongs to the Inquest, and the relevancy that these Articles conjoyn'd, or any part of them are sufficient to infer the Crime, belongs to the Judge. As to the Presumptions offered for the exculpation of the Pannal, they are not at all relevant; for though so horrid a Murder is not to be presumed a∣gainst Nature, yet being proved, or so strongly evinced, it does but con∣clude the Pannal's greater Guilt; and suppose that Sir James Standsfield was formerly Melancholy, and had been Frantick in the year 1679, yet it is known he recovered his Health, and was of a compos'd, sedat temper of mind for many years thereafter, and was as capable and diligent about his Affairs, these many years, as he had been formerly, and was so considered and employed by the wisest men in the Kingdom; and at the time of his Death there was no Sickness, or returning of Frenzie upon him, but all that Week he had composedly done his Affairs; and did upon the Saturday, when he went Home, discourse rationally upon all the Subjects that occur∣red: But it being so clearly documented and proven that he was Strangled, it is a ridiculous conceit, and there remains no possibility that after he was Strangled, he walked out and drowned himself. And as to that Presumpti∣on, that the Pannal rendered himself Prisoner, it was indeed suitable to the rest of his Impudence, and he did not render himself till after the Order to apprehend him was intimate to him, when he could not Escape, and when he was under Observation, and there did not want Project in fixing upon this Impudence when he could not Escape, as an qualification of Innocence, that he would render. Sir David Thoirs without repetition of the Replyes made by His Majesties Advocat, doth make his Duply to the foresaids Replyes, and every mem∣ber thereof, in order as follows, viz. TO the First, Anent the Treasonable Words, the Pannals Procurators oppon their former Answers, and the Act of Parliament whereupon that part of the Ditty is founded, being only in order to such Treasonable Speeches advisedly spoken. The constant tract of the Pannal's life, in drink∣ing his Majesties good Health at all occasions, and offering to adventure his life in his Service in the last Rebellion, sufficiently demonstrats, that if any such Expression did escape the Pannel, as it is denyed, the same was only rash and unadvised, and not deliberate and advised, as is required by the Act of Parliament, to infer the pains libelled; and the qualifications added by my Lord Advocat, bearing, that the Pannal did conjure the persons then present to Secrecy, demonstrats, that the Pannal was ex incontinenti hearti∣ly sorrowful and penitent for the same. And it's clear by that excellent Law of the Cod, the words whereof are, Si quis Imperatori maledixerit, si ex insania miserando, si ex temeritate, & petulantia temnenda, si ex animo in∣juriandi ad principem remittendum, which demonstrats, that by the Com∣mon Law, such an rash and unadvised Expression was never to be laid hold on to infer a capital Punishment, where the Person alledged, expresser there∣of, was not otherways suspect of Disloyalty. 2o. Repeats the Defence as to Crimes alledged committed abroad, and it were against reason, and equity, that persons for one and the self-same Crime, should be subject to the punishments of several Jurisdictions, where
the punishment of the saids Crimes are different: But seeing my Lord Ad∣vocat declares he hath no Probation for these alledged Crimes, but Certifi∣cats and Affidavits, they cannot be obtruded as a part of the Libel, because the saids pretended Certificats and Affidavits, are neither insert in the Libel, or given out to the Pannal, and all Crimes are to be proven testibus, non testi∣moniis; and if the custom of Affidavits should be introduced in this Court, all Pannals (how innocent soever) might be murdered, by being deprived of their unanswerable Objections against the Granters of these Affidavits, &c. and therefore they cannot be sustained as a qualification to load the Pannal, or make the Inquest have a prejudicat opinion of him. 3o. As to my Lord Advocat's Reply anent the Act of Indemnity, the for∣mer Defence and Act of Indemnity is opponed, and bears expresly Murders, Robberies, Slaughters, and all other Crimes committed against His Majesty, and Laws of the Kingdom, either by Word, Writ, or Deed, which undoubt∣edly excludes all alledged Crimes, said, done, or committed by the Pannal before that time, and this favour & gratia principis, is to be ampliat and extended, and not restricted, and all His Majesties Judges and Officers of State are commanded to sustain the same, according to the most ample In∣terpretations for the Pannal, that the Words will allow. 4o. The pretence that the Pannal was of the quality of a Burger, or a Ba∣ron, is most irrelevant, the Pannal having no visible Fortune at the time, and as my Lord Advocat himself acknowledgeth, no expectation of any Fortune whatsoever, so that if Barons, Burgars, Liferenters, Woodserters, and likewise these who have nothing in possession at the time, shall be seclu∣ded from the benefit of that Indemnity, it is scarce intelligible, to whom, and for what cause the same was granted. 3o. And as to that part of the Reply, bearing, that this was a privat Injury, and so not comprehended within the Act of Indemnity, the former Defence is opponed, and all pretence of pri∣vat Injury was taken away by dissimulation or death. As to the pretence that the Reconciliation can be no defence against the Libel, as to vindicta publica, and that the Letter whereupon the Defence is founded doth not import a Dissimulation. It is Duplyed, That the Act of Parliament being an Comminatory Law, and principally intended in favours of Parents, the same was never yet made use of, and it were very hard to make use of the same to deprive a Parent of his Child, for any rash or passio∣nate Expression, especially where upon Repentance the Father had remitted the Injury; but the Father being in effect Judge of the Injury, his remitting the same ought at least to Assoilzie the Child, from any capital conclusion. And as to the alledged habitual Cursing, the same is denyed, and the former De∣fence founded upon the Act of Indemnity is repeated and opponed, and the Libel is opponed, which doth not bear habitual Cursing, but particular Acts at particular Times. And as to the Qualifications alledged by my Lord Advocat, for clearing that the Defunct Sir James Standsfield was murdered, the Pannal is truly sor∣ry, that for his own Defence, and for clearing of his own Innocence his Lawers should be necessitate to plead any thing relating to his Fathers Infir∣mities, or way and manner of his Death. But it is duplyed, That the whole Presumptions adduced by my Lord Advocat are allanerly fallacious Conje∣ctures, and can neither be separatim, or complexly relevant to infer any such thing, because 1o. That the Minister did hear a whispering noise, and was thereby terrified, his Terror and Consternation having (as he himself pre∣tends) put him in a Disorder and Confusion, he was thereby rendered inca∣pable to observe or judge of any thing that happened. 2o. That the Body
was swiming above Water, imports nothing, the Defunct having a great Coat of thick Cloth about him, which was sufficient to keep him floating a∣bove. 3o. The pretence that there was no Water in the Defuncts Body when the Chirurgions visited the same, imports nothing because the Defuncts Body having been several times stirred before that time, by which the water might have run out, as it actually did (in case there was any water within it). 4o. Albeit where a Man is drowned unwillingly, and endeavors to breathe, so long as he can, his breathing may suck-in the Water; Yet if a Man intend to drown himself, he will certainly endeavour all means for quick dispatch of himself, and thereby keep in his Breath, and the keeping in of the Breath after that manner was sufficient, both to keep the Body floating, and the water from coming in. 5o. To put the matter beyond all question, the Defunct was lying in the water a considerable space from the Bank; And albeit the Ice was not so strong as to have carried a Child, yet the Ice was whole and intire betwixt the Defunct and the Bank, which demonstrats, that the Defunct had jump∣ed in from the Bank to that place where he was lying. 6o. As to that pre∣tence, that there was Blood about the Defuncts neck, all lapper'd and bruised before incision was made, the Defunct being pulled out of the water, by an great Cleik, the touching of the Neck with the Cleik, when his breath was just gone out, was sufficient to have made the Blood where that part was to lapper and congeal. 7o. As to the declarations of the Physicians, and Chi∣rurgions, they are only declarations ex auditu, and upon report of one or two Chirurgions, and hath no foundation, but the ignorance or knowledge of the saids two Reporters; neither can any such declarations be obtruded against the Pannal, because not given out with the Libel; But whatever may be in∣ferred from these Presumptions, whether the Defunct was Murdered or not, the same does not concern the Pannal, unless his accession to the Murder were instructed, as is impossible it can be. As to the qualifications alledged by my Lord Advocat, for fixing the Murder, or accession thereto upon the Pannal; It is duplyed to the first, That the Pannal's alledged vitious Life, and the story at Treves, his being Drunk in Prison, and Threatning to cut Throats upon small provocations, the same are extrinsick to the Lybel, and cannot be respected. 2o. As to the alledged threatning used in James Smith's House, the Lybel is op∣poned, bearing these expressions, to have been used in the year 1684, or some year preceeding; And therefore the former defence founded upon the Indemnity, is repeated, and opponed. And whereas my Lord Advocat pretends, that minae praecedentes cum damno sequuto, is sufficient either to fix the guilt upon the Person who used the Threats, or at least to burden him with the probation, that another commited the Crime. It is Duplyed, 1o. That My Lord Advocat's Position is absolutly denyed, unless he can in∣struct some other positive accession against the Pannal, and these pretended Threats being taken away, not only by the Act of Indemnity, but likeways by dissimulation, which is not only offered to be inferred from the Letter made mention of in the Defence, but likeways by the Defuncts owning, re∣ceiving, intertaining, furnishing, and providing for the Pannal, in every thing suitable as his eldest Son, the same doth undoubtedly take away all pretence that can be founded upon threatning, so many years preceeding; and by no Law can the Pannal be burdened to prove who were either A∣ctors, or in accession to his Fathers Murder. As to the 2d qualification bearing, that the Defunct said to several Per∣sons, that the Pannal offered to invade him (denying the same) the Fa∣ther's
assertion could not infer a Crime against the Pannal, unless the Crime it self were otherwayes proven by witnesses, and the same is Libel∣ed to have been said by Sir James before the Act of Indemnity. And Sir James's other assertion, that he was in trouble, for fear of prejudice from his Family, cannot infer a Crime, especially against the Pannal; and far less can it be proven by the Relict and the other Son, who in Sir James's ap∣prehension were designing mischief against him, and for their own vindica∣tion, they would certainly depone partially against the Pannal. And the same is repeated against the other expressions alledged spoken by the Mother; And witnesses cannot be received to prove what another witness said. As to the pretence, that the Pannal refused to sup with his Father the night before his Death. It is Duplyed, the Pannal was not at all in use to sup, except on Sundays night. And the Pannal had no kindness for the Minister, Because he and others of his Gang, had endeavoured to keep up discord be∣twixt him and his Father. As to the alledged Bleeding of the Corps, the former Defences are op∣poned; And albeit the Pannal did help to lift his Fathers Corps before the incision, yet no Blood did appear till long thereafter that the incision was made, and the Pannal did fall to grip that part of his Father's Head where the Incision was. So that the Blood falling from the wound, can neither be a Ground nor Presumption for guilt; And though the Pannal was surprised to see his Father's Blood, Yet the same did only proceed from natural Duty and Affection, and not from any apprehension of Guilt. And these qualifica∣tions being all Libel'd and Debated upon, It is humbly desired for the Pan∣nal, that the Lords of Justiciary would give a separat Interloquitor upon every particular qualification. Sir Patrick Hume for the Pannal adds, That as to the point of Treason, It is offered to be proven, that it was when he was Drunk, and after Cups, and is so presumed, especially it being, as it is acknowledged by the Libel, in a Drunken company. 2o. As to the Act of Indemnity, It is extended to all Crimes except the Arch-bishop's Murder, and exceptio firmat regulat, &c. And the Act bears not that Clause excepting other Crimes, which uses to be excepted. 3o. As to the qualifications condescended on in my Lord Advocat's an∣swer, either they are Libel'd, and so oppones the former answer; And if they be not Libel'd, they cannot be considered as qualifications. 4o. Whereas it is alledged, That the Pannal was in use to threaten to cut Throats, when in passion, the Argument is retorted: For though he threat∣ned, nothing followed; And so his Threatnings were but verba jactantia. 5o. As to the citation out of Mattheus, that parties may be punished upon presumptions. It is answered, That the Case there stated is where the Per∣son who committed the Slaughter, was apprehended in the place where it was committed, That he was all bloody and with a bloody Sword, àn∣swerable to the Wound, and that he became pale when he was apprehen∣ded, and that he made no answer, but in terrour fled away, which are such Acts as do evidently make appear the Slaughter, and could admit of no o∣ther construction, but that cannot be pretended in this Case, where all the Presumptions are remote and extrinsick, and even in the Case instanced by Mattheus, and others of that Nature, they are only to take effect in order to an Arbitrary, but not a capital Punishment, which is the opinion of all Law∣ers, who ever wrote upon the subject, and particularly Muscard, de prob: con∣clus. 123. Numb. 30. and 31. where the question is stated, an plures praesum∣ptiones conjunguntur, in order to inferr a capital punishment? And he con∣cludes
in the negative as a general conclusion by all Lawers, but only to in∣ferr an arbitrary Punishment. As to the bleeding of the Body, It is offered to be proven, that the Pannal touched his Father's Body before the Incision, and it did not bleed. THe Lords, Justice General, and Commissioners of Justiciary, Having considered the Libel, pursued by His Majestie's Advocat against Phi∣lip Standsfield the Pannal: And the first part thereof, anent the Treason li∣bel'd, they find the samen as it is lybel'd, relevant to inferr the pain of Trea∣son. And as to the Pannal's cursing of his Father, mentioned in the Indite∣ment; They find these Expressions, or either of them, viz. the Devil take him, the Devil rive him, God damn him, relevant to inferr the pain of Death: And repells the Defence founded upon the Act of Indemnity, and finds the Pannal is not under or below the quality therein specified. As to the Pannal's murthering of his Father mentioned in the Inditement, they found the Libel as it is lybelled and qualified relevant to inferr the pain of Death, and remits the same with the qualifications lybel'd to the knowledge of the Assise, and allowes Witnesses to be led for the Pannal's proving his Father to have been Melancholy the day before the committing of the Murder, and remits to the Assise to consider the Import thereof, if it be proven, and repells the whole other Defences proponed for the Pannal. The Lords continues the Dyet against the said Philip Standsfield, till to morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon: And ordains him to be car∣ried back to Prison, and the Witnesses and Assisers to attend, ilk Person under the pain of 200 Merks. Edinburgh the seventh of February, 1688. Philip Standsfield Prisoner, being this day entered on Pannal, dilated, in∣dyted and accused for the Treasonable drinking of the King's confusion, cur∣sing his Father, and for the cruel and unnatural murdering of him in manner mentioned in his Ditty. The Interloquitor above-written was this day read again in presence of the Pannal, and the Assisers afternamed, viz. William Bailly of Lamingtoun. James Glen, Stationer. Alexander Reid, elder, Goldsmith. Charles Charters, Merchand. David Hepburn of Humby. Edward Gillespy, Merchand. Robert Sandilands, Merchand. Samuel Moncrief, Merchand. Thomas Lendall, Merchand. James Cleiland, Merchand. Hepburn of Beinstoun. William Paton, Merchand. George Braithwood, Stabler. John Marshal, Merchand. Alexander Edgar, Chirurgion in Had∣dingtoun. The Assise lawfully sworn, no Objection of the Law in the contrary. His Majesties Advocat for Probation adduced the Witnesses after deponing, viz. John Robertson late Servitor to Sir James Standsfield of New-milns, aged twenty four years, unmarried, purged of malice, prejudice, hatred, ill will, and partial Counsel, and solemnly sworn, Depones, a little time before harvest last, the Pannal being in the Kitchin of New-milns, in the deceast Sir James Standsfield's house, where the Deponent was likewise present, he saw the Pan∣nal Philip Standsfield take a Cup of Ale, and heard him say: There is the Pope's confusion, the Antichrists, the Chancelours, and the Kings confusion, and put the Cup to his Head, and drink a little, and then gave it to Samuel
Spofforth, and commanded him to drink it, and made him drink it on his knees; depones, that there were likewise besides Samuel Spofforth, Jeremy Smith, Agnes Bruce and Elspeth Jameson; and depones, that Philip Stands∣field the Pannal was not drunk at the time; Depones, that at the naming of the several Confusions above-mentioned, he still drank a little of the cup; And this is the Truth as he shall answer to God: The Deponent further depones, that he said to the Pannal, after the drinking of the saids Confusions, that it was Treason, and he answered, Ye dog what are you concerned; ye do not un∣derstand to whom ye speak. Sic subscribitur, John Robertson. Agnes Bruce, Servant to the deceast Sir James Standsfield, aged twenty four years, unmarried, purged and sworn, Depones, That a little before Harvest last, she being in the Kitchin of New-milns with Philip Stands∣field the Pannal, she saw him take a Cup of Ale, and drink the confusion of the Pope, and the King, and heard him bid Samuel Spofforth sit down on his Knees and drink the same, which accordingly he did, after this the Deponent went up Stairs, and knows no more what past at that time, but heard they drank more confusions; Depones, that about a week after it be∣ing talked in the house, that he had drunk the confusions aforesaid, he said to the Deponent, God damn him, if he knew who divulged it, he would be their Death: And this is the Truth as she shall answer to God, depones she cannot write. Sic subscribitur, Linlithgow. Samuel Spofforth, late Servitor to Sir James Standsfield of New-milns, a∣ged 19 years, unmarried, purged and sworn, Depones, that a little before Harvest last, the Deponent was in the Kitchin of New-milns with Philip Standsfield the Pannal, where he heard him drink a confusion to the Pope, Antichrist, and the King, and to the Devil, and the Pannal prest the Deponent to drink the same confusions upon his knees; Depones, John Robertson, Ag∣nes Bruce, Jeremy Smith and Elspheth Jameson were all likewise present at that time, and that these confusions were drunk severally: And this is the Truth as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, Samuel Spofforth. John Robertson above design'd being Re-examined, purged and sworn, Depones, That the Deponent being at Morum Castle after Harvest last, in order to give a call to a Minister, the Deponent having met with Phi∣lip Standsfield the Pannal, he said to him, Ye are a wise lad, if ye have subscribed that Bond, the Devil take him, and particularly, the Devil take his Father, and named his Father; depon'd, that at another time in the midst of Harvest last, the Deponent and Sir James Standsfield the Pannal's Father being going to Smeitoun with a Minister, the Pannal ask∣ed him, Where he and his Father was going? and the Deponent an∣swered, that he was going to Smeitoun with his Father; And the Pannal Philip Standsfield said, Devil, let never one of them come back again, Horse nor Man: Depones further, That several times, and frequently, when the Deponent has been seeking the Pannel to come to Dinner with his Father, the Pannels ordinar Answer was, the Devil damn him, and you both, and Devil rive him, for I will not go to him, and if he had a sixpence a day, he would not go near him, for his Father girned upon him like a Sheeps-head in a tongs, and that he has heard him say some∣times, God damn his Father: And this is the Truth as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, John Robertson.
William Scot Clothier in New-milns, Aged 30 years, Married, Purged and Sworn, Depones, That betwixt Michaelmass and Martimass last, the Pannal Philip Standsfield having come to the Deponent's Shop, and asked for some Tobacco, the Deponant said to Philip, his Father would not let him want Money to buy Tobacco; and the Pannal Philip said, the Devil take him and his Father both, for there never came an honest man out of Tork-shire: De∣pones, his Wife was present with him, when that Discourse past: Depones, he cannot write. And this is the truth as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur. Linlithgow. Agnes Bruce above-designed being Re-examined, Purged and Sworn, De∣pones, That she did hear the Pannal usually vow and swear he would kill any person that offended him; and that the Pannal did haunt much with Janet Johnston, George Thomson and his Wife, and that he went frequently out of his Fathers House after Supper to these persons; and further Depones, that she has heard the Pannal frequently curse his Father, and bid the Devil damn him, and rive him, and swell him; and that she has frequently heard him express his hatred and abhorrence of his Father, and that he could not abide to see his Father: further Depones, that the Munday at Night before Sir James came to Edinburgh, the last time he was in it, being about a Fourth∣night before his Death, the Deponent was ordered to call the Pannal to his Mother after he was gone to his Chamber, and that accordingly she did it, and when the Pannal came down, the Deponent left him with his Mother alone, and when she was without the Door, she heard him say to his Mo∣ther several times, God damn him if he did it not; and desired his Mother to take a good Heart, for as long as he had, she should not want: Depones, she knows not what he meaned by these words, but knows there had been a little quarrel betwixt Sir James and his Lady that same Night: Further Depones, that on Tuesday thereafter, when Sir James Standsfield was going in to Edinburgh, she did hear Philip Standsfield the Pannal say in his Mothers Chamber (his Father not being present,) God let him never return, God let him never see his Fathers face again, the Devil go with him, the Devil rive him, and take him away; and that there was no body in the Roum at the time but the Pannal and his Mother, and the Deponent was at the Door: Further Depones, that about a month before, Sir James having reproved the Pannal, upon the occasion of an Accompt given in by William Anderson Brewer, she did hear the Pannal say in his Mothers Chamber (Sir James not being present,) God damn him if he should not do ten times worse, and that he could not endure to see his Fathers face, and that he had hated his Father these six or seven years: Further Depones, that about a Fourth-night or twenty days before Sir James his death, it being said that Philip was to go to Town with his Father, she heard him say, he would be hang'd ere he went with him, let him go, the Devil go with him, and let him never return, and this likewise in his Mothers Chamber, and in her presence: Depones, the Pannal did ordinarly shift occasions of being in his Fathers company: De∣pones, that the Friday before Sir James his death, she knows the Pannal and Janet Johnstoun were a considerable time together in the Pannal's Chamber, where the Deponent heard Janet Johnstoun's tongue, but doth not know if George Thomson and his Wife were with them: Depones, that on the Wed∣nesday before Sir James his death, Philip having cursed some of the Servants, the Deponent said to him, God be thanked, he was not their Master; and that he answered her with an Oath, she knew not how soon he might be their Master: Further Depones, that she thought Sir James not so merry as his ordinar the night before his death, but that he conveyed Mr. Bell to his
Chamber, and thereafter came down to his own; and the Deponent having desired to speak with Sir James, his Servant John Robertson told her she could not, because his Chamber-door was shut, and he was gone to Bed; and that she did then see light in his Roum, and when she was going away, found the Hall-door which was without his Chamber-door shut, and that the Hall-door was not usually closed in the night-time except Sir James had done it himself, and which he did but once in two or three Nights: Depones, that on the Saturday's night when Sir James came home, he did go to his Ladies Chamber, where he stayed not a quarter of an hour, and that his Lady fell a quarreling of him for going to another House before he came there, and that the Deponent came out of the Chamber, and knows not what more past there: Depones, the next morning, when Sir James was mist, the Deponent went in to his Roum to put on a Fire, and found the Bed better spread up than it used to be, and the Curtains more drawen about it, and the Candle which usually was at the Bed-head, she found it standing on a Chair at the Bed-foot. And further Depones, that when the Defunct's body was bring∣ing up to the House, the Deponent would have had him brought to his own Chamber, but Philip swore that the Body should not enter there, for he had not died like a Man, but like a Beast: Depones, that the Body was then put in the Walk-miln (but knows not if Philip caused do it,) and that the Body from that was brought to a Cellar within the Closs where there was very little light: Depones, that she did not see any water come out of his mouth, and that when the Deponent lifted up the Linen-sheet, which was over him in the Cellar, some of them caused let it down again, for it was not fit to let the Body be seen. Depones, that Janet Johnstoun was present with the Bo∣dy in the Cellar with the rest; and though it was known that neither Sir James nor his Lady would look upon her for a good time before, nor was she openly seen about the House, yet that morning she went to the Ladies Chamber, as soon as the Body was taken out, and the Deponent was present and saw her come in, and well enough taken with: Depones, she heard Phi∣lip after his Father's death, Greet and Cry, but saw no Tears: Depones, im∣mediatly after his Fathers body was found, he would have forced his Fathers Chamber-door it being shut, but the Key being gotten, it was opened and he entred in, and first took his Fathers Gold and Money out of his pocket, and then got the Keys, and searched the Cabinet, and that within an hour after his Father was brought from the Water, he got the Buckles of his Father's shoes, and put them in his: Depones, that on the Munday after Sir James's death, the Lady and Janet Johnstoun having quarrelled together about some remains of the Holland of the Woonding-sheet, Philip came down out of his own Chamber, and the Deponent heard him say to Janet Johnstoun, hold your peace when I command you, for he would reward her well for the kind∣ness she had done to him at that time: Depones, that when the order came from Edinburgh to raise the Corps again, the Deponent did meet George Thomson the Taylor, and perceived him shaking and trembling, and asked him what troubled him? and that his answer was, he heard the blackest Newes that ever he heard in his life, for Sir James's body was to be raised a∣gain, and said he would sew no more in the House of New-milns for the World, and carried the Mournings to his own House: Depones, she knows nothing of false Keys made use of about the House, only she heard the Lady say, that there were: Depones, Philip had no lockfast place in the House, except a little Coffer, and that it once being opened, the Deponent did see several Keys within it, and that he offered once the Key of one of the Roums to the De∣ponet, but the Deponent took it not, because she had the ordinar Key of the
Roum: Depones, that Philip was in use to ly alone, but that after his Fa∣thers death, he would not ly in a Roum alone at New-milns, and that he de∣clared to the Deponent that he was afraid to be alone in a Roum, either night or day, and that he sleept not the night after his Father died, and that he should not go into the Roum where his Father lay, if once he had the Cabinet out of it: Depones, that a short time before Sir James died, the La∣dy having fallen in a Swond, and the Deponent having told Philip of it, Philip came to his Mothers Chamber, and that his Mother told him then, that he was like in a short time to lose his Mother; and that he answered in the Deponents hearing, that his Father should be dead first: And depones, that some few days thereafter, in his Mothers Chamber again, and in the Deponents hearing, he renewed the same Words with an Oath: Further depones, that two Nights after Sir James's Death, the Lady told to the De∣ponent, that something then came in her Mind which she had heard, to wit, that Philip, before he went to London, when he was in his Pomp, ha∣ving heard that Sir James was to give his Estate to his second Son, in the House of James Smith in the Nungate, had vowed to kill his Brother, and the like, or little less to his Father; and that thereafter, when they were coming into Edinburgh, the Lady renewed again to the Deponent, the same Words, and added, what if they should put her Bairn in Prison. And this is the Truth, as she shall answer to God. Depones she cannot write, Sic Subscribitur. Linlithgow. John Shand, sometimes Servitor to Sir James Standsfield, Aged 43 Years, unmarried, purged and sworn, depones, that a little after Philip Standsfield, the Pannals Marriage, the Pannal and the Deponent being in James Smiths House, in Nungate, of Haddingtoun, the Pannal did expostulat with the Deponent, that his Father dealt too narrowly with him, he being then married; and the Deponent told the Pannal that his Father was in straits, and exhorted him to be dutiful to his Father; thereafter the Pannal said, if I knew my Father would give his Estate to my Brother John, I would cut his Throat, and the Land-lord of the House being by, and present, and surprized, cryed out, God preserve me, what means the Man; the Land-lord understanding by the Word, His, his Father; And though the Deponent took the Expression in the same sense, as James Smith did; yet the Depo∣nent endeavoured to excuse it, by saying it was not his Father that he mean∣ed, but his Brother, or his man Donald; and the Pannal being present, said nothing for clearing of the Expression; whereupon the Deponent went a∣way, and left the Pannal, and could not endure to stay longer in his Com∣pany: Depones, the night before Sir James's Death, being the Friday, the Deponent was with Sir James in his Chamber, in Edinburgh, where the Defunct was reading a Sermon-book, and appeared to be sad, and said to the Deponent, I have no Comfort in my Wife and Family. And this is the Truth, as he shal answer to God, Sic subscribitur. John Shand. Mr. Roderick Mckenzie Advocate, Being solemnly Sworn, and Purged, depones, that about eight dayes before Sir James Standfield's Death; The Deponent and he having met in the Parliament Closs, the Defunct invited him to take his morning Draught. And when they were gone to Mr. Sheil's House, the Deponent perceiving him to be in some concern, the Deponent asked him, what troubled him? The Defunct answered, that he had no sa∣tisfaction at Home; whereupon the Deponent said, that People reported that he was partly the occasion of it, having disherished his Son the Pan∣nal, and acquainted him therewith: And the Defunct answered, ye do not know my Son, for he is the greatest Debauch in the Earth: And that which
troubles me most is, that he twice attempted my own Person: And this is the truth as he shall answer to God, Sic subscribitur. Rod. Mckenzie. Archibald Dumbar Merchant in Edinburgh, aged 26 years, Married, pur∣ged, and Sworn, Depones that the Deponent having met with the deceast Sir James Standsfield at Culter: But he does not remember positively the time, but it was either in the year of this Kings Parliament, or the Harvest before, and Sir James and the Deponent, and some other company being in an Roum: Sir James was discoursing of his Sons undutyfulness, and with∣in a little while having heard a shot at the utter-door of the house, and the Deponent, and others offering to go out to see what the matter was. Sir James was unwilling to let them, least they should come to hasard. And thereafter having heard another Shot, they did offer to go down again, and Sir James still disswaded them, and said, that it might be his distracted Son Philip. And they having enquired, if he was in the Country, and how he came to fear any harm from him, Sir James said, he believed he was in the Country, and that in his going South, he had followed him to Lothian burn, and hot two Pistols, first one, and then another at him, and if it had not been that Sir James was well horsed, and his Son Philip upon a work-horse, he had killed him. And Samuel Menzies having said he was sure there could not be Ball in them. Sir James said, he had gotten too many proofs of his Son's unnaturality to him, that he had no will to be in his reverence. Depones that Sir James all that night went not to Bed, and the Deponent fat up with him, and conveyed him into Edinburgh. And this is the truth as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur. Archibald Dunbar. Mr. William Clerk Advocat, purged, and sworn, Depones, that having frequent occasions to be with Sir James Standsfield and he having desired him to draw a disposition of his Estate to his Son John. Sir James did com∣plain of his Son Philip's undutyfulness to him. And the Deponent having diswaded him to do it, since his Son Philip might be reclaimed: Sir James said, no, for he had no expectation of it; for when he was at the Lead-hills, there was some Pistol shot at him, which he was sure came from his Son Philip. And this is the truth as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, William Clerk. Mr. Iohn Bell Minister of the Gospel, aged 40 years, Solutus, purged and sworn, produces a written Declaration signed under his hand, upon what he knows relating to the Murder. And Depones the same is truth as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur. John Bell. Follows the enor of the said Declaration. The declaration of Mr. John Bell, in answer to several interrogatores pro∣posed by his Majesties Advocat before the Lords of the Committee of the Council. Imprimis, I declare, that at Sir James Standfield's earnest desire, I went from this Town with him to New-milns. And that by the way I discern∣ed nothing but sound Judgment, and reason in Sir James, for his discourse was both rational and pertinent, and that both at Supper that night, and after Supper his discourse was rational, and his carriage most civil, and he was pleased to accompany me to my Chamber, and sat with me there (as I supposed) until it was about ten a Clock at night, discoursing pertinently, and to good purpose. 2o. I declare, that having slept but little I was awakened in Fear by a Cry (as I supposed) and being waking I heard for a time a great Dinn, and confused noise of several voices, and Persons some times walking, which af∣frighted me (supposing them to be evil wicked Spirits) And I apprehended
the Voices to be near the Chamber door sometimes, or in the Transe, or Stairs, and sometimes below, which put me to arise in the night and bolt the Chamber door further, and to recommend my self by Prayer for protection, and preservation to the Majestie of God; and having gone again to Bed, I heard these voices continue, but more laigh till within a little time, they came about to the Chamber window; And then I heard the voice as high as before, which encreased my fear, and made me rise again to look over the window, to see whether they were men or women; but the window would not come up for me, which window looked to the Garden, and Wa∣ter, whither the voices went on till I heard them no more, only towards the morning I heard walking on the stairs, and in the Transe above that Chamber where I was lying. 3o. I declare that I told the Women who put on the fire in my Chamber that Sabbath morning, that I had rested little that night through dinn I heard, and that I was sure there were evil Spirits about that house that night. 4o. I declare that about an hour after day, Philip came to my Chamber and asked if Sir James came to that Chamber this morning, and told me that he had been seeking him upon the banks of the water; unto which I replyed, I have not seen your Father, but what mean ye by the Banks of the water? whereupon Philip without answering went down stairs immediatly, and within a little time, I followed to see what he meaned, and having gone without the Gate, and up the Cawsey that leads to the Manufactory; One came running, and said, they had found Sir James lying in the water, where∣upon I was stricken with such astonishment, fear, and trembling, that I could go no further, but returned trembling to the Chamber, and having sitten down on the bed side, I said to an honest man who accompanied me, this is the saddest day that ever I saw; my affrightment in the night was terri∣fying to me, but this is more grievous; and having gone to an honest mans house, where I took horse that morning, I said, if the Majestie of God did ever permit the devil, and his instruments, to do a honest man wrong, then Sir James Standsfield has received wrong this last night, which the Lord will discover in his good time. 5o. I declare that after my return from Morum, that Sabbath evening, Philip told me that he had advertised several Freinds at Edinburgh, and that he was expecting the Commissary amongst others that night, whereupon I commended what he had done, in sending for such intelligent Persons, and that for two reasons (1) Because it was necessary his Fathers body should be sighted. (2) Because they could advise him about his Burial. Philip an∣swered that he was seen by these that took him out of the water. But I replyed that was not enough, for the Murder committed was either a vio∣lent Murder, or a distracted Murder; and having described what a distra∣cted Murder was (upon Philips relateing some distemper his Father had been in some years formerly) I said, That I conceived no Person, could come to such a high Act of frenzie, to do such a thing, but it would be known on him, many hours, yea some days before; But I could testifie, that Sir James was in his right reason yesternight at ten a clock, wherefore I inclin'd to think it was a violent Murder committed by wicked Spirits; And so advi∣sed that the Corps might be sighted by the nearest Physicians, and Freinds, and the honest men living in that Town; nevertheless they went and buri∣ed Sir James that night, without either acquainting me, or several honest Persons who lived in the place. Mr. John Bell depones his above written de∣claration is truth, as he shall answer to God, Sic subscribitur. Linlithgow. John Bell.
Sir Robert Sinclar of Steinstoun, purged and sworn, Depones, Sir Iames Standsfield being at the Deponent's House, told the Deponent, that he re∣grated that his Son Philip had mispent his Time and Money, and when he came Home from London, he was ashamed to tell how he came on him in his Chamber, at London; And this is the Truth as he shall answer to God, Sic suscribitur. Ro: Sinclar. James Murehead Chirurgion, aged 32 years, married, purged and sworn, Depones, that after the Deponent and James Craufurd Chirurgion had open∣ed the Corps, about the Neck, and sewed it up again, and removed the foul Linen, and put on again the clean Linens, in doing whereof they were ob∣liged to shake the Body to and fro, and move the head back and foreward: The Deponent desired that the Friends might lift the Body, and put it in the Coffin, and that the Pannal having come and lift up the Head, he did let it fall upon the Table suddenly, and that it made a considerable noise at the falling, and that the Pannal retired back quickly rubbing his Hands on his Breast, and crying, O God! O God! and some such other Words, and that the Deponent being astonished thereat, looked to the Corps, and as the Pan∣nal did take away his hand from it, did see it darting out Blood through the Linnen, from the left-side of the Neck which the Pannal touched, and that the Deponent was amazed at the sight, partly through the darting out of the Blood, and partly through the apprehension he had of the Murder. De∣pones, he saw no Body touch the left-side of the Defunct's Head the time it bled, but the Pannal: Depones, that as soon as the Deponent recovered out of his amazement, he cryed to his Boy to give the Pannal some Triacle wa∣ter, which he did; but Depones he did not see Philip the Pannal return a∣gain to the Body of his Father: Depones when the Deponent and the other Chirurgion were putting on the clean Linens, and stirring and moving the Head and Craig, he saw no Blood at all. And this is the Truth as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, Ja. Murehead. James Murehead, and James Craufurd Chirurgions give in their Report and Declaration in Write, anent the Murder of Umquhile Sir James Standsfield, which they renewed upon Oath, in presence of the Justices and Assisers, and whereof the Tenor follows: Edinburgh, December 1. 1687. November 30. 1687. We viewed the Corps in Mo∣rum Church. We under Subscribers James Craufurd and James Murehead Chirurgions in Edinburgh, having order from Sir John Dalrymple his Majesties Advocat to go to Morum, and there to take up the Corps of Sir James Standsfield, and to sight and view the same exactly, and if need were to open up the Body, and to consider, whether there appeared any evidence of Wounds, Bruises, or Strangling upon the Corps, besides what might have happened by his fal∣ling or drowning in the water, &c. In obedience thereto, we caused take up the said Corps, and in presence of Philip Standsfield, Mr. Andrew Melvil Mi∣nister of Morum, James Hamilton Writer to the Signet, James Row, and Alex∣ander Campbel Merchands in Edinburgh, Ʋmphray Spurway, James Dick, James Mitchel, and John Robertson Indwellers in New-milns, and some others having with all possible exactness viewed the Corps; We observed the Face a little swelled and inclining to a dark reddish colour, some fulness of some capillarie Veins in the Pallat of the Mouth towards the Uvula, as also a large and conspicuous swelling about three inches broad of a dark red or blae co∣lour, from the one side of the Larinx round backwards to the other side thereof, we observed the Jugular Veins on both sides the Neck very large
and distended and full of Blood; There was a large swelling under and be∣twixt the Chin and the Cartilago Scutiformis, there was also a little scratch below the left Mandibula, which had rankled the Cuticula, and made some little Impression on the Cutis, having made Incision from the Chin down along the Larinx, and cross upon the swelling of the Neck: We found a greater laxness and distance (as we think) than ordinary betwixt the Cartila∣go Scutiformis and Os hyoides; we found the Tumour on the Neck, con∣taining brused like dark or blackish Blood; the Jugulars when cut, bled considerably, especially that on the left-side. Having opened his Breast, we found the Lungs distended to the filling up their Capacities, but free of water, his Stomach, Liver, &c. were all in good condition, we found no water within the Corps, the Corps had no smell at all; The Breast, Belly, Privy Parts, &c. were all well coloured, there was no swelling in his Belly, nor any thing by ordinary to be seen on his Head; This we attest and subscribe with our Hands. Sic subscribitur, James Craufurd. James Murehead. Edinburgh 6. December 1687. IN presence of the Lord Arch-bishop of Glasgow, Lord Tarbat, President of Session, Advocat, and Castlehill. James Murehead, and James Craufurd Chirurgions, being solemnly sworn in the presence of the Committee of Council, Depones that the written report anent the Body of the Deceist Sir James Standsfield is true, according to their Skill, and this is the truth, as they shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, James Craufurd. John Glasgow. James Murehead. J. P. D. C. Edinburgh 7 February 1688. in presence of the Justices and Assisers. James Murehead, and James Craufurd Chirurgions, being solemnly sworn, Depone upon the truth, and verity, of the above-written declaration in all points. Sic subscribitur, James Craufurd. James Murehead. Linlithgow. Follows the Chirurgions of Edinburgh their opinion anent the said Murder. WE undersubscrivers, Chirurgions in Edinburgh, having fully consi∣dered the Report made by James Craufurd, and James Murehead, concerning the condition of the Corps of Sir James Standsfield, and though it be not usual to declare more than matter of Fact, yet in obedience to your Lordships commands, where ye desire to be informed, if these Symptoms, found upon the Body, do import, Drowning, or Strangling. We humbly offer our opinion, so far as our Art or Experience will allow. And whereas the report informs us, that there was found a swelling, and preter-natural redness in the Face, a large and conspicuous Tumour, about three Inches broad, of a dark red, or black colour, from the one side of the Larinx, round backwards to the other side thereof, a large swelling betwixt the Chin and the Cartilago scutiformis, the Jugular Veines, on both sides very large, and distended, and when Incision was made downwards, betwixt the Os hyoid and Larinx was observed a laxnes, and distance betwixt the Os hyoid and the Cartilago scutiformis, Incision being made cross alongst the Tumor, it was found full of bruised Blood; The Jugulars likeways when opened yield∣ing a considerable quantity of Blood, especially on the left side, no smell, or corruption appearing in any part of the Body. It is very probable these parts have suffered some external violence, which hath made them appear so far different from their natural figure and colour, and could not be caused by Drowning simply. As to the other part of the report, the Breast, and Belly, being opened, the Lungs found distended, the Bronchi full of air,
without any water, nor any water found in the Stomach, or Intestines, a Body when drowned, being generally found to have much water in it, with other circumstances of the Report considered, gives just ground to think he was not drowned. This we subscribe at Edinburgh, the 3 day of Februa∣ry, 1688. Sic subscribitur, John Baillie, Deacon, George Stirling, James Craufurd, William Borthwick, Thomas Edgar, James Murebead. Follows the Report of the Colledge of Physicians. Edinburgh 6 February 1688. THe Colledge of Physicians, being assembled at the desire of his Majesties Advocat: To consider a Report made by some, Chirurgions, concerning the Body of the late Sir James Standsfield, and to give their opinion, whether by the said Report, there is any just ground to believe, that the said Sir James Standsfield was Strangled, or Drowned? And they have accordingly consider∣ed the said Report. They are of opinion, supposing the verity of the said Re∣port or declaration, that there is sufficient ground to believe, that the said Sir James Standsfield was Strangled, and not Drowned, in testimony where∣of their Presents are subscribed by Sir Andrew Balfowr, President of the said Colledge. Sic. subscribitur, A. Balfowr. P. C. R. M. Ʋmphray Spurway Clothier at New-milns, aged 50 years, salutus, Purged and sworn; Depones upon the truth and verity of his own declaration given in by him, which is all written, and subscribed with his own hand, and con∣sists of two leaves of paper, written on all sides, which is truth, as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, Ʋmphray Spurway. Follows the Declaration of Ʋmphray Spurway English-man. I Ʋmphray Spurway of New-milns, Clothier, being summoned to appear be∣fore the Lords of his Majesties Privy Council in Edinburgh, the 6 of De∣cember, 1687. To declare my knowledge of what I had seen, and heard, re∣lating to the death of Sir James Standsfield of New-milns, Did then and there declare before the saids Lords, as hereafter followeth. And after declaring what I had to say, was commanded to commit to writing my said Declara∣tion, under my own hand, which I the aforesaid Ʋmphray Spurway do hereby humbly offer to the abovesaid Lords of his Majesties Council, subscribing the same with my own hand. About six weeks before the death of Sir James Standsfield, after Night I went to pay my respects to Sir James, as I usually did when he was at New-milns, at which time I found him not so free for Discourse, nor so pleasant as at other times: In so much that I used that freedom with him, to Quere the reason why his Honour was so Melancholy? who with a great sigh, wring∣ing his hands together, with tears trickling down his Cheeks; said, Mr. Spur∣way, I have great cause for it; I have born my own burden, without com∣plaining to others, but I have a very wicked Family, and it's very sad that a man should be destroyed by his own Bowels; But let me be never so spa∣ring in my expence, both at home and abroad, yet they at home of my Fa∣mily consume me; condescending on some particulars, of some extravagant sums of money, monethly brought into him, that his Family had expended, besides what he allowed for them, which was very sufficient: But that which grieved him most was, that his youngest Son, whom he had some Comfortable hopes of, and upon whom he had settled his Estate upon; His just Debts be∣ing first payed, and that to the knowledge of his Son; But now he was fru∣strated of his hopes of that his Son too: For his eldest Son had debauched
his youngest Son, who had several times of late come in Drunk, as the other; This he declared to me with very great grief of heart: But the Saturday's night after Sir James, and a Minister, one Mr. Bell, came to New-milns from Edinburgh, I came in at the house of one James Marr, where I saw Sir James, and Mr. Bell sitting by the fire, before he had been at his own house, which I wondred at, having never known the like done by him before; but since, I have had my thoughts, that he had a fear upon him, (good Gentleman) of going to his own house, but having sat some time with him, he desired Mr. Marr to send one of his People at his house, to know, if they had kindled a fire for him; And upon the return the Messenger gave this answer: May it please your Honour, your fire is kindled for you; upon which Sir James, and the Minister arose, and took their leave of Mr. Marr; And I also accompanyed Sir James and the Minister half the way toward his home, and so took my leave of him, wishing his Honour a good night: But the next morning being Sabbath-day after the light well appeared, one Agnes Bruce came at my Chamber-door, and knocked. I went and opened the door, says she, Sir, Sir James is gone out of his Lodging-roum this morning, and we have sought all the Roums of the house for him, but cannot find him; she goes off, I immediatly followed her, and when I came out of my door, I met with Master Philip Standsfield, and James Dick, Mr. Standsfield declares to me, Lord, Master Spurway, what should be the cause of this man's discontent, that he should thus leave his Lodgings, and walk out? To which I replyed, Sir, do you wonder the cause of his discontent, who never gave him content, but had been the cause of grieving him, from one to the other of them ever since I knew the Family: But he turned his back upon me, and made no reply at all; however I went at Sir James's house, but could not procure the keys of nei∣ther of the Gardens, and I sent abroad of Sir James's servants, and of my own, some on horse-back, and some on foot, to inquire after him; At last a servant of mine, one Will. Bowman found him in the River, a little be-west the Town; I went at the place, and saw him lying about two yeards, or eight foot from the Brink of the River, lying upon his Belly, just at the top of the water, as it were floating, only his Coat and Westcoat loose about him, and a shirt on him that I saw. I saw the place at the Brink of the River, where some one had stood all beaten to mash with feet, and the ground very open and mellow, although a very hard frosty morning; So I gave order to some to get a Ladder, and to set the one end into the River, as near the hinder part of Sir James as they could, and the other end of the Ladder to fall at the top of the Brae, which was very steep, and so they might get him out easily; So I came away from the place, and desired Mr. Marr to see the Body land∣ed, Declaring that I would go home, and write to Mr. George Hume merch∣ant in Edinburgh of the sad sight which I had seen, desiring him to com∣municat the same to my Lord Advocat, with desire to know by the Mes∣senger his Lordship's pleasure, what of advice or direction he would be pleased to give concerning it, and it should be followed; But the Messen∣ger that I sent, after he had delivered my Letter to Mr. Hume, and Order given by Commissary Dalrymple, how to proceed further with the Body of Sir James, which Order was directed to my self by a Letter, which when I read the Letter, the Contents was: That I should endeavour to procure two or three discreet persons of New milns to my self, and we together view the Body of Sir James; and if we found no grounds to believe that his Person had not been wronged by others, that then with all speed he should be Buried, and that as privatly, and with as little noise as could be; But this Letter, which was the Commissary's Order to me, was sent by the hand of
one James Mitchel, Kinsman to Sir James; For that Horse that the Express rode on to Edinburgh, was taken out of the Stable, where he was set up: And one Mr. Patrick Smith, the Brother-in-Law of Sir James Standsfield, mounted on him to come for New-Milns: So that my Express was thereby disabled, to bring me the answer of my Letter; and the said James Mitchel, who brought my Letter, came home at the place by Nine of the Clock, that Sabbath day at night, and gave an account of the Letter that he had for me; but they diswaded him from bringing it me, so that I had it not till three hours after Sir James was buried. But upon Monday morning, I arose a∣bout three or four of the Clock; and coming out of my House, I saw great Lights at Sir James's Gate, which occasioned my going down, to see what the matter was; and as I went, I met with one Will. Robison, coming up of home, I asked what the meaning was of these Lights, and of the Hor∣ses that I then saw at Sir James's Gate? who answered me, that Sir James's Corps were brought out at the Gate, and that they were carrying it at Morum to be buried, having received orders from my Lord Advocate for that purpose: At which I returned to my House, thinking it very strange thus to proceed without having had the Corps viewed by some Person, as I well knew was customary in England, in such cases. The next step to my remembrance, was, that upon the Tuesday night following, after I was in Bed, one Mr. Alexander Campbell in Edinburgh, with one Mr. James Row, and an Gentleman, one Mr. Hamilton, with two Chirurgions, came at my House, and caused me to rise out of my Bed, showing me an order, which they had from my Lord Advocat, for the taking up again the Body of Sir James Standsfield; and commanded me to make ready to go with them, and having seen the Order, readily submitted thereunto, and when coming upon the place at Morum, caused the said Grave to be opened, and the Coffin taken up. It was carried into the Church, and there opened; and as soon as Sir James's Grave-cloaths were taken off him, and all his up∣per parts uncovered home to his privy parts, me-thought his Face look'd not as I expected, nor as others had insinuated, that were at the dressing of him at first; for they said that his Body and Face was very fair and fresh; but I found his Face at first view of another Complection, being blackish with some strakes of red-like standing, or rather strangled Blood; and under his left Ear I saw a swelling home to his Throat, of a blackish red Colour: After this I saw the Chirurgions opening his Body, beginning at the top of his Chin, and so down to the Pit of his Stomach, and then cut his Skin on both sides his Throat, towards each Ear, and coming at the place near his left Ear, that I saw swoln, I there saw of corroded, or congeal'd Blood, ly∣ing in a lump of a great thickness, and two or three inches long, which proved to me he had been Strangled: And one thing more I observed, that when Mr. Murehead put off his Cap at first from his Head, in slipping it back, Sir James's Eye-lids opened, and his Eyes appeared, but his Eye-lids much swoln, and very red, which did also prove to me a Symptom of Strangling. This being done, and his breast opened, so that his intrals appeared, and to me seemed in good order, and no appearance of water in his Body; nei∣ther then, nor when first he was taken out of the River; the like I think, has not been ever known by any man that cast himself, or that has been cast into a River alive, and not to have his Body full of water; nor that ever a dead man should ly at the top of the water, where no running Stream is, but a still Water, of about 5 foot deep: But to me in this it showes, that as God is a Wonder-working-God, so he has in this showen
no less, to convince men, that this worthy Gentleman murdered not him∣self, but was murdered. But my last Observation was of a wonder more, that the Lord did show, when the Chirurgions had caused the Body of Sir James to be by their Ser∣vants sewen up again, and his Grave-cloathes put on. A Speech was made to this purpose, It is requisit now, that those of Sir James Standsfield's Rela∣tions, and nearest Friends should take him off from the place where now he lyes, and lift him into his Coffin. So I saw Mr. James Row at the left-side of Sir James's Head and Shoulder, and Mr. Philip Standsfield at the right∣side of his Head and Shoulder, and going to lift off the Body, I saw Mr. Philip drop the Head of his Father upon the Furm, and much Blood in his Hand, and himself flying off from the Body, crying, Lord, have mercy up∣on me, or upon us, wipeing off the Blood on his Cloaths, and so lay him∣self over a Seat in the Church, some supposing that he would swarff or swoun away, called for a Bottle of Water for him. After this we went for Morum Castle, where Mr. Philip Standsfield, my self, and several others stayed un∣til it was day: In which time I challenged Mr. Philip for his unkindness to me, by his not inviting me to accompany the Corps of his Father, when first buried, knowing the Intimacy that there was betwixt his Father and my self; and that of all the People in or about the Town, his Father de∣lighted in no ones Company, as in mine; and that he did not give me no∣tice of his Burial, that I might do my last Office of Love and Service to him, by accompanying his Body to his Burial place; I took it very ill from him: So then Mr. Philip swore that he had sent two of his Servants to in∣vite me, but if those damn'd Rogues would not do it, what could he help it; and yet did declare, as is proved, and as himself since confest before my Lord Advocat, that he would not invite me, assigning this as his Reason, supposing that my self, and James Marr had been Instruments of setting his Father against him, which was a false suggestion: All which particulars I have before the Lords of His Majesties Honourable Privy Council declared: So by their Command I have in this sheet of Paper written it over with my own Hand, and do hereby subscribe my Name, the sixth of December, 1687. Sic subscribitur, per me, Ʋmphray Spurway. Edinburgh, the 7th of February, 1688. In presence of the Justices and Assisers, Ʋmphray Spurway ownes his De∣claration above-written to be Truth in all poynts; As he shal answer to God. Sic subscribitur, Ʋmphray Spurway. Linlithgow. James Mitchel, Nephew to the deceast Sir James Standsfield, aged 20 years, unmarried, purged and sworn, Depones, that about twenty dayes before Sir James Standsfield's Death, being in company with Philip the Pan∣nal, he heard the Pannal say, that if his Father did dispone his Estate by him, he would kill him, though he should die in the Grass-Market for it: De∣pones that several times about a Month before Sir James's Death, he heard the Pannal say, that little thought the People had how soon the Pan∣would be Laird, and when he was, he would then ride in their Skirts that had been ill to him. And this is the Truth, as he shall answer to God, Sic subscribitur, James Mitchel. John Topping in Monkrig, Aged 25 Years, married, purged and sworn, Depones that upon the Sabbath-morning, after Sir James Standsfield's Death, the Deponent coming from Monkrig to New-Milns, by the side of the Water, he discovered a Body Floating, and saw Philip Standsfield look∣ing to that place of the Water where the Body was, and the Deponent asked the Pannal, whose Body that was in the Water, and the Pannal
made no answer; and when he came to New-milns, he heard that Sir James's Body was found in the water; Depones he saw the Body taken out of the water, and went alongst with it, near to the Walk-miln, but observed no wa∣ter come from the Body. This is the Truth, as he shall answer to God. Depones he cannot write. Sic subscribitur, Linlithgow. James Dick in New-milns, aged fourty seven years, married, purged and sworn; Depones that the Pannal Philip Standsfield and the Deponent being at Morum after taking up of the Corps, and discoursing about the finding of the Body in the water, the Deponent said to the Pannal, that he saw something in the water, when they were searching after Sir James, but he did not suppose it to be Sir James's Body, and the Pannal said, I saw him before any of you: Depones that he saw the Body after it was taken out of the water at the Brink of the Brae, and went alongst with the Body a piece of the way, and observed no water come from the Mouth. And this is the Truth as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, James Dick. His Majesties Advocat desired that James Thomson, son to George Thomson in New-milns, and Anna Mark, daughter to Janet Johnstoun, Spouse to the said James Thomson, might be examined as Witnesses against the Pannal, for pro∣ving his Accession to his Fathers Murder. And the Procurators for the Pan∣nal having alledged, that the foresaids Persons were but children, and so not by Law capable to be Witnesses, the Boy not being above thirteen years of Age, and the Girl not above ten years. The Lords, Justice General, and Commissioners of Justiciary, refused to receive them as Witnesses, but in regard the Persons on the Inquest earnestly desired the said James Thomson and Anna Mark might be examined, anent their knowledge of the Pannal's Accession to the forsaid Murder, they al∣lowed the forenamed persons their Declarations to be taken for clearing of the Assise. And accordingly the said James Thomson being examined in pre∣sence of the Justices and Inquest, declared as after follows; That Janet Johnstoun came to George Thomsons house betwixt nine and ten at night, and Philip Standsfield the Pannal came there shortly thereafter, and the House being dark, the said Philip gave the Declarant a turnor to buy a Candle, which he did in the neighbouring house, and after the Declarant returned with the Candle, his Mother ordered him to go to his Bed, which was in the same Roum, and beat him because he did not presently obey. Declares he heard one come to the Door, and inquire for Janet Johnstoun, and desire her to come home, and give her Child suck: Declares he knew by the voice that the Person who came was Agnes Mark the said Janets daughter, and that Janet ordered her to go away, and she should follow her; Declares she stayed a considerable time thereafter, and the said Thomsons wife was desired to go for a pint of Ale, and Philip took out an handful of Money to see if he had any small Money, and finding he had none, the Ale was taken on upon trust; Furder Declares that the said George Thomson and his Wife, and Janet Johnstoun did stay together, and whisper softly a conside∣rable time; Declares he heard Philip Standsfield complain that his Father would not give him Money, and pray the Devil take his Father, and God damn his own Soul if he should not make an end of his Father, and then all would be his, and then he would be kind to them; Declares Philip Standsfield and Janet Johnstoun went away about eleven, and shortly after his Father and Mother came to the bed where the Declarant was lying cross the Bed∣foot; and the Declarant in the night time perceived his Father and Mother rising out of the Bed, and going out of the house, and that they stayed a con∣siderable time away, about an hour and an half, or two hours, and that the
Declarant was perfectly awake, when they went and were away, and he wondred what they were going about: Declares his Mother came in first, and came softly to Bed, and within some time after his Father came in, and put a stool to the back of the door, without locking it, for the Lock made always a great noise when they locked the door, and the Declarants Father called to him whenever he came in, but the Declarant made no answer, that it might be thought he was sleeping, and his Mother asked, what had stayed his Father; and thereupon his Father and Mother did fall a discoursing of se∣veral things, and particularly his Father said, that the Deed was done, and that Philip Standsfield guarded the Chamber-door, with a drawen Sword and a bendet Pistol, and that he never thought a man would have died so soon, and that they carried him out towards the water-side, and they tyed a stone about his Neck, and leaving him there came back to the little kiln, and reckoned whether they should cast him in the water with the stone about his Neck or not, and whether they should cast him far in or near the side, and at length they returned and took away the stone from about his Neck, and threw him in the water; Declares his Father said, that yet he was afraid for all that, that the Murder would come out, and his Mother answered, Hout fool, there is no fear of that, it will be thought he has drowned himself, because he will be found in the water; Declares when Sir James was missed in the morning, the Declarants Mother said to his Father, Rise quickly, for if ye be found in your Bed, they will say that ye have a hand in the Murder; Declares the Coat and Wastecoat which were upon Sir James, when he was found in the water, were sent to Thomsons house, and Thomsons Wife said to her Husband and Janet Johnstoun in presence of the Declarant, that she was affrighted to see the said Coat and Wastecoat, for she thought that some evil spirit was in it, and desired her Husband to send it away, which he would not; And further that his Mother said to her Husband in the De∣clarants hearing, that she was affrighted to be in the house alone after night fell, and accordingly when ever her Husband went out, she went out with him, which was not her ordinary; Declares the said George Thomson did go into Edinburgh several days before the Declarants Mother was brought in, and she did immediatly after he came into Edinburgh send away Sir James's Coat and Wastecoat, and that she was never in her own house after night, since her Husband came in, but did lie in Janet Johnstouns house. Sic sub∣scribitur, Linlithgow, I. P. D. Anna Mark daughter to Janet Johnstoun declares that on the said Saturdays night Philip came up to her mothers house, and sent her for George Thomson and his wife, and thereafter he sent her to see if Sir James was come home; declares that she saw Philip with his hat off give a low salutation to George Thomson when he came up to him, and when she returned and told that Sir James was come, Philip did take a drink, and runs down to New-milns, that about eleven a Clock that night, her good-father sent her to seek her mother, and that she found her mother with Philip in George Thomsons house, and that her mother bad her go home, and she would come after her, and that her good-father thereafter finding her mother did not come, sent her for Mar∣garet Isles to give suck to the Child, and went home again; but that her mo∣ther did not come long after that, as she thinks about two in the morning, and that she heard her good-father say, Bitch and Whore, where have ye been so long? And she answered, wherever I have been, the deed is done, and then went to bed, and that after that, she heard them speak together, but could not know what they said; she declares also, that her mother said, she was still feared, and would not abide alone, nor lie alone in the bed; but said, she was afraid.
Edinburgh, February 7th 1688. The said Anna Mark being Examined in presence of the Assise and Justices, declares affirmative, conform to the a∣bove-written Declaration in all points. Sic subscribitur, Linlithgow, I. P. D. Sir George Mckenzie's Speech to the Inquest. Gentlemen of the Inquest, I Am glad to see so strong, and universal a propensity for Justice in my native Country, that every man upon first hearing this Death, concluded it a Murder, and trembled least it should not have been discovered; every man be∣came Sollicitor in it, wished to be of the Inquest; and ardent Prayers were generally put up to Al∣mighty God for this end, with as much earnest∣ness as uses to be for removing general Plagues: And the Almighty in return of those, did first make so clear Impressions on all mens Spirits, of Philip's being the Murderer, that he had fall'n by these; but his Divine Majesty, who loves to see just things done in a legal way, fur∣nished thereafter a full probation in an extraor∣dinary manner, whereby we might not only convince our selves, but all such as are not wicked enough to have been the Authors. You will discern the Finger of God in all the steps of this Probation, as evidently as Philip's Guilt; and this extraordinary Discovery has been made, as well to convince this wicked Age, that the World is govern'd by Divine Provi∣dence, as that he is guilty of this Murder. He is accused before you for three Crimes, Trea∣son, the Cursing of his Father, and the Murder∣ing him: Crimes in great Affinity, and natu∣rally subservient to one another; for to pray Confusion to the King, who is Pater patriae, is a Cursing our great Parent; And what can prove better a design to Murder his Parent, than the malitious hatred that prevails over a Son to Curse him? What restrains vitious men from Murdering those, by whose Death they may expect licentious Liberty, and an o∣pulent Succession, save the fear of the Laws of the Land, or at least an innate awe of the Law of Nature? But here you see in the Treason a contempt of the Laws of the Land, and in the Cursing an abhorrence of the Laws of Nature. There is no Reason to suspect our Zeal in this Case from any State Design; for we took pains to shun a Probation of the Treason: It was forced upon us, and not sought by us, so violent were, and are we in the search of the Murder, that even Treason was not able to di∣vert us. Nor press I it at this time; but to let you see there is nothing so wicked or dan∣gerous, which this Pannal durst not attempt. He not only wishes the King's Confusion, but drinks it openly; and not only drinks the King's Confusion himself, but he forces others to do so; nor needed he to be drunk, to be guil∣ty, for this was the first step of his drinking; and to convince you that he knew it was a Crime, it is proved that he took his Compli∣ces sworn, never to detect it, the fatal Encou∣ragement which always tempt him to commit his Villanies. The Cursing his Father is not from meer humor or dissoluteness, but it be∣comes yet probable by a previous design to have his Estate, and from the restraint he found from him, of being debarred from the ravishing hopes of a boundless Liberty: The Expressi∣ons are various and execrable, such as, Devil take him, drown him, rive him, let him ne∣ver come back, let him never eat more, &c. and these Expressions, which should never have been once spoke, were frequently repeited, and are prov'd, not by suspect Persons, or Stran∣gers, but by his Father's, and his own Servants, and such of them too as were Philip's own Fa∣vourits, and who think themselves very unhap∣py in being obliged to Depone against him. You are then, Gentlemen, in the third place to judge, how far this Murder and Paricide are prov'd, in which you need to be the less scrupulous, that the Son, who is accused of it, is to die however; for either of the two former Crimes are so far prov'd beyond all doubt, that though he should escape this, he cannot these. And as to the Probation of this Crime, I must first represent to you, that in occult or atroci∣ous Crimes, the Law has relaxed, and remit∣ted much of its scrupulousness in Probation, because in these the ordinary Probation cannot be had, and to admit none but such, were to reject all: And therefore in Hamesucken, which is the Beating a man in his own House, but much more the Murdering a man by way of Hamesucken in his own House, wherein all means are used to cover, and few can be got for discovering; you must not expect two Wit∣nesses who saw the Murder committed, but on∣ly such Probation as can before God convince you, that this Murder was committed by that man; no Inquest ever failed to find the Mur∣der of Children to be clearly prov'd, though there were no Witnesses that saw it committed, and the Murdering Parents is a more atrocious Crime, because we owe more Duty to our Pa∣rents, than any Parent does to a Child, and never Son ow'd more than this did, nor can be more believ'd to have killed a Parent. For clearing whereof you are to consider first, that he did not Drown himself, as was pretended, but was Murdered by some Persons; and as the Law violently presumes, that no man would Murder himself, so without the help of this pre∣sumption, it is prov'd most convincingly by ocular Inspection, that he was Strangled; the marks of Strangling, viz. the congeal'd Blood, the dislocation of one of the Vertebrae in his Neck, &c. being visible signs prov'd in the or∣dinary way, and we have added to this the O∣pinion
both of the Chirurgions and Phycisians, who at once declare, that he was not Drown'd, and that he was Strangled; the outward marks likewise of his not being Drown'd, appearing as visibly as that he was Strangled; so you must con∣clude that he was Strangled; except you can think, that after he had Strangled himself, and broke his own Neck, he drown'd himself. In the next place, who could have Murder∣ed this innocent and obliging Gentleman, ex∣cept some Person who had access to his House, wherein he was Murdered, and had Malice a∣gainst himself. And these two can meet in no Person, but this unnatural barbarous Son; for one of the things that hightens his Guilt is, that he should abhorre a Father, who engaged meer Strangers to love him as a Friend: and we have prov'd, that he not only hated his Father, and that he had done so for many years, but that he vowed he would take away his Life be∣fore Christmass next, and that in many vari∣ous, but clear expressions, and at many seve∣ral times; for sometimes he swore, if he made a Disposition to his second Son, he should take his Life; sometimes, that he should be Master of all before Christmass, and he should use the Servants as they used him; that though his Mo∣ther was like to die, that his Father should die before her: and he scarce ever spoke of his Fa∣ther, without swearing he would strike a Sword to his Heart; nor would his Passion so much as suffer him to dissemble this even to his Mother; and he who durst own it to her, durst certainly do it whenever he had occasion. I proceed now to clear to you, that I have prov'd, that he not only design'd and vow'd in Passion, that he would Murder his Father, but that he actually attempted to Murder him, and for this I have led these Witnesses, who prove, that when his Father came from the Leaden-Mines, he fled into Culter, as a trembling Pa∣tridge pursued by a Haulk, telling some Gen∣tlemen, that he had been pursued seven Miles by his unnatural Son, who accordingly came to the House, and shot several Pistols in at the Windows, whereupon the Gentlemen, who now Depone, were forc'd to watch with his Father all the night, and were forc'd to Convoy him the next day near to Edinburgh. We have al∣so produc'd other Gentlemen, to whom his Father declared, that he attempted against his Life: and who will not believe the best of Fa∣thers Deponing against the worst of Sons? Nor could any thing have drawn this from the Father, save the terrifying danger, to which he was hourly exposed. All the Supream Courts of Europe have found the attempt to kill, sufficient to infer Paricide, this is a higher degree of Guilt than Cursing, and yet that in∣fers Death; and to attempt to kill a Father is more villanous, than to kill a Stranger. What shall be said then of frequent, and deliberate attempts? And thus you have this Son again prov'd guilty of Death, and even of Paricide. That which hastened the perpetrating this Crime was, that his Father wearied out with his Villanies, was at last forc'd to dispone his Estate to his second Son, and tho' there be no∣thing more ridiculous than to ask, What Rea∣son the Son had to kill his Father, as he now does? For there can be no Reason for so bar∣barous an Action; yet this was a Motive to him, and may be a Proof to you; for so kind a Father, who had tryed all Means and Me∣thods to reclaim his licentious Son, had never proceeded to this, unless he had been driven to it by those frequent Attempts made by his Son upon his Life, in hopes to enjoy his Estate by the Death that he was to give. To disappoint which hopes his Father design'd to settle the Estate on the second Brother, after which Set∣tlement he could gain nothing but the Gallows by killing his Father. Whereupon he to pre∣vent the delivery of the Disposition, did associat to himself  Thomson, whom himself used to call the Devil's Taylor, Thomson's Wife, and Janet Johnston, who was his own Con∣cubine, and his Father's known Enemy, whom he could never have frequented, except upon so barbarous a design. Thomson denyed that he was in the House for eight days before, and yet it is prov'd he was in Sir James's House, the night the Murder was committed; Johnston deny'd also before the Council, that she was out of her House after nine a Clock that night, and yet it is prov'd that she stay'd abroad till after twelve, so that her Husband was forc'd to send for a Stranger, to give suck to her In∣fant. Why did they both deny, or she aban∣don her Child, at so suspect a time? And it is ridiculous to pretend as they do, that they for∣got so extraordinary a circumstance in so ex∣traordinary a night, especially being examined upon it, within two or three days thereafter. By their assistance the Murder was design'd to be upon Saturday, the day  of Janua∣ry; but God to discover, and revenge a Mur∣der (which he thought fit to suffer to be com∣mitted, for the punishment of so many preceed∣ing horrid Crimes) inspired Sir James to bring with him that night, a devout Minister, for preparing the Father, and proving against the Son; and this pious and grave man, whose Merit may be laid in Ballance with many Wit∣nesses, Depones, that he heard that night, the noise of many People within the House, which was inconsistent with Sir James's drowning himself without it: And Depones, that his at∣tention followed this noise until it died out to∣wards the River, into which he was thrown by them; and the Brink is prov'd to have been broken, and beat by many Feet, which forti∣fies much this Deposition. It is also prov'd, that he refused that night to come to publick Prayer with his Father, swearing that he could not look upon him, and that the next morning, when all went to find out his Father, he con∣fessed he had first found him; but that he came away, without discovering that he had found him, nor did he shew the least grief when he was found by others; whereas if Na∣ture had not been quit devour'd by Vice and Guilt, he had certainly thrown himself upon his dead Father, and had lamented that fatal Death, which no man, except he, saw with dry eyes; but whilst others were mourning for his Father, this Miscreant would not suffer him to be carried in to his own House, saying,
that he died like a Dog, O criminal Moderati∣on that never appeared in this passionat Crea∣ture save upon the Death of his Father. O cursed Justice never showen or pretended to save in asserting, that his Father deserved no respect, because he drown'd himself. Upon this villanous pretext, he caused throw him into a remot House, where none were allowed to see the Body, save his own Accomplices, to prevent all Discovery by Inspection of it, and for the same reason caused bury him very sud∣denly, in spight of a Countermand from his Freinds at Edinburgh. But they fully perswa∣ded, that Sir James was Murdered by his own Son, sent out some Chirurgions and Freinds, who having raised the Body, did see it bleed miraculously upon his touching it. In which God Almighty himself was pleased to bear a share in the testimonies which we produce; that Divine Power, which makes the Blood circulat during Life, has oft-times, in all Na∣tions, opened a passage to it after Death, up∣on such occasions; but most in this case, for after all the Wounds had been sewed up, and the Body designedly shaken up and down, and which is most wonderful, after the Body had been buried for several days, which naturally occasions the Blood to congeal; upon Philip's touching it the Blood darted and sprung out to the great astonishment of the Chirurgions themselves, who were desired to watch this Event, whereupon Philip astonished more than they, threw down the Body, crying, O God! O God! and cleansing his Hand grew so faint, that they were forc'd to give him a Cordial. But least any shadow of difficulty might remain with you, his Divine Providence, which oft∣times reveals it self by the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, has brought us two little Wit∣nesses, whom as no body could be so unwor∣thy as to corrupt, so none can be such Infidels as not to believe, especially since they Depone against their own Parents, and have owned firmly in their presence, what they now De∣pone in yours; from them ye have an account, how Philip that night came into the House of their Parents, and there swore, He would be ridd of his Father that very Night; how they went out at midnight, and after their return made their reflections, how easily Sir James had died, and how briskly Philip had beha∣ved, by guarding the door with a Pistol in his one Hand, and a Sword in the other, how they had hung a Stone about his Neck, but had thereafter taken it away, and how the Mo∣ther durst not stay in her own House, while Sir James's Coat was there, and if you had seen this little Boy upon his knees, begging his Father to confess with so much Affection, so much Judgement, so much Piety, you had needed no other Probation but himself; the Father himself before his Death was convinced, and frequently foretold, that his Son would kill him, and the Mother how soon she heard of her Husband's death, and some of the cir∣cumstances, now insisted upon, and remem∣bred what she had heard her Son say to her self, and what he had said at Nunland, con∣cluded he was the Murderer, in spight even of that criminal kindness which she had for him; almost the whole Nation was convinced of this before any Probation was led: and the Lords of the Privy Council, among whom many of our Judges sit, did declare, that they thought that half of the Probation which was led be∣fore them, sufficient to convince an Inquest. How then should the least scruple remain with you, before whom so full, so clear, and so le∣gal a Probation has been led, that like a Pend, every part of it supports another, and like a Chain, every Link draws on another. I need not fortifie so pregnant a Probation, by laying out before you, how often he and his Complices have contradicted one another, and even how often he has contradicted himself, in the most obvious and material points, and how he denyes every thing with Oaths, and with equal confidence, though never so clearly prov'd: Albeit such as these are the chief things that make up the Probation in other Cases, nor how he suffered the greatest Indignities ima∣ginable from his Complices, in presence of the Privy Council, though this convinced ma∣ny of their Lordships, that he was at the mer∣cy of those Complices, who were too far upon his Secrets, not to be slavishlie submitted to. But I cannot omit, how that since he came in∣to Prison, he has lived so Impiouslie, and A∣theisticallie, as shewes, that he had no awe up∣on his Spirit, to restrain him from commiting any Crime from a love to God, or a fear to Hell, and that he constantly filled and kept himself drunk from morning till night, there∣by to drown the voice of his Conscience, and to make himself insensible of the Terrors of the Almighty. The Judges have declared what was neces∣sary to be prov'd, and you are only to judge, if we have prov'd what they thought necessa∣ry; and therefore there is no place to doubt, if a man's life may be taken away upon meer presumptions; for the Judges have eased you of that scruple, by finding the grounds in this qualified Libel relevant: and his own Advo∣cats have acknowledged this Probation to be so strong and unanswerable, that before the half of it was led, they went away and de∣serted a Client, whom they found they could not defend, nor should any man doubt of a Probation, which ones own Advocats thinks in∣vincible. If then such amongst you as are Fa∣thers, would not wish to be murdered by your own Children; or such of you as are Sons, would not wish the World to believe that you are weary of your Fathers; you will all con∣cur, to find this Miscreant guilty of a Crime that God has taken so much pains to detect, and all mankind has such reason to wish to be punished. May then the Almighty God who form'd your Hearts, convince them; and may this poor Nation Cite you, as the re∣makable Curbers of Vice, to all succeeding Ages.
Thereafter His Majesties Advocat protested for an Assise of Error against the Inquest, in case they should assoilzie the Pannal. The Persons who past upon the Assise of Philip Standsfield, returned their Verdict in presence of the saids Lords, whereupon the Tenor follows. The whole Assise called upon the Jury of Philip Standsfield, upon the three Points following, particularly lybel'd against him, to wit, the Crime of Treason, the Cursing of his Father, and accession to his Father's Murder, they unanimously in one voice by the Mouth of William Baillie of Laming∣toun their Chancelor, finds the Pannal guilty of the foresaid three Crimes. Sic subscribitur, William Baillie of Lamingtoun Chancelor. THE Lords, Justice General, and Commissioners of Justiciary, ha∣ving considered the Verdict of the Assise returned against Philip Standsfield, they by the Mouth of John Leslie Dempster of Court, decern∣ed and adjudged the said Philip Standsfield, to be taken upon Wednesday next, being the fifteenth of February instant, to the Mercat-cross of Edin∣burgh, and there betwixt two and four a Clock in the Afternoon to be hang∣ed on a Gibbet till he be dead, and his Tongue to be cut out, and burnt upon a Scaffold, and his right hand to be cut off, and affixt on the East-Port of Haddingtoun, and his Body to be carried to the Gallowlie betwixt Leith and Edinburgh, and there to be hanged up in Chains, and ordains his Name, Fame, Memory, and Honours to be extinct, his Arms to be riven forth, and delet out of the Books of Arms, swa that his Posterity may ne∣ver have Place, nor be able hereafter to bruik or joyse any Honours, Offices, Titles, or Dignities within this Realm in time coming, and to have forsault∣ed, amitted and tint all and sundry his Lands, Heretages, Titles, Offices, Tacks, Stedings, Roums, Possessions, Goods and Gear whatsomever per∣taining to him, to our Soveraign Lord, to remain perpetuallie with his Highness in Property; which was pronounced for Doom, whereupon His Majesties Advocat asked, and took Instruments. Sic subscribitur, Linlithgow. Jo. Lockhart, David Balfour, Roger Hoge, P. Lyon. Extracted forth of the Books of Adjournal, By me Mr. Thomas Gordon Clerk to the Justice Court. Sic subscribitur, Tho. Gordon. Which Doom and Sentence above-written, was accordingly put to due Execution upon the Person of the said Philip Standsfield, in manner above-prescribed. FINIS.
