T2345 12777454 93783
A TRUE ACCOUNT, OF THE Behaviour, and Manner of the Execution of six persons viz. Henry Cornish, and Elizabeth Gaunt, Condemned for High-Treason, Richard Hooker, for Robery on the High Way. Samuel Presby, for Robery Edward Linsey, for Deserting his Co∣lours. Thomas Crompton, for Murthering Edg. Who were Executed on Friday the 23th. of October 5. Henry Cornish, at Sper-Lane End in CHEAPSIDE, Edward Linsey on TOWER-HILL, Richard Hooker, Samuel Presby, Thomas Crompton, Elizabeth Gant at TYBURN: The said Elizabeth Gaunt Burnt, for High-Treason. IT is observed, that frequent Ex∣amples have not been hitherto sufficient to deter some Persons from committing Crimes, which render them lyable to the se∣verity of Justice; whose heavy stroak puts a Period to their Days with shame and disgrace, as an In∣stance of which, more than hereto∣fore has been observed; I shall re∣cite in the following Pages. Henry Cornish, a Person well known in the City of London, if not throughout the whole Kingdom, not weighing his Duty and Allegience to his lawful Severeign, at a time he was in a Station to serve his Prince: Being brought upon his Tryal, upon an Indictment of High-Treason, found against him at the Sessions House in the Old-Bayly, and there pleading not Guilty; it was proved
by sufficient Evidence, that he was at a Meeting, where divers Treason∣able Proposals were tendered; and that he was not only conniving, but consenting thereto; to which, he only producing Evidence to prove his Behauiour, &c was upon full Evidence in that Case found Guilty, and received Sentence as in Case of High-Treason. On Monday the 19th. of this Instant October, 1685. at the place aforesaid, after which, being reconveyed to the County Goal of Newgate, he become very sensible of approaching Death; spending the time allowed him, in order to prepare himself for a future State in Pious Devotions, appearing much concerned at the misery that had befallen him; confessing that his sins had provoked the Almighty to suffer him to run into those law∣less ways, that had brought him in the end, to shame and disgrace; and so continued very penitent: When on Friday the 23th. of October, pursu∣ant to a Warrant signed for his Execution, he was conveyed by the Sheriffs Officers to a Gibbet set up for that purpose, between Kings-street and Soper-Lane in Cheapside; and there after the Repetition of some Prayers, and the like, Execu∣ted according to Law. William Ring, being tryed at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly the 19th of October, upon an Indictment laid against him, for harbouring, com∣forting, and maintaining Joseph Kelloway, a Rebel and Traytor to his most sacred Majesty, knowing him so to be; as being one of those actually in the Western Rebellion, as likewise one Lawrence, another Rebel and Traytor; he knowing him so to be, which being plainly made out against him, and he ma∣king but a slender Excuse or De∣fence was found Guilty of the Trea∣on, according to the Statute in that Case made and ptovided; after which, being rerconveyed to New∣gate, he as the former became very pensive, considering his Latter End, and acknowledging that he had been a grievous sinner; yet he hoped God would in the abundance of his mercy, pardon and forgive him, as he heartily desired to forgive all the World; intreating such as came to visit him, (during the respit) to pray for him in their retirements, hoping as he said, that in his last extremity it might prevail with the Almigh∣ty, to support and strengthen him; and further proceeded to acknow∣ledge that for his sins the punish∣ment he was to undergo had fallen upon him; and that he desired no∣thing more, than to bear it with patience: He was often observed to pray both publickly and privately whilst he was in Newgate, and to ask Questions as to his eternal state of such as came to visit him, and continued in a moderate temper, sen∣sible of his offence; But his Majesty was pleased, out of his Royal Cle∣mency and and Mercy to grant him a Gracious Reprieve. Elizabeth Gaunt, being Indicted at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, upon an Indictment of High-Treason on the 19h. Instant, for harbouring and comforting John Burton Out-Law∣ed for High-Treason, endeavouring to provide for his escape and flight from Justice; and thereupon put∣ing her self upon God and her Coun∣try, it was proved that she had har∣boured the said Burton knowing him to be so Out-Law'd; to which she ha∣ving very little to object, the Juriors upon the return of their Verdict, brought her in Guilty of the High-Treason as laid in the Indictment, and she according to the Statute in that Case made, and provided, re∣ceived Sentence to be Burnt, after which, with a heavy Countenance returning to Newgate, she as the for∣mer became very pensive, seeming much desirous of Life at first, as it is
supposed, flattering her self with hopes of a Pardon; but finding her offence admitted of no mercy, she seriously reflected on her Latter End, often lifting her Eyes towards Hea∣ven, and extending her Arms, desi∣ring the God of infinite mercies to pardon her sins, and blot out all her transgressions; giving him praise that he had taught her to number her days, intreating him that she might apply her heart to Wisdom, and was often observed to retire, as much as the conveniency of the place would permit, and pray to her self continuing that state, till the day according to its specification in the Warrant came for her Execution: When being conveyed to Tyburn, the common place of Execution, she was fastened with a Cord to a Post a midst a Pile of Faggots, which be∣ing set on fire after she had been a while strangled, she was thereby re∣duced to Ashes. Edward Linsey, of the Parish of St. Alhallows Barkin, was Indicted the last Sessions at Justice-Hall in the Old Bayly for deserting his Colours; after his having betaken himself to his Majesties service, and received three shillings sixpence Pay, which being proved against him, he was found Guilty, and Sentenced to dye, when upon his return to Newgate, he for a time seemed resolute; but perceiving that his offence admitted neither Pardon nor Reprieve he be∣came somewhat serious, and began to reflect upon his past ill-spent life, saying, he had been a grievous sin∣ner, and that for his many Enormi∣ties, God had brought him to shame and punishment, which, as he said nevertheless hoped might redound to his advantage in another life; and so continued a sense of his condition, both in Newgate and at the place of Execution, which, that it might de∣ter others from the like disregard and disloyalty; whereupon a Gibbet Erected on Tower-Hill for that pur∣pose, he suffered according to Sen∣tence. Richard Hooker, being tryed and found guilty, for Robing one Ar∣thur Anslow on the High-Way, and taking from him divers things of value, received Sentence, and with the rest being rconveyed to Newgate became more than ordinarily con∣cerned at the near approach of Death, being much desirous to live, asking divers that came to visit him, if they thought he should be pardon∣ed; but finding the day of dissoluti∣on at hand without any appearance of such Grace and Favour; his Crime being of too high a Nature to admit his longer continuance on Earth; he much bewailed his un∣happy State, saying, that bad Com∣pany had inticed and drawn him a∣way by degrees of sin, till he be∣came bold therein; but that God by this affliction had made him sensible of his Latter End, and that he was but Dust; therefore he earnestly advised all that heard him, or beheld the sad Example he was made, in forfeiting his Life to offended Ju∣stice, thereby to take warning, and make it their business to live honest∣ly and not give heed to temptations of the like nature: He said he was born of honest Parentage, and had good Education, but that he mis∣employed it, and through his Obsti∣nacy and Disobedience, became im∣prosperous in the World who, had he been ruled, might have lived hap∣py and comfortable. Thomas Crompton, being tryed for Killing one Edward Herring, on the 20th. of August last upon a Rescue, giving him a mortal Wound, &c. and plain proof being made out a∣gainst him, he was found Guilty of wilful murther, and received Sen∣tence of Death: When returning to Newgate, in order to expect the Ex∣ecution of that Sentence; he appear∣ed very much concerned at his mis∣fortune and more for the Blood he had shed; saying, he had been Guil∣ty of Sabbath-breaking and Pro∣phaneness; for which, he verily be∣lieved,
that God being highly offen∣ded with him, had suffered him to commit a Crime punishable with Death, yet he nevertheless hoped for mercy at the hands of his Creator, and that he should be saved, through the meritorious Death and Passion of his Dear and Compassionate Saviour, desiring the Prayers of his Visitants; that God would strengthen him patiently to undergo the punishment which for his of∣fence the Law should inflict upon him, being observed at sundry times to give good heed and attention to such expressions as were delivered, relating to his Eternal Well fare, and so continued to the last. Samuel Presby, being tryed upon an Indictment the preceedent Sessi∣ons, for stealing 119 Yards of Cloath value at 36 l. out of the Ware-House of one Mr. Smith of St. Mary Hill, and upon proof that he had confessed it, was found Guilty; he received Sentence of Death, hav∣ing before been Burnt in the Hand: He in Newgate during the respit, much exclaimed against bad Company, saying, that, that had been his ruin; especially associating himself with Leud Women; desiring all Persons, but more especially the younger sort to shun and avoid them, least by their means, they were taken in the snare of inevitable ruin and dis∣grace: Continuing very penitent, not only in Newgate, but at the place of Execution. Catharine Brown of Twitenham, in the County of Middlesex, being try∣ed at the Old Bayly for Murthering her Bastard Child, on the 4th of this Instant October and found Guilty, re∣ceived Sentence as the former; she in Newgate, greatly lamented her un∣happy state, saying, she had been deluded and drawn away to commit uncleanness, and by retiring to avoid the shame and punishment of that offence she had fallen into a greater, but was heartily sorry for her mis∣doings; looking upon the Sentence she lay under, to be the just reward of her sins: She said she had been well Educated, and brought up by careful and indulgent Parents, but being of a rambling Disposition; it was her misfortune to be over-come with fair Words to yield to lawless Embraces, but hoped God would forgive her that, and her other fol∣leys; pleased out of his Royal Cle∣mency and Mercy, to grant to her a Gracious Reprieve. On the 23th. of October, 1685. Richard Hooker, Elizabeth Gant, Samuel Presby and Thomas Crompton, were conveyed to Tyburn; and there after praying a while, and the usual Ceremonies performed, they were Executed according to Sentence. The rest, whose Names are not herein mentioned, but were Senten∣ced the last Sessions, received a Gra∣cious Reprieve. This may be Printed, R. L. S. October the 23th. 1685 LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley, near Fleet-Bridge, 1685.
