T2369A R222517 99833680 38158
A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Great Tryals and Cruel Sufferings undergone by those two faithful Servants of God, KATHERINE EVANS And SARAH CHEEVERS, In the time of their above three years and a halfs Confinement in the Island MALTA. Also, How God at last by his Almighty Power effected their Deliverance, and brought them back into the Land of their Nativity. To which is added, A short RELATION from George Robinson, of the Sufferings that befel him in his Journey to Jerusalem; and how God saved him from the hands of Cru∣elty when the Sentence of Death was passed against him. London, Printed for R. Wilson, 1663.
AN EPISTLE TO THE READERS. MAny there be among the Na∣tions in the World, that in their haste have unjustly con∣demned the innocent, guilt∣less, and harmless People of the Lord of Hosts (scornfully called Quakers) viz. That they are Papists, Jesuites, and what not, adhering to the Whorish false Church of Rome: I say to such on this wise, which is my advice, as a man to his friend, to whom this may come; Be not hasty to judge before the time, as many do to their own hurt, guilt and condem∣nation, before they have a clear and
right understanding of the things that differ from Equity and Truth, and so the Nobility of the Mind which should weigh and passe true Sentence of sound and perfect Judgement, the same being vailed with a hasty dark spirit of pre∣judice, or evil-surmising, which gets up into the seat of enmity, and therein pas∣seth sentence of the pure Way and things of God as Evil, Heresie, and what not? And thus it comes to passe, and indeed it cannot be otherwise with such that have not their minds stayed and fixed in that which is perfect and true, and clear and single, as is the clear manifestation of the Grace of Life, which is the Light of the Lord Jesus shining in the heart and conscience of the sons and daughters of men; and the same Light of the Lord which enlightneth the poor and deceitful man's eyes, is the true measure and equal ballance, which all are to try, and prove, and weigh words, thoughts, intents, wayes and actions, whether they be ju∣stifiable
or condemnable; and hereby with the same measure of the true Spirit of God, who is Light, is true sentence to be passed accordingly: For if that which is perfectly true be measured with a false measure, or with an unequal ballance, it doth appear so to all that behold the same with an evil eye, or measure that with the same measure; save onely to them that discern the measure, weight, or bal∣lance: As for instance, as to the thing natural; If a deceitful man with a false measure, being guided by a deceivable spirit (albeit his eyes be enlight∣ned with the Light of the Lord,Prov. 29. which is true) if he measure a piece of Cloth to his Customer with his deceitful measure, though the Cloth be good, yet he not giving it its true measure, the simple-hearted is there∣by deceived, and knoweth it not till it be brought to a true measure, which doth answer the true Principle, or Light of God in the conscience to Justification, as
doth not the false, but contrariwise: Wherefore it is needful, and of absolute concernment, for the mind of every man male and female, to be guided and exer∣cised in the true manifestation of the Light of Jesus in the conscience; and so blessed is the man, the people, the family that bring their deeds to the Light, that they may be manifest they are wrought in God who is Light, who is Truth; and so what is here following, written and published, is to be tryed and proved by the Witness of God in every Conscience, which is true, and will answer to the same things or words that spring forth from its own clear nature. Therefore, when thou hast honestly read this throughout with a meek spirit of sobriety and moderation, that's single and pure, then with the same spirit of singleness and of true discerning, judge honestly, and cease from hastiness in such matters of Eternity, lest a place of Re∣pentance become finally hid from thine
eyes, not to Salvation, but contrariwise; which I desire not, neither doth the Lord, whose Servant, a living and true Wit∣ness, I am, for Him, his Truth and Peo∣ple, of these things and much more. Wherefore let the Reader see hereby, how that the Lord hath chosen the foolish things of this life to confound the wise, and that the living God Eternal hath chosen the weak things, to confound and bring to nought the things that are mighty, subtil, and potent; yea, base things, which are so deemed despisable and contemptible, yet behold God hath chosen them; and things that are not approvable in the sight of the prudent of this world, even to bring to nought things that are. But may some say, Wherefore, or why doth the most High, Wise, In∣visible, Immortal God do thus? My Answer is one and the same as the Apostle saith, viz. That no flesh should glory in His presence, who of
God is made in us, Wisdom, Righte∣ousness, Sanctification, and Redem∣ption. And why should it be accoun∣ted such a foolish thing in the eyes of the wise men f this world, to see the wisdom of God dispensed through a weak Vessel? as is a free-born woman from above, a weaker Vessel than that of the man. Now tell me, O man of understand∣ing, What must not the Spirit of Christ, or the same that is begotten of God in the female, as well as in the male, what must not (I say) the same Spirit of Life from God speak, but be limited in the weaker Vessel, in the foolish Vessel, in the Ves∣sel which is not esteemed, but base, con∣temptible and despised in the eyes of lofty man, that must be laid low, who excels in that wisdom and knowledge which is not from above, but otherwise, bruitish, and puffeth up the fleshly mind that's enmity to God, and is therefore to be confounded and moved backward, and
slain upon the Cross, which is the Power of God that crucifieth the lusts and in∣ordinate affections of the flesh, which thereby come to be silent before the Lord, who is that one and self-same Spirit that is quick and powerful; so that not any other spirit governs or rules over the members of the body, but that which cre∣ated the body; and every Member which is to have the Supream Authority and Preheminence, as well in the female as in the male; and so He the Spirit of Truth, that's to guide into all Truth; He, the Man, is not he to speak? viz. Christ in the male, the same in the female, where He is risen and manifest as King, Priest and Prophet, a Guide, Leader, and Commander in all equitable and just things which are truly honourable? But the Woman was in the trans∣gression against the Spirit; Flesh lust∣eth against the Spirit, saith the Apostle; and the Woman (that's in the trans∣gression) is to be under obedience, and to
be in silence, to learn in silence, and to ask her Husband at home: But what if she have a disorderly drunken husband (and not Christ the Man, the true Hus∣band, the true Lord) how can he teach her, seeing the Woman is to learn of her Husband in silence, and to be under o∣bedience (and not to usurp Authority over the Man) as also saith the Law, which hath dominion over all that are under it in the transgression? but the Spirit of Grace and Truth that's poured upon Sons and Daughters, teacheth us to deny the sin, and guideth from the same, and so maketh free from its Con∣demnation, and from under the Law, to be under the Grace and Truth that is in the one Seed, Christ, in the Male Christ, in the Female, the quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven: And those who are led and guided by this, are not under the Law, which saith, the wo∣man is not to usurp authority over the man, as also saith the able Minister
of the Mystery of the glory and riches of Eternity, which is Christ the fulness in his Saints, their hope of Life and Glory: But the Woman is to be under obedience, as also saith the Law; yea, but they that are led by the Spirit, are not under the Law, so are the Sons of God manifest; yet under the Grace covered; the same Grace with which the Man-Child, the holy Child Jesus was covered and filled with; the same, and no other but that which did and doth save the Saints from sin, and so from under the Law and its condemnation; and not only so, but al∣so the same Grace which bringeth Salva∣tion, and appeareth to all men; it tea∣cheth them not onely to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, but also to live sober∣ly and righteously in this present world. And verily this Grace is in them, which saves and justifieth them; and it's not of themselves, it is the gift of God. And such are the Servants of the li∣ving and true God, that have their
fruits (and possess the same) unto Ho∣liness; and not only so, but the end of the same, which is the pure manifestation of the Eternal Substance, to wit, Ever∣lasting Life, pre clean Power, which is the excellent Treasure in the Earthen Vessels, as saith the holy Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. But O ye Congregations of the dead! ye gathered Churches of so many Names and Heads, to you sounds my Voice, saying, What have ye done? Oh! how guilty do ye appear before mine eye that's single (in the Lord's Light) of despising Prophecying, and quenching the tender Spirit of Glory, which resteth at this day in and upon many Sons and Daugh∣ters; and behold, if ye can see how they o, and have prophesied in the Name of the Lord, and have fore-warned you of that which is justly come to pass upon you, whilst many of you despised and wondred, in the dayes of haughtiness, and its prosperity among you. But, O
my soul, how hast thou been wounded in me, whilst I have travelled and mourned over you! And so you have been found despising that, and quenching that Spi∣rit of Grace which teacheth the Saints in Light, and reproves for sin, and testi∣fieth against the World and its deeds, because they are evil. And this same Spirit strived long with you, and in you, and would have arisen up in its Authority, Power and great Glory from on high, had ye not preferred and exalted the spirit of this World in its proper place in you, above the Just and Long-suffering, which is but one and the same in male and fe∣male. Oh! what have you done? Can any of you yet smite upon your thigh, and say so yet? if ye can, enquire, enquire ye, the Watchman's voice is the same it was, and not otherwise; viz. Return, come; yea, return and come to the ten∣der Spirit of holiness, and of the gentle∣ness
of Christ, and his yoke of Self-de∣nial, and the daily Cross, they are the two great Ordinances which ye have left behind; and so the Vail and the Dark∣ness hath covered you; but the true Is∣raelites have Light in their dwellings, and their habitations are in the best of the Land of the living. Wherefore my spirit saith, Return, come and hearken to the Lamb's Voice, and now see whether ye can follow Him (or a stranger) wheresoever he goeth, that's the true Prophet, raised up like unto Moses, and obey his Voice, which savoureth not of this World; for so his Kingdom and Servants are not. There∣fore beware, lest your souls be cut off from the Land of the Living, and ye perish in the outward observations, (by which the Kingdom cometh not) among the Congregations of the dead, where ye are yet seeking the living; But I, as a Brother (even Joseph) tel you yet again, He is not there, but is arisen from the
dead, from death to life, who is the quick∣ning Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, over the Earth, over all the Land Aegypt, over the Land of Darkness; the same Lord, the same Spirit which hath done excellent things, is exalted in the new Heaven, and in the new Earth, wherein dwelleth Righteousness; and let the Vir∣gin-Daughter of Sion publish the same, even from hence forth to all generations; yea, and my spirit is ready to say, Amen. There was one that saw a little Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, and he well retained his sight so long un∣til (in the Light of the living) he saw the same which was so little, wax so great, that it became an exceeding great Mountain. Verily, the beloved City is manifest, set upon a holy Hill; it cannot be bid from them that see; the Glory of God doth enlighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof, and his Light is like
unto a Stone most precious, clear as Chrystal. The Fountain is opened free; come down from on high, and thou shalt see if thou dost thirst for Springs of Life. To the Light submit thy mind, and cease from strife, in the same to behold the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, from the false Church. Dan. Baker.
A SALUTATION and INFOR∣MATION to the whole Body of the Elect of God, whether gathered or scattered abroad upon the face of the whole Earth. O Ye Eternal and blessed Ones, whose dwelling is on high, in the fulness of all Beauty and Brightness, Glory, and everlasting Joy, Happiness and Peace for evermore; We who are poor Sufferers for the Seed of God, in the Covenant of Light, Life and Truth, do dearly salute and imbrace you all, according to our measures, Blessing, and Honour and Glo∣ry be given to our Lord God for ever, of all who know him, who hath counted us worthy, and hath chosen us among his faithful Ones, to bear his Name, and to witness forth his Truth, before the High
and Mighty men of the Earth, and to fight the Lord's Battel with his spiritual Wea∣pons, to the breaking down of strong holds, high lofty looks and vain imaginations, and spiritual wickedness in high places. The Lord did give us a prosperous Journey hither, and when we came to Legorn, we were refreshed with Friends [who were there before us] and they did get a passage for us (and lodging) but as soon as we heard of the Vessel, we did feel our Service. So we went into the City in the living Power of the Lord, and there were many tender hearts did visit us, to their comfort, and our joy: The little time we staid there, we gave some of our Books and one Paper: so journying towards A∣lexandria, the Captain told us that Malta was in the way, and he must put in there a small time. But before we came there, our burthen was so heavy, that I was made to cry out (saying) Oh we have a dread∣full Cup to drink at that place! Oh how am I straitned till it be accomplished! And when we came there, the Walls of the City were full of people; some stood on the top of the Walls, as if something had troubled them. Before we came there,
we stood upon the Deck of the Ship, and I looked upon them, and said in my heart, Shall ye destroy us? If we give up to the Lord, then he is sufficient to deliver us out of their hands; but if we disobey our God, all those could not deliver us out of his hand. So all fear of man was taken from us. The English Consul came aboard the Ship (as the Captain said) but we did not see him, and invited us to his House, it was the seventh, or last day of the week. The next morning, being moved of the Lord, we went a-shore, and the Consul met us, and we gave him a Paper, who sent us to his House with his Servant; and when we came there, at the present we were well entertained (like Princes) their Neighbours and Kinsfolk came in, and some Jesuites, and we gave them Books; they read a little, and laid them down, they were too hot: We declared our Mes∣sage to them in the Name of the Lord, and we gave some Books in the Street; so they were all set on work. Away went the Friars to the King (or Supream in the Island) and he would not meddle with us, but said, we were honest women, we might go about our business; and that
night we went a-board the Ship again: the Consul was troubled, for their snare was laid, and we felt it: Being moved of the Lord, we went in again the next day, and the Consul having a Sister in the Nun∣nery, desired us to go thither, that she might see us; and we went to them, and gave them a Boo; then to the Consuls we returned again, and sitting to wait to know the mind of the Lord, what he would have us to do, he said we must give in the great Paper; and if we would go to save our life, we should lose it.
Here followeth a Copy of some more words which they had written before the for∣mer was given forth. A True Declaration concerning the Lord's love to us in all our Voy∣age. We were at Sea, between London and Plymouth, many Weeks, and one day we had some tryals; and between Plymouth and Legorn we were 31. days, and we had many tryals and storms within and with∣out; but the Lord did deliver us out of all. And when we came to Legorn, with the rest of our friends, we went into the Town after we had product, and stayed there ma∣ny dayes, where we had service every day; for all sorts of People came unto us, but no man did offer to hurt us, yet we gave them Books; and having got passage in a Dutch ship, we sailed towards Cyprus, in∣tending to go to Alexandria; but the Lord had appointed something for us to do by the way, as he did make it manifest to us, as I did speak; for the Master of the ship had no business in the place, but being in company with another ship, which had
some business at the City of Malta, (in the Island of Malta, where Paul suffered shipwrack) and being in the Harbour, on the first day of the week, we being moved of the Lord, went into the Town, and the English Consul met us on the shore, and asked us conrning our coming, and we told him truth, and gave him some Books, and a Paper, and he told us there was an Inquisition, and he kindly entreated us to go to his house, and said, All that he had was at our service while we were there. And in the fear and dread of the Lord we went, and there came many to see us, and we called them to repentance, and many of them were tender, but the whole City is given to Idolatry. And we went a ship∣board that night, and the next day we be∣ing moved to go into the City again, dared not to flee the Cross, but in obedience went, desiring the will of God to be done. And when we came to the Governour, he told us that he had a sister in the Nunnery did desire to see us if we were free; and in the fear of God we went, and talked with them, and gave them a Book, and one of their Priests was with us (at the Nun∣nery) and had us into their place of Wor∣ship, and some would have us bow to the
high Altar, which we did deny; and ha∣ving a great burthen, we went to the Con∣sul again, and were waiting upon the Lord what to do, that we might know. And the Inquisitors sent for us, and when we came before them, they asked our Names, and the Names of our Husbands, and the Names of our Fathers and Mo∣thers, and how many Children we had; and they asked us, Wherefore we came into that Country? And we told them, We were the Servants of the living God, and were moved to come and call them to Repen∣tance; and many other Questions, and they went away, but commanded that we should be stayed there. And the next day they came again, and called for us, and we came; but they would examine us apart, and called Sarah, and they asked, Whether she was a true Catholick? She said, That she was a true Christian that worshippeth God in Spirit and in Truth; and they proffer∣ed her the Crucifix, and would have had her swear that she would speak the Truth; and she said she should speak the Truth, but she would not swear, for Christ com∣manded her not to swear, saying, Swear not at all: And the English Consul perswaded her with much entreating, to swear, say∣ing,
None should do her any harm: But she denied; and they took some Books from her, and would have had her swear by them, but she would not: And they asked, Wherefore she brought the Books? And she said, Because we could not speak their Language, and they might know where∣fore we came; and they asked of her, what George Fox was; and she said, he was a Minister. And they asked wherefore she came thither? she said, To do the Will of God, as she was moved of the Lord. And they asked, How the Lord did appear unto her? And she said, by his Spirit. And they asked, Where she was when the Lord ap∣peared unto her? And she said, upon the Way. And they asked, Whether she did see his Presence, and hear his Voice? And she said, she did hear his Voice, and saw his Presence. And they asked, What he said to her? And she said, the Lord told her she must go over the Seas to do his Will. And they asked, How she knew it was the Lord? And she said, He bid her go, and his living Presence should go with her, and he was faithful that had promised, for she did feel his living Presence. So they went away. Two dayes after they came again, and called for me, and offered me the Crucifix,
and told me, the Magistrate commanded me to swear that I would speak the Truth. And I told them that I should speak the Truth, for I was a Witness for God; but I should not swear, for a greater than the Magi∣strate saith, Swear not at all; but let your yea, be yea; and your nay, nay; for whatso∣ever is more cometh of evil. But said they, You must obey the Justice, and he commands you to swear. I said, I should obey Justice, but if I should swear, I should do an unjust thing; for (the just) Christ said, Swear not at all. And they asked me, Whether I did own that Christ that died at Jerusalem? I answered, We owned the same Christ, and no other, he is the same yesterday, to day and for ever. And they asked me, What I would do at Jerusalem? I said, I did not know that I should go there, but I should go to Alex∣andria; and they said, What to do? and I said, to do the Will of God; and if the Lord did open my mouth, I should call them to Repentance, and declare to them the day of the Lord, and direct their minds from darkness to Light. Then they asked me, Whether I did tremble when I did preach? And I told them, I did tremble when the power of
God was upon me. And they asked, Whe∣ther I did see the Lord? I said, God was a Spirit, and he was spiritually discerned. That day that we were had from the English Consuls to the Inquisition, the Con∣suls Wife brought us meat to eat, and as she past by me, I was smote with an Arrow to the heart, and I eard a voice, saying, It is finished, she hath obtained her purpose. I did not taste of her meat, but went aside and wept bitterly. The Consul did affirm to us the night before, that there was no such thing, (as to ensnare us) intended; but it was in us as fire, and our souls were heavy even unto death; for many dayes before we saw in a Vision of our going there, (to prison) and we said, Pilate would do the Jews a pleasure, and wash his hands in innocency. He required a sign of me, if we were the Messengers of God; and the Lord gave me a sign for him, that stuck by him while he lived. The same day it was he called me, and told me, the Inquisition had sent for us, and they had Papers from Rome, and he did hope we should be set free, which was a lye; For he knew there was a room prepared for us. And there came a man with a black Rod, and the Chancellor and the Consul, and
had us before their Lord Inquisitor, and he asked us, Whether we had changed our minds yet? We said, Nay, we should not change from the Truth. He asked, What new Light we talkt of? We said, no new Light, but the same the Prophets and Apostles bare te∣stimony to. Then he said. How came this Light to be lost ever since the Primitive times? We said, it was not lost, men had it still (in them) but they did not know it, by reason that the night of Apostacy had, and hath overspread the Nations. Then he said, If we would change our minds, and do as they would have us to do, we should say so, or else they would use us as they pleased. We said, the Will of the Lord be done. And he arose up and went his way with the Consul, and left us there. And the man with the black Rod, and the Keeper, took us and put us into an inner room in the Inquisition, which had but two little holes in it for light or air; but the glory of the Lord did shine round about us. After the Consul came with tears in his eyes, and said, he was as sorry as for his own flesh, but there was some hopes in time; and so he went away, but never had peace while he lived. He would have given up the thirty pieces of silver again, but it
would not be received; the Witness was risen much in him, but slavish fear possest him. This was upon the sixt day of the Week, and our stomacks were taken away from all meat. The next second day came a Magistrate, two Friars, & the man with the black Rod, and a Scribe, and the Keeper to the Inqui∣sition, to sit upon Judgement, and examin∣ed us apart, concrning our faith in Christ. The Magistrate would have had us to swear, and we answered, No; Christ said, Swear not at all; and so said James the Apostle. He asked, if we would speak Truth? We said, Yea. He asked, Whether we did be∣lieve the Creed? We said, we did believe in God, and in Jesus Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered at Jerusalem under Pilate, and arose again from the dead the third day, and ascended to his Father, and shall come to judge∣ment, to judge both quick and dead. He asked, How we did believe the Resurrection? We answered, we did believe that the just and the unjust should arise, according to the Scriptures. He said, Do you believe in the Saints, and pray to them? We said, we did believe the Communion of Saints, but we did not pray to them, but to God onely,
in the Name of Jesus Christ. He asked, Whether we did believe in the Catholick Church? We said, we did believe the true Church of Christ; but the word Catholick we have not read in Scripture. He asked, If we believed a Purgatory? We said, No; but a Heaven and a Hell. The Friar said, We were commanded to pray for the dead; for those that were in Heaven had no need, and they that were in Hell, there is no redemption; therefore there must be a Purgatory. He ask∣ed, If we believed their holy Sacrament? We said, we never read the Word Sacra∣ment in Scripture. The Friar replyed, Where we did read in our Bibles, Sanctifica∣tion, it was Sacrament in theirs. He said, Their holy Sacrament was Bread and Wine, which they converted into the Flesh and Blood of Christ, by the virtue of Christ. We said, they did work Miracles then, for Christ's virtue is the same as it was when he turn∣ed Water into Wine, at the Marriage in Canaan. He said, If we did not eat the Fesh, and drink the Blood of the Son of God, we had no Life in us. We said, the Flesh and Blood of Christ is spiritual, and we do feed upon it daily; for that which is begotten of God in us, can no more live without spi∣ritual food, than our temporal bodies can
without temporal food. He said, That we did never hear Mass. We said, we did hear the voice of Christ, he only had the words of eternal Life, and that was sufficient for us. He said, We were Hereticks and Heathens. We said, they were Hereticks that lived in sin and wickedness, and such were Heathen that knew not God. He asked about our Meetings in England; And we told them the truth to their amaze∣ment. And they asked, Who was the Head of our Church? We said, Christ. And they asked, What George Fox is? And we said, He is a Minister of Christ. They asked, Whether he sent us? We said, No; The Lord did move us to come. The Friar said, We were deceived, and had not the faith: but we have all virtues. We said, that faith was the ground from whence virtues do pro∣ceed. They said, If we would take their ho∣ly Sacrament, we might have our liberty; or else the Pope would not leave us for millions of Gold, but we should lose our souls and our bo∣dies too. We said, the Lord had provided for our souls, and our bodies were free∣ly given up to serve the Lord. They askt us, If we did not believe Marriage was a Sacrament? We said, it was an Ordinance of God. They askt us, If we did believe
men could forgive sins? We said, none could forgive sins but God onely. They brought us that Scripture, Whose sins ye re∣mit in earth, shall be remitted in heaven. We said, all Power was Gods, & he could give it to whom he would (that were born of the eternal Spirit, and guided by the same; such have power to do the Fathers Will, as I an∣swered a Friar also in the City of Naples) and they were silent, the Power greatly working. We asked them wherein we had wronged them, that we should be kept Prisoners all days of our lives; and said, Our innocent blood would be required at their hands. The Friar said, He would take our blood upon him, and our journey into Turky too. We told him, the time would come he would find he had enough upon him without it. They said, The Pope was Christ's Vicar, and we were of his Church, and what he did, was for the good of our Souls. We answered, The Lord had not committed the charge of our souls to the Pope, nor to them; for he had taken them into his own possession, glory was to his Name for ever. They said, We must be obedient. We said, we were obe∣dient to the government of Christs Spirit. The Friar said, None had the true Light
but the Catholicks; the Light that we had; was the spirit of the Devil. We said, Wo to him that calleth Jesus accursed: Can the Devil give power over sin and iniquity? then he would destroy his own kingdom. He said, We were laught at, and mockt at f every one. We said, What did become of the mockers? It was no matter. He said, We did run about to preach, and had not the true Faith. We said the true Faith is held in a pure Conscience void of offence towards God and man; and we had the true Faith. And he said, There was but one Faith, either theirs, or ours; and ask'd us which it was? We said, Every one had the true Faith, that did believe in God, and in Jesus whom he had sent; but they that say they do believe, and do not keep his Commandments, are lyars, and the truth is not in them. He said it was true: but he did thirst daily for our blood, because we would not turn, and urged us much about our Faith and Sacrament, to bring us under their Law; but the Lord preserved us. They said, It was impossible we could live long in that hot room. So the next week-day they sate in Council; but, Oh how the swelling Sea did rage, and the proud waves
did foam, even unto the clouds of Heaven! and Proclamation was made at the Prison-Gate, we did not know the words, but the fire of the Lord flamed against it, [K.] my life was smitten, and I was in a very great agony, so that sweat was as drops of blood, and the Righteous One was laid into a Se∣pulcher, and a great stone was roll'd to the door; but the Prophecy was, that he should rise again the third day, which was fulfil∣led. But the next day they came to sit up∣on Judgement again, [but I say, in the true Judgment they sate not, but upon it they got up unjustly above the Righteous, and upon the same they sate; a Child of Wisdom may understand] and they brought many Propositions written in a Paper, but the Friar would suffer the Magistrate to propound but few to us, for fear the Light would break forth: But they ask'd, how many Friends of ours were gone forth in the Ministry, and into what parts? We told them what we did know. They said, All that came where the Pope had any thing to do, should never go back again. We said, the Lord was as sufficient for us, as he was for the Children in the fiery Furnace, and our trust was in God. They said, we were but few, and had been but a little while, but they
were many Countries, and had stood many hun∣dred years, and wrought many Miracles; and we had none. We said, we had thou∣sands at our Meetings, but none of us dare speak a word, but as they are eternally mo∣ved of the Lord: and we had Miracles; The Blind receive their sight, the Deaf do hear, and the Dumb d speak, the Poor do receive the Gospel, the Lame do walk, and the Dead are raised. He asked, Why I look'd so, whether my Spirit was weak? I said, Nay, my body was weak, because I eat no meat, [it was in their Lent] He of∣fered me a Licence to eat flesh. I said I could not eat any thing at all, the ter∣rors of death were strongly upon me. But three nights after the Lord said un∣to me, about the eleventh hour, Arise, and put on your clothes. I said, When wilt thou come, Lord? He said, VVhether at midnight, or at Cock-crow, do thou watch. My Friend and I arose, and the Lord said, Go, stand at the Door. And we stood at the door in the Power of the Lord, I did scarce know whether I was in the body, or out of the body. And about the twelfth hour there came many to the Prison-Gate: We heard the Keyes, and looked when they would come in. They
ran to and fro till the fourth hour: and the Lord said, he had smote them with blind∣ness, they could not find the way. And we went to bed, where I lay night and day for twelve dayes together, fasting and sweating, that my bed was wet, and great was our affliction. The tenth day of my fast there came two Fryars, the Chancellor, the man with the black Rod, and a Physician, and the Keeper; and the Friar commanded my dear Friend to go out of the room, and he came and pull'd my hand out of the bed, and said, Is the Devil so great in you, that you cannot speak? I said, Depart from me thou worker of iniquity, I know thee not; the Power of the Lord is upon me, and thou callest him Devil. He took his Crucifix to strike me in the mouth; and I said, Look here! and I asked him, Whether it were that Cross which crucified Paul to the World, and the World unto him? And he said, it was. I denied him, and said, the Lord had made me a Witness for himself against all workers of iniquity. He bid me be obedient, and went to strike me. I said, Wilt thou strike me? He said, he would. I said, Thou art out of the Apo∣stles Doctrine, they were no strikers; I
deny thee to be any of them who went in the Name of the Lord. He said, he had brought me a Physician in charity. I said, the Lord was my Physician, and my sa∣ving-health. He said, I should be whipt, and quartered, and burnt that night in Malta, and my Mate too: wherefore did we come to teach them? I told him I did not fear, the Lord was on our side, and he had no power but what he had received and if e did not use it to the same end the Lord gave it him, the Lord would judge him. And they were all smitten as dead men, and went away. And as soon as they were gone, the Lord said unto me, The last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death; and the Life arose over Death, and I glorified God. The Friar went to my Friend, and told her, I called him worker of iniquity. Did she, said Sarah? Art thou without sin? He said he was; Then she hath wronged thee. [But I say, the wise Reader may judge:] For between the eighth and ninth hour in the evening, he sent a Drum to proclaim at the Prison-Gate; We know not what it was, but the Fire of the Lord consumed it. And about the fourth hour in the morning they were coming with a Drum and Guns;
and the Lord said unto me, Arise out of thy Grave-clothes: And we arose, and they came up to the Gate to devour us in a moment. But the Lord lifted up his Standard with his own Spirit of Might, and made them to retreat, and they fled as dust before the wind, praises and honour be given to our God for ever. I went to bed again, and the Lord said unto me, He∣rod will seek the young Child's life, to destroy it yet again; and great was my affliction, so that my dear Fellow-Labourer in the Work of God, did look every hour when I should depart the body for many dayes together; and we did look every hour when we should be brought to the stake day and night for several weeks, and Isaac was freely offered up: but the Lord said, he had provided a Ram in the bush. Afterwards the Friar came again with his Physician; I told him, that I could not take any thing, unless I was moved of the Lord. He said, we must never come forth of that Room while we lived, and we might thank God and him it was no worse, for it was like to be worse. We said, if we had died, we had died as innocent as ever did Servants of the Lord. He said it was well we were innocent. They did (also) look
still when I would die. The Friar bid my Friend take notice what torment I would be in at the hour of death; thousands of Devils (he said) would fetch my soul to Hell. She said, she did not fear any such thing. And he asked▪ if I did not think it expe∣dient for the Elders of the Church to pray over the sick? I said, Yea, such as were eternal∣ly moved of the Spirit of e Lord. He fell down on his knees and did howl, and wish bitter wishes upon himself if he had not the true Faith: but we denyed him. The Physician was in a great rage at Sa∣rah, because she could not bow to him, but to God only. The last day of my Fast I began to be an hungry, but was afraid to eat, the Enemy was so strong; but the Lord said unto me, If thine Enemy hunger, féed him; if he thirst, give him drink: in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. I did eat, and was re∣freshed, and glorified God; and in the midst of our extremity the Lord sent his holy Angels to comfort us, so that we re∣joyced and magnified God; and in the time of our great tryal, the Sun and Earth did mourn visibly three dayes, and the
horror of Death and pains of Hell was up∣on me; the Sun was darkned, the Moon was turned into blood, and the Stars did fall from Heaven, and there was great tribulation ten dayes, such as never was from the beginning of the world; and then I did see the Son of man coming in the Clouds with Power and great Glory, triumphing over his Enemies; the Hea∣vens were on fire, and the Elements did melt with fervent heat, and the Trumpet sounded out of Sion, and an Allarm was struck up in Jerusalem, and all the Ene∣mies of God were called to the great Day of Battel of the Lord. And I saw a great Wonder in Heaven, the Woman cloathed with the Sun, and had the Moon under her feet, and a Crown of twelve Stars upon her head, and she travelled in pain ready to be delivered of a Man-child; and there was a great Dragon stood ready to devour the Man-child as soon as it was born: and there was given to the Woman two wings of a great Eagle to carry her into the De∣sert, where she should be nourished for a time, times, and half a time; and the Dragon cast a Flood out of his mouth, &c. And I saw War in Heaven, Michael and his Angels against the Dragon and his An∣gels,
and the Lamb and his Army did over∣come them. And there was a Trumpet sounded in Heaven, and I heard a Voice saying to me, The City is divided into thrée parts. And I heard another Trum∣pet sounding, and I looked and saw an Angel go down into a great Pool of water, and I heard a Voice saying unto me, VVhosoever goeth down next after the troubling of the waters, shall be healed of whatsoever Disease he hath. And I heard another Trumpet sounding, and I heard a Voice saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, Babylon the great is fallen. And I looked and saw the smoak of her torment how it did ascend; and I heard another Trumpet sounding, and I heard a Voice saying, Rejoyce and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Hea∣ven: for he that is mighty hath magni∣fied you, and Holy is his Name: And from henceforth all generations shall call you blessed. And I heard another Trum∣pet sounding in Heaven, and I heard a Voice saying unto me, Behold! and I looked, and I saw Pharaoh and his Host pursuing the Children of Israel, and he and his Host were drowned in the Sea.
Dear Friends and People, whatsoever I have written, it is not because it is re∣corded in the Scripture, or that I have heard of such things; but in obedience to the Lord I have written the things which I did hear, see, tasted and handled of the good Word of God, to the praise of his Name for ever. And all this time my dear Sister in Christ Jesus, was in as great affliction as I (in a manner) to see my strong Travel night and day; yet she was kept in the patience, and would willingly have given me up to death, that I might have been at rest; yet she would have been left in as great dan∣ger, wo and misery, as ever was any poor captive for the Lord's truth; for they did work night and day with their Divinati∣ons, Inchantments and Temptations, thin∣king thereby to bring us under their pow∣er; but the Lord prevented them every way, so that great was their rage; and they came often with their Physician, and said it was in charity: I askt them whether they did keep us in that hot room to kill us, and bring us a Physitian to make us alive. The Fryar said, The Inquisitor would lose his Head if he should take us thence; and it was better to keep us there, than to kill us.
The Room was so hot and so close, that we were fain to rise often out of our bed, and lie down at a chink of their door for Air to fetch breath; and with the fire with∣in, and the heat without, our skin was like sheeps Leather, and the Hair did fall off our heads, and we did fail often. Our Affli∣ctions and Burthens were so eat, that when it was day we wished for night; and when it was night we wished for day; we sought death, but could not find it; we de∣sired to die, but death fled from us: We did eat our bread weeping, and mingled our drink with our Tears. We did write to the Inquisitor, and laid before him our Innocency, and our Faithfulness, in giving our Testimony for the Lord amongst them: And I told him, if it were our Blood they did thurst after, they might take it any o∣ther way, as well as to smother us up in that hot room. So he sent the Fryar, and he took away our Ink-horns (they had our Bibles before). We asked why they took away our goods? They said, It was all theirs, and our Lives too, if they would. We asked, how we had forfeited our lives unto them; they said, For bringing Books and Papers. We said, if there were any thing in them that was not true, they might
write against it. They said, They did scorn to write to Fools and Asses that did not know true Latine. And they told us, the Inqui∣sitor would have us separated, because I was weak, and I should go into a cooler room; but Sarah should abide there; I took her by the arm, and said, The Lord hath joyned us together, and wo be to them that should part us. I said, I rather chuse to dye there with my Friend, than to part from her. He was smitten, and went away, and came no more in five weeks; and the door was not opened in that time. Then they came again to part us, but I was sick, and broken out from head to foot. They sent for a Do∣ctor, and he said, We must have air, or else we must dye. So the Lord compelled them to go to the Inquisitor, and he gave order for the door to be set open six hours in a day: they did not part us till Ten weeks after: But oh the dark clouds and the sharp show∣ers the Lord did carry us through! Death it self had been better than to have parted in that place. They said, we corrupted each other, and that they thought when we were parted, we would have bowed to them. But they found we were more stronger after∣wards than we were before; the Lord our God did fit us for every condition. They
came and brought a Scourge of small Hemp, and asked us, If we would have any of it. They said, They did whip themselves till the blood did come. We said, that could not reach the Devil, he sate upon the heart. They said, All the men and women of Mal∣ta were for us, if we would be Catholicks, for there would be none like unto us. We said, the Lord had changed us into that hich chan∣ged not. They said, All their holy Women did pray for us, and we should be honoured of all the World if we would turn. We said, we were of God, and the whole world did lye in wickedness, and we denied the ho∣nor of the World, and the glory too. They said, We should be honoured of God too, but now we were hated of all. We said, it is an evident token whose Servants we are; the servant is not greater than the Lord; and that Scrpture was fulfilled which saith, All this will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. Upon a First day of the week, we were fasting and waiting upon the Lord till the second hour (after mid-day) and the Fry∣ars came and commanded us, In the Name of the Lord to kneel down with them to prayer. We said, we could not pray but as we were moved of the Lord. They commanded
us the second time. Then they kneeled down by our bed side, and prayed, and when they had done, they said, They had tryed our Spirits, now they knew what Spirit we were of. We told them, they could not know our Spirits, unless their minds were turned to the Light of the Lord Jesus in their Consciences. The English Fryar was wroth, and shewed us his Crucifix, and bid us look there. We said, the Lord saith, Thou shalt not make to thy self the Likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water under the earth; thou shalt not bow to them, nor worship them, but I the Lord thy God only. He was so mad, he called for the Irons to chain Sarah, be∣cause she spake so boldly to him: She bow∣ed her head, and said to him, Not only my feet, but my hands and my neck also for the Testimony of Jesus. His wrath was soon appeased, and he said, He would do us any good he could; he did see what we did was not in malice: the power had broken him down for that present. They came to us often, saying, If you would do but a little, you should be set at liberty; but you will do nothing at all, but are against every thing. We said, we are against nothing that is of God, but would do any thing that might make for God's glory.
Many did think we should not have been heard nor seen after we were in the Inqui∣sition; but the Lord did work wonderfully for us, and his Truth: For they new built the Inquisition, and there were many La∣bourers for a year and a half, and the great Men came to see the building; and we were carried forth with great ower to de∣clare in the Name of the Lord Jesus, not fearing the face of man; the Lord was our strength: But behold they threatned us with Irons and Halters, for preaching the Light so boldly; and they said, None ought to preach but Prelates to a Bishop (as they use to say in England.) Now their Lord Inquisitor (so called) and the Magi∣strates were kept moderate towards us, and gave order, we should have Ink and Paper to write to England. But we were hindered still; and we do believe they would have set us at liberty, had it not been for the Fryars; it was they that wrote against us still to the Pope, and to the Inquisitor; and we told them so. They sought three quar∣ters of a year to part us, before they could bring it to pass; and when they did part us, they prepared a Bed for Sarah, and their own Catholicks lay upon the Boards, that had not beds of their own. When we were
parted, the Lord would not suffer me to keep any money; I knew not the mind of God in it. Their Fryars came and said, We should never see one anothers faces again, but the Inquisitor should send me my food. But the Lord would not suffer him to send it. Sarah did send me such as she could get, near three weeks time. Then the Fry∣ar came and askt me, what I did want? I said, one to wash my Linnen, and some∣thing hot to eat; I was weak. He sent to Sarah to know if she would do it for me. She said she would. And by that means we did hear of each other every day. The Fryar said, You may free your self of misery when you will; you may make your self a Catholick, and have your freedom to go where you will. I told him, I might make my self a Catho∣lick, and have a name that I did live, when I was dead; and said, he had Catholicks enough already; he should bring some of them to the Light in their Consciences, that they might stand in awe, and sin not. He said, He would lose one of his fingers if we would be Catholicks. I said, it was Babylon that was built with Blood; Sion was re∣deemed through Iudgment. They would have had me to set a Picture at my beds head, for a representation. I askt them if
they did think I did lack a Calf to wor∣ship? And whether they did not walk by the Rule of Scripture? The Fryar said, They did, but they had Traditions too. I said, if their traditions did derogate or dissent from the fundamentals of Christ's Do∣ctrine, the Prophets and Apostles, I deni∣ed them in the Name of the Lord. He said, They did not. I askt  where they had their Rule to burn them that could not joyn with them for Conscience? He said, St. Paul did worse, he gave them to the De∣vil, and that they did judge all damned that were not of their Faith. And he askt whe∣ther we did judge them so? I said, No, we had otherwise learned Christ. I askt him, why they did bind that which the Lord did not bind? and set tyes, chains and limits, where the Lord did not? as in meats and drinks, or in respect of dayes or times, which the Apostle called beggarly Elements, and Rudiments of the world, and forbidding to marry (a Doctrine of Devils said I.) He could no tell what to say, but told me, That St. Peter was the Pope of Rome, and did build an Altar there, and the Pope was his Successor, and he could do what he would. I denied that, and said, We never read any such thing in Scripture; for Peter, Christ's
Apostle, had no money to build Altars; he himself did offer Sacrifice upon the Altars made without hands. And he said, We were but a few, and risen up but late, and they were many, and had stood Fourteen hundred years; and God was a lyar if they had not the true Faith; for he had confirmed it to them by a thousand miracles. I said, the few number, and the little Flock is Christ's Flock. He askt if we were? then all the World, said he. I said, Our Faith was from the beginning. Abel was of our Church; and the World by Wisdom did not know God. He went to Sarah with the same Tempta∣tion, and she told him also, that Abel was of our Church. He said, Abel was a Catho∣lick, and Cain and Judas were so. She said, Then the Devil was a Catholick, and she would not be one. He threatned her, and told her, how many they were. She said, Daniel was but one; and if there were no more but she her self, she would not turn; but took her fingers and shewed them, if they would tear her joint∣meal, she did believe the Lord would en∣able her to endure it for the Truth. So they went from one to another, think∣ing to entangle us in our talk; but we were guided by one Spirit, and spake one and
the same thing in effect, so that they had not a jot nor tittle against us, but for righte∣ousness sake: Our God did keep us by his own Power & Holiness out of their hands; honor and praises be given to his powerful Name for ever. He (the said Fryar) came to me another time like a Bear robbed of her Whelps, and told me, If I would be a Catholick, I should say so; otherwise they wo use me bad∣ly, and I should never see the face of Sarah again, but should dye by my self, and a thou∣sand Devils should carry my Soul to Hell. I asked him if he were the Messenger of God to me. He said he was. I said, What is my sin, or wherein have I provoked the Lord, that he doth send me such a strait Message? He said, Because I would not be a Catholick. I said, I deny thee and thy Mes∣sage too, and the Spirit which spake in thee; the Lord never spake it. He said, that he would lay me in a whole pile of Chains, where I should see neither Sun nor Moon. I said, He could not separate me from the Love of God in Christ Jesus, lay me where he would. He said, He would give me to the Devil. I said, I did not fear all the Devils in Hell, the Lord was my Keeper; though he had the Inquisition, with all the Coun∣tries
round about, on his side, and was alone by my self, I did not fear them; if there were thousands more, the Lord was on my right hand, and the worst they could do, was but to kill the body; they could not touch my life no more than the Devil could Job's. He said, That I should never go out of that Room alive. I said, the Lord was sufficient to deliver me: But whether he would or would not, I would not forsake a living Fountain to drink at a broken Ci∣stern: And they had no Law to keep us there, but such a Law as Ahab had for Na∣both's Vineyard. He curst himself, and cal∣led upon his gods, and went forth; and as he was making fast the door, he put in his hand at the hole of the door, and said, Abide there Member of the Devil. I said, The Devil's Members did the Devil's Works; the Woes and Plagues of the Lord would be upon them for it. He went and told the Inquisitor of it, and he laught at him: I saw it, and felt it in that which is Eternal. I was moved out of that Room before he came again; and when he came; he brought one of the Inquisitors men with him, and two very good Hens, and said, The Lord Inquisitor had sent them in love to me. I said, his love I did receive, but I
could not take his Hens, for it was not the practice of the Servants of the Lord to be chargeable to any while they have of their own. He said, We must not count any thing our own; for in the Primitive times they did sell their Possessions, and laid them down at the Apostles feet. He said, We should not want any thing if they did spend a thou∣sand Crowns. I believe he woud have had us laid down our money at his feet. He said, I was proud, because I would not take the Inquisitors Hens when he sent them me in charity. I asked whether he kept me in Prison, and sent me his Charity. He said, It was for the good of our Souls he kept us in prison. I told him, our Souls were out of the Inquisitors reach, or his either: He told me before, If we had not been going to preach, we might have gone where we would. I askt him, What should our souls have done then? and why their love should extend more to us, than to their own Family? They could not charge us with Sin, and they did commit all manner of Sin; they might put them into the Inquisition, and bid turn. He said again, We had not the true Faith, and shewed me his Crucifix, and askt me, If I thought he did worship that? I askt him what he did do with it? He said, It was a
Representation. I said, it did not represent Christ, for he was the express Image of his Father's Glory, which is Light and Life. I said, if he could put any life in any of his images, he might bring them to me. And I askt him what Representation Daniel had in the Lyons Den; or Jonas in the Whales belly; they cryed unto the Lord, and he delivered them. He said, I talkt like a mad woman, I talkt so much against their Idols. He was in a rage, and said, He would give me to the Devil. I bid him give his own, I am the Lord's. He stood up, and said, He would do by me as the Apostles did by Ananias and Saphira. He stood up and opened his mouth; and I stood up to him, and denied him in the Name of the Lord, the living God, and said, he had no power over me. And away he went to Sarah with the Hens, and told her, that I was sick, and the Lord Inquisitor had sent two Hens, and I would be glad to eat a piece of one if she would dress one of them presently, and the o∣ther to morrow. [Mark this Deceiver, this Lyar!] But she standing in the Counsel of the Lord, answered him accordingly as I did; and he carried them away again. We did not dare to take them, the Lord did forbid us. He said, You would fain be
burned, because you would make the World be∣lieve you did love God so well as to suffer in that kind. I said, I did not desire to be burnt; but if the Lord did call me to it, I did believe he would give me power to under∣go it for his Truth; and if every hair of my head was a body, I could offer them up all for the Testimony of Jesus. He came twice to know whether I had not been inspired of the Holy Ghost to be a Catholick, since I came into the Inquisition. I said, No; he said, We were; he said, We called the Spirit of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Devil. We said, the Spirit of the Holy Ghost in us will resist the Devil. We told him, the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost was never wrought in the Will of man, nor in man's time, but in the Will of God, and in God's time. He asked, How we did know a clean from an unclean Spirit? We said, An unclean spirit did burden the Seed of God, and dam up the Springs of Life; and a clean Spirit would open the Spring of Life, and refresh the Seed; it was a Riddle to him, but he said it was true: he would assent to pure Truth some∣times. We asked him, Whether every man and woman did not stand guilty before God of
all the Sins they ever committed before Regeneration? He said, Yea. And he did confess all their Learning and Languages (in their places) was but to serve the Lord. We told him, all their Praying, Preaching and Crouding, was no more accepted than Cain's Sacrifice, unless they were moved of the eternal Spirit of the Lord. We askt him, If he that was in them, was greater than he that was in us; and why they had not overcome us all that time? We were very sensible of their workings day and night: He said, Because we resisted still. We askt him for our Bibles. He said, We should never see them again, they were false. We said, if they were conjuring Books, they had no warrant from the Lord to take them from us. They alwayes came two Fryars at a time, and they would fall down and howl, and wish bitter wishes upon themselves if they were not in the Truth. We would deny them, and preach Truth to them, the Light of the Lord Jesus in the Consciences of every one, to lead them to a pure life; and did ask them where the pure and holy Life was, and what all of them did do, that the People did live in sin and all manner of wickedness? and whether Words and
Forms would serve without Life and Pow∣er? He was as bloody a fiery Serpent, as e∣ver was born of a woman, and did strike as hard at our Lives, and would hold up his hand often to strike us, but had never the power, he would quickly be cut down, that he would say, we were good women, and he would do us any good. He was compelled to work for us sometimes, and would say it was for God's sake, and would have us thank him for it. We would tell him, those that did any thing for God, did not look for a reward from man. He said, We were the worst of all creatures, and we should be used worse than any; the Turks, Arminians, Pro∣testants and Lutherans should be used better than we. We said, the pure Life was ever counted the worst, and we must suffer; we were the Lord's, and could trust him; let him do what he would with us, we did not fear any evil tydings; we were setled and grounded in the Truth; and the more they did persecute us, the more stronger we did grow; We were bold and valiant for God's Trh, that whatsoever we did suf∣fer, we could not fear: We were separa∣ted One year; I had neither Fire nor Candle in that time above two hours, none did bring me any, nor I had not freedom to call for any.
The Fryars went to Sarah, and told her, if she would, she should go forth of the Pri∣son, and say nothing, nor do nothing. She said, she would upon that account. He said, they would come in the morning, and so they did; but the Lord saw their deceit, and fore-warned Sarah, and bid her mind Esau, who sold his Birth-right for a morsel of meat; and Judas, that betrayed his Master for thir∣ty pieces of Silver: That when they came, she (was strengthned against them, and) said, she stood in the Counsel of God, and could take up nothing in her own will; they had not power to have her forth. They said the Inquisitor said, If we did want Lin∣nen, Woollen, Stockens, Shooes or Money, we should have it. But there was a poor English Man, heard that Sarah was in a Room with a window next the Street, it was high; he got up, and spake a few words to her, and they came violently and hall'd him down, and cast him into Prison upon Life and Death: And the Friars came to know of us whe∣ther he had brought any Letters. We said, No; I did not see him. They said, they did think he would be hang'd for it. He was one that they had taken from the Turks, and made a Catholick of him. Sa∣rah
wrote a few lines to me of it, and said, She did think the English Friars were the chief actors of it (we had a private way to send to each other.) I wrote to her a∣gain, and after my Salutation, I said, Whereas she said the Friars were the chief actors, she might be sure of that, for they did hasten to fill up their measures; but I believe the Lord will preserve the poor man for his love; I am made to seek the Lord for him with tears: and I desired she would send him something once a day, if the Keeper would carry it; and I told her of the glorious Manifestations of God to my Soul, for her comfort, so that I was ra∣vished with Love, and my Beloved was the chiefest of ten thousands; and how I did not fear the face of any man, though I did feel their arrows, for my Physician is nigh me; and how I was waiting upon the Lord, and saw our safe return into England, and I was talking with G. F. to my great re∣freshment: The Name of G. F. did prick them to the heart. I said, it was much they did not tempt us with Money. I bid her take heed, the Light would discover it; and many more things, let it come under what cover it would. And this Paper came to the Friars hands,
by what means we could never tell, but as the Light did shew us, the Lord would have it so; it smote the Friar, that he was tormented many dayes; and he translated it into Italian, and laid it before their Lord Inquisitor, and got the Inquisitor's Lieute∣nant, and came to me with both the Pa∣pers in his hand, and askt me, If I could read it? I said, yea, I writ it. O! did you indeed (said he.) And what is it you say of me here? That which is truth, said I. Then he said, Where is the Paper Sarah sent? bring it, or else I will search the Trunk, and every where else. I bid him search where he would. He said, I must tell what man it was that brought me the Ink, or else I should be tyed with Chains presently. I told him I had done no∣thing but what was just and right in the sight of God, and what I did suffer would be for Truth's sake; and I did not care, I would not meddle nor make with he poor Workmen. He said, For God's sake tell me what Sarah did write? I told him, a few words, and said it was truth. Said he, You say it is much we do not tempt you with Money. And in a few hours they came and tempted us with Money often. So the Lieutenant took my Ink and threw it a∣way; and they were smitten as if they
would have fallen to the ground, and went their way: I saw them no more in three Weeks; but the poor man was set free the next morning. They went to Sarah, and told her, that I had honestly confest all, and that she was best to confess too; and threatned her with a Halter, and to take away a Bed and Trunk, and her Money, to have half of it for me. She an∣swered, she might not fend to me any more. She askt him, Whether he was a Minister of Christ, or a Magistrate? if he were a Magistrate, he might take her mo∣ney, but she would not give it him: And they that were with him, said, No, he should not meddle with any thing. He was a bitter wicked man. He told her, She was possest. She answered and said, She was with the power of an endless Life. The Lord was not wanting to us at any time, for Power nor Words to stop the mouths of gain-sayers of his Truth, nei∣ther in Revelations nor Visions; Praises be to his Name for ever: He kept us in our weakest condition, bold for his Truth, declaring against all sin and wickedness, so that many were convinced, but did not dare to own it, for fear of Faggot and Fire. There were none that had any thing to say
against what we spake, but the Friars, but would have us to joyn with them. There were none did come into the Inquisition, but the Judgments of the Lord would be upon them, so that they would cry and foam, and send for a Physitian many of them. The unclean spirits would cry out as much as ever they did against Jesus, and would gnash vvith their teeth vvhen we vvere at prayer: there vvas a Friar, and other great Men, the Friar vvould run as if he had been at his wits end, and call to the Keeper, and he vvould run for the En∣glish Frier, and he vvould go to the In∣quisitor for counsel, and sometimes they vvould send him word they should have a remedy, I should be sent to Rome; and sometimes the Friars would come, but had not power to say any thing to me of it. The Lord did say unto us, Lift up your Voice like the noise of a Trumpet, and sound forth my Truth like the shout of a King. There vvas one that Life was risen in him, but they vvere upon him as Eagles, till they had destroyed him; he did undergo terrible Judgments all the time he vvas in the Inquisition. Our Money served us a year and seven weeks; and vvhen it vvas almost gone,
the Friars brought the Inquisitors Chamber∣lain to buy our Hats. We said, vve came not there to sel our clothes, nor any thing vve had. Then the Friar did commend us for that, and told us, we might have kept our money to serve us otherwise. We said, no, we could not keep any money, and be charge∣able to any; vve could trust God. He said, He did see we could; but they should have maintained us vvhile they kept us Pri∣soners. And then the Lord did take away our Stomacks; vve did eat but little for three or four Weeks; and then the Lord called us to fasting for eleven dayes together, but it vvas so little, that the Friars came and said, That it was impossible that Creatures could live with so little meat, as they did see vve did for so long time together; and as∣ked, what we would do? And said, their Lord Inquisitor said, We might have any thing we would. We said, we must vvait to know the mind of God, vvhat he vvould have us to do. We did not fast in our own wills, but in obedience to the Lord. They were much troubled, and sent us meat, and said The English Connsul sent it. We could not take any thing till the Lord's time was come: We vvere vveak, so that Sarah did
dress her head as she would lye in her Grave (poor Lamb) I lay looking for the Lord to put an end to the sad Tryal, which way it seemed good in his sight: Then I heard a voice, saying, Ye shall not dye. I believed the Lord, and his glory did appear much in our fast; he was very gracious to us, and did refresh us with his living Pre∣sence continually, and we did behold his beauty to our great joy and comfort; and he was large to us in his Promises, so that we were keept quiet and still (the sting of Death being taken away) our souls, hearts, and minds were at peace with the Lord, so that they could not tell whether we were dead or alive, but as they did call to us once a day, till the time the Lord had appointed we should eat; and they were made to bring many good things, and laid them down by us; so that Scripture we witnessed fulfilled, Our Enemies treated us kindly in a strange Land, said I. But we were afraid to eat, and cryed to the Lord, and said, We had rather dye, than eat any thing that is polluted and unclean. The Lord said unto me, Thou mayest as freely eat, as if thou hadst wrought for it with thy hands; I will sanctifie it to thee through the Cross. And he said to Sarah, Thou shalt eat the
Fruit of thy hands, and be blessed. We did eat, and were refreshed, to the praise and glory of our God for ever. We did eat but little in two Months; and they did bring us what ever we did speak for, for eight or ten dayes; and afterward we were so straitned for want of Food, it did us more hurt than our Fast: Yet the Lord did work as great a Miracle by our preservation, as he did by raising Lazarus out of the Grave. The Friars did say, The Lord did keep us alive by his mighty Power, because we should be Catholicks. We said, the Lord would make it manifest to us then; they should know the Lord had another end in it, one day. But still they said, There was no Redemp∣tion for us. We said, with the Lord there was Mercy and plenteous Redemption. We bid them, Take heed ye be not found fighters against God. They said, We were foolish Women. We said, we were the Lords Fools, and the Lord's Fool were right dear, and precious in his sight, and wo to them that do offend them. He said, They were the Lord's Fools, and shewed us their deceitful Gowns, and their shaven Crowns, and said, They did wear it for God's sake, to be laught at by the World. We said, they did
not wear it for God's sake, unless they were moved of the holy Spirit of God to wear it. He said, It was no matter, they did wear it because of their Superiours. [Mark, and before it was for God's sake, as he said] He thought to bring us under him for our food, and did make us suffer a while though the Inquisitor and the Magistrates had taken a course we should want for no∣thing. But the Lord did torment him and all the rest, till they did bring us such things as were fitting. Then he did work all that he could to send me to Rome, and was coming two or three times (for what I know) to fetch me forth, but the Lord would not suffer them; and when they saw they could not prevail that way, they said we should go both; but the Fri∣ar should go first, because he was not well; he got leave to go, he was so weary of com∣ming to us, that he did beseech the Lord Inquisitor he might come no more to us. He told Sarah, I was a Witch, and that I knew what was done at London, and he would come to me no more, he said, because when he did tell me a company of lyes, I said, I had a Witness for God in me, which was faithful and true, and I did believe God's Witness.
The Diviners did wax mad, and did run as at their wits end, from Mountain to Hill, and from Hill to Mountain, to cover them: They ran to the Inquisitor, & writ to the Pope, and went to him; their King did not hide them at all; some of them did gnash with their teeth, and even gnaw their tongues for pain: Yet the rest would not repent of their blasphemy, sorcery nor enchantments, but did post on to fill up their measures. Oh! the Lord reward them according to their works. A little before the Fryar went to Rome, he came to the Inquisition Chamber with a Scribe, to write concerning us, to carry it with him; I saw him, as God would have it; the Lord said, There is thy deadly foe. They were writing part of three days; and when they had ended it, the Lord would not let me eat till the Scribe did come where I was, that I might pronounce wo against it, and defie it, which I did do in the Name of the Lord, and it did wi∣ther with all the rest. After it was gone, the English Consul came to us with a Scribe, and he brought us a Doller from a Master of a ship, that came from Plymouth; I told him I did receive my Country-mans Love, but could not receive his Money.
He askt me, What I would do if I would take no money? I said, the Lord was my portion, and I could not lack any good thing. I said to him, We were in thy house near 15. Weeks, didst thou see any cause of Death or Bonds in us? He said, No. I askt him, how he would dispence with his Conscience for telling us, He would have us before the Inquisitor, when he knew that Room was provided for us; and had not we been kept alive by the mighty Power of God, we might have been dead long since. He said, How could I help it? I said, we are the Servants of the living God, and were brought here by permission, and in the spirit of Meekness gave in our Testimony for the Lord in faithfulness, and told you the Truth as it is in Jesus, and called you all to Repentance, and fore∣warned you in love to your souls, of the evil the Lord is bringing upon you, if you do not repent. He said, How ever it be, it will go well with you. [Mark that] I told him, he required a sign of me when we were at his house, if we were the Servants of the Lord God; I gave him a sign from the living God, and my Friend gave him another from the Lord, to his shame and destruction for ever. I askt him, whe∣ther
that was not true we spake to him? he said it was, but how should he help it? I said, Thou art a condemned person, and stand∣est guilty before God; yet nevertheless repent, if thou canst find a place. He smiled upon the Scribe in deceit, but his lips did quiver, and his belly trembled, and he could scarce stand upon his legs. He was as proper a man as most was in the City, and full, and in his prime age. Oh! he was consumed as a snail in a shel, which was a sufficient sign for the whole Ci∣ty, if their hearts were not harder than Adamants. He said, How should he help it? he might have helpt it, but he was as wil∣ling to prove us, as any of them all. He was sworn upon his Oath to protect the English; and their Ruler bid him let us go about our business, and said, we were honest Women; and then he might have let us go before we were under the black Rod. Then he went to Sarah with the Dollar; she told him she could not take the Mo∣ney, but if he had a Letter for us, she should be free to receive that. He said, he had not any. He askt her, What she did want? She said, the Lord was her Shepherd, she could not want any good thing; but she did long for her freedom. He said, That,
you may have in time. He told us, We should have Ink and Paper to write, but when he was gone, they would not let us. The next time we heard of him, he was dead. We could have rejoyced if he had died for Righteousness sake; for the Lord delight∣eth not in the death of a sinner. The Friar was gone to Rome, and they said, he must stay there till we came. There was great working to send us thither, but the Lord did prevent them, that they could not send us thither. Then the Lord did work to bring us together again after so long time we had been parted. There were five doors between us with Locks and Bolts, but the Keeper had not power to make them fast, but as Sarah could undo them to come where I could see her, but could not speak to her, for there were them that did watch us night and day; yet she being moved of the Lord, did come to my door by night; she must come by the Fri∣ars door, he and the Doctor of Law were together, and they did set a trap to take her in; many did watch about the Prison, and would complain. Then she was lockt up again; but they had no peace in that, till the doors were open again; then we did sit in the sight of each other, to wait upon
the Lord, so that our voices were heard far; the Magistrates would hear and bow to it sometime; then the complainers were weary, and did work to have us brought to∣gether, and we did wait and pray, and the Magistrates would come in and look upon us many times, but would say nothing to us. There were of divers Nations brought into the Inquisition, Prisoners; and the Friars, and the rest that were great, would go in their way to make Christians of them, and we were made to stand up against them and their ways, and deny them in the Name of the Lord, and to declare the Truth to the simple-hearted continually, if we did suffer death for it. We could not endure to hear the Name of the Lord blas∣phemed, nor his pure way of Truth per∣verted, nor the ignorant deceived. They did write all they understood of what we spake, and sent it to the Court-Chamber before the Inquisitor and Magistrates, but the Lord did blast it with the mildews of his wrathful indignation, and burnt it up with the brightness of his Son, and we re∣joyced in our God; but still our burdens continued very heavy, and our righteous souls were vexed with the filthy conversa∣tion of the wicked, and the pure Seed of
God was prest from day to day, that our spirits did mourn, and our hearts were grieved because of the hardness of their hearts, and their rebellion against their Maker, who was so gracious to them, to suf∣fer them so long in all their abominations, and waited to be gracious to them, and knockt at the door of their hearts, calling for Justice, Mercy and Humility; but be∣hold Oppression, Cruelty, and Self-exaltati∣on, notwithstanding the Lord did strive so much with them, and sent so many unde∣niable Truths, and infallible Testimonies of the coming of his Son to Judgement, and so clear a manifestation of the way to eternal Salvation, given forth of his own mouth, by his eternal Spirit, and having us for an example, who were kept by his Power and Holiness; they had not a jot nor tittle against us, but for righteousness sake, though they had winnowed and fan∣ned us so long: glory, honour and praises be given to our God for ever. O they would not let us know of any English Ship that came into the Harbour, as near as they could, but the Lord would make it manifest to us; we had a great working and striving in our Bodies, but we knew not what it meant; the arrows of
the Wicked did fly, so that my soul was plunged and overwhelmed from head to feet, and the terrors of the unrighteous had taken hold of us, and the flames of Hell compassed us about; then the Lord ap∣peared unto me in a dream, and said, There were two English Friends in the City, which did plead for our Liberty in our behalf, and he had taken all fear away from them, and made them bold. And in a little while after the Magi∣strates sent for us forth, and askt us, whe∣ther we were sick? or, whether we did want any thing? and were very tender to us, and said, we should write to England, and bid the Scribe give us Ink and Paper; he said he would, but he was so wicked he did not. They did not tell us of any English that were there; but there was one Francis Steward of London, a Captain of a Ship, and a Friar of Ireland, which came to the City together, (for what we know) and they did take great paines for us, and went to their Ruler, and the Inquisitor, and to se∣veral Magistrates and Friars, and the new English Consul with them, and wrought much amongst them, that all were willing to let us go, save the Inquisitor, they said; and he said, He could not free us without an
Order from the Pope. But we had many heavy enemies besides, which would not be seen; but they obtained the favour to come and speak with us, which was a great thing in such a place. They sent for us to the Court-Chamber, and the English Consul askt us, If we were willing to go back to England? We said, if it were the will of God we might. The Captain spake to us with tears in his eyes, and told us what they had done for us, but could not prevail; It is this Inquisitor (said he) the rest were made free; you have preached among these people he said. We told him, we were called upon the Testimony of our Conscience, and the Truth that we have witnessed forth among them, we should stand to maintain with our blood. He said, If they could get us off, he would freely give us our passage, and pro∣vide for us, and the Vessel was his own. We told him, his love was as well accept∣ed of the Lord, as if he did carry us. He offered us money; he saw the Lord would not suffer us to take any. He took our Names. We told them they took us out of our way, and put us into the Inquisiti∣on, and bid us change our minds; and we could not, the Lord had changed us into
that which changed not, if they would burn us to ashes, or chop us as Herbs to the Pot. The Friar said, We did not work; which was false, we had Work of our own, and did work as we were able. We told him, our Work and Maintenance was in Eng∣land. And they said, It was true. He said, We would not accept of the Inquisitors Diet. We did not know who did prepare for us; we did receive our meat as we had freedom in the Lord. Then he said, We had suffer∣ed long enough, and too long, but we should have our freedom in few days, and that they would send to the Pope for an Order. And there were many English Ships that way; but the Captain saw it was a very hard thing, so that it grieved him to the heart: He prayed God to comfort us, and he went away, and we do beseech God to bless and preserve him, unto everlasting Life, and never to let him nor his, go without a bles∣sing from him, for his love: he did venture himself exceedingly in that place. But af∣ter he was gone, they arose up against us with one accord: The Inquisitor came up into a Tower, and lookt down upon us as if he would have eaten us, and they did try us for our lives again, and did shut up our doors many Weeks, we could not
tell for what; at length the Inquisitor came into the Tower again, and Sarah was moved to call to him, to have the door opened for us to go down into the Court to wash our clothes. Then he gave command for the door to be opened once a week; and in a little while 'twas open ever day. But great was our affliction indeed; and she told him if we were the Popes Prison∣ers, we would appeal to the Pope, and he should send us to him. But them in the Prison with us, especially the Friar, were mortal Enemies to us, but yet they would have fed us with the choicest of their meat, and would gladly give us whole Bottels of wine, if we would receive it, and were greatly troubled because we did re∣fuse to eat and drink with them, and did persecute us exceedingly; but the Lord did visit them with his dreadful Judge∣ments, the Friar was tormented night and day, his body did perish, the Doctors and Chyrurgeons did follow him a long time. And there were two or three English Ships there, came into harbour, and Sarah saw the coming of them in a Vision of the night, and there was great pleading for us, that we saw; but she heard a Voice, saying, We could not go now. So we were mad:
willing to wait the Lords time. Then they sent for us forth when the Ships were gone, and askt us, If we would be Catholicks? And we said, we were true Christians, and had received the Spirit of Christ, and he that had not the Spirit of Christ was none of his. The English Con∣sul told us of the Ships, and said, They would not let us go unless we would be Catho∣licks; and that we must suffer more impri∣sonment yet, and said, he did what he could for us. One of the Magistrates shewed us the Cross; We told them, and said, We did take up the Cross of Christ daily, which is the great Power of God to crucifie sin and iniquity: so we told them that one of their Fathers did promise us our liberty. We did think that Friar was too tender-hearted to stay among them; he did take a great deal of pains for us (the Captain said) We told him, he would never have cause to repent it; the blessing of God would be upon him for any thing he should do for us; for we were the Servants of the living God; and he promised us our freedoms in a little time.
This following, I D. B. received from them in other Papers to Friends. O Dearly beloved Friends, Fathers, and Elders, and Pillars of Gods Spiritu∣all House, and Brethren and Sisters in the Lord Jesus Christ, in the measure of Love and Life of our God, do we salute you all, and do embrace you in that which is Eternal, and we do greatly rejoyce, and glorify the Name of our Heavenly Father; that he hath counted us worthy to be partakers of the death and suffer∣ings of his blessed Son, with you; though we be the least of God's Flock, yet we are of the true Fold, whereof Christ Jesus is shepherd; and he hath had as tender a care over us, as he hath had of any of his Lambs which he hath called forth in this the day of his Power; and hath carried us through, and over as great afflictions as most of our Bre∣thren and sufferers for his Name, both in mockings, scoffings, scornings, reproaches, stripes, contradictions, perils at Land, and pe∣rils at Sea, fiery tryals, cruel threatnings,
grief of heart, sorrow of soul, heats and colds, fastings and watchings, fears within, and frightings without, terrible temptations and persecutions, and dreadful imprisonments and buffettings of Satan; yet in all these our tryals the Lord was very gracious unto us, and not absent himself from us, neither suffered his faithfulness to fail us, but did bear us up, and keep us from fainting in the midst of our ex∣tremity; we had not another to make our moan to, but the Lord alone, neither could we expect a drop of mercy, favour or refresh∣ment, but what he did distil from his living Presence, and work by his own strength; for we sat one in one room, and the other in the a∣nother, near a year; as Owls in deserts, and as People forsaken in solitary places; then did we enjoy the presence of the Lord, and did behold the brightness of his glory, and we did see you our dear Friends, in the Light of Jesus, and did behold your order; and stedfastness of your Faith and Love to all Saints, and were refresh∣ed in all the faithful hearted, and felt the is∣sues of Love and Life which did stream from the hearts of those that were wholly joyn∣ed to the Fountain, and were made sensible of the benefit of your Prayers. O the sorrows, the mournings, the tears! but those that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
A true sorrow begets a true joy, and a true Cross, a true Crown: For when our sorrows did abound, the Love of God did abound much more; the deeper the sorrows, the greater the joyes; the greater the Cross, the weightier the Crown. Dear Friends and Brethren, marvel not that Israel is not gathered, our Judgement re∣mains with the Lord, and so do our Labours; for it was not for want of travel, nor pain, nor love to their souls; for we could have been contented to have fed upon the Grass on the ground, so we might have had our freedom a∣mongst them: For, had it not been for the great opposition, they would have followed af∣ter us as Chickens after a Hen, both great and small. But oh the swelling Seas, the raging and foaming Waves, stormy Winds and Floods, and deep Waters, and high Mountains and Hills, hard Rocks, rough Ways, and crooked Paths, tall Cedars, strong Oaks, fruitless Trees, and corrupted ones, that cumber the ground, and hinder the righteous Seed to be sown, and the noble Plants from being planted! Oh! they shut up the Kingdom against the simple heart∣ed, and hide the key of Knowledge from the innocent Ones, and will not enter into the Kingdom themselves, nor suffer them that would enter, but stir up the Magistrates to
form carnal Weapons, thinking to prevent the Lord of taking to him his Inheritance, and to dispossess his Son, who is Heir of all, that he might not have a dwelling-place among them, nor a habitation nigh them; because that his Light will discover their darkness, and his brightness will burn up all their abominations, and mar their beauty, and stain their glory, their pomp and their pride, that it may perish as the untimely Figs, and fall as the Flower of the Field, and wither as the Grass upon the house-top. Oh! the Belly of Hell, the Jaws of Satan, the whole Mystery of Iniquity is at the height, and all manner of Abominations that make desolate, stands where it ought not, and is upholden by a Law; That upon pain of death none must speak against it, nor walk con∣trary to it. But praises to our God, he carried us forth to declare against it daily. Oh! the blind guides, the seducing spirits, that do cause the people to erre, and compel them to worship the Beast and his Image, and have his mark in their fore-heads, and in their hands, and to bow to Pictures and painted Walls, and to worship the things of their own hands, and to fall down to that which their own fingers have fashioned, and will not suffer them to look to∣wards Sion upon pain of death, nor to walk to∣wards Jerusalem upon pain of Faggot and
Fire, but must abide in Babel, and believe whatsoever they speak or do, to be truth. But oh the wayes, the worships, the fashions, forms, customs, traditions, observaions and imagi∣nations which they have drawn in by their dark Divinations, to keep the poor people in blindness and ignorance, so that they perish for want of knowledge, and are corrupt∣ed, because the way of Truth is not made known among them; they are all in the many wayes, out of the one true and living way, and their wayes be so many and so monstrous, that they are unrehearsible; but the Lord our God hath kindled a fire in the midst of them, that will consume all forms, fashions, customs and traditions of men; and will burn up the briars, thorns and tares, stubble and fruitless Trees, and corrupted ones, and will blast all the fruits, works and labours of wicked and ungodly men, with the mildews of his wrath∣full indignation, and will scatter all his ene∣mies with the whirl-winds of his displeasure. They do not know the Scriptures. Their Bibles would grieve any honest heart to behold them, because of the corruption. They said, our Bi∣bles were false. I asked wherein? The Fri∣ar said, Maccabees was not in them. I said, if any were taken from them, yet the rest might be pure; but if any were added to them,
then they were corrupted. He askt me, Whe∣ther I did not think it meet for every one to bow at the Name of Jesus. I said, Yea. He said, Iesus, and bid me fall down, or bow my body. I told him, My heart and whole body was bowed under the Name of Jesus; but I should not stoop to his will, nor any man's else: He that departeth from Iniquity, boweth to the Name of Jesus; but those that live in Sin and Wickedness, do not stoop to the Son of God. And he told me, they stood in the same Power the Apostles did, and were guided by the same Spirit as they were. I asked why they did abuse their Power then, and make use of Car∣nal Weapons? He said they did not, they were all spiritual, their Inquisition, & their Chains and Irons, and all is spiritual [the Wise may judge.] And he asked, Whether we judged them all damn'd that were not of our Judge∣ment. I said, Nay, we had otherwise learned Christ; those that were in a reprobate Condi∣tion to day, the Lord may call them out of it to morrow, for what I know. He said, They did judge us damn'd, and all that were not of their Faith. I told him, Man's Judgement we did not matter.
A Vision. IN a Vision of the night, I saw in the Fir∣mament six Suns; one at a distance from the rest, that did appear to be but half an hour high; the other five stood four-square, one in the middle; and they did cross over each other; the highest did not seem to be above an hour high. And when I did awake, I was troubled in my spirit to know the Vision; and I waited upon the Lord, and he signified to me in the Light, The six Suns were six Nations, whose Lights were near out; and the five which crossed each other, signified to me some rising amongst them. And the Friar came to me, and said, It was God's will we should be kept there, or else they could not keep us. I told him, the Lord did suffer wicked men to do wicked∣ly, but did not will them to do it. He did suffer Herod to take off John Baptist's head, but he did not will him to do it: and did suffer Stephen to be stoned, and Judas to betray Christ, but he did not will them to
do it; for if he had, he would not have condemned them for it. He said, Then we are wicked men. I said, They are wicked men that work wickedness. The Friar would say still, We had not the true Faith. We said, By Faith we stand, and by the Power of God we are upholden; dost thou think it is by our own power and holiness we are kept from a vain conver∣sation, from sin and wickedness? He said, That was our pride. We said, No, We could glory in the Lord, we were children of wrath once as well as others; but the Lord hath quickned us that were dead, by the living Word of his Grace, and hath washed, cleansed and sanctified us through soul and spirit, in part, according to our measures, and we do press forward towards that which is perfect. He then said, We were good Women, but yet there was no redem∣ption for us, except we would be Cathlicks. Now the Lord said, Fear not Daughters of Sion, I will carry you forth as Gold tryed in the fire. And many precious Pro∣mies did the Lord refresh us with in our greatest extremity, and would appear in his Glory, that our souls would be ravished in his presence. I had the Spirit of Prayer up∣on me, but was afraid to speak to the Lord,
for fear I should speak one word that would not please him. And the Lord said, Fear not Daughter of Sion, ask what thou wilt, and I will grant it thée, whatsoever thy heart can with. I desired nothing of the Lord, but what would make for his Glory, whether it were my liberty or bon∣dage, life or death; wherein I was high∣ly accepted of the Lord. The Room wherein I was separated, was near the Chancery, where all the Bi∣shops Courtiers did resort, and would come into the Inquisition Courts, and I had work amongst them daily; they would come on purpose to their condemnation: some would be smitten, and run as if they hunt∣ed; and some would be set on fire, and cry, Caldere, caldere, and fuoco, fuoco; and many would pitty us, because we were not Catholicks: the Friars would say, We might be Catholicks, and keep our own Religion too: and we should not be known we were Catho∣licks, except we were brought before a Justice of Peace. We askt if we should profess a Christ we should be asham'd of? But as for the poor Workmen, they were willing to do any thing for us, and were diligent to hear us, the Witness of God in them did answer to the Truth: There were
many eyes over them; had it not been for the great opposition, there were hundreds would have flown to the Truth. And because I said, I did talk with G.F. he (the Friar) asked, Whether G. F. did bring me money to maintain me in prison? I said, No; but though I was abent in bo∣dy, yet I was present in spirit, and was refreshed in him, and in hundreds more besides. They said, I had seen Revelati∣ons, and had talk'd with G. F. and he was God's Revelation. Sarah said, Christ was God's Revelation. He said, she came un∣der the Haltar for saying Christ was God's Revelation. She answered, Paul said, As soon as it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, I did not consult with flesh and blood, but im∣mediately I went and preached him; and is not Christ God's Revelation then? He said, Who denied that? What they would have done to Sarah if they had taken her forth, we know not; but the Lord did work so wonderfully that night for the preservation of her poor soul out of their net, that he is worthy to be glorified for ever. The next time he came to me, he came in Sheeps clothing, but he had a Wolf un∣der his Gown; he gave me words as soft
as Butter, and as smooth as Oyl, when he had a Sword in his heart, and a Spear in his hand; when they speak most fairest, then beware of them. He desired us we would not think so hard∣ly of him, as if he were the Author of all our wrongs and troubles; he was not (he said) but would do any good he could for us, were it with his blood. But we thought he had been the chiefest that cast the poor man in Pri∣son, but he was the man that hope him out without any punishment at all, though the Inquisitor did say he should be severely punished. I told him he did well; he would have peace in it, and would never have cause to repent it. He did entreat us, he might not bear all the burthen. We told him of many wicked things he did act against us, and of his lying and cruel words. He bid us, take no notice what he did speak. But we did feel his spirit, that what he spake he would do, if he had not been chained. I did use to tell him, My conscience was not seared with a hot iron, I was not past feeling. At last he was so weary of coming to us, he did entreat the Inquisitor he might not come to us any more; the Judgment of the Lord did fol∣low him so, it was like to kill him.
When we were partted, the Lord did work mightily for us, and we were kept by the Power of the Lord over our Enemies, and were bold for God's Truth, and did make war with them in Righteousness, so they could not gain-say us in the Truth: So that Scripture was fulfilled, The wicked mouthes must be stopped; and they were put to silence; praises be to our God, and were made to confess, or say Of a truth God was in us: our God was a consuming fire to them, they were not able to stand in his presence, but they would howl and make a noise like dogs, and cry, Jesu, Maria, and flie as people driven by a mighty rushing wind; the Power of the Lord did pursue after them like a sword; that Scripture was fulfilled, which saith, Christ came not to send peace on earth, but a sword, to cut down his Enemies; the Lord was on our side, and did take our part, and did fight for us, and did tread down our Enemies under our feet, that they could not hurt us. Mighty was the Work of God daily, our tongues cannot express it; they did work day and night with their Inchantments and Divi∣nations, Sorceries, unclean spirits crying and foaming, insomuch that we could take little rest day or night sometimes; but the
Lord was with us, and did work mightily by his Power, and kept us over them in the Life of the Son of God. My Pison was nigh to the Palace, and to their Worship, that I could be heard of both; and it was laid upon me of the Lord to call them to Repentance, and to turn to the Light, wherewith they were enlightned, vvhich vvould lead them out of all their wicked Wayes, Works and Worships, to serve the true and living God in Spirit and in Truth; the Power did raise the Witness in many, and troubled them; they did sigh and groan, and some did stay to hear me so long as they durst; for there were many did watch; and it was upon pain of death, or at least to be imprisoned: As was the poor English-man that did come and speak to me, whom they hall'd down violently, and put him in prison; but the Lord delivered him for his Love. And we were parted One Year, but great was the Work of the Lord, and great was the Power to carry it on. He was not wanting to us, glory be to his Name, but did give us Words & Wisdom according to our Work: So that Scripture was fulfilled which saith on this vvise, Ye need not pre∣meditate afore-hand what to speak, or what
to say; for it shall be given you of my hea∣venly Father what ye ought to speak, that the Enemies shall not gain-say: they were so tormented, that they did run to the Hills and to the Mountains, to cover them from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Wrath of the Lamb, which sits upon the Throne, to judge them righteously, and to condemn them for all their wicked deeds, which they so ungodlily had committed against him. Oh! the goodness of the Lord, and his long-suffering and forbearance, vvhich would lead them to Repentance; but they would not hearken to his Counsel, but turned his Laws behind their backs, and hated to be instructed by them; therefore the Lord did laugh at their destruction, and did mock when their fear came: Their wickedness was so great, and my burthen so heavy to bear it, that I cryed to the Lord, and said, It is better for me to die, than to live: and would gladly have given up my life in testimony against them all; I was (as 'twere) compelled to declare against all their Wayes, Works and Wor∣ships, insomuch that they ran to the Inqui∣sitor to have me chained, or punish'd some other way; but the Power of the Lord
chained them, that they could not diminish a hair of my head; the Lord was my safe∣ty, praises be to his Name for ever. Now some, as they passed to their Wor∣ship-houses, would sigh, and some pray, and some did throw stones at my Window; they did work night and day about the Pri∣son, as though they would have broke through to slay me; but the Lord was with me, and did fight for me, and did scatter his Enemies as the dust before the Wind: Glory be to his Name for evermore. I cannot express the large Love of our God, how he did preserve us from so many Deaths and Threatnings, as they did come to me with, falling down upon their knees, saying Mass, and would have me to say af∣ter them; but in the Name of the Lord I denyed them. They would howl like Dogs, because they could not beguile the Innocent, and slay my righteous life; but praises be to the Lord our God, who did preserve me from the Wolf and the De∣vourers, denying them & their Sacrifices. And when they saw they could not pre∣vail to betray us from the Truth, then they said, they would give us to the Devil to be tormented, and deliver us over to their bad Catholicks, to do by us as they pleased; for
they would use us badly, and so they did seek to do: Oh the cursed noises and cryes the Sodomites did make, crying, Quake, quake, running about the Prison raging, and some singing, and crouding round the Prison night and day, as if they would have broke through to slay me; and the sons of Belial did run to bear false witness, so that I looked every hour when they would fetch me out, and slay me. The Enemy did so work to perswade, that they had prest my dear yoke fellow with stones, which was a great trouble to me, because I I could not suffer death with her; I did yeeld she had been slain. And afrerwards this great tribulation being ended, then they said, my (dear and faithful) yoke-fel∣low should be sent to Rome, and I should tarry at Malta; which did so encrease my sorrow and wrought upon my spirit, to try and examine wherefore the Lord should deal so hardly with me, as to leave me be∣hind; or whether he did not count me worthy to go and give in my Testimony with her, to Rome, and offer up my Life for the Testimony of Jesus, than to have my liberty to return to England with her? and I cryed day and night to the Lord, and would not give my soul rest, nor my eyes
sleep, till the Lord did answer me, glory and praises be to his Name for ever. But we saw Jacob must part with all, Benjamin must go too. So we were willing to give up in obedience to the Lord; our tryals were unspeakable. Oh the unclean spirits! they would speak to us at noon-day; but the Lord did give us power over them, that we did not fear the wild Boars out of the Wood, nor the wild Beasts out of the Field. Then there was one came and said, that Katherine and I must be both sent to Rome. Which did rejoyce my soul, and renewed my strength, because the Lord did count me worthy to go and give in my Testimo∣ny for his Truth, the Word of his Prophe∣sie, before the great and mighty ones of the Earth. The Lord said, I should not be a∣fraid; and he shewed me in the Light how he had bowed them down before us, and I saw them in the Light of Christ, how the Pope, the Friars and Sorcerers stood in ranks, bowing down before us. So we saw our Dominion in Spirit. They did work to send us to Rome, but the Lord did blast it, and fought against them, that they could not send us.
Now our Testimony was as largely gi∣ven in at Rome, as at Malta. The Friars came to me, and shewed me Mary and her Babe pictured against a Wall, and would have me look upon it. I stampt with my foot, and said, Cursed be all Images and Image-makers, and all that fall down to worship them; Christ Jesus is the express Image of his Fathers Brightness, which is Light and Life; who doth reveal the My∣stery of Iniquity, the cunning working of Satan, to draw out the mind to follow him, from the pure Life, and to vail over the Just One from beholding the Presence of the Lord. But glory be to the Lord, who hath made him manifest in thousands of his, in this Day of his Power. When we were separated, we spake one and the same thing, being guided by one Spirit. They would go from me to Katherine, and they would bid her speak as Sarah did, and so she did, to their condemnation: Praises to the Lord, Amen.
A PAPER sent from them, to the Pope's Lord Inquisitor in Malta. For the Lord Inquisitor and his Council, &c. MEns persons I cannot admire; they that do admire and respect any man's per∣son, do it because of advantage; and such are transgressors, the Apostles (James and Jude) say. In obedience to the Lord, in love to your souls, from the Fountain of Love, and Springs of Life that stream forth to the refreshment of the whole City of God, am I constrained to visit you with these few Lines; and I beseech you to reade it with the Spirit of Moderation and Meekness, and see that nothing arise in you against it, for it is God's Truth. Christ Jesus who is the Light of the world, that hath enl ghtned every one that comes into the world, saith, This is Life eternal, to know thee the only true God, & Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. Now the knowledge of God is Life eternal; and there is no other way to come to this knowledge, but to have the mind
turned from darkness to the Light; out of the visible, to that which is invisible, viz. the Light in the Conscience, which convinceth of sin and iniquity, when no mortal eye can see you: And as you come to love it, and to have your minds staid upon it, you will feel the Incomes of God's Power to administer con∣demnation upon the transgressor, that keeps the pure Seed in bondage in you; For Sion is redeemed through Judgement, and her Converts with Righteousness. Paul saith, If thou believest in thy heart the Lord Jesus, and confessest with thy mouth that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved; for with the heart man believeth unto Salvation: And we do believe, and see, and taste, and handle of the good Word of Life, and have received the Spirit of Truth, to lead us into all Truth, and doth bring all things to our remembrance, without any visible thing. And Paul wrote to the Galatians, saying, My little Chil∣dren, of whom I travel in birth till Christ be formed in you. Where Christ is formed within, there needs no form without; the out∣ward form is called an Earthen Vessel, or an Earthen Tabernacle, or an Earthen House; but Christ Jesus is the express Image of his Fathers Glory (or Substance) which is Light and Life.
Now the Image of Christ is a pure and a holy Image, a meek and a Dove-like Image, an innocent and a Lamb-like Image, a righ∣teous and a glorious Image, Christ in you the hope of Glory, saith the Apostle to the Saints. The Lord our God hath given to every man a measure of the manifestation of his own Spi∣rit to profit withal, which is the Light in the Conscience, the true Teacher of his People; it is the Grace of God that bringeth Salvati∣on, that appeareth to all men, and it teacheth all that come to believe in it, and to love and to be guided by it, to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to walk soberly, righteously, holy and godly in this present world; and it will deal plainly with every one; none need to fear being deceived by that in them which doth condemn them for sin and evil: But they that live in Pride, are deceived already; they that live in Covetousness, are deceived already; and they that live in Lusts or Drunkenness, are deceived already; or in Lying, Swearing, Adultery or Idolatry, are deceived; or in Hypocrisie and Deceit, Hard-heartedness or Cruelty, they are deceived already; for those you know, are fruits which do proceed from a deceived heart, being corrupted for want of
knowledge: My People perish for want of knowledge, saith God. He that hath not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his; and he that hath the Spirit of Christ, ought himself to walk as Christ walked: Now Christ was no Persecutor, he never imprisoned any, nor ever put any to suffer, but He and the holy Prophets and Apostles were made to suffer as evil doers, this we know. The Day of the Lord is hot and terrible against all sin and iniquity, and that nature from whence it doth proceed, and We are a WO for all them that are laying up of a Fuel for it. This is God's Truth, whether you can re∣ceive it yea or nay: I am ready to seal it with my blood, if the Lord shall call me to it. Whosoever shall interpret this Paper before the Lord Inquisitor (so called) I charge thee in the Name of the living God, as thou wilt answer before his dreadful pre∣sence, to interpret it word by word, as it is written, without adding or diminish∣ing. Katherine Evans.
THe Friar then came to me, and askt me, why I did not work? I said unto him, What work dost thou do? He said, he did write. I told him I would write too, if he would bring me Pen, Ink and Paper; and I would write Truth. He said, He would not that we should write; for St. Paul did work at Rome, and we might get nine or ten grains a day, if we did knit, that is three half-pence. I told him, if we could have that priviledge amongst them, that Paul had at Rome under Caesar, which was a Heathenish King, we would have wrought, and not have been chargeable to any. Paul lived in his own hired house two years, with a Souldier to look to him, and had Friends of the same Occupation to work with him, and could send where he would, and whosoever would come to him, might, and he taught them in the Name of the Lord Jesus; and no man forbad him. So I askt him, Whether he knew the holy War of God, yea or nay? if he did, I told him he then did know we could not be without exercise day nor night. Then his mouth was stopped, and he spake no more to me of work. But though our affliction of body
was very great, and our travel of soul was greater, yet we did knit Stockens, and gave to them that were made serviceable to us, and did make Garments for the poor Pri∣soners, and mended their Clothes which had need, and were made helpful to them all, to their condemnation that did perse∣cute us. But we could not work at the Friar's will, nor any mans else, but as we had freedom in the Lord. As I was weak in my bed, the Friar came to me, and said, We did deny the Scriptures. I told him, they did deny them; we did own them, and hold them forth, thou dost know it. He was in a rage, be∣cause I said they denied the Scriptures, and bid me eat my words again, and threatned death upon me. I said, Christ Jesus was the Light of the World, and had lighted every one that cometh into the World; which Light is our Salvation that do re∣ceive it, and the same Light is the Worlds Condemnation that do not believe in it. Then he said, He would lay me in Chains, where I should neither see Sun nor Moon. They say, The Father hath almost killed you, said he, but I will kill you quite before I have done. He had a Book in his hand, and he did study in it: I told him, he did
comprehend the words in his carnal mind; and he was wroth, and said, he would give me to the Devils to be tormented. I said, I deny the Devil and all his works and workers. Some would come unto the Prison upon their Saints dayes, and ask us, what day it was? We did answer, We did not know, neither did we observe dayes nor times, months nor years. Then answer would be made, It was St. Joseph's day, or some other Saint; and St. Joseph should punish us that night, because we did not observe his day. We answered, We did know the Saints to be at peace with us, and we did not fear them. We further said, Paul did call it beggarly Elements and Rudiments of the World, to observe days, times, months and years; and their mouthes would be stopt for a time. Then came the Friar ano∣ther time, and told me, it was seventeen dayes to their Christmas; and said, the Vir∣gin Mary conceived with child that day, be∣ing the same day he spake to me on; as if she did go with child but seventeen dayes. And he said, the next day was Lady Ann's day, the Virgin Mary's Mother, a Saint. Then, as I was crying to the Lord in Prayer because of our long-suffering, and
our strong travel and labour, and no fruit, as did appear; the Lord said unto me, Be not grieved, though Israel be not gather∣ed; the seed of Malta shall be as the stars of the sky for multitude: That which ye have sown, shall not dye, but live: Glo∣ry be to the Name of the Lord for ever. A Copy of a Writing from their hands, sent in pursuit after the Friar. MALACHY, THou saidst thou wouldst try whether we had the true Spirit, yea or nay; and thou hast tryed day and night, but thou never tryedst the right way; the Seed of God is not tried with deceit, lying, hypocrisie, nor cruel∣ty: But if thou hadst turned in with thy mind to the Light of God in thy Conscience, thou wouldst soon have known us; or had the Love of Christ been shed abroad in thy heart, thou mightst have comprehended us; or, hadst thou found the Ballance of the Sanctuary of the true Tabernacle, which God hath pitched, and not man, thou mightst have weighed us; or,
hadst thou laid Judgement to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, thou mightst have fathomed us; or, couldst thou have opened the Book of Life, thou mightst have read us; , hadst thou gone into the House of Israel, thou mightest have had fellowship with us, &c. Contrary to our wills were we cast in a∣mongst you, and have given our Testimony for the Lord, and called you all to Repentance, and have forewarned you of the evil the Lord s bringing upon you; but you have slighted the day of your Visitation, and have done de∣spite to the Spirit of Grace, and have cast ma∣ny hard speeches and false aspersions upon the Truth, and the Messengers thereof, and the Lord will visit for these things; and you have blinded your eyes that you will not see, and stopped your ears that you might not hear, and hardened your hearts that you might not un∣derstand; lest you should see with your eyes, and hear with your ears, and understand with your hearts, and turn to the Lord, and be con∣verted, and he should heal you. Oh that you had known in this your day, what had belonged to your peace! but now it is hid from your eyes. The desire of our souls is, That every one may repent that can find a place; and what ever you have done to us, we desire it may not be laid to your charge; for we count our selves happy
that we were found worthy to suffer for t Name of the Lord. Written in the In∣quisition-Prison in the Isle of Malta. Katherine Evans. Sarah Cheevers. Behold victorious Hymns and Songs, and Praises, all in Verse; The same sprung from the Seed of life, its perfect Righteousness. OH Lord my Life is given up, thy Truth for to declare; O Lord, keep thou me in thine Arms, and guide me in thy Fear. Thy Bow is bent, thy Sword is drawn thine enemies to deface, Thy fire's kindled against all those that will not Truth imbrace. Thine Arrows which are sharp and keen, upon their heads shall fall; Thy double-edged Sword also, to cut them down withal. So plague the Heathen, and correct the People in thy Wrath,
That they may fear and dread thy Name, and come to know thy Truth. Throughout the World so large and wide, thy Truth thou dost declare, Thy saving health for to enjoy, by thy Light doth appear. Thou dost send forth thy Messengers, glad-tydings to proclaim, To call the hungry forth to feed on thy Lamb, being slain. Feasts of fat things thou dost prepare the hungry for to feed, And cloath the nak'd with garments fair, that want and stand in need. Heaven's Glory is appearing, its Brightness shineth forth, Over all Nations it's clearing the Lord's Eternal Truth. Every one that's in darkness, under its shadow lye, May come forth into the Brightness, out of obscurity. O Lord teach me thy perfect Wayes, that I may walk therein, And lead me in the Path of Life, and cleanse me from all sin. How gracious is the Lord our God, and kind to Israel, With us he doth make his abode, his Presence doth us fill.
So that we are not desolate, nor yet distrest with woes, Because the Lord doth take our part, and doth confound our foes. Every one that is opprest, and cast in danger deep, If that in God they put their trust, he will them safely keep. Right dear and precious to the Lord are all his little ones, That suffer for his holy Name, he will avenge their wrongs. And in his Wrath he will destroy his Enemies so stout, And suddenly will make a way, and lead his Servants out: And he himself will them restore to Joy and Comfort both, And will preserve them evermore, because they do him love. But as for men of corrupt minds, whose wayes defiled are, The Lord will visit with all kinds of Judgments, and not spare. He will pursue them with his Sword, and cut them to the ground, That do reject his holy Word, his Plagues shall them confound: Because that they do not obey his Mercies and his Grace,
Which he so free to them doth give, if they would them imbrace. But as their Fathers did, so they requite the Lord with wrong, And persecute thy Messengers, and make them suffer long: Because that they the Truth declare, as Scripture telleth plain, That Christ himself, the Lord's own Heir, is come, and he will reign Both Lord and Prince, and King also, throughout the World that's wide, And Antichrist will overthrow, and Babel in her pride. It's not their golden Candlesticks, nor Lamps, that be so many, That can shine through the Clouds so thick to give a Light to any; To lead to a true resting-place, where they may still behold The Beauty of God's glorious Face, more bright than fined Gold. Thou seest, O Lord, what man hath done, for to exalt himself Against the Lord, thy blessed Son, who is our saving health. They have changed his glorious Form and Image, that's so bright, And fashion'd it like sinful man, corrupted in thy sight.
Arise, O Lord, arise in haste, and punish for these things, These men that have sought thy disgrace, that they might reign as Kings Over thine own Inheritance, contrary to thy Will, To keep them still in ignorance, without knowledge or skill. But now the God of Pow'r is come, to raise up Sion bright, And to build up Jerusalem in all the Heathens sight. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail, though they be wide and strong, Against the gathering in of all that to the Lord belong. All Glory, Honour, Laud and Praise be to the Lord of Might, Who hath made known in these our days, his Way, his Truth, his Light. Concerning the Cross of Christ, which is not a visible sign, or a piece of Wood, but the invisible and immortal Power of the Lord God, and his Wisdom unto Salvation, to and in all them that believe, is the same Christ, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God: But the same Cross is to the outward Jew
(or Christian) a stumbling-block, and to the wise Greek (that's exalted and puft up in the knowledge above, and over the Meek Life) foolishness, as saith the Scripture, 1 Cor. 1.18, 19. THe Cross of Christ I do imbrace, Which gives an entrance into Grace; Both Sin and Death it doth deface, And makes me run a glorious race. A Crown of Life I do obtain, And Sin and Death is daily slain; And Christ himself alone to reign Thorow the Cross I do obtain. The Cross of Christ is more to me, Than all the treasures I can see; It brings me to my resting-place, For to behold God's lovely Face. The Cross of Christ is Power indeed Against the Serpent and his seed: And Salvation it doth bring To all that do believe therein. The Cross of Christ is my delight, It doth uphold me day and night: It keeps me from the power of sin, Through Christ who is my heav'nly King. Without the Cross I cannot be From Sin and Death at all set free. The Cross alone doth crucifie Transgression, Sin, Iniquity:
It doth break down the Middle-wall, And slayes the Enmity withal; And makes of twain one perfect man, So renews Christ for me again. The Cross of Christ it doth destroy That nature that doth disobey, In those that do themselves deny, And take it up most willingly, And daily bear it after him, Who is our Lord, our Prince, and King; And not at all to let it down, Till they come to enjoy the Crown. The Cross of Christ is Power and Life, It doth destroy all mortal strife; It keepeth from the power of Sin, All those that love to walk therein. All that do own Christ Jesus Cross, Through self-denial they must pass, For to be purged from their sin, And no longer live therein. The Cross of Christ doth operate Through every vein and vital part, The heart and reins to cleanse from sin, Of them that's exercis'd therein. All they that live in wickedness, Are enemies to Christ Jesus Cross; For ev'ry sin and uncleanness Doth pierce the Life of Christ Jesus.
Perfect Love, and breathings of unde∣filed Life, to the Seed of God, greet∣ing. THe streams of Beauty, pure & bright, That springeth up both day and night. My love to Truth doth me constrain In Prison ever to remain; If it in truth be so that I Cannot be set at liberty. My dear Redeemers face so bright, Doth shine upon me day and night; His Countenance doth exceed all Captivity and Bondage thrall. My pure and undefiled Love, Which cometh from a harmless Dove, Within whose brests doth still remain, God's perfect praises to maintain. I have not time nor place to show The Love which from my heart doth flow. The blessing of th' Almighty be, On Jacobs Seed eternally. And let it make its sure abode Upon the Heritage of God. Amen. K. E.
THese Writings following, are Copies of divers Letters which they had written to their Friends and near Relati∣ons in the time of my visitation of them: But it came so to pass, that as they were handing the same through the Grate of the Prison, by the hand of another man, to be communicated to my hand, being then pre∣sent in the Room also, that the said Let∣ters were intercepted, and in the first place communicated to the Pope's Lord Inquisi∣tor, and he forthwith sent for the Consul, and charged him to get the same truly co∣pied forth: Then the Consul was wrath with me that he should be exercised with so much trouble: But in the Light and Counsel of my God, I seeing and knowing that there was nothing in them but what came from a good ground of Innocency and Truth, and pure natural Affection, I was moved in bowels of tender Love, lest the said Letters should be finally miscarri∣ed, or shut up in obscurity, therefore I pro∣pounded to the Consul, If that were such a trouble to him, if he would let me have the Letters, I should copy them out truly. And after some time he consented, and gave them into my hand, and laid it upon
my Conscience to perform as I had said, which I did with gladness of heart, not in submission to his Will, but in obedience to the God of Love and Peace, which guided me in the same; and so after I had finish∣ed them, I gave the fair Copies into the Consul's hands for his Lord Inquisitor. And so in the wisdom of the Lord, which is wiser than the Serpents, I obtained the very desire of my heart for his Truth and Peoples sake, and retained the Original Copies; and in the endless Love and Pow∣er of the Lord Almighty, which was, and is with me, and accompanied me (blessed and magnified be the Power of his excel∣lent Majesty and Glory, Amen) over the heads of the lofty Mountains, and barren Hills, I brought the Treasures of a bles∣sed and good ground away with this body in which I am, so that they were not only in my hands, but also the precious sub∣stance and vertue of the same that accom∣anied them, even in my heart, within my osome; and the Words of wisdoms Life did I wear as a Chain of precious Stones and Diamonds about my neck, & as Brace∣lets and Ornaments of a comely and de∣licate chaste Bride, about my hands and loins; and behold the Almighty Lord and
King of Eternal Life, that had so might∣ly preserved me in the shadow of his ha of Almightiness, which stopt the mout of devouring Lyons, and chained and li∣mitted the ravening and devouring wi Beasts of the Forrest, even he the King  blessedness and endless Glory, filled m heart with his spotless and unexpressibl Love: And as I lay upon the deck of th Vessel in which I was a Passenger, and  stranger among Men of many and dive Nations, in the morning of the day I fe and beheld the exceeding Glory of th Lord under the secret shadow of his Al∣mightiness, in a Vision of God; and in th same I beheld the Bride, the Lamb's Wife prepared for the Bridegroom's coming and why should not I declare somewhat o the felicity that mine eye in the Eterna Life of blessedness saw; albeit, the Re is unutterable which I felt, and know how to be silent in the Father's Presence, where every Babe knoweth my voice, which i to give a sound in their ears to whom I write, and not to spread Pearls before Swine, that will defile and trample o them: That mine eye, mine eye hath seen, and perfectly beheld the Free-born from above, coming out of the Wilderness, co∣vered
with goodly and comely Raiment, white and clean, as the light of the Sun, or as a Stone most precious, clear as Chry∣stal; and mine eye beheld a Crown which was embraced in the Arms of the Bride∣groom, and the Crown was well adorned with many Stars, which did excel each o∣ther in Glory; and mine eye beheld the Sun as a Bridegroom rejoycing over the Virgin-Bride of his Espousal, so that I was even sick with pure and undefiled Love. Mine eye, mine eye did so affect my heart, so that I awaked in the same, in the morning of a clear day, and I looked, and behold the Sun was arisen above the Horizon of the Earth and Waters, and my Life abundantly blessed and magnified the living Lord, my King and my God, the Rock of my strength, and saving-health of his Anointed. And behold I had seen a Vision of God in the morning-light, and the sweet Solution of the same was given me to treasure up within my very heart, till an appointed time and season: The Chil∣dren of the Morning-light may right-well read the same as they sit together in their several places, that's over and above the earth, and be comforted and refreshed at the joyful Sound of the same Voice that
brings the glad-tyding of the good things, yea, and my Spirit with you the blessed of the Lord, shall bless his Name, who is the mighty God in the midst of us: Even so Amen, Ha-le-lu-jah. PRaise ye the Lord, Salvation to his Name, Ye Saints in Life, Free from all strife, Your voice sound forth the same. My Life shall sing To Sion's King, His Love in peace and glory, Who hath so free Begotten me Into his Life that's holy. Among his Saints and Messengers, his Fame my heart shall sound, Because their life Is free from strife, In Love that doth abound. My prayers in the Life that's clean, shall from the same ascend, Unto the God of Love and Peace, that he may you defend.
To perfect Love and Unity, that it may more abound; For so your fame In his pure Name, Doth give a certain sound. Unto the Nations round about, your Fame aloud shall sing, To call them all Both great and small, To bow to Sion's King. Your Gates alwayes, (Of perfect praise) Full wide shall open stand, That all may come I'th free-born Son, (Th' Light) to dwell in your Land, Of rest and peace, In righteousness, I'th living Way that's holy; So you shall sing, And fruit shall spring Within the City holy. The Vine that's true, Shall compass you That sit under his shade,
With great delight In his clear sight, None shall make you afraid. Within the perfect Love there is no fear; So in the Father's sight ye are right dear. My bowels and my soul, my very heart, To you ye living Saints extends; Much could I write In the true Light; But ye can read, my Friends, Without a Book of words, Which finally may end; My mind that's clean, Come read the same; Behold I am your Eriend. In Jacob's Land, Where he did stand; I'th place that's blest, Where he did rest, Who like a Prince prevail'd, with the true Lord of Might, Who also blessed him, even in the Morning-light. Selah.
And seeing that it hapned so, that the Copies of the Letters of the Lord's Priso∣ners, were left in the hands of their Ene∣mies, in a strange Land, it is seen meet to insert them among th rest of their Wri∣tings, for the good of many of their own Nation of England, who may right-well savour the tender love and vertue of true and pure natural Affection, not only to their Kindred and Fathers House, but also to their own Country; all of which they were truly called to forsake, as was good old Abraham our Father, who in obedi∣ence to the good Word & Commandment of the Almighty God, went forth, not knowing whither he went; even as these poor Women, and many more, who are deemed by the Wise of this world, foolish things, not well considering how that the Lord hath chosen the Poor of this world, and made them Rich in Faith; and also chuseth base things, and weak things, and foolish things, to confound the things that are mighty, and to bring to nought things that are, to the end that no Flesh should glory in his presence; who with his migh∣ty hand, and out-stretched arm of Dignity and excellent Power, is defacing and stai∣ning the Pride of all Glory, and bringing
into contempt all the Honourable of the earth that's out of order, and bringing down the haughtiness & loftiness of Man, who shall know that it is the everlasting and terrible God of Eternity, when he a∣riseth to shake terribly the Earth, that pres∣seth down, and oppresseth the Seed of his Bowels, and trampleth on the principal Wheat that came out of the good Husband∣mans right hand; for which the God of Heaven is visiting the Nations, as in the ancient dayes: Albit, he hath long time held his peace in the habitation of his Ho∣liness, where his Honour dwelleth; but behold, behold, he is arising in the Great∣ness of his strengh, even as a Lyon over his Prey, or as a Lyonness bereaved of her Young; for out of Sion hath he uttered his Voice, and thundered forth the Majesty of his powerful Word of Salvation, through the Gate of his beloved City Jerusalem, from on high, free-born, which hath ec∣choed into the ears and hearts of the Hy∣pocrites, and surprized the double-minded with fear on every hand; for he hath cry∣ed, and yet will, in the Spirit of his Pro∣phesie, through his Sons and Daughters, in whom He which is holy dwelleth, to make waste Mountains and Hills, and to devour
at once, as in the ancient dayes: And my Spirit saith, Even so the Lord hasten it (Amen) for his Elects sake. Katherine Evans to her Husband and Children. For the hand of JOHN EVANS, my right dear and precious Hus∣band, with my tender-hearted Children, who are more dear and precious unto me, than the Apple of mine eye. MOst dear and faithful Husband, Friend and Brother, begotten of my Eternal Father, of the immortal Seed of the Cove∣nant of Light, Life and Blessedness, I have unity and fellowship with thee day and night, to my great Refreshment, and continual Com∣fort; Praises, Praises be given to our God for evermore, who hath joyned us together in that which neither Sea nor Land can separate or divide.
My dear heart, my Soul doth dearly salute thee, with my dear and precious Children, which are dear and precious in the Light of the Lord, to thy endless joy, and my everlasting comfort; glory be to our Lord God eternally, who hath called you with a holy Calling, and hath caused his Beauty to shine upon you in this the day of his Power, wherein he is making up of his Jewels, and binding up of his faith∣ful Ones in the Bond of everlasting Love and Salvation, among whom he hath numbred you of his own free Grace; in whch I beseech you (dear hearts) in the fear of the Lord, to abide in your measures, according to the ma∣nifestation of the Revelation of the Son of God in you; keep a diligent watch over every Thought, Word and Action, and let your minds be staid continually in the Light, where you will find out the snares and baits of Satan, and be preserved out of his Traps, Nets and Pits, that you may not be captivated by him at his will. Oh my dear Husband and Children, how often have I poured out my Soul to our everlasting Father for you, with Rivers of Tears, night and day, that you might be kept pure and single in the sight of our God, impro∣ving your Talents as wise Virgins, having Oyl in your Vessels, and your Lamps burning, and cloathed with the long white Robes of
Righteousness, ready to enter the Bed-cham∣ber, and to sup with the Lamb, and to feed t the Feast of fat things, where your souls may be nourished, refreshed, comforted, and sa∣tisfied, never to hunger again. My dear hearts, you do not want teaching, you are in a Land of Blessedness, which floweth with Milk and Honey, among the faithful Stewards, whose mouths are opened wide in Righteousness, to declare the Eternal Myste∣ries of the everlasting Kingdom, of the end∣less Joyes, and eternal Glory; whereinto all the willing and obedient shall enter, and be blessed for ever. My dear hearts, the Promises of the Lord are large, and are all Yea and Amen to those that fear his Name; he will comfort the Mourners in Sion, and will cause the Heavy-hearted in Jerusalem to rejoyce, because of the glad-tydings; They that do bear the Cross with patience, shall wear the Crown with joy; for it is through the long-suffering and pati∣ent waitings, the Crown of Life and Immor∣tality comes to be obtained: The Lord hath exercised my Patience, and tryed me to the ut∣termost, to his praise and my eternal comfort, who hath not been wanting to us in any thing in his own due time; We are Witnesses he can provide a Table in the Wilderness, both spiri∣tual
and temporal. Oh the endless Love  our God, who is an everlasting Fountain  all living Refreshment; whose Chrystal stream never cease running to every thirsty Soul, th breatheth after the springs of Life and Sal∣vation! In our deepest Affliction, when I looked f every breath to be the last, I could not wish  had not come over Seas, because I knew it w my Eternal Father's Will to prove me, with my dear and faithful Friend; In all afflicti∣ons and miseries, the Lord remembred Mercy, and did not leave nor forsake us, nor suffer h Faithfulness to fail us, but caused the swe drops of his Mercy to distil upon us, and the brightness of his glorious Countenance to shine into our hearts; and was never wanting to  in Revelations nor Visions. Oh! how may I do to set forth the Fulness of God's Love t our Souls? No tongue can express it, no hear can conceive it, nor mind can comprehend it. Oh the ravishments, the raptures, the glorio bright-shining Countenance of our Lord God, who is our fulness in emptiness, our strength i weakness, our health in sickness, our life i death, our joy in sorrow, our peace in disquiet∣ness, our praise in heaviness, our power in a needs or necessities; He alone is a full God un∣to us, and to all that can trust him; he hat
emptied us of our selves, and hath unbotto∣med us of our selves, and hath wholly built us upon the sure Foundation, the Rock of Ages, Christ Jesus the Light of the world; where the swelling Seas, nor raging, foaming Waves, nor stormy Winds, though they beat vehemently, can be able to remove us. Glory, honor and praises is to our God for ever, who out of his everlasting Treasures, doth fill us with his Eternal Riches day by day; he did nourish our souls with the choicest of his Mer∣cies, and doth feed our bodies with his good Creatures, and relieve all our Necessities in a full measure; Praises, Praises be to him a∣lone, who is our everlasting portion, our con∣fidence, and our rejoycing, whom we serve ac∣ceptably with reverence and God-like fear; for our God is a consuming fire. Oh my dear Husband and precious Chil∣dren, you may feel the issues of Love and Life, which stream forth as a River to every soul of ou, from a heart that is wholly joyned to the ountain! My Prayers are for you day and ight without ceasing, beseeching the Lord God of Power to pour down his tender Mer∣ies upon you, and to keep you in his pure fear, nd to encrease your Faith, to confirm you in  Righteousness, and strengthen you in be∣ving in the Name of the Lord God Al∣mighty,
that you may be established as Mo Sion, that can never be moved. Keep y Souls unspotted of the World, and love  another with a pure heart, fervently ser one another in love; build up one another  the Eternal, and bear one anothers burde for the Seeds sake, and so fulfil the Law o God. This is the Word of the Lord unt you, my dearly beloved. Dear hearts, I do commit you into the hand of the Almighty, who dwelleth on high, an to the Word of his Grace in you, who is abl to build you up to everlasting Life, and eter∣nal Salvation. By me, who am thy dear an precious Wife, and Spouse, in the Marriage  the Lamb, in the Bed undefiled, K. E. My dearly beloved Yoak-mate in the Wor of our God, doth dearly salute you; Salut us dearly to our precious Friends in all place I do believe we shall see your faces again wi joy. Dearly salute us to T. H. R. S. and h Sister, S. B. and his Daughter, N. M. a his dear Wife, with all the rest of our de Friends in Bristol. T. C. and his dear Wi and Daughter, and all Friends in Bristol  else-where. J. G. and his precious Wife, Children and Servants, with all Friend
Our dear Love to E. H. with her Husband and Children at Alderberry. The Original of this was written in the Inquisition in Malta, in the 11th. Month of the year, 1661. Sarah Cheevers to her Husband and Children. MY Dear Husband, my love, my life is given up to serve the living God, and to obey his pure Call in the measure of the ma∣nifestation of his Love, Light, Life and Spi∣rit of Christ Jesus, his only begotten Son, whom he hath manifested in me, and thou∣sands, by the brightness of his Appearing, to put an end to Sin and Satan, and bring to light Immortality, through the preaching of the everlasting Gospel, by the Spirit of Prophesie, which is poured out upon the Sons & Daugh∣ters of the living God, according to his pur∣pose; whereof he hath chosen me, who am the least of all; but God, who is rich in mercy, for his own Name sake hath passed by mine
Offences, and hath counted me worthy to bear testimony to his holy Name, before the migh∣ty Men of the Earth. Oh the Love of the Lord to my Soul! my tongue cannot express, neither hath it entred into the heart of Man, to conceive of the things that God hath laid up for them that fear him. Therefore doth my soul breath to my God for thee and my Children, night and day, that your minds may be joyned to the Light of the Lord Jesus, to lead you out of Satans King∣dom, into the Kingdom of God, where we may enjoy one another in the Life Eternal, where neither Sea nor Land can separate; In which Light and Life do I salute thee my dear Hus∣band, with my Children, wishing you to em∣brace Gods love, in making his Truth so clear∣ly manifest amongst you; whereof I am a Witness, even of the everlasting Fountain that hath been opened by the Messengers of Christ, who preach to you the Word of God in season, and out of season, directing you where you may find your aviour to purge and cleanse you from your sins, and to reconcile you to his Father, and to have unity with him and all the Saints, in the Light, that ye may be fellow Citizens in the Kingdom of Glory, Rest▪ and Peace, which Christ hath purchased for them that love him, and obey him: What profit is there for to gain
the whole World, and lose your own Souls? Seek first the Kingdom of God, & the Righte∣ousness thereof, and all other things shall be added to you, Godliness is great gain, having the promise of this life that now is, and that which is to come; which is fulfilled to me, who have tasted of the Lord's endless Love and Mercies to my soul; and from a moving of the same love and life do I breath to thee my dear Husband, with my Children; my dear Love salutes you all; my Prayers to my God are for you all, that your minds may be joyned to the Ligh, wherewith you are light∣ned, that I may enjoy you in that which is E∣ternal, and have community with you in the Spirit. He that is joyned to the Lord, is one spirit, one heart, one mind, one soul, to serve the Lord with one consent. I cannot by Pen or Paper set forth the large Love of God in ful∣filling his gracious Promises to me in the Wil∣derness, being put into Prison for God's Truth, there to remain all dayes of my life, being searched, tryed, examined upon pain of death among the Enemies of God and his Truth; standing in jeopardy for my life, until the Lord had subdued and brought them under by his mighty Power, and made them to feed us, and would have given us money or clothes; but the Lord did deck our Table richly in the Wil∣derness.
The Day of the Lord is appeari wherein he will discover every Deed of dark∣ness, let it be done never so secret; the Lig of Christ Jesus will make it manifest in every Conscience; the Lord will rip up all covering that is not of his own Spirit. The God f Peace be with you all, Amen. Written in the Inquisition-Prison, by the hand of Sarah Cheevers, for the hand of Henry Cheevers, my dear Husband; give this, fail not. I do not well remember that this was one of the surprized Letters. A Letter to a Kinswoman of S. C. S. P. MY dear Kinswoman, I dearly salute thee, with thy Husband, and thy ten∣der Babes: I am not unmindful of thee, nor of thy Love that thou shewed'st to me; I know thou shalt not lose thy reward; thou hast found refreshment in it; for it was of the Lord;
My Burthen was weighty for the Lord; I ould have fled the Cross; but praises be to he Lord that kept me to it, that I might ot lose the Crown; I was straitned in it, till I gave up to it: Praised be the Name of our God for ever, Amen. Stand fast in the Lord; et none take thy Crown. The God of Power preserve and keep thee low and single in his fear, pressing forward to the price of an in∣terruptible Crown of Glory, Peace and Rest, ut of all strife. Keep to the pure Life; watch the Enemy; keep thy mind staid in the mea∣sure of God's Grace, that is able to make thee wise unto salvation, and to give thee an inhe∣itance with the rest of the Children of Light. My tender lamb, fear and dread the living God; keep in his presence, go not out to let in the Enemy, to break thy peace, and to dar∣ken thy understanding, and to vail over the pure, from beholding thy Saviour: Incline thine ear to him, give up to a daily Cross to thy own will; Stand single, empty; wait up∣on the Lord to be fill'd with his Fulness: let him be all thy treasure, ask of him, he giveth liberally: Believe, and thou shalt receive; his Promise is large; I have found it so. Ha∣ving nothing, yet enjoying all things. I have asted, handled and felt of his everlasting Love, and indurable Riches; my life is rapt
up in it; I have found Him whom my s loveth: Oh! what might I do to set hi forth? He is the choicest of ten thousands▪ therefore doth my soul love him. My life is given up for him, his Truth for to declare; Lord guide me in thy path, and keep me in thy fear. Amen. My dear Aunt: My dear love and life is with thee; and I do embrace thee in the Arms and Bosom of my Eternal Fathers love, with thy dear Husband and little Ones. Another in the same Paper to Friends. MY dearly beloved Sisters & Friends of Truth, I dearly salute you in the Light, Life and Love of our God, which is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, wherein I do rejoyce, and have union with you. My Life is given up to serve the Lord. Oh how my soul travels for the Seed of God's Kingdom, to be sown throughout all Nations, for the ga∣thering in of Christ's scattered Flock, and for the destruction of sin and Satan: For our God is weighing the Mountains in
Scales, and the Dust in an equal Ballance: He is pulling down the mighty, and raising the meek, humble, lowly; he is feeding the poor and hungry with good things, but the rich he sends empty away. My dear Babes and Lambs, feed of the sincere Milk of the Word of Life, that you may grow up in it, and wax strong in spirit to praise the Lord, and to glorifie him who is wor∣thy. Be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might; seek him earnestly, call upon him continually; let your whole Meditations be staid in him alway. Seek him earnestly; deny your own thoughts and words; give heed to the Light, bring all your deeds to it; give up all that is contrary, to be slain; stand single, empty, naked before the Lord, that you may be filled with the Streams of his everlasting Love. Oh my dear hearts! our God is full of love; stand not back, press forward, let nothing hinder you; the Lord calls for you, My Son, give me thy heart: The Pro∣mise of our God is as large to you as to any, if you can believe; your straitness is in your selves; For God is a full Foun∣tain; abundance of love runs forth to them that can trust him; I can witness it; in the barren Wilderness he caused streams
of living Water to break forth: I cannot express it, it is so large; therefore doth my soul thirst after you, my dear Ones; the love of God is to you. My dear Sisters, I have you in my remembrance, and do pray to my God and your God, that you may be enlarged in your measures to praise the Lord, and to be kept in a sensible feeling of his Power daily; and that you may en∣crease in wisdom, strength and power over God's Enemies. The Blessing of the Lord God Almighty be with you, and preserve you by his mighty Power, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. Salute me to my Sister S. R. there is a tender Plant in her; I do feel it to my comfort, praises be to the Lord. I am in health I praise the Lord, and do want no∣thing; the Lord is my portion, I cannot want; he hath deckt my Table richly, he hath anointed my head with Balm, it run∣neth down the skirts of my cloathing. Written in the Inquisiti∣on-Prison at the Isle of Malta, by a sufferer for the Seeds sake. Fare∣wel at this time, Amen. Your dear Sister in the Lord, Sa. Cheevers.
Another from K. E. to her Husband and Children; with somewhat from both the Lord's Prisoners, to Friends; the which was taken with the rest of the Letters, in the Inquisition, and copied out for their Lord Inquisitor. DEar Husband, with my dear Children, I beseech you together, to wait in the patience, having your minds alwayes staid upon the Lord: Keep out of incum∣brances, for that is the Enemies opportu∣nity to step in, when the mind is gone forth, to vail the pure, and darken the understanding, and so hinder you of the pure enjoyment of beholding the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. Take no more upon you than you are able to perform in the Spirit of moderation and meekness, for that is in the sight of God of great price: See the Lord going before you in all your occasions, that you may be prosperous in all your underta∣kings; wait diligently upon the Lord, to be seasoned with his Grace, that you may
come to a pure understanding of the m¦ons of his Eternal Spirit, and a true kno¦ledge of the operation of his hands; you will be able with all Saints, to com¦prehend what is the heigth, and dept and length, and breadth of the riches  his Grace and Love towards mankind  Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen, saith my spirit▪ This is the Counsel of the Lord unto yo. I do often remember M. H. I do de∣sire she may be brought up in the fear o God, and want for nothing that is conve∣nient for her; salute me to her dearly. I have been very sensible, dear Husband, of thine, and our Children, and many dear friends more, of your sorrowful souls, mourning hearts, grieved spirits, troubled minds for us, as being Members of one Body, Christ Jesus being our Head, we must needs suffer together, that we may rejoyce together; a true sorrow begets a true joy; a true Cross, a true Crown. We do beleive it is our heavenly Fathers will and purpose to bring us back as safe to England, as ever he brought us thence, for his own glory; though we are some of the least of Christ's Flock, yet we do belong to the true Fold, and our Shepherd hath had as great a care of us, as he could have for any of his
Lambs, and hath brought us through great affliction, praises be given to his glorious Name, of us, and you, and all that know him for ever. Though we are absent in body in the will of God, from you, yet we are present in spirit in the will of God, with you, and do receive the benefit of all your prayers daily, and do feel the Springs of Life that do stream from all the faithful hearted, to our great refreshment and strengthening. After our money was gone, the Lord In∣quisitor, with the rest in Authority, put a great allowance in one of their servants hands for our maintenance, because we could take no money our selves; the Lord of Heaven did forbid us to meddle with a∣ny; and he did send to know whether we did want any clothes, he would send it to the Prison to us: This was the large love of our God to us, and we were made con∣tented with that we had, till the Lord God (who is rich in mercy, and full of all Grace, and is never unmindful of any which trust in his Name) of his everlasting love did send his faithful Messenger, whose feet are beautiful, and face is comely, cloathed with a bright shining Garment from the Crown of the head, to the soal of
the foot, and came in great power and strength indeed, armed with the whol Armour of Light, and drest in the Majesty of the Most High, and being commissione of the Higher Power, went to the Lor Inquisitor to demand our lawful liberty which would not be granted, except we could get some English Merchants of Le∣gorn or Messaena, to engage 4000 Doller that we should never come into those parts again. The Lord (who alone is ou Life and Redeemer) moved our dear Bro∣ther to offer his own body to redeem ours, but it would not be received; then he offe∣red to lay down his own dear and preciou life for our liberty: Greater love can n man have, than to lay down his life for hi Friend; the Lord will restore it into his bosom double; his service can never be blotted out; his Name is called Daniel Baker; his outward being is near London, a right dear and precious heart he is: The blessing, strength, and power of the Al∣mighty be upon him and his, and oversha∣dow them for ever, Amen. Greater com∣fort could never be administred to us in our conditions; Glory, honor and praise to our God for evermore, Amen.
This is a dear and sweet salutation in that which never changeth, fadeth away, nor waxeth old, from us whom the Lord hath counted worthy to bear his Name, and suffer for his sake, to all our Christian Friends, Fathers and Elders, Pillars of Gods spiritual House, Brethren and Sisters in the Lord Jesus Christ. O my dear Husband, with our dear and precious Children, Lambs of God and Babes of Christ, begotten of the Immortal Seed of Light, Life and Truth, with us, and all the whole Family of everlasting blessedness. Pray for us believingly; all things are possible with our God. So my Darlings, in the Arms of everlasting Love do I take my leave of you; the blessing and peace of the Most High be upon you ever, Amen, Amen. Oh my dear Husband! praise the Lord that ever thou hadst a Wife that was found worthy to suffer for the Name of the Lord, inasmuch as I can understand the moving of the Spirit of God: My dear and faithful Yoke-fellow, Sister and Friend, is worthy to be embraced of all friends for ever; the deeper the sorrow, the greater the joy; the heavier the Cross, the weightier the
Crown. This was written in the Inqui∣sition at Malta, of us Katherine Evans, Sarah Cheevers. Malta 11th. Month of the year, 1661. From K. E. for two Friends. DEarly beloved Brother in the ever∣lasting Covenant of Light and Life, do I dearly salute and embrace thee, with thy dear Wife, my beloved Sister, and thy dear Children, whom I dearly love in that which never changeth: My dear and faithful Friends, I am often refreshed in you, when the Light brings you to my re∣membrance; then do I feel the springs of Love and Life, which ariseth from the pure Fountain of Eternal refreshments, to my joy and comfort, wherein I am made to praise and glorifie my God and your God, who hath redeemed us out of the Chains of darkness, and Kingdom of blackness, into the everlasting brightness, glory, joy, and perfect blessedness for ever, to dwell in the enjoyment of his living presence, as we abide faithful to Eternity; in his pre∣sence
is fulness of joy, and at his right and is pleasure for evermore. My prayers are night and day without ceasing, to our Heavenly Father, that not one of his begetting may ever turn or slide back, but that every one may press for∣ward towards the Mark of the price of the high calling in Christ Jesus, who is our Life and Glory, and so all may come to wear the Crown of Life and Immortality, triumphing in the everlasting Blessedness of the Heavenly Riches and Eternal Joy and Happiness, that's perfect for ever, Amen. Oh! my dear Brother and Sister, we are all Children of our Father, begotten in the everlasting Seed of the Promise of E∣ternal Life and Salvation. Oh my pre∣cious Friends! wait patiently with me, al∣wayes in the pure Fear of the perfect and pure God, who hath an eternal Treasure, full of everlasting Riches, and ready to distribute them to all his dutiful Children: Glory and Praises be given to his blessed Name for ever. Oh my Beloved ones! your love to me is written in the Records that cannot be lost. Dear hearts, glorifie our God in my behalf, that ever he counted me worthy to
suffer for his Name; I hope to see you faces again (yet once more) with joy and gladness, with my dear yoke-fellow in the Lord's Work, before we go hence, and be no more seen. So in the tender bowels of pure Love, do I take my leave of you at this time. The everlasting peace and blessedness be upon you, and upon the whole Israel of God, Amen. Dearly salute us to all Friends. This was written in the Inquisition at Malta, in the 11th month of the year, 1661. Katherine Evans. There was another Letter (and Paper) which was intercepted; but I have it not here with me, it being sent home from Legorn. Yet here followeth more of their Writings to Friends, and to my own particular, which at several times I received from them, unknown to their Oppressors.
A Copy of a Letter that I was moved to write the next day after I came to the Island and City, and communicated to their hands. DEar Lambs, Peace be unto you, Amen. Now seeing that the Everlasting God and Father of all Truth, hath in his tender love, fatherly mercy, and bowels of compassion (through the tryals of ma∣nifold sufferings and temptations) hither∣to, even to this day, upheld and preserved you in the Innocency, and its Testimony against the contrary; although sometimes (I know that) you have tasted the sentence of death in your selves, and even (as it were) ready to despair of life; yet in the living Testimony of Innocency, in the an∣swer of a good Conscience, I Daniel, bear you Record in the Covenant of Life, the same remaineth with you, and you are in it a good sweet savour to the Lord, and his Eternal Truth and People. Oh! blessed for ever be his Name, yea, and my very heart and life blesseth and magnifieth the Lord on your behalf.
Wherefore my dear Friends, be faithful, full of Faith, and the living invisible God of Peace is with you, and will not forsake you, seeing it is so; and much more you know which might be declared. Oh! I am moved in the Bowels of my Father's Love, as one with you (in tryals, and the exercise of manifold temptations) to stir up your pure and innocent minds by way of remembrance, and also to beseech you to take heed to the Testimony of Life that's undefiled, and manifest in you, and to dwell in the same which retains the Joy and Comfort of the Lord, and his Peace, which you know is not of the World; and so to watch and beware of the Enemy that is near to tempt to make shipwrack of Faith and a good Conscience, and to dis∣pair, and so to betray not only your own innocent long-sufferings, but also the Te∣stimony of the Lord God of our Life, for which you have so long suffered, and by the pure Divine Vertue of the same have you been to this day preserved; so that the Lord (who is and will be your reward) hath not been wanting to you on his part. Oh faint not, but lift up your heads, and be faithful still, as I am not otherwise per∣swaded concerning you; and I am well
perswaded that in his own Covenant and Way, Deliverance will come to the Seed; and ye know, if the same come not in his own Covenant of Truth, in the Light of his Countenance, it cannot be well; but your nay (you know) is to be nay, and so to stand in the Truth, against the contrary, whatsoever our God permits unreasonable men to inflict upon the outward or visible body; and the same also will work for his Glory, and also for the Good and Eternal Peace of his innocent suffering Lambs not∣withstanding. Your tender Brother, D. B. ANd when this, with other Papers, I had (through not a little difficulty) communicated to their hands over the heads of our Enemies, I was moved to speak my Message, as from the Lord of Life, to them, after I had offered up my body, and to lay down my Life for these poor Innocents, my dear Friends; and so with my voice I saluted them in the Lord's Truth, as they stood at the Prison-Grates, with these words, in the behalf of the ge∣neral Assembly of the Saints in light, to
wit, The whole Body of God's Elect, right dearly, owneth your Testimony, and you are a sweet savour unto the Lord and his people: And forasmuch as one of these poor affli∣cted Lambs replied, and said on this wise, as if it was a trouble to them that they could not be more serviceable. Then my heart being melted, and my bowels of pi∣ty, mercy and compassion, being moved, I said, That it was a wonderful mercy of the Lord, in as much as they were preser∣ved in their own measure of Truth, and pure Innocency, for which my heart prai∣sed the Lord for what mine eye saw, which right dearly affected my heart; and we were well refreshed at that season, in the sweet presence of our living God, albeit, our bodies were at a distance, but so as we could behold each others face through the Prison bars of Iron, in the Inquisition. Now for so much as in the Wisdom of God it is seen meet, that the fore-mentio∣ned and following Writings which came from their hands, might appear to publick view, that thereby every Member of the one Body may have a right understanding; and not only so, but also a sensible feeling,
not only of the tryals & sufferings in part of these innocent Lambs, but also, of the Consolations of each other, as fellow-Members of the infinite Body of which Christ Jesus the Lord is both King and Head; in whom be endless dominion and pure glory, and eternal salvation, Amen. And so I being as it were constrained to publish the acceptable Words, that sound and savor of pure innocency and clear truth, for the Elect's sake; in the same Love and Life I am the more free hereun∣to, even as a Child, that differs but little from a servant, as I am in the Fathers Love, Power and Grace of Life, fitted to serve the undefiled Life of the least in the Kingdom of Blessedness, and to admini∣ster comfort, or what else I have received from the Eternal Fountain or Fulness, for the use or service of either body, mind, soul or spirit, of my own flesh or family, seeing no man ever hated his own Flesh; and he is worse than an Infidel that pro∣videth not for his own Family, especially them of his own House.
This is a sweet Salutation to Gods Elect Church in England and Ireland. RIght dear, precious and Heavenly Ones, whose Beauty shineth bright, and at whose Name the hearts of the Hea∣then do tremble: We, who through the everlasting Mercies of our God, are Mem∣bers of the same Body, and are held in strait Captivity, and hard Bondage, for witnessing forth the same Testimony and Covenant of pure Light, Life and Truth of our God, with you dear and faithful Ones indeed; We here in the same Cove∣nant of pure Love, and bowels of tender∣ness, do dearly salute and imbrace you all, glorifying and praising our eternal Father for you all, who hath counted us worthy to partake of the fellowship and sufferings for the Bodies sake, with you in tribulati∣ons, fiery tryals, manifold temptations, fastings, watchings, heats and colds, and cruel threatning and persecutions, perils by Sea, and perils by Land, standing in jeopardy of our lives year after year, and looking every hour, day and night, for ma∣ny
Weeks together, when we should be brought out to Execution; but though Pro∣clamation was made, and they came up to the very Gate with a Drum and Mus∣quets, to fetch us out to destroy us, yet the Lord God of everlasting strength, who in the deepest of all dangers, and greatest extremity, when all hopes were past, did but blow upon them with the breath of his nostrils, and they did fly as dust before the Wind; for which we do intreat all Friends to glorifie our God on our behalf; for never did the Lord our God work grea∣ter Deliverance for any, than he hath done for us from time to time, who are the least and weakest, for what we know, that ever the Lord our God sent forth in so great and weighty a work: but all things are possible with him, who made and created all things; It is he alone which carrieth on his own Work by his own mighty Pow∣er, and the glory shall be his own for ever∣more, Amen. Oh our dearly beloved Friends, did you know but the third part of the Afflictions the Lord our God hath carried us through, you would say, The Lord hath wrought as great a Miracle in our preservation, as ever he did in raising Lazarus out of the
Grave: And in the greatest of our afflicti∣ons, we could not say in our hearts, Fa∣ther, would thou hadst not brought us hither, but cryed mightily to our God for Power to carry us through whatsoever should be inflicted upon us, that the Truth of our God might not suffer through our weakness: And the Lord did hear us, and answered us in righteousness, and carried us on with all boldness, and made our fore-heads as Flint, & our brows as Brass, in the faces of our Enemies, that whensoe∣ver we were brought forth upon tryal, all fear was taken away, that we stood as Iron-Gates, and Castle-Walls in the faces of our Enemies, so that they said, we would fain be burned; but we answered, No, we would not willingly be burned; but if our heavenly Father doth call us to suffer in that kind for his Name sake, he will give us power to go through it: and we have great cause to believe it; for our Lord God never called us to do any service for him, but he gave us power, and made way for his own Work; glory and praise be to his holy Name for ever. Dearly beloved Friends, marvel not why Israel is not gathered in all this time; it is not for want of labour, nor travel, nor
grief, nor pain, fasting nor mourning, nor weeping, nor love to their souls; but it is because of the great Oppression: For here are a willing people, but they dare not until the Lord make way for them. Truly Friends, we have not been idle since we saw your faces, nor have we had much ease to the flesh, but do travel night and day for Sion's prosperity and perfect joy, and for the reparation of Jerusalem, and her pure praise; though our sorrows are deep, and our afflictions grievous, yet we do wait with patience to reap the peace∣able fruits of righteousness, and enjoy the benefit of our uprightness; Praises be to our God for ever, he hath kept us by his power and holiness, that our Ene∣mies have not one jot or tittle against us, but for the Truth of our God, and that we could not joyn with them; so they would not suffer us to have one line of refresh∣ment, but stript us out of all, so that we could not expect one drop of mercy, favour nor affection, but what our heavenly Fa∣ther did distil upon us from his living pre∣sence, and work for us by the operation of his own Arm of strength and power. But dear Friends, though a long Winter, and many sharp and terrible Storms have
past over our heads, so that we cannot ex∣press our Sorrows; so likewise we cannot declare our Joys. Oh! in the midst of all our afflictions, our God did draw nigh un∣to us, and did speak comfortably unto us with many sweet and precious Promises, and did never suffer his faithfulness to fail us, nor was he wanting unto us in Visions and Revelations. Oh! how doth he ap∣pear in his Glory, Beauty and Brightness, so that our souls are ravished and wrapped up with his living presence and glory ma∣ny times, so that we do not dare to look out at our long-sufferings nor tryals, but do press forwards towards the fulness of Joy and Blessedness, which our eternal Father hath prepared for all them that love him, and walk in obedience to him; and we know, the deeper our sorrow is, the greater our Joy shall be; and the heavier our Cross, the weightier our Crown, as we abide faithful: And we do believe, that neither principalities, nor powers, nor suf∣ferings, nor imprisonment, nor persecuti∣on, nor life nor death, shall be able to se∣parate us from the Love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord and Saviour, Amen: Dearly beloved Friends, though our bodies are bolted up in the Rocks & Caves
of the Earth, yet our spirits (you know) none can limit nor confine to any place. And we do behold your order and stedfast∣ness of your Faith, and Labour of love, and are daily refreshed in all the faithful-hear∣ted. Oh dear hearts! the remembrance of the least of you is precious. Oh! the Rivers of tears that have distilled from our eyes, whilst we do think upon you, for joy, because of your growth and flourishing in the Truth. Oh! you are Virgins indeed, who have Oyl in your Vessels, and your Lamps burning, and are clothed with the long white Robes of Righteousness, and are adorned with the Ornaments of pure beauty and glorious brightness (abundance of you) to our joy and comfort; and we do pray night and day, That every Babe of our Heavenly Father's begetting may prosper, even as we desire our own souls should prosper; and that every one may be kept out of incumbrances, and use the World as if they used it not; but every one's mind, spirit, heart and soul, may be exercised in the Eternal, by the Power of God, out of the earthly, and out of the visible, out of the carnal and perishing things of this life (so as to trust in it) in∣to the heavenly, into the spiritual, into the
invisible, into that which never changeth, fadeth, nor waxeth old, where every one may dwell in the enjoyment of the pre∣sence of the Lord; for in the presence of the Lord is fulness of joy, and at his right hand is pleasure for evermore. Oh, that every one may be emptied of your selves, and unbottomed of your selves, that you may build wholly upon the sure foundati∣on, and anchored so fast upon the Rock of Ages, that neither the swelling Seas, nor the foaming Waves, nor stormy Winds, though they beat vehemently, may ever be able to remove you. Oh dear Brethren, in the life and power you may feel the issues of Love and Life, which stream as a Ri∣ver to every soul of you, from the hearts of us that are wholly joyned to the Foun∣tain; Glory and everlasting Praises be given to his holy Name. Our whole souls, spirits, hearts and minds, are given up to serve the Lord in whatsoever he requireth of us, as he shall make it manifest unto us: And we do blesse his Name for ever, that he hath found us worthy of so high a calling, as to bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of Iron. Our prayers are continually for the advancement of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus throughout
the whole Earth, for the gathering of the Seed of the Elect of God, and for the rai∣sing of it up over the Seed of the Serpent, in power and great glory, to bear rule, and to have dominion over the whole World, that the Kingdoms of this World, may become the Kingdoms of our Lord Jesus, that he may rule in his Princely Power, and reign in his Kingly Majesty, whose Right it is; that the knowledge of the Lord may cover the Earth, as the Wa∣ter covereth the Sea; that all the Children of the Lord may be taught of the Lord, and be established in Righteousness; that so the Mourners in Sion may rejoyce, and the heavy-hearted in Jerusalem may be right glad: The Lord God of Power hasten it for his own Name's sake, and for his Elects sake, that lye in captivity under the hands of the dark powers of the Earth, either spiritual or temporal; Amen, Amen, saith our spirits. Dear and precious Friends and Brethren, pray for us, that we may finish our Testi∣mony to the glory of God, and to the praise of his holy Name, and to the comfort of all that love his appearing, and to our own eternal salvation, and to the shame and confusion of all that hate the Lord Jesus,
and persecute his Truth. So in the pure Unity of the Covenant of Light, Life, Peace, Love, and everlasting Righteous∣ness, do we take our leaves of you all at this time, hoping and believing we shall see your faces once again, before we go hence, and be no more seen. Dear Friends, pray for us. Though we were in many straits and hardships by reason of the oppression; yet whilst our minds were staid upon the Foun∣tain, we saw no want; but our tender Fa∣ther, whose heavenly eye was ever over us, saw our necessities, sent his right dear and precious Servant, and just and faith∣ful Steward, Daniel Baker, to administer to our Necessities both spiritual and tem∣poral; he came not in his own time, will nor strength, but in the Will and Time, Strength and Power of the Almighty God; at whose presence the Mountains were re∣moved, the tall Cedars were made to bow, the strong Oaks to stoop. Oh wonderful! He went to the Lord Inquisitor (the Popes Deputy) to demand our lawful Liberty, which would not be granted, unless he and we would write to Messaena, or Legorn, to some English Merchant, to be engaged for four thousand Dollers: Which Propositi∣on
being out of the Covenant of Light, we durst not stoop to it; but our dear Brother in Christ Jesus offered his body for our Li∣berty, but it would not be granted; no∣thing would serve but one to engage for four thousand Dollers to be paid, if ever we come into these parts again. Then in obedience to the Lord he offered up his Life for our Freedom, but all would not serve; the Will of our God be done. Oh dear Friends! greater Love was ne∣ver heard of, than for a man to lay down his Life for his Friend: Oh! it is worthy to be recorded in remembrance of him for ever; here he came up and down to admi∣nister to us with his Life in his hand, time after time. So the Lord God of Power reward him double into his bosome for ever. Oh! how did he refresh our souls, spirits, minds and bodies through great tri∣als, which is never to be forgotten. Written in the Inquisition at Malta, in the 11th Month of the year, 1661. By us, Ka. Evans. S. Cheevers. Who have suffered for the living Testimo∣ny of Jesus, and his pure Innocency, in Bonds, Tryals and Tribulations, more than three years, to this day.
A short Relation of some more of their exceeding great Tryals and Tempta∣tions. NOw in short time after we were taken Prisoners, we were stung with Flyes called Muskatoes, in our faces & our heads, as we lay in our Beds, that were swollen as if we had the small-Pox, so that all people were afraid of us, save the English Consul; they thought we had been unclean persons, so that a Friar told Sarah he saw an evil Spirit in her face, which was a great tryal; they could not sleep in their beds in the house, they were so tormented; and we were told, that they had seen them that did pray and preach every day, were burnt for Witches in a short time; and they would keep us to see our lives & conver∣sations; and so they have: And glory be to our God, they cannot lay guilt to our charge, but are made to confess the Truth. In a few dayes after we were there, in a Vision in the night, the Lord appeared to me, and shewed me, that round about us,
and above and beneath us, there were ma∣ny Magicians of Aegypt; and the Lord smote me, and said unto me, The Devil hath desired to winnow you as Wheat; but pray that your Faith fail not. And the sight was very dreadful and terrible; and the Voice of the Lord did awake me with much trembling and amazement, and a great War, for the space of twelve hours, before I could get the victory; and we did witness but little ease to the flesh night nor day. We went in obedience to the Lord to one of their Tower-Houses, in time of their Worship, and stood trem∣bling in the midst of them; and I was made to turn my back to the high Altar, and kneel down, and lift up my voice in prayer unto the Lord; and he that was say∣ing Service, drew off his Surplice, and kneeled a little beside us till I had done, and he reacht forth his hand to us, to come to him, and offered me a token; and the Lord shewed me it was the Mark of the Beast; and I refused it; and he put it in∣to Sarah's hand, and she gave it him again, and shewed him her Purse, that she had to give, if any had need. And he asked if we were Calvinists or Lutherans? And we said, Nay: And he asked if we would go
to Rome to the Pope? But we denied. And he asked if we were Catholicks? And we told him, We were true Chirstians, the Servants of the living God. And many of them were amazed, and came round about us; we having but little of their Tongue, gave our Testimony (for the Lord) in words and signs, as well as we could; and they were made subject to the Power at that present, praises be given to our God, and we departed in peace. And since that, the Lord laid such a hea∣vy burthen upon us, that we did question what he would do with us, before we knew the mind of God in it. And upon a set-day they had a great Meeting to take their holy Sacrament (as they call it) in a high place; but we knew nothing of it, nor where it was, but what the Lord revealed to us: And we were made to go in, and stand in the midst; and there were many lights in divers places, & many Christs, as they call them, and much costliness and a∣bominations of the Earth; they had so many sorts of holy Garments (as they call them) of so many colours, that it would make one wonder how the Devil did invent it. And there we were made to stand in the midst for the space of three parts of an
hour, as near as I can judge, in great pow∣er, trembling and quaking, and bitter mourning, so that they were all amazed, and some removed further for fear, but knew not what to do; for I never did wit∣ness such an Earthquake. In the end one came soberly, and spake to us to go forth; and we went in the Lord's time, and sate at the door trembling and mourning, to the astonishment of them; and being so overcome with their Abominations, we went along the street reeling to and fro, and staggering like drunken men, so that we were a wound to all that saw us: It was the wonderful Power of God that made way for us to go forth to them, and kept us. They have used all the Craft they have day and night, to inchant us, as the Lord hath made it known unto us; Glory and praises be to his everlasting Name for evermore. We know that there is no In∣chantment against Jacob, nor divination against Israel. Dearly beloved Friends, We dearly sa∣lute you all in the invisible Life of our God, who is our life, our peace, our stay and strength; under whose Shadow we are refreshed; praises, glory and honor be gi∣ven
unto his powerful Name, of all his, for ever. Truly Friends, we are not able to de∣clare the large Mercies of our God, vouch∣safed unto us from time to time; his Horn is our Strength, and his Name our strong Tower in all our troubles, temptations, tryals and sufferings; he is a God at hand, and not afar off, and doth make us sensi∣ble before-hand, by Visions and Revelati∣ons, what is coming upon us; and doth arm us with his own Armour, and makes us as bold as Lyons; for we fear not the face of man, because we know we shall not suffer any thing but what shall make for the glory of our God: But truly we had fainted long ago, had not the Lord upheld us by his free Spirit; but we know the Lord taketh care of the least of them that trust him; Praises be unto him for ever. Dear Friends, though we be absent in bo∣dy, yet we are present in spirit, and do feel you in that which cannot be separa∣ted, as we abide faithful, and are much refreshed in you; and the remembrance of you is precious unto us: Oh, that all our Friends could prize the company and the sight of each others faces. We do not want the company of Friars, Jesuites and Ma∣gistrates,
nor great women. Here are some that have breathings after Life, but they dare not shew it; for the same thing that was, is; they will not enter in them∣selves, nor suffer them that would. The Lord Inquisitor sent to us, That if we would (being we are good women) we should go into the Nunnery amongst the holy women, and be maintained as long as we live, in regard we have denied the world, and all that we have. And the Friar told us, if we would come to their Masse-house, and receive their holy Sacrament, we should be the most eminent Catholicks in all Malta. But we denied them in the Name of the Lord, and all their dead fop∣pery which they have invented. Here we are kept under the Inquisition, as they say, till they have Orders from the Pope of Rome what they should do with us. We beseech you all, faithful Friends, pray for us, for great are our tryals: Did you but know the Abominations that the Devil hath invented here, you would think it were tryal enough. But here we have cruel mockings; and the same contra∣dictions, tryals and temptations that ever the Servants of the Lord had, and Christ himself. It is the wonderful Power of
God that we are preserved till this time; for all the whole Island are Papists, and given up to Idolatry. We are despised of all People, and abhorred of all Nations; and because they cannot have any just thing against us, they do invent lies against us: but the Lord is on our side, for else the Enemy would soon destroy us; for great is their rage; and we have continual war with them, night and day we feel: be∣hold their threatnings and cruelty is more than our tongues can express. Great is the love of our God, for he doth refresh us with the sweet drops of his mercy, and doth water us every moment with the everlasting springs of his Love, or else we had fainted long ago. Oh! let all who know the Lord, praise and glorifie his holy Name for ever and ever, Amen. Dear Friends, farewel in the Lord. From us who are in outward bonds in the City of Malta, for the Testimo∣ny of JESUS, Glory be to his Name for ever, who hath counted us wor∣thy. We are in health at present, blessed be God. Ka. Evans. Sa. Chevers.
Several other Writings to D. B. whilst he was in MALTA. OH thou tender-hearted one, whom our God and our eternal Father hath sent to relieve us his poor innocent Lambs, in hard bondage, and deep capti∣vity, which thou art an eye-witness of; none can receive or discern it, but those that do see it: But our heavenly Father, who hath respect to the rest of them that believe in his Name, hath sent thee to be an eye-witness in some measure, of what we have undergone. Oh my dear, precious and endeared one! thou meek Lamb, thou innocent Dove, who dost bear the likeness, beauty and brightness of that unspotted One that is come in the Volumn of the Book to do the Will of God: We can give in our Testi∣mony for thee, that thou camest here in the Power & Authority of the Most High, to which the tall Cedars were made to bow, and the strong Oaks to bend; praises, praises be given to our everlasting God for evermore.
Oh my dearly beloved Brother, thy beauty shineth indeed, thou art all glori∣ous within and without; thy Garments are perfumed with all delightsom scents; We smell the sweet Odours thereof, and do feel the fulness of Love and Life which runs from thy tender heart day and night to us, and in the same Unity of Love do our hearts stream forth to thee, as thou knowest full well: Oh how have our hearts and bowels been melted for thee! our heads and eyes have run with tears, and our souls have been poured forth to our heavenly Father for thy preservation, and we did truly labour to see thy face before thou camest: Glory and praises be given to our Eternal Lord God, Amen, saith our spirits; that he doth vouchsafe us so great a mercy, as to behold the face of so preci∣ous a Friend. We do beseech God to mo∣derate us with his Eternal Spirit, that we may alwayes be mindful of his mercies, and never to let his benefits slip out of our minds. We have been near death many times, when we had none to come near us, but those that preached death and de∣struction to us; I have lain twelve dayes, or more, in a fast, in strong travel night and day, that my dearly beloved Yoke∣mate
would have been glad if the Lord would have taken me out of the body, be∣cause of my great affliction. Then the English Friar which was here, came up and down to us, and would say to my Friend, She is ready to depart; send for me, and take notice what tormentt she will be in; a thousand Devils will be about her, to fetch her soul to Hell, because she will not be a Catholick. And after we were parted, we were called to fast, so that my Friend was so weak, that she put on such linnen upon her head, as she thought to lie in in her Grave: We did eat but little in a month together, when our money was almost done, till we did know the mind of the Lord what to do. Then thy did run to and fro like mad men, and the Friars did come and say, The Inquisitor sent them to tell us, we might have any thing we would eat; and they did say, it was not possible that e∣ver creatures could live with so little meat for so long a time together. They did bring us meat, and say, the English Consul did send it. It was a glorious Fast indeed, the Lord did appear wonderfully in it, praises be given to him for ever, Amen. We were very weak, because the power did work so strongly; I had no manner of food
in my body five or six days together; We did lie in our clothes, because we had no strength to put them off, nor one to make our bed: Then we did speak to the Friar, that we might come together; but he said they had no such order; if we would have a Physician, we might. And there we lay, none knowing from morning to morning whether we were dead or alive. We were kept quiet and still till the Lord's time was come; they brought many things for us to eat: Then the Lord said, Thou mayest take as freely as if thou hadst la∣boured for it with thy hands; I will san∣ctifie it to thee through the Cross. And he said unto Sarah, she should eat of the fruit of her hands, and be blessed. And we did eat, and were refreshed, and glori∣fied the Lord; We did cry mightily unto the Lord night and day, that we might not eat nor drink to offend him, we would ra∣ther dye. The Lord was well pleased with our Sacrifice, and did increase our strength, and administred comfort to us; honor and glory be to his blessed Name for ever. In the lowest of all our conditions, we were kept a top of all the mountains, so that they could not make us shrink or bow one jot or tittle to any of their Precepts or
Commands. Yet the Friars have com∣manded us in the name of their god to kneel with them in prayer. The time is too little for me to disclose the twentieth part of the terrible tryals; but whensoever we were brought upon any tryal, the Lord did take away all fear from us, and multiplied our strength, and gave us power and boldness to plead for the Truth of the Lord Jesus, and wisdom of words, to stop the mouthes of the gain∣sayers, that they would be made to say, We spake Truth; they could never say o∣therwise: But they would say, We had not the true Faith, but we had all Virtues. Oh dear heart! if it be our Eternal Fa∣thers good pleasure to carry thee away without us, we do beseech our heavenly Father to bless, and give thee a prospe∣rous return, and to feed thee with the fulness of the blessing of the powerful Go∣spel of the Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. And we do believe we shall not want thy pray∣ers, nor the prayers of all the Faithful, that we may keep faithful to the end; so that our God may be glorified, his Church and People may be refreshed and rejoyced, and we may receive our Reward with the rest of the Lord's Lambs.
Our Life is with the; for oh! thou art full of Love, thou tender-hearted one, who hast offered up thy sanctified body, and pu∣rified life, in obedience to the Lord, for us poor afflicted Lambs with thee, and com∣panions in tribulations, trials and persecu∣tions, and in perils at Sea, and perils by Land. Oh thou precious Lamb of God, great is thy reward in Heaven, great will be the Well-spring of joy that will arise in thee, in thy Journey: Oh thou happy one indeed! whom the Lord our God hath made choice of amongst his faithful Flock, and en∣dued with so much power to come into such a place as this, not the like in all Eu∣rope, by their own report, and all others, and to stop the mouths of Lyons, and to trample upon the heads of Serpents, Scor∣pions and Vipers of the Earth, and they could not hurt thee; their stings are taken out of their heads, and out of their tails; Glory, Honour and everlasting Praises be given to our God for evermore, of all that know him, for he is worthy. And the Lord bless thee and thine for ever Amen, and encrease thy strength, and multiply thee abundantly in every good Gift and Grace, and prosper all thy un∣dertakings,
that thou mayest be approved for ever before the King of Saints, in the General Assembly of the Most High, and stand before the Throne of his Majesty with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; Amen, Amen, saith our spirits. Dearly beloved pray for us, that we fall not, nor fail, whereby our Enemies may have any advantage to rejoyce, and say, We served a God that could not save us, and called upon a God that could not deli∣ver us; as if we were like them, to call upon stocks, stones, pictures, and painted walls, and dead things, that cannot see, hear nor speak through their throats. We do be∣seech thee to tell all our dear Friends, Fa∣thers and Elders, the Pillars of the spiri∣tual Building, with all the rest of our Chri∣stian Brethren, that we do desire their Prayers, for we have need of them. HOw strong and pow'rful is our KING To all that do believe in him? He doth preserve them from the Snare And Teeth of those that would them tear. We that are sufferers for the Seed, Our hearts are wounded, and do bleed, To see th' Oppression, Cruelty Of men, that do thy Truth deny.
In Prisons strong, and Dungeons deep, To God alone we cry and weep: Our sorrows none can learn nor reade, But those that in our path do tread. But He whose Beauty shineth bright, Who turneth darkness into Light, Makes Cedars bow, and Oaks to bend To him, that's sent to the same end. He is a Fountain pure and clear, His Chrystal Streams run far and near, To cleanse all those that come to him, For to be healed of their sin. All them that patiently abide, And never swerve nor go aside; The Lord will free them out of all Captivity, Bondage and Thrall. LEt E. C. know, that his Exhortations I do dearly imbrace, and do witness it to be an eternal Truth. I have had large experience of it, the Lord hath carried me on in much difficult service, so that many times the way hath been stopt up, that to the eye of Reason I could not have a way made either by Sea or Land: Oh! if thou didst but know what experience I had of the mighty hand of the Lord in making a way, thou wouldst wonder. Once my way was stopt, and my persecution was
so hot, that I sate in a Field all night to wait upon the Lord, to make way for me to do the work he laid upon me? I could not get lodging for money in the Town nor City; it was at Salisbury where I was whipt in the Market. And the next morning I went through the City by the Watchmen, and they took no notice of me. Where∣soever the Lord did send me, into what Land, or City, or place soever, if they did put me out never so oft, he would make me go till I got victory; save in the Isle of Man, there was a Souldier came to my Bed side with a naked Sword, and took me by the Arm, and hall'd me out of the Bed at the tenth hour of the night, and carried me on Ship-board: When I put on my clothes I did not dare to rise. That place lies upon me yet; and I have motions to Edinburgh in Scotland, I was never there. The Lord did make me to do him service to almost all the mighty men in England and Ireland, insomuch that I cryed oft to my God, saying, Lord, what wilt thou do with me that am so foolish, to go to such wise men! If I were wise, I did not care if thou didst carry me to the end of the Earth. The Lord said, The foolish things must con∣found the wise; and he would carry me
before the mightiest men in all the earth, to bear his Name before them, and I should have victory wheresoever I went: And I do believe the Lord, and we both are made willing to wait the Lord's time, which is a time of peace and joy, safety and happiness. And we do bless, laud, praise and magnifie his holy Name, that he sent so heavenly a Messenger to relieve, strengthen, comfort and refresh us in our great necessity, which is a mercy beyond expression; all Friends that do understand it, will say so: Glory and everlasting praises, honour, power and dominion be given to our eternal Lord God for ever∣more, of us, and all that know him. Amen, Amen, saith our Spirit. Oh true and Faithful Brother, into the Arms of everlasting Power and Holiness, Strength and Mightiness, Purity & Righ∣teousness, do we commit thee to be kept and preserved, and prosperously carried on in thy Journey: The powerful blessing, peace, joy and happiness of the Majesty of the Most High God go along with thee, to preserve and protect thee for ever. Amen, Amen. Pray for us, dear Heart, that we may re∣cive strength to overcome, that we may
sing the Song of Moses and the Lamb, and the Redeemed of the Lord, Amen. Dear Heart, it is hard for us to part with thee; thou wilt feel it. The Will of our eternal Father be done: In the pure Unity of the blessed Spirit of Light, Life, Joy, Peace, and everlasting Glory do we here take our leave of thee at this time, hoping to see thy face again with joy in our Lord's time. O dear Heart! our hearts, souls, spi∣rits, and our whole lives go along with thee. The pure Peace of our God rest upon thee, Amen. Dearly salute us to all Friends, for they are dear and precious to us indeed. Farewel, farewel, dear Heart, farewel. Dear Heart, THou hast cleared thy Conscience to∣wards us in the sight of God and man; if here had been many Friends, what could have been done more concerning us than thou hast done? Thou hast stood in great jeopardy ever since, and thy life hath been
sought for much; We have felt it, and cry∣ed night and day to our heavenly Father to preserve thee, and safely deliver thee: Whatsoever we do suffer, we desire the Will of our heavenly Father to be done in all things. If the Lord doth stir up the Earth to help the Woman, it is his own free love; and upon that account we shall receive it, and not upon any other. This they spake concerning the Money I left with them, and for their necessities: And the Lord did appear unto me in a Vi∣sion of the night, and smote me on the arm, and said, Look, there is the Pope, he will not hurt thée; where he stood in the room as one forsaken of God and man; this was at the English Consuls, when there was some fear upon me concerning him. Now here is a Roman in the Prison which came hither upon some account, he is a Doctor of Law, and differs from them in many things; but they are all of one spirit: He doth constantly affirm, that the Pope hath sent an Order to set us free; and he saith, they are liars and false blasphemers, if they do say the Pope sent any such Order as they speak of. They do meet every day con∣cerning us, we do feel them; some would have it one way, and some another, and so
they cannot agree, because they do act contrary to the Will of God; the Lord sets it all on fire, and hath burned all that they have done these three years concerning us. Now where they will look a Reward of their charges, we do not know; the wise are taken in their own craftiness, and the sub∣tile in their own snare. There have twelve of them sate in Judgement upon us three years, and some have struck hard at our lives, so that we have been even at deaths door. I have lain very weak three weeks at a time. There are many for us, as far as they do dare. The Lord sayes, there were two with the Inquisitor for us, and did plead much with him: I did see it in a Night-Vision. The English Consul which is dead, was with us two several times after we were in the Inquisition; he said he would lend us five pounds when we did want: but when our Money was near done, we were made to rejoyce great∣ly, and could not take any of any one. We did not know the mind of the Lord in it; but had we had Money, we had not known the mighty Power of God. Now we are able to trust the Lord where-ever he shall carry us without money. We do question the Money in the Consul's hand,
it will be hard for him to part with it. Our life is with thee. A few Lines to D. B. OH our dear and faithfull Friend and Brother, begotten of our heavenly Fa∣ther, right dear and precious in his sight, and beautiful before his presence. Dear Heart, we do glorifie our God in our hearts, souls and spirits, who hath called, chosen and elected thee to come up to the help of him against the Mighty, and hath carried thee along in so weighty a work, and hath prospered thee there∣in; praises be given to his blessed Name for ever, who hath inclosed thee in his Bosom and Chamber of his Everlasting Love, and hath hid thee in his private Pavillion, where them that would hurt thee cannot find thee, because of the shadow of his Almightiness, under whose defence thou art kept safe; and he doth carry thee upon the Wings of his Power, so that the Mountains do become plain before thee, which we do clearly see in the Light; Eternal Ho∣nour and Glory be to his Name for ever, who is called, Wondeful Counsellor, the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, in whom we have fellowship, and uni∣ty one with another, and none can hinder.
Dear heart, we do dearly embrace thy sweet Exhortations, thou being sensible of the insti∣gations of Satan, who hath winnowed us with every bait, winding and twining sleights that he hath: Praises be to our God for ever, who hath perserved us, and prevented him. The Enemies being busie with their Tempta∣tions, to have us enter into their Covenant, thereupon I was moved to write these follow∣ing words, which I communicated to their hands with the former Paper, viz. BEhold the Word of Life arose in me, saying, (this morning) Keep to Yea and Nay, & I will confirm my Covenant unto thée. These Words were spoken to the true Seed that shall inherit the King∣dom; the same (you know) is but one in Male and Female. And so the blessing of my Life rest upon you, and be with you in the same, even in that which hath no end; neither fadeth away; yea, and my Spirit saith, Amen. Dear Lambs, read within, & be refreshed, and the God of Life & Peace encrease the same, & multiply your strength abundant∣ly, Amen. Malta, 10th d. 11th m. 61. D. B.
Another Paper from them to my hand. DEar and precious heart, in the Eternal Covenant of Light and Life of our God, do we salute thee, and dearly embrace thee. Oh! what hath the Lord made thee un∣to us, far more precious than we are able to express; and great will be thy Reward for thy faithfulness to the Lord, and thy dear and tender Love to us, and thy diligent care of us. Oh! thou art the Messenger we have cried long for, to our Heavenly Father, saying, How long, O Lord, How long will it be before thou wilt send thy Messenger, whose feet are beautiful, coming upon the Mountains, bring∣ing glad-tydings of great joy to us thy poor Captives? Now hath the Lord our God an∣swered us at large; Praises, Praises be to his Name for evermore. Oh! how are our souls refreshed, and our spirits supported, and our hearts comforted, our minds rejoyced, and our bodies strength∣ned; thou canst never do greater service to the Lord our God, than to come into such a place as this is, to offer up thy dear Life in ransoming us: Great was the Power that
brought thee, and great is the Power that doth uphold thee, and mighty is the Strength which doth preserve thee, and great will be thy Re∣ward: Thy labour of Love we do bear Testi∣mony cannot be forgotten, nor thy Faith un∣feigned put out of remembrance; it is writ∣ten in the Book of Life for ever, and it will be registred and read in the House of Israel eternally: The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, and he will perform it. Farewel in the Lord. By us, Katherine Evans. Sarah Cheevers. OH our dearly Beloved, & precious Friend and Brother, right honourable indeed for ever: We dare not look out at thy depar∣ture, because we stand in the will of our Ma∣ker. The blessing of the Almighty be upon thee for ever, and make thee flourish in all thy endeavours; Thou art called by the Name of Daniel Baker; in the midst of thine Ene∣mies, thou art in the hand of thy Maker: And this the Lord hath spoken, where-ever thou dost come, thy Glass shall not be broken, until thy Sand be run. Oh! this day is this
Prophesie fulfilled in our sight: When they have done dealing treacherously, they shall be dealt treacherously withal; the Lord doth steal in upon them; Praises be to his Name. Dear heart, salute us dearly to thy dear and precious Wife, with all dear Friends, in the Covenant of Grace & Peace. Dear heart, farewel, farewel. K. E. S. C. Another Letter from Sarah Cheevers, to Friends in Ireland, to be read among the Assemblies of Saints in Light. OH! all ye righteous Ones▪ whose dwellings are on high, in the Fulness of beau∣ty, holiness and glory, whose Name and Fame reacheth to the ends of the Earth, to the asto∣nishment of the Heathen, and the amaze∣ment of the Ungodly; to the preparation of all Nations to appear before the dreadful Pre∣sence of our Lord God Almighty, to be stript of all false coverings, and to be left without excuse: Glory and Praises be to our God for
ever, Amen; who hath made us eye-witnesses of his mighty Work, and helpers together with you, according to our measures, to the chaining down of the Powers of darkness, and to the defacing of that painted Harlot, My∣stery Babylon, with all her Lovers, to the utter overthrow of Antichrist, with all his wicked Kingdom, Amen. The day is dawning, the Sun of Righte∣ousness is arising over all Nations, for to make a clear separation, to gather in his own Flock, and to scatter the proud in the imaginations of their own hearts, to feed the hungry, to heal the sick, and to bind up the broken hearted, to cloath the naked, to visit the spirits in prison, and comfort the Mourners in Sion, to cause the heavy-hearted in Jerusalem to rejoyce. Oh my dear Friends! who are precious in the sight of our Heavenly Father, partakers of his Divine Nature, living Stones, and ho∣ly Assemblies; wherein dwelleth the fulness of God Almightie's Power and Strength; Riches, Glory, Wisdom, Counsel, Knowledge and Understanding; he is the Rock of Ages, the sure Foundation, the Ark of the Cove∣nant of the Promise of everlasting Blessed∣ness, Amen. My dear and precious Ones, whom my soul loveth, my heart delighteth in you, and my
spirit rejoyceth greatly because of the excel∣lency of God's Almightiness amongst you, so that you are a dread to the Nations; Kings, Princes, and mighty Men of the Earth shall bow before the Power of Almighty God; by whom we stand, and all shall be brought under the Foot-stool of Christ & his Government, and he alone shall reign in Righteousness, and rule the Nations in Judgement; then shall the cry of the Poor be heard, and the sighing of the Needy be eased, and the yoke of Wickedness be broken, and the Oppressed shall be set free; the Image of Christ restored, and the Image of that subtile Serpent defaced, destroyed, and utterly cast down for ever, Amen; so saith my spirit: Glory, honour, laud and praise be given to our Lord God Almighty, for ever, Amen. A sweet Salutation is this, from the brea∣thing forth of my pure Life, to the same Life; in my Spirit, joyning in my measure, a suffer∣er for the Seeds sake; Glory to the Lord, who hath counted me worthy: Farewel, farewel my dear hearts. My dear Yoke-mate K. E. dearly salutes all Friends. Oh ye holy Assemblies! whose hearts are wholly joyned to the Lord, I with you, in the Life and Power of the Almighty God, do tra∣vel for the raising of the Seed, and the ga∣thering
in of the lost Sheep of the House of Israel. Oh! blessed be the Day wherein the Lord called me, and counted me worthy to suf∣fer for the Seeds sake: Praise, praise the Lord for me ye blessed of the Lord, in whom the living Praises are found in the living Fountain of God Almighty, the Fulness that filleth every empty soul, in the Streams of Love, Life, Light, Strength, Riches, Im∣mortality, and Eternal Glory. So Truth, Joy, Peace and everlasting Blessedness remain with you all for ever, Amen. My Life is given up for the Service of the Lord; Bonds, Chains, Bolts, Irons, Double-doors, Death it self is too little for the Testi∣mony of Jesus, and for the Word of God; so the Seed be gathered, it is but a reasonable Sa∣crifice: Bonds and Afflictions betide the Gos∣pel of Christ; He that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution; it is an evident token. My dear Friends, my Light, my Life, my Love hath perfect Union in the Eternal Spirit of the living God, and remains with you all for ever; Fathers, Elders, Pillars, Nursing-Mothers in Israel, true Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile. My dear Salutation, and breathing forth of my Eternal Father's Love is to all the breathing Seed, begotten of the
Heavenly Father; Peace, Mercy and Truth be multiplied among you all for ever, Amen. Pray for us that we may have boldness over our Enemies, to fulfil the righteous Will of our heavenly Father, and be kept faithful in his Will, for ever, Amen. Streams of Love and Life flow from a living Fountain to you all my dear Friends; Our Love remaineth ever with you all, Amen. Present this to the hand of L. C. L C. Thou Nursing-Mother in Israel, peace be to thee for ever, Amen. Thy dear Brother Daniel Baker, in the Covenant of Life, in obedience to the Lord, hath visi∣ted us, to the amazement of our Enemies, Glory be to the Lord for ever, Amen: He hath been a faithful Steward indeed, worthy to be had in remembrance in the Book of Is∣rael for ever, Amen. Whatsoever for the Truth we suffer, our Reward is with us, and our innocent Life will clear us, Amen. Written by me, Sarah Cheevers, a Prisoner in the Inquisition, for the clear Testimony of the Lord Je∣sus; This 11th. Month of the year, 1661.
NOw after I had received these Papers, though not through little straits and difficulty, with jeopardy of my precious Life, which my God sweetly through all preserved, Glory to his Name: my heart was, as it were, overcome with the loving-kindness and salvation of the living Lord, and in his savory Life my mouth was filled with thanksgiving and praises to my God; and I said in my heart on this wise, Who am I, O Lord, or what was my Father's House, or what is the Land of my Nativi∣ty, that I (a poor: afflicted and despised Worm) should be raised up to see and perceive what mine eye, mine eye in thy Eternal Power and pure Life beholds! Oh my God! thou hast known the inno∣cent travel of my Soul, which I right-well know the same is not hid from thee, even from the day of my birth, unto this mo∣ment, through no small trials and tribu∣lations, and through the exercise of mani∣fold temptations; yet behold, my Life is preserved at this time: And Oh, my heart, my mind, my soul, my spirit, in thy pure undefiled Life and Vertue, blesseth thy
Name, thy pure Name, which thy Virgins love and live in, and in the same they glorifie thy Beloved, and the Wings of thy Majesty overshadoweth them; and their delight is under the secret shadow of thy Almightiness, blessed be thy Glory, bles∣sed be thy undefiled Power, blessed and magnified be thy pure Wisdom, and let the same be so even in the Tabernacles of the Just for ever. Thou Lamb of Immor∣tality, the Thrones, the Kingdoms, and Eternal Dominions are thine, and over all thy Throne is, and shall be exalted, and thy Lambs behold thy Glory and thy Ma∣jesty, in this the day of thy terrible and glorious ppearance: Wisdom, Riches, Glory, Power, Might and Dominion ever∣lasting (with Eternal Salvation) over all, to thy Name, Amen, saith my spirit, in the Life which is, was, and for ever shall be, the same which liveth and abideth for e∣ver, and fadeth not away: In the same I commend thy dear tender Lambs, to be preserved according to the unsearchable Wisdom and Counsel of thine own heart, to thy everlasting Renown and Glory, and their Eternal comfort and joy, and felicity, with thy Saints and Angels in the Light of thy Countenance, and in everlasting re∣membrance
in the powerful and Eternal Kingdom of Immortality, if I be no more in this World, when this body is gone to its place, according to thy Eternal Purpose and Decree, in thy Eternal Counsel; so be it, saith my spirit, yea and Amen saith my soul, which blesseth and magnifieth thy Eternal Name, inasmuch as thou hast so far fulfilled thy (living) Word of Pro∣phesie, and not only so, but much more al∣so in the desire of my heart, in the behalf of thy dear, tender, suffering, and long-suffering Seed of thine own Bowels; for which be innumerable Praises, Wisdom, Salvation, Glory and Dominion to thy ho∣ly Name, Amen, Amen. MY right dearly & well-beloved Friends of Eternal Life, of the Church of the first-born of the living God, which is the Pillar and ground of Truth, of which Christ Jesus our Lord is the alone and only Head: Peace be unto you in him, who is arisen in his pure immortal Life, and hath brought Life and Immortality to light, through the Word of his Power, and his Eternal Gospel of Peace, which is not hid from us, but it's clearly ma∣nifest in us by his coming, who ariseth with
healing in his wings: Glory, Dominion, li∣ving endless Praises Immortal to his Name, now and for evermore; and let all the upright in heart, with my precious life, say, Even so, Amen. Dear suffering, and long-suffering Lambs, ye know, that as I came in the eternal Love and Peace of Immanuel, God's Lamb, to vi∣sit and serve you, and minister to your necessi∣ties; the which, in the same Life and Peace, and in the integrity and uprightness of heart, and in its pure innocency, my God knoweth; and behold I call your Life that's manifest in you, in which is our perfect Unity as Mem∣bers of one Body, to bear me record, That I have endeavoured in the good will of my God, to perform the same; and verily, the hand and blessing of Almighty God is with me, and hath blessed me, and so my reward is with me, and my work hath been manifest before me, even in the Light of his Countenance that liveth for ever; and this Scripture is fulfilled in me also, The Father worketh hitherto, and I work. So my dear Friends, I have honestly and na∣kedly, before the Lord, cleared my Conscience so far concerning you, & on your behalf, which is my reasonable service; and so I leave the same to the livig Testimony of the Lord Je∣sus
which you hold, and for which I am sa∣tisfied (and in the behalf of the whole body of God's Elect you have so long suffered) So the Eternal God of Power, Dominion and Glory, of Heaven and Earth, consolate, support and strengthen you to the end, that your Testi∣mony may be finished with joy, to his everla∣sting praise, to whom only it belongs; and so my Spirit in the Light and Life Immortal, saith, Even so, Amen. Farewel dear Lambs, I am your true Brother, D. B. Joseph was not made known to his Brethren the first time, though his Bowels yearned to∣wards and over them, till at last he could no longer forbear crying out with tears, saying, I am Joseph your Brother; and little Ben∣jamin the youngest, he dearly loved you know. This 5th day of the Week, and the 30th. of the 11th. Month, 1661. So farewel, and feel the Well-spring of Life. When my face you do not see, Wait in the Eternal Life, and then remember me.
This and many other Papers was com∣municated to each others hands, (which are seen meet not to be added hereunto) with the jeopardy of my life, and what else did attend us; but magnified, and for ever blessed be the living Lord and his Good∣ness, Wisdom and Salvation, who pro∣spered his Work and Workers in his own Life of lasting Righteousness, through and over self, over all that which must dye and go to its place, Amen. DANIEL. Here followeth somewhat relating to the Travel and Service of D. B. which he hath freedom to give forth for the Truth's sake, and Friends satisfa∣ction. THE intent of the Spirit of the Lord within my heart and mind, stirring me up to write somewhat concerning my travel from my Native Country, Kindred
and Father's House, being freely given up to serve the Lord, his Truth and People, in the Power and Gospel of God; I ha∣ving no imposition or necessity at all laid upon my Conscience, as from any mortal man, but certainly it was a pure necessity from the living God of Heaven & Earth; many of his faithful Servants, Messengers, Sons and Daughters that were, and are as dear and precious to me as my own life, may bear me record on the Lord's behalf unto the truth of what I write on this wise; and surely in the Counsel everla∣sting, the thing was hid from me then, whether ever I should return to my Native Country or not. However, in the love and favour of God, and in his fear set up within my heart, was I given up, with my body also offered as a living Sacrifice, which was but my reasonable sacrifice, to give a sound to the Nations afar off, of the mighty Day of our God, and his blessed Truth, the Light of Jesus manifest in eve∣ry Conscience, in which Light we have most assuredly believed unto salvation: And verily the Power and pure Presence of his Eternal Strength was with me, through many hardships, trials and tribula∣tions; the right-hand of the hiding of his
Power did sweetly guide, strengthen & sup∣port me, even as it did, and doth his Lambs whom he so sends forth as among Wolves, in his Dove-like Innocency, harmles∣ness and wisdom, which are as wise, or ra∣ther wiser than the Serpents. And this Scripture have I well witnessed fulfilled, whilst travelling from one Nation to ano∣ther People, as my Father did in the anci∣ent dayes. And on this wise, with three more Brethren, so freely given up with one consent in the behalf of the Gospel ever∣lasting, that is now preaching again to the Nations, Tongues and Kindreds. We set forward the 16th. of the third Month, and we sweetly parted with our right dearly beloved Friends, Brethren, Fathers and near Relations, that were flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, and from all our outward Acquaintance and Native Country, in the Will, Love and Spirit of our God, in the same day from Gravesend we set forth; and at the end of forty four dayes, we arrived at Legorn in Italy, where we gave a certain sound of our innocent Service and Message of Salvati∣on, and of its Life and Blessedness, co∣ming upon the Nations as a weight either to condemnation or justification, as the
same is received or rejected among them. And thus as we had opportunity, among the men of our own Nation, the Jews and others, we gave a sound, and the blessing of the God of Heaven, and his Presence was with us, whether the Nations of men did hear or forbear; but the Witness of God in sundry was reached, and the same an∣swered in us: And herein we are so far well satisfied, whilst others were hardened, who defied us and our Testimony, as their uncircumcised Fathers always did resist and gain-say the Truth that saves from sin, and so finally from its condemnation. And it came to pass, after that we had waited upon the Lord to understand his good will and pleasure, he answered us in the joy of our hearts, and we received his Counsel, and communicated of the same to each others satisfaction in the love of God, n which we were wel confirmed to obey the same until the death, as the Lord our God might have permitted for his Names sake, who then further ordained us to be separated, viz. John Stubs and Henry Fell to pass on towards Alexandria, and, my dear brother and companion, Richard Scos∣trop, with me, to pass Eastward, to Constan∣tinople, and Smyrna in Asia; and after a
little season we parted in the goodness of God. And when twenty four dayes were finished, having (in the mean time) touched a little season at the Island Zant, we arri∣ved at Smyrna. But behold it came to pass, immediately at our coming, there was not a little stir, together with the evil sur∣mizings, and what else arising up as a flood, with threatnings breathed forth from the Apostate Christians, especially men of no small degree (of our own Na∣tion) against us, when Turks, Jews, Greeks, Heathens, and others, were not altogether so evil affectd, as to let us from the exer∣cise of our Conscience void of offence towards God and man, and so to hold forth the example of the harmless Life, and un∣blameable Conversation, in all equitable∣ness in Doctrine, Life and Practice of what we professed in the midst of them. But oh! how the Christians (by name) in Asia (who should first have received the Word of saving-health) how did they de∣fie and reproach not only us, but our living Testimony and Message of Blessedness, which day by day was sounded in their ears notwithstanding: The Lord God lay not what they did against us to their charge, when they have most need of mercy and
peace with God, if, happily, repentance unto life be witnessed by them, who know not what they did; yea, and my Spirit is ready to say, Amen, for their sakes that ha∣ted us without a cause, as the same unbe∣lieving nature did our Lord and Master, whom we love, serve and honour in the same, and therefore keep his Sayings, which are not grievous to us in that one and the selfe-same Spirit, which reproves the World for sin, in which we worship him as the Father; the which guideth into all Truth, from all Evil; concerning which we well admonished their minds to subject to the One, and to avoid and turn from the other, each having their proper effects at∣tending them, as anguish, woes, judge∣ments & disquietments upon the soul and conscience that doth evil; and contrari∣wise, blessings, peace, glory, honor, and the goodness of God attending the soul of man which worketh good, in the Light of the same excellent Spirit of God which ex∣erciseth the Conscience in temperance and sobriety, meeekness and gentleness of Christ. And on this wise we besought the men of our own Nation, together with many more in those parts, that they might become
a sweet savour of the pure Life of Christ and Christianity indeed and in truth, which tends to answer the Witness of the Eternal God, manifest in Turks, Greeks, Jews, Heathens, and Apostate Christians, among the dark Nations, where they have their conversation: Yet I am constrained to express somewhat of their manner of dealing with us to our good; Wherefore Men of reasonable and honourable under∣standing, may bear with me, to the end that the honest-hearted may be informed to be∣ware of a persecuting Spirit, which is not of God, neither ever was it born of him. Their Threatnings encreased daily, and they burdened themselves exceedingly with us, whose Deportment and Behavi∣our they were made to confess to; as did the Consul and divers others; which in truth they could not say otherwise, but that it was temperate, innocent, harmless and unblameable in our Conversation; Mag∣nified be the Lord, and blessed be his Grace of Life, by which we in submission to the same, were guided herein: But because our Testimony was not for, but against whatsoever might be said in truth to be evil, unjust, or unequitable (which is dis∣honourable) therefore were we hated of the
High and Lofty, to the disquieting of their own rest day and night; because they bur∣thened themselves so with the truth and innocency of the Lord's Testimony, which our Life held forth among them who re∣ceived not the same in his love, that they might be saved not only from sin, but also from the wrath to come. So they forth∣with sent a Message from Smyrna, to the great City Constantinople, to the King's Em∣bassador of England, and besought him to expel us out from among them of Asia, that we might not have a Being in the ex∣tent of their Authority, in visiting them on this wise, as by the annexed Warrant thou that reads the same, may understand. A Coppy of the Warrant which they produc'd and prosecuted. VVHereas we are informed, that there is lately arrived with the Zant Frigot, one Daniel Baker, with his Compani∣on, commonly called Quakers, with intention to come up to this Port; and because we suffici∣ently have had experience, that the Carriage of that sort of People is ridiculous, and is
capable to bring dishonour to our Nation, be∣sides other ill conveniences that may redound to them in particular, and to the English in ge∣neral. We therefore will and require you to give a stop to the said Quakers, from proceeding any further in their Journey, either to Constanti∣nople, or the present Court of the Grand Sig∣nior, (viz. the great Emperor of the Turks) or to any other place where our Authority ex∣tends, shipping them away either directly for England, or any other Part which they shall chuse to imbarque. And we do hereby require all Officers and Members of the Factory, and Masters and Officers of Ships, to be aiding and assisting to you herein: And for so doing, this shall be your Warrant. For our loving Friend, Anthony Isaacson, Esquire, Consul for the English Nation at Smyrna; By his Excellency's Command. Paul Ricoat, Secretary. Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court at Pare of Constantinople, the 19th. day of July (it should be August, for we were not in Asia in the Month called July) 1661. Winchels. 4.
And forthwith this Warrant was dis∣patcht with a Messenger from the Embas∣sador's Court at Constantinople, to Smyrna; and behold, the Merchants of the Earth, and others that could not endure to hear of the sound of Truth, received the same not with little gladness; (poor men! wo and alas for them!) the end of which will not be peace, but contrariwise, wo and misery: And they put the same Warrant in execution, and sent a Turkish Janisary, and a Drugerman, that were Officers un∣der the Consul of the English Nation; and they came with Harmols, (viz. called Por∣ters) with Cain's Weapons, and fetcht us from our Lodging before the Consul; and the man was courteous and moderate, and had his ear open then to what we in the re∣verence and fear of the Lord then said un∣to him, which was his honor, who then saw over and beyond that foolish Ceremo∣ny of the Hat, neither did he burthen him∣self with the same, as many unwisely do, to the clouding or veiling of the nobility of a good Understanding, which hath a more noble respect to Equity, Justice and Judgement, without respect of Persons in them, where it is set up in its proper and peculiar Authority, than to such foolish
Ceremonies, which are below men of Wis∣dom; yet he desired that we might not take it ill as from him (in his place of Au∣thority) in doing as he was obliged in the prosecution of the Warrant, which sum∣moned all Officers and Members of the Factory, with Masters & Officers of Ships, to be aiding and assisting to surprize and banish two innocent, naked, harmless Men, that had neither Bow nor Sword, nor any such like material or visible Wea∣pon of War to resist evil, as Paul and Bar∣nabus had not, against whom the hard-hear∣ted Jews cryed out with the same voice, Help men of Israel, &c. and such like stir there was. And we let the Consul know at our first coming, that we owned his place of Authority, and were ready to sub∣mit to any thing that was just or equitable; and at last, in this thing, we could not sub∣mit without suffering, forasmuch as in the uprightness of our heart, and in the inno∣cency of the same, were we come so far to do the Will of God, and to suffer for it, as his hand permitted. So with many other expressions I clear∣ed my Conscience, as also by Words, Suf∣ferings and Writings, to the whole Nati∣on there; and the Consul seemed to be
unwilling to use violence against us, that at our departure we prayed for them that hated us without a cause, knowing not what they did; we seeing it could not at that season be otherwise, but what the Lord had permitted them to bring to pass, not to their justification, but as a Judgement among them from the living God, who did not onely dispence the visitation of his Love and Salvation day by day among them, but he visited them also with the strokes of his Displeasure, even unto death and destruction; and surely he smote and took away of the Chiefest, & others of them daily: And verily my heart often cryed, and besought the Lord for them in secret more especially, (though I was constrai∣ned not to cease uttering my voice openly among them, and for them) while they sought my hurt; as many of them, I know, by the Witness of God in them may re∣member. And so we were sent away as Prisoners, or rather as Lambs driven from the Dens of Lyons, or from the barren Caves of ravening Wolves, whose nature worried them. Now we had spoken for a passage by a Dutch ship, to have gone from thence to Constantinople, but before the Ship depar∣ted
Smyrna, the Warrant came to the Con∣sul's hands, which thou mayest see came not from either them called Turks, Jews, Heathens, Greeks, or Barbarians, but even from the men of our own Nation. Alas! alas! yea, wo and alas for them. So the Reader may see what a stir there hath been in the Region of Asia, against the appearance of Truth, and its Innocen∣cy, in plainness, to expel and banish it, together with its Message and Messengers, out of their Coasts or Borders, and not to have any entertainment, or at least to come within the extent of their Authority, what∣ever becomes of them, let them go where they will, &c. So as in effect they say, We will not have this man, the Light, Truth, Temperance, Innocency, its Life and Wisdom from above, to rule, or have its preheminence over us in our Consci∣ences; we will rather chuse to live in the practice of our own evil hearts and ways: And therefore thus to their own hurt, they say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy Wayes;Job 21. and as for the Word of the Lord, we have no delight in it. Lo they have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what Wisdom is in them? And such
the holy perfect and upright Man saw rebel against the Light, and said, They are of those that rebel against the Light, they know not the Wayes thereof,Job 24.13. nei∣ther abide in the Paths thereof. And so with consent they joyned toge∣ther to banish Truth, its Message and Mes∣sengers of Peace, which provoked them to jealousie that believed not, who scorned us as fools, and what not else, not honestly considering, how that God is provoking the Nations to jealousie and wrath with a foo∣lish People, as in the ancient dayes, Deut. 22. was prophesied. And such besought our Lord and Master, even Jesus, to de∣part out of their Coasts or Borders, who loved and fed their Swine upon the Moun∣tains; even the Gadarens besought him to depart; who saith, He that loveth Fa∣ther or Mother, or what else, more than Me, is not worthy of Me; and Father and Mo∣ther, and such Relations, are of more honourable esteem than many Swine. And to his Disciples he also saith (that was dead, and is alive, and liveth for ever) As they have done unto me, so will they do unto you; if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. These are his faith∣ful and true Sayings; He that receiveth
you, receiveth me; and he that receiveth me,John 13.20. receiveth him that sent me; [Mark that:] Verily, verily I say unto you, Whom∣soever receiveth whom I shall send, receiveth me; and him that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me, &c. He that despiseth you, despiseth me; and he that despiseth me, de∣spiseth him that sent me. And it's to be un∣derstood, that such like dealing J. S. and H. F. our Brethren, found at Alexandria, from whom they also were banished. And on this wise being rejected, despi∣sed, banished out of Asia, from Smyrna, in about eight dayes we arrived at the Island Zant, where my dear Brother and Companion in sufferings, and not only so, but in the Kingdom & patience of Christ, he was visited with sickness nigh unto death; but the Word and Commandment of the Lord ordered me to pass through part of Italy, and my face was set towards Venice; and we weighed the thing in the fear and counsel of the Lord, and were both given up in one to travel; yet it was so, that the poor Lamb was not capable in body to travel with me, by reason of weak∣ness; and he being fully perswaded and satisfied in his own mind, that I was to
pass onward, in the tender Love of our God he did the more constrain me; I fin∣ding some unwillingness to leave him in that condition, which was not a little cross unto me: But in the heavenly Will and Peace of our God, and joy of the Lord, out of all visibles we parted asunder; and it came to pass, that he laid down his Bo∣dy there in about two dayes after. There being a Ship of Venice ready, I embarqued on the same, and had a good Passage through the Gulf of Venice. Af∣ter three Weeks were finished, was I ad∣mitted (together with the Ships company) to receive Product or Admission to come into the City, as their manner is; and there I continued about eight dayes as a sign and wonder among many, and gave somewhat of a sound of the Lord's Day (in truth) among them; and from thence I travelled to Legorn, and my face was as if it were set towards England, I being alone, as a Mourning-Dove in a desolate Wilderness: Yet it came so to pass when I arrived at the same Port or City, that the everlasting Love of my God did fill and overcome my heart, and mine eye right dearly affected the same; and verily the living Word and Commandment of my
God sounded in mine ear, and mine un∣derstanding was quickened in the Spirit of Life from God, so that I was made wil∣ling, and not to rebel against the Heaven∣ly Voice; [And what if I testifie, that mine eye saw the Angel of his presence?] which was expresly for me to give up, and pass away from thence, to visit his long-suffering Seed of Innocency, shut up in the Inquisition, in the Isle of Malta, under the Popes Authority, and to communicate to their necessities; and verily the sweet Promise of the Lord entered and possessed my heart, and my God made my way pro∣sperous; for in the Light of his Counte∣nance he had often set these poor afflicted long-suffering Innocents before my face: Wherefore my body and mind was freely offered up as my reasonable service, to serve his Truth, & the least Member of it; and so to the death of the Cross, whereto I became obedient in uprightness of heart, as if I should never see the face of my Kindred or Native Country more. (a Vessel of France being ready to de∣part from thence East-ward) I embarqued thereon for the Isle of Cicilia to Masena, and from thence to the Isle of Malta in a Vessel of the said Island; and in my pas∣sage
the Vessel did bear in to Syracuse, where Paul abode three dayes in his pas∣sage to Rome (after he had suffered ship∣wrack on Malta) and at Syracuse I abode five dayes, where I gave a sound of the Lord's Truth and Life: And so we imme∣diately sailed from thence, and within twenty four hours we arrived at the Island of Malta; and within some hours after I came upon the said Island, I had admit∣tance to the Pope's Lord Inquisitor, to whom I delivered my Message in the Ita∣lian Tongue, on this wise, I am come to demand the just Liberty of my innocent Friends; the two English Women in Prison in the Inquisition: And he asked, If I were re∣lated to them as a Husband or Kinsman, and whether I came out of England on pur∣pose with that Message. And I answered, I came from Legorn for that same end; and he replied at last, They should abide in Prison till they dye, except some English Merchants or others that were able, would engage or give obligation for the value of three or four thousand Dollers, conditio∣nally, that they should never return again into those Parts. On this wise was his reply divers times with the Consul and many others, together
and asunder; but in the Name and Fear of the Lord God I withstood the same un∣christian-like Demand and Cruelty, in the Word, Power and Travel of the Lord in his innocent suffering Lambs behalf; al∣beit, they daily threatned me with their Cruelty and Inquisition of darkness, and followed me to and fro with their Officer and Black-rod, and the Pope's Deputy would have bound me, that I should nei∣ther speak good nor evil to any one while I was on the Island, as the Consul said, save to him; neither to come to the Pri∣son alone, except the Consul came also with me, or some of his Family at least: But their Snares, Bonds and Covenants, in the Name of my God I defied, because the Spirit of Life from the Lord gave me dominion through sufferings in spirit, first, over their unjust dark Impositions; yea, and in the same good Authority, in the innocency and uprightness of my heart, I travelled through, and over the darkness, over its works, and ceased not to publish the end of my coming, which they would not have known abroad, and the sound of Truth; and its dread and fame struck ter∣ror in their hearts, that both high and wise, great Men, together with the popish Priests
and Jesuites, Knights, them called of the Nobility, of the Pope's Dominion of Spain, and France, and of many Nations; they did not burthen themselves a little with my bodily presence, my clear Testimony and Friends in general, all which they de∣fied and withstood, as it doth appear by the words of Truth in this Treatse. And thus it comes to pass among the Nations, because we are not of this world, as our Life and Testimony also is not for, but against the same; therefore we marvel not if the World hate us, knowing its birth which is from beneath, earthly and sensual, persecuteth that which is from a∣bove, heavenly and spiritual; and so the Lord hath made me as a burthensome stone among them. My heart blesseth his Name that wonderfully preserved me: Yet some of them came to see somewhat of my In∣nocency. About twenty four dayes I abode upon the said Island, they daily continuing their Threatnings against me as aforesaid, and many times attempted me to take my Pas∣sage to Cicillia, or to some parts of Italy, to produce the unreasonable and unchristian-like Obligation demanded by them; but in the fear of God I, with my dear Friends,
withstood them, and they were freely gi∣ven up, rather to suffer, than to hurt Gods Truth and People thus to gratifie them; who (as it doth appear) the Spirit of the Lord God of Truth, rules neither in Pope, nor in any of his Lords, Priests or Jesuites, that exercise such Lordship over the Inno∣cent, long-suffering Heritage of the ever∣lasting God. The time hasteneth, and be∣hold it cometh to pass, that the weight of eternal Vengeance is coming over them, which the Man of Sin, and his Sons of Perdition will not be able to bear: For the doleful Cry of the Innocent, that sighs and groans with tears, hath long uttered its voice, which hath ascended into the ears of the Most High, who is higher than the Highest, yet hath he respect unto the needy, to uphold them, yea, and to such as are of an upright, contrite, lowly, and trembling heart: What if I should say, the God of Love and Long-suffering dwels in such? and verily their sacrifice is ac∣ceptable in his bosom that liveth for ever; and I am a living Witnes, that the sweet Testimony & innocent Sufferings of these his long-suffering Lambs, is right dear and precious in his eye, which is the Light of his Countenance; and so it is not other∣wise,
but the same in oneness with his peo∣ple concerning them. And so in the endless mercy, blessing and peace of our God, we parted, and I came away with the love and peace of my God within my heart, having the answer and living testimony of a good Consci∣ence; and in the wisdom of God brought away these their Words and Writings, which testifieth somewhat of their Suffer∣ings and Faithfulness unto the Lord, his Truth & People, which I right-well know, cannot be shut out of the Record of Life eternal, unto which I bear Record again, that they have been, and are a sweet sa∣vour unto the Lord God of Faithfulness, and so their Reward, which attends the same, is not only with them, but with all the Sons and Daughters of truth and inno∣cency, that are so travelling in their Long-sufferings, which are but light and momen∣tary in competition to the eternal weight of Glory, which afterward is to be revea∣led in the same that suffered in all gene∣rations, even from righteous Abel, unto this day of our God; to whom be Wisdom, Glory, Salvation, and everlasting Thans∣givings ad Dominion, for ever, Amen, saith my soul and spirit; even so, Amen.
And it came to pass in the third Month of the year, 1662. also after my God had well preserved me in my passage, and in his work and service from Malta to divers places in Italy, till I came to the Straits mouth (of the Mediterranean Sea) at the place called Gibralter, it was the pleasure of the Lord God to suffer the Wind and Weather to continue contrary well nigh about thirty dayes, in which season I suf∣fered many Trials and Tribulations in spi∣rit, having little or no Rest in the same, be∣cause of the Vision and Words of the E∣verlasting, which sounded often up to my understanding, even as the roaring of a Lyon, which mine eye saw, and mine ear heard also [in the year —61. when I was a Prisoner for the pure Word and Testi∣mony of God and his Truth, in Worcester City Jayl, before I departed England] and the place was the high Mountain of Gibral∣ter, that stands within the King of Spains Dominion, which was the subject of the Vision; and often as I cast mine eye up∣on the scituation of the place, the pure Life and Power of God's eternal Presence did arise up in me, in the word of life, so that I saw clearly that some great exceeding weighty service for his Name and eternal
Truths sake was to be done by me, which was so terrible and dreadful to me, when as I entred into reasoning, so that I was brought down even to the jaws of death in dust and ashes; and as Jonah turned his back upon Nineveh, the same temptation attended me also, to my wounding, before I could give up; for I fled often from the place to escape with my life from among such an unreasonable and bloody generati∣on, and the Lord would not be intreated to let such a bitter Cup pass unfulfilled, but behold with the sound and stroak of his e∣ternal Word, his Spirit of Life became awakened, quickned, and mightily revived in me, in his Wisdom, over all fear of the Nations of men; and the same brake through the snares and bonds of death, and over destruction, and the true Seed that mourned, cried, Not my Will, but thy Will be done, on earth as it is in heaven: and so it was a hard thing to part with little Isaac, which is received again in the Covenant of promise of Life, and that was offered up which fled so often (but at last was caught in a thicket:) When the Ships of divers Nations attempted to pass through, but the God of heaven, whom the wind and sea obeyeth, suffered them not; but
they knew not what the matter was which was revealed within my heart, as the dis∣pleasure of God was against them, to humble them also, as I told them often by words and writings to clear my Conscience; al∣beit, they strove, being perplexed in their minds, and attempted often, to wit, seven or eight times in about twenty one dayes, and could not pass but about two or three Leagues; and on this wise it happened, it would either prove calm, and then the currant would drive them back into the Straits again sometimes, and otherwhile Storms and Tempests would scatter them, as a figure of Pharoah and his Hoste of Egyptian darkness, so that the Chariot-wheels mine eye saw struck off, so that they drove but heavily, within and with∣out; and at last I gave out among them, that God had service for me to do at that place, and my Life was given up to do his Will, if I never saw my Native Coun∣try, Kindred, or Fathers house at all any more; and therefore the pleasure of the Lord in his mighty Power had made me willing, & also gave me dominion through and over the Bonds and Snares of Death and Destruction, as it were to lay down my precious Life, that I may take it again,
together with the body, which through his righteous judgements he had prepared to perform the good pleasure of his Almigh∣tiness, for his Truth and Names sake. Now the heavenly Voice was often sounded within my heart on this wise, saying, O Jerusalem, cut off thine hair, and further∣more to gird sackcloth on my loins, as to the Prophet, Jer. 7.29. and so I became o∣bedient in the singleness and innocency of my heart, unto the God of Heaven, and of my Life, as a dreadful Sign against the whorish Church of Rome, and against all her Heads & Horns throughout the world: And I then signified to the Master of the Ship, in which I was a passenger, how that I did believe that God would soon give opportunity for the Fleet of Ships to pass away after this service of God was per∣formed; and after I had used many per∣swasions, to the end that he might suffer my body on that wise to be cast among the wicked idolaters, lyars and murtherers,Isa. 57.20. which are like the troubled Sea: So the Ship-master let my Body be on this wise cast over board from the Ship, [God having provided a Whale to swallow up that which fled from his presence so often] and
so it happened, that it was upon one of their called Holy-dayes, or Saints dayes, namely, the day called Holy-Thursday. So I being cast on dry land, passed through their streets directly, until I came into the Mass-House, or Idolaters Tem∣ple, among the Idolaters, where I found the Frier or Priest at the High Altar, down upon his knees, in his white Surplice, ado∣ring of the Host; (which is a Chalice, or a piece of Bread, which they called the real Substance of the body of Christ, after their unclean spirit of darkness hath mut∣tered some words over it, which they call Consecration) and after I had stood a season viewing this Idolatry, with the indignation of the eternal God set up with∣in my heart against the same, I turned my back-part upon the Priest, and his dead god, and dumb Idols, at the high Altar; and in the holy Commandment of Life e∣ternal, my face was set towards the people and I beheld them a certain season in the power of God in which I stood; I saw the multitude of ignorant People upon their knees also, worshipping the dark inventi∣ons and Imaginations of their sottish Lea∣ders, and blind Guides, and they know not what; and in the Lord's time (which mine
eye had a circumspect heed unto) I then spread forth mine arms, and stript off my Vesture, and rent the same from top to bot∣tom, in divers pieces, and cast them from me with indignation; and then I took my Hat off my head, (which was the upper∣most covering of the outside of a man) and cast the same under my feet, and stam∣ped upon these things, and the nakedness appeared with the sack-cloath covering, to their astonishment; and then with a clear voice I sounded Repentance three times, & gave testimony as the sound of a Trum∣pet among them, that the Life of Christ and his Saints was arisen from the dead; and so passed away, sounding the same words of the Lord's Message, with Repen∣tance, through the streets, as it were flying from the Idols temple, and from Idolatry, and Idolaters, until I came to the Sea side, and there was I moved to kneel down and pray, and give thanks to the living Lord, who had so wonderfully preserved me in doing his pleasure and good will on earth; and he suffered no man to touch or do me harm. And the next day following the Lord God gave opportunity accordingly as I had let the Ship-master know I believed
would come to pass, and it was so, and all the Fleet did partake of the blessing: but how many of them rewarded me (men of my own Nation, to whom I also conti∣nued a sign, which they spake bitter things against) the Lord my God saw the same, and smote them with rebuke and astonish∣ment in his displeasure; who in his wise determinate Counsel, ordained me for ma∣ny dayes & nights to be tryed on this wise, and to fall among divers temptations af∣terwards, the which as a mighty Host sur∣rounded and beset me on every hand, im∣mediately after I had done his good will in his all-sufficient power and strength: Thus the Enemy with his subtilty, in a mystery, was suffered to compass me about, to steal away my peace and reward with my God, in whom the same is hid, and then I was in a blessed condition, though sometime vailed for a little season, and then the Fa∣thers Countenance was hid from mine eye, and therefore was I troubled: Yet, blessed are ye when you fall among divers Temptati∣ons, saith one; and verily they were even as thorns in my flesh, yea, as Messengers of Satan suffered to buffet me for a season; even as the Servant of God witnessed, who was wrapt up into the third Heaven: What
if I should somewhat testifie so was it with me, lest I should be exalted above mea∣sure, so that I was made to bow and fall upon my face, and cry day and night to the Lord of Eternal Life, that had respect to the tears of the Innocent, and bowed the strength of his Arm to support the Lowly: And so his Almightiness gave ear to the sighs and groans of my distressed state, and had respect unto the voice of my mour∣ning, as a Dove or Pelican in the Wilder∣ness; and verily his Grace I found suffi∣cient to save and preserve my Innocency, in its sweet life of holiness to the Lord, through all this, and that which letted; Salvation to his Name, Amen. So his strength is made perfect in weakness, even so it is in truth, in which I set to my seal of my right-hand, that God is true, in which Life I give thanks to his Name of Power and Defence, the which over all Nations is to be exalted in the hearts of his Saints, as in the ancient dayes; yea, and much more abundantly in the Light of his bright-shining Countenance, in which his eter∣nal and excellent Glory, and pure dreadful Majesty, for ever hath his holy habitation; to whom be endless Dominion, with Prai∣ses
living and everlasting, over all, Amen. Written in Newgate this 5th Month, the 18th day, 1662. where he suffereth Bonds, together with many Brethren of Truth, for one and the same Testimony of the Lord Jesus; not for evil doing or speaking, but against the same: For we suffer because we cannot otherwise but meet together in the Name and Fear of God; neither swear at all, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath, Mat. 5. Jam. 5.12. D. B. A Copy of a Paper which was written in the Spanish Tongue, and deli∣vered the same day that I was up∣on the service, directed as follow∣eth, viz. For the Governor and Inhabitants of Gibletore, in the Kingdom of Spain. BEhold, behold, the great day of God is come, and of his wrath, and of the wrath of his Lamb is come, and the hour of
his Judgements is come; Wherefore, Oh In∣habitants of the earth, Repent, Repent, Re∣pent, and fear God, and give Glory and Honor to him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Fountains of Waters: Wo, wo, wo to the Inha∣bitants of the Earth: And I heard another Voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my People, that ye partake not of her sins, & that ye receive not of her plagues. These are the words of the Power of Christ, that is contrary to the false Church. Behold, behold, Plagues, Plagues, Plagues are coming upon the Church of Rome, and upon her Heads in England, and in all parts of the World: And the Woman which thou sawest is that great City which reigneth over the Kings of the Earth; and he saith unto me, the waters which thou sawest where the Whore sitteth, are Peoples, Na∣tions, Multitudes and Tongues, &c. These Words, with a Paper in Latine with honest Words of Truth, was delive∣red with many more Scriptures in their own Language, that they may read, under∣stand, repent, and cease from Idolatry, and from all Ungodliness, that the Blessings of Eternal Life might arise through Judge∣ments, and have room among the Nati∣ons,
to the eternal glory and renown of the Lord God over all, who is blessed for ever, Amen. A brief Account of their further Tryals, and how God at last by his Al∣mighty Power effected their Deliverance, and brought them again into the Land of their Na∣tivity. THe second month the year 1662. at the time of their Feast called the Re∣surrection of Christ, on the first day, we spake to the Keeper to buy us some meat,
not knowing but we might have eaten it in the time of their Feast; yet it had been laid upon us to fast most times when they did feast, which did torment them: for when we did fast in obedience to the Lord, they were greatly troubled: so the Keeper asked me, whether we would not eat meat to morrow, yea or nay? I was smote that I durst not say, but what the Lord will we shall do. When the morning came there was a great Triumph amongst them, and there sounded a Trumpet near us, in refe∣rence to the Lord Inquisitor. Immediatly the Word of the Lord came unto us, say∣ing, We must not eat Bread nor drink VVater in thrée dayes, nor I (K.) must not speak word in that time, but be silent and sit upon the ground in the Inquisi∣tion with very little clothes on; nothing upon our heads but ashes, no stoken nor shoe on; and the last day Sarah had no∣thing at all but one petticoat on; and they kept much ado and said, we would mort and go to the Devil, because the wind blew very cold. So in the end the Lord opened Sarah's mouth in Prophesie against their Superstition, Idolatry, and unclean con∣versation: they came wondring and look'd upon us, but could not tell what to say,
for we were very dreadful to them. So the time being expired of our Fast, the Lord opened my mouth in praises, and with singing these Verse following. All praise to him that hath not put nor cast me out of mind, Nor yet his mercy from me shut, as I could ever find. Infinite Glory, Laud and Praise be given to his Name, Who hath made known in these our dayes his strength and noble fame. Oh none is like unto the Lamb! whose beauty shineth bright, O glorifie his holy Name, his Majesty and Might. My soul praise thou the only God, a Fountain pure and clear, Whose Chrystal streams spreads all abroad, and cleanseth far and near. The Well-springs of Eternity, which are so pure and sweet, And do arise continually my Bridegroom for to meet.
My sweet and dear beloved one, whose Voice is more to me Than all the Glory of the Earth, or Treasures I can see. He is the glory of my life, my joy and my delight, Within the bosome of his Love he clos'd me day and night. He doth preserve me clean and pure within his Pavill'on, Where I with him should be secure, and saved from all wrong. My soul praise thou the Lord, I say, praise him with joy and peace; My sp'rit and mind both night and day, praise him, and never cease. O magnifie his Maestie, his Fame and his Renown, Whose dwelling is in Sion hie, the glory of his Crown. O praises, praises to our God, sing praises to our King, O teach the People all abroad, his praises for to sing. A Sion Song of Glory bright, that doth shine out so clear,
O manifest it in the sight of Nations far and near; That God may have his Glory due, his Honour and his Fame, And all his Saints may sing anew the praises of his Name. And after I had sung, the Lord com∣manded me to go to the Well in the Court, and drink Water the first thing I took: So in obedience to our tender Father and God of health and power, we went and drank much Water in the sight of the Pri∣soners; we were very dry, and they cried out in their language, saying, We would kill our selves, and go to the Devil. S. washed her head in cold water, and we never had so much as the snuff in our noses. After that they did admire and said, It was the Lord that did command us and preserve us; if they should have done so, they should have died. So the Lord was glorified, and we were comforted. And many a time were we made a dreadful sign and wonder to them, that it can never be forgotten; Praises, praises to our God who wrought it in our hearts. K. E.
For the hands of our right worthily beloved Friends. RIght dear and precious Friends in the Eternal Truth and Covenant of Life and Immortality, yea Right Honourable indeed, who are strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Peace, Love and Salvation, with whom my soul is re∣freshed, nourished and cherished day by day; and my spirit is supported, and my heart is comforted with the well-springs of Eternal Life, that stream from the Foun∣tain and Rock of Salvation, for which my soul doth truly magnifie the God of Life, that giveth Life, with you my Eternal Friends according to my measure, in which I dearly salute and imbrace you in the heavenly unity of divine vertue; Praises, praises to our pure, holy, and wise God and Father of the Eternal Fulness of all Blessedness, who doth give me of the same richly to enjoy, so that I do mount up with wings as an Eagle, and do run and am not weary, and walk and am not faint, because I do see of the travel of my soul and am
satisfied the Glory is the Lord's, whose mighty Power doth the work; yea, ever∣lasting praises, laud, honour and dominion to the Lord of lords, King of kings, over all Scepters, Thrones, Tongues and Lan∣guages, for ever to rule and reign, world without end, Amen, and Amen. O precious and wel-beloved Brethren, Fathers and Elders, the Pillars of God's spiritual Building, whom my sol right dearly loveth; yea verily, the Lord our God hath not raised, renowned, honoured nor exalted you higher in the heart, mind, spirit and soul, in any one member in all his whole Body, than he hath in me ac∣cording to my measure; the God of my Life and sweet Salvation doth know that you have been and are in my thoughts of right dear remembrance, so that my life hath not, neither doth it seem dear to me to save you harmless ever since I first saw your faces. God Almighty bless and pre∣serve you out of the hands of unreasonable men, and encrease and multiply his whole Church and People in strength, life and power, and add unto you daily such as shall be saved, and number in his Isra∣elites indeed, in whose mouths there is no guile, out of every Kindred, Tongue and
Nation, both Jew and Gentile, bond and free, so many as are appointed Heirs of Eternal Salvation, Amen, Amen, saith my spirit. And the Lord keep you all in the Power, Dominion and Authority over the Heathen, and all the dark Powers that do corrupt the Earth for ever, Amen. Oh dear and worthy Friends, I can do no less than put you in remembrance of our gracious Deliverance out of the Inqui∣sition, in our eternal Father's own time and way, and according to his own will; none wrought it but himself, that he alone may have the Glory, Honour and Renown of his own mighty Work, in the hearts of you and all the faithful-hearted, and from Sea to Sea, and from Island to Island; yea verily the Voice is gone forth to the ends of the Earth, to the praise, honour and glory of the strength of our powerful Lord God; and here is our joy, and here is our Glory, and here is our Crown, that our pure, holy, perfect and wise God is mag∣nified. And is not our Joy, your Joy, and our Crown your Crown? yea really, I know it cannot be otherwise; For if one of the members of the body do faint or fail, or break or start aside, it causeth a breach or defect in the whole body: So
likewise, if one member do prosper in his measure, be it never so small, I know the whole body is strengthened, refreshed and comforted; and we know you all delight in us, and rejoyce over us, even as the Bridegroom rejoyceth over the ride; I do behold it in the Light of Righteous∣ness, and receive the benefit of it in the bright shining Countenance of our ever∣lasting Father's Love: and our souls do magnifie the Lord of Life and Glory, and our spirits do sing for joy, that ever we were found worthy of so high and honour∣able a Calling, to bear the Name of our pure, perfect Redeemer before the High and Mighty of the Earth, and to suffer so long time under them, for our pure living Testimony of the pure holy Life of Inno∣cency; Oh! praises, praises to our God everlastingly world without end, Amen, Amen. In a short time after our gracious De∣liverance out of the Inquisition, the Lord committed great Judgement to me to pronounce against the City, saying, That I must prophesie yet once more in his Name, and give it out in writing. The Cross seemed very heavy, but I did not
dare to look at it, but was obedient to the heavenly Voice, and writ the Prophecy. O All ye Heads and Rulers, Princes and Governours of Malta, hearken to the Voice of the Lord. The 25th day of the sixth month, called August, the year 1662. near the tenth hour of the day, the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Thou must pro∣phesie yet once more in my Name to the Heads and Rulers, Princes and Governours of Mal∣ta, the aforesaid City, and prophesie saying, Thus saith the Lord God of power, who made Heaven and Earth, the Seas and all things that are therein, and is the Preserver of all mankind, especially of them that do believe in his Name, My wrath is kindled against you, and my Judgment is set up amongst you, be∣cause of your hard-heartedness and unbelief. I the Lord God, who desire the death of no man, but that all should return unto me and live, in tenderness and love to your souls, I cast in my Servants yet amongst you, contrary to their wills, and out of their own knowledge, to go and forewarn you of the evil that I was bringing upon you, with line upon line, and precept upon precept, of my undenyable Testi∣monies, and unfailable Truths of the glorious and powerful Appearing of my blessed Son the
Lord Jesus Christ the Light of the World, in thousands of my Saints and People, in this the great and mighty Day of my Power, for the destruction of Sin and Satan, and all the works of darkness, all manner of iniquity and un∣cleanness in this Nation, and in all Nations and Counries throughout the whole Earth; for all the Wicked shall be brought to Judge∣ment, that that which is pure may arise to rule in the hearts of people; and I will over∣turn, overturn in all places, till I have re∣stored Judges as at the first, and Counsellours as at the beginning, men of perfect hearts and upright spirits, fearing my Name, doing the works of Equity and Justice to every one with∣out respect of persons, like unto faithful Mo∣ses and righteous Samuel; and will establish my beloved Son upon his Throne, and he shall rule in his Princely Power, and reign in his Kingly Majesty, whose right it is over all, and his own Spiritual Government shall be set up in all places, Righteous Rulership and pure Worship in Spirit and in Truth; and there is nothing that can prevent the Lord, who saith, If ye will not hear my Servant which speakeh my Word, whom you have proved almost these four years, whose life hath been harmless and spotless in pure Innocency amongst you; then will I bring Wo upon Wo, and Judgment upon
Judgment upon you, till the living shall not be able to bury the dead; my mouth hath spoken it, and my zeal will perform it: and every man's hands shall be upon his loins for pain; for the day of Recompence is come. But if you will hear my Servant which speaketh unto you in my Name, and return in your minds to the Light in your Consciences, which con∣vinceth of all sin, and wait upon me in pure silence, holy fear, dread and awe; and deny all evil thoughts, words and actions: then will I pour out of my Spirit upon you, and will make my wayes known unto you, and will soon cure you of your diseases, and heal you of your pain. This have I written in obedience to the God of all Power, whom I truly serve in spirit and in truth, according to my mea∣sure. O dear and noble Prince and Peo∣ple, receive it from the Lord, and not from me, and prove the Prophecy in the Spirit of meekness, as you are wise and sober-minded men, without rashness or hastiness, in the fear of the Lord God that gave you life; and see whether I have prophesied in mine own name, or in the Name of the Lord; if in mine own name, the things I have prophesied of will not come to pass; but if in the Name of the
Lord, then they will come to pass daily one after another. This have we prophesied ever since the time you call Christ's Resurrection, as we have been moved of the Spirit of the Lord, and delivered it to the Consul to take it to the Grand Master, with the rest of the Heads and Governors. The Consul threa∣tened me with the Prison again. The Lord said, Fear not, I am thy God. And in a few dayes after the Lord uttered his Voice, and manifested his mighty Po∣wer in great Thunder and Lightning, so that it set on fire one of their Powder-houses, being near a mile out of the City. It was in the eighth month, the eighth day of the month, in the night, according to their account; and the wind of the Pow∣der blew down another Powder-house, a quarter of a mile from it, but the Powder was preserved; and it did great execution in the City, as they say, it blowed down five Houses, and broke most of the Glass Windows of both Palaces, and all the Merchants Windows in the City; and the Magazine where the Merchants Goods were, the Doors were blown out of the hooks, and the Walls shaken and torn, and the whole City was terribly shaken,
and the doors of the houses drew up, so that great fear fell upon them all; and we heard a great shreem in the City, it was at mid∣night, and they rung out their Bells; and there was a great Glass Window in the Chamber where we lay, over right our Beds-feet, it was very thick Glass, and much of it was broken to pieces, and beat in on each side of our bed, but the Lord did not suffer any harm to us, the glory is his own. The House was so shaken, that we did exceedingly fear and quake, but it was taken from us in a moment of time, and we gave up unto the Lord to live or to die, and we had great joy and peace in the Lord. And when it was day the Con∣sul came to us, and asked of us whether we were not dead, because we were still and quiet; and while he was speaking, there came in one after another declaring what was done in the City; and he told us how all his Chamber doors were drew o∣pen, and what great fear he was in, and all the States in the City; he said the Ships in the Harbour had some harm too. There was never the like known in that place they said. We answered them, saying, One Wo is past, and behold another Wo cometh quickly, if you do not repent: yet they re∣pented
not of their blasphemy, rebellion, hard-heartedness, nor unbelief, but they ran up and down to their fathers the Sor∣cerers, Inchanters and Wisards, and they soon piec'd them up again. There were many of the Friars did dwell near the Con∣sul's, and we did see their running to and fro; and in few dayes after Sarah was cal∣led to fasting, and to baldness, and to strew ashes upon her head, and to sit upon the ground with her upper parts naked for some time, and the Power of the Lord did work mightily in it, and they were amazed at it from the greatest to the least; and the Lord opened her mouth, and she spake to the Consul to tell the Grand Master to pro∣claim a Fast, and to meet together to wait upon the Lord, with their minds turned to the Light; for the Lord called for Repen∣tance, and for fasting and baldness, and girding on of sackcloth, that so he might turn away his righteous Judgments from them; for the hour of his Judgments was come, wherein the Painted Harlot should be stripped naked, and a Cup of trembling should be given her from the hand of the Lord; and many did die of a violent Fea∣ver; and we were much exercised in fast∣ing: and the Consul went forth with the
news amongst the Magistrates, and they talked with the Friars, and they told them we had a good intent; and in a short time after the Inquisitor sent a Dutch Friar and one of the other; the Lord had prepared us for their coming; and when they came the Consul called us before them, and so he talked a little while with us, and he said, we had a good intent, but the Devil had de∣ceived us. We asked him, whether the Devil could give power over sin, yea or nay? He said, the Devil could transform himself into an Angel of Light. We an∣swered him, we did know he could, but he could not hide himself from the Chil∣dren of Light: but they that were in the dark could not discern him. He was not able to hear us, nor to stay in the room, but the Consul did stand up against us, and accused us to him falsly before our faces, as we made it to appear to him, and so they departed; and the Consul wrought desperately against us to get us into bon∣dage again, but our God was with us: and seeing he could not prevail against us, to get us into Prison again, then he and his Confederates combined together how to cheat us of our Money. I do believe they received the Books before we came
out of the Inquisition, for we received dear Daniel's Letter from Legorn that did men∣tion them: We felt his workings day and night, he came subtilly to us, and told us he had wrought to set us at liberty, and the Quisitor and Grand Master bid him send us away by the next convenient passage; But now the Devil had sent Books out of Eng∣land, and he said he knew not what to do with them, the Magistrates would not let us go; if they should know of them, they would say we would send more when we came to England; and he asked us whe∣the we would receive them? We asked him, whether they were directed to us? he said, No. We bid him deliver them where they were directed, whatsoever we did suffer for it. He kept much ado and said, If we would give a grandy Priest ten or twelve Scoothes, (which is near fifty shil∣lings) they would conceal them. We an∣swered, Nay, it was of the Lord, in love to their souls, he should deliver them up, and make good use of them that their souls might live. He raged at us, but said no more of that to us. In a little while after there came a Hol∣land Ship, which was bound for Smyrna, and the Consul sent to us to come & speak
with him, it was in the evening, I was going to bed; I felt a filthy thing, and had no freedom to go to him, but Sarah went; yet he came to me and told me, There was a Holland Ship bound for Smyrna, if we would promise him to stay there till he came back, he would call for us. We told the Consul, we stood in the Will of God, and we could not promise any thing, unless we knew the mind of God in it. He was very angry, and said we would dwell at Malta. Now we told him, we did believe the Lord had appointed a Vessel to carry us, whether it was that yea or nay, we knew not; we did not know whether that might come back in half a year; and however we did not mean to hire a Ship on purpose to fetch us. We said he might send us in a Barque to Mescena, and there we might imbarque for Legorn. He said, No; the In∣quisitor said if we should go thither, we would preach God to the Roman Catholicks, and he did not love that; and there was an Inquisi∣tion that did belong to the King of Spain, and though the Pope had set us free, yet he would take us Prisoners again. We told him we would adventure that; but he had an end of his own in it: he had much Annise to send to Legorn, and he would have had us
to engage the Flemen to call for us to carry that too, that we might have paid part for the carriage of it; but our God had ap∣pointed a greater work for us to do which we knew not of. In a little time after we were freed from the Inquisition, he told us Daniel took up an hundred Dollers, and he would have us send to Mescena for an hundred more. We told him, we had received no such order, and withal asked him what we should do with so much money, seeing we had mo∣ney in his hands? and said, we would not send for money to keep us in bonds; and minded him of his Promise to dear Da∣niel Baker. He said Daniel could not re∣deem us out of Prison, but he had stood Cap in hand to the Inquisitor for us. That was true, if he had continued faithful, great would have been his reward, but he sought himself in it; and when his ex∣pected end was not answered, then he and his wife and servants were very bitter against us for Righteousness sake, in-so-much that we stood in great hazard of our lives; many a time we did feel their slay∣ing Instruments drawn, so that we had even the sentence of death in our selves, but the Lord prevented them, and pre∣served
us, and great was our travel of soul night and day; the glory is the Lord's, whose mighty Power did the work: ever∣lasting praises, honour and dominion over all to our pure, holy and perfect Lord God, world without end, Amen. Now for the satisfaction of all Friends concerning our deliverance out of he In∣quisition, this is a true and brief Relation. Three quarters of a year before Daniel Ba∣ker came to Malta, the Consul for the Eng∣lish came to us, and said, the Inquisitor sent him to know if we would be Catholicks yea or nay? We answered, we were true Chri∣stians. He said, if we would be Catholicks, we might dwell at Melita, or go to England. We said we were the Servants of the true and living God. One of the Magistrates said, we were not Christians, neither had we the Cross of Christ. We answered, we were Christians, and had received the Spirit of Christ which made a Christian, and he that had not the Spirit of Christ was no Chri∣stian, and we had the Cross of Christ; without the Cross there was no Salvation: the Cross of Christ is the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that belie∣veth.
He said, If we would not be Catholicks, we must suffer long Imprisonment by the Popes Order. That was not true, I had an An∣swer in my Conscience against it. And in a little time after they told us, if we would kiss the Cross we should be freed out of Pri∣son, and go to the Consul's till a convenient passage did present to carry us for England; for the Pope had sent word they should take it into their consideration, and set us free for England, without doing any violencce, as we heard, and we did believe it, be∣cause we had a more sure word of Prophe∣cy than did use to proceed out of their mouthes: we told them we could not kiss the Cross to get our liberty, neither did we desire our freedom on any such terms; but we looked every day when they would call us forth to kiss the Cross, and we did pray and cry mightily to our Eternal Fa∣ther to prevent them in it, and to preserve us out of it; for the Tempter was very strong within and without, so that I took little rest for many dayes and nights, see∣ing the great danger it would plunge us into; for I saw the painted walls, and the Crosses set before me, but the gracious God of power, who did appear in our Af∣flictions, and revealed his Will to me in a
Night-Vision, saying, Touch not, taste not, handle not, but wait diligently up∣on me: you have two things yet to work over before you can be set at liberty. We knew the Cross was one, but we knew not what the other was. The next time the Consul came, he told us that the Inquisitor said, If any one would engage for three or four thousand Dollers to be paid if ever we came thither again, we should be set at liberty, but he said no more of the Cross; but the Obligation was the second thing that we were to work over, but I could never see, nor dare desire any man to be engaged for us, because I do know all Decrees, Laws, Tyes, Bonds and Chains, and Precepts of men must be bro∣ken through the righteous Decree of our mighty Lord God, and upon the same con∣sideration we were made willing to wait, till the Lord should break this Chain also, that no other dear Friend or Lamb of God might suffer for the same thing; no, God forbid. Then it pleased the Lord to send Daniel Baker, who in obedience to the God of Heaven did offer up body for body, yea life & all for our liberty, but could not be heard; but the Inquisitor said, If any would
engage for the payment of three or four thou∣sand Dollers, to be paid if ever we came there again, we should have our liberty; but other∣wise we must die in the Prison, for that was the Pope's Law: but we knew it was left to his consideration, so we told them we could not engage, nor desire any to en∣gage for us, because it was out of the Co∣venant of God; and our yea was yea, and our nay was nay, and we did not believe that ever it was the mind of God that we should return thither again. So Daniel departed in the Love of God, and they sent to England to Friends, and to other Islands to the English Merchants, for some to engage for us, that we might have our liberty, but the Merchants sent word they were not willing to answer their unrea∣sonable demands, for the payment of so many thousand Dollers, if in case we re∣turned thither again. There were many that did seek for our liberty, that were not of us, because they knew our cruel and strait bondage and terrible afflictions, and were willing to engage what was reason; but because our just and wise God would make his Power known for his own ho∣nour, he would not suffer any thing to prevail for our Deliverance, insomuch as
we could understand, but what he wrought by his invisible Power in the hearts of our Enemies. It was given into my heart half a year after Daniel came thence, that if I could speak with the Inquisitor, he would grant us our liberty; and in a little time he came to the Inquisition-Court-Cham∣ber, and we heard of it, and desired to speak with him, which he granted us, and we told him we had wronged none, we had defrauded none, neither was guile found in our mouthes; but we had suffered inno∣cently almost four years, for Conscience-sake, and we knew they had no peace in our sufferings. So the Inquisitor was very courteous to us, and promised our liberty in a few dayes, and he said he would send for the Consul, and get him to engage for five hundred Dollers to be paid for us, if ever we came again; in case the Consul did deny it, he would send to Rome to the Pope for an Order to set us at liberty with∣out an Obligation. So we were contented to wait the Lord's time; who had often promised us, That we should have our liberty in a day when we thought not of, and at an hour when we were not aware; and good was the Word of the Lord, and faithful in all his Promises.
About two weeks after the Inquisitor came to the Inquisition with his Lieute∣nant and other of the Magistrates, and a Consul for the English, and he sent the Proctor of the Court to call us forth before them; and when we came he told us, the Consul would engage for the payment of five hundred Dollers, if ever we returned thither again. We not knowing at present whe∣ther it was the mind of our heavenly Fa∣ther that the Earth should help the Wo∣man yea or nay, yet waiting in the Fer of God, it was brought to my remembrance that the Lord had said we had two things to work over, before we could be set at liberty. So they used many words, but we eying the Lord, yet answered them in the Spirit of meekness. They called for half a sheet of paper, and the Chancellour asked what he should write? but the Lord stood up for his own glory, so that they had not power to write one Letter. The Lieutenant said, they would talk of it another time; and they did ask us, whether we would not return back again to our Husbands and Children, if it were the will of God? We answered, It was our intent in the will of God so to do. The Lord Inquisitor took his leave very courteously of us, and desired our prospe∣rous
return into our Country; and like∣wise the Magistrates, with the inferiour Officers, not requiring penny or penny-worths for any Fees or Attendance that we had among them in that time; but as we saw our freedom in the Lord, we gave the Keeper and some poor men something for Conscience sake. So we departed in peace, according to the compleat example of the holy men of God, kneeling down and desiring our hea∣venly Father never to lay to their charge what they did unto us, because they knew us not; so this Scripture was fulfilled, that he made our enemies our footstool, and they that hate us without a cause to be at peace with us. So we were delivered in Power and great glory out of the Inquisition into the Consul's hand to be sent for England, as opportunity did present. The Consul said that he did engage for us after we were out of the Inquisition, but we could never find that it was true. So we were kept eleven weeks at the Consul's house, before they could have a passage to carry us out of their Coast; and the Cross was so heavy, and the travel of souls so great, that, as to the visible, all hopes were past that I could live in the bo∣dy;
but all things are possible with God, who by his mighty Power hath removed Mountains, and subdued the Earth, and broke through the double-doors, locks and bolts, and Iron bars, and all the chains of wickedness, & every unrighteous Decree; and by his high & mighty Hand and strong outstretched Arm hath returned our Cap∣tivity, that Jacob may rejoyce and Israel may be glad, magnified be the Name of our Eternal Father for ever; yea, Honour and Glory, Power and Dominion over all to him who ruleth on high, world without end, Amen. And when we had been at the Consul's house eleven weeks, there came one of the King's Frigats, called the Saphire, the Captain's name was Samuel Titswel. The Grand-Master sent to the Captain of the Saphire to entreat him to stay the Ship all night, to take up almost forty Passengers. The Captain made himself unwilling, be∣cause he had no product, but lay out in the Road a league from the City. The Grand-Master writ to him, he knew his brother at England would not deny him such a cour∣tesie to take in twenty four Knights, Ca∣valliers, and their servants, and two Qua∣kers, and so he staid till the next day, it
was for his great advantage. Upon pain of death the Cavaliers must not see us heretofore, but our heavenly Father doth know how to bring his own purposes to pass, and none can hinder him. Oh! that we should be put on board with so many of them, and one was the Inquisi∣tors own brother, as he said, and was as like him as if the same man, as I told the Captain, before I knew who he was: he spake to the Captain often that we might not want any thing that was in the Ship, and he told us if we were at Malta again we should not be persecuted so; for as soon as he saw our faces he said, he would not differ with us; he and some other of them laid to the Captain, If we went to Heaven one way, and they another, yet we should all meet together at the last. But we held out Christ Jesus the Light of the World, to be the alone way to the Father: And great was our labour from day to day. But our own Country-men were much worse than most of them, so that they bid us go back to Malta again; and said the Eng∣lish would use us worse than the Maltezes. So when we came to Legorn, the Ship could get no product, and if we would go a-shoar there, we might go into the Laza∣retta
for forty dayes. And so the King's Agent desired the Captain to carry us as far as he could, till he met the General, and then he would provide a passage for us, if that Ship was commanded back a∣gain; for if he should have left us there in Lazaretta, the Agent must take order for us, he said, according to the King's Order. The Merchants shewed us no small kindness, and treated us with much love, and sent us Wine and Bread, and a great many good things for our refresh∣ment: the Sea was high so that they could not conveniently come to us, but they told the Captain they would come; and if we would have money or any thing else whatsoever we would write for, they would send it to us. We had but little money, but being we were coming for our Coun∣try, we saw but little freedom to take up money: And the Captain promised, as we should not want any money, nor any thing else till we came to England; so he should not have taken any money for our passage, because it was the King's Ship, but he received several Dollers which victu∣alled the Ship; So he hasted thence and came to Tarloone, and there he could get no product, but all the Malta Knights were
set a-shoar into Lazaretta: so we came to Malago, and there the Captain had pro∣duct, but he did not dare to make any long stay there, for fear the Fleet should be be∣fore him at Tangeer. He was sent before the Fleet out of Turkie, with Letters to Malta, and to Legorn, and other places, and we had some service for the Lord in every Harbour. So we came to Tangeer above two weeks before the Fleet came. The Captain said it was above an hundred pound out of his way, because he made so much haste. The Lord did hasten him for his Work's sake, as it was clearly manifested to us all along. The Captain said we must not go a-shoar till he had spoke with the Governour's Excellency. So we went a-shoar as we were moved of the Lord, and great was our Work for the Seeds sake. Oh! oh! great are the Abominations of the wicked in that place; none worse than English-men for swear∣ing, lying, pride, drunkenness, whoredoms, and such like, so that our righteous souls were vexed day and night with their un∣clean conversation, and the pure Spirit of the Lor was grieved, and the Seed of God was pressed, even as a Cart is pressed with
sheaves; So we declared boldly against them all in the Name of the Lord, and they came flocking about us, high and low, great and small, into the house where we were lodged, or where-ever we went, of all sorts. In a few days we were moved to go to the Governour, and to lay their Abominations before him, the just Judg∣ments due unto them from the Lord for their great and grievous Wickedness; and laid it upon him from the Lord to suppress it, in so much as lay in him to do, lest the just and holy Lord God Almighty did sud∣denly deliver them into the hands of their Enemies to be destroyed, after the rest of them were slain in the Wrath and Anger of the Almighty: and we told him they had not greater enemies without than they had within, and if they did repent and truly fear the Lord, their Enemies would be subdued within, and they would know when to go out against their Enemies and prosper, and the Lord would make their Enemies to be at peace with them. So the Governour said, he did lovingly re∣ceive our good Instructions and Admoni∣tions, and promised to follow our Coun∣sel; and would have given us money, and desired us to eat and drink in his house.
We did freely imbrace his love, without meat, drink or money. And he was very courteous to us, and tender over us, so that he gave Command∣ment to all the Garison, That none should abuse us in word nor action, upon pain of se∣vere punishment. There are many Portu∣gals, Jews and Irish which could as freely have burnt us, as they could have burnt wood; but our pure, holy, wise, strong and powerful Lord God, protected us in the midst of them, and took away all slavish fear from us, so that we were as bold as Lions for God's Truth, against all their Idolatry and Wickedness. The Lord is worthy to have the glory for evermore, Amen. And in a few dayes after it was laid upon us of the Lord, to go forth to meet the Moors their Enemies, which laid siege a∣gainst them, and they were such a bloody savage people, that it seemed a very hard thing to us, but the Lord said unto me, Go forth, fear not, they shall not harm thée, or you, Behold the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon is with you. And so we believed, and were made willing to adventure life and all in obedience. And so we went to the Governour to desire we
might be let out of the Gate, declaring the mind of God in it: but the Governor told us, we must expect nothing but cruel death, or bonds for ever, telling us what terrible weapons they had, and entreated us to go again to our lodging, and wait up∣on the Lord, and pray as our manner was, he said, and then if we could not have peace, we might come to him again. And in two or three dayes after he came to us, and asked us concerning the thing. We told him we were made willing to bear and to wait upon the Lord to perswade his heart to let us go, and said we did believe the Lord would preserve us in the midst of them, and deliver us from them, and we should be returned as safe as we went forth; yet however our bodies were but a reasonable sacrifice to offer for him that gave them us. So he left us at that time. After that we went to his house again, and he did seem to be somewhat willing then to let us go. Then his Se∣cretary stept to him, and desired him that he would not let us go, declaring to him that if he did let us go, that it could not possibly be expected that ever we should return into the City again, or see any of our Relations or Country, except the Lord
did work a wonderful Miracle by deliver∣ing us out of their hands: And then the Governour told us in pitty and tenderness towards us, he believing we were innocent harmless women, and did truly fear God, he could not let us go forth, the English would speak very hardly of him, and say he forced us forth to be destroyed by them. So in a day or two after the Moors did shew forth their Flag to parley for Peace, and came near to treat with them, and till then our souls, hearts and spirits were ex∣ercised in such strong travel and labour night and day, we could not hide it from the people of the house where we lay; but we do believe if we had gone forth among them before they came to treat with them, the Lord our God who liveth for ever, would have preserved us, and we should have been returned, to the conviction of many, and to the astonishment of all the whole Garison, for his own glory: but if we should have gone forth to them when they came to parley for Peace, then our Country-men would have said, that that was the reason we were preserved, and God would not have had the glory. The Lord said, our Sacrifice was accepted, because he knew the uprightness of our hearts.
We went to take our leaves of the Go∣vernour, having finished our Testimonies in that place, acknowledging the love we received from him; and he proffered us whatever we wanted for the Ship, and his kindness extended so far that he would send it to the Vessel. We received his love, but took nothing of him, and so we departed the City, and went aboard the Ship that brought us thither; and that Ship was commanded back into the Straits, so that we were destitute of a passage. So Sarah being moved of the Lord, went un∣to the General and made him acquainted therewith, and he very lovingly sent us a∣board in another Ship, and bade us take care for nothing, he would give Order we should not want any thing till we came to England. When we were ready to set sail, there came a mighty Scool of Fish dancing round the Ship, and leaping above water with great joy, as I am a witness of; and as I waited on the Lord, considering what it might signifie, the Lord answered me, It signified the multitudes of his Saints and Servants in England or elsewhere, that will rejoyce at the return of our Captivity, and glorifie his Name: which
caused great joy and refreshment to our souls. The Lord made it manifest we should have a safe passage to England, and caused us to declare it, so that many de∣sired to return with us in that Ship on that account; yet I told them we might meet with storms and hardships by the way, and so it came to pass; and great tryals we had by reason of storms and tempestuous weather, that we were in great danger and peril, so that many were wounded and bruised with the tossing of the Vessel, and the Master of the Ship cast over-board, when the Sea was so high as Mountains; yet the Lord wrought wonderfully for his deliverance, and he was brought into the Ship safe again, and we all came safe to Land. The Captain was a very civil man, and we were very civilly used in that Ship. We were scattered from all the rest of the Ships, and could never see them again. And so the Name of the Lord be magni∣fied for ever over all, whose Name is a strong Tower to all that can trust in him. It is laid upon me to manifest the large love of God to us in our greatest extre∣mity, when we knew nothing but that we should be burnt for many dayes together.
Then in a Vision of the night I saw a large Room, and a great Wood-fire in the Chimney; and I saw the eternal Son of God sitting in a Chair by the fire, in the form of a servant: And likewise I saw a very amiable well-favoured Man-Child sitting in a hollow Chair over the fire, it had no clothes on but a little fine linen about the upper parts, it did not appear to be above three quarters old; the fire did flame on every side of it, yet the Child did play and was merry: I would have took it up, for fear it should have been burnt, but he that sate in the Chair bade me let it alone. I turned me about and I saw another heavenly Angel of God's presence standing a little wayes off; it was not Gabriel: and then he that sate in the Chair, bade me take up the Child, and it had no harm. Let him that readeth, understand. And then I did awake, and I called to my Friend Sarah, and bid her she should not fear, for the heavenly Host of God's Presence did follow us; and as we do believe, who can harm us; though they did bind us to a stake, yet shall they never have power to kindle fire upon us. And Sarah answer∣ed, she did know without our heavenly
Father they cannot touch a hair of our heads; And the Lord said, However it be, it shall go well with you. And so we magnifie the Name of the Lord night and day, and he is worthy to be praised for evermore, Amen. Ka. Evans. There came to Malta whilst we were in the Inquisition, twenty sail of Ships out of France and Spain, to joyn with the Cave∣liers in Malta, to fight against the Turks, as the Keeper told us; and the fear and dread of the Lord fell upon me, and the Lord commanded me to prophesie against them, and I cryed out daily, saying, God is angry, God is angry, and they cannot pro∣sper; go not forth to murther, nor to kill one another: Christ came not to destroy life, but to save it. This I told many as they were in hearing, yet there was great triumphing and glorying in blood, and in the strength of Pharoah all the time they were there. And the night before they went forth, I saw in a Vision a broad Tub of blood, and it did run over on each side into the water and defiled it, that I could have none to drink, and I was exceedingly troubled in spirit. And this did signifie their great
slaughter and fight upon the Sea with the Turks; and they returned with great loss, and their joy was turned into sorrow, and their mirth into mourning, because they would not be forewarned. Sa. Cheevers. To the English Fryar Malachi. THou art a bloody Persecutor of God and his eternal Truth, and the Mes∣sengers thereof; go whither thou wilt the righteous God will follow thee and find thee out; dig never so deep, thou canst not hide thy self from the Light; Cruel∣ty, hard-heartedness, vain-glory, hypo∣crisie, lying, blasphemy, pride, unbelief, all manner of wickedness lodgeth within thee: thou in thy measure art the sinck of Hell, thy mouth uttereth perverse things; the poyson of Asps is under thy tongue, thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; thou art for eternal burnings. Thou saidst thou madest thy self a holy man, having wit and learning, so thou becamest a Prelate or a Bishop, and studied Divinity fifteen years, and by it
thou camest by thy Ordination to be a Fa∣ther of Learning, a Saviour of Souls; thou saidst thou hadst received vertue to remit sins, and thou didst offer to take our blood upon thee, and to save our souls and bo∣dies, and wouldst have us to pray in the name of such a holy Father as thou who art a Catholick; and didst kneel down of∣ten, and speak many bitter wishes; that you were in the true Faith: But glory be to the Name of our God for ever, the Light did discover thee when thou camest under many false covers and colours; thy lyes and blasphemies were manifested to us by the Light, and by the Light judged and condemned, and we preserved and justi∣fied. O thou perverter of the pure way of Righteousness, thou child of the Devil, thou deceiver of souls, the Lord will re∣quire the souls of the simple at thy hands; thou hast caused them to err from the li∣ving God; thou Lucifer, thou shalt be cast down from thy seat, with all thy whore∣doms, into the bottomless pit, there to re∣main for ever, Amen. And the Lord Je∣sus Christ alone shall reign over all the powers of darkness unto the ends of the Earth, and the powers of darkness disco∣vered, defaced and utterly destroyed with
the brightness of his coming; then shalt thou and thy kingdom, with all your car∣nal weapons that you have formed to up∣hold you, be thrown down and overturned, and thou, and all such deceivers as thou art, shall be cast into utter darkness, with the lyers, unbelievers, Sorcerers, fearful, blasphemers, blood-thirsty, there to receive your reward, weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth for ever: then shall you know with Dives, one drop of cold Water from us whom you have afflicted [for the Testi∣mony of Jesus, and the Word of God] will not stand you in stead to cool your tormented tongues for your Blasphemies. Thou hast slighted the day of thy Visi∣tation; thou hast had line upon line, and precept upon precept declared to thee of the good Word of God, but thou hast made a mock, and said it was a foolish thing: thou didst want men of learning and wit; thou hast learning and tongues, Oh! dost thou not see thy folly? Hath not God chosen the foolish things to confound the wisdom of the wise, and to bring to nought the counsel of the prudent? In the Light thou art known, by the Light thou art judged and con∣demned. Thy Gospel is carnal that doth uphold thy Kingdom; Iniquity, double-doors,
Chains, Bolts, Iron Whips, Racks, Halters, Quarterings, Cruelties, Blood-thirstiness; what wickedness is there that is not in your Kingdom? you will cheat and cozen one another, and will tolerate all manner of vice, and say it is pardon∣able, and will remit their sins, if they will believe in you, and pray in your name: Thou wouldst have us pray by thy spirit after thee, and say Mass and Pater noster, and pray to Saints departed, and thy Jesus and Mary with Beads and Crucifixes, and cross our foreheads and chins. Oh thou Antichrist! wouldst thou have us turn from the Spirit of the living God, which is pure and holy, to pray to stocks and stones, thy dead gods, which cannot see, nor hear, nor speak. The Lord said for∣merly, and doth say now, Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, or the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, &c. Cursed be thy Images, and thou that teachest people to fall down to worship them. Thou sayest, this is Moses Law: He that despiseth Mo∣ses's Law, dyeth without mercy, under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer pu∣nishment shall he be thought worthy, that trampleth under foot the blood of the Covenant,
and counteth it an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and hath done despite to the Spirit of Grace? Thou art he, Malachi, the Lord saith, thou art a cursed Reprobate, Depart from me thou worker of iniqui∣ty, I know thée not. Thou sayest, thou wouldst chain our arms, because we could not bow at thy commacd: We said, our necks, with our whole bodies; for the Te∣stimony of Jesus and the Word of God, which we give forth among you, we were ready to seal it with our blood; glory be to the Lord God Almighty, who called and counted us worthy to suffer for his Name-sake, and gave us power over thee, thou crooked Scorpion: if thou hadst known that Power that did restrain thy hands and thy feet from shedding our blood, thou wouldst have known whose Servants we were; but thou art in the Reprobation with Cain, Judas and bloody Herod: thou wouldest have us call thee a holy Father; and thou sayest, Whosoever sins ye remit on Earth, they should be remitted in Heaven; and yet thou saidst, none could be assured of their Salvation in this life; and thou asked us about a Purgatory: we knew no such place. The Scripture speaks of a Hell and a Heaven, in which the souls of the Righ∣teous
should enter into when they depart he body, where is joy and rest for ever∣more; but the souls of the wicked into everlasting torment. Thou saidst, thou couldst prove a Purgatory in Maccabees: we know no such place; but we know it speaketh of a woman that had seven sons, which because they could not forsake the Law of the living God, their tongues were cut out. Art not thou a lyer? didst not thou say, thou wast a Remitter of sins, and a saviour of souls, and yet they must dye in their sins, and go to Purgatory? Oh thou blind guide! thou art to be denied: dost not thou see thy own confusion? If any sin against God, you then give a Pardon; but if any offend you, Oh the Rackings, Hal∣terings, Strapado's, Chains, Bolts, Irons! your cruelty doth exceed what we do te∣stifie; you have sold your selves to work wicked Abominations: you wear defiled garments to deceive the simple-hearted, and say there is virtue in them, and think it an honour for them to kiss your defiled garments. The Spirit speaketh expresly, that in the latter days there should be seducing spirits, teaching lyes in hypocrisie, the Doctrine of the Devil; to abstain from marriage, and meats which God hath created for the preser∣vation
of the Creation: but if a man com∣mit Adultery with a woman, and come and confess to you, you will pardon him: Oh horrible Blasphemy! there is none can forgive sins but God only: If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the Propitia∣tion for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. When Nathan came to David to tell him of his sins, the faithful Witness in his own Conscience which did convince him he was a sinner, made him cry out, I am the man that hath sinned against the Lord. Nathan was a true Prophet of the Lord, to convince of sin, but not pardon sin. If Noah, Daniel and Job were in that City, they should save but their own souls alive for their own righte∣ousness. Oh! how do you dare to pervert the holy Scriptures, which by so many infallible Testimonies were given forth by the Spirit of the living God? For the Scriptures are of no private interpretation, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy Ghost; and they are profitable for Doctrine, Uses, and Reproofs, that all whose minds are turned to the measure of the Grace of God that bringeth Salvation that hath appeared in all, to teach and lead out
of sin, and to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously and godly in this present evil world, they come to have the Scriptures fulfilled in them, as they were in them which gave them forth, for they lived in the life of the Scriptures; their lives, and what they did declare, was Yea and Amen; and they were guided by one Spirit, and they spake one and the same thing as the Light did lead them: for the Light is a perfect guide into all truth, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart of every one, and is a dis∣cerner of spirits; it shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not. The Light will discover every deed of dark∣ness; it is the faithful and true Witness of God, which he hath given to every one a measure to profit, to convince, to reprove, to instruct, to condemn, to justifie. And those that receive the Light in the love thereof, to them he doth reveal his ever∣lasting loving-kindness, and make known the Mysteries of his Truth and Counsel. The willing and obedient shall eat the good of the Land, but those that refuse and rebel, the Sword of the Lord shall devour. The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, and his zeal will perform it.
Every one that loveth the Light, will bring their deeds to the Light, that they may be approved of the Light that they are wrought in God; for to the Light of Christ all must come; and whatsoever hath been done in secret shal be made manifest; when the Book of every ones Conscience shall be laid open, then shall every ones heart be made manifest by the Light, and shall receive every one according to their deeds done in the body: they that sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but they that sow to the Spirit, shall reap life everlast∣ing: For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Christ Jesus our Lord; who is the Light of the World, that lighteth every one that cometh into the World, that all men through him might be∣lieve. He is the true Light and Life of men. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son into the World, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. This Life is in the Son; he that hath the Son, hath Life. O Friends and People of all sorts, turn in your minds to the Light within, which will shew you your conditions, and how you have been seeking a Saviour without, in the many wandrings from hills to moun∣tains,
crying, Lo here, and Lo there, when he is nigh you, calling you to return to him, that your sins may be pardoned, and you reconciled and redeemed from your sins and from your beloved lusts, that war against your souls. The works of the flesh are manifest by the Light; and as you come to love the Light, you will have power over every deed of darkness, and to a daily cross to be crucified with Christ from sin, and from the beggarly rudiments of the world, to live to God. God is holy, as it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy, saith the Lord. Holiness be∣comes the House of the Lord for ever. What, know you not that your bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost to dwell in? The Spirit of the living God cannot dwell with any de∣filed thing, but alwayes bears witness a∣gainst it. If any man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? No, not one. Can a Fountain bring forth sweet water and bitter? You say you are Christians: Do you walk like Christ? Paul said, Be ye followers of me, as I am a follower of Christ. And Christ saith, Love your enemies; bless them that curse you, and despitefully use you,
that you may be the Children of your heavenly Father. Christ died for his Enemies, He was made sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might become the Righteousness of God in him. What greater Love can there be? O turn in your minds, and examine your own hearts, every one in particular; Do you keep Christ's Commandments? Christ saith, If you love me, you will keep my Com∣mandments. Christ's Command is Love. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and thy neigh∣bour as thy self; and do to all, as thou wouldst have all do unto thee. Owe nothing to any but love. Love is the fulfilling of the pure Law of God, which is holy, just and good. Not one jot or tittle shall pass, till all is fulfilled. All that come to the Light, and obey it, come to the fulfilling of the Law: for the Law is the Light. I had not known sin but by the Law: for the Law saith, Thou shalt not covet; and Christ saith, He that breaks one of these least Commandments, is guilty if the whole. It is not enough to talk of a Christ that suffered at Jerusalem once for all, and to make him a cloak to cover your sins; be not deceived, but let such know he is in every one to condemn for sin, and to make every evil deed manifest, and to
bear testimony against it, and to leave all without excuse: for all must be tryed by the Light of Christ, that lighteth every one that cometh into the world; and all that love the Light, will bring their deeds to the Light to be approved; O but those that hate it, it will be their condemna∣tion. My endeared Salutation and Greeting to the Seed Immortal in all through∣out the whole World. Farewel.  Sarah Cheevers. An additional Account of GEORGE ROBINSON'S: shewing his Call to go to Jerusalem; And how God in his Journey thither was present with, and did preserve him from the hands of those who sought to take his Life, &c. FRIENDS, EVen as the Lord in many Ages and Generations past hath called his Ser∣vants abroad into many Countries and Regions of the World, to bear forth a Te∣stimony
unto his glorious and ever blessed Name, that people might be gathered to him, and be blessed by him; even in like manner he hath done in this our day, bles∣sed be his Name for evermore. And so my dear Friends, I being sensible in some measure, of the Lord's great Love in this particular, do in dear love, both to the Lord and his People, shew forth the same. In the year 1657, about the beginning of the seventh month thereof, as I was waiting upon the Lord in singleness of heart, his blessed Presence filled me, and by the power of his Spirit, did command me to go unto Jerusalem; And further said unto me, Thy sufferings shall be great, but I will bear thee over them all. Accordingly, about the middle of the aforesaid month, I began my Voyage to∣wards Jerusalem, and imbarqued with four Friends more, in a Ship (called The Joshua of London) bound for Legorn in Italy, where in ahout six weeks time we arrived; and soon after we were sent for by the Gover∣nour of that place, who after examination of us, whither we were going (and the like) said, we must not stay ashore, but go aboard a Ship, there to abide until we could get passage
whither we were bound. Nevertheless we eturned to our Lodgings again, where we aid some dayes, in which time both Eng∣sh and others daily visited us, to whom we pake the things belonging to God's King∣om, and then left that place, and went board a Ship to wait for a passage whither we were bound. And in about two weeks ime after, I left the rest of Friends, and mbarqued in a French Ship, bound for St. John de Acra, formerly called Ptolomais, and after a few dayes sail, we passed by the Island of Malta (where Paul suffered shipwrack) where we made little stay, but hoisted sail, and in about two or three weeks time we came to the ruinated City Tirus, having met with a contrary wind, we were stayed three or four dayes; the Inhabitants, being Turks and Greeks, were moderate towards me; and from thence in about one day we came to Ptolomais, or St. John de Acra, where I remained about eight dayes (being much opposed by the Friars) in a French Merchants house, and hen imbarqued in a Vessel (amongst Greeks and Turks) bound for Joppa, but the Wind rising against us, we came to an Anchor at Tourtons; and on the next mor∣ning divers Turks came aboard, and de∣manded
Tribute of those called Christians in the Vessel, which they paid for fear of sufferings, but very unwillingly, their de∣mands being very unreasonable; and in like manner demanded of me, but I re∣fusing to pay according to their demands, they threatned to beat the soals of my feet with a stick, and one of them would have put his hand into my pocket, but the chiefest of them rebuked him: Soon after they began to take me out of the Vessel to effect their work; but one of the Turks belonging to the Vessel, speaking to them as they were taking me ashore, they let me alone; wherein I saw the good hand of God preserving me, and also there be∣ing an Armenian present, and seeing I ra∣ther chose to suffer, than to grant them their unreasonable demands, he cryed out, I was a good Christian, I was a good Christian, and became very loving unto me whilst he remained with me. After this, about three or four dayes we came to Joppa, and from thence the same day we came to Ramlah (or Ramoth in Gilead) which (as it did appear) the Friars at Jerusalem, hear∣ing of my coming, gave order unto some there, to stay me, which accordingly was done; for I was taken and carried into a
house, and locked up into a room for one night and a part of the day following, and then had liberty to go into the yard, but as a Prisoner, in which time the Turks shew∣ed friendship unto me, one Antient man especially of great reputation, who desired that I might come unto his house; which thing being granted, he courteously enter∣tained me. And further, it came to pass about four or five dayes after my confinement, there came an Irish Friar, with a Guard accompanying him from Je∣rusalem, unto me (it being twenty miles distant) and discoursed with me concern∣ing the things of God's Kingdom. At first he seemed in words as though he would have shewed friendship unto me; but the poyson of Asps was under his tongue: for when he could not prevail over me, nor others with him in way of discourse, about the things of God, he then said that was not the business he was sent about; but he had divers things to propound unto me, from his brethren the Friars at Jerusalem as followeth) which he would do. 1. Whether I would promise when I come to Jerusalem, that I would visit the Holy Places (as he called them) as other Pil∣grims did.
2. And give such sums of money, as is the usual manner of Pilgrims. 3. Wear such a sort of habit as is the man∣ner of Pilgrims. 4. Speak nothing against the Turks Laws. 5. And when I came to Jerusalem, not to speak any thing about Religion. And thus they strove to make their hold strong, to keep me from Jerusalem, but all was in vain: for I not conforming unto them, but standing in the Will of the Lord, to do as he might order me; they then the next morning took me and set me upon a horse, and with a Guard both of Horsemen and Footmen, with the afore∣said Irish Friar, I was brought from thence back to Joppa, and was imbarqued the same day in a Vessel (with one Popish Father as a Guard) bound for St. John de Acra (or Ptolomais) but in our Voyage a very strong Wind arose upon us, wherby the Vessel was near to sink; and then the Popish Father in a distressed condition cryed out, and beat his face with his hands, and would have me to pray for them; the poor Sea∣men threw their Goods over into the Sea, to lighten the Vessel, and they lost their Helm; great was their dammage, yet through the mercy of the Lord our lives
were preserved, and came safe to the place whither we were bound: yet great was the enmity that arose in the Friars in that place, whereby their children would hard∣ly receive me, though I was willing to give to the utmost for what necessaries I had occasion for, which I had done before (as they also knew) yet by reason of the Fryars and Jesuites enmity at the present, many of their party feared to receive me, neither did I know a place outwardly where to lay my head with safety; nay, not so much as upon a stone, unless the Lord did wonderfully preserve me, which in my heart I did believe he would do; whereby I remained content in my spirit, without any murmuring, and began to walk out of the City (it raining) to lie down in the field (for what I knew) but there came a French Merchant, called Sur-Rubie, whom the Lord (after my exercise) had prepared to receive me, a man that I had never seen before (that I knew of) who friendly took me unto his house as I was passing along, where I remained above twenty dayes, and he would often speak unto me, saying, Surely it was the Lord's doing (his receiving of me) for, said he, my own Country-men, when they come to me,
they are little to me, but thee I can willingly receive. The old man would admire the Lord's doing in this thing, and did believe I was sent of the Lord, and he did love me exceeding much: but the Friars had so far prevailed with the Consul, that in 20. dayes time I could not be received into a Vessel for to go towards Jerusalem; so that I knew not but to have gone by Land; yet it was several dayes Journey, and I knew not the way, no not so much as out of the City, besides the much difficulty there is in going through the Country, be∣yond my expression; yet I not looking at the hardships, but at the heavenly Will of our Lord, I was made to cry in my heart, Lord, thy Will be done, and not mine; and so being preparing to go, and taking leave of the tender old man, he cryed, I should be destroyed if I went by Land, and would not let me go; but the next morning he went unto the Consul, and spake unto him ear∣nestly, that I might have liberty to go by Sea to Joppa, (for before the Consul had given order to the contrary) the Friars also did speak to the Consul very much to hinder me, being I could not conform to joyn with them, and said I would turn Turk, and be a Devil; yet the friendly
old man appeared, and in my behalf op∣posed them, and through the Lord's great goodness liberty was obtained for my re∣turn back to Joppa by Sea, contrary to the wills of the Friars, who thought to have sent me back again out of those parts; for within about three or four dayes, a Vessel being bound for Joppa I entred therein, and in about a dayes time arrived there, where some Friars also (who went along in the same Vessel) sought to hinder me from going to Jerusalem: but I going ashoar before them, payed for my passage, and so went on my Journey alone; where having met with many people in the way peace∣ably passed by me, untill I came about six miles, and then I met with three men, two of them riding upon Asses, and the other going on foot; they asked me for money, one of them holding his Gun to my breast, and another of them put his hand into my pockets & took some things out, I not resisting them, but stood in the fear of the Lord, who preserved me, for they passed away; and he that took my things forth of my pockets, put them up a∣gain, taking nothing from me, nor did me the least harm, but one of them took me by the hand and led me a little on my way
in a friendly manner, and so left me. So I passing through the like dangers (through the great love of God, which caused me to glorifie his blessed Name) I came (though in much weakness of body) unto Ramlah, or Ramoth Gilead, and going through the Town I was known (having been there before) two men of the said Town, Ad∣herents to the Friars (which before had opposed me) arose and laid hold on me, and hurried me in a violent manner to∣wards the place in the Town, in which be∣fore I had been kept prisoner; but as they were abusing me, there came two Turks and threw them violently from me, and took me from them, one leading me by one arm, the other by the other arm, and in that manner brought me to one of their Houses of Worship or Mosco; and I being entered thereinto, many people gathered together therein, also the Priests of Ma∣homet, before whom I was called and caused to sit down; And then it was de∣manded of me, Whether I would turn unto the Turks Religion? I answered, I could not turn unto them: but they pressed me very much, and said they would give me great things, and I should not need fear what the Christians could do unto me.
Nevertheless I answered, I could not turn unto them for all the World: yet mighti∣ly did many strive with me with an ardent affection, and would have had me hold up one finger, as a sign of owning them: and one bid me say, Christ is bad; I answer∣ed, I knew him to be good, and I was his Servant. Then some of the chief of them were displeased very much, and said, If I would not turn to their Religion, I should die. I answered, I should rather die than turn unto them. It was answered, I should then die. So they gave order to the Executi∣oner (for, as I understand, they execute presently after Sentence) who haled me away to the place where it was expected I should have been burnt to death with Camels dung, and so sate me down upon the ground, where the Lord preserved me over the fear of men, though I was as a Sheep prepared for the slaughter. And thus it came to pass, whilst some appeared very violent, the Lord raised up some others amongst them whom he made in∣strumental in his hand for the preserva∣tion of my life. And there came an anti∣ent tender man, a Turk, and of great re∣putation, unto me, and said, Whether I would turn from my Religion or not, I should
not die. Then they brought me before them again, who asked me, Will you turn? I an∣swered, Nay. They then recorded it in a Book, that I was no Roman Catholick, but of another Religion; for I had denied the Roman Catholicks unto them, yet owned I was a Christian. After this they were much broken down in their spirits, as men whose strength fai∣led, and then the aforesaid Antient man took me, and ordered his servants to con∣duct me to his house, where he friendly entertained me; but within about four or five dayes time there came a Guard of Horsemen, which I understood the Friars had hired to bring me before the Bashaw of Gaza; for, as it was told me, the Friars in Jerusalem had pre-informed the said Bashaw against me (whom they looked up∣on to be their chiefest friend in all these parts) who desired me to be brought be∣fore him, and swore he would kill me in his own person; and with the aforesaid Guard of armed men I was brought in two dayes unto Gaza (where Sampson formerly dwelt) where I remained about five days; in which time it was said I should go be∣fore the Bashaw, but it came not so to pass, for he being informed by some Turks of the
wicked proceedings of the Friars towards me, whereupon he gave order that the Friars should pay an hundred Dollers un∣to those men which had informed him of their bad dealings towards me: and fur∣ther, those men which brought me to Ga∣za, he ordered they should convey me back, and from thence the Friars should cause me to be brought to Jerusalem, who were the great opposers of my coming thi∣ther. In this said City I was in a friendly manner both visited and received by many both Turks, Greeks and Armenians: The Greeks and Armenians (being professed Christians) were raised unto much love to me, they understanding I owned my self a Christian, and chused rather to die than to turn from my Religion: And the Turks were raised to a loving moderate enquiry, being I suffered and went through great things, yet differed from all others. The Jews in them parts were moderate towards me likewise. According to the afore-mentioned Or∣der, I was brought to Jerusalem, but being come thither, the Friars laid wait for me, and by their appointment I was taken and brought to their Convent, where at first they seemingly shewed love unto me, and
one confessed, there was now an evident sign that I was a good Christian, for I was come through Persecution and Sufferings; and those things which had been spoken of me to the con∣trary were manifest to be untrue. I answered, It was he and his brethren which had per∣secuted and caused me to suffer, and with∣stood my coming to Jerusalem. He said, The English (a Friar like himself) had in∣formed them by writing against me, which caused them to do what they had done unto me, and desired I would now pass those things by, seeing I was come in such a miraculous manner; for it was the Lord's work (said he) to carry me through, and I might praise God I was preserved. The next morning there came a Friar unto me, and asked me, If I would become an obedient child, and go to visit the Holy Places (as he called them) accord∣ing to their customs? I answered, Nay, I should not visit them. He said, Whereas others give great sums of money to see them, I should see them for nothing. I answered, Nay, I should not visit them in their man∣ner, for in so doing I should sin against God. He said, they would honour me as much as ever they honoured any English-man that ever came thither, if I would conform unto them. I said, Nay, I should not conform;
and as for their honor, I mattered not for it. Then he became wrath and said, They would make me an example to all English-men that should come thither. I said, I chose ra∣ther their dishonour than their honour. He then seeing he could not prevail over me with his temptations, he in anger passed from me, and in a short time came again, and called me to divers of his Brethren; the chief among them asked me, If I would visit their Church, and the holy Sepulchre, and Bethlehem, and the rest of the holy places, as other Pilgrims did? I said, at the present I had no business to visit them, and in their manner I should not visit them at all (that is to say, worship them) Then one of them said, How could I be a Servant of God, and would not go to visit the places where the holy men of God dwelt? I answered, That they, under pretence of doing service to God, in visiting the places where the holy men dwelt, they did oppose that Way, and resist that Life, which the holy men of God lived and walked in. One of them said, What, did I preach unto them? I said, I would have them turn from those evil practices they lived in, else the Wrath of the Almighty would break forth upon them, or words to that effect. They further said, If I would
not go to visit the places before-mentioned, would I give the 25. Dollers, as is the manner of those that visited them? for (said they) the Turks must be paid whether I would visit them or not; but if I would visit them, then they would pay it for me. I said, I would not have them to pay it for me; but if the Turks had a Law to compel me to pay 25. Dollers when I visited not the places, as those did pay that did visit them, I said that Law was unequal; and I should chuse rather to suffer the penalty of the same in breaking it, than to give 25. Dollers to fulfil it. After this the Popish Friars brought me before a Turk in Authority in that place, who asked me di∣vers Questions, and soberly received Answers ther∣unto; and soberly discoursed with me about the Worship of the Christians; and also asked me the ground of my coming to Jerusalem? I answered him, The Lord God of Heaven and Earth had ap∣peared unto me, and commanded me to come thi∣ther, and in obedience unto him I was come; and further, in the power of the Lord I declared the great and tender love of God in visiting them, and his great and compassionate mercies that he would gather them in this the Day of his gathering. And this was that which lay upon me from the Lord to declare unto them, whether they would hear or forbear. And thus, my dear Friends, I cleared my Con∣science, whether they would hear or forbear; wher∣in I found great peace with the Lord, who in my many tryals was not wanting unto me, but magnified his glorious Name in going along with me, and pre∣serving me; to whom is all the glory due for ever∣more, Amen. Geo. Robinson. THE END.
