T2631 12786498 93885
The True Copy of a PETITION Presented in July 1683. To the Most Christian King BY DEPUTIES, from those of his SƲBJECTS who are of the REFORMED RELIGION, whose CHƲRCHES have been taken from them, and Demolished. And since That, Have Assembled in the Open Fields, but after PRAYER, PREACHING, and Receiving of the HOLY SACRA∣MENT, Return'd in all peaceable manner, to their respective Habi∣tations. Translated from the French Printed Copy by a sure Hand, and Re-printed at Edinburgh,Anno Dom 1683. TO THE KING. SIR, YOUR most humble Subjects of the Protestant Religion, not hav∣ing power to resist the Motions of their Consciences, are con∣strained to Assemble Together, to call upon the Holy Name of God, and sing his Praises; and by this Religious Acting, to expose themselves to all the Violences and Rigour, which a too fierce zeal can infuse into the Breasts of your Officers. And because God hath established your Majesty for their Monarch, they are obliged to justifie their Proceed∣ings and Behaviour before your Majesty, with all the Humility they are capable of.
These Assemblies, SIR, do no way hurt or wound that Fidelity which your Petitioners owe your Majesty; They are all accorded to sacrifice their Fortunes and their Lives for your Service. The very same Religion which constrains them to Assemble together to cele∣brate the Glory of God, teaches them that they can never dispense under any Pretence whatever, with that Allegiance which is due to your Majesty. Nor has your Majesty any need to publish your Decla∣rations to enforce them to embrace a Maxim so certain, and so well grounded upon Christianity. It remains then, SIR, that your Peti∣tioners insist upon nothing, but what is only due to God, for as to what concerns your Majesty, their past behaviour gives testimony of the reality and purity of their Intentions, and may serve as a Security to your Majesty for the future; and, in a word, your Petitioners are all ready with their Blood to sign the Oath of their Allegiance. As to what concerns their Duty towards God, your Majesty hath so much Piety to take it not amiss, that they render to that great God that Wor∣ship and Adoration which they owe him, they also presume to hope, that your Majesty will have the goodness to reflect upon their Behaviour; that you will compassionate the Desolations to which their Piety exposes them; and that perhaps you will extend your Indignation against those who have by surprize obtained so many severe Decrees and Declarations against them, and yet would further provoke your Wrath against Subjects so faithful, and so innocent. Your Supplicants, SIR, are perswaded that God has not sent them into this World, but to glorifie him; and they will rather choose to lose their Lives a thousand times, than fail of their Duty so Holy and Indispen∣sible. It is in your Majesties power to deprive them of all the Advantages of this World, and also to doom to utter Destruction: They are ready for to sacrifice all, to suffer all Miseries at your Majesties pleasure. But it May be, when your Majesty shall consider, That your Petitioners do not give way to the Most Faithful of all your Subjects [which all the world confesses] in their Duties to God, your Majesty will not do that Inju∣ry to his Glory and to his Goodness, as to destroy a People, for no other reason meriting your Indignation. The Miseries of your Petitioners, SIR, only arise from the Reve∣rence they have for the Divinity, whole Word they look upon as the on∣ly Rule of their Religious Worship. Were the Dispute alone concerning our opposing Men for the ser∣vice of your Majesty, though all the World should rebel against your Majesties Will, though all your other Subjects should fail of their Fi∣delity and Obedience, your Petitioners would inviolably stand by their August Monarch, and with pleasure spend the last drop of Blood in his Service. But their Unhappiness is so great, that the Declarations put forth against them, to the prejudice of so many Edicts and Decrees made by your Majesty, and the Kings your Predecessors, appear to them incom∣patible with the Commands of the great Creator of Heaven and Earth.
For God hath ordained them to instruct their Children and their Families, and to declare unto them the Word of Life. He also pro∣nounces his dreadful Anathema's against them who shut the Gates of Heaven against those, to whom he freely opens them. He commands them to offer to him Hymns and spiritual Songs. Nevertheless, SIR, those Declarations that have been surreptitiously obtained against us, forbid us to sing the Psalms of David, which do contain the Praises of God. In short, SIR, It is the pleasure of God that we should Assemble to∣gether in his Name, to render him the solemn Adoration and Honour which is due to him. Nevertheless, SIR, those Declarations which your Petitioners Enemies have obtained against us by repeated Surpri∣zes, forbid them to assemble together, to render to that great God the service which is due to him. During this Inability of your Petitioners, to reconcile the Will of God to what is exacted from them, they find themselves constrained by their Consciences, to expose themselves to all sorts of Calamities, for the continuance of giving Glory to the Majesty of God, who will be served according to his Word. If the Doctrine of your Petitioners were Abominable, if their Wor∣ship were Scandalous, if they preferred the Creature in the place of the Creator, there might be some Reason to sollicit your Majesty to refuse their Protection: But all their Crime, and all the Difference between theirs, and the Catholick Religion, consists in this: That they prefer the Word of God, before the Traditions of Men: And the true Worship of that great God, [who protests to be jealous of his honour, and that he will not yield it to any other] before the Religious Worship of the Creature. All Religion, SIR, to speak properly, consists only in Belief, in Pray∣ers, and in Works: And your Petitioners believe, and hold the Creed of the Holy Apostles; and the Lords Prayer, to be the Model of those which they present to God, and the Commandments of that God are the Rule and Guidance of their Conduct and Conversation. They know' and have no need, according to St. Paul, of knowing any other but only Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. They acknowledge God for the only true God, and for him who sent Jesus Christ; for on this Belief it is that our Lord hath founded Life Eternal. Their Enemies make strange Interpretations of their Opinions, and their Worship. However, SIR, your Petitioners implore the mercy of God. They trust in the incomprehensible Charity, and infinite Me∣rits of their adorable Saviour, whom they do imbrace with a con∣stant and lively Faith. They have recourse, with all humility, to the healthful succour and grace of his holy Spirit; and to this Trinity it is, that they render their Adoration and Homage, invoking it after the same Form that the Scripture hath prescribed in his Word. They medi∣tate upon his Wonders. They sing his Praises: And they make it their continual study to live Holily among themselves, Justly toward their Neighbour, Obediently toward your Majesty, and Religiously toward God.
They therefore supplicate your Majesty to be the Judge, Whether your Petitioners are unworthy of your Paternal Goodnesse, and the Ho∣nour of your Protection. Whether they merit to be thrown into that extremity of Destruction wherein they are at present over-whelm'd, sufficient enough to move the Groans of the most insensible. And lastly, SIR, Whether it be possible that they should live without continuing to assemble together, to ender to God the service which they owe him. After all this, your Petitioners cannot but pray to the great God, who advances your Throne above all the Thrones of the Earth, to incline your Majesties heart toward your Subjects, whose Innocency and Alle∣geance is apparent to the eyes of the whole world. And if those your poor People shall not yet be able to move the Compassion of their Au∣gust Monarch, for whom they shall always retain a sincere Love, and aw∣ful Reverence, a singular Veneration, and inviolable Fidelity. They do protest before the face of that great God for whose sake they are expos∣ed to so much Misery, That they will render him Honour and Glory in the midst of their most terrible Calamities. But, SIR, your Petitioners hope much better things from the Natural E∣quity, Goodness, and Piety of your Majesty; for which Reason, they prostrate themselves at your Royal Feet, and most humbly implore your Majesty. To recall all the Declarations, Decrees, and other Judgements, which have reduc'd them to that Deplorable Condition wherein they are, and deprive them not of the Liberty of their Consciences, and exercise of their Religion, by vertue of so many solemn Edicts, confirmed by so many Declarations granted them by your Majesty, without which it is impossible for them to live. [And your Petitioner shall continue to pray for the Preservation of Your Majesty's Sacred Person, your Royal Family, and the Honour and Prosperity of your Kingdom.]
