t2813 09618992 43828
THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEDINGS AT THE ASSIZES Holden for the County of Surry: Which began on Fryday the 12th of this instant March 1679. and ended on the Wednesday following, where a great num∣ber of Malefactors were Tried; the most remarkable of which I shall give the Reader an impartial Account. Viz. Jone Phillips, James Christian, for Murder, John Seamor, John Selby, Richard Smith, all three notorious Highway-Men. William Phips, and William Watson, for Horse-stealling, and Margaret Clark for setting her Masters house on Fire in Southwark. being eight in number, which received Sentance of Death. Eeight burned in the hand, three to be whipt, and two to be Transported. And so this great Assize ended. THE first notorious Offender that received her Tryal was Rebeccah Serjeant, against whom three several Bills of Indictments were preferred, all of them for her Stealing Gold Rings, the first Indictment was, for that she the Pri∣soner coming into the Shop of Jeremiah Pipit living in St. Mary Magdalins Bermondsy, and there pretending to cheapen several Rings, conveyed the two specified in the Indictment, and valued at 15 s. into her Bosom, and so departed undiscovered. The next was for Stealing a Ring in the same manner from Richard Gunter, living in St. Olaves Southwark valued 9 s. pretending there that her Mother sent her to cheapen a Ring. The Third and last was for Stealing a Ring from James Gunter of the said Parish: but being apprehended, she fairly confessed the several Fellonies, as likewise upon her Trial. William Phips was Arraigned, and Tried for stealing a Gelding, vallued at five pounds out of the Grounds of Henery Laden, at Long Ditton in the County of Surry, the 20th of September past, being taken upon the back of the said Gelding in Kingston, he pre∣tended, he bought him, but could produce no Witness to confirm it, therefore was found Guilty of the Fellony. John Wood, alias Knight, was Arraigned and found Guilty; for stealing a Tankard and a Riding-hood from Elizabeth Griffin in the Parish of Redriff. Rogor Palmer, a Bargemans Servant was Tryed for Robbing a Gentleman of his Mare, valued at fifty s. he pleaded in Court that he bought her in Smithfield, but being not able to prove the same, and a notorious Offender he was found Guilty of the Fellonious Steal∣ing of the said Mare.
The next were Margaret Clark and John Satterthwait, for that notorious Crime of Firing Mt. Delanoy's House, in Montague Close in Southwark, on the first of January last, he Circumstances sworn to were thus, that a Neigh∣bour of Mr. Delanys on the first of January aforesaid, smelling a strong scent of Fire, was much surprised, and thereupon began to search about his own House, but not finding any there, imagined that it must needs be at Mr. De∣lawnies, being the more suspicious place, by reason he could diserne a Smoke issuing out from between the Boards, and that all the Family except the afore∣said Margaret Clark and one of the Apprentices, were in the Country; the said Delanoy being a Dyer. Whereupon he went and knocked at the Dore, calling to the aforesaid Margaret Clark, who was a long time before she would Answer but when she did, seemed loath to let him in, but did at last; who entering, told her there was Fire in the House, at which, in great Amazement, she made strange of; but he persisting, after much search, found it in a Buttery, where the Flames had reached the Seiling. and asking her for the Aprentice she told him he was in Bed, whereupon he running up Stairs, pulled him out, surprized with the Event, and both of them after some time, quenched the raging Element, the which no sooner done. but another Fire began in the Dyhouse, far distant from the former, that being quenched, another began in the Garret, upon which they suspecting some Treachery, questioned the said Margaret Clark; who for a while faintly denied that she knew any thing of the Concerne; but being hard pressed, confessed that three Gentlemen getting her to an Alehouse hard by and proffered her a Reward of two thousand pounds, if she would Fire her Masters House, or let them in to do it in a convenient time, and that after it was done,  should come to the Fleece Tavern in Holbourn, and there ask for the Number 9. and by that find them, and receive her monies, and in order thereunto she had let the now Prisoner Mr. Satterthwait in, and that he did effect what was done, and farther, that she understood by them that they were Papists, this Con∣fession she likewise confirmed upon her Trial, and Satterthwait being taken up∣on suspicion for the hiring her, he being by her described, and found drinking at the Bear-Tavern, was carried before the Justice, where she was, who no soo∣ner seeing him, but charged him to be the same that had hired her; but in Court several Gentlemen and others, attesting where he was that day, and all the time she charged him to be there, whereupon he was acquitted, but she was found Guilty of the notorious Fellony. John Buttolph and William Savory, were Indicted, and Arraigned for Robing a Vessel upon the River of Thames, for that they in the Company of four more, all Armed, and with Plack Caps pulled over their Faces only peepholes left, did come Aboard the said Vessel lying about Limehouse, in the River of Thames, and binding one Harrison, who lay aboard, and conveyed thence in a Boat brought by them, one Bail of Spanish-Cloth, four pieces of Hair Camblet, ten grose of Silk-buttons, one dosen of Silk-hoods, fifty pair of Silk Stockins, several pair of Shoos, Fring-Gloves, and Ribbons, in all to the vallue of two hundred pounds, leaving the said Harris bound; between one and two in the morning they brought a Boat with them to carry off the Goods, one Furr be∣ing Master of the Vessel, who they swore desperately they would have killed, had they found him on board. Upon search for these Goods, and great suspici∣on both the Prisoners were apprehended, and upon search of Savories, house se∣veral of them were found, as likewise 6 Pistols, 6 Swords and 3 Black Caps; Savories Wife Confessing that Buttolph brought them thither, under the notion of uncustomed Goods, in the name of one Mr. Mannering a Marchant, desiring her to secure them, and the next day they should be sent for. All this was sworn in Court, and her Examination produced, yet by reason she was fled, and not to be found, the jury for want of Evidence, brought them in not Guilty.
The next were three notorious High way men, viz. John Seymour, alias Her∣ring, John Selby, Rechard Smith who were o less than 5 times Indicted for Rob∣bing on the High way, first for robbing Christopher Hunt of 7 pound of Womens Hair, vallued at forty pounds upon Baght Heath, the fifteenth of January, a second for Robing Roger Pipit of his Sword, seven pous in monies, near Eg∣ham, as likewise the Parson of Egham; taking from him a Watch, and monies to a considerable vallue; the next for Robing Mr. Addleson a Butcher of five or six pounds, they had been notorious villains, Herring especially, and had ta∣ken the name of Seamor as a Trophy ever since he Robbed Esquire Seamor, the Speaker of the Parliament House, Captain Richardson did appear against them, and did assert that they had been in twenty Robberies, and a fellow gave Evi∣dence against them, that had been their Companion in several, they were taken upon suspicion of Fellony and carried to Salisbury Goal, where when these In∣dictments came against them they were brought to this Assize, the evidence was all so plain and positive, that the jury found them Guilty of the several Fellonies and Robberies, nor could they well deny them themselves, and so received Sen∣tance of Death. William Watson, was indicted and took his Trial, together with William Gettern for stealing a Gelding from Squire Curtis in the Parish of Moden, vallued at five pounds, it was proved against them, that they were taken with the Horse in their possession upon the Road; designed for London, but the latter upon examination did affirm that he overtook the former upon the Road, desiring him to let him ride behinde him, who refusing to grant his request, told him if he would accom∣pany him he would ride softly by, so that they had not been Associates long, ere they were both apprehended and committed to the Goal, and likewise Watson confessing he was no ways concerned in the Robbery, the jury aquitted him, but Watson being found Guilty of the Fellony, received Sentance of Death. John Philips of the Parish of St. Georges Southwark was Indict∣ed, for that she with an Awl about 4 Inches long, did Murther James Philips her Son, a Child about 9 weeks old, the Circum∣stances were as followeth; She having as it is credibly reported, a very cruel man to her Husband, who not only abused her, but kept her from such necessaryes as were requisite Women, which made her grow weary and desperate, not caring to prolong her Life, so that thinking the Murther of her Child would be the only means to put a period to her own: She with the aforesaid Awl in her Husbands absence run it into the Throat, and leaving the Awl sticking there, went out of Doors, but one of the Neigh∣bours hearing the Child cry after an unusual manner, went to see what the matter was, and when she came found it lying in the Cradle in the posture before recited, whereat being affrighted she went and called some other Neighbours in, and whilst they are dressing the Child, the Prisoner came back again, having been as far as St. Pauls London, but as she said, her Conscience misgiving her returned, and being demanded why she acted such an unnatu∣raral Cruelty, she said that now her Grief was at an end, and she did it that she might likewise dye: But upon Examination in Court she made a faint excuse, saying the Awl was in the Cra∣dle and so run into the Child; but that being false by her former Confession, she was found Guilty of wilful Murther.
James Christian was Arraigned and Tryed for killing Robert Bury a Water-man in the Parish of Redriff, the manner thus: the said James Christian having a former grudg again the Deceased for taking a Fare out of his Boat, had often threatned, and once most grievously beaten him, but watching his Opportunity one Night, when the said Bury reatched some Goods in his Boat, the Pri∣soner came, and as it is supposed found him asleep, whereupon with a Staff he struck him over the head and waked him, upon which some words passed between them, so that the Prisoner ta∣king up the Hook or Etcher of the Boat, gave him several Mor∣tal Wounds on the head with the same, of which the said Bury dyed in the space of 7 or 8 Weeks, affirming to the last that the Prisoner had been the cause of his Death. Whereupon the Ju∣ry after some Consult brought in Christian abovesaid, Guilty of wilful Murther. Francis Harwood, a notorious Offender was arraigned and try∣ed for breaking open the House of Th. Stanto in the Parish of St. Georges Southwark and Feloniously bearing thence one Searge Petticoat with Silver Lace, one Scarf, one Cloth Coat, and seve∣ral other Goods to the value of 20 l. himself confessing, That he knew where the Goods were, and that for 20 shillings he would help him to them again, but denied that he either broke the House or Stole them, but having been burnt in the hand before at Ails∣bury, he was only found Guilty of the Felony. William Smith, and John Smith took their Tryals for Stealing 7 Cows, the Goods and Chattels of Tho. Bret of Kingston upon Thames, they being taken driving the Cows towards London, but upon examination in Cou, one of them did viz. William affirm∣ed that he accidentally coming along the Road and overtaking the other driving of them bought them of him, who affirmed that he found them in the Forest, so that John Smith was found Guilty of the Felony and the other acquitted. Tho. Goff, a Rower in a Bumboat was tryed for Stealing several Cables and Hassers from on Board a Vessel lying in Redriff road upon the Thames making the Boy that watched aboard first drunk which being proved plainly against him, he was found Guilty of Felony. Edward Billing was Indicted and Arraigned for Fellony and Burglary, for that he about two of the Clock on the 20. of Jan. did Felloniously break and enter the Shop of Richard Bullien of Redriff, and taking thence wrought Iron to a considerable value, but being pursued he ran into a house of Office standing over the Thames and endeavoured to thrust it down into the same; the Fellony being plain, the Jury found that, but could not find the Burglary by aeason there was no proof of that. FINIS.
