W2594 17166976 106121
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For Encouraging Seamen and Mariners to Enter themselves on Their Majesties Ships of War. WILLIAM R. WE being desirous to give all due Encouragement to such Seamen as shall Voluntarily Enter themselves in Our Service on Board Our Ships of War in Our Royal Navy, have thought sit by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to publish this Our Royal Proclamation: And We do hereby Promise and Declare, That all such Seamen as shall Voluntarily Enter themselves on Board any of Our Ships of War, of the First, Second, and Third Rates, before the Twentieth Day of January next, shall re∣ceive Six Weeks Pay, as Our Free Gift and Royal Bounty, which shall be paid them before the respective Ships to which they belong shall Sail from the Buoy of the Nore. And We do hereby further Declare, That no such able Seamen that shall so Volun∣tarily Enter themselves within the time before mentioned on Board any of Our Ships of the First, and Second Rates, shall be Turned Over to other Ships. And We do hereby Command and Require the said Seamen to Repair on Board the respective Ships on which they shall so Enter themselves, and give their Constant At∣tendance, for sitting out to Sea such Ships as each of them do belong unto. And We are also Graciously pleased to Declare, That Conduct-Money, according to the Practice of the Navy, shall likewise be Allowed to such able Seamen as shall Voluntarily enter them∣selves on Board any of Our said Ships, according to the true meaning of this Our Pro∣clamation. And for the prevention of any Deceits and Abuses that may happen by any Per∣son or Persons leaving the Ships to which they belong, and Entring him or themselves on Board any other of Our said Ships, as aforesaid, in Order to the Obtaining of the Boun∣ty-Money herein before Granted, We do hereby likewise Direct, Declare, and Command, That such Seamen, belonging to any of Our Ships or Vessels whatsoever, as shall leave any the Ships or Vessels to which they belong, and Enter themselves on Board any other of Our Ships, in Order to the Obtaining of the said Bounty-Money, shall not only lose the Wages due to them in the Ship, which they shall so leave, but shall also be severely Punished according to their Demerits. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the One and twentieth Day of December, 1691. In the Third Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties, 1691.
