W3390 R33682 13548968 100166 Decemb. 24. 1685. This may be printed. R. M.
LOYALTY, The Ornament of Christianity: OR, Scripture Proofs FOR MONARCHY. With Comments in Verse on each Proof; and Applications relating to the unpa∣rallel'd Rebellion in the West: where∣in the Arch-Traitor Ferguson is in some measure anatomiz'd, and his Disciples characteriz'd. Written by a Souldier, Geo. Wood. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let Judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. Ezra 7. 26. London, Printed by John Darby, for the Author. 1686.
To the Right Honourable, Heroick and Valiant, JOHN Lord Churchil of Aymouth, Baron of Sandridge; one of the most Honourable Lords of his Maje∣sty's Bed-chamber; Major-Ge∣neral of all his Majesty's Forces, and Colonel of his Majesty's third Troop of Horse-Guards, &c. MY LORD, WE read in Holy Writ, a Catalogue of King David's Worthies, who ventured their Lives to settle their Soveraign in the peace∣able
possession of his Kingdom: But should I go about to give an account of those truly Loyal Heroes, who lately so freely ven∣tur'd their Lives and Fortunes for their King and Country, my Book wou'd swell to so prodigi∣ous a bulk, that it wou'd be tiresome and troublesome to read. None were more singularly e∣minent in this blessed Work, than your Illustrious Lordship; and therefore the Dedication of this Loyal Book most properly be∣longs to you. The considerati∣on of which matchless Loyalty
in your Lordship, has embol∣dened me to lay these my dull Labours at your Lordship's feet: If you vouchsafe to patronize them, let the Whigs spit out their Venom, as fast as Whales spout out Water, I value't not a Rush; I know they are the Seed of the old Serpent, and they'l nibble at my Heels, if they cannot bite me by the Throat. But having a glimps of your Lordship's Fa∣vour, where's the Ferguson I need to fear? What hurt can another Absalom, or Achitophel, do me? I humbly therefore beg, that this my poor (but Loyal) Labours, may find Protection under your
Lordship's most loyal and indul∣gent Wing; not for any worth or ingenuity that can be found in them, but purely because this Fruit springs from a Loyal Tree. My Lord! this is not a Piece for Phanaticks to countenance; I believe they will be so far from fa∣vouring of it, that they will burn it, and stab me if it lies in their power, unless God fastens some of those Texts of Scripture upon their hearts, to convince or convert them: but I dread them no more, than the Sun dreads the Dung∣hil; nor love them, no more than they love the King. If any
thing can convert them, these Scriptures will; but if they wil∣fully sin against knowledg, and thereby bring upon themselves certain Damnation, there is no Art nor Power that can prevent it. However, (God be praised for it) if this Loyal Book will not convince these Rebels, His Royal Majesty has a many No∣ble, Loyal, and Valorous He∣roes, (of whom your Lordship deservedly ought to be reckoned one of the chief) that are able to suppress thousands of them, and force them to their Obedience;
your Lordship having already, by your Valour, and prudent Conduct, been a main Instru∣ment, under his Majesty, to re∣duce those Traitors and Rebels, who lately, with the height of Impudence, did rise in Rebellion against his Sacred Majesty; which glorious Action of yours, is not only delightful to all his Maje∣sty's Loyal and Loving Subjects, (for which they have your No∣ble and Heroick Person in vene∣ration) but the memory thereof will be (to your Lordship's never dying Honour) sweet and fresh in the mouths of all Loyal Subjects to succeeding Ages.
Now to conclude; My humble Request to your Lordship is, That you will be pleased to ac∣cept of the good Will for the good Deed: I having ventur'd to compose and write this Book in Defence of Monarchy, who am one of the meanest and weakest of his Majesty's Subjects, having had the honour to serve his Ma∣jesty, in Military Employments, by Sea and Land, from my Youth to this present day; and therefore I hope Your Lordship will consider me, as a Souldier, that has liv'd more by the Sword than by the Word; and that will sufficiently excuse the want
of those smooth Lines which o∣therwise you might justly have expected from me; wishing Your Lordship, and all Your Noble Family, all the happiness that Heaven can shower down upon You in this Life, and Eternal Happiness in the World to come: I presume to subscribe my self, My Lord, The humblest of Your Lordship's Servants, GEO. WOOD.
Courteous Reader; LET it not appear strange to thee, that I who never was an Academian, nor bred at the feet of Gamaliel, but a Soul∣dier from my Youth, unto this present day, in his Majesty's Service, both by Land and Sea, should adventure to write on so Sacred a Subject. If you take a serious view of the State of this present World, you will find I am not the only Man that is found out of my proper Station Some are doing that which, like Sampson's Foxes, with Fire-brands in their Tails, consume our Plenty. Some Rebels are writing, preaching, and fighting, to disturb our Peace: Others are studying, plotting, and contriving the downfal of the peacefullest King that ever reign'd.
Now, whilst these Men are so forward and hasty to destroy our Peace, who can blame me, if I strive, with my small Might, to pre∣serve it? Though many will say I am out of my Element, and act out of my Sphere; Yet none can say that I do not act as I am bound in duty. This Subject indeed requires a far bet∣ter Pen, much more understanding than I am master of. But when I consider the Wi∣dows Mites were accepted, it encourages me to think, that all Loyal Persons will prize the Will as much as the Deed: May I but give any satisfaction to such, I value not the dis∣pleasure of others. If the smoothest Orators, and the sweetest Poets, should write upon this Subject, they cannot want for too great a number of Phanatical Criticks, to render their Labours unprofitable and contemptible. These Caterpillars will bite off my Blossoms; these Toads will spit out their Venom; but my comfort is, Curst Cows have short Horns. Indeed, I wou'd seek to convince and convert them, but I wou'd never study to please them:
If these my poor Labours meet with any welcome from those who are lovers of their King and their Countries Peace, my Toil is sufficiently requited. How can I expect less than abuse from those, who have murdered such as I go about to preserve? What I seek to save, they have sought to destroy. What agreement can there be between God and Be∣lial? Yet out of pity to such who, it may be, wou'd pluck out my Throat, I have printed this Book, in hopes they may meet with some powerful Text that may prevail with them, to FEAR GOD, AND HONOUR THE KING; (being confident, that no one in this kind has been presented to publick view). I leave the Courteous Reader to judg how necessary and convenient this Book may be for the Press in these sad times, especially when a good King becomes the Mark of so many bad Men, who know not what Obedience to MONARCHY means; but by their Actions and Behaviour, by their Lives and Doctrines, seem to deny the
express Words of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, and to treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and bring irrecoverable Damnation upon their own Souls. I have (to make this Book a little more pleasant and delightful to the Reader) made some Poetical Comments upon the several Texts of Scripture: If either may be serviceable for the Publick Good, it will be matter of great satisfaction to me. I have (the Phanaticks will think) been a little too severe upon the Arch-Traitor Ferguson; and yet I know not what Pen or Tongue can revile him too much, who has been so eminently instrumental to shed so much innocent Blood, and so impudent∣ly villanous, as to attempt a change in the Government; and which is yet more than all, to contrive the downfal of the best of Kings: There are but too many who bave just cause to stile him a Comrade for the Devil, rather than a Companion for Christians, because they have been led to ruin, as Sheep to the Slaughter, by
his rebellious, canting, and deceitful Stories; Murder and Sacriledg having been at the bot∣tom of all his Designs, even when he has seem∣ingly preached and practis'd the contrary. But it were happy if I had no more Fergusons to reprove; I doubt, that little piece of sower Leven, has leven'd a considerable Lump; and we have too many lurking Traitors, who are, and have been Abettors of his wicked Designs: I hope this Book may meet with them; but if it does not, God will find them out, and all such as wilfully, disloyally, and traiterously, draw away the Hearts of the Subjects from our dread Soveraign. I wou'd fain per∣swade such Reprobates, to read what the Pro∣phet Samuel tells them, 1 Sam. 15. 22, 23. That to obey, is better than Sacri∣fice; and to hearken, than the Fat of Rams. For Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness is as Ini∣quity and Idolatry. And what St. Paul speaks, Heb. 10. 26, 27. For if we sin wilfully after we have received the
knowledg of the Truth, there remaineth no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Ad∣versaries. Possibly it may prevail with them to live a peaceable and a quiet life, in all godliness and honesty, 1 Tim. 2. 2. Which we shall never be able effectually to attain, till we have all learn'd that excellent Precept given us from the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 17. to FEAR GOD, AND HONOUR THE KING. Now to conclude; I heartily wish that the Seduced, and the Seducers of his Majesty's Subjects, may read and consider the many weighty Texts in this small Book, that it may speedily put them upon the Duty of Repentance; that God may speak pardon to their perishing Souls; and the King grant Mercy to their dying Bodies; that we may live together in Unity, and in the Ponds of Peace.
That God wou'd smite their Hearts, and work this happy change, shall be the earnest Prayer of, The KING's most loyal Subject, and their Friend and Servant in the LORD JESUS, GEO. WOOD.
STRONG Scripture Proofs In Defence of MONARCHY. Beginning with the Old Testament, Written by the Author. Anno 1685.
Strong Scripture Proofs in Defence of MONARCHY, &c. THE Islraelites were brought from Egypt's Land, Unto Mount Sinai, at the Lord's Com∣mand. There Moses did the Law of God display; Curst them that from's Commands should go astray. Above the rest, this was the chiefest thing, To fear the Lord, and to obey the King. But at this time no King they have, we find; Yet Kingly aw was then in Moses mind:
He did foresee, a King should Rule and Reign, Read his own words, for they are full and plain. DEUTERONOMY, Chap. 17. Vers. 14, 15. Thou shalt in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall chuse, &c. And, EXODUS, Chap. 22. Vers. 28. Thou shalt not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People. As Moses prophesy'd, so now we find The Israelites, according to their mind, Procure a King; to Samuel they pray, That they may have a Sacred King t'obey. The Prophet pray'd, that they may have a King. God granted one; with one consent they sing. Here God himself ordained, that King Saul Should be the King and Ruler of them all. I SAMUEL, Chap. 10. Vers. 1. Then Samuel took a Vial of Oil, and poured it upon his head,
and kissed him, and said, Is it not because the LORD hath anointed thee to be Captain over his Inheritance? Vers. 24. And Samuel said to all the People, See ye him whom the LORD hath chosen, that there is none like him among all the People? and all the People shouted, and said, GOD SAVE the KING. God gave King Saul, a wise and godly heart, Fitted him for to act his Kingly part. Now gen'ral Acclamations fill the Sky, God save King Saul, and may he never die. These were his Subjects Pray'rs, they all seem'd glad, That such a pious prudent King they had. But wicked Men their King did soon despise, And impiously did murmur in this wise; Can this Man save us from our Enemies? Shall Saul Reign over us? Shall he be King? Shall we be shelter'd underneath his Wing?
But they were soon convinc'd of this great Evil, And known to be but Servants of the Devil? And had not Saul been merciful, they'd dy'd, For in some measure they their King defy'd. I. SAMUEL, Chap. 2. Vers. 12. And the Peo∣ple said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shall Saul reign over us? bring the Men that we may put them to death. Here the King's Mercy wrought a happy change; From their Obedience they no longer range. Whilst the King liv'd, they always liv'd in awe, And study'd due Allegiance to his Law. They were not like the Rebels in the West; Who when they were with gracious Pardons blest; Turn'd tail to their Obedience, and became The just Promoters of their lasting Shame.
WHEN Saul was settl'd on his Glori∣ous Throne, And was, for Pomp, inferiour unto none; He did neglect to serve the God of Heav'n, By whom his Honour and his Power was giv'n. Beneath his Feet the Lord's Commands he trod, Did not obey Jehovah as his God: Therefore another King the Lord did chuse; And Saul, for his transgression, did refuse. When Saul perceiv'd that David shou'd succeed, He us'd all means to obstruct what God decreed. He made him fly, we find, from place to place; And David durst not look King Saul i'th Face. He fear'd his Wrath, yet wou'd not throw him down, Tho he were sure thereby to gain a Crown.
He often cou'd have kill'd him, but forbore To dye the Earth with Royal Purple Gore. His Servants often tempted him to slay him; And yet he rather study'd to obey him. Said he (when he had pow'r to kill the King) The Lord forbid that I should do this thing. I. SAMUEL, Chap. 24. Vers. 4. Then David arose, and cut off the Skirt of Saul's Robe privily. Vers. 5. And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's Skirt. Vers. 6. And he said unto his Men, The LORD forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master, the LORD's Anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the LORD. CHAP. 26. Vers. 9, 11. And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not; for who can stretch forth his hand against the LORD's Anoin∣ted, and be guiltless?—But I pray thee, take now the Spear that is at his Bolster, and the Cruse of Water, and let us go.
Vers. 13. Then David went over to the other side: Vers. 14. And David cried to the People, and to Abner the Son of Ner, saying, Answerest thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou that criest to the KING? Vers. 15. And David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant Man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept thy Lord the King? for there came one of the People to destroy the KING thy LORD. Vers. 16. This thing is not good that thou hast done: as the LORD liveth, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your Master the LORD's Anointed. Wou'd ev'ry Subject were a David now; Wou'd ev'ry Subjects heart and knee wou'd bow To our most gracious King, whom God has sent To give three Kingdoms Plenty and Content. Those who have trait'rous Hearts, rebellious Minds, Who to act Mischief are as swift as Hinds.
Such who disturb our happy peaceful King, May they on any Country Gallows swing. David durst do no ill unto King Saul; Yet David's rise must not be till his Fall. David's Heart smote him when his Skirt was cut: He soon drew back, he soon withdrew his foot From doing further mischief, and he cry'd, That Saul's great Gen'ral should by right have dy'd, Because he did no better guard his King. Curs't Ferguson wou'd scarce have done this thing: This wicked Viper scarce slept Night or Day, He was so greedy of a Royal Prey: He had no time to read this Text, I fear, Some other Texts rung oftner in his ear.
He was for binding our blest King in Chains, Hoping Rebellion would requite his pains. But God, I hope, our King will long preserve, And give such Rebels what they do deserve. Rebellion, Treason, Murder, these great Crimes, Being too oft repeated in our Times. God will not let them go unpunish'd here, Ev'n in this Life, they pay for them full dear. They pierce the Heav'ns, and for Vengeance cry. On such vile Wretches God has still an eye; A watchful eye, to give them their desert, Scaffold and Ax, or else a Rope and Cart. Those who go yet unpunish'd now, I hope, Will fear their God and King, for fear a Rope
Make them repent too late: Let God arise, And thro' his Mercy give them flowing eyes; Make them repent, before it be too late, Lest they fall under their deserved Fate.
AFTER King Saul, King David's Life had sought, He and his Men with the Philistines fought. But Israel fled, and three of's Sons were slain, And he lay wounded, very full of pain. Upon the Mountains of Gilboa, then In great distress, he call'd to one of's Men To fall upon him: he had only breath To beg a Wound, and strength to crave a death. The young Man saw him, then to David went, Told him the News (thinking to give content). But David rent his Cloaths; and mourn'd for Saul, And griev'd extreamly for his hasty fall. The Man that brought the News, was forth∣with slain, David esteem'd him but a Second Cain.
How, wast thou not afraid, said he, to slay Him that in Israel bare so great a sway? II. SAMUEL, Chap. 1. Vers. 14, 15, 16. And David said unto him,—Thy Blood be upon thy Head; for thy Mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the LORD's Anointed. You that disturb our Peace, our King and State, Want you a Patern now to imitate, That leads to Loyalty? Then read this Text, And, without doubt, your hearts wil be perplext. Tho Saul was David's Foe, kept him from's Crown; Tho he had just pretence to cast him down, He durst not entertain a thought to slay him, But rather sought to please, and to obey him. Much more ought we our peaceful King to love, Who is establish'd by the God above.
He that sweet England's golden Scepter sways, Shou'd be the subject of our constant praise; We shou'd his Fame, high as Gilboa, raise. Yet like, accursed Men, we'in ambush lie, To spill his Blood, and bring that Sacred Dye Upon our Souls, a stain that still will last, When all the Glory of the World is past: Much Soap and Niter cannot make us clean, If once this stain upon our Souls is seen.
WHEN News was brought to David, Saul was dead; David was then in Ziklag, where he fled From Saul's pursuit. The Men of Judah came, And did King David in the Streets proclaim. II. SAMUEL, Chap. 2. Vers. 4. And the Men of Judah came, and there they anointed David KING over the House of Ju∣dah, &c. Thus David being setled in his Throne, Prized by all, and envy'd now by none. When he perceiv'd that he was fully blest, With peaceful Subjects, and with quiet rest; He studied thankfulness to God above; Advis'd with Nathan to express his Love.
II. SAMUEL, Chap. 7. Vers. 1. And it came to pass when the KING sate in his House, and the LORD had given him rest round abot from all his Enemies, Vers▪ ▪ the KING said unto Nathan the Prophet▪ See now, I dwell in an House of Cedar, but the Ark of GOD dwelleth within Curtains, &c. Now, good King David, makes it his chief care, To build the Lord a glorious House of Pray'r; That he, his God, may for his Mercy's praise, And magnify him for his wond'rous Ways. God was well pleas'd, sent Nathan to the King, Who did this joyful Message to him bring. II. SAMUEL, Chap. 7. Vers. 11. Also the LORD telleth thee, that he will make thee an House. Vers. 12. And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy Fathers, I will set up thy Seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy
Bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom, &c. Vers. 13, 14, 15, 16. And thine House, and thy Kingdom shall be established for ever before thee; thy Throne shall be established for ever. Here David's thankfulness is well repay'd; New blessings on his Royal Head is lay'd. The Crown's secur'd to David and his Heirs; This was the fruit of David's Zeal and Pray'rs. God was a Father to him, and his Race, He gave them Honour, Wisdom, Wealth, and Grace. If God so highly prizes Kings, then we Shou'd all, with great submission, bend the knee. If Heav'n doth put such value upon Kings, That it doth mount their Fame on Cherubs Wings.
Then how much more ought we to love and fear'm! With what a sacred aw shou'd we come near'm! This may reprove ev'ry rebellious Creature, Who harbours Treason in his cursed Nature. And this shou'd lay the Western Rebels low, Who did the Coals of a Rebellion blow.
PEACE crowns King David now on ev'ry side; Tho his Dominions were both large and wide. His God was pleased highly with his Duty, In Holiness he saw the greatest beauty. His Subjects underneath their Vines do sing, Lord, long preserve our Soveraign Lord the King; The hand of God guides him in ev'ry thing. But as the Water damm'd up in a place; And long debarr'd from running on its Race, At last with greater violence breaks out: Ev'n so his Peace for War begins to shout. The Viper which he long had warm'd in's Breast, Crawls out, and now begins to break his Rest.
Absalom sneaks about from place to place, And try's to bring the King into disgrace. He fawns and cringes now to all he meets, Kisses the meanest Rascals in the Streets; And all to bring his wicked Ends about, To gain the Crown, and turn his Father out. But this unnatural Youth must have some help; Achitophel, that old and wicked Whelp, Helps him with counsel: now the Plot goes on, Which good King David little thinks upon. They get the Herd together, and prepare Things ready for this most unnatural War. David thinks more upon his dying Day, Than that his Son's in a rebellious way. They find him unprovided, hugging Peace, He thinks it's time that he from Wars should cease.
His Armour now grows rusty; but behold, His Crown and Kingdom now is bought and sold. Absalom's mounted, dos in's Armour rattle; But David's unprovided for the Battle. Now all his Friends about him loudly cry, Prepare your Horses; for unless you fly, The best of Kings by th'worst of Rogues must die. David, and's trusty Friends, forsake the City, Finding them void of Grace, and void of pity. He passes Kidron's Brook, and flys by guess, Still aiming to come at the Wilderness. Those that are with him, weep to see his State, And only wish they cou'd subdue his Fate. They grieve for this Rebellion, but, alass! With pensive Hearts the King & they must pass,
'Till God finds out a way to bring relief, And ease they'r heavy sighs, & matchless grief. And now the time is come, God sees, and hears The Pray'rs of David, usher'd in with Tears. God smote the Rebells Hearts, away they fly From those who drew them to th'Conspiracy. And his good Subjects follow'd their good King, Resolv'd to live and die beneath his Wing; So that his Loyal Army did encrease: Now have at those who did disturb his Peace. The Battl's pitch'd; it's by the King appointed, And who shall lead them but the Lord's A∣nointed. He itches to be foremost, I will go. But his good Subjects kindly answer, No;
It matters not for us, if thousands die, Thou'rt better than ten thousand, is the cry. II. SAMUEL, Chap. 18. Vers. 3. But the Peo∣ple answered, Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee away, they will not care for us; nei∣ther if half of us die, will they care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us; therefore now it is better that thou succour us out of the City. This is the Language of good Subjects still, They're always ready their own Blood to spill: Provided Royal Blood may not be shed, They do not care how many Men lie dead. The King's intreated, and he stays behind, The rest go on the Trayt'rous Rogues to find. Mark now, what comes of the rebellious Crew, How every Traitor has his proper due.
Absalom is pursu'd (when forc'd to fly); He's taken up between the Earth and Sky; A Tree secures him, holds him by the Hair, Till Joab did to Absalom repair; Who carry'd in his hand a fatal Dart, By which he stab'd the Traitor to the Heart. Bad was this Death, Achitophel's was worse, He hang'd himself, and without doubt the Curse Of the Almighty follow'd to his Grave; Such Deaths as these may all such Traitors have. These Rebels were like ours, who rose i'th West; Nay, ours were worse, and truly bad's the best. For David's Son, we find, was lawful Heir: But what Pretence had our late Young Man there?
He cou'd not lay a Claim to any Crown, Unless that he had dropt five Shillings down. Well, but the Wapping Lads, they made a noise. And he was puft up by some Western Boys, To a Conceit, that he was Prince of Wales. And fool'd by Shipton's, & such old Wives Tales. Ferguson acts Achitophel's ill Part, In the same way, with the same Mind & Heart. But God defeated all these bloody Knaves; Sent some, with shame, unto their dusty Graves. It's true, Achitophel escapes a vvhile, And has not smarted for his matchless Guile. But he, vvith sorrovv, vvill go to his Grave; Till then, a troubled Conscience let him have. May he be mark't, like Cain, vvhen he is found, For Ferguson's a greater Vagabond.
But, God be prais'd, his Counsel's brought to nought, And some their Enterprize have dearly bought. Whilst our good King, rides on the Wings of Fame, He sees his Enemies are cloth'd vvith shame. May his Crovvn flourish on his Royal Head, When ev'ry trait'rous Enemy is dead.
WHEN all King David's Rebells were supprest, He waxed old, and did prepare for rest. Then Adonijah did usurp the Crown, But David found a way to cast him down. He caus'd young Solomon to be proclaim'd; And when they heard that he their King was nam'd: Then Adonijah's Heart was fill'd with fear, Ran to the Altar; and the King did swear, If he wou'd but be Loyal, he'd forgive His Brother's Crime, and suffer him to live. I KINGS, Chap. 1. Vers. 28. Then King Da∣vid answered, and said, Call me Bath-sheba: and she came into the King's Presence, and stood before the King.
Vers. 29. And the King sware, and said, As the LORD liveth, that hath redeemed my Soul out of all distress, Vers. 30. Even as I sware unto thee by the Lord God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy Son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my Throne in my stead; even so will I certain∣ly do this day, &c. Vers. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. Vers. 39. And Zadock the Priest took an Horn of Oil out of the Tabernacle, and anointed Solomon; and they blew the Trumpet, and all the People said, God save King Solomon, &c. Vers. 40, 47. and so to the end of this Chapter. Solomon being seated on his Throne, And David's Crown and Scepter now his own. David instructed him, and he obey'd; He was a glorious King by's Counsel made. II SAMUEL, Chap. 23. Vers. 1. Now these be the last words of David: David the Son of Jesse said; and the Man who was raised up on high, the Anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet Psalmist of Israel, said, &c. Vers. 2, 3, 4, 5.
And, I CHRON. Chap. 28. Vers. 4, 5, 6, 7, 9. And thou, Solomon my Son, know thou the GOD of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the LORD searcheth all hearts, and understand∣eth all the imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. Solomon's ways were pleasing unto God, For he the Paths of his good Father trod. His Zeal was great, his Wisdom did excel; No King before was this King's parallel. I KINGS, Chap. 3. Vers. 5. In Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and GOD said, Ask what I shall give thee, &c. Vers. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Solomon pray'd: it was but ask, and have; For whatsoe're he askt, Jehovah gave. He begg'd a wise and understanding Heart: God his great Wisdom to him did impart.
He gave him Wealth, and Honour too, we find; To any King, God never was more kind: And promis'd him, if he wou'd sound his praise, That he wou'd likewise give him length of days. All Nations were at peace with him; thus blest, With Wisdom, Honour, Wealth, and Peace, and rest. I KINGS, Chap. 3. Vers. 10. And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. Vers. 11. And GOD said unto him, &c. Vers. 12, 13, 14. Solomon's Fame now reaches ev'ry Ear, And he fills every Heart with Love and Fear. The Queen of Sheba hears the great Report; She, in an instant, quits her Pomp at Court; Hastens to see him: When she saw his State, And that he liv'd at such a glorious Rate.
Her Spirits fail'd her, she had nought to say, But for a certain time she speechless lay. At last her silence broke, and then she said, She's happy that may be the King's Handmaid. Blessed are they who in thy presence wait, That may behold thy Wisdom, and thy State. I KINGS, Chap. 10. Vers. 6, 7, 8. Happy are thy Men, happy are these thy Servants which stand continually before thee: and that hear thy Wisdom. Vers. 9. Blessed be the LORD thy GOD which delighted in thee, &c. Thus happy are the Kings whom God doth love, He sends them Guardian Angels from Above. He makes their Riches swell, their Wars to cease; He makes their Enemies to be at Peace. He keeps them as the Apple of his Eye, When wicked Traitors do in ambush lie.
He makes them famous unto after Story, When he has brought them to himself in Glory.
BY God's appointment, we have plainly found, That Kings by him have all along been crown'd: And finding good King David so Divine, Settl'd th' Succession in his Royal Line, Whilst Judah was a Kingdom so't remain'd, And still the Son after the Father Reign'd. The Kingly Prophet David did foresee, That this Succession wou'd hereafter be. Therefore his Royal Voice he often raises, And gives the Great Jehovah his due Praises. In Psalm the twenty first, read, how the King Has tun'd his Instruments, God's praise to sing. The hundred and fifth Psalm, may us convince, How we're oblig'd to due obedience.
The Psalms, indeed, are very full of Beauty, In chalking forth the ways to Kingly Duty. PSALMS. PSAL. 21. Vers. 1. The King shall joy in thy strength, O LORD: and in thy Salvation how greatly shall he rejoice? Ver. 2, 3, 4. Vers. 5. His Glory is great in thy Salvation: Honour and Majesty hast thou laid upon him. Ver. 6. Vers. 7. For the King trusteth in the LORD: and through the Mercy of the most High, he shall not be moved. Psal. 18. Vers. 47, 50. Psal. 61. Vers. 6, 7. Psal. 89. Vers. 3, 4, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 34, 35, 36, 37. Psal. 105. Vers. 15. Touch not mine Anointed: and do my Prophets no harm. Psal. 132. Vers. 17, 18. Why shou'd not ev'ry Subject imitate King David's Precepts, tho of former date? His Ways were Sacred, Counsel always pure, By his Examples, let him then allure
Us, in these days, to reverence our King, That Peace and Wealth may make the Subjects sing. Wou'd you but read, how disobedient Slaves, Have been, with shame, soon hurried to their Graves. Wou'd you but mind whither their Paths do lead; What Inconveniences this Crime doth breed. Wou'd you the sad Examples often read; Certainly it wou'd make your hearts to bleed. But some seem hardned in their Impudence, For lack of Wisdom, Piety, and Sense. Let those bad Men, that don't deserve to live, Have Patience whilst [This Discourse which passed between the Earl and the Presbyterian Minister, I had the honour to have the Relation of it from the Earl's own mouth, several years ago, when I little intended the writing of this Book. I this Example give].
The Earls of Airly always lov'd their King, And due Obedience shew'd in ev'ry thing. In Prison, out of Prison, they were true And faithful to their Kings, (give them their due;) They speak, and acted, suffer'd for them too. He that now is, was sometime in the Tower, Nol's Friends oft aim'd his Honour to devour. He had prepar'd for Death, and did not doubt, But they would quickly come to fetch him out, To lose his Head. Phanatick Preachers came, Who did the Earl of Airly highly blame, For being Loyal. He was not afraid Of them, nor Death, but soon this Answer made; Read, said the Earl, K. David's Psalms with care, And you will find your Arguments are bare,
Sensless, and sinful, and they spring from Hell, Where now too many such curst Zealots dwell. The wicked Presbyter reply'd with speed, To what you offer, must not be agree'd. David did Preach Obedience to his Law, And strove to keep his Subjects all in aw; With Doctrines like to these: The reason see, 'Cause he upon his Throne in Peace shou'd be. This was his Policy, as he was King; It's not our Duty to preach such a Thing. Surely this Villain was a second Cain, He never preach'd for God, but still for Gain. When David was a Subject unto Saul, How loth was he to see his Master's fall. Tho by his Death he was to gain the Crown, Yet he ne're hast'nd forward his Renown;
But out of fear to God, and love to's King, Liv'd in Obedience underneath his Wing. See these false Prophets, how they wrest God's Writ, For their own profit: Want of Grace and Wit, Emboldens them for to expound God's Word, To please their curst Designs. And Cromwel's Sword Must side with them: And thus the Lord's A∣nointed, For useless things, by this vile Brood's ap∣pointed. But hold, can this curst Presbyter prevail, To sham the Earl with this his wicked Tale? He left his Slime behind him like a Snail. The Earl remains unshaken by his Wind; It's Loyalty alone contents his Mind. A Goal, and Loyalty, doth him content, He doth not loss of Liberty repent.
He values not his Life, nor his Estate, His Heart shall still upon his Soveraign wait; As (God be praised) at this day it doth; And still he lives in Peace and Honour both. He made's escape from th'Tower, whenas his Fate Was gaping to devour him at the Gate. Long may such truly loyal Lords as he, The Corner Stones of these three Kingdoms be. May all disloyal Men, who hate a King, Be judg'd by Airly, early for to swing.
SOLOMON, as you read, by God was blest; On him the Mercies of the Lord did rest. In token of his Thankfulness, the King, To God's great Glory, improv'd ev'ry thing. His Wisdom he so highly did improve, That he gain'd God's, and ev'ry Mortal's love. Three thousand witty Proverbs he exprest, A thousand and five Songs he made at least. In all these things, much Loyalty is found; He was the wisest King that e're was crown'd. Read but his Works, and you will quickly find, That God himself to Kings was always kind. They give account to none but God alone; Man's greatest Pow'r can never reach the Throne.
PROVERBS. Chap. 14. Vers. 28, 35. Chap. 16. Vers. 10. A Divine Sentence is in the Lips of the King; his Mouth transgresseth not in Judgment, &c. Vers. 12, 13, 14, 15. Chap. 19. Vers. 12. Chap. 20. Vers. 2. The fear of a King, is as the roaring of a Lion: whoso provoketh him to Anger, sinneth against his own Soul, &c. Vers. 8, 26, 28. Chap. 21. Vers. 1. Chap. 22. Vers. 29. Chap. 24. Vers. 21. My Son, fear thou the LORD, and the King: and meddle not with them that are given to change. Chap. 25. Vers. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Chap. 28. Vers. 2. Chap. 29. Vers. 4.
SONG of SOLOMON. Chap. 3. Vers. 9, 10, 11. Yet to our grief, the curst Phanaticks try'd; The best of Kings by those Usurpers dy'd. They made a Law, contrary to all Reason, To paint, or colour, their most hellish Treason. Now, at this day, God seeks revenge on those, Who side with such as were King Charles his Foes. The Western Blades, I mean, for what are they, But such as did pursue the self-same way? They were for killing Kings, as well as th'rest; Sure they were Birds of prey of the same Nest. But now their Wings are clipt, they cannot fly: In some dark Cages may they always lie:
And may the God of Heav'n bless the King in's Royal Line, That they, like th'Sun, may always on their Loyal Subjects shine. Where they one Mercy now enjoy, may there be added ten: Let ev'ry Loyal Subject say, AMEN, Ev'n so, AMEN.
E'RE I have done with good King Solomon's Reign, Reader, I think, it may not be in vain, To give a hint, to shew he was more wise, Than has been yet apparent to your eyes. Besides, the Proverbs, and the Songs he teaches, We find that Solomon himself here preaches. Ecclesiastes shews you his great Parts, By which the King takes captive most Mens Hearts. You do not find the King doth preach alone, Unto his Subjects, from his splendid Throne; But to succeeding Ages, his Truths reach, Ev'n unto us this day that King doth preach;
And nothing more than Loyalty's exprest, For only this will make a Kingdom blest. ECCLESIASTES. Chap. 8. Vers. 2. I counsel thee to keep the King's Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of GOD. Vers. 3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing, for he doth whatso∣ever pleaseth him. Vers. 4. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power: and who may say unto him, What dost thou? Chap. 10. Vers. 16, 17, 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; and, &c. Solomon had God's Spirit, and foresaw, Some Fergusons wo'd make a breach in's Law, He knew that Herd wou'd not be kept in aw. For ought I know, this mov'd him thus to teach, That made him this most Sacred Doctrine preach.
You that have been misled, read o're his Works; If you have Hearts as hard as Jews, or Turks, Yet you will see something will find an Art, To touch your Conscience, and to prick your Heart: Something will meet with you, to make you leave The ways of Ferguson, amd make you grieve That he, or Satan, has so long deluded Your Understandings, and so long intruded His hatred Doctrine on you. Do but read This good King's Works, and you no Preacher need. His Texts are plain and powerful, you'l find; Then to your selves, and to your Souls be kind. Up, and be doing, e're it be too late, Before you'r thrust within the Traitor's Gate;
Before Iack Ketch doth catch you, and before Your God shall say, that you shall be no more. The fatal Day draws near; let not that Sect, Make you your Duty, and your Time neglect. Read, and consider, and you'l find much beauty, In the performance of your Sacred Duty. The King is God's Vicegerent, fear t'offend: Who dare, with God, or with his King contend? You'd better wake a drouzy Lion far, Than he that is made bright by God's own Star. If you run on in disobedient Ways, You gain but Hell, whilst others gain much Praise, And by their Loyalty their Fortunes raise.
FORTY full Years King Solomon had Reign'd; The praise of all his Subjects he had gain'd. Then with his Fathers this good King did sleep, Now Rehoboam doth his Scepter keep. So the Succession lasted many Years, As by the Texts of Holy Writ appears. The Son succeeds the Father, and one Brother, By the same Method, doth succeed another. A Sacred aw for Kings was then required; And now, what is there more or less desired? We have a Gracious King, by God appointed, Let's love, and fear, and serve the Lord's A∣nointed.
Solomon's Wisdom, Hezekiah's Zeal, Are both in James the Second. I appeal, Ev'n to Phanatick Foes, if Truth they'l speak, They'l say, he's wise, he's zealous, just and meek. Since we're so happy in our Sacred King, Vive le Roy with one consent we'll sing.
THE Jews sinning; to Babylon were sent, There Slaves to be until they did repent. Now God takes pity of the Jews again, In the beginning of King Cyrus's Reign, He gave command to Cyrus, to restore The large Dominions which were theirs before. He, tho a Heathen King, did not deny The great Commands of him that sits on High. EZRA, Chap. 1. Vers. 1, 2. Thus saith Cyrus King of Persia, The LORD God of Heaven hath given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth, &c. Vers. 3. Chap. 6. Vers. 8, 10, 11. Chap. 7. Vers. 26. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King,
let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. God turns the Hearts of Kings as pleaseth him; And as the Brooks of Water, so they swim Round this vast Orb. Who is't that can resist Him that contains the Winds within his Fist? If Heathens did obey the God of Heav'n; How shall then our Phanaticks be forgiv'n? Who do pretend to greater Light than they, Yet have not learn'd the Voice of God t'obey. And if that Cyrus was by all obey'd, When he his great and mighty Scepter sway'd: Then how much more shou'd our Angelick Prince, Expect that we shou'd shew Obedience? He that defends our Faith, supports our Peace, That makes our Wars and Controversies cease.
He who preserves the Church of England pure! How can we fancy that he shou'd endure To see his Subjects act such horrid Treason, Against his Sacred Person, without reason? Solomon's Wisdom he hath shown of late, In the subduing of his bloody Fate. And David's valour on the Seas we've seen, Before he marry'd this our Royal Queen. King Hezekiah's Zeal to him belongs, If we on all his Vertues make our Songs. Then Moses meekness in him, let's proclaim, And let some Angel's Pen his Vertues name. He is, it's hard for me to tell you what, Sum all Perfections up, and He is that! If so, then they must be of hellish Breed, The worst of the despised Serpent's Seed,
Who think him ill; much worse are they who Act That thing which may his peaceful Reign protract. Yet he was hardly setled on his Throne, When cursed Treason in the Land was known. Rebels of blackest hue crept to the West, Each sharping Swords and Syths to pierce his Breast. Can God behold this Wickedness? Can he, With his pure Eyes, this horrid Treason see, And not reveal it? No, a Trumpet's sounded, And they're no sooner met than they're con∣founded. The Great Jehovah has a watchful eye, For some small time, Traitors securely lie, And hatch their Treason, but at last they die;
Before they bring it up unto perfection, God finds them out, and gives them due cor∣rection. They often die, like Birds upon a Tree, It's seldom they from God's great Wrath can flee. The Vulture Ferguson escapes a while; I fancy he can hardly go a mile In any Land, but Conscience bids him Hark, To hear the cry of Bloodhounds, how they bark, And howl for Justice; ev'ry noise he hears, He does imagine that some ravenous Bears Dog him at's Heels, his filthy Flesh to tear. And, oh! Who can a wounded Conscience bear? He does but linger out his hateful Life, Which Justice will cut off with his keen Knife.
POWERFUL Scripture Proofs FOR MONARCHY. Diligently collected out of the New Testament OF OUR Lord and Saviour JESƲS CHRIST. Written by the Author. Anno 1685.
Powerful Scripture Proofs in De∣fence of Monarchy, &c. THAT wicked Men may be convinc'd by Reason, And hinder'd from Rebellion, and from Treason. No one, I think, can want for Argument, Who reads the Texts in the Old Testament; There's Proof on Proof, and Texts so plain and full. They cannot chuse but pierce the thickest Skull. Yet some may think, all they have read too few, Therefore unto the Old, I add the New. Here are such awful Texts sent down from Heav'n, That sure they cannot think to be forgiv'n Who disobey them; read, and you will find, Enough to satisfy a Critick's Mind.
St. MATTHEW, Chap. 17. Vers. 24. And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received Tribute-mony, came to Peter, and said, Doth not your Master pay Tribute? Vers. 25. He saith, Yes. &c. Vers. 26. Vers. 27. Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the Sea, and cast an Hook, and take up the first Fish that cometh up: and when thou hast opened his Mouth, thou shalt find a piece of Mony; that take, and give unto them for me and thee. A Miracle our Blessed Saviour wrought. Was this his great Obedience shown for nought? Did he unto Authority submit? Then 'twas to teach us awfulness and wit. He shew'd Obedience ev'n to heath'nish Kings, And these Examples he upon us brings, For our Instruction: Christian Kings much more, It is our Duty daily to adore. Next to the Deity, an awful fear, Shou'd pierce each Subject's Heart, & ev'ry Ear.
READ further yet in Luke, and you will find, That which unfolds the Eyes ev'n of the Blind. The blindest Whig, if he but reads this Text, Must have his Conscience very much perplext. If ever he has disobedient been, What stronger Argument was ever seen, Than this which now I do declare to you, Give unto Caesar, what is Caesar's due? St. LƲKE. Chap. 20. Vers. 20. And they watched him, &c. Vers. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. And Jesus said un∣to them, Render therefore unto Cesar the things which be Cesar's, and unto God the things which be God's.
The tempting Pharisees have nought to say, Their Mouths are stopt as if it were with Clay. They were convinc'd, by this his Sacred Word, Which pierc'd far deeper than a two-edg'd Sword. And shall not our Phanaticks see the evil Of Disobedience, which comes from the Devil? What Doctrine did they preach i'th Rebels Camp? Their Coin, I fear, had Belzebub for stamp, There was not one had Oil within his Lamp. If Christ had call'd them to his Judgment-Seat, Rebellion's such a Sin, there's none more great. I wish it were repented of, by those Who hitherto have been King James his Foes. Without repentance, when they hence must fly, They in the hottest place of Hell shall lie.
The Rebels did intend to cut off Kings; On their own Necks the Whigs this mischief brings. It prov'd a happy thing unto this Nation; Their wickedness did give all Men occasion To shew their Loyalty. The King has found, Most of his Subjects hearts, loyal and found. Most of the Clergy-men, who preach'd the Word, And all the Souldiers too, who wore a Sword, They were all ready, both to Preach and Fight, For to maintain our Royal Sov'raign's Right. Princes and Lords made ready for the Battle, When they perceiv'd the Whigish Canon rattle. And his Great Council, our good Parliament, Hastily strove to give the King content.
This tri'd his Friends, and this found out his Foes, Who will, in time, receive deserved blows. This Skirmish made the Crown more fast to's Head, For most of's Foes are now in Goals, or dead, Except a few poor Wretches that are fled. And now he sits in peace, and shines much more With Glory, than he ever did before. God strikes a greater aw in's Subjects Hearts, To the confounding all the Rebels Arts. No King e're did so gloriously appear; Now ev'ry Heart he fills with Love or Fear.
BUT now some more Examples let us call: Let us but listen to the Apostle Paul. And when we find him brought before the Jews, To answer Festus, when they him accuse, St. Paul, we see, doth readily refuse. Paul knew that they were under Cesar's power, And did believe that him they wou'd devour. Therefore, to Cesar, he makes his complaint; This was the policy of that good Saint. The Jews, like Whigs, wou'd soon a Law have found, That good St. Paul shou'd have been hang'd or drown'd. Paul reasons thus; Shall I by these be try'd? No, I'le to Cesar, he for Cesar cry'd, If he had not, doubtless the Saint had dy'd:
ACTS, Chap. 25. Vers. 10. Then said Paul, I stand at Cesar's Judgment-Seat, where I ought to be judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong, &c. Vers. 11. No Man may deliver me unto them. I appeal unto Cesar, &c. V. 12. If Cesar had such Power in those days; If they his Crown to such a height did raise. Then how much more sho'd our King be obey'd, Upon whose Head 3 Kingdoms weight is laid? We no oppression find from our good King; No, Heav'ns be prais'd, he suffers no such thing. He gives us wholsome Laws, he grants us rest, By his protection we continue blest. He breaks his sleep to give his Subjects Peace; All our Calamities and Sorrows cease. Lord, long command that our blest King may Reign, Then no good Subject ever will complain.
THE Bishop of th' Ephesians next let's view, He was for giving crowned Heads their due. Pious Instructions he leaves for our use, Which no good Christian surely dare refuse. I TIMOTHY, Chap. 2. Vers. 1. I ex∣hort therefore, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made for all Men: Vers. 2. For Kings, and for all that are in Au∣thority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Vers. 3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour. Here he not only bids us pray for Kings, But a much sweeter Lesson to us sings. He bids us pray for all that are in Power, Whether they're good, or bad, or rich, or poor.
Chalking out this way to a quiet Life, Which is sufficient to prevent all Strife. This is the way to please the God of Heav'n, By whom our wicked sins must be forgiv'n. Now he that has a grain of sense in's Pate, How dare he offer to disturb the State? But God and Christ, Prophets and Bishops too, Command al Men that they sho'd humbly bow, nd be obedient unto Kings: Yet we, A cursed Tribe of Hell-hounds daily see, Who use their Art & Pow'r still to destroy'em, So far are they from wishing to enjoy'em. Their Rye-house Plots, their Wapping Treats, we find, Do fully, and most fairly, paint their Mind. Their King of Lime, and their Cabals elsewhere, Do shew how far they from Obedience were.
But God, in time, will pluck those bitter Weeds, And cause Iack Ketch to cut off all their Heads. No Peace in Israel there is like to be, Whilst we such wicked Vermin in it see. Each goes to Bed with Treason in his Heart, And when he rises, then he doth impart His wiched thoughts unto his bosom Friend, Who, Monster-like, quickly his Aid doth lend. And thus it's hatch'd, and brought to Bed, but, Lord, Reward the Authors with a Hempen Cord.
HE that hath Ears to hear, or Eyes to see, I pray that he wou'd read these Texts with me. I. St. PETER, Chap. 2. Vers. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King, as Su∣pream, &c. Vers. 14, 15. Vers. 17. Honour all Men, love the Brotherhood, FEAR GOD, HONOƲR THE KING. And, ROMANS, Chap. 13. Vers. 1. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers. For there is no Power but of God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Vers. 2. Whosoever therefore resisteth the Power, resisteth the Ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, &c. Vers. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Now, Reader, tell me, if thou art not sear'd, Whether this Light before to thee appear'd?
Or since this Light is come, it's want of Wit, And Grace, if longer thou in Darkness sit. If God shou'd send his Angels now to preach, I'm sure no other Doctrine they wou'd teach. This is the Language of the God of Love, He preaches thus from's glorious Throne above. This is the Will of God, dare you resist? Can you stand up against his angry Fist? Who dare provoke to Wrath the God of Sion? Or who dare go to wake the drowsy Lion? Phanaticks now indeed grow wondrous bold, Since they their Faith and Loyalty have sold. But there's a day draws near of Recompence, For such as had no Grace, nor Fear, nor Sense,
Nor no Obedience; Oh, a dreadful day, For such as run in this rebellious way, When they are summon'd, What is't they can say? Is it enough to say, This Canting Fool Has bred me in his Irreligious School? This Ferguson, that Jenkins, or his Brother, Drew me to hate a King, and drew my Mother, My Father too, into this fatal snare, Where now we're come beyond the reach of Pray'r? We suckt his pois'nous Doctrines in our mouth, And took his Treason for the Word of Truth. Thus will these Hellhounds say when 'tis too late, When Troops of Devils at their Elbows wait. You that are yet alive, Oh! turn to God, That you may never feel the weight of's Rod.
Turn to the King likewise with humble aw, Obey his Sacred Person, and his Law. Fear to offend him, he's the Lord's Anointed; To rule us, and protect us, he's appointed. He's God's Vicegerent, hearken to his Word; For, wo be to you, if he whets his Sword. The Frowns of Kings are not to be endur'd, These by Rebellion chiefly are procur'd. May the blest Pow'rs Above keep us in peace; Then Sorrows, and our Sufferings both will cease. And, O, thou glorious God of Heav'n Above, Send down thy choicest Blessings, with thy Love, To our dread Sov'raign; give him such a Heart, As he may from thy Footsteps ne're depart.
Lengthen his Comforts, and prolong his days. Then give us Hearts to spread abroad thy praise. Guide thou his Council; Let his Souldiers fight For Royal James, under the God of Might. Be with his Clergy, bless their Ways & Words, And let their Doctrine pierce like two-edg'd Swords. And, Lord, we pray thee give us all content, In our blest King, and happy Parliament. Let ev'ry one, within his proper Station, Act for the Peace and Profit of the Nation: That we may all have cause, thy praise to sing; And with one Voice cry out, God save the King. AMEN.
