W3532A R201911 99825144 29519
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the other
AN exact and true Definition of the most Stupendious Water∣commanding Engine, invented by the Right Honourable (and deservedly to be praised and admired) Ed∣ward Somerset, Lord Marquess of Worce∣ster, and by his Lordship himself presented to his most Excellent Majesty Charles the Second, our most gracious Sovereign. An Act of Parliament thereupon granted, with great applause of both Houses, being through his Majesties particular favour passed, by special Commission to the Right Honourable the Earl of Clarenden, Lord High Chancellour of England; the Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer; the Lord Roberts, Lord Privy Seal, third Officer of the Crown, preceding all Dukes, not of the Blood Royal; the Duke of Al∣bemarle his Grace, most deservedly by his
transcendent merits never to be forgotten, Lord General of his Majesties Land-forces; the Lord Marquess of Dorchester, and the Earl Lynsey, Lord High Chamberlain, by his place preceding all Earls, both likewise of the Privy Council: They passed the said Act upon the third of June, 1663. For the more expedition, and in Testimony of the great consequence thereof to the King and Kingdom. His most Excellent Majesty having the tenth part, without deducting of Charges, freely given him by the said Lord Mar∣quess, and there evidently accruing a con∣siderable Profit and Benefit to every indivi∣dual Subject of the whole Nation, if he either have surrounded Marish-ground to drein, or dry Land to improve; Commo∣dities to sell portable from Town to Town, and through the Countrys to the Towns by Cuts thus fed by water; or if he have (I further say) Mines wherewith to en∣rich himself withall, Houses to be served, or Gardens to be beautified by plentiful
Fountains with little charge, yet certain in ever so dry a Summer: and there being indeed no place but either wanteth wa∣ter, or is overburdened therewith, and by this Engine either defect is remediable, that is to say, water necessary to man-kind, furnished with the pleasantness thereof, pro∣cured, and the water unnecessary, as easily rejected. Thus whole Cities may be kept Clean, Delightful and Wholesome, needing no other Scavengery then by means thereof to void their dirt, and avoid noisomness, the Cause of Infection, Sicknesses and Conta∣gion it self, by Stenches commonly ingen∣dring and fomenting the same. After the Act of Parliament, there is here set down a Latin Elogium, & an English Pa∣negirick, both of them composed through duty and gratitude by an Antient Servant of his Lordships, presuming to begin the way to the greatest Wits and Poets to di∣late upon so plentiful and admirable a
Theam, and so deserving a person of King and Kingdom, and indeed of all that ever knew him. This Antient Servant of his Lordships, hath for forty years been an eye witness of his great ingenuity, indefatigable pains, and vaste expences in perfecting for publique service, not onely this most Stupendious Water-commanding Engine, but likewise several other rare, useful, and never former∣ly heard of Mathematical Conclusions, of which he hath owned a Century, and thereunto I refer you: though this alone were enough to eternalize his Name to all Ages and future times. I think it not amiss to give further notice in his Lordships behalf, that he intends within a moneth or two to erect an Office, and to intrust some very responsible and honourable persons with power to Treat and Conclude with such as desire at a rea∣sonable rate to reap the benefit of the same Water-commanding Engine, in any of the
aforesaid useful and beneficial operations, whereof his Majesty is to reap the first fruit; and then the whole Kingdom in general, be∣fore his Lordship is re-imbursed, and his reward beginneth; whose laudable inventi∣ons Almighty God prosper with blessings on earth, and reward in heaven.
Most Gracious Sovereign, THe same individual Definition of my Water-work, which I formerly pre∣sumed to put into Your Royal Hands, I again adventure to present to Your Maje∣sty; praying Your Belief of it, as Your Majesty shall find it true by comparing it with the real Effect; which if found pun∣ctually agreeing, Vouchsafe then not to be apt hereafter to lend a believing Ear to such persons, as Malice causeth to detract from, or Ignorance to slight what shall (though never so seemingly strange) be averr'd by me, who will never be convinced of a Falshood in Word or Deed towards Your Sacred Majesty; before whom I shall ever speak as in the presence of Almighty God, whose Vicegerent on Earth I deem You:
And to Your Majesties transcendent Judg∣ment I submit all, and will presume to sub∣scribe my self, SIR, Your Sacred Majesties Faithfully-Devoted, and passionately-Affected, Ʋseful, if cherished, Subject and Servant, WORCESTER. A Stupendious or a Water-Commanding En∣gine, boundless for Height, or Quantity, requiring no External, nor even Additional help, or force to be set, or continued in moti∣on, but what intrinsecally is afforded from its own Operation, nor yet the twentieth part thereof: And the Engine consisteth of the following Particulars; 1. A perfect Counterpoize for what Quantity soever of Water. 2. A perfect Countervail for what Height soever it is to be brought unto. 3. A Primum Mobile commanding both
Height and Quantity Regulator-wise. 4. A Vicegerent or Countervail sup∣plying the place, and performing the full force of a Man, Wind, Beast, or Mill. 5. A Helm or Stern, with Bitt and Reins, wherewith any Child may guide, order, and controul the whole Operation. 6. A particular Magazine for Water, according to the intended Quantity or Height of Water. 7. An Aquaduct capable of any intend∣ed Quantity or Height of Water. 8. A place for the Original Fountain or even River to run into, and naturally of its own accord incorporate it self with the rising Water, and at the very bottom of the same Aquaduct, though never so big or high. By Divine Providence, and Heavenly Inspiration, this is my Stupendious Water-Commanding Engine, bound∣less for Height and Quantity.
Whosoever is Master of Weight, Is Master of Force; Whosoever is Master of Water, Is Master of both: And consequently, to him all Forceable Actions and Atchievments are easie, which are in any wise beneficial to or for Man∣kind. Exegi Monumentum aere perennius, Regalíque situ Pyramidum altius; Quod non imber edax, non Aquilo impotens, Possit diruere, aut innumer abilis Annorum series, & fuga temporum: Non omnis moriar, multáque pars mei Vitabit Libitinam, dum stabit Anglia. Capitolium. Horace. Reader observe, This tells us how to keep Our morning-Thoughts awake, while others sleep: 'Tis Art and Nature's product, scan'd by some: Judge of it by th'Effects; then give your doom. To God alone be all Praise, Honour and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. WORCESTER.
An Act to Enable Edward Marquess of Worcester to Receive the Benefit and Pro∣fit of a Water-Commanding Engine by him Invented; One Tenth part whereof is appropria∣ted for the Benefit of the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Succes∣sors. WHEREAS The Right Honourable Edward Mar∣quess of Worcester hath affirmed to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, That he hath by long and indefatigable pains and study, and with great and vast expen∣ces,
invented and found out a Secret in Nature, never heretofore discovered, being a Water-Commanding Engine, of greater force and advantage then hi∣therto hath been known; and being no Pump or Force now in use, nor work∣ing by any Suckers, Barrels, or Bel∣lows heretofore used for the raising and conveying of Water; which said En∣gine will yield very great benefit and advantage to the Common-wealth, by draining of all sorts of Mines, Marish, Oazie, or Overflown Grounds; by fur∣nishing of Rivers and Cutts with wa∣ter to make them Navigable and Por∣table from Town to Town; by impro∣ving of Lands wanting water; by the supplying and bringing in of water into the City of London, or into any other places; and by divers other ways and means whereby great Encouragement will be given to the People of this Na∣tion to undertake to work rich Mines, to drain, and gain in many Marish, Oazie, and surrounded Grounds, which
hitherto they have been deterred to en∣deavour the improvement of, by reason of the vast sums of money which must be necessarily expended by the draining and conveying away the water out of the same. And whereas the said Ed∣ward Marquess of Worcester is willing and contented to setle a tenth part of the accruing benefit thereof upon His Maje∣sty, His Heirs and Successors, for the term of years after in this Act mention∣ed; To the end therefore that the said Edward Marquess of Worcester may have and enjoy the full and particular benefit and profit of this his new In∣vention, with a Prohibition to all o∣thers to make use thereof for ninety and nine years: May it therefore please the Kings most Excellent Majesty, That it may be Enacted, And Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Par∣liament Assembled, and by the Autho∣rity
thereof, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Edward Mar∣quess of Worcester, His Executors and Assigns, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the said ninety and nine years, to have, receive, take, and enjoy, to his and their own proper use and uses, the Profit, Benefit, and Advantage which shall any ways a∣rise, happen, or accrue by means or rea∣son of the aforesaid Engine and new Invention. And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one full tenth part of the accruing Bene∣fit thereof (without deduction or abate∣ment for or by reason of any Charges or Expences whatsoever) shall be paid and answered, and accounted for by the said Edward Marquess of Worcester, his Executors, Administrators, and As∣signs, for His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, into His Majesties publick receipt of Exchequer yearly, and every year at the Feasts of Saint Michael the Arch-angel, and the Annunciation of
the Blessed Virgin Mary, during the said Term of Ninety nine years, the first payment to be made at the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-angel, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and three; And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Person or Persons whatsoever within his Ma∣jesties Kingdom of England & Domini∣on of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the Dominions and Terri∣tories thereunto belonging, do, or shall at any time hereafter, during the said term, Counterfeit, Imitate, put in pra∣ctice, or erect the said Water-command∣ing Engine (without the consent and License first had and obtained in writ∣ing from the said Edward Marquess of Worcester, or his Assignes) That it shall, and may be lawful to and for the said Edward Marquess of Worcester, or his Assignes, with his, or their A∣gents or Work-men by a Warrant from the Lord Chief Justice, or from any
two Justices of Peace within the re∣spective County or Liberty, where such search shall be made, and assisted by the Constable or Constables neer adjacent, to enter into, or upon the said place or places where the said Work or Engine shall be made or erected; And upon dis∣covery of any such Engine, to proceed against the said Person or Persons by Action, Information or Indictment; and after Conviction thereof in due course of Law in any Assizes, or pub∣lique Sessions of the Peace, or any of the Courts at Westminster, or any other His Majesties Courts of Record in any City, Burrough, or Town Corporate, or in any Stanary, Court, or Juris∣diction of Lead-mines; Then such En∣gines to be forfeited, and seized to and for the use of the said Edward Marquess of Worcester, his Executors, Admini∣strators and Assignes respectively: And further, that the said Actor or A∣ctors, Contriver or Contrivers thereof, and every of them, shall lose, and forfeit Five
fore the Nine and twentieth day of Sep∣tember, One thousand six hundred sixty threé; And be by him or them then put into the Exchequer, and kept there. Copia vera. Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliament.
In admirandam magis quàm imitandam, aut ullis Encomiis satis praedicandam, Illustrissimi Domini Marchionis Vigorniae Machinam Hydraulicam, Elogium. Barbara Pyramidum sileat miracula Memphis, Assiduus jactet nec Babylona labor. Horat. SIste viator, depone sarcinam, & dumreficis membra Labore languida, pasce mentem novitatis avidam; Perpende gyganteam hanc molé, aeterni motus aemulam, Naturae & Artis compaginem, Coeli Solíque stuporem. Pondera ponderibus librata hîc Aethera scandunt, Et redeunt proprias mox subitura vices. Mens praegnans agitata Deo, nunc praestat in Orbe, Quae nec stellifero sunt tribuenda Polo. Taceat Rhodus, facessat Ephesus, et quicquid fabulosa Praedicat antiquitas; illic laudanda Artificis industria, Hîc admiranda mentis sublimitas celebranda venit. Cui impares fuere tot seculis retroactis omnes Graeci,
Et Romani, humano conatù, id praestitit nostra Aetate unus Cambrobritannus, Divino afflatu:Soli Deo Gloria. Martis & Imperii Palmam fert Roma perennem; Artis & Ingenii Cambria culmen habet. —pauci, quos aequus amavit Jupiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus, Hoc potuere.— Jacobus Rollocus, Scoto-Belga-Britannus.
A Panegyrick to the Right Honourable EDWARD, Lord Marquess of Worcester, Ʋpon his stupendious and never-sufficiently∣commended Water-work. I know mean subjects need a skilful Pen To stretch their worth on tenter-hooks, but when A Theam falls out so pregnant, who can chuse But strain his vulgar Wit to prove a Muse? COme, fainting Pilgrim, lay here down thy Pack, And, while thou rests thy wearied limbs, look back Upon this Pageant, th'Emblem of his mind, Whose Art and Skill hath this our Age refin'd. Here little David curbs the Gyant's brood, Small drops of Rain contend with Noah's Flood; One weighs a thousand coming down apace, Weighs but himself when he hath run his race. The Heavens admire, the Centre stands amaz'd, To see such Streams by so small Forces rais'd. Great is the Work, but greater is the Fame Of that great Peer who did invent the same. What Force or Strength can do is in his reach, His long Experience, Cost and Charges, teach;
What Greeks, nor Romans e're could do, this day, Our Noble Britain here hath found the way. If Ages past had bred you, we had seen Your Glories current run a bigger stream; But Art and Envy meeting face to face, Like France and Spain, dispute who shall take place. None but ignoble Minds love to detract From th'Honour due to such a noble Act: On then, that after-ages may relate Your Service done to Country, King and State. And though that envious Spirits spit their gall, Your noble Deeds are so well known to all, As if their malice should take from your praise, Your own deserts will crown your head with Bays. By your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant, James Rollock.
