E186_12 53403907 97700
Numb. 27. Mercurius Publicus: COMPRISING The Sum of Forraign Intelligence; WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For Information of the People. From Thursday June 28. to Thursday July 5. 1660. To the Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY. The humble Petition of the Nobility and Gentry of the Six Counties of North-wales. Sheweth, THat your Petitioners being fully assured of the dutiful affections of their Neighbours and Country-men of the British Nation in the Six Counties aforesaid, do in all humility and thankfulness to God and your Majesty, on behalf of our selves and them, acknowledge those happy
fruits of your Majesties most Gracious Government whereof we have already tasted, in that security and freedome we enjoy in the liberty of our persons and property of our Estates. And though we cannot make the least doubt (being con∣vinced thereunto by your Majesties most pious and exem∣plary practice in matters of Religion) but that your Ma∣jesties first and chief care is for the resettlement of the Church upon the Ancient Foundation of Truth and Peace; yet seeing we have suffered so deeply in the contrary pra∣ctice by some that of late have had he power over us, who under the pretence of propagating the Gospel, have for a long time shut up our Churches, converted the endowmans of the Church to their own use, and sown the seeds of false Doctrine and Schism among us. Your Majesties Petitioners think themselves in duty bound, to represent in all humility this grievance to your Sacred Majesty, and as the best expedient for the re-obtaining their formr happiness in order to their eternal Salvation (without which nothing can be happy to them) to beseech your Majesty, that out of your pious and Princely care, you would be pleased to cause all those good and wholesome Laws for uniformity in Religion, the Government of the Church, and the maintenance of the Clergy, to be put in execution, which have been made since the Reformation, whether by your Royal, Preecessor, Queen Elizabeth, or your Grandfather, and Father of ever happy memory. And your Petitioners shall pray, &c. Subscribed by Herbert, H. Herbert, John Salisbury, Thomas Middleton, Thomas Humphreys, and several other Gentlemen of Quality.
By Letters from Edinborough of the 21, we have this further accompt of the solemnity, That the Major Gene∣ral, after his remembrance of h Majesty to the Earl of Scaford, fired the great Cannon called Mounce Megg (a Cannon never fired but on extraordinary occasions) af∣ter which followed all the Guns in Edinborough Castle,  Cittadel, and the ships in the Road. A plentiful Largess was bestowed amongst the Souldiery to heighten them in their joye; about fifteen hundred bonfires were mae on Arthurs Seat, one or forty load of coals, and at the Major Generals door one almost as big. After this was variety of fire-works, some burned in the water, other flw in the ayr, two Castles firing one against the other, then several sorts of boxes thrown into the ayr, and fall∣ing in several shapes, which with divers others, gave great content to the spectators My Correspondent there did further inform me, that what he vvrit concerning Major Ahernthey, vvas too gree∣dily taken up by him from  brisk report that vvas raised by some ill people, and desires it may be amended in the next Pnt, vvhich for his and the Readers satisfaction I have done accordingly. As for Major Aberlu, my friend of the Intelligence Office, hath not yet told me vvhere he lives, till which time I must desire that Gentlemans pardon. Whitehall. On Thursday, being the day appointed for the Thanksgiving for his sacred Maje∣sties restauration in his Majesties passage ween the Guard-chamber, and his clo∣set, stood a person nee up  will wh a drawn sword under his cloak, which was not  discover;  Mjesty passing  George  Sejeant at As, casting is eye about for the security of his Mjesties , diovered the  Sword, and thereupon presently with his Mace seized  the person ook from  the said naked sword, and upon view found the sm to be a  sword back ilted, ked half way down from the point, a weapon it  a , but by the care and pdenc of the , his Majesties  mischief was prevented, the person secured, and his Ma∣j  by a Right Honorable the Earl of Pemoroke, and the party remains under examination.
Friday. His Majesty with his two Royal Brothers, the Dukes of York and Gloce∣ster, with several of the Nobility and Gentry, went to Copt-hall, where they were highly treated by the Earl of Middlesex. On Saturday his Majesty, with their Royal Highnesses his Brothers, his Excel∣lency, with divers of the Nobility and Gentry, were highly entertained at Roe∣hampton. From his Excellencies Quarters at the Cock-pit. On Monday his Excellency granted a Commission to Major Richard Fincher, to be Major to Col. Nortons Regiment at Portsmouth. Also a Commission to Captain Potts, son to Sir John Potts, to be a Captain in the same Regiment. Sir John Mennes having a Patent from his Majesty to be Governour of Dal Ca∣stle, his Excellency ordered the present Governour forthwith to surrender it to him. William Bing Esq hauing a Patent for Weymouth Castle, his Excellency ordered the present Governour forthwith to surrender it to him. His Excellency hath by Commission given the Command of the Regiment which was lately Col. Hackers, to Francis Lord Hawley, Viscount Duncannon. He hath likewise given a Commission to Sir Chichester Wrey, to be Major of that Regiment, to Sir Francis Vincent Baronet, Sir Thomas Stukeley, James Muldiford, and  Sherrard, to be Captains in the same Regiment. On Friday his Excellency sate in the House of Commons, and took his leave of them, having such Honours conferred on him by his Majesty, as puts him in an higher capacity. Major Abr. Holmes, Timothy Clare, Nicholas Lockyer, R. Jones, Anth. Spinage, and  Gregory Captains, Commissary Everard, Lievt. Hendly, Lievtenant Goff, and one Corporal Brown, formerly committed to the custody of the Marshal General, and being no Officers in this present Army, were on Saturday by his Ex∣cellencies Order discharged of their Imprisonment, upon giving security to be true and loyal Subjects to our Soveraign Lord the King, and not to disturb the publick peace of his Majesties Kingdomes. London. The Artillery Company meeting on Tuesday the 26 of June, 1660. at a general Court then held in the Artillery garden did unanimously make choice of his Highness the Duke of York to be their Commander in chief, and made choice of twelve of the Court of Asistants, to acquaint his Highness the ewith, and desire his accep∣tance. On Saturday the 30th of June, the Lord Lucas, Sir John Robinson, Liev∣tenant of the Tower, their Deputy President, with Col. Shepherd, and others of the Assistants accordingly, went to Whitehall, to attend his Highness, and being com∣manded by him to come into his Bed cha, the L. Lucas acquainted the Duke that these Gentlemen of the Artillery Company were come to tender their services unto his Highness, and to acquaint him what they had done in reference to his Election to be their Commander in chief; then Col Shepherd was desired to declare the mind of the Company, which he did in these words following: May it please your Highness, WE are commanded by the Artillery Company to acquaint you, that at our General Court your Highness was with one heart and one hand freely chosen to be our Commander in chief; but we durst not have so presumed, had we not known that your Highness was a Lover of Arms in general, and that in the year 1641. You mani∣fested so much love to that Company in particular, that you honored us so far, as
to enter your self to be a member of it; and it being the ancient custome of our Company still to have liberty to make choice of one of the members of it to be our Com∣mander, we do humbly pray your Highness will pardon our boldness, and be pleased to own us as your own Company, and to accept of our earnest request to be our Com∣mander in chief, and we shall be ready to yeild obedience to your Highness Commands. And humbly pray for the encrease of your Highness prosperity and happiness. Upon which motion his Highness did very lovingly accept of it, and them, and promised they should still continue their ancient priviledges and customes, and he would be ready to do what he could for them: Then he asked what number they might be; it was answered, about four hundred or five hundred, and that they hoped they should be above three hundred in Arms on Thursday next to attend him, and if they were commanded, should be ready to wait upon him that very day at White∣hall; and when the Company was drawn up, they should deliver unto him their leading stff, according to custome: To which he replyed, He would accept of it, and re∣turned them hearty thanks. On Friday the 29th, a Committee of Aldermen and Common-Council went to invite the Lords of his Majesties Privy-Council to dinner with them at Guild-hall, July 5. the day appointed by his Majesty, which they were pleased to accept of: They likewise made a particular invitation to the Lord Chancellor, and several other per∣sons of Honor, which they were pleased to accept. His Sacred Majesty in conside∣ration of the eminent services and constant loyalty of Sir John Robinson Knight and Baronet, Alderman of London, made him Lievtenant of the Tower, which on Friday he took possession of. To morrow Doctor Reynolds is to preach before his Majesty in his Chappel at Whitehall. Venice, June 5. 1660. We have received a confirmation of the taking of the Castle of Schiatto, by Gen. Morosini, who hath given leave to 300 Turks, that were there in Garrison, to go out with their Families, and gave to the Aga that commanded them, a Vessel to transport himself to the next Continent. After which exploit he went to the Isle of Cerigo with his Army. M. Marco Bmb, General of Candia, hath sent word hi∣ther, that the Turks having drawn their Forces within a Pi∣stol shot off the Out-works of the Metropolitan City of that Island, they found there such resistance, that they were forced to retire with great precipitation and loss of men: And that they were expecting with great impatience the supplies of the Christian Princes, to recruite their Soul∣diers, above 900 of theirs being lately dead of several di∣seases.
St. John de Laz, Iune 21. 1660. The 12 instant, the Count of Fuenseldagne, Extraordi∣nary Embassadour of Spain, having been met at Aurogna by the Marshal de Clrembut and M. de Chabenas, Bonnevil Introductor of the Embassadours, who went to fetch him with the Kings Coaches, followed by the Coaches of all the Lords of the Court, made his entrance into this Town with a magnificent Retinue, as you have heard already. He was conducted to the Lodgings prepared for him, and presently after vsited by the Duke of Crequi, in the name of the King; by M. de St. Ange for the Queen Mother, by the Marquis of Hutefort for the Queen, by the Count of Vallac for Monsieur the Kings Brother, and by the Abbot of Parbere for the Cardinal Mazarin. Then the Count of Armagnac, great master of the Horse, with the said M. de Bonnevil, went to fetch him with the Kings Coa∣ches and brought him to his audience. That night the Car∣dinal Mzarin feasted him at Supper, and the King gave him the pleasure of a Spanish Comedy. The 13. the two Queens made their Devotions at the Church of the . The same day Cardinal Mazarin met again with Don Lewis d' Aro at the Isle of the Conference. The 14. then Majesties went to take the air upon the Seaside, and the 15 the whole Court went away from hence for Bayonne. Bayonne, Iune 22. 1660. The 15 instant, the Queen made her entrance here with all . The King, Monsieur his Brother and the Queen Mother came first into this Cty. The Princess arrived here in a very rich Coach, being accompanied by te Princess Palatin, and the Dutchess of Nvilles. There wnt before her , all the other Coaches for her houshold, with six Trumpets of the Kings, four of the
Chamber, and two others, at the head of the Gensd' armes and the Light Horsemen. The Kings Life-guard was a∣bout her Coach, and the Queen Mothers Guards, and the Company of Musketeers on Horse back were at the Rear. When she came to a Triumphant Arch erected out of the Gates, with a rich Canopy of red Damask spread with Golden Flowers de Luce, she alighted, and ascended the Throne prepared there, where being un∣der the Canopy, with the Crown on her Head, the Duke of Espernon, Governour of this Province, who was come hither purposely to receive her Majesty in this first City both of his Governmenment and of the Kingdom, presented to her the Officers of the Senechal and the Jurat, who made their Speeches to her Majesty; which done, he presented to her Majesty, in a Bison, the Keyes of the City. Then coming down from her Throne, she was conducted by four Consuls under another Canopy of Cloth of Gold and Silver to her Coach. She continued her Journey, two Ushers of the Chambers going before her with the Maces, the four Consuls carrying the Cano∣py, and all the Corporations of this City in their For∣malities; At the sounding of the Trumpets her Majesty came into the Town, through the streets hung with rich Hangings, and strewed wih Flowers, and went to the Ca∣thedral Church, the Avenues whereof were lined by two Files of the Company of the 100 Switzers. Her Majesty went in under the Canopy, and was received by our Bi∣shop and his Clergy with his usual Ceremonies, who con∣ducted her to the great Altar, where the Te Deum was sung. From thence her Majesty went to the Kings Lodgings through some streets richly adorned, and lined with Ms∣qucees, Gendrms, and Light-Horsemen. At night the Ceremony was ended by Bonfires lighted every where, with an infinite number of Lights at the Windows, con∣tinual shooting of the Canons, and the Inhabitants Mus∣kets,
by the reiterated acclamations of the people high and low, and by all other tokens of an extraordinary joy, be∣fitting the first City of the Kingdom that had the honour to receive a Princess, to whom the Nation is engaged for its tranquillity. The next day their Majesties went to Mass to the same Church; and having again received the Com∣plements of our Consuls, they went that night to Aqs. The Count de Fuenseldagn hath bin feasted at Bdache by Marshal Duke de Grammont, with his ordinary sumptuous∣ness and neatness; which hath given great satisfaction to the said Ambassadour, who could not but admire the beau∣ty and richness of that House, where nothing is wanting that can contribute to the ornament of a House of pleasure. Amsterdam, Iune 24. 1660. The 21 instant, the Royal Princess having been enter∣tained with rich Presents by the Chamber of the East-In∣dia Company, went away from hence towards Harlem. The affairs of the Prince her Son go on very well in our Provinces, the States of Zealand having appointed Commissioners to draw a List of the charges and places formerly possessed by his Predecessors, and settle all things again as they were in 1651. Mont de Marsan, June 22. 1660. Their Majesties being come from Bayonne to Aqs, came on the 10 to Bzas, and the next day arrived here. This Town vvas prepared to receive them with a greater solem∣nity then vvas performed, because the King would not suffer it, having bin pleased to accept of our respects, ex∣pressed to their Majesties by the speeches of the Corpora∣tions of Justice, and of the Town, and of our affection te∣stfied unto them by the great and joyful acclamations of all ou people. The 20. their Majesties went from hence for Burdeaux.
Narbone 25 June 1660. The 21 instant about three a clock in the morning there was a great Earthquake here, which did much affright us. We hear that the like hapned at the same time at Bourdeaux, Montpellier, Beziers and other places. Mr. de Merenville hath given order for drawing, with all possible diligence out of Roses and Cap de Quiers, all the Artillery and Amuniti∣ons that were therein: The Spaniards being already arrived to the Port of the said Roses, with all things necessary to take possession of it. Naples, June . 1660. Mr. Elpidio Beneditti, Cardinal Mazarines Agent, is gone from hence to Rome, being very well satisfied with the Vice-Roy, who presented him six brave Horses. The occasion of his voyage was for the re-establishment of the Prince of Mo∣naco into all the Lands belonging to him in this Kingdome, according to the Treaty of Peace. Besides the 2000. Itali∣ans, and 1000. Germans, lately sent from hence into Spain, with abundance of Ammunitions and Provisions: The For∣ces that are in the Milanez, being 5000. Foot, and 2000. Horse, are to be transported also thither in the Galleys of this Kingdome, to be imployed against Portugal. Cardinal Filomarini's goods have been seized on. Rome, June 7. 1660. The Cardinal Maldachini, formerly fallen into the Popes disgrace, hath been recalled home by the mediation of Car∣dinal Antonio. But the Pope having chidden him very bit∣terly, when he went to kiss his Toe, and make his submissions unto him; the Cardinal took it so much to heart, and was so highly displeased at it, that he hath since withdrawn him∣self again from Rome. Madrid, June 3. 1660. The Marquis of Manzera, ordinary Ambassadour of the Republick of Venice in this Court, hath been recalled, and is to discharge the same Fuction in the Court of France. The Spaniards are very much incensed at the late invasion made by the Portuguez upon the Spanish Dominions,
it is reported, that for to be revenged of it, they are resolved to make incursions into Portugal, and to make there as great havock as they can, for which end, orders have been given to fall on that Kingdome on all sides. The Marquis of Via∣nes, Governour of Galicia, doth march that way with 8000 Foot, and 800 Horse; and the Governour of Camara marcheth another way with his Forces. We hear that those of Lisbon are very much disgusted at the Queen of Portugal, and that the Council of the Chamber hath taken from her the management of the Affairs. Turin, June 19. 1660. The two Regiments of Foot that are sent to the supply of the Venetians, were shipped away eight dayes since, upon the Po, but the Horse are not gone yet. The Governour of Milan hath demanded leave to raise some new Forces in Sa∣voy. Two French Pirates bearing the Flag of Savoy, have lately seized upon a Grecian Vessel coming from Algier to Marseille, which is intended here to be restored with all its lading. The King of France hath desired that his Sub∣jects should pay no Toll at Villefranche, which not being granted, it hath caused some distaste; and we hear, that what comes from Dauphi into Savoy, is seized there. Riga in Lifland, 31 May 1660. The News being come hither how Vice Admiral Ruyter had seized on to Suedish ships about Copenhagen; our Go∣vernour hath likewise made an Imbargo upon all the ships and goods belonging here to the Dutch, and doth threaten a Confiscation of them, unless the Peace be suddenly concluded. Dantzick 12 June 1660. All things are preparing for the Dyet which is to be held at Warsow, about the latter end of this month; but it is re∣ported that the Nobility will not come thither, till after the King of Poland hath given them satisfaction upon their de∣mands. The Great Duke of Moscovy is so much alarm'd by the peace concluded between Sueden and Poland, that he
hath sent an Embassadour to the King of Poland, to make some Propositions to him, much more advantageous then the former, with order to repair to Warsow afore the open∣ing of the Dyet, where the States, after they have end∣ed the business of the Ratification of peace, are particularly to take into consideration how to expel the Moscovites out of Lithuania, it being resolved to give the chief command of all the Forces to be imployed against them, unto General Czarnesky, and the Lieutenantship to the Waywode Sapiha. The Count Koningsmarck hath shipped away part of his Re∣tinue for Lubeck, whither he is to go as soon as the news comes of the restauration of the Duke of Curland into his dominions. Wismar, 15 June 1660. Since the conclusion of the Peace between the Kings of Sueden and Denmark, we enjoy here a perfect tranquility, al∣though the Imperial forces be not yet removed from Mack∣lenburgh and Pomerania, their Officers keeping such an ex∣act Discipline among them, that the Country is no way an∣noyed by them. A Suedish ship riding before Warnemunde to receive the Toll of all the ships coming into Rostock and going out from thence, was lately fired by a Thunderbolt that fell upon her: All the Souldiers that were aboard her were consumed by the fire. Collen 22 June 1660. The 12 instant the young Prince, of whom the Dutchess of Newburgh was brought to bed two days before, was Christened at Dussldorp with great Ceremonies. The differences betwixt the City of Munster and the Bishop are so far from an accom∣modation, that at present both the parties have no other thoughts but to put themselves in posture to right themselves by the way of Arms. That Prelate who hopeth to have as∣sistance from several Princes of the Empire, being resolved not to abate any thing of his pretentions, and the City be∣ing resolved to venture all for the preservation of their Pri∣vileges.
Advertisement of Books newly Printed and Published. ☞ Nasorah, Seu Critica Divina, Or A Synoptital Directory on the Sacred Scriptures. The First part, Containing the several Canons of both Scriptures; Namely, of the Old and New Testament. (As the same are distinguished in the General Analysis, at the begining of this Trea∣tise.) By Ferdinando Parkburst . Sold by G. Bedel, and T. Gollins, at the Middle Temple-gate, Fleetstreet, and James Mags, near the Piazza in Covent Garden. There is a Book newly come forth in defence of Christ Jesus, Scriptures, Ministry and Ministers, against some Principall Quakers. By Francis Duke of Westminster. Sold by Miles Michael in Westminster-Hall, the first shp on the right hand. The Silent Soul, with Soveraign Antidotes against the most Miserable Exegents, or a Christian with an Olive Leaf in his mouth, when he is under the sharpest Tryals and Troubles, the saddst and dakest Providences and Changes; and Published by Thomas Brook, Preacher of the Gospel at Margaret Fish-street hill. Appor of Gold for young Men and Women, and a Crown of Glory for old Man and Weomen, or the happiness of being good betimes. By the same Author. A String of Pearl, or the best things reserved till last; with a serious discourse touching a well-grounded Assurance of Mans everlasting Happiness and Bles∣sedness. A Book of Short-Writing, the most exact lineal, and speedy, that hath been published. By Theophilus Metcalf. That Sheltons Short-hand Book in Latine, very useful for all Schollers, and Foreign Nations, newly translated and cut in Bass Plate. All five sold by John Hancock in Popes head Alley, the first shop next Corn-hill. ☞ We must call upon you again for a Black Dog, between a Grey∣hound and a Spaniel, no white about him, onely a streak on his Brest, and his Tayl a little bobbed. It is His Majesties own Dog, and doubtless was stoln, for the Dog was not born nor bred in England, and would never forsake His Master. Who∣soever findes him may acquaint any at Whitehal, for the Dog was better known at Court, than those who stole him. Will they never leave robbing His Majesty? must He not keep a Dog? This Dogs place (though better then some imagine) is the only place which no body offers to beg.
Advertisements. ☞ A Leather Portmantle lost at Sittingburn or Rochester, when his Majesty came thither, wherein was a Suit of Camolet Holland, with two little laces in a seam, eight pair of white Gloves, and a pair of Does leather; about twenty yards of ski-colour'd Ribbon twelvepenny broad, and a whole piece of black Ribbon ten penny broad; a cloath lead coloured cloak, with store of linnen; a pair of shooes, slippers, a Montero and o∣ther things; all which belong to a Gentleman (a near Servant to His Majesty) who hath been too long Imprisoned and Seque∣stred, to be now robbed when all men hope to enjoy their own. If any can give notice, they may leave word with Mr. Samuel Merne His Majesties Book-binder, at his house in Little Britain, and they shall be thankfully rewarded. A Black Mare 14 handful high, with a star in her forehead, with a long tayl never dockt, five years old. Lost out of a piece of a Gound near Cambden-house, Kinsingon: If any one can give notice of her to Mr. Richad Kellaways at the Rose in Knights-bridge, or to Mr. James Pierce at the White-Heat in Long-acre, they shall be well rewarded for their pains, Whitehal Wednesday the 27 of June. This day the Maior of St. Albans, accompanied with Mr. Foxwist the Recorder, and some of the principal Burgesses his Brethren, as the Representative of the said Corporation, made their Humble Address to His Majesty, the Recorder making a short and pithy Speech by way of Congratulation of his Majesties happy Restauration to his Royal Throne; and as∣surance of their Loyalty and Allegiance to his Majesty: and presented him with a Resignation of the Fee-Farm-rent pur∣chased by the Corporation in His Majesties absence, and the Arrears incurred in the mean time being a 100 l. in Gold, which His Majesty was pleased Graciously to accept, and to express his kind acceptance thereof, and that the Corpora∣tion should, as occasion required, participate of his Royal Grace and Favour. From Innerness, June 16. I have as I acquainted you in my last, made inquiry into the
business of Capt. Roll, which was contradicted in some late Pamphlets, but upon discourse with Sir James Smith and Mr. Calmady. I finde that the said Capt. Roll was seised for speak∣ing words, and that Mr. Calmady giving too much credit to him that brought the note, did in haste sign it. Wednesday, Dr. Colladon, Deputy from the Common∣wealth of Geneva, having presented unto His Majesty the Letters of th Lords Syndicks and Magistraes, and of the Pastors and Professors of that place, congratulating His Ma∣jesties happy Return and Restauration to his Kingdomes; And demanded in their Name of His Majesty, the continua∣tion of His Royal Favour and good Affection towards them. His Majesty was pleased to return them thanks for their ex∣pression of so Cordial a respect, and to give to the said De∣puties a very gracious and acceptable Answer upon his De∣mand. His Majesty having been pleased to bestow a Grant for the Degree and Honour of Baronet upon Nicholas Steward of Hartly Mawditt, in the County of Southampton▪ Esquire; A Patent passed under the Great Seal of England for con∣ferring the said Honour and Degree of Baronet upon the said Sir Nicholas Steward accordingly. Whitehal. On Monday last Colonel Sir John Robinson, Alderman of London, and a Member of this Parliament, was by his Ma∣jesty made Lieutenant of the Tower of London, an action most acceptable not only to the City and Parliament, but indeed to the whole Nation; the very prisoners themselves being glad of his company. The Kingdome having for a long time, by reason of his Majesties absence, been troubled with the Evil, great num∣bers have lately flocked for Cure. His Sacred Majesty on Monday last touched 250 in the Banquetting House, amongst whom, when his Majesty was delivering the Gold, one shuf∣fled himself in, out of an hope of profit, which had not been stroak'd; but his Majesty presently discovered him, saying, This man hath not yet been touched. His Majesty
hath for the future appointed every Friday for the Cure, at which time 200. and no more are to be presented to him, who are first to repair to Mr. Knight, His Majesties Chyrur∣gion, living at the Cross-Guns in Russel street, Covent-Gar∣den, over against the Rose Tavern, for their Tickets. That none might loose their labour, tis thought fit to make it known, that he will be at his house every Wednesday and Thursday, from Two till Six of the Clock, to attend that servic: And if any person of Quality shall send to him, he will wait on them at their lodgings upon notice given to him. On Tuesday His Majesty was pleased to be at Supper with the Lord Barcley, where he was very highly entertained. His Majesty hath been graciously pleased, to make Sir Wil∣liam Compton, brother to the Earl of Nothampton, Master of his Majesties Ordnance; Col. William Legge, Lieutenant of the Ordnance; Persons that have suffered with his Majesty in all his troubles; and Major Francis Nicols Surveyor of his Ordnance▪ his faithfulness in adhering to his Excellency in all these late Changes. These following were restored to their Offices, being for∣merly put out for serving his Majesty, viz. Edward Sherborne to his place of Clerk to his Majesties Ordnance, Mr. Marsh to his place of Storekeeper, and Mr. Clark formerly Com∣missary General in his late Majesties Army, to his place of Clerk of the Deliveries. His Majesty conferred on Mr. Hore the Office of Comp∣troller of his Majesties Mint. That the Souldiery may see the affection that his Sacred Majesty hath for the Army, he hath been pleased to do them so much honour, as to take that Regiment that was lately Col. Unton Crooks, for his own, which is now stiled, The Royal Regiment: What the Names of the Officers are, you may see in the next. His Highness the Duke of York, hath so far honoured the Regiment of the Lord Falconberg as to own it, which is now called, The Duke of Yorks Regiment, the Lord Fal∣conberg and the Officers being still continued.
From His Excellency Quarters at the Cock-pit. His Excellency hah been pleased, lately to change some Officers, and dispose their commands to oher. He hath given the command of the Troop late Captain Shermans, in the Lord Viscount Falklands Regiment, to Col. Henry Heylin. The Toop that was late Capt. Greenwoods in the same Regiment to Capt. Tho. Moley. The company late Major Waterhouse's in Col. Daniels Regiment to Capt. Leonard Aizay. His Exellency hath likewise commissined Major Adam Brown, Brother to Sir Ambrose Brown, to be Major of Sir Anthony Ashley-Coopers Regiment, be∣ing about to confer a greater honor on Major Harley. London. The Lord Major and Aldermen of London, upon a Mes∣sage from the Lord Chamberlain, delivered by Serjeant Char∣nock, concerning His Majesties Reception, have ordered the streets to be railed on one side; all the Livery-men will stand in their Formalities, with Banners and Streamers, distinguishing each Company; on the other side the Guards. The Guards to wait on His Majesty by eight in the morning at Whitehal, where the Lord Major, Aldermen, and City Officers in their Gowns, with about 600 of the several Companies, are to attend in their Velvet Coats and Chains, and Footmen follow∣ing them; from whence they proceed in this order, First, The Citizens in Velvet Coats and Chains, with Banners of distinguishment; the Aldermen in their Gowns, next the Serjeants at Arms and Heralds, after them immedi∣ately before the Kings Coach, the Lord Major bare with the Sword; with Garter the King at Arms on the right hand, and His Majesties Gentlemen Usher on the left; after which, His Majesties Coach guarded on both sides with His Royal Band of Pensios and Querries; after His Majesties Coach, fol∣low the House of Lords and Commons in their order; at Cheapside they have appointed Pageants. Of this and other entertainment, you may expect more in the next. Westminster. Phineas Paine that was lately committed upon misinformati∣on given, that he was the person that executed His late Ma∣jesty, is upon examination discharged. London, Printed by J: Macock, and Tho. Newcomb, 1660.
