22919.1 99899075 150757
A merry new Song of a rich Widdowes wooing, That married a young man to her owne vndooing. To the tune of, Stand thy ground old Harry. I Am so sicke for loue, as like was neuer no man, Which makes me cry, With a loue-sicke eye, Haue at thy coat old woman: Haue at thy coat old woman, Heere and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. I may haue maidens young, and lusty gallants plenty: Yet will I be As true to thée, as if thou wert but twenty. Haue at thy coat old woman, Haue at thy coat old woman: Here and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. Ile till thy pasture ground, and mow thy pleasant meddow: My mother me told, I must be bold in wooing of a Widdow. Haue at thy coat old woman, Haue at thy coat old woman: Here and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. Ile giue thée all those ioyes a young man may afford thée: And ride each day With thée any way, and brauely will maintaine thée, ue at thy coat, &c. This pleas'd the widdow well, and her old bloud reuiued, To heare his noate, Still haue at thy coat, 'twould make at old wench long-liued. Haue at thy coat old woman, Haue at thy coat old woman: Here and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. Old Rat she lou'd good chéese, and thereupon would nibble, And dance a round To heare the sound and musicke of his fiddle. Haue at thy coat old woman, Haue at thy coat old woman: Here and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. To an old womans heart no greater comfort may be, Then to liue in delight, And marry a Knight, and to be made a Lady. Haue at thy coat old woman, Haue at thy coat old woman: Here and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. The Moone scarce changed thrice, ere this old Lasse did marry: But all her sport Was quicke and short, and did full soone miscarry. Haue at thy coat, &c. The Second part. To the same Tune. IN Gold and Siluer-lace, and pipes of smoaking Fogus, Then euery day He spent her away in gold a braue Iacobus. Haue at thy coat old woman, Haue at thy coat old woman: Here and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. He made her Reddockes flye, and her old bags to ratlte: It was charge to kéepe So many shéepe, and heards of horned Cattle. Haue at thy coat old woman, Haue at thy coat old woman: Here and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. An hundred of good Oakes he sold to buy a Hobby, Abroad for to ride In pompe and pride, while she sate like a noddy. Haue at thy coat, &c. Her comply coat of woollen, he chang'd into fine Satten: Yet in a wéeke She was to séeke, and beg her bread by Patten. Haue at thy coat, &c. Her house most richly stored whereof he made not dainty: But in a day He consum'd away what she had got in twenty. Haue at thy coat, &c. He cherisht her mumbling gums, with food as they had néede on: For want of her téeth, He gaue her Bull-béefe, but once a wéeke to féede on. Haue at thy coat, &c. When she had liued two moneths, this lusty youngmans purchase, With kindnesse thus kild, Her coffin he fild with her consumed carkasse. Haue at thy coat old woman, Haue at thy coat old woman: Heere and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. ¶Old women take good héede, and trust your selues with no man: For as you doe heare, She hath paid full deare, for Haue at thy coat old woman. Haue at thy coat old woman, Haue at thy coat old woman: Here and there, and euery where, Haue at thy coat old woman. FINIS. Printed at London for T. Langley.
