669.f.24[10] 99870332 163741
AN HEROICAL SONG On the Atchievements of his most Excellent Highnesse IAMES DUKE OF YORK, ADMIRAL of CASTILE. COme rare invention some sprightly strain, The mighty Cleavelands pregnant brain, To speak great York, St. James for Spain, Whom we will have again. The Glorious Lustre of whose whitest Rose, Stalkt upon prickles to our late Red Nose, Too fragrant for the Breech without a Hose, Return'd in spight of Foes. Forc'd by his barbarous Country to Exile, And leave a wretched, self confounding Isle, Now the high Admiral of great Castile, Fortunes first pleasing Smile. A Prince, whose Infant eryes were sounds of Warre, His Swadling Clothes were Harnesse, a la guarre Wer's first plain words, the Martial Starre At's getting helpt C. R. Sprung from the Loynes of Henery le grand, That Val'rous Captain, to whose Soveraign hand, France owes its present Greatnesse and Command, And we th' hope of our Land. His other Grandsire, that peace-making King, That did the two discordant Nations bring To unity, from whose most royal spring Such streams derive to him. But the immediate Parents of this Prince Were the great matchless couple, Innocence And Wisdomes Patterns, in whose just defence, Hony soit qui maly'a pense. He Charls the good, She Mary good and great, Once the sole Orn'ments of this wanton State, She still survives his most unworthy fate, For him we mourn too late. Their sublimate perfections thus combin'd And all their several vertues here we find Centred in him, whom Nature had design'd But one degree behind. His Childish plays were Stratagems and Arts, Where he was alwayes taking Forts, our Hearts His Tennis Balls resembled Warlike Darts, Disguis'd, and so departs. Drest like a little Lady in a Gown, ('Twas Pallas sure) he left this thankless Town To keep a head as a reserve to th' Crown, If it descended down. Then trac'd the world, and forrain places see, Examin'd Courts, and their State mystery A privy Counsellor in's minority. Now just past twenty three. Since which, the French and bloody Flandrian Field, Have seen him a Victorious Sword to wield, Death like the Gorgons Head plac'd in his Shield, Compell'd the Foe to yield. With what undaunted valour did he set Upon the Dunkirke Camp what ere he met He overthrew, nor did their force him let. But Fortune did forget. Forc'd to give ore th' attempt, and to retreat, How did he change not leave the battels seat, And the advancing Enemy still rebeat, And saved the defeat. The amazed Belgicks wondred to behold His glorious valour, and their hands uphold T'Heaven for safety, fearing him too bold, And wisht our Pistols into Gold. But as if the Earth Elements could not suffice His Macedon Spirit, the great Ocean cries Let me pay tribute to his fame, and rise, High with my richest prize. Now the great James is lanch't into the Main St. James, Patron and Admiral of Spain St. George for England we still will maintain. Till we see great Charls again. LONDON. Printed by Henry Blunt, 1660.
