S2786A E1065_6 99869383 169263
Several ORDERS Made and agreed upon By the Iustices of the Peace for the City and Liberty of WESTMINSTER, Vpon Monday the 10. day of March, 1655. Concerning the future Licensing of all Inn-keepers, Victualers, & Alehouse-keepers, within the said City and Liberty. Putting in execution the Laws and Ordinances for the better Observation of the Lords-day; And the Laws and Statutes concerning the Punishment and Conveyance of Rogues, Sturdy Beggers, and Vagrants, to the place of their birth: With a declaration of such persons as are accounted Rogues by the several Statutes; and the penalties of several persons, both Officers and private persons neglecting their duty concer∣ning them. Setting forth what will be for the time to come expected from the Church-wardens, Overseers of the Poor, Constables and others, Inhabitants within the said City and Liberty. LONDON, Printed by W.G.
City, Bur∣rough, and Towne of Westmin∣ster, in the County of Midd. FOrasmuch as notwithstanding divers Good, Acts, and Ordinances of Parliament, made for the better observation of the Lords day, and the many endeavours used for the due execution of them. It is observed that the said day is very much pro∣phaned, and the observation thereof much neglected within this City and Liberty by Vineners, Inholders, Alehousekeepers, Victualers, Cooks, Tobaccosellers, and such like, by suffering drinking, and tipling, in their houser and by Butchers, Fruiterers, Polterers, & others, in selling, and exposing to sale their commodities; and by others, in using unlawful Pastimes, Traveling, and Working in their ordinary Callings and Professions upon the said day, and by Bargemen, Boatmen, and Watermen, Sayling and Rowing upon the River of Thames, and such as imploy them; and by such as imploy or travell with Choa∣ches, and Sedans, on that day, and by Taylors. Barbers, Millers, Cord wayners or Shoo∣makers, carrying their Wares, and exercising their Callings upon the same day. Wee have thought fit for the better discovering and suppressing the severall offences afore∣said, and for the more exact execution of the severall Lawes and Ordinances made for that purpose, to appoint, and do accordingly appoint, the persons undernamed Inhabi∣tants within the Parish of within the said City and Liberty dilligently, and by all lawfull wayes and meanes to make discovery of all persons offending against any the Lawes and Ordinances aforesaid, to us or any other of the Iustices of the Peace of the said City and Liberty, or to any Constable or other Officer, who are authorised by any of the said Acts or Ordinances to apprehend such Offenders; and for that end do also will and require, and in the name of his Highnesse the Lord Protector of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland &c. hereby straightly charge & command all such Constables, and other Officers and Ministers, within the Parish of within the said City & Liberty to whom it shall appertain, to be diligent in the execution of the powere & authorities given them by the said Lawes, or any of them; & also to be ayding and assisting unto the said persons hereunder particularly named, and every or any of them, in the finding out and causing to bee apprehended all and every such person and persons as shall offend in any of the kinds aforesaid, or otherwise contrary to the lawes aforesaid, and them to bring before us, or some of us or some other of the Iustices of the Peace of the said City and Liberty, to the end such offenders, and every of them may be further dealt withall as to justice shall appertaine; and to the end that you and every of you may the better understand what you may and ought to do herein, and will be ex∣pected from you the Churchwardens, and Overseers of the poore of your Parish, are hereby required to buy a convenient number of books, contayning the Act and Or∣dinances made for the better observation of the Lords day, and punishment of such per∣sons as shall therein offend, and to charge their disbursment therein upon their accounts, which shall bee allowed them upon the passing thereof. Given under our hands  this  day of  165 To And to the high Constable, of the said City and Liberty, and all petty Constables, , Overseers of the poore, and to all Gover∣nors of the Company of the Watermen, and all other Officers and Mi∣nisters within the said City and Liberty to whom it shall concerne.
City, Bur∣rough, & Towne of Westmin∣ster, in the County of Mid. At a meeting at the Vestry in Margarets Church in Westminster, on Monday the 10. day of March 1655. before the Right Honourable Sir John Barkstead Knight Lievetenant of his Highness Tower of London, Sir John Thorowgood Kt. Ed∣ward Bulstrode, Edward Grosvenor, Edward Carey, William Wheeler, Francis Blake, Francis VVhite, and Ralph Hall, Esqs His Highness Justices assigned to keep the publike Peace within the Liberty of the late Deane and Chap∣ter of the Colegiate Church of Peters Westm. of the City, Burrough and Town of Westm. in the County, of Midd. and also to hear and determinediverse fellonies, tres∣passes and other misdoings within the said City and Liberty committed. IT is Ordered by the said Justices, that whatsoever Offi∣cer shall apprehend any Rogues or Vagabonds, and correct or cause them to be corrected according to Law, and shall deliver him, her, or them, over with a Certificate of his, her, or their said correction, unto the next Officer, to be conveyed to the place of his, her, or their birth or aboad, as the case shall require, shall have two shillings paid unto him for every such Rogue or Vagabond, by such officer to whom they shall be so delivered; and that every such Officer so paying the same, shall receive the like sum of the next Officer, and so from Officer to Officer unto the last Officer of the place in the cofines of this City & Liberty; which said last officer shall be allowed his disbursment therein at the determination of the time wherein he shall serve the same Office, he producing unto the next Justice of the Peace a re∣ceipt under the hand of such Officer to whom he paid the same, upon his re∣ceipt of such Rogues and Vagabonds, the said receipt being allowed under the hand of the said Justice; and in case any other person not being an Of∣ficer shall apprehend any Rogues or Vagrants, and bring him, her, or them unto the Constable or other Officer of the place where they were so apprehended, such Constable or other Officer shall in like manner pay un∣to
such person the sum of two shillings for every such Rogue or Va∣gabond, and upon the performance of his duty in his, her, or their correcti∣on or conveiance as aforesaid, shall bee in lie manner reimbursed; and in case any of the Officers aforesaid shall refuse to perform this Order, in pay∣ing the said mony and conveying any such Rogues or Vagabonds that then upon complaint thereof made by such person or Officer who shall bee grieved therby unto a Justice of Peace, the said Justice is desired to bind him in a Recognizance to appear at the next Sessions of the publike Peace to be holden for this City & Liberty, that such Officer so refusing may be procee∣ded against according to Law for his said contempt: And it is also Ordered that this Order be forthwith Printed and sent to the Justice of the Peace of each severall division by the Clerk of the Peace of the said City and Liber∣ty, and the said Justices are desired to call together the Church-wardens, and Constables, of the severall Parishes within their respective divisions and to acquaint them with this Order, and to give the same in charge unto them for their observance thereof accordingly; and to the end all Officers, Ministers, and others who are herein concerned, may the better understand their duty, and know the penalty that they incurr for their negligence therein; It is thought fit that the said Justices of the Peace within their said divisions shall disperse abroad among the Constables a Paper, signify∣ing what persons are by the Law and Statutes adjudged Rogues, with the penalty imposed upon each of the said Officers for his neglect in the per∣formance of his duty, that they may not pretend ignorance when they come to be punished for the same. The persons hereunder named being above the age of seaven yeares are adjudged Rogues by the Lawes and Statutes of this Nation. All persons calling themselves Schollers going about begging, all Seafa∣ring men pretending losses of their Ships and Goods on the Sea, going about the Countrey begging, having no testimony under the hand of a Justice of Peace or the times limited by the same for his journey expired. All idle persons going about in any Countrey either begging or using any subtile craft or unlawfull Games and Plaies or faining themselves to have knowledge in Physiognomy, Palmistrey, or other like crafty science or pre∣tending that they can tell destinies, fortunes, or such other like fantasticall imaginations. All persons that be or utter themselves to be Proctors, Procurers, Pa∣tet-gatherers or Collectors for Goales, Prisons, or Hospitals, all Fencers, Bearwards, common Players of Interludes and Minstrels, wandring a∣broad, all Juglers, Tinkers, Pedlars, and petty Chapmen, wandring abroad, all wandring persons and common Labourers being persons able in body, using loytering, and refusing to worke for such reasonable wages as is taxed or commonly given in such parts where such persons do or shall hap∣pen to dwell or abide, not having living otherwise to maintaine them∣selves. All persons delivered out of Goales that beg for their Fees, or otherwise
do travell begging, all such persons as shall wander abroad begging, preten∣ding lesses y sire or otherwise, all such persons not being Fello, wndring and pretending themselves to be Egyptians, or wandring in the habit, fortue, atire of counterfeit Egyptians; All such persons as shall wander up and downe the Country to sell Glasses, are adjudged, deemed, and taken as Rogues, Vagabonds, and Sturdy beggers. The penalties by Law to bee imposed upon such persons as shall neglect their duty in passing of Rogues, I. That the Minister of the place shall Register the testimoniall, signi∣fying the day and place of his punishment in a booke kept for that purpose, upon paine of five shillings. II. That if a Constable, Tithingman, or Headborough, bee negligent in the Execution of his duty herein, hee shall forfeit for every default twenty shillings. III. That if any person doe in any wise disturbe or let the execution of the Law herein, or making rescusse against any Officer or person in the execution of the Statute made 39. Eliz. Cap. 4. He shall forfeit for every offence five pound, and be bound to his good behaviour. IV. That every person or persons that seeth or knoweth any Rogue to resort to his or their Houses to beg, gather or receive any Almes, shall convey him, or cause him to bee conveyed to the next Consta Tythingman upon paine of ten shillings. V. That the Constables or Headboroughs, having Warrants directed to them for privy searchers for Rogues, and neglect to give an account in writing under their hands to the Justices of the Peace, at the next meeting, such Rogues as they have passed and conveyed since the last meeting of the said justices, shall incur what fine the said Justices shall please to set up∣on them, not exceeding forty shillings. VI. That all fines and forfeitures appointed, or to grow by the Act of 39. Eliz. Cap. 4 except such as bee otherwise limited by the said Act, shall wholly go and be imployed for the use of the reparations and maintenance of the House of Corection, & stock and store thereof, or reliefe of the poor; where the offence shall be committed, at the discretion of the Justices of the Peace of te same City and Liberty, and that all fines and forfeitues appointed to grow by conviction of any person, shall by Warrant under te hads and Seas of any two or more Justices of the Peace, &c. be Levied by distresse and sale of the Goods and Chattels of the Offender; wich shal be good in Law against such Offender, and that if any of the said Offences shal be confessed by the Offender, and that the same shall bee proved by two sfficint awfull Witnesses, before such two or more Justices of the Peace that then every such person shall forthwith stand and be in Law con∣victed thereof.
City, Bo∣rough, and Town of Westmin∣ster in the County of Middl. At a meeting at the Half-moon in the Strand on Friday the 29 day of March, 1649. Before Sir John Thorowgood Knight, Thomas Lathum, John Hooker, Edw. Birkhead, Tho. Fauconberge, George Manley, and Edward Carter, Esquires Justices assigned to keep the publick Peace within the Liberty of the late Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of Peters Westminster, of the City, Borough, and Town of Westminster, in the County of Middl. And also to hear and determine divers Felonies, Trespasses, and other mis∣doings committed within the said City and Liberty: These Articles were agreed upon, as followeth, viz. I. THat the said Justices in their several Divisions do consider and report in writing to the next Sessions what number of Alehouses are needful and sufficient in each Parish, for accommodation of Labourers and Travellers. II. That all Cellars, Blind- or Ally- and Backward-Ale∣houses be forthwith suppressed, and no more in such places licensed. III. That all disorderly Alehouses be from time to time suppress'd; and as the Alehouse-keepers shall dye, and remove their habitations, no new Li∣censes be granted to their Successors in their Houses, unless such Houses be fitted and seated in very convenient places, until such time as the supernume∣rary Alehouses be reduced to the numbers to be reported needful for each Parish, as aforesaid. IV. That the Justices here present do agree, That they will not License any Alehouse but in their respective Divisions, unless the License be taken and subscribed by one Justice of Peace of that Division, and those not to exceed the number to be reported as aforesaid.
V. That if any new Licenses be granted, the Clerk of the Peace do the first day of the next Quarter-Sessions acquaint the Court with such Licenses, and by whom granted: And the Clerk of the Peace do likewise send to each Justice of the Peace a Catalogue of the names of all Licensed Alehouse∣keepers in the Division where such Justice inhabiteth: And also from time to time to send the names of all suppressed Alehouse-keepers. VI. That no person that hath adhered to, or voluntarily assisted the Ene∣my against the Parliament, shal either be continued a Victualler, or hereafter licensed. VII. If any person that is well-affected to the Parliament, shall henceforth desire to be licensed, that he be licensed in stead of any person that he shall discover to be a Delinquent, or to have assisted or contributed to the Enemy, the former Rules subscribed by the Justices being observed.
At another meeting in the Vestry of Margarets Church in Westm. on Monday the 10. day of March, 1655. Before Sir John Barkstead Knight, Lieutenant of his Highness Tower of London, Sir John Thorowgood Knight, Edward Bulstrode, William Wheeler, Edw. Grosvenor, Francis Blake, Francis White, and Ralph Hall, Esquires his Highness Justices as∣signed to keep the publick Peace within the Liberty of the late Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of Peters Westminster, of the City, Borrough, and Town of Westminster, in the County of Middl. And also to hear and determine divers Felonies, Tres∣passes, and other misdoings committed within the said City and Liberty: These Articles aforesaid were agreed upon, confirmed, and assented unto; and also the Articles following were ordered from henceforth to be observed. THat all and every licensed Inn-keeper, Alehouse∣keeper or Victualler, that shall permit or suffer any Traveller, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, Drover, or any of their Servants, to come into his, her, or their house after twelve of the clock on any Saturday∣night; or shall suffer any person to travel from his, her, or their house, until after one of the clock on Monday Morning, without good and urgent cause to be allowed by some Justice of the Peace; or shall permit and suffer any person or persons to be or remain in his, her, or their houses, contrary to the Law in that case made and provided, and shall be thereof convict, shall forthwith be suppress'd, and not again licensed, but upon good cause shewed to the Justices of Peace in their Quarter-Sessions. II. That all such Inn-keepers, Alehouse-keepers, or Victuallers, as shall at any time hereafter be convicted for profane Cursing or Swearing, Drunken∣ness, suffering disorders in their houses; gaming, or playing at Billiard-Tables, Shovelboard-Tables, Dice, Cards, Tables, Nine-pins, Pigeon-holes, Bowling Alley, or Bowling-Green, or any other unlawful game in his, her, or their House, Yard, Backside; or any other place to his, her, or their House belonging; or who hath or shall keep in his, her, or their House, Billiard-Tables, Shovelboard-Tables, Dice, Cards, Tables, Nine-pins, Pigeonholes, Bowling-Alley or Bowling-Green, or any of them, or any other unlawful game; or shall want accommodation of lodging, for Souldiers, Labourers or Travellers, shall be suppress'd, and not again licensed, but as aforesaid. III. That no Bailiff, or his Under-officer, Follower, or Servant, nor any Beadle, be licensed or allowed to keep any Ale-house or Victualling-house; nor they, nor any of them; or any Constable, Brewer, or any Parish-officer, shall be taken as Surety for any Inn-keeper, Alehouse-keeper or Victualler, for the performance of the Condition of his Recognizance for Victualling, within this City and Liberty.
