A128 R231147 99897243 136892
THE ABSTRACT Of the CLAIMS Of all Persons Claiming as INNOCENTS In the City, County of the City, And County of DUBLIN. blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE C2 R Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie, and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castlestreet, 1663.
By His MAJESTIES Commissioners Appointed to execute the Act for Settlement of IRELAND. WHereas by our late published Rules, Or∣ders and Directions, &c. dated the two and twentieth of OCTOBER last past, To prevent the surprizal of any person for want of due notice when We intend to begin with any particular County, and that all persons concerned in any of the Lands claimed by Innocents in such County, may have certain notice of the persons claim∣ing the same: We have thought fit and ordered to begin with the several Claimants in the City and County of the City of DUBLIN, and to send forth our publick notice thereof to the several Counties throughout this Kingdom, with Lists containing the Claimants Names and Denominations aswel of the Lands claimed in those particular Counties, as of Lands claimed in other Counties: These are therefore to signifie unto all persons con∣cerned, That upon TUESDAY the tenth day of FEBRUARY next ensuing, We intend to sit publickly in Court at the KINGS INNS DUBLIN, then and there to proceed to the hearing of such of the undernamed Claimaints Causes, (a List whereof is herewith sent) as shall then, and so from time to time, be fitted and pre∣pared for our Adjudication, according to our said published Rules, Orders and Directions, &c. And We do further hereby signifie, That the said under-named Claimants are hereby required to ap∣point
their Atturneys respectively to prosecute their Claims before Us. And all Souldiers, Adventurers, and other per∣sons whatsoever, concerned in any of the under-men∣tioned Lands, their Atturneys, Agents or Sollicitors, (who have been so remiss and negligent in prosecuting their Claims, and bringing in their answers, that We could not hitherto proceed to the publick hearing of Causes, as We intended) are hereby likewise requi∣red to be more diligent in making their appearances, in filing their answers, and producing their Witnesses, Evidences and other Writings, according to the re∣spective days and times, and at the peril by Us prescri∣bed in Our published Rules, Orders and Directions a∣foresaid. Given at the Kings Inns Dublin, the 16th day of December, 1662. Signed by Order, THOMAS KENNEDY, Chief Clerk to the said Commissioners.
Claimants Names. Denominations of the City, County of the City, & County of DUBLIN. Other Counties. Denominations. Anglesey Ar∣thur Earl, and Walter Plun∣ket. 7 Houses.     Anglesey Ar∣thur Earl, and Patr. Tallant. 5 Houses in S. Brides street.     Arthur John. Several houses, waste land. Carbery house in Skinner-row. 8 houses and 24 acres of land. Hacketstown. Pierstown Lumlottery. A bond of the Staple of 400 l. A Bond of the Staple of 100 l. Neals-town, Westpelstown. Meath Louth Roscomon Mayo ‖ Louth: Roscomon: Mayo and Sligo. The Rectory of Knock∣mark: Heathstown: Har∣ristown: Drumine: New∣rath: Mullagh: Curry: Drumcassil: Richards-town: Abby in Atherdee and Parks: Galy: Leo: Garran: Ballikilline: Drombofin, Dromoma∣dery: Fullenlanker: Cluombuock: ‖ A bond of the Staple of 1000 l. Allen Edward. Several Houses: Athgoe Kildare Louth Wicklow Bishopscourt: Oughte∣rard with the Rectory thereof: Painstown: Hartwelmill: Keelocks: Rathmore: Palmerstown Little Rath: Atherdee Kilbride. Archibald Pierce. Two Houses Clogheran, Swords Cappag, Killenardan Wicklow Cavan Kildare Glasinmullin, the Tiths of Brea, Ten poles of land and a Castle, Crikriagh, Latelow: Toniveagh, Maghery in Caltry, Knockitean, A∣ghatenevulty, Kiltily Benevulty, Lesderig Bogh, Aghigaslan, Black∣hall, Several Statutes. Arthur Patrick. Two houses, Colmans-town. Two Statutes for 400 l.     Allen Ralph. Two houses, one waste plot of ground.    
Arthur Bennet. 5 Houses, One park in S. Keavans street, Irish∣town, the wood of Castleknock. Kildare Tipperary Creistown, Kellystown, Newtown. Annagh, Derry: Ballyurgane. Ash Rich. jun. 1 House in Highstreet. Kildare The great Fernaght. Archibald Christofer. One Stonehouse in St. Patrickstreet. Oldgrange, Brea. The Rectory of New-town in the Strand. Kildare Wicklow Catherlagh Grangfort alias Grange foer, Collinstown al. Collins, Thorimstown, al. Coninstown, Coole∣rick, Huetstown, Kilcae, Tymolinbey, S. Johns∣land: Inchmaquidder, Naas, The Rectory of Kilcrony, Killelade, Portress, Moylabby, Spretstown Crookstown Gurteen, Ivaughan, Da∣vidstown, Kilrush, Tir∣doyn, Solland, Johns∣town, Kill. Ratool, Corristown, al Ballishroe, Spinnans, Toberogan, Gracesland Gibbletstown, the Re∣ctory of Fontsland, Glancar, Glancormack. Castledermot. Archbald Ed∣ward. Two houses in Thomas∣street, 2 in S. Kevan∣street, 2 Tenements at the Green. Wicklow Templecarrig Aylmer Ge∣rald. One house in Shipstreet Meath Louth Sisly, Obrestown, Mala∣fine, Balrath, Deens, Higginstown, Carrick, Cruistown, Begnetshills, Baristown, Rectory of Ballimagarvey, Billards∣town, Senescalstown, Thirstenstown, Dunmo. Drogheda 2 houses Hainstown, Reynoldstown, Gibstown, Carnonbreg, Preistland, Chanonrock Coolcredan, Dromcawel Monasterbois.
Allen Law∣rence. Three houses in Wine∣tavern street, several houses in S. Patrick∣street, 2 houses on Mer∣chants key, A Feefarm in S. Nicolas parish with∣out the walls, A Statute Staple of 200 l. A Sta∣tute Staple of 800 l. County Clantarf, Dalky. Louth Sligo Queens Meath Richardstown, Poo∣haustown, Verdestown, Branganstown, Bergan, Mashfieldstown, Rath∣eskin. Dromcouragh &c. Inch al. Ballycoolin &c. Davistown, Corballies, Much-Roberstown. Brown Tho∣mas. Three houses and a gar∣den, an Orchard and a park in S. Thomastreet, Clondalkin, Knock∣muckine, Venables farm, Lukan.     Bath Peter. 8 Houses, Barbies land, Coolock, the troul-mill of Swords, S. Dowlagh, 40 acres betwixt Santry and Clunturk, Clun∣turk, A Statute Staple of 1000 l. on Athcarn, Richinhead, Hackes∣town, A rent charge on Walter Cruce. Meath Roscomon Grange end, Thomas town, the Grange of Trevet, the red moor al Dunsoghlin, A Statute Staple of 830 l. on the estate of G. Crofton. Blake Patrick, and others. 4 Houses, Rathcool, Tassagart. Galway Gortigany, Killogene∣malow, Killogecostraw, Gortincorra. Barnwall Will. Mary his wife and Dominick Hughs. One house on Cockhill. Westmeath Mullingare. Ball Thomas. 2 Houses in Pipestreet 1 house in Highstreet. Meath Kildare Bolton, Robinston. Millston. Bermingham Patrick. One garden-plot in Ox∣montown.     Brown Mabell. One house in Rosemary lane.     Beal Josias and Barbara. One house in S. Johns lane.    
Bellew Edward 10 l. per annum out of William Higgins houses and lands.     Bath Patrick. 2 Houses and several other Tenements in Pipestreet and Mary lane, Glasnevine. Meath Balgeath. Barnwal James Several houses, Deum∣nagh, Tirenure, Camish, Gallan-town, Cromisin, Ballimad, Ballibrigen, Balliformot. Wicklow Louth Tiniepark, Ardee. Banks Andrew. One messuage in High∣street, 1 house in Skin∣ner-row, 1 house in Highstreet.     Barnwel Ro∣bert. 2 houses in Cookstreet. Mearh Wicklow Clonmeath, Masetown, Kilmakennock. Bret John and others. 2 Houses in Highstreet. 1 house in Christchurch lane. Meath Deece Barony Goltromer, Knockmark Ratooth Bar. Mixmal. Brenan Ri∣chard. 1 House in S. Johns lane.     Brice Richard. 1 House in the Corn-market, 2 houses in S. James street, 1 house in S. Thomas street, Kil∣mainam, 2 houses in Newstreet, Giffords grove, Flouds freehold, Fitzsimons or Bealings land, the Backey, the new park. Newcastle Bar. Hospital of S. John of Jerusalem, Sloesland, Clinshers park, Crumlin. Meath Dunboyn Barnwel Mary. 1 House in S. Thomas-street.    
Bor John. 2 Houses in S. Michaels lane. Galway Meath Canmer, Ballimrergh, Garnaan, Balaghbane, Derrin, Laghlin, Tober∣kegh, Ballinderry, Ballagh, Cagail. Great Bewbeck. Burnel Henry Esq; Houses in Oxmontown, Irishtown, Lutterils∣town, Barbiston, Castle∣knock, Blancherston, Hartstown, al. Staheny, Coulock, Backistown, Castle-Curragh, A mill and weir in the Liffie, Ric∣kenhead, Diswelstown, Kellistown, Clansillagh, Finaghsland, Jannings land, Stagob, Porters∣town, Dillons land, The pace, Ashtown, Carpenterstown, Meath Kildare Moyfinragh Bar. Castle-Rickard, Ballinihan. Salt Bar. Killistown, Creestown, Newtown, Gragesal∣lagh, Powerstown, Kilmartin, Craserath. Barnwal Pa∣trick. 5 Houses. Meath Louth Duleek Bar. Kilmone, Primerston, Rath, Iriston, Ballihake Kilrew, Smithston, Franckston, Keaser, Balliston, Tough, Bodin Ratouth, Flemington, Mananstown, Kinard, Hilton. Ratowth Bar. Mosenrath, Rathmolan, Treman, Stranne, Clon∣covan. 7 Houses in Drogheda. Birmingham Mary and Ma∣ximilian Dem∣psey & Anne ux. The Fleece in Fish-shamblestreet. Kildare Kings Carhery. Donferth, Disert, Mu∣clan, Mulgigh, Killien, Ballinamallagh, Kil∣murry, Kilshanchoe, Irr, Ballrennet, Ballin∣derry, half Mucklan, Inkehy half Bar. Ballicolgan, Laraghs.
Ball John. 11 Houses and the shut clap-mill, Portrane & the Rectory thereof. Meath Kildare Duleek Bar. Londerstown, New∣town of Duleek, Bolton, Robinstown. Milletstown. Birne Daniel. Several houses and te∣nements. Castlknock Bar. Stagobby, Abbistown. Wexford Wicklow Queens Shilmalier Barony. Ardsmead, Collinstown. Arcklow. Ballinecorbeg, Balli∣caple, Ballinclare, Carrigmore. Portnelton. Quintinally, Moret. Stradbally. Allebeg. Bamber Roger & Teresa ux. One house in High∣street, 1 house in S. Patrickstreet. Nettercross. Murtheree. Lowth Keappock, Brodlogh, Baltrasney, Miltown, Rath, Drommore, Capogs mill, S. Sundays land, Atherdee, Reco∣gnizance of 1000 l. ac∣knowledged by Tho. Keppocks Recognizance of 200 l. from Gerald Cowley of Atherdee & William Moor of Bar∣meath, Another Reco∣gnizance of 300 l. ac∣knowledged by John Dowdal of Atherdee. Barnwell James of Brimore. 1 house on merchants Key, Brimore, Fle∣mingstown, Newhaven, Moylaragh, Plunkets land. Balrodery Bar. Balrothery, Balbrigan, Balscaddan, Garrestown, Tobergrag, Ballimad, Drimnagh. Ʋppercross. Crusrath, Little Sta∣heny, Blancherstown, Ringwellstown, Tyrrynure, Camadge. Meath Dunboyn Bar. Peirstown, Marshal, Dunboyn, Newtown de Dunboyn, Brabstown, Collierstown, Black∣wood, Hawkenstown, Warenstown. Duleek. Battranstown, Cock∣ranstown, Boynanstown Denamstown, Pruins∣town, Racastown, The Grange of the Logh, S. Ganstons, Duleek, Carblagh.
  Newcastle Bar. Ballyformant, Gallans∣town, Crumlin, Fox and Goose.   Kells Kilmainam beg. Margallen Oristown, Knock, Lyshanstown. Atherdee The chiefLord demeasn and the meadow adjoy∣ning, the great hill of Atherdee, Mullaghdry∣lan, Mullaghmulin, Sta∣killin. Brown Dame Mary. 2 houses on the blind Key. Longford Moydo Bar. Bellamore, Caldragh∣gebbedegh, Clontehe, Clonelan. Barnwel Simon & ux. Five houses in the Suburbs. Meath Duleek Bar. Kilmone, Brimerston, Irishton, Rath, Balli∣hack. Ratouth. Kilbrew and the Advou∣son of Kilbrew parish, Smithston, Franckston, Reasle, Paliston, Toagh Bodin, Ratouth, Flem∣mington, Grange end, Dunsaghlin, Mananston, Kinand, Ulton. Moyfenrath Rashmolian, Troman, Little Stran. 7 houses in Drogheda. Crawley Edw. 3 houses, Bellingstown, Kilcoskan, Great and little Bellingstown, Loghmartin. Louth Monaghan Ferrald Cookstown, Athclare. Ballymeaghan. Cheevers John. 2 Houses on the Wood-Key, Balrodery Garistown. Meath Kildare Skreen. Mastown, Corballis, Painstown, Rogerstown Bodingham, Kilmoon. Naas. Rathmoor, Pounches∣town, Woolfstown, Haynstown, Athgarret, Firhill, Skeogs,
    Wicklow Catherlagh Wexford Philipstown, Edistown, Cradogstown, Balcase, Ballicane al. Plowland, Godamendy, Ramore∣mill. Talbotstown bar. 3 Castles, Butlers court, Knockanem, Cnockerin, Cnocanore, Oldcourt, Monfin, Raturele, Cul∣lenshil, Balligore, Co∣menstown, Bollensmut∣tane, Ballydangelly, both the lowest: Cnock∣anybroky, Inchbane, Ballinetony, Bollynes∣kehanie, Ballynoltagh, the Kell of 3 Castles, Temanerly, Coshana∣vally, Slewnelaraghduff, Slewsaw, Carrigletrim: Killincnappagh, Ballin∣foyl, Ballysillore, Clono∣vally, Sknygane, mac-Nebantry, Carrigdown: Glanbride, Downfoord, 18 tenements and land in the town of Wick∣low. Catherlagh Grangefort: Littletown, Ballygory: Glenoge: Rathvern: Rathveren al. Rathverehan: Clin∣clogh al. Kingclogh: Motelessagh, Ballensy∣neare, Banogboy: the tythes of Frierstown. Bargie bar. Ballyhaly, Ballylosky: the hill in the barony of Bargy, Horestown, Halslone, Scurlogs bush, Lecane, Deans castle, Grange, Graige, Balli∣mader, Ballyfrorie, Banno, Duncormuck.
      Shilmalier Coolrahin, Church∣town, Ballycollany, Ballear, Birdstown, Sommerstown. Fort Cossenstown, Balli∣cnocane, Killalane, Bal∣limenan, Ballyvouch, Ballyrely, Hayesland, Clongaddy, Roches, Keatings, Ballygrun∣gan, Cloomeen, Car∣rigechurch, Barristown, Kereaght; Island. Cadowgan E∣liz. vid. One house on the Woodkey.     Chamberlain Roger. One house in Parsons∣lane.     Clerk John. Swan-tavern in High∣street, Five houses and a waste piece of ground in Oxmantown, Two houses in Castlestreet, Six houses in S. Tho∣mas and S. James street, One house in S. Ste∣phens street, One judgment. Meath Tipperary Dunhoyn Notston, Rowan, Cra∣dockstown, Loughsal∣lagh, Bradston, Main, Barrets place, Stephens place, Barons park, Philipston al. Boolis, Kenaghston, Purchers∣ton, Curcoyn, Ball∣mucolly called Tues land, Nallswood, Go∣nocks, Warrenstown, Mileston, Muchfeild, Stockins, Walsheogrow, Lawkins, Pinkstown, Ballipadine, Dunboyn, Dun aghlin, Clonee, Ronskeagh. One parcel of land. Carrick Simon. One house in Highstreet     Carbery Richard. One messuage by New∣gate. Meath Ballymagarvy.
Culm Debora vid. Two houses in Golden lane. Meath Tarraghee al. Castleboy Cunnigar Farm Blakes∣bush, Thornton, Ba∣rons meadow, Knock∣gowran, Bodinsleys, Baronsleys, Skryne. Cosgrave Matthew. One house on the Mer∣chants key.     Cosgrave Laurence. One house on the Mer∣chants key.     Crolly alias Chamberlin Thomasin vid. 16 houses, Colock. Glasnievin al. Dracots farm, Kilmainham. Meath Westmeath Kells Chamberlinstown. Lune Moyacher. Mollengar Two houses in Mollen∣gar. Cook Amy. 6 Houses.     Cleer Patrick. 2 houses in S. Thomas street.     Coleman Tho∣mas. A house, Orchard and garden in Newstreet.     Christ-Church Dean and Cha∣pter. The Chantry lands of S. Annes Guild, S. Seths Guild, 3 houses in Oxmontown, several houses on the Wood∣key, One house, Ʋppercross. Smothscourt al. Simonscourt. Colcot and the Cony∣burry al. Scald hills, Ballimore-Eustace.     Caddle Robert 2 houses in S. Patricks street.     Carbery John. Baggatrath al. Baggots∣roth.     Conran Wal∣ter. 1 house in S. Thomas street. Balrodery Bar. Courragh.    
Crump Chri∣stophar and o∣thers. The horse-pool and one house in S. Michans, Shallon, Dancestown, Kilmainham, Rahine, The mill of Collotrath, &c.     Delahide John. 2 Houses, Irishtown, Phepostown, Rahinny and Corballis. Wicklow Rathmuck, Ballyogan, Rathsalcan, the Tythes of Ashtown and Pells∣town. Dunsany Lord. One house, the Pace, Castlknock Bar. Fullam. Meath Cavan Skreen. Dunsany, Corballis, Cloony, Hilltown, Ulickstown, Oristown. Dunboyn Garrestown, Kenni∣stown, Voldenstown, Duleek. Curraghstown, Erick, Tutrath, Oldcastle, half Fower Fenner, Bolies, Drum∣lerry, Castletor, Cres∣drame. Kells Ballyhist, Corristown, one Tenement and a chiefry in Kells. Great and little Glane, Tullaghmedan, Deece Barony The Rectory of Kiltale, Scurlockstown, Phernock. Castleruan Knocknevoy, Aghbrack and Lorganboy. Clomayho Kilfacy, Crocovertuine, Corkloghan, Corfur∣noy. Claminghan Bellychan, Tulliboy, Aghnehsdern.
Dowde Tho∣mas. One house in High∣street, 2 houses in Schoolhouse lane, One house in S. Patrickstreet Nettercross. Murdery, Dowds-Ca∣bragh, Strawbelly. Castleknock. Porterstown, Bursers-town. Meath Louth Meath Navan, Rathmory, Knock-Rickard, Mol∣loghdryllen, Ballitrasny Broadlogh, S. Sundays land, Atherdee, Mil∣lockstown, Kildermot, Atherdee Huntstown, Haghlam, Simonstown, Finway. Ferrard Melton, Rathdroni∣mure. Dunboyn Clonee, Morrals land. Dutton John. 1 house in Bridgstreet.     Desmineere Lewis & John. One house in the Mer∣chants Key.     Dongan Tho∣mas. Two Houses in Wine-Taverne street, three houses in the New-Roe.     Duffe Richard and Ux. Eleven Houses. Cooleck. Kilmainham, Clontarfe. Collinstown, Davans-stown, Balleforman.     Devenish James. Five Tenements called Horsemarket.     Deey Michael. Eight Houses.     Dongan Wil∣liam, Lord Vis∣count. The Park without Saint James, Stayne near the Colledge four Houses. Dalky, Abbotstown, the Rectory and Tithes of Palmers-town. Kildare. Salt. Castletown, Kildrought, Moretown, Kilmarre∣dock, Godfrey-Harris∣ton, Coolmac-Tho∣mas, Collinbacks-town, Possicks-town, Ardresse, Bebus. Naas. Shearlocks-town, with the moyety of the tithes Clare. Clare, Cooledriny. Salt. The impropriate tithes
    Longford Meath Queens Kilkenny. Catherlagh of Kildrought. Killeullin. Tobberrogan, Johns∣town. Salt half Bar. Killmean, Gibbins-town, Moretown. Clare. Corrihils, Kilbegges, Long-town, Ballymany. Kannell. Grange-Clare. Clare. Corrickeragh, the im∣propriate tithes of Kil∣begg. Connell. The Tithes of Grange-Clare. Clare. The tithes of Corcke∣ragh, Stabbers-town, & Hodgestown. Ballinesheegard, Cooly∣vore. Kells. Ballybreagheny, Gibs-town, Donagh-Patrick, Korbins-town. Deece. The impropriate tithes of Moyglare. Rathnemanagh, Knoka∣negrough, Coolcorin, Balliteighin, Knockan∣derry, Mariborogh. The tithes of Temple Michael, Cool-Sarskan and Monegan. The half of the tithes of Cloedagh, the half of the Rectory of A∣thade. Sleward The tithes of the Baro∣ny of Sleward. Ʋpper Ormond. The impropriation of Middlethird, the im∣propriation
    Catherlagh Tipperary. of S. Johns town, alias Scadans and the tithes. The tithes of Kilkenny∣begg, Lysmayneny, Lis∣necloanta, Garrinemo∣na, Lisnemorragh, Gort∣nemoddah. The impropriation of Luchoe, Rathneganna∣nagh, Cleofadda, Car∣rigigown, Barnedirge, Cloughurdan, Lough∣anatteney, Ball ristenna, Tiwel, Balliduffe, Sheraghquillagh, Ro∣dine, Lisbally, Rath∣nerenra, Lisservan, Camsheceragh, Gort∣more, Ross-Reilcerrin, Lisludican, Ballidaggan, Lissduffe, Ballyriskard and Knockna. Doyn George One house in Damas∣street. Downe. Donag-Clony, Moyga∣nan, Ballykeele, Ballya∣ghreskiugh, Moyree. Upper Bar. of Tuugh. Bawn and Dullany. Castlereagh. Ballynehatty and Bally vnlvally. Dowde Chri∣stopher. One house in Cook-street.     Dowdal Wal∣ter. One house and Garden in Oxmantown, one house in S. Jame-street. Meath Lune. Athboy. Halfoor. Outfolk, alias Outhale. Kells Crievagh. Lime. Culconun, upper Bar∣vecon. Kells. Deamers-town, Grish-town.
Dowdal Ste∣phen. One house near New∣gate, one house in Corn-market, one on the Mer∣chants key. Meath Louth Duleek Bar. Gallanstown, the little Boolies, the small farm, Kenock, both the Car∣nes, Gaskranstown, the Deems. Skreen Bar. The fourty Acres, two houses in Duleek. Farrard Bar. Terfeighan, Dunnany & Corstown, Dales and Kilcloghes, Callan, se∣veral houses, Coolpark and other lands in Dro∣gheda. Dungan Dame Mary. Four houses in Fisham∣ble street, Parils, Stain, Dalkey, The Rectory & Tithes of Palmerstown, Abbotstown. Queens Kildare Meath Longford Kilkenny Catherlagh Rathnemanagh, Knock∣negrough, Coultoryne, Ballyteigerine, Knock∣enderry, Mariborough. Castletown, Kildraught, Moortown, Collen-blackstown, Godfryhar∣ristown, Bebus, Sher∣lockstown, Carryshills, Kilbegs, the tithes of Longtown, Ballimany, Grange, Clare, Corcke∣ragh and the tithes, Kilmelridock, Coul mac Thomas, Possicks∣town, Ardress, the tithes of Stablerstown, Hodgestown and Kil∣drogh. Kells Norbinstown, the tithes of Moyglare, Gibstown, Donaghpatrick, Bally∣breaghwene. The tithes of Bally∣nesegard & Culivore. The tithes of Temple-micheal, Coolforckan and Mongany. The tithes of Cloydagh S. Johnstown, Kilken∣nisbeg and Limoyneary,
    Tipperary the Rectory and tithes of Athad. Ʋpper Ormond. Lisnecloonta, Goryne∣mona, Lynemoragh, Gortnemudagh and Middlethreed. Lower Ormond. Lorchoe, Rathue, Gan∣nanagh, Cleofadan, Cor∣rigigowen, Barnedirge, Cloghurdan, Loghane∣attyunvy, Ballistinny, Tywell, Ballyduffe, She∣nagh, Quillogh, Rodine, Lisbally, Rath-mac-Ke∣nan, Lisseynan, Camse∣ragh, Gortmore, Rosse, Bealcarrin, Lisludican, Reilydaggin, Lisduffe, Balyrickard, Knockenae, Sleward. Slevord. Dillon Luke. Three houses and lands, Castlknock, Cappock, Blanshers∣town, Cardiffs and the new Mills and Killmar∣martin. Nettercross. Finglas, Johns-town and the Boding. Newcastle Bar. Blundels-town, Kilma∣talway, Cromlyn, Coulecoat. Coolock. Killigh. Lowth Meath Two houses and a Mea∣dow in Drogheda. Ferard. Dillons-land. Betagh-town, and other lands. Enos Mary. A house in High-street.     Eastwood John One house in S. Nicho∣las-street.     Eustace James. Eighteen Acres in the Parish of S. James, 26 Houses. Castleknock. Damastown, Maistown, Louth Kildare Five houses in Dro∣gheda. Salt. Confye, Newtown, Bals∣cot, Howes-land Bally∣garee.
  Corstown, Ballycaeke. Ballruddry. Balredry. Newcastle Bar. Rathcool, Taffagard, Clondalkan, Black∣homehill. Radown uppercross. Dawkey, Dowdings∣town. Newcastle. Luckan. Ballruddry. Calcott. Meath Dunboyn Milestown, Rathlick. Flemming John Three houses and a waste piece of ground in Oxmantown, three houses in Sautry.     Fyan Francis Sixteen houses in S. Francis-street, one house in Corn-Market. Louth One house in Droghe∣da. Fitz Symons Henry Three houses in Cook∣street, one house near Newgate, one house in Backlane.     Finleys Mary The third part of six houses. Neithercross Bar. Murtherie. Louth Keappocke, Brodlogh, Baltraswry, Miltown, Rathdrummore, S. Sundays land, Capotkes-Mill and 14 houses, the third part of a Mort∣gage of a 1000 pounds upon Thomas Keppocks estate of Atherdie, the third part of a Mort∣gage of 300 l. upon John Dowdal of Ather∣die, a third part of 200 pounds upon Gerrard Cowly of Ardy, and William More of Bar∣meth. Frayne Red∣mond Two houses in S. Fran∣cis-street.   Rathcourath. Mullenmichan, Icheny∣aday.
      Moyahill. Molingard. Fartullagh. Carrick, Carrickfrayne, Oulanstown, Mahans∣town. Farbils. Porters-town, Dar∣disland, Killucken, Rathwyre. Flemming Garret. Two houses in Tho∣mas-street. Cavan. Moneghan. Louth Meath Fermanagh Clank. Taghart, Dromhalp, Dingan, Dromaller, Tollibrick, Corlea, Lisenamneagh, Moher, Cornesaw, Capnaugh, Corwillis, Edendo∣gullan, Dowae, Laragh, Drombarr, Moagh, Mollaghnercrea, Bal∣leaghly, Corhalman, Cormay, Lisnesasenagh, Coremery, Cortoberr, Corvaddy, Lisnarlare, Killbegge, Cabragh, Corrigirry, Eneskea, Moybolg, the impro∣priate tithes of Killane, Cnockbridge, Moybo∣logg, Templeport. Castleraighdown. Magherendown. Dartry. Toughreah, Tatecacke, Corslea, Cortreen. Atherdee Laganwater, Tullie, Newtown, Cormortine, Greatwood. Kells Emlagh, Mary-Abbey. Demifore. Corbally, Derreherri∣dan, Grangestown, Cnockanvilry, Kilragh, Emlagh, Castleraigne, Lergan, Muntes. The impropriate tithes
    Letrim. of Kinally and Killert. The impropriate tithes of Clanclare, Killaster and Moynally. Fitz Gerald Patrick. Two hoses in Mary Lane. Kildare. Meath Clane. Clane. Clane. Ikeathy. Oughter. Inny. Kilmurry. Salt. Ardresse. Dunboyn Clony. Fitz Simons James Three houses in the Wood Key. Newcastle. Callaghtown. Swords. Swordes, Rogans-town, Battlepark.     Foster James Six houses in Francis-street.     Fullam Tho∣mas. One house in Castle-street.     Fingall Earl Luke A house in Oxman∣town. Balrothery. Reynolds-town. Cavan. Castleraghan. Cloghwelly, Getragh, Cloghwellyetrach, Cloghurgool, Liss∣nalany, Drumgore, Cor∣nuslee, Cargach, Dru∣nane, Bare, Virginia, Clanmore, Richardrom, Balleene, Carnehuesky, Killikeene, Lislea, Car∣gach, Enagh, Thar∣tach, Lislurty, Eden∣burt, Logh-Ramer, Portan, Gallon-mac-Geroge, Eterand, Car∣gach, Carrick, Athy∣hencruagh, Munin∣chocan, Knockatam∣pal, Tineden, An∣chonquilly,
    Eastmeath. Corronagh, Knocknegartan, Agen∣tegall, Ballahdorragh, Island, Knocknefea, Barnagh, Lurganboy, part of Knocknofea, Gallonfieragh, Gallon∣stramore, Galloniteragh and Gallonstramore, Aghecullen, Keallreagh, Moet, Crosseighan, Aghedowan, Outeragh, Carrigeagh, Pollgariffe, Lacarowihill, Edenco∣nishian, Shandrom, A∣ghemore, Cloonmago, Fry, Neid, Knockowny, Cooletwoe, Pollyteden, Aghonehae, Galloaroe, Galloncourtampull, Knocklahan, Aghe∣brack, Lorganboy, Poll∣nashye, Lissinaghan, Downamolloge, Knock∣anroe, Lissedonnelan, Aghoncheadgotah, Lor∣geragh, Skarenhien, Tomquill, Omery, Killoge, Mulianeshana∣clone, Agheneden. Castleraghan. Ardskea, Clontras∣fane, Deherny, Lemne∣nesse, Carrigneveagh, Culemoney, Ne Carri∣bruse, Fertaghow, Fer∣tagheghtra, Aghen∣dronge, Napertune, Loghrawie, Agheler, Killegnemore. Ratooth. Growtoran al. Groves∣land, Rayes-town, Foyls-town part. Rathre∣gan, Lismachon, Ribes-town, Parsons-town, Porre-town, Wood∣land, Tillikilliconner, Beleams-town, Little
Fingall Earl Luke.     and mickle Derricks, Clonrosse, Swyocks-town, Drumnineere, Dunsaghlin, Creemore, Dunshaghlin, Ardca, La∣dyhill. Halfore. Killalan, Gechans-town, Galboys-town, Seraghs-town, Tonlegaith, Corestown, Old castle, Castle Corr, Crosdrum alias Fassagh, Glanca, Baltrasny, Hamlings-town, Newtown, Gi∣verveamon, Rath, Cor∣riston. Dunboyn. Part Bellandy, Foyles-town, New Bracetown, Balliantry, Nottstown, Little Bally mac Colly, Kennanstown, Dun∣boyn. Kells. Killsby, Nillinaghs-town, Mills-town, Cul∣linstown, Boltown, Ro∣bertstown, Drumbar∣rugh, Destinrath, Cal∣liaghtown, Maprath, Curragh, Clunfenan, Cornesase, Mote, Ra∣thenrick, Loghan, Ca∣bragh, Scurlocks land. Deece. Tulloghmeaden, Kil∣tayle, part Boyesttown, Knockmack, Morestown Bedfadstown, Bollog∣bane. Skreene. Walterstown, part Cul∣vestown, Killeene, Clowanstown, Smiths∣town, Berelstown, Dwogston. Navan. Tullaghanoge, Courts-town, Monistown,
    Westmeath. Louth Meadstown, Tulchans∣town, adjacent towns, Little Bellardan. Fore. Raherkin, Hartstown, the Rectory of Kilskyer. Slaven. Fegenstown part, Swylefield. Delvyn. Legshiny. Fore. Glanydon, Carrack, Carrack, Martins-town, Ballimiowen, Arkistown. A house in Drogheda. Foster John Six houses and a Brew∣house in St. Francis street, Two in St. Mi∣chaels Lane. Newcastle Bar. Ballidowde, Esker, I∣rish town, Lucan. Meath Westmeath. Deece. Kilgrage, Peirstown, Porterstown, Baystown, Ratoth Bar. Dunsaghlin. Ktlkenny Bar. The Rectory of Drum∣ram. Fitz Simons Marcus A house in New-street, Two other houses. Balrodery. Ballmadrought, Cor∣duffe. Ʋppercross. Rathcool, Dalky, New∣land. Newcastle. Colmanstown, Bally∣more, Tassagard. Kildare Castle Dermot. Fyan Edmund Several houses in Col∣ledge Green, and a house in Corn-market, a house in Winetavern street, and a house in Bride∣street.     Fitz Williams William, and Alice his wife Two parts of the Pre∣cinct of S. John Baptist without New gate, three Mills and and a Garden, a house &c. in Back∣lane, Wicklow Rahinclag, Ballogh, Shallon, Benettstown, Trablie, Ratouth, Fin∣nor, Millhill, Duleeke, Walterstown, Salimoor,
  a house in Ram∣lane, a house in Cook∣street, a house in Corn∣market. County. Clonshillagh, with the Rectory and Grange, Skirmullin alias Tir∣mullin, Fiblestown, Barnegeeth, Janings land alias James land, Fenaghs land, Mistel∣ston, Godamendy, Huntstown, Brune alias Rohernebrune, Cole∣manstown, Loghton, Tobberbin, Baldovan, Colecot, Fedanston, Esker, Ballowne, Flock∣meadow, Rohnicallagh, Brandonsgrow, Kille∣agh, Owenstown, Law∣renstown, Vallanstown, Great Stokeing.   Orsborns land, Mab∣ston, Curtlagston, Go∣nogkeston, Rathleeke, Mognelswood, Ballama∣colly, Mastockstown, Haughingston, Roet∣ston, Priston. Fagan Cristo∣pher Esq; A house and a Castle-in Corn-market, two-Tofts in Cook-street, and a waste piece of ground, two houses on Wood-key, one house in Fishamble street, one house in S. Michaels lane, six houses, &c. in Oxmantown, two houses in S. Patrick∣street, six houses in Sheepstreet, two houses in Wine-tavern street, a house in Skinner rowe, two houses in Bridge∣street, Casyes tower on Wood-key, Ash-park or Combe-park, &c. County. Feltrim, Mabestown, Effernock, Clongel, Drynam and Hamons∣towne, Stacoule, Kin∣saly, Meath Wexford Sligo. Morgallen. Drakestown, Williams∣town, Mountainstown, the Grange. Kells. Cullcomman Kells, Mullaghegh Kells. Ratouth. Cullcomman. Ballagheene. Killgowne, Ballybane, Ballyhought, Ballinte∣gert, Tinekilly, Bally∣dovenell, Tobbernenan. Tirrerill. Ballynashee, Rathduffe, Tillinure, Cashell alias Cashelnebuny, Carrow Geoltie, Carrow Iclean, Umerirow, Carrow∣vickissook. Carran. Carrowardcoran, Bally∣onachan, Carrowknock∣choirke,
  S. Doughlags, Bo∣huner and Ballmacartie with the tithes, &c. the Rath of Killofferie with the Rectory and tithes, Effernock, the great tithes of Balgriffin. Newcastle. The upper Mill, Rath-cool. Rathdowne. Bloyke, with the great and small tithes and cu∣stoms, Dalkey and the tithes of Dalkey, and Brenanstown. Balrodery. The Curragh, Darcis∣town, Loughshenny, Thomastown, Tan∣kardstown, Donabate, Palmerstown. Castleknock. Newtown, Rathcool, Cromline. Ʋppercross. Upper mill, Cromlin. Nethercross. Luske.   Carrowdan∣clonagh, Carrowknock∣choilme, Carrowknock∣rawer, Leaghskeagh. Farrel Ed∣mond and o∣thers Two houses. Louth Atherdee. Painstown. Fitz Rery Ro∣bert One house in S. Tho∣mas street. Newcastle Bar. Colletrath, Sprickles∣town, Gallanston, Cor∣restown, Chappel Mid∣way. Ratouth. Greeneg.     Fox Gear∣rot and Elinor his wife The Castle of the Cran, Newcastle. two houses in Castle∣street. County. Cromblin. Westmeath. Rathcourath. Moyvoore, Temple Patrick, Loggenegall, Ballinecurrie, the five Acres.
      Killkenny. The impropriate Re∣ctories of both the Ba∣skins. Kerbery. The Grange, Ballnial∣lacke. Fitz Gerald George One house. Meath Kildare Westmeath. Moyfenragh. Tycrahan, Kilarde, Ballyboggan, Clonards, Harristown, Ballinekill alias Woodtown, Knoc∣kanegolly Park, Killos∣billin, Cappaghvoggan, Baltogeny, Kilnecla∣nagh, Kilnegatlagh, Kil∣murry, Kilmir, Donoer, Insimore, Rathinally, Woodtown, Rathclony, Ardnemullan, Tou∣laght, Aghnegullagh, Kilvarding, Balline∣barne, Annagh, Moy∣drum, Enan. Lune. Baltonoran, Ballinne∣bracky, Ballinegulsy, Portlester, Parkestown, Crossanstown, Moyfe∣char, Ballyver, Much∣wood, Coleronan, Woodtowne west, Cor∣ballis, Rathkenan, Rath∣cormack, Moyrath, San∣toe, Cluny. Carbry. Kilrumurry, Ballyowne, Ballinekill, Dirrinligg. Forbill. Canagad, Clontrave, Munganstown, Griffins∣town, Aneskenan, Der∣rymore, Bruttenstown, Chananstown, Jo∣vistown, Pristown, Pa∣getts Park, Milestown, Creggstown, Rathfarne. Cloghanstown, Fores∣town,
    Kings. Clonycullin, Ball∣royne, Griffinstown, Ra∣hintull, Kerinstown, Kilpatrick, 7 l. per an. out of the Earl of Kil∣dares land in Farbill, Corballis, Poslickstown Ballintlevy, Ballintor∣nan, Croughoule, Kil∣croughoule, Glan∣more, Coyne, Mr. Gawlyes lands, Carnes, Knockmant, Banachir, Sarswelstown, John Duffs town, Corbets∣town, Ballindeny, Gnewbane, Killinure, Ballyneclagh. Moyashill. Newtown, Spittlehouse, Ardmornes, Corri∣naghir, Rahincorrick al. Suircan and Corboge. Clonlonan. Upper Clonlonan wood, Clonaltron wood and other parcels, Knoc∣kinea. Moyashill and Magha∣rederon. Pettits wood, and a house in Molingare, Clonykivant, Rath∣wyre, Killucan. Coronellor, Philips∣town, Lihince. Gilbert Sir George One house in Bridge∣street.     Gough An∣thony Two houses, a mort∣gage of 70 l. on two houses in S. Michaels lane, the Pill in Ox∣mantown. Wicklow Tipperary. Kildare. Downe. The Rectory of Arkloe with the tithes. The Rectory of New∣town, Lenan, with the tithes. Eight or nine Tene∣ments in Kill. Ardagh, Donowan, Dromcroe, Ballyawn,
      Mahirmorghie, Bally∣attine, the two Dirricks, the two Mondoraghes, Molederthan, Glastrym. Gernon Ni∣cholas One house.     Gough Igna∣tius Eight houses and Te∣nements, Sarkes, Par∣kes, Glasnivin, Why∣lestown, Hayestown, Balldongan, Ballinston, Hutton.     Glover John One house in Newroe. Newcastle. Sagard.     Graham Haure Two houses with two Backsides, two houses upon the Key. Garrestown. Meath Kildare Wicklow Wexford Macetown. Paunchtown, Wooles∣town, Rathmore, Paynestown, Athgarret. Part Grange. Ballihally, Balliare, Cassenstown, Bridstown, S. Margarets, Famers∣town, Balliknockane. Gough Willi∣am A house in S. Francis street, a house in High∣street, five Houses in S. Michaels lane, a house on Wood-key, several houses without Pole∣gate, a house in Skin∣ners Rowe. Balredry. Sutton, Redmonds farm, Balldungan, Whitestown and Hayes∣town. Louth Meath Longford Kildare Farrar. Martinstown. Dundalke. Cnockgoe. Ardie. Stermanstown, New∣town, Mollastown, Lis∣ranny, two houses in Drogheda. Davistown, Moretown, Malagha. Gruill. Taghimy, Killincarra. Kill. Gibbons Tho∣mas Two houses, and two plots of ground in Ox∣mantown. Coolock. Kilbarrock. Castleknock. Ballyboggan. Meath Deece. Paddinstown and Tho∣mastown.
Hamilton Sir Francis Nine houses.     Hicky William Twelve houses. Westmeath. Fininsland. Holmes Peter Three houses and a Horse-mill. Cloghranswordes. Meath Duleek. Kerreston. Higgin Francis Five houses and a plot of ground.     Handcock Christopher Ten houses. Nethercross. Clandalkin, Tassagard, Swordes. Kildare. Rathmore, Mergetts∣town. Harding Philip One house in High-street.     Holmes Simp∣son Two Parks and two water-mills, neer Tho∣mas court wood.     Hicky William One house in the Mer∣chants key.     Hurley John Two houses in S. James street.     Humphrey Joan, alias Bal∣lew, Patrick mapas and o∣thers. One house. Meath Duleeke. Clarestown. Hewlett George, and Mary Ʋx. One house in Oxman∣town.     Hore Mary, Margaret and Alson One house on the Mer∣chants key, two houses in High-street, two houses in Cook-street, Two houses in S. Brides street, two houses in Newrowe, several houses in S. Francis-street, several houses in S. Mary Abbey. Kilsalgham, Domnuck, Coolcoyes, Corstown, Meath Wexford. Clatterston, Bulston, Caleston, three houses. Baller, Mashall, Rishalls, Haristown, Skal, Rish, Kildowan, the Dirrtra, Cristown, Grang-Sal∣lah, Polhore, Castell-hills, Tammon.
  Thomtown, the Rath, Bulkhale, Bedfords, Stradbally, great King∣ston, Rathla Castone, Leythill, Luske, Castle∣knock, Irishtown, Har∣ristown, Rickinhead, Castle Carroaght.     Hamble John A house in S. Nicholas street. Meath Louth Duleeke. Ballymadde, Smiths∣town, Gillinstown, Corballis, Duleeke. Ferrard. A house in Drogheda, a house in Fermonfecuin. Harris Edward Several houses in Fish∣amble-street, 2 houses near S. Owens Church, two other houses, and two parks near St. Ke∣vins. One house and a plot of Ground in Cooksstreet. One other in Castlestreet, The Town of Portrae. Meath Bar. Duleeke. Newtowne, Lander∣stowne. Bar. Moyfenra. Clunguffin. Irving David and Ann Ux. 2 Houses.     Jans Edward. Two houses and Gar∣dens in Glasmaquinock near Oxmontown, 2 small meadow Parks, one great house in St. Michaels lane, one house in Winetavern street, one house in St. Patrick street, two houses in St. Nicholas-street, Three houses in Rochell-lane, 3 houses in St. Georges lane. Newcastle. The great and little Farm of Kilmaynham. Meath Westmeath. Duleeke. Shallon, Kilkarvan, Prinestown, Batram∣stowne. The mill of Kil∣beard, houses in Duleek, the Abby of Skryne, Cusacks-hall with parks, houses in Skryne, Thorneton, Loghtown, Baldoghnan. Rathconraght. Ballimore. Corkery. The Abby of Monti Feonan with a mill.
Jans Michael and Frances Ux. One house near New∣gate, one house in Corne-market, one house on the Merchants Key. Meath. Louth Duleeke. Galstown, the little Boolies, Small Farm, Kenock, the moyety of both the Carnes in Duleeke, Gaskianstown, Deemes, two houses in Duleek. Terfeaghan with many houses, dales, and part of Kilclogher, Callan. Farrard. Dunnany. One house and garden in Deerstreet, one house in Batchelors lane, eight acres of land in the Franches, one park in Green-Bater, two crofts without the gates, one Orchard without S. Lawrence gate, and a messuage in Batchelors Lane with seven walls and a Garden, and a Tenement in Heirs lane, one house in S. Johns street and a gar∣den, one shop with a chamber, one house in S. Peters street, one park, two houses, one half of a meadow, one house in Batchelors lane. Kenneday Wal∣ter, George Usher and John Walsh One house. Tassagard. Meath. Nottstown, Rowan, Bradistown, Lough∣sallagh, Cradockstown, Maynebarretts place, Stephens place, Barrons park, Philips town al. Boolies, Kennaghts∣town, Pincherston, Car∣coyne, Balleneolly, Nalliwood, Warrinston, Gonock, Millestown, The Much-fields, Stoc∣kens, Walshesgrow,
    Kildare Lamkins, Pincklestown, Dunboyn, Dunsaghlyn, Clony. Lexlip. Kearny Ed∣mund One house in S. Patrick∣street. Corke. Cosmee. Conrey. Garrihinagh al. Kill∣more, Tonneregigh, Monnimore, Rahingh, Killbegg, Bealtra, Gort∣nacrussy, Templetryen, Garrestown, Gortni∣crussy. Carake. Ballany. Limricke. Gortgare, Schoule. Kildare, Went∣worth Earl Kildare house, 1 house in S. Michaels lane, one garden and an Orchard near the Castle, S. Ste∣phens Hospital, and the lands to the same be∣longing, the tithes of the lands of the house of the hogs, Mintions mantle, &c. Clondalkin, the Rectory of Gracedew, Tippkenin. In Com. Dublin or Wicklow. Kilconut, Templecar∣gie, Shebela, Killinure, Moylisty, Moyskeagh, Mynore, Ballyellis, Kil∣lalig and half the Goule, Cremesellin. Catherlagh Cavan. Lymerick. Kinnagh, Tonnegrohe, Barkill, Ballycaslune, and Dowganstown. Aghtryde, Gary-Ro∣bert, Crosrath, Poll∣kill, Pollrath, Clone∣tedaffe, Rahinmore, Rathclaghagh, Garysal∣lagh, Conline, Dro∣mard, Callaghnegh, Aghtilmore, Lowagh al. Lodagh, Ballene∣cross, the mannor of Clonmahone. Glaschony, Killane∣weary, Ballinfryory, Drommeyne. Cosmore. Acleckagh, Brittal, Cor∣kincolrone, Lishmo∣reen, Peacke, Adare and several Burgesses, &c. Cragane, Sallene and Farranna, Pallicy, Gar∣rytullane, Garrypooky, Garrineportriffe, Castle Robert, Bantageara, Garranabrickene, Bal∣laghnegerah, La∣ghughne sporteenagh, Gurteenebalanaha,
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl of     Keapacraheene, a parcel of pasture land, Gar∣ryannony, Rathnawi∣tagh, Ballyacarraney, Ballyvodane, Ballywil∣ly, Heighragh, Ardefi∣one, Lisavill, Bohuran∣usky, Ballynabnoly, Garryanpookey, Bally∣sheoondehey, Killegno∣sy, Mollane, Gortganiffe, Gortaknochane, Garke∣more, Balleaguossy, Ballynaswagh, Ballykea∣ling. Cosmore. Lower, Gleananore, Be∣abas, Rathmore, Do∣nenamanie and Bally∣trastane, Ballynahow, Pollagh, Kearhowe, Ballymacrorie, Doone∣kippe, Ballymickane, Cloncallane, Castle∣kippnie, Rahen, Ure∣gare, Ballystonymore, Ballystonybegg, Ballyn∣curreyo, Ballywillen∣begg, Kearhowreagh, Ballyany, Coskenydedy, Criggane, Clounshane. Kerry. Claghrane, Ballylong∣fort. Poblebryen. The Island of Corka∣more. Connollagh. Lishduffe, Finterstown, and Garraneard. Cosmay. Tullorvey, White Ab∣bey, Black Abbey, Poor Abbey, Gortnadoghny, Gortnegea, Bollybally, Bonefion, Park more, Feranboy, Garryone, Girtenan, Varmsculla, Felesteene, Ballycul∣leene,
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl     Cloghrane, Tullo∣vine, Ballenta, John Leas Dolloe, Maurice Fitz Geralds Dolloe, Rus∣sels Curagh Ineanoge. Thorntons Curraghine∣oge, Tuoreene, Shan∣clonin, Skeaghmerry∣geoge, Rathbrenagh, Ballenfryora, Creaff∣begg, Croomegleab∣land, Rosstemple, Ga∣raneroe, Ballylosky, Fanningstown, Rath∣cannon, Clogher, Clon∣bryen, Ballynenanty, Greallagh, Garebally, Broffe, Ballygrenane, Ballyvolhane, Fearan-Henry roe, Ballysal∣laugh, Ballyvettoge, Ballyncolly, Cnocksaw∣ney, Clonygerra, Bally∣lenanemore, Ballyher∣rone, Clonmore, Rath∣marckey, Thomas town, Cahirassy. Kenry. Ballynishane, Pallice, Ballydowell, Ballyva∣nane, Killesaragh, Dro∣more, Ballyonollane, Keillmoreene, Caher Inereagh, Corry, Tuogh, Ballymickleharnane, Keilvarigie, Corry, Corry, Kiellknockane, Ballyvadane, Criggina∣cree, Ballyassea, Court mac Rynoll, Ballyoga∣hassy, Ballymacshane∣boy, Graigeanister, An∣lands town, Ballingady, Ballygadybeg, Ballin∣willen, Ballinahowe, Garryduffe, Gartannon∣teene, Gortenure, Mone∣grany, Gortavilly, Kearhew, Garuffe, Li∣sancarry,
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl   Clare and Lymerick. Galway and Limerick. Kilkenny. Kildare Westmeath. Ferancuddelly, Ballenfollardy, Ball∣woodane, Parkmore, Ballygossy, &c. Kilcashin. Kilcarnell alias Kilcar∣well. Kerdons house in the City. Sherlockston, several houses and lands in the town of Naas, Walter∣ston, Moynooth, New∣town, Kellistown, Creffstown, Curretown, Collinsland, Newton∣west al. Macabe, the Mannor of Kilka, great and little Bealand, Nar∣roghbeg, Rathculvin, Hubberstown, Bally∣nase, little Birtown, Mullaghinaste, Kilmead, Ballycollane, Ballyhyde, Ballynibarny, Youngs∣town, Ardnegresse, Bal∣lynybarney, the Man∣nor of Kildare, Browns∣town, Irishtown, Bally∣nure, Kilnabooly, Ards∣coll, Donede, Philips∣town, Castleridy. Keyle, Ballymullen Ali∣as Milton, Pallagh Alias the Pace, Garrygevil and the Spittle house, the Mannor of Bal∣linderry alias the Slaughtne Arts, Bally∣negeale alias Irish∣towne, Ballynemacher, Leskevin, Machercoirk, Roskeay, Impire, Col∣rownig, Kilnevan, Bal∣lynobbane, Noghowal Portloman, Desert alias Rathnobagdagh, Bal∣lynegallogath, Varvel∣stowne
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl of   Kerry and Desmond. Roscom∣mon. Garron. A ware on the River of Enish, alias Cartomugarrowe, Ballintogher, Coolam∣ber, Lockelstown, Far∣rinmurry Ballynhiska∣nagh, Ballydronan, Ard∣maghcar, Killeagh, Fer∣ruffennagh, Barbrackan, the little Ruske, Car∣neregan, Twoerane, Aghtybore, Brackagh∣nehuly, Belane lower Ballyneran, Coolymne, Cleglass, Ballynebrye, Carneclonemacke, Clo∣neregroy, Scarpe. The fishings on the Logh-Royal and the River of the same, a Castle near the same, Brennybegg, Ballysallagh, Ballintlew, Ballintornan, Bancor, Knockunuit, Sarsfields∣town, Sydan, Mottown, Robbinston, Castle∣town, Kennaleagh, Mil∣ton, Newcastle, Castle∣corre, Rathbeg, Rath∣more, Moggilty, Clon∣colman, several Lands held by the Scept of Menter Brenan, the Countrey of Calry, Tooballynelly, the Countrey of Breawni∣ury, the Country of Towennany, Ballymick∣nema, Bishopstown, Glaskrine, Rathaspike, Kiltobber, Clonguillan, Keylnere and Cloncul∣lan. The fishings on the Ri∣ver of Goolin and Bal∣lycarbry. Conymore, Clonesalli∣aghe, Beahaghe al. Bea∣ghe and Ballinegarragh.
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl   Corke. Galway. Ballygorgan, Ballyne∣melagh, Castlemore. Bissegnie, Ballaghe, Bal∣lyclanwilliamboy, Gort∣netarnoge, Ballagh, Lis∣nigrisie, The Rectory of Lickmatash, Garry∣duffe, Kilboggie, Car∣rowemore, Ballyva∣rowghter, Kilmyoode, Templenan, Trymo∣tume, Lowghnaton, Gurtenelaghen, Lisne∣grough, Lissertary, Kil∣tragh, Leneghton, Clo∣nefia, Carrynarke, Kil∣crine, Leggen, Lonegh∣ton, Kilkrine, Carrow∣nakitoe, Cograne. Longford. Cartonacetapana, Mul∣lagh, Lissidaganie, Kil∣logs, Sesseveg, Lisna∣kashie, Dunleo, Clone∣lehane, Cartrona, Har∣duarna, Killeronie, Car∣rownikin, Rokan, Lis∣danille, Bitervase, Clon∣nanayneneva, Stenagith, Irkare al. Toberntawry, Tobernikerhin, Low∣ghanamroge, Gortka∣erne, Dowler, Carrown∣meanagh, Truscan, Car∣rowgar, Lena, Renagh, Gurtin, Creran, Car∣rowneanagh, Care∣mare, Clogh, Clonkin∣begg, Coolenearnock, lands in the town of Clare, Lissenefranke, Clonnanynen, Trustran al. Derrymane, Carrow∣keile, Carrownfeire, Longford, Greygane∣bony, Gregangarrowe, Tryanreanghe, Car∣rownkilly, Aghrane, Dowlagh & Naghrough,
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl   Tipperary. Wexford. Wicklow Mayo Meath the Rectories of Assu∣fraigh al. Asaskreagh and Kilsalen al. Killosa∣len, and Lissecharra, Rathmore, Rathne∣gleny. Garryhucke al. Jack-garden, Ballybeg, Tho∣maston, Ballykellca∣ghan al. Ballyclecaghan. Toomenyfanshoge, Bal∣lyduffny, Killmare, Bal∣lyhamuck al. Kilma∣nock, Garyvarowne, Caryhenigon, Gary∣howe, Lackandarragh and Mone Edmond. Ballykeene al. Bally∣keine, Knockanemohill, Ballenepark and Bal∣lenefunshoge. Glancoagh, Ballyvonell and Carrowkiltrone. The penny place, and several houses and lands in Dunboyne, Clony, Bennetston, Rathtig, Hilton, Mounckton. Several houses and Lands in the Town of Duleeke, other parcels, viz. Maryridge, Mary∣land and Roodland, one Dove house and lands in Kinawde, Bretunston, Broynanston, Arrath & Grenock, Newton of Moyaghy, Kildalkey, Knockodder, Top∣psland, several houses and Lands in the Town of Kells, Coocorr, Jen∣kinstown, Quoynstown, Donoghstown, Wood∣cockstown, Warren∣stone, Barretstowne, Wernockstown, Gugh∣terhillagh, Cullentragh, The mannor of Rath∣skeagh,
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl of   Kings. Drumgoyle, &c. Ballyshane, Clonbrona, Ballynerve, Balline∣kelly, Clonecreane, Bo∣lynarge, the Mannor of Eglish, Derrynlogh, Ballyquillan, Cullani∣nore, Cullanvolly, the Island of Kiltobber, Ballinglasse al. Clonde∣glasse, Kilvoyler, Leagh, Ballintrohan, Cullan∣beg, Cullanmore, Bally∣connocke, Kilvem, Cur∣raghroddery, Roscurra al. Kneebeg, Killmoy∣lar, Gniew, Cossan, Ilandwile, Knockbane, Tulchanmore, the Freagh, Clondelue, Streamstown, Lands in Delny a mac Coghlan, Cameshbegg, Ballykill mac Rossny, Moystine, Ballinkillin, Doubran∣cher, Moylmich, Isker∣castle, Killtauragh, Noybagh, Aghny, Droyne, Kilmunynog, Carramore al. the great Quart and Aghlena, Bancorr al. Bannagher with the fishing Ware, Castle and town there, Moyslin, the Castle of Kilnegorrhenagh, Cow∣er, Castle Feddan, Russ∣nis, Nabagh, Carrow∣shinagh, Ballydona, Williamston, Balleveri∣van, Ballintulchan, Kil∣linanagh, Ballinkillin, Tullagh, Morahin, Bal∣lymore, Ballycony, Bal¦lykillmurey, Agbarny, Ballydroid, Castlebrack and the Country of Toosmeare alias' Bally∣cashany, Urike, Mony∣coyle,
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl     Cappaghilowcan, the great & little park, Coolenepish, Carry∣more, Clonveclahan, Culboran, Lawagh, Ruscaghbeg, Arteblany, Moyhanagh, Bally mac Gilly, Sylan, Killmur∣rey, Ballynebracke, Car∣tron mac Killy, Rath∣light, Killmore, Gad∣danstown and other lands in Ely, Carrol, the Mannor of Lea, &c. Rathdonvoy, Boly∣bracke, Cogshnohovan, Curra, and other lands, &c. Garrinelegan, Ma∣ghernehagh, Gartene∣gowen, with divers Wares on the River of Shannon, Maynes. Der∣rinioghe, Derrynagh, Garvally, Aghtene, Kil∣lenegarvaghe, Glen∣cromine, Ardehorme, Moyshlin, Killawragh, Moylagh, Aghie, alias Athie, Killmanyvoke, The Rahin, a yearly rent out of Sir John Mac Coghlans lands, Lanvaghe, Moynaghie and the parish thereof, Towmoyane, killniller, Ballni vohane, Kilmoy∣lecke, Killiene, Inchla∣cour, Derrnilaghe, Bal∣lynafalla, Ballykeale, Ballykillkallama, Litter, Loughan, Maghernore, Gortmelougha, Gurte∣melee, Gurteneffees, Kil∣lenemore, Bally macder∣mot, Cowldrie, Ballyk∣nochan, Bally mac murghe, Cappabirne, Rossemore and Killma∣caddawe.
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl   Longford Queens Sligo. Downe. Ballycowen. Lynally, alias Sanvach, and Moyraghie. Camagh, Correynagh, Smeare, Rathmore, Gukinroe, Taugaght, Breaghwoy, Sunnagh, Camroayne, Cullough, Barry, Desertdolagh, Leslight, Ballynaght and Ralight. The Strate Dishoke. Carrowdrom, Cor∣micke, Carrowomigan, Carrowcarrymilton, Carrowgranymore, Carrownecrene, Car∣rowelisdowgan, Clane∣gashel, Lands in the Territory of Slaight. Ofliny. Shaneboy Mac Owen Hara; Cowlecashell, Cornmick, Leighcar∣rowdullogh, and Leighcarrowknappard, the Castle Lordship and Land of Slygo, Tire∣connel, Kilnisky, Car∣bery, Fermanacke with several other parcels in Connaught, Clonmur∣rey, Cornetrig, Ros∣crib, Wranck, Carrow∣ougin, Carrowe, Car∣rimiltin, Carrowgru∣nem, several parcells of Land in or near Cowle and Cashell, Cormicke, Leighcarrowe, Tallagh, Leighcarrowknappe, The Rectories of As∣saghfragh, alias Agha∣skragh, Kilsalen, alias Killoslen, &c. The customes, &c. of Ardglass, Strangford, Killogh, Shipland, Por∣taferry and all other the
Kildare, Went∣worth Earl of   Louth Wexford & Wicklow Forts and Creeks on the River of Strang∣ford and Loghquanie, Corballyes, Ballyregan. Pryorstowne, Knocke and Callaghcurry. Both the Annaghs and Ballinward, Pallis A∣chulline, Mawghor, the Mannor of old Rosse, viz. Ballyboly, Killskan∣lan, Rochestown, Balli∣melagh and Breymli∣more, Newbane Car∣naght, the Mannor of Killonghy, alias Kille∣gin, viz. Knockstown, Freshalstou, Kingstown, Ballystraghboe. The Tomenerlies and the Quenlaght, &c. Clon∣roch, Ballyvonin, To∣nyferny, Downany, the Roddenagh, Garrin∣tansey, Raturtin, the two Clondeliffs, the Great Forrest, Bir∣nestown, Rackardstown, Ballyshane, the mannor and Town of Dipps, viz. Ballyneslany, Ros∣sard, Ballybo and Castleton, &c, Kilche∣relagh, Ballyhobin, St. Michans Chappel and Roches Conycrew, Kil∣corly, Adromminac∣core, Powers mill and the Earls meadow, the Ferry of Rosse, Ca∣fisstown, Prestallstown, Dowdwarfe, the Parso∣nage and Viccarage of Old Ross, Nash, Cul∣linstown, Ballyshinan. The Stone house, Pier∣cestown, Ardmore, Ballyronum, Ken∣lestown, Ballyarnum,
      Killegin, both Clon∣dalies, Robstown, Brynestown, Woolfer∣stown, Castlenech, Bal∣lygormogan, Roche∣stown, Rodiston, alias Brymilemore, alias Kilstalan, and Ballyne∣boly, Ballyshenan, the Government, &c. of Ross, all the land in Fassagh of Bentry, the mills of old Ross and Rosseponter, the Island of Dromduffe, Bally∣brittas, Minemore, Garrynarren, Killaco∣vat, Ballyot, Ballymer∣gin, Ballyhenecke and Ballynekerd. Lutterell Tho∣mas Six houses in the Pre∣cinct of S. John with∣out Newgate. Castleknock. Lutterels town, Bran∣doingrove, Killistor∣nane, Ballestrowen alias Stravanstown, Skirmul∣lin, Clansillagh, James∣land, Finnighsland, Bar∣bistown, Kissianstown, Coninstown, Frebleck∣ton, Barnegeath, great Stahenny. Newcastle. Godamendy, Missels∣town, Huntstown, the Pace, Whites-town, Diswellstown, Carpen∣ters-town, Blanchers∣town, Scaltweod alias Greatwood. Ballyowen, Esker, Fid∣danstown, Bishopsfield, Loughtown, Rathcoole, Colemanstown. Newcastle. Lucan, Ballydowde, Baldonan, Flockmea∣dowe, Kildare Naas. The Naas, Phinceston, Rathsker. Salt. Lexly, Tobershoghlin, Danamore, Flessesstown, Muchrath, Lanckton. Clare. Abbey of Clare, New∣town. Dunboyne. Ballymacolly, Mastock∣ston, Hawkinston, Roes∣town, Walterstown, Rathleeke, Dunboyne, Loghsallagh, Milestown, Curtlaghston, Bennett∣ston, Kilbrenan, Mayne, Gunnogs, Handcocks∣land, Osburnsland. Ratooth. Fearnehouse, and other houses and lands. Deece. Toubly part. Duleeke. Finnor, Mooretown, Rowlestown, Millhill, Clownestown.
  Coldcott, Fryer∣town, Killakee, Stayony. Ʋppercross. Rahincullagh, Killima∣talway, Bruine al. Bo∣herbrane. Nethercross. Killeagh, Tibberbir, Cotterelstown, the Re∣ctory of Durabate. Castleknock. Voltanstown, Lawrence∣town, Owens town, Clunsillagh. Balrothery. Knockroder.     Leynes Bartho∣lomew, & Eli∣nor Ʋx. Three houses. Nethercross. Swords. Balrodery. Grallagh. Nethercross. Littlebealingstown. Newcastle. Coolecolt, Crumlyn and New Mill. Nethercross. Ballhary. Kildare Meath Lowth Salt. Lexlip. Ministown. Several Tenements. Luttrell Alice, al. S. Lawrence Widdow. A house in High-street, another house. Castleknock. Duswelstown, Bland∣cherdston, Schallwood, Blackethmil, Lucan, Rathcole. Newcastle. Killmatalvey, Frierton, Cosserelston, Cloghro∣der, Cotterelstown, Killakee, Slagony. Castle Carbery. Ballyonan, Ballinekilly. Kildare Naas. Rahesker, Naas. Clane. Clane. Salt. Donamore, Lexlip. Dunboyne. Dunboyne, Mayne, Kil∣brenan, Handcockland. Duleeke. Rowleston, Morton. Screene. Clowneston. Moor Patrick One house.     Martin Wil∣liam One house, cellar and garden in the Wood∣key.    
Martin Willi∣am One tenement in Castle-street.     Minshal Sir Richard and Dame Mary Vx Eight houses, 19 Mes∣suages. Balrudery. Kilcrogh, Jordans town, Cotterelstown. Nethercross. Reglish of Luske with the tithes thereof. Longford Ardagh. Cullenny, Serieagh∣morefada, Kriaghadoe, Kriewiny, Homane, Corribane, Culmahensy, Lisnamucky, Garnuke∣sagh, Cnockachahud, Glacke, Clenragh, Doonenamalagh, Fie∣aghfada. Mallone Wil∣liam Fourty three houses. Castleknock. Kilmaineham, Polemill, Phepestown. Newcastle. Westpanstown, Bally∣doude. Nethereross. The third part of the great tithes of Gry∣nocke, Kilsalchan and Chappel-midway, Brownstown, Culdrie. Coll ck. Dunbro. Newcastle. Turimore. Meath. Skreene. Lismull in with the great and small tithes, Jurdanstown, Blandes∣town, Loughtown, Castletown. Mey Matthew Seven houses. Newcastle. Athgoe, Newcastle, Kilmatalway, Kilmain∣ham. Meath. Ratouth. Ratouth. Milles Ralph Orphan Eight houses &c. Newcastle. Moyles Castle, Black∣borns land, Wards land alias Korkagh Farme.     Murtagh Wil∣liam One house.     Mason Mat∣thew & Elinor Ʋx. One plot of ground and one house.    
Meath Henry, Lord Bishop Six Parks or Closes, Ballyboughte, S. James Parish. Coolock. Ballybought, Drishoge, Drumconragh, Clyn∣mell, Glasnevyne, Sta∣coole, Ballygriffin. Balrotherie. Baltra, &c. Balcarrid. Eastmeath. Duleek. Athcarne, Deens, Clony, Dollerstown, Hayestown, Great Boolies, little Boolies, Knock Island, Micknanstown. Skreene. Ballrath, Ardmullcan, Johnstown, Rathfeagh, Slanestown, Ediketown, Great Waterside, Little Waterside, Irishtown, Timole. Morgallen. Shilliogge, Wilkins∣town. Nottingham Ignatius One house.     Nottingham Peter Five houses. Newcastle. Ballyowen, Ealker, Lu∣can, Nanger, Ballydoud, Clandolkan, Killmar∣tin, Fininstown, Poores∣town. Kildare. Meath Athgarred, Little New∣town, Kildrathad. Partmany, Pinkins. Plunket Chri∣stopher Two houses. Rathdown. James land, Pluncketts parks. Balruddery. Chief rent of Tankards town, Rent of Wax out of little Ballagheragh. Meath Navan. Priestrath, Five tene∣ments. Ratouth. One tenement, little Dorix, Racrossane, two tenements in Crenock, with ten acres of land. Plunckett Thomas Two houses, two gar∣dens, one Orchard, and one park, in S. Katha∣rines parish, one house and a Backside in S. Ni∣cholas Parish without the Walls, two tene∣ments, one Garden, and one Orchard, idem. In Brownstown 160 acres, Barrony of Ne∣thercross and Balrothe∣rie. Louth Bewly, Blakestown and Ballinreske, New town, Barsplunckett, sixty acres in Jermin Fearn, twenty acres in Balray, Laraghmenshy, Balma∣glan, sixty acres in Pri∣ors town, twenty acres in Miltown, sixty acres in Galcowes town. Pipers town, Cottrels∣town, ninety acres in Browns town, five acres
    Meath Droghedah and a Milne in Kercock, Three acres & an house in Rathdrumner, fourty acres in Nichols town, sixty acres in Dunleere, fifteen acres in Burrin, thirty acres in Rahas∣car, thirty acres in Swinestown, ninety acres in Peoganstown, thirty acres in Finway. Sixty acres in Gronfty. In the town of Droghe∣dah, two houses in West-street on old walls and garden in the North side of the said street, one park of two acres, one house in Batchelors lane, 2 parks in Green∣bater, two parks and a Milne without S. Sun∣days gate, two parks in Yellow-bater, a park neer the Green hills, one tenement in S. Laurence street, Fyans Roe. Pilkinton Tho∣mas, Alice Vx. and Wakefield John Three houses. Wexford. Gory. Killibeggs. Payne Joseph Two Tenements.     Penteny Ri∣chard One house in Oxman∣town. Balrodery. Knock-Tirkinton, Boe∣hill. Coolock and Nethercross. Surgostown, Laresstown, Crosshouth.     Percivall Sir One messuage in S. Ni∣cholas street.    
Pluncket Sir Nicolas and Dame Kathe∣rine and others The corner house in Winetavern street in M. Palfreys possession, houses, one cellar, one Horse-mill. Wexford. Wicklow 63 Messuages, gardens and tofts, the Castlehill, Fagh and S. Johns, Buldlort, Tynnicarry, Tynniknock, Rathne∣mony, Ballirahine. Anarelly, Ballenetunny, Balleneskeagh with the tythes, Balleneparky, Ballesallagh. Purcel William and Edmond. 3 Houses.     Pierce Dame Elinor One Close.     Plunkett Wil∣liam One house. Coolock. Bagatrath, Portmar∣nock, Carrickhill. Mayo Ballanidoe, Dowmore, Carrownelegan, Knock∣neaghan, Rathbane, Knockgrany, Iverland, Cowbegg, Cowla. Plunkett An∣gell and Fran∣cis Plunkett Twenty six houses. Meath Lune. Rathmore, Ballinto∣gher, Ballivanan, Gar∣ranban, Rathconny, Derriconer, both the Clownies, both the Gills towns, Lincher∣land, Moyagher part. Kells. Fords town, Ballagh∣boy, Dowrath, New∣town, Corraghtown, Ruoristown, Scurlocks∣town. S. Patricks the Dean and Cha∣pter. The Chantry lands of S. Annes, The tythes of great and little Ca∣bragh. Wicklow Rathmuck, Ballyogan, and Rathsalcan, the tithes of Ashtown, and Pelstown. Palsrey Ri∣chard Four houses and a Ten∣nis Court. Balrothery. Newinnings in Reynolds town.     Pain John Esq; Several houses.    
S. Patricks Vi∣cars Chorals Corporation Several houses.     Plunkett Chri∣stopher One Messuage in Cook∣street. Dunsoughly, Harris∣town, Brachan, New∣town of Dunsoughly, S. Margery Dubbore, Uttermoye, Jonestown, Merifall, Balleskin, Kill∣donan, Cillmacmonan, Hallowood, Rath, Don∣nabate, Cromlin, Mill-Dawispark, Luske, Knock, Balrodry, Tanchardstown. Meath Loghgoure, little Logh∣goure, Morton, Molli∣nan, Ballimore, Ponder∣lagh, Collestown, Wil∣kinstown, Rathbegan, Warringstown, Partans, Dunsalin, Gallmore-Island in Rathtouth, Preistrath, several houses in Rathtouth, Flemmington, Runtons∣town, Moyaghery, Cur∣raghtown, Kells, Mol∣lagheh, Gonnox, Mag∣ginsyard, Greens park, Finglas Bridge. Plunkett Ri∣chard One tenement in S. James street, one house in S. Thomas street. Meath Kells. Crosse Kille. Plunkett Wal∣ter Several houses in the City and Suburbs, late belonging to Thomas Plunkett Alderman. Meath Deece. Dirpatrike, Littletown, Mullaughine, Tullagh∣medan, Augher Turin and the Barons Farm, Knockmark, Allens land, Bedfastown, Dromry, Plunketts land, the Colledge houses and lands, Moor∣town, Talbote, the Glane, Killtale and Branganstown. Palles James and Mary Two houses in Corn∣market, two houses in High-street, one house in Back lane, one house in S. Frances street, 3 l. per an. out of three parks and one Orchard in New-street, 20 l. per an. on Dunsoghly, New∣ton and Bragon, 15 l. out of and 150 l. mort∣gage Lowth Meath. Alexander. 20 l. per an. out of Ard∣vally, 200 l. Mortgage on Castletown, 50 l. mortgage on Cooks∣town, 160 l. mortgage on Alexander Reads land. 8 l. per ann. out of Har∣locks town, a statute staple of 600 l.
  on Kildonane and Balliskin, Talbots Farm in Crumlin, 26 l. mort∣gage out of Rochords Farm in Crumlin, a sta∣tute staple of 200 l.   80 l. per an. out of Cri∣vitenall. Quinn Peter 3 Houses, 3 shops, &c. Cluntarfe. Meath. Kildare Deece. Agherske, Tury, Bed∣fastown, Mooretown, Fenesland, Knockmark, Kilcoolie. Soneboyne. Salestown. Duleeke. Dardestown. Clane. Longetown. Quatrod Ni∣cholas One house in Oxmon∣town.     Quinne John 4 Houses, &c. and a Gar∣den, Clonslagh and cer∣tain houses, &c. Wexford. Forth. Garrisynott, Kildeiske, Talbottstown, Heares∣mead, Collenstown. Quinne Marcus Nine houses.     Roscommon, Wentworth Earl Roscommon house in Oxmantown. Several houses lands and tenements.   Trim, Navan, Kells. Athlone, Athboy. In Blagh street. The tenements in pos∣session of Robert Rate∣gam, Widow Lloyd, Robert Ferral, James Nutter, John Hopkins, Patrick Helane, John Griffin, George Dob∣son, Garrat Barry, Pa∣trick Helane and George Dobson. In Market-street. Isaac Reynolds, Walter Walsh, Widow Willi∣ams, Alexander Jepth∣son, Tho. Graunt, Tho. West, John Hopkins. In High-street. William May, William
Roscommon Wentworth Earl     Harrison, Mrs. Newman, Tho. Kelly, Richard Helane, Moragh, Logh∣len, Richard Clowde, Derby Fine, Teige Fo∣ranane, John Hely, Da∣vid Bourke, Thade Dil∣lon, Mrs. Brinnin, Ro∣bert Quely, Paul Ne∣lane, William Mallore, Tho. Taylor, and Chri∣stopher Kernons. In Blynd-street. Paul Nelane, Thady Dillon, Christopher Kernan, James Kernan, and Owen Brinnans. In Haggard-street. Joseph Pressick and Mallone, John Rely, Nicholas Sheely, Do∣nogh Foronan, Charls Connor, three gardens nigh the Church, Mo∣rogh, Loghlin, 2 parks without Nauan-gate, 1 near the great Mill, 1 other without Blagh∣gate called Hoppyard, Patrick Chaine, John Martin, a fishing Weire over against the Maud∣lins and Dirby, Lide∣ocks. In the Navan. In Horsend-street two tenements in the hands of one Jacob, one near the wall in the Bakers occupation, one other possessed by a Cooper near Trym gate one o∣ther by Graham, Wa∣fers castle, also a Cab∣bin, and a garden there. In Kells. In S. Johns street one tenement, in Maudlins street one tenement
Roscommon Wentworth Earl   Eastmeath. Westmeath. with two gardens, in Carrigstreet one waste tenement. In Athlone in Irishtown Nine tenements. In Athboy Ten tenements. Navan. Newtown, Ardgreagh, Rathnally and the mill, Harbertstown, Dungen∣ny, Mogomet, Clunfane, Vallenaughton, Felles∣town, Cloundavan, Ro∣binrath. Deece. Grange, Creroge, little Finglogh town. Moyfenragh. Fosters town, Earbers∣town, Turnie, Mawd∣lins, the Mill of New∣town. Lune. Woodtown-abbot, Fil∣pots town al. Moneshal∣labod, Dervor, Rath∣carran. Halfowre. Dyamore, Martinstown, Thomas town, Willi∣ams town, Phillips town, Patricks town al. Partridg town, Ballni∣vally, Knocklogh, Ken∣naghan. Rathconrath. Shonlish, Beologh and Agloghbane. Kilkenny west. Cluonkeene, Cloghir, Creggah; Ballynenoan, Gnivenemanagh, Kil∣kenny, Ferraneskehie, Lisnesrkiny & Tullagh∣anglass, Knocknegonin, the Plow land of the castle of Walterstown, Rathbreack, Ballintro∣hane, the Island of In∣nishbofin,
    Longford the tithes of Kilkenny, Bryanmor, the Abby of Athlone, Spit∣tlehouse and tenements called Garragh, Cluo∣ninore and Middowe. Cluonlonun. Boyledonnogh, Hories, Boyanagh, Tyrodono∣lon, Black Hories, Knockshane al. Graunts land 20 acres. Rathconrath. Garragh, Cluonagh, Shyeg, Lisnegrio, Fer∣ranegawne, Belanimo, Athboy, Buolegaroc∣kan, Feranekirk, the Castle Cartron, Crag∣gan, Aghaconner, Agha∣temple, Boleredmond, Mount Cornely, Ardne∣gacone, Garrowe, Sca∣hardand, Cappudna, Farribregge, Atteniu∣roona, Carrowreagh, Cluonibreene. Shrule. Keele, Carrigge, Rath∣begg, Rathmore, Tange, Newcastle, Garrincorr al. Corr, Abby of Shrule, Cloghanbedy, Aghanderry, Tullonon, Cluonsuse, Townsted, The Fairs, fishings, Wares and mills, Clu∣onebreen, Drumlisne∣gereagh, Dromanure, Rathorne, Killree, Rath∣sallowe, Killinboy, Cnockagh, Ballynema∣nagh, Lisnecreave, and Cronagh, Forgney, A∣crecam, Tomerick, Cla∣rinullagh, Tonag∣knock, Ballycor, Aghni∣dramen.
    Longford Tipperary Kings. Cavan. Shrule. Agnehend, Aghnagan, Corbane, Leter, Bally∣macknemae. Rathline. Moegh, Castlecor, De∣roge, Knockboy. Cluoneen, Grange, Gortnevulny, Mona∣sterg, Litterluna and Re∣ctory, Cluoncreken. 54 Acres in Ballyvinas∣sedy, Roscullinagh, and Droninicam, the moun∣tain of Shevobloome, Mucklone, the Vica∣rages of Kilcoman, and Aghencon, the Rectory of Syrakeran, Linnet, Littere, Roscowragh, Inchinebeo, Corbally, Cluonirekeen, Cowly∣shell, Killcoleman, Bal∣lenokennet, Balleca∣slane, Ardare, Garry∣hand, Ballybrit, Mony∣fadda, Lenybanan. Moonery one pole of land with appurtenan∣ces, also several Fairs and markets in the Counties of West∣meath, Kings, Mayo, Gal∣way, Sleygo, and Ros∣common. Russel Chri∣stopher 16. Houses. Nethereross. Seatowne, Newtowne, alias Knockmowles, Kelleys farm, 20 houses and a great stonewall, Gammwell, Smythes∣land, the Firr park, Tampanfield.     Rellick George. 2 Houses.    
Relly Stephen. 2 Tenements, &c. Mary acre.     Rogerson Tho∣mas. One house.     Read Bigget. Two houses.     Roe Henry and Ellinor Ʋx. Several statutes upon several persons in the City of Dublin.     Rery Fitz Ro∣bert A house in Thomas Street. Castleknock. Colletrath, Sprickles∣town, Gallantston, Cor∣restown, Chappell-Midway. Ratooth. Grenog.     Strong James, Richard and Christopher Five houses. The Rectory and tithes of Sherlockstown, a Statute staple against Christopher and Henry Burnell late of Castle∣knock, and Edmond Geashell of Paslocks∣town.     Sedgrave Law∣rence. The third part of the Precinct Ambite of St. John the Baptist.     Sheet James Dr. One house.     Saltonstal Samuel. A house in Corne∣market.     John Sergeant. A house in High-street.     Sarsfield Pa∣trick. 2 Houses, a mill and a parke. Newcastle. Lucan, Waspanstown, Padingstown, great and little Bolinetagh, Al∣lenswood and Sagard. Kildare. Offaly. Tully, Braiistown, Fry∣erstown, Merny, Mar∣tinstown, Kilbrid, Loughbroan, several Tenements in Kildare, Rathbryde, the tythes
  Ʋppercross. Rathcoole. Wicklow Kings. and Rectories of Fry∣ers town, Rathbryde, Kilcorkry, Davids town, Duneny, Ballygreny, Rathmuke, Fenner, Ballihinoge and Bally∣necailagh. Old Connel. Roseberry, and Clun∣gorie, Corvells, Cor∣vells Court, Scarlets∣town, Ricards town, Clungaunagh. The Tythes and Rectories of Mooretown, Roseberry, and Killelan. Kilcullen. The tythes and Recto∣ries of Thomas town, and Mooretown. Maraghandreban. The tythes and Recto∣ries of Lipstown, Blake∣hall and Calverstown. Naase. Turnings, Clunings, Killinemore, White-Church, Ladycastle, Stone mill and Barron∣rath. Clane. Ballynecapoke, Bea∣taughtowne, Maud∣leeves and Clane. Shillelly. The Rectories of Car∣now, Hackets town and Gilberstown. The tythes of Raghan, Lynoll, Killaghy, Bally∣hin, Ballyhoy, Drum∣cullen, Eglish, Kilbrid and Kilmurry, alias Kil∣manchan and the Parso∣nage of Killurim. Seagrave John 3. Houses in Highstreet, one in Bridgstreet, 3 in St. Nicholas-street, 3 in   Duleeke. Bartons town, Bel∣lewston & Ballinegarvy.
  St. Francis-street, 1 Mault-house in Oxmon∣mantown. Nethercross, part of Newcastle, & Vpper∣cross. Collects Inn al. the old Exchequer and Higgin∣green, little Cabragh, Finglas wood, New∣grange, Kilmacredocke, and Ballykellmore, Muchmore and little Wayre. Balrothery, and Ʋppercross. Tubergraigan, Gares∣town, Kilmakargin. Nethercross. Colcot and Tussagart, Ballyboggan. Meath Ratouth. A Statute staple of 1200 l. on Rathbeggan. Springham Thomas A house in Bridg-street. Castleknock. Killmenaham.     Taylor Mary, and Bridget Talbot Willi∣am One house.     Six houses. Newcastle. Two waste pieces of ground, Five tenements with 26 acres of land. Louth Dondalk. Haggards town, New∣town, Killalyn, Bally∣balrick. Tyreconnel Earl A house, Merriyonny, Rings end, Baggots Rath. Newcastle. A house and plot of ground, Finstown, Kil∣tale. Rathdown. Caleragh. Castleknock. Cappuck. Rathdowne. Bullerstown, Kilterna∣nin, Mallalride. Wicklow Meath Downe. Rathdown. Great Bray. Navan. Hallanstown and Athro∣nan. Templeton, Moore∣town and Mucklough.
  Coolock. Symons Court, Owens∣town. Rathdown. Dundrum, Glancullea, Little Bray, Killinacud.     Talbot Willi∣am Eight houses. Coolock. Puckstown. Balrothery. Balwinstown, Edestown, Garristown. The Crosse. Swords, Kahinny, Cor∣ballis. Castleknock. Stradwally, Clandalkin, Kilmainum. Meath Ratooth. Roberts town, Johns∣town, Donreagh, Little Bulstown, Greenock. Talbott Mar∣gery Certain houses. Balreddery. Garristown. Nethercross. Swords, Puckstown. Balruddery. Ballwynstown, Dolphins Barne.     Taaffe, alias Cook Julian Tyrenure.     Talbot Sir Henry One waste piece of ground without S. James gate, Madder garden, 8 Tenements in S. James, 1 Tenement in S. Thomas street, 18 Tenements in S. Francis street, 1 Tenement on the Corn market, 1 Te∣nement in S. Patrick-street, 6 Tenements in Sheep-street, the Brick∣walls in Castle-street, 2 Tenements in Fish∣amble-street, 6 Tene∣ments in Skinner Roe,    
  1 Tenement in S. Ni∣cholas parish, the wine∣tavern gate with 6 Te∣nements, 1 Tenement in Wine-tavern street, 3 Tenements opposite the old Crane.     Usher Arlenter Four houses and a Ten∣nis Court. Newcastle Vppercross. Cromlin, Clandalkin.     Valden Sil∣vester One house.     Usher George and Alice Vx. Twenty five houses. Coolock. Sutton, Whitstown, Hayes town, the Rath, Baldangan. Kildare Rosscom∣mon Westmeath Moyfanragh. Freefans al. little Free∣fans, Richardstown, Hoartown. Duleeke. Rath Cane, Trim. Salt. Calrow town and the tithes, Kill. Rosscommon. A Mortgage of 200 l. Multerfarnan. Usher Arlenter of Cromlin. One house in Fishamble street, one Orchard and Garden, one piece of waste ground in Cook∣street.     Usher Henry One Stone house. The Mannor of Baldon∣gan, Lytown, Ballens∣town, Whites town, Hayes town, the Rath. Coolock. Sutton and other lands. Catherlagh Wicklow Westmeath Meath. Rosscom∣mon. The Rectory of Ar∣tlo, &c. The parsonage of Kill∣magorge. The lands of the Abbey of Mullifarnan. Beartanstown and Bal∣dongan. Cloynreny, Sanvally Mac Corvill, Agdrum∣nagh, Caldragh, Lis∣gilroe, Lyshumuske, Gorseloghan and Clonne.
Wiseman Ed∣ward and Ma∣ry Ʋx. One house in Castle∣street.     White Domi∣nick and Luke White. Fourteen houses, three shops, and certain par∣cels of ground.     Warren Peter and John War∣ren. A house in S. Kavans parish. County. Danabrook, Cornes∣court, Glaunemucke, Ballowley.     White Stephen One house on the Wood-key, one waste house in S. Francis∣street. Balruddery. 10 l. per annum out of Little Hollywood. Lowth Meath Dundalk. One Castle, 24 acres & a half, and 10 houses in Carlingford. Seven houses, one Orchard, and one Croft in Drogheda. Arder. Two houses in Arder. Duleeke. Fifty two acres in Har∣kinston.       Additional
Banks Elinor One house in High∣street.     Brown Tho∣mas Several houses in Dub∣lin, one Castle in Clon∣dalkin, Seskin.     Ball al. Gough Ann One house in Ram-Lane, the thirds of Bar∣tholomew Balls estate.     Baggot Elinor & al. Several houses in Dub∣lin and Oxmantown, Clandalkin, Clown∣burrus.   Downestown, Slane, the tythes of Bally∣ferman. Bamber Ri∣chard Several houses in Dub∣lin.     Brown Sir Ri∣chard Several houses in Dub∣lin. Longford Killmoore, Ballykenny, Tully Rowe, Bailyri∣chan, Killeclogh, Cer∣rillman, Drumderrick, Cullaghneddagh, Ba∣chilboy, Carridmere, Tuma, Feaghmoore, Tarrybog, Corryglass, Lissahanedan, the fish∣ing Were of Ballybeg, Keebe, Clunart, Bo∣hine, Clogher, Tully, Monteryelgan, Cnock∣angoly, Sin, Friaghnane, Carrylackluanagh, Car∣ryballentampan, Done∣gall, Knodoragh, Balle∣garne, Agheratna, Balle∣namoore, Caldragh, Gobedagh, Clonelegh, Clunellan, Risbage. Barnwall Ri∣chard One house in Cook∣street Dublin, Lispople, Drumnifield, Knock∣bryne, Roganstown. Meath. Louth. Moneghan. With a Water-mill, S. Johns Rath, Staba∣nan, Lychistown, other lands, Carlingford, Ballug, Corballies, Cowly, Balliregan, Brockaroagh. Brook William and his wife Several tenements on the Wood-key.    
Bath Richard and others Several houses in Dub∣lin and Oxmantown, Glasnevin. Monaghan Meath. Annaghagh, Dennis∣town. Balgeeth. Brown John of Neals town Several houses in Dub∣lin, Rowlagh, Steeple∣farm, Cappaghs, Barnes∣wood, Clandalkin, Nealstown, Ballgaddy, Bally mac negine, Bally mac Kenny, Hoyles half farm, Clanborries, Pars-Moores, Haumless half farm, Rathline, Skellins∣ford, a Watermill in Kings mills town.     Blackny Willi∣am One house in Dublin. Reykentore, Sankers town, Balcunry, Heaths town, Nodds town, Wise town, Adams town, Freeland, Par∣kinstown.     Carberry Ni∣cholas Several Messuages, &c.     Clanbrasel Henry Earl S. Maryes dissolved Abbey, &c.     Clarke George One house in Stephen street, two houses, gar∣dens and Backsides in James street, three houses, gardens and backsides in S. Thomas street, one house in the Backlane with a back∣side, one house in S. Patrick street with a garden and backside. Kildare Two hundred and fifty pounds due on John Clarkes estate, three hundred pounds due on James Eustace his lands in Moone, in the right of his wife. Crump Chri∣stopher & Vx. Robert Barn∣well & Ʋx. Lawrence Pur∣field and Igna∣tius Hursell One Lease for 61 years by the Master and War∣dens of S. Anns Guild, an annuity of 10 l. per an. to issue out of a house in Cornmarket, one Bond of the staple of Kildare Four Messuages, 67 a∣cres of land in Ardresse Barrony of Salt, one Annutty of 5 l. sterl. out of Corners Court, one Annuity of 10 l. per an. out of Corners
  of 320 l. acknowledged by Patrick Halgan.   court, a lease of 99 years out of Monally. Dowdal Igna∣tius One house in Wine∣tavern street. Lowth One house on the Key of Droghedah, one o∣ther house in Harpies lane, one garden plot in S. Johns lane, an house or tenement in Ri∣chards town with seve∣ral acres of land, seve∣ral houses and lands in Mollincrosse, certain houses and lands in the town and fields of Col∣lem. Dowdal Pa∣trick One house in Cook∣street, one void piece of ground joyning on the west upon the Cor∣ner house of Bridge∣street, and extending on the East to the signe of the Bull on the Mer∣chant-key. Meath Louth. Slane. Regskon and the mill thereof. Atherdee. Coologs land. One house and backside at the middle gate of A∣therdee, one house and backside in the High∣street of Atherdee, one house and backside in the said street, 60 acres of land in the fields of Atherdee. Dundalke. Ballymacklyot. Dowdall Mat∣thew One house and garden in Thomas-street, one house and garden in Francis street, one house and garden in Patrick street: in Kilmainham ten acres of land. Westmeath Meath Louth Delvine. Cloran, Corcullintragh. Slan. One house and back∣side in Slane. Deece. A mortgage of 200 l. on Lumbardstown and Fi∣dorffe. Ratooth. A mortgage of 200 l. upon Smiths town, Himlingstone and A∣glastan. In Louth 2 acres, in Dundalk two houses and eight acres.
Draycott Henry One house in S. Mi∣chaels lane. Meath Louth. Westmeath Wexford. Duleeke. Momantown, Colpe, the little Bebeg, great Be∣beg, Duleek, Lough, Graycots, Corballid, Routhgrainge, Calangh town, Miltown, Rod∣der, Fullerstown, Kilnac∣dasland, Davistown, both the Graggs, Balgeeth, Scalernagh, Febeg, Colpe, Kells, Drogheda. Febeg, the Rectory of S. Leonard of Dundalk. The Rectory of Killan and Garr. Norristown and Clares∣town, Dipford and Crooked more. Ellcock Eliza∣beth One house in Pipe∣street.     Eiffe John The Monastery of S. Thomas near Dublin.     Fanning Rose Houses several, &c.     Fullam Ni∣cholas Houses several, &c.     Fleming Rose al. Quine One house in Oxman∣town, three tenements and 12 acres of ground in Santhy, 2 tenements near Youngs castle, one other house in Oxman∣town, and one near S. Michaels Church stile.     Gernon Tho∣mas Houses several.     Hore Philip of Kilsalchon One house in High∣street, two in Cook∣street, one in S. Brides street called Henry the eighth, two in New∣street, houses in S. Fran∣cis street, several houses and gardens in S. Maries Meath. Clatterstown, Bulls town, and some land in in Calestown, the Man∣nor of Ballemalshalrish, al. Shalrish and Kildow∣an, Ballishelan, Tracris∣town, Harnistown, the Dirr.
  Abbeys, 1 house on Mer∣chants key formerly cal∣led Fitz Simons house. The mannor house and lands of Killshalcon, Dunmake, Thorntown, Coolcoye, Carrestown, the Ruth, Balkhale, Bed∣ford, Sradbally, great Kings town, Rathlucas town, Longhyhill, se∣veral houses and gar∣dens in Luske, the town of Castleknock, Irish∣town Hares town, Ri∣kenhead, and Castle Curragh. Wexford Graigshallagh, Pole∣hore, Mortgages of 140 l. on Lawrence Bea∣lies land in Stradbally, 140 l. on Paslastown and Matestown with several other Mortgages, three houses, the Castle hills, some lands in Tumen. Jordan John One house in Kesars lane, and another on Colledg green. Balmuguire, one mes∣suage and 15 acres in in Luske, Clomedan al. Ashtown, one house and 2 acres in Swords, 5 tenements and 26 acres in Cromlin. Kings Four tenements and gardens in Philipstown. Lambert Phi∣lip One house near New∣gate. Wexford Fort. Ballyheire, Beng, Bally∣wich, Ballicollan, little Killian, Muckrath, Collkeran, the village o 9 acres and Chappel, Ballycrinegan. Shilmaleere. Marshals town. Barge. Richards town. City Wexford. Three houses. Lynch Bar∣tholomew   Roscom∣mon. Scaldpark, and the four quarters of Ballinehoe.
