B1666 E293_26 99860973 113100
A Brief RELATION OF The taking of Bridgewater by the Parliaments Forces under the command of Sir Tho: Fairfax; and therein, all the Lord Gorings Train, 36. pieces of Ordnance, 2000. prisoners, 800. horse, with great store of Oxen. Sent in a Letter to the Committee of both Kingdoms. Together with A Letter concerning the deliver∣ing up of Pontefract Castle by Treaty to the use of the Parliament, with all the things therein. Also, hopes of reducing Scarbrough by treaty. Sent to the Honorable, William Lenthall Esq Speaker to the House of COMMONS. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That these Letters be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Ho∣norable House of Commons: Iuly 25. 1645.
From Master Samuel Bedford, Scout-Master to the Committee of both Kingdoms. Honoured Sir, AFter the Generall had taken this side of the Town, we Summoned the Town, they altogether refused, and fired that part of the Town we had taken. The Generall Summoned it again, and told them they should march away, or else if they would yield on some further condition; they de∣nyed, said they would stand it out to
the last man: The Generall perceived their fury, sent to them that he would give leave for all the women and chil∣dren to come out of the Town: The Governour returned thanks, sent his wife and many Ladyes out; then our men shot wilde-fire into the Town and fired it; whereupon, the Governour sent out to the Generall to Parley: Our Generall refused, only he would be mercifull and spare their lives; where∣upon they yielded themselves Priso∣ners: There was all the Lord Gorings train, 36. Peeces of Ordnance, 2000. Prisoners at the least, 800. Horse, and great store of Oxen. July 23. four in the morning.
To the Honourable VVilliam Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons. SIR, WEE thought fit the last week to Summon Ponte∣fract Castle, which caused the enemy to desire a Trea∣ty; whereupon we appointed Col: Wastell, Col: Copley, Col: Overton, and Col: Bright, or any three of them to Treat; and this day it is agreed, that the Castle shall be delivered up to the use of the Parliament, to morrow at eight of the Clock in the morning, with all the things therein, save that the Officers are allowed to carry away what is properly their own, so that it
exceed not what a Cloth-bag will con∣tain; and the Souldiers to March to Newark with 200. Muskets, and 200. Pikes. VVe consented to so good con∣ditions, because the Plague is very hot in the Country, and especially in that Town, of which some of our Souldi∣ers are dead. VVe are also in Treaty with Scarbrough, which we hope short∣ly will be Reduced. Thus much we thought fit to give you notice of, de∣siring the House may be acquainted therewith: From York the 20. of Iuly, 1645. Your very affectio∣nate Friends and humble Servants, Fran. Pierrepont, Wilfrid Lawson, Henry Cholmley.
Iulii 24. 1645. ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That these Letters concerning the taking of Bridgewater and Pontefract Castle, be forthwith Printed and Published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
