B171A E413_5 99863968 116186
THE VICTORIOUS PROCEEDINGS OF THE PROTESTANT ARMIE IN IRELAND. Vnder the Command of the Right Honourable Maj. Gen. Iones, in his late expedition against the Irish Rebels. WHEREIN IS SET FORTH, Severall great Overthrowes, given to the said Rebels, since the 9. of October last, 1647. As also the manner of the taking of 10. strong Castles belong∣ing to the enemy, with the losse of few men, together with all their Armes, and Ammunition. Being a full and perfect Relation of the severall Victories obtained from the 9. of October till the 20. of November, 1647. LONDON Printed by B. A. for further satisfaction.
The further successefull Proceedings of the Prote∣stant Army in Ireland, commanded by Colonell Michael Jones. SIR, ACcording to my promise, I here tender unto you the further relation of the proceedings of our ar∣my; also the taking of Athboy, and after the Ge∣nrall had disposed of the prisoners, and placed a Garison there, he marched to Kells five miles Northwards from Athboy, and there quartered; and that night Sir Tho. Atme∣strong with a party of 500. horse was sent into the Coun∣ty of Cavan, to harrase and prey that Country. Sunday the x. of October, we marched from Hells north∣ward, severall Castles in the Country quitting their Gar∣risons, and about 11. of the clock we came before a very strong Fort, called Ardtonian, alias Cumce Fort, the Ge∣nerall caused the place to be summoned; whereupon an Officer came forth, & after parley, desired quarter, which being granted, there marched forth Lieut. Comice, an En∣signe, 38. Souldiers, a Piper, & a great sort of their nasty Country women & children the Gen. left captain Richard Perkins of Col. Kinnastons Regiment, & 70 men in Gar∣rison there. This day Sir Jo. Gifford with a party of horse brought in a prey of Cowes & Sheepe, a great reliefe to the Army. Then the army marched 3 miles from thence to a place called Nebber (a Castle & Fort of Earth, sur∣rounded
with water of great strength) it ng smmo∣ned, the Commander within desired that one from Us might be sent in, & he would send one to our Campe, and by eight of the clock next morning, would resolve the Generall what he would doe, Major Miles Somne In∣geneer Generall to the Army, was sent by the Generall in, where he remained that night, and one Pluncket was sent forth, who likewise remained n the Campe that night. Munday October the 11. Major Semur came forth and certified the place to be of great strength, about 11 of the clock after long debate (the consequence of the place requiring of it) they had quarter to march with Arms, Bag and Baggage, with a fourth part of their corne: There marched thence, a Lieutenant and an En∣signe, and about 70. men, with a great number of their old retirue of women and children, Lieutenant Colo∣nell Napper of Colonell Kingstons Regiment is now in Garrison there. Tuesday the 12. of October, after the Gen. had set∣led his businesse about the Nebber, he marched to Bal∣lagho (a very ill passage for our Ordnance and Carria∣ges) In our march thither Sir Thomas Armstrong with the party of horse under his command, came to the Army with a very good prey of cattell, at that time a great re∣lief to the Army, being in great want of Victuals, when we came to Ballagho (a very strong Castle with great Works) upon a passe lying on the laggan water; which severs the Countries of Meath, Lowth, and Mounaghan, each from other, and commands all that part of the Country. It was immediatly summoned, they within re∣fusing to yeeld, the Gen. caused strong guards both of horse and foot to watch the place all night.
Wednesday the 13 of Octob. our Ordinance by reason of the badnesse of the waies came not to us till noon, when assoon as they in the Castle perceived them come, they desired to parley, which being hearkened unto, (for the Works and Castle could not be gained by all likelihood without great losse) it was agreed they should march a∣way with their Arms, Bag and Baggage (not march worth) there marched away Col: Fleming Commander of the Castle, an Ensign and 47 Souldies, Lieutenant Colonel Blagvale of Col: Moores Reg. was left in garrison there. Thursday the 14 of Octob. we marched close under the Castle of Ballaghoo over the passe (a very dangerous Foord) into the County of Manughan, and leaving Car∣rigment Rosse on our right hand whither the Brittish for∣ces marched, we marched into the County of Cavan, and came to a place called Cabbvagh belonging to one Thomas Fleming (now of the Rebels supreme Councell,) a place commanding all that part of the Country, which being summoned, took quarter and delivered up the Castle, there marched thence 12 Musketeers to another Garri∣son of the enemies called the Nogh, this place was left to Col: Monk to slight or settle a Garrison there, as he should think fit, it being in the Province of Ulster. Friday the 15 of Octob. the Army remained at Cabb∣vagh, and the Gen. with some horse marched to another Garrison of theirs called the Nogh 2 miles from Cabb∣vagh, a place of very great strength, commanded by a son of Tho. Flemings, there was a great store of corne a∣bout this place, the Castle being summoned took quar∣ter, and they marched away with Bag and Baggage. A Troop of Col: Ponsonbyes Regiment of horse is now in Garrison at the Nogh.
Col. Monk with the Ulster Forces sate down before Islands in a low close under Carrick Macff, after some shot made, those in the Island cryed out for quarter, and had it granted: there was great store of Meale and Corn, & other Country provisions found in those Islands, the Country all about was burnt. Satterday the 12. of Octob. the Gen. & Col. Monk met at Cabbragh aforesaid in the county of Cavad, and after some consultation, our Forces and the Ulster Forces parted, they homewards, and we marched neere to a place called Roffine in the County of Meath, where wee quartered that night, and received intelligence of out Convoy formerly sent to Dublin, to be neer, and march∣ing to us. Sunday the 17. of Octob. about ten of the clock, we met with our Convoy, which brought provision of Bisket & cheefe to the army, then standing in a great need thereof: from this place the Gen. sent col. Coot, to garrison at a place called Roffine, about which is great store of corne. Sir Patrick Weames, & capt. Richard Burrowes to Mogalty, part of col. Ponsoies horse to Nobber & Ardloman. the Gen. dismist col. Moor & the Dundalke Forces home to their quarters, and he marched to Durmoe, a strong Ca∣stle of the Rebels upon the River of Reyn (the last Garri∣son of the Enemies in the English quarters) it being sum∣moned, tooke quarter to march away with their swords and cloakes only, Lieut. Delamare and 24. men. In this ca∣stle is Capt. Roe of Col. Hungerfords Regiment left in ga∣rison. The army marched over the Royne (a very unto∣ward crosse way for our Ordinance) and that night wee quartered at n place called Dullardstone. Munday the 18. of Octob. we marched from Dullard∣stone, and this day the General dismist the Drogheda for∣ces
home to their quarters. This thy we quartered at a place called Killeglan within ten miles of Dublin. Tuesday the 19. of Octob. we marched from Killeglan towards Dublin, in the way the Lord Moore tooke his leave of the Generall, and went to his quarters to Melli∣fort, and the night we marched to the city of Dublin, to the great rejoycing of the well-affected Citizens, who in our absence lost neer upon 600. Cowes taken from them by the Rebels. Thus have I endeavoured to give you a full and perfect accompt of the proceedings of our Army in their la march abroad, and if it pleased God so to put in the hart of the Parliament there as to looke upon us with some supply of money, I make no doubt, with Gods assistance, the Rebels hearts would quickly be quite broke: if mo∣ney be not sent, things will go very crosse, and we in great danger among our own party here. God Almighty stirre y their hearts to look upon us here, I am SIR, Your most humble servant, R. B. Dublin the 26. of Octob. 1647.
Post-script. AFter the returne of our Army to the City of Dublin, the Generall sent out a party of horse into the County of Wickle, who brought with them a good prey of Cattle to Dublin, which was a great reliefe to the Army, the 23 of October, the Generall commandes to be kept as a day of Thanksgiving for the great deliverance from the Irish Rebellion, and for the good successes God had been pleased to give him in this his Expedition. FINIS. Imprimatur G. M.
