B2442 45504299 171605
THE PSALMS OF DAVID In Meeter: Newly translated, and dili∣gently compared with the Original Text, and former Translations: More plaine, smooth, and agreeable to the Text, then any heretofore. Allowed by the authority of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland and appointed to be sung in Congregations and Families. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1650.
EDINBURGH, 6. August, 1649. Ante meridiem, Sess. ult. Reference to the Commission for publick Af∣fairs for re-examining the Paraphrase of the Psalms, & emitting the same for publick use. THe General Assembly having taken some view of the new Paraphrase of the Psalms in Meeter, with the cor∣rections and animadversions there∣upon sent from several persons and Presbyte∣ries, and finding that they cannot overtake the review and examination of the whole in this Assembly; Therefore now after so much time, and so great pains about the correcting and ex∣amining thereof from time to time some years by gone, that the Work may come now to some conclusion, They do Ordain the Brethren ap∣pointed for perusing the same during the meet∣ing of this Assembly, viz. Masters James Ham∣miltoun, John Smith, Hew Mackail, Robert Trail, George Hutcheson, and Robert Lowrie, after the dissolving of this Assembly, to go on in that Work carefully, and to report their travels to the Commission of the General Assembly for publick affairs, at their meeting at Edinburgh in November. And the said Commission after perusal and re-examination thereof, is hereby authorized with full power to conclude and e∣stablish the Paraphrase, and to publish and emit the same for publick use. A. Ker.
EDINB. 23. Nov. 1649. Postmeridiem. THE Commission of the General Assembly having with great diligence considered the Paraphrase of the Psalms in meeter sent from the Assembly of Divines in England, by our Commissioners, whilst they were there, as it is corrected by former Generall Assemblies, Committies from them, and now at last by the Brethren deputed by the late Assembly for that purpose: And ha∣ving exactly examined the same, Do approve the said Paraphrase, as it is now compiled: And therefore ac∣cording to the power given them by the said Assembly, Do appoint it to be printed and published for publick use; Hereby authorizing the same to be the only Para∣phrase of the Psalms of David to be sung in the Kirk of Scotland; And discharging the old Paraphrase, and any other then this new Paraphrase to be made use of in any Congregation or Family after the first day of May in the year 1650. And for uniformitie in this part of the worship of God, Do seriously recommend to Presbyteries, to cause make publick intimation of this Act, and take special care that the same be timeously put to execution, and duely observed. A. Ker. EDINBURGH, 8. Jan. 1650. THE Committee of Estates having considered the English Paraphrase of the Psalms of David in meeter, presented this day unto them by the Commiss. of the Gen. Assembly, together with their Act, and the Act of the late Assembly, approving the said Paraphrase and appointing the same to be sung through this Kirk. Therefore the Committee doth also approve the said Pa∣raphrase, and interpone their authority for the publish∣ing and practising thereof: Hereby ordaining the same, and no other to be made use of, throughout this King∣dom, according to the tenour of the said Acts of the General Assembly and their Commissioners. T▪ Henderson.
THE PSALMS OF DAVID In Meeter. PSALM I. THat man hath perfect blessednesse, who walketh not astray In counsell of ungodly men, nor stands in sinners way, Nor sitteth in the scorners chair. But placeth his delight Upon Gods Law, and meditates on his Law day and night. He shall be like a tree that growes near planted by a river, Which in his season yeelds his fruit, and his leaf fadeth never: And all he doth shall prosper well. The wicked are not so: But like they are unto the chaff which winde drives to and fro.
In judgement therefore shall not stand such as ungodly are, Nor in th' assembly of the just shall wicked men appear. For why? the way of godly men unto the Lord is known: Whereas the way of wicked men shall quite be over-thrown. PSAL. II. VVHy rage the Heathen? and vain things why do the people minde? Kings of the earth do set themselves, and Princes are combinde To plot against the Lord, and his Anointed, saying thus, Let us asunder break their band and cast their cords from us. He that in Heaven sits shall laugh: the Lord shall scorn them all: Then shall he speak to them in wrath, in re he vex them shall. Yet notwithstanding I have him to be my King appointed: And over Sion, my holy hill, I have him King anointed. The sure decree I will declare: the Lord hath said to me, Thou art mine onely Son, this day I have begotten thee.
Ask of me, and for heritage the Heathen I'le make thine, And for possession I to thee will give earths utmost line. Thou shalt, as with a weightie rod of iron, break them all, And, as a potters sheard, thou shalt them dash in pieces small. Now therefore, Kings, be wise, be taught ye Judges of the earth. Serve God in fear, and see that ye joyn trembling with your mirth. Kisse ye the Son, lest in his ire ye perish from the way, If once his wrath begin to burn. Blest all that on him stay. PSAL. III. A Psalme of David when he fled from Absa∣lom his son. O Lord, how are my foes increas'd? against me many rise. Many say of my soul, for him in God no succour lyes. Yet thou my shield, and glory are, th'uplifter of my head. I cry'd and from his holy hill the Lord me answer made. I laid me down and slept, I wak'd, for God sustained me.
I will not fear though thousands ten set round against me be. Arise, O Lord, save me, my God; for thou my foes hast stroke All on the chek-bone; and the teeth of wicked men hast broke. Salvation doth appertain unto the Lord alone: Thy blessing, Lord, for evermore thy people is upon. PSAL. IV. To the chief musician on Neginoth, A Psalm of David. GIve ear unto me when I call, God of my righteousnesse: Have mercy, hear my pray'r, thou hast enlarg'd me in distresse. O ye the sons of men, how long will ye love vanities? How long my glory turn to shame, and will ye follow lies? But know that for himself, the Lord the godly man doth chuse: The Lord, when I on him do call, to hear will not refuse. Fear, and sin not, talk with your heart on bed, and silent be. Offrings present of righteousnesse: and in the Lord trust ye.
O who will show us any good? is that which many say: But of thy countenance the light, Lord, lift on us alway. Upon my heart bestow'd by thee more gladnesse I have found, Than they, ev'n then, when corn and wine did most with them abound. I will both lay me down in peace, and quiet sleep will take: Because thou onely, me to dwell in safetie, Lord, dost make. PSAL. V. To the chief musician on Nehiloth, A Psalm of David. GIve ear unto my words, O Lord, my meditation weigh. Hear my loud cry, my King, my God; for I to thee will pray. Lord, thou shalt early hear voice; I early will direct My pray'r to thee, and looking up an answer will expect. For thou art not a God that doth in wickednesse delight: Neither shall evill dwell with thee. Nor fooles stand in thy sight. All that ill-doers are thou hat'st. Cut'st off that liars be: The bloudy and deceitfull man abhored is by thee.
But I into thy house will come in thine abundant grace: And I will worship in thy fear toward thy holy place. Because of those mine enemies, Lord, in thy righteousnesse Do thou me lead; do thou thy way make straight before my face. For in their mouth there is no truth, their inward part is ill; Their throat's an open sepulchre, their tongue doth flatter still. O God destroy them; let them be by their own counsell quell'd: Them for their many sins cast out, for they 'gainst thee rebell'd. But let all joy that trust in thee; and still make shouting noise: For them thou sav'st: Let all that love thy Name, in thee rejoyce. For, Lord, unto the righteous man▪ thou wilt thy blessing yeeld; With favour thou wilt compasse him about, as with a shield. PSAL. VI. To the chief musician on Neginoth upon Sheminith, a Psalm of David. LOrd in thy wrath rebuke me not, Nor in thy hot rage chasten me. Lord pitty me, for I am weak:
Heal me, for my bones vexed be. My soul is also vexed sore: But, Lord, how long stay wilt thou make? Return, O Lord, my soul set free: O save me for thy mercies sake. Because those that deceased are, Of thee shall no remembrance have: And who is he that will to thee Give praises lying in the grave? I with my groaning weary am, I also all the night, my bed Have caused for to swim, and I With tears my couch have watered. Mine eye consum'd with grief growes old, Because of all mine enemies. Hence from me wicked workers all, For God hath heard my weeping cryes. God hath my supplication heard; My pray'r received graciously. Sham'd, and sore vex'd be all my foes, Sham'd, and back-turned suddenly. Another of the same. IN thy great indignation, O Lord, rebuke me not; Nor on the lay thy chastning hand in thy displeasure hot. Lord, I am weak, therefore on me have mercy, and me spare: Heal me, O Lord, because thou know'st my bones much vexed are.
My soul is vexed sore; but, Lord, how long stay wilt thou make? Return, Lord, free my soul, and save me for thy mercies sake. Because of thee in death there shall no more remembrance be: Of those that in the grave do ly, who shall give thanks to thee? I with my groaning weary am, and all the night my bed I caused for to swim: with tears my couch I watered. By reason of my vexing grief, mine eye consumed is; It waxeth old, because of all that be mine enemies. But now depart from me, all ye that work iniquity; For why, the Lord hath heard my voice, when I did mourn and cry. Unto my supplication the Lord did hearing give; When I to him my prayer make, the Lord will it receive. Let all be sham'd, and troubled sore, that enemies are to me; Let them turn back, and suddenly ashamed let them be.
PSAL. VII. Shiggaion of David, which he sang unto the Lord, concerning the words of Cush the Benjamite. O Lord my God, in thee do I my confidence repose: Save and deliver me from all my persecuting foes. Lest that the enemy my soul should like a Lion tear, In pieces renting it, while there is no deliverer. O Lord my God, if it be so that I committed this; If it be so, that in my hands iniquity there is. If I rewarded ill to him that was at peace with me: (Yea, ev'n the man that without cause my foe was, I did free.) Then let the foe pursue, and take my soul, and my life thrust Down to the earth, and let him lay mine honour in the dust. Rise in thy wrath, Lord, raise thy self, for my foes raging be: And to the judgement, which thou hast commanded, wake for me. So shall th'assembly of thy folk about encompasse thee:
Thou therefore for their sakes, return unto thy place on hie. The Lord he shall the people judge: my judge, Jehovah, be, After my righteousnesse, and mine integrity in me. O let the wickeds malice end, but stablish stedfastly The righteous: for the righteous God the hearts and reins doth try. In God, who saves th'upright in heart, is my defence and stay. God just men judgeth, God is wroth with ill men every day. If he do not return again, then he his sword will whet; His bow he hath already bent, and hath it ready set. He also hath for him prepar'd the instruments of death; Against the persecutors he his shafts ordained hath. Behold, he with iniquity doth travail as in birth; A mischief he conceived hath, and falshood shall bring forth. He made a pit, and digg'd it deep, another there to take, But he is fall'n into the ditch which he himself did make. Upon his own head, his mischief
shall be returned home; His violent dealing also down on his own pate shall come. According to his righteousnesse the Lord I'le magnifie: And will sing praise unto the Name of God, that is most hie. PSAL. VIII. To the chief musician upon Gittith, A Psalm of David. HOw excellent in all the earth, Lord, our Lord, is thy Name! Who hast thy glory far advanc'd above the starrie frame. From infants and from sucklings mouth thou didest strength ordain, For thy foes cause, that so thou might'st th'avenging foe restrain. When I look up unto the heavens which thine own fingers fram'd, Unto the moon, and to the starres, which were by thee ordain'd; Then say I, what is man, that he remembred is by thee? Or what the son of man, that thou so kind to him should be? For thou a little lower hast him then the angels made, With glory and with dignity thou crowned hast his head.
Of thy hand-works thou mad'st him Lord; all under's feet didst lay: All sheep and oxen, yea, and beasts that in the field do stray: Fowls of the air, fish of the sea, all that passe through the same. How excellent in all the earth, Lord, our Lord, is thy Name! PSAL. IX. To the chief musician upon Muth-labben, A Psalm of David. LOrd, thee I'le praise with all my heart, thy wonders all proclaime. In thee most high, I'le greatly joy, and sing unto thy Name. When back my foes were turn'd, they fell, and perisht at thy sight. For thou maintain'd my right and cause, on throne sat'st, judging right. The heathen thou rebuked hast, the wicked over-thrown; Thou hast put out their names, that they may never more be known. O enemy! now destructions have an end perpetuall: Thou cities raz'd, perisht with them is their memoriall. God shall endure for ay: he doth for judgement set his throne:
In righteousnesse to judge the world, justice to give each one. God also will a refuge be for those that are opprest; A refuge will he be in times of trouble to distrest. And they that know thy Name, in thee their confidence will place: For thou hast not forsaken them that truly seek thy face. O sing ye praises to the Lord, that dwels in Sion hill: And all the nations among, his deeds record ye still. When he enquireth after blood, he then remembreth them: The humble folk he not forgets that call upon his Name. Lord, pitie me, behold the grief which I from foes sustain, Ev'n thou who from the gates of death dost raise me up again; That I, in Sions daughters gates, may all thy praise advance: And that I may rejoyce alwayes in thy deliverance. The heathen are sunk in the pit, which they themselves prepar'd And in the net which they have hid their own feet fast are snar'd. The Lord is by the judgement known
which he himself hath wrought: The sinners hands do make the snares wherewith themselves are caught. They, who are wicked, into hell, each one shall turned be, And all the nations that forget to seek the Lord most hie. For they that needy are, shall not forgotten be alway: The expectation of the poor shall not be lost for ay. Arise, Lord, let not man prevail, judge heathens in thy sight. That they may know themselves but men, the nations, Lord, affright. PSAL. X. VVHerefore is it, that thou, O Lord, dost stand from us afar? And wherefore hidest thou thy self, when times so troublous are? The wicked in his loftinesse doth persecute the poor: In these devices they have fram'd let them be taken sure. The wicked of his hearts desire doth talk with boasting great; He blesseth him that's covetous, whom yet the Lord doth hate. The wicked, through his pride of face, on God he doth not call: And in the counsels of his heart the Lord is not at all.
His wayes they alwayes grievous are: thy judgements from his sight Removed are: at all his foes he puffeth with despight. Within his heart he thus hath said. I shall not moved be: And no adversity at all shall ever come to me. His mouth with cursing, fraud, deceit, is fill'd abundantly: And underneath his tongue, there is mischief and vanity. He closely sits in villages: he slayes the innocent: Against the poor that passe him by his cruell eyes are bent. He Lyon-like lurks in his den: he waits the poor to take: And when he draws him in his net, his prey he doth him make. Himself he humbleth very low, he croucheth down withall, That so a multitude of poor may by his strong ones fall. He this hath said within his heart, the Lord hath quite forgot: He hides his countenance, and he for ever sees it not. O Lord, do thou arise; O God, lift up thine hand on hie: But not the meek afflicted ones out of thy memorie.
Why is it that the wicked man thus doth the Lord despise? Because, that God will it require, he in his heart denies. Thou hast it seen, for their mischief and spite thou wilt repay: The poor commits himself to thee, thou art the orphans stay. The arm break of the wicked man, and of the evill one: Do thou seek out his wickednesse untill thou findest none. The Lord is King through ages all, ev'n to eternity: The heathen people from their land are perisht utterly. O Lord, of those that humble are thou the desire didst heare: Thou wilt prepare their heart, and thou to heare wilt bend thine eare: To judge the fatherlesse, and those that are oppressed sore, That man, that is but sprung of earth, may them oppresse no more. PSAL. XI. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. I in the Lord do put my trust: how is it then that ye Say to my soul, flee as a bird unto your mountain hie?
For lo, the wicked bend their bow, their shafts on string they fit: That those who upright are in heart they privily may hit. If the foundations be destroy'd, what hath the righteous done? God in his holy Temple is, in heaven is his throne: His eyes do see, his eye-lids try mens sons. The just he proves: But his soul hates the wicked man, and him that violence loves. Snares, fire and brimstone, furious storms on sinners he shall rain: This, as the portion of their cup, doth unto them pertain. Because the Lord most righteous doth in righteousnesse delight, And with a pleasant countenance beholdeth the upright. PSAL XII. To the chief musician upon Sheminith, A Psalm of David. HElp Lord, because the godly man doth dayly fade away; And from among the sons of men the faithfull do decay. Unto his neighbour every one doth utter vanitie: They with a double heart do speak, and lips of flatterie.
God shall cut off all flattering lips, tongues that speak proudly, thus, Wee'l with our tongue prevail, our lips are ours: who's Lord ov'r us? For poor opprest, and for the sighs of needie, rise will I, Saith God, and him in safety set from such as him defy. The words of God are words most pure: they be like silver try'd In earthen furnace, seven times that hath been purify'd. Lord, thou shalt them preserve and keep for ever, from this race. On each side walk the wicked, when vile men are high in place. PSAL. XIII. To chief musician, A Psalm of David. HOw long wilt thou forget me, Lord, shall it for ever be? O how long shall it be, that thou wilt hide thy face from me? How long take counsel in my soul, still sad in heart, shall I? How long exalted over me shall be mine enemy? O Lord my God, consider well, and answer to me make: Mine eyes enlighten, lest the sleep of death me overtake.
Lest that mine enemie should say, against him I prevail'd; And, those that trouble me, rejoyce when I am mov'd and fail'd. But I have all my confidence thy mercy set upon: My heart within me shall rejoyce in thy salvation. I will unto the Lord my God sing praises chearfully, Because he hath his bountie shown to me abundantly. PSAL. XIV. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. That there is not a God, the fool doth in his heart conclude: They are corrupt, their works are vile, not one of them doth good. Upon mens sons the Lord from heaven did cast his eyes abroad; To see if any understood, and did seek after God. They altogether filthy are, they all aside are gone: And there is none that doeth good, yea, sure there is not one. These workers of iniquity do they not know at all, That they my people eat as bread, and on God do not call?
There fear'd they much: for God is with the whole race of the just. You shame the counsel of the poor, because God is his trust. Let Israels help from Sion come. When back the Lord shal bring His captives, Jacob shall rejoyce, and Israel shall sing. PSAL. XV. A Psalm of David. VVIthin thy tabernacle, Lord, who shall abide with thee? And in thy high and holy hill who shall a dweller be? The man that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousnesse, And, as he thinketh in his heart, so doth he truth expresse. Who doth not slander with his tongue, nor to his friend doth hurt, Nor yet against his neighbour doth take up an ill report. In whose eyes vile men are despis'd; but those that God do fear He honoureth: and changeth not, though to his hurt he swear. His coyn puts not to usury, nor take reward will he Against the guiltlesse. Who doth thus shall never moved be.
PSAL. XVI. Michtam of David. LOrd keep me: for I trust in thee To God thus was my speech, Thou art my Lord, and unto thee my goodnesse doth not reach: To saints on earth, to th'excellent where my delight's all plac't. Their sorrows shall be multipli'd, to other gods that haste: Of their drink-offerings of bloud I will no offering make, Yea, neither I their very names up in my lips will take. God is of mine inheritance and cup the portion: The lot that fallen is to me, thou dost maintain alone. Unto me happily the lines in pleasant places fell; Yea, the inheritance I got, in beautie doth excell. I blesse the Lord, because he doth by counsel me conduct: And in the seasons of the night, my reins do me instruct. Before me still the Lord I set: sith it is so, that he Doth ever stand at my right hand, I shall not moved be.
Because of this my heart is glad, and joy shall be exprest Ev'n by my glory: and my flesh in confidence shall rest. Because my soul in grave to dwell shall not be left by thee; Nor wilt thou give thine Holy One corruption to see. Thou wilt me shew the path of life: of joyes there is full store Before thy face, at thy right hand are pleasures evermore. PSAL XVII. A Prayer of David. LOrd, hear the right, attend my cry, unto my pray'r give heed, That doth not in hypocrisie from feigned lips proceed. And from before thy presence forth my sentence do thou send: Toward these things that equall are, do thou thine eyes intend. Thou prov'dst mine heart, thou visitst me, by night thou didst me try, Yet nothing found'st: for that my mouth shall not sin purpos'd I. As for mens works, I by the word that from thy lips doth flow, Did me preserve out of the paths wherein destroyers go.
Hold up my goings, Lord: me guide in those thy paths divine, So that my footsteps may not slide out of these wayes of thine. I called have on thee, O God, because thou wilt me hear: That thou may'st hearken to my speech, to me incline thine ear. Thy wondrous loving kindnesse show, thou that by thy right hand Sav'st them that in thee trust, from those that up against them stand. As th'apple of the eye me keep; in thy wings shade me close, From lewd oppressours, compassing me round, as deadly foes. In their own fat they are inclos'd: their mouth speaks loftily, Our steps they compast; and to ground down bowing set their eye. He like unto a lion is, that's greedy of his prey, Or lion young, which lurking doth in secret places stay. Arise, and disappoint my foe, and cast him down, O Lord: My soul save from the wicked man, the man which is thy sword. From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from wordly men me save, Which onely in this present life their part and portion have:
Whose belly with thy treasure hid thou fill'st, they children have In plentie, of their goods the rest they to their children leave. But as for me, I thine own face in righteousnesse will see: And with thy likenesse, when I wake, I satisfi'd shall be. PSAL. XVIII. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David, the ser∣vant of the Lord, who spake unto the Lord the words of this song, in the day that the Lord delive∣red him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul: and he said, THee will I love, O Lord, my strength. My fortresse is the Lord, My rock, and he that doth to me deliverance afford: My God, my strength, whom I will trust, a buckler unto me, The horn of my salvation, and my high towr is he. Upon the Lord, who worthy is of praises, will I cry: And then shall I preserved be safe from mine enemy. Floods of ill men affrighted me, deaths pangs about me went. Hells sorrows me environed: deaths snares did me prevent.
In my distresse I call'd on God, cry to my God did I: He from his temple heard my voice, to his ears came my cry. Th'earth, as affrighted, then did shake, trembling upon it seised; The hills foundations moved were, because he was displeased. Up from his nostrils came a smoke, and from his mouth there came Devouring fire, and coals by it were turned into flame. He also bowed down the heav'ns, and thence he did descend: And thickest clouds of darknesse did under his feet attend. And he upon a cherub rode, and thereon he did fly: Yea, on the swift wings of the winde his flight was from on hy. He darknesse made his secret place: about him for his tent Dark waters were, and thickest clouds of th'airie firmament. And at the brightnesse of that light which was before his eye, His thick clouds past away, hail-stones and coals of fire did flye. The Lord God also in the heav'ns did thunder in his ire,
And there the highest gave his voice, hail-stones and coals of fire. Yea, he his arrows sent abroad, and them he scattered: His lightnings also he shot out, and them discomfited. The waters chanels then were seen, the worlds foundations vast At thy rebuke discovered were, and at thy nostrils blast. And from above the Lord sent down, and took me from below, From many waters he me drew, which would me over-flow. He me reliev'd from my strong foes, and such as did me hare: Because he saw that they for me too strong were, and too great. They me prevented in the day of my calamitie: But even then the Lord himself a stay was unto me. He, to a place of libertie where room was, hath me brought: Because he took delight in me, he my deliverance wrought. According to my righteousnesse he did me recompense, He me repay'd according to
my hands pure innocence. For I Gods wayes kept, from my God did not turn wickedlie. His judgements were before me, I his Lawes put not from me. Sincere before him was my heart, with him upright was I: And watchfully I kept my self from mine iniquity. After my righteousnesse the Lord hath recompensed me, After the cleannesse of my hands appearing in his eye. Thou gracious to the gracious art, to upright men upright. Pure to the pure, froward thou kythes unto the froward wight. For thou wilt the afflicted save, in grief that low do ly: But wilt bring down the countenance of them whose looks are hy. The Lord will light my candle so, that it shall shine full bright: The Lord my God will also make my darknesse to be light. By thee through troups of men I break, and them discomfite all: And, by my God assisting me, I over-leap a wall. As for God, perfect is his way: the Lord his word is try'd:
He is a buckler to all those who do on him confide. Who but the Lord is God? but he who is a rock and stay? It's God that girdeth me with strength, and perfect makes my way. He made my feet swift as the hindes, set me on my high places. Mine hands to war he taught, mine armes brake bows of steel in pieces. The shield of thy salvation thou didst on me bestow: Thy right hand held me up, and great thy kindnesse made me grow. And in my way, my steps thou hast enlarged under me, That I go safely, and my feet are kept from sliding free. Mine enemies I pursued have, and did them over-take: Nor did I turn again, till I an end of them did make. I wounded them, they could not rise: they at my feet did fall. Thou girdest me with strength for war: my foes thou brought down all. And thou hast giv'n to me the necks of all mine enemies: That I might them destroy and slay who did against me rise. They cryed out, but there was none
that would or could them save: Yea, they did cry unto the Lord, but he no answer gave. Then did I beat them small, as dust before the winde that flyes: And I did cast them out like dirt upon the street that lyes. Thou mad'st me free from peoples strife; and heathens head to be: A people whom I have not known, shall service do to me. At hearing they shall me obey, to me they shall submit. Strangers for fear shall fade away, who in close places sit. God lives, blest be my rock: the God of my health praised be. God doth avenge me, and subdues the people under me. He saves me from mine enemies: Yea, thou hast lifted me Above my foes: and from the man of violence, setst me free. Therefore to thee will I give thanks the heathen folk among: And to thy Name, O Lord, I will sing praises in a song. He great deliverance gives his King: he mercy doth extend To David, his anointed one, and his seed without end.
PSAL. XIX. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. THe heav'ns Gods glory do declare: the skyes his hand-works preach. Day utters speech to day, and night to night doth knowledge teach. There is no speech nor tongue, to which their voice doth not extend. Their line is gone through all the earth, their words to the worlds end. In them he set the sun a tent, Who bride-groom-like forth goes From's chamber, as a strong man doth, to run his race, rejoyce. From heav'ns end is his going forth, circling to th'end again: And there is nothing from his heat that hidden doth remain. Gods Law is perfect, and converts the soul in sin that lyes: Gods testimony is most sure, and makes the simple wise. The statutes of the Lord are right, and do rejoyce the heart: The Lords command is pure, and doth light to the eyes impart. Unspotted is the fear of God, and doth endure for ever: The judgements of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether.
They, more then gold, yea, much fine gold, to be desired are: Then honey, from the honey comb that dropeth, sweeter far. Moreover, they thy servant warn how he his life should frame: A great reward provided is for them that keep the same. Who can his errours understand? O cleanse thou me within From secret faults. Thy servant keep from all presumptuous sin, And do not suffer them to have dominion over me: Then righteous and innocent I from much sin shall be. The words which from my mouth proceed, the thoughts sent from my heart Accept, O Lord, for thou my strength and my redeemer art. PSAL. XX. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. JEhovah hear thee in the day when trouble he doth send, And let the Name of Jacobs God thee from all ill defend. O let him help send from above, out of his sanctuaries From Sion his own holy hill, let him give strength to thee.
Let him remember all thy gifts, accept thy sacrifice. Grant thee thine hearts wish, and fulfill thy thoughts and counsel wise. In thy salvation we will joy; in our Gods Name we will Display our banners: and the Lord thy prayers all fulfill. Now know I, God his King doth save: he from his holy heaven Will hear him, with the saving strength by his right hand that's given. In chariots some put confidence, some horses trust upon: But we remember will the Name of our Lord God alone. We rise, and upright stand, when they are bowed down, and fall. Deliver, Lord, and let the King us hear, when we do call. PSAL. XXI. To the chief musician, A psalm of David. THe King in thy great strength, O Lord, shall very joyfull be, In thy salvation rejoyce how vehemently shall he! Thou hast bestowed upon him all that his heart would have, And thou from him didst not withhold what e're his lips did crave.
For thou with blessings him prevent'st of goodnesse manifold; And thou hast set upon his head a crown of purest gold. When he desired life of thee, thou life to him didst give: Ev'n such a length of dayes, that he for evermore should live. In that salvation wrought by thee, his glory is made great, Honour and comly majestie thou hast upon him set. Because that thou for evermore most blessed hast him made: And thou hast with thy countenance made him exceeding glad: Because the King upon the Lord his confidence doth lay, And through the grace of the most high shall not be mov'd away. Thine hand shall all those men finde out that enemies are to thee, Ev'n thy right hand shall finde out those, of thee that haters be. Like fiery ov'n thou shalt them make, when kindled is thine ire: God shall them swallow in his wrath, devoure them shall the fire. Their fruit from earth thou shalt destroy, their seed men from among. For they, beyond their might, 'gainst thee did plot mischief and wrong.
Thou therefore shalt make them turn back, when thou thy shafts shalt place Upon thy strings, made ready all to flie against their face. In thy great power and strength, O Lord, be thou exalted hie: So shall we sing with joyfull hearts, thy power praise shall we. PSAL. XXII. To the chief musician upon Aijeleth Shahar, A Psalm of David. MY God, my God why hast thou me forsaken? why so far Art thou from helping me, and from my words that roaring are? All day, my God, to thee I cry, yet am not heard by thee; And in the season of the night I cannot silent be. But thou art holy, thou that dost inhabite Israels praise. Our fathers hop'd in thee, they hop'd, and thou didst them release. When unto thee they sent their cry, to them deliverance came: Because they put their trust in thee, they were not put to shame. But as for me, a worm I am, and as no man am pris'd: Reproach of men I am, and by
the people am despis'd. All that me see laugh me to scorn: shoot out the lip do they, They nod and shake their heads at me, and mocking, thus do say, This man did trust in God, that he would free him by his might: Let him deliver him, sith he had in him such delight. But thou art he out of the womb that didst me safely take: When I was on my mothers breasts, thou me to hope didst make. And I was cast upon thy care, ev'n from the womb till now: And from my mothers belly, Lord, my God and guide art thou. Be not far off, for grief is near; and none to help is found. Bulls many compasse me; strong bulls of Bashan me surround. Their mouthes they op'ned wide on me, upon me gape did they, Like to a Lion ravening and roaring for his prey. Like water I'm powr'd out, my bones all out of joynt do part: Amidst my bowels, as the wax, so melted is my heart. My strength is like a potsheard dry'd: my tongue it cleaveth fast
Unto my jaws; and to the dust of death thou brought me hast. For dogs have compast me about: the wicked, that did meet In their assembly, me inclos'd, they pierc'd my hands and feet. I all my bones may tell: they do upon me look and stare. Upon my vesture lots they cast, and clothes among them share. But be not far, O Lord, my strength; haste to give help to me. From sword my soul, from pow'r of dogs my darling set thou free. Out of the roaring Lions mouth do thou me shield and save: For from the horns of Unicorns an ear to me thou gave. I will shew forth thy Name unto those that my brethren are: Amidst the congregation thy praise I will declare. Praise ye the Lord, who do him fear: him glorifie, all ye The seed of Jacob; fear him all that Isra'ls children be. For he despis'd not, nor abhor'd th'afflicteds misery: Nor from him hid his face, but heard when he to him did cry. Within the congregation great
my praise shall be of thee: My vows before them that him fear shall be perform'd by me. The meek shall eat, and shall be fill'd: they also praise shall give Unto the Lord that do him seek; your heart shall ever live. All ends of th'earth remember shall, and turn the Lord unto: All kindreds of the nations to him shall homage do. Because the Kingdom to the Lord doth appertain, as his: Likewise among the nations the governour he is. Earths fat ones eat, and worship shall: all who to dust descend Shall bow to him: none of them can his soul from death defend. A seed shall service do to him, unto the Lord it shall Be for a generation reck'ned in ages all. They shall come, and they shall declare his truth and righteousnesse Unto a people yet unborn, and that he hath done this.
PSAL. XXIII. A Psalm of David. THe Lord's my shepherd, I'le not want. He makes me down to ly In pastures green: he leadeth me the quiet waters by. My soul he doth restore again; and me to walk doth make Into the paths of righteousnesse, ev'n for his own Names sake. Yea, though I walk in deaths dark vale, yet will I fear none ill: For thou art with me, and thy rod and staff me comfort still. My table thou hast furnished in presence of my foes: My head thou dost with oyl anoint, and my cup overflowes. Goodnesse and mercy all my life shall surely follow me: And in Gods house for evermore my dwelling place shall be. PSAL. XXIV. A Psalm of David. THe earth belongs unto the Lord, and all that it contains: The world that is inhabited, and all that there remains.
For the foundation thereof he on the seas did lay, And he hath it established upon the flouds to stay. Who is the man that shall ascend into the hill of God? Or who within his holy place shall have a firm abode? Whose hands are clean, whose heart is pure, and unto vanity Who hath not lifted up his soul, nor sworn deceitfully. He from th'Eternall shall receive the blessing him upon, And righteousnesse, ev'n from the God of his salvation. This is the generation that after him inquire, O Jacob, who do seek thy face with their whole hearts desire Ye gates lift up your heads on high, ye doors that last for ay Be lifted up, that so the King of glory enter may. But who of glory is the King? the mighty Lord is this, Ev'n that same Lord, that great in might, and strong in battell is. Ye gates lift up your heads, ye doors, doors that do last for ay Be lifted up, that so the King
of glory enter may. But who is he that is the King of glory? Who is this? The Lord of hosts, and none but he the King of glory is. PSAL. XXV. A Psalm of David. TO thee I lift my soul: O Lord, I trust in thee, My God, let me not be asham'd, nor foes triumph ov'r me. Let none that wait on thee be put to shame at all; But those that without cause transgresse let shame upon them fall. Shew me thy wayes, O Lord; thy paths O teach thou me. And do thou lead me in thy truth, therein my teacher be: For thou art God that do'st to me salvation send, And I upon thee, all the day expecting, do attend. Thy tender mercies, Lord, I pray thee to remember, And loving kindnesses: for they have been of old for ever. My sins and faults of youth do thou, O Lord, forget: After thy mercy think on me, and for thy goodnesse great.
God good and upright is: the way hee'l sinners show. The meek in judgement he will guide, and make his path to know. The whole paths of the Lord are truth and mercy sure To those that do his covenant keep, and testimonies pure. Now for thine own Names sake, O Lord, I thee intreat To pardon mine iniquitie: for it is very great. What man is he that fears the Lord, and doth him serve? Him shall he teach the way that he shall choose and still observe. His soul shall dwell at ease; and his posteritie Shall flourish still, and of the earth inheritours shall be. With those that fear him, is the secret of the Lord: The knowledge of his covenant he will to them afford. Mine eyes upon the Lord continually are set: For it is he that shall bring forth my feet out of the net. Turn unto me thy face, and to me mercy show: Because that I am desolate, and am brought very low.
My hearts griefs are increas'd: me from distresse relieve. See mine affliction and my pain, and all my sins forgive. Consider thou my foes, because they many are, And it a cruell hatred is, which they against me beare. O do thou keep my soul, do thou deliver me: And let me never be asham'd, because I trust in thee. Let uprightnesse and truth keep me, who thee attend. Redemption, Lord, to Israel from all his troubles send. Another of the same. TO thee I lift my soul, O Lord: My God, I trust in thee: Let me not be asham'd; let not my foes triumph ov'r me. Yea, let thou none ashamed be that do on thee attend; Ashamed let them be, O Lord, who without cause offend. Thy wayes, Lord, shew; teach me thy paths. Lead me in truth, teach me: For of my safetie thou art God, all day I wait on thee. Thy mercies, that most tender are, do thou, O Lord, remember,
And loving kindnesses: for they have been of old for ever. Let not the errours of my youth, nor sins remembred be: In mercy, for thy goodnesse sake, O Lord, remember me. The Lord is good and gracious, He upright is also: He therefore sinners will instruct: in wayes that they should go. The meek and lowly he will guide in judgement just alway: To meek and poor afflicted ones hee'l clearly teach his way. The whole paths of the Lord our God are truth and mercy sure, To such as keep his covenant. and testimonies pure. Now for thine own Names sake, O Lord, I humbly thee intreat To pardon mine iniquitie: for it is very great. What man fears God? him shall he teach the way that he shall choose. His soul shall dwell at ease, his seed the earth, as heirs, shall use. The secret of the Lord is with such as do fear his Name, And he his holy covenant will manifest to them.
Towards the Lord my waiting eyes continually are set: For he it is that shall bring forth my feet out of the net. O turn thee unto me, O God, have mercy me upon: Because I solitary am, and in affliction. Enlarg'd the griefs are of my heart: me from distresse relieve. See mine affliction, and my pain, and all my sins forgive. Consider thou mine enemies, because they many are; And it a cruell hatred is, which they against me beare. O do thou keep my soul, O God, do thou deliver me: Let me not be asham'd, for I do put my trust in thee. O let integritie and truth keep me, who thee attend. Redemption, Lord, to Israel from all his troubles send, PSAL. XXVI. A Psalm of David. JUdge me, O Lord, for I have walkt in mine integrity: I trusted also in the Lord;
slide therefore shall not I. Examine me, and do me prove; try heart and reins, O God. For thy love is before mine eyes, thy truths paths I have trod With persons vain I have not sat, nor with dissemblers gone. Th'assembly of ill men I hate: to sit with such I shun. Mine hands in innocence, O Lord, I'le wash and purify: So to thine holy altar go and compasse it will I. That I, with voice of thanksgiving, may publish and declare, And tell of all thy mighty works, that great and wondrous are. The habitation of thy house, Lord, I have loved well, Yea, in that place I do delight, where doth thine honour dwell. With sinners gather not my soul, and such as bloud would spill: Whose hands mischievous plots, right hand corrupting bribes do fill. But as for me, I will walk on in mine integritie: Do thou redeem me, and, O Lord, be mercifull to me. My foot upon an even place doth stand with stedfastnesse:
Within the congregations th'Eternall I will blesse. PSAL. XXVII. A Psalm of David. THe Lord's my light, and saving health, who shall make me dismaid? My lifes strength is the Lord, of whom then shall I be afraid? When as mine enemies and foes, most wicked persons all, To eat my flesh against me rose, they stumbled and did fall. Against me though an host encamp, my heart yet fearlesse is: Though war against me rise, I will be confident in this. One thing I of the Lord desir'd, and will seek to obtain, That all dayes of my life I may within Gods house remain, That I the beauty of the Lord behold may and admire, And that I in his holy place may reverently enquire. For he, in his pavilion, shall me hide in evill dayes: In secret of his tent me hide, and on a rock me raise. And now, ev'n at this present time,
mine head shall lifted be Above all those that be my foes, and round encompasse me: Therefore unto his tabernacle I'le sacrifices bring Of joyfulnesse, I'le sing, yea, I to God will praises sing. O Lord, give ear unto my voice, when I do cry to thee: Upon me also mercy have, and do thou answer me. When thou didst say, seek ye my face, then unto thee reply Thus did my heart, above all things Thy face, Lord, seek will I. Far from me hide not thou thy face, put not away from thee Thy servant in thy wrath: thou hast an helper been to me: O God of my salvation, leave me not, nor forsake. Though me my parents both should leave, the Lord will me up take. O Lord, instruct me in thy way, to me a leader be In a plain path, because of those that hatred bear to me. Give me not to mine enemies will: for witnesses, that lie, Against me risen are, and such as breath our crueltie.
I fainted had, unlesse that I believed had, to see The Lords own goodnesse in the land of them that living be. Wait on the Lord: and be thou strong, and he shall strength afford Unto thine heart: yea, do thou wait, I say, upon the Lord. PSAL. XXVIII. A Psalm of David. TO thee I'le cry, O Lord, my rock, hold not thy peace to me: Lest, like those that to pit descend, I by thy silence be. The voice hear of my humble pray'rs, when unto thee I cry: When to thy holy oracle I lift mine hands on hy. With ill men draw me not away, that work iniquity: That speak peace to their friends, while in their hearts doth mischief ly. Give them according to their deeds, and ills endeavoured: And, as their handie-works deserve, to them be rendered. God shall not build, but them destroy who would not understand The Lords own works, nor did regard the doing of his hand.
For ever blessed be the Lord, for graciously he heard The voice of my petitions, and prayers did regard. The Lord's my strength and shield, my heart upon him did rely, And I am helped, hence my heart doth joy exceedingly, And with my song I will him praise. Their strength is God alone: He also is the saving strength of his anointed One. O thine own people do thou save, blesse thine inheritance: Them also do thou feed, and them for evermore advance. PSAL. XXIX. A Psalm of David. GIve ye unto the Lord, ye sons that of the mighty be, All strength and glory to the Lord, with cheerfulnesse give ye. Unto the Lord the glory give, that to his Name is due; And in the beautie of holinesse, unto Jehovah bow. The Lords voice on the waters is: the God of majestie Doth thunder, and on multitudes
of waters sitteth He. A pow'rfull voice it is, that comes out from the Lord most hie; The voice of that great Lord is full of glorious majestie. The voice of the Eternall doth asunder cedars tear: Yea, God the Lord doth cedars break that Lebanon doth bear. He makes them like a calf to skip: ev'n that great Lebanon, And like to a young unicorn the mountain Sirion. Gods voice divides the flames of fire: The desert it doth shake: The Lord doth make the wildernesse of Kadesh, all to quake. Gods voice doth make the hindes to calve; it makes the forrests bare: And in his Temple every one his glory doth declare. The Lord sits on the flouds: the Lord sits King, and ever shall. The Lord will give his people strength, and with peace blesse them all. PSAL. XXX. A Psalm and song at the dedication of the house of David. LOrd, I will thee extoll, for thou hast lifted me on hie,
And over me thou to rejoyce mad'st not mine enemie. O thou who art the Lord my God, I in distresse to thee With loud crys lifted up my voice, and thou hast healed me. O Lord, my soul thou hast brought up, and rescu'd from the grave: That I to pit should not go down, alive thou didst me save. O ye that are his holy ones, sing praise unto the Lord: And give unto him thanks, when you his holinesse record. For, but a moment lasts his wrath; life in his favour lyes: Weeping may for a night endure, at morn doth joy arise. In my prosperitie, I said, that nothing shall me move. O Lord, thou hast my mountain made to stand strong by thy love: But when that thou, O gracious God, didst hide thy face from me, Then quickly was my prosperous state, turn'd into miserie. Wherefore unto the Lord, my cry I caused to ascend: My humble supplication, I to the Lord did send. What profit is there in my bloud,
when I go down to pit? Shall unto thee the dust give praise? thy truth declare shall it? Hear, Lord, have mercy, help me, Lord. From me thou turn'd my sadnesse, To dancing: yea, my sackcloth loos'd, and girded me with gladnesse. That sing thy praise my glory may, and never silent be: O Lord my God, for evermore I will give thanks to thee. PSAL. XXXI. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. IN thee, O Lord, I put my trust, sham'd let me never be: According to thy righteousnesse, do thou deliver me. Bow down thine ear to me, with speed send me deliverance: To save me, my strong rock be thou, and my house of defence. Because thou art my rock, and thee I for my fortresse take: Therefore do thou me lead and guide, ev'n for thine own Names sake. And sith thou art my strength, therefore pull me out of the net, Which they in subtiltie for me so privily have set.
Into thine hands, I do commit my sp'rit: for thou art he, O thou Jehovah, God of truth, that hast redeemed me. Those that do lying vanities regard, I have abhor'd: But as for me, my confidence is fixed on the Lord. I'le in thy mercy gladly joy: for thou, my miseries Considered hast; thou hast my soul known in adversities; And thou hast not inclosed me within the enemies hand; And by thee have my feet been made in a large room to stand. O Lord, upon me mercy have, for trouble is on me; Mine eye, my belly, and my soul with grief consumed be. Because my life with grief is spent, my years with sighs and grones: My strength doth fail; and for my sin consumed are my bones. I was a scorn to all my foes, and to my friends a fear: And specially reproacht of those that were my neighbours near: When they me saw, they from me fled. Ev'n so I am forgot, As men are out of minde, when dead: I'm like a broken pot.
For slanders I of many hear'd, fear compast me, while they Against me did consult and plot, to take my life away. But as for me, O Lord, my trust, upon thee I did lay: And I to thee, thou art my God, did confidently say. My times are wholly in thine hand: do thou deliver me From their hands, that mine enemies and persecuters be. Thy countenance to shine, do thou upon thy servant make: Unto me give salvation, for thy great mercies sake. Let me not be asham'd, O Lord, for on thee call'd I have: Let wicked men be sham'd, let them be silent in the grave. To silence put the lying lips: that grievous things do say, And hard reports, in pride and scorn, on righteous men do lay. How great's the goodnesse thou for them that fear thee keepst in store; And wroughtst for them that trust in thee, the sons of men before! In secret of thy presence, thou shalt hide them from mans pride: From strife of tongues, thou closely shalt, as in a tent, them hide.
All praise and thanks be to the Lord; for he hath magnify'd His wondrous love to me, within a city fortify'd. For from thine eyes cut off I am, (I in my haste had said) My voice yet heardst thou, when to thee with cryes, my moan I made. O love the Lord, all ye his saints: because the Lord doth guard The faithfull, and he plenteously proud doers doth reward. Be of good courage, and he strength unto your heart shall send, All ye whose hope and confidence doth on the Lord depend. PSAL XXXII. A Psalm of David. Maschil. O Blessed is the man, to whom is freely pardoned All the transgression he hath done, whose sin is covered. Blest is the man, to whom the Lord imputeth not his sin, And in whose sp'rit there is no guile, nor fraud is found therein. When as I did refrain my speech, and silent was my tongue, My bones then waxed old, because I roared all day long.
For, upon me both day and night, thine hand did heavie ly, So that my moisture turned is in summers drought thereby. I thereupon have unto thee my sin acknowledged, And likewise mine iniquitie, I have not covered: I will confesse unto the Lord my trespasses, said I; And of my sin, thou freely didst forgive th'iniquity. For this, shall every godly one, his prayer make to thee, In such a time he shall thee seek, as found thou mayest be. Surely, when flouds of waters great, do swell up to the brim, They shall not over-whelm his soul, nor once come near to him. Thou art my hiding-place, thou shalt from trouble keep me free: Thou, with songs of deliverance, about shalt compasse me. I will instruct thee, and thee teach the way that thou shalt go, And, with mine eye upon thee set, I will direction show. Then be not like the horse, or mule, which do not understand: Whose mouth, lest they come near to thee,
a bridle must command. Unto the man that wicked is, his sorrows shall abound: But him that trusteth in the Lord, mercy shall compasse round. Ye righteous, in the Lord be glad, in him do ye rejoyce: All ye that upright are in heart, for joy lift up your voyce. PSAL. XXXIII. YE righteous in the Lord rejoyce: it comely is, and right, That upright men with thankfull voyce, should praise the Lord of might. Praise God with harp: and unto him sing with the psalterie, Upon a ten-string'd instrument make ye sweet melodie. A new song to him sing, and play with loud noise skilfully. For, right is Gods word, all his works are done in verity. To judgement, and to righteousnesse, a love He beareth still: The loving kindnesse of the Lord the earth throughout doth fill. The heavens by the word of God, did their beginning take; And by the breathing of his mouth, He all their hosts did make.
The waters of the seas He brings together as an heap: And in store-houses, as it were, He layeth up the depth. Let earth, and all that live therein, with reverence fear the Lord: Let all the worlds inhabitants dread him with one accord. For he did speak the word, and done it was, without delay; Established, it firmly stood whatever he did say. God doth the counsel bring to nought, which heathen folk do take: And what the people do devise, of none effect doth make. O! but the counsel of the Lord, doth stand for ever sure, And of his heart the purposes, from age to age endure. That nation blessed is, whose God Jehovah is: and those A blessed people are, whom for his heritage he chose. The Lord from heav'n sees, and beholds all sons of men full well. He views all from his dwelling place, that in the earth do dwell. He forms their hearts alike: and all their doings he observes. Great hosts save not a King: much strength,
no mighty man preserves. An horse for preservation, is a deceitfull thing: And by the greatnesse of his strength, can no deliverance bring. Behold, on those that do him fear, the Lord doth set his eye: Ev'n those, who on his mercy do with confidence rely. From death to free their soul, in dearth, life unto them to yeeld. Our soul doth wait upon the Lord: he is our help and shield. Sith in his holy Name we trust, our heart shall joyfull be. Lord, let thy mercy be on us, as we do hope in thee. PSAL. XXXIV. A Psalm of David, when he changed his behaviour before Abimelech: who drove him away, and he departed. GOd will I blesse all times: his praise my mouth shall still expresse. My soul shall boast in God: the meek shall hear with joyfulnesse. Extoll the Lord with me, let us exalt his Name together. I sought the Lord, he heard, and did me from all fears deliver.
They look'd to him, and lightned were: not shamed were their faces. This poor man cry'd, God heard, and sav'd him from all his distresses. The angel of the Lord encamps, and round encompasseth All those about that do him fear, and them delivereth. O taste and see, that God is good: who trusts in him is blest. Fear God his saints: none that him fear shall be with want opprest. The lions young may hungry be, and they may lack their food: But they that truly seek the Lord, shall not lack any good. O children, hither do ye come, and unto me give ear: I shall you teach to understand how ye the Lord should fear. What man is he that life desires, to see good would live long? Thy lips refrain from speaking guile, and from ill words thy tongue. Depart from ill, do good; seek peace, pursue it earnestly. Gods eyes are on the just; his ears are open to their cry. The face of God is set against those that do wickedly, That he may quite out from the earth cut off their memory.
The righteous cry unto the Lord, he unto them gives ear; And they, out of their troubles all, by him delivered are. The Lord is ever nigh to them that be of broken sp'rit: To them he safetie doth afford, that are in heart contrite. The troubles that afflict the just, in number many be: But yet at length, out of them all, the Lord doth set them free. He carefully his bones doth keep, what ever can befall; That not so much as one of them can broken be at all. Ill shall the wicked slay: laid waste shall be, who hate the just. The Lord redeems his servants souls: none perish that him trust. PSAL. XXXV. A Psalm of David. PLead, Lord, with those that plead, and fight with those that fight with me. Of shield and buckler take thou hold, stand up mine help to be. Draw also out the spear, and do against them stop the way, That me pursue: unto my soul, I'm thy salvation, say.
Let them confounded be, and sham'd, that for my soul have sought: Who plot my hurt, turn'd back be they, and to confusion brought. Let them be like unto the chaff, that flies before the winde: And let the angell of the Lord, pursue them hard behinde. With darknesse cover thou their way, and let it slipperie prove, And let the angel of the Lord pursue them from above. For, without cause have they for me their net hid in a pit, They also have without a cause, for my soul digged it. Let ruine seise him unawares, his net he hid withall Himself, let catch: and in the same destruction let him fall. My soul in God shall joy: and glad in his salvation be. And all my bones shall say, O Lord, who is like unto thee, Which dost the poor set free from him that is for him too strong; The poor and needy from the man that spoils and does him wrong? False witnesses rose; to my charge things I not knew they laid. They, to the spoiling of my soul, me ill for good repay'd.
But as for me, when they were sick, in sackcloth sad I mourn'd: My humbled soul did fast, my pray'r into my bosome turn'd. My self I did behave, as he had been my friend, or brother: I heavily bow'd down, as one that mourneth for his mother. But in my trouble they rejoyc'd, gathering themselves together: Yea, abjects vile, together did themselves against me gather; I knew it not, they did me tear, and quiet would not be. With mocking hypocrites, at feasts they gnasht their teeth at me. How long, Lord, lookst thou on? from those destructions they intend Rescue my soul, from lions young, my darling do defend. I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, within th'assembly great: And, where much people gathered are, thy praises forth will set. Let not my wrongfull enemies proudly rejoyce ov'r me: Nor, who me hate without a cause, let them wink with the eye. For peace they do not speak at all. but craftie plots prepare Against all those within the land, that meek and quiet are.
With mouths set wide, they 'gainst me said, Ha, ha, our eye doth see. Lord, thou hast seen, hold not thy peace: Lord, be not far from me. Stir up thy self; wake, that thou mayst judgement to me afford: Ev'n to my cause, O thou that art my onely God and Lord. O Lord my God, do thou me judge after thy righteousnesse, And let them not their joy 'gainst me triumphantly expresse. Nor let them say within their hearts, ah, we would have it thus; Nor suffer them to say, that he is swallowed up by us. Sham'd and confounded be they all that at my hurt are glad: Let those against me that do boast, with shame and scorn be clad▪ Let them that love my righteous cause be glad, shout, and not cease To say, the Lord be magnify'd, who loves his servants peace. Thy righteousnesse shall also be declared by my tongue, The praises that belong to thee, speak shall it all day long.
PSAL. XXXVI. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David, the servant of the Lord. THe wicked mans transgression, within my heart thus sayes, Undoubtedly the fear of God is not before his eyes. Because himself he flattereth in his own blinded eye, Untill the hatefulnesse be found of his iniquity. Words from his mouth proceeding, are fraud and iniquity: He to be wise, and to do good, hath left off utterly. He mischief, lying on his bed, most cunningly doth plot, He sets himself in ways not good; ill he abhoreth not. Thy mercy, Lord, is in the heaven; thy truth doth reach the clouds. Thy justice is like mountains great; thy judgements deep as flouds; Lord, thou preservest man and beast. How precious is thy grace! Therefore, in shadow of thy wings, mens sons their trust shall place. They, with the fatnesse of thy house, shall be well satisfi'd:
From rivers of thy pleasures, thou wilt drink to them provide. Because of life the fountain pure remains alone with thee: And in that purest light of thine, we clearly light shall see. Thy loving kindnesse unto them continue that thee know; And still on men upright in heart, thy righteousnesse bestow. Let not the foot of cruell pride come, and against me stand: And let me not removed be, Lord, by the wickeds hand. There fall'n are they, and ruined, that work iniquities: Cast down they are, and never shall be able to arise. PSAL. XXXVII. A Psalm of David. FOr evill doers fret thou not thy self, unquietly, Nor do thou envy bear to those that work iniquity. For even like unto the grasse, soon be cut down shall they, And, like the green and tender herb, they wither shall away. Set thou thy trust upon the Lord,
and be thou doing good. And so thou in the land shalt dwell, and verily have food. Delight thy self in God hee'l give thine hearts desire to thee. Thy way to God commit, him trust, it bring to passe shall he. And, like unto the light, he shall thy righteousnesse display, And he thy judgement shall bring forth like noon-tide of the day. Rest in the Lord, and patiently wait for him: do not fret For him, who prospering in his way, successe in sin doth get. Do thou from anger cease, and wrath see thou forsake also: Fret not thy self in any wise, that evill thou should do. For, those that evill doers are, shall be cut off and fall: But those that wait upon the Lord, the earth inherit shall. For, yet a little while, and then the wicked shall not be: His place thou shall consider well, but it thou shalt not see. But, by inheritance, the earth the meek-ones shall possesse: They also shall delight themselves in an abundant peace.
The wicked plots against the just, and at him whets his teeth. The Lord shall laugh at him, because his day he coming seeth. The wicked have drawn out the sword, and bent their bow, to slay The poor and needy, and to kill men of an upright way. But their own sword, which they have drawn, shall enter their own heart, Their bows, which they have bent, shall break, and into pieces part. A little that a just man hath, is more, and better far Then is the wealth of many such as lewd and wicked are. For sinners arms shall broken be: but God the just sustains. God knows the just mans dayes, and still their heritage remains. They shall not be asham'd, when they the evill time do see: And when the dayes of famine are, they satisfi'd shall be. But wicked men, and foes of God, as fat of lambs decay, They shall consume; yea, into smoke they shall consume away. The wicked borrows, but the same again he doth not pay: Whereas the righteous mercy shows, and gives his own away.
For such as blessed be of him, the earth inherit shall; And, they that cursed are of him, shall be destroyed all. A good mans footsteps by the Lord are ordered aright: And, in the way wherein he walks, he greatly doth delight. Although he fall, yet shall he not be cast down utterly: Because the Lord with his own hand upholds him mightily. I have been young, and now am old: yet have I never seen The just man left, nor that his seed for bread have beggers been. He's ever mercifull, and lends: his seed is blest therefore. Depart from evill, and do good: and dwell for evermore. For God loves judgement, and his saints leaves not in any case, They are kept ever: but cut off shall be the sinners race. The just inherit shall the land, and ever in it dwell. The just mans mouth doth wisedom speak: his tongue doth judgement tell. In's heart the Law is of his God, his steps slide not away. The wicked man doth watch the just, and seeketh him to slay.
Yet him the Lord will not forsake, nor leave him in his hands, The righteous will He not condemn, when he in judgement stands, Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and thee exalt shall He, Th'earth to inherit: when cut off the wicked thou shalt see. I saw the wicked great in pow'r: spread like a green bay-tree. He past, yea, was not: him I sought, but found he could not be. Mark thou the perfect, and behold the man of uprightnesse: Because that surely of this man the latter end is peace. But those men that transgressours are, shall be destroy'd together, The latter end of wicked men shall be cut off for ever. But the salvation of the just is from the Lord above, He, in the time of their distresse, their stay and strength doth prove. The Lord shall help, and them deliver: He shall them free and save From wicked men: because in him their confidence they have.
PSAL. XXXVIII. A Psalm of David to bring to remembrance. IN thy great indignation, O Lord, rebuke me not: Nor on me lay thy chastning hand, in thy displeasure hot. For in me fast thine arrows stick, thine hand doth presse me sore. And in my flesh there is no health nor soundnesse any more. This grief I have, because thy wrath is forth against me gone: And in my bones there is no rest, for sin that I have done. Because, gone up above mine head my great transgressions be: And, as a weightie burden, they too heavy are for me. My wounds do stink, and are corrupt: my folly makes it so. I troubled am, and much bow'd down; all day I mourning go. For a disease that loathsome is, so fills my loins with pain. That in my weak and wearie flesh no soundnesse doth remain. So feeble and infirm am I, and broken am so sore; That through disquiet of my heart,
I have been made to roare. O Lord, all that I do desire, is still before thine eye: And of my heart the secret groans not hidden are from thee. My heart doth pant uncessantly, my strength doth quite decay: As for mine eyes, their wonted light is from me gone away. My lovers and my friends do stand at distance from my sore: And those do stand aloof, that were kinsmen, and kind before. Yea, they that seek my life, lay snares: who seek to do me wrong Speak things mischievous, and deceits imagine all day long. But, as one deaf, that heareth not, I suffered all to passe: I as a dumb man did become, whose mouth not op'ned was. As one that hears not, in whose mouth are no reproofs at all. For, Lord, I hope in thee, my God, thou'lt hear me when I call. For I said, hear me, lest they should rejoyce ov'r me, with pride: And ov'r me magnifie themselves, when as my foot doth slide. For, I am near to halt, my grief is still before mine eye.
For I'le declare my sin; and grieve for mine iniquity. But yet mine enemies lively are, and strong are they beside: And, they that hate me wrongfully, are greatly multipli'de. And they, for good that render ill, as enemies me withstood: Yea, ev'n for this, because that I do follow what is good. Forsake me not, O Lord: my God, far from me never be. O Lord, thou my salvation art, haste to give help to me. PSAL. XXXIX. To the chief musician, even to Jeduthun, A Psalm of David. I Said, I will look to my wayes, lest with my tongue I sin: In sight of wicked men, my mouth with bridle I'le keep in. With silence, I as dumb became, I did my self restrain From speaking good, but then the more increased was my pain. My heart within me waxed hot, and while I musing was, The fire did burn: and from my tongue these words I did let passe. Mine end, and measure of my dayes,
O Lord, unto me show What is the same: that I thereby, my frailtie well may know. Lo, thou my dayes an hand-bredth mad'st, mine age is in thine eye As nothing: sure each man at best is wholly vanity. Sure, each man walks in a vain show: they vex themselves in vain: He heaps up wealth, and doth not know to whom it shall pertain. And now, O Lord. what wait I for? my hope is fix'd on thee. Free me from all my trespasses, the fools scorn make not me. Dumb was I, opening not my mouth, because this work was thine. Thy stroke take from me: by the blow of thine hand, I do pine. When with rebukes thou dost correct man, for iniquity, Thou wastes his beautie like a moth: sure each man's vanity. Attend my cry, Lord, at my tears, and pray'rs, not silent be: I sojourn as my fathers all, and stranger am with thee. O spare thou me, that I my strength recover may again, Before from hence I do depart, and here no more remain.
PSAL. XL. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. I Waited for the Lord my God, and patiently did bear; At length to me he did incline my voice and cry to hear. He took me from a fearfull pit, and from the myrie clay, And on a rock he set my feet, establishing my way. He put a new song in my mouth, our God to magnify: Many shall see it, and shall fear, and on the Lord rely. O blessed is the man whose trust upon the Lord relyes: Respecting not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies. O Lord my God, full many are the wonders thou hast done; Thy gracious thoughts to us ward, far above all thoughts, are gone: In order none can reckon them to thee: if them declare, And speak of them I would, they moe then can be numbred are. No sacrifice, nor offering didst thou at all desire, Mine ears thou bor'd: sin-offring thou,
and burnt, didst not require, Then to the Lord, these were my words, I come, behold and see: Within the volume of thy Book, it written is of me: To do thy will, I take delight, O thou my God that art: Yea, that most holy Law of thine, I have within my heart. Within the congregation great I righteousnesse did preach: Lo, thou dost know, O Lord, that I refrained not my speech. I never did within my heart conceal thy righteousnesse: I thy salvation have declar'd, and shown thy faithfulnesse: Thy kindnesse, which most loving is, concealed have not I, Nor from the congregation great have hid thy verity. Thy tender mercies, Lord, from me O do thou not restrain: Thy loving kindnesse, and thy truth, let them me still maintain. For ills, past reck'ning, compasse me, and mine iniquities Such hold upon me taken have, I cannot lift mine eyes: They more then hairs are on mine head, thence is my heart dismaid.
Be pleased, Lord, to rescue me: Lord, hasten to mine aid. Sham'd and confounded be they all that seek my soul to kill: Yea, let them backward driven be, and sham'd that wish me ill. For a reward of this their shame, confounded let them be, That in this manner scoffing say, Aha, aha, to me. In thee let all be glad, and joy, who seeking thee abide: Who thy salvation love, say still, the Lord be magnifi'd. I'm poor and needy, yet the Lord of me a care doth take: Thou art my help and Saviour, my God, no tarrying make. PSAL. XLI. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. BLessed is he that wisely doth the poor mans case consider; For, when the time of trouble is, the Lord will him deliver. God will him keep; yea, save alive, on earth he blest shall live; And to his enemies desire, thou wilt him not up give. God will give strength, when he on bed
of languishing doth mourn: And in his sicknesse sore, O Lord, thou all his bed will turn. I said, O Lord, do thou extend thy mercie unto me; O do thou heal my soul, for why, I have offended thee. Those that to me are enemies, of me do evill say: When shall he die, that so his name may perish quite away? To see me if he comes, he speaks vain words; but then his heart Heaps mischief to it, which he tells, when forth he doth depart. My haters, joyntly whispering, 'gainst me, my hurt devise. Mischief, say they, cleaves fast to him: he lyeth, and shall not rise. Yea, ev'n mine own familiar friend, on whom I did rely, Who ate my bread, ev'n he his heel against me lifted hie. But, Lord, be mercifull to me, and up again me raise, That I may justly them requite according to their wayes. By this I know, that certainly I favoured am by thee: Because my hatefull enemy triumphs not over me.
But as for me, thou me upholdst in mine integrity: And, me before thy countenance thou setst continually. The Lord, the God of Israel, be blest for ever then, From age to age eternally. Amen, yea, and amen. PSAL. XLII. To the chief musician Maschil, for the sons of Korah. LIke as the hart for water-brooks in thirst doth pant and bray; So pants my longing soul, O God, that come to thee I may. My soul for God, the living God, doth thirst: when shall I near Unto thy countenance approach, and in Gods sight appear? My tears have unto me been meat both in the night and day, While unto me continually, Where is thy God, they say? My soul is poured out in me, when this I think upon; Because that with the multitude I heretofore had gone: With them into Gods house I went, with voice of joy and praise, Yea, with the multitude, that kept
the solemn holy dayes. O why art thou cast down, my soul, why in me so dismaid? Trust God, for I shall praise him yet, his countenance is mine aid. My God, my soul's cast down in me: thee therefore minde I will From Jordans land, the Hermonites, and ev'n from Mizar hill. At the noise of thy water-spouts, deep unto deep doth call: Thy breaking waves passe over me, yea, and thy billows all. His loving kindnesse yet the Lord command will in the day, His song's with me by night, to God, by whom I live, I'le pray. And I will say to God, my rock, why me forgets thou so? Why, for my foes oppression, thus mourning do I go? It's as a sword within my bones, when my foes me upbraid: Ev'n when by them, Where is thy God, it's dayly to me said? O why art thou cast down, my soul? why, thus with grief opprest, Art thou disquieted in me? in God still hope and rest; For yet I know I shall him praise, who graciously to me
The health is of my countenance, yea, mine own God is he. PSAL. XLIII. JUdge me, O God, and plead my cause against th'ungodly nation; From the unjust and craftie man, O be thou my salvation. For, thou the God art of my strength, why thrusts thou me thee fro? For th'enemies oppression, why do I mourning go? O send thy light forth, and thy truth: let them be guides to me, And bring me to thine holy Hill, ev'n where thy dwellings be. Then will I to Gods Altar go, to God my chiefest joy: Yea, God, my God, thy Name to praise my harp I will employ. Why art thou then cast down, my soul? what should discourage thee? And why, with vexing thoughts, art thou disquieted in me? Still trust in God, for him to praise good cause I yet shall have; He of my countenance is the health, my God that doth me save. PSAL. XLIV. To the chief musician for the sons of Korah, Maschil. O God, we with our ears have heard, our fathers have us told,
What works thou in their dayes hadst done, ev'n in the dayes of old. Thy hand did drive the Heathen out, and plant them in their place; Thou didst afflict the nations, but them thou didst encrease. For, neither got their sword the land, nor did their arm them save: But thy right hand, presence, and arm; for, thou them favour gave. Thou art my King: for Jacob, Lord, deliverances command. Through thee, we shall push down our foes, that do against us stand: We, through thy Name, shall tread down those that risen against us have. For, in my bow I shall not trust, nor shall my sword me save. But, from our foes thou hast us sav'd, our haters put to shame. In God we all the day do boast, and ever praise thy Name. But now we are cast off by thee, and us thou purst to shame; And, when our armies do go forth, thou go'st not with the same. Thou mak'st us from the enemie, faint-hearted, to turn back: And they, who hate us, for themselves our spoils away do take. Like sheep for meat thou gavest us:
'mong Heathen cast we be. Thou didst for nought thy people sell. their price enrich'd not thee. Thou mak'st us a reproach to be unto our neighbours near; Derision, and a scorn to them, that round about us are. A by-word also thou dost us among the Heathen make: The people, in contempt and spite, at us their heads do shake. Before me my confusion continually abides; And, of my bashfull countenance, the shame me ever hides. For voice of him that doth reproach, and speaketh blasphemie: By reason of th'avenging foe, and cruell enemie. All this is come on us; yet we have not forgotten thee, Nor falsely in thy Covenant behav'd our selves have we. Back from thy way our heart not turn'd: our steps no straying made: Though us thou breakst in dragons place, and coverest with deaths shade. If we Gods Name forgot, or streacht to a strange god our hands: Shall not God search this out? for he hearts secrets understands.
Yea, for thy sake, we're kill'd all day: counted as slaughter-sheep. Rise, Lord, cast us not ever off, awake, why dost thou sleep? O wherefore hidest thou thy face? forgetst our case distrest, And our oppression? For our soul is to the dust down prest; Our belly also on the earth, fast cleaving, hold doth take. Rise for our help, and us redeem, ev'n for thy mercies sake. PSAL. XLV. To the chief musician upon Shoshannim, for the sons of Korah, Maschil, a song of loves. MY heart brings forth a goodly thing: my works that I endite Concern the King: my tongue's a pen of one that swift doth write. Thou fairer art then sons of men: into thy lips is store Of grace infus'd; God therefore thee hath blest for evermore. O thou that art the mighty One, thy sword gird on thy thigh: Ev'n with thy glory excellent, and with thy Majestie. For meeknesse, truth and righteousnesse, in state ride prosperouslie: And thy right hand shall thee instruct in things that fearfull be.
Thine arrows sharply pierce the hearts of th'enemies of the King; And under thy subjection the people down do bring. For ever and for ever is, O God, thy throne of might: The scepter of thy Kingdome is a scepter that is right. Thou lovest right, and hatest ill: for God, thy God most hie Above thy fellows hath, with th'oyl of joy, anointed thee. Of aloes, myrrhe, and cassia, a smell thy garments had; Out of thy ivorie palaces, whereby they made thee glad. Among thy women honourable Kings daughters were at hand: Upon thy right hand did the queen, in gold of Ophir stand. O daughter, hearken and regard, and do thine ear incline; Likewise forget thy fathers house, and people that are thine. Then of the King desir'd shall be thy beautie vehemently: Because he is thy Lord, do thou him worship reverently. The daughter there of Tyre shal be, with gifts and offrings great: Those of the people that are rich thy favour shall intreat.
Behold the daughter of the King all glorious is within; And, with embroyderies of gold, her garments wrought have bin. She shall be brought unto the King, in robes with needle wrought: Her fellow-virgins following, shall unto thee be brought. They shall be brought with gladnesse great, and mirth on every side, Into the palace of the King, and there they shall abide. In stead of those thy fathers dear, thy children thou mayst take, And in all places of the earth, them noble Princes make. Thy Name remembred I will make, through ages all, to be: The people therefore evermore shall praises give to thee. Another of the same. MY heart enditing is good matter in a song: I speak the things that I have made which to the King belong: My tongue shall be as quick his honour to endite, As is the pen of any scribe that useth fast to write. Thou'rt fairest of all men,
grace in thy lips doth slow: And therefore blessings evermore on thee doth God bestow. Thy sword gird on thy thigh, thou that art most of might: Appear in dreadfull Majestie, and in thy glory bright. For meeknesse, truth and right, ride prosperously in state: And thy right hand shall teach to thee things terrible and great. Thy shafts shall pierce their hearts that foes are to the King: Whereby into subjection the people thou shalt bring. Thy royall seat, O Lord▪ for ever shall remain: The scepter of thy Kingdom doth all righteousnesse maintain. Thou loves right, and hates ill: for God, thy God most hie, Above thy fellows hath with th'oyl of joy anointed thee. Of myrrhe and spices sweet a smell thy garments had: Out of thy ivorie palaces, whereby they made thee glad. And, in thy glorious train, Kings daughters waiting stand: And thy fair queen, in Ophir gold, doth stand at thy right hand.
O daughter, take good heed, incline, and give good ear; Thou must forget thy kindred all, and fathers house most dear. Thy beautie to the King, shall then delightfull be: And, do thou humbly worship him, because thy Lord is he. The daughter then of Tyre there with a gift shall be, And all the wealthy of the land shall make their sute to thee. The daughter of the King all glorious is within; And, with embroyderies of gold, her garments wrought have bin. She cometh to the King in robes with needle wrought: The virgins that do follow her shall unto thee be brought. They shall be brought with joy, and mirth on every side, Into the palace of the King, and there they shall abide. And, in thy fathers stead, thy children thou may'st take, And, in all places of the earth, them noble Princes make. I will show forth thy Name to generations all: Therefore thy people evermore to thee give praises shall.
PSAL. XLVI. To the chief musician for the sons of Korah, A song upon Alamoth. GOd is our refuge, and our strength, in straits a present aid. Therefore, although the earth remove, we will not be afraid: Though hills amidst the sea be cast, Though waters roaring make, And troubled be; yea, though the hills by swelling seas do shake. A river is, whose streams do glad the City of our God: The holy place, wherein the Lord most high hath his abode. God in the midst of her doth dwell: nothing shall her remove; The Lord to her an helper will, and that right early, prove. The Heathen rag'd tumultuously, the Kingdoms moved were: The Lord God uttered his voice, the earth did melt for fear. The Lord of hosts upon our side doth constantly remain: The God of Jacob's our refuge, us safely to maintain. Come, and behold what wondrous works have by the Lord been wrought:
Come, see what desolations he on the earth hath brought. Unto the ends of all the earth wars into peace he turns: The bow he breaks, the spear he cuts, in fire the chariot burns. Be still, and know that I am God: among the Heathen I Will be exalted, I on earth will be exalted hie. Our God, who is the Lord of hosts, is still upon our side. The God of Jacob our refuge for ever will abide. PSAL. XLVII. To the chief musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah. ALL people clap your hands, to God with voice of triumph shout. For dreadfull is the Lord most high, great King, the earth throughout. The Heathen people under us he surely shall subdue: And he shall make the Nations under our feet to bow. The lot of our inheritance choose out for us shall he, Of Jacob whom he loved well, ev'n the excellencie. God is with shouts gone up, the Lord with trumpets sounding hie. Sing praise to God, sing praise, sing praise, praise to our King sing ye.
For, God is King of all the earth, with knowledge praise expresse. God rules the nations, God sits on his throne of holinesse. The princes of the people are assembled willinglie, Ev'n of the God of Abraham they who the people be. For why, the shields that do defend the earth, are only his: They to the Lord belong, yea He exalted greatly is. PSAL. XLVIII. A song, and psalm for the sons of Korah. GReat is the Lord, and greatly He is to be praised still, Within the City of our God, upon his holy hill. Mount Sion stands most beautifull, the joy of all the land; The City of the mighty King on her north side doth stand. The Lord, within her palaces, is for a refuge known: For lo, the Kings that gathered were together by have gone. But, when they did behold the same, they wondring, would not stay; But, being troubled at the sight, they thence did haste away. Great terrour there took hold on them, they were possess'd with fear,
Their grief came like a womans pain, when she a childe doth bear. Thou Tarshish ships with east wind breaks; As we have heard it told; So in the City of the Lord our eyes did it behold, In our Gods City, which his hand for ever stablish will. We, of thy loving kindnesse thought, Lord, in thy Temple still. O Lord, according to thy Name, through all the earth's thy praise: And thy right hand, O Lord, is full of righteousnesse alwayes. Because thy judgements are made known, let Sion mount rejoyce; Of Judah let the daughters all send forth a chearfull voice. Walk about Sion, and go round, the high towrs thereof tell: Consider ye her palaces, and mark her bulwarks well, That ye may tell posteritie. For this God doth abide Our God for evermore, he will ev'n unto death us guide. PSAL. XLIX. To the chief musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah. HEar this all people, and give ear all in the world that dwell,
Both low and high, both rich and poor. My mouth shall wisedom tell. My heart shall knowledge meditate, I will incline mine ear To parables, and on the harp my sayings dark declare. Amidst those dayes, that evill be, why should I, fearing, doubt? When of my heels th'iniquitie shall compasse me about. Who e're they be, that in their wealth their confidence do pitch, And boast themselves, because they are become exceeding rich. Yet none of these his brother can redeem by any way, Nor can he unto God, for him sufficient ransome pay; (Their souls redemption precious is, and it can never be) That still he should for ever live, and not corruption see. For why? he seeth that wise men die, and brutish fools also Do perish, and their wealth, when dead, to others they let go. Their inward thought is, that their house, and dwelling places shall Stand through all ages; they their lands by their own names do call. But yet in honour shall not man
abide continually; But passing hence, may be compar'd unto the beasts that dy. Thus, brutish folly plainly is their wisedome, and their way; Yet, their posteritie approve what they do fondly say. Like sheep, they in the grave are laid, and death shall them devour; And, in the morning, upright men shall over them have pow'r: Their beautie, from their dwelling, shall consume within the grave. But, from hells hand God will mee free, for he shall me receive. Be thou not then afraid, when one enriched thou dost see, Nor when the glory of his house advanced is on hie. For, he shall carry nothing hence, when death his dayes doth end; Nor shall his glory after him into the grave descend. Although he his own soul did blesse whilst he on earth did live, (And when thou to thy self dost well, men will thee peaises give) He to his fathers race shall go, they never shall see light. Man honour'd, wanting knowledge, is like beasts that perish quite.
PSAL. L. A Psalm of Asaph. THe mighty God, the Lord hath spoken, and did call The earth, from rising of the sun, to where he hath his fall. From out of Sion hill, which, of excellency And beautie the perfection is, God shined gloriously. Our God shall surely come, keep silence shall not He; Before Him fire shall waste, great storms shall round about Him be. Unto the heaven's clear, He from above shall call, And to the earth likewise, that He may judge his people all. Together let my saints unto me gathered be, Those that by sacrifice have made a covenant with me. And then the heavens shall his righteousnesse declare; Because the Lord himself is He, by whom men judged are. My people Israel hear, speak will I from on hie, Against thee I will testifie,
God, ev'n thy God am I. I, for thy sacrifice, no blame will on thee lay, Nor for burnt-offrings, which to me thou off'redst every day. I'le take no calf, nor goats, from house or fold of thine: For, beasts of forrests, cattell all on thousand hills are mine. The fowls on mountains high, are all to me well known, Wilde beasts, which in the fields do ly, ev'n they are all mine own. Then, if I hungry were, I would not tell it thee; Because the world, and fulnesse all thereof belongs to me. Will I eat flesh of buls? or goats bloud drink will I? Thanks offer thou to God, and pay thy vows to the most hie; And call upon me, when in trouble thou shalt be, I will deliver thee, and thou my Name shalt glorifie, But to the wicked man God saith, my laws and truth Shouldst thou declare? how darst thou take my covenant in thy mouth? Sith thou instruction hates, which should thy wayes direct.
And, sith my words behinde thy back thou casts, and dost reject. When thou a thief didst see, with him thou didst consent; And with the vile adulterers partaker on thou went. Thou giv'st thy mouth to ill, thy tongue deceit doth frame; Thou sits, and 'gainst thy brother speaks, thy mothers son does shame. Because I silence kept, while thou these things hast wrought; That I was altogether like thy self, hath been thy thought: Yet I will thee reprove, and set before thine eyes In order ranked thy misdeeds, and thine iniquities. Now, ye that God forget, this carefully consider; Lest I in pieces tear you all, and none can you deliver. Who so doth offer praise, me glorifies, and I Will shew him Gods salvation, that orders right his way. Another of the same. THe mighty God the Lord hath spoke, and call'd the earth upon, Ev'n from the rising of the sun,
unto his going down. From out of Sion, his own hill, where the perfection hie Of beauty is, from thence the Lord hath shined gloriously. Our God shall come, and shall no more be silent, but speak out: Before him fire shall waste, great storms shall compasse him about. He, to the heavens from above, and to the earth below Shall call, that He his judgement may before his people show. Let all my saints together be unto me gathered, Those, that by sacrifice, with me a covenant have made. And then the heavens shall declare His righteousnesse abroad: Because the Lord himself doth come, none else is judge but God. Hear, O my people, and I'le speak: O Israel by name, Against thee I will testifie, God, ev'n thy God I am. I, for thy sacrifices few, reprove thee never will; Nor for burnt-offrings to have been before me offred still. I'le take no bullock, nor hee-goats from house, nor folds of thine:
For, beasts of forrests, cattell all on thousand hills, are mine. The fowls are all to me well known, that mountains high do yeeld; And I do challenge as mine own, the wilde beasts of the field. If I were hungry, I would not to thee for need complain; For earth, and all its fulnesse, doth to me of right pertain. That I, to eat the flesh of bulls take pleasure, dost thou think? Or, that I need to quench my thirst, the bloud of goats to drink? Nay, rather unto me, thy God, thanksgiving offer thou, To the most high perform thy word, and fully pay thy vow. And, in the day of trouble great, see that thou call on me; I will deliver thee, and thou my Name shalt glorifie, But, God unto the wicked saith, why should thou mention make Of my commands? how dar'st thou in thy mouth my covenant take? Sith it is so, that thou dost hate all good instruction; And sith thou casts, behinde thy back, and slights my words each one. When thou a thief didst see, then straight
thou joyn'd with him in sin; And, with the vile adulterers, thou hast partaker bin: Thy mouth to evill thou dost give, thy tongue deceit doth frame, Thou sitst, and 'gainst thy brother speak'st, thy mothers son to shame. These things thou wickedly hast done, and I have silent bin; Thou thought that I was like thy self, and did approve thy sin: But I will sharply thee reprove, and I will order right, Thy sins and thy transgressions in presence of thy sight. Consider this, and be afraid, ye that forget the Lord, Left I in pieces tear you all, when none can help afford. Who offereth praise, me glorifies: I will shew Gods salvation To him that ordereth aright his life, and conversation. PSAL. LI. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came unto him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba. AFter thy loving kindnesse, Lord, have mercy upon me: For thy compassions great, blot out all mine iniquitie.
Me cleanse from sin, and throughly wash from mine iniquitie. For, my transgressions I confesse, my sin I ever see. 'Gainst thee, thee onely, have I sinn'd, in thy sight done this ill, That, when thou speaks, thou may be just, and clear in judging still. Behold, I in iniquity was form'd the womb within; My mother also me conceiv'd in guiltinesse and sin. Behold, thou, in the inward parts, with truth delighted art; And wisdome thou shalt make me know within the hidden part. Do thou with hyssop sprinkle me, I shall be cleansed so; Yea, wash thou me, and then I shall be whiter then the snow. Of gladnesse, and of joyfulnesse, make me to hear the voice; That so, these very bones, which thou hast broken, may rejoyce. All mine iniquities blot out, thy face hide from my sin. Create a clean heart: Lord, renew a right sp'rit me within. Cast me not from thy sight, nor take thy holy sp'rit away: Restore me thy salvations joy;
with thy free sp'rit me stay. Then will I teach thy ways unto those that transgressours be; And those that sinners are, shall then be turned unto thee. O GOD of my salvation God, me from blood-guiltinesse Set free: then shall my tongue aloud sing of thy righteousnesse. My closed lips, O Lord, by thee let them be opened; Then shall thy praises by my mouth abroad be published. For thou desir'st not sacrifice, else would I give it thee; Nor wilt thou with burnt-offering at all delighted be. A broken spirit is to God a pleasing sacrifice, A broken, and a contrite heart, Lord, thou wilt not despise. Shew kindnesse and do good, O Lord, to Sion thine own hill; The walls of thy Jerusalem build up, of thy good will. Then righteous offrings shall thee please, and offrings burnt, which they, With whole burnt-offrings and with calves, shall on thine altar lay.
PSAL. LII. To the chief musician Maschil, A Psalm of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of Ahimelech. VVHy dost thou boast, O mighty man, of mischief and of ill? The goodnesse of Almighty God endureth ever still. Thy tongue mischievous calumnies deviseth subtily, Like to a razor, sharp to cut, working deceitfully. Ill more then good, and more then truth thou lovest to speak wrong: Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitfull tongue. So God shall thee destroy for ay, remove thee, pluck thee out Quite from thy house, out of the land of life he shall thee root. The righteous shall it see, and fear, and laugh at him they shall: Lo, this the man is, that did not make GOD his strength at all: But he, in his abundant wealth, his confidence did place; And he took strength unto himself from his own wickednesse. But I am in the house of God
like to an olive green: My confidence for ever hath upon Gods mercy been. And I for ever will thee praise, because thou hast done this: I on thy Name will wait, for good before thy saints it is. PSAL. LIII. To the chief musician upon Mahalath, Maschil, A Psalm of David. THat there is not a God, the fool doth in his heart conclude: They are corrupt, their works are vile, not one of them doth good. The Lord upon the sons of men from heav'n did cast his eyes, To see if any one there was that sought God, and was wise. They altogether filthy are, they all are backward gone; And there is none that doeth good, no not so much as one. These workers of iniquity do they not know at all, That they my people eat as bread and on God do not call. Ev'n there they were afraid, and stood with trembling all dismaid, Whereas there was no cause at all, why they should be afraid.
For God his bones that thee besieg'd hath scattered all abroad, Thou hast confounded them, for they despised are of God. Let Israels help from Sion come▪ When back the Lord shall bring His captives, Jacob shall rejoyce, and Israel shall sing▪ PSAL. LIV. To the chief musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A Psalm of David, when the Ziphims came and said to Saul, doth not David hide himself with us? SAve me, O God, by thy great Name, and judge me by thy strength: My prayer hear, O God; give ear unto my words at length. For they that strangers are to me do up against me rise; Oppressours seek my soul, and God set not before their eyes. The Lord my God my helper is, lo, therefore I am bold, He taketh part with every one that doth my soul uphold. Unto mine enemies he shall mischief and ill repay. O for thy truths sake cut them off, and sweep them clean away. I will a sacrifice to thee give with free willingnesse:
Thy Name, O Lord, because it's good, with praise I will confesse. For he hath me delivered from all adversities: And his desire mine eye hath seen upon mine enemies. PSAL LV. To the chief musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A Psalm of David. LOrd, hear my pray'r, hide not thy self from my intreating voice: Attend and hear me, in my plaint I mourn and make a noise. Because of th'enemies voice, and for lewd mens oppression great; On me they cast iniquitie, and they in wrath me hate. Sore pain'd within me is my heart, deaths terrors on me fall; On me comes trembling, fear and dread o'rewhelmed me withall. O that I like a dove had wings, said I, then would I flie Far hence, that I might finde a place where I in rest might be. Lo then far off I wander would, and in the desert stay: From windy storm and tempest I would haste to scape away. O Lord, on them destruction bring,
and do their tongues divide: For in the city violence, and strife I have espide. They day and night upon the walls do go about it round: There mischief is, and sorrow there in midst of it is found. Abundant wickednesse there is within her inward part; And from her streets deceitfulnesse and guile do not depart. He was no foe that me reproach'd, then that endure I could, Nor hater that did 'gainst me boast, from him me hide I would. But thou man, who mine equal, guide, and mine acquaintance wast, We join'd sweet counsels, to Gods house in company we past. Let death upon them seise, and down let them go quick to hell; For wickednesse doth much abound among them where they dwell. I'le call on God, God will me save. I'le pray and make a noise At evening, morning, and at noon; and he shall hear my voice. He hath my soul delivered, that it in peace might be, From battell that against me was, for many were with me.
The Lord shall hear, and them afflict, of old who hath abode: Because they never changes have, therefore they fear not God. 'Gainst those that were at peace with him he hath put forth his hand: The covenant that he had made, by breaking he prophan'd. More smooth then butter were his words, while in his heart was war; His speeches were more soft then oyl, and yet drawn swords they are. Cast thou thy burden on the Lord, and he shall thee sustain; Yea, he shall cause the righteous man unmoved to remain. But thou, O Lord my God, those men in justice shalt o'rethrow, And in destructions dungeon dark at last shalt lay them low. The bloudy and deceitfull men shall not live half their dayes; But upon thee with confidence I will depend alwayes. PSAL. LVI. To the chief musician upon Jonath-elemrechokim, Michtam of David, when the Philistines took him in Gath. SHew mercy, Lord to me: for man would swallow me outright:
He me oppresseth, while he doth against me daily fight. They daily would me swallow up, that hate me spitefully; For they be many that do fight against me, O most hie. When I'm afraid, I'le trust in thee: In God I'le praise his word, I will not fear what flesh can do, my trust is in the Lord. Each day they wrest my words, their thoughts 'gainst me are all for ill. They meet, they lurk, they mark my steps waiting my soul to kill. But shall they by iniquitie escape thy judgement so? O God, with indignation, down do thou the people throw. My wandrings all what they have been thou know'st, their number took. Into thy bottle put my tears, are they not in thy book? My foes shall, when I cry, turn back, I know't, God is for me. In God his word I'le praise, his word in God shall praised be. In God I trust, I will not fear what man can do to me. Thy vows upon me are, O God: I'le render praise to thee. Wilt thou not, who from death me sav'd,
my feet from falls keep free, To walk before God in the light of those that living be. PSAL. LVII. To the chief musician Al-taschith, Michtam of David, when he fled from Saul in the cave, BE mercifull to me, O God, thy mercy unto me Do thou extend, because my soul doth put her trust in thee. Yea, in the shadow of thy wings my refuge I will place, Untill these sad calamities do wholly overpasse. My cry I will cause to ascend unto the Lord most hie, To God, who doth all things for me perform most perfectly. From heav'n he shall send down, and me from his reproach defend, That would devour me; God his truth and mercy forth shall send. My soul among fierce lions is, I firebrands live among, Mens sons, whose teeth are spears and darts, a sharp sword is their tongue. Be thou exalted very high above the heav'ns, O God; Let thou thy glory be advanc'd o're all the earth abroad.
My soul's bow'd down, for they a net have laid, my steps to snare; Into the pit, which they have dig'd for me, they fallen are. My heart is fixt, my heart is fixt, O God, I'le sing, and praise. My glory wake, wake psaltry, harp; my self I'le early raise. I'le praise thee 'mong the people, Lord, 'mong nations sing will I▪ For great to heav'n thy mercy is, thy truth is to the sky. O Lord, exalted be thy Name, above the heav'ns to stand: Do thou thy glory far advance above both sea and land. PSAL. LVIII. To the chief musician Al-taschith, Michtam of David. DO ye, O congregation, indeed speak righteousnesse? O ye that are the sons of men, judge ye with uprightnesse? Yea ev'n within your very hearts ye wickednesse have done; And ye the violence of your hands do weigh the earth upon. The wicked men estranged are ev'n from the very womb; They speaking lies do stray, as soon
as to the world they come. Unto a serpents poyson like their poyson doth appear; Yea, they are like the adder deaf, that closely stops her ear: That so she may not hear the voice of one that charm her would, No not though he most cunning were, and charm most wisely could. Their teeth, O God, within their mouth break thou in pieces small; The great teeth break thou out, O Lord, of these young lions all. Let them like waters melt away, which downward still do flow: In pieces cut his arrows all, when he shall bend his bow. Like to a snail that melts away, let each of them be gone: Like womans birth untimely, that they never see the sun. He shall them take away, before your pots the thorns can finde, Both living, and in fury great, as with a stormy winde. The righteous when he vengeance sees, he shall be joyfull then; The righteous one shall wash his feet in bloud of wicked men. So men shall say, the righteous man reward shall never misse;
And verily upon the earth a God to judge there is. PSAL. LIX. To the chief musician Al-taschith, Michtam of David: when Saul sent, and they watched the house to kill him. MY God, deliver me from those that are mine enemies: And do thou me defend from those that up against me rise. Do thou deliver me from them that work iniquity; And give me safety from the men of bloud cruelty. For lo, they for my soul lay wait; the mighty do combine Against me, Lord, not for my fault, nor any sin of mine. They run, and without fault in me themselves do ready make: Awake to meet me with thy help, and do thou notice take. Awake therefore, Lord God of hosts▪ thou God of Israel, To visit Heathen all: spare none that wickedly rebell. At ev'ning they go to and fro; they make great noise, and sound Like to a dog, and often walk about the city round.
Behold, they belch out with their mouth; and in their lips are swords: For they do say thus, who is he that now doth hear our words? But thou, O Lord, shalt laugh at them, and all the Heathen mock. While he's in pow'r I'le wait on thee: for God is my high rock. He of my mercy that is God, betimes shall me prevent: Upon mine enemies God shall let me see mine hearts content. Them slay not, left my folk forget; but scatter them abroad By thy strong pow'r; and bring them down, O thou our shield, and God. For their mouths sin, and for the words that from their lips do fly, Let them be taken in their pride, because they curse and lye. In wrath consume them, them consume, that so they may not be: And that in Jacob God doth rule to th'earths ends let them see. At evening let thou them return, making great noise, and sound Like to a dog, and often walk about the city round. And let them wander up and down in seeking food, to eat; And let them grudge when they shall not be satisfi'd with meat.
But of thy pow'r I'le sing aloud at morn thy mercy praise: For thou to me my refuge wast, and towr in troublous dayes. O God, that art my strength, I will sing praises unto thee; For God is my defence, a God of mercy unto me. PSAL. LX. To the chief musician upon Shushan-eduth, Michtam of David, to teach, when he strove with Aram Naharaim, and with Aram Zobah, when Joab returned, and smote of Edom in the valley of salt, twelve thousand, O Lord, thou hast rejected us, and scattered us abroad, Thou justly hast displeased been, return to us, O God. The earth to tremble thou hast made; therein didst breaches make: Do thou thereof the breaches heal, because the land doth shake. Unto thy people, thou hard things hast shew'd, and on them sent: And thou hast caused us to drink wine of astonishment. And yet a banner thou hast given to them who thee do fear: That it by them, because of truth displayed may appear.
That thy beloved people may delivered be from thrall; Save with the pow'r of thy right hand, and hear me when I call. God in his holinesse hath spoke, herein I will take pleasure: Shechem I will divide, and forth will Succoths valley measure. Gilead I claim as mine, by right, Manasseh mine shall be, Ephraim is of mine head the strength, Judah gives laws for me. Moab's my washing-pot, my shoe I'le over Edom throw: And over Palestina's land I will in triumph go. O who is he will bring me to the city fortifi'd? O who is he that to the land of Edom will me guide? O God, which hadest us cast off, this thing wilt thou not do? Ev'n thou, O God, which didest not forth with our armies go. Help us from trouble: for the help is vain which man supplies. Through God wee'l do great acts: he shall tread down our enemies.
PSAL. LXI. To the chief musician upon Neginoth, A Psalm of David. O God, give ear unto my cry. unto my pray'r attend. From th'utmost corner of the land my cry to thee I'le send, What time my heart is overwhelm'd, and in perplexity; Do thou me lead unto the Rock that higher is then I. For thou hast for my refuge been a shelter by thy pow'r, And, for defence against my foes, thou hast been a strong tow'r Within thy Tabernacle I for ever will abide: And under covert of thy wings with confidence me hide. For thou, the vows that I did make. O Lord my God, didst hear: Thou hast given me the heritage of those thy Name that fear. A life prolong'd for many dayes thou to the King shalt give: Like many generations be the years which he shall live. He in Gods presence, his abode for evermore shall have: O do thou truth and mercy both
prepare that may him save. And so will I perpetually sing praise unto thy Name. That, having made my vows, I may each day perform the same. PSAL. LXII. To the chief musician, to Jeduthun, A Psalm of David. MY soul with expectation depends on God indeed; My strength and my salvation doth from him alone proceed. He onely my salvation is, and my strong rock is He; He onely is my sure defence; much mov'd I shall not be. How long will ye against a man plot mischief? ye shall all Be slain, ye as a tottering fence shall be, and bowing wall. They onely plot to cast him down from his excellency; They joy in lies, with mouth they blesse, but they curse inwardly. My soul wait thou with patience upon thy God alone: On him dependeth all my hope and expectation. He onely my salvation is, and my strong Rock is He; He onely is my sure defence: I shall not moved be.
In God my glory placed is, and my salvation sure: In God the Rock is of my strength, my refuge most secure. Ye people place your confidence in him continually; Before him pour ye out your heart: God is our refuge hie. Surely mean men are vanitie, and great men are a lie: In ballance laid, they wholly are more light then vanitie. Trust ye not in oppression, in robbery be not vain: On wealth set not your hearts, when as increased is your gain. God hath it spoken once to me, yea, this I heard again, That power, to Almighty God alone, doth appertain. Yea, mercy also unto thee belongs, O Lord, alone; For thou according to his work rewardest every one. PSAL. LXIII. A Psalm of David, when he was in the wildernesse of Judah. LOrd, thee my God I'le early seek: my soul doth thirst for thee, My flesh longs in a dry parcht land, wherein no waters be.
That I thy power may behold, and brightnesse of thy face, As I have seen thee heretofore, within thy holy place. Since better is thy love then life, my lips thee praise shall give. I in thy Name will lift my hands, and blesse thee while I live. Ev'n as with marrow and with fat, my soul shall filled be; Then shall my mouth, with joyfull lips, sing praises unto thee: When I do thee upon my bed remember with delight, And when on thee I meditate in watches of the night. In shadow of thy wings I'le joy. for thou mine help hast been. My soul thee follows hard; and me thy right hand doth sustain. Who seek my soul to spill, shall sink down to earths lowest room: They by thy sword shall be cut off, and foxes prey become. Yet shall the King in God rejoyce, and each one glory shall That swear by him, but stopt shall be the mouth of liers all.
PSAL. LXIV. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. VVHen I to thee my prayer make, Lord, to my voice give ear: My life save from the enemy of whom I stand in fear. Me from their secret counsell hide who do live wickedly; From insurrection of those men that work iniquity. Who do their tongues with malice whet, and make them cut like swords; In whose bent bows are arrows set; ev'n sharp and bitter words: That they may at the perfect man in secret aim their shot; Yea suddenly they dare at him to shoot and fear it not. In ill encourage they themselves; and their snares close to lay Together conference they have, Who shall them see? they say. They have searcht out iniquities, a perfect search they keep: Of each of them the inward thought, and very heart is deep. God shall an arrow shoot at them, and wound them suddenly. So their own tongue shal them confound: all who them see shall fly.
And on all men a fear shall fall; Gods works they shall declare: For they shall wisely notice take what these his doings are. In God the righteous shall rejoyce, and trust upon his might; Yea they, shall greatly glory all, in heart that are upright. PSAL. LXV. To the chief musician, A Psalm and song of David. PRaise waits for thee in Sion, Lord; to thee vows paid shall be. O thou that hearer art of pray'r, all flesh shall come to thee. Iniquities, I must confesse, prevail against me do: But as for our transgressions, them purge away shalt thou. Blest is the man whom thou dost choose, and mak'st approach to thee: That he within thy courts, O Lord, may still a dweller be: We surely shall be satisfi'd with thy abundant grace, And with the goodnes of thy House, ev'n of thy holy place. O God of our salvation, thou in thy righteousnesse
By fearfull works unto our pray'rs thine answer dost expresse: Therefore the ends of all the earth, and these afar that be Upon the sea, their confidence. O Lord, will place in thee. Who, being girt with pow'r, sets fast, by his great strength, the hills. Who noise of seas, noise of their waves, and peoples tumult stills. Those in the utmost parts that dwell are at thy signes afraid: Th'outgoings of the morn and even by thee are joyfull made. The earth thou visit'st watring it, thou mak'st it rich to grow With Gods full flood; thou corn prepar'st, when thou provid'st it so. Her ridges thou dost water much, her furrows settleft; With showres thou dost her mollifie, her spring by thee is blest. So thou the year most liberally dost with thy goodnesse crown; And all thy paths abundantly on us drop fatnesse down. They drop upon the pastures wide, that do in deserts ly: The little hills on every side rejoyce right pleasantly. With flocks the pastures cloathed be,
the vales with corn are clad; And now they shout and sing to thee, for thou hast made them glad. PSAL. LXVI. To the chief musician, A song or psalm. ALL lands to God in joyfull sounds aloft your voices raise. Sing forth the honour of his Name, and glorious make his praise. Say unto God, How terrible in all thy works art thou? Through thy great pow'r thy foes to thee shall be constrain'd to bow. All on the earth shall worship thee, they shall thy praise proclaime. In songs: they shall sing cheerfully unto thy holy Name. Come, and the works that God hath wrought with admiration see: In's workings to the sons of men most terrible is he. Into dry land the sea he turn'd, and they a passage had. Ev'n marching through the floud on foot, there we in him were glad. He ruleth ever by his power, his eyes the nations see: O let not the rebellious ones lift up themselves on hie. Ye people blesse our God; aloud
the voice speak of his praise. Our soul in life who safe preserves, our foot from sliding stays. For thou didst prove, and try us, Lord, as men do silver try; Broughtst us into the net, and mad'st bands on our loins to ly. Thou hast caus'd men ride o're our heads; and though that we did passe Through fire and water, yet thou broughtst us to a wealthy place. I'le bring burnt-offrings to thy house, to thee my vows I'le pay, Which my lips utter'd, my mouth spake when trouble on me lay. Burnt-sacrifices of fat rams with incense I will bring; Of bullocks and of goats I will present an offering. All that fear God come hear, I'le tell what he did for my soul. I with my mouth unto him cryd my tongue did him extoll. If in my heart I sin regard, the Lord me will not hear: But surely God me heard, and to my prayers voice gave ear. O let the Lord, our gracious God, for ever blessed be, Who turned not my pray'r from him, nor yet his grace from me.
PSAL. LXVII. To the chief musician on Neginoth, A Psalm or song. LOrd, blesse and pity us, shine on us with thy face: That th'earth thy way, and nations all may know thy saving grace, Let people praise thee, Lord, let people all thee praise. O let the nations be glad, in songs their voices raise: Thou'lt justly people judge, on earth rule nations all. Let people praise thee, Lord, let them praise thee both great and small. The earth her fruit shall yeeld, our God shall blessing send. God shall us blesse, men shall him fear, unto earths utmost end. Another of the same. LOrd, unto us be mercifull, do thou us also blesse: And graciously cause shine on us the brightnesse of his face. That so thy way upon the earth to all men may be known, Also among the nations all thy saying health be shown. O let the people praise thee, Lord,
let people all thee praise. O let the nations be glad, and sing for joy always: For rightly thou shalt people judge, and nations rule on earth. Let people praise thee, Lord, let all the folk praise thee with mirth. Then shall the earth yeeld her increase, God, our God blesse us shall. God shall us blesse, and of the earth the ends shall fear him all. PSAL. LXVIII. To the chief musician, A Psalm or song of David. LEt God arise, and scattered let all his enemies be; And let all those that do him hate before his presence flee. As smoak is driven, so drive thou them: as fire melts wax away, Before Gods face let wicked men so perish and decay. But let the righteous be glad, let them before Gods sight Be very joyfull, yea let them rejoyce with all their might. To God sing, to his Name sing praise, extoll him with your voice, That rides on heav'n by his Name JAH, before his face rejoyce. Because the Lord a Father is
unto the fatherlesse: God is the widows judge, within his place of holinesse. God doth the solitary set in families; and from bands The chain'd doth free, but rebels do inhabit parched lands. O God, what time thou didst go forth before thy peoples face; And when, through the great wildernesse, thy glorious marching was; Then at Gods presence shook the earth, then drops from heaven fell; This Sinai shook before the Lord, the God Israel. O God, thou to thine heritage didst send a plenteous rain; Whereby thou, when it weary was, didst it refresh again. Thy congregation then did make their habitation there: Of thine own goodnesse for the poor, O God, thou didst prepare. The Lord himself did give the word, the word abroad did spread; Great was the company of them the same who published. Kings of great armies foiled were, and forc'd to flee away, And women, who remain'd at home, did distribute the prey.
Though ye have lyen among the pots, like doves ye shall appear; Whose wings with silver, and with gold whose feathers covered are. When there th'Almighty scatt'red Kings, like Salmons snow 'twas white. Gods hill is like to Bashan hill, like Bashan hill for hight. Why do ye leap ye mountains high? this is the hill where God Desires to dwell, yea God in it for ay will make abode. Gods chariots twenty thousand are, thousands of Angels strong; In's holy place God is, as in mount Sinai, them among. Thou hast, O Lord, most glorious ascended up on hie, And in triumph victorious led captive captivitie: Thou hast received gifts for men, for such as did rebell, Yea, ev'n for them; that God the Lord in midst of them might dwell. Blest be the Lord, who is to us of our salvation God, Who daily with his benefits us plenteously doth load. He, of salvation is the God, who is our God most strong▪ And unto God the Lord from death the issues belong.
But surely, God shall wound the head of those that are his foes; The hairy scalp of him that still on in his trespasse goes. God said, my people I will bring again from Bashan hill; Yea, from the seas devouring deeps, them bring again I will. That in the bloud of enemies thy foot imbru'd may be; And, of thy dogs dipt in the same, the tongues thou mayest see. Thy goings they have seen, O God, the steps of Majesty Of my God, and my mighty King, within the sanctuary. Before went singers, players next on instruments took way; And them among the damsels were that did on timbrels play. Within the congregations blesse God with one accord; From Isra'ls fountain do ye blesse and praise the mighty Lord. With their Prince little Benjamin, Princes and councell there Of Judah were, there Zabulons and Naphtalies Princes were. Thy God commands thy strength: make strong what thou wrought'st for us, Lord. For thy house at Jerusalem Kings shall thee gifts afford.
The spear-mens host, the multitude of bulls, which fiercely look, Those calves which people have forth sent, O Lord our God rebuke, Till every one submit himself, and silver pieces bring: The people that delight in war disperse, O God and King. Those that be Princes great, shall then come out of Egypt lands, And Aethiopia to God shall soon stretch out her hands. O all ye Kingdoms of the earth, sing praises to this King; For he is Lord that ruleth all, unto him praises sing. To him that rides on heav'ns of heav'ns which he of old did found; Lo, he sends out his voice, a voice in might that doth abound. Strength unto God do ye ascribe; for his excellencie Is over Israel, his strength is in the clouds most hie. Thou'rt from thy Temple dreadfull, Lord; Isra'ls own God is he Who gives his people strength, and pow'r: O let God blessed be.
PSAL. LXIX. To the chief musician upon Shoshannim, A Psalm of David. SAve me, O God, because the flouds do so environ me, That ev'n into my very soul come in the waters be. I downward in deep mire do sink, where standing there is none: I am into deep waters come, where flouds have o're me gone. I weary with my crying am, my throat is also dry'd; Mine eyes do fail, while for my God I waiting do abide. Those men that do without a cause bear hatred unto me Then are the hairs upon my head, in number moe they be: They that would me destroy, and are mine enemies wrongfully Are mighty: so, what I took not, to render forc'd was I. Lord thou my folly know'st, my sins not covered are from thee. Let none that wait oh thee be sham'd, Lord, God of hosts, for mee. O Lord, the God of Israel, let none, who search do make And seek thee, be at any time confounded for my sake.
For I have born reproach for thee, my face is hid with shame. To brethren strange, to mothers sons an alien I became. Because the zeal did eat me up which to thy House I bare; And the reproaches cast at thee, upon me fallen are. My tears and fasts t'afflict my soul were turned to my shame. When sackcloth I did wear, to them a proverb I became. The men, that in the gate do sit, against me evill spake; They also, that vile drunkards were, of me their song did make. But in an acceptable time my pray'r, Lord, is to thee: In truth of thy salvation, Lord, and mercy great, hear me. Deliver me out of the mire, from sinking do me keep; Free me from those that do me hate, and from the waters deep. Let not the floud on me prevail, whose water overflows; Nor deep me swallow, nor the pit her mouth upon me close. Hear me, O Lord, because thy love and kindnesse is most good; Turn unto me, according to
thy mercies multitude. Nor from thy servant hide thy face, I'm troubled, soon attend. Draw neer my soul, and it redeem, me from my foes defend. To thee is my reproach well known, my shame, and my disgrace: Those that mine adversaries be, are all before thy face. Reproach hath broke my heart, I'm full of grief; I look'd for one To pity me, but none I found; comforters found I none. They also bitter gall did give unto me for my meat: They gave me vineger to drink, when as my thirst was great. Before them let their table prove a snare; and do thou make Their welfare and prosperitie a trap, themselves to take. Let thou their eyes so darkned be, that sight may them forsake; And let their loins be made by thee continually to shake. Thy fury pour thou out on them, and indignation; And let thy wrathfull anger, Lord, fast hold take them upon. All waste and desolate let be their habitation,
And in their tabernacles all inhabitants be none. Because him they do persecute, whom thou didst smite before; They talk unto the grief of those whom thou hast wounded sore. Adde thou iniquity unto their former wickednesse: And do not let them come at all into thy righteousnesse. Out of the book of life let them be raz'd, and blotted quite; Among the just and righteous let not their names be writ. But now, become exceeding poor, and sorrowfull am I: By thy salvation, O my God, let me be set on hie. The Name of God, I, with a song, most cheerfully will praise; And I, in giving thanks to him, his Name shall highly raise. This to the Lord a sacrifice more gracious shall prove, Then bullock, ox, or any beast that hath both horn and hoof. When this the humble men shall see, it joy to them shall give: O all ye, that do seek the Lord, your heart shall ever live. For, God the poor hears, and will not
his prisoners contemn. Let heav'n, and earth, and seas him praise, and all that move in them. For God will Judah's cities build, and He will Sion save; That they may dwell therein, and it in sure possession have. And they that are his servants seed, inherit shall the same; So shall they have their dwelling there, that love his blessed Name. PSAL. LXX. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance. LOrd, haste me to deliver, with speed, Lord, succour me. Let them, that for my soul do seek, sham'd and confounded be: Turn'd back be they and sham'd, that in my hurt delight. Turn'd back be they, Ha ha that say, their shaming to requite. In thee let all be glad, and joy that seek for thee: Let them, who thy salvation love, say still, God praised be. I poor and needy am, come, Lord, and make no stay: My help thou and deliverer art, O Lord, make no delay.
Another of the same. MAke haste, O God, me to preserve, with speed, Lord, succour me. Let them that for my soul do seek sham'd and confounded be: Let them be turned back and sham'd, that in my hurt delight. Turn'd back be they, Ha ha that say, their shaming to requite. O Lord, in thee let all be glad, and joy that seek for thee: Let them, who thy salvation love, say still, God praised be. But I both poor and needy am: come, Lord, and make no stay: My help thou and deliverer art, O Lord, make no delay. PSAL. LXXI. O Lord, my hope and confidence is plac'd in thee alone: Then let thy servant never be put to confusion. And let me, in thy righteousnesse, from thee deliv'rance have; Cause me escape, incline thine ear unto me, and me save. Be thou my dwelling rock, to which I ever may resort: Thou gav'st commandment me to save, for thou'rt my rock and fort.
Free me, my God, from wicked hands, hands cruell and unjust. For thou, O Lord God, art my hope, and, from my youth, my trust. Thou from the womb didst hold me up: thou art the same that me Out of my mothers bowels took, I ever will praise thee. To many I a wonder am; but thou'rt my refuge strong. Fill'd let my mouth be with thy praise, and honour, all day long. O do not cast me off, when as old age doth overtake me; And, when my strength decayed is, then do not Thou forsake me. For those that are mine enemies, against me speak with hate: And, they together counsell take that for my soul lay wait. They said, God leaves him; him pursue and take; none will him save. Be Thou not far from me, my God: thy speedy help I crave. Confound, consume them, that unto my soul are enemies: Cloath'd be they with reproach and shame, that do my hurt devise. But I with expectation will hope continually; And yet with praises more and more
I will thee magnify. Thy justice and salvation my mouth abroad shall show, Ev'n all the day; for I thereof the numbers do not know. And I will constantly go on in strength of God, the Lord: And thine own righteousnesse, ev'n thine alone, I will record. For, even from my youth, O God, by Thee I have been taught; And hitherto I have declar'd the wonders Thou hast wrought. And now, Lord, leave me not, when I old and gray-headed grow; Till to this age thy strength and pow'r, to all to come I show. And thy most perfect righteousnesse, O Lord, is very high, Who hast so great things done: O God, who is like unto Thee? Thou Lord, who great adversities, and sore to me didst show, Shalt quicken, and bring me again from depths of earth below. My greatnesse, and my pow'r thou wilt increase and far extend: On every side, against all grief, thou wilt me comfort send. Thee, ev'n thy truth I'le also praise, my God, with psalterie:
Thou holy One of Israel, with harp I'le sing to Thee. My lips shall much rejoyce in Thee, when I thy praises sound: My soul, which Thou redeemed hast, in joy shall much abound. My tongue thy justice shall proclaim, continuing all day long; For they confounded are, and sham'd, that seek to do me wrong. PSAL. LXXII. A Psalm for Solomon. O Lord, thy judgements give the King, his son thy righteousnesse. With right he shall thy people judge, thy poor with uprightnesse. The lofty mountains shall bring forth unto the people peace; Likewise the little hills the same shall do by righteousnesse. The peoples poor ones he shall judge, the needies children save: And those shall he in pieces break who them oppressed have. They shall thee fear, while sun and moon do last, through ages all. Like rain on mown grasse he shall drop, or showres on earth that fall. The just shall flourish in his dayes, and prosper in his reign:
He shall, while doth the moon endure, abundant peace maintain His large and great dominion shall from sea to sea extend, It from the river shall reach forth unto earths utmost end. They, in the wildernesse that dwell, bow down before him must: And they, that are his enemies, shall lick the very dust. The Kings of Tarshish, and the Isles to him shall presents bring; And unto him shall offer gifts Sheba's and Seba's King. Yea, all the mighty Kings on earth before him down shall fall: And all the nations of the world do service to him shall. For He the needy shall preserve, when he to Him doth call; The poor also, and him that hath no help of man at all. The poor man and the indigent in mercy He shall spare: He shall preserve alive the souls of those that needy are. Both from deceit and violence, their soul He shall set free; And in His sight right precious and dear their bloud shall be. Yea, He shall live, and giv'n to Him
shall be of Sheba's gold; For Him still shall they pray, and He shall daily be extoll'd. Of corn an handfull in the earth on tops of mountains high, With prosperous fruit shall shake, like trees on Lebanon that be. The city shall be flourishing, her citizens abound In number shall, like to the grasse that growes upon the ground, His Name for ever shall endure, last like the sun it shall: Men shall be blest in Him, and blest all nations shall Him call. Now blessed be the Lord, our God, the God of Israel, For He alone doth wondrous works, in glory that excell. And blessed be His glorious Name to all eternitie; The whole earth let His glory fill: Amen, so let it be. The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended. PSAL. LXXIII. A Psalm of Asaph. YEt God is good to Israel, to each pure hearted one. But as for me, my steps neer slipt, my feet were almost gone.
For I envious was, and grudg'd the foolish folk to see, When I perceiv'd the wicked sort enjoy prosperitie. For still their strength continueth firm, their death of bands is free: They are not toil'd as other men, nor plagu'd as others be: Therefore, their pride, like to a chain, them compasseth about; And, as a garment, violence doth cover them throughout. Their eyes stand out with fat, they have more then their hearts could wish. They are corrupt, their talk of wrong both lewd and loftie is. They set their mouth against the heav'ns, in their blasphemous talk; And their reproaching tongue throughout the earth at large doth walk. His people oftentimes for this look back, and turn about, Sith waters of so full a cup to these are poured out. And thus they say, How can it be that God these things doth know? Or, can there in the Highest be knowledge of things below? Behold, these are the wicked ones, yet prosper at their will In worldly things, they do increase
in wealth and riches still. I verily have done in vain my heart to purifie: To no effect in innocence washed my hands have I. For dayly, and all day throughout great plagues I suffered have; Yea, every morning I of new did chastisement receive. If in this manner foolishly to speak I would intend, Thy childrens generation behold I should offend. When I this thought to know, it was too hard a thing for me, Till to Gods Sanctuary I went, then I their end did see. Assuredly thou didst them set a slippery place upon: Them suddenly thou castedst down into destruction. How in a moment, suddenly to ruine brought are they! With fearfull terrours utterly they are consum'd away. Ev'n like unto a dream, when one from sleeping doth arise; So thou, O Lord, when thou awak'st, their image shalt despise. Thus grieved was my heart in me, and me my reins opprest.
So rude was I, and ignorant, and in thy sight a beast. Neverthelesse continually, O Lord, I am with thee: Thou do'st me hold by my right hand, and still upholdest me. Thou, with thy counsel, while I live, wilt me conduct and guide; And to thy glory afterward receive me, to abide. Whom have I in the heavens high, but thee, O Lord, alone? And in the earth, whom I desire beside thee, there is none. My flesh and heart doth faint and fail, but God doth fail me never; For of my heart God is the strength, and portion for ever. For lo, those that are far from thee, they quickly perish shall: Them, that a-whoring from thee go, thou hast destroyed all. But surely it is good for me, that I draw near to God: In God I trust, that all thy works I may declare abroad. PSAL. LXXIV. Maschil of Asaph. O God, why hast thou cast us off? is it for evermore?
Against thy pasture sheep why doth thine anger smoke so sore? O call to thy rememberance thy congregation, Which thou hast purchased of old; still think the same upon. The rod of thine inheritance, which thou redeemed hast, This Sion hill, wherein thou hadst, thy dwelling in times past. To these long desolations thy feet lift, do not tarry; For all the ills thy foes have done within thy Sanctuary. Amidst thy congregations thine enemies do roar: Their ensigns they set up, for signs of triumph, thee before. A man was famous, and was had in estimation, According as he lifted up his axe thick trees upon. But all at once with axes now and hammers they go to, And down the carved work thereof they break, and quite undo. They fired have thy Sanctuary, and have defil'd the same, By casting down unto the ground the place where dwelt thy Name. Thus said they in their hearts, Let us
destroy them out of hand: They burnt up all the Synagogues of God, within the land. Our signs we do not now behold; there is not us among A prophet more, nor any one that knows the time how long. How long, Lord, shall the enemy thus in reproach exclaime? And shall the adversary thus alwayes blaspheme thy Name? Thy hand, ev'n thy right hand of might, why dost thou thus draw back? O from thy bosome pluck it out for our deliverance sake. For certainly God is my King, ev'n from the times of old, Working in midst of all the earth salvation manifold. The sea, by thy great pow'r to part asunder, thou didst make; And thou the dragons heads, O Lord, within the waters brake. The Leviathans heads thou brake in pieces, and didst give Him to be meat unto the folk in wildernesse that live. Thou clave the fountain and the floud, which did with streams abound: Thou dry'dst the mighty waters up unto the very ground.
Thine onely is the day, O Lord, thine also is the night; And thou alone prepared hast the sun and shining light. By thee the borders of the earth were setled every where: The summer and the winter both by thee created were. That th'enemy reproached hath, O keep it in record; And that the foolish people have blasphem'd thy Name, O Lord. Unto the multitude do not thy turtles soul deliver; The congregation of thy poor do not forget for ever. Unto thy covenant have respect: for earths dark places be Full of the habitations of horrid crueltie. O let not those that be opprest return again with shame: Let those that poor and needy are give praise unto thy Name. Do thou, O God, arise and plead the cause, that is thine own: Remember how thou art reproacht still by the foolish one. Do not forget the voice of those that are thine enemies: Of those the tumult ever grows that do against thee rise.
PSAL. LXXXV. To the chief musician Al-taschith, A psalm or song of Asaph. TO thee, O God, do we give thanks, we do give thanks to thee: Because thy wondrous works declare thy great Name near to be. I purpose, when I shall receive the congregation, That I shall judgement uprightly render to every one. Dissolved is the land, with all that in the same do dwell; But I the pillars thereof do bear up and stablish well. I, to the foolish people said, Do not deal foolishly; And unto those that wicked are, Lift not your horn on hie. Lift not your horn on high, nor speak with stubborn neck: but know, That nor from East, nor West, nor South promotion doth flow. But God is Judge: He puts down one, and sets another up. For in the hand of God most high of red wine is a cup; It's full of mixture; he pours forth, and makes the wicked all Wring out the bitter dregs thereof,
yea, and they drink them shall. But I, for ever will declare, I Jacobs God will praise. All horns of lewd men I'le cut off; but just mens horns will raise. PSAL. LXXVI. To the chief musician on Neginoth, A Psalm or song of Asaph. IN Judah's land God is well known, his Name's in Israel great: In Salem is his Tabernacle, in Sion is his Seat. There arrows of the bow he brake, the shield, the sword, the war. More glorious thou then hils of prey, more excellent art far. Those that were stout of heart are spoil'd, they slept their sleep outright; And none of those their hands did finde that were the men of might. When thy rebuke, O Jacobs God, had forth against them past, Their horses and their chariots both were in a dead sleep cast. Thou, Lord, ev'n thou art He that should be fear'd, and who is he That may stand up before thy sight, if once thou angry be? From heav'n thou judgement caus'd be heard; the earth was still with fear,
When God to judgement rose, to save all meek on earth that were. Surely the very wrath of man unto thy praise redounds: Thou to the remnant of his wrath wilt set restraining bounds. Vow to the Lord, your God, and pay; all ye that near Him be Bring gifts and presents unto Him, for to be fear'd is He. By Him the spirits shall be cut off of those that princes are: Unto the Kings that are on earth He fearfull doth appear. PSAL. LXXVII. To the chief musician, to Jeduthun, A Psalm of Asaph. UNto the Lord I with my voice, I unto God did cry Ev'n with my voice, and unto me his ear he did apply. I in my trouble sought the Lord; my sore by night did run, And ceased not: my grieved soul did consolation shun. I to remembrance God did call, yet trouble did remain; And overwhelm'd my spirit was whiles I did sore complain. Mine eyes debar'd from rest and sleep,
thou makest still to wake: My trouble is so great, that I unable am to speak. The dayes of old to minde I call'd, and oft did think upon The times and ages, that are past full many years agone. By night my song I call to minde, and commune with my heart, My sp'rit did carefully inquire how I might ease my smart. For ever will the Lord cast off? and gracious be no more? For ever is his mercy gone? fails his word evermore? Is't true that to be gracious the Lord forgotten hath? And that his tender mercies He hath shut up in his wrath? Then did I say, that surely this is mine infirmitie: I'le minde the years of the right hand of Him that is most hie. Yea, I remember will the works performed by the Lord; The wonders done of old by thee I surely will record. I also will of all thy works my meditation make, And of thy doings to discourse great pleasure I will take.
O God, thy way most holy is within thy Sanctuary: And what God is so great in pow'r, as is our God most hie? Thou art the God that wonders do'st by thy right hand most strong; Thy mighty pow'r thou hast declar'd the nations among. To thine own people with thine arm thou didst redemption bring; To Jacobs sons, and to the Tribes of Joseph that do spring. The waters, Lord, perceived thee, the waters saw thee well; And they for fear aside did flie; the depths on trembling fell. The clouds in water forth were pour'd, sound loudly did the sky; And swiftly through the world abroad thine arrows fierce did fly. Thy thunders voice alongst the heav'n a mighty noise did make: By lightnings lightned was the world, th'earth tremble did and shake. Thy way is in the sea, and in the waters great thy path; Yet are thy footsteps hid, O Lord, none knowledge thereof hath. Thy people thou didst safely lead like to a flock of sheep, By Moses hand and Aarons Thou didst them conduct and keep.
PSAL. LXXVIII. Maschil of Asaph. A Trend, my people, to my Law, thereto give thou an ear: The words that from my mouth proceed attentively do hear. My mouth shall speak a parable, and sayings dark of old: The same which we have heard, and known, and us our fathers told. We also will them not conceal from their posteritie: Them to the generation to come declare will we: The praises of the Lord our God, and His Almighty strength, The wondrous works that He hath done we will shew forth at length. His testimony and His law in Israel He did place, And charg'd, our fathers, it to show to their succeeding race. That so the race, which was to come, might well them learn and know; And sons unborn, who should arise, might to their sons them show: That they might set their hope in God, and suffer not to fall His mighty works out of their minde, but keep His precepts all.
And might not, like their fathers, be a stiff rebellious race, A race not right in heart; with God whose sp'rit not stedfast was. The sons of Ephraim, who nor bows nor other arms did lack, When as the day of battell was they faintly turned back. They brake Gods cov'nant, and refus'd in His commands to go. His works and wonders they forgot, which He to them did show. Things marvellous He brought to passe, their fathers them beheld, Within the land of Aegypt done, yea ev'n in Zoans field. By Him divided was the sea, He caus'd them through to passe; And He the water made to stand, that like an heap it was. With cloud by day, with light of fire all night he did them guide. In desert rocks He clave and drink as from great depths supply'd. He from the rock brought streams, like flouds made waters to run down. Yet sinning more, in desert they provok'd the Highest One. For, in their heart they tempted God: and speaking with mistrust, They greedily did meat require
to satisfie their lust. Against the Lord himself they spake, and murmuring said thus, A table in the wildernesse can God prepare for us? Behold, He smote the rock, and thence came streams and waters great; But can He give His people bread? and send them flesh to eat? The Lord did hear, and waxed wroth, so kindled was a flame 'Gainst Jacob; and 'gainst Israel up indignation came: For they believ'd not God, nor trust in His salvation had: Though flouds above He did command, and heav'ns doors open made; And Manna rain'd on them, and gave them corn of heav'n to eat. Man Angels food did eat, to them He to the full sent meat. And in the heaven He did cause an Eastern winde to blow; And by his power He let out the Southern winde to go. Then flesh, as thick as dust, He made to rain down them among; And feathered fowls, like as the sand which ly'th the shore along. At his command amidst their camp these showres of flesh down fell,
All round about the tabernacles and tents where they did dwell. So did they eat abundantly, and had of meat their fill; For He did give to them what was their own desire and will. They from their lust had not estrang'd their heart and their desire; But while the meat was in their mouth, which they did so require, Gods wrath upon them came, and slew the fattest of them all; So that the choise of Israel, o'rethrown by death, did fall. Yet notwithstanding of all this, they sinned still the more; And, though He had great wonders wrought, believ'd Him not therefore. Wherefore their dayes in vanity He did consume and wast, And by His wrath their wretched years away in trouble past. But when He slew them, then they did to seek Him shew desire: Yea, they return'd, and after God right early did inquire. And that the Lord had been their Rock they did remember then: Ev'n that the high Almighty God had their Redeemer been. Yet with their mouth they flatter'd Him,
and spake but fainedly, And they unto the God of truth with their false tongues did ly. For, though their words were good, their heart with Him was not sincere: Unstedfast and perfidious they in his covenant were. But full of pity, He forgave their sin, them did not slay; Nor stirr'd up all His wrath, but oft his anger turn'd away. For that they were but fading flesh to minde He did recall; A winde that passeth soon away, and not returns at all. How often did they Him provoke within the wildernesse? And in the desert did Him grieve with their rebelliousnesse? Yea, turning back they tempted God, and limits set upon Him who in midst of Israel is the onely Holy One. They did not call to minde His pow'r; nor yet the day when He Delivered them out of the hand of their fierce enemie. Nor how great signes in Aegypt land He openly had wrought, What miracles in Zoans field His hand to passe had brought.
How lakes and rivers every where He turned into bloud; So that nor man, nor beast could drink of standing lake or floud. He brought among them swarms of flies, which did them sore annoy; And diverse kindes of filthy frogs He sent, them to destroy. He to the caterpiller gave the fruits of all their soil: Their labours He deliver'd up unto the locusts spoil. Their vines with hail, their sycomors He with the frost did blast. Their beasts to hail He gave, their flocks hot thunder-bolts did wast. Fierce burning wrath He on them cast, and indignation strong, And troubles sore, by sending forth ill angels them among. He to His wrath made way: their soul from death He did not save; But over to the pestilence the lifes of them He gave. In Aegypt Land the first-born all He smote down every where; Amongst the tents of Ham, ev'n these chief of their strength that were. But His own people like to sheep thence to go forth He made; And He amidst the wildernesse them, as a flock, did lead.
And He them safely on did lead, so that they did not fear: Whereas their enemies by the sea quite overwhelmed were. To borders of His Sanctuary the Lord his people led, Ev'n to the mount, which His right hand for them had purchased. The nations of Canaan by His Almighty hand Before their face He did expell out of their native land, Which for inheritance to them by line He did divide, And made the tribes of Israel within their tents abide. Yet God most high they did provoke, and tempted ever still, And to observe His testimonies did not incline their will. But like their fathers turned back, and dealt unfaithfully: Aside they turned, like a bow that shoots deceitfully. For, they to anger did provoke Him with their places hie; And with their graven images mov'd Him to jealousie. When God heard this, He waxed wroth, and much loath'd Israel then: So Shilohs tent He left, the tent which He had plac'd with men:
And He his strength delivered into captivity, He left his glory in the hand of his proud enemy. His people also He gave over unto the swords fierce rage: So sore His wrath inflamed was against his heritage. The fire consum'd their choyce young men: their maids no marriage had. And when their priests fell by the sword, their wives no mourning made. But then the Lord arose, as one that doth from sleep awake; And like a gyant, that by wine refresht, a shout doth make. Upon his enemies hinder parts He made his stroke to fall; And so upon them He did put a shame perpetuall. Moreover, He the tabernacle of Joseph did refuse; The mighty tribe of Ephraim He would in no wise chuse. But He did chuse Jehudahs tribe to be the rest above, And of mount Sion He made choise, which He so much did love. And He his Sanctuary built, like to a palace hie, Like to the earth, which He did found to perpetuitie.
Of David, that his servant was, He also choise did make; And even from the folds of sheep was pleased him to take. From waiting on the ews with young, He brought him for to feed Israel, His inheritance, His people Jacobs seed. So after the integrity of his heart He them fed; And by the good skill of His hands them wisely governed. PSAL. LXXIX. A Psalm of Asaph. O God, the heathen entred have Thine heritage, by them Defiled is Thy house; on heaps they laid Jerusalem. The bodies of thy servants they have cast forth to be meat To rav'nous fowls, thy dear saints flesh they give to beasts, to eat. Their bloud about Jerusalem like water have they shed; And there was none to bury them when they were slain and dead. Unto our neighbours a reproach most base become are we; A scorn and laughing stock to them that round about us be.
How long, Lord, shall thine anger last? wilt thou still keep the same? And shall thy fervent jealousie burn, like unto a flame? On heathens pour thy fury forth, that have thee never known, And on these kingdomes which thy Name have never call'd upon. For these are they which Jacob have devoured cruelly, And they his habitation have caused waste to ly. Against us minde not former sins: thy tender mercies show, Let them prevent us speedily, for we're brought very low. For thy Names glory help us, Lord, who hast our Saviour bin: Deliver us; for thy Names sake O purge away our sin. Why say the heathen, Where's their God? let Him to them be known, When these, who shed thy servants bloud, are in our sight o'rethrown. O let the prisoners sighs ascend before thy sight on hie: Preserve those in thy mighty pow'r, that are design'd to dy. And to our neighbours bosome cause it seven-fold rendred be, Ev'n the reproach, wherewith they have, O Lord, reproached thee.
So we thy folk, and pasture-sheep, shall give thee thanks alwayes, And unto generations all we will shew forth thy praise. PSAL. LXXX. To the chief musician upon Shoshannim Eduth, A Psalm of Asaph. HEar, Israels Shepherd, like a flock thou that dost Joseph guide; Shine forth, O thou that dost between the cherubims abide. In Ephraims and Benjamins, and in Manassehs sight, O come for our salvation, stir up thy strength and might. Turn us again, O Lord, our God, and upon us vouchsafe To make thy countenance to shine, and so we shall be safe. O Lord of hosts, Almighty God, how long shall kindled be Thy wrath against the prayer made by thine own folk to thee? Thou tears of sorrow gives to them, in stead of bread, to eat; Yea, tears in stead of drink thou gives to them in measure great. Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours round about: Our enemies among themselves at us do laugh and flout.
Turn us again, O God of hosts, and upon us vouchsafe To make thy countenance to shine, and so we shall be safe. A vine from Aegypt brought thou hast, by thine outstretched hand: And thou the heathen out didst cast, to plant it in their land. Before it thou a room didst make, where it might grow and stand; Thou causedst it deep root to take, and it did fill the land. The mountains vail'd were with its shade, as with a covering: Like goodly Cedars were the boughs, which out from it did spring. Upon the one hand, to the sea her boughs she did out send; On th'other side, unto the floud her branches did extend. Why hast thou then thus broken down and tane her hedge away? So that all passengers do pluck, and make of her a prey. The boar who from the forrest comes doth waste it at his pleasure: The wilde beast of the field also devoures it out of measure. O God of hosts, we thee beseech return now unto thine; Look down from heav'n in love, behold and visit this thy vine:
This vineyard which thine own right hand hath planted us among: And that same branch, which for thy self thou hast made to be strong. Burnt up it is with flaming fire, it also is cut down: They utterly are perished when as thy face doth frown. O let thy hand be still upon the man of thy right hand; The son of man, whom for thy self thou madest strong to stand. So henceforth we will not go back, nor turn from thee at all: O do thou quicken us, and we upon thy Name will call. Turn us again, Lord God of hosts, and upon us vouchsafe To make thy countenance to shine, and so we shall be safe. PSAL. LXXXI. To the chief musician upon Gittith A Psalm of Asaph. SIng loud to God, our strength; with joy to Jacobs God do sing. Take up a psalm, the pleasant harp, timbrell and psaltry bring. Blow trumpets at new moon, what day our feast appointed is; For charge to Israel, and a Law of Jacobs God was this.
To Joseph this a testimony He made, when Aegypt land He travell'd through, where speech I heard I did not understand. His shoulder I from burdens took, his hands from pots did free. Thou didst in trouble on me call, and I deliver'd thee: In secret place of thundering I did thee answer make; And at the streams of Meribah, of thee a proof did take, O thou, my people, give an ear, I'le testifie to thee; To thee, O Israel, if thou wilt but hearken unto me. In midst of thee there shall not be any strange god at all; Nor unto any god unknown, thou bowing down shalt fall. I am the Lord thy God, which did from Aegypt land thee guide: I'le fill thy mouth abundantly, do thou it open wide. But yet my people to my voice would not attentive be; And ev'n may chosen Israel he would have none of Me. So to the lust of their own hearts I them delivered: And then in counsels of their own they vainly wandered.
O that my people had me heard, Isra'l My wayes had chose! I had their enemies soon subdu'd, my hand turn'd on their foes. The haters of the Lord, to Him submission should have fain'd; But as for them, their time should have for evermore remain'd. He should have also fed them with the finest of the wheat: Of honey from the rock, thy fill I should have made thee eat. PSAL. LXXXII. A Psalm of Asaph. IN gods assembly GOD doth stand; He judgeth gods among. How long, accepting persons vile, will ye give judgement wrong? Defend the poor and fatherlesse, to poor opprest do right. The poor and needy ones set free, rid them from ill mens might. They know not, nor will understand, in darknesse they walk on: All the foundations of the earth out of their course are gone. I said that you are gods, and are sons of the Highest all; But ye shall die like men, and as one of the princes fall.
O God, do thou raise up thy self, the earth to judgement call: For thou, as thine inheritance, shalt take the nations all. PSAL. LXXXIII. A song or Psalm of Asaph. KEep not, O God, we thee intreat, O keep not silence now: Do thou not hold thy peace, O God, and still no more be thou. For lo, thine enemies a noise tumultuously have made; And they that haters are of thee, have lifted up the head. Against thy chosen people they do craftie counsell take; And they against thy hidden ones do consultations make. Come, let us cut them off, said they, from being a nation; That of the name of Israel may no more be mention. For with joynt heart they plot, in league against thee they combine. The tents of Edom, Ishmaelites, Moabs, and Hagars line. Gebal and Ammon, Amalek, Philistines, those of Tyre; And Assur joyn'd with them, to help Lots children they conspire.
Do to them as to Midian, Jabin at Kison-strand; And Sisera, which at Endor fell, as dung to fat the land. Like Oreb, and like Zeeb make their noble men to fall▪ Like Zeba, and Zalmunna-like, make thou their princes all: Who said, For our possession let us Gods houses take. My God, them like a wheel, as chaff before the winde, them make. As fire consumes a wood, as flame doth mountains set on fire; Chase and affright them with the storm and tempest of thine ire. Their faces fill with shame, O Lord, that they may seek thy Name. Let them confounded be, and vext, and perish in their shame. That men may know, that Thou, to whom alone doth appertain The Name JEHOVAH, dost most high o're all the earth remain. PSAL. LXXXIV. To the chief musician upon Gittith, A Psalm for the sons of Korah. HOw lovely is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts, to me! The Tabernacles of thy grace how pleasant, Lord, they be!
My thirstie soul longs vehemently, yea, faints thy Courts to see: My very heart and flesh cry out, O living God, for thee. Behold, the sparrow findeth out an house wherein to rest: The swallow also for her self hath purchased a nest: Ev'n thine own altars, where she safe her young ones forth may bring, O thou Almighty, Lord of hosts, who art my God, and King. Blest are they in thy House that dwell, they ever give thee praise. Blest is the man whose strength thou art, in whose heart are thy wayes. Who passing through Baca's dry vale, therein do dig up wells; Also the rain that falleth down the pools with water fills. So they from strength unwearied go still forward unto strength, Untill in Zion they appear before the Lord at length. Lord God of hosts, my prayer hear, O Jacobs God, give ear. See God, our shield, look on the face of thine anointed dear. For in thy Courts one day excells a thousand; rather in My Gods house will I keep a door,
then dwell in tents of sin. For, God the Lord's a sun and shield: Hee'll grace and glory give; And will withhold no good from them that uprightly do live. O thou that art the Lord of hosts, that man is truly blest, Who by assured confidence on thee alone doth rest. PSAL. LXXXV. To the chief musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah. O Lord, thou hast been favourable to thy beloved Land: Jacobs captivity thou hast recall'd with mighty hand. Thou pardoned thy people hast all their iniquities, Thou all their trespasses and sins hast covered from thine eyes. Thou tookst off all thine ire, and turn'dst from thy wraths furiousnesse. Turn us, God of our health, and cause thy wrath 'gainst us to cease. Shall thy displeasure thus endure against us without end? Wilt thou to generations all thine anger forth extend? That in thee may thy people joy, wilt thou not us revive? Shew us thy mercy, Lord, to us do thy salvation give.
I'le hear what God, the Lord; will speak: to his folk He'll speak peace, And to His saints; but let them not return to foolishnesse. To them that fear Him, surely near is His salvation; That glory in our land may have her habitation. Truth met with mercy, righteousnesse and peace kiss'd mutually. Truth springs from earth, and righteousnesse looks down from heaven hie. Yea, what is good the Lord shall give: our land shall yeeld increase. Justice, to set us in His steps, shall go before His face. PSAL. LXXXVI. A Prayer of David. O Lord, do thou bow down thine ear, and hear me graciously; Because I sore afflicted am, and am in poverty. Because I'm holy, let my soul by thee preserved be: O thou my God, thy servant save that puts his trust in thee. Sith unto thee I daily cry, be mercifull to me. Rejoyce thy servants soul: for, Lord, I lift my soul to thee.
For thou art gracious, O Lord, and ready to forgive, And rich in mercy, all that call upon thee, to relieve. Hear, Lord, my pray'r; unto the voice of my request attend. In troublous times I'le call on thee, for thou wilt answer send. Lord, there is none among the gods that may with thee compare; And like the works which thou hast done not any work is there. All nations, whom thou mad'st, shall come and worship reverently Before thy face; and they, O Lord, thy Name shall glorify. Because thou art exceeding great, and works by thee are done, Which are to be admir'd; and thou art God thy self alone. Teach me thy way, and in thy truth, O Lord, then walk will I: Unite my heart, that I thy Name may fear continually. O Lord, my God, with all my heart to thee I will give praise; And I the glory will ascribe unto thy Name alwayes. Because thy mercy toward me in greatnesse doth excell; And thou deliver'd hast my soul
out from the lowest hell. O God, the proud against me rise, and violent men have met, That for my soul have sought; and thee before them have not set. But thou art full of pity, Lord, a God most gracious, Long-suffering, and in thy truth and mercy plenteous. O turn to me thy countenance, and mercy on me have: Thy servant strengthen, and the son of thine own hand-maid save. Shew me a signe for good, that they which do me hate, may see, And be asham'd; because thou, Lord, didst help and comfort me. PSAL. LXXXVII. A Psalm or song for the sons of Korah. UPon the hills of holinesse He his foundation sets. God, more then Jacobs dwellings all, delights in Zions gates. Things glorious are said of thee, thou City of the Lord. Rahab and Babel I, to those that know me, will record: Behold ev'n Tyrus, and with it the land of Palestine, And likewise AEthiopia;
this man was born therein. And it of Zion shall be said, This man, and that man there Was born; and He that is most high himself shall stablish her. When God the people writes, He'll count that this man born was there. There be that sing, and play; and all my well-springs in thee are. PSAL. LXXXVIII. A song or psalm for the sons of Korah, to the chief musician upon Mahalath Leannoth, Maschil of Heman the Ezrahite. LOrd God, my Saviour, day and night before thee cry'd have I. Before thee let my prayer come, give ear unto my cry. For troubles great do fill my soul: my life drawes nigh the grave. I'm counted with those that go down to pit, and no strength have. Ev'n free among the dead, like them that slain in grave do ly, Cut off from thy hand, whom no more thou hast in memory. Thou hast me laid in lowest pit, in deeps, and darksome caves. Thy wrath lies hard on me, thou hast me prest with all thy waves.
Thou hast put far from me my friends, thou mad'st them to abhor me; And I am so shut up, that I finde no evasion for me. By reason of affliction mine eye mourns dolefully: To thee, Lord, do I call, and stretch my hands continually. Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shall they rise and thee blesse? Shall in the grave thy love be told? in death thy faithfulnesse? Shall thy great wonders in the dark, or shall thy righteousnesse Be known to any in the land of deep forgetfulnesse? But, Lord, to thee I cry'd, my pray'r at morn prevent shall thee. Why, Lord, dost thou cast off my soul? and hid'st thy face from me? Distrest am I, and from my youth I ready am to dy; Thy terrours I have born, and am distracted fearfully. The dreadfull fiercenesse of thy wrath quite over me doth go: Thy terrours great have cut me off, they did pursue me so. For round about me every day like water, they did roul: And gathering together, they have compassed my soul.
My friend thou hast put far from me, and him that did me love; And those that mine acquaintance were to darknesse didst remove. PSAL. LXXXIX. Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite. GOds mercies I will ever sing, and with my mouth I shall Thy faithfulnesse make to be known to generations all. For mercy shall be built, said I, for ever to endure. Thy faithfulnesse ev'n in the heav'ns thou wilt establish sure. I with my chosen one have made a covenant graciously; And to My servant whom I lov'd, to David sworn have I: That I thy seed establish shall for ever to remain; And will to generations all thy Throne build and maintain. The praises of thy wonders, Lord, the heavens shall expresse; And in the congregation of saints, thy faithfulnesse. For who in heaven with the Lord may once himself compare? Who is like God among the sons of those that mighty are?
Great fear in meetings of the saints is due unto the Lord; And He, of all about Him, should with reverence be ador'd. O thou that art the Lord of hosts, what Lord in mightinesse Is like to thee? who compast round art with thy faithfulnesse. Ev'n in the raging of the sea thou over it dost reign; And when the waves thereof do swell, thou stillest them again. Rahab in pieces thou didst break, like one that slaughtered is; And with thy mighty arm thou hast disperst thine enemies. The heav'ns are thine, thou for thine own the earth dost also take: The world, and fulnesse of the same, thy pow'r did found and make. The North and South from thee alone their first beginning had: Both Tabor mount, and Hermon hill shall in thy Name be glad. Thou hast an arm that's full of pow'r, thy Hand is great in might; And thy right hand exceedingly exalted is in height. Justice and judgement of thy Throne are made the dwelling place: Mercy, accompani'd with truth, shall go before thy face.
O greatly blest the people are, the joyfull sound that know: In brightnesse of thy face, O Lord, they ever on shall go. They in thy Name shall all the day rejoyce exceedingly, And in thy righteousnesse shall they exalted be on hy. Because the glory of their strength doth only stand in thee, And in thy favour shall our horn and pow'r exalted be. For God is our defence, and He to us doth safety bring: The Holy One of Israel is our Almighty King. In vision to thy holy-one thou saidst, I help upon A strong one laid; out of the folk I rais'd a chosen one. Ev'n David, I have found him out a servant unto Me; And with my holy oyl My King anointed him to be. With whom My hand shall stablisht be, Mine arm shall make him strong. On him the foe shall not exact, nor son of mischief wrong. I will beat down before his face all his malicious foes: I will them greatly plague, who do with hatred him oppose.
My mercy, and my faithfulnesse with him yet still shall be; And in My Name his horn and pow'r, men shall exalted see. His hand and pow'r shal reach afar, I'le set it in the sea; And his right hand established shall in the rivers be. Thou art my father, he shall ery, thou art my God alone; And he shall say, Thou art the rock of my salvation. I'le make him My first-born, more high then Kings of any land: My love I'le ever keep for him. My cov'nant fast shall stand. His seed I by My pow'r will make for ever to endure; And, as the dayes of heav'n, his throne shall stable be and sure. But if his children shall forsake My Lawes, and go astray, And in My judgements shal not walk, but wander from My way. If they My Lawes break, and do not keep My Commandements, I'le visit then their faults with rods, their sins with chastisements. Yet I'le not take My love from him, nor false My promise make; My cov'nant I'le not break, nor change what with my mouth I spake.
Once by My Holinesse I sware, to David I'le not ly. His seed and throne shall as the sun before Me last for ay. It like the moon shall ever be establisht stedfastly; And like to that which in the heav'n doth witnesse faithfully. But thou displeased, hast cast off, thou didst abhor and loath; With him that thine anointed is thou hast been very wroth. Thou hast thy servants covenan made void and quite cast by; Thou hast profan'd his crown, while it cast on the ground doth ly. Thou all his hedges hast broke down, his strong holds down hast torn. He to all passers by a spoil, to neighbours is a scorn. Thou hast set up his foes right hand, mad'st all his enemies glad; Turn'd his swords edge, and him to stand in battell hast not made. His glory thou hast made to cease, his throne to ground down cast; Shortned his dayes of youth, and him with shame thou covered hast. How long, Lord? wilt thou hide thy self for ever in thine ire? And shall thine indignation burn like unto a fire?
Remember, Lord, how short a time I shall on earth remain; O wherefore is it so, that thou hast made all men in vain? What man is he that liveth here, and death shall never see? Or from the power of the grave what man his soul shall free? Thy former loving kindnesses, O Lord; where be they now? Those which in truth and faithfulnesse to David sworn hast thou. Minde, Lord, thy servants sad reproach: how I in bosome bear The scornings of the people all who strong and mighty are. Wherewith thy raging enemies reproach'd, O Lord, think on, Wherewith they have reproach'd the steps of thine anointed one. All blessing to the Lord, our God, let be ascribed then: For evermore so let it be. Amen, yea and amen. PSAL. XC. A prayer of Moses, the man of God. LOrd, thou hast been our dwelling place in generations all. Before thou ever hadst, brought forth the mountains great or small.
Ere ever thou hadst form'd the earth, and all the world abroad, Ev'n thou, from everlasting art to everlasting, God. Thou dost unto destruction man that is mortall turn: And unto them thou say'st, again ye sons of men return. Because a thousand years appear no more before thy sight Then yesterday, when it is past, or then a watch by night. As with an overflowing floud thou carriest them away: They like a sleep are, like the grasse that grows at morn are they. At morn it flourishes and growes, cut down at ev'n doth fade: For by thine anger we consume, thy wrath makes us afraid. Our sins thou and iniquities dost in thy presence place, And setst our secret faults before the brightnesse of thy face. For in thine anger all our dayes do passe on, to an end; And, as a tale that hath been told, so we our years do spend. Threescore and ten years do summe up our dayes and years we see: Or if by reason of more strength,
in some fourscore they be; Yet doth the strength of such old men but grief and labour prove; For it is soon cut off, and we fly hence, and soon remove. Who knowes the power of thy wrath? according to thy fear So is thy wrath. Lord teach thou us our end in minde to bear: And so to count our dayes, that we our hearts may still apply To learn thy wisdom and thy truth, that we may live thereby. Turn yet again to us, O Lord; how long thus shall it be? Let it repent thee now, for those that servants are to thee. O with thy tender mercies, Lord, us early satisfie; So we rejoyce shall all our dayes, and still be glad in thee. According as the dayes have been wherein we grief have had, And years wherein we ill have seen, so do thou make us glad. O let thy work and pow'r appear thy servants face before; And show unto their children dear thy glory evermore. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be us upon:
Our handie-works establish thou, establish them each one. PSAL. XCI. HE that doth in the secret place of the most High reside, Under the shade of Him, that is th'Almighty, shall abide. I of the Lord, my God, will say, He is my refuge still, He is my fortresse, and my God, and in Him trust I will. Assuredly He shall thee save, and give deliverance From subtile fowlers snare, and from the noysome pestilence. His feathers shall thee hide; thy trust under His wings shall be: His faithfulnesse shall be a shield and buckler unto thee. Thou shalt not need to be afraid for terrours of the night, Nor for the arrow that doth fly by day, while it is light: Nor for the pestilence, that walks in darknesse secretly, Nor for destruction, that doth waste at noon-day, openly. A thousand at thy side shall fall, on thy right hand shall ly Ten thousand dead, yet unto thee
it shall not once come nigh. Only thou with thine eyes shalt look, and a beholder be; And thou therein the just reward of wicked men shalt see. Because the Lord, who constantly my refuge is alone, Ev'n the most High is made by thee thy habitation. No plague shall near thy dwelling come, no ill shall thee befall: For thee to keep in all thy wayes His Angels charge He shall. They in their hands shall bear thee up, still waiting thee upon; Lest thou at any time should dash thy foot against a stone. Upon the adder thou shalt tread, and on the Lyon strong; Thy feet on Dragons trample shall, and on the Lions young. Because on Me he set his love, I'le save and set him free: Because My great Name he hath known, I will him set on high. He'll call on Me, I'le answer him, I will be with him still In trouble to deliver him, and honour him I will. With length of dayes unto his minde I will him satisfie;
I also My salvation will cause his eyes to see. PSAL. XCII. A psalm or song for the Sabbath-day. TO render thanks unto the Lord it is a comely thing, And to thy Name, O thou most high, due praise aloud to sing. Thy loving kindnesse to show forth, when shines the morning light; And to declare thy faithfulnesse, with pleasure, every night, On a ten stringed instrument, upon the psalterie: And on the harp, with solemn sound, and grave-sweet melodie. For thou, Lord, by thy mighty work, hast made my heart right glad; And I will triumph in the works which by thine hands were made. How great, Lord, are thy works! each thought of thine a deep it is; A brutish man it knoweth not, fools understand not this. When those that lewd and wicked are, spring quickly up like grasse, And workers of iniquity do flourish all apace, It is that they for ever may destroyed be and slain:
But thou, O Lord, art the most High, for ever to remain. For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, thine enemies perish shall: The workers of iniquity shall be dispersed all. But thou shalt, like unto the horn of th'unicorn exalt My horn on high; thou with fresh oyl anoint me also shalt. Mine eye shall also my desire see on mine enemies; Mine ears shall of the wicked hear, that do against me rise. But like the palm-tree, flourishing shall be the righteous one: He shall like to the Cedar grow that is in Lebanon. Those that within the house of God are planted by His grace, They shall grow up, and flourish all in our Gods holy place. And in old age, when others fade, they fruit still forth shall bring: They shall be fat, and full of sap, and ay be flourishing. To shew that upright is the Lord, He is a rock to me: And He from all unrighteousnesse is altogether free.
PSAL. XCIII. THe Lord doth reign, and cloath'd is He with majesty most bright: His works do shew him cloath'd to be, and girt about with might. The world is also stablished, that it can not depart. Thy Throne is fixt of old, and thou from everlasting art. The flouds, O Lord, have lifted up, they lifted up their voice; The flouds have lifted up their waves, and made a mighty noise. But yet the Lord, that is on high, is more of might by far, Then noise of many waters is, or great sea billows are. Thy testimonies, every one, in faithfulnesse excell: And holinesse for ever, Lord, thine House becometh well. PSAL. XCIV. O Lord God, unto whom alone all vengeance doth belong, O mighty God, who vengeance own'st, shine forth, avenging wrong. Lift up thy self, thou of the earth the Soveraign Judge that art, And unto those that are so proud a due reward impart.
How long, O mighty God, shall they who lewd and wicked be, How long shall they who wicked are, thus triumph haughtilie? How long shall things most hard by them be uttered and told, And all that work iniquity to boast themselves be bold? Thy folk they break in pieces, Lord, thine heritage oppresse: The widow they, and stranger slay, and kill the fatherlesse. Yet say they, God it shall not see, nor God of Jacob know. Ye brutish people understand, fools, when wise will ye grow? The Lord did plant the ear of man, and hear then shall not He? He only form'd the eye, and then shall he not clearly see? He that the nations doth correct, shall He not chastise you? He knowledge unto man doth teach, and shall Himself not know? Mans thoughts to be but vanity, the Lord doth well discern, Blest is the man thou chastnest, Lord, and mak'st thy Law to learn. That thou may'st give him rest from dayes of sad adversitie, Untill the pit be dig'd for those that work iniquitie.
For sure the Lord will not cast off those that His people be, Neither His own inheritance quite and forsake will He. But judgement unto righteousnesse shall yet return again, And all shall follow after it that are right hearted men. Who will rise up for me, against those that do wickedly? Who will stand up for me, 'gainst those that work iniquity? Unlesse the Lord had been my help, when I was sore opprest, Almost my soul had in the house of silence been at rest. When I had uttered this word, My foot doth slip away, Thy mercy held me up, O Lord, thy goodnesse did me stay, Amidst the multitude of thoughts, which in my heart do fight, My soul, left it be overcharg'd, thy comforts do delight. Shall of iniquity the throne have fellowship with thee, Which mischief, cunningly contriv'd, doth by a law decree? Against the righteous souls they joyn, they guiltlesse bloud condemn: But of my refuge God's the rock, and my defence from them.
On them their own iniquity the Lord shall bring and lay, And cut them off in their own sin, our Lord God shall them slay. PSAL. XCV. O Come, let us sing to the Lord, come, let us, every one, A joyfull noise make to the Rock of our salvation. Let us before His presence come, with praise and thankful voice: Let us sing Psalms to Him with grace, and make a joyfull noise. For God a great God, and great King, above all gods, He is. Depths of the earth are in His hand, the strength of hills is His. To Him the spacious sea belongs, for He the same did make: The dry land also from His hands its form at first did take. O come, and let us worship Him, let us bow down withall, And on our knees before the Lord, our maker, let us fall. For He's our God, the people we of His own pasture are, And of His hand the sheep; to day if ye His voice will hear, Then harden not your hearts, as in the provocation,
As in the desert, on the day of the tentation. When Me your fathers tempt'd, and prov'd, and did My working see: Ev'n for the space of fourty years this race hath grieved Me: I said, This people erres in heart, My wayes they do not know: To whom I sware in wrath, that to My rest they should not go. PSAL. XCVI. O sing a new song to the Lord, sing, all the earth, to God: To God sing, blesse His Name, shew still His saving health abroad. Among the heathen nations His glory do declare: And unto all the people show His works that wondrous are. For great's the Lord, and greatly He is to be magnifi'd; Yea, worthy to he fear'd is He above all gods beside: For all the gods are idols dumb which blinded nations fear: But our God is the Lord, by whom the heav'ns created were. Great honour is before His face, and majesty divine: Strength is with in His holy place,
and there doth beauty shine. Do you, ascribe unto the Lord, of people every tribe, Glory do you unto the Lord, and mighty pow'r ascribe. Give ye the glory to the Lord that to His Name is due: Come ye into His Courts, and bring an offering with you, In beauty of His holinesse O do the Lord adore: Likewise let all the earth throughout tremble His face before. Among the heathen say, God reigns: the world shall stedfastly Be fixt from moving, He shall judge the people righteously. Let heav'ns be glad befor the Lord, and let the earth rejoyce, Let seas, and all that is therein, cry out, and make a noyse: Let fields rejoyce, and every thing that springeth of the earth: Then woods, and every tree shall sing with gladnesse and with mirth Before the Lord; because He comes, to judge the earth comes He: He'll judge the world with righteousnes, the people faithfullie.
PSAL. XCVII. GOD reigneth, let the earth be glad, and isles rejoyce each one. Dark clouds Him compasse, and in right with judgement dwells His Throne. Fire goes before Him, and His foes it burns up round about. His lightnings lighten did the world, earth saw, and shook throughout. Hills, at the presence of the Lord, like wax, did melt away: Ev'n at the presence of the Lord of all the earth, I say. The heav'ns declare His righteousnesse, all men His glory see. All who serve graven images confounded let them be: Who do of idols boast themselves let shame upon them fall. Ye that are called gods, see that ye do Him worship all. Sion did hear, and joyfull was, glad Judahs daughters were, They much rejoyc'd, O Lord, because Thy judgements did appear. For thou O Lord, art high above all things on earth that are: Above all other gods thou art exalted very far. Hate ill, all ye that love the Lord:
His saints souls keepeth He, And from the hands of wicked men He sets them safe and free. For all those that be righteous sown is a joyfull light, And gladnesse sown is for all those that are in heart upright. Ye righteous in the Lord rejoyce, expresse your thankfulnesse, When ye into your memory do call His holinesse. PSAL. XCVIII. A Psalm. O sing a new song to the Lord, for wonders He hath done: His right hand, and His holy arm Him victory hath won. The Lord God his salvation hath caused to be known: His justice in the heathens sight He openly hath shown. He mindful of His grace and truth to Israels house hath been: And the salvation of our God all ends of th'earth have seen. Let all the earth unto the Lord send forth a joyfull noyse: Lift up your voice aloud to Him, sing praises, and rejoyce. With harp, with harp, and voice of psalms,
unto JEHOVAH sing. With trumpets, cornets, gladly sound before the Lord, the King. Let seas, and all their fulnesse roar, the world, and dwellers there. Let flouds clap hands, and let the hills together joy declare Before the Lord; because he comes, to judge the earth comes He: He'll judge the world with righteousnesse, His folk with equitie. PSAL. XCIX. TH' Eternall Lord doth reign, as King, let all the people quake: He sits between the Cherubims, let th'earth be mov'd and shake. The Lord in Sion great, and high above all people is. Thy great and dreadfull Name (for it is Holy) let them blesse. The Kings strength also judgement loves: thou setlest equity, Just judgement thou dost execute in Jacob, righteously. The Lord our God exalt on hie, and reverently do ye Before His footstool worship Him: the Holy-One is He. Moses and Aaron 'mongst His priests, Samuel with them that call
Upon His Name; these call'd on God, and He them answer'd all. Within the pillar of the cloud He unto them did speak: The testimonies, He them taught, and lawes, they did not break. Thou answeredst them, O Lord, our God, thou wast a God that gave Pardon to them, though on their deeds thou wouldest vengeance have. Do ye exalt the Lord, our God, and at His holy hill Do ye Him worship; for the Lord our God is Holy still. PSAL. C. A Psalm of praise. ALL people that on earth do dwell, Sing to the Lord with chearfull voice. Him serve with mirth, His praise forth tell, Come ye before Him and rejoyce. Know, that the Lord is God indeed, Without our aid He did us make: We are his flock, he doth us feed, And for his sheep he doth us take. O enter then his gates with praise, Approach with joy his Courts unto: Praise, laud; and blesse his Name alwayes, For it is seemly so to do. For why? the Lord our God is good, His mercy is for ever sure: His truth at all times firmly stood, And shall from age to age endure.
Another of the same. O All ye lands, unto the Lord make ye a joyfull noyse. Serve God with gladnesse, him before come with a singing voice. Know ye the Lord, that he is God, not we, but He us made; We are his people, and the sheep within his pasture fed. Enter his gates and courts, with praise, to thank him go ye thither: To him expresse your thankfulnesse, and blesse his Name together. Because the Lord our God is good, his mercy faileth never; And to all generations his truth endureth ever. PSAL. CI. A Psalm of David. I Mercy will, and judgement sing, Lord, I will sing to thee. With wisdom, in a perfect way shall my behaviour be. O when in kindnesse unto me, wilt thou be pleas'd to come? I with a perfect heart will walk within my house, at home. I will endure no wicked thing before mine eyes to be:
I hate their work that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. A stubborn and a froward heart depart quite from me shall: A person giv'n to wickednesse I will not know at all. I'le cut him off, that slandereth his neighbour privily: The haughtie heart I will not bear, nor him that looketh hie. Upon the faithfull of the land mine eyes shall be, that they May dwell with me: he shall me serve that walks in perfect way. Who of deceit a worker is, in my house shall not dwell: And in my presence shall he not remain, that lies doth tell. Yea, all the wicked of the land early destroy will I: All from Gods city to cut off, that work iniquity. PSAL CII. A prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and poureth out his complaint before the Lord. O Lord, unto my pray'r give ear, my cry let come to thee; And in the day of my distresse hide not thy face from me: Give ear to me: what time I call, to answer me make haste.
For as an hearth my bones are burnt, my dayes, like smoke, do waste. My heart within me smitten is, and it is withered, Like very grasse, so that I do forget to eat my bread. By reason of my groaning voice, my bones cleave to my skin. Like pelican in wildernesse forsaken I have bin: I like an owl in desert am, that nightly there doth moan: I watch, and like a sparrow am on the house top alone. My bitter enemies all the day reproaches cast on me: And being mad at me, with rage against me sworn they be. For why, I ashes eaten have, like bread, in sorrows deep; My drink I also mingled have with tears that I did weep. Thy wrath and indignation did cause this grief and pain: For thou hast lift me up on high, and cast me down again. My dayes are like unto a shade, which doth declining passe: And I am dry'd and withered, ev'n like unto the grasse. But thou, Lord, everlasting art,
and thy remembrance shall Continually endure, and be to generations all. Thou shalt arise, and mercy have upon thy Zion yet: The time to favour her is come, the time that thou hast set. For in her rubbish, and her stones thy servants pleasure take, Yea, they the very dust thereof do favour, for her sake. So shall the heathen people fear the Lords most holy Name: And all the Kings on earth shal dread thy glory, and thy fame. When Zion by the mighty Lord built up again shall be, In Glory then, and Majesty to men appear shall He. The prayer of the destitute he surely will regard, Their prayer will he not despise, by him it shall be heard. For generations yet to come this shall be on record: So shall the people, that shall be created, praise the Lord. He from his Sanctuaries height hath downward cast his eye▪ And from his glorious Throne in heav'n, the Lord the earth did spy:
That of the mournfull prisoner the groanings he might hear, To set them free that unto death by men appointed are: That they in Zion may declare the Lords most holy Name, And publish in Jerusalem the praises of the same: When as the people gather shall in troups with one accord, When Kingdoms shall assembled be to serve the highest Lord. My wonted force and strength he hath abated in the way; And he my dayes hath shortened: Thus therefore did I say▪ My God, in mid-time of my dayes, take thou me not away: From age to age, eternally thy years endure and stay. The firm foundation of the earth of old time thou hast laid: The heavens also are the work which thine own hands have made. Thou shalt for evermore endure, but they shall perish all; Yea, every one of them wax old, like to a garment, shall: Thou as a vesture shalt them change, and they shall changed be. But Thou the same art, and thy years are to eternitie.
The children of thy servants shall continually endure, And in thy sight, O Lord, their seed shall be establisht sure. Another of the same. LOrd, hear my pray'r, and let my cry Have speedie accesse unto thee. In day of my calamity O hide not Thou thy face from me: Hear when I call to thee, that day An answer speedily return: My dayes like smoke consume away, And, as an hearth, my bones do burn. My heart is wounded very sore, And withered, like to grasse, doth fade: I am forgetfull grown therefore To take and eat my daily bread. By reason of my smart within, And voice of my most grievous groans, My flesh consumed is, my skin, All parcht, doth cleave unto my bones. The Pelican of wildernesse, The Owl in deserts I do match, And Sparrow-like companionlesse, Upon the houses top I watch. I all day long am made a scorn, Reproach'd by my malicious foes: The mad men are against me sworn, The men against me that arose. For I have ashes eaten up,
To me as if they had been bread; And with my drink I in my cup Of bitter tears a mixture made. Because thy wrath was not appeas'd, And dreadfull indignation, Therefore it was that thou me rais'd, And thou again didst cast me down. My dayes are like a shade alway, Which doth declining swiftly passe: And I am withered away Much like unto the fading grasse. But thou O Lord, shalt still endure From change and all mutation free, And, to all generations, sure Shall thy remembrance ever be. Thou shalt arise, and mercy yet Thou to mount Zion shalt extend: Her time for favour which was set, Behold, is now come to an end. Thy saints take pleasure in her stones, Her very dust to them is dear. All heathen lands and kingly thrones On earth, thy glorious Name shall fear. God in his glory shall appear, When Zion he builds and repairs. He shall regard and lend his ear Unto the needies humble pray'rs. Th' afflicteds pray'r He will not scorn: All times this shall be in record, And generations yet unborn Shall praise and magnifie the Lord.
He from his holy place look'd down, The earth he view'd from heav'n on hie; To hear the prisoners mourning groan, And free them that are dam'd to die; That Zion, and Jerusalem too His Name and praise may well record, When people and the Kingdoms do Assemble all to praise the Lord. My strength he weakned in the way, My dayes of life he shortened. My God, O take me not away In mid-time of my dayes, I said: Thy years throughout all ages last. Of old thou hast established The earths foundation firm and fast: Thy mighty hands the heav'ns have made. They perish shall, as garments do, But thou shalt evermore endure: As vestures, thou shalt change them so, And they shall all be changed sure. But from all changes thou art free, Thy endlesse years do last for ay. Thy servants, and their seed who be, Establish'd shall before thee stay. PSAL. CIII. A Psalm of David. O thou my soul, blesse God, the Lord, and all that in me is Be stirred up his holy Name to magnifie and blesse.
Blesse, O my soul, the Lord, thy God, and not forgetfull be Of all his gracious benefites he hath bestow'd on thee. All thine iniquities who doth most graciously forgive: Who thy diseases all and pains doth heal, and thee relieve. Who doth redeem thy life, that thou to death may not go down: Who thee with loving kindnesse doth and tender mercies crown. Who with abundance of good things doth satisfie thy mouth: So that, ev'n as the Eagles age, renewed is thy youth. God righteous judgement executes for all oppressed ones. His way to Moses, he his acts made known to Israels sons. Lord our God is mercifull, and he is gracious, Long suffering, and slow to wrath, in mercy plenteous. He will not chide continually, nor keep his anger still. With us he dealt not as we sin'd, nor did require our ill. For as the heaven in its height the earth surmounteth far, So great to those that do him fear,
his tender mercies are. As far as East is distant from the VVest, so far hath He From us removed, in His love, all our iniquitie. Such pity as a father hath unto his children dear, Like pity shews the Lord to such as worship Him in fear. For He remembers, we are dust, and He our frame well knows. Frail man, his dayes are like the grasse, as flowr in field he grows. For over it the winde doth passe, and it away is gone, And of the place where once it was it shall no more be known. But unto them, that do Him fear, Gods mercy never ends; And to their childrens children still His righteousnesse extends: To such as keep, his covenant, and mindfull are alway Of His most just commandements, that they may them obey. The Lord prepared hath His Throne in heavens firm to stand: And every thing that being hath His Kingdom doth command. O ye his Angels, that excell in strength, blesse ye the Lord,
Ye who obey what he commands, and hearken to his word. O blesse, and magnifie the Lord, ye glorious hosts of his, Ye ministers, that do fulfill what e're his pleasure is. O blesse the Lord, all ye his works, wherewith the world is stor'd In his dominions every-where: my soul blesse thou the Lord. PSAL. CIV. BLesse God, my soul: O Lord my God, thou are exceeding great, With Honour and with Majestie thou clothed art in state. With light, as with a robe, thy self thou coverest about; And, like unto a curtain, thou the heavens stretchest out. Who of his chambers doth the beams within the waters lay; Who doth the clouds his chariot make, on wings of winde make way. Who flaming fire his ministers, his Angels sp'rits doth make; Who earths foundations did lay, that it should never shake. Thou didst it cover with the deep, as with a garment spred: The waters stood above the hills, when thou the word but said.
But, at the voice of thy rebuke they fled, and would not stay: They, at thy thunders dreadfull voice, did haste them fast away. They by the mountains do ascend, and by the valley ground Descend, unto that very place which thou for them didst found. Thou hast a bound unto them set▪ that they may not passe over, That they do not return again the face of earth to cover. He to the valleys sends the springs, which run among the hills: They to all beasts of field give drink, wilde asses drink their fills. By them the fowls of heav'n shal have their habitation, Which do among the branches sing with delectation. He from his chambers watereth the hills, when they are dry'd: With fruit and increase of thy works the earth is satisfi'd. For cattel he makes grasse to grow, he makes the herb to spring For th' use of man, that food to him, he from the earth may bring. And wine, that to the heart of man doth cheerfulnesse impart, Oil that his face makes shine, and bread
that strengtheneth his heart. The trees of God are full of sap, the Cedars that do stand In Lebanon, which planted were by his Almighty hand. Birds of the air upon their boughs do choose their nests to make: As for the Stork, the fir-trees she doth for her dwelling take. The loftie mountains for wilde goats a place of refuge be: The Conies also to the rocks do for their safetie flee. He sets the Moon in heav'n, thereby the seasons to discern: From Him the Sun, his certain time of going down, doth learn. Thou darknesse mak'st, 'tis night, then beasts of forrests creep abroad. The Lions young roar for their prey, and seek their meat from God. The Sun doth rise, and home they flock, down in their dens they ly. Man goes to work, his labour he doth to the evening ply. How manifold, Lord, are thy works! in wisdom wonderfull Thou every one of them hast made; earth's of thy riches full. So is this great and spacious sea, wherein things creeping are
Which numbred cannot be; and beasts both great and small are there. There ships go, there thou mak'st to play that Leviathan great: These all wait on thee, that thou may'st in due time give them meat. That, which thou givest unto them, they gather for their food; Thine hand thou op'nest liberally, they filled are with good. Thou hid'st thy face, they troubled are; their breath thou tak'st away, Then do they die, and to their dust return again do they. Thy quickning Spirit thou sendest forth, then they created be: And then the earths decayed face renewed is by thee. The glory of the mighty Lord continue shall for ever: The Lord JEHOVAH shall rejoyce in all his works together. Earth, as affrighted, trembleth all, if He on it but look: And if the mountains He but touch, they presently do smoke. I will sing to the Lord most high, so long as I shall live; And while I being have, I shall to my God praises give. Of Him my meditation shall
sweet thoughts to me afford; And as for me, I will rejoyce in God, my only Lord. From earth let sinners be consum'd, let ill men no more be. O thou my soul, blesse thou the Lord: praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CV. GIve thanks to God, call on His Name, to men his deeds make known. Sing ye to him, sing psalms; proclaim his wondrous works each one. See that ye in his holy Name to glory do accord: And let the heart of every one rejoyce, that seeks the Lord. The Lord Almighty, and his strength with stedfast hearts seek ye. His blessed and his gracious face seek ye continually. Think on the works that he hath done, which admiration breed; His wonders; and the judgements all which from his mouth proceed. O ye that are of Abrahams race, his servant well approv'n, And ye that Jacobs children are, whom he choos'd for his own, Because He, and He only, is the mighty Lord, our God;
And his most righteous judgements are in all the earth abroad. His Covenant he remembred hath, that it may ever stand: To thousand generations the word he did command. VVhich Covenant he firmly made with faithfull Abraham, And unto Isaac by his oath he did renew the same: And unto Jacob, for a Law, he made it firm and sure, A Covenant to Israel, which ever should endure. He said, I'le give Canaans land for heritage to you: VVhile they were strangers there, and few, in number very few. VVhile yet they went from land to land, without a sure abode; And while, through sundry kingdoms, they did wander far abroad: Yet notwithstanding suffered he no man to do them wrong: Yea, for their sakes, he did reprove Kings, who were great and strong. Thus did he say, Touch ye not those that mine anointed be, Not do the Prophets any harm that do pertain to Me. He call'd for famine the land,
he brake the staff of bread. But yet he sent a man before, by whom they should be fed: Ev'n Joseph, whom unnaturally sell for a slave did they; Whose feet with fetters they did hurt, and he in irons lay. Untill the time that his word came to give him liberty: The word and purpose of the Lord did him in prison try. Then sent the King, and did command that he enlarg'd should be, He that the peoples ruler was, did send to set him free. A Lord, to rule his family, he rais'd him, as most fit; To him, of all that he possest, he did the charge commit. That he might at his pleasure binde the Princes of the land; And he might teach his Senatours wisdom to understand. The people then of Israel down into Aegypt came: And Jacob also sojourned within the land of Ham. And he did greatly, by his pow'r, increase his people there; And stronger then their enemies they by his blessing were.
Their heart he turned to envy his folk maliciously, With those that his own servants were to deal in subtilty. His servant Moses he did send, Aaron his chosen one: By these, his signes and wonders great in Hams land were made known. Darknesse he sent, and made it dark: his word they did obey. He turn'd their waters into bloud, and he their fish did slay. The land in plenty brought forth frogs in chambers of their Kings. His word all sorts of flies and lice in all their borders brings. He hail for rain, and flaming fire into their land he sent: And he their vines and fig-trees smote, trees of their coasts he rent. He spake, and Caterpillars came, Locusts did much abound, Which in their land all herbs consum'd, and all fruits of their ground. He smote all first-born in their land, chief of their strength each one. With gold and silver brought them forth, weak in their tribes were none. Aegypt was glad when sorth they went: their fear on them did light. He spread a cloud for covering,
and fire to shine by night. They askt, and he brought Quails; with bread of heav'n he filled them. He op'ned rocks, floods gusht, and ran in deserts, like a stream. For on his holy promise he, and servant Abraham, thought, With joy his people, his elect with gladnesse forth he brought▪ And unto them the pleasant lands he of the heathen gave, That of the peoples labours they inheritance might have; That they his statutes might observe, according to his word, And that they might his Lawes obey. Give praise unto the Lord. PSAL. CVI. GIve praise and thanks unto the Lord, for bountifull is He: His tender mercy doth endure unto eternitie. Gods mighty works who can expresse? or shew forth all his praise? Blessed are they that judgement keep, and justly do alwayes. Remember me, Lord, with that love, which thou to thine dost bear: With thy salvation, O my God, to visit me, draw near:
That I thy chosens good may see, and in their joy rejoyce, And may with thine inheritance triumph with chearfull voice. We with our fathers sinned have, and of iniquity Too long we have the workers been, we have done wickedly. The wonders great which thou, O Lord, didst work in Aegypt land, Our fathers, though they saw, yet them they did not understand: And they thy mercies multitude kept not in memory, But at the sea, ev'n the Red-sea, provok'd him grievously. Neverthelesse he saved them, ev'n for his own Names sake; That so, he might to be welt known his mighty power, make. When he the Red-sea did rebuke, then dryed up it was: Through depths, as through the wildernesse, He safely made them passe. From hands, of those that hated them, he did his people save, And from the enemies cruell hand to them redemption gave. The waters overwhelm'd their foes, not one was left alive: Then they believ'd his word, and praise
to him in songs did give. But soon did they his mighty works forget unthankfully, And on, his counsell and his will did not wait patiently. But much did lust in wildernesse, and God in desert tempt. He gave them what they sought, but to their soul he leannesse sent. And against Moses, in the camp, their envy did appear, At Aaron they, the saint of God, envious also were. Therefore the earth did open wide, and Dathan did devour, And all Abirams company did cover in that hour. Likewise among their company a fire was kindled then, And so the hot consuming flame burnt up these wicked men. Upon the hill of Horeb, they an idol-calf did frame, A molten image they did make, and worshipped the same And thus their Glory, and their God, most vainly changed they Into the likenesse of an ox that eateth grasse or hay. They did forget the mighty God, that had their Saviour been,
By whom such great things brought to passe they had in Aegypt seen. In Hams land he did wondrous works: things terrible did he, When he his mighty hand and arm stretcht out at the Red-sea. Then said he, he would them destroy, had not, his wrath to stay, His chosen Moses stood in breach, that them he should not slay. Yea, they despis'd the pleasant land, believed not his word; But in their tents they murmured, not hearkning to the Lord. Therefore in desert, them to slay he lifted up his hand: 'mong nations to o'rethrow their seed, and scatter in each land. They unto Baal-Peor did themselves associat: The sacrifices of the dead they did profanely eat. Thus, by their lewd inventions, they did provoke his ire; And then, upon them suddenly the plague brake in, as fire. Then Phineas rose, and justice did, and so the plague did cease: That to all ages counted was to him for righteousnesse. And at the waters, where they strove,
they did him angry make, In such sort, that it fared ill with Moses for their sake. Because they there his spirit meek provoked bitterly, So that he uttered with his lips words unadvisedly. Nor, as the Lord commanded them, did they the nations slay; But with the heathen mingled were, and learn'd of them their way. And they their idols serv'd, which did a snare unto them turn: Their sons and daughters they to devils in sacrifice did burn. In their own childrens guiltlesse bloud their hands they did embrew, Whom to Canaans idols they for sacrifices slew. So was the land defil'd with bloud; They stain'd with their own way, And with their own inventions a whoring they did stray. Against his people kindled was the wrath of God therefore, Insomuch that he did his own inheritance abhore. He gave them to the heathens hand, their foes did them command: Their enemies them opprest, they were made subject to their hand.
He many times delivered them, but with their counsel, so They him provok'd, that for their sin they were brought very low. Yet their affliction he beheld, when he did hear their cry: And he for them his Covenant did call to memory: After his mercies multitude he did repent; And made Them to be pity'd of all those who them did captive lead. O Lord, our God, us save, and gather the heathen from among, That we thy holy Name may praise in a triumphant song. Blest be JEHOVAH, Israels God, to all eternitie: Let all the people say, Amen. Praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CVII. PRaise God, for he is good, for still his mercies lasting be. Let Gods redeem'd say so, whom he from th' enemies hand did free: And gathered them out of the lands, from North, South, East and VVest. They stray'd in deserts pathlesse way▪ no city found to rest. For thirst and hunger in them faints
their soul. VVhen straits them presse They cry unto the Lord, and he them frees from their distresse. Them also in a way to walk, that right is, he did guide, That they might to a city go, wherein they might abide. O that men to the Lord would give praise, for his goodnesse, then, And for his works of wonder done unto the sons of men. For he the soul that longing is doth fully satisfie, VVith goodnesse he the hungry soul doth fill abundantly Such as shut up in darknesse deep, and in deathsshade abide, VVhom strongly hath affliction bound, and irons fast have ty'd (Because against the words of God they wrought rebelliously, And they the counsell did contemn of him that is most hie) Their heart he did bring down with grief, they fell, no help could have. In trouble then they cry'd to God, he them from straits did save. He out of darknesse did them bring, and from deaths shade them take: These bands wherewith they had been bound, asunder quite he brake.
O that men to the Lord would give praise, for his goodnesse then, And for his works of wonder done unto the sons of men. Because the mighty gates of brasse in piece she did tear, By him in sunder also cut the bars of iron were. Fools for their sin, and their offence, do sore affliction bear. All kinde of meat their soul abhors, they to deaths-gates draw near. In grief they cry to God, he saves them from their miseries: He sends his word them heals, and them from their destructions frees. O that men to the Lord would give praise, for his goodnesse then, And for his works of wonder done unto the sons of men. And let them sacrifice to him off'rings of thankfulnesse, And let them shew abroad his worke in songs of joyfulnesse. Who go to sea in ships, and in great waters trading be, Within the deep these men Gods works, and his great wonders see. For he commands, and forth in haste the stormie tempest flyes, Which makes the sea with rouling waves aloft to swell and rise.
They mount to heav'n, then to the depths they do go down again, Their soul doth faint, and melt away with trouble and with pain. They reel and stagger like one drunk, at their wits end they be: Then they to God in trouble cry, who them from straits doth free. The storm is chang'd into a calm, at his command and will, So that the waves which rag'd before, now quiet are and still. Then are they glad, because at rest and quiet now they be, So to the haven he them brings which they desir'd to see. O that men to the Lord would give praise, for his goodnesse, then, And for his works of wonder, done unto the sons of men. Among the people gathered, let them exalt his Name; Among assembled Elders spread his most renowned fame. He to dry land turns water-springs, and floods to wildernesse: For sins of those that dwell therein fat land to barrennesse. The burnt and parched wildernesse to water-pools he brings. The ground that was dry'd up before he turns to water springs.
And there, for dwelling, he a place doth to the hungry give, That they a city may prepare commodiously to live. There sow they fields, and vineyards plant to yeeld fruits of increase. His blessing makes them multiply, lets not their beasts decrease. Again they are diminished, and very low brought down, Through sorrow, and affliction, and great oppression. He upon Princes pours contempt, and causeth them to stray And wander in a wildernesse, wherein there is no way. Yet setteth he the poor on high from all his miseries; And he, much like unto a flock, doth make him families. They that are righteous shall rejoice, when they the same shal see; And, ashamed, stop her mouth shall all iniquitie. Who so is wise, and will these things observe, and them record, Ev'n they shall understand the love and kindnesse of the Lord.
PSAL. CVIII. A song or Psalm of David. MY heart is fixt, Lord: I will sing, and with my glory praise. Awake up psaltery and harp, my self I'le early raise. I'le praise thee 'mongst the people, Lord, 'mong nations sing will I. For above heav'n thy mercy's great, thy truth doth reach the sky. Be thou above the heavens, Lord, exalted gloriously: Thy glory all the earth above be lifted up on hie. That those who thy beloved are delivered may be; O do thou save with thy right hand, and answer give to me. God in his holinesse hath said, Herein I will take pleasure, Shechem I will divide, and forth will Succoths valley measure. Gilead I claim as Mine by right, Manasseh Mine shall be, Ephraim is of My head the strength, Judah gives laws for Me. Moab's My washing-pot, My shoe I'le over Edom throw, Over the land of Palestine
I will in triumph go. who is he will bring me to the City fortifi'd! O who is he that to the land of Edom will me guide! O God, thou who hadst cast us off, this thing wilt thou not do? And wilt not thou, ev'n thou, O God, forth with our armies go? Do thou from trouble give us help, for helplesse is mans aid. Through God we shall do valiantly, our foes He shall down tread. PSAL. CIX. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. O thou the God of all my praise, do thou not hold thy peace: For mouths of wicked men, to speak against me, do not cease; The mouths of vile deceitfull men against me opened be: And with a false and lying tongue they have accused me. They did beset me round about with words of hatefull spight: And, though to them no cause I gave, against me they did fight. They for my love became my foes, but I me set to pray. Evil for good, hatred for love to me they did repay.
Set thou the wicked over him, and upon his right hand Give thou his greatest enemy, ev'n Satan, leave to stand. And when by thee he shall be judg'd, let him condemned be; And let his pray'r be turn'd to sin, when he shall call on thee. Few be his dayes, and in his room his charge another take. His children let be fotherlesse, his wife a widow make. His children let be vagabonds, and beg continually; And from their places desolate seek bread for their supply. Let covetous extortioners catch all he hath away: Of all for which he labour'd hath let strangers make a prey. Let there be none to pity him, let there be none at all That on his children fatherlesse will let his mercy fall. Let his posterity from earth cut off for ever be, And in the following age their name be blotted out by thee. Let God his fathers wickednesse still to remembrance call; And never let his mothers sin he blotted out at all.
But let them all before the Lord appear continually, That He may wholly from the earth cut off their memory. Because he mercy minded not, but persecuted still The poor and needy, that he might the broken-hearted kill. As he in cursing pleasure took, so let it to him fall; As he delighted not to blesse, so blesse him not at all. As cursing he like clothes put on, into his bowels so Like water, and into his bones like oyl down let it go. Like to that garment let it be which doth himself aray, And for a girdle wherewith he is girt about alway. From God let his be their reward that enemies are to me, And their reward, that speak against my soul maliciously. But do thou, for thine own Names sake, O God the Lord, for me: Sith good and sweet they mercy is, from trouble set me free. For I am poor and indigent, afflicted sore am I, My heart within me also is wounded exceedingly.
I passe like a declining shade. am like the locust tost. My knees through fasting weakned are, my flesh hath fatnesse lost. I also am a vile reproach unto them made to be: And they that did upon me look did shake their heads at me. O do thou help and succour me, who art my God and Lord: And, for thy tender mercies sake, safety to me afford. That thereby they may know, that this is thy Almighty hand, And that thou, Lord, hast done the same they may well understand. Although they curse with spite, yet, Lord, blesse thou with loving voice: Let them asham'd be, when they rise: thy servant let rejoice. Let thou mine adversaries all with shame be cloathed over, And let their own confusion them, as a mantle, cover. But as for me, I with my mouth will greatly praise the Lord; And I among the multitude His praises will record. For He shall stand at his right hand who is in povertie, To save him from all those that would condemn his soul to die.
PSAL. CX. A Psalm of David. THe Lord did say unto my Lord, Sit thou at My right hand, Untill I make thy foes a stool, whereon thy feet may stand. The Lord shall out of Zion send the rod of thy great pow'r: In midst of all thine enemies be thou the Governour. A willing people, in thy day of pow'r, shall come to thee, In holy beauties, from morns womb: thy youth like dew shall be. The Lord himself hath made an oath, and will repent him never, Of th' order of Melchisedek Thou art a Priest for ever. The glorious and mighty Lord, that sits at thy right hand, Shall, in his day of wrath, strike through Kings, that do Him withstand. He shall among the heathen judge, He shall with bodies dead The places fill, o're many lands, He wound shall every head. The brook that runneth in the way with drink shall Him supply: And for this cause, in triumph He shall lift His head on hie.
PSAL. CXI. PRaise ye the Lord: with my whole heart I will Gods praise declare, Where the assemblies of the just and congregations are. The whole works of the Lord our God are great above all measure, Sought out they are of every one that do therein take pleasure. His work most honourable is, most glorious and pure, And his untainted Righteousnesse for ever doth endure. His works most wonderfull He hath made to be thought upon: The Lord is gracious, and He is full of compassion. He giveth meat unto all those that truly do Him fear; And evermore His Covenant He in his minde will bear. He did the power of His works unto His people show, When He the heathens heritage upon them did bestow. His handy-works are truth and right: all His commands are sure; And done in truth and uprightnesse, they evermore endure. He sent redemption to His folk, His Covenant for ay
He did command: Holy His Name and reverend is alway. Wisdoms beginning is Gods fear: good understanding they Have all, that His commands fulfill: His praise endures for ay. PSAL. CXII. PRaise ye the Lord. The man is blest that fears the Lord aright, He who in His commandements doth greatly take delight. His seed and off-spring powerfull shall be the earth upon: Of upright men blessed shall be the generation. Riches and wealth shall ever be within his house in store: And His unspotted righteousnesse endures for evermore. Unto the upright light doth rise, though he in darknesse be: Compassionate and mercifull, and righteous is he. A good man doth his favour shew, and doth to others lend: He with discretion his affairs will guide unto the end. Surely there is not any thing that ever shall him move: The righteous mans memoriall shall everlasting prove.
When he shall evill tidings hear, he shall not be afraid; His heart is fixt, his confidence upon the Lord is staid. His heart is firmly stablished, afraid he shall not be, Untill upon his enemies he his desire shall see. He hath disperst, giv'n to the poor, his righteousnesse shall be To ages all; with honour shall his horn be raised high. The wicked shall it see, and fret, his teeth gnash, melt away: What wicked men do most desire shall utterly decay. PSAL. CXIII. PRaise God: ye servants of the Lord, O praise, the Lords Name praise. Yea, blessed be the Name of God from this time forth alwayes. From rising Sun, to where it sets, Gods Name is to be prais'd. Above all nations God is high, 'bove heav'n His glory rais'd. Unto the Lord, our God, that dwells on high, who can compare? Himself that humbleth things to see in heav'n and earth that are. He from the dust doth raise the poor, that very low did ly,
And from the dung-hill lifts the man opprest with poverty: That He may highly him advance, and with the Princes set, With those that of His people are the chief, ev'n Princes great The barren woman house to keep He maketh, and to be Of sons a mother full of joy. Praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CXIV. VVHen Isra'l out of Aegypt went, and did his dwelling change, When Jacobs house went out from those that were of language strange, He Judah did His Sanctuary, His Kingdom Israel make: The sea it saw, and quickly fled, Jordan was driven back. Like rams the mountains, and like lambs the hills skipt to and fro: O sea why stedst thou? Jordan back why wast thou driven so? Ye mountains great, wherefore was it, that ye did skip like rams? And wherefore was it, little hills, that ye did leap like lambs? O at the presence of the Lord earth tremble thou for fear, While as the presence of the God of Jacob doth appear.
Who from the hard and stonie rock did standing water bring, And by His pow'r did turn the flint into a water spring. PSAL. CXV. NOt unto us, Lord, not to us, but do thou glory take Unto thy Name, ev'n for thy truth, and for thy mercies sake. O wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God now gone? But our God in the heavens is, what pleas'd Him He hath done. Their idols silver are and gold, work of mens hands they be: Mouths have they, but they do not speak; and eyes, but do not see. Ears have they, but they do not hear; noses, but savour not: Hands, feet, but handle not, nor walk, nor speak they through their throat. Like them their makers are, and all on them their trust that build. O Isra'l, trust thou in the Lord, He is their help and shield. O Aarons house, trust in the Lord, their help and shield is He. Ye that fear God, trust in the Lord, their help and shield He'll be. The Lord of us hath mindfull been, and He will blesse us still,
He will the house of Isra'l blesse, blesse Aarons house He will. Both small and great that fear the Lord He will them surely blesse. The Lord will you, you and your seed ay more and more increase. O blessed are ye of the Lord, who made the earth and heaven. The heav'n, ev'n heav'ns are Gods, but He earth to mens sons hath given. The dead, nor who to silence go, Gods praise do not record. But henceforth we for ever will blesse God▪ Praise ye the Lord. PSAL. CXVI. I Love the Lord, because my voice and prayers He did hear. I, while I live, will call on Him, who bow'd to me His ear. Of death the cords, and sorrows did about me compasse round, The pains of hell took hold on me, I grief and trouble found. Upon the Name of God, the Lord, then did I call, and say, Deliver Thou my soul, O Lord, I do thee humbly pray. God mercifull and righteous is, yea, gracious is our Lord. God saves the meek: I was brought low, He did me help afford.
O thou my soul, do thou return unto thy quiet rest For largely lo▪ the Lord to thee His bounty hath exprest. For my distressed soul from death delivered was by Thee, Thou didst my mourning eyes from tears, my feet from falling, free. I in the land of those that live will walk the Lord before. I did believe, therefore I spake: I was afflicted sore. I said when I was in my haste, That all men liars be. What shall I render to the Lord, for all His gifts to me? I'le of salvation take the cup, on Gods Name will I call: I'le pay my vows now to the Lord, before His people all. Dear in Gods sight is His saints death. Thy servant, Lord, am I, Thy servant sure, Thine hand-maids son: my bands Thou didst unty. Thank-offerings I to Thee will give, and on Gods Name will call. I'le pay my vows now to the Lord, before His people all Within the courts of Gods own house, within the midst of thee, O City of Jerusalem. Praise to the Lord give ye.
PSAL. CXVII. O give ye praise unto the Lord, all nations that be: Likewise, ye people all, accord His Name to magnifie. For great to us-ward ever are His loving kindnesses: His truth endures for evermore. The Lord O do ye blesse. PSAL. CXVIII. O praise the Lord, for He is good: His mercy lasteth ever. Let those of Israel now say, His mercy faileth never. Now let the house of Aaron say, His mercy lasteth ever. Let those that fear the Lord now say, His mercy faileth never. I in distresse call'd on the Lord; the Lord did answer me, He in a large place did me set, from trouble made me free. The mighty Lord is on my side. I will not be afraid: For any thing that man can do I shall not be dismaid. The Lord doth take my part with them that help to succour me: Therefore on those that do me hate I my desire shall see.
Better it is to trust in God, then trust in mans defence: Better to trust in God, then make Princes our confidence. The nations, joyning all in one, did compasse me about: But in the Lords most Holy Name I shall them all root out. They compast me about, I say, they compast me about: But in the Lords most Holy Name I shall them all root out. Like Bees they compast me about: like unto thorns that flame They quenched are: for them shall I destroy in Gods own Name. Thou sore hast thrust, that I might fall, but my Lord helped me. God my salvation is become, my strength and song is He. In dwellings of the righteous is heard the melody Of joy and health: the Lords right hand doth ever valiantly. The right hand of the Mighty Lord exalted is on hy: The right hand of the Mighty Lord doth ever valiantly. I shall not die, but live, and shall the works of God discover. The Lord hath me chastised sore,
but not to death given over. O set ye open unto me the gates of righteousnesse: Then will I enter into them, and I the Lord will blesse. This is the gate of God, by it the just shall enter in. Thee will I praise, for thou me heardst, and hast my safety bin. That stone, is made head corner-stone, which builders did despise: This is the doing of the Lord, and wondrous in our eyes. This is the day God made, in it wee'll joy triumphantly. Save now I pray thee, Lord, I pray send now prosperity. Blessed is He, in Gods great Name that cometh us to save. We, from the house which to the Lord pertains, you blessed have. God is the Lord, who unto us hath made light to arise: Binde ye unto the altars horns, with cords, the sacrifice. Thou art my God, I'le thee exalt: my God, I will thee praise. Give thanks to God, for He is good, His mercy lasts alwayes.
PSAL. CXIX. א ALEPH. The first part. BLessed are they that undefil'd, and straight are in the way: Who in the Lords most holy Law do walk, and do not stray, Blessed are they, who to observe His statutes are inclin'd; And who do seek the living God with their whole heart and minde. Such in his wayes do walk, and they do no iniquity: Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts carefully. O that thy statutes to observe thou wouldst my wayes direct: Then shall I not be sham'd, when I thy precepts all respect. Then with integrity of heart thee will I praise and blesse, When I the judgements all have learn'd of thy pure righteousnesse. That I will keep thy statutes all firmly resolv'd have I: O do not then, most gracious God, forsake me utterly. ב BETH. The 2. part. By what means shall a young man learn his way to purifie? If he according to thy Word thereto attentive be. Unfainedly Thee have I sought
with all my soul and heart: O let me not from the right path of thy commands depart. Thy word I in my heart have hid, that I offend not thee. O Lord, thou ever blessed art, thy statutes teach thou me. The judgements of thy mouth each one my lips declared have: More joy thy testimonies way then riches all, me gave. I will thy holy precepts make my meditation: And carefully I'le have respect unto thy ways each one. Upon thy statutes my delight shall constantly be set: And by thy grace I never will thy holy word forget. ג GIMEL. The 3. part. With me thy servant, in thy grace, deal bountifully, Lord: That by thy favour I may live, and duely keep thy word. Open mine eyes, that of thy Law the wonders I may see. I am a stranger on this earth, hide not thy Laws from me. My soul within me breaks, and doth much fainting still endure, Through longing that it hath all times unto thy judgements pure.
Thou hast rebuk'd the cursed proud, who from thy precepts swerve. Reproach and shame remove from me, for I thy Laws observe. Against me Princes spake with spite, while they in councell sat: But I, thy servant, did upon thy statutes meditate. My comfort, and my hearts delight thy testimonies be, And they in all my doubts and fears are counsellers to me. ד DALETH. The 4. part. My soul to dust cleaves: quicken me according to thy word. My ways I shew'd, and me thou heardst: teach me thy statutes, Lord. The way of thy commandements make me aright to know: So all thy works, that wondrous are, I shall to others show. My soul doth melt, and drop away, for heavinesse and grief: To me, according to thy word, give strength, and send relief. From me the wicked way of lies let far removed be, And graciously thy holy Law do thou grant unto me. I chosen have the perfect way of truth and verity: Thy judgments, that most righteous are,
before me, laid, have I. I to thy testimonies cleave: shame do not on me cast. I'le run thy precepts way, when thou my heart enlarged hast. ה HE. The 5. part. Teach me, O Lord, the perfect way of thy precepts divine, And to observe it to the end I shall my heart incline. Give understanding unto me, so keep thy Law shall I; Yea, ev'n with my whole heart, I shal observe it carefully. In thy Laws path make me to go, for I delight therein. My heart unto thy testimonies, and not to greed incline. Turn thou away my sight and eyes from viewing vanitie, And in thy good and holy way be pleas'd to quicken me. Confirm to me thy gracious word, which I did gladly hear, Ev'n to thy servant, Lord, who is devoted to thy fear. Turn thou away my fear'd reproach: for good thy judgements be. Lo, for thy precepts I have long'd: in thy truth quicken me. ו VAU. The 6. part. Let thy sweet mercies also come, and visit me, O Lord,
Ev'n thy benign salvation, according to thy word. So shall I have wherewith I may give him an answer just, Who spitefully reproacheth me: for in thy word I trust. The word of truth out of my mouth take thou not utterly: For on thy judgements righteous my hope doth still rely. So shall I keep for evermore thy Law continually: And sith that I thy precepts seek, I'le walk at liberty. I'le speak thy word to Kings, and I with shame shall not be mov'd: And will delight my self alwayes in thy Laws, which I lov'd. To thy commandments which I lov'd, my hands lift up I will: And I will also meditate upon thy statutes still. ז ZAIN. The 7. part. Remember, Lord, thy gracious word, thou to thy servant spake, Which, for a ground of my sure hope, thou causedst me to take. This word of thine my comfort is in my affliction: For in my straits I am reviv'd by this thy word alone. The men whose hearts with pride are stuff'd,
did greatly me deride: Yet from thy straight commandements I have not turn'd aside, Thy judgements righteous, O Lord, which thou of old forth gave, I did remember, and my self by them comforted have. Horrour took hold on me, because ill men thy Law forsake. I in my house of pilgrimage thy Laws my songs do make. Thy Name by night, Lord, I did minde, and I have kept thy Law. And this I had, because thy word I kept, and stood in aw. ח CHETH. The 8. part. Thou my sure portion art alone, which I did choose, O Lord: I have resolv'd and said, that I would keep thy holy word. With my whole heart I did intreat thy face, and favour free: According to thy gracious word be mercifull to me. I thought upon my former wayes, and did my life well try: And to thy testimonies pure my feet then turned I. I did not stay, nor linger long, as those that slothfull are, But hastily thy Laws to keep my self I did prepare.
Bands of ill men me robb'd; yet I thy precepts did not slight. I'le rise at midnight, thee to praise, ev'n for thy judgements right. I am companion to all those, who fear, and thee obey. O Lord, thy mercy fills the earth: teach me thy Laws, I pray. ט TETH. The 9. part. Well hast thou with thy servant dealt, as thou didst promise give. Good judgement me, and knowledge, teach; for I thy word believe. Ere I afflicted was, I stray'd, but now I keep thy word, Both good thou art, and good thou dost: teach me thy statutes, Lord. The men, that are puft up with pride, against me forg'd a ly: Yet thy commandements observe with my whole heart will I. Their hearts, through worldly ease & wealth, as fat as grease they be: But in thy holy Law I take delight continually. It hath been very good for me, that I afflicted was, That I might well instructed be, and learn thy holy Laws. The word that cometh from thy mouth is better unto me, Then many thousands, and great summs of gold and silver be.
י JOD. The 10. part. Thou mad'st and fashionedst me: thy Laws to know give wisdom, Lord. So who thee fear, shall joy to see me trusting in thy word. That very right thy judgements are I know and do confesse, And that thou hast afflicted me in truth and faithfulnesse. O let thy kindnesse mercifull, I pray thee, comfort me, As to thy servant faithfully was promised by thee. And let thy tender mercies come to me, that I may live: Because thy holy Laws to me sweet delectation give. Lord, let the proud ashamed be: for they, without a cause, With me perversly deal; but I will muse upon thy Laws. Let such as fear thee, and have known thy statutes, turn to me. My heart let in thy Laws be sound, that sham'd I never be. כ CAPH. The 11. part. My soul for thy salvation faints: yet I thy word believe. Mine eyes fail for thy word: I say, When wilt thou comfort give? For like a bottle I'm become, that in the smoke is set:
I'm black and parcht with grief, yet I thy statutes not forget. How many are thy servants dayes? when wilt thou execute Just judgement on these wicked men that do me persecute? The proud have digged pits for me, which is against thy Laws. Thy words all faithfull are: help me pursu'd without a cause. They so consum'd me, that on earth my life they scarce did leave: Thy precepts yet forsook I not, but close to them I clave. After thy loving kindnesse, Lord, me quicken, and preserve: The testimonie of thy mouth so shall I still observe. ל LAMED. The 12. part. Thy word for ever is, O Lord, in heaven settled fast: Unto all generations thy faithfulnesse doth last. The earth thou hast established, and it abides by thee: This day they stand, as thou ordain'd: for all thy servants be. Unlesse in thy most perfect Law my soul delights had found, I should have perished, when as my troubles did abound. Thy precepts I will nev'r forget:
they quickning to me brought. Lord, I am thine: O save thou me: thy precepts I have sought. For me the wicked have laid wait, me seeking to destroy: But I thy testimonies true consider will with joy. An end of all perfection here have I seen, O God: But as for thy commandement it is exceeding broad. מ MEM. The 13. part. O how love I thy Law! it is my study all the day. It makes me wiser then my foes: for it doth with me stay. Then all my teachers, now I have more understanding far: Because my meditation thy▪ testimonies are. In understanding I excell those that are ancients, For I endeavoured to keep all thy commandements. My feet from each ill way I stay'd, that I may keep thy word. I from thy judgements have not swerv'd, for thou hast taught me, Lord. How sweet unto my taste, O Lord, are all thy words of truth! Yea, I do finde them sweeter far, then honey to my mouth.
I, through thy precepts that are pure, do understanding get: I therefore every way that's false with all my heart do hate. נ NUN. The 14. part. Thy word is to my feet a lamp, and to my path a light. I sworn have, and I will perform, to keep thy judgements right. I am with sore affliction ev'n overwhelm'd, O Lord: In mercy raise, and quicken me, according to thy word. The free-will offrings of my mouth accept, I thee beseech: And unto me thy servant, Lord, thy judgements clearly teach. Though still my soul be in my hand, thy Laws I'le not forget. I err'd not from them, though for me the wicked snares did set. I of thy testimonies have above all things made choice, To be my heritage for ay, for they my Heart rejoice. I carefully inclined have my heart, still to attend, That I thy statures may perform alway unto the end. ס SAMECH. The 15. part. I hate the thoughts of vanitie, but love thy Law do I.
My shield and hiding-place thou art: I on thy word rely. All ye that evill doers are, from me depart away; For the commandments of my God I purpose to obey. According to thy faithfull word uphold and stablish me, That I may live, and of my hope ashamed never be. Hold thou me up, so shall I be in peace and safetie still, And to thy statutes have respect continually I will. Thou treadst down all that love to stray, false their deceit doth prove. Lewd men, like drosse, away thou putst, therefore thy Law I love. For fear of thee my very flesh doth tremble, all dismaid; And of thy righteous judgements, Lord, my soul is much afraid. ע AIN. The 16. part. To all men I have judgment done, performing justice right: Then let me not be left unto my fierce oppressours might. For good unto thy servant, Lord, thy servants surety be: From the oppression of the proud do thou deliver me. Mine eyes do fail with looking long for thy salvation,
The word of thy pure righteousnesse while I do wait upon. In mercy with thy servant deal, thy Laws me teach and show: I am thy servant, wisdom give, that I thy Laws may know. It's time thou work, Lord: for they have made void thy Law divine: Therefore thy precepts more I love then gold, yea gold most fine. Concerning all things, thy commands all right I judge therefore: And every false and wicked way I perfectly abhore. פ PE. The 17. part. Thy statutes, Lord, are wonderfull, my soul them keeps with care. The entrance of thy words gives light, makes wise who simple are. My mouth I have wide opened, and panted earnestly, While after thy commandements I long'd exceedingly. Look on me, Lord, and mercifull do thou unto me prove, As thou art wont to do to those, thy Name who truly love. O let my footsteps in thy word aright still ordered be: Let no iniquitie obtain dominion over me. From mans oppression save thou me
so keep thy Laws I will. Thy face make on thy servant shine: teach me the statutes still. Rivers of waters from mine eyes did run down, when I saw How wicked men run on in sin, and do not keep thy Law. צ TSADDI. The 18. part. O Lord, thou art most righteous, thy judgements are upright. Thy testimonies thou command'st most faithfull are and right. My zeal hath ev'n consumed me, because mine enemies Thy holy words forgotten have, and do thy Laws despise. Thy word's most pure, therefore on it thy servants love is set. Small, and despis'd I am, yet I thy precepts not forget. Thy righteousnesse, is righteousnesse which ever doth endure: Thy holy Law, Lord, also is the very truth most pure. Trouble and anguish have me found, and taken hold on me: Yet in my trouble my delight thy just commandments be. Eternall righteousnesse is in thy testimonies all: Lord, to me understanding give, and ever live I shall.
ק KOPH. The 19. part. With my whole heart I cry'd, Lord, hear: I will thy word obey. I cry'd to thee, save me, and I will keep thy Laws alway. I of the morning did prevent the dawning, and did cry: For all my expectation did on thy word rely. Mine eyes did timously prevent the watches of the night, That in thy word, with carefull minde, then meditate I might, After thy loving kindnesse hear my voice, that calls on thee: According to thy judgement, Lord, revive and quicken me. Who follow mischief, they draw nigh; they from thy Law are far: But thou art near, Lord: most firm truth all thy commandments are. As for thy testimonies all, of old this have I try'd, That thou hast surely founded them, for ever to abide. ר RESH. The 20. part. Consider mine affliction, in safety do me set: Deliver me, O Lord, for I thy Law do not forget. After thy word revive thou me; save me, and plead my cause.
Salvation is from sinners far, for they seek not thy Laws. O Lord, both great and manifold thy tender mercies be: According to thy judgements just revive and quicken me. My persecuters many are, and foes, which do combine: Yet from thy testimonies pure my heart doth not decline. I saw transgressours, and was griev'd: for they keep not thy word. See how I love thy Law! as thou art kinde, me quicken, Lord. From the beginning all thy word hath been most true and sure: Thy righteous judgements every one for evermore endure. ש SHIN. The 21. part. Princes have persecuted me, although no cause they saw: But still of thy most holy word my heart doth stand in aw. I at thy word rejoyce, as one of spoil that findes great store. Thy Law I love, but lying all I hate and do abhorre. Seven times a day it is my care to give due praise to thee: Because of all thy judgements, Lord, which righteous ever be. Great peace have they who love thy Law:
offence they shall have none. I hop'd for thy salvation, Lord, and thy commands have done. My soul thy testimonies pure observed carefully: On them my heart is set, and them I love exceedingly. Thy testimonies and thy Laws I kept, with speciall care: For all my works, and wayes each one before thee open are. ת TAU. The 22. part. O let my earnest pray'r and cry come near before thee, Lord: Give understanding unto me according to thy word, Let my request before thee come: after thy word me free. My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught thy Laws to me. My tongue of thy most blessed word shall speak, and it confesse: Because all thy commandements are perfect righteousnesse. Let thy strong hand make help to me: thy precepts are my choice. I long'd for thy salvation, Lord, and in thy Law rejoice. O let my soul live, and it shall give praises unto thee: And let thy judgements gracious be helpfull unto me.
I like a lost sheep went astray, thy servant seek, and finde: For thy commands I suffred not to slip out of my minde. PSAL. CXX. A song of degrees. IN my distresse to God I cry'd, and He gave ear to me. From lying lips, and guilful tongue O Lord, my soul set free. What shall be giv'n thee? or what shall be done to thee, false tongue? Ev'n burning coals of juniper, sharp arrows of the strong. Wo's me, that I in Mesech am a sojourner so long; That I in tabernacles dwell to Kedar that belong. My soul with him that hateth peace hath long a dweller been. I am for peace: but when I speak for battell they are keen. PSAL. CXXI. A song of degrees. I to the hils will lift mine eyes, from whence doth come mine aid: My safetie cometh from the Lord, who heav'n and earth hath made. Thy foot Hee'll not let slide, nor will He slumber that thee keeps: Behold, He that keeps Israel, He slumbers not, nor sleeps.
The Lord thee keeps, the Lord thy shade on thy right hand doth stay: The Moon by night thee shall not smite, nor yet the Sun by day. The Lord shall keep thy soul, He shall preserve thee from all ill: Henceforth thy going out and in God keep for ever will. PSAL. CXXII. A song of degrees of David. I joy'd, when to the house of God go up, they said to me. Jerusalem within thy gates our feet shall standing be. Jerusalem as a city is compactly built together: Unto that place the Tribes go up, the Tribes of God go thither, To Israels testimonie, there to Gods Name thanks to pay. For thrones of judgement, ev'n the thrones of Davids house there stay. Pray that Jerusalem may have peace and felicitie: Let them, that love thee and thy peace, have still prosperitie. Therefore I wish that peace may still within thy walls remain, And ever may thy palaces prosperitie retain. Now, for my friends and brethrens sake, peace be in thee, I'le say:
And for the house of God our Lord, I'le seek thy good alway. PSAL. CXXIII. A song of degrees. O thou that dwellest in the heav'ns, I lift mine eyes to Thee. Behold, as servants eyes do look their masters hand to see, As hand-maids eyes her mistresse hand, so do our eyes attend Upon the Lord our God, untill to us he mercy send. O Lord, be gracious to us, unto us gracious be: Because replenish'd with contempt exceedingly are we. Our soul is fill'd with scorn of those that at their ease abide, And with the insolent contempt of those that swell in pride. PSAL CXXIV. A song of degrees of David. HAd not the Lord been on our side, may Israel now say: Had not the Lord been on our side, when men rose us to slay: They had us swallow'd quick when as their wrath 'gainst us did flame: Waters had cover'd us, our soul had sunk beneath the stream. Then had the waters, swelling high, over our soul made way.
Blest be the Lord, who to their teeth us gave not for a prey. Our soul's escaped, as a bird out of the fowlers snare: The snare asunder broken is, and we escaped are. Our sure, and all-sufficient help is in JEHOVAH'S Name; His Name, who did the heav'n create, and who the earth did frame. Another of the same. NOw Israel may say, and that truly, If that the Lord had not our cause maintain'd: If that the Lord had not our right sustain'd, When cruell men against us furiously Rose up in wrath, to make of us their prey. Then certainly they had devour'd us all, And swallowed quick, for ought that we could deem; Such was their rage, as we might well esteem: And as fierce flouds before them all things drown, So had they brought our soul to death quite down. The raging streams, with their proud swelling waves,
Had then our soul ov'rwhelmed in the deep: But blest be God, who doth us sefely keep. And hath not given us for a living prey Unto their teeth and bloudy cruelty. Ev'n as a bird out of the fowlers snare Escapes away, so is our soul set free; Broke are their nets, and thus escaped wee. Therefore our help is in the Lords great Name, Who heav'n and earth by his great pow'r did frame. PSAL. CXXV. A song of degrees. THey, in the Lord that firmly trust, shall be like Zion hill, Which at no time can be remov'd, but standeth ever still. As round about Jerusalem the mountains stand alway, The Lord His folk doth compasse so from henceforth and for ay. For ill mens rod upon the lot of just men shall not ly, Left righteous men stretch forth their hands unto iniquity. Do thou to all those that be good
thy goodnesse, Lord, impart; And do thou good to those that are upright within their heart. But as for such as turn aside after their crooked way, God shall lead forth with wicked men: on Israel peace shall stay, PSAL. CXXVI. A song of degrees. VVHen Zions bondage God turn'd back, as men that dream'd were we. Then fill'd with laughter was our mouth, our tongue with melodie: They 'mong the heathen said, The Lord great things for them hath wrought: The Lord hath done great things for us, whence joy to us is brought. As streams of water in the South, our bondage, Lord, recall. Who sow in tears, a reaping time of joy enjoy they shall. That man, who bearing precious seed, in going forth doth mourn, He doubtlesse, bringing back his sheaves, rejoycing shall return. PSAL. CXXVII. A song of degrees for Salomon. EXcept the Lord do build the house, the builders lose their pain: Except the Lord the city keep, the watchmen watch in vain. It's vain for you to rise betimes,
or late from rest to keep, To feed on sorrows bread: so gives He his beloved sleep. Lo, children are Gods heritage, the wombs-fruit His reward. The sons of youth as arrows are for strong mens hands prepar'd. O happy is the man that hath his quiver fill'd with those: They, unashamed, in the gate shall speak unto their foes. PSAL. CXXVIII. A song of degrees. BLest is each one that fears the Lord, and walketh in his wayes. For of thy labour thou shalt eat, and happie be alwayes. Thy wife shall, as a fruitfull vine, by thy house sides, be found, Thy children like to olive plants about thy table round. Behold, the man that fears the Lord, thus blessed shall he be. The Lord shall out of Zion give His blessing unto thee: Thou shalt Jerusalems good behold, whilst thou on earth dost dwell. Thou shalt thy childrens children see, and peace on Israel. PSAL. CXXIX. A song of degrees. OFt did they vex me from my youth, may Israel now declare:
Oft did they vex me from my youth, yet not victorious were. The plowers plow'd upon my back, they long their furrows drew. The righteous Lord did cut the cords of the ungodly crue. Let Zions haters all be turn'd back with confusion. As grasse on houses tops be they, which fades ere it be grown: Whereof enough to fill his hand the mower can not finde: Nor can the man his bosome fill, whose work is, sheaves to binde. Neither say they who do go by, Gods blessing on you rest; We, in the Name of God, the Lord, do wish you to be blest. PSAL. CXXX. A song of degrees. LOrd, from the depths to thee I cry'd. My voice, Lord, do thou hear: Unto my supplications voyce, give an attentive ear. Lord, who shall stand, if thou, O Lord, should'st mark iniquitie? But yet with Thee forgivenesse is, that fear'd Thou mayest be. I wait for God, my soul doth wait, my hope is in His word. More then they, that for morning watch, my soul waits for the Lord:
I say, more then they that do watch the morning light to see. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with Him mercies be, And plenteous redemption is ever found with Him. And from all his iniquities he Israel shall redeem. PSAL. CXXXI. A song of degrees of David. MY heart not haughtie is, O Lord, mine eyes not lofty be: Nor do I deal in matters great, or things for me too hie. I surely have my self behav'd with quiet sp'rit and milde, As childe of mother wean'd: my soul is like a weaned childe. Upon the Lord let all the hope of Israel rely, Ev'n from the time that present is unto eternity. PSAL. CXXXII. A song of degrees. DAvid, and his afflictions all, Lord, do thou think upon: How unto God he sware, and vow'd to Jacobs mightie One. I will not come within my house, nor rest in bed at all: Nor shall mine eyes take any sleep, nor eye-lids slumber shall, Till for the Lord a place I finde,
where He may make abode: A place of habitation for Jacobs mightie God. Lo, at the place of Ephratah of it we understood: And we did finde it in the fields and city of the wood. We'll go into His Tabernacles, and at His footstool bow. Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, th' Ark of Thy strength, and Thou. O let Thy Priests be cloathed, Lord, with truth and righteousnesse: And let all those that are Thy saints shout loud for joyfulnesse. For thine own servant Davids sake, do not deny Thy grace, Nor of Thine own anointed one turn Thou away the face. The Lord in truth to David sware, He will not turn from it, I of thy bodies fruit will make upon thy throne to sit. My Covenant if thy sons will keep, and Laws to them made known, Their children then shall also sit for ever on Thy throne. For God of Zion hath made choice, there He desires to dwell. This is My rest, here still I'le stay, for I do like it well. Her food I'le greatly blesse, her poor
with bread will satisfie. Her priests I'le cloathe with health, her saints shall shout forth joyfullie. And there will I make Davids horn to bud forth pleasantlie: For him that Mine anointed is, a lamp ordain'd have I. As with a garment, I will cloathe with shame his enemies all: But yet the crown that he doth wear, upon him flourish shall. PSAL. CXXXIII. A song of degrees of David. BEhold, how good a thing it is, and how becoming well, Together such as brethren are in unitie to dwell. Like precious ointment on the head, that down the beard did flow, Ev'n Aarons beard, and to the skirts did of his garments go. As Hermons dew, the dew that doth on Zion hills descend: For there the blessing God commands, life that shall never end. PSAL. CXXXIV. A song of degrees. BEhold, blesse ye the Lord, all ye that his attendants are, Ev'n you that in Gods Temple be, and praise Him nightly there. Your hands within Gods holy place
lift up, and praise His Name. From Zion hill the Lord thee blesse, that heav'n and earth did frame. PSAL. CXXXV. PRaise ye the Lord; the Lords Name praise, His servants praise ye God: Who stand in Gods house, in the Courts of our God make abode. Praise ye the Lord, for He is good, unto Him praises sing: Sing praises to His Name, because it is a pleasant thing. For Jacob to Himself the Lord did choose, of His good pleasure, And He hath chosen Israel for His peculiar treasure. Because I know assuredly the Lord is very great, And that our Lord, above all gods, in glory hath His seat. What thing soever pleas'd the Lord, that in the heav'n did He, And in the earth, the seas, and all the places deep that be. He from the ends of earth doth make the vapours to ascend: With rain He lightnings makes, and winde doth from His treasures send. Aegypts first-born from man to beast who smore. Strange tokens He On Pharaoh, and his servants sent, Aegypt, in midst of thee.
He smote great nations, flew great Kings: Sihon of Heshbon King, And Og of Bashan, and to nought did Canaans Kingdoms bring. And for a wealthy heritage their pleasant land He gave, An heritage which Israel His chosen folk should have. Thy Name, O Lord, shall still endure, and Thy memoriall With honour shall continued be to generations all. For why, the righteous God will judge His people righteouslie, Concerning those that do Him serve Himself repent will He. The idols of the nations of silver are and gold, And by the hands of men is made their fashion and mold. Mouthes have they, but they do not speak; eyes, but they do not see: Ears have they but hear not, and in their mouthes no breathing be. Their makers are like them, so are all that on them rely. O Israels house blesse God; blesse God O Aarons family. O blesse the Lord of Levies house ye who His servants are; And blesse the Holy Name of God all ye the Lord that fear. And blessed be the Lord our God,
from Zions holy hill, Who dwelleth at Jerusalem. The Lord O praise ye still. PSAL. CXXXVI. GIve thanks to God, for good is He: for mercy hath He ever. Thanks to the God of gods give ye: for His grace faileth never. Thanks give the Lord of lords unto: for mercy hath He ever. Who only wonders great can do: for His grace faileth never. Who by His wisdom made heav'ns high: for mercy He hath ever. Who stretcht the earth above the sea: for His grace faileth never. To Him that made the great Light shine: for mercy He hath ever. The Sun to rule till day decline: for His grace faileth never. The Moon and Stars to rule by night, for mercy hath He ever. Who Aegypts first-born kill'd outright, for His grace faileth never. And Israel brought from Aegypt land, for mercy hath He ever. With stretcht out arm, and with strong hand: for His grace faileth never. By whom the Red-sea parted was; for mercy hath He ever. And through its midst made Israel passe: for His grace faileth never. But Pharaoh, and his host did drown:
for mercy hath He ever. Who through the desert led His own: for His grace faileth never. To Him great Kings who overthrew: for He hath mercy ever. Yea, famous Kings in battell slew: for His grace faileth never. Ev'n Sihon King of Amorites: for He hath mercy ever. And Og the King of Bashanites: for His grace faileth never. Their land in heritage to have, (for mercy He hath ever) His servant Israel right He gave: for His grace faileth never. In our low state who on us thought: for He hath mercy ever. And from our foes our freedom wrought▪ for His grace faileth never. Who doth all flesh with food relieve: for He hath mercy ever. Thanks to the God of heaven give: for His grace faileth never. Another of the same. PRaise God, for He is kinde, His mercy lasts for ay. Give thanks with heart and minde To God of gods alway: For certainly His mercies dure Most firm and sure Eternally.
The Lord of lords praise ye, Whose mercies still endure. Great wonders only He Doth work by His great pow'r: For certainly, &c. Which God Omnipotent, By might and wisdom hie, The heav'n and firmament Did frame, as we may see: For certainly, &c. To Him who did outstretch This earth so great and wide, Above the waters reach Making it to abide: For certainly, &c. Great Lights He made to be, For His grace lasteth ay: Such as the Sun we see To rule the lightsome day: For certainly, &c. Also the Moon so clear, Which shineth in our sight: The Stars that do appear, To guide the darksome night: For certainly, &c. To Him that Aegypt smote, Who did his message scorn; And in His anger hot Did kill all their first-born: For certainly, &c. Thence Israel out He brought: For His grace lasteth ever.
With a strong hand He wrought, And stretcht out arm deliver: For certainly, &c. The sea He cut in two; For His grace lasteth still: And through its midst to go Made His own Israel: For certainly, &c. But overwhelm'd and lost Was proud King Pharao, With all his mighty host, And chariots there also: For certainly, &c. To Him who pow'rfully His chosen people led, Ev'n through the desert dry, And in that place them fed: For certainly, &c. To Him great Kings who smote: For His grace hath no bound. Who slew and spared not Kings famous and renownd: For certainly, &c. Sihon th' Amorites King: For His grace lasteth ever. Og also who did reign The land of Bashan over: For certainly, &c. Their land by lot He gave, For His grace faileth never, That Israel might it have, In heritage for ever: For certainly, &c.
Who hath remembered Us, in our low estate; And us delivered From foes who did us hate: For certainly, &c. Who to all flesh gives food: For His grace faileth never. Give thanks to God most good, The God of heav'n for ever: For certainly, &c. PSAL. CXXXVII. BY Babels streams we sat, and wept, when Zion we thought on. In midst thereof we hang'd our harps the willow trees upon. For there a song required they who did us captive bring; Our spoilers call'd for mirth, and said, A song of Zion sing. O how the Lords song shall we sing within a fora in land? If thee Jerusalem I forget, skill part from my right hand. My tongue to my mouths roof let cleave, if I do thee forget Jerusalem, and thee above my chief joy do not set. Remember Edoms children, Lord, who in Jerusalems day, Ev'n unto its foundation raze, raze it quite, did say. O daughter thou of Babylon, near to destruction,
Blest shall he be that thee rewards, as thou to us hast done. Yea, happy surely shall he be, thy tender little ones VVho shall lay hold upon, and them shall dash against the stones. PSAL. CXXXVIII. A Psalm of David. THee will I praise with all my heart, I will sing praise to thee Before the gods: And worship will toward thy Sanctuarie. I'le praise thy Name, ev'n for thy truth, and kindnesse of thy love: For thou thy word hast magnifi'd all thy great Name above, Thou didst me answer in the day when I to thee did cry: And thou my fainting soul with strength didst strengthen inwardly. All Kings upon the earth that are, shall give thee praise, O Lord, When as they from thy mouth shall hear thy true and faithfull word. Yea, in the righteous ways of God with gladnesse they shall sing: For great's the Glory of the Lord, who doth for ever reign. Though God be hie, yet He respects all those that lowly be; VVhereas the proud and lofty ones afar off knoweth He.
Though I in midst of trouble walk, I life from thee shall have, 'Gainst my foes wrath thou'lt stretch thine hand, thy right hand shall me save. Surely that which concerneth me, the Lord will perfect make: Lord, still thy mercy lasts, Do not thine own hands works forsake. PSAL. CXXXIX. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. O Lord thou hast me search'd and known. Thou knowst my sitting down, And rising up; yea, all my thoughts afar to thee are known. My footsteps, and my lying down thou compassest alwayes; Thou also most intirely art acquaint with all my wayes. For in my tongue, before I speak, not any word can be, But altogether, lo, O Lord, it is well known to thee. Behinde, before, thou hast beset, and laid on me thy hand. Such knowledge is too strange for me, too high to understand. From thy sp'rit whither shall I go? or from thy presence fly? Ascend I heav'n, lo, thou art there; there if in hell I ly. Take I the mornings wings, and dwell in utmost parts of sea: Ev'n there, Lord, shall thy hand me lead, thy right hand hold shall me.
If I do say, that darknesse shall me cover from thy sight, Then surely shall the very night about me be as light. Yea, darknesse hideth not from thee, but night doth shine as day: To thee the darknesse and the light are both alike alway, For thou possessed hast my reins, and thou hast covered me, When I within my mothers womb inclosed was by thee, Thee will I praise, for fearfully and strangely made I am; Thy works are marvelous, and right well my soul doth know the same. My substance was not hid from thee, when as in secret I Was made, and in earths lowest parts was wrought most curiously. Thine eyes my substance did behold, yet being unperfite, And in the volume of thy book my members all were writ, Which after in continuance were fashion'd every one, When as they yet all shapelesse were, and of them there was none. How precious also are thy thoughts O gracious God, to me? And in their summe how passing great and numberlesse they be?
If I should count them, then the sand they more in number be: VVhat time soever I awake, I ever am with thee. Thou, Lord, wilt sure the wicked slay: hence from me bloudy men. Thy foes against thee lewdly speak, and take thy Name in vain. Do not I hate all those, O Lord, that hatred bear to thee? VVith those that up against thee rise can I but grieved be? VVith perfect hatred them I hate, my foes I them do hold. Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me my thoughts unfold: And see if any wicked way there be at all in me; And in thine everlasting way to me a leader be. PSAL. CXL. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David. LOrd, from the ill and froward man give me deliverance, And do thou safe preserve me, from the man of violence. VVho in their heart mischievous things are meditating ever; And they for war assembled are continually together. Much like unto a serpents tongue their tongues they sharp do make;
And underneath their lips there lyes the poyson of a snake. Lord, keep me from the wickeds hands, from violent men me save; VVho, utterly to overthrow my goings, purpos'd have. The proud for me a snare have hid, and cords, yea they a net Have by the way side for me spread, they grins for me have set. I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: unto the cry Of all my supplications, Lord, do thine ear apply. O God the Lord, who art the strength of my salvation, A covering in the day of war my head thou hast put on. Unto the wicked man, O Lord, his wishes do not grant, Nor further thou his ill device, lest they themselves should vaunt. As for the head and chief of those about that compasse me, Ev'n by the mischief of their lips let thou them covered be. Let burning coals upon them fall, them throw in fiery flame, And in deep pits, that they no more may rise out of the same. Let not an evill-speaker be on earth established:
Mischief shall hunt the violent man till he be ruined. I know God will th'afflicteds cause maintain, and poor mens right. Surely the just shall praise thy Name, th'upright dwell in thy sight. PSAL. CXLI. A Psalm of David. O Lord, I unto thee do cry, do thou make haste to me, And give an ear unto my voice, when I cry unto thee. As incense let my prayer be directed in thine eyes; And the uplifting of my hands as th'ev'ning sacrifice. Set, Lord, a watch before my mouth, keep of my lips the door. My heart incline thou not unto the ills I should abhor, To practise wicked works with men that work iniquitie: And with their delicates my taste let me not satisfie. Let him that righteous is me smite, it shall a kindnesse be; Let him reprove, I shall it count a precious oyl to me: Such smiting shall not break my head: for yet the time shall fall, VVhen I in their calamities to God pray for them shall. VVhen as their Judges down shall be
in stony places cast, Then shall they hear my words, for they shall sweet be to their taste. About the graves devouring mouth our bones are scattered round, As wood, which men do cut and cleave, lyes scattered on the ground. But unto thee, O God the Lord, mine eyes uplifted be: My soul do not leave destitute, my trust is set on thee. Lord, keep me safely from the snare, which they for me prepare, And from the subtile grinnes of them, that wicked workers are. Let workers of iniquity into their own nets fall, VVhilst I do by thine help escape the danger of them all. PSAL. CXLXII. Maschil of David: a prayer when he was in the cave. I with my voice cry'd to the Lord, with it made my request: Pour'd out to Him my plaint, to Him my trouble I exprest. VVhen in me was o'rewhelm'd my sp'rit, then well thou knew'st my way: VVhere I did walk, a snare for me they privily did lay. I look'd on my right hand, and view'd, but none to know me were;
All refuge failed me, no man did for my soul take care. I cry'd to thee, I said, Thou art my refuge, Lord, alone, And in the land of those that live thou art my portion. Because I am brought very low, attend unto my cry; Me from my persecuters save, who stronger are then I. From prison bring my soul, that I thy Name may glorify: The just shall compasse me, when thou with me dealst bounteously. PSAL. CXLIII. A Psalm of David. LOrd, hear my pray'r, attend my suits and in thy faithfulnesse Give thou an answer unto me, and in thy righteousnesse. Thy servant also bring thou not in judgement to be try'd; Because no living man can be in thy sight justify'd, For th'enemy hath pursu'd my soul, my life to ground down tread: In darknesse he hath made me dwell, as who have long been dead. My sprit is therefore overwhelm'd in me, perplexedly; VVithin me is my very heart amazed wondrously.
I call to minde the dayes of old, to meditate I use On all thy works; upon the deeds I, of thy hands, do muse. My hands to thee I stretch: my soul thirsts, as dry land, for thee. Haste, Lord, to hear, my spirit fails, hide not thy face from me: Lest like to them I do become, that go down to the dust. At morn let me thy kindnesse hear, for in thee do I trust. Teach me the way that I should walk, I lift my soul to thee. Lord, free me from my foes, I fly to thee, to cover me. Because thou art my God, to do thy will do me instruct: Thy sp'rit is good, me to the land of uprightnesse conduct. Revive and quicken me, O Lord, ev'n for thine own Names sake: And do thou, for thy righteousnesse, my soul from trouble take. And of thy mercy slay my foes; let all destroyed be That do afflict my soul, for I a servant am to thee. Another of the same. OH, hear my prayer, Lord, And unto my desire To bow thine ear accord, I humbly thee require:
And in thy faithfulnesse Unto me answer make, And in thy righteousnesse Upon me pity take. In judgement enter not VVith me thy servant poor: For why, this well I wot, No sinner can endure The sight of thee, O God, If thou his deeds shalt try, He dare make none abode Himself to justifie. Behold the cruell foe Me persecutes with spight, My soul to overthrow: Yea he my life down quite Unto the ground hath smote, And made me dwell full low In darknesse, as forgot, Or men dead long ago. Therefore, my sprit much vext O'rewhelm'd is me within; My heart right sore perplext, And desolate hath bin. Yet I do call to mind VVhat ancient dayes record, Thy works of every kinde I think upon, O Lord. Lo, I do stretch my hands To thee my help alone, For thou well understands All my complaint and mone:
My thirsting soul desires, And longeth after Thee, As thirsty ground requires VVith rain refresht to be. Lord, let my pray'r prevail, To answer it make speed, For lo, my sp'rit doth fail; Hide not thy face in need, Left I be like to those. That do in darknesse sit. Or him that downward goes Into the dreadfull pit. Because I trust in thee, O Lord, cause me to hear Thy loving kindnesse free, When morning doth appear: Cause me to know the way Wherein my path should be, For why my soul on hie I do lift up to thee. From my fierce enemie In safetie do me guide, Because I fly to thee, Lord, that thou mayst me hide. My God alone art thou, Teach me thy righteousnesse: Thy sp'rit's good, lead me to The land of uprightnesse, O Lord for thy Names sake, Be pleas'd to quicken me: And for thy truth, forth take My soul from miserie.
And of thy grace destroy My foes, and put to shame All who my soul annoy: For I thy servant am. PSAL. CXLIV. A Psalm of David. O Blessed ever be the Lord, who is my strength and might, Who doth instruct my hands to war, my fingers teach to fight. My goodnesse, fortresse, my high tow'r, deliverer, and shield, In whom I trust; who under me my people makes to yeeld. Lord, what is man, that thou of him dost so much knowledge take? Or son of man, that thou of him so great account dost make? Man is like vanity: his dayes, as shadows, passe away. Lord▪ bow thy heav'ns come down, touch thou the hils, and smoke shall they. Cast forth thy lightning, scatter them: thine arrows shoot, them rout. Thine hand send from above me save, from great depths draw me out: And from the hand of children strange, Whose mouth speaks vanity: And their right hand is a right hand that works deceitfully. A new song I to thee will sing, Lord, on a psalterie;
I, on a ten-string'd instrument, will praises sing to thee. Ev'n He it is, that unto Kings salvation doth send: Who His own servant David doth from hurtfull sword defend. O free me from strange childrens hands, whose mouth speaks vanity; And their right hand a right hand is, that works deceitfully. That as the plants our sons may be in youth grown up that are; Our daughters like to corner stones cary'd like a palace fair. That to afford all kinde of store our garners may be fill'd; That our sheep thousands, in our streets ten thousands they may yeeld. That strong our oxen be for work, that no in-breaking be, Nor going out, and that our streets may from complaints be free. Those people blessed are, who be in such a case as this: Yea, blessed all those people are, whose God JEHOVAH is. PSAL. CXLV. Davids psalm of praise. I'le thee extoll, my God, O King, I'le blesse thy Name alwayes: Thee will I blesse each day, and will thy Name for ever praise.
Great is the Lord, much to be prais'd, His greatnesse search exceeds, Race unto race shall praise thy works, and show thy mighty deeds. I of thy glorious Majesty the Honour will record, I'le speak of all thy mighty works, which wondrous are, O Lord. Men of thine acts the might shall show, thine acts, that dreadfull are: And I, thy Glory to advance, thy Greatnesse will declare. The memory of thy goodnesse great they largely shall expresse: With songs of praise they shall extoll thy perfect righteousnesse. The Lord is very gracious, in him compassions flow, In mercy He is very great, and is to anger slow. The Lord JEHOVAH unto all His goodnesse doth declare: And over all His other works His tender mercies are, Thee all thy works shall praise, O Lord, and thee thy saints shall blesse. They shall thy Kingdoms glory show, thy pow'r by speech expresse. To make the sons of men to know His acts done mightily, And of His Kingdom th'excellent and glorious Majesty. Thy Kingdom shall for ever stand,
thy reign through ages all. God raiseth all that are bow'd down, upholdeth all that fall. The eyes of all things wait on thee, the giver of all good, And thou in time convenient bestows on them their food. Thy hand thou openest liberally, and of thy bounty gives Enough to satisfie the need of every thing that lives. The Lord is just in all his ways; Holy, in his works all. God's near to all that call on him, in truth that on him call. He will accomplish the desire of those that do him fear: He also will deliver them, and he their cry will hear. The Lord preserves all who Him love, that nought can them annoy: But he all those that wicked are will utterly destroy. My mouth the praises of the Lord to publish, cease shall never: Let all flesh blesse his Holy Name for ever and for ever. Another of the same. O Lord, that art my God and King, Thee will I magnifie and praise: I will thee blesse, and gladly sing Unto thy holy Name alwayes.
Each day I rise, I will thee blesse, And praise thy Name time without end. Much to be prais'd, and great God is, His Greatnesse none can comprehend. Race shall thy works praise unto race, The mighty acts show, done by thee. I will speak of the glorious grace, And honour of thy Majestie: Thy wondrous works I wil record. By men the Might shall be extold Of all thy dreadfull acts, O Lord: And I thy greatnesse will unfold. They utter shall abundantly The memory of thy goodnesse great, And shall sing praises cheerfully, Whilst they thy righteousnes relate. The Lord our God is gracious, Compassionat is he also, In mercy he is plenteous, But unto wrath and anger slow. Good unto all men is the Lord: O're all his works his mercy is. Thy works all praise to thee afford: Thy saints, O Lord thy Name shall blesse. The glory of thy Kingdom show Shall they, and of thy power tell. That so mens sons his deeds may know, His Kingdoms grace that doth excell. Thy Kingdom hath none end at all, It doth through ages all remain. The Lord upholdeth all that fall, The cast-down raiseth up again.
The eyes of all things, Lord, attend, And on thee wait, that here do live: And thou in season due dost send Sufficient food them to relieve. Yea, thou thine hand dost open wide, And every thing dost satisfie, That lives, and doth on earth abide, Of thy great liberalitie. The Lord is just in his wayes all, And holy in his works each one. He's near to all that on him call, Who call in truth on him alone. God will the just desire fulfill Of such as do him fear and dread: Their cry regard, and hear he will, And save them in the time of need. The Lord preserves all, more and lesse, That bear to him a loving heart: But workers all of wickednesse Destroy will he, and clean subvert. Therefore my mouth and lips I'le frame To speak the praises of the Lord: To magnifie his holy Name For ever let all flesh accord. PSAL. CXLVI. PRaise God: the Lord praise, O my soul. I'le praise God while I live: While I have being, to my God in songs I'le praises give. Trust not in Princes, nor mans son, in whom there is no stay: His breath departs, to's earth he turns, that day his thoughts decay.
O happy is that man and blest, whom Jacobs God doth aid, Whose hope upon the Lord doth rest, and on his God is staid VVho made the earth and heavens high, who made the swelling deep, And all that is within the same: who truth doth ever keep: VVho righteous judgement executes for those opprest that be; VVho to the hungry giveth food, God sets the prisoners free. The Lord doth give the blinde their sight, the bowel down doth raise: The Lord doth dearly love all those that walk in upright wayes. The strangers shield, the widows stay▪ the orphans help is he: But yet by him the wickeds way turn'd upside-down shall be. The Lord shall reign for evermore, thy God, O Zion, He Reigns to all generations. Praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CXLVII. PRaise ye the Lord: for it is good praise to our God to sing: For it is pleasant, and to praise it is a comely thing. God doth build up Jerusalem: and He it is alone That the disperst of Israel doth gather into one.
Those, that are broken in their hearts, and grieved in their mindes, He healeth, and their painfull wounds he tenderly up bindes. He counts the number of the stars, he names them every one. Great is our Lord, and of great pow'r: his wisdom search can none. The Lord lifts up the meek, and casts the wicked to the ground. Sing to the Lord, and give him thanks, on harp his praises sound: Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who for the earth below Prepareth rain, who maketh grasse upon the mountains grow. He gives the beast his food he feeds the ravens young, that cry. His pleasure not in horses strength, nor in mans legs doth ly: But in all those, that do him fear, the Lord doth pleasure take, In those that to his mercy do by hope themselves betake. The Lord praise, O Jerusalem; Zion, thy God confesse: For thy gates bars he maketh strong, thy sons in thee doth blesse. He in thy borders maketh peace: with fine wheat filleth thee. He sends forth his command on earth, his word runs speedilie.
Hoar frost, like ashes, scattereth he: like wool he snow doth give: Like morsels casteth forth his yee; who in its cold can live? He sendeth forth his mighty word, and melteth them again: His windes he makes to blow, and then the waters flow amain. The doctrine of his holy word to Jacob he doth show; His statutes and his judgements He gives Israel to know. To any nation never He such favour did afford: For they his judgements have not known. O do ye praise the Lord. PSAL. CXLVIII. PRaise God. From heavens praise the Lord, in heights praise to Him be. All ye his Angels praise ye Him, his hosts all praise Him ye. O praise ye Him both Sun and Moon, praise Him all stars of light. Ye heav'ns of heav'ns Him praise, and flouds above the heavens height. Let all the creatures praise the Name of our Almighty Lord: For he commanded, and they were created by his word. He also, for all times to come, hath them establisht sure: He hath appointed them a Law, which ever shall endure.
Praise ye JEHOVAH from the earth, dragons, and every deep: Fire, hail, snow, vapour, stormy winde, his word that fully keep. All hills and mountains, fruitfull trees, and all ye cedars hy. Beasts, and all cattell creeping things, and all ye birds that fly. Kings of the earth, all Nations, Princes, earths Judges all. Both young men, yea, and maidens too, old men, and children small. Let them Gods Name praise: for his Name alone is excellent: His glory reacheth far above the earth, and firmament. His peoples horn, The praise of all his saints exalteth He Ev'n Israels seed, a people near to Him. The Lord praise ye. Another of the same. THe Lord of heav'n confesse, On high his glories raise. Him let all Angels blesse, Him all his armies praise. Him glorifie Sun, Moon, and Stars: Ye higher Spheres, And cloudie sky. From God your beings are, Him therefore famous make: You all created were, When he the word but spake.
And from that place, Where sixt you be By his decree, You cannot passe. Praise God from earth below, Ye dragons, and ye deeps: Fire, hail, clouds, winde and snow, Whom in command He keeps. Praise ye his Name Hills great and small, Trees low and tall: Beasts wilde and tame. All things that creep or fly: Ye Kings, ye vulgar throng, All Princes mean or hie. Both men and virgins young, Ev'n young and old, Exalt his Name, For much his fame Should be extold. O let Gods Name be prais'd Above both earth and sky: For He his saints hath rais'd, And set their horn on hy; Ev'n those that be Of Israels race Near to his grace. The Lord praise ye. PSAL. CXLIX. PRaise ye the Lord: unto Him sing a new song, and his praise In the assembly of his saints in sweet Psalms do ye raise.
Let Israel in his Maker joy, and to Him praises sing: Let all, that Zions children are, be joyfull in their King. O let them unto his great Name give praises in the dance: Let them with timbrel and with harp in songs his praise advance. For God doth pleasure take in those that his own people be: And He with his salvation the meek will beautifie. And in his glory excellent let all his saints rejoice: Let them to him upon their beds aloud lift up their voice. Let in their mouth aloft be rais'd the high praise of the Lord, And let them have in their right hand a sharp two-edged sword: To execute the vengeance due upon the heathen all, And make deserved punishment upon the people fall. And ev'n with chains as prisoners, binde their Kings that them command, Yea, and with iron fetters strong the nobles of their land. On them the judgement to perform found written in his word: This honour is to all his saints. O do ye praise the Lord.
PSAL. CL. PRaise ye the Lord: Gods praise, within his Sanctuary raise: And to Him in the firmament of his pow'r give ye praise. Because of all his mighty acts with praise Him magnifie: O praise Him, as he doth excell in glorious Majestie. Praise Him with Trumpets sound, his praise with Psaltery advance: With Timbrel, Harp, string'd instruments, and Organs, in the dance. Praise Him on Cymbals loud, Him praise on Cymbals sounding hie. Let each thing breathing praise the Lord. Praise to the Lord give ye. FINIS.
An Index to finde any Psalm of the Book, whereof ye have the first line. The first figure showeth the number of the Psalm: The second the number of the Page. A. Psalm 47 ALl people clap your hands Page. 90 Psalm 51 After thy loving kindnesse Page. 100 Psalm 66 All lands to God in joyfull sounds Page. 124 Psalm 78 Attend my people to my Law Page. 154 Psalm 100 All people that on earth do dwell Page. 199 B. Psalm 41 Blessed is he that wisely doth Page. 77 Psalm 57 Be mercifull to me, O God, Page. 110 Psalm 104 Blesse God, my soul Page. 20 Psalm 119 Blessed are they that undefil'd Page. 244 Psalm 128 Blest is each one that fears the Lord, Page. 267 Psalm 133 Behold, how good a thing it is, Page. 271 Psalm 134 Behold, blesse ye the Lord Page. 271 Psalm 137 By Babels streams we sate, Page. 289 D. Psalm 58 Do ye, O Congregation, Page. 11 Psalm 132 David and his afflictions all Page. 269 E. Psalm 127 Except the Lord do build Page. 266 F. Psalm 37 For evill doers fret thou not, Page. 66 G. Psalm 4 Give ear unto me when I call. Page. 4
Psalm 5 Give ear unto my words, O Lord. Page. 5 Psalm 29 Give ye unto the Lord Page. 49 Psalm 34 God will I blesse all times Page. 59 Psalm 46 God is our refuge Page. 89 Psalm 48 Great is the Lord Page. 91 Psalm 89 Gods mercies I will ever sing, Page. 178 Psalm 97 God reigneth let the earth be glad, Page. 196 Psalm 105 Give thanks to God call on his Name, Page. 214 Psalm 106 Give praise and thanks unto the Lord, Page. 218 Psalm 136 Give thanks to God, Page. 285 H. Psalm 8 How excellent in all the earth Page. 11 Psalm 12 Help, Lord, because the godly man Page. 17 Psalm 13 How long wilt thou forget me, Lord? Page. 18 Psalm 49 Hear this all people Page. 92 Psalm 80 Hear, Israels shepherd Page. 164 Psalm 84 How lovely is thy dwelling-place, Page. 10 Psalm 91 He that doth in the secret place Page. 186 Psalm 124 Had not the Lord been on our side? Page. 263 I. Psalm 6 In thy great indignation Page. 7 Psalm 11 I in the Lord do put my trust, Page. 16 Psalm 20 Jehovah hear thee Page. 31 Psalm 26 Judge me O Lord, Page. 44 Psalm 31 In thee, O Lord, I put my trust, Page. 52 Psalm 38 In thy great indignation Page. 71 Psalm 39 I said, I will look to my wayes, Page. 73 Psalm 40 I waited for the Lord Page. 75 Psalm 43 Judge me, O God, and plead Page. 81 Psalm 76 In Judahs land God is well known, Page. 150 Psalm 82 In Gods assembly God doth stand, Page. 168 Psalm 101 I mercy will and judgment sing. Page. 200 Psalm 116 I love the Lord, because my voice Page. 239 Psalm 120 In my distresse to God I cry'd, Page. 261
Psalm 107 Praise God, for He is good Page. 283 Psalm 111 Praise ye the Lord, Page. 234 Psalm 112 Praise ye the Lord, Page. 235 Psalm 113 Praise God ye servants of the Lord, Page. 236 Psalm 135 Praise ye the Lord, the Lords Name Page. 272 Psalm 146 Praise God: the Lord praise, Page. 295 Psalm 147 Praise ye the Lord: Page. 296 Psalm 148 Praise God. From heavens Page. 298 Psalm 149 Praise ye the Lord: Page. 300 Psalm 150 Praise ye the Lord, Page. 302 S. Psalm 54 Save me, O God, Page. 105 Psalm 56 Shew mercy, Lord, Page. 108 Psalm 69 Save me, O God, because the flouds Page. 132 Psalm 81 Sing loud to God our strength Page. 166 T. Psalm 1 That man hath perfect blessednesse Page. 1 Psalm 14 That there is not a God Page. 19 Psalm 18 Thee will I love, O Lord, Page. 24 Psalm 19 The heavens Gods glory do declare, Page. 30 Psalm 21 The King in thy great strength Page. 32 Psalm 23 The Lord's my shepherd Page. 38 Psalm 24 The earth belongs unto the Lord, Page. 38 Psalm 25 To thee I lift my soul, O Lord, Page. 42 Psalm 27 The Lord's my light Page. 46 Psalm 28 To thee I'le cry, O Lord, my Rock, Page. 48 Psalm 36 The whicked mans transgression Page. 65 Psalm 50 The mighty God the Lord Page. 95 Psalm 50 The mighty God the Lord Page. 97 Psalm 53 That there is not a God Page. 104 Psalm 75 To thee, O God, do we give thanks Page. 149 Psalm 92 To render thanks unto the Lord Page. 188 Psalm  The Lord doth reign Page. 190 Psalm  Th'Eternal Lord doth reign Page. 198
Psalm 110 The Lord did say unto my Lord, Page. 233 Psalm 125 They in the Lord that firmly trust, Page. 265 Psalm 138 Thee will I praise with all my heart, Page. 290 W. U. Psalm 2 Why rage the Heathen? Page. 2 Psalm 10 Wherefore is it, that thou, O Lord, Page. 14 Psalm 15 Within thy Tabernacle, Lord, Page. 20 Psalm 52 Why dost thou boast Page. 103 Psalm 64 When I to thee my prayer make Page. 121 Psalm 77 Unto the Lord I with my voice Page. 151 Psalm 87 Upon the hills of holinesse Page. 175 Psalm 124 When Israel out of Aegypt went Page. 237 Psalm 126 When Zions bondage God turn'd back Page. 266 Y. Psalm 33 Ye righteous in the Lord rejoyce Page. 57 Psalm 73 Yet God is good to Israel Page. 142 FINIS.
