b2972 e365_5 99861776 113921
THE Speech without doores defended without reason. OR, A Vindication of the Parliaments honour: IN A Rejoynder to three Pamphlets published in Defence of M. Chaloners Speech. Aeschines Epist. 11. Senatui Populoque Atheniensi. For I heare that some incite you to new things Alexander being dead: but I would advise you those things which are fit for the future. I Did before give a sufficient account of my selfe, and of my faithfulnesse to the Parliament; and I must now say, that the Authours of these Pamphlets have been extreamly mista∣ken, and very unhappy in their Auguries concerning me. The Scripture which was prefixed in the Title of my Animadver∣sions, For the transgrassion of a Land, many are the Princes there∣of, Prov. 28.2. was not intended against the Parliament, and the Pamphlet which hath put this notion in the heads of people, hath done but a disservice to the Parliament: For my part, I am no such Guifted Brother, as to draw from  what is
not in it, neither did I make any other use of my Text (as he cals it) then any Minister of H. M. his Ordination may doe: But it was intended against change of Government, which the Speech without Doors did (and the defences of it doe) too too much drive at. Amongst other Judgements which came upon a Land for the transgression thereof, one and a chiefe one is the change of Government, or Governours in a State, , said Xenophon, All changes of Govern∣vernment are mortiferous. And what more dangerous or deadly, then an alteration of the fundamentall Government of this Kingdome by the King, and both Houses of Parliament? Nor doth it want its owne danger, to have many voided places in Parliament, and so a frequent succession of many new Members, or to have the chiefe Officers Civill and Military put into ma∣ny new hands, if the persons intrusted be not extraordinary well principled. The state of the Question between the Speech without Doors, and my Animadversions upon it, doth not concerne the main∣taining of the Law of the Land, which one of the Pamphlets would now draw into the Dispute. I will (according to my power) maintaine the Law of the Land as much as any, and am obliged so to do, though not upon the reason given in that Pam∣phlet, because We are by Covenant obliged to maintaine as well the Law of the Land, as the Person of the King. It seemes this man is not well acquainted with the Covenant, read it againe, finde this in it, Et Phyllida solus habeto. Neither yet is our Question, whethet His Majesties Person is to be disposed of solely and singly by the Houses of Parliament; I said not a word against M. Chaloners result or conclusion, (which his defenders chiefly speake to) or in defence of the Scotch Papers, of which I say still, let them speake for themselves. My Dispute was and is against that Speech, for arguing against the Scotch Papers, from such principles as are inconsistent with, and destructive to the honour of the Parliament, and interest of England. When M. Challo∣ner shall bring convincing reasons to prove his conclusion, I shall therein joyne with him, mean while my exceptions against his Speech ought not to be challenged as exception against the Votes of Parliament, concerning their right to dispose of the
Kings Person. And whereas it is pleaded in the justification of the Speech, pag. 13. That since the Gentleman doth but assert their (the Parliaments) Votos, they would be very forgetfull of their owne interest, if they should be offendod thereat. This is a most presump∣tuous and unsufferably injurious imputation to the Parliament, as if their Interest did engage them to approve of every Speech or Pamphlet which undertaketh to assert their Votes, without examining the principles and arguments of such an Assertion, whether they be good or bad, true or false, consistent or incon∣sistent with their Honours. He that will tell a notorious lie, if so be he do it to assert the Votes of Parliament, may by this rule have an easie excuse. But the Speech without Doors holdeth forth to the world not onely a ridiculous Assertion, but a ridiculous sense of those Votes of Parliament: For the Kingdoms are contending (said M. Chal∣loner) about the Kings Person, not who shall have it, but who shall not have it; which inferreth by consequence, that the Par∣liament either did not wisely, or not uprightly in that Vote, that the Person of the King is to be disposed of as both Houses shall thinke fit. He that writes the justification of M. Challoners Speech (pardon me if this expression be Identicall) doth indeed confute M. Challoner, while he goeth about to prove, that the Parliament did both uprightly and wisely in that Vote: Sure, if the Parliament voted wisely, M. Challoner spake not wisely; when he did upon the matter deliver (I will not say, he did in∣tend) this sense of the Vote, That both Houses are to dispose, as they shall think fit, of a Person whom they desire not to have in their Power, nor in the Kingdom. If therefore, any hurt hath or shall come to that Vote of the Honourable Houses, it cometh by the dangerous Arguments for it, and the ridiculous sense of it, first delivered, and now defen∣ded in M. Challoners Speech; for my part, I have said nothing against their Vote, but vindicated their Honour. This premised, and the Question stated, as before, I will speake so much the more freely what I thinke, because none of these Pamphlets have dared to avouch against me that M. Challoners Speech was prin∣ted as it was spoken in the House, (which was before pretended in the Title Page) yea the Justification of his Speech tells me,
that the Gentleman neither ownes the printing, nor the Title-page, whereby he hath so far justified me, as that I have not pre∣sumed to examine any thing spoken within Doors; neither did I in professing this at first, contradict my selfe (as I am now char∣ged) by reporting somewhat spoken by M. Challoner in the House, but not printed. 'Tis one thing to intermeddle by exa∣mining, another thing to make a simple Narration; I hope all words spoken within those walls are not unlawfull to be utte∣red againe. Well, the Speech which was out, is not yet in; we are still without Doors, and now also without the Lines of Communication: where at the first view I find him who digged for me the ditch of selfe-contradiction, fallen into it himselfe; For pag. 9. he holds, that the King of one Kingdome being in another Kingdome, is still a King, Rex though not in Regno. Yet pag. 10. he will not admit the King of Scotland being in England, to be any more then a Subject. Now if I were resolved to defend the Scotch Papers (as I am not) there is no need of it; for there is not so much as one of our Brethrens Arguments repeated, touched, or answered, either in the Speech, or in the Defences of it: So that whereas the Authour of one of the Pamphlets observeth, that my An∣swer did but catch at parts, and instances of the Speech, the Rea∣der may observe, that my Answer catched at much more of the Speech, then either that Pamphlet catched of my Answer, or the Speech catched of the Scotch Papers: but we shall see anon whether he and his fellowes have not catched M. Challonor in∣stead of me. The Penman of that Pamphlet, which I mention∣ed last, is a pretender to be one of the State Wits, but he ac∣counts it a pedantike confinement for wisemen in discourses of State to speake properly, and his owne language is suitable to his rule, when he calls his Defence of M. Challoners Speech A indiffexent Censure of it. He would gladly have the Authour of Lex Rex (by him much mistaken to my best information) to speak as improperly as M. Challonor, and another of these Pam∣phlets strikes upon the same string, although the Authour of that Book without maintaining the propriety of the terms of that distinction, doth onely open the sense and meaning of it in other and better expressions; neither will all this quibling of
the Adiaphorist (for so his Title of A indifferent Censure pre∣tendeth) make Persona to be Vox Concreta, or if it be, prethee what's Personatus? In the next place, he would take off my exception against that most certaine truth (as he calls it) in the Speech, that the Person either of Prince or private man, being in a Forraign State, is at the sole dispose of that State, where he resides, and to be ruled by their Lawes: Looke you here what a fallacious diversion this is, he knew well that the Commissioners from both Houses of Par∣liament are neither Princes nor private men, and so he would be sure to exempt the Commissioners of Parliament from subje∣ction to the Lawes and Jurisdiction of another State. Concer∣ning which, I find a strange descrepance betweene the wit and the will of him that wrote the last and largest Justification of M. Challoners Speech, pag. 7.8. his will is to decline that infe∣rence, that the Commissioners of Parliament being in Scotland must be at the sole dispose of that State, and subject to their Lawes, and Jurisdiction: yet this wit is such, as doth upon the matter yeeld the same thing which he declineth, leaving more Authority to the Parliament over their Commissioners being in Scotland, then a Master dwelling in Scotland, hath over his ser∣vants, (which cannot sure exempt them from being ruled by the Law of that Land) and at most no more then is provided by Treaty or Contract between the Kingdomes, which will a∣mount to as much as nothing; For I dare say, there never was nor never will be any such Treaty or Contract between these Kingdomes, that the Ambassadours or Commissioners sent from the one Kingdom, shall not be subject to the Lawes, nor at the sole dispose of the other Kingdome: The Law of Nations was never yet so farre doubted of, as to Minister the least occasion for such a Proviso. But good now, how shall M. Challonors prin∣ciples be made good, unlesse the Commissioners of Parliament being in Scotland, be at the sole dispose of that State, and be ruled by their Laws, not by the Orders or Commands of both Houses? For his Speech, pag. 6, 7. saith, That the locall subjection for the time, doth totally obstruct the operation of the other subjection: and that any Subject coming from another Kingdom, is to be disposed of by the sole Authority of that Supream Power where he makes his residence.
Hence chiefly grow mistakes in these debates, because men would give unto others such measure as they will not be content to receive to themselves. I do not know how happy the man that wrote the Indifferent censure may be in defending M. Challoner; But I am sure he is no good defender of the Authority of King and Parliament. He thinks no sober man will deny that Prince Charles is solely at the dispose of the State of France, and that he cannot be recalled by King and Parliament. If he mean de facto, he is as wide from the thing in dispute as none-sense is from sense: But if he mean de jure (which was the only thing in debate) or that King and Parliament have not an  or lawfull and just Authority to recall Prince Charles, but that by right and good reason he is at the sole dispose of the State of France, then he hath spoken high Treason, let him answer it as he can. Sure his words doe more then leane this way, when he addeth; That Princes who by mis∣fortune, have been cast upon other Princes Countries, may be detained without imputation of Tyranny for taking that advantage. Where (by the way) he had done as well for the honour of the Nation to have spared the two Instances of that King in England, and to have sought his instances somewhere else, the Law of God provided better entertainment for afflicted stran∣gers, then to adde griefe to their sorrow. If it must fare so ill with strangers (whether Princes or Parliament men) me thinks it were a good motion to revive the Law of the old Aedui, that it be not lawfull for the Magistrate to go without his own territories. As for my instance of Ambassadours which I brought against M. Challoner, all three pamphlets say somewhat of the Protecti∣on and safety which Ambassadours ought to have, but nothing to the defence of M. Challoners principles, admitting of no pro∣tection to Embassadours in England, without their subjection to the Lawes of England. Here, Here is a , yea a new light, which cannot be found amongst all the Books of the learned Polititi∣ans, who are by these more learned Pamphleters put in a mar∣vellous great mistake for holding that Embassadours, however subject unto and obliged by the Lawes of God, Nature and Na∣tions,
(against which when they do grossely trespasse, the Prince or State where they are resident doth usually make Remonstrance thereof to the Prince or State that sent them, and so demanded Justice in such cases from those to whom it pro∣perly belongeth to judge or punish them) yet they are not sub∣jected to the Government, Jurisdiction or municipall Lawes of that State, unto which they were sent. Surely he that holdeth the contrary leaves the safety of Embassadors in a most lubricous posture, by subjecting them to two Princes or States, whose ends, Counsels, opinions, interests and Lawes are usually diffe∣rent and not seldome inconsistent. So that Jus Legatorum, which the Nations have accounted sacred and inviolable, shall be more exposed to danger then Jus Subditorum, and an Embassadour qui incolumis vel inter hostium tela versari possit (as Tully saith) shall be of all other men in least safety. And if it be true which the Justifier of M. Challoners Speech saith, That it is not the Law of Nations (which by the way he confoundeth with the Law of Nature infused into all men, and will acknowledge no Law by the consent of Nations; untill it be ratified forsooth by an Occu∣menicall Parliament.) But only the particular Contract, confide∣racy and Agreement betwixt his (the Embassadours) Master, and that Prince or State, unto whom he is sent that can protect and de∣fend him; Then we must bid farewell to that of Livius (gene∣rally approved by Polititians) concerning the Embassadours of King Tarquinius, inviolable with the Romans by the Law of Na∣tions, even when they were upon designes and practises against that State, having corrupted many of their young Nobility a∣gainst them. Quanquam visisunt (Legati) comisisse ut hostium loco essent, jus tamen Gentium valuit. The instance of King John who was also Duke of Normandy I must still laugh at, For M. Challenor and his Defenders take hold of the resolution of the Lawyers in France; This peradventure might have seemed somwhat against the Scotch Papers; If M. Chal∣lenor had not told withall, what the State of England at that time pleaded against the State of France. The English pleaded that although the Duke of Normandy be a Subject of France, yet the French ought not so much as dispose of the person of that Subject of theirs, because in so doing they should dispose of the
person of the King of England, which they held to be a great in∣dignity to the Kingdome of England, just so do our Brethren of Scotland plead (I am now but stating matter of Fact) that it were an indignity to that free Kingdom, if the Parliament here should singly and without the advice and consent of the Parliament of Scotland, dispose of the person of this Individuall King of En∣gland, because in so doing they should dispose of the person of the King of Scotland. If M. Challenor will say that in the debate about King John, the French were in the right and the English in the wrong, let him speake out, I have another Answer for him: But if he hold that the English were in the right against the French; Then how will he make the very same Argument, (in point of right or wrong) to be good in the mouthes of the English, and bad in the mouthes of the Scotch. Whereas I touched as to the mutuall interest of two Kingdoms, and in reference to that resolution of the Lawyers in France con∣cerning the Duke of Normandy, the vast disproportion between him who is a King of one Kingdome, and Subject of another, and him who is King of more Kingdoms then one, this is yeel∣ded to me; But withall I am told that I am out in another kind; For there is also a vast disproportion between a King of two Kingdomes ruling in peace and Justice, and one who hath been in war against his Kingdomes. Now see him that makes this Ob∣jection here put out by himselfe; For I shall only answer him in his own words, the debate is not come so far yet, as to questi∣on how the Kings Person shall be disposed of, but by whom. If the question were how to dispose of him, I admit that disproporti∣on which is objected: But it is neither here nor there, when the debate is by whom, by both Kingdomes, or by England singly. The Close of the indifferent censure saith, That the effects of the Kings shelter in the Scotch Army have been already very sad, as by Jealousies here to keepe so many Armies at a needlesse charge, and hinder the reliefe of poore Ireland: But sith the effect could not be without the Cause, say truth now; Whether had the Armies been yet kept up, although his Majesty had come to Lon∣don, when he went to the Scotch Army? If they had, and you Sir know they had, then you dealt not fairely nor faithfully in this Observation.
However (if you will) let the King and the Scotch be put to it, and offer made that the Parliaments Army in this Kingdome shall be forthwith disbanded or sent into Ireland, upon his Ma∣jesties returning to his great Councell the Parliament, and upon our Brethrens rendring of the Garrisons, and marching away with their Army. See whether upon such an offer or assurance his Majesty will not give a satisfactory Answer to the Propositions of peace, and he returne to London, and our Brethren home a∣gaine, and then the Author of the Pamphlet who begins to doubt whether Newcastle be in Scotland, (for I never heard it doubted by another) will be soone put out of doubt, or if he will he may desire to have it presently resolved upon the Question, that Newcastle is in England. I have yet somewhat to add concerning that Pamphlet which ends with the bleating of sheepish Logick, but begins in the Ti∣tle page with a pretence to answer all moderate men: Tis well that he makes not himselfe , but , yet as violent and injurious as he is, he hath said more for me then against me. (If there be any thing materiall in him it is already touched, I shall only take hold of his acknowledgments) I had said that M. Challoners Speech without Doores presented him Goliah-like, coming forth for the Parliament, but stumbling wofully. My Replier tells me that God did not permit me in this to lye, I thanke him for his observation: Hee acknowledgeth pag. 3. That the Scots are bound to maintain the Kings person, if the Parliament should wrong his person; And is not Mr. Challoners Speech here well defended? much good may this defence doe him. Amongst other inferences I had drawn this from Mr. Challe∣nors Speech, That the person of the King of England if he were in Scotland, must be disposed of by the Supreame power of that Country, without the advice and consent of the Parliament of England, which I presume was far from M. Challenors meaning to admit: for speaking of the Scots, he said, I conceive they will not take upon them any Authority to dispose of the Person of a King of England, yet my inference is yeelded by the Replier in M. Chal∣lenors name, who also in the Close saith, That if the Scots shall get the King into Scotland, as they have no right in him, in En∣gland
we could pertaine as little to him he being in Scotland. My In∣ference is also confessed to be true, by the Author of the largest Pamphlet pag. 4. And who is the Malignant now, he that main∣taines or they that yeeld up the Priviledge of Parliament and in∣terest of England. No man can be said to be Rex, but in Regno, said M. Challenor, Then by just Analogy (said I) The Parliament of England can∣not be acknowledged a Parliament, but in England only. The Replyer tells me that M. Challenor only denyeth a forraign King the Title of that Country he shall happen to come unto, and not the Title of his owne that he brought with him. And that al∣though in England we would not admit of Marie as Queene of England, yet was she acknowledged Queene of Scotch at her being here. I confesse this is more then had been acknowledged in Scot∣land if she had been there at that time: But however I do not see how it agreeth with M. Challoners Speech without doores, ad∣mitting of no regality in the person of a King of Scotland com∣ing into England before the Union, and affirming that he must be taken as a Subject, not as a King: and I know as little, who have ever affirmed or were to be contradicted for affirming, That the King of one Kingdome coming by some accident into another Kingdome, doth thereby become King of that Kingdome, which he happeneth to come into. But to passe that, I shall be glad to have this riddle opened, how these two things (which the Re∣plier holds in Mr. Challenors name) can hang together, that a King of England being in Scotland doth not lose his interest in England, but is still King of England, and yet his Subjects of En∣gland during his being in Scotland doe not pertain to him, but lose their interest and right in him. I shall at last observe that one part of the Speech without doores is disclaimed (peradventure it shall fare so with other parts of it:) Tis alledged that the Gentleman said not that England is as distinct in Interests from Scotland as Spaine, but that England is as distinct a Kingdome from Scotland as Spaine. Yet I find in that part of the Speech, the words as distinst repeated, and referred not to the King∣domes, but to Lawes, Priviledges, Interests; It was this latter clause which I animadverted, but since he passeth from it so doe I; And now to conclude, I acknowledge one Error in my Anim∣adversions,
which none of the three Repliers have Animadver∣ted, and that was the putting of  for  by the Prin∣ters mistake. I am not yet convinced by my Antagonists, and if I had been as apt to take fire as they were to give it, my discourse had broken forth in a hot flame. But I intend not oleum camino. What ever some men drive at, I trust the honourable Houses, and all true hearted English-men (and none more then my selfe) shall endeavour the preservation of Union between the King∣domes, together with a sincere, constant and reall pursuance of all the other ends expressed in the solemne League and Covenant. FINIS. Printed in the Yeare 1646.
