B4766 E355_26 99861680 159906
The IRISH PAPERS, Containing the Lord Digbyes Let∣ter, And the Lord Inchiquins answer, with other speciall Passages of the Overtures concerning the whole designe in Ireland, The Plot of the Rebells discovered: And preparations for the com∣ming in of the Marquisse of ORMOND to the Parliament, whose strength in Dublin is betweene 5. and 6000. Men. October 1. 1646. These Jrish Papers are appointed to bee printed, and are published according to Order. LONDON, Printed by F. Leech, Anno Dom. 1646.
A Copy of the Lord George Digby's Letter to the Lord Inchiquine. My Lord, I Have severall times (While I was in England) endeavoured (though unsucksesfully) to con∣vey unto your Lordship this truth, that a∣mongst all the Calamitites of my Country, and misfortunes to the King my Mr. there hath not happened any thing of a more neere, and per∣sonall affliction to mee, then the separation from his service, and interests a person from whom I had so high a value, and particular a friendship, as for your Lordship: and upon whose affection, and abillities I had founded so great part of my solidest hopes for his Ma∣jesties Restauration. And really (my Lord) how opposite cour∣ses soever, we have since runne, and appeare stil ingaged in: I must professe that I have ever cherisht all the arguments I could possibly raise to perswade my selfe that either some strange mistake, or some desperate malice of others have occasioned this separation: And that only
the impossibility of our meeting to cleere them had continued it. VVherefore (my Lord) wee being now both upon a sceene, where it will depend meerly upon our own wills to give our selves that satisfaction, concerning one anothers opi∣nions, and actions, (which a much lesse kind∣nesse then ours was, might challenge.) I send this not onely to invite, but even to conjure Your Lordship, to pay that dutie to former friendship, as to agree of the place, and manner where (upon the mutuall security of our owne honours) I may waite upon you, and enjoy the happinesse of an houres or twos Conference with you, from which I hope their may bee much advantage produced to the publike, and am most assured, at least of much satisfaction to our selves, since certainly, either I shall have so much reason to worke upon you, or yours so much power on mee as though not to alter my opinion in relation to the publike, yet so far to inlighten me in what concernes my owne perticular, as not to let my publike engagements in the contrary way bee any longer any impedement to my resu∣ming
in a private one, the affection where∣with I was formerly. My Lord; Your Lordships most affectionate humble servant. George Digby. Klkenny, Sept. the 2d 1646. To the Right Honourable the Lord Inchequin: This letter was sent from Kilkenny after that the Lord Digby was come thither with the Marquesse of Ormond, and the Forces from Dublin. The Lord Inchequin having received this letter, by a messenger from the Lord Digby, peruseth it, disdaines the perfidious traducement of it; and returnes his Lordship a plenary answer as followeth. The Copy of the Lord Inchequins An∣swer to the Lord Digbies Letter. My Lord: THe place you are now in, whom I know to bee a person in whom his Majesty re∣posed so much trust, And the peace now con∣cluded by His Majesties authority to the utter ruine (as I conceive) of all that professe the Protestant Religion in this Kingdome, and submit therunto; have evidenced to the whole
world those just grounds that caused my sepa∣ration from that Your Lordship is pleased to call his service, and interests, though I assure my selfe it tends to the ruine of both. I find Your Lordships opinion, in relation to the publike so setled, that I am not so vaine to entertaine a hope of altering Your Lord∣ship by my reasons: And I am very sure (though I must acknowledge your reasons and abilities to bee great) my resolutions are built upon such a foundation as can never bee moved: And therefore cannot imagine what advantage can bee derived to the publike by our personall meeting, the honour whereof J may not (for any perticular respect) allow my selfe. And for the private friendship (with the mention whereof you are pleased to ho∣nour me) the publique impediments being re∣moved, J shal be ambitius to have it renued, and shal also accompt it an honour to be estee∣med by you, My Lord, Your Lordships most humble servant Inchiquin. Cork the 9th of Sept. 1646. For the Lord Georg Digby; But the meane while the Lord Castle-haven in∣formes the Marquisse of Ormond that a Plot is
taid against him, and the Lord Digby by the old Na∣live Irish, to cut them off, and that the Assembly of the Catholike Clergy are designing to declare the su∣preame Counsell perjured, and to excommunicate them for concluding that peace without them. This causeth Digby and Ormond to hast back to Dublin with their forces, the Clergy of Dublin commend the worke, pray to have their Hirarchy and Booke of Common-prayer continued, But the Popish Clergy at Waterford declare the supreame Counsell to be per∣jured, and proceed to excommunication, send out their curss, and thunderbolts, & resolve to advance the po∣pish Religion, or else to yeeld to no peace, and after ma∣ny meetings, & divers consultations had in that assem∣bly, at last they resolve to send Propositions to the Marquisse of Ormond, whereunto if he wil consent then they will yeeld to a peace, else declare open Warre against the power of the King, as well as against the Parliament. The Marquisse of Ormond hereupon musters up his strength in Dublin, which amount to 5. or 6000. men able to beare armes, vvhich if he will declare him∣selfe for the Parliament (as some hope and expect)) fre∣land will (probably) be an easier work to  then vvas before thought on, for entertainment whereof there are preparations to some Overtures. FINIS.
