C2101 E140_25 99860523 156547
His Maiesties Answer to a Message sent to him by the House of Commons, at Yorke, March 19. 1641. ALSO Two Remarkable Letters from IRELAND Sent over by Robert Pickering, Secretary unto Sir Symon Harcourt, March, 17. 1641. The first being the Copy of a Letter written by the Earle of Osmond one of the Com∣manders of the Rebels, unto the Earle of Delvin, wherein he declares the great distresse they are in for want of Ammunition and other Provision, and also frustrate of the reliefe they hoped for out of Flanders. Which Letter and Bearer was intercepted by the night Scouts of Sir Symon Harcourt. The second, the Copie of the Popes Bull sent un∣to the Irish Rebels, found in the Trunke of Macke Oro∣bie, his Legate, who was taken prisoner in the Lord Mountgarrets Quarter. LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. 1641.
The Copie of a Letter written by the Earle of Osmond a Commander of the Rebels, unto the Earle of Delvia, that lay at the Head of Hoare. COUZEN; I Wish J could salute you with bet∣ter Newes, or you served me with better Councell, when it would have stood me in stead; J give us all for undone, onely this choice as yet is left us, that wee may choose the Sword before the Halter, Tom Butler writes from Brussels: That the Spaniard loves us well, but himselfe a great deale better: I he Governout of Flanders hath made stay of the Ships in Dunkirke, norwithstanding the meanes he made to his Confessor, who laboured by all Jmportunity to get the Am∣munition free, if not the bottomes, but could obtain nothing we then deale effectually with the Governour and Captaine of Dunkirke by the Sollicitation of the Irish Cloister, to let them steate away as if it were unknowne to them, but nei∣ther would heare him. The Count from Brussels had beene asore him, and had layd such a strict charge upon him, that
he would listen to nothing: The King of Spaine in this case, his reason is setcht from Portugall, that none of the English may helpe against him. he with holds his wonted ayd to us, but the English will as certainly deceive him, when their owne turne is served and they have made an end with us: The Spaniard will find more English in Portugall then he will be willing to bid welcome, they hate him as cordially as us, and us the more for the Respect bore us from Spaine. More Forces are arrived from England, 400 vnder the command of one Greenvill, with 700 more, the Scots are of a certaine arrived in the North also, but what number yet J cannot learne. It is Rumoured in Dublin, that now the Parliament in England will presse a great Army for Leicester, and that he will be here before Easter. We are likely to bee beset on all sides, and for ought I see to be devoured, Roach is Arrived out of France, but with as little comfort, The Cardinall giveth good words, but wee may justly suspect his performance. The French King is so imbarked in the Spanish Broyle, that he I feare will little heed vs, my men begin to be weary of it already, The same Philomy writes of his, And so it will follow in others, For we are naked of Armes, And e∣specially destitute of powder, The taking of that provision at Eniskenning hath lost vs both our Lives and Honour, Let me desire you, at your first conveniencie, to send my Wife and Three Daughters for Nantes, or Dunkirke, And for my part, if friends abroad regard neither the Common tye of the Catholique Faith; Not their former promises, But onely their owne particulers: As we have but too just cause to doubt they doe not, J will shortly over too, lea∣ving all to the Arbitrament of Fortune, Rather then to see the miserable slavery of my Nation, And utter treading
downe of my Countrey by the Barbarous morellesse Scots, and proud insulting English; If you have any better Ty∣dings to write, You may Commit them to the bearer safe∣ly, Macke me Cherrie, Who by reason of his perfect En∣glish Tongue, passeth for one of that Nation; And there∣by sometime doth advantage vs; My Love Commend vn∣to my Carefull Countesse and Young Daughter; Thus Com∣mitting your and our affayres to the Almighty, and protecti∣on of Saint PATRICKE. From Dondeniell. March. 14. 1641. Charles Osmond.
The Coppie of the Popes Bull unto the Irish Rebels. VRBAN the eyght, by the Divine providence, Bishop of Rome. Bishop of Bishops, and servant of the ser∣vant of God. To all the Cleargie, Peeres, and people of Jreland, his well beloved Sonnes in Christ, now consederate in holy League, for the maintenance of Ca∣tholique Religion to the very perill of their blood, greeting and Apostolicall benediction. SEeing that your unspeakeable sufferings have beene now of late related unto us, by the Provost of the Irish Nation, of late which yee have undergone for these many Ages, not onely patiently, but willingly groaning under the Egyp∣tian Yoake of Hetesie, more heavie then that of Pharoahs, yea and most ready to beare it still, so that, the one thing ne∣cessary, the most unvaluable Pearle, the better part might not hee taken from you, nor the gate of Eternall happinesse after Life ended shut against you. Which when wee understood, Wee as our dutie required, with bended Knee both of heart and bodie, have recommended this your most pious in∣tention to the Throne of grace, at the blessed Sacrifice of the Altar, feare yee not that ever ayde celestiall shall be wanting to you, who have so religiously preferred the salvation of your Souls, Christs Spouse, the welfare of the Church Catho∣lque, before your lively hoods and honours, freinds, Fathers, Mothers, Wives, Children, Sonnes, Daughters, Yea, and then which nothing is more deare to man, life it selfe, how shall the Saviour of the World passe by you disregarded, whom in his Gospell he solemnely professeth to be more deare unto him then his owne Bretheren shall not Christ
fight for his owne Champions, will not blessed St. Peter maintaine them that weigh not their owne possessions, so they may desend his, God forbid that you should ever be desti∣tute of assistance, who have the blessed Mother of God for their shield and Buckler, as whom they honour, reverence, and adore, more zealously then all the World, goe on with prosperous successe, behave your selves manfully, that which yee have with transcendant piety begun, Wee earnestly re∣quire that with resolved constancy yee endeavour to accom∣plish, strictly charging you that you by no meanes ye with∣draw your hand from this plough, least yee be ever after unfit for the glorious society of heavenly trumphant Catho∣liques, you shall not onely have the universall party of the Roman Catholique faith spectators, but Orators and fuitors to the divine Deity in heaven but coadjutors, contributors to their utmost power in wishes consultations, allowances both for Armes, Victuals and other things necessary there in your Country & of this be assured, as for us to whom the government of our Lords blessed vessell is committed, doubt yee not but that you shall continually have us an intercessor to the Court of heaven for you, and an advances of your successe, and en∣terprize there in your Kingdome, all the wayes wee for our Pastorall dutie shall thinke meetest: What remaineth, Wee by this our Legate Orobie with the summe of Foure hundred Duckets; with hearty recommendation and pastorall affection bestow upon you our plenarie Judulgence of all your sinnes, and benediction Apostolicall. Given at Rome the last of February New-stile, Anno Salutis 1642. Under the Seale of the Fisherman, in the Nineteenth yeare of our Popedome. Under written, Rancone and S. R. L. P. S.
His Majesties Answer to a Message sent to Him by the House of Commons, concerning Lycences granted by him to persons to goe into Ireland. HIS Majesty hath seen and considered the Message presented to Him by the Lord: Compton and Master Baynton, the 19th of March, 1641. at Yorke; Touching such persons as have been Licensed by His Majesty to passe into Ireland. Though he will not insist upon what little Reason they had to suspect that some ill-affected persons had passed into Ire∣land, under colour of his Majesties Licence (Inferences be∣ing slender Proofes to ground beliefe upon) yet he must needs avow, That for any thing that is yet Declared, He cannot see any ground why Master Pym should so boldly affirme before both houses of Parliament, I hat since the stop upon the Ports by both Houses against all Irish Papists, many of the chiefe Com∣manders now in the head of the Rebells, have been suffered to passe by his Majesties immediate VVarant; For as yet there is not any particular person named that is now so much as in Rebellion (much lesse in the head of the Rebells) to whom his Majesty hath given Licence. And therefore according to his Majesties Reply upon that Subject, His Majestie expects, That his House of Commons publish such a Declaration, Whereby this mistaking may be cleared, That so all the World may see his Majesties Caution in giving of Passes; And likewise, That his Ministers have not abused his Majesties trust, by any surreptitious Warrants. And lastly, his Maesty expects, That heneforth there be more warinee used, before such publike Aspersions be laid; unlesse the Grounds be before-hand better Warranted by suf∣ficient Proofes. FINIS.
