c3879a e1000_12 99866866 119154
A TRVE RELATION OF THE STATE of the CASE Between the ever Honourable PARLIAMENT AND THE OFFICERS OF THE ARMY, That fell out on the eleventh and twelfth of October, 1659. Published to prevent mistakes, By a Lover of his Countrey and Freedom E. D. LONDON, Printed by J. C. 1659.
A TRUE RELATION OF The State of the Case BETWEEN Parliament and some Aspiring Officers of the ARMY. 1. THere is no Nation under Heaven, I conceive, hath met with more turnings and shakings, and hath had sorer and deeper designs against it then this Common-wealth. 2. And truly all things duly considered, there is no com∣pany of people under the whole Heaven, that have been so great enemies to its peace, and settlement, as some Officers of the Army, witness the interruption of this Parliament the 20th April 1653. then routing the little Juncto Parliament (so named) made and set up by themselves, and then setting up Oliver that Usurper to be Protector, then proclaim∣ing his Son Richard, dissolving his Parliament plucking him down, then inviting this honourable Parliament to take on them that Trust, that they stood cloathed with by the Peoples choice, and now only out of am∣bition interrupt them again. 3. So that it is plain▪ they have not only been the great hinderers of the Peace and good settlement of the Common-wealth, but lust, ambi∣tion, Covetiousness haveng possessed their hearts) are likely to prove ve∣ry
Vipors to this Common-wealth, even to eat out the very Bowels thereof, so that truly it is a sign we are fallen into the last times spoken of by the Apostle, 2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4. and all those those things there spoken of, for ehe most part, these ambitions Officers of thr Army are guilty of, viz. Lovers of themselves, covetous boasters-proud blasphemers, disobe∣dient, unthankeful, unholy, Truce-breakers, false accusars, traytors, high∣minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God. 1. That they inordinately love themselves, is clear to all the world, because that in all these turnings, they have only made themselves great, as to be named Lords Sir Reverence, and to ger great Estates, as in the Protectors time to have 1000 li. year a piece to be of his Councel to oppresse the Nation, and to defeat the inferiour Officers, Seamen and Souldiers of their pay, they being by them run in Arrear nigh a year, which they never by this Parliament were sithence the War, but payed to a day, and now this Parliament, would have payed all their Arrears, and have setled construt pay for them and the Navy, which may appear, by thier Votes of the 11. of Octob inant. 1659 Secondly, They are lovers of themselves, because in all their Proposals to this Parliament, viz: that from Darby, drawn up and signed by. Lam∣bert Brigade, and their Reprosentation delivered to the House the 5th instant, signed by 230 Officers, they do not propose one thing for the good of this Common-wealth, nor for the good of the honest people, or Good old cause; but wholly for themselves, as that Fleetwood may be General, Lambert may be the next General Officer, that is, to be Ma∣jor General of the Army of England, and Scotland, Disborrow the next, to be Leiut. Gen. of the horse, and General Monk to be Major Gen. of the Foot, to have their Arrears, constant pay, and power without the Parliament, to turn out, and put in to die Army, and do not they love themselves very well? but the Parliament, the Good Old Cause, the good people, and this Common-wealth but a little. 3ly, They are Covetous boasters, for what a stir and ado do they keep in trumpeting their own honour, and the great valour they shewed, and jeopardy they were in at VVinnington Bridge, by Sir George Booths Ar∣my, and this they do twice in their last Representation of Octob. 5. when alassit is well known there was not so great service or vallour shewed or done in that busineses, as hath been done by many a single Troop of this Army, and what is all this cry for? Is it not that they may be made great, and have large pay, to tho oppression and ruinc of the good peo∣ple of this Common-wealth, and herein they are covetous Boasters-
4ly, They are proud Blasphemers, because they commit Treason, Re∣bellion, Rapine, rnd spoyl on the people of this Common-wealthy, and they say, God teacheth, directeth and commands them to do it; They breake Covenants, Promises, Faith Protestations, Engagements, Declarations, Sollemn Appeals to God, with hands lifted up to Heaven, in the most so∣lemn way that could be, Repent of aebellion and Treason, and the next day repent, they did repent, and commit greater Treasons and Rebellions, and yet say God is amongst them, and use Gods Name and his Ordinances to colour all their villainous wickednesses, this is proud blasphemy; yea such as never was in the world, worse than Rabshakahs, Esay 37. For these have not only dispised God, but made him to colour all their evils, by the which they have made not only this Common-wealth, the Good old Cause, the Churches of Christ, and all Profession of Rdligion rediculous contemptible, a scorn & hissing to all the world, and God his name and them that dwell in the Heaven is reproached & blasphemed by their wicked vile deeds. 5. They are disobedient, because look in all their Declarations, there Engage-ments, Proposals, and Representations of the Officers of the Army to this Parliament, especially their Declaration to invite the Members to return to their Trust, of April 6, 1659. viz. That the Long Parliament consisting of the Members, which continued their sitting until the 20th. of April 1653. were eminent assertors of that Cause (the Good Old Cause) and had a special presence of God with them, and were signally blessed in that work; And there fore we do hereby most earnestly desire the Parliament consisting of those Members who continued to sit since the year 1648. until the 20th of April, 1653. to return to the exercise and discharge of their Trust, and we shall be ready in our places to yield them as becometh us, our utmost assistance to sit in safety for the improving the present op∣portunity for setling and securing the peace and freedom of this Com∣monwealth. And in a Letter of May the 18. from General Monk, and the Officers in Scotland, pag. 5. You may rest assured with greatest con∣fidence, that we shall appear in your DEFENCE and VINDI∣CATION of your AUTHORITY, against the Oppression of all ARBITRARY Powers whatsoever. And in their Repre∣sentation of October 5, 1659. pag. 2. they say; That neither we nor our faithful brethren of the Northern Bridgade who signed the said Petition and Proposals did designe and intend the inturruption of the Parliament, the prejudice of the peace of this Commonwealth, or any
other by and sinister respect, not becoming the Trust reposed in us. And in pag. 9. Wherefore through the help of our God we shall be found (notwithstanding all indeavous to the contrary) faithfull to you and this Commonwealth; And so in many other Papers from Ire and and Dunkirk, where they do say as much as can be said by any men; Nay many of them to make their wickedness the greater, when they took their Commissions, not being required, did voluntarily pronise in the Parliament to serve the Parliament with all faithfulness & submission as to the Supream Authority of this Commonwealth: And in particu∣lar Lambert; for when he came for his Commission, the Parliament were about two hours debating whether he should have Commission under them or no; but being called in to receive his Commission, when he had it, did desire leave of the Parliament to speak a few words, which he was permitted to do. And there and then did he promise the PARLIAMENT he would serve them with all faithfulness and obedience; and when he could serve them no longer, he would give up his Commission to them, and lye down at the feet of the Parlia∣ment, or words to this effect. And so did Colonel Rich almost in totidem vibis. And Fleetwood did promise the Parliament the? 12th. of October 1659. (on the parting the Act for vacating his Commission as Lieutenant General of the Army, and putting it under the Govern∣ment of Seamen) that he would faithfully acquiess, and further to shew their disobedience & jugling, that when they had one October 13, 1659. besieged all the Parliament-men in their Lodgings in White Hall, and stopt all the passages that none could go to Westminster, and had vio∣lently turned back the Speaker. The Council of State made an Order for all the Forces to withdraw and march to their Quarters, as well those for the Parliament as those that were against them; those for the Parliament in obedience to the Order marched away, and so did most of the other, but Lambert and Sidenham contrary to their trust, and like Traytors in disobedience to the Councils Order, caused two Com∣panies of Foot to take possession of the Parliament-House took away by violence the Keyes from Mr. Hully, and have by that means kept the Parliament by violence ever since from doing their duties. Who ever can trust so vile, and faithless, false-hetrted, dessembling, hypocritical a people. I can liken this people to none for the heighth of desimulation, but to Henry 4th of France, about the miscaror of the poor Protestant, there see that History. Sixthly, They are, I mean the ambitions Officers of the Army, unholy
because they sin and commit Rapin, Treason, and Rebellion, and then dissemble repentance, and commit it again, as at VVindsor in 1648, at James 1652, at VVallingford-house in 1659. and many other places at several other times, but now the light of their dissembling, jugling, hypocritical wickedness they shew in the sight of the Sun. For Wed∣nesday the 11 of Gctober 1659. in the Chappel at VVhite-hall, Packer, and Spencer and divers others repented of their repentance, and like the Dog swallow up again their own Vomit, that in them the Pro∣verb spoken of by the Apostles is verified, 2 Petér 2.22. Mr. Packer remember what you said in Richards Parliament, we say remember how you confessed your sins, in having a hand in breaking up Parliamentss, and bringing that ruine that is none on this Land, and promised before God, Angels, and Men, never to have a hand in it any more; Oh false man! How do'st thou dare to look God in the face? We wonder thou canst lye on thy Pillow and sleep, for fear the judgement of God should overtake thee; be sure it will, if thou doest not now in good earnest repent of all thy horrible hypocrisies. And thou valiant Copta Spencer, that never fought but with a good Dinner, and at that sport thou art an excellent good Trencher Chap∣len, and as stout as any man alive, and art none of the lesser Lyers, and dessembler amongst the Holy Ones, for thou canst write Letters from thy Quarters August 2 1659. to Mr. Kiffen, that all those poor people might be deluded, to pray for valiant Copta Spencer that he may do that he never did in his life, fight beat his Enemies, for now saith Spencer he and we are surrounded, and to morrow we are to be ingaged this was so notoriously, as could be told by man, for there was no envy visible by above 60 miles therefore its believed thou meants poor Cap∣ta, that they should pray thou mightest have a good stomack to thy vi∣ctuals, for Hunger is all the Enemits thou darest to encounter with; tush these ate but small things to their Solemn Meetings, and confessing be∣fore God and his People of their wandering and going in divers wayes from righteous and equal paths, going in the dark and stumbling; and then bless God that there eyes are open, and now they see the truth, and there is great joy, and anon this light is become their darkness, and their former dark paths (they all having gotten Catts eyes) they are now the true light ways, and now they are as joccond as may be they are now in the ready road of destruction, but I pray you brave aspiring Officers let us ask this one question of you (though some say some of you are Atheists) Did you beleeve there was a God when you made your promises, when you professed your faiths; when you ingaged, I, and
that in outward shew to a God, wee say; if then you did believe there was a God, you beleeve there is no God now, or you sin and commit horrible wickedness against God, and the light of your own hearts and Consciences, and are we are afraid incorruptable, that his vengeance may overtake you to the utmost, for you are contrary to all men and please not God, but every day are filling up your sins to that end, 1 Thess. 2.15, 16. Therefore consider betimes before it be too late, and repent and do your first works, for do you think the Nation will ever trust you that have thus fasly betrayed their Lives, Liberties and Estates, to your own lust? No, no, never think it, for God will make your very Regiments rebel against you, and that is not to be feared but in few Moneths will come to pass and you shall not withstand it. Seventhly, They are, I mean the Officers of the Army, false aceu∣ers, for they say and lay to the Parliaments charge these several false particulars. That they were and did carry on a Presbyterian Designe, and would have setled the Presbyterian Government, this is false and envy it self cannot prove it in the least; and if 40 or 50 Members may be beleived, they say and do averre, there was not one man that ever did move fi∣thence their last Sitting, any such matter or any thing tending to it. Secondly, They say the Parliament would have made a Law to have persecuted the godly people of this Nation for Conscience sake in matter of Religion, that is, the hook, that the Officers of the Army have baited, by which they have chached the Churches of the Congregational way to ap∣prove of their wickedness in interrupting this Parliament, but they are but meerly abused as the people of Jerusalem were by Absolom, 2 Sam. 15.11. Being in the simplicity of their hearts, for they know not the thinge. For it is false as ever any thing was; as may be seen by the vote of the Committee, that is and hath been Printed into News Books, and I am assured they would have setled Liberty of Conscience so clear, as no man should ever have had any more fear of persecution from the Magistrate. No it should not have been in the power of future Parliam. to have medled with it, it should have been a ctanding Fundamental, as the Vote it self will evidence, viz. at the Committees for the Govern∣ment, sitting in the Speakers Chrmber, October 8, 1659. Resolved, That the Supream delegated power is not intrusted to re∣strain the profession of any person or persons, who profess Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ God manifest in the flesh, and in God the Holy Spirit, God blessed for evermore, and do acknowledge the holy Scriptures of the Old and new Testament, to be the revealed or witten
word or will of God, but ought to give due encouragement, and equall Protection to them in the profession of their Faith, and exercise of Reli∣gion, whilst they abuse not this Liberty, to the Civil injury of others, or disturbance of others in their way of Worship. This is clear and full, I wonder what we would have desired more, but put the case that it had been true, as it is false, must we for fear of perse∣cution for Religion rebell and commit Treason? Surely, the Gospel of Christ teacheth no such thing, but patiently to suffer and not to resist & rise up against the Supream Authority, and throw that down to set up Liberty of Conscience. 3ly, These Officers say they sat 6 Moneths and did nothing, This is so great a slander, as I wonder with what impudence they can affirm such a thing, as all that have but read the Diurnals, may see, the baseness of this slander. First they spent one month nigh hand, to put and settle things in away so as they might run with some ease and that they might keep the head above water, from sinking in that disorder and confusion as Oliver the late Usurper, and his Son Richard by the means of these Officers of Army, had brought this Nation and Common-wealth into. 2ly, Then the Armies Act of Indempnity and free pardon. 3ly, The Acts for the several Militias of the Counties, and Cities of this Nation, which took up much time. 4ly, the passing of all the Commissions for the Officers of the Armies of England Scotland, Ireland, and Dunkirk, which could not quickly be dispatched. 5ly, Then Sir George Booths rebellion, which did hinder them nigh 2 months. 6ly, The Acts for the union of Scotland and settlement of Ireland, which were very long Acts, and of great weight and concernment, and were not to be slightly passed, they took up a very great deal of time in a Grand Committee. 7ly, The Act for Sequstrations. 8ly. The Act for the Keepers of the Great Scal. 9. The sending the Plenepotentiaries to the Sound, and many other matters which we cannot remember, that we can testefie they laboured like hor∣ses night and day: therefore here they ly and slander the Parliament, for they are free from this their abuse. Fourthly, They say they would not have prosecuted against Sir George Booth, and his party, Oh envy it it self! who can with any face of honesty fasten this on the Parliament? Can things be done in a day? was all Examinations taken and ready; was the depth of the plot found out? All know it was universally laid, over all Nation, and therefore the more need of time, to take all Examinations, for the more clear and full disco∣very of and proof of all, that there might be the moree Justice done, as so great & horrible a Plot did deserve.
But if there were any delay, it was in in Sr. Henry Vain, who had the whole to report, and delayed it, till he was called upon again and again. And then, did not these slanderers the Officers of the Army, hin∣der the Parliament at least three weeks by their foolish papers, it is more then probable that these Officers would not have Sr. George and his party prosecuted, because they have obstructed and interrupted the Parliament, the way and means to it; and indeed it is strange, that the Army should desire their prosecution, when they have done ten times worse, for Sr. George and his party never did ingage to be true and faithful to this Parliament, the Officers of the Army did ingage, and they were for a free Parliament, and the Officers of the Army are for no Parliaments nor Laws, but what must come under the test of their swords, and in all these things they speak falsly to deceive, and in them as the Prophet saith, Eze. 22.9. Are men that carry tales to shed blood. But what is the State of this great case, that the Nation must be ruined, and all Authority kicked at, and pluckt up by the roots, the case is the same it was at the first with the King and Parliament, whether the King should have the command of the Militia, or the Parliament; and so it is now, whether the Parliament should have the command of the Army, or Luit. Gen. Fleetwood, I had almost said Lambert, for so it is and will be, how cunningly soever it is carried. And it arose thus, assoon as indeed God had beaten down Sr. George Booths Army, by taking away their hearts, Chester quited and Cherck Castle delivered, Major Creed is sent up with a Letter giving a full ac∣count of all, and for that he and Lieut. Col. Dukenfield, had given them each 250 l. and that day L. Gen. Fleetwood, moved the Parlia∣ment, that Lambert might be made Major General of the Armies of England and Scotland, as formerly, to this the House giveth their Negative, as by experience we find they had good cause so to do, but yet they gave Lambert a 1000 l.to buy him a Jewel, as an ac∣knowledgment from the Parliament for his good service, and we think every man will Judge, it a good reward, but this did not please his Majesty, for so he must be called shortly. Then Major Creed returning and Capt. Brown, to the Northern Bri∣gade, where meeting with Col. Zanchy and Col. Axtel and others, as they were returning to London, from Chester, they did consider in their hearts, what they should do by way of returning thanks to God (and as Major Creed declared to the Council of Officers of the Army at
Wallingford-house) they went to prayer, and God set this upon their hearts, that is, that paper that was signed by the Northern Brigade, and sent up to London by Capt. Brown, to the Classis; this is horrible delusions, and no less then Blasphemy against the great God of Heaven, to father such things of him; will any think God told Creed and the other Officers, that they should appoint the Parliament to make Fleetwood General, and Lambert Major General of the Army of England and Scotland, and Disborrow to be Lieut. Gen. of the Horse, and Monk to be Major General of the Foot, or else the Parliament shall be interrupted; surely, they mean the god of this world, that ruleth in the hearts of the children of dis∣obedience, as they are; they indeed say they went to prayers, just like the Conjurors, begin all things in Gods Name, how wicked soever it is, according to the old Proverb, In Nomine Domini incipit omne ma∣lum, O good Lord what a sad condition is this Common-wealth in, that have such Commanders over their Armies, that are guided by Enthusiasms, so that now if their hearts be prompt by lust and covetous∣ness, to take away all Law, Property and Rigth, from every man, that he by Law hath, to that which is known, they must do it, for God set it on their hearts, he told them so; this they say, and is very likely it will come to such a matter, for the worshipful Doctor Worsely, did preach such a doctrine at Wallingford-house, before the Venerable Assembly of Officers, that all our Lawes, Lives, Liberties, Estates, were in the dispose of the Army, and this passed without the least controul, and indeed, they must so practise, or else they cannot raise any money, as you will see hereafter; well this paper is sent from Darby to London by Capt. Brown (and not onely thither, but to Scotland and Ireland, and that before it was known here to Lieutenant General, or any of the Officers, a most presumptious thing if it were true, which we cannot believe, that any particular Officers did dare to send a pa∣ber, to ingage the Armies of three Nations, without making it known to the Chief Officers, as close as it is carried, and it is very probable, that the Officers were the Plotters of it, because when they did know it, they were so far from discountenance∣ing and punishing the Authors, as they fall in with them, and justifie them, as may be seen in their Representation of Octo∣cter the 5th. 1659. When this paper arrives at London, it taketh Lodging at White-Hall in Lamberts Quarters, and on Wednes∣day was there read, before twenty Officers; now Lambert did not know of it, till now, and when he and L. G. Fleetwood knew of it,
they did not approve of it (no, no more then a man that is very hungry approveth of good victuals such as he liketh with all his heart) if they did not, why did not they stifle it in the birth and suppresse it, which they might have done if they had pleased; but they were so far from it, as they do give it countenance and all the furtherance they can, else why did not L. G. Fleetwood according to the commands of Parliament cause the Army to desist; but that is so far from him as they justifie it, (as aforesaid) by their Representations of Octob. 5. 1659. And now their Representation being come to the House, they had thanks for their good expressions of their good affections to the Parliament, and that the Parliament would proceed to give them all satisfaction that may be, and on Saturday the 8. of Octob. they would go on their paper, and so did, and Monday and Tuesday following, as may be seen by the Votes that passed the House (that have been printed in the News Books) how the Parliament did make all the speed possible to have given them full satisfaction to all their demands as it might stand with the honour of Parliament and the Freedom of Englishmen. But behold while the Parliament is hasting to give them all just satisfa∣ction to their desire, the Councel of Officers of the Army, order the Coppies of the representations to the sent to all the Regiments of horse and foot, and to all garisons in the 3. Nations to be by them signed and speedily to be sent to Mr. Samford, L. G. Fleetwoods Secretary, and ordered that those nine Officers (that were by the Parliament uncommissionated) should write a Letter under their hands and inclose those coppies, the which they did. Now this coming to the Parliament, and they having proof of it, that they were a labouring as one man to combine against the Parliament, and to force them; they clearly did foresee they could not sit to make a perpetual Coordinate Senate, of which they expected to be there freely without being imposed on, and rather then to do it they would die, therefore they were resolved to try the obedience of the Army, whether they would acquiesce in such resolves as they shall make or no, that they might have good ground to know they sat freely, and were by them ac∣knowledged the Supream Authority and the Army their servants, from whom they took all their commissions, which very act if there were no more should have taught them subjection, therefore now it came to this issue, whether the Parliament shall come to the Army, and dispose of them, or Lieutenant General Fleetwood, or Lambert, and whether the Parliameni shall be Master, and the Army be the Servant, or the Parliament be the slave, to sit
there, and by their authority make such Lawes, and raise such monies, on the people, as they the Officers of the Army would force, and compell them to, and thereby oppresse, and even totally give away all our Liber∣ties at one blow, and make us slaves for ever, which they were not at all in the least willing to do; and upon this ground the Parliament did proceed against those nine Officers, and to the Alteration of the Conduct of the Army, as you may see by the Act of Parliament, and Votes of the 12. of October, 1659. And we would fain know, what the Parliament could do lesse then they did, having so clear profit, under their own hands, and divers other Circumstances; be sides, is it any new thing the Parliament hath done, have they not former Presidents many, look but back to about Feb. 1645. and you will find, they took away the Commissions of the Earls of Essex, Warwick, Manchesters, Earls of Stamfords, & Darbith, Sir William Wallers, Masseyes, Gells, Lawhorns, and divers others; did these, jeopard their lives in the high places of the Field, as well as these Officers? Yes that they did, but then the doctrine of Rebellion was not learned by them. Now here is the plain case, and the miserable condition, we are brought to, whether we shall suffer, all Authority in our old and ancient, Conserva∣tors the Parliament, the great boundary of all our Liberties, against Tyranny and Slavery, to be thus trodden under foot, and be subject to some three or four mens wills, and Lust; viz. Fleetwood, Lambert, Desborow, and Berry; for so it is, but we hope all true English-men will abominate it; for let them say what they will, and pretend never so much, Tyrants, yea, Ar∣rant Tyrants they must be; for Lawes, for what they do, they have none, and make Lawes, they we are sure cannot; and King James saith, he is A Tyrant that ruleth without Law, and this is true in these men. We would very fain know how they can raise any money, on the people, but by Tyranny, it being against the Fundamental Lawes of England, as Magna Charta, and Petition of Right, and it it is declared by this Parlia∣ment to be High Treason, for any mony to be raised, without our own consent in Parliament, see the words of the Act it self. Viz. And be it further enacted, that no person or persons shall after the ele∣venth of October, 1659. Assess, Levy, Collect together, or receive any Cu∣stome, Impost, Excise, Assessement, Contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any summe, or summes of mony, or other Impositions whatsoever, upon the people of this Common-wealth, without their consent in Parliament; or as by Law might
have been done before the third of November, 1640. And be it further enacted and declared, that every person offending, contrary to this Act, shall be, and is hereby judged to be guilty of High Treason, and shall for it suffer as in case of High Treason; How can they now raise money to have it, to pay the poor souldiers and Sea-men, no wayes but by rapine, Robbery, and Plunder, and what that will come to, no man knoweth. But if this Parliament had been let alone, they would have made this Na∣tion happy; and a flourishing Nation, in Trade: for by the first of Jan. next, they would have quite taken off from Trade, all Custome, and Excise; they had an Act of Parliament for that end, under consideration; and have payed all the debts of this Common-wealth, yea the Publick Faith and all; and have setled us under a sure and good government of Annuall and successive Parliaments, that we should not have feared every 6 months, to have bin a ruine to a new Government, which doth render us the most ridiculous people in the world, and indeed we have by the practises, and evill acting of the Officers of the Army, rendred Magistry, the most ridiculous, and contemptible things that can be, so that we are the scorn and laughter of all Nations, that but hear of us. Therefore Noble and Brave English-men, stand for your Rights, Liberties, and Lawes, that you have bought with your money, purchased with your blood, and be not inslaved by an Army, and to dye, rather then to pay one peny that is not levied by consent in Parliament; keep your goods, and de∣fend your houses against all that shall come either to quarter on you, or to levie, or gather mony of you, as you would against thieves, Rogues, & Robbers. The Officers of the Army cry all, they are not for, but against A sin∣gle person, we wonder men are so voyd of sence; is not he that is Generall of an Army, a Prince? and who ever it is that doth meddle with the Civil affaires, not by authority of Parliament, though it be (as the French-man saith) one twee three feier veeve Kings, or a Counsel, or Coordinate Senate for life, it is all, a single person, and will devolve into it quickly; we hope all true English men wil never subject their necks to such a yoak, to have men in highest authority for their lives, this will be worse then then the Nor∣man yoak, and it will not last long, but must center in one, and then let the child be named; and if you please, let it be King, because it is a short word, and you see quickly learned. But let them do what they can, they will not, nor shall they long stand; God shall, and surely God will confound them, as he did the King, and that great Tyrant, Oliver, that great aspiring trayterly Crom∣well, who by his cheats and hypocrisies, deep dissimulations, pretending
religion, couzened and deceived all the poor honest Church-men, and so do and will these men, how fair soever they promise, they can do no good, that shall be lasting, because it is built and layed on an unrighte∣ous foundation, it is laid in Treason, Rebellion, Hypocrisie, lying, slan∣dering, yea, in horrid Blasphemy; and yet these are the men that pretend to set up the Kingdom of Christ among us; Surely when Christ cometh he will not need the lust, Ambition, Covetousnesse, Hypocrisie, Dis∣sembling, Lying, Rebelling Trayterousnesse of people, that are no more to be confided in, then the Devil that is their father, for his works they do, therefore they are his children and servants, for his servants they are whom they obey, Rom. 6.16. John 8.45. How is it possible these men can think to prosper when they are guilty, and must be guilty of more horrid wickednesses, treasons and rebellions; For had Zimri peace that slew his master? 2 Kings 9.31. And do these men think to have peace that have not onely slain one Master, but divers; This Parliament twice, April, 20. 1653, then the little Junto: then this last and greatest, this Parliament, now this 10. of October, 1659. Surely if Cain shall be avenged seven fould, truly Lamech seventy and seven foold, Gen. 4.24. And blesse not your selves because you have not yet been brought to judgement, therefore you do har∣den your hearts according to Eccles. 8.11 for God will come and that suddenly, Jude 15. to execute judgement upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly (as you are) among them of all your ungodly deeds, which you have ungodlily committed, and of all the hard speeches you have spoken of God and against him. Well now I warrant you they promise very fair things, a very blessed and good Government; But how can this be when the foundation is nought? there is not any thing as to a Government, that can be setled without the peoples consent in Parliament that will be in this Nation durable; have we not experience in the late great Tyrants dayes that nothing would down with this people, but what they set up by their Representatives assembled in Parliament; for it is against the liberty and freedom of people, and a∣gainst the Fundamental Laws of England, to have a Government and Laws imposed on them without and against their wills and consent in Parli∣ament. I but these men say they will settle the Righteous Laws of Christ, and so said M. G. Harison, but it was not in his power; for when those Laws and Christs government cometh to be setled, he will need none of your Commanders, especially so base and wicked ones as these Officers are; for he will not settle it by might or power, but by his spirit, Zach, 4.6. he
will make all hearts then willing to stoop to him in that day of his power, Psal. 110. It is true, he was full of his impulses of spirit and Enthusiasmes, and tell him of Magna Carta and Petition of Right, he would puffe at all these, and say we shall have Laws from Heaven, but he was forced to fly to Magna Carta in the Protectors time, and therefore till Christ come, let us have but our ancient and Fundamental Laws, and Liberties, we shall then do very well, and let us tell all these men where had we been in the late Tyrants time had it not been for our Laws; We remember a speech of that Tyrants to Sergant Maynard and Twisden when they came before him about Mr. Conyes case, saith he to them, You tell me it is against Magna Car∣ta, and Petition of Right; Magna Carta, saith he, Magna Farta; Petition of Right, Petition of Shite: I have more ado to Conquer 2. or 3. musty old Laws, then I have to Conquer 3. Nations. I and so not onely he, but all such as he was shall find I hope the hardest task that ever they undertook. And this businesse now is no other then Olivers was, it is but Harisons spirit transmigrated into Sir Henry Vain, Salloway, Sidenham and others that Lambert doth now make use of, and it shall effect as little as he did at that time. Therefore most Noble Englishmen be not abused by their flatteries, nor drawn into snares to Petition them, and make addresses to them; they deserve no addresse but a Halter and an Ax, and that must be accom∣plished by the hazzard of your lives and fortunes, and better dye, as Mr. Clement Cook said in the Parl. 3 Carol. It is better to dye by the hand of a Forrain enemy then to be destroyed at home; and so we and our children had better dye with our swords in our hands in defence of our Laws and li∣berties, then to loose all, and be enslaved by an Army. And all you Congregational men, take heed of being deceived, all the World sees you have been for every turn, and run to worship the rising Sun, it sheweth your weaknesse and instabilities; one while the Lord is with this Parliament, then with the little Parliament, and then with the late Tyrant, Oliver, then with his Son Richard, then with this Parliament, and now with the Army; do you think that God followeth your wan∣drings, and is as uncertain as you are? no, he is a God of Truth and certainty, and loveth uprightness of heart, and doth hate all wicked doers and their wayes he wil curse and blast them, as you see, he did the late Ty∣rant in all that he undertook; what and how hath this Nation been un∣done? how is the Armies and N vies behinde in pay and the Common∣wealth in debt 300 thousand pounds, and yet these blessed Officers would
have the late Tyrants Wife have 8000 l. per annum, setled on her, and his eldest Son Richard 10000 l. and all his debts payed, which was 30000 l. do you not think these are like to prove easy masters to you? do you think to escape them? no, for as the Duke of Medina Sidonya said in 88. That his sword knew no difference between a Catholick, and a Heretick, but he came to make way for his Master; So it will be with these men, they will not know you from others; therefore beware of your applications to them, and take the wise mans Counsel, Prov. 24.21.22. My son fear thou the Lord and the supream authority, and meddle not with them that are given to change, for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knoweth the ruine of them both? For Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Faithlesse and Godlesse, all things they can swollow, Who wear cold Iron, and the wars do follow. Written by a Heathen, but made to true by those that professe them∣selves Christians. FINIS.
