D497A 669.f.16[96] 99870401 163249
A Declaration of the Generals at Sea, and the Captains under their Command, concerning the late Dissolution of the Parliament; And their Resolution thereupon. As it was sent to Vice-Admirall Penn, to be Communicated to the Commanders and Officers of the Ships under his Command. GENTLEMEN, THere being certain Intelligence come to our Hands of the great change within our Nation, viz. The Dissolution of this Parli∣ament. We the General Commanders and Officers here pre∣sent with this part of the Fleet, have had a very serious Consi∣deration therof, as also what was our duty, and incombent upon us in such a juncture of time, and find it set upon our spirits that we were Called and Intrusted by this Nation for Defence of the same against the Enemies thereof at Sea, whether the People of the Ʋnited Provinces, or others: And we are resolved in the strength of God unanimously to prosecute the same according to the trust reposed in us; and have thought good to signifie the same unto you, desiring you will take the effectuallest course you can for the strengthening and incouraging one another in this work; and doubt not but the Lord who hath done great and wonderfull things for his people that have trusted in him, will also be found among us his poor unworthy servants, if we continue firm and constant in our duties, walking before him in faith, humility and dependance, not seeking our selves, but his glory; which that we may all do, is the desire and pray∣ers of From on board the Resolution at the Spithead, 22 April, 1653. Your very affectionate Friends and Brethren, Captains. Richard Deane, Tho. Crosby. Saith Hawly. Lionel Lane. Tho. Arkinstall. Jo. Jefferson. Giles Shelly. Rob. Sanders. Edw. Blagg. Rob. Graves. Will. Limbrey. Rich. Stayner. George Moncke. Fran. Parke, Ja. Peacocke, Andr. Rand, Geo. Dakins, Nich. Foster, Jer. Smith, Ben. Grimston; John Hayward, Anth. Earning, Will. Pyle, John Edwin, Generals. Will. Haddocke, Tho. Thorowgood, Will Goodson, Fran. Bundidge, Robert Clarke, John Seaman, Eustace Smith, Tho. Hare, Nich. Lucas, Jonath. Hide, Will. Morcock. This is a true Copy of the Originall sent to Vice-Admirall Penn, to be Communicated to the Commanders and Officers of the Ships under his Command. Ex: John Poortmans Cler'. Generall Blake is ashore, for the better Recovery of his health. Vice-Admirall Penn is come into the Downs; we have there at present above 70. Sail of gallant Ships; where it is expected that Generall Deane, and Generall Moncke will be with him very suddenly; and then away upon Action. London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, dwelling in Thamestreet over against Baynards-Castle.
