D715 669.f.24[1] 99870287 163732
A DECLARATION OF THE NOBILITY AND GENTRY OF THE COUNTY of VVORCESTER Adhering to the late KING. HAving under our present consideration and prospect (though not without much horror and amazement) the vast and wasting confusions under which these Nations for many years have languished, out of which distressed and miserable condition we judge it impossible to be redeemed without the only aide of that omnipotent hand, which hath justly sent these afflicting chastisements for our multiplyed offences against his Divine Majesty. And considering farther how the Divine Clemency by late and wonderfull Revolutions, (wherein his Excellency the Lord Generall Monck, being to his perpetuall honour most signally instrumentall,) hath revived our hopes of re-obtaining the blessings of Peace and Re-settlement, if we can become such good Christians, as to have mutuall mercy one for another, desiring no otherwise to be our selves forgiven, then as we do freely and heartily forgive. We therefore, the Nobility and Gentry of the County of Worcester, having as deeply tasted of the sad cala∣mities of these late Intestine Warres, as any other of our neighbour-Counties, and to the increase of our unhap∣pinesse do yet lye under the severe and heavy censure of some persons who asperse us as full of Revenge. Do neverthelesse hereby declare before God and the world, that we neither do nor will harbour any thought of Rancor or Revenge against them or any other person which hath been of a contrary judgement unto us, But are most readily willing to lay aside all kind of Animosities whatsoever, and returne into all mutuall Christian love and friendship; whereby we may with them Redintegrate into the Unity of Mind, as well as of Nation: Presu∣ming also, that all such who have not totally strai'd from the pathes of charity, will in this believe us. And that we may not be wanting to give a full Testimony and Assurance of our quiet and peaceable deport∣ment for the future; with an humble and unwearied patience, we wait for the blessing of our great and gracious God upon this ensuing Parliament. Subscribed by The Earl of Shrewsbury. Thomas Lord Windsor. Sr Jo. Packington Barronet. Sr William Russell Barronet. Sr Ralph Clare Knight of the Bath. Sr Rowland Berkley Knight. Sr John Winford Knight. Sr Edward Barret Knight. Sam. Sandyes Esquire. Shar. Talbot Esquire. Tho. Savage Esquire. Henry Townsend Esquire. Francis Finch Esquire. Tho. Hornyold Esquire. Iohn Fortescue Esquire. Tho. Wilde Esquire Io. Keyt Esquire, William Sheldon Esquire. Phillip Brace Esquire. Edward Barret Gent. Anthony Bushell Gent. William Sheldon Gent. Io. Sandys Gent. Printed for Charles Adams at the Talbot in Fleetstreet. 1660.
