E1351A 669.f.11[72] 99858781 162723
Die Iovis, 2 September, 1647, A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament. THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, taking into their serious consideration the great inconvenience and danger which daily doth, or may accrue by the resort of divers Persons to the doores of both Hou∣ses, under pretence of Arreares to them due, the greatest part of them being persons evill affected to the Parliament and Kingdome; and their comming thither being for the most part (though under other pre∣tence) to disturbe them in their proceedings; and likewise remem∣bring the effectuall course by them taken by their late instructions, bea∣ring date the 28. of May last, for the determining of all Accompts, so that there can be no colour of any such resort as aforesaid, except it be of such who are unwil∣ling the truth of their Accompts should appeare, Doe hereby Order and Declare, That hence∣forth no person or persons shall presume to resort thither under any such pretence, both Houses having formerly Ordered, That the Committee for the Accompts of the whole Kingdome, or other Committees authorized for that purpose, shall present Rolls of such Accompts so deter∣mined to both Houses, and not otherwaies, where those persons concerned therein shall receive such further assurance and satisfaction as both Houses shall finde to be just. And in case after the publication hereof any person shall presume contrary to this Declaration, the Guards atten∣ding on either or both Houses, are hereby required to seize upon them, and keepe them in safe Custody; and if upon examination by the Committee of Complaints it be found that there is any Arreare due to any such person, every such summe of money shall be, and is forfeit for his or their contempt, and such further punishment upon others as both Houses shall appoint. ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith printed and published. Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. Printed at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Baily. 1647.
