E1473A 669.f.5[64] 99869718 160777
Die Jovis 28. Julii. 1642. A DECLARATION OF The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Vpon information received, that divers of His Majesties Souldiers under colour of his command, and in some places countenanced by his Majesties Presence, have violently attempted to seize on the Magazine in sundry places. WHereas the Lords and Commons have received diverse informations from severall Counties, that the Soul∣diers raised by His Maiesty, and that other ill affect∣ed persons under the colour of his Command, and in some places countenaunced by His Maiesties pre∣sence do endeavor with violence, and in a hostile man∣ner to take away the magazines of powder, and Armes out of the possession of the Counties (whose proper goods they are, being purchased with their owne mo∣nies) and likewise to disarme the trayned-Bands of the County, to the end that the said Counties being deprived of the meanes of their owne just defence, might bee exposed to the malice, and fury of those wicked persons that should bee armed with their owne weapons; It is decla∣red by the Lords and Commons, That whosoever shall endeavor to preserve the magazines of any county, or the Armes of the train'd, or voluntary Bands, and to defend them by force, if the same shall be attempted to bee taken away, shall doe according to Law, and their duty, as likewise all other persons shall, of what county soever, being assistant to them therein; And they doe further Order and declare that all persons whatsoever, shall use their utmost endea∣vour to resist any attempt that shall bee made, for the surprise of any such ma∣gazine, or armes of the trayn'd or voluntary Bands, and that every person in so doing shall be protected, and saved harmelesse, by the authority, and power of both Houses of Parliament. Jovis 28. Iuly 1642. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Declaration shall be forthwith printed and published. Io. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. London, Printed for I. Wright. 1642.
