E1626 669.f.4[76] 99869112 160698
❧ A Letter sent from both Houses of Parliament, to all the High-Sheriffs of this Kingdom, concerning the late Propositions for Ireland. Master Sheriff. THe Lords and Commons being deeply sensible of the unspeakable calamities which his Majesties good Sub∣jects of the Kingdom of Ireland do now suffer, by the barbarous cruelties and massacres of the Rebells there, and conceiving these printed Propositions herewith sent (being ratified by his Majesties Royall assent, and the unanimous approbation of both Houses of Parliament) do undoubtedly tend to the speedy and effectuall reducing of those bloody Rebells, the propagating of the Protestant Religion, the augmenting of the greatnesse and the Revenue of the Crown of England, and the establishing of an happy and firm peace for the future in his Majesties three Kingdoms; and all this to be effected (by Gods gracious assistance) without the generall charge of the Subject, and to the great advantage of those that shall under-write; have thought fit to require you to publish these printed Propositions and In∣structions at this Lent Assizes, to the intent that all his Majesties good people within your Countie, may take notice of the benefit they may receive by under-writing in due time; And that so many of them then present and willing to sub∣scribe, may give up a Note of their Names, Sums, and dates of their Subscriptions to you, to be entred in the Paperbook mentioned in the printed Instructions, which is forthwith to be sent unto you. And you are further directed hereby, at this Lent Assizes (if they be not past) by the advice and assistance of the Justices of Peace for your County, then pre∣sent, to appoint certain dayes and places most convenient for this service; when and where your self, and the Justices of Peace within each division, will be present, to receive the Names, Summes, and times of Subscription, of such of his Majesties well-affected Subjects within your Countie as shall not have subscribed at this Lent Assizes, their Names Sums, and times of Subscription, to be likewise entred in the Paperbook. And if this Letter come to your hands af∣ter the Assizes, then to appoint such times and places as may best speed this service. And further, your self, and the Ju∣stices of Peace, the Ministers of Gods Word, and persons of quality within your County, are hereby earnestly desired to shew themselves active and exemplary in advancing this great and pious work; 'Tis a service tending so much to the glory of God, the honour and profit of his Majestie, and the peace and tranquilitie of his three Kingdoms for the future. And you are likewise to inform those that shall under-write, that the Act of Parliament (which his Majestie hath promised to passe▪ for the setling of those two Millions and half of Acres) is already in hand, and that the Lands are to be divided so indifferently by Lot amongst them that under-write, that no one man, whatsoever, shall have more respect or advantage than another, in the division. And lastly, You are to give a speedie account to the Parliament of your proceedings herein, and of those that do really advance this service. Thus not doubting of your utmost care and diligence herein, we bid you heartilie farewell. The Propositions. I That two Millions and an halfe of those Acres may be assigned, allotted, and divided amongst them after this proportion, viz. For each adventure of 200 li. 1000 Acres in Ulster. 300 li. 1000 Acres in Conaght. 450 li. 1000 Acres in Munster. 600 li. 1000 Acres in Leinster. All according to the English measure, and consisting of Meadow, Arrable, and profitable Pasture, the Bogs, Woods, and barren Mountaines be∣ing cast in over and above. These two Millions and a halfe of Acres to be holden in free and common Soccage of the King▪ as of his Castle of Doublin. II. That out of these two Millions and an halfe of Acres, a constant rent shall be reserved to the Crowne of England, after this proportion, viz Out of each Acre thereof in Ulster 1d— Conaght 1d—ob Munster 2d—{que} Leinster. 3d— Whereby His Majesties Revenue out of those Lands will be much improved, besides the advantages that He will have by the comming to his ands of all other the Lands of the Rebels, and their personall estates, without any charge unto his Majesty. III That for the erecting of Mannors, setling of Waste and Commons, maintaining of Preaching Ministers, creating of Corporations, and re∣gulating of the severall Plantations, one or more Commissions be hereafter granted by Authority of Parliament. IV. That Monies for this great occasion may be the more speedily advanced, All the Undertakers in the City of London, and within twenty Miles distrant thereof, shall under-write their severall sums before the twentieth day of March, 1641. and all within sixty miles of London, before the first day of April, 1642, And the rest of the Kingdom before the first day of May, 1642. V. That the severall sums to be under-written, shall be paid in at four payments, viz. one fourth part within ten dayes after such under-wri∣ting; and the other three parts at three Moneths, three Moneths, and three Moneths: all to be paid into the Chamber of London. VI. That for the better securing of the said severall sums accordingly, every one that doth so under-write, shall at the time of his subscription pay down the twentieth part of the totall sum that shall be by him then under-written. And in case that the residue of his first fourth part be not paid in to such person or persons as shall be appointed to receive the same within the ten dayes before limited, then such party shall not onely forfeit the twentieth part of the sum totall formerly deposited, but so much more of his first fourth payment to be added thereunto, as shall make up the one moity of the said first payment. And if the same person shall fail in any other of the three payments, he shall then forfeit his entire first fourth part, and all the benefit of his subscription; which forfeiture shall accrue to the com∣mon benefit of the rest of the undertakers. March 11. London, Printed for Ioseph Hunscott. 1641.
