E1568aA R230607 45097689 171287
THE HVMBLE PETITION AND DECLARATION of both Houses of Parliament, to the KINGS Most Excellent Majestie, Sent to Yorke by one Lord, and two Members of the House of Commons, on Wednesday the 23. of March. 1641. In Answer to every particular of his Majesties Speech at Newmarket: which he made to the Committee of both Houses when they presented the last Declaration. With their Additionall Information received from the Governour of Rotterdam, concerning the great Fleet prepared in Denmarke, which by means of the Lord Digby should have beene transported over to Hull. Whereunto is added, A Coppy of the Petition, delivered to the King at Newark, by the Inhabitants of Lincolne. London, Printed by the coppy that was printed for Iohn Wright. Ann. Dom. 1641.
March 23. 1641. TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majestie. The humble Petition and Declaration of the Lords and Commons, assembled in PARLIAMENT. May it please your Majestie, YOur Majesties most loyall Sub∣jects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament, cannot conceive that the Declaration which your Ma∣jestie received from us at New∣market, was such as did deserve that censure your Majestie was pleased to say upon us, in that Speech which your Majestie
made to our Committees there, and sent in writing to both Houses; our addresse therein being accompanied with plainnesse, humility, and faithfulnesse, wee thought more proper for removing the distraction of the Kingdome, then if we had then proceeded accor∣ding to your Majesties Message of the 20. of Ianuary. By which your Majestie was pleased to desire, that we would declare what we intended to doe for your Ma∣jestie, and what we expected to be done for our selves. In both which we have beene very much hindered by your Majesties denyall to secure us and the whole Kingdome, by disposing the Militia, as we had diverse times most humbly petitioned, and yet we have not beene altogether negligent of either; having lately made good proceedings in preparing a book of Rates, to be passed in a Bill of Tunnage and Poundage: and likewise the most materiall heads of those humble de∣sires which we intended to make for the good and con∣tentment of your Majestie and your people: but none of these could be perfected before the Kingdom be put into safety, by setling the Militia; And untill your Majestie shall be pleased to concurre with your Par∣liament in these necessary things, we hold it impossi∣ble for you to give the World or your People such sa∣tisfaction concerning the fears and jealousies which we have expressed, as we hope your Majestie hath already received, touching that exception which you were pleased to take to Master Pyms Speech. As for your Majesties feares and doubts, the ground whereof is from seditious Pamphlets and Sermons, we shall be as carefull to endeavour the removall, as soone as wee shall understand what Pamphlets and
Sermons are by your Majestie intended; as we have beene to prevent all dangerous Tumults. And if any extraordinary concourse of people out of the Citie to Westminster, had the face and shew of tumult and dan∣ger in your Majesties apprehension, it will appeare to be caused by your Majesties denyall of such a guard to your Parliament as they might have cause to con∣fide in, and by taking into White hall such a Guard for your selfe, as gave just cause of jealousie to the Parliament; and of terrour and offence to your Peo∣ple. We seek nothing but your Majesties Honour, and the peace and prosperity of your Kingdomes. And we are heartily sorry we have such plentifull matter of an answer to that question, Whether you had violated our Laws? We beseech You to remember that the Go∣vernment of this Kingdom as it was in a great part man∣naged by your Ministers before the beginning of this Parliament, consisted of many continued and multi∣plied Acts of violation of Lawes, the wounds where∣of were scarcely healed, when the extremity of all these violations, was far exceeded by the late strange and unheard of breach of our lawes in the Accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, and the five Members of the Commons House, and in the proceedings thereupon: for which we have yet received no full satisfaction. To your Majesties next question, Whether you had denied any Bill for the ease and security of your Sub∣jects, we wish we could stop in the midst of our an∣swer; that with much thankfulnesse we acknowledge that your Majesty hath past many good Bils full of contentment, and advantage to your People: But Truth and Necessity enforceth us to adde this, That
even in or about the time of passing those Bils, some designe or other had been afoot, which if it had taken effect, would not onely have deprived us of the fruit of those Bils, but have reduced us to a worse conditi∣on of confusion than that wherein the Parliament found us. And if your Majesty had asked us the third questi∣on intimated in that Speech, what we had done for your selfe, our answer would have been much more easie, That we have paid two Armies wherewith the Kingdom was burthened last year; and have under∣gone the charge of the war in IRELAND at this time; when through many other excessive charges and pressures, whereby your Subjects have been ex∣hausted, and the stocke of the Kingdom very much di∣minished; which great mischiefes, and the charges thereupon ensuing, have been occasioned by the evill counsels so powerfull with your Majesty, which have and will cost this Kingdom more than two millions: all which in justice ought to have been borne by your Majesty. As for that free and general pardon your Majesty hath been pleased to offer, it can be no security to our feares and jealousies, for which your Majesty seemes to propound it; because they arise not from any guilt of our own actions, but from the evill designes and attempts of others. To this our humble Answer to that Speech, we de∣sire to adde an information which we lately received from the Deputy Governour of the Merchant Adven∣turers at Roterdam in Holland, That an unknown per∣son appertaining to the Lord Digby did lately solli∣cite one Iames Henly a Mariner to go to Elsenore, and
to take charge of a Ship in the Fleet of the King of Denmarke there prepared, which he should conduct to Hull: in which Fleet likewise he said a great Army was to be transported. And although we are not apt to give credit to Informations of this nature, yet we can∣not altogether thinke it fit to be neglected, but that it may justly adde somewhat to the weight of our feares and jealousies, considering with what circumstances it is accompanied of the Lord Dighies preceding expres∣sions in his Letter to her Majesty, and Sir Lewis Dives; and your Majesties succeeding course of withdrawing your selfe Northward from your Parliament, in a man∣ner very sutable and correspondent to that evil coun∣sel. Which we doubt will make much deeper impressi∣on in the generality of your People. And therefore we most humbly advise and beseech your Majesty for the procuring and setling the Confidence of your Parlia∣ment and all your Subjects, and for the other important reasons concerning the recovery of Ireland and secu∣ring this Kingdom, which have been formerly pre∣sented to your Majesty, you will be graciously pleased with all convenient speed to returne to these parts, and to close with the Counsell and desire of your Parlia∣ment: where you shall finde their dutifull affections and endeavours, ready to attend your Majesty with such entertainment, as shall not onely give your Ma∣jesty just cause of security in their faithfulnesse; but other manifold evidences of their earnest intentions and endeavours to advance your Majesties service, ho∣nour and contentment; and to establish it upon the sure foundation of the peace and prosperity of all your Kingdomes. FINIS.
A coppy of the Petition delivered to the KING at Newark, in his Majesties passage to Yorke, by divers of the Inhabitants of the County of Lincolne. To the KINGS Most Excellent Majestie. The humble Petition of your Majesties loving Subjects, in the County of Lincolne. IN all humility representing, as our thankfullest acknowledgements to God, and to your Majesty, of the gracious blessings which we have for these many yeeres enjoyed under your Majesties Government, and parti∣cularly the blessed fruits of this present Parliament, by your Majesties wise∣dom and goodnesse assembled, whereby many wholesome lawes have been enact∣ed for the great honour of your Majesty, the relief of your People, the pro∣sperous Government of this Kingdom, and happy setling of the late troubles in both Kingdomes. So also our saddest regreat for any the least misunder∣standing and differences which have happened between your sacred Majesty and the said Parliament, or any of the Members of the same, with our many distractions thereupon, and feares of the utter ruine of your Majesty, your royall Posterity and Kingdomes, by the malicious and insolent designes of the Popish party, and the advantage that forraigne enemies may take thereby. Humbly prostrating our selves at your Majesties feet, do most affectio∣nately pray, That your Majesty and Parliament may by all good meanes be firmely re-united, and for that purpose, That you would graciously please to reside neer, and listen unto the faithfull Counsels of your said Parliament; Whereby Romish Idolatry and Supersti∣tion may be extirpated. The Church and Common-wealth duly re∣formed, the true Religion, and all things setled in a blessed peace under your Majesties government, And we shall still have further cause to continue our cheerfull Aides, both of persons and estates, for your Majesty and your Kingdomes prosperity and honour, And ever pray for your Majesties long and happy Reigne over us, &c.
