E1989A 45097713 171308
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the maintenance and pay of the GARRISONS OF Newport Pagnel, Bedford, Lyn Regis, and other Garrisons in the Eastern Association. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be Printed and Published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Hono∣rable House of Commons, Sept. 4. 1645.
Die Mercurii 3. Sept. 1645. AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. VVHereas by a former Ordi∣nance made in or about the eighteenth of Decem∣ber, 1643. It was provided and Ordained, That the Town of Newport Pagnell in the County of Buckingham should be For∣tified, and the Garrison there main∣tained at the charges of severall Counties neer adjoyning, but no pro∣vision
is thereby made for the Garri∣sons of Bedford in the county of Bed∣ford; of Huntington in the county of Huntington; of the Castle of Cam∣bridge in the county of Cambridge, or Lyn Regis in the county of Norfolk; and at present there is no provision or maintenance made for the said last recited Garrisons. The Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, taking into their serious consideration, how the said Garrisons may for the time to come be maintained, and have con∣stant pay provided for the Officers and Souldiers of the said Garrisons; Have Ordered, and be it by authori∣ty of Parliament Ordained, That the said Ordinance, made, in or about the eighteenth of December, 1643. for the maintaining the said Garrison of Newport Pagnell, be repealed and made void from the first day of June in the year of our Lord God, 1645. And the said Lords and Commons
do further Declare and Ordain, That for the maintaining the said Garrisons of Newport Pagnell, Bedford, Huntington, Castle at Cambridge and Lyn Regis, from the said first day of June, 1645. there shall be monethly raised, within all the counties, ci∣ties and places, hereafter named, the monethly Sum of Three thou∣sand, seven hundred, fourty and six pounds, the same to be Assessed, rai∣sed, and Leavied, within the said counties and cities respectively, in manner and form following: Viz. In the county of Bedford, the mo∣nethly sum of One hundred seventy three pounds, and three pence. In the county of Hertford, the mo∣nethly sum of Two hundred ninety seven pounds, sixteen shillings and a peny, In the county of Cambridge, the monethly sum of Two hundred forty five pounds, six shillings and eight pence.
In the Isle of Ely, the monethly sum of Ninety pounds, seventeen shillings and eleven pence. In the County of Huntington, the monethly sum of One hundred thir∣ty nine pounds, sixteen shillings and seven pence. In the County of Norfolk, the mo∣nethly sum of Eight hundred sixty six pounds, nineteen shillings and five pence. In the County of Suffolk, the mo∣nethly sum of Eight hundred and fif∣teen pounds, eleven shillings and nine pence. In the County of Essex, the month∣ly sum of Seven hundred and four∣teen pounds, four shillings and seven pence. In the County of the City of Nor∣wich, the monethly sum of One hun∣dred pounds, thirteen shillings and seven pence. In the County of Northampton, the monethly sum of Two hundred pounds.
In the county of Buckingham, the monethly sum of Eighty pounds. And it is also Ordained, That the first moneth and time of payment shall begin and be Accompted from the first day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1645. and to continue for the space of one whole year, next after the first of June last past. And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the severall Lords Lieutenants of the respective Counties of the Eastern Association, shall be, and are hereby appointed, to be of the Committee of the said Association; And that the severall sums of money monthly rai∣sed within the said counties, shall be imployed and disposed of for the maintenance and pay of such and so many Officers within the said seve∣rall Garrisons, as by the said Com∣mittee for the Eastern Association shall be nominated and appointed: and also for the maintenance of the
severall Souldiers, within the said severall Garrisons, as hereafter fol∣loweth: Viz. At Newport Pagnell, Eight hundred Foot, and One hundred and twenty Horse. At the Town of Bedford, Eigh∣ty foot, and Fourty Dragoons. At the Town of Huntington, Eighty Foot, and Fourty Dragoons. At the castle of Cambridge, One hundred and twenty Foot, and ten Horse; which said Horse are to be ordered and directed, by the said Committee of the Eastern Association. At the Town of Lyn Regis, One thousand Foot, whereof Three hundred are to be sent to Boston, for the better se∣curing of that Garrison, as they shall be ordered and directed by both Hou∣ses of Parliament, or the Commit∣tee of both Kingdoms, or by the said Committee of the House of Com∣mons for the Eastern Association. And be it further Ordained, That the said Committee for the said Ea∣stern
Association, shall and may, from time to time, nominate & appoint, such person & persons to be Treasurer and treasurers, for the receiving and paying such Sums of money, to be raised with∣in the said counties as abovesaid, as they shall think fit; and that the severall Collectors, and other persons within the said several counties, do pay all mo∣neys by them received, and to be recei∣ved and collected by vertue of this Or∣dinance, to such Treasurer or Treasu∣rers, so to be named and appointed as aforesaid. And be it further ordained and decla∣red, That all the sums of mony to be as∣sessed and raised by vertue of this Ordi∣nance, shall be wholly imployed in the maintaining and paying the Officers and Souldiers of the said Garrisons, and in and about the said Garrisons, and necessary preservation of them, and to no other use whatsoever; And that the said Treasurer and Treasurers shall issue forth, and pay no sum of mo∣ney, but for the uses and intents afore∣said,
and that by warrant and Order in writing, to be from time to time had, and made from the said Committee for the Eastern Association, under five or more of their hands, which said Com∣mittee are to issue forth no Order or warrant, but for the uses and intents aforesaid, other then in allowances of necessary Fees and charges to Treasu∣rers, Collectors, and other persons im∣ployed in the collecting, raising, and paying of the said moneys; which said Treasurers, Collectors, and other per∣sons, are to have no greater Fees or al∣lowances, then is allowed to the Trea∣surers, Collectors, and other persons appointed for the collecting the severall Sums of money, raised by the severall Ordinances of Parliament, for the pay∣ment of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army. And it is further Ordained by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That for the Asses∣sing, Leavying, and raising the severall monethly Sums aforesaid upon the se∣verall counties aforesaid, The Comit∣tees, or any three or more of them of the
severall counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Isle of Ely, Huntington, Nor∣thampton, Bedford, Buckingham, and city of Norwich respectively, already esta∣blished, and appointed by Parliament, for the Assessing, Raising, and Leavy∣ing the severall Sums of money, for the payment of the Army under the com∣mand of Sir Thomas Fairfax, shall and may have power to nominate Assessors, Collectors, and other Officers and per∣sons for the assessing, raising, collecting and leavying the monethly Sums of money within the said severall counties, cities and places; and shall have power to assesse, tax, raise, collect and leavy the said severall sums of money within the said respective counties, with the best equality they may, upon each Pa∣rish, Township or place, within the said severall counties: And shall, and may send forth their warrants to the high Constables, or such other persons, as they or any three of them shall think fit∣ting, for the rating, assessing, and col∣lecting of the severall sums taxed, or
rated upon the said severall Parishes, Townships and places; which Sums so Rated and Taxed, to be raised by di∣stresse and sale of the goods of all and singular such persons as shall refuse or neglect, after lawfull demand, to pay their proportions so rated upon them, by Warrant under the hand of any two or more of the said Cōmittees respective∣ly: And if any person shall finde himself grieved by any such Tax, That such person, upon complaint to the said com∣mittees, or any two of them respective∣ly, if they shall think fit, shall be relieved in such sort, as they or any two of them respectively shall finde reasonable: Pro∣vided, That such complaint be made within six dayes after notice of his said Tax; And if any person or persons within the said respective counties, which by vertue of this Ordinance shal be Rated to pay any Sum or Sums of money, shall obstinately refuse to pay the same; And if no goods of such per∣son or persons can be found, whereby he may be distrained for payment thereof,
That then it shall be lawfull to, and for the said Committees, or any three or more of them respectively to cause such person, not being a Peer of this Realm, or assistant of the house of Peers, so refu∣sing or neglecting to be imprisoned, and there to be detained & kept, untill he or they shall pay their said rates & Taxes. And it is further Ordained, That for the better raising of the said severall Sums of money, within the said seve∣rall counties, that all person and per∣sons, bodies politique and corporate; all Mannors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, and Hereditaments, goods and chattels whatsoever within the said counties, that are liable and chargeable with the taxes & payment of any money for the payment of the said Army under Sir Tho: Fairfax, within the said counties, are and shall be liable to the payment of the said severall Sums to be raised by vertue of this Ordinance: And the said Committees of the said severall coun∣ties or any three or more of them, shall and may, do and execute all such power
and authority for the raising of the faid severall Sums of money to be raised within the said counties by vertue of this Ordinance, as to them or any three of them is given by vertue of the said ordinances for the payment of the army under the command of Sir Tho: Fairfax, upon al persons not being a Peer of this realm or assistant of the house of Peers, and shal & may give such allowance and allowances to Officers, and Fine & im∣prison, except as aforesaid, such as shall neglect or refuse their severall duties & offices, in such sort and maner as in and by the said Ordinance for the payment of Sir Tho: Fairfaxes Army is appointed. And it is further Ordered and De∣clared, That all Sum and Sums of money not yet assessed, collected or paid from the severall counties, named in and by the said Ordinance, made in or about the Eighteenth of December 1643. for the execting and maintaining of the Garrison of Newport Pagnell, untill the said first day of June 1645. shall and may be forthwith assessed, collected and paid
in such manner, and by such person and persons, as in and by this Ordinance is appointed and declared, unto the said Treasurer and Treasurers to be ap∣pointed by vertue of this present Ordi∣nance; which said Sums of money shall be paid and disposed for the payment and discharge of the Billet and Quar∣ter due by the Officers and Souldiers of Newport Pagnell, unto the Inhabi∣tants of Newport Pagnell, and three hun∣dreds of Newport, and other Towns and places neer adjoyning; and after such Quarter and Billet first paid, then the remainder and overplus (if any be) to such person and persons, as by the said Committee for the Eastern Association shall be appointed and declared. And it is further Ordained and decla∣red, That the said Committee for the Eastern Association, shal and may from time to time, cause Musters to be taken within the said Garrisons, so often as they shall hold fitting; and that they shall and may nominate and appoint such person and persons as they please, to take such Musters. FINIS.
