E2196 669.f.25[12] 99870563 163817
CR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Of both Houses of Parliament, For Proclaiming of His Majesty King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. ALthough it can no way be doubted, but that His Majesties Right and Title to his Crowns add Kingdomes, is, and was every way compleated by the death of His most Royal Father of Glorious Memory, without the Ceremony or Solemnity of a Proclamati∣on; Yet since Proclamations in such Cases have been alwayes used, to the end that all Good Subjects might upon this occasion testifie their Duty and Respects; And since the Armed Violence, and other the Calamities of these many years last past, have hi∣therto deprived Vs of any such opportunity▪ wherein we might express Our Loyal∣ty and Allegiance to his Majesty. Wée therefore the Lords and Commons now As∣sembled in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, and other Freémen of this Kingdom now present, do, according to Our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully and unanimously Acknowledge and Pro∣claim, That immediately upon the decease of Our late Soveraign Lord King Charles, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same, did by Inherent Birth-right, and lawfull and un∣doubted Succession, descend and come to His most Excellent Majesty Charles the Se∣cond, as being Lineally, Iustly, and Lawfully next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm; And that by the Goodness and Providence of Almighty God, Heé is of Eng∣land, Scotland, France, and Ireland the most Potent, Mighty, and undoubted King, De∣fender of the Faith, &c. And thereunto Wee most humbly and faithfully do submit and oblige our Selves, our Heirs and Posterities for ever. Dated the 8th day of May 1660. Die Martis, May 8. 1660. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That this Procla∣mation be forthwith Printed and Published. JO. BROWNE, Cleric. Parliamentorum. LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and Francis Tyton, Printers to the House of Lords, 1660.
