E2724aA R176181 45097764 171355
THE SENTENCE OF THE House of Commons, VPON MR. HENRY DARELL, For reporting that Master PYM A Member of the said House, should take a Bribe of thirty pounds: Together, With the said Master Darells acknowledgement of his errour therein. Ordered that this acknowledgment of Master Darells, and the sentence of the Commons thereupon bee forthwith Printed. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed for E. Husbands and I. Franck. Oct. 19. 1642.
Die Jovis, 13 Octob. 1642. THis Acknowledgement, subscribed by Master Da∣rells owne hand, was by himselfe this day volun∣tarily offered to the House of Com∣mons and read, viz. WHereas I Henry Darell did report, that Master Pym a Bribe of thirty pounds, I doe seriously
confesse I never had any true ground for it, and am heartily sorry that I should report so false an untruth, And humbly crave pardon for this my great folly and offence in reporting the same words: And am so farre from justifying of them, that I am willing to give such satisfaction to this Honourable House, and to Master Pym in particular, as to this House shall seem fitting, and referre my selfe wholly to your mercy, it being my first Offence, and hope that it shall be hereafter a warning to me ever to commit the like. Henry Darell. Master Darell was called in, and demanded by Master Speaker, whe∣ther this Acknowledgment were his
owne, and under his hand: he did acknowledge it to be his owne, and under his hand: And thereupon the House proceeded to this Sentence, viz. Resolved upon the Question, That Master Henry Darell shall make his Acknowledgment here at the Barre presently, and on the first day of the next full Terme, that he shall make the same Acknowledgment at the Kings Bench Barre, the Chancery Barre, the Common-Pleas Barre, and the Exchequer Bar, the Courts then sitting. And then Master Darell kneeling, Master Speaker pronounced the Sentence aforesaid, and in part of performance thereof, hee did upon his knees make this acknowledge∣ment,
and read it upon his knees. Resolved upon the Question, That Master Darell shall be bailed upon such Baile as this House shall allow in the meane time till he hath per∣formed the rest of the Sentence, and upon Certificate thereof to be discharged. FINIS.
Ordered that this acknowledgment of Master Darells, and the Sentence of the Commons thereupon, bee forthwith Printed. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
