E3037 e884_5 99866369 118640
Englands Remembrancers. OR, A word in season to all English men about their Elections of the members for the approaching Parliament. Dear Christian friends and Countrey-men WE have all reason to complain, and say, this day is a day of trouble, rebuke, and blasphemy; our country that was great among the nations is now become vile, all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies; how is the profession of holinesse (by the un∣righteousnesse amongst us) blasted with the names of hy∣pocrisie, falsenesse, ambition and covetousnesse? how is the glory and strength of our nation spoiled, and the bloud of many thousands poured forth in wast like water? how is the treasure exhausted, trade and com∣merce destroyed? and how are all our rights, liberties and properties inva∣ded, and subverted by arbitrary powers and force of armes? who can say his life or estate is secured for a moment, if the jealousie, envy, pride, lust or covetousnesse of some in power please to command it? and how is de∣struction threatned daily by forreign enemies? surely the day of the Lord is very great and terrible against us, and yet there is mercy with him that he might be feared for in his abundant goodnesse he seems to open a door of hope, and to give us all leave by our Deputies to advise the means of our safety and peace; and the present writts for election of our representatives being the product of divine providence, and we are confident not long since, beyond the thoughts of those that sent them forth, may be justly looked up∣on as the voice of God to you all saying; gather the people, call a solemn Assembly, go and reason together, for in the multitude of councell there is safety. Dear Christians, it is by the choice of your Deputies only, that the whole body politick of this nation can consult together for their preserva∣tion by this means only you may all speak your minds, one to another and every one to the whole nation? it is the naturall way to settle your Go∣vernment, and provide for your common good, and in your present case,
there is no other way or means consistent with the laws of God, or the na∣ture of mankind, whereby our breaches can be healed, lawfull powers and authorities created, righteousnesse and justice exercised amongst us. For which ends we most earnestly beseech you to be very serious and considerate in a matter of such high importance, and take heed that you neither mistake, nor carelessely sleight, or neglect your present duty, in the choice of your common Assembly. Let it not be like a price put into the hands of fools without wisdome or hearts to use it. O that you would all begge of God courage, wisdome, and faithfulnesse, impartiality and integrity of heart in this great affaire. First then, mistake not your present duty; think not (as some) that your strength in this affair is to sit still; let not the darknesse of unexamined scruples prevent your acting in the choice of your representa∣tives. It may be some of vour tender hearts, being troubled at what hath been done by the Lord Protector (so called) are affraid to vote in the choice of your Deputies, lest you should seem to approve his power, be∣cause the choice is appointed by his writs: but we pray, examine this better. First consider, that the writs for elections neither did, nor ever could be justly construed to give the people any right to choose their members of the Parliament; the Almighty God the Creatour, and the fundamentall laws of this nation, gave the people that right by their birth: it was not in the pleasure of the Kings heretofore▪ whether the people should ever chuse their Deputies for the common Assemblies, though it was left to their discretion and prudence what time in the year it was most necessary to call the Assem∣bly. The Kings were bound by the laws and their oaths to send out writs every year to summon a Parliament; and the last law made about Parlia∣ments, ordained the very Constables to summon the people to the elections, if the Kings and others should neglect their duties to summon them; and we hope none of you would have thought that the Constables summons had gi∣ven you right to choose. The writs are only to call you to exercise your own rights, and surely you may use your own rights whosoever call you to do it. If a thief should stop your way to your own house for a time, and after∣ward send to you, and bid you go home if you please; we suppose none of you would scruple to go to your own house; why then should you scruple (whatsoever you think of the Lord Protector) to use your own rights in the expected election, now he permits you to do it, being no way derived or claimed from him? And if it be objected, that the way of elections ap∣proved by the laws is altered; it is easily answered, that the divisions of the numbers of the Electours into severall bodies or meetings, different from those former waies of meeting, change not the rights, and that you use your own
rights as farre as he will suffer you, and it were frowardnesse to cast away what you may enjoy, because ye have not all your rights. But it may be some others of you will say, that God requires at this time higher waies of advancing Christs Kingdome, than by Parliaments, and that God is gone out of the dispensation of Parliaments, and therefore you can∣not look after this to chuse or to be chosen; but upon due examination this darknesse of your minds will vanish, and you will find that the Saints pre∣paration for Christs Kingdome, which God requires, is clothing themselves with righteousnesse. Rev. 19.8. and that no righteous civile powers of go∣verning in this nation can be yet derived from any other fountain then the peoples consent or choice; and that you cannot be righteous or holy in set∣ting up, consenting, or adhering to any other civile governing powers. 'Tis yet the law given by God, and repeated by Christ, that you should do un∣to all men, (Saints or not Saints) even as you would that they should do to you. And we do believe that you would not, that any man or men should impose laws upon you at pleasure, and assume a power over your lives and estates without your consent; and therefore it cannot be righteousnesse in you to do it unto others. Say not therefore that God is gone out of Parliaments, unlesse you could prove that God hath abolished this old law; or that by some other divlne law the power of politick government is now to be der∣ved from other originall then the peoples consent or choice; and we beseech you, dear Christians, never fancy that ye are righteous or holie, if the divine laws be not your rule; we can no way so highly advance Christs Kingdome, as by obeying his laws, and to be found doing them when he comes. But say some others, we dare not have a hand in the choice of Parlia∣ments, for we doubt they will take away our liberty of conscience in wor∣shipping God, and we now enjoy it under the Lord Protector, thats worth▪ all things else. Dear Christians, we beseech you trie these your fears, whether they be of God; by what you alledge; you seem to saie, we cannot endeavour to set∣tle a righteous government, lest they oppresse our consciences. First trie whether you can find by scripture or reason, any other waie (except the peo∣ples personall agreement) to settle a lawfull authoritie in this nation, but by some chosen Deputies to represent the people, and consent in their behalfs to such laws as are now necessarie for safetie, peace, and common right and justice a mongst us; if you can, then there is place for prudence, to advise whether your liberties will be secure by Parliaments; but if you can find no other just means of making our laws, and setling a lawfull government, then you must either renounce obedience to God, or else cheerefullie do your
dutie, and chuse your Deputies with wisdome and integritie, and trust to the divine providence to blesse and protect you and your liberties, whilest you walk according to his rules, and no question, if there be due addresses to God, and dependance upon him (if it be at this time good for his people, and most for his honour to preserve their liberties in his worship) he will do it by Parliaments, and will smite the hearts of anie that now intend per∣secution, as he smote the heart of Saul in his journie. Act. 9.4. However you maie more comfortablie depend upon God in pursuing the paths of righteousnesse in government, than you can in adhering to anie power as∣sumed in unrighteousnesse, under good pretences, when the Ark tottered. 2 Sam. 6.6, 7. Vzziah put forth his hand with an intent to save the Arke, yet it cest him his life, because he took his own way, and not Gods to his good ends. And manie that adhered to Absolom in his rebellion. 2 Sam. 15, 4. (upon hopes of greater liberty, which he promised them▪) justlie pe∣rished with him. God will have justice, and mercie, rather than sacrif ce; and its better to suffer for righteousnesse sake, than to enjoy the pleasures of in for a season. yet if your representatives may be duely chosen, and freely consult without the influence of a Court, or the a we of a mercenarie souldi∣er, their own interests and concernment bind them, much more than anie Court, standing counsell or arbitrary powers, to provide for liberty of con∣science, they themselves being subject to the laws they make, and being without anie possible private interest in oporessing any mans conscience, when the others have alwaies an interest of their own, crosse to the peoples, which guides their resolutions, and may probably lead them to oppresse one day the same peoples conscience, that were their savourites the daie before. But some maie yet saie, it is to no purpose to mind these elections, be∣cause the Lord Protector with his red-Coats will either force them to serve his ends, or turn them home again. We confesse there is much cause for these fears, yet they are no ground for you to forbear to elect, or to be elected, it cannot be denied that (unlesse there could be a personall agreement of the people) an assemblie of the peo∣ples Deputies, is the onlie visible means to settle justice, r ght and peace in the nation; and if so, then, no fear of the successe or of anie danger, can war∣rant the omission or neglect of using the last or onlie visible means of com∣mon right and safetie, when there was no other visible means left to preserve her Countrie from ruine, then it was fit for Esther to attempt that means. Esther 4.16. (though the Tyrants sword had decreed it to be death to use it) and to crie out if I perish I perish: none that love justice and their Coun∣trie, may omit any one prebable means of their prosperitie and safetie.
Secondly, the successe of a lawfull means of good ought not to be distru∣sted, who knows what Jonathan and his armour-bearer maie do when the spirit of God cometh upon them. 1 Sam. 14.6. when Hezekiah had paid Senacharib all his due tribute, and nothing would content him, but that He∣zokiah and his people must be slaves, and the people were in great fear be∣cause of his mightie host, what became of his one hundred and eightie thou∣sand men in a night. 2 Kings 18.14. with 31. Thirdly, admit the hopes of good were very small, if the possiblt means be not used, and justice and righteousnesse in government be subverted, and the name of God thereby blasphemed and your Countrie ruined, you cannot comfortably suffer under it, your conscience will be galled with remem∣brance that you neglected one opportunity that might possibly have pre∣vented all the mischief. Fourthly, if the assembly prove fruitlesse, yet your electing carefully such as you ought may prevent much mischief; if men of corrupt, rotten princi∣ples, and of mean base servile spirits should stand under the notion of the peoples representatives, by reason of honest mens negligence about the ele∣ction; how will the name and glorie of God be eclipsed, that should shine forth in laws founded on justice and reason, and in governours acted by no∣ble and sanctified principles? how may unrighte ousnesse be setled by a law; and you and your posterities sold for slaves, to serve like beast; the will and lust of great men; therefore the danger you mention as a discouragement in your election, is the greatest possible argument of care and caution in the ele∣ction. And if your Deputies should be returned home again, for their fait∣fulness and integrity in their trust, the sin be upon their heads that doe r, and the measure of their iniquity will be the sooner full, and fit for divine vengeance. Now as we hope all honest men will be satisfied, that it is their duties to choose their Deputies for the approching Parliament, so we hum∣blie pray them, not to sleight their dutie, nor do it negligently. Think not upon this as a small thing, that must give place to a bargain, or a daies har∣vest work, or the saving of a load or two of hay or Corn, do not think it of such mean concernment, that it is indifferent with you whether you go to the elections or not, unless your friend or your land-lord send to you. Let us intreat you to consider the na∣ture of your Dutie and the Importance of it to your selves and o∣thers. You are now to choose those that are to judge of all your common grievances and complaints, and to studie and contrive your redress, ease and happiness, you are now to choose those that are to dispose of and commd
your purses, and to lay what taxes upon you they in their wisedome shall think necessary: you are now to choose those that are to make warre or peace for you, so that the bloud of your selves and the whole Countrey, is in effect (under God) bound up in the wisdome and Integrity of their Resolutions; they may under God involve you in bloud and Confusion, or settle you in peace and Happinesse: you are now to choose those that are to choose for you all the Rules of your civil lives and conversations, they are to judge wherein you shall be bound and wherein free. The Rules and Lawes you have already are in their power to alter (saving to you your naturall Rights) and what new lawes they judge necessary, you are to be bound by them: you are to choose those that are to supervise the Administra∣tion of all Justice amongst you; so that in truth you are now to provide for all righteousnhsse amongst men, wherein the Glory of God, and the Ho∣nour of the profession of Christianity is so much concern'd. And in a word, you are now to choose those whom you trust with your persons, your lives, your estates, your wives and children, and your countrey. If you have any value for any of these, and love to justice, and the Honour of God, and love to your dearest Countrey, and tendernesse to your wives and children, or your own bloud, or any love to your trades, peace and safety, you are se∣riously to mind this election and to take heed how you choose, and whom you choose, and to do it conscionably as in the sight of God, and not as men∣pleasers. Take heed that no vile corrupt motive bias or incline your minds in your Election. Let not any Dependance you have upon any man for personall profit and advantage move you, let not friendship or relation of any kind whatsoever make you recede from the pure and noble principles of free-born English men. Let not the greatest power or pompe of any man make you admire him, or incline your minds to trust him. Let not hopes of favour or countenance of any man allure you, sell not your selves and po∣sterity, and countrey at such low prices as these. Neither let the threats or terrour of any man, nor yet the clashing of the souldiers Armes affright you out of your Impartiall judgements and Integrity in your choice; and we beseech you lay aside all personall prejudice against any sort of men, and agree together to have nothing in your eyes in your Elections, but the worth and fitnesse of the persons for so great a trust as you are to repose in them. And enquire after these ensuing Qualifications. First, that they be such men as Jethro counselled Moses to choose, men, fearing God, and haring coverousnesse, and lovers of righteousnesse and truth. Exod. 18.21. Secondly, that they be men of judgement and wisedome, having a
sence of, and able to look into the true causes of all our Countries misees distractions and burthens; and by Gods help to contrive the best means of our ease and settlement in freedome and peace. Thirdly, that they be men of courage and fortitude, despising danger and hazard for the common good; such as think not their lives too dear to venture for righteousnesse sake: men of cowardly mean spirits will sell themselves and you for slaves, if any man of power boldly attempt to be a tyrant over you. Fourthly, that they be men of uprightnesse and integrity in their lives, such as sear not good laws but love them; how can evil doers to whom good laws are a terrour be instrumentall to make such laws? such as are faith breakers and falsifiers of their trusts, proud and arbitrary, oppressours of others, or despisers of the laws; such can never heartily endeavour that justice should be done on such offendours, and without that, you can never enjoy freedome or safety. Fifthly, that they be full of mercie, love and goodnesse to all men, full of the bowells of Christ, taking compassion of such as are out of the way, not malic ous cruell or blocdy, whose hands and hearts are readie to thirst for the bloud of such as are not of their minds though men more righteous then themselves. Sixthly, that they be men of meek humble and sober minds, not proud or ambitious, nor passionate, such will easily degene ate into tyrants, or be readie to share in tyranny. Seventhly, That they be men of publick enlarged minds and hearts, who know they are not born for themselves, but to give glory to God in righteousnesse in their generation; such as cannot be satisfied unlesse they be doing good to othes; not men of private mean spirits who mnd not how the nation fares, if it be well with them; such will be readie to be∣tray you to save themselves. Eighthly, That they be men equally concerned with you in all they shall advise about, or enact, whose interest is bound up in yours, and must share equallie in all your common burthens, opp essions and losses, not such as live upon the publick purse, or any of their adherents, whose gain is your losse, and whose pomp and greatnesse must be founded in your op∣pressions and ruines. Ninthly, that they be men of sound experience in publick affairs and well affected with the worth of our good old cause, and well read in the deceipts of this age, and such of whose faithfulnesse you have had some try∣all; seek out we say, dear Christian friends and Countrey-men, for men
thus fitted by God for publick trust, and meet and advise together how you may find out men so qualified; and then acquaint each other with your knowledge you have of them, and lend such in your stead to the Grand As∣sembly, and then pray for them, and stand by them, and take every affront done to them, as done to the whole nation, and to every one of you in par∣ticular, and then without doubt (if God shall please to humble the nation for the sins which have brought us under all our miseries) the mighty God will so blesse all those endeavours that tend to the advancing of righteous∣nesse, truth and justice, that the voice of Tyranny and Oppression will be no more heard amongst us; your liberties will be vindicated, your Grie∣vances and burthens eas'd, the Honour of our Countrey (that now lieth in the dust among all nations) will be again restored; your trades reviv'd, peace and plenty returned, and the Generations yet unborn will have cause to blesse God for such an Assembly: and what shall we say more to you? dear Christians and Countrymen; Do not the teares of the widow, and the cryes of the fatherlesse speak? do not your imprisoned friends speak? do not your banished neighbours speak? do not your infringed rights speak? do not your invaded properties speak? do not your gasping liberties speak? do not your often affronted Representatives, (which have been trod upon with scorn) speak?Witnesse Ja∣maica. do not your incumbred estates speak? do not the bloud of many thousands speak, some slain with the sword, and others killed with hunger? do not the cries of your poor brethren the honest Sea men, the wall and bulwark of our Nation against forreiners, who have so freely venturd their lives upon all just accounts and calls, and are now most barbarously forced from their wives and children to serve the ambitious, and fruitlesse designes of one man? do not all your ruines at home and abroad, by land and sea speak to you? Surely they have loud voices, surely they do daily cry in your cares, Help, help, or England perishes. FINIS.
