F1461 E1865_2 99869051 170487
FAIR PLAY In the LOTTERY, OR Mirth for Money. In several witty passages and conceits of Persons that came to the Lottery. Represented by way of Droll By E F. Gent. Printed by H. Brugis at the Signe of the Sir Iohn Oldcastle in Pye-Corner.
TO THE Right Worshipful and In∣genious, Sir EDWARD FORD Knight, the Author wishes much health and happiness. Honoured Sir, THe many favours that I have of late received from you, has very much induced me for to present my few Observations unto your knowing view. I must confess they are not worthy Your seri∣ous speculation, being but a little Drollery of some sorts of people at your Lottery: In a word Sir, if you please for once to Patronize this little piece, if e're a better bud spring up to my hand, the whole Stock is yours, Root and Branch, in the interim I take leave to remain, Your affectionate and assured Servant to command EDWARD FORD.
On Lotteries. LOtteries or Chances, chances here below, Are too too frequent, yet men desire to know Something on that account, to signifie, Being mutual here, their mutability: And thus in order every man does crave Something, that's changing to his very grave, That work being done, no doubt he doth surmise Blanks stand for nought, tis faith that gets the prize. On a Gentlewoman with child, that long'd to draw a peice of plate and could not. VVHen Ladies long for Plate that is obscure, And very fairly ventures, yet not sure; Who knowes the Babe within her may confess And weep in secret for her sad success. Alas! the little Infant never saw The Plate she wisht, and had a mind to draw, And yet by consequence this drawn may be, She long'd for somthing in the Lottery, Lady I pitty you, because your lot Seem'd for to frown which wo'd have smil'd being got That Lotteries cruel for to make him rue You lost your pise and wrong'd your infant too Yet Mistriss don't dispond it is not known How soon bad fortune may be overthrown, For though the lott into the lap is cast The Bason and Ure may be yours at last.
Of a blind Maid that came to see the Lotteryr. SHe was pretty merry though of a mean ranck For she did laugh to hear she had a blank, Her fortune being hard she would not stay, She came in blind, and so she went away. It was a blind come off well met saith she, Fortnne's as blind as I, I plainly see. On a handsome Sempstris that came to the Lot∣tery to put in her White hand into the Box VVHat do you grope for Mistress, why entice With such a tempting hand Fortune the Shee's coy and skittish, will not, cannot stand And though you stroke her will not come to hand, nice, Your powerful touch that all flesh can allure Cannot tempt down a Spoon much less the Ure, Forbear, you Tarnish all the Plate we shew, It all seems copper to your brighter hue. The beauteous lustre that enchants the eyes And makes their Purses not our Plate the Prize Loses its charming look while all admire And who, that fairer better shew enquire. But Fortune would not sully that fair sight A blank was drawn and so twas white to white. Nothing but blanks she drew, in my opinion 'Twas a friend of mine one Mistress B—
Of one that got a Silver Tankerd. A Gentlewoman, whose fortune did abound Made her to prize for joy her happy state And all her wishes for the present crownd Obtaining such a handsome piece of plate, Comely she was as most is in the town Though at a blush she look't a little Brown. Of one that murmured at his hard mis∣fortune. BUt one being angry as it did appear His fortune was not good at that same time Paper he did protest was very dear Or else 'twas made of rags was very fine, And told his neighbour in a murmuring speech He had not Paper enough, to wipe his breech. On a Cook that came to the Lottery. SOon after this coms in a jovial Cook, And he adventures very free and faire He lives hard by Py-Corner, or Pasty nook, As true a Trout as other Trojans are; He lost his money, but wisht me hold my peace Or else he vow'd to fret in his own grease.
On a humourous Gentelman that complained to a Lady what mony he had lost. I vow sweet Lady, Fortune doth not advance My fate at all, but sends me still ill chance, A bove three pound dear Madam it has cost me And still the blanks has play'd the fools & crost me, Yet I will not despond, no more then brag Harry go home, and fetch me tother bagg And if I lose again and nothing get Though I learn nothing it shall teach me wit. On a poore Labourer that got two peices of plate for two shillings. AMongst a sort of Sparks a Labourer comes For to adventure as your gallants do And hee's in hope for to pick up his crums As in conclusion it prov'd very true, His Fortune that was good, say what you please He labour'd hard and yet got plate with ease On a Lady that asked if there were ever a stew pot in the Lottery or no. NO Madam sayes the Trumpet, yet ther's a Lot Though not for stews, for this same Chamber∣pot.
On a Taylor that came to the Lotteriy. BUt then a nimble Taylor he come in And must have a dozen Lots, I that he must He was as spruce we thought as he was trim And ask't if we had faith enough to trust T'was Answer'd that would do very well For sometimes hee'd not trust a rag in Hell. Of a merry Gentelman that lost some mony at the Lottery. A pretty Gentelman and his indeared Bride Came to the Lottery to sport a while Only another Lady too beside, Merry they seem'd to be for they did smile, They ventur'd very fair for Cup or Bowl Yet still they lost, and that was very foul, When they had lost what they thought good them∣selves The Gentelman did say that he wood send (First looking merily upon the shelves) For the plate he had won, by a Porter or a Frind, The Porter came not as he did indent And thereupon the plate was never sent.
On a Bailf that came to the Lottery. COme on my boy give me as many lotts As thou canst well afford for a mery Crowne, Better spent here, then wasted upon sots, If Fortune be not dogged, and too much frown Pox on't, the'r blanks this 'tis to minde your pelf I have often pincht others, and now I am pincht, my self. On a merry Gentleman and his Lady that came to the Lottery. LAd, some lots, pox on your drilling way You are no Cheats, what are you then I pray? I have had twenty now and never a prize Take em you knave just where the Bason lyes Tis not a peny matter for the Ure For that lyes pretty safe I am very sure Well done, lets see if there be nothing here I will not venture a peny more this year. Hetherto blanks prove they all, so we are sow'st And may conclude Sweet Lady we are Choust On a Whore that came to the Lottery. COme on my boy, give mee a lot or two If I get any thing Ile pay thee well I get my mony light enough tis true, And that my Neighbours if you aske, can tell; Well done lad if there be written in't Ile give 't a foole or have it put in print.
Of one that said the Lottery was a mere Cheate. THere is a sort of rash and Childish elvs That calls your Lotteries Cheats and cunning snaps When tis well known that they do cheat themselves The baite proceeding still from their own traps Thers none compel'd to venture, is there pray? Then who can help the thing, that will away. But grant it be a Cheat, you'l grant this too The world's a Cheat, then pray Sir what are you. On an old Woman that came to the Lottery with Spectacles. BUt then an antient Matron she comes in In hope to be a gainer with the rest? But to say truth, she lost and did not win: Her Fortune being then, none of the best. Her Spectacles did help her for to light Her purse, as well as eyes that wanted sight. On a Pickpocket that came to venture his mony at the Lottery A pickpocket or own they call a foyle Came to the Lottery and ventur'd half a peice You must think he did not get it with much toyle; So long as Crowds do stock, or any geese. They all prove'd blanks which made him say in fine This Trade is Cunninger by half then mine.
On an honest woman that won a Silver Flagon at the Lottery. SWeet Mistris Walker, I must needs confess I cannot chuse but much Congratulate This happy Fortune, and thy good success, In wininng such a handsome piece of plate, I wish for thy sake it had been a better thing Because I am sure th'art one that loves the King. On a Cookes wife that did dream she won a peice of Plate IT seems you dream't, you won a piece of plate But when you waked found t'was no such thing Then t'was your dream made you so fortunate And to your sences did such solace bring. Even so men dream here to get joy and blise But when they wake, they find how true it is. But Mistris pray suppose that I had dream't I had gi'n you a sound, for that same Plate you got And for my paines you gave me good content Which love of yours ought not to be forgot. But putting up my mony I did finde Twas but a dream, I saw you not so kinde.
On a Player that came to the Lottery. AN honest Player unto the Lottery came And in a frolicke, ventur'd a Crown or two Tis not a halfe peny matter for his name Because there was no forme in't that I knew He drank to me and setting down the glass Said he had acted fare to play the asse. A few Lines upon the breaking up of Sir Ed∣ward Fords Lottery at the Crown in Smithfield. FOr whose good hap the Trumpet cheerfull sounds And his success with joy and Triumph Crownes And as promistuously ther's many a blank Throwne in the box for one prize that is good Even so of every sort degree and ranke That comes with the world of flesh and blood. This sad experience we have allwaies had For one man that is good ther's twenty bad The pretty Child that drawes to day his lots Demonstrates innocently very Cleare And those devided by a sort of sotts That makes no use of what they see or hear, O that by faith a Lottery drawn might be. To do our souls good to eternity On this consideration we should strive
For to get faith which is a glorious prize And will no doubt kepe our poor souls alive When other comforts perishes and dies And in conclusion, Carefull to be found Cloath'd with the weding garment and so Crownd. On Jack Adams innocent of Clarkenwell AHa look yonder Mamy, ther's a danty thing If we had that two'd make us laugh and sing Harke Mamy the Trumpit boes, I'de venture a peny or a crooked pin If I were sure to lose and not to win. Mamy you must call to this great boy Hear, he wonte let me a see this fine toy Which me thinks finely shews Own standing by, upon his words streigh swore He never saw a fool at a Lottery before; Another answered, Friend it is not so There's none but fools come there for ought I know On a drunckenman that came to venture his Mo∣ny at the Lottery TRumpet I'de have you know that I am willing To venture my mony as free as any man Give me a lot old boy, and their's a shilling I'le have the bason and Ure if I can Yet having got a cup, it was his lot, To have a blank, yet cal'd for tother Pot.
On a Merry Cobler living in Smithfeld BUt then an honest Cobler my good Friend, A great mind had to get a piece of plate He lives in Smithfeld nere to Duck Lane end So he might have it at an easy rate. But being greev'd to see some lose in Plush, One Bird i'th hand is still worth two i'th Bush. At length with courage Hector like he came And did desire a Lot might favor, who Had put his genius in a noble frame. Making him merry and his Neighbours too. His Mony then being missing in his purse For madness the next day, waxt worse and worse Scorning their laughter, for one small peece, Next day he comes and calls for more, And then he lost a pretey handsome fleece I think in Shillings twas some three or four Although his daily labour is in Leather He cannot yet bring both his ends together E're frantick like, his fortune was so bad He made a vow, to come there no more And for a day or two was very sad Which in a Welshman seem'd but very poor. Yet still sayes e're the Lottery be past Hee'l come and venture and win all at last. On a poor man that came to the Lottery. AT length a poor man comes amongst the rest To venture a Shilling or two in hope to win Though for my part I did bed him straight Not for to do so, cause he look't so thin In breif he lost, yet if you'l take my word He had his Coyne again, of Sir Edward Ford.
On a Capt. that got two pieces of Plate for Twenty Shillings ANd then a Captain he drew for a piece, Two pieces of plate, both costly ones indeed One he bestowed I think upon his Neece, Still loving for to pleasure those that need. He call'd for Sack which I guest very fine He had a Caudle cup, and I a cup of wine. Likewise a Lady living in this Towne, For one five Shillings two handsome prizes drew One as I take it was a bonny Crowne, The other a Sugar box, both good and new. And yet t'is like you'le say, in jesting sort She had a Sugar box, but paid sweetly for't. On a Sparke I like your Gallant Sparks, that now and then Ventures his mony at Lotteries like man, For if his calculation be but sound For own poor Shilling he may get a pound, Had I said twenty pound I had not ly'd Set but your blanks, and scurvy chance aside: But he shall sure be poor and come to lack That loses all and leaves no Coyne for Sack.
Of an old Usurer that came to the Lottery BUt then a greedy Usurer in truth Came to the sport only in love to see If he could get him any thing forsooth That had got so much before by Usuery He lost one shilling, which made him look full sad Another to it would have made him mad. The Embleme of a Lottery. THis World may very well compared be By its Contracting and uncertain waies Very much like unto a Lottery That is so frequent used now adayes For still the Revolutions of these things Makes some men sad, whilst others gladly sings The wicked sort, they do Resemble much Your blanks, that seemes so white unto the eyes But being open'd torne is with a touch Thrown under foot and there in dirt it lyes. The Trumpet never sounds for any those Nor thankes return'd for any Chose But then your holy and religious man He is compared unto your Costly prize Which though at first it lookes so paile and wan Why yet within, there the Rich Treasure lyes. FINIS
