F138 E345_19 99861592 159803
ARTICLES Of Agreement Concluded and agreed on by His EXCELLENCY Sir Tho, Fairfax, Generall of the Forces raised by the Parliament on the one part: And Colonell THOMAS BLAGGE Governour of VVallingford on the other part: For and concerning the rendring of the Garrison of WALLINGFORD Castle and Towne. Read in both Houses of Parliament upon Fryday 24. July 1646. Published by Command. London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 25 July 1646.
Articles of Agreement concluded and agreed by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Generall of the Forces rai∣sed by the Parliament, on the one part, and Colonell Thomas Blagge Governour of Wal∣lingford on the other part. For, and concerning the rendring of the Garrison of Wallingford Castle and Towne, (viz.) 1 THat the Castle and Town of Walling∣ford, with all the Ordnance, Arms, Am∣munition, Stores and Provisions of Warre thereunto belonging, shall be delivered up without wilfull spoile or imbezzlement, unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fair∣fax, or such as he shall appoint to receive the same, up∣on Wednesday the 29 July 1646. in such manner, and with such exceptions as are contained in the ensuing Articles. 2 That on the said 29 day of July, the Governour, and all Officers and Souldiers of the Garrison, with all other persons therein (that will) shall march out of Walling∣ford, with their Horses and Arms properly belonging to them (and proportionable to their present and past Commands or Imployments) with flying Colours, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, Match lighted at
both ends, Bullets in their mouths, and every Souldier twelve charges of Powder, Match and Bullet propor∣tionable, with one Peece of Ordnance with equipage, and with bagge and baggage, to any place within ten miles of Wallingford, which the Governour shall chuse, where, in regard His Majesty hath no Garrison open, nor Army neare, all their Horses and Arms, ex∣cept what are allowed in the insuing Articles, are to be delivered up to such as His Excellency Sir Thomas Fair∣fax shall appoint; all the Souldiers shall be disbanded, and all such, both Officers, Souldiers, and others, as shall ingage themselves never to beare Armes against the Parliament, nor to do any thing wilfully to the pre∣judice of their affaires, during their abode in the Par∣liaments Quarters, shall have the benefit of the ensuing Articles; That is to say, 3 That all such as shall desire to go to their homes or private friends, (who shall not be prejudiced by recei∣ving them) shall have the Generals Passe and Protecti∣on, for their peaceable repaire to, and abode at the se∣verall places they shall desire for to go unto, the Go∣vernour, Officers and Gentlemen, to passe with equi∣page of Horses and Armes, answerable to their present and past commands or qualities; and all, both Officers, Souldiers, and others, to passe with bagge and baggage. And the Troopers onely with their Swords, and their bagge and baggage. 4 That all such (if there be any) who shall desire to take entertainment for forraigne service, shall have Passes for their Officers (not exceeding foure) with
their Horses and two Servants apeece, to go to London to treat with any Forraigne Ambassadour or a Gentl. for entertainment, and all of them shall have liberty and Passes to march, the Officers with equipage with Horses and Arms properly their owne, and answerable to their present or past Commands, the Common Soul∣diers with their Swords, and all with Bagge and Bag∣gage to the Quarters neer unto Harwich or Southamp∣ton, or to any Port between them, to be transported, where they shall be assisted in the procuring of Vessels and shipping for their transportation, at the usuall rates accustomed for fraught by the Governour of the next Garrison or Port Towne, who shall also take care or their safety and accommodation with Quarters untill shipping be provided and weather reasonable, they paying for the same after 28 daies from the Render. 5. That all the persons now in Wallingford, not be∣ing of the Souldiery of the Garrison, shall have liber∣ty for their persons and goods to stay in the Towne of Wallingford one Moneth after the rendring, if they desire it, and then to have the Generals Passe and Pro∣tection as others going out at the rendring upon the like ingagement; And that any person whatsoever, who being sick and wounded, cannot at present re∣move, shall have liberty to stay till they be recovered or able to go away, and shall have fit accommodation and subsistance provided for them during such their stay, and then shall injoy the benefit of these Articles, 6. That no person whatsoever comprized in this Capitulation shall be reproached, reviled, affronted,
plundered, or injured in their march, Rendezvouz, or quarters, journies, or places of abode by these Arti∣cles allowed, nor shall be compelled to beare Armes, nor be imprisoned, restrained, sued, molested, damni∣fied for any matter whatsoever, of publike or private concernment, relating to this present War, the matter or grounds arising before the rendering of the Garri∣son, during the space of six Moneths after the rende∣ring thereof, nor be compelled to take any Oathes, or ingagements then what is mentioned in the second Article during the time of six Moneths, and to have liberty during the said time to travell about their law∣full affaires. 7. That all Horses and other Goods now in Wal∣lingford taken as lawfull prize of Warre, or properly belonging to the Governour, or Officers of the Garri∣son before, or during the siege, shall be continued in the possession of the present possessors, except such as are to be delivered by the returne of these Articles. 8 That such Houshold-stuffe and Goods now in Wallingford as shall appeare to the Generall, or such as he shall depute for that purpose, to have been bor∣rowed by any Officer or Gentleman in the Garrison, for their use and accommodation in the Garrison, shall be restored back to the owners. 9 That if any person or persons shall wilfully vio∣late these Articles in any part, the guilt thereof shall be imputed to such person or persons only, and shall not prejudice any other not acting nor consenting in the same.
10 That the Governour and three more such Offi∣cers and Gentlemen as he shall name, shall have Passes from the Generall for themselves, with two servants a peece, their Horses, Swords, Pistols, and necessaries to goe to the King, to give him an accompt of the said Garrison, and to returne to their homes or friends, and that five weekes shall be allowed for this jour∣ney, which shall not be reckoned any of the six months mentioned in the sixt Article, but he and they shall be allowed six Moneths after the end of the said five weekes. 11 That no Officer, Souldier, or other person who by the Articles are to march out of the Castle or Town of Wallingford, or shall march in, shall plunder, spoyle, or injure any inhabitant or other person therein, in their Persons, Goods, or Estates, or carry away any thing that is properly belonging to any of them. 12 That all persons comprised within these Arti∣cles shall peaceably and quietly injoy all their Goods, Debts, and moveables, during the space of six Months after the rendering, and shall have liberty within the said space (if they shall resolve to go beyond the ses) to dispose of their said Goods, Debts, and moveables, and to depart the Kingdome with the same as they shall thinke fit and desire, and shall have Passes for their Transportation accordingly from his Excel∣lency. 13 That all persons comprised within these Arti∣cles,
shall upon request have a Certificate under the hand of the Generall, or such as he shall appoint, that such persons were in the Castle or Towne of Walling∣ford at the time of the rendering, and are to have the benefit of these Articles. 14 That the Townes-men, and the Inhabitants of the Towne of Wallingford shall not bee troubled, or questioned for any thing said or written by any of them, nor the Corporation thereof prejudiced for any thing done by any of them by expresse Command since it was a Garrison, and that they shall have the benefit of these Articles that may concerne them. 15 That Mr. John Chamberlin of Sherborne shall have the benefit of these Articles. Signed Tho. Blagge. FINIS.
