F2302aA R43625 42475032 151142
A Full and True ACCOUNT of the Behaviour, Confession, & Execution OF Mr. Richard Buttler, FOR A Notorious Fellony and Burglary. WHO WAS Executed at TYBOƲRN, on Monday the 29th. of July, 1695. after having been Twice severally Reprieved, for the Space of 17. Days. WITH A Brief RELATION of his Extravagant Life, and other Remarkable Mat∣ters and Circumstances, that Attended him to his untimely End, &c. RICHARD BUTLER, having been Tryed the last Sessions at the Old-Baily, and found Guilty of a Notorious Fellony and Burglary; for that he with other his Accomplices, broke into the House of Robert West, of the Parish of Full∣ham, in the County of Middlesex, on the 4th. of April last, taking thence Plate, Rings, and wearing Apparel to a great Value, he, pur∣suant to the said Conviction, in the close of the Sessions, received Sentence of Death. Being remanded to Newgate, he seemed not at all concernded at the deplorable Cir∣cumstances he lay under: But indeed own'd he had liv'd a wicked profligate Life, contra∣ry to his better Knowledge and the good E∣ducation his Parents had bestowed on him, being early drawn away to follow bad Com∣pany; especially by Lewd Women, who in the end proved the worst of his Enemies, for by their insatiable Craving, he was forced to still their Clamours, to undertake these late Evil Practices. Being visited by the Minister, and some of his Friends, they advized him to be Serious, and consider his latter End, seeing he was Dead in Law, and the time of his Death as it were fixed to a certain Period: He found his Conscience touched with some Remorse, and, like Foelix, trembled at the Thoughts of Death and Judgment to come; but this conti∣nued not long; for being left by them, he laboured to wash away his Thoughts of what he was to suffer, if not of an Eternal State, with Liquors conveyed to him; yet this did little to the Stilling his Conscience, which brought to his Remembrance his past Evil Courses, and cast him at certain times into Agonies of Mind, which so shook his Soul, that it little varied from a kind of Di∣straction; striving continually to behave him∣self unconcenedly On Friday the 19th. of July, having before hand notice he must Die that Day, there ap∣peared in him a Confusion of Thoughts between Fear and Resoluteness, and being delivered to the Sheriff's Officers, and put into a Cart with Edmund Allen, (who suffer'd for Poyso∣ning his Wife) he behaved himself very ex∣travagantly, as a Person not prepared for a∣nother World: but by the way a gracious Reprieve met him, and a longer time was allowed him to prepare himself for Death, at which he seemed not much concerned, however he was brought back to Newgate, and had seasonable Advice given him to make use of the pretious Moments offered as it were by a wonderful Providence, to enable him the better to fit himself for an Eternitie, upon which depended his everlast∣ing Happiness or Misery; but we do not find he was so careful about it as he ought to be. On Monday, the 29th. After 17 days Re∣prieve he was again brought down and put into a Cart, appearing much Disordered, telling the People He was now come again, to show himself, desiring their Company, &c. Being come to the Place of Execution, and tyed up, the Reverend Ordinary was earnest in perswading him to be Serious, and to consider he was launching into Eternity and therefore ought to employ his Minutes to a good purpose; according whereunto he prayed with him; but Butler slighted it, professing himself a Roman-Catholick, and that he would die in that Faith: He protest∣ed he was Innocent of the Fact he was about to suffer for; but, being desired to be circum∣spect in his Words, for that the Evidence was plain against him, he Inveighed against his Accusers vowing he never broke open a House in his Life. The Ordinary desired for to sing a Psalm with him but he refus'd; and so, after he had spent a small time in pri-Prayer after his own method, the Cart was drove away and his Soul committedto
