F364 E181_24 99871263 123669
A FAMOUS BATTEL Fought by the Earle of Corke, the Earle of Ormond, and the Lord MOORE Against the Rebels in IRELAND WHEREIN Is shewed the braue Valour of the Lord MOORE HOW HE RECOVERED DƲBLIN FROM the Besiege of the Rebels, and by his policy undermined the ground, and laid 20. Barrels of Gun-powder in a Vault, and killed 2000. of the Rebels at that time. Also a great and bloody Battell betwixt the Earle of Ormond and Tyrone, and the number of men that were slaine. Whereunto is added the trecherous Plots against Dublin, and how it hath bin defended, and is now very strongly fortified As also of the great Guard that is daily set to defend London Derry, and of some plots lately intended against the same. With the Relation how some English forces are come upon the rebels and have slaine many of them. LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1642.
A famous Battel Fought BY The Lord Moore, the Earle of Cork, and the Earle of Ormond, against the Rebels, December the 23. 1641. VPon the 23. of Decemb. the rebels pre∣pared themselves for battell, and their intent was to beat downe the famous ci∣ty of Dublin: but first they came to Kilmanum and burnt downe all the houses there, using un∣heard of torments to the poore protestants, but then about the space of two dayes after Tyrone was to bring an Atmy of ten thousand men to assault the aforesaid city of Dublin, & to march by Kilmanam, but the Lord Moore having intel∣ligence of it, he caused the drums to beat vp, to call his souldiers together, and then related to them what the rebels intent was: wherefore he made a proposition to them, which they very willingly agreed to it, that was, to undermind the ground by the way that they in ended to come, and to lay 20 barrels of Gun-powder in the same vault, the one end of it came to Kilma∣num,
and there by the policy that he used, the fire caught hold on the powder just as they were marching over the said place, and there at that instant were slaine and wounded of the rebels about the number of 2000, which put them in a great perplexity, and caused them to retreat backe upon the sudden. Then the Earle o Cork and the Earle of Ormond pursued them, which the rebels seeing, resoluely withsthod them, and there a bloudy ourtell did insue, the rebels being in number 1000. the Earle of Tyrone were their Generall: the Lord Moore and the Earle of Ormonds force were 6000. The Earle of Ormond bringing up his men so couragiously, that it was his hard fortune to receive a wound in the thigh with a bullet: but God be praised, he hath recovered it againe. Ty∣rone had a great wound in the arme, but the good Lord Moore received no harme at all. In this great and victiorious battell were slain on the rebels side 4000. and of the protestants side nine hundred. Upon the 24 day of Decemb. the rebels renu∣ed their forces, intending to assault the City of Dublin, but they were beaten back by that true, valorous, and experienced Souldier Captaine Field, who hath bin in the King of Swedlands wars these 16 yeeres last past. Then the rebels seeing that they could not gaine the aforesaid city, by reason they were so
often resistted, and beaten backe therefore Ty∣rone devised another way to gaine it by policle, as may appeare by this insuing story. Vpon the 19 day of December, the rebels sent a great company of men with great store of mo∣neyes about them to the city of Dublin, under pretence of being protestants, & that they were faine to flye from the County of Conoham for safeguard of their lives, and to leave all their goods behind them, save onely some moneyes which they brought with them. Therefore they desired, and intreated, that they might have Lodging, and they would pay for all things which they called for. Whereupon they were let in, and some Lod∣ged in one place and some in another, where they behaved themselves well in an outward shew, but trechery and cruelty lodged in their brests; for they had taken an Oath before they came from the rebels to be true to them, and not to discover any of their sccrets or intents, but to kill all the protestants they possible could, after their time was expired. For they had so plotted together that when they were entred the City, after the space of fourc dayes they should kill all the protestants they possible could, the houre was set downe which they should begin at, they having great store of pistols and bullets about them.
Vpon the 4. day towards evening, the rebels in∣tended to approach neere the city, & to enter in∣to it by trecheny; for upon the third day three or foure of them were talking together, saying, tomorrow night about twelve of the clocke, we shall be abou our blessed designe of killing the hereticks: but there was a poore man in the next roome overhearing of them, who presently went to the Lord Chiefe Jvstice, and told them hovv it vvas. Whereupon there was a generall search made throughout the whole city, and took and impri∣soned all strangers which they found in every house & being examined before the Lord chiefe Justices, they confessed how it was, that when they were about this bloudy massacre, he rebels were to come against the city, and to batter it downe. The Major of London-derry having some in∣telligence that the rebels were shortly resolved to assault it, did give strct command, that the city should be strongly guarded, and have a great fotrfication set about it to defend it. At the publication of which warrant, each man prepared Arms to the same intent, & about the evening as many of the rebls came suppo∣sing to have taken it▪ they very strongly defen∣ded themselves and the city and repeled the re∣bels, driving them back wi great strength and courage, slaying many of hem,  kng  other flye.
The Red-shanke likewise hearin how blou∣dily and inhuman they did prosecute the pro∣testants, came on the backe side of Ireland, and slew many of them, not sparing either man, wo∣man, or child, vvhom they suspeded to be rebels, but killing them all with couragious puissance. The City and Castle of Dublin is now is ve∣ry strongy fortified, and they doe worke with home worke, so that they now defend them∣selves from the rebels Tyranny very valiantly. For by the helpe of the Scots, that are on the back side, and other English men lately gone o∣ver on the front they doe now massacre the Re∣bels notably, and have sufficiently kept and de∣fended the Castle of Dublin from their bloudy and inhumane designes. Thus we see that misery and calamity may sometimes continue, for a night, but joy & com∣fort commeth in the morning. For Almighty God will not suffer his peo∣ple to perish altogether, but at length hee riseth himselfe, and confounds all their enemies. FINJS.
