F879 E200_29 R212619 99871222 157570
MASTER FYNES HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT: Touching the proffer of the Citie of LONDON by the Lord Maior: on Thursday the 17. of February, 1641. to disburse 60000 l. towards the suppressing the Rebellion in IRELAND. woodcut of a crown bordered by two birds LONDON, Printed for F. C. and T. B. 1641.
MASTER FYNES HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT: Touching the proffer of the Citie of London by the Lord Maior, on Thursday the 17. of Fe∣bruary, to disburse 60000l. towards the suppressing the Rebellion in Ireland. Anno Dom. 1641. Master Speaker, THis proposition made by the Citie of London, for the loane of the summe of money, towards the sup∣pressing of the Rebels in Ireland, is not in my opinion to be rejected: The conditions under which they will disburse the same, is now the thing we have to consider of: viz. 1. That London-Derry in Ireland, now in subje∣ction to the Rebels, when recovered, may be resto∣red to them; and satisfaction made by the Rebels for the damage done thereto.
2. That all that shall be wonne, both lands and goods, from the Rebels, by the Army paid with their money, may be theirs for the same. 3. That if nought be recovered from them, they are willing to lose their money. These propositions I conceive (under favour) to be very reasonable, and may without much difficul∣ty be consented unto, and that for these reasons. 1. The rebellion in Ireland is so generall, that it is not the force of one Army can suppresse them in every place; and if the like proffer were made ei∣ther by other Cities, or the Merchants joyne to∣gether, or if any great personages in this King∣dome, whereof money or armes, or what force they could raise for other severall places in subjection to the Rebels, and upon such propositions to be pre∣sented unto the Parliament; I conceive it would be the speediest course to subdue the Rebels, and reduce that Kingdome to the due obedience to His Majestie and the Crowne of England, and to the Lawes and Ordinances made by His Majestie, and His States of both Kingdomes. 2. By this means the Souldiers will be much ani∣mated and incouraged to fight, when they shal fight not onely for Religion, their King and Countrey, but also for their owne profits and particular be∣nefit, that what they valiantly win is their owne: This will put life and vigour into them, make them chearefull and willing to hazard themselves, not onely in their persons, but even their estates and fortunes, if need require, upon such grounds and
hopes, conceiving if they lose their lives, or for∣tunes, or both, yet may they be confident of their reward in the other world, even from God himself, and his Christ, whose cause they have undertaken, whose most holy Word and Doctrine they strive to maintaine in its purity and sincerity, his true reli∣gion seeke to uphold and defend, and his honour and glory endeavour to vindicate. They cannot likewise expect otherwise then reward in their po∣sterity and kindred by their King and Countrey, whose cause it is also they undertake to defend, and whose honour and ancient fame and glory they en∣deavour to revive, and vindicate against the open and publique enemies and adversaries to the same. 3. By this means many that are revolted from the Protestants to the Rebels may be drawne to returne, nd many that are not yet revolted (although favou∣rers of their cause, and well-wishers to them) nay perchance of their Religion, be dehorted from the same, and meerely for hopes of profit and prefer∣ment, may remaine faithfull and stedfast in their service to their lawfull King and native Countrey; What man but desperate will take part in the de∣fence of a cause that no way can bee conceived pro∣sperous or profitable; they may increase in strength, and be permitted to do great mischiefe and damage to the Protestants, but this must have an end, this cannot long continue, bloud requires bloud, ven∣geance will be at last repayed by him who hath all power in his hands both of Heaven and Earth, to their shame and utter confusion, and Christ and his
servants must have the victory: nay, former times have made this manifest. The troubles in this Kingdome in the raigne of King Henry the eighth, by that faction raised after that Prince endeavoured to purge the Church and this Land of Idolatry, which continued from the 28. to the 31. yeare of his raigne, yet at last they were subdued both in this Kingdome and the Kingdome of Ireland, and the troubles in the raigne of Queene Elizabeth of good memory not much inferiour to the present distem∣pers of both States, raised also by the same faction, were at length appeased and brought to true subje∣ction to the Queene and Crowne of England: We have had experience aswell now of later times as formerly of their devillish practises and stratagems privately agitated when they could not prevaile by publique insurrection, yet few through the good providence of God have taken effect, but have been avoyded and prevented by some meanes or other. These things considered and joyned with future hopes of preferment, may prove a maine cause to dehort Souldiers from revolting to the Rebels, and to draw such as are revolted backe againe to their lawfull service and true obedience. 4. Lastly, hereby may forraigne States be mo∣ved to withdraw their ayde and assistance, intended to supply the Rebels withall, when they shall per∣ceive that such force is providing of all sorts of men for supply of the Protestants, and the reasons and grounds which moves them so willingly to take Armes, that it is very improbable and unlikely
such successe of their enterprises will follow as is desired: And that the Rebels are very unconstant if in danger to be overcome, and considering the un∣justnesse of their cause, being onely publique rebel∣lion against their lawfull Soveraigne, onely cloaked and covered under the bare title of the defence of their Religion, and pretended liberties in the exer∣cise thereof in that Kingdome, they (I conceive) will be the more cautious how they intangle them∣selves in the defence of their unjust quarrell. And thus much of the reasons why I conceive these pro∣positions of the Citie of London is convenient and necessary to be consented unto, and confirmed by Parliament: which notwithstanding I humbly leave to the further consideration of this Honourable House. Averred by George Nixon Clerke. FINIS.
