G1061 E115_19 99871529 156023
GOOD NEWES FROM Lincolne-Shire. BEING A true Relation of the apprehention of Sir William Ballaudine, (Master of the Horse to the Prince Palts∣grave) Sarjeant Major Killaway, Sarjeant Major Dlman, and diverse other Commanders who were going to assist the King against the Parliament; and are now ordered to be brought up to LONDON. ALSO The Abstract of an Oath of Association (or Confederacie) of diverse ill-affected persons in the County of Yorke: with some of the neighbouring Counties, for the raising an Army of Horse and foot, under the Command of the Earle of Cumberland. Printed for William Gifford. Septemb. 5. 1642.
JOYFULL NEWES FROM LINCOLNE-SHIRE: Being a true Relation of the apprehending of Sir William Ballaudine, (Master of the Horse to the Prince Paltsgrave) Serieant Maior Killaway, Serieant Maior Dolman, and divers other Commanders, who are or∣dered to be brought up to London. Also the Oath of Association of divers ill-affe∣cted persons in Yorkshire with the neighbou∣ring Countreyes, for the raising of an Army of Horse and Foot under the command of the Earl of Cumberland. VPon Thursday morning last, being the first of September, when the Com∣mittee for the defence of the Kingdom sate in the usuall place, in the Court of Wards, information was given to them of a ship, that lately struck in at a Creeke in Lin∣colnshire, where it hath not been known that any ship hath landed heretofore, and there
landed out of the ship eleven men, and ma∣ny trunks of a great weight, but the ship was lanched forth again to the sea, and the Coun∣trey rose and had taken ten of the men, but the eleventh being (as is reported) Gentle∣man of the Prince Paltsgraves Horse was escaped away for the present, but was after∣ward apprehended: for upon Friday follow∣ing the second of September, the Parlia∣ment received information by certain men that came out of Lincolnshire, that Sir Willi∣am Ballaudine, together with Serieant Maior Killaway, and Serieant Maior Dolman, with diverse other Commanders are taken in Lin∣colnshire, and commanded to be brought upon, because it is conceived they were go∣ing to the King to assist him against the Parliament. Many out of every Countrey (espeically those that are well-affected to the good of the Kingdome) are willing and for∣ward to manifest their courage for maintain∣ing the peace thereof against the disturbers of the same. One M. Hill the Under-She∣riffe of Glourestershire, having ten more with him, met with Sir Ralph Dutton and ten Cavaliers, who were raising of men against the Parliament in that countrey, whereupon the said M. Hill, with the rest of his compa∣ny, fell upon Sir Ralph Dutton and his Cava∣liers,
who so valiantly pursued them, that Sir Ralph Dutton was forced to swim the river Severne, and tooke two of the Cavaliers and brought them up to the Parliament, who had thanks returned them for their fidelity and paines, with further encouragement to send up all the malignant Cavaliers, and all those who should endeavour to put in ex∣ecution the illegall Commission of Array, if they appeare in that Countrey, and that all Countreyes shall do the like. Since Sir Ralph Dutton fled out of Glo∣cester-shire, he hath been very lately in He∣reford-shire, where he thought to have rai∣sed five men for the Kings service against the Parliament: and that he might the better effect his intended purpose, he hath im∣ployed severall agents to assist him in the raising of them: but staying there in hopes of men till they could not raise money to de∣fray ordinary expences, they were forced to flie from thence without either. A thousand souldiers being lately sent from London into Hampshire, did pillage di∣verse Papists houses by the way, and after they came thither: so that the Papists in those parts begin to flie, finding their plotting with Col. Goring to betray Portsmouth, is like to ruine the contrivers of that revolt, since all the Isle of Wight stands wholly for the King and Parliament.
The Parliaments Forces by the assistance of the trained bands in Hampshire having be∣sieged Colonell Goring in the towne, and seized upon all his fortifications and other out works, daily plying him with then Ord∣nance, the towne being divided, and keep∣ing garrison one upon the other, insomuch that Colonell Goring finding small hope of∣fecurity in the towne, and seeing His Maie∣sties expected aid intercepted, hath thought it most requisite to make the best of a hard bargaine, and having lost all but the last stake, well to husband it, lest in losing that he become a bankerupt. Wherefore he hath humbly presented his desires to the Commanders of the Parlia∣ments Forces, wherein are contained these particulars. That although it were in his own power to keep the towne against them, yet so farre he did pitie the distressed estate of the town, that to prevent the effusion of blood he was willing to resigne up the towne, upon this condition, that upon the delivery of the said towne, his life might be secured, and have free recourse to his Maiesty. But they knowing that this request made by the Colonell was more for his own ends, then any intention of good service to the State, still proceed in making of works, the
Pioners being very active in their designes. The souldiers likewise are very forward, and make severall assaults, thinking to draw them out of the towne: but they play least in sight, only playing with their Ordnance; but, the besiegers being intrencht, they do little hurt, onely now and then a bullet lights in the trenches. I he Cavaliers made an attempt to sal∣ley out of the towne upon some forces of ours came with provision, but being resi∣sted, they were forced to flie, some of them taking the river, were forced to swim for it, being glad they could so esc ape away. Certaine letters were taken which were opened, wherein there was a discovery of the intention of the Cavaliers to give an alarme by night from Chichester side, by that meanes to draw our Forces from before Portsmouth, thinking by that meanes to give the Colonel and his souldiers opportunity to escape: but their proiect being discovered, the Co∣lonell remaines our fast-friend, without a∣ny hope of deliverance. There is now a par∣ley between those of the town and the Com∣mittee for the Parliament, and it is thought the towne will yeeld without shedding of blood, if they agree not upon conditions, the souldiers are to fall presently upon the town. This is witnessed by William Iorden.
There came Letters from Yorkshire to the Parliament on Thursday, signifying that the ill affected party of that county have entred into an Oath of Association with neigh∣bouring Countreyes, and imposing upon the County, contrary to their consents, a charge to maintain an army of Horse and Foot un∣der the command of the Earle of Cumber∣land, with an intent to disarme all well-affe∣cted persons in the Countrey that will not consent to their illegall actions, and indea∣vour the having of a Commission of Oyer and Terminer in His Maiesties absence, and a Councell of Warre to be continually kept there, to keep the countrey in subiection. FINIS.
