H2597 E638_9 R202446 99862721 114896
THE HONOUR OF THE English Soldiery, Illustrated by way of Parallel, betwixt Them, and those of other NATIONS, in point of Discipline and Behaviour; Especially of FRANCE. Occasioned by severall Relations, sent over, touching the Barbarous Tyranny of the FRENCH Soldiery, and their FOREIN AUXILIARIES. Set forth as a warning to ENGLAND, against admit∣ting the Scots, or any other Foreiners under any pretence whatsoever. Barbarus has Segetes? LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1651:
The Honor of the English Soldiery, Illustrated by way of Parallel, betwixt them, and those of other Nations, in point of Discipline and Behaviour; especially of FRANCE. AS often as I contemplate the good Order and Discipline of the old Roman Mili∣tia (whereby that Queen of Cities be∣came Lady of the world) comparing it with ours, it seems to me as if the fa∣mous Manlii, the Fabii, and the Sci∣pio's, were revived again among the gallant Commanders and Captains of the English Nation; For, without controversie, those antient Heroes may here finde their Parallels in every Punctilio of true valor and honor, not any whit inferior in Civil or moral Indowments: But if to the accomplishments of nature, we add those also that are Spiritual; by how much Grace excels Na∣ture, Christian piety morality, so farre we may conclude, that
as the present persons and Actions take their rise from mor Noble Principles and designes, so they must needs transcend the highest examples of old Rome, and appear much more excellent, every way, than all the Monuments and Triumphs of the Roman vertue. How great then is the happiness of this Nation (even in the midst of misery) that notwithstanding, through the continued Plots and malice of her Enemies, she be constrained still to keep a Militia on foot for her necessary defence, yet the matter is carried, through the care and seve∣rity of those which Command, that so good Order is observed among the Soldiery, as it equals, if not exceeds the strictest Patern of the Roman Discipline! Time was (you may re∣member) not long since, when the poor people were wont to tremble at the very name of approaching Soldiery; Let the North consider how it was harassed by the insulting Cavalier, and farre worse afterwards by the pernicious and most merci∣less Scot, who like the Locust, devoured what the Palmer∣worm had left, utterly drained them of their wealth and provisions, cleared both man and beast (driving all away) to the impoverishing and starving of many Thousands, in the Northern Counties; nor did they abate one tittle of the like inhumanity, all along the Countrey, in that their memorable march (to no purpose) to the siege of Hereford. Let the West likewise remember, what it suffer'd by that wretched crew under Goring and Grenviel; neither let it be forgotten by the whole Land, how much every part did groan under the cruelty of Rupert, and his implacable pack of Foreiners and Plunderers; whose rapacious lusts knew no measure, nor their eyes any pity, wheresoever they came. Nor is it possible; that the Mid-land Counties and Frontiers should forget the devastations, burnings free-quarters, and plunders, made by the incursions of both the Parties, as well Parliamentary, as Royal; For in those days, little better was the constitution of many even of the Parliaments Forces, who were too much infected with the High-Boys, Dammees and Ranters; so that the poor people in all parts, were ground to powder (like Corn in the mill) betwixt two disagreeing Parties, who both seem'd
to agree in the same point of inhumanity, to inhance the mise∣ries and sorrows of an afflicted Kingdom. But in process of time, it seeming good to the wisdome of Par∣liament, to alter the Commander in Chief, and establish a new model of the Militia (as it now stands to this day) especiall care was taken in the first place to put such onely in place of Com∣mand, as were men of known principles of integrity and Piety; and the whole mass of the Soldiery (especially the Cavalry) was made up for the most part, of men of the same temper; such as ingaged upon internal respects of Conscience and duty, not out of Mercenary, or any other inferior considerations; by which means it came to pass, that the Army was soon freed from all the inconveniences and extravagancies of the former esta∣blishment. The noble and serious behaviour of the good, wrought a shame in the bad; and as for those whom good ex∣ample and their own ingenuity could not amend, the Laws and Ordinances of Warr were put in quick execution to re∣strain them; so that either for fear or shame, there followed an universal change in the behaviour of the Soldiery Military Discipline was soon revived after the strictest examples of an∣tient Severity; Quarters were discharged, Plunder and Op∣pression avoided; drunkenness, swearing, lasiviousness, and all kindes of Luxury, were cashired; the work of God was bet∣ter minded and carried on for the works sake; Religious ex∣ercises and Conventions frequented, Godliness advanced, and the power of godliness made the onely rise of preferment: In the Intervalls of Action they lived like Saints, and at the point of Action, behaved themselves like Lyons, being resol∣ved to triumph, even in death, as an Army of Martyrs. In which posture and resolution they continue to this very day. Whose houses have they at any time causlesly burnt, in a vain humor of revenge and oftentation? whose wives, or daughters have they ravished? What Towns do they ransack? What Vil∣luges do they spoil and abuse? Whose exen, whose sheep, whose provisions have they taken, and not paid for them, or made re∣stitution? If any Nation in the world may glory in a Soldie∣ry, sure, none more than England; yea, none so much: For,
it can be no Hyperbole to use this expression after a Noble Person; that since the days of the Israelits, under the con∣duct of Moses and Joshua, not any age, Commonweal, or Kingdome, is able to produce one Instance (in all points e∣quall) of so noble a Military Discipline and Institution. And if no former age, certainly much less the present; the whole race of mankinde being degenerated from the pure Principles of Martial and Moral honesty, and the reins let loose to all sorts of luxurie; But above all others, among the Soldiery, as you may see in the Nations round about us, where the people are made miserable examples of their cruel∣ty and Tyranny. In Poland the Villagers are quite eaten up betwixt their own Countrimen and the Cossacks. How sad is the condition of poor Germany, groaning still under the va∣riou s Pressures of the Swedish, Spanish, and Imperiall For∣ces! Even as miserable as the State of Flanders and the Frontiers, under the cruel exactions of the Spaniard on the one side, and the plundring Lorainer on the other. And though, out of all these Countries, we might furnish you with such Relations, as would move stones to pity; yet in regard we have many fresh Instances brought to hand, by Letters of a late date from our neighbours of France, it is much more con∣venient to publish them, as timely warning-pieces to us in England, to beware of admitting Scots or others into this Land, considering the present miserable state of that delicious Kingdom, under the intolerable Tyranny of their own, and those Forein Auxiliaries, who pretended they came in there for their assistance.
A true Relation of what hapned about the City of Rheims since May 20. 1651. And the pitifull estate of the Countrey. Out of several Letters written from the said City of Rheims, May 27. 1651. WE are here falne into a dispair, by the disorder com∣mitted in the Countrey by the Soldiery. The Re∣giments of Estampes and of Palluau the Forreiner, have heen here, and have received the Estape, and yet have com∣mitted such excesses as will make one tremble to think on. The Regiment of Palluau have burnt part of the Suburbs of Espernay, have ravished women and maids in the Coun∣trey, and carried away all the horses of the poor Plough∣men, wheresoever they have passed, they have plundered the Gentlemens houses, and have taken from one alone 200 sheep, with all his horses and cattell: They have killed or wounded to death several persons, and they do hunt the poor Ploughmen, as one should hunt a hare in Champagne: nothing dare appear before them: The Cattel of the Vil∣lages of Chenay and St. Thierry, have been wholly carrried a∣way by them: In a word, it is no worse a desolation then if an Army of hungry Barbarians had marched through the Province. I should give you too much sorrow, if I should inlarge more upon the miseries of this forsaken Countrey. Another of the said 27. of May. The misery is such here, that I think it cannot be holpen by the hands of men, be their minds never so much affected to the remedy of it: God must touch the hearts of the Grandees, and make them have a feeling knowledge of the publick desolations, and give them an efficacious will to re∣medy them: I know they hear enough of them, by the fre∣quent recitals they have of them, but what comes into their ears, doth not come to their hearts, as it would do should they see it.
The last day of May. I could add to the Relation I have formerly sent you of our miseries, but the little while you are resolved to stay, keeps me from telling you any thing more, but that it is im∣possible to hinder the ravishings, rapts, burnings, murders, and plundrings which are continued here with as much li∣berty, as if they were not forbidden. Three daies since a Captain killed with his own hands and in cold blood, within a musquet shot of our Gates, a poor Country man who was coming hither with his wife and a childe of six years old he led by the hand, the Countrey man not having so much as said a word to him. I do mention that murther, not that it is alone, but because it seems more odious. The greatest mi∣sery is, that there is no Justice done, and that the Officers and Soldiers are assured of the impunity, of what crime soe∣ver they may commit. The greatest hurt done to them, is to restore what is in esse, when they pass through some City where they are not the stronger: it is to be feared lest those who are to prevent those disorders, and do not use the authority they have in hand, do fall into the dis∣grace, which ordinarily attends the injustice of those who want care or courage to repress the crimes. Things are grown to such a height, that there is no excuse now for such as are to stop the publick violences. I dare say no more, but that I wish those who have in their hands the protection of the people, be as willing to help them, as they are knowing their oppressions. Of the third of June. You ought to expect nothing from me but complaints of our miseries, for although in my former Letters I have ac∣quainted you with the chiefest circumstances, yet the evil is carrried to the extremity, and time producing every moment, some new subjects of disgrace. I am forced to tell you that the Soldiers have lately killed the Curat of Baconne, and a Coun∣trey man of the same place, who remained alone in the Vil∣lage, whom they wounded with three shot of a firelock in the head. They have plundred the Village of Nauroy, which
is in the Dominion of l'Hospital, where they left nothing, and killed two Inhabitants and wounded all the rest, one only excepted who is fled. They have forced the house called du Nuyseman belonging to Madame de St. Piere, have plunder∣ed it, killed Nicholas du Pont her farmor, and carried away all her horses and cattel. No body dares appeare abroad in the Countrey, where Robberyes, murders, burnings, ravish∣ings and randsomings are more frequent and more free then in the enemyes Country. Two or three things are the causes of that. 1. The impunity that reignes absolutely every where. 2. The want of paying the Souldiers: 3. the necessity which is in the Province, were no bread being to be found the Soul∣diers take the liberty to run and to plunder whatsoever they meet withall. The Ministers of State may be assured of two things: first that the Province is wholy ruinated without restource, and that shortly it will be more desolate then ever Lorrain hath been; 2. That before the Kings army be in a body it will be ruinated by the famine and want, nothing absolutely be∣ing to be found here for its substsience either of men or horses. I think that all the remainder of the people here are going to resort to Paris to begg their bread, which cannot but bring an infections aire there and such diseases as the necessity hath produced among them. Of the 5. of Iune. I told you in my last part of the disorders commited here by the Souldiery, but as every day begets some new violence; so you shall have no Letter of me, but it will tell you some new misery we are at present somuch surrounded on al parts, and the advenues so much possessed, that it is impossible either to come in or to goe out without danger both of life and of the goods; all Soldiers without exception running as so many hungry wolfes upon the way, and not sparing the lives nor the goods of such as fall into their hands: They doe unteame the horses from the Ploughs and doe carry them away. And Saturday last they took within sight of the Towne the horses of the Carriers who were bringing Victualls, wood and ne∣cessarys
for the Inhabitants, and left their wagons upon the way: in two or three houres they took away above 100. horses and misused those who offered to resist. I thinke that if over the despaire hath bene excusable; such as in this unhap∣py age shall be forced to a defence, will have a lawfull excuse. The 3 Instant one of our villages was assaulted in the night by 200. Men of Pallnau, who forced it, killed one of the In∣habitants and wounded all the rest, one only excepted, they tooke a way all the horses and Cowes, stripped a Gentleman who is a Gens d'arme to the King, having very scurvily used him before: His complaint having been adressed to me here, I have arrested three Officers untill the Commander hath given satisfaction. The same day Mr. de Fremont's house, whom you know was forced and plundered, and the souldiers hav∣ing undermined the Dongeon, he and his sonne in Law Mr. de Maisieres was forced to run away through the Souldiers with their Pistols cockt in their hands. Yesternight the Vil∣lage of Bourgoigne was plundered and the women striped starke naked. Never France saw such extremityes. The last yeare though full of misery was nothing neare comparable to this. I esteeme that now the only hand of God is able to helpe us, since the earthly powers if they can, they will not. I cannot but griefe you by the rehearsall of these calamitys, but you must be partaker of the miserys of the Province, though you be absent. Of the 7. of Iune. I would end here the recitall of our miserys, should I not be confident you will stay til the arivall of my Lord Bishop of Chaalons, who goes to witnesse the desolation of the Province, not being able to see any longer the violence and oppressi∣on, without giving warning to those who have the remedy in their hands. I have told in my last how the Gentlemen's houses have lost the priviledges and the respect, which cover∣ed them from the insolency of the Souldiery; they were not long since a shelter to some of our Cittizens, who enjoyed the protection which the birth of the Nobles gave them hither∣to, but now they are no more, regarded then others, and
their houses looke no otherwise now then so many store∣houses, where the Country people hath gathered the remain∣der of their wrack, that it might be so much the more easily carried away. They are not content to plunder the Noble∣men's houses; but themselves are ignominiously stripped, and their Wives and Daughters are not free from that dishonour. Many in their presence have bin stripped to their very smocks, and we could not keepe our teares, when we saw persons of that condition, who have severall times ventured their lives and estate for the service of the King and Kingdome, run away to us in raggs they had borrowed of some poore Coun∣treymen to hide their nakednes. I dare not exagerate the∣evill, lest the readers of these fruitlesse Storys, and those who will not remedy them, as they are bound by their authority, thinke it is rather an amplificated discourse then a true Story. Yet I thinke my selfe obliged to tell you againe that the dis∣order is infinitly above what I can tell or write. The King's Subjects are no lesse molested, then if they were in the hands of the Barbarians their enemys, for their blood, their goods, their quietnesse, their honour are no way spared. A Mayde some two dayes since flying (to save her honour) from the hands of some unhappy Souldiers who pursued her very nar∣rowly, her zeale to the preservation of her chastity caused her death; these madd fellowes not able to overtake her afore she came into the Village of Sillery, where she intended to have saved her selfe, shot at her, so that she fell downe dead and her corps was thrown by these Villains into a fen. Yes∣ternight the Mills of Tinqueux, of the Abbesse and of the Archbishop, and the Folleries, have beene forced and plun∣dred, and what soever was found in carried away, which caus∣eth here a great heat, because abundance of Merchants in∣teressed in the taking of the Marchandises, which have been valued, have kept such quarter, that Mr de Bezancon, hath beene forced to get on horseback and repaire to the place where the Regiment doth quarter, to take an order about it. Thus much for the Souldiery.
Of the same 7. of Iune. Mr. de Bezancon is come back from Pevy, where was the regiment of Languedoc, who have made terrible disorders in these parts: the said Mr. de Bezancon hath beene forced to goe thither in person, to make use of the King's authority, and cause such things as remaine in esse of their plunderings & robbery to be restored. The evill doth dayly increase: You heard of the death of the Curate of Baconne, as he was treat∣ing for the randsome of that poore village. Mr. de Neuville hath beene plundered at Nauroy; Mess. de Fremont and de Maisieres have had the like fortune; but he that hath had the hardest measure is Mr. de Vilette, dwelling upon the Parish of Pevy, whose house was totally plundered Sunday last at night, he, his Wife and foure children turned out and stripped to their shirts: I saw him on Monday night, and he struck horror into me by the recitall of the hard usage he had re∣ceived, the poore raggs of Canvas that were given him out of charity to cover his nakednesse, drew my teares, specially hearing him grieve for the misfortune of his wife, and of three of his Children, whom he knew not what was become of. The Regiment who hath made that disorder is that of Languedoc, who fired Pevy the 5. instant, and burnt some houses: I should never have done, if I should undertake to tell you all the horrible and sad storys, that are acted here. It is easy to judge, wee are forsaken by the protection of men, that the ruine of this poore Country is indubitable, and that in our pressing misery God alone is to be our hope and consolation. Of the 10. of Iune: Since this Letter is to find you still in Paris, I thinke my selfe bound in duty to tell you that this night the Village of Isle hath beene plundered by the Regiment of Chacq, and foure Inhabitants killed on the Holy Sacrament's day. The Baron du Tour's house was fired by 260. Polonois command∣ed by the Sergens of that Regiment: The house hath beene totally plundered, with losse of 4000. Livers. The same Po∣lonois have plundered Chamery, Sermier, and Nogent; the
plundering continues in the Country without remedy; for what we do in arresting the Officers, when by chance they come to Town, doth with great paines, produce but little good: An expresse order of the King to some man of autho∣rity, is necessary to arrest and punish the Commanders, and compell them to redresse the disorders of their Soldiers Mr. de Bougy, who commands the army in the absence of the Duke de Chaune, came hither yesterday, and goes this day to the quarters of the army, which they are removing a lit∣tle, but foure regiments are left, one company whereof in the licenciousnesse of the time, is able to ruinate an whole Province. Of the same day. The Castle du Cosson, which last Summer had kept free a∣gainst the endeavours, of a whole Army, was yesterday the prey of the Poland regiment quartered at Villersalerand: they have taken and plundered all; 260. Soldiers did the worke, but the whole regiment of 1200. men was not farr off. The Soldiers want bread, and have no Commissarys of the Victuals to provide any, so that they doe pillage all the places round about the said Village where they are quartered. Cha∣mery, Sermiers, Villaneuds, Champflery, and others have felt the effects of their hostility. Of the 11. of Iune. One of our Regiments having carryed away all the Cattell of the village of Isle, and the Inhabitants going to have them againe, were very ill used; 4. having beene killed out right and two deadly wounded. The same Regiment, those of Bougy & Navarre did plunder on the 9. instant Avaux Sur-Aisne, where they committed great excesses both upon the men and the women and maydes, part of whom were ravished, with all Kind of imaginable brutality. Of the 12. of Iune. I have much entertianed you with our misfortunes, and I could wish the end of them should put an end to my Let∣ters: but since they doe continue and that every day begets a particular disgrace, I must speake as long as my voyce can
hold, that I might not incurre into the reproach of having concealed the evill from them, who are to stop it. I thinke I have told you how the Regiment of the Poloneis, had on the day of the Holy Sacrament, forced the Castle du Cosson, bro∣ken open the Gates with Axes, and plundered the house, out of which they carryed for the value of about 4000. Livers. My Lord Bishop of Puy, hath the Processe verball of the same in his hand. They have further forced and plundered the Curate's house at Chamery, and carried away his goods whilst he was saying Masse. They have also pillaged the village of Sermier, as you shall see by the Processe verball I do send you. I complained of it to Mr. de Bezancon, and as I was pressing for Iustice, the commander of that Regiment came, who ingaged his word to see the same redressed, and offered presently to take horse and repaire to the Regiment for that purpose, leaving an officer as an ostage; but as his intention was not right, and that he thought that being gone himselfe, he would finde one way or another to free his ostage, he hath endeavored what he could to compasse it; but as the busi∣nesse was worth a particular observation, I appointed some guards upon the said Officer by the advice of Mr. de Bezan∣con; so that the Regiment being out of hope to rescue their officer without repairing the dammages, Yesterday about 4. a clock in the evening, the officers of that Regiment seised on 6. Inhabitants hard by the Towne, whom they have carryed away with them; one is the Son of Mr. le Tresorier Doulet, two are the Sons of Mr. l' Espagnol one of our Sheriffs, two others are the Sons of the late deceased Eleu Cordier, and the last is Mr. Josseteau Batchelour in Divinity Curate of Gueux, who gave out to take the aire. I need not to tell you the consequence of that attempt; which once suffered they may come and pull the Magistrats out of their places, when in performance of the King's command they shall goe about to represse the publick violences in the Country and Towns; you may judge whether this be not a trampling under foot of the Roiall authority and a forceing by armes the Iustice. Mr de Bezancon is gone out in person to moderate such a high
insolency, for I dare not hope a punishment, not for want of zeale in him, but because licenciousnesse hath settled an im∣punity, and that it seemes now it be feared lest the Justices should ruinate the armys, when as the contrary would hap∣pen, should it be practised. Our City is in such rumour be∣cause of that disorder, that should not the respect and the love due to the King be deeply ingraved in the hearts of our Inhabitants, wee should expect some tumult within our Walles, because this violence doth give us no more li∣berty to goe out, then if wee were besieged by the enemy. Last friday a Regiment having sent a party of twelve here to goe and carry away the Cattle of Isle, the Inhabitants come out to hinder them but presently the whole Regiment fell upon them, killed 4: of them and wounded two more who are a dying, drove away all the Cattle, and tooke all the In∣habitants prisoners, whom they have sent back, having kept them and misused them 24. houres: As for the Cows they have kept 11. and restored the rest, for they have a pistoll a peece. If such disorders are committed with somuch liber∣ty because of the impunity, judg you if upon the high ways & in the Country any thing can be sure, and whether all things are not fallen into a confusion, the particulars wherof I doe forbeare; else I should write every Post an history and not a private Letter. Pray let My Lord Bishop du Puy see this, that he might obtain of the Queen's bounty some reme∣dy to these mischiefes, which are leading us into a dispair. The wound is great and pressing which requires a speedy and powerfull awe; the said forces are going from us, and if once they get into the body of the army, hardly Iustice is to be looked for. Of the 14. of Iune. This word will be the close of all the circumstances of the impietys and disorders mentioned in my former Letters; and as it is one of the greatest inhumanitys that might fall into the apprehension of a man, it comes very fitly the last, that being added to an infinite number of others you have repre∣sented to those in authority for a remedy, it might worke
finally upon their spirit for the obtaining of what divine Iu∣stice requires of men, and which they should have done up∣on their first notice of these crying sines, which earth doth not punish. Some Souldiers of the Regiment of Navarre came lately into the Village of Beaumont, under the conduct of a Sergeant to looke for women or maydens to full their bru∣tality. Some of them, mooved by noyse, ran away and escaped by some byways. Those villaines who have lesse humanity, then the Divells themselves cames, into a house in this Village, where they found a poore woman looking to her daughter sick to death, and neere her end: at first they fell upon that poor dying creature, who had no strength to defend her self. The mother being wild to see such an abominable spectacle, did what she could to hinder them, and because she disturbed them, they forceably turned her out of the roome, and with words which I dare not foule a Letter with, they forceably did shut her out, untill those among them who had inhuma∣nity enough to ravish her daughter, had done. Then they leaving her for dead they went away and gave liberty to the mother to come to her daughter againe: but the same day they returned to make an end of an action which will make the earth guilty before God, and will make the Land lyable to a publick Plague, if such an horrible crime be not revenged: They offered to ravish the Mother, but she being stronger, they forced her to run away from the roome, and having shut her out againe they continued their cruelty upon the daughter, and made her dye in the endeavours of a brutality, which the Divell would not doe, had he a body: This goes beyond human beleife, and truly now adays those that pro∣fesse to beare armes, have nothing of man but the face. That same Regiment have plundred three days since the Village of Avaux belonging to Mr. le President de Mesmes, carried away all the Cows, Horses, and goods, leaving no∣thing. I cannot imagin that France can subsist long in that disor∣der; and I am perswaded that either it draws to her end, or that those, who can stop that confusion, will speedily look
to the remedy. Mr. de Besancon with much adoe got away the 6 Inhabitants they had carried away, and hath been pro∣mised by the Officers some satisfaction out of their pay for the dammages done to the Castle of Cosson. Yesterday the Company of the Duke de Valois quartered without order in Cormonstrevil, and upon their march carried away all the horses of the Villages where they came; I dare say no more, I have so many complaints in my hands, that one makes me forget another. One of June 17. Since my Letters in this miserable time cannot be but a sad History of our misfortunes, give me leave to tell you two things, which take away from me all hopes of redress. The first, That although our disasters be well enough known, and that those who are to remedy them, have their eyes o∣pened, yet no order is taken for it, by want of will; for it goes against the common sence of all men, to say that a So∣veraign King, who can do whatsoever he pleaseth, wants power to do what he ought to will. Therefore no marvel if in stead of diminishing, the said disorders are increasing daily, even to producing such implieties, as hell it self is not capable of. The second is, That having given us some hope of breathing, by the orders sent for the removing of such Forces as were upon us, new ones are presently sent to take their place; which makes us believe that our ruine is una∣voidable, and that in vain we have complained, since the end of our miseries, is the beginning of greater ones. I might say much thereupon, but I chuse rather to make it short, telling you onely what hapned yesterday hereabouts by the violence of the Regiment of Harcourt, who assaulted a Con∣voy of 10 Carts full of Corn coming from Chaalon hither for the relief of our extream necessity, wounded two of the Cartmen to death, and all the rest less dangerously, took 7 horses, 22 sacks of corn, and a cart full of Oats. I know not the tenth part of the disorders that happen hereabouts; Judge by the pattern what may be the pieces. I durst not rehears any particulars of the Sacriledges and
horrible profanations of the holy things, and of the holy of the holys, which we know, for fear the continual recital of these abominations, and the exposing of these horrors to the publick view, do force at last heaven to cause the earth to gape, or send down his thunderbotls and his fire to consume whatsoever might keep the memory of the high impunity of those crimes and execrable impieties. Every one knows the plundering and pillaging of all our Churches last year, both by the enemies Forces, and by our own, to the full knowledge of the Officers and Commanders, and of such as were appointed to do Justice, yet no punishment made, nor even an intent to do it, so that nothing was left in the Churches for their Ministry, nor even the little mettal used in the Baptistery. The rigours and violences committed by the Soldiers upon the Curats and Church-Officers, by the plundring of whatsoever was necessary for their subsistence, and the excesses practised upon their persons, which forced the poor Shepheards to forsake their Flocks and leave them without any help and assistance upon their death bed, which is not denied even to the greatest Criminals condemned to death, are also very well known. The Kings Declaration of the 27 of January last, verified in Parliament the 24 of April bears the truth of the report of these Sacrileges and execrable attempts upon the sacred person of the Son of God, and the punishment ordered: but that Declaration hath been without execution; with shame we can say that this year our Churches have not been other∣wise plundred, but by losing and carrying away such orna∣ments as had been begged and given by way of alms in Pa∣ris during the last winter, for the restablishing of the exer∣cises of Religion in most of our said Churches, which was wholly ceased, had it not been for that suyply, and which will cease hereafter, notwithstanding our ancient possession which we do justifie since the establishment of this State.
An extract of some Informations of the violences and disor∣ders committed by General Roze's Forces in the Land of Tierasche in the Dioces of Laon, where they were quar∣tered the last winter, and have wholly ruinated and made desolate the said Countrey. Of the 30. & last day of April 1651. and the days following. THe Village du Hoquet hath been wholly ruinated by the pillaging of the said Roze's Forces, who murthered 16. Inhabitants there, wounded 10. took and carried away all the Ornaments of the Church, the rest of the Inhabitants for the most part having been starved. The Village of Morguy is also ruinated by the said For∣ces, the Ploughmen dead or fled, after they had lost their goods by the plundring of Castle St. Clement, and in the woods of Val St. Piere, where they are gone for refuge. At Plomion the Church hath been broken in several pla∣ces, all the glasses broken, and the Ornaments taken away, part of the covert ruinated; Mr. du Beltoy Governor of Bergue's house plundred, notwithstanding the resistance made by the guards there, wherein were all the remainders of the goods and houshold-stuff of the Inhabitants remai∣ning at the said Plomion: Mr. Flander the Curat hath been stripped, abused and beaten with shedding of bloud, and in danger of his life. At St. Geneviefue and d'Olignon all the buildings have been ruinated and demolished, and the Church brought in∣to a very bad posture, having been plundred by the said for∣ces, who have broken, burnt, or carried away whatsoever was in it. At Chery lez Buchy, they made use of the Church for a Corps of guards for a long while. Rozoy, Romeroy, Aspermont, Ralimon, Malincau, Hul∣turquê and St. George, have been wholly ruinated, the houses demolished, and the timber either burnt or carried away for the most part, the said Moligneau and St. George burnt
down to the ground, the inhabitants dead, or brought to an extream necessity. The Chappell of Ease to the said Parish made use of du∣ring two moneths as a store-house for the General Rose, so that Mr. Stephen Laureau Priest and Canon of Rozoy, could not obtain leave of the said Generall to say Masse therein; no not upon the Easter day, nor to celebrate there the divine Service in any wise, during his abode there; though the in∣habitants of those places were hindered by the Soldiers to goe to the Church of the said Rozoy. At Noircourt most part of the inhabitants have been kil∣led, and there remain but 3 or 4. of 60. Above 300 men wo∣men and children have been starved, the Church and the or∣naments thereof wholly plundered by the said Forces, who have killed Clement Bugny in the Church, have ravished the women and the maids, and have stript off their very smocks. Madam de Hautels her house hath been wholly plundered, and the cattell taken and carried away. All the inhabitants of Berlise except two or three, have perished by famine or misery; the Church hath been plun∣dered, the holy Sacrament trampled under foot, the wo∣men ravished and stripped stark naked with all imaginable cruelty. At Grand Bieux the Church hath been wholly plundered, the holy Sacrament trampled under foot, and no ornaments left, the village partly burnt down, and the inhabitants rui∣nated and brought to an extream misery. At Resigny, Planche, Tyran, and Petit Havy, most part of the houses have been ruinated and burnt, the Church plundered, the holy Sacrament trampled under foot, all the ornaments taken and carried away, and the inhabitants fled, or forced to beg. At Fondevall, Hovy, Lonnaire, Ropre and Archon, of fifty turning Plowes there is not one left, the houses demolished everywhere, & the inhabitants brought to an extream mise∣ry: after they have been beaten, stripped, abused & woun∣ded severall wayes; A maid of about twelve or thirteen
years hath been ravished in the presence of Mr Francis Ju∣melet Curate of the said Fondevall, and severall others. It is impossible to write all the cruelties and tyrannies they have practised in this Countrey. The Church of Archon hath been plundered and ruinated, the ornaments taken, & the persons fled therein put to ransome. The Soldiers have seised on three women, whom they have kept a day and one night, and have violated two of them as it is suppo∣sed. At Dolie most of the buildings have been burnt, the Church plundred, and whatsoever belonging to the In∣habitants, for their last subsistence taken from them, part of the said Inhabitants imprisoned and put to ran∣some. At Yvier the Village hath been plundred and pillaged; the women killed, the Church plundred and profaned, and all the Ornaments and things necessary for the divine ser∣vice carried away. At Ivier the Church wholly plundred and most part de∣molished, all the Inhabitants brought to extream misery, the houses, mills and buildings partly burnt. They have cut the ears of two particular men, Massin Minu and Ni∣colas Gerard, and then to have a ransome of the said Gerard, they warmed his feet, burnt his shoes and stocking upon his legs; hanged some by the Chin, and practised several other cruelties. The houses of two Gentlewomen of that place having been wholly plundred, their Mills burnt, and they brought to beg. At Landouzy laville the Inhabitants have been plundred & wholly ruinated, after they had contributed six weeks some money to the Forces quartered in the Abby of Foigny, where the corn of the said Inhabitants was hidden, which was taken and whatsoever was therein, even to the very dishes and trenchers wherewith the Friers had feasted that same day the General Roze. At Janses the Church plundred, the holy Sacrament trampled under foot; having gotten it by force out of the
Curats hands, who defended it with the hazard of his life; all the Ornaments taken away, Mr. James Noel Curat of that place stripped to his Shirt, and so carried from house to house, to shew the places where his Parishoners did hide the goods, with threatning to Pistol him every foot, not∣withstanding his sickness of a continual Feaver he had ever since a seaven night before, and would have died of cold, had not a Cavalier given him at last an old sack to put on his shoulders, and an old draibe to cover his nakedness. The Women and the Maidens have been violated in the presence of the Curate, and of his mother, who was above 80 years old, and was stripped, beaten and abused before the great Altar: so that it is impossible to tell all the inhu∣manities and cruelties of those Barbarians. At Nancelle the Church plundered, and all the ornaments, the Chalice and the vessell of the holy Oyle taken and car∣ried away, with all the houshold-stuffe of the inhabitants, of whom 16 named in the informations, have been killed, others have been starved, and others are brought into an ex∣tream misery. The Curate Mr. Anthony de Migneau stripped and abused: one Neselet killed in cold blood, ha∣ving promised to give 50. Rixdalers for his ransome, not being able to give 100. which was demanded by the Soldi∣ers for his ransome, he begging severall times his life upon his knees. At Harrigny the Church wholly plundered and broken with the Cannon in three places, the holy Host taken in the Ciboire carried away, the Chalices and Ornaments burnt, part of the houses burnt likewise, eight inhabitants killed, two deadly wounded, the others imprisoned and put to ransome of two thousand five hundred Livers; and one Pe∣travé having been stripped and laid down upon the ground, being demanded whether he were well so, was presently killed in cold blood with two Pistols shot by the Soldiers; who likewise did cut off the eares of a poor woman, widow of Nicholas Bohoin, and then cut her head in two pieces with a broad sword. Not halfe the houses in Harrigny are
up. Chironsar's house of the same parish, where was Mr. de Magincourt, was plundered, he and his wife stripped stark naked, the woman having thrown herselfe out at a window to save herselfe with great hazard of her life, and the said Mr. de Magincourt tied to a horses tail, & so drawn to Plomion: the Women and the Maidens that were fled there, ravished, three men killed, and five or six wounded. What inhabitants are left in this poore and desolate Countrey, would have been starved and perished of misery, without the assistance of the extraordinary almes of Paris, which have been increased six Weekes since by 1600 Livers every moneth, because of the newes comming daily of the extream misery of those wretches. Now behold here (as in a Map) the miseries of poor France under an irregular and insulting Soldiery, from whose hands they could not have had more hard measure, if things had been wrapt up in a sudden confusion under the Conduct of some Forein Invader. Had Attila and Totila, with the old Goths and Vandals, been revived again to over∣run France (as they formerly did Italy & Spain) with a new Inundation, greater breaches could not have bin made upon the Peoples Propriety, nor more barbarous and bloudy at∣tempts against their lives and safety. But that which adds to the misfortunes of that Nation more then all, is, that those whose power and pitty are concerned in a redress, have so little regard of any remedy; but riding in pompous equi∣page over the heads of the people, promise themselves that they shall see no sorrow, but seem to sport, and laugh at the many cries and groans that fly to heaven for vengeance; And therefore, without question, it will suddenly come, when the sins of the Amorites are at the full; The time of the deliverance is at hand, and God will cut it short in righ∣teousness; For, the decree of Liberty is gone forth from the holy one, to speak Peace and Freedome to all the affli∣cted of the earth, even to the Nations that are oppressed round about us: So that if any credit may be given to the
cted of the earth, even to the Nations that are oppressed round about us: So that if any credit may be given to the Saws of old Seers which come by Tradition, we may well say, after them, In England is begun a dance, Shall pass through Italy, Spain, and France. And truely, if we consider the now condition of France, the present motions of Superior and inferior Bodies (though but with an oblique aspect upon Liberty) in that great con∣stellation of Parliaments, there is some hope that the day of their redemption is drawing nigh; which hope would be much advanced, could we but see them begin to lift up their heads with resolution; but alas, the great obstacles are their Inconstancie, and Luxury, which are the two prime Qualities or Ingredients which constitute the Tem∣per of that Nation, whereby the Major part of them are in a manner disabled from the persuit of so noble a designe, which must be the work of a more sober and serious Gene∣ration. In the mean time, behold the many exactions and op∣pressions under which they labour, to serve the lusts of their Lordly Tyrants; and from thence let us take measure of our own Felicity; For, whereas we pay one penny, they pay ten, yea very often the utmost farthing: And to what end is all the Tribute, but to uphold the pride and Tyran∣ny of their Taskmasters? whereas in England the Con∣tributions required, are such as arise onely out of present necessity, for preventing the return of that Tyranny which was driven out of the Nation, with the expence of so much Bloud and Treasure: Now, what man can be so stupid as not to dispose part of his estate to so noble an end, rather than permit the re-inthroning of an Hereditary Tyrant (a Tyrant both by nature and Interest) to sweep all away with your lives and Fortunes? A Tyrant that suckt in his Fa∣thers Principles with his Mothers Milk; that was nurst up with the Bloud and Butchery of a Kingdome; one that is undoubted heir of all the Curses of his Family, besides those
smaller Curses that attend him; A Tyrat, who, if he re∣turn, will bring an innumerable Train of Tyrants at his heels: There is the Tyrant-Cavalier, the Tyrant Scot, and what other Tyrannick Foreiners, God knows. These are they that will tax ye, and toll ye, and tell ye, what a madness it is to mutter at a few Temporary Taxes, when too late ye may chance to finde how much it concerns the State to raise them, to preserve you from the hellish mise∣ries that must of necessity over-flow all, upon the Return of an inraged Enemy. Regnabit Sauguine multo Ad Regnum quisquis venit ab exilio. His reign will be most cruell and bloody that comes from Banishment to a Kingdom. His declared interest is revenge for the death of his Father, which (might his fury take way) would reach to the whole Nation; and what his fury can∣not assault, his Scottish crew of Foreiners will overthrow, whose cruelty will spare neither Friend nor Foe, their quar∣rell being now at the very name and nation of English; And assure your selves the bottomlesse pit of their avarice will swallow all in gross, without making any nice distinction or difference betwixt Presbyter and Independent. Take heed then; you see here what horrid disasters have befallen France by admitting Foreiners into their Countrey; learn by those sad spectacles there, to avoid the like here a∣mong our selves. Remember what the Scot did in times past, how mercilesse he was when a friend in Covenant; what wil he then not do when he comes in with his unjust and hypocriticall pretences, as an Avenger of the Covenant? We know wel enough what they hope, what they dream of, and what wil be the Word throughout all their marches and Quarters; Arise, kill and slay, and take possession: For, this hath been their cursed hope and design ever since they were a nation. What remains then, but that for the prevention of these
Tyrannies in the future, which now threaten us with open face, men should lay aside all traiterous Animosities, Compli∣ances and Designes; and since the quarrell is become purely Nationall, let us then vindicate the honor and freedom of our Nation with an unanimous consent; if we cannot a∣gree upon other terms, yet let us unite as Englishmen, and dispute afterward among our selves; for, this instant is the very criticall minute of Englands necessity, and from hence we must date either our Triumphs, or else an ignoble and ignominious vassalage under a Scottish usurpation. What, shall this gallant warlick Nation be betrayed by her own to the lousie Scot, who dares not look her nobly in the Face? Nothing but our own base Vacillation and Treache∣ry can undoe us; For, judge, in reason what such an un∣tutor'd Rabble can do against so brave an Army? That first beat them home (under Hamilton) to their own dores, with a handfull in comparison of the Scottish Numbers; and last year with such another handfull beat them (in greater numbers) out of the better half of their Coun∣try, that God (who is the Lord of Hosts) might have the praise of the Victory: An Army that, to all worldly ad∣vantages, hath hitherto had a special protection from hea∣ven, God having sealed them for his own by many miracu∣lous Successes, to the wonder and envie of the world. Let us rejoyce then, and give God thanks, that he hath given us such an Army for our necessary Protection, and not unworthily repine at those poor pence that go to relieve them. One month of Scotch Free-quarter and Plunder will grinde more than a Twelve-months Tax; yet their in∣tention is not to stay a month, but for ever; and one Scot∣tish Laird will sit as heavie as ten of the old Danish Lor∣danes. Look to it, and consider what may follow; what the Scots behaviour will be, and how different from this of the English Soldiery; whose discipline is so exact and noble, that the least piece of vice or violence is very rarely to be found among them; and if at any time, then it is most severely punish. What Cries
of the Country do they occasion, or whom do they abuse in a march, without remedy? It was said of King Al∣fred, before the Conquest, that by his Severity and diligence he so terrified robbers, that a Travailer might pass safe all o∣ver England, with his purse in his hand; the like may be said of our Noble Cromwel, and his incomparable disci∣pline, that any man may pass through the Land, without the least prejudice from the Soldiery; So that whosoever takes a survey of the rude and licentious Courses of the Dutch, French, and Spanish Militia, with the rest of the world, shall finde a vast disproportion in the Points of Mar∣tial honor and Order, betwixt the English, and those of o∣ther Nations: And he may boldly conclude, that for some thousands of years, not any Age or Country under heaven, can produce any one example of discipline in all points e∣qual to the Patern of England. Veget. 3. lib. cap. ult. Disciplinam militarem Populi Romani debes inquirere, qui ex parvissimis Finibus, imperiam suum poene Solis regi∣onibus, & mundi ipsius fine distendit. FINIS.
