L1532 E473_28 99864701 116933
A LETTER FROM The Navy vvith the Earle of WARWICK, Lord ADMIRALL: From HELLEVOYT SLUICE, Novemb. 24. 1648. Being a Narrative of his Proceedings, in reducing the Revolted Ships with the PRINCE: viz. The Constant Warwick, carrying 32 Guns. The Love, 38 Guns. The Hinde, 18 Guns. The Satisfaction, 28 Guns. A Ship laden with Sugars. A Catch, and other small Vessels. ALSO, The present Condition of the PRINCE, Duke of YORKE, Prince RUPERT, and the rest of the Cavallerie in HOLLAND, and from FRANCE. LONDON, Printed for Lawrence Blaikloke, and are to be sold in the Old-Bayly. 1648.
From on Board the St. George riding at Anchor at Hellevoyt Sluice, Nov. 24. 1648. Sir, IN my last, being of the 14th. current, I gave you something an obscure Rela∣tion of our and the Enemies Actions: But now having the advantage of time and conveyance, I shall give you the re∣collection of a bad memory in a little perfecter forme. Upon the fourth current, Newes came to us that the Revolters had gotten all their Winter Provisions, their men, and abundance of Gentry, on board each Ship, and had appointed severall Frigots, from Oastend and other places, a day of the Moneth to come to the Harbours mouth, intending upon sight of them to set saile, being in hope of the States Men of War their Convoy out to Sea. Upon this Information, a man was presently sent to Oastend, who told us, that there were Irish-men victu∣aling there. Upon this, the Lord Admirall advised with his Councell what was expedient to be done: they ordered every Ship with which of the Revolters they should fight at Sea, expecting their comming every houre, which was desired by us; and yet this newes did somewhat startle some. But when we supposed them in their highest condition, then was there the most dis∣content,
by reason of Prince Ruperts being made Ad∣mirall (as suddenly was apparent;) for the next day, being the fifth, (a fatall day for Traitors) the Constant Warwick, a Frigot of 32 Guns came from them, which they intended should have maintained the rest, having new rigged and tallowed her. This Vessell we only fea∣red would escape and injure the Kingdome, because she sailes best of any in England; But God prevented their intentions in this, and since that day they have not pro∣spered. The Lord Admirall having intimation from this, and other Vessels, that more intended to desert them, if there might be an advantage of their secure comming from them, His Lordship advised with his Councell what ought to be done in order thereunto, who concluded it might be advantagious to go up with his whole Fleet, and Anchor board and board with them. Accordingly, upon the eighth current, in the after∣noon, our foresaile was loosed, and guns fired for warning to the Fleet to weigh Anchor (although his Lordship had made many scruples, and seemed to oppose it) but having lien long in one place, our Cable being bu∣ried with sand, 'twas somewhat late ere we could get our Anchors up, and the winde being also at North east, so that we could not get up to them that night, but came to an anchor short, most of our smaller ships anchoring very neer them, so that they discoursed with them all that night, in which night they put their land souldiers on board; But the Hind a Ship of eighteen Guns, cut her Cables and came to his Lordship, receiving a shot through her Hull, but hurt none; The next morning being the ninth, I observed their fore-sailes loose,
and Anchors apeeke, ready to weigh, when they saw us weigh (halfe the Dutch Fleet were now gone) and as we heard, would fire upon us. When we came up up∣on the flood againe, in the afternoone, we weighed, they weighed, and the Dutch weighed, all plying up the river. Our Frigots were round their Admirall, endeavouring to provoke him to fire (as Prince Rupert vapoured he would) but they then would not take notice of affronts. There was so little winde that we could not make our Ships worke, for our Reer-Admirall runne a ground, and one of theirs. In stead of firing upon us, they all hastened to gaine the Sluice, which we might have prevented had there not been slacknesse in some—We had one Fri∣got in their Admiralls way, and lay before the Sluice mouth, where our Vice-Admirall might have been also, if ordered, and then the Valiant Prince could not have runne his head into that hole, as presently after∣wards he did, by carrying a Hawser on shore, and the Guinea Frigot also, the rest being all at an Anchor as neere the Peere as they could get, and the Dutch as neer to them as they could get, and our Fleet mixed with them both, all the three Fleets being within a small compasse. In the night they cut the Cables of five more (which we have since taken up) and haled them all but one (ve∣ry valiantly) into the Sluice, where one lay thwart the others sterns. Our men were mightily vexed to see such brave Ships of their Kingdomes, haled into such a place to be spoy∣led, and might not have the liberty to fire upon them. All the meanes in the world were used to provoke them
to fire but one Gun, but we could not prevaile to make them breake the peace that the Hollander lay to keep. The next Morning being the 10. assoone as it was light, I thought I should have seene some scuffle, for the Love (a Ship of 38 Guns) weighed and ran right for the Sluice: One of our Ships layd her crosse the Hauser, forcing her to an Anchor, some of the Souldiers on board her cryed fire, but immediately she yeelded. After her, a Prize they had weighed and stood for the Sluice, we laid her crosse the Hawser and tooke her. There was a third run her selfe on shore, to whom we sent three Fri∣gots, and divers Boats full of men, who yeelded upon condition that the Captaine and his whole Company should go on shoare with Bag and baggage: But in the in∣terim they send Boats laden with men to relieve her, and our men chased them all to the Peere, and there Prince Rupert was busie in building Forts, himself & his men flinging the Turffes, and Stones, and Musket bullets at our men, but durst not fire so much as a Pistol. This Ship is called the Satisfaction, a Navy-ship of 28 Guns, now a float again, and our Reare-Admirall also, who hath taken no harme, a thing much admired. We have taken in all, the Constant Warwick, a Frigot of 32 Guns; The Hinde, a Frigot of 18 Guns; The Love, a Ship of 38 Guns; The Satisfaction, a Ship of 28 Guns; A Ship laden with Sugar, and a Catch. Since this they have rai∣sed two Forts, and planted Guns in them, (our Fleet ri∣ding within command of them, some within Pistol shot) have built a Court-of-Guard house. If the Towne were their owne they could not keepe a more strict guard. They take all men prisoners that come upon the Island, take our Letters, and all things that come over Land to
us. The Lord Admirall hath sent to the States to know if they will allow a Foreigne Prince to raise workes to debarre the English Fleet in their Harbour, but no answer is yet returned. They have now taken the sailes from most of their yards, are taking out the Guns, and have haled in the fifth Ship that lay crosse. These Ships have neer two hundred Brasse Guns in them, which we apprehend they will sell, for 'tis thought some of these Ships backs are broke. They have one Ship of fifty two Guns, and three of forty Guns apeece, the Guinea Frigot, which carries a∣bove thirtie, The Blackmoore Lady, twenty eight, The Roe-buck, twelve Guns, one small Pincke, two Hoyes, and two Catches, and all hailed into the Sluice. The Lord Admirall is now sending Frigots to Sea, towards the West, and North-coast, to ferrit the Irish, and every day expecteth the Parliaments Agent from the Hague to give an accompt of his Message from the States, and then I suppose he will have some thoughts homewards, if liberty may not be gotten to use our en∣deavours to reduce the Ships. By the carrying on of things between the States and his Lordship, I apprehend they have some minde to quarrel, which I shall be better able to judge of by their answer when it comes. If we should receive but one shot from the Towne, I suppose the Lord Admirall would fire the Ships which would burne downe the Towne. We have lost three good advantages, two whereof were knowne and omitted, which makes men grumble.
The Prince is well againe, and at the Hague, the Duke of Yorke is still at the Brill, who was ill, but escaped the Pox Master Crofts gave the Lord Admirall a visit. Ma∣ster of the Princes horse, who came lately from France, sayes things looke there with an English face. Hellivoit-Sluice. Nov. 24. 1648. Imprimatur G. M. Novemb. 25. 1648. FINIS.
