q157e e407_11 99862807 160505
THE QUEENES LETTER To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY. Expressing her Royall inclination to his sacred Majesty; and the peace of the Kingdomes committed to his charge. With her gracious Advice to his Majesty, concerning the Propositions, delivered to his Majesty, at Hampton Court, Sept. 7. 1647. by the Commissioners of both Houses of the Parliament of England, and the Commissioners of the King∣dome of Scotland. Translated out of the French Copy, and commanded to be Printed for publicke satisfaction. Printed in the Yeare 1647. Septemb. 16.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. My deare Heart: AS there could no occasion minister greater griefe to my sorrowfull heart, thn to heare of a short adjournement of these unnaturall divisions betweene you and your liege people; and presently to have the consuming flames of a new Warre, suddenly breake out afresh in your lan∣guishing Kingdomes, So there could no welcomer newes salute mine eare, then speedily to heare of a finall period to be put to these unhappy distractions; that so the sweete harmony of desired peace
and concord, (which produceth most blessings) may reunite you and your Subjects, and tie you fast each to other in the sacred bands of Love and Ʋnity, the only meanes under God, to support your Royall Estate with honour and plenty at home, and with power and reputation abroad: Therefore I shall desire your Majestie to grant your Par∣liament and people whatsoever with a good conscience and honour, you may, for the further prevention of shedding of innocent blood, and preservation of those committed to your charge. Sir, assure your selfe, nothing shall be dis∣pleasing to me, that pleaseth you, my Lord; for I shall for ever esteeme your good, and the good of all your faithfull Subjects, the only businesse of all my actions, and shall be contented to share
with you, and them (not only in bles∣sings) but even in the worst of calami∣ties that can happen to a disconsolate, and unjust banished wife: but Sir, I from my heart forgive all the opprobrious tongues and pens, that have cast their calumnies on my unspotted integrity, and shall pray to the King of Kings, and to your sacred Majesty to doe the like. Concerning the Propositions tendred your Majesty, I humbly conceive; The chiefe things to be considered, will be two, conscience and policy: For the first, I know it never entred into your Roy∣all thoughts to change the government by Bishops, no only concurring with the most generall opinion of most Christians in all ages, as being the best; but considering you hold your selfe bound by the Oath you tooke at your Coronation, not to alter the Govern∣ment of the Church, from what you found it. And for the Churches Patrimony, you cannot suffer any diminution or alienation of it, without danger to your conscience, or brach of your Coronation Oath; but for whatsoever shall be offred for the rectifying abu∣ses
crept into the Church in government of discipline, or for the ease of tender consciences. (endangering not the foundation) I desire your Majesty to lend a speedy eare unto, and give your gracious answer therunto: For as it is your Majesties duty to pro∣tect the Church; so it is the Churches duty to assist your Majesty in maintaining your just authority; for as your Predecessors have beene alwaies carefull to keepe the dependency of the Clergy intirely upon the Crowne, without which (as I humbly conceive) it will scarcely sit fast upon your Royall head; therefore it much behoves your Majesty to doe nothing to change or lessen this so necessary dependency. The other maine Proposition will be concerning the Militia; next to conscience certainely there is no fitter subject for a Kings quarrell, for without it your Majesties power is but a shadow, and therefore by no meanes to be quitted; but to be maintained according to the knowne Lawes of the Land: Yet for the speedy attainment of this so long looked for and wished for peace, prayed for by all good Christi∣ans, That your Majesty may be pleased to permit the City of London, and all other strong Holds and Gar∣risons, with other military Forts, to reside in the hands of the Parliaments Lord Generall, Sir Thomas
Fait fax, untill Articles be performed and agree∣ed upon, to give such further Assurance for perfor∣mance of conditions, as your Majesty shall judge ne∣cessary for the concluding a firme and lasting Peace; which being once setled, all things may returne, and run in their ancient channels. I have received a Petition from divers Earles, Lords, and Gentlemen, now banished, and exempted from pardon, who desired that I would move your Majesty to intercede betweene them and your Parli∣ament, that the edge of so severe and sharpe a cen∣sure, as perpetuall banishment may be abated by your great clemency, candor, and goodnesse, and they re∣restored into favour, and their Sequestrations taken off when peace shalbe firmly established, which I know your Majesties mercifull disposition, will (when you shall see time) consider of. Thus, deare Heart, understanding the Commissioners were arived at your Court of Hampton with Propostions, I thought good to put you in minde, that you have a care of your Honour, and that if you have a peace, it may bee such as may hold. Farewell, my deare Heart, I cannot write any more, but that I am absolutely. Yours▪ FINIS.
