R1154 E149_30 R4438 99872682 156737
THE RESOLVTION Of the Protestant Gentry and Commonalty of CHESHIRE Concerning their Petition lately presented to the Kings Majesty at Yorke. Wherein is declared their Loyalty to his Sacred Majestie, and due obedience to the Honourable Houses of Parliament. With all their Protestation to spend their Lives and Estates to defend His Sacred Majesty from all dan∣gers, either Forreigne or Domesticke. And also to defend the Parliament against all opposers, declaring their great confidence, that their Councels and Determinations tend to the advancement of his Majesties Honour and the preservation of all his Loving Subjects London, Printed for J. Horton, 1642. June 6.
The Resolution of the Protes∣testant Gentry and Commonal∣ty of Cheshire. SUch have beene the feares and distractions of the County of Chester, by reason of the innumerable and indeed unsufferable assemblies and tumultuous meetings of the Papists, and others that are New∣tralls, or as we may terme them, luke∣warme both in Loyalty and Religion, that the Gentry and Commonalty of the Protestant Party were constrayned to draw themselves to a head, and set downe their Resolution, protesting to to performe these two particulars. First they resolved to be Loyall to his Maiesty, according to their Petition
lately presented to his Maiesty at Yorke, by the Gentry and Commonalty of of the said County. Secondly, they resolved to be obedi∣ent to the Parliamen. Withall desiring that all true heart∣ed Protestants, that desire to expresse themselves Loyall Subjects to his Ma∣iesty, and obedient Servants to the Par∣liament, would with unite consent take the same Resolution. The maner and Forme followeth in as true and as exact a manner as could be gathered by one that was a specta∣tor when the Oath was taken, and Re∣solution declared to the high Sheriffe of the said County. First they resolved and sollemnely Protestest to declare themselves true and loyall Subiects to his Sacred Ma∣iesty, and to his heires forever.
Next to maintaine and to defend the Protestant profession in all points whatsoever, agreeable to the Church of England, against all Sects and Schismes, against all Papists, Donatists, Armini∣ans, and all other Hipocriticall Doc∣trines whatsoeves, allso to maintaine the iust Prerogative of his Maiesties Regall Authority, against all opposers whatsoever. Secondly, they Constantly and with a ioynt consent resolved to maintaine and defend the high Court of Parlia∣ment, and according to their bounden Dutie to acknowledge them (next to God, and his Maiesty) the cheife Au∣thors of their present security, and the onely meanes of their happy continu∣ance, and future preservation, decla∣ring their Councels to be Religious, their Commands Lawfull, and their Actions Loyall, withall promising and protesting obedience to their Com∣mands,
and to those appointed by by them to have Command, and to be Governours of the Militia. This is the Resolution of the Prots∣tant Gentry and Commonalty of Cheshire and this ought to be the resolution of all the Protestants in the Kingdome, seeing that we have so many unknown Enemies, so many Absoloms. which day∣ly rebell against his Maiesty, seeing we have so many disturbers, so many Arons lifting up the golden Calse of Idolatry so many deceivers sowing teares among the Corne, so many  blasphe∣ming the Lord of Hosts plotting the destruction of Gods annointed we had need to have some Davids, to quell their swelling and ore daring Pride, w have need of some true hearted Protetants, to defend the Protestant Religion, see∣ing we have so many Papists, so many wolves in Sheeps Clothing so many destroyers, so many private conspira∣tors,
that dayly conspire the downfall of the Gospell. Wherefore let all those that would be esteemed either the zealous Servants of God, or the Loyall Subiects of their gratious Soveraigne and obedient Ser∣vants to the high Court of Parliament, let them I say take up the resolution of the Gentry and Commonalty of Cheshire and with them cry, long live King Charles, and God preserve the Par∣liament. FINIS.
