R177 E399_17 R201718 99862217 160384
A NOTABLE AND MEMORABLE STORY OF THE CRUEL WAR between the CARTHAGINIANS and their own Mercenaries. Gathered out of Polybius, and other Authors, by that famous Historian, Sir WALTER RALEGH. Eccles. 1.9. The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be: and that which is done, is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the Sun. LONDON: Printed for Tho: Ʋnderhill at the Signe of the Bible in Woodstreet. 167.
Of the cruell War begun beween the Carthaginians and their own Mercenaries. AFer that the first Punick War was ended; Amil∣car, leaving Erjx, went to Lilibaum, from whence most conveniently the Army might be trans∣pord into Africk: the care of which businesse he committed unto Gesco, to whom, as to a man of approved sufficiencie, he delivered over his charge. Gesco had an especial consideration of the great summes, wherein Carthage was indebted unto these Mercenaries; and, withall, of the great disabilitie to make payment. Therefore he thought it the wisest way, to send them over (as it were) by handfuls, a few at a time; that so the first might have heir dis∣patch, and be gone, ere the second or third Companies arrived. Herein he dealt providently. For it had not been hard to per∣swade any small umber, lodged within so great a City as Car∣thage, unto some such reasonable composition, as the present emptinesse of the common Treasurie did require: so that the first might have been friendly discharged, and a good president left unto the second and third, whilest their disjunction had made them unable to recover their whole due by force. But the Car∣thaginians were of a contrary opinion. They thought to finde, in the whole Army, some that would be contented to gratifie the Publick State, by remitting a great part of their own due: and hoped by such an example, to draw all the multitude to the like agreement and capitulation. So they detained the fist and se∣cond comers; telling them, that they would make an even rec∣koning with all together. Thus every day the number increa∣sed, and many disorders (a thing incident among Soudie) were committed; which much disquieted the City, not accu∣stomed unto the like. In this regard it was though fit, to re∣move them all to some other place where they might be lesse troublesome. This must be done by some colourable words of perswasion: for their number was already so great, that it was
not safe to offend them too farre. Wherefore it is devised, that they should all attend the coming of their fellows, at Sicca: re∣ceiving every one a piece of gold, to bear his charges in the mean while. This motion is accepted, and the Souldiers began to dislodge; leaving behinde them their wives, their children, and all their baggage, as meaning shortly to fetch away all, when they came back for their pay. But the Carthaginians have no fancie to their returning into the Town; and therefore compell them to trusse up their fardels, that they might have none occasion left to make any errands thither. So to Sicea they removed, with all their goods; and there lay waiting for news of their fellows arrivall, and their own pay. Businesse they had none to do, and therefore might easily be drawn to mutinie: the whole argu∣ment of their discourse inclining them to nothing else. Their daily talk was, how rich they should be, when all their money came in; how much would fall to every single share; and for how long time the City was behinde hand with them in reckon∣ing. They were all grown Arithmetitians, and he was thought a man of worth, that could finde most reason to increase their demands, to the very highest, even beyond their due. No part of their long service was forgotten; but the comfortable words and promises of their Captains, leading them forth to any dan∣gerous fight, were called to minde, as so many obligations, not to be cancelled, without satisfying their expectation by some nordinarie largesse. Thus the time passeth away; untill the whole Army being ar∣rived, and lodged in Sicca, Hanno comes thither to clear the ac∣count. Now is the day come, wherein they shall all be made rich; especially if they can hold together, in maintaining stout∣ly the common cause. So think they all; and assemble them∣selves to hear what good news this messenger had brought: with a full resolution to help his memory, in case he should hap∣pen to forget any part of the many promises made to them; all which were to be confidered in their Donative. Hanno begins a very formall Oration; wherein he bewails the poverty of Car∣thage; tels them, how great a summe of money is to be paid unto the Romans; reckons up the excessive charges, whereat the Com∣mon-wealth had been in the late war; and finally desires them
to hold themselves contented with part of their pay, and out of the love which they bare unto the City, to remit the rest. Few of them understood his discourse: for the Carthaginian Army was composed of sundrie Nations, as Greeks, Africans, Gauls, Li∣gurians, Spaniards, and others, all of different languages. Yet they staed upon him, and were (as I think) little pleased with his very gesture. But when such, as conceived the whole tenor of his speech, had informed the rest what cold comfort he brought; they were all enraged, and fared like mad men, so that nothing would serve to appease them. Hanno would fain have asswaged their fury, but he knew not how: for he lesse understood their dissonant lowd noyses, than they did his Oration. An Army collected out of so many Coun∣treys, that have no one language common to all, or to the greater part of them, is neither easily stirred up to mutinie, nor easily pacified, when once it is broken into outrage. The best that Hanno can do, is to use the help of Interpreters and messen∣gers. But these Interpreters mistake his meaning; some, for want of skill; others of set purpose; and such as deliver his er∣rands in the worst sense, are best beleeved. Finally, they think themselves much abused by the Carthaginians, and resolve to de∣mand their own in peremptorie termes, at a neerer distance. In this mood they leave Sicca, and march as far as Tunis, that is within a very little of Carthage, and there they incamp. Now begin the Carthaginians to finde their own errour. It is a good rule, Curandum inprimis, ne magna injuria fiat Portibus & miseris. Have speciall care that valiant povertie Be not opprest with too great injurie. But this proud City having neglected the rule, hath also been careless in providing to secure her self against the inconveni∣ence that might follow. She had suffered the whole multitude, whereunto she was like to give cause of discontent, to joyn it self into one bdy, when the severall troops might easily have been dispersed: she hath turned out of her gates the wives, children, and gds of these poore men, which had she retained in shew of kindnesse, she might have used them as Hostages, for her own
safety; and by imploying a miserable pennie father, in her ne∣gotiation with men of Warre, she hath weakened the reputation of her bravest Captains, that might best have served to free her from the threatning danger. Yet likely it is, that Amca had no desire to be used as an instrument in defrauding his own Souldiers of their wages: especially considering, that as he best could bear witnesse of their merits, so was he not ignorant, that means to content them were not wanting, i the Citizens had been willing thereunto. Hereunto may be added a probable conjecture, that Hanno, with his complices, who at this very time was a bitter enemy to Amilcar, had the boldnesse to impose the blame of his own wretched counsell, upon the liberall po∣mises made by the Captains. Amilcar therefore did wisely, in suffering those that maligned him, to have the managing of their own plot, and to deal the cards which themselves had shuffled. This they continue to do as foolishly, as they had at first begun. They furnish a market at Tuis, for the Souldiers; whom they suffer to buy what they list, and at what price they list. They send ever and anon some of their Senators into the Camp; who promise to satisfie all demands, as far forth as it should be possible. And thus by shifting from one extreame to another, they make the Souldiers understand, into what fear the City was driven; which cannot choose but adde much to the passions already stirred up. This sudden change of weather, and the true cause of it, is quickly found by the Army, which thereupon grows wise, and finding the season sit, labours to make a great harvest. Money must be had, and without any abatement. This is granted. Ma∣ny have lost their horses, in publick service of the State. The State shall pay for them. They had lived some yeers by aking hard shift, without receiving their allowance of victuals from Carthage. If they had lived, they wanted not meat; herefore what was this to the Carthginians? Was it not all one, whether the ships did bring in provision; or their Captain direct them where to fetch it? But this woud not serve. They said that they had een sometimes driven to buy; and that (since they could not reember, how much, or at what rate they bught) they would be payed for their provision, during the whole time, and according to the dearest price that wheat had bon, whiest the
Warre lasted. Such are now the demands of these Mutiners; who might easily have been satisfied with far lesse charges, and far more honour, by receiving their due at the first. But now they make no end of craving. For whilest the Carthaginians are perplexed, about this Corn-money; the Souldiers have de∣vised many more tricks, whereby to extort a greater summe of money, without all regard of shame. Since therefore no good end could be found of these controversies which daily did mul∣tiply, it was thought convenient, that one of the Carthaginians, which had commanded in Sicil, should be chosen by the Soul∣diers, to reconcile all differences. Hereunto the Army condes∣cended, and made choise of Gesco: partly out of good liking to him, who had shewed himself at all times a friendly man to them, and carefull of their good, especially when they were to be transported into Africk: partly out of a dislike which they had conceived of Amilcar; for that he had not visited them in all this busie time. So Gesco comes among them; and, to please them the better, comes not without money: which might give better countenance to his proceedings, than barren eloquence had done to the negotiation of Hanno. He cals unto him first of all, the Captains, and then, the severall Nations apart; rebuking them gently for that which had passed; advising them tempe∣rately concerning the present; and exhorting them to continue thei love unto the State, which had long entertained them, and would needs alwayes be mindfull of their good servies. After this he began to put hand to his purse: offering to give them their whole pay in hand; and then after to consider of other reckonings at a more convenient time. This had been well ac∣cep ed, and might have served to bring all to a quit passe; if two seditious ring-leaders of the multitude had not stood a∣gainst it. There was in the Camp one Spedius, a sturdie fellow, ad audacious, but a slave; that in the late war had fled from a Ro∣man whom he served, and therefore stood in fear, lest he soud be delivered back to his Master; at whose hands he could exp ct no lesse, than to be whipt and crucified. This wretch could finde no better way to prolong his own life, than by raiing such trou∣bles as might serve to with-draw men from care of private matters, and make his own restitution impossible, were his M∣ster
never so importunate. With Spendius there associated him∣self one Matho; an hot-headed man, that had been so forward in stirring up the tumult, as he could not choose but fear, lest his own death should be made an example, to deter others from the like seditious behaviour. This Matho deals with his Countrey∣men the Africans; telling them, that they were in farre worse con∣dition, than either the Gaules, the Greeks, the Spaniards, or any forrain Mercinaries. For (saith he) these our companions have no more to do, than to receive their wages, and so get them gone: but we, that are to stay behinde in Africa, shall be called to another manner of ac∣count, when we are left alone; so that we shall have cause to wish, that we had returned hme beggers, rather then loden with the money; which (little thugh it be) shall break our backs. Ye are not ignorant, how ty∣rannically these our haughty Masters of Carthage do reign over us. They think it reasnable, that our lives and goods shuld be at their disposition; which they have at other times been accustomed to take from us, even without apparent cause, as it were to declare their Soveraigntie: what will they now do, seeing that we have demeaned our selves as freemen, and been bold to set a good face on the matter, demanding our own, as others have done? Ye all do know, that it were a very shame for us, if having been as forward in every danger of warre, as any other men, w shuld now stand quaking like slaves, and not dare to open our mouthes, when others take libertie to require their due. This notwithstanding ye may assure your selves, that we are like to be taught better manners, as soon as our fellows are gone: in regard of whom they are content to shadow their indignation with a good, but a forced countenance. Let us therefore be wise; and con∣sider, that they hate and fear us. Their hatred will shew it self, when their fear is once past unlesse we now take our time, and, whilest we are the stronger, enfeeble them so greatly, that their hatred shll not be able to do us wrong. All their strength consisteth in money, wherewithall they have hired others against us, and us against others. At the present they have neither money nor friends. The best Army that ever served them, whereof we are no small part, lyes at their gates, ready to help us if we be men. A better opportunity cannt be expected: for were our swords once drawn, all Africk would rise on our side. As for the Carthaginians, whither can they send for help? The case it self is plain: but we must quickly resolve. Either we must prevent the diligence of Gesco, by in∣cesing these Gaules and Spaniards, and procuring them to daw blood; or else it behooveth us to pease our good masters, by joyning with
them against our fellows, yea by offering to forgive unto them all our wa∣ges, if s (peradventure) they may be won to forgive us, or not ove-cru∣elty to punish our faults committed. He is most worthily a wretched slave, that neither hath care to win his Masters love, nor the courage to attempt his own libertie. By such perswasions Matho wins the African Souldiers to his own purpose. They are not now so greedie of money, as of quar∣rell; which he that seeketh, will not misse to finde. When Gsco therefore offered to pay them their whole stipend presently, but referred their other Demands, for horses and victuals, to some other more convenient time; they brake into great outrage, and say that they will have all, even all at once, and that out of hand. In this tumult, the whole Armie flock together about Matho and Spendius; whose diligence is not wanting, to adde more fuell to the fire already blazing. Matho and Spendius are the onely men to whom the Souldiers will hearken: if any other stand up to make a Speech, a showre of stones, flying about his ears, puts him to silence, that he shall never afterwards speak word more. Neither stay they to consider what it is that any man would say: enough hath been said already by those good spokesmen; so that no other word (though perhaps to the same purpose) can be heard, save onely, Throw, throw. Now the Rebellion begins to take form Matho and Spendius are chosen Captains; who, followed by a desperate crue o Ruf∣fians, will suffer no man to make his own peace, but pursue their own ends, under fair pretence of the common cause. All which notwithstanding, Gesco is not wanting to the good of his coun∣trey, but adventures himself upon their furie. One while he dals with the Captains, and other principal men; aking them by he hand, and giving gentle words: another while he woks wi h the severall Nations; putting them all in hope of th ir own hearts desire, if any reason would content them. Noe of them are so sullen as the Africans: indeed none of them had so good cause. They require him peremptorily, to give them their own, and not o feed them with words. The truth is, that they are not so covetous as they seem: but will be more gld of an ill An∣swer, than of a good pyment. This is more then Gsco knows: Wherefore, as rebuking their inconsiderate heat, he tels them, That they may do well, if they stand in vant of money, to seek
it of their Captain, Matho. This is enough. Shall he both de∣fraud them and deride them? They stay no longer, but lay vio∣lent hands upon the treasure that he had brought; yea upon him also, and all that are with him: as intending to take this in part of payment, and, for the rest, to take another course. Ma∣tho and Spendius are glad of this. It hd little pleased them to see their feows begin to grow calm, by his fair language: where∣fore they cast into bonds both him, and all the Carthaginians that they can finde; that so the Army may be freed from danger of good admonition, which they call Treaon. After this follows open war. Math sollicits all Afrck; and his Embassadours are every∣where well entertained. Neither is it needfull to use perswasion: the very fame of this rebellion sufficeth to draw the whole coun∣trey into it. Now must the Carthaginians be plagued for their op∣pressions, with which they have plagued others. It is true, that adversitie hath never been untold of her errours: and as she is ever assured to hear her own, so commonly with her own she undergoes those of other men. The Africans finding the Cartha∣ginians hang under the wheel, tell them boldly, that their Im∣positions were mercilesse; that they took from them the one half of their corn; that they doubled their tributes in all things else; and that they inflicted upon their vassals the greatest punish∣ment for the least offences. These cruelties the Carthaginians themselves have forgotten: but the people, that have suffered so much, retain all in perfect memory. Wherefore not onely such as can bear Arms, are ready to do service in this great commotion; but the very women bring forth their jewels, and other ornaments, offering all to sale for the maintenance of so just a quarrell. By this great forwardnesse, and liberall contri∣bution, Matho and Spendius are supplyed with a strong aid of threescore and ten thousand Africans: and are moreover furnish∣ed with money, not onely to satisfie the present appetite of their men, but sufficient to continue the war begun, though it should be of long endurance. These using the advantage of their present strength, besieged Ʋca, and Hippagreta, Cities of great importance, as being seat∣ed upon the Western Haven of Carthage, where it is divided by a neck of land; Hppagreta standing inwards upon the great Lake; Ʋca further out upon the Sea. Neither was the Camp at
Tunes abandoned, which lay filthy to hider the Carthaginians, from passing up into the Countrey: for Matho and Spendius wanted not men, to follow the war in a l parts at once. How the Carthaginians were amazed with this unexpected pe∣rill, any man may conceive. But the businesse it self awakes them hastily. They are hardly prest on all sides; and therefore travail∣ed their brains to the uttermost, how to shake of these furious dgs from their shoulders, who sometimes by night, sometimes b day, came unto the ver wals of their City. In this exigent Hmo was made their Generall: who failed not in his accusto∣med diligence of making all good preparation: but had gotten together whatsoever was needfull, as well to relieve a Town be∣sieged, as to batter and assail any place defended against him, with these provisions, and with an hundred Elephants, he came to Ʋtica, so suddenly, that the Enemies as men surprised, for∣sook their Trenches, and retyred themselves unto a rising peece of woody ground, where they might be safe against the violenc of his beasts. Hanno, thinking that he had to do with Numidians, whose custome was, after any losse, to flie two or three whole dayes journey off; presently entred the Town; to shew himself, after this his victory. But these good fellows, against whom he was to war, had learned of Amilcar, to retyre and to fight again, many times, in one day, as need required. Therefore as soon as they perceived, that he knew not how to use a victory; they as∣sailed their own Camp, and with great slaughter, drave the Carthaginians out of it, forcing them to hide themselves within Ʋtica; and got possssion of all the store, that Hanno had brought for the relief of the Town. This bad beginning Hanno followed with sutable indiscretion: loosing the benefit of many fair op∣portunities, and suffering the Enemies to take possession of all the entrance from Carthge to the firm land. The Carthaginians, peceiving this, were exceedingly trou∣bled, and did therefore let fa l their shete-anchor; sending to the field their great Captain, Amilar, whom they furnished wth ten thousand foot of supply, and seventy Eephants. Amilcar had work enough to do, before he should be able to meet with the Enemy upon equall ground. For besides other places of ad∣vantage that the Mercenaries had occupied, Hanno had suffered them to win the onely Bridge, by which the River Macra, or
Bagradas, was passable unto these, that were to travell into the Continent. This River had not many foords, nor those easie for a single man to get over: but upon them all was kept such guard, as gave to Amilcar little hope of prevailing in seeking way by force. As for the Bridge it self, Matho and his followers were there lodged: and had there built a Town, wherein to lye commodiously, intentive onely to the custody thereof. But Amil∣car had observed, that the very mouth of Bagradas used to be sometimes cloyed with sand and gravell, that was driven in by certain customarie windes, and could not be driven out again, by force of that slow River, till the winde falling, or changing, suffered the weight of the waters, to disburden their channell. Heeof he made use; and taking his opportunity, passd the Ri∣ver, contrary to all expectation, either of the Enemy, or of his own Citizens. There was no need to bid Spendus look about him, when once it was heard, that Amilca was come over Bagradas: all the Mercenaries were troubled with the news; knowing that they were no longer to deal with the improvident gravity of Hanno, but with an able spirit, even with their own Master in the Art of War, whom they admired, though they hated him. But this fear was soon changed into presumption; when more than 15. thousand of their own society, were come from Ʋtica; and other ten thousand from the guard of the Bridge. Their Army was far greater, than that of Amilcr; and they were, in their own judgement, the better men, upon which confidence, they resol∣ved to charge him on all sides, and beat him down, in despight of his worth and eputation. Wih this resolution they attend∣ed upon him, watching for some advantage, and still exhorting one another to play the men, and give the onet. Especially they that followed him in the Rere, had a great minde to begin the fight; whereunto their proptnesse was such, as took from them their former circumspection. Amilcar held his way to∣wa ds the Bridge, keeping himself on plain grounds, that were fittest for the service of his E ephants, which he placed in front of his Army. Neither made he shew of any desire to fight, but suffeed the rashnesse o his Enemies to increase, till it should bek into some dsorder. At length perceiving, that with more boldnesse than good heed, they followed him so neer, as would
be little for their good, if he should turn upon them, he hastned his mrch, even to such a pace, as made a shew little differing from plain flght. The Meccenaries presently fell upon his skirts; beleeving, that for fear of them he was ready to run away. But whilest they confusedly, as in sudden opinion of vi∣ctry, were diving at the hee's of those that had the Rear; A∣milcar wheeled about, and met them in the face, charging them hotly, but in very good order, so that amazed with the appre∣hesion of inxpected danger, they fled without making any resistance. In this overthrow, there were six thousand of the Mercenaries slain, and about two thousand taken, the rest fled, some to the Camp at Ʋtica, others to the Town at the Bridge; whither Amilcar followed them so fas, that he wan the place easily; the Enemies being thence also fled unto Tunes, as not ha∣ving recollected their spirits to make it good. The fame of this, victory, together with the diligence of Amil∣car in pursuing it, caused may Towns revolted, partly by fear, part y by force, to return to their former obedience. Yet was not Matho wanting to himself, in this dangerous time. He sent about Numidia and Africk, for new supplyes; admonishing the people, now or never to do their best, for the recovery of their freedome; he perswaded Spendius, and Autaritus that was Ca∣ptain of the Gauls, to wait upon Amilca, and alwayes to keep the higher grounds, or at least the foot of some hill, where they might be safe from the Elephants; and he himslf continued to presse the Town of Hippagreta with an hard siege. It was neces∣sary for Amilca, in passing from place to place, as his busin sse requied, to take such wayes as there were: for all the Countrey lay not levell. Therefore Spendius, who ti l coasted him, had once gotten a notable advantage of ground: the Carthaginians lying in a Plain, surrounded with hils, that were occupied by the Mercenaries, with their Numidian and African succours. In this difficultie, the fame of Amica his eronall worth did greatly benefit his Countre. For N vasus a young Genle∣man commanding over the Numidians, was glad of this occsion serving to get the aquintance and love of so brave a man, which he much desired: and therefore came unto Amilcar, sig∣nifying his good affection to him with offer to do him all ser∣vice. Amilcar joyfully entertained this iend; promised unto
him his own daughter in marriage; and so wan from the Ene∣mies two thousand horse, that following Naravasus turned un∣to the Carthaginians side. With this help he gave battell unto Spendius: wherein the Numid an laboured to approve his own valour, to his new friend. So the victory was great: for there were slain ten thousand of Spendius his fellows, and foure thou∣sand taken prisoners; but Spend us himself, with Auarius the Gaule, escaped to do more mischief. Amilcar dealt very gently with his prisoners: pardoning all offences past, and dismissing as many, as were unwilling to become his followers; yet with condition, that they should never more bear Arms against the Carthaginians; threatning to take sharp revenge upon all, that should break this Covenant. This humanitie was vehemently suspected by Matho, Spen∣dius, and Autarius, as tending to win from them, the hearts of their Souldiers. Wherefore they resolved to take such order, that not a man among them should dare, to trust in the good nature of Amilcar, nor to hope for any safetie, whilest Carthage was able to do him hurt. They counterfeited letters of advertise∣ment, wherein was contained, that some of their company re∣spective onely of their private benefit, and carelesse of the gene∣rall good, had a purpose to betray them all unto the Carthagini∣ans, with whom they held intelligence; and that it was needful, to look well unto Gesco, and his companions, whom these tray∣tors had a purpose to enlarge. Upon this Theme Spendus makes an Oration to the Souldiers, exhorting them to fide ity; and shewing with many words, that the seeming humanity of Amil∣car, toward some, was no other than a bait, wherewith to entrap them all at once together; as also telling them, what a dange∣rous Enemy Gsco would prove, if he might escape their hands. While he is yet in the midst of his tale, were letters come to the same purpose. Then steps forth Autarius, and speaks his minde plainly: saying, that it were the best, yea the onely way, for the common safetie, to cut off all hope of reconciliation with Car∣thage; that if some were devising to make their own peace, it would go hard with those that had a care of the warre; that it were better to make an end of Geso his life, than to trouble themselves with looking to his custody; that by such a course every one should be ingaged in the present Action, as having
none other hope left, than in victory alone; finally, that such as would speak here-against, were worthy to be reputed Traitors. This Anarius was in great credit with the Souldiers, and could speak sundrie languages, in such sort, that he was understood by all. According to his motion therefore it was agreed, that Gesco, and all the other prisoners, should forthwith be put to horrible death, by torments. Neverthelesse there were some, that for the love of Gesco, sought to alter his intended cruelty; but they were forthwith stoned to death, as a Document unto others; and so the Decree was put in execution. Neither were they therewithall contented; but further ordained, that all Car∣thaginian prisoners which they took, should be served in like sort: and that the subects or friends of Carthage, should lose their hands, and so be sent home: which rule they observed ever afterwards. Of this cruelty I need say no more, than that it was most exe∣crab e feitie A for the counsell of using it, it was like uno the counsell of Ahitphel; All Israel shall hear, that thou art abhorred of thy father; then shll the hands of all that are with thee, be strong. Such are the fruits of desperation. Against these inconveniences Mercy and Severitie, used with due respect, are the best remedies. In neither of which Amilcar failed For as long as these his own Souldiers were any way likely to be reclaimed, by gentle courses; hi humanity was rea∣dy to invite them. But when they were transported with beastly outrage, beyond all regard of honesty and shame; he rewarded their villanie with answerable vengeance; casting them unto wilde beasts, to be devoured. Untill this time Hanno, wi h the Army under his command, had kept himself apart from Amilcar, and done little, as may seem, fo that nothing is remembed of him, since his late losses. Neither was Amilcar sorry so want his help, as being able to do better without him. But when the war grew to such extremity, as threatned utter ruine to the one or he other side: then was Hanno sent for, and came to Amilcar, wih whom he joyned his Forces. By this accesse of strength Amilcar was not enabled, to do more then in former times: rather he could now perform nothing; such was the hatred between him and his unworthy Colleague. The Towns of Ʋtica and Hippagreta, that had stood
alwayes firm on the Carthaginian pay, did now  nto the Enemy, murdering all the Souldirs tht they had in Garison, and casting their bodies forth, without uffering thm to be bu∣ried. The proviions brought by S, for maintnane of the Army, were lost in foule weather: and Carthage it self stood in danger of being besieged, about which Math a Sed us con∣sulted, whilest one of the Carthaginian Gnerals did (as it were) binde the others hands The Carthaginians seeing that all ran towards ruine, through the discord of the Generls, commited the decision of their controversies, unto the Army that served under them. The judgement of the Army was, that Hanno should depart the Camp: which he did, and Hannibal ws sent in his stead, one that would be directed by Amilcar; and that was enough. After this the affairs of Cathage began to prosper somewhat better. Matho and Spendius had brought their Amy neer unto the City; and lay before it, as in a siege. They might well be bold, to hope and adventure much; having in thei Camp about fiftie thousand, besides those that lay abroad in Garrisons. Ne∣verthelesse, the City was too strong for them to win by assault: and the entrance of victuals they could not hinder, if any should be sent in by friends from abroad. Hieron King of Syracuse, though during the wars in Sicil he as∣sisted the Romans, and still continued in their Alliance, yet now sent succours to the Carthaginians: fearing their fall, and conse∣quently his own; because if no other State gave the Rmans somewhat to trouble their digestion, the Principalitie of Syra∣cus would soon be devoured by them. The Romans also gave them some sl nder assistance, and for the present refused good offers made unto them by the Mercenaries. This they did, to shew a kinde of noble disposition; which was indeed but coun∣tereit, as the sequel manifestly proved. While Math and his followers were busily pressing the City, Ailcar was as diligent, in waiting at their backs, and cutting off all that came to their supply: so that finding themselves m re streightly besieged by him, than Carthage was by them, they pu posed to desist from their vain attempt, and try some other couse. Hereupon the issue into the field: when Spendius, and one Zarcas an African Captin assistng the rebellion, take
upon them to find Amilcar work; leaving Math in Tunis, to ne∣gotiate with their friends, and take a generall care of the busi∣nesse. The Elephants of Carthage, and horse of Naravasus, made Spendius fearfull to descend into the Plains. Wherefore he be∣took himself to his former method of war; keeping the moun∣tains, and rough grounds, or occupying the streightest passages, wherein the desperate courage of his men might shew it self, with little disadvantage. But Amilcar had more skill in this Art, than could be matched by the labour of Spendius. He drew the Enemy to many skirmishes; in all which the successe was such, as added courage to his own men, and abated the strength and spirit of the Rebels. Thus he continued, provoking them night and day: still intrapping some of them, and sometimes giving them the over-throw in plain battell: untill at length he got them into a streight, whence ere they should get out, he meant to take of them a good account. Their judgement was enough, to perceive their own disadvantage: and therefore they had the lesse stomack to fight; but awaiting for help from Tunis. Amilcar prudently foreseeing, that necessity might teach them, to dare impossibilities, used the benefit of their present fear, and shut them close up with Trench and Rampart. There they waited miserably for succour, that came not: and having spent all their victuals, were so pinched with hunger, that they fed upon the bodies of their prisoners. This they suffered patiently, as know∣ing that they had not deserved any favour from Carthage: and hoping, that their friends at Tunis would not be unmindfull of them. But when they were driven to such extremity, that they were fain to devour their own companions, and yet saw none appearance or likelihood of relief: their obstinacie was broken, and they threatned their Captains with what they deserved, unlesse they would go forth to Amilcar, and seek such peace as might be gotten. So Spendius, Zrxas, and Antaritus, fell to con∣sultation, wherein it was resolved to obey the multitude, and yeeld themselves, if it were so required, unto the death, rather than perish by the hands of their own Companions. Hereupon they send to crave pale, which is granted; and these three come forth total with Amilcar in person. What they could say unto him, it is hard to conjecture: yet by the conditions which Amil∣car granted, it seems that they took the blame upon themselves,
and craved pardon for the multitude. The conditions were, that the Carthaginians should choose, out of the whole number of these Enemies, any ten whom they pleased, to remain at their discre∣tion; and that the rest should all be dismissed, each in his shirt, o in one single coat. When the peace was thus concluded, Amil∣car told these Ringleaders, that he chose them presently, as part of the ten, and so commanded to lay hands on them: the rest he forthwith went to fetch, with his whose Armie in order. The Rebels, who knew not that peace was concluded upon so gentle articles, thought themselves betrayed: and therefore amazedly ran to arms. But they wanted Captains to order them; and the same astonishment, that made them break the Covenants of peace, whereof they were ignorant, gave unto Amilcar both co∣lour of justice, in accomplishing revenge, and ease in doing the execution. They were all slain: being fourty thousand, or more, in number. This was a famous exploit: and the news thereof, exceeding welcome to Carthage; and terrible to the revolted Cities of Africk. Henceforward Amilcar, with his Naavasus and Hannibal, carried the war from Town to Town, and found all places rea∣die to yeeld: Ʋtica, and Hippagreta, onely standing out, upon fear of deserved vengeance, and Tunis, being held by Matho, with the remainder of his Armie. It was thought fit to begin with Tunis wherein lay the chief strength of the Enemy. Coming before this Town, they brought forth Spendius, with his fellows, in view of the defendants, and crucified them under the wals; to terrifie those of his old companions, that were still in arms. Wth this rigour the fiege began; as if speedy victory had been assured. Hannibal quartered on that part of Tunis, which lay to∣wards Carthage; Amilcar on the opposite side: too far asunder to help one another in sudden accidents; and therefore it behoved each, to be the more circumspect. Matho from the wals beheld his own destinie, in the miserie of his companion, and knew not how to avoid it otherwise than b a cast at dice with fortune. So he brake out upon that part of the Carthaginian Armie that lay secure, as if all danger were past, under the command of Hannibal: and with so great and unexpected furie he sallied, that after an exceeding slaughter, he took Hannibal prisoner; on whom, and thirtie the most noble
of the Carthaginian prisoners, he presently revenged the death of Spenaius by the same torture. O this Amilcar knew nothing, till it was too late; neither had he strength enough remaining, after his great losse, to continue the siege; but was fain to break it up, and remove unto the mouth of the River Bagradas, where he incamped. The terror was no lesse within Carthage, upon the fame of this losse, than had been the joy of the late great victory. All that could bear Arms, were sent into the field, under Hanno; whom, it seems, they thought the most able of their Captains surviving th late accidents of War. If there were any Law among them, forbidding the imployment of one sole Generall, neer unto their City (for they are known to have trusted one man abroad) the time did not permit, in this ha ie exigent, to devise about re∣pealing it. But thirtie principall men are chosen by the Senate, to bring Hanno to Amilcars Camp, and by all ood perswasions to reconcile them. This could not be effected in one day. It neer∣ly touched Amilcar in his honour, that the carelesnesse of Hanni∣bal seemed to be imputed unto him, by sending his enemy to moderate his proceedings. Nevertheesse after many conferen∣ces, the authority of the Senators prevailed; Amilcar and Hanno were made friends; and thenceforth, whilest this war lasted, Hanno took warning by Hannibals calamities, to follow good directions, though afterwards he returned to his old and deadly hatred. In the mean season Matho was come abroad, as meaning to use the reputation of his own successe, whilest it gave some life unto his businesse. He had reason to do as he did: but he want∣ed skill to deal with Amilcar. The skirmishes, and ight exerci∣ses of war, wherein Amilcar trained his Carthaginians, did so far abate the strength, and withall diminish the credit of Matho; that he resolved to try the fortune of one battell: wherein either his own desire should be accomplished, or his cares ended. To this conclusion the Carthaginians were no lesse prone, than Matho: as being weary of these long troubles, and insupportable expen∣ces; confident in the valour of their own men, which had ap∣proved  slf in many trials; and well assured of Amilcar his great worth, whereunto the Enemy hath not what to oppose.
According to this determination, each part was diligent in ma∣king provision: inviting their friends to help; and drawing forth into the field, all that lay in Garrison. The issue of this battell might have been foretold, without help of witchcraft. Matho, and his followers, had nothing whereon to presume, save their daring spirits, which had been well cooled by the many late skirmishes, wherein they had learned how to run away. The Carthaginians had reason to dare, as having been often victorious: and in all points else they had the better of their Enemies; especially (which is worth all the rest) they had such a Commander, as was not easily to be match∣ed in that Age. Neither was it likely, that the desire of liberty should work so much, in men accustomed to servitude; as the honour of their State would, in Citizens, whose future and pre∣sent good lay all at once ingaged in that adventure. So the Car∣thaginians wan a great victory, wherein most of the Africans their Enemies were slain; the rest fled into a Town, which was not to be defended, and therefore they all yeelded; and Matho himself was taken alive. Immediately upon this victory, all the Africans that had rebelled, made submission to their old masters: Ʋtica, onely, and Hippagreta stood out, as knowing how little they de∣served of favour. But they were soon forced, to take what con∣ditions best pleased the victors. Matho and his fellows were led to Carthage in triumph; where they suffered all torments that could be devised, in recompence of the mischiefs which they had wrought in this war. The war had lasted three yeers, and about foure moneths, when it came to this good end: which the Carthaginians, whose Subjects did not love them, should with lesse expence, by contenting their Mercinaries, have prevented in the beginning. FINIS.
