S5341 E18_19 99868832 121188
PHINEHAS'S ZEAL IN EXECVTION OF IVDGEMENT. OR, A DIVINE REMEDY FOR ENGLANDS Misery. A SERMON PREACHED before the Right Honourable House of Lords in the Abby of Westminster, at their late Solemne monethly Fast, October 30. 1644. By Edmund Staunton D. D. Pastour of Kingston upon Thames in the Countie of Surrey. A Member of the Assembly of Divines. LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane in Pauls Church-yard. 1645.
Die Mercurii 30 Octob. 1644. IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament: That this House doth here∣by returne thanks to Doctor Staunton, for his great pains taken in his Sermon preached by him this day, before their Lordships in the Abby Church Westmin∣ster, it being the day of the monethly Fast: And this House doth desire him to Print and publish the same. And lastly, it is Ordered that none shall presume to Print or reprint his said Sermon, without being Authorized under the hand of the said Doctor Staunton. Io. Brown. Cler. Parliamentorum. I Authorize CHRISTOPHER MEREDITH to print my Sermon. EDMUND STAUNTON.
TO THE RIGHT HONORA∣BLE HOVSE OF LORDS Assembled in Parliament. My Lords, SHort warning is some apo∣logie for slight performan∣ces, and what I cannot far∣ther fairely excuse, your no∣ble Candor can freely par∣don. The Citie Petiti∣on for execution of Iudgement, Ordin. Octo. 24. 1644. and your Gol∣den Ordinance, for giving no quarter to Irish, or Papists borne in Ireland, taken in Armes against the Parliament; led my thoughts to this Argument, as seasonable, if not as necessary.  Gladi∣tus, à vastan∣do dictus, à  deva∣status fuit. The Sword like it selfe,
layeth waste and desolate; bleeding Eng∣land groaneth and cryeth, Ierm. 47.6. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy selfe into thy scab∣bard, rest and be still: Many Soveraigne sword-quieting Remedies have been recom∣mended to your Honours: as faith acted, prayer fervent, Humiliation unfained, re∣formation reall, of persons and families. And this of executing Iudgement, hath in it an healing vertue also. Though when all is done, Christ alone must dry up our bloudy issues, and that living Corner-stone, must be our blood-stone. It was your Honours just at∣tempt long agoe, to bring delinquents to con∣digne punishment, the opposition whereof by an adverse partie, hath occasioned these Civill warres, and intestine broyles in the Nation, so that the Case of the Israelites opposed by the Benjamites, runs Parallel with our present quarrels; The Israelites had a gene∣rall Assembly, a kind of Parliament, where∣to complaint is made by the Levite, Iud. 19. last. against the men of Gibeah for their horrid, their non∣such delinquencie. Hereupon the Assembly
Orders and Decreeth their punishment, sends out Messengers to the Benjamites, Iud. 20. and faire∣ly demands that those Children of Belial might be by them delivered up to Iustice; but the Benjamites would not hearken to their Brethren the Israelites; take up Arms rather to protect their Delinquents: and thus the war began, which for a while went on du∣biously, for the Israelites (though friends to Truth and Iustice) lost in two battailes for∣tie thousand men; yet the warre ended suc∣cessefully. God directed the Israelites to a Stratagem, whereby all the Benjamites ex∣cept six hundreth were destroyed. And all this may Incourage your Honours to work for, and wait on God. And when perhaps some else-where Nobles, may be solemni∣zing The So∣lemn Festi∣vals. Decemb. 25. these approaching Idolized Festivals, with Playes and Interludes, which in Ludorum scenicorum delicata est insania. Aust. lib. 1. de Civ. Dei. cap. 32. Austins Language is a delicate madnesse, Your Ho∣nours, I hope, will be fasting, praying, hea∣ring, and receiving the word with all readines of mind, which will be your Act. 17.11. , more noble. non genere, sed virtute & pietate nobiles, Bez. in Loc. Berean Nobilitie; And though others may be hatch∣ing devilish designes for the pouring out of
blood Innocent; Your Honours will in∣gage your Selves in due execution of Iudge∣ment; and so offer to God a Isa. 34.5,6. sacrifice of blood nocent. I know there may be many Politick Reasonings in the Case, but when God giveth out a Command, he expecteth downright Dutie, not any subtle Dispute. A due and Regular execution of Iudgement, will gild over your Coates of Honour, and as it were Royalize your blood already no∣ble. The Heathens got a name, a kinde of immortalitie, for their morall endowments; Socrates for his wisdome, Aristides for Iu∣stice, Cicero for his eloquence, and Cato for gravitie, &c. And your Lordships zeale for God in execution of Iudgement, will make posteritie to mention your Names and Families with Honour. I am Your Lordships to serve you in and for the Lord of Lords: EDMUND STAUNTON.
A SERMON PREACHED TO the Right Honourable House of Lords on the Monethly Fast, October 30. 1644. Psal. 106. vers. 30. Then stood up Phinehas and executed judgement, and so the plague was stayed. Coherence. HEre are three verses together, which holds forth a three∣fold estate of Israel. 1. Sinning Israel; They joyned themselves unto Baal∣peor, and eate the sacrifices of the dead, vers. 28. 2. Plagued Israel; They provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague brake in upon them, vers. 29.
3. Relieved Israel. Then stood up Phinehas, and executed iudgement: and so the plague was stayed. vers. 30. 1. Sinning Israel. 1. Israels Sinne was twofold. First, Corpo∣rall uncleannesse, They committed whoredome with the daughters of Moab. Numb. 25.1. Se∣condly, Spirituall uncleannesse, The people did eate and bowed down to their gods. vers. 2. They ioyned themselves to Baal-peor, and eate the sacrifice of the dead, to wit, dead Israel, of dead sacrifices to dead gods, so the Psalmist, vers. 28. Observation. Hence observe, that Corporall and spirituall uncleannesse, usually goe together: adultery and idolatry are sister sins; and upon this dou∣ble right of double uncleannesse, Rome chal∣lengeth that title of Mother of Or forni∣cations. . harlots and abominations of the earth, Rev. 17.5. 2. Plagued Israel. 2. Gods plaguing of Israel hath two de∣grees or steps in it. 1. The kindling of it in Gods wrath, they provoked him to anger with there inventions. 2. The flaming of it in Isra∣els misery, the plague brake in upon them, vers. 29. For clearing the history which we have at
large, Numb. 25. and the opening of the text, these quere's must be answered. 1. Quaere. 1. What kinde of plague this was. For an∣swer, some thinke it was the plague of pesti∣lence, because the word plague is usually so taken: others conceive it rather to be a plague of slaughters by the hand of Moses, who had command from God to take all the heads of the people, (to wit, the ringleaders to idolatry) and to hang them up before the Lord against the Sunne. Numb. 25.4. and by the Iudges, who had command from Moses, To slay every one his men that were joyned unto Baal peor, vers. 5. And probably this was the plague the Psal∣mist speaks of, partly, because the word is genericall, implying many kinds or species, and is sometimes particularly applyed to this by slaughters. So there was a great slaughter or plague among the people, 1 Sam. 4.17. partly, because it sutes best with the Numb. 25. history, which mentions this plague by slaughter, not that by pestilence. 2. Quaere. 2. Quere is this, The plague being great, for it brake in upon them as a flood of waters, or as an hoast of armed men, the question is,
how great this plague was: For answer, aske Moses, he saith, those that died in the plague were twentie and foure thousand, Numb. 25.9. aske Paul and he saith, There fell three and twentie thousand, 1 Corinth. 10.8. these va∣rying calculations, some reconcile thus; Paul speaks in generals, relating to the story, Num∣bers 25. Moses speaks more particularly, being the Historian: others take notice of the dou∣ble slaughter, one by the Iudges with the sword, wherein probably were cut off about three and twentie thousand, and this is Pauls num∣ber, another by Moses, with the halter hang∣ing up the heads of the people, probably about a thousand, which being added to the former, makes up the foure and twentie thousand, the number set down by Moses. 3. Quaere. A third Quere is this, Why and how the execution of judgement should be called a plague in Israel; it seemes rather a blessing then a curse in Israel. For Answer, What was done by Moses and the Iudges, as it was the cutting off of so many Idolaters and Adulte∣rers, so it was a blessing; as there was the taking away of so many mens lives, so it was
a sad thing, a kinde of plague in Israel, especially, all these falling in one day, 1 Cor. 10.8. as for instance, should the Parlia∣ment put to death an hundred, or but half an hundred of the Traytors and Rebels against the State in a day, it would in one sense be a sad spectacle, a kinde of plague, but in another a blessing in our Israel. 3. Releeved Israel. Thirdly, for the releeving of Israel, that is brought about by the execution of judge∣ment: Then stood up Phinehas and executed judgement, and then the plague was stayed, vers. 30. And here two doubts more must be answered. 1. Doubt Answered. First, What Phinehas had to do in exe∣cution of Iudgement, who for his pede∣gree was the sonne of Eleazar, the sonne of Aaron the Priest, Numb. 25.7. for his of∣fice at the most but praefectus sacris (as Mollerus) Mol. in v. 31. a Ruler in the Sanctuary, but in publique administration of civill Iu∣stice, he was privatus, è plebe unus, a pri∣vate man, one among the people, so that this act of his might seeme not to be zeal,
but murther rather, and that in a high de∣gree, for there was shedding blood, noble, if not royall blood, Zimri being the sonne of Salu, a prince of a chiefe house among the Simeonites, Numb. 25.14. and withall his slaying them in the act of their sinning might be at once a killing of their bodies & souls also, and so double murther: For Answer, it is cleare that this act of Phine∣as was counted unto him for righteousnesse, to wit, as a Non loqui∣tur de iusti∣tia personae, sedoperis. Mol. righteous act unto all generati∣ons for evermore, vers. 31. And some Di∣vines give this reason for the clearing of him, that he did it by speciall instinct, and by a motion extraordinary,  Calv. in Lo∣cum. and by a holy pang of zeale, yet this (by the way) is no constant rule for us to walke by. 2. Doubt an∣swered. A second Doubt is, Why the pacifying of Gods wrath, and the staying of the plague is ascribed to this act of Phineas, having a blush of irregularitie in it, rather then to the acts of Moses and the Iudges, which were by expresse command from God and very regular; For Answer, the acts of Moses and the Iudges Numb. 25.4.shaked the fire
of Gods wrath, that of Phineas quenched it; again, the acts of Moses and the Iudges had a rise from a sparke, that of Phineas from a flame of zeale and holy indignati∣on in him; hence the Lord who is exceed∣ingly taken with the springs and roots of actions, sets the crowne upon the head of Phineas. These things I lay down as probable, not as demonstrative. Division of the words. The Text hath in it foure particulars. First, The quando, The circumstance of time, then. Secondly, The quis, The agent, Phi∣neas. Thirdly, The quid, What he doth, his acts are double. First, he stood up, or, arose up, Numb. 25.7. being quickned by a spirit of zeale within him. Secondly, he executed judge∣ment or prayed, so some render it, it may be both. Fourthly, The quid inde, the fruits and issues. First, the wrath of God was pacified, as it is implyed in the Psalme, and expressed in Numbers.  in Pih. iudicavit.  in Hithp. Ora∣vit. Cal. Mol. Numb. 25.11. Secondly, the plague was stayed.
1. The Quando. The time. First, for the quando, or the circum∣stance of time, it falles under a threefold consideration. First, then, when sinne came to a height of impudency, Zimri and Cosby not blush∣ing to act uncleannesse Numb. 25.6. in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the Congregation of the children of Israel, who were weeping before the doore of the Tabernacle of the Congrega∣tion: As it were on a Day of Solemn Hu∣miliations. Observation. Hence observe, that when sinne is grown impudent, that is Gods time to cut off a sin∣ner. Put ye in the sicle, for the harvest is ripe; come get you down for the presse is full, the fats overflow, for their wickednesse is great, saith the Lord by his Prophet Ioel.Ioel 3.13. Secondly, when Zimri and Cosby were in the act of sinning. Observation. Hence observe, how Dan. 5.23,24,25. the vengeance of God oft seiseth on the sinner in the very act of sinning. So Belshazzer is met withall in his carowsing act, Act. 5.1,2,3,4. Ananias and Saphira in their lying act leavened with sacriledge, & Herod in his proud act, taking in the ap∣plause
of the people, crying, It is the voice of a God, and not of a man: Act. 12.22,23. for the Angell of the Lord smote him as some think, with an audible blow, Lorinus in Locum. however a blow fatall and deadly, for because he gave not God the glory, he was eaten up of wormes (of wormes a∣bove ground) and gave up the ghost. Thirdly, Then, when Moses and the Iudges were cutting off the troublers of Is∣rael, by thousands, in a way of justice. Observation. Hence observe, the Magistrates due and regular execution of justice, bindeth not up Gods hands from pouring out of his wrath up∣on his enemies, in wayes something strange and extraordinary. 2. The quis. Phinehas. Secondly, For the quis, the agent, Phi∣nehas is the man that executes judgment, a man unthought of for such a service: Observation. hence observe that when God hath work to do, he can finde out workmen, a Phinehas with zeale in his heart and a javelin in his hand, to thrust through the proudest Zimri's and Cosbi's, the most daring sinners. 3. The quid. 4. Quid inde; together. I shall put the third and the fourth, the quid and the quid inde, both together,
what he doth and what comes of it, he executeth judgement, and thereupon wrath was pacified and the plague stayed. Observation. Hence observe, Numb. 25.11. that execution of judge∣ment, is Gods way to pacisie Gods wrath and to stay his iudgements. The confirmation hereof I shall lay down in three Arguments. 1. Argument. A Remotio∣ne causae. First, The removall of the Cause takes away the effect also, execution of judge∣ment removes the sinne or the sinner, and therefore takes away Gods wrath and judgement; Whilest Achan lives, Israel is troubled; stone Achan, burne the accursed wedge of gold, the silver, and the Baby∣lonish garment, &c. and the Lord turnes from the fiercenesse of his anger, Iosh. 7. last. Whilest Ionah is in the ship, the Searageth, cast him over board, and there is a calme presently, Ionah 1.15. 2. Argument. A Maiore. The second Argument runs thus; Exe∣cution of judgement that a vertus in it, to turne a curse into a blessing, therefore much more to prevent a curse or procure a blessing; instance the case of Levi, his
curse was to be divided in Iacob, and scatter∣ed in Israel, Genesis 49. verse 7. But the Levites in an after story shewed them∣selves zealous in execution of judge∣ment upon the Idolaters, who had wor∣shipped the Molten Calfe, Moses stood in the Gate of the Campe, and said, Who is on the Lords side? let him come to me: and all the sonnes of Levi gathered themselves together unto him, and he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, put every man his sword by his side, and goe in and out from gate to gate throughout the Camp and slay e∣very man his Brother, and every man his Com∣panion, and every man his neighbour: and the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses, and there fell of the people that day a∣bout three thousand men; thereupon God bestowed upon the Levites a blessing that day, Exodus 32.26,27,28,29. What bles∣sing? this, that the Levites should be given to the Priests for the Service of the Taberna∣cle of the Congregation, Numb. 3.6,7. And thus their scattering is made no curse, but a blessing, an honour to Levi, and a mercy
to all Israel: Levi unscattered had been as Candles in the pound, dark & useles, but the Levites thus scattered, are set up as so many shining lights through all the roomes of the house of Israel. Levi unscattered had been as so many schollers cloystered toge∣ther in the Academy, So Levi. Deut. 33.10. but the Levites thus scattered, are as so many pious able Di∣vines, dispersed up and down through a Kingdom, a blessing to a Nation. 3. Argument. Ab exemplo divino. A third Argument is from Gods own ex∣ample, who best knowes the way for the pacifying of his own wrath, & he quiets himself in his executions of judgment; the Gen. 7. and 8. Chapters. old world sinnes, God is angry, the world is drowned, and God pacified. So also in the Prophet Isaiah Chap. 1. vers. 24. The Lord of hosts the mighty one of Israel saith, Ah, I will ease me of mine Aduersaries, and a∣venge me of mine Enemies. Gods avenging himself is his self-easing. Again thus in the Prophet Zachary Chap. 6. vers. 8. The An∣gell cryes unto him, saying, Behold these that go towards the North country have quiet∣ed my spirit in the North country. Whether
the black horses in the vision were Angells, or Meeds and Persians, laying wast the Babylonians which lay North from Iudea, it may be questioned, but this is certaine that Iudgment was executed, and thereby the spirit of the Lord quieted. The Appli∣cation. 1. Information. For application in the first place, this truth informs us who are friends, who ene∣mies to our English Israel, who for the pa∣cifying of wrath, and the removall of judg∣ments; those who advance and help on the execution of Iudgmēt are our friends, they who hinder are our enemies; ob∣structers of justice are State-traitors; the weedes and flags that stop the rivers make the flouds rise, the waters to overflow; and drown the Countries, and the damming up of the streames of Iustice makes the wrath of God to arise as a mighty flood of waters, and deluge like to drowne a Nation. God seemes to cry in England as once Iehu did in Iezreel, 2 King. 9.32,33. Who is one my side, who? The Eunuchs looked out at the win∣dow, and he said, Throw her down: and some of her bloud was sprinkled on the wall, and on
the horses, and he trod her under foot; their executing of Iudgment did evidence their siding with Iehu, and those in Israel, who stand for execution of Iustice, side with the God of Israel. 2. Exhorta∣tion 1. To perso∣nall executi∣on of judge∣ment. Againe in the next place this exhorts and counsells us to the execution of Iudg∣ment, and that first private and personall on our own lusts in our breasts and bosomes, lying, swearing, prophanations of Sab∣baths, breach of Covenants, uncleannesse, &c. these, these are the Acbans that trouble Israel: Covetousnesse with her self-ends and aimes, seeking great things, even in sad times, makes up the wedge of Gold, and the Silver, pride in Apparell, naked breasts, even in a Day of Humiliation, and that in the solemne Congregation (which of late mine eyes have seen, and my heart lamen∣ted) black spots to set out beauty, (It is mercy God turnes them not into blew spots, tokens of the pestilence) are as the babylonish garment, accursed things in Israel; the way to help all were for every man to mortifie his lusts by that spirit of Iudgment
and of burning, Isaiah 4.4. Were our Cor∣ruptions brought forth & arraigned as the malefactors, and by the spirit of the Lord adjudged to death, and executed, were our lusts laid on heapes as the fuell, and by the spirit of the Lord, as a flame of fire, burnt and consumed, this were the way to pacify Gods wrath, and remove his judgments: let's not wrangle with Parliament and Ar∣mies, and complaine such a Commander is unfaithfull, such a leading man carryes on his own designes, when our lusts at home, our personall corruptions are the inlets of all our miseries; yea the sinnes of inferiours God oft times punisheth with sinfull miscariages in superiours; the ake∣ing of the head is oft from taking cold in the feet, and the wheeles above in the clock stand stil, because the plummets below are down; and God gives up David to a num∣bering of the people, when the anger of the Lord was yet kindled against Israel: 2 Sam. 24.1. holi∣nesse at home gives victories abroad; Iacob clenseth his houshold from the strange Gods, bids it be cleane, Gen. 35.2. and the terrour
of the Lord was upon the cities round about him, vers. 5. Iosua was the man renouned for victories, and he is the man that saith, I and my house will serve the Lord: Iosh. 24.15. and Davids method is first to cleanse his family, and then purge the Kingdom, He that works de∣ceite shall not dwell within my house, Psal. 101.7. And then, I will early destroy all the wick∣ed of the land, &c. ver. 8. Secondly, For publick and nationall exe∣cutions of judgment, you (my Lords) are some of our State-Physitians, and King∣dom-Chirurgions, the people bring in cōplaints, make known their grievances, lay open their sores, that you might help to heale them; What if County Commit∣tees gall and tire out the people day after day, weeke after weeke, with tedious waitings, and sorely grieve them with unjust taxations? your Honours must help to ease them; if widows and orphans made so by the warres, I may call them sword widows, and sword orphans; if a company of poor maimed souldiers that once fought for their lives, now beg that
they may live, (which is neither for the honour nor incouragement of Souldiery) (you my Lords) must take some order for the releeving of them; if justice, justice be cryed for by God and the Kingdome, you are the Moseses and Iudges that must sentence them to the axe, or to the hal∣ter. For the manner how, and the motives why there should be a due execution of Iu∣stice, we may take it in these ensuing con∣siderations. Modificati∣va. 1. Sincerely. For the manner first, the execution of ju∣stice should be sincere, sincerely, in regard of its springs & aymes, the springs are zeal for God, a love of truth and justice, hatred of sinne, and a desire of welfare to Church and State; the ends should be Gods glo∣ry, the advancing of truth and peace, sup∣pressing of sinne and errour, reformation and (if it may be) salvation to such as fall under the lash of Iustice. Moses grinds to powder the golden Calf, and it was his zeale constrained him; Exod. 32.20. Phinehas thrust Zimri and Cos by through with a javelin, and
it was his zeale that fired him thereto; Numb. 25.30. Christ whipt the byers and sellers out of the Temple, and the reason was, the Ioh. 2.17. zeale of his fathers house eate him up. Iehu had a kinde of zeale too, and that in the execu∣tion of judgment upon the house of A∣hab, 2 Chron. 22.8. but his eye was upon himself, not up∣on the Lord, and for the establishing of his own Kingdome, not the Lords, he fail'd in the spring and end of action, and therefore what he doth is accompted by the Lord not zeale but murther, and God threatens to avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu, Hosea 1.4. 2. Magnani∣mous eye. Secondly, Iudgement should be execu∣ted magnanimiter, with a resolution re∣moving all blocks in the way, breaking all barres that hinder Iustice. 1. Iron barre. As first, an Iron barre of fears: The feare of man brings a snare; Prov. 29.25. What if the Popish partie should in the end prevaile? It is wisdome so to carry it, that which way soever the game goes, we may save our own stakes: thus reasons flesh and blood,
but faith and zeale soone snap this barre in sunder. 2. Golden barre. Secondly, there is a Golden barre of hopes which hinders Iustice; hopes of pre∣ferment, a high prizing of court smiles; and promises, a gaping for great places, are remora's and lets to the execution of Iustice, though the covenant engages all that have taken it, not to be swayed by feares or hopes, Dan. 11.32. yet that of Daniel is the portion of too too many, that they do wick∣edly against the Covenant, and are corrupt by flatteries; when in the meane time, the people that know their God shall be strong and doe exployts. Themistocles a Heathen may shame many a Christian, Tolle tu, ego sum Themi∣stocles. who finding a chaine of Gold in the street, would not foule his finger for it; but in an heroick Moralitie of spirit saith to another, Take thou it up, I am Themistocles. 3. Fleshie barre. A third is, a Fleshy barre of naturall or civill Relations and Ingagements, Such a man should be punished, but he is my neere Kinsman, my old Companion; An∣other
deserves to smart for his facts, but a deare friend spake for him; in such a case remember Levi, who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seene him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children, for they observed the word of the Lord and kept his Covenant, Deut. 33.9. Zeal laid aside naturall affections in Levi, when it put him upon this worke, the ex∣ecution of Iudgement. Brutus spared not his own sonnes, when they transgressed the Lawes. And Aristides was so Con∣stant and Resolute in a way of Iustice, Aristides. Citius solem de coelo, &c. that the Sunne might as easily be pulled out of the firmament, as he from his or be of Iustice. 4. Effemi∣nate barre. Lastly, there is an Effeminate barre (if I may so phrase it) of groundlesse pitie, that is an enemy to Iustice; pitie is due to men, but Iustice to the troublers of Israel, and pitie to one, may be crueltie to thousands. Augustine: saevit in vul∣nus, ut homo sanetur; si vulnus palpe∣tur, homo perdetur. The Chirurgion is cruell to the wound, that he may save the man, and kindnesse to a disease, may prove the death to the
Patient. Moses was the meekest man on earth in his dayes, a man full of pitie, and yet he hangs up many, very many of the heads of the people against the Sunne be∣fore the Lord. 3. Speedily, Thirdly, Iudgement must be executed celeriter speedily, without delayes: Let Iudgement be speedily executed, Ezra 7.26. Execute Iudgement in the morning, Ier. 21.12. Evening-justice, Noon-justice, is not so seasonable, so acceptable to the Lord as Morning-justice; delayes break the spirits of the innocent, harden the hearts, and strengthen the hands of the guiltie. 4. Proporti∣onably. Fourthly, Iustice and judgement should be administred proportionaliter, in a pro∣portion to the nature and degree of crimes and facts, sometiems death, sometimes banishment, Ezra 7.26. in one case confiscation of goods, in another imprisonment. I need not minde your Honours of a mixture of mercy with justice, the Iudges robes, though red, have some streamings of white about them; and David saith, he will sing of mercy, of
Iudgement, Psal. 101.1. as occasion serves execute justice, and pronounce sentence yea unto death, though Augustus-like, you doe it with teares in your eyes. 5. Imparti∣ally. Lastly, execute judgement impartiali∣ter, impartially and throughly, in regard of persons and things: to hang a poore souldier now and then for running from his Colours, who was perhaps afraid of being starved at his Colours, may have a piece of Iustice in it, but it was Sauls spa∣ring of Agag, and the fat among the flocke, that rent his Kingdome from him, and gave it to his neighbour better then he. 1 Sam. 15.28. Salomons throne was supported by Lions, and it is Couragious execution of lustice, that holds up thrones and kingdomes. Motives. The Considerations, inforcing the dutie of executing Iudgement, may be briefly these. Gods Ap∣probation. First, Gods approbation: Phinehas exe∣cutes Iudgement, and it is accounted to him for righteousnesse, vers. 31. Fasting, praying, and hearing are good, and execution of
judgement is good also; 1 Sam. 15. Sauls obedience in slaying Agag, had been better then his sa∣crifice. Iosh. 7. Ioshua rends his cloathes, lyes on his face untill evening, but all in vaine, whilest the accursed thing remaines in the Camp of Israel. 2. Gods Re∣muneration. Secondly, Consider Gods remuneration, his rewarding those that do execute judg∣ment: the Lord gives unto Phinehas his co∣venant of peace, and to his seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting Priest∣hood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Is∣rael, Numb. 25.12,13. Mol. in loc. Cum De∣us approbet, & praemiis ornet hoc fa∣ctum, exem∣plum hoc om∣nibus guber∣natoribus proponitur, ut iusto zelo arderent ad∣versus turpi∣tudinem, &c. and so holds out an example, and incouragement to all in au∣thoritie, to burne with zeale for God a∣gainst his enemies: God will be no mans debtor, whoever honours him he will honour: and would you (my Lords) Exod. 1. alluded to. as the Hebrew midwives feare God, and preserve the Males in Israel, the Cause of God, and of his people, God would build you Hou∣ses, raise your Families, and spread your Honours.
3. Gods Pacifi∣cation. Thirdly, Execution of Iudgmēt for God, is the pacification of wrath in God; Hence the Lord by the Prophet, Ier. 5.1. Run ye to and fro through the streets of Ierusalem, and see now, and know, and seeke in the broad places thereof, to wit, to the gates where were the Seats of Iustice, if you can finde a man, (that is) a publique man zealous for God, if there be any that executeth judg∣ment, and seeketh the truth, and I will pardon it. Whence we may argue thus; If one such man saves a Ierusalem, and that by promise, then many such men might save a Nation: There is a fire of civill war kindled in England, still burning in the bowels of it, and for my part, I thinke there is but two bloods will quench it, the blood of Christ and of his desperate ene∣mies: free grace in God hath powred out the one, full Iustice in your Honours should help to powre out the other. The sacred Story in the Old Testament all a∣long, discovers sinne to be the make-bate, and execution of Iudgement to be the
make-peace between God and Israel; and the judiciall Laws for the policie of the Iewes, however abrogated, yet had they an appendix of morall equitie, and so a perpetuall obligation in them. 4. Hopes and feares. Fourthly, Feares and hopes, should spur on to the execution of judgement: feare we may, when we remember Gods curse on Ahab, who cryed my brother Benhadad, the curse was this, Because thou hast let goe out of thy hand, a man whom I appointed to ut∣ter destruction, therfore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people, 1 King, 20.42. The acomplishment whereof we finde, when the dogs licked up the blood of Ahab, according to the word of the Lord which he spake, Chap. 22.38. Should the blood∣thirsty enemies break in upon us, and spill our blood as water upon the ground, ra∣vish our wives and daughters, and slay our tender infants, before our faces, then would our lives goe for their lives, and our people for their people. Probably the way to sheath one sword were to draw another, and if the sword of Iustice did more, the
sword of warre would doe lesse; the Phy∣sitian by way of revulsion stops bleeding by letting bloud; and did England bleed enough in the Malignant veine, we have cause to think that other sad Issues of blood would be stopt and staunched. And again hope we may for peace, for plentie, for all prosperitie, and that by promise upon the due execution of Iudgment; If you through∣ly execute judgement between a man and his neighbour, then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers for ever and ever, Ier. 7.5.7. We dwell yet in a Land flowing with milk and ho∣ney, in a healthy and wealthy Nation, gi∣ven to our fathers, let us not loose England for want of Iustice. 5. It eviden∣ceth the sin∣ceritie of de∣votions. Fifthly and lastly; All devotions, yea, fa∣sting and praying, are but formall and hypo∣criticall, without execution of judgement; Hence Gods expostulation with the peo∣ple, Zach. 7.5. When you fasted and mourned, did you at all fast unto me, even unto me? their fasting was no fasting in Gods accompt, and the reason is, because they did not exe∣cute
true judgement, vers. 9. to fast and set Naboth on high, crushing the innocent, is Iesabelish and devilish, to fast and spare Agags, our fatest lusts unmortified, and the great firebrands of State unpunished, is but to play the hypocrite and the Pharisee. My Lords, we are cast upon troublous times, which are trying times, and as Hie∣rom saith of Iob, Hier. Haec ei contigerunt, ut appareret foris homini∣bus, quod in∣trinsecus erat apud Deum. all those evils befell him, that he might appeare to be outwardly to men, what he was inwardly to God, so the Lord goes on in such a way of provi∣dence, as that the thoughts of many hearts will be discovered, and it will appeare who are for God, and who for Baal. It is sad to thinke how some renowned Wor∣thies, L. Brooke, Mr. Hamden, &c. who travelled with your Honours in this worke of Reformation, have layed down their lives in the quarrell; it is sadder yet to see that others like the Neh. 3.5. Nobles of Te∣coa have not put their necks to the worke of the Lord; Nay, their heads, hearts, and hands, their lands, and their lives are layed out against the Lord, and against his cause; yet ride you on patiently (ye men of Honor)
gird your swords upon your thighes, ex∣ecute judgement in the feare of the Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart; so God did command the Levites, 2 Chron. 19.9. Go on not in your own names or strength, but in the name and strength of the Lord your God; let there be a holy ambition, and a pious emulation among you, to be each more active, more helpfull then other for the building of the walles, yea, the Temple of Ierusalem, for setling the af∣faires of State and Church, and in the things of God, his worship and Church∣government be not swayed by subtle insi∣nuations, seeming holinesse, personall pre∣engagements or popular politick Argu∣ments on the one side, or on the other, but what shall be found to have Gods Royall stamp of Ius Divinum, be it Formaliter, by expresse precept, or constant Apostolicall practice, or consequeutive only, by a neces∣sitie of rationall deduction, feare not to give it your politicall stamp of civill sanction, whatsoever is commanded by the God of hea∣ven, let it be diligently done, for the house of
the God of heaven, Ezra 7.23. Your ene∣mies are engaged, and you had need be re∣solute, your Arke and their Dagon will scarce stand together, and in probabilitie, either your sword must cut down them, or theirs you; should you hold your peace, and stay in the cause, yet (as Mordecai to He∣ster) deliverance shall come from some other place, but you and your fathers houses shall be destroyed, and who knowes whether God hath not reserved you in the Kingdome for such a time as this? Hest. 4.14. The Kingdome, nay the three kingdomes upon the point have much what entrusted your Honours with their lands, liberties, lives, and souls also; yea, with all that concernes them and their po∣sterities, therefore be faithfull to the death, and the Lord of Lords shall give you the crowne of Life. I beseech you execute judgement, as you will answer it at the Day of Iudgement. And now could I lift up my voyce as a trumpet, had I the shrill cry of an angell, which might be heard from East, to West,
from North to South, in all the corners of the Kingdome, my note should be, exe∣cution of judgement, execution of judge∣ment, execution of judgement, that is Gods way to pacifie Gods wrath; Then stood up Phinehas and executed judge ment, and so the plague was stayed. FINIS.
