S5257 E200_46 99860196 112310
A Renowned SPEECH Spoken to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, May, 28 at the last great Assembly of the Gentry and Commonalty of Yorkshire, by that most Judicious Gentleman Sir Phillip Stapleton, One of the Committees appointed by the Ho∣nourable House of Commons to attend his Majesties pleasure, and to give Information to the Members of the said House of all passages that concerne the good of the King and Kingdome. Wherein is declared the great uncertainty of his Maje∣sties undertakings, the said undertakings not being se∣conded with the unite applause and joynt Assi∣stance of the whole Kingdome. Likewise discribing the manifold and innumerable dan∣gers that attends Civill discord, and home-bred con∣tention, shewing by Presidents of Yorke and Lan∣caster, what cruell effects such designes produce both to the King and Subject. London, Printed for J. Horton, 1642. June 2.
A Renowned Speech Spoken to the Kings most Ex∣cellent Maiesty, at the last great As∣sembly of the Gentry and Com∣monalty of Yorkshire, by that most judicious Gentleman Sir Phillip Stapleton. Most gracious Soveraigne, LEt not mee incurre your Maiesties displeasure, if I that am one of the poo∣rest of the Subiects pre∣sume to speake some few words unto my Lord the King. According to your Maiesties Com∣mand we the Gentry and Commonal∣ty
of Yorkshire are here met to know your Maiesties pleasure, and knowing to fulfill what we with Honour may performe, or with Loyalty execute, nor have we brought with us the least thought of such a feare since. 'Twere disloyalty in the highest Degree to thinke a Prince so gracious, (from whom we have received such large ex∣pressions of Royall Love, and Fa∣vour) should Command any thing not sutable to Law and to our Consci∣ences, farre be it from us to thinke it, onely let me take Lycence with your Royall favour to tell what some men mutter. As touching your Maiesties Demands to have a guard of Horse and Foote to waite upon your Maiesty. First, that the malignant Party hath counselled your Maiesty to take this course, and under this pretence to gaine a power of Horse and foote which should be imployed against the Parliament.
We hope much better, nor can We give just, credit to such vaine, Re∣ports, yet should We with our Persons and Estates purchase a ruine to our selves and Kingdome, it would be a sad reward for all our Service. Oh my dread Lord, Let but your serious Judgement call to mind what sad Disasters, home∣bred strife doth breed in private Fami∣lies, and if in them what mischiefe in a Kingdome, a Kingdome that is divi∣ded into as many factions as there is Counties, the Church, the State, the Court, the City, and the County too full of dissention, let your Maiesty call into your mind the Hellish Plots the Papists daily layd to ruine and destroy, your Royall Father, could they have him and yet love you so deare believe it nor my Lord, their slattering tongues and their dissembling Traines are inwardly a poyson; their Oyly Councels seeme
to quench this Fire, but with that oyle they doe your fall conspire, cast backe your Eye to Yorke and Lancaster, how many Nobles lost their Noble Lives, how many Subiects paid their lives as Tribute to their then doubtfull King how was this Kingdome wasted and destroyed, and in the end when warre did cease to frowne, he lost a Kingdome, to obtaine a Crowne. Besides great King, admit a Guard were raisd as is intended, (depending on your Royall Wisdome in the use of them) what could such Forces doe a∣gainst Kingdome, what can rawe Soul∣diers doe against those thousands of ex∣pert Souldiers, which have taken Oath to defend your Royall Maiesty and the high Court of Parliament, but if your Maiesty shall put your selfe in opposi∣on, and raise Forces against your Loy∣all and obedient Subiects, they ought in Lawes of Nature, both humane
and divine, for to defend and make re∣sistance and should this come to passe which God forbid) Tillage and Trade must cease, Forraigne Commerce and Traffique must have end, and Hostilli∣ty must be the practice of this King∣dome, both to defend your Sacred Ma∣iesty from your Domesticke Enemies, the Papists, (which but assembled by your gracious Licence would soone de∣clare themselves your owne and King∣domes greatest Enemies) and to secure the Kingdome from the invasion of Forraigne Enemies, that dayly watch advantage to get a footing in this fruit∣full Ile, and to suppresse the Gospell, and it is greatly to be feared that by their Grand incendiaries heere, they are the chiefest Authors of these great distractions. I feare I have displeas'd your Maie∣sty, if so I crave your gratious pardon tis my true Love and zealous Loyaltie
to your Sacred Maiesty, and this my Native Kingdome, that makes me bold to presse your Maiesty, beside the inter∣rest and assurance I have of the fidelity of that great Councell, whereof by the favour of my Country, I was chosen a member, which trust I will till death faithfully discharge both to your Sa∣cred Maiestie, and this my Countrie. FINIS.
