T1516 669.f.25[76] 99871199 163881
To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Addresse of your Majesties most Loyal Subjects of the Clergy in the County of KENT. Most Gracious Soveraign, AS we cannot look, but with an holy amazement upon that Divine hand of Providence, which with most admirable and indiscernable progresses hath restored your Sacred Majesty to your undoubted Birthright, and into the arms and hearts of your loyal Subjects; so we conceive it to be our duty, to express unto the world our abundant thankfulness to that omnipotent God, and testifie our joy in that miraculous and happy Restitution: It being evidently and eminently apparent, that not by might, nor by power, but by his Spirit hath the Lord brought you forth through variety of difficulties and oppositions, as our Zerubbabel, and hath made the Great Mountain a Plain before your Sacred feet; in whom we see concentred all those Excellencies which we are confident will, through Gods mercy, make this Church and Nation under your Majesties Government and protection compleatly happy. And as we never did formerly make the least Addresses to those prodigious Usurpers, which had involved this Church and Kingdom in divers Labyrinths of wo and misery, and well-nigh blasted the most-flourishing and Catholique Religion, — and the best constituted Monarchy upon Earth: So we must needs be sensible of this blessed alteration, under the warmth and spreading rayes of your Majesties benigne and most auspicious constellation, whereby our stifled hopes have recovered such strength, as to revive us into an expectation, that your incomparable piety and wisdom will restore and establish the purity of Religion, together with that Primitive and Apostolique Government which is most agreeable to the Word of God, whereby this glorious Church and Kingdom shall be again the astonishment of our adversaries, and the rejoycing of all sincere and faithfull Christians, both at home and abroad. Wherein as you will appear the true Defender of the Faith, so it will remain as an indelible character, and eternal monument of your admirable wisdom, and singular goodness. And we cannot but with all demonstrations of joy, and expressions of thankfulness to your Majesty, bless and praise the God of Heaven, who hath put it into your Royall heart to appear so seasonably and zealously in the Cause of God, against the Viciousness and Prophaneness of this Age. And we daily pray, that God who hath stirred up your Divine Soul, will also enable your Royal Hands to obviate, and give a perfect check to those Debauches which are so much a dishonour to God, a scandal to the Nation, and a reproach to the Gospel which we profess. And now, Dread Soveraign, in all humility we begg leave with our hearts and hands, unanimously and cheerfully to testifie and subscribe our Obedience and Loyalty: And though our hands be weak, yet we shall lay forth our hearts in our prayers (which are the Churches best and only weapons) to the God of Heaven, That he (who in such a continued series of wonders, hath hitherto preserved your Majesty from the hands of your Enemies, and now restored you to your Regal Throne in Peace) will be pleased to bless you with length of dayes, and Crown you with his loving kindnesse and tender mercies, and be a wall of fire round about you, to scare away all Foraign Invaders, and preserve you in safety from Domestique Conspiracies, and so fasten you as a nail in a sure place, that your Throne being established in righteous∣ness, your Crown may never be shaken, till you change it for that Immarcessible Crown of glory which is prepared in the highest Heavens for all those that love the second coming of the Lord JESUS. This Addresse was presented and read to his Royal Majesty, on Tuesday the 24 of this instant July, by several MINISTERS of the said County, some of whose Names are hereunto annexed. John Lee of South-fleet. Thomas Morris of Ash. Robert Hasselwood of Sutton at Hone. Henry Cunningham of North-fleet. Samuel Grymes of Hadlow. Thomas Stansall of Longfield. Richard Bosse of Seavenoke. John Stevens of Seale. Francis Collins of Norkhols. Samuel Sharp of Sundridge. John Beadle of Eynsford. Walter Drury of Sandherst. John Cottingham of Halsted. Robers Mills of Chelsfield. James Hickford of Igtham. Edward Clerke of Cheevening. John Codd of Leyburn. Thomas Brown of Farningham. John Lingue of Yalden. Isaac Sanderson of Plumstead. George Eves of Hartley. James Peate of Bidborough. Edward Master of Kingsdown. John Stileman of Tunbridge. William Lister of Melton. Thomas Plume of Greenwich. Robert Litler of Deptford. Thomas Depup of Crayford. Thomas Smoult of Depup. Edward Archbole of Trottescliffe. Robert Beadle of Wilmington. John Stacey of Rydley. Thomas Lee of Leigh. Thomas Jones of Nusted. Oliver North of Teston.
