T2614A R185626 43077710 151824
A True COPY of a LETTER FROM His Majesty's Camp BETWEEN Mecklin and Vilvoord IN FLANDERS. July 22. Written by a Gentleman of Quality in the Army, to a Friend of his in London. SIR, ON Tuesday last, being the 18th. Instant, the King im∣mediately after Dinner, re∣ceived Advice that some French Squadrons began to appear on the Hills before the Camp: Also that morning we heard that the French were in Motion, though it was not known which way. That morning I had rid out with the King to the end of the Left Wing of our Camp, and I heard his Majesty ask, What are those Squa∣drons, seeing some at a good distance, and which no body else would take no∣tice of; but about three his Majesty got on Horse-back, and soon disposed the Army into its due order, for receiving the Enemy if they advanc'd. All that Evening we beheld the Enemy gent∣ly approaching towards us; and our Ar∣my as well as theirs lay that night un∣der their Arms in the open Field, with∣out Tents or any refreshment. His Ma∣jesty also lay that night in one of his Coaches in his Clothes; the next morn∣ing we beheld the French Squadrons and Batalions nearer to us, expecting to receive them from the Ground where we had posted our selves, and where we had towards the Right cast up a good Trench in the night time. It is since said that the French did little expect to find us there in the morning, but thought we should retreat in the night, because their Numbers were so much superior to ours; for they were esteemed to be 80000. whereas our Army, after the Duke of Wirtemberg's Detachment, and 10 Batalions more to Liege from Hoperting Camp, was not thought to have been above 45000. which Number in the Muster-Roll seldom gives above 40000 effective Men, as some tell me. A∣bout half an hour after Four that morn∣ing our Cannon began to play, and in a little time they returned upon us, both of us playing from different Batteries till after eight, and then our small Shot began to Fire, and we drove the French out of a Village they had possessed be∣fore
a Village they had possessed before us; which Attack was led on by the Duke of Friesland; then they came on more to∣wards the Right, but seeing our Trenches that we had cast up, they retreated; af∣ter this their main Attack was on our Right Wing, which was continued for about five Hours, and our Men often re∣pulsed them with great bravery and re∣solution; but they still supplying their Men with fresh Batalions to support them as they drew off, or filed before ours; and our Foot being at last spent for want of more reserves, and some Horse on our side not behaving them∣selves so well as thy should, the French at last broke in upon us, and our Men gave way, so that we lost the Field of Battle, and retreated in some disorder, having left many of our Cannon be∣hind us. We took the Duke of Berwick, and some others, Prisoners, who were sent some hours before to Leewe. Count Solmes, as he was sitting upon the ground, at the Head of Brigadier Earl's Regi∣ment, had one Leg about the Ancle much shattered and contused by a Ca∣non Bullet, which also wounded the inward part of his other Thigh, of which wounds we hear he since died: The Duke of Ormond having his Horse shot under him, and his Groom being then out of the way, with his other Horses, he went and charged on Foot, and was taken Prisoner, but one of the Wretches who took him, drew a Dagger and run him through the Neck, of which Wound he is like to recover. Mr. Zeulestein, and Major General Scravenmore are also Prisoners. My Lord Portland is Wound∣ed in one of his Fingers of each hand, but that hinders not my Lord's great and continual application to business. The French have no great reason to boast of a Victory; for Monsieur Gattinier tells me, That there are 28000 dead on the place of Battel, whereof we as yet reckon them to have lost but 21000. An Aid du Camp, of the Elector of Bavaria, was sent hither last Night to inform His Majesty that the French have sent 6000 Wounded Soldiers to Namur, and above 600 Wounded Officers, besides what they have sent to Mons and other Gari∣sons: And instead of pursuing us from Neer Hespen, or advancing at all sinc the Battle, they are retreated towards Tongres: They have lost Forty Officers of very great Quality, whereof seven Brigadier Generals; whereas we have not lost so much as one Colonel or Ge∣neral Officer, besides those mentioned to be taken Prisoners. We have lost only the name of a Vi∣ctory; but the real Advantage and Ho∣nour lies wholly on our side. The Court is all one, just as full as before. The strength of our Defence we wholly owe, under God, to his most Excellent Ma∣jesty, of whose Galantry and Conduct the French Officers are so very sensible, that several of them have said to Mon∣sieur Zeulestins Aid du Camp, who has been among them to see his Master since the Fight, That if our King were theirs they should adore him. His Ma∣jesty on such Occasions is indefatigable, and can live on Horse-back longer than the strongest of his Followers. He led up himself divers Attacks, and rallyed our Men, that would otherwise have fled. He had one Bullet struck on his Scarfe about his Middle, but God be thanked did his Majesty no harm: A∣nother Bullet went through his Peruke and did no hurt. It strikes me still with Horror to think to what Danger the Safety of all Europe was exposed in his Majesty's Person. We are now encamp'd between two Rivers near Vilvoord. And this day my Lord Athlone, and General Talmash joyned us with their Army, which they had brought from about Diest. The Duke of Wirtemberg is ordered to encamp four or five Miles off, here being not room e∣nough to receive him: And we do, or shall soon find our selves much stronger than before. I shall only add, That with the extraordinary Fatigue of that terrible Day, his Majesty had indeed lost much of that Plumpness and Ruddiness which he had before. The whole Day of Battle and the Night following, when he lay upon Straw in a little Cottage, near Tirlemont, his Majesty did not cough at all; but he was the worse for his not coughing. Now he begins already to return to his pristine Vigour and good Complexion, which I never saw his Ma∣jesty to have better than before the Fight. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Hodgkin. 1693.
