w3211 e1479_4 99867655 119976
WESTROW REVIVED. A Funerall Poem without Fiction. Composed by Geo: Wither Esq. That GOD may be glorified in his Saints; That the memory of Thomas Westrow Esq; may be preserved, and that others by his exemplary Life and Death may be drawn to imitation of his Vertues. Blest are the Dead who dye in CHRIST; For, from their Labours they do rest; And, whether they do live or dye, His Saints are precious in his eye. To the READER. READER, peruse this thorow: For, to Thee It most pertains, though WESTROW named be; And, gives (as by the way) some short hints, there, To what Intents, He, chiefly doth appear, And whereof, if good heed shall not be took Somwhat, ere long, more fully will be spoke. Both Moses, and the Prophets, many a day Have spoken; and a Greater one then they. Hear them: For when GOD sendeth by the DEAD, His Messages will come with much more Dread Then Comfort; and few men; with good effect, Shall hear these, the former do neglect. Be wise, or else; But, Ile, now say no more, The Feet of messengers are at the door. LONDON: Printed by F: Neile in Aldersgatestreet: 1653.
WESTROVV REVIVED. The first CANTO. The Authors musings here are shown The Night, ere ought, to him was known Of Westrowes death; whereof, the Morrow Assur'd him, to his greater sorrow: Then, that which he hath more to say, Is put off, to another day. TWas midnight; and, I had my self undrest, In hope, the nights remainder, for my rest Had been allowd; and, in that hope, all those Distractings, which my minde might discompose Quite threw aside, and hastned to the place, Where, that refreshment, offer'd an embrace. But, in sleeps posture, ere I down was laid, A Thought, within my heart, start up, and said, Westrowe, thy best, and most deserving Friend, Lies feeble, and approaching to his end, By thee unvisited (though two days, now Are past, since of his weakness thou didst know.) How, canst thou answer such a grosse neglecting, Of one, so well, so truly thee affecting? A second Thought thus answer'd thereunto, (To make amends) to morrow I will go
In hope, (since I, for this neglect am griev'd) A just excuse, will kindly be receiv'd; And, that Love-reall, shall not through defect That's accidental, suffer by suspect. To morrow, said a third thought, comes too late; His Lifes Commission, is quite out of date; And, that, which might have been enjoy'd to day, Is, by procrastination, lost for aye. Thou, too too long, thy purpose hast forbore, And, never now, shalt hear, or see him more. Yet, be not grieved, that it happens thus, For, he is safe. And, as good Lazarus Lost nothing, by a sickness unto death, Save only that suspention of his breath For some few days, which did a means provide, Whereby, both GOD, and he, were glorifide In greater measure; so, it may, be thou, Shalt hereby, have occasions offered, now, Of that, whereby, hereafter may be made Advantages, which could not else be had. Advantages! cride out, another Thought, Alas! what good effect can forth be brought By such an Accident, if I shall hear That, to be true, which yet, is but my fear? How can my pretermission ought produce Of any future comfortable use? Or, to what likely profitable end, Can such a comfortles privation tend? In Fancies Tennescourt, thus, to and fro My Thoughts were tost, and plaid at hazzard so, That very much distemper'd I became, With that unlook'd for, and unpleasing game. Their silent Dialogue made such impressions Upon my heart, and so inhanc'd my passion That, all the night ensuing they did keep My mind on him, and bard mine eyes from sleep.
I, likewise, have so frequently perceiv'd My souls presagings true, that I beleev'd This sad surmize; and thereon did proceed To muse, as if he had been dead indeed And buried too. From whence, broak in upon me, Such apprehensions of the Favours done me, And of his kindnesses in my oppressions, That, they exacted from me those confessions Which in the following pages wil ensue To give, what to his memory is due. Dear GOD! if humane mercy so indears So swet, so pretious, if that Love appears (And so obliging) which enjoy'd may be By Creatures! what is that, which flows from thee? If, little sparklings, may beget a flame, What may be thought of that, from whence they came? And, why from him should not my soul ascend, To clasp thy love, oh my Eternal Friend! Who wert, and art, and wilt continue so, When all the World shall into nothing go! Some will at first, perhaps, with prejudice Peruse, what in this Poeme I expresse, On this Occasion; judging, that, hereby I, somewhat would, beyond the verity, Insinuate; to make small things, appear More in the show, then they in substance are. But they shall see at last, that, I pursue My Theame no farther then I make it true: And, bear me witnes, ere this hath an end, That, I have done but what becomes a Friend: That, real cause, occasion'd my unrest: And, that, of him, my thoughts are here exprest, Without hyperboes; without devising Or adding, what the World cals Poetizing: And, that, I rather put upon the score Lesse, then I ow his memory, then more.
But, to the matter: being full of grief, By what my fear had rais'd up to belief, To say, within my self, I thus began; Westrowe, that noble single hearted man, Whom GOD, had in a time of need bestown To be my Friend, is now no more his own. Alas! nor mine: Westrowe, that heretofore, Was, to the Widdow, Fatherless, and poor, A Husband, Friend, and Father, them to feed, To cloath, and harbor, in the time of need. Westrowe, GODS faithfull Almner; he, from whom No needy soul, who for relief did come, Went empty (if his needines requir'd, Undoubtedly, the succor he deserv'd) And, then, as GOD doth, he did alms bestow Upon the good, and bad, on Friend, and Foe. Yea, and when none did ask, what he could grant, Sought where to find out those, who stood in want: And, often, was directed unto them, By Providence, in acceptable time. That Westrowe, now, hath left us to bemoan Our losses. For thereby, he can have none, Nor meant us any: But, is gone away That, our contentment, he make perfect may By his well-being, in a safe possessing, His portion, in an everlasting Blessing: And, that, we may look off, from him, to heed His Love, from whom, all mercies do proceed. Westrowe is gone, and we remaining have No more of him, but what is in his Grave: There, now, he resteth, and exchanged hath Life mortifide, for an inlivening death. And, him I do behold in contemplation, So represented, by transfiguration, As having laid that earthly vail aside (Which from the World, his better parts did hide)
That, I will now disclose them; therefore, stay And, know him Reader, ere thou go away. Nor few, nor mean Advantages he had Relating to this life, But, these were made Of small account, with him; and, used so, As if with them, he little had to do, Except, for others sakes: For, he denide Himself, to all things, but, Christ crucifide; And, in respect of him, plac'd those among Such despicable things, as drosse and dung; He therefore, let them pass, to be forgot; And, will not mention, what he prized not. He, living, walk'd upright, in crooked ways, And, chose the best part, in the worst of days. He, dying, cheerfully, himself denide, That (being thereby wholly nudifide From all that was his own), he might be clothd, With what he lov'd, instead of what he lothd. And, he that can throw off, such Rags as these, Shall find himself, exceedingly at ease. How, can I know this, some, perhaps, may say, If he be dead, and I now far away: Thus; when I saw him last, I, saw him then Himself undressing, from that bane of men Self-love, and selfness; and I know, he never Would fall from his intention, and endevour, Till that were done. For, I was always neer him In spirit, though, I did not see, nor hear him. We did communicate (when not by quill, Or with our tongues) in spirit, and in will As Angels do: yea, many times, when we In words and terms, appear'd to disagree, (Because of that defect which is in those) Ev'n then, in will, and spirit, we did close: And, they whom such experiments acquaints With that communion which belongs to Saints
Do know, that men may credibly aver, Sometimes, what they did neither see, nor hear: And, worthy my regard it doth not seem, What, others, of this mistery shall deem. This confidence of Him, is but the same Which he exprest of me, when last I came To visit him; at which time, I receiv'd Assurance, of what is of him beleev'd: For, these, the last words were, which from his tongue, I heard; and, they, from this occasion sprung. I told him, that I might be faulty judg'd, (Considering how to him I was oblig'd) That, nor by conversation, nor by pen, I, lately had with him, (like other men) My thoughts communicated; but persu'd My own affairs, as if to be renu'd, Our Friendship, needed not those complements VVhich discontinance of respect prevents. To such effect I spake; whereto, he gave This answer (which I oft repeated have VVith much contentment;) trouble not thy self, VVith needless things, we are now past the shelf, That ship-wracks friendship. That, which seems neglect To others; and begets a dis-respect, Secures you more to me, then if you had Left your affairs at hazzard; visits made; And added to your frequent visitations, Acknowledgments of Debts, and Obligations As others do▪ It would not give me more Assurance of you, then I had before. For, my own heart, hath so informed me, Of what you are; and of what you shall be VVith an assurance, so undubitable, (And everlastingly irrevocable) That, whatsoever shall of you be told, (Though we each other never more behold
Nor line comes from you) I, shall live, and dye, More confident, of your sincerity Then, if it were expressed every day, By all that you, or other men could say. These words (though mine) give, really, the sence, VVherein, he did express his confidence: In this sence, his last words to me he spoke; And, so, my everlasting leave I took. I think, it may inferred be, from hence, Things may be known, beyond the reach of sence, VVithout corporall presence; and that we Of some things, though but part of them we see, May know the rest: He, that doth see me go, And hear me speak, may, without question, know That, I have heart, and lungs; although his eye Ne'r saw them, or the place in which they lye: And, he, that knows but what he hears, and sees, Is from a beast removed so fevv degrees, That, I shall mention unto him, in vain VVhat to the Saints communion doth pertain. Only to those I, therefore vvill proceed, To speak, vvho can beleeve, as vvell read: To be, he rather labor'd, then to seem; And, sought his honor in self-disesteem. He vvanted not repute, of being good, Save, vvhere his meaning vvas misunderstood; VVhich seldom hapned, but, vvhere prepossession Gain'd entrance, by a mis begot suspition, And vvhat he suffered by it, did produce, Effects, vvhich vvere to him of some good use: And such as gave sometimes occasions, too, Of that, vvhich good to other men vvill do. Such, as did knovv him vvell, knevv none to be A truer Friend, or better man then he. He, by youths frailties, learned to improve In riper years, th'increase of Faith, and Love;
And, by his life, exemplified that, Of which the Formalist, doth only prate His Charity, was large; yet, what he did As much as might be, he from others hid. For, often, his misdoings, he would tell, But, seldom mention, wherein, he did well. He took more comfort, in a needfull giving, Then pleasure, in large benefits receiving. And (liking not their thrift, who do defer Almsdeeds, untill their treasures useless are Unto themselves) he did, by timely giving, Forgiving, and a seasonable relieving, Shew, he beleev'd, that, thereby leave he shall, More to his childe, then if he lest him all. And, that, he fear'd, should he not fructifie, (When, in his hungry members, Christ, pass'd by) Till, that which may be call'd his own time, came, He, and the cursed figtree, were the same. He, in his judgment, joyned not in one, With some good men: But, disagreed with none So far, as to infringe the band of peace; Or, hinder Christian charities increase: Because, he knew, the wisest, here belowe, Know but in part, the things they ought to know: And, that, to clear his sight, GOD, now and then, Did leave a darkness upon other men; Yea, and sometimes, a frowardness, to prove And exercise, his patience. and his love. The Christian liberty, he did profess, Without allowing of licentiousness. He, labour'd, that, the Conscience might be free, From force, (yea though depravd it seem'd to be,) Because, he saw more hypocrites thereby Then Converts made; and, that hypocrisie Is worse then error; For, it seldom burns, For Conscience; and, to GOD, as rarely turns.
Because likewise, he was not vvithout fears, That, some, vvho burn'd in zeal, to weed out tares, Might purposely, or causually, instead Of that which they pretended forth to weed, Either pluck up the wheat, or do it hurt, By careless treading it, into the durt. For, hardly, can distinguishment be made Twixt Ray, and Wheat, when they are in the blade. Moreover, since the owner of the Corn, Commanded, that such weeds should be forborn Till Harvest, to assent, he was afraid, That, this Commandment should be disobaid, Lest, to himself, he might contract the guilt Of blood, that may be innocently spilt. And, from this tendernes, some took offence, Not justly given, or arising thence. If, he sometimes, did put himself to trouble, By vainly building, with wood, straw, or stubble, (As all men do) which quite away consumes To nothing, when the fiery tryall comes; The losse was his, which only did redound To losse, of what, was better lost, then found. He was but man; and man at best, is light, And must have grains allow'd to make him weight. As he had fallings, and his humane failings, So he had also risings, and prevailings; And all GODS Saints have lesse advantag'd been, By their own righteousnes, then by their sin: For, both must be disclaim'd, and they brook worst, And find it hardest, to renounce the first. He, by stil cleaving to the true foundation, (And gratious Author of our preservation) Found himself safe, when all those works were gone, Which he had vainly builded thereupon. And was well pleas'd to see that turn'd to smoke, Wherein, he, formerly had pleasure took.
Which▪ vvere it heeded vvell, vvould (sans all doubt) Conclude those Quarrels, which arise about Our superstructures, and must be denide As useles, when by fire they shall be tride. To truth essentiall, he did firm adhear Although sometimes, in termes, he did appear To leave it: And, when thither he retired, Where, he in quiet privacy, expired; His mind, he so compos'd, did so confute All self-mistakings, by a self-dispute; And, so examined, and so repented, All, whereto by mistakes he had assented, Unwarrantably (whether, it related To ought which had been publickly debated, Or privatly; For Church, or Common-weal For GOD or men.) And, there, so setled all His Interests; that vvith a quiet mind, He did enjoy the peace, he sought to find; And▪ unto GOD, a resignation made, Of will, opinions, and of all he had: Even of his selfnes; and therein, found more Enjoyment, then, in all the world before. His body, was consumed, by the zeal He bore to GODS house, and this Common-weal, (And, by foreseeing, that he might outlive, The honour of that Representative (Of which he was a Member,) For, when he And I, our thoughts confer'd, we might foresee, That, in a short time (as my muse foretold, Some moneths before it came) that happen would Which now is come to passe, although those few, Who to the Publike Interest were true, Had neither counsel, nor endeavour spar'd, To help keep off the mischief that was fear'd. Ere, therefore, actually it did ensue, Tir'de out, with vain endeav'rings, he withdrew▪
A place for his retirement he had chose, Near to the Banks of Thame, vvhere backvvard flovvs, The Tide at highest, up against the stream; That, he might neither be too far from them, To vvhom he had Relations, nor too nigh To such as might disturb his privacy. There, what he could not other waves promote, He sought to further by a zealous Vote. There, private prayers, offered he at home, That, GOD himself would (for the time to come) Assume the Work, and call in those thereto Who, might accomplish, what they could not do. The World, thus left He, er'e it him forsook: Against the Flesh, the Spirits part he took; And by their combatings, attain'd to have A Resurrection, er'e he had a Grave. But, lo, their long fought Battel novv is past, The Spirit triumphs, and the flesh, at last By yeelding to be conquered, hath vvon, More, then by being victor, it had done; And now is lodg'd, in her withdrawing-room, To rest, untill the tiumph-day shall come. There, from it labors, let it therefore, cease; There, let it lye in hope, and rest in peace, Till, to a better life, that Flesh, and we, Rais'd by a second Resurrection be There to appear, where we shall fully know What is but darkly, apprehended now: Where, we shall see the root of all those things, Whence flow our needless bitter Quarrellings; And, where, accordingly we shall receive, To what we acted, or, as we beleeve. Oh! come LORD JESUS come, and fetch us thithes▪ Gather thy Saints, and chosen-ones together; And, mean time, in that Saint be glorifi'd For whose commemoration I provide.
By thine, and their examples, who do follow Their steps, Oh! so inform us, how to hallow Our hearts, so cleanse our hands, and guide our feet, That, they now gone before, and we may meet. Thou, that art both our life, and way therto; That open door, through which we are to go: A Fountain alwayes flowing, to refresh The thirsting Spirit, and the fainting Flesh; Supply unto us, by thy Holy Ghost, What, by our selves, and others, we have lost. O thou! who (being GOD'S eternal Son,) To free us, from a dungeon, leftst a Throne, And, underneath his heavy wrath didst lye Till thou crid'st out Lamasabakthani. To Heav'nly joyes, convert our earthly greef; Decrease our doubtings, and increase Beleef; Our carnal love, improve to love divine, Till our Affections loose themselves in thine? Oh! let that Love, from whence all beings flow, Which made all things above, and all below: Whose Wisdom, did first set them in their way, Whose Providence, preserv'd them to this day, And shall hereafter, govern and dispose, That which keeps Order, and that, which misgoes, Oh! hasten to perfection! hasten on, The work intended, ere the world begun; And, let that Glory, which produce it shall, Be his (and his alone) that's ALL in ALL. Thus, mused I, or, much (if not the same,) To this effect, before the morning came. These contemplations, ere I knew him dead, By thinking on my Friend, conceiv'd I had, Which afterward, in words, thus, up I drest; To leave it thereby, vocally exprest, What penance, I was put to, for omitting A duty, my obligements well befitting
Then, as the dawning Light began to creep About my Chamber, I fell fast asleep. Next day, (no longer meaning to defer A Visit, but till means prepared were) I, meeting with a Friend of his and mine, Informed him, what, I did predivine; What I had suffered, what, I have done, With what, I had that day resolv'd upon; And, to prevent it, was assur'd by him, That, my Presagings, were no idle dream; For, he was dead indeed, and on the morrow To be interr'd; which did renew my sorrow, And, reingage me, further to pursue What, to his pious Memory is due. For, there is much behind, as yet unsaid; Which, being truly known, and duly weighd Will add a fairer lustre to his Fame; Not without some reflectings, to my shame, For, leaving him, without a Valediction, Who was so true a Friend in my affliction. Assoon therefore, as I have gotten leisure, What's yet remaining, forth in Words, to measure Expect it; and in pawn thereof, (till I, Shall to your view expose it) let this lye; With this ensuing Epitaph, till He Shall honour'd, by a better musing be. The EPITAPH. HIs GRAVE (though he desired none With Name, or Title thereupon) Was made below this Marble stone? And, here, interred, now, He lies, To wait CHRISTS coming in the Skies, At whose approach the DEAD shall rise.
Yet, seek not here, among the DEAD, (On stones, or brass, or sheets of Lead) What, to his honour may be read: But, if you more of him, would hear, Peruse the sheets, whose Forefronts bear His NAME inscribed; and read him, there. For though that MONUMENT be built Withou cost graving paint, or guilt, It shall remain, when this is spilt: Yea, though it hath but paper wings, It shall out last, those lasting things, Which, make up Monuments for Kings. CANTO the second. After a due preoccupation, It offers to commemoration, Particulars: Insists upon A rarely memorable-one Illustrating a matchles Friend; And, so, this Canto hath an end. THe foll'wing evening, after I had heard That verifide, whereof I was afeard The night before, I, then a fresh inspir'd, To give my Musings utterance, retir'd. And, that no interruptions I might find, Put all my own concernments, out of mind. For, he that honestly one work, would do, Must not, the same time, be imploy'd on two.
But, on the paper, ere I fixt my pen, Such things, as possibly by other men Might be objected, question'd, or alleadg'd, To hinder that, wherein I was ingag'd, Rush'd in upon me; and, delaies, had wrought, Had I not on a sudden kickt them out; And given some of them, (ere they would go;) Areasonable civell answer too. Among the rest, One (vvho scarce vvent avvay Well satisfide vvith ought that I could say) Thus question'd me: Art thou become so vain, To think, by charmes, and words to raise again The dead to life; or, to preserve the Name Of freinds deceased, by surviving Fame, Among this Generation, wherein none Or few, regard what shall be said, or done, To that effect? Canst thou have hope to bring By poesie (which an unhallowed thing, Is now accounted) any due respect To him, whose memory thou dost affect? Or, think that thou maist dignifie his Herse, By such a despicable thing, as verse? Canst thou hope this, when he that versifies, Seems but a coyner, of facetious Lies? When lovers of the muses, are so scanty, That, there are hardly two, in five times twenty, Who, if thy Poem serious be, will heed it; Or, (if they will) that have the wit to read it, More gracefully, then if an Asse should play Upon a Harp, or to the Viol bray? For, neither heeding accents, points, or time, They, only make a clinking on the Rime. More harshly grating on juditious ears, Then scraping trenchers, which none gladly hears? And, what, of all thy musings, have th'effects Been hitherto, but troubles, and neglects?
This being urg'd, I, thereto made reply Thus, in my self: Admit all this, quoth I: Mo wiseman fears to do, what should be done Through dread of that which may mis-fall thereon: Nor, so much cares, what may thereof be thought, As to be always doing, as he ought. It is the Muses duty, to be there Most active, where, most Difficulties are; And, most couragiously, there to advance Their Standards, where appears most Ignorance; That to succeeding Ages they may leave Those things, which present times, will not receive. It is a portion, whereto they were born To be exposed to contempt and scorn; And, tis their honour, to have wisely dar'd Just things, for which, the world gives no reward. Though Poets are despis'd, and, will yet more Contemned be, (and thrust behind the doore) As Ignorance gets ground; and, as the Base Shall rise to sit in honourable place; There was a time, when Princes did contend In Poetry, and Poets to befriend; And, when the one shall consecrate his Muse, True Piety, and Virtue to infuse; And, men in power, by Righteousness maintain Their dignity, it shall be so again. The Muses, in times past, so awfull were That, they made Kings to fawn, and Tyrants fear. The Vulger, they made Hero's; Hero's GODS: Drew Trees and Beasts, out of the salvage woods, To follow them: That is, they drew together Blockish and bruitish men (as rude as either Wild Plants, or Beasts, and them allur'd unto What reasonable creatures ought to do. Their Charm threw down the vicious to that hell, Where everlasting Infamy doth dwell:
Raisd up the well deservers from the Grave, The life of never dying fame to have, Yea, by their charms they have expel'd the devill, The furious, and the melancholy evill. And, not alone in former Generations, Among the learned, and most civill Nations, Had Poesie esteem, and good effects, In spight of envy, malice, and neglects. But, also, here, and lately some have lived Who, by their musings, honor have received. And been enabled, by their inspirations, To vindicate the Muses reputations. Yea, (in his measure) ev'n the barbarous Bard, Is of his, people, so belov'd, or fear'd; That, whom soere he pleases (by his rimes) He makes to be the minion of the times Within his Orb: And, they among us here, Who of this faculty the masters are (As to the language) can th'affections raise, And move the Readers passions various wayes, By their composures; though they do abuse His gift, who did that faculty infuse; As I my self have done, till he that gave it, Inform'd me better, to what end I have it. Then, why, with confidency may not I, Hope by the help of sacred poesie, So to embalm my Friend, by that perfume (Which fluently will by extraction come From his own vertues) that, a sweet breath'd fame, Disfused from the Orders of his Name, May draw some after him? and make them grow In love, with what doth from those Orders flow? And, thereby wooe them to an imitation Of him, and to a virtuous emulation? If David, in an fun'rall song preserved, The memory of that, which well deserved,
In wicked Saul his foe; why may not I Seek to preserve a good mans memory? Why may not I with warranty commend The matchles love of my deceased Friend? Why may not I, as fully as I can Illustrate my beloved Jonathan? If, also, they, whose poesie affords Little save empty shews, and swelling words, Forc'd Metaphors, and frothy strains of wit, (Which on the Jancy, ticklings do beget) Perused are with some effect that's good, And, are most pleasing, when least understood) Why may not I, be read by two, or three, With more advantage both to them, and me, Then, by a thousand, that are pleas'd with chaff, And, at my plain expressions jeer, and laugh. Why may not I, who have advantages, Of truth, and real merits (which helps, these Impostures had not) trophies hope to Rear That shall more lasting, and more fair appear Then such as they build, who composures fain Out of the durty notions of their brain, Or, from the vapours, that strong drink infuses, To dignifie the subject of their mufes? Why may not I, this faculty imploy, To build up that, which others do destroy, By their abusing it? and, hope thereby So to repreeve it from that Obliquie. Which now it suffers, that, the best of men, May fall in love with poesie agen, And, not (as now they do) avert their eyes, As if asham'd of him that versifies? For, this is part, wherto my Poems tend Though, peradventure, I may miss my end. Let it not therefore, seem a prophanation Of Piety, unto this Generation,
That, I adventure to redeem from blame The gift, by some employed to their shame; Since, it was first confer'd on each receiver, To raise up his own spirit, to the giver: And, then, to rouse up other mens affections, From carnal, popular, and vain dejections? Or that, to take my Reader, by the ear, I lay among my verses. here and there, Some books, with reason baited, which, sometime, Doth eatch those who expected nought but rime. Nor, let this (though a long preoccupation) Seem to be needless, or a vain digression; For, though it nothing adds, to my intents, The taking somwhat from them, it prevents; Which being done, ile now proceed to that Wherof, I purpose, further to relate. The subject of my Musings, being large Tis not within my graspings, to discharge What's thereto due; nor can it be confin'd, Within that compasse, which I have design'd. To tell you therefore, fully, what he was, Or, what he was not, would so far surpasse, This limit, that I only must expresse So much as may enable you to guesse At what remains untold, (though it be more Then here ensues, or hath been said before) And that I may, his inside lay to view Which I much better, then his outside knew. He was a man, indowed with no lesse Of piety, then moral Righteousnes; And in the practising of both, so harty That, to the honest, and the god'y party; (As call'd some are) he brought a supplement, Of reall worth, as well as Ornament:
And aim'd at that reward, for which he ran, Not in the outward, but the inward-man. From youths extravagancies, which, (as he Hath oft confessed) he once thought to be Th'accomplishments of Gentry, without which They had in vain, been nobly born, or rich, From these (ev'n when he most indanger'd seem'd) He was by GODS especiall grace redeemd, (And brought off, by his providentiall hand) In seasonable time; even as a brand Snatchd from the fire. For, those commodious places, Prepared for the Muses, and the Grace, To coinhabite in, for education, Of youth in knowledge; and to keep this Nation From Barbarisme; Places, were become So fraught with Vices, and so perilsome, To soul and hody, that, he was almost By ill examples, and lewd consorts, lost. For which, a threatning vengeance hangeth over Those Seats, that will admit of no Remover Of what is menaced, till their Foundation Is rooted up, or saved by purgation. With what prvarications, he, was there Impoyson'd, and what principles they were Whereby he was indangerd, he to us Rendr'd as banefull, and ridiculous As words could make them; that, it might advance GOD'S grace vouchsafd, for his deliverance; And make them useful, unto those who heard What he was saved from, and what vvas fear'd. He was among the first, whose knowing zeal, Flamd our, to vindicate this Common-weal From thraldom and oppression; thereto moved In conscience, and by principles approved. Not stirred up, by factious discontent, By rashness, want, or by malevolent
Affections, or Designs; though not without Some counterpleas, in vvhat he went about: For, in immergencies, which do relate To private conscience, and Affairs of State, The wisest man, his resolution brings To settlement, by various combatings. With him, thus far'd it: Then he to withstand The publick Fo, was honor'd with Command; Wherein, he ventur'd not his life alone, Without that profit, which by many a one Was aim'd at, and enjoy'd) but lent, and give, And, wasted his Estate, to gard, and save The Publique Interest, without a prayre Exhibited, or temporall repair. Unsought for, (as I verily beleeve) He, afterward, the honor did receive Of supream trust; and, without cause of blame, According to his powre, discharg'd the same; The speaking, of no needfull truth forbearing; The powre, or presence, of no person fearing; Swaid nor by hatred, neither by affection, To others; nor by that which ha reflection Upon himself; But, freely said his mind, And conscience, as he did occasions find, In whatsoever matter was debated; Whether the thing propos'd, to GOD related, Or Common-wealth: if they who present were, (As I beleeve they did) the truth aver. And, if it so did happen that, sometime A tender pity, did prevail with him To plead for mercy, on behalf of some Made liable, by law unto the doom Of mulct, or death; the same he never prest Ought further, then the Publique Interest, VVith safety might allow it: And altho, He felt what other men are moov'd unto.
By naturall Affections, he did still Conform his Judgment, and confine his will To Justice: And, this, rather doth increase His honour, then appear to make it less. And, though the Author, of the History Of Independents, hath injuriously (Among his other Leazings) added him Unto his lying Catalogue, of them. Who, to the damage of the Common-weal, By their Commands, Gifts, Offices, or spoil, Inriched, and aloft advanced be. From poore estates, and from a low degree; On him, that sticks not; but, reflects disgrace Apparently, upon that Liers face. For, to all those, who knew him, tis well known, That, with a large estate, by birth his own, He was indow'd. His Mother, yet, in Kent Survive; a Lady, rarely eminent For Charity, and for a open doore, To such as are in misery, and poore. And, as he no way needed to inlarge His portion, or the Common-wealth to charge By such supplies, as others have desired (And often surreptitiously acquired) So, he was all his life, so far from craving, From wishing, from receiving, and from having Gift, place, or office, whereby he might add An augmentation, unto what he had, That, many vvhom the Common miseries Had begger'd, and vvhose pub iek services, And wants he savv neglected, he reliev'd Out of his ovvn estate; and them repriev'd From ruining, vvhen helper they had none: Among vvhich number, I my self, vvas one. And, that, vvhich in this kind he lent or gave Was meant (as I beleeve) as vvell to save
The Nations honour, as to do a deed Of simple Charity, in time of need: For, he preferr'd, the Publick Faith before His private Credit; and, did so abhor Their Avarice, vvho by a mutual Giving, Forgiving, and unseasonably relieving, Obstructed those performances, vvhereby Our deep Ingagements did neglected lye: That, to prevent it, he thought fit to scatter A portion of his bread upon the water Lest after private miseries, things vvorse Ensude; a nationall, a publick curse. Then, those large Legacies, vvhich he in death To Charitable uses, did bequeath, (Consider'd, vvith his frequent bounteous giving, To such as vvere distrest vvhil'st he vvas living.) Do make it, vvithout question evident That he, both had enough, and such content With vvhat he had, that, he upon his score Leaves nothing, that shall make his Children poor As they vvill do, vvho gave and took the bread, Wherevvith the Fatherless should have been fed; And, have, vvith vvhat their Servants blood did buy, Inlarg'd their Fields, and rais'd their houses high. But, I to little purpose thus go on To set my Candle up before the Sun. They who had eyes to see it did behold, And knew as much before, as I have told. They, who by wilfulnes, dark-sighted be Set up what light we can, will never see. Now, some of you, (it may be) will suppose That my conjectures only, I disclose; Or that a knowledge of such things I fain Which to his private actings do pertain; Or, take them up on Trust. If, so, they think, So, let it be; I will not strive to sink
A milstone in a shallow dish of water; Or seek to fill a viol, with such matter, As it admits not. Things, vvhich must be known As well by others eyes, as by my own To make them certain; Ile no further mention, Without proof it seem a self invention That, which hath passed 'tvvixt us tvvo alone; Those things, vvhereof my knovvledg can by none Be doubted of) to mind I vvill recall; And, out of many, bring forth one for all; One, that shall set forth his deserving more Then all that I have mentioned before; (At lest according to that excellence Which suits a sensuall Intelligence) And, when vvith that expression I have done, Ile rather leave it to be thought upon, Then imitated; till self-love begins To loose that ground, vvhich hitherto it vvins. He, that is really a faithfull friend, Hath that, vvhich doth vvithin it comprehend All morall vertues; yea, and, therevvith too That charity, vvhich from true Faith doth flovv: For, such a person cannot be alone (In being so) a faithfull friend to ONE; But also to all others▪ yea, extend; His love to all GODS creatures, as his friends▪ And, doubtles▪ far above all those, to him, Who, for himself alone created them. This vertue therefore, doth on men confer The highest excellence they can have here; And, this rare vertue, (vvhereof, I, the Sound Had vainly heard before) in him, I found And thereof, such experiment vvill give That, you shall think of him, as I beleeve; And that in charity, he did out go Most men, vvho thereof, make the greatest show.
That, you may know him; whom I knew so well, My means of knowing him, thus, first ile tell. The late intestine Wars, which with a flood, Of miseries, and with a sea of blood Ore flow'd these Nations, like a raging torrent (Which bears dovvn all vvith an impetuous current,) Brake in, ev'n at first rising▪ vvhere then lay My chief Estate, and svvept it all avvay; That, little thereof, vvhich elsevvhere vvas left, Was also, by th' Oppressors hand bereft, Save only some small part of my Estate, Consisting in rings, housholdstuff, and plate, Which being portable, preserved vvere, Or got together, by my future care, That, vvhich expos'd my portion to the raging, Of my destroyers, vvas, a free ingaging Against the common foe: And, they, vvith vvhom I▪ for the Publique▪ did ingag'd become, Gave me the Publique Faith, that vvhat I lost Should be repaired at the publique cost; And, that my Children, should be look'd upon VVith favour, and regard, vvhen I vvas gone. By these incouragements I did pursue Their services, untill I neither knevv Which way my pesent wants, might have supply, Or whereon, for the future to rely; And then, perforce, retreated for recruit, To prosecute the Cause with fresh pursuit: VVhereof I got some few effects in show, VVhich in the substance, prov'd not to be so. But rather brought, much greater mischiefs on me, Then all my open enemies had done me. For, some vvho had but fainedly pretended, To that, vvhich I had seriously defended; Perceiving, me, preparing to disclose Their falshood, did become my open Foes;
And through their Complices (who by the hand Of Providence were weeded from the Land, Soon after) they so wrought, that Innocence And Faithfulness were judged an offence, Maugre apparent proofs and demonstrations Yet extant, by their own examinations: So, I was finde, confinde, and on my head That censure lay'd, which they had merited With seven▪ fold more; and for my service past Into disgrace, was innocently cast, With nothing for subsistance, but, that poore House-furniture, which was within my doore. To add more burthen to those heavy weights, And drive me, thereby, into greater streights; My Friends, and my Acquaintance, then began To look upon me as a faulty man Who had deceiv'd their hope▪ so that, if they Who (though too few to help me) day by day Were at my trial, had not seen and heard Th'injustice done me, and the same declar'd; I had, in likelihood, ere this day, ended My life in want; disgrac'd, and unbefriended. For, as my Friends fell off, my Foes fell on With fresh pursute of what they had begun, And▪ had not GOD in an unlook'd for houre Deprived them of their abused powre, They had destroy'd me quite. But, I, at last Escap'd; and they into the pit were cast. Mean while, they insolently domineer'd, Made songs and pamphlets on me; scoft and jeer'd, And had so villifide my Reputation To those who represented, then, this Nation, That, of four thousand pounds (to which account My due (prov'd fully) truly did amount) I could not get one penny for relief Of me, or mine, to mittigate our grief;
Though, I had forced words into their ears, Which from by-standers, oft, extracted tears; And, to compassion, might that Judg have wan Who neither feared GOD, nor car'd for man. To add yet further, to my great afflictions, GOD, with a sicknes, (spreading forth infections) Visits my house, and drove all those from thence, Who were some comfort in my indigence, That, being shut up, and excluded from All other helpers, I, to him might come. My children were all sick of that disease; Their single keeper, to her little ease, Was their sad Mother, whilst (as sad as she) I, sought, whereby they might supported be. And we, who served were, a while before With sixteen houshold servants, (sometimes more) Had then, but one Boy (who, sick also lay) And one poor woman, hired by the day. To pay, and feed those, I my plate had sold: My Wife, the silver, and the lace of gold Which lately trim'd her Garmnts, ript away; To buy things needfull, for the present day: Her Ornaments she chang'd for bread, to eat: Then, sold the dishes, which did hold our meat: And last of all, our highest valued things, The pretious stones, the jewels, and the rings, To us, from honorable Persons sent, As tokens of respect (the same way went. And what was left, ill spar'd though it could be) To follow, for ought I then could see. Only this hope remain'd, that GOD had sent A sicknes, which by death, would wants prevent; Or, give us by his own hand, some repair: For, of his love, I, never shall despair. In this good hope, the Worlds neglect I scorn'd, And my petitions, into prayers turn'd,
Directed unto him; who only knew My wants, and what was likely to ensue. But, he likewise, to answer me delaid; And for a while seem'd deaf to what I pray'd: Yet knowing not, what els remain'd to do, Or whether, or to whom, for help to go; Nor caring (if GOD left me) for supplies From other hands; I still renew'd my cries To him alone, and suddenly was cheer'd With somewhat, which to sence no where appear'd, And, as a Loves, thinking (in a dream) He hears his best Be oued calling him, Starts up in hast, and runneth out to meet The voice that cals him, ere he find his feet, And goes he knovvs not whether: So, with me It far'd, who (hoping not deceiv'd to be) Walk'd forth to see, if providence divine, Would bring to sight, or mind, some Friend of mine, Or his, from whom, I might that ayd receive Which to obtain from GOD, I did beleeve. And, mark his goodnes, Oh! all you that read it So mark it, and with seriousnes so heed it That; (if I should forget it) you may be Remembrancers, hereafter unto me As I have been to you, in former time, Of what concerns this Nation, and this Clime. In this distresse, he, meets me, of whom here I am discoursing; And with pleasing chear Salutes me thus: Amid thy troubles now How is it with thee George? how farest thou? I, answer'd, SIR, I live, though I am poore; And, of my welfare, cannot say much more. Take heart said he; These dayes will have an end, And future times will better thee befriend. I sought thee at thy house, not with intent To trifle out an hour in complement
But, lovingly brought thither, by a fear Lest more lay on thee, then thou well mightst bear. For, thy Petitions I, have heard, and seen, Of those transactions I have witnes been, Whereby thou, wert oppressed; and wherein Thy Country hath no lesse abused been. I, also publickly have heard debated Thy claims, and when they were allow'd, and stated; Saw what was justly, or unjustly done; And am assured GOD will look thereon Yea, I have so well heeded what thou hast Both lately and in former time exprest For GOD, and also for thy Countries sake, Whereof ensuing times will notice take That, I, my self to be obliged, thought To seek thy welfare; and from GOD have brought This token of his love▪ thus having said, Just twenty pounds into my hand he laid Of currant gold; whereat (as one amaz'd) On him with overflowing eyes I gaz'd; Not able, for the present, to afford The retribution of one thankfull word. For, out of me, my heart away was gone To GOD, who made him do, what he had done. But, after recollection, SIR, said I, He hat hath mov'd you, to this charity Will doubtlesly with interest repay What you have ministred to me this day; For, GOD himself alone, and none but he (Who knows in what distresses all men be) Could, you, to me so timely have directed Opprest with wants, and of all friends neglected Or, so inlarg'd your heart, to bring relief Proportionable to my present grief.
And, therefore, now il'e tell you, in what state You find me, that you may rejoyce thereat, By making you assur'd, that you have wrought A work, which in it self rewards hath brought That will requite it fully, though I liv'd, To let slip out of mind, what I receiv'd. Then, told him all, that is before exprest, And so much more as did infer the rest That might have follow'd, if GOD had not sent His charity, my ruine to prevent. The same impression, which his Act had made On me, my words on him, effected had; And, I am confident, that, had I given To him, the greatest gift, on this side Heav'n, He had not gone away, with more content Then, in his being made an instrument, Of such a timely mercy; and, that he So opportunely too, should meet with me. Now judg, if this be true, which I protest (Except the words, wherein it is exprest, And, some few circumstances, to supply The story, with a formal decency,) Is real truth; and no poetick strain, More adding, then the Essence did contain. Judg now, what, I, could honestly have lesse Hereof declar'd, then here I do expresse, Consid'ring what he was to me, till then; And, what I was to many other men. For, at their dore, for whom I had of late, My life adventur'd; lost my whole Estate; (And those expos'd, who were more dear to me Then life, and livelyhood, destroy'd to be) Ev'n at their dore, I, perishing was left Of credit, and Estate, at once bereft: To let me thereby know, and knowing, heed, That in the times of triall, and of need,
Tis none of those Acquaintance, or those Friends, Which we our selves get, or whose love attends On our Prosperities; nor that, which we Think, obligations, upon them to be; Nor publick Faith, nor Vows, nor Protestations, Either of Princes, Parliaments or Nations; Nor that which is, nor that, which we suppose A merit in Us, (or, for Virtue goes) Which, for helps, are to be relide upon, In great extremities; But, GOD, alone, And, that, in our Desertions, he, can make Not only, strangers, pity on us take; But, also, from the malice of our Foes, Raise us up help, salve mortall wounds, by blows; Cure us by sickness; make us rich, by losses: Give us true joy, in grief; Content, in Crosses; A life, by dying; and the first beginning Of justifying righteousness, by sinning: Yea, by the hiding (for a time) his Face, Assurances of everlasting grace: And to confirm my oft experiment Hereof; GOD, made this Friend an Instrument, To give me, of that mercy, one pledg more, Of which, he gave me many, heretofore. And yet, this is not all; for, ere those weights Which lay upon me; and the many streights, Then pressing me, removed were and past, (Which, some yeers, and some months to boot, did last) In times of like need, he continued on That work of mercy, thus by him began; Till, in this manner, he, upon his score, Had set me, twenty hundred Crowns, and more, Without desiring, Band, or Bill, or Note, To testifie the lending of one groat; Or urging me, betwixt our selves, to say I ow'd him ought, or that I would repay.
Thus much for this time: For, tis cold, and late; And, that you may have time to ruminate On what is said; ile now break off, and borrow An hour or two, from my affairs to morrow, So much, of what remaineth, to recite As seemeth pertinent: And so, good night. The third CANTO. The Author, sheweth to what end, This Poem, was design'd, and pen'd. Next, he proceeedeth to unfold What, is begun, and left untold Relating to his Friend, and Him; And, gives you then, a breathing time. WHen I have spent the day, as oft I do, In vvheeling round, and trudging to and fro, Through that meander, which do what I can Still further leads, (then when I first began) From my desired rest; and, nothing leaves me, But new assurance, that the World deceives me; And yet still keeps me active, with a thought That, I am thereby doing what I ought; (Because, ev'n by persuing what is vain, A knowledg of some usefulnes I gain, Which els could not be had) I take content In suffering what I labour to prevent; Permitting GOD, to order as he pleases, Me, and my something, and my nothing nesses. And, in the night, when all to rest are gone; I muse on things more worthy thinking on, And, how, to others, and my self, I may Add somewhat, by our losses in the day. Nor are my watchings, in that stollen leisure, So painfull, as some think; but full of pleasure.
Nor do my solitary Musings tend To that deceitfull, and unfruitfull end, As is perhaps thought, in those lucubrations, Wherein I take my loanly recreations; For, that, which me all night doth waking keep, Refresheth more my spirit, then my sleep. The subject, which this hour employes my pen, Makes my dead friend, to live with me agen: I, visit him, and oft he visits me With inter-courses, which no eyes can see. Within my Chamber; (none els being there) Me thinks, we two, as if alone we were Converse together, and he brings unto My memory, and thought, what I should do To order so my life, that when I dye, No living soul may be more glad as I. Sometime, with him I walk unto his grave, To view what kind of lodgings dead men have, And whether I can, see among them, there, Such dreadfull things, as flesh and blood doth fear. Yea, there, at midnight I have with him been, And every corner of the grave have seen, By Contemplation, (which sees many sights, Not to be view'd by ordinary lights) Yet there I did behold no greater dread, Then when I sleep most sweetly in my bed. Sometimes, he comes into my mind, and brings A multitude of temporary things To be by many thought of, who yet live, And were of that late Representative, Which from it honor, and, it being, fell, Because they nor beleev'd, nor acted vvell. Of somethings too, that neerly vvill concern The wise, (till they are grovvn too wise to learn) He me remembers, by those conferences Which vve oft had, vvhen he enjoy'd his senses.
And, whereupon, I oft did more then guesse At what was verifide in their successe: Yea, and sometimes, he makes me think upon The present Powre, and on what's yet undone, And should be done, and will be done, ere long, Unles, it grows, in self opinion strong, And sleights that counsel, which may save the State, As their Foregoers did, till 'twas too late Sometime, the thought of him, translates me hence To Heav'n; where, what transcends intelligence And my expression, is to me disclos'd, By fraction, and by notions discompos'd; Which, nay the lesse a certainty declare Of some things, which for edifying are. Sometime again (for we can any whither Go safely) we descend to Hell together By contemplation; and there, take full views Of that which on Hypocrisie ensues; And, on each other failing, and offence, Perpetuating an Impenitence; And, thence, assume occasion to improve My thank fulnes, for that eternall love By whom I am secured from that place, Through his preventing, and assisting grace. By thinking upon him, who in his grave Lies thoughtles, of what thinkings I can have Thus, I my self employ; and, by things past, The ordering of future things forecast; And, find a means whereby I do refresh My Spirit, whilst imprison'd in the Flesh And wherefore, judg you, I my time thus spend? Is it to tell the World I had a Friend? How vain were that! since, I am not to know It cares not, whether I have Friends, or no. And, loves to hear of no respect that's shown To any, whom she takes not for her own.
Is it to gain a gratiousnes with those Who, have, what he hath left at their dispose? That were to fall, ten thousand leagues below My spirit; and more base in me, would show Then it would do in them, to look upon With such a thought, what, here, by me is done, For, these my retributions, are as free From self ends, as his bounty was to me, And, rather should be paid back, ten time double, Then I would loose my freedom for that buble. It is to please, his near and dear relations, With large applauses, and commemorations Of him that's gone? Alas! that doth but keep Sorrows awake, which els would fall asleep. Doth but his knowledg in the fiesh renew, Which keeps his better being, from their view; Adds brine to thirst; and to devouring fire Casts Oyl, which makes it but to flame the higher: And, if no better use, could hence be rais'd, It came to far lesse, then, not to be prais'd. Is it to honor him, that's in his Grave? That were the simplest thought the fool could have, What honor can they want, who tryumph there, Where sulnes of eternall glories are? What honor can he have from earthly things, Or glory, from a fame with paper vvings, Which cannot make a flight for many miles, Beyond the compasse of these British Isles? Or, from an Epitaph, on stone, or brasse Read by a fevv, in some obscured place? Or, hovv vvill it concern, or please him novv, Who, to himself, vvould not, in life, allovv Those attributes of honor, vvhich appear'd Then due; nor, for an empty title car'd? And, vvould have been displeas'd, if he had knowvvn I, vvould on him, this trifle, have bestovvn,
(Onely because, it to his honor tends) Although, therewith, compos'd to other ends? Beside, (although it somwhat may concern His reputation) I am not to learn That these Blasts, for the most part, oftner rear A dust, to cloud it, then preserve it clear; Or, stirs up, envy, hate, or evill-will, To brawl, which else (it may be) had lain still. For, to the Flower that spreads the fairest blooms, The Cankerworm and Caterpiller comes. Moreover, they, who least deserving are May in this kind of honor have a share With best Desert; and buy, with what was theirs, A better Monument then this appears. Is it for some advantages design'd Unto my self? sure no; for none I find Hereby acquirable; nor had I brought My poverty to light, if I had sought Self-honor; seeing, there is nothing more Dishonourable thought, then to be poore. Well then; if it were neither so nor so, What is my purpose, in what now I do? Ev'n this, That, from the best man whom I knew Here living, I might set forth to your view A self-deniall, through the want of which The Common-wealth grows poore, and poore men rich. That, also, by him, in whose charity, GOD, did appear, in my necessity, Others may be provok'd, through his examples, To shew more love unto those living Temples, In which he dwelleth; and, at least, forbear To ruine them, although they have no care Of their Repair: For, this is one of those Deficiencies, which multiplies our woes, And, through defect, whereof our former cost, And present hopes, will suddenly be lost,
As they have been; unless we do with speed Put, what is yet but words, into a Deed; Not dreaming still, that, we from GOD can hide, What is by men, apparently espide: For, though we will not see, what we behold, Nor credit what we know true, being told, It shall, in spight of all our impudence, Let in a Fear, against which, no defence Can possibly be made; and, then, the doom We fear'd in secret, openly shall come. He, of this self-deniall vvas a Teacher, Yea, and as vvell a Pattern as a Preacher Who, taught vvith power, such principles as these, And, not as do our Scribes and Pharisees. I vvrote this partly likewise, in requital Of his rare kindness; and by his recitall Of vvhat he vvas, to stir up imitation In all those vvho had any near relation Unto his fleshly being; and thereby, To pay my debt to his posterity; And, that (if vvell improved) it might be Some retribution, for his love to me. But, (in the first place, though I name it lst) This opportunity I have embrac'd, To keep still visible, before mine eyes, That Object, vvhich the vvorld doth most despise To look upon; ev'n that, disgracefull, poore, And lovve estate, in vvhich I, heretofore Was friendless left; and, in hovv just a time, GOD, sent me full Deliverance, by him; One, from a Thousand chose, to signifie Thus much; that, (notvvithstanding they vvhom, I, Remembred often; me remembred not) His everlasting love, vvas not forgot. Having novv shevvn the Reason of my Rime, I vvill return again to speak of him
Who caused this discourse, which I am in; And, where I left ff, there, I will begin. Before, the bounty, which from him did come, Amounted to the fore expressed sum, Ashamed in my self, to see how far He had ingag'd me, without taking care Of reimbursement; unto him I sent Unask, a true and full acknowledgment Of all I had received: But, to my hand, He back returned it, with this command That, to no Person, I a word should say Of what had past betwixt us, in that way. For, well I know, said he, both you, and I, Shall get but disadvantages thereby. The World, is full of envy, and malicious, Making to us, our best works most pernitious. They who in her affairs, are chiefly wise, And, view, our actions, with meer carnal eyes, Will judg me but a fool; and, think perchance, Your wit, hath wrought out of my ignorance Or easines, that, which is an effect Of GODS good providence, and my respect: Keep it in secret therefore; for, from thence, There can arise no mischief, or offence. These Reasons charm'd me; and, with much ado, I silence kept, because, he wil'd it so. Only, (some few dayes after he forbid This to be mention'd) him, I friendly chid By these ensuing Verses, which are next Inserted here, as not beside my Text. SIR, though, so friendly, you to me have been, That, to forget it, were a mortall sin, Yet, I am one, whom divers do suppose To make no difference, betwixt Friends, and Foes In my reproovings; And, if that be true, My worthy noble Friend, then, have at You.
For, you forget your self, and strive to clime To heights, so unfrequented at this time, That, I suppose, I am in conscience tide Your temper, and your practises, to chide, Lest by soft-hearted kindnes, and compassion (With such like vertues, now grown out of fashion) It may deservedly be said, by some, One of these Sectarie you are become, (And, of these Hereticks thought worse then Turks) Who shew their true beleeving, by their works; And, seem to bring their simple custome hither, Of living well, and lovingly together. Fy! have you honor'd been to sit among The wisest of this Common-wealth so long? And where, the men, who do themselves suppese To be (at least) the wisest part of these, Can many dayes, weeks, moneths, yea many years, Hear Widdows out-cries, and see Orphans tears, Without the casting of one look aside On those, who by their path, stand Crucifide? And will you so degenerate from them Whose practises, are patterns for the time To look on him, whom they have trampled on, And lest, as to the world-ward, quite undone? Can you descend so low, to fix your eyes On those, whom men in honor do despise? Yea, in a manner, seek unto them, too, Who are distrest, (before they seek to you?) We them to be releev'd, by your expene? (As if you suffer'd, by their indigence) And charge them, that they tell it unto none, As if a deed of darknes, you had done? Beleeve, it SIR, this is a novelty, Which doth betray you, so apparently That, were it known, your best Friends would not stick, To voice you, publickly, a Schismatick.
Scarce parallel'd: For, you in this divide From all I know, in all the World beside, Excepting one or two; and you, and they Make up that little Congregation may, With whom CHRIST promis'd he would present be Though it consisted but of tvvo, or three: And which was promised, (for ought I hear) Though none of them, a Priest, or Prelate were. The circumstances heeded in your acts, Do very strangely aggravate the facts. Had it been only, in a humor done, Or, in a fit, but once, or tvvice alone (As works of charity, are, now and then, Performed, and repented of agen,) Or, had that charity, from you distil'd, But, drop by drop; or had it forth been fil'd By thimbles full, (as unto those we give, Our Aquavitae, whom we faint perceive) Had it been so, or so, I should have thought So much thereof, as I in reason ought; (Though, with much more respect then yet I see, My publike services, will thought on be) And would have striv'd, as far as I was able To make the gifts, and thanks, proportionable, As wise men do; or, some way complemented, And customary services presented, According to the fashion: But, the course, That you have took, Acknowledgments inforce Beyond all Presidents: For, Sir, you stretch Your noblenes so far beyond the reach Of my weak faculties, to retribute Acknowledgments, which therunto may suit; Yea, and so oft, so long, so gen'rously You have releeved my necessity; That, therewith overcharged, I am fain, To break out of the ro de, into a strain,
Some way extravagantly to declare, As often in such straights as these we are Constrain'd to do; And, as once Peter did When through CHRISTS manhood, he the Godhead spid; And, when, he having fish'd all night for nought, And drew a whole ship lading at one draught, He cride out, LORD, go from me (get thee gone) For I confesse my self a sinfull one. As, is the Fruit, so, may the season be A token of the nature of the Tree: (As that which cometh by the Rivers side, And, whereby Righteous men are typifide Illustrates well,) I, therefore, in respect Ev'n of the time, may somewhat here object, To show, yet farther, how you rend from those Who have our earthly things, at their dispose. For, at such times of need, still, ayd you lent, As if by GOD himself, it had been sent, Who, only, knew my wants; and unto whom I, only shew them, when such great ones come: Because, in greatest wants, I do perceive Men readier to destroy, then to relieve. Such, is the state of many in distresse; Such, is the hate, of those, who do oppresse. The rightly timing of a benefit, Doth, very often, more then double it: And, though such charity, may, in these dayes, Return you little present gain, or praise, Yet, GOD observes it; and, as sure, as he Will of a cup of Water heed full be Bestow'd on him who doth assume the name, Of his Disciple, (although not the same) You timely, and your large benevolence, Shall have a timely, and large recompence. Me, in due season, GOD not only shall Enable too, some way, to pay you all;
But, add mean time, a blessing to defray That interest which he doth yet delay: And, in that place, where some of those (I fear) Who, me opprest, will tremble to appear, You, shall be welcomed, with come ye blessed, Who fed, and cloath'd me, when I was distressed. These things consider'd, this, which I begun, Pretending some reproof, intendeth none: But, rather, is, (that debts be not forgot) A memorandum only, or a note, Subscribed with my hand, for intimation, That, you, with me, shall have his obligation Whose word is pass'd already to restore Whatever shall be lent unto the poor: And, who, doth good to every one intend, Whose heart he moves, the needy to befriend. Yet, that, mean time, I may not failing be To pay as much in hand, as lies in me; Receive this Benediction. Whensoere The day of fiery tryall shall appear, To prove your Faith, and purge you quite from all Your selfnes: which ere long time will befall: Let, then, your Faith be strong, and GOD be seen A friend to you, as you to me have been: And let your charity before him stand, To manacle, and weaken every hand, That would oppress those, whom you leave behind: Let them GODS favour, in all troubles find: Be safe preserved, in all times, and places, By his free mercies, and preventing Graces; And let this prayer, stil, about GOD'S Throne Be fluttering, till he saith, so be it done. These Verses, for his large benevolence Were, for a long time, all his evidence.
Nor would he more receive, though many a time Security was offer'd unto him. And, once, it was in words like these, denide: When first I your necessity supplide, My purpose was not, meerly to relieve Your present need; but, likewise, ayd to give That, by your own endeavour, (with my cost) You might recover that which you have lost. The State, hath no part satisfied, yet, Of your allow'd, and overlong due debt: And, till that shall be done, I will expect No payment, neither ought to that effect. But, his assistance having made me strong, That, to recover, which had been by wrong Detained from me, in a private hand; (And having somwhat more at my command) I thought my self oblig'd (as I was able) To render some returns proportionable To my Estate. So, he accepts, at last, Security for part, and left the rest; (Of which, to him, I somewhat yearly brought) Without his asking, as expecting ought (By any thing expressed) untill that, Were pay'd me, which is owing by the State; Or, till the residue, I could repay, By some enablement another way. This, shews it is no frivilous occasion From whence this Poem springs; or, Obligation To be as inconsiderable, slighted Which me to this acknowledgment invited: But rather, in regard of GOD, and Man, An act, which ought, as fully as I can To be exprest; That, for it I might give The praise to GOD, and, men th' example have. For, by his charity, GOD'S love appears: I was, thereby, preserved many years
From perishing: Thereby, likewise, together VVith that assistance, which I had from other Concurring helps, (which have the same way, been To me by GOD'S good providence, sent in.) I got to be possessor of the gate, Of those, who were mine enemies of late; And, thereby, also, partly to expresse To others, in their need, my thankfulness. Thereto, the Noble, and much Honored Bradshaw, and Dixwell, ayde contributed, Among some others, who are not forgot. Although their kindnes I here mention not; Yea, GOD, for me, so likewise, did dispose The purpose, of my avaritious foes, That, doubly, it advantag'd me, and more Then all those loving friends had done before. VVhich, suddenly improoving my Estate Beyond, what I did hope, or aimed at; The World doth seem to think, and some do say, That, I, to thrive, have practised her way; And, on my conscience, would now love me too, If, truly, she beleev'd it had been so: For, nothing renders her, a Foe to me But, that she fears my words, and deeds agree. And, that, though baits, and snares for me are laid To serve her ends, I shall not be betraid. Now, having finished this little story, VVhich hath a neer relation to GOD'S glory As well as to the honour of my Friend, With some brief inferences, I will end. But, lest, these may detain you overlong, Here pause; and read them, in the following Song.
The fourth CANTO. Of Christian love, the large extents; The sad, the bad, the mad events Of discord, here the Muse displaies; That Idol SELFNES open laies. Some other things to heed commends, And, then, with praise, and Prayer ends. WHat shall that Musing profir, which affords Nothing but bare Relations, or meer words? Or, what will things avail, that shall be read, Concerning those, who sleep among the dead If no advantages at all they give To benefit, or better those that live? Sure none; Lest, therefore, these may justly passe For tingling Cymbals, or for sounding Brasse, Some useful notes, or notions, ile discover On this occasion, ere I passe it over. And though I cannot talk, as others do, He preach my way; and, preach to purpose too. Of many things, which merit mention may, Wherein my Friend, hath pattern'd out the way Of walking, and of practise; three things, here, Shall be insisted on, as those that are Deserving speciall heed: Such, as (if we Well imitate) a true ALL HEAL shall be: End all Quarrels; Take off, from our eyes The blinding scales, and filmes of prejudice Which keeps us dark, and from a right perceiving, of truth, and, in a wilfull misheleeving. An imitation thereof, would bring hither Outward, and inward peace; and knit together
CHRISTS disunited members so, that love Would ripen knowledg; Knowledg help improve A saving Faith; That Faith renevv the Will; A will renewed, would GODS minde fulfill, And therewith, so acquainted make us grow That, we should learn to Act, as vvell as know. The first of these is Love; love, not extending It self, to these, or those, but comprehending All things created, with an imitation Of CHRIST, by meekness in his conversation With Publicans and sinners; and, vvith such As knew but little, and beleev'd not much. Such, vvas CHRISTS love; and (if I do not miss) According to man's measure, such vvas his. For, though, that vail of flesh vvhich others vvear, And, that, vvhich clothed him, vvhen he vvas here, Disguiz'd his inward man, and made him pass For one of those, vvho running of a Race Doth beat the air in vain; yet, they, vvhose eyes Observed him vvhen he vvas neer the prize, Savv, he had usde the means, and chose the ground, Which best advantag'd him, and would be crown'd, When, many, at a loss themselves would find. Who, better dieted, and disciplin'd Were thought to be; For, none could know so well What best befitted him, as he might tell. Near to his latter end, he had attain'd Such love to all, and, therewith, so unfain'd A longing both to win, and to be won Unto the Truth, that, he was Fo to none So much, as to himself: and, by forbearing, By hopefulness, long-suffering, patient hearing, And meekness, without bitterness of spirit, True quietness of heart he did inherit Within himself; and waited, when GOD'S leisure Would of his grace, to others, fill the measure.
My cognizance of him, perswades me so, And, whether he thus perfect were, or no, It serves the turn, as well to let us see What you, and I, and every man should be. Yet, of this Christian temper I had proof, To make it forth, with evidence enough. For, though in fundamentals we agreed, Essentially (as by what did succed, Is manifest) yea, though we did accord In one GOD, in one CHRIST, one Faith, one word. One will, and hope; (as all true Christians do,) Yet, in some accidentall means thereto We disagree'd; yea, often, did dissent In some things, which 'twixt others made a rent. And, I was oft, so earnest in dispute, His tenents to disprove, and to confute, That, they who should have heard us, might have judg'd Not me to him, but him to me, oblig'd, And that like Paul d Barnabas, at least, A parting, would hae followed our contest. Yet, though we both stood firm, to what we thought Nor losse of love, nor breach 'twixt us, it wrought; But, rather, to each other kept us nearer, The firmer in our friendship, and the dearer: Because we both knew, that, one Judg we had, In whom Atonement, would, at last, be made: Because, we both intended, not that He, Or, I, might conquer, but, Truth victor be: And, I, might conquer, but, Truth victor be: And, this declareth his deserving, more Then all, that I have said of him before. For, what man els, but he, would not have thought My Obligations, should my soul have brought In bondage to his Judgment? or, at least Kept me from owning mine, by hot contest? Who els but he, would have continued on His love, and bounty, unto such a One
As thwarted his opinions? and, not rather Have made me scatter what he holp to gather? Converted former friendship, into hate, And, sought to ruine me, in my Estate? Which had with ease been done; since, at that time, My chief subsistance, was receiv'd from him. But, of his judgment, what er'e think I might I knew his love was firm; his heart upright; And, this beleef of no man, I could have Who gave his charity, to make a slave: Or, who from bondage did my flesh unbind To lay a greater Thraldom, on my mind. No, (though from servitude, he set me free) If he, thus cruel, should to others be. Nay, though a King, with me should share his Throne, And prize me, as his chief elected one, Were he a Tyrant over other men, I could not give him love, for love agen: Nay, further (be it spoke with reverence To him I speak of, and without offence) Could I believe that GOD, in whom I trust Were (though he lov'd me) cruel and unjust, I would not seek with him in Heav'n to dwell, But, rather, go, and live alone in Hell. For, he, that's with essential GOD delighted, And, thereunto by hearty love united; Should therewith feel to him, such vertue giv'n, As would translate the lowest Hell to Heav'n. I fear, I go too high in my expressions, Ile therefore stoop again, from these digressions To speak what's possible to be beleev'd Of those, by whom this cannot be receiv'd. And shew them, in my common strain, how far From Christian love, the greatest number are, Who most professe it; that, affect they may A far more excellent, and better way,
If carnall lusts, will give them time to read it, And, their self-love, admit of Grace to heed it. It is not love, but cruelty in those, Who, would on others consciences impose Their Yoaks, or break the bands of loving kindnes, Because, their friends have weaknesses, or blindnes: Nay, (which of cruelties appears the worst) Because, they would not be, from that divorst, Which is their comforts chief preservative; And, without which, none happily can live Here, or hereafter; And, when doing so, To these imposers, no true good can do. What is a friend for; or, what better are Those friends, then foes, who neither can forbear Nor help to bear, that Friends infirmities With meeknes, whom he hath been pleas'd to prize? But, beat the lame, because, they cannot run; Leave him that's blind, because he sees no Sun; And, seperate from them, for that, which they Would willingly disclaim, and cast away If they were able; or, els, did not fear They, thereby, sinners against Conscience, were? Whereas, they rather should with these abide, To lead the lame; to be the blind-mans guide: And, with long-suffring, to instruct the other, Till he becomes a true beleeving Brother. Oh! how far off! how far! are such as those From imitating him, who lov'd his Foes? (And dide to save them?) who persue with hate Their friends, for those concerments, which relate Unto themselves alone? How far are such From loving them, who have offended much? This temper at this time, is very rare, For gen'rally almost, we bite and tear, So barbarously, each others flesh, and fleeces, And rend CHRISTS Robes into so many peeces,
That, we seem rather Woolves, and doggs, then sheep, Belonging to that Flock which he doth keep. Nor are they, only, Woolves in sheeps array, Who, thus their Woolvish nature do betray, But, ev'n on some of us, who of his Fold Are Members, this, distemper doth lay hold. Ev'n we forsooth, for whom our GOD hath done So much of late; we, we, who look upon Our selves at this time, as a People chose By special providence, to scourge his Foes; And, to be they, whom he first cals to bring Unto his Throne, our Everlasting King, Whose Banners LOVE; Ev'n we, have here of late, Instead thereof, advanc'd the Flagg of HATE To be our Standard; and, the same display With as much virulency as we may Against each other: Yea, against those, too, Who seek GOD'S face, as truly as we do. Some of us, so aloft, our selves do carry With hope of great atchievements temporary, That, we forget from whence we first ascended; Slight them, for whose sakes, we have been befriended; None loving, but our selves; and looking on All els, as if the Earth, for us alone, Had been created; and all others, born For objects of our hatred, or our scorn: And, leave them unrewarded, by whose hands The ground was won, on which our building stands. Some of us, on a spirituall account, To such an overweningnes do mount, As if, we only, were the men, to whom Belongs that Kingdom, which is yet to come: Or, as if Heav'n, for none els were ordain'd, But, those, who are among us entertain'd; Bound up to our Rules; marked, with our Prints; Or, qualifide with our distinguishments:
And, so bewitch't are we, by our own Dreams, With that, which we have Preach'd upon those Theams, That, if we take not heed, 'twill bring about That mischief, which we purpose to keep out. For, we through want of love, are so devided, By having this way, or els that way, sided To raise what others build up, or, in striving To raise a Babell, of our own contriving; That, some perchance, may see the Dragons tail, Swing once more over us, ere we prevail. Yea, want of love, on all sides, so misteaches, Here, sucn Obstructions makes, and there, such breaches That, we are like to make our common Foe, An easie passage, where he could not go. Yet, 'tis not possible to make us wake From our vain Dreams, a safer course to take; Unles, GOD, shall, our Adderlike deaf ear, Pence by some stranger charms, then, yet, we hear: For, they are thought to speak words most in season, Who speak most impudently, and least reason: In which besottednes, if he walk on Much longer, as too long time we have done, (Acting, as if we thought, to shew, our folly Would be an argument to prove us holy. And drive still furiously against each other, As if all shortly would be mad together,) They, will not much mistake therein, who shall This Isle, Great BEDLAM, now Great BRITAN call. The other vertue, of my now dead Friend, Which to our imitation, Ile commend, Is, to be zealous, in the pulling down Of our great Idol. now, more famous grown, Then was Diana; and, ador'd by us, Much more then she was once, at Ephesus. That weak, that base, that despicable ELFE, Cal'd SELFNES, which, man sets up in himself;
And, for whose services, and adoration, We from all things within the whole Creation, Make patterns to our selves: And, not of these Alone, make we fantastick images. But, of things also, which had neither birth, Or being, on, or underneath the earth; Neither within the water, ayr, or fire, Or any where, in lower place, or higher. This, is that God, which now is worship'd more, Then Baal, and all those Idols heretofore, Which did provoke to wrath. There, are our loves Most fixt. Thereto, our Temples, Altars, Groves Are consecrated; and, what els, beside Whereby, an Idol may be glorifide. Thereto, those Tithes, those Duties, those Oblations, Thanksgivings, Prayers, solemn Observations, All forms, and ceremonies, (whether taught By truth, or, superstitiously in brought;) Our Governments, our Parliaments, our Laws, Our Armies, our unjust, and righteous Cause; Our Conquests, all our wisdom, all our wealth; Our honor, beauty, with our youth, and health; Our righteousnes (if we in us, have any; Our wickednesses, (whereof we have many;) Ev'n Scriptures, Judgments, mercies, Sacraments, With what els, GOD ordains, or man invents, Are all, by some among us, now converted, (Or, rather, to speak properly, perverted) Some way to serve, as to advance the praise Of SELFNES, that great Idol of our dayes. And, some, who vote, and speak against it more Then many; more, then any, her adore. Most, who pretend, to serve the Common-weal, Do most intend, from thence to rob and steal Wherewith, to sacrifice before the shrine, Of that lou'd Idol; which doth glare, and shine,
With jewels, gold, and those embellishments, VVhich should have been the publike Ornaments. They, from poor Orphans, and sad Widdows, tear Their Garments, for that pseudo-god to wear: Pluck from their hungry mouths, their bread and meat, For that devouring God of theirs to eat: And, then, for his drink-offrings, pour forth floods Of faithfull servants, Friends, and Childrens bloods. Most, who pretend true Justice to maintain, Do more contend, to wrong those who complain, Then hovv to right them; that, thereby they may Make innocents, this cursed Idols pray: And, to their faithfull friends, are most severe; Either, to make a shevv, as if they vvere Impartiall, or, perhaps, thereby, to pay A good desert, the clean contrary vvay. Most, vvho pretend to charity, do give Either, in hope they, thereby shall receive Some benefit; or, els in hope to raise A Monument, or Trophie of self praise: And fevv out of a tendernes of heart, Give, to releeve, or to revvard desert. Most, vvho pretend to friendship, do but buy With complements, or some cheap courtesie, Their self advantages; and, to more charge, When they are put, it is but to inlarge Their selfnes; and, some way thereby, among Such other ends, to make their party strong: For, when unserviceable, these are grown, They cast them off, as Persons never known. Yea, when the times doth come, which truly shows Who is a Friends, they then become their Foes. Most, who pretend for GOD, that vertue fain For nought; with them, is godlines, but gain. They frequently, more bold with him do make, Then with all others; and from him dare take
What ere they can, to sacrifice unto, This Idoll; and suppose no wrong they do. Yea, those pert Jewish women, who had given And, would give spice Cakes to the Queen of Heaven (And had befoold their Husbands to consent That, them they should, in GODS despight, present, Took not his Oyl, his pure Wheat▪ and his spices, To make, their wicked wilfull Sacrifices, With bolder impudence, then many a one Among us, for this to Idols use have done. A Spirit, being, GOD, in no need stands Either of Churches, Tithes, or Rents, or Lands, Or Forms, or any of those other things, Which, for GODS worship, our devotion brings: For, these will do his deity no good: But, selfnes, is a God of flesh, and blood, That will be highly pleas'd, with those oblations Which GOD Almighty, counts abominations, If not made use of, with all circumstances, Which, in a right way, piety advances. And, therefore, we do purpose (if we may) To take them, for this Idol, quite away. But peradventure, ere effect that finds We may be taken hence, or change our minds. This, is in every heart, the Antichrist, Which doth usurp CHRISTS Temples, and resist His raigning there. There, paramount is he (Though other Antichrists, there, also be) His chiefest opposite; and gives offence, More then his Foes of greater eminence. The Devill, doth in the World, against him rant, As his chief Foe; In his Church militant, (At large) The man of sin; And, this, or that Corruption in each individual State Or Congregation: But, this, hath alone In every single man, the supream Throne
Of opposition; though, sometimes, appearing In one beloved sin, and sometimes wearing Another habit, as it best befits The place, or person, where, inthron'd it sits: And, though the Devill, Turk, and Pope, and all Whom, in their sphears, The Antichrist we call Should down be thrown; we shal rejoyce in vain If, in our hearts, this Antichrist still raign. This, is that Idol, which prolongs our woes: This, is that Idol, which, if ere we lose Our present hopes, is that, which will effect it: And, I do more then probably suspect it. This, is the last thing, my deceased friend, Declaim'd against, before his latter end, As likely to be that abomination, Which will occasion here, a desolation; If not destroyed, or, at least, debased Within those Temples, wherein it is placed. This Idol, hath in every heart a shrine; Yea, (though I hatert) doth possesse in mine The inmost room; there, screwed in so fast, That, thence, I fear, it hardly will be cast Till all that Fabrick shall be broken down, VVherewith it is incorporated grown, It knows what now I think, what now I write, And sticks the closer to me, in despight Of all that I can think, or say, or do: Yea, and by means of this performance too, The more exalted in my heart will be, If, GOD himself, shall not deliver me. But, he will add sufficiency of Grace; For, I intend ev'n in that very place, VVhere fixt it stands, to sacrifise the Beast VVith all the trinkets of self Interest: VVhich, if I can do, while 'tis fixed there, VVill better please, then if destroy'd it were.
Another Virtue in my Friend, no less Deserving heed, was Conscientiousness In words and works; whereof, an imitation, Would bring much happiness unto this Nation. For whise good Conscience, entertain we shall, It keeps a never-ending Festivall, Which gladdeth more the heart, then when we seast To entertain our best beloved Guest. If sleighted; it becomes our greatest Fo: If cherished; it such a Friend will grow, That, when all else forsake us, and abuse us; When they oppress, and causlesly accuse us; When opportunity the Devil wins, To muster up against us, all our sins; When, GOD perhaps, doth lay upon us too, A heavy hand: when Death (as it will do) Arresteth us, our countless debts to pay, And, to his dungeon carries us away; Ev'n then, when all our honors and our wealth, Our youth, our strength, our pleasures, and our health, Shrink from us: when, our best beloved Friends, Our wives and children, upon whom depends Our greatest earthly comforts, will forgo us; Lodg us among the dead, where none shall know us; And, leave us without succour, all alone, To give account for that which we have done: Then, will this Friend, if well we cherish her; (Yea, though she formerly abused were, If we be sorrowfull for our offence And reconciled by true penitence, Will go along with us unto the Grave; Remove all thence, whereof, we dread may have; Sleep there with us, whilest there we shall remain; Rise with us, vvhen vve shall arise again; And, make us there, vvith joyfulness appear Before that Judge, vvhom other men shall fear:
For, having in this life, the privileges, Of our Accusers, Witnesses, and Judges, (Which none else hath by our terrestriall Laws,) Before hand, she determineth our Cause. She, by the Law that's vvritten in our hearts, Doth judg us; and no jot from that departs; So that no Soul, can justly counter-plead, An Ignorance; or stand in any need Of an Interpreter, or, witness brought, To testifie, of vvhat, vvas good or nought: For, none, vvill she condemn for that offence, Whereof, he bringeth not an evidence Within himself, to clear, or to condemn. For that, vvhich is objected unto them. And, vvhosoever to this judgment comes, Shall blame themselves, and justifie her dooms. Look therefore that you keep this Judg your friend, And that, by your fault, she vvho vvill pretend To be this Conscience, be not entertain'd Instead thereof: For, Conscience may be strain'd So far, and by accustomed refusing Good counsell; and by vvilfully abusing Her just reproofs, till her avvay vve chase And let an evil conscience take her place. And, vvhat events, may aftervvard ensue, I leave it, to be thought upon, by you. Hovv, vve may knovv a Conscience rectifide; Hovv, to preserve it, vve may means provide; How to recover it again when lost; Time to compose a large discourse would cost: To sound these depths, I therefore will forbear, And onely add, for your example here, What, by occasion of my Friend, that's gone, I have, since his departure, mused on. Good Conscience, whereof high esteem he made Three Objects hath; to vvhich there must be had
A due respect, asunder, and together, Without neglecting, what belongs to either; Except in things, wherein the less is debter, To wave his due, for that, which is the greater. GOD is the first; our neighbours, or our brother (In some respects) the next; our selves the other; Whose welfare, in some cases, may before The second be preferr'd, and tender'd more: Because, it is the Rule whereby to square, That ove, which to our neighbours, we should bear. Our duties to all these, were in the heart First written; and renew'd again, in part, By common grace: But, sin hath so defaced That Table, and that writing so much rased, That, we must seek to make up that Record By what, GOD hath supplied in his Word; And, they, who would preserve the conscience fair And blameless, to that Glass, must oft repair; Which, (by that aid, which GOD to add will please) Shews us, our several duties, to all these. All they, whose Conscience is this way renew'd, Know what should be embrac'd, and vvhat eschew'd. Such, vvill not of his honour, God, bereave, To save their Countrey; nor, their lives to save, Spoil or betray that; nor, themselves deprive Of ought, vvhich they to serve these, did recieve Through cowardise or sloth; nor, to enjoy The pleasures of the flesh, the Soul destroy. To GOD, they will not make a sacrifice Of guiltless blood; or, honour him vvith lies: Or, offer to him things achiev'd by stealth, By fraud or rapine; nor their Common-wealth Repair, inrich, or strengthen, by oppressions; By tollerating any knovvn transgressions, To Piety destructive; or, to that True Justice, vvhose defect, may ruinate
Humane society; either, by searing To dravv their svvords against a Tyrants daring; Or seeking, by a warlike way of murther, Hovv, to inlarge their territories further; In hope of needles gain, or fruitles glory, hais'd out of black deeds, by a bloody story: But, prosecute the troublers of their peace, Till safety, may be setled; and, then, cease: That, throughout all the World it may be knovvn, They sought not to inlarge, but save their ovvn; And to disable those from doing vvrong, Who, els, vvould all the World embroyl, ere long. Such, vvill not make their Publique Faith a scorn. That they vvho live, and they vvho are unborn May in times future, be discourag'd from Assisting, vvhen another need shall come; And, let all, rather unto ruine run, Then trust, vvhat is not to be trusted on. Such, vvill not (as in times of need they may) Take some mens lands, and lively hoods avvay, The Publique to secure, vvithout supply, For losse of that, vvhich it vvas saved by: But, to each private sufferer, reimburse Their private damage, from the Publique purse. Such, vvill not misemploy their Powr, in place Of supream Trust, unjustly, to disgrace Their faithfull servants, upon bare surmizes, On misreports, vvhich evill will devises To blast their credit, ruine their Estate, (Perhaps their lives too) by objecting hate Which is untrue- For, they not being there Who could refute that, vvherevvith charg'd they vvere, (Nor suffred to take notice, from vvhose tongue They, in their absence, did receive that vvrong) A prejudice, doth bring a censure on them, Which ere they can prevent it, hath undone them.
If they good conscience have, who thus can do; Ile think, the devill hath some conscience too; How seared are the consciences of those, Who, give their friends, much lesse respect then foes? Obliging them by favours whom they fear, VVould els be traytors, (or perhaps so are) And disoblige true men, because, they know No injury can make them lesse then so? VVhat conscience, have they who do pretend, The Publique hath not, to releeve a friend That's perishing; and, yet the self-same day (Though no need were) profusely give away Large sums among themselves; and gratifie Those men, who with their faction do comply? (And own their ways, opinions, and designs) As if they did possesse, the Indian Mines? VVhat Consciences have they, who pay some worst, VVho merit best; and last, who serv'd them first: Provide for those; who for self-ends do serve; And let the Common-wealths true servant starve? Give ready Coyn to some; and unto them Who did the same work, at the self-same time, Not any thing at all? except, perchance, A Warrant, Order, or an Ordinance Which by begetting others, doth still add New troubles, and expence to what they had; And without profit, so inlarge their cost, By pretious time, and redious labour lost; That, if at first, their debts they had forgiven (And added so much more, to make all even) To get a flat deniall; some, had gain'd Much more thereby, then will be now obtain'd, Though they were pay'd to morrow? One, I know VVho by experiment, hath found it so; Yet, some of them, who may this conscience own, Wo uld seem to think, great things on him, bestown:
Because, Gods mercy, other wayes supplies That, which to him, their Justice yet denies. What partiall Consciences are also theirs? Who, in establishing of just Arrears, Gave some full Interest for debts delay'd, And none to others, for like debts unpay'd Ten summers after; and, which may, before They are discharg'd, stand charged ten years more And then at last, perhaps, aside be lay'd Among those debts, that never shall be pay'd? From such corrupted consciences as these, Hath sprung our Epidemicall disease: Those many fold complainings, in our streets, Wherewith each friend his sad companion greets: Those scandals, which are publish'd in disgrace Of persons, who were lately in the place Sapream Trust: hence, also, flows that hate The Quarrels, discontentment, and debate, Which is amongst us: Hence, those hazzards rise VVhich make us fearfull, and our Enemies Still hopefull, that, it either shall occasion Some broyl within, or, some without Invasion. And, if I may beleeve what my heart tels, That, which they do expect, or somewhat els Equivalent, vvill shortly come to passe, If vve below, and they vvho are in place Above us, make not conscience of our vvayes More then vve have done, in preceding dayes. For, if there be a GOD, as my soul knovvs There is, by that, vvhich daily from him flovvs: If there be devils, as I knovv vvell to, There are by vvhat, I see their servants do. GOD, or the Devill vvill to us appear By some new Act of Grace, or work of fear, To purge hearts, from death procuring works, And that hypocrisie within them lurks;
And keep us to the rule of doing so, To others, as we would be done unto. Of which good practise, whilst he here was living My Westrow (having by examples of giving) Deserved to be a pattern, I, contrived, This vvay, of having him, again revived; That, I, and you, and others, by the light From henoe reflecting, may walk more upright. Lord, let these overflowings of my Spirit, Which, in themselves have neither powr, nor merit. Produce forth good effects; and not be found Like that, which gives an useles, emyty sound. Let it be some way, fruitfull unto them, Who had relations in the flesh to him, Who, hereof gave occasion; and, some way To every Reader, who peruse it may; And, not a memorandum only be To other men; but, likewise unto me. Vouchsafe me grace, whilst, here I live to serve (In this my Generation) not to swarve From my appointed work; but to persever In doing it, with vigilant endeavour; That, of my Talent, when I must appear To give account (which time approacheth near) I may be faithful found, and to that joy Admittance have, which nothing can destroy. Let neither fears, nor hopes, neglects, or wrongs, Deter from doing what to me belongs: And, though my faculty hath small esteem, And needles to the World, perhaps, may seem, In those affairs which may be pertinent To thy great work: make it a supplement Of some good use; that, times to come may see My wither'd leaves, did help adorn the Tree During that season, wherein cloth'd it stood; And, were for cure of some diseases good.
Of what, in others, to be good, or ill, I have observ'd; let application, still, So to my self be made, that what I saw, To be amisse in them, may me withdraw From erring paths; and, in their steps to tread, Who nave uprightly walk'd, (alive or dead.) That, I may truly foot thy measures, too, As well as pipe them out, to those that do: Lest, I my self, a Reprobate be found, When all things have compleatly daunc'd their round. Let not the Revolutions, or the changes, Or, that prevarication which now ranges Throughout the VVorld, me, from my station carry; Or, cause me from good Principles to vary. But, in the stream, of all those great distractions, Diffring opinions, counter-marching actions, Plottings, designings, threatnings, and pertakings, Whimsies, Chimeras, doubtings, and mistakings, Fawnings, and frownings, praises, or disgraces, Wants, and aboundings, in all times, and places, So steddy keep my Judgment, and so clear, That, all my Life, I firmly may adhear To truth, and honesty; and, plainly see What man intends, or is design'd by thee, And, whatsoere, without me, makes a din; Let, me have alwayes, peace, and joy, within, My life, hath been a warfar to this day; And troubles multiply: Yet, if it lay Within my powr, to chuse what other lot The best man living hath, (or I have not) And, might my self, my own self being make; Let me no comfort, in my Portion take, If, I, would chuse ought els, but that which now I have, and thy free mercy, shall allow: For, of thy love, so well assur'd am I;
And, how, thou best knowst, what for me is best; That, on thy VVisdom, Powr, and Love Ile rest. I, love to see the doing what thou dost, (Oh GOD! most holy, powrful, wise, and just) And, therefore, though my flesh be terrifide By thy approaches, and, oft loth to bide Where, I may stand to see thee marching on, And doing, here, such things as thou hast done: Yea, though sometime, such horrors on me cease, That, they do shake my bones; yet naytheles, My spirit, so is pleased, to behold Those Judgments, and those mercies manifold, Which I observe; that, in no other time, Nor, (might I chuse) in any other Clime, Would I have liu'd, save where I might have seen Such things, as have to me discovered been: No, though thy Judgments, which, now on us be, Have in the flesh, with others, wrapt up me, For, whatsoever former times afford; Whatever, hath been written in the Word; What signs, or wonders, have been to thy glory Recorded in prophane, or sacred story; Hath been a new transacted, in my dayes. So, have I seen the River, and the Seas Made passable: So, have I seen thy wonders In blood, and Vermine; in fire, hail, and thunders; And, in those other dreadfull signs, whereby Thou, heretofore didst Pharaoh terrifie; Mysteriously, or morally (at least) If not in all things, lit'rally exprest: And, have abserv'd, that, they on other men Have now, the same effects, which they had then. To carnal wisdom, but events of chance They do appear; and, such, to ignorance. Great Kings, and Princes, will not yet be wise, But fool themselves, with vanities, and lies;
And, are like Pharaoh, daily hardned so, As if they dared thee, thy worst to do. Yea, their inchanters, though they cannot stand Before thee, (and acknowledg 'tis thy hand, Which is upon them) do endeavour still, To seek themselves, and to resist thy will. And, all of us, almost as heedles are, Of what thou dost, as Jacobs off-spring were. Thy judgments, mercies, threatnings, promises; The severall causes, and effects of these, Have been to me, exemplifide a new, By that, which hath been offred to my view: Th' occurrances, betwixt thy Friends, and Foes, Long time ago, foretipifying those That should succeed, (and, were for Presidents, That like proceedings, would have like Events Throughout all ages) I've seem parallel'd By those, which with mine eyes, I beheld: And, by those tipes, compar'd with what I saw, Did, sometimes from them such conclusions draw, That, I foretold, when few beleeved me, What, they and I, have liv'd, fulfil'd to see. And, though, thou art not pleas'd to let me know, Perspicuously, what is approaching now: Yet, I see dim appearances, whereby I may suspect a mischief drawing nigh. A Cloud, which like a mans hand seems to be, Or, els, a mans hand, like a Cloud I see Threatning a storm. I see, me thinks, Ob Father! Vapours far off disperst, begin to gather Into divided bodies, whence may break A voice of Thunder, and things dreadfull; speak, With sad events; If we with speed repent not; And, thou, the plagues, which we deserve, prevent not. Oh! therefore, turn our hearts; and unto thee So, from our own wayes let us turned be,
That, thou maist still continue thy compassion, With thy accustom'd favours, to this Nation. And, my beloved Brethren, for whose warnings, I, thus adventure my dim fore-discernings To publique censure, though not for my sake, (For your own safety, notice of them take: And, of your vanities, repent with speed; That, Judgments, but conditionally decreed, May be averted: And, that, those good things, Of whose approach the season symptoms brings, Deferred may not be: For, there is, yet, Somwhat, to be removed, which doth LET, That Kingdoms coming, for which, many pray; And, that Removall, must prepare the Way. If, GOD, this way, by judgments, must inforce, It will, for us, now living, be the worse; And, we shall bear the strong pangs of that BIRTH Which, that mysterious WOMAN will bring forth, On whom, the DRAGON waiteth to devour The MANCHILD, who (deliver'd from his power By his Almighty Father, and our GOD) Shall rule the Nations, with an IRON ROD. But, if we willingly remove from hence, That LET; it shall produce a recompence, Which will requite our labour, and destroy The great Obstructer of our promis'd Joy. Here, I had done. But somwhat, presseth in, On which, I could anew again begin. It doth not much concern my Theam, I know; But, what, of that? It may concern you, tho. My Muse, oft times, when she is on her wings, Wheels from her Game, to unexpected things Which come to view; and, thereby more hath won Somtimes, then if aside she had not gone. So, may she now; Ile therefore, let her fly At what she sees, although I know not why.
The Kingdom look'd for, seems to be near By many tokens, which to me appear, As well upon the Governments of those Who, there to are profest, or secret Foes, As on the SAINIS: For, when I was but young, (And ever since my child-hood, all along) I, thereto had an eye: And, in this clime, (Or little world) I've seen within my time Four Governments, almost as differing Both in the roots, from which they forth did spring, And discipline, as DANIELS Monarchies: And, much, to be consider'd, in them lies, To make me to beleeve, that, CHRIST is shaking The Worlds foundations; and, approaches making. The first was, when much sam'd ELIZABETH, Raig'nd here; In whose time, (though I drew my breath Not thirteen years) I, observations made Of things, then said and done, both good, and bad, More then my age did promise; and, er'c taught, Was to the best part, of my knowledg brought. During this Monarchy, I did perceive, Sincerity, begin to take her leave; That, Christian zeal abate, and cool again. Which was so hot, when she began to Raign; And, introductions of such deviations, As, both forego, and foreshow alterations. Yet, that, which then did seem to keep in aw These Nations, was, the GOSPEL, and the LAW. Next her, out from the Caledonian Wood, A ramping Lyon came; and, up he stood. As, he first got this pow'r, he kept the same, By acting of the Fox, and seeming tame. To his devourings, he impos'd no measure: The Law he govern'd by, was WILL, and PLEASƲRE; And, he pursude, what he design'd at first, As far, as any crasty coward durst.
More stoutly, his Successor, carried on, Then politickly, what his SIRE begun; And after many struglings, and much cost, Himself, his Kingdoms, and desigments he lost. Yet, for that Government, thus much Ile say, Justice, and piety, wore in that day, The fairest out-side; and, were trim'd about With many Ornaments, now, nigh worn out; And, goodnes, had a very glorious shell, Although the kernels therein prov'd not well. Against this Government, the People rose, In throaning them, whom they themselves had chose; And whilst they were continu'd on the Throne, NECESSITIE, was law, for what was done: Which Law, to lengthen, and corroborate, They, new NECESSITIES did still create; Till their Adorers, did their Pow'r contemn, And, found great need of all things, but of THEM. For, by indulging selfnes, they destroy'd, What had by self-deniall been enoy'd; And made themselves so rich, and some so poor, That, now, the Peoples choice, is out of dore. Yet, whilst they kept the Throne, GOD, by them wrought Effects, which will not wholly come to nought: For, though self-seeking, most prevailed then, There were among them, good, and righteous men, (To GOD, and to their Country serviceable) Whose number, had it been proportionable To ten, for each five Cities, Towns, or Shiers; Had made the work, reserv'd for others, theirs. The SWORD, hath now, obtain'd the soveraign pow'r, Let it, Oh LORD! protect, and not devou'r. Let, it take notice, that it is prepar'd, The Vineyard, only, to secure and gard, (Or, cut away those Plants, which might annoy The fruitfull Vines, and their sweet grapes destroy)
Not to possesse the same as if it own. Let us (although the pow'r thereon bestown, Should be abus'd) obediently attend, Till to the raign, thereof, thou setst an end: For, when thou pleasest, thou, canst in one hour, Make it destroy it self, by it own Powr. To rule us, thou hast now advanced it; Let us, for conscience sake, therefore, submit, Whether it be for future good, or ill; Because, to have it so, it is thy will. Thou canst as well by Arms, as by the Gown Rule peaceably, and make thy mercy known. Although it be a Sword, that bears the sway, Let, it thine Adversaries, only, slay; Let none of thine, have any cause to fear it: And, let it no wayes dammage those that wear it. Still, mindfull make it, for whose good, and ayd 'Twas first advanced, disciplin'd, and payd: Who, did contribute, what, first, made it strong To conquer: who, still adds, what doth belong To keeping of that Powr; and, let it not Indanger those by whom it was begot; Wrong their propriety, whom it defended; And whose just preservation was intended; Nor, breake those antient bounds which kept should be 'Twixt man and man; and, betwixt man, and Thee; And, upon whose Infringers thou hast laid, Curse, whereof, all, ought to be afraid. Let it perform the works thereto appointed; Make way for Justice, and for thy Anointed: And, when the time design'd thereto is done, Let it, to what must follow, yeeld the Throne. The next, I hope shall be the LIVING-WORD. Let his long look'd for KINGDOM come, Oh LORD! Let over us, that King of Nations raign, To whom, all praise, and Glory doth pertain.
For, whatsoer'e this proves, that best will please us. Come therefore, quickly Quickly come, LORD JESƲS. Mean while, accept a sacrifice of praise, For what hath been vouchsafed in these days, By way of preparation, to that End, For which, in Faith, and hope, we do attend. Accept of prases, from the single hearted, For all thy Saints, which are from hence departed; And, for all those, who shall make up the sum, By which thy Kingdom, will compleat become. Accept my Thanks, for what thou didst confer On me, by him that's gone, and those, yet here: Accept it rather, for that love of thine, Vouchsafed from thy self, to me and mine, By frequent pledges; and, for that Free grace, Whereby before all time, I chosen was, To be eternally made One with Thee; And, in thy self, accept them LORD, of me. Thus, having my Friends Obit, truly truly kept. Six nights, (whilst others round about me slept) Here, that Contexture, which conceiv'd I had, Is now produced, spun, and weav'd, and made. 'Tis true the Object, of my contemplations, Was WESIROW: But, from him, my Meditations, Rose higher; and my soul did contemplate Things, which concen these Nations, and this State; And, thereupon, some hints, are interweaved, Which will (if passed by, as unperceived). Make th which is, the Muses way of giving Life to the  Dead; to be, unto the Living, An on  presage; at least to some, Of death, of shame, or, of worse things to come. FINIS.
