a844 53298926 179722
A DECLARATION OF THE COMMANDER in Chief of the Forces in SCOTLAND, And of the OFFICERS of the Army under his Command, In Vindication of the Liberties of the PEOPLE, and the Priviledges of PARLIAMENT. HAving, to the great grief of our hearts, been informed of a most unhappy difference lately fallen out betwixt the Parliament and some Officers of the Army at London, which hath occasioned the displacing of sundry of the said Officers; And also the in∣terruption of the Members of Parliament in the discharge of their Duty, We therefore, having earnestly besought the LORD to direct us in this great and weighty Affair, wherein the Liberty and Peace of these Nations, and the Interest of the Godly and Faithfull therein is so nearly concerned, do finde it our duty to Declare, and we do hereby Declare, That we shall use our Christian endeavours to the utmost for the be∣getting of a Right understanding and Reconciliation betwixt the Parlia∣ment and the said Officers of the Army. And we do also Declare, That we shall, through the strength of God, assert and maintain the Freedom and Priviledges of the present Parliament, the so often, and lately acknow∣ledged Supream Authority of these Nations, and not suffer the Members thereof to be illegally interrupted or molested in the discharge of their Du∣ties; And we do solemnly avow to all the world, that our only intention in doing this, is to preserve the Rights of our Country, and to protect and encourage all the Godly and Faithfull therein, according to our De∣claration to the Churches, lately emitted and published; and likewise to esta∣blish the Peace of these Nations, and the Government of a Free-State or Commonwealth, To which we stand obliged by several Vows and En∣gagements, made before GOD and many Witnesses: And as we have within us the Testimony of sincere hearts and unbyassed consciences to en∣courage us in these our Vndertakings, so we doubt not of the concurrent assistance of all the unprejudiced Faithfull in the Land, for whose sakes principally we are drawn forth to this Engagement. And we therefore invite all our Brethren of the Army, and of the Militia, and all others that professe love to GOD and His People, and to their own and their Posterities Liberties, to come and give us their chearful aid in this Work, whereunto the Lord hath called us, lest they be made a Prey to the Lusts of Men, and then bewail the losse of this opportunity which God hath put into their hands. Linlithgow, Octob. 21. 1659. Signed in the Name and by the Consent of the Commander in Chief and the Officers of the Army in Scotland. WILLIAM CLARKE, Secretary. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts Close, over against the Trone Church, 1659.
