B3898 99883161 183587
The two faithful Lovers, Or, A merry song in praise of Betty. Young-men and maids I do intend To sing a song that's newly Pen'd; And if you please to have it out 'Twill please your fancies without doubt. By T.B. Tune of, the amorous Damsel of Bristol-City. With Allowance. IN a May-Morning as I was walking I heard two Lovers together talking; With words so sweet he spake unto her, And thus he did begin to wooe her: Said he well met my dearest Betty, Thou art a Girl that is wondous pretty; If I could gain but your love and favour, I'd b thy dearest Love fo eer. Slight not Sweetheart this loving motion, A Hundred pound it is my Portion, But if we never injoy one penny, True-love is better than bggs of Money. The Mids Aswer. Good sir your words are kindly poken, But hasty love is soonest brken; 'Tis good for you observe our doing, And be not you too, uick in wooing.
If I should grant you my love to marry, Perhaps you'd wish you did longer tarry, And in one Year begin to flout me, And wish that you had gone without me. Some men do flout their Wives, 'tis certain And say they might had better fortune; So thus they alwaies frown and lowre, And scarcely live one quiet hour. The Mans Answer. Sweet-heart my love on thee is fixed, Both night and day I am perplexed; Then prithee do not thou deny me, But come sweetheart and sit down by me. Doubt not sweetheart ile ne'r offend thee, My love is true which I pretend thee, Ile not forsake thee for Gold nor Money, Then do not slight me my dearest Honey. Betty blame me not for my speeches, I do not aim for Gold nor Riches, My heart is fixed without moving; Sweet Betty be thou kind and loving. Grant but to me thy Love and Favour, Both day and night I hard will labour If that I have but health my honey Thou shalt not want for Meat nor Money. The maids Answer. Youngmen have such a way in wooing To vow ad swer the'l still e loing; Yet in one Year there is small regarding Which makes some Maids repent their bar∣gain. Yet if I thought your love was constant Which you pretend now at this instant, Methinks I cannot well deny thee Because with words you satisfie me. For what you said I do commend you, And in this cause I will befriend you; Ask but the good will of my Father, And you and I will joyn together. The mans Answer. Oh now thy words it doth revive me, For I did fear thou wouldst deny me, While life doth last ile ne'r forsake thee, Since for my wife I mean to take thee. There is never a Maid in London City In my conceit is like my Betty, She is so handome in her favour, I think my self a blest to have her. So to concude, I wish each Lover To prove so constant to each other As those two did, of whom i'me speaking: There need not be so much heart-breaking. Printed for J Wright. J. Clark. W. Tackery. a I. Passingr.
