c6520 99887062 183268
The Counterfeit Court Lady: OR, An Answer to, Your Humble Servant Madam. Discovering all her cunning Knacks and feats, How wittily she doth bestow her Cheats: By which she doth much admiration gain, And in a splendid Garb her self maintain. To the Tune of, Your Humble servant Madam. I A am a Lass That doth surpass, the beauties of the City; And near the Court, Where Blades resort, i'm counted wondrous witty: I have an oyly Tongue, And very well it's hung, if that you will believe me; Your flattering disease, My humour cannot please, for there's none that can deceive me No vapouring Cheat, Shall do the feat, with such a Girl as I am; I'le sit and smile, And him beguile, and all his Oaths defie 'um: He that will cog and lye, Gains not my company, when once his plot I faddam; For I scorn that any man, Should ever me trappan, with your humble servant Madam. The Second Part, To the same Tune. AT my first Rise, I was so wise, to gain a great mans favour; And by my art, I won his heart, all by my brisk behaviour: VVhere I had Gold at will, My mind for to fulfil, he willing was to grant it; But though that he is gone, And I am left alone, I never fear to want it. My Rich attire, Made all admire, and by what means I gain'd it; I have a knack, To drink good Sack, and bravely to maintain it; VVith my Pearl about my neck, And my Gallants at a beck, I us'd to drein their Purses; Before they will not grant, VVhatever I do want, they'l sell both Coach and Horses. To train up youth, I speak the truth, upon my Reputation; I do excell, And do it well, as any in the Nation: If I may gain their gold, I'le make them free and bold, there's none that shall out-vie them, For all the art of Love, You shall of them approve, when e're you please to try them. Young Ladies they Observe my way, they think I am a neat one; If I do glance, Or Sing, or Dance, I am a most compleat one. Though my breeding was not great, Yet I have learnt the feat, for to delude a Sinner; To sit upon his Lap, And catch him in a trap, for I am no young beginner. How happy he Is thought to be, that by his comely carriage, Hath got the Art, To win my heart, and treat with me of Marriage: VVhen I seem to comply, He knows no reason why, but that he may believe me; Thus I get Diamond Rings, And many pritty things, for none could e're deceive me. Thus with my wit, Great benefit, and Riches I have gotten; VVhich I in store, Keep for the Poor, when I am dead and rotten: He shall be paid full well, That Rings my Passing-Bell, and digs my Grave a fadam, Then all that can be said, Here lies one Buried, that was a Ranting Madam. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.
