D971 99887673 183295
The Deluded Lasses Lamentation: OR, The False Youth's Unkindness to his Beloved Mistress. To the Tune of Is she gone, let her go. Licensed according to Order. IS she gone? let her go, I do not care, Though she has a dainty thing, I had my share: She has more Land than I by one whole Acre, I have plow'd in her Ground, who will may take her. Did not you promise me when you lay by me, That you wou'd Marry me, can you deny me? If I did promise thee, 'twas but to try thee, Bring in your Witness, for now I defie thee. Did not you swear by the Powers above, That you wou'd Marry if I'd grant you love? Of all fair Lasses I thought thee bonniest, And wou'd have marry'd thee hadst thou kept honest. 'Twas your deluding Tongue made me miscarry, Because you promis'd with me for to marry, Had not you yielded so soon to lye by me, Then to have Marry'd I had not deny'd thee. I never lay with Man, except it were you, Not thinking you wou'd have prov'd so untrue: If to lye by me thou then hadst refused, Then I thy Person sure ne'er had abused. You with the Art of a vigorous Lover, Told me you pleasure and joys cou'd discover; But your false pleasure did last but a moment, And for that pleasure I suffer more Torment. Sweet fair charming Beauty you then had in store, Had Vertue been added, there needed no more; But if you had not been as willing as I, You had not yielded with me for to lye. Your promise made me to let ye lye by me, I thought you constant, and could not deny thee; But had I known the Intent of your Passion, Thus for to grieve there had been no occasion. Thou fond and foolish Girl, leave thy lamenting When thou art wiser then I'll be Relenting; When thou again art a Virgin I'll Wed thee, And then with License I boldly may Bed thee. You pleasure take to rail at my Misfortune, Whilst my poor heart do's ake to think of parti, But since that you are resolved to flye me, I hope no other Lass e'er will lye by thee. Farewell thou perjur'd Youth, false and deceitfull, I ne'er thought you wou'd have prov'd so ungratefull First by deluding Words thus to deceive me, Having obtain'd your ends, scornfully leave me. Do but remember now when you came to me, Every solemn Vow made to undoe me; By your alluring Charms I was invited, You for my present Harms may be required. Being the worst of Men, first to Defile me, And this no sooner done, but streight revile me; From which I perfectly now do discover, You were no more at best, but a false Lover. Let Lasses young and fair, that hears this Story, Of a false Lover be ware, blast not your Glory; For many young-men will strive to deceive you, And when they have their Will, streightway will leave you. Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, I. Back.
