E356 99885171 182502
AN ELEGIE On Coronel BLOOD, Notorious fo stealing the Crown, &c. Who Dyed the Twenty Sixth of August, 1680. 30 Aug. 1680. Thanks ye kind Fates, for your last Favour shown Of stealing BLOOD, who lately stole the Crown; We'l not exclaim so much against you since; As well as BEDLOE, you have fetcht him hence, He who hath been a Plague to all Mankind: And never was to any one a Friend, Nay to himself such torment was at last, He wisht his Life had long ago been past. For who can bear, a discontented minde. Or any Peace with an ill Conscience finde, Thro' his whole Life, he practis'd Villany And Lov'd it though he nothing got thereby; At first uneasy at the Kings return With secret Malice his bold heart 'did burn. Against his Sovereign, and on pretence He had much wrong'd his Feign'd Innocence; To IRELAND went, and several ways did try Rather then he would unrevenged Dye, To vent his Malice on His MAJESTY. But finding there all his attempts prove vain, To ENGLAND forthwith he returns again, And after some small time, he had Liv'd here The first Great thing in which he did appear, Was rescuing from Justice CAPTAIN MASON, Whom all the WORLD doth know, t'have been a base one The next ill thing he Boldly undertook, Was Barbarously seizing of a DUKE. Whom as he since confess'd, he did intend To Hang for Injuries he did pretend: The DUKE had alone him, though the World does know His Grace was ne're to a Good Man a Foe: Having through all, his many well spent Days; Serv'd His KING and Country, several ways And Patiently his troubles underwent, Finding a sweetness, ev'n in Banishment And Death, he Patiently wou'd have endur'd, The KINGS Restoring cou'd he have secur'd: A DUKE, who being by Providence preserv'd Hath begot Sons; who Valiantly have serv'd. His MAJESTY, and Great Renown Obtein'd In many Battles by your Valour Gain'd, Great OSSERY, who by his Conduct wise, Did Oft by Stratagems, his Foes surprize And hath as often beat them with his Sword; Was the Eldest Son, of this most Noble LORD. But I my HEROE almost had forgot, And th' next thing he Engag'd in was a PLOT. To seize the CROWN; and without doubt he who So Great a Piece of Villany would do, When he saw Time, wou'd have attempted too; His MAJESTY; but failing of the prize, About the Town he undiscover'd lies, Harbour'd by some of's fellow Rogues, yet see How few can scape concernd in Villany, In a short time, he apprehended was And brav'd His MAJESTY, even to his Face Yet when one wou'd, have thought he should have had; Reward for's Villany; and have been made Example to all Ages our good King, Gave him his Life, (who long has strove to bring Destruction on him,) and did him Restore, To liberty, thinking he ne're wou'd more Do any thing unjust again when loe; His stiring Spirit, was not contented so, For he Engages inth' Conspiracy, To ruine th' Honour, Life, and Liberty, Of a deserving Noble Honest Peer, And had him brought, unto destruction near But Divine providence for ever Blest: Prevented this, as well as all the Rest By th' coming in of some, that were concern'd Which all your PLOT; into confusion turn'd, At last our Famous HEROE Coronel BLOOD, Seeing his Projects all will do no good, And that Success was to him still deny'd, Fell sick with Grief, broke his great Heart and dy'd. The EPITAPH. HERE Lies the Man, who boldly hath run through, More Villanies then ever ENGLAND knew; And nere to any Friend, he had was true, Here let him then by all unpittied Lye, And Let's Rejoyce his time was come to Dye. FINIS. LONDON, Printed by J. S. in the Year, 1680.
