E442 99890183 182523
AN ELEGY ON THE TRULY HONOURABLE, AND MOST VIRTUOUS, CHARITABLE, and PIOUS LADY, Countesse of Devonshire, VVho lately Departed this Life, being a Hundred and odd Years of Age, whose Corps now Lies in Deserved State in Holbourn. ARe all the Poets Dumb? And is there Note Whose Tears may fill our empty Helicon? So as to fix a Never-dying Verse On Pious Devonshires deserving Herse. Had Shee been only that which now adays Is thought enough for a Great Madams Praise, Handsome, Brisk, Aiery, Complaisant and Gay, Less Zealous at a Sermon than a Play; Been Painted or Perfum'd with Ambergreece, And skill'd in nought but Modes and Point-Ve, Shee would have had the Dablery of the Quill VVhine, and the Town with vain App fill; But Her Perfection (like the Suns bright Rays) Dazells their Sight, and Withers their Sto Bays VVhose Prostituted Pen's for sordid Hire, Dawb glorious Vice, and from Apollo's Quire Filch Sacred Raptures, which profanely they Upon the Shrine of every Wanton Lay. VVe scorn to bath her Corps with a forc'd Tear, Nor shall her Train borrow the Blacks they wear. Their Vulgar Spice and Gums too trivial be, Ours is a Theme of Truth, not Poetry. Shee was a Lady 'bove the Common strain, In whom all Vertues did United Raign; By Birth derived from the Noblest Springs, And Godmother unto the best of Kings. Her Dawning Beams so glorious did appear, They Darted Love and Wonder every where; Yet Her Ripe Years surpass'd in inward Grace The charming Beauties of Her Youthful Face▪ Though Streams of Grandeur flow'd in her high Blood, She before Great, prefer'd the Name of Good. Knowledge that often Puffs a spungy Crest, Gave her the Treasure of a lowly Breast. Wisdom that once abus'd turns Vanity, Taught Her a holy Meek Simplicity. Rubes that Cloath the Brow with Proud disdain, Her Charity Improv'd for endless Gain▪ How Lib'ral were Her Alms! which yet she did In secret, wishing still they might be hid; And seem'd in Publick-view, ashamed more For to Releive, than some t'oppress the Poor: Mans Good, Gods Glory, was her highest pitch, True Knowledge made her Wise, that Wisdom Rich; To say sh's now an Angel is scarce more Praise than she had, for she seem'd such before. Her lie so Straight, it shames the Popish square Prescrib'd in Rules of saint Bridget or Clare; VVhilst Pilgrimageing here, she stood possest Of Heav'n in part, For her Rich furnisht Brest VVas a fair Temple, and her heart a shrine, So Purg'd, that she appeared All Divine; Strictly Religious, of firm loyalty, In discource Pleasant, without vanity; Kind to her Servants; to Relations Dear, To nothing but Her Self or sin severe; To a good old Age she Liv'd, and every how'r Into her Lamp fresh Oil of Grace did pour; At length death Welcome summons having spy'd, she Smil'd her self into a Corpse, and Dy'd, The Jewel snatcht to Bliss, below is set In Solemn state th' abondon'd Caskinet, To shew how all things Fade, and what small trust VVe owe this World, Compos'd of Fleeting dust, VVhere Beauty, Honour, Riches, all we have, Are Plunder'd from us by th' insatiate Grave. Ladies! when by her Marble Tomb you pass Let it's Reflection be your Looking-glass VVhere Youth, may learn to Live and Age to Dye, Your Rule's above, but your Example nigh. This Heav'n-fled Saint hath scor'd both the way, Heaven sets not Earth such Coppies ev'ry day. Her Vertves be your Guide they lye before yee, So shall you ad more honour to her story, And Gain your selves A Crown her Crown more Glory. FINIS.
