F2549 52614681 175890
A Further and Full Account of the Surrender of Galway, VVith the Articles contained therein. Published by Authority. From the Camp before Galway, July 22. 1691. ON Sunday the 19th instant, the Army marched from Atheuree to this place. The General immediatly sent a Trumpeter to my Lord Dil∣lon Governor of the Town, and offered him the Benefit of the Lords Ju∣stices Proclamation of the 7th, which he enclosed to him, if he would Sur∣render it before he was obliged to fire his Cannon The Answer was, That Monsieur Dussone, who Commanded, was of the same Opinion with himself and the rest of the Officers, who were resolved to Defend it to the last. While it was light, our Men made but small Advances, but at night they attack'd a small Fort they had made to command a Valley between the Town and us, and immediatly beat the Irish out of it; and hearing that Baldarock O Donnel intended to throw himself and his Brigade into the place that night, or the next morning, the Tin-Boats were immediatly put into the Water, and Six Regiments of Foot, and Four Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, sent over the River, and Posted in the way Baldarock was to take, so that finding no Succours could be put in on that side, he retired with his Rabble into the County of Mayo burning and destroying all the Country as he marched. The taking this Fort, and pas∣sing the Water so suddenly, we suppose, were the things that frighted them into a Treaty; For on the 20th, about 10 in the morning, the Governour desired a safe Conduct for some Persons he intended to send to the General to Capitulat; and in the afternoon three of their Lieutenant-Colonels came out, and as many of ours went into the Town as Hostages: The Treaty lasted the rest of the day, and night, they being often obliged to go back to con∣sult their Principals; At last it was agreed, That on next Sunday morning, at six a Clock, the Town should be delivered to such Officers as the General should appoint, and in the mean time we should have five Hostages for the due perfor∣mance of Articles, whereof my Lord Clanriccard is one, and all the Out∣works of the Town put into our Possession, That the Enemy should forbear to For∣tify in this time, and withdraw all their Cannon from the Walls, but that we may be permitted to work, and Post our selves where we will, provided we came not within three yards of the Wall, nor place any Cannon upon the Batteries we make. The Garrison and Townsmen that remain, have the benefit of the Lord Justices Proclamation, which gives them their Estates and Liberties; and those who have a mind to depart, are to be conducted safe to Limerick, with their Arms, Drums beating, &c. and six Pieces of Cannon. They have liberty to send to my Lord Tyrconnel, to acquaint him with what they have done, and invite him to do the same at Limerick. A French Vessel of 30 Guns sailed out of the Harbour as we marched hi∣ther, and two more remain still here. Edinburgh, Re-printed in the Year, 1691.
