M1694 99885224 182633
A MEMORIAL on the Death of that faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, NATHANAEL STRANGE, Pro. 10.7. Mat. 26.13 Es. 57.2 Rev. 17.14Who for his Loyalty to his Lord the King, ran through many Jeopar∣dies and Dangers;Isa. 26.13. Est. 3.8. 1 Chron. 11, 19 Neb. 6.2, 11. Num 23.21, 23 Numb. 24.7. Luke 1.32. Heb. 10.37. Chearfully and constantly Witnessing to his Princely Authority over All Nations;Rom. 6.16. Psa. 119.32 Psa. 134.1. 2 Cor. 6.5. Act. 5.31, 32. & 26. 16, 22. Pro. 14.32. Gen. 50.24. Psal. 72. Zech. 9.10. Psa 110 5,6. and in full confidence of Christs Coming, and his Glorious Reign on Earth,Jer. 23.5. Isa. 32.1. & 24.23. Rev. 11.7. rested from all his Labours, Rev. 14.13. the fourth day of the eighth Month, 1665. An Acrostick. NEw Griefs, new Sorrows now are come, now Strange from hence is flown Away from us, who here do dwell within this Frigid Zone. This World too low, for thee so High, so Heavenly divine; Heav'n is thy home, where thou dost dwell, & in great Glory shine. Alas! Strange, thou art gone, to whom the World was very strange; Now unto us great Loss, to thee great Gain: most happy Change! All Earthly Joys contemn didst thou, because thou wert Sublime; Eternity was in thine Eye, beyond the bounds of Time. Labour'ous was thy Work and Care, i'th' Vineyard night and day; Sions great Friend, and Watchman true, who never ceas'd to pray That Babylon'an-Powers might be unto nothing brought; Regent o're Nations and Affections CHRIST alone was sought. Admirable Graces and Gifts did richly thee adorn; Now scarce thine Equal left, for which we all lament and mourn. God's Glory was thine only Aim, endeav'ring Souls to save; Evangelist wast thou, whose Message Joy to many gave. Anagram. NATHANAEL STRANGE. Satan then all Anger. ENrag'd was Satan; (Satan then all in his Anger) Why? God by such Evangelick means, will make his Power dye. No glad-tidings sent unto man of Liberty, of Peace A bide can he: for when man's free, Then doth his Kingdom cease. Raging Satan, in's Anger then, his Agents did imploy To catch that Soul, whom God preserv'd, and now possess'd in Joy. Satan then all in Anger. When? Ev'n then, when Strange did preach. Learning truly Divine did he, all those that heard him teach. Enrag'd therefore was Satan, yet could not at all prevail Against him, who his Kingdom did with so great force assail. No Power ever can prevail 'gainst JESUS CHRIST our King: All Nations he will under him into subjection bring: His Scepter, and his Laws, must bear the Rule and Sway alone. This Doctrine strange unto the World, Strange to the World made known. A Single-state he did prefer, It being his intent Nothing should let him in his Work, for which the Lord him sent. Scatutum est hominibus at semel moriantur. STRANGE, he was an Example which did teach (Being in Conversation just, upright) The same which in his Doctrine he did preach; Which evidenc'd he was a shining Light: Mirrour of Virtue, in which we might see His Splendour, and our own Deficiencie. Some years ago i'th' Army he was made An Officer; and for the Good Old Cause No time in Idleness by him delay'd; His Aim was to advance God's Righteous Laws. A Valiant Souldier, to maintain God's Right, Who with his Sword & Doctrine both did fight. But we have sin'd; and therefore for our sin Frustrate was made that Glorious Design; And we are brought where first we did begin, As if Heaven and Earth did both combine, To make us see it's vain for us to trust In Arm of Flesh, that must return to dust. Therfore with our whol heart we should implore The God of Grace, that we might be more wise; And Him alone, in all things to adore; His Servants love, but not them idolize; Lest we the Glory from our God should take, And of more Sorrow for the same partake. Moses a Righteous man, yet he did fail; And for his Sin most justly he did die: Which doth declare, the best of us are frail, And subject unto great Infirmity. By Pestilence, or Sword, the Just may die, And the Just God, no honour lose thereby. Our GOD, (not Man) let's glorifie in all: So may we stand, or otherwise we fall. London, Printed in the Year, 1666.
