p2671 99885168 182492
A POEM DEDICATED TO THE Lasting Honour of the Pious and Reverend Divine Mr. RICHARD BAXTER. RICHARD BAXTER HATH GOD MADE A GLORIOUS LIGHT TO GUIDE OUR STEPS IN THIS APOSTATE NIGHT WITH GRACE, WITH GIFTS, WITH COURAGE HATH GOD BLESS'D HIM TO CONDUCT THE CHURCH TO CANAAN's REST. REgardless Age! could England's pur-blind Sence Imagine that Eternal Providence Createth wonders still, as formerly He wrought for Israel's sake, we All should Spy An ANGEL Brandishing a Gospel-Word, Resolving (by That only Powerfull Sword,) Deliverance to the Churches to aford. Brought out we have been from Egyptian Yoke Although not free'd from fear of Amalek's Stroke Xerxes(that Eastern Terrour) did not fright The Grecians, as the Tall' Zanzummims Sight Enlarg'd our fear, had not Almighty Power Rais'd up A JOSHUA in This needfull Hour. How Many tedious Yeare have We abode And weary'd Steps in pathless Desart trod, Trav'lling from Stage to Stage, and Round About Hemm'd in between the Mounts of Fear and Doubt? Great hath Our longing Expectation been Of keeping Jubilees, not Wand'ring (in Distrust,) so long, in Wilderness of Sin; Murm'ring although Our Waters have been sweet And Loathing Manna, as not fit to eat. Drawn up we have been into Numerous Forms, Endless Contentions, whilest approaching Storms (Arm'd with the face of Vengeance) raise our fears Gather round Our Tents, and hallow in our ears. Loud Ecchoing Sounds (alas!) doe scarse Awake Our Charmed Minds, or prompts us (yet) to make Religion our great Work: we only Croud In New Opinions, under which we shroud Our Hearts; Remaining still as Vain: as Proud: Ʋncharable: Whisperers of Lyes Selfish, and Covetous; under This Disguise, Lord! What a mighty Puther hath been rais'd In Babylon? The Church hath stood Amaz'd! Greedy in Expectation of some Bright Holy, (most Humble) Soul-Reviving Light, To chase Away these Shades of Winter Night. THese many Years, we all have gon a Round O're Hills and Dales, (Led by uncertain Sound;) Giddy with knowledge we have long been made Unstable, since the Pulpit grew a Trade; Into the Dith, (like Lost-Sheep) have we Stray'd; Defiled filthily hath our Fleece been, Each Broad-Sleeve of Our (Starch'd) Profession, in Opprobrious pickle! yet we Buffet all (Unchristian-like,) who but Lament our Fall Revile (yea Persecute) and Nick-names call. Such are but Bashan's Rams-Horns Batt'ring down The Church, (not Jericho, or Triple-Crown.) Each conscientious Shepherd passing by Points at Our Engine of Divinity! Sighs much to see Our great Apostacy. In This Degenerate Age Religion stands Neglected [like Old Monuments] with hands Though Listed Up, yet broke: with batt'red face Half gon: (An Object rather of Disgrace;) Just like King David' Men, with Beards half-shorn Stands True-Religion, made a Publique Scorn, Apostate Age! how are We swerved from Pure Christianity? Upbraid not Rome Or think That only, the Apostate See, Since Many Antichrists with Ʋs there be; They (Spiritual) Babel founded deep in bloud, And We, Those Ruines; plaister up with Mud. [ Notions: Schism: and a blind Mill-horse Track:] E're since a Crape-Profession cloath'd our back. Narrow but Plain, i Canaan's blessed Rode In which the Primitive Christians safely trod; Great talks of New-Light spread; And since our hope Hung down its head, We yearly Burn the Pope; [That Flame Lights well to See, how much we Grope.] WHilest Crowding in a sad confused Rout (In which true Piety is justled Out.) The Lord of Hosts (his Kingdom to increase) Hath sent us His Embassadour of Peace. Grace into him is poured, to Instruct Rash Zeal, and mired Steps for to Conduct A right, in Paths of Truth, Peace, Amity, Compassion: (Christian-like Conformity.) Erecting A HOLY TEMPLE,1 Kin. 6.7. [Wherein dwells Wisdom, with Pure Religion which excells In Meekness] Pav'd with Love: [A shame to Those That Hammer forth, with loud (Canonical) Blows Hideous Shapes, which Harden (but not Molifie) Gazers on Their (Gorgon-like) Divinity!] Imbroydered all Throughout with Saving Grace Flourishing the Banner of Triumphant Peace This Famous WORTHIE stands, whose Gifts and Parts, (Shining in Lowliness,) steals all our Hearts. Wisdom, Experience, Conduct, Courage too Is found in Him, to Lead us safely through This Howling Desart, where the Wolvish sound Hurries the Flock, and their soft ear doth wound; Confirming Faith and Patience; strengthning Love Opposing Errours, and Debates, which move Unruly Passions, and engender Strise, Rending Divisions, whilest Religious Life Abateth, and its hidden (Vital part) Gives up the Ghost, as Stabbed at the Heart. England's Commissioner for Peace, is He Heavens Blessed Harbinger: Ordain'd to be A Sanctuary to the Church of God, That hath been Scourg'd with Plague, and Flaming Rod▪ Hath been Benighted, and in Wilderness, Grov'ling a long time (as all must confess:) O're-cast with Egypt's Darkness, and in Wiles Devis'd by Satan (who mankind beguiles) Beleagur'd Round; In such a Lab'rynth, where Leviathan's hoarse Sounds, Awake our fear. Eternal GOD! When Thy Church was Dejected Singl'd out for Slaughter, Thou didst then Protect it: Sending us such a Light as few expected; Dear God: Thy Praise shall never be neglected. HArk! (hark again) methinks we hear the sweet Inamouring Sound of His so glorious Feet, (Moving o're Mountains) who Glad Tydings brings To Ev'ry Sinner, from the King of Kings. Of Ʋniversall Grace for All Mankind: (Conveigh'd To All, who are Resolv'd in mind;) Obliging to some Law, the Heathen World [Nigh lost, through willfull Ʋnbelief, and hurl'd Down headlong into such a dismall Vale Un'wares) where Darkness did so much prevail, (Confusion also) [till This Glorious Light Thrust forth Its Conquering Rays, and scatter'd Night.] The Militant Church is Happy in This Guide Her footsteps to Direct that none may slide Establishing Her Knowledge: and Her Love; (Consormity so like to GOD above.) His Vital Substance few aright Descry Ʋnseen It must be, [when Our Dazled Eye Repells That Sun-Shine of Divinity! Comfort our selves we doe (for all) to think His Beams make Day, though Glittering through the Chink. 'Tis very strange that in a Crazed Shell Of bone and skin, such Sanctity doth dwell! Crowning Religion with such Conversation As makes Him a Great Blessing to Our Nation (Not'thstanding many Proud mens Emulation. All after Ages shall, of Him, Relate And Praises to JEHOVAH Consecrate, Nation shall unto Nation, This Great Act Sound forth, in hearts of Harmony, Compact; Recording evermore THY worthy Fame Eternizing the Glory of the same; Saints All, with Angels also, shall Proclaim THY GREAT SALVATION! when we BAXTER name. 21. Dec. 1680 FINIS.
