S1398 52528898 178918
ACT Anent the Pole-Money. Edinburgh, March 23. 1699. THe Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, as being impowered by the Twelfth Act of the last Session of this current Parliament, Intituled Act anent Pole-money, to Order and Appoint such other Methods and Cour∣ses as they shall judge fit, for stating and In-bringing of the Pole-Money im∣posed by the said Act: Do hereby Order and Appoint the Commissioner of Supply in each Shire, to meet with all convenient Diligence at the Head-Burgh or other usual place of Meeting, within the said Shire by their Conveener; or if they have none, by the Sheriff for that effect; And there to Order one of their Number per vices, to Attend or keep Court Weekly two days at least, viz. Tues∣day and Thursday each Week at the said Burgh. As also, That the Magistrats of Burghs Royal, Appoint one of their Number to Attend and keep Court Week∣ly per vices within their Burgh at least two days each Week, to the effect the said Commissioner or Magistrat so to be appointed, may give out Warrands for Citation, at the Instance of the Tacksmen of the said Pole, or any having their Order, against the persons lyable in payment of the said Pole, Single, Double, or Quadruple, the Single and Double being always included in the said Quadru∣ples, being the highest and outmost wherein any person can be lyable by the said Act; and sustain Process and Administer Justice, and pass Decreets against the saids Persons lyable, conform to the said Act of Parliament. As also, that Pro∣cess be sustained in the case foresaid, upon a Citation to one Dyet, whereupon the Persons cited, if personally apprehended, may be likewise holden as Confest, and that upon the Decreets to be given by the said Commissioners or Magistrats of Burghs against the Persons lyable in the foresaid Pole; The like summar Ex∣ecution may be directed as upon Decreets for Supply or Excise, Quartering on∣ly excepted: And farder, that a Precept or Letters may be directed against all these that shall be decerned for the said Pole, within one Shire or Burgh, and that the several Persons and Sums therein contained shall not make several Causes, but shall only be payed for as one Cause: And the saids Lords do hereby appoint&or∣dain all Clerks of Shires and of Burghs Royal, to exhibite and make patent to the said Tacksmen, or any having their Order, their respective Valuation and Stent-Roll when required, in order to particular mens Stents or Valuation, whose Poles are not other ways determined; As likewise, that the Inhabitants of Burghs Royal give Lists when required, of such as Reside within their Families; and that the Magistrats give the necessary Orders for that effect: and the foresaid Clerks of Shires and Burghs, and also their Collectors, are hereby Ordained to give to the saids Tacksmen or these having their Orders, Notes or Abstracts of what In∣struments may be taken in their hands by any Person lyable in the said Pole, a∣nent their Listing or paying. And lastly, the saids Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, Require and Ordain the Commissioners of the said Shires, to cause their Clerks give Extracts of their Collectors Bonds to the said Tacksmen, or any ha∣ving their Order; And if need beis, that they give also summar Processes and Execution at the Instance of the said Tacksmen and their foresaids, against the saids Collectors and their Cautioners, upon their saids Bonds as Accords. And the saids Commissioners and Magistrats of Burghs, and all others concerned, are here∣by strictly Commanded and Required to Observe and Perform the Premisses as they will be answerable. And these Presents are Ordained to be Printed and Pub∣lished at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of Shires, and of all Burghs Royal in the usual Form. Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1699.
