s1770b 52612317 179622
C R royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the levying or transporting of Souldiers vvithout Licence. CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To  Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as We did by a Proclamation of the twenty third of July last, prohibit any persons whatsoever to levy any men in this Our ancient Kingdom, or to transport any of Our Subjects thereof into the service of any forraign Prince or State without Our special licence: and discharged all Masters of ships to transport them under all highest pains. And we being informed, that notwithstan∣ding of the said Proclamation, since the publishing thereof, many of Our subjects of this Kingdom, have been taken on and transported abroad, and some of the souldiers of Our standing Forces have been, and daily are seduced and debauched from their service, and in∣gaged to serve in forraign Countries by persons having no warrand or licence from Ʋs, in high and manifest contempt of Our Authority, and contrare to the said Proclamation. There∣fore, We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby prohibit and dis∣charge all Masters of Ships to receive on board, or to transport to any forraign Countrey any subjects of this Kingdom who have been levyed without Our special licence, or any other Passengers who are not Merchants or Seamen, unless they have a Pass under the hand of any one of Our Privy Councellors: Certifying such as shall transgress herein, that they shall be fyned in the sum of three thousand merks, Scots money; whereof a third part to be ap∣plyed to the use of the informer. Likeas, We do hereby authorize and require any one of Our Privy Councellors, upon information given, that any of Our Subjects of this Kingdom, Souldiers or others are taken on to serve in any forraign Countrey, without warrand, as said is, to cause stop them in their passage, and imprison them, and to cause seize upon and se∣cure the persons who have ingaged them, or who shall be known to have been dealing with, and seducing them thereto, until they find caution to answer for the same, and that they shall not levy or transport any of Our Subjects to any forraign service; with power to any Privy Councellor to give such orders as shall be necessary for that effect to the Magistrats of Burghs, or any of Our standing forces, who are hereby required to put these orders in exe∣cution, as they will be answerable at their highest peril. And it is hereby declared, that such persons as have already contraveened the former Proclamation, shall be proceeded against, and censured conform to the tenor thereof. The which to do we commit to you con∣junctly and severally Our full Power by thir Our Letters, delivering them by you duely exe∣cute and indorsat again to the Bearer. Given under Our Sig a Edinburgh, the first of October, one thousand six hun∣dred, and seventy four Years. Al. Gibson Cl. Sti. Concilii. God Save the King. to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674.
