S6160 99887897 183556
The Suffolk Miracle, OR, A Relation of a Young Man, who, a Month after his Death, appeared to his Sweet-heart, and carryed her behind him Forty Miles in two hours time, and was never seen after but in the Grave. To the Tune of, My bleeding heart, &c. A Wonder stranger ne'r was known then what I now shall treat upon, In Suffolk there did lately dwell a Farmer rich and known full well. He had a Daughter fair and bright, on whom he plac'd his chief delight, Her beauty was beyond compare she was both vertuous and fair. There was a young man living by, Who was so charmed with her eye, That he could never be at rest, he was with love so much possest, He made address to her, and she did grant him love immediately; But when her Father came to here, he parted her and and her poor dear. Forty miles distant was she sent unto his brothers with intent, That she should there so long remain till she had chang'd her mind again. Hereat this young man sadly griev'd but knew not how to be reliev'd, he sigh'd and sob'd continually that his true love he could not see. She by no means could to him send who was her hearts espoused friend, He sigh'd she griev'd but all in vain For she con'd must still remain. He mourn'd so much that Doctors art could give no ease unto his heart Who was so strangly terrified that in short time for love he dght
She that from him was sent away, knew nothing of his dying day, But constant still she did remain to love the dead was then in vain. After he had in grave been laid a month or more unto this maid, He comes about middle of the night who joy'd to see her hearts delight. Her Fathers Horse which well she knew her mothers hood and safeguard to, He brought with him to testifie her parents order he came by. Which when her unckle understood he hop't it would be for her good, And gave consent to her straight way, that with him she should come away. When she was got her love behind they pass'd as swift as any wind, That in two hours or little more he brought her to her Fathers door. But as they did this great haste make he did complain his head did ake, Her handcherchief she then took out and tyed the same his head about. And unto him she thus did say thou art as cold as any clay, When we come home a fire wee'l have but little dream't he went to Grave. Soon were they at her Fathers door and after she ne'r see him more, Ile set the Horse up then he said and there he set this harmless maid. She knockt and strait a man he cryed Whose there, 'tis I, she then replyed, Who wondred much her voice to hear and was possest with dread and fear. Her Father he did rest, and then he stare'd like an affrighted man. Down stairs he ran, when he see her cry'd out my Child how cam'st thou here. Pray Sir did you not send for me by such a messenger said she, Which made his hair flare on his heart, as knowing well that he was dead. Where is he then to her he said he's in the stable quoth the maid, Go in said he and go to bed I'le see the horse well littered. He stare'd about and there could see no shape of any mankind see, But found his horse all on a sweat, which made him in a deadly fret. His Daughter he said nothing too nor no one else though well they knew, That he was dead a month before for fear of grieveing her full sore. Her father to his Father went who was deceas'd, with this intent To tell him what his daughter said so both came back unto this maid. They ask'd her and she still did say twas he that then brought her away, Which when they heard they were amaz'd and on each others strangly gaz'd. A Handcherchief she said she tyed about his head and that they ryed, The Sexton they did speak unto that he the grave would then undoe. Affrighted then they did behold his body turning into mould, And though he had a month been dead this kercheif was about his head. This thing unto her then they told and the whole truth they unfold, She was thereat so terrified and griev'd she quickly after dyed. Part not true love you Rich men then, but if they be right honest men, Your daughters love give them their way, for force oft breeds their lives decay. Printed by and A. M, and sold by the Booksellers of Pye-corner and London-bridge
