Y121B 49521474 174260
THE Young-Mans Lamentation Containing, His Pastionate Complaint of his Unconstant Lover, To∣gether, with his Resolution to leave her who scornfully slighted him. To an Excellent New Tune, or, Over Hills and high Mountains. Licensed according to Order. MEeing s a pleasure, but parting's a grief, An Vnconstant Lover i worse than a Thief, A Tief can but Rob me, a take what I have, But an Vnconstant Lover will bring me to the Grave. When fancy is grounded, and rooted beside, The lover is wounded as soon as deny'd; Many Torments are bleeding to encrease his pain, And the lover lies bleeding by the darts of disdain. This is my condition, I needs must confess, With humble submission I have made my address; In her Charms I delighted more than Gold I declare, Yet am scornfully slighted for the love which I bear. I value not treasure, the rich Golden Ore, There's joy, love, and pleasure, which I dearly adore; But alas! that sweet blessing I may not enjoy, I am sorrows possessing, which my life will destroy. Like a Ship on the Ocean, I am tost too and fro, From the heighth of promotion, to the depth of sad woe, While the Billows are roaring in a Tempest of grief, I the Fates am imploring, but can find no relief. Of a false-hearted lover I needs must complain, To my grief I discover that my sighs are in vain; Having mov'd her to pity, with tears in my eyes, While that sorrowful dity she would scorn and despise. To think that my Iewel should torture me so, In loves flaming fuel with a Feavour I glow, She's more than ungrateful, unconstant, unkind To her dear loyal lover, like the wavering wind. In her Cheeks blushing Roses, with lillies appear, Where Cupid reposes, as her Charms I draw near, I account it my duty her perfection to prize, She's a Phoenix for beauty, was she constant likewise. If her heart was not ranging, she should soon be my Bride, But alas she is changing and turns with the Tide, Having ruined many by her flse-heart alone, She's not constant to any, but can love more than one. Since I find out her folly, I'll no longer repine, But will strive to be jolly with a Glass of Rich Wine, No longer about her will I troubled be, I can now live without her, let her go, farewell she. Tho' I am forsaken, yet she is forswon, Yet she is mistaken, if she think that I'll mourn; I'll set as ly by her, as e'er she did b me, And for ever will deny her, let her go, farewel she. Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, and J. Back.
