10410 99845614 10523
diagram of the veins of a horse I B The 2 temple v The 2 eye. v The 2 forhead. v The 2 pallet. v The 2 necke. ve The 2 plate. ve The 2 fore shanke. ve The 2 side. ve The shanke. ve The houfe. v The hanch. ve The taile. ve
diagram of a farrier's tools
THE English Farrier, OR, Countrey-mans Treasure. Shewing approved Remedies to cure all Diseases, Hurts, Maimes, Maladies, and Griefes in Horses: and how to know the severall Diseases that breed in them; with a description of every Veine; how, and when to let them blood, according to the nature of their Diseases. With directions to know the severall Ages of them. Faithfully set forth according to Art and approved ex∣periment, for the benefit of Gentlemen, Farmers, Inholders, Husbandmen, and generally for all. depiction of the farrier's profession At London printed by John Beale 16
The Contents. Chap. 1. How and when a horse should be let blood, & by what signe a man may know whether it bee needfull or no. Chap. 2. In how many Veines a horse may be let blood, with a description of the severall Veines. Chap. 3. Directions to know when to let a Horse blood, and in what Veine, and for what disease, griefe, or cause, and how to know the griefe or disease. Chap. 4. How to know the Age of a Horse. Chap. 5. Things necessary to be knowne by every Far∣rier. Chap. 6. To know the severall Diseases that grow in Horses and in what parts they grow, and upon what causes. Chap. 7. How to judge of the sicknesses and impediments in a horse by his Doung or Ordure. Chap. 8. How to judge of the sicknesses or impediments in a Horse by his Stale or Vrine. Chap. 9. A description of the number, qualities, and mea∣sure of the Sinews of a Horse. Chap. 10. Of the three powers or vertues whereby as well the body of a Horse as every other beast is go∣verned. Chap. 11. Of the number and situation of bones that be in a Horses body. Chap. 12. In what points the art of shooing doth con∣sist, and of hooves and of the divers kinds there∣of.
Chap. 13. Of paring and shooing the perfect hooveand fore-feete, and how to make the shooes and nayles. Chap. 14. Of paring and shooing the hinder feet. Chap. 15. How to keepe the hoove of a horse moyst in the Stable, and the Receit of the oyntment. Chap. 16. Approved Remedies for curing all kindes of Diseases, Hurts, Maymes, Maladies or Griefes, in Horses.
THE English Farrier, OR Countrey-mans Treasure. Chap. 1. How, and when a horse should be let blood, and by what signe a man may know whether it be need∣full or no. FIrst, to preserue health, it is good to let him blood foure times a yeere First, in the Sprng about the be∣ginnng of May, because the blood beginneth to increase: Secondly, in Septem∣ber, because the blood beng then inflamed ine∣qually, may euaporate or breake out: Thirdly, about the middest of December, to let out the grosse and knotty blood: Fourthly, about the middest of March. But I would not wish you to let a horse blood but once a yeare, & that in the beginning of May, within a fortnight after his putting to grasse; for then you shall let out the grosse and old blood, and the new will come in his place: Except it be vp∣on great need, I would wish you not to let him blood at all: for oft letting blood causeth debility in the horse, it hindreth the sight, and maketh the blood resort inwardly, which cloyeth the heart and intrals, and leaueth the outward parts de∣stitute.
Chap. 2. In how many Veines a horse may be let blood, with a description of the severall Veines. IN the two Temple Veines, which bee the first and principall Veines in the head. In the two Eye veines, which are easie to find in the face of the horse, somewhat beneath his eies In the two Pallet veines in the Mouth. In the two Necke veines. In the two Plate veines which are in the breast. In the two Fore-head veines. In the two Fore-shanke veines. In the two Fore veines before. In the two Side veines, which may be called the Shanke veines. In the Taile-veine. In the Hanch-veine. In the Hoofe-veine. In the two Fore shanke veines behind. So that an horse may be let blood in 13 veins: All which, are easie enough to know, because e∣very one lyeth in a little Gutter, which you shall find by feeling with your finger. Chap. 3.  to know when to let a horse blood, and  what Veine, and for what disease, griefe, or , and how to know the griefe or disease. be pained with any griefe in his
inesse, Frensie Falling-euill, diagram of the veins of a horse I B The 2 temple v The 2 eye. v The 2 forhead. v The 2 pallet. v The 2 necke. ve The 2 plate. ve The 2 fore shanke. ve The 2 side. ve The shanke. ve The houfe. v The hanch. ve The taile. ve
or such like, then it is good to let him bloud in the temple veine, with a fleme. If his eies be watrish, or bloud-shotten or grieu∣ed with Pin or web, or haw, then it is good to let him blood in the Eye veine, with a fleme. If he haue any wearinesse or heauines of body, or be diseased in the throat with the stranglings or Quinasie, or swelling of the Arteries either within or without, then it is good to let him blood in the Pallat veines in the mouth with a Cornet. If he be vexed with an Ague, or with any other disease vniuersall hurting his Body, then let him blood in the Necke-veine If his griefe be in the Lungs Liuer, or any o∣ther inward part: then let him bloud in the brest veines, which we call (before) the Plate veines. If he be grieued in the shoulders, then let him blood in the fore-féete veines aboue the knee with a launce, and that very warily: for that place is full of Sinewes. If hee be grieued in the Ioynts, then let him blood in the Shackle-veines, and that very wa∣rily: for that place is full of Sinewes also. If he be foiled in the fore-feet with Foundring, or otherwise, then let him blood in the two veins (make way first with your drawer, to come to your veines) in the Fore-feete. If he be diseased in the Kidnies or Reines, Backe or Belly then let him blood in the Flank-veines.
If he haue any griefe in his hips, then let himblood in the taile vaine, or hoofe veine. If his hinder Legges be grieued, or Ioynts, or Feete: then let him blood on the Shackle-Veins, and on the two veines behind on the hin∣der Feete, Chap. 4. How to know the age of a Horse. A Horse hath forty teeth: the thirtieth moneth after his foaling he looseth two aboue and two beneath; in the fourth yeere, he looseth two aboue and two beneath: when he is fiue, he cast∣eth all the rest both aboue & beneath. Those that come first aboue, are hollow: when he is six, his hollow teeth are filled vp: and in the seuenth all the rest are filled vp: then you may no longer iudge of his age by his teeth. Chap. 5. Things necessary to be knowne by every Farier. AS first to know into what disease a horse is inclinable. Secondly what be the causes of euery disease in particuiar, Thirdly how and by what wyes and meanes these diseases doe grow. Fourthly the signes how to know and distin∣guish them, Fifthly and lasty the meanes and mannr how to cure them,
Chap. 6. To know the severall diseases that grow in horses, and in what parts they grow, and upon what causes. BAgges, in the weakes of the mouth. Barbs, be two teats growing vnder the tong. Bottes, doe grow and breed in the Maw & guts. Blisters, on his body, cōmeth through heat & cold. Canker, is in his mouth venomed, & wil make his tong to haue clifts, and scabs in his vpper lips vnderneath, and are full of black a weales or pimples, so that he can hardly eate his meate. Coult-Evill, is by ranknes of water and bloud: it will cause his belly and Yeard to swell. Cloying, is in the hoofe of the Feete. Cords, is a stacke sinew in the legges before. Cubs, is a swelling sinew behinde the hoofe. Crotches, is a ruffe scuruines about the fetlocks Interfeering, is striking on the ioynt aboue the pastorne. Farcion, or Farcie, is a Scabbe or knobs brea∣king in diuers places of his body, and com∣meth chiefely in the Veines. Feaver, is a sickenesse taken with cold, and will cause him to shake. Thistula, is an old rotten Sore in the body. Foundering, is taken in the body, and feet also. Fraying, is taken in the body, feet, and legges, which is a stiffenesse comming only with cold. Prounce or Pimples, is in the pallet of his mouth, Galling, or other hurt: and come especially by eating of frozen grasse, or dust.
Gigges or Flapes, are Pimples or Teats in the inside of the mouth. Glaunders, are Curnels vnder his Iawes: and when they are ripe, they will run at his Nose, and so breake out. Gorge, is a swelling of bloud on the legges Gravelling, is taken in the Feet Web in the Eye, or the Haw, which is a Gristle growing on the Feime which scowreth the Eye Hide bound, is when the skinne cleaueth to the flesh and the Ribbes. Hoofe-bound, is in the pinching of the hoofe. Itch in the Tayle, is by excesse of blood. Lampas, is the flesh in the mouth nigh the vpper Teeth. Mange, is Mallender, is a the knees. Molt-long, is the of a -hoofe. Mourning of the Chine, is a Wasting from the backe or Navel-galled, is a against the Nauell, or as Paines is a aboue , or foot-lock. Poule-evill, is on the of the Necke: and breedeth by stripes. Pin or web, which couereth the beard of the Eye. Rume, is taken by cold, & so his Teeth will wax loose, & seeme long, & then he cannot eate his meat, but it wil lie in lumps, about his Iaws. Ring-bone, is a hard gristle about the Hoofe. Quinnasie, is sorenesse in the Throat. Selander, is a Scab on the Hammes on the hin∣der legges.
Shackle-galled, is on the Pastorne. Spavin, is on the Ioynt in the hoofes behind. Splent, is a splend sinew aboue the fetterlocks. Staggers, is a dizzinesse in the head, breeding of cold and of the Yellowes. Stranglings, is a swelling in the Throat. Stone, in a horse. Surbating, is vnder the Soales of the Feet on the further side. Vives, is a certaine Curnell vnder the eare, or a Canker in the Mouth or Throat. Wind-gals, are Bladders about the fetterlocks. Yellow, is a kind of Iaundies, and will cause the Eyes to looke yellow, and other parts of the body also. Chap. 7. How to judge of the sicknesses and impedimets in a horse, by his doung or ordure. I haue found for the most part the dung or ordure is cor∣respondent to the food the hose eaeth especially for the co∣lour, for if he run at grasse, or be
led in the Stable, th wil his dung be euermore green, howbeit of a more brightand sometimes again of a more dark colour, and freer from darknesse is euer best, and doth make appearance of the more sanity and health of the beast, as also that is th reby the lesse subiect to constiuenesse, and therfore in better state of body. But if his ordure be very bright and laxatiue, it is an infallible signe that he hath eaten some thing that is a∣gainst nature; as a Feather or some naughty worme, some Spider or the like unwholesome thing, otherwise he scow∣reth of some inward cod which hath formerly lurked in his stomacke or body: but if his doung at grasse or soyle be very hard and costiue, which he putteth forth with round and hard trattles, then is it a great sign that he is very hot in his body and inward parts, which may endanger the sta∣ners, or else doth shew that he hath a surfet which he got (before his putting forth) through intemperate riding, shing, raw, or euill food, or the like, whereby the horse is in danger to become morfounded, to haue the yellows, or iaundise, or a feauer; which will otherwise hardly appeare in him in it's effect vntill his comming into the Stable, at what time due order must be taken for spéedy preuention. But if your horse doe féed vpon Straw, then will the colour of his doung be yellow and some what hard, long, and well compact, all which be tokens of a healthy and a sound body; but if it be reddish, and excéeding dry, it is a signe of ensu∣ing sicknesse, by means of a great drought in the body, and so also if it be thine: but if it be blackish, and doth not smell strong, then is it a sign that the horse is in danger of death. But if your horse doe féed vpon Hay and Oates, and that he be sound in body, then will his Excrements be a brown yellow, moyst, and wel compact but if the brownesse be con∣uerted into redishnesse, you may be then well assured that he hath some distemperature in his body, but when it con∣uerteth into blacknesse, then if preuention be not spéedily had, death ensueth: and as touching the smell, that falleth out according to the quantity of the prouender you giue him for the more prouender, the stronger will be the smell of his Ordure, and Pease and Beanes will cause his Ordure to smell stronger than Oates, & bread more than any grayn or Pulse; and the more bread and prouender you giue him, the more perfect and sound shall you kéep him in his body. But if his dung be brown and slimy, and shine withall, thenbe you assured he hath much greace which lyéth in his bo∣dy, which Physicke must fetch away from him, for then al∣so is his bloud putrified, corrupted, or enflamed. But if you doe find by his Excrements that he voydeth vndigested stuffe, which you may know by the whole corns of Oates, Wheat and other Grayne he sendeth forth in his doung, then perswade yourselfe, that your horse hath lately taken a formall surfet, which may right easily bring him to his end, if a discréet course be not spéedily taken: in a word, if his doung be black and hath little or no smell, then make you no question but that he is in danger of death, which will ful soone after follow, if the greater care be not taken to hinder and preuent the same. Chap. 8. How to judge of the sicknesses or impediments in a horse by his Stale or Vrine. IF he shall find his water to be either pale, whitish or yel∣low not much unlike to the colour of Whey, or fat Am∣ber, or if it be not very cleare, but smelleth somwhat strong let the ferrier then be confident the horse is not sicke, but sound and healthy, and in perfect state of body; but if his Vrine be extreame cleare and white, and of the colour of Rock-water, and withall slimy, then hath he a taint in his Kidneis, Reines, or back, or else he enclineth to the stone or else he hath som stoppage in his Kidneys. But if his wa∣ter be high coloured like to the colour of strong Beer, then is it a token the blood of the horse is enflamed, and that he is subiect to a Feauer, or to some strong Surfet: but if it be red and of the colour almost of blood, then is the blood more inflamed, which came of ouer hard riding, which may prone very dangerous to his life. But if it be of a pale greenish colour thick, and viscous, then certainely his Backe is growne weake, and he is in danger of a Consumption of his Steed. But if it be high coloured and nebuled or mix∣ed with small Clouds, with a kind of blacknesse therein, then this doth demonstrate ensuing sicknesse and death, if it be not carefully preuented. But if the Nebulosity be dispersed into seuerall parts, and not combined as it were into on Masse or Body; this then argueth, that the malice of the disease beginneth to depart, whereby the Ferrier may haue great hope of the health of the Horse.
Chap. 9. A discription of the number quallity and measure of the sinewes of a horse. IT behooueth vs also to describe vnto you the number, quality, and measure of the sinewes of a horse. From the id nostrils vp to the top of the head, and so downe a∣long the backe, euen to the crooper comes it great cords or tendons, euery one xii. foote long. Thn is there two branches and principall sinewes of the braine, contain∣ing foure foote. Then from the shouders to the nex iot downwarde two great sinewes or tendons. And from that ioynt downe to the pastorns foure great snewes. Also in the forepart and about his brest, aswell within s without, are x. sinews, and as many in his hinder parts. Then from the reynes of his backe vnto his stones are foure, so that in his whole body he hath in all foure and thirty apparant sinewes. Chap. 10. Of the three powers or vertues whereby as well the body of a horse as every other beast is governed. THe powers and vertues whereby the body of euery beast is gouerned, are in number thrée, that is to say, the power Animall, the power Vitall, and the pow∣er Naturall. The power Animall, is a vertue incident to the braine, which through the sinewes cmming like conduite pipes from the braine, distributeth féeling and moouing to all the parts of the body. The power Vitall is a vertue belonging to the heart, which giueth life and spirite to all the body; and to euery parte thereof, by meanes of the arters, which also like conduit pypes doe procéede from the heart, the chiefe fountaine of natu∣rall heate.
The power Naturall, is a vertue properly apper∣taining to the liuer, which giueth nutriment vnto all the body, and to euery part thereof, by meanes of the veins, which like wise procéed from the liuer like conduit pips, carying the blood from the liuer, which is the fountaine of bloud vnto euery part of the body. Moreouer, the power naturall comprehendeth foure other vertues, that is to say, the vertue attractiue, whereby it draweth sust∣inance méet to nourish the body, then the vertue reten∣tiue whereby it retaineth and kéepeth the sustinance re∣ceiued, thirdly, the vertue digestiue, whereby it digest∣eth the same: and finally the vertue expulsiue, whereby it expelleth excrements, or superfluitys. Thus you sée that the thrée powers before recyted, be of no small im∣portance, and therefore the Ferrer had néed to haue a speciall regard vnto them. For if any of them fayle, the beast cannot liue. Chap. 11. Of the number and situation of bones that be in a horses body. EUery Horse or Oxe, hath in the vpper part of his head two bones, and from his forehead vnto his nostrills, other two Also two nether Iawe bones, and of téeth in all, to the number of xl. that is to say, of Iaw téeth, or side teeth, xxiiii of tushes xiii. of fortéeth, other∣wise called the shearing téeth xii The ioynt bones, aswel of the necke as of the backe, be in all twenty two. that is to say from the head to the withers, vii. and from thence to the reynes or kidneys. viii. and from thence to the tayle, seauen, then is there the great broad hinder bone, called the sacred bone, which hath xii. seames or ioyntures Also in the horses shoulder be two great bone called the spade bones, and from thence to the forcelles or Canell bones, other two bones and from thence to the first ioynt aboue the legges, other two and from thence to the knees two called the thigh bones, and from thence to the pastornes, other two called the shanke bones, and from thence downward to the hooues, be in all xvi. little bones. Then there is a great bone in his brest where∣vnto
are fastened xxvi. ribbes. And to the Colelle behinde be two bones, and from the moayrs to the ioints other two, and also two towards the ribbes. From the bending of the hough vnto the legge, are two small bons and from the legge to the two feciles of the legge, other two little bones and from the pastorns to the hooue six∣teene little bones. The summe of all the bones, is one hundrad threescore and ten. Chap. 12. In what points the art of shooing doth consist, and of hooves and of divers kinds thereof. THe Art of shooing consisteth in these points, that is to say, in paring the hooue well, in making the shooe of good stuffe, in well fashoning the webbe there∣of, and well piercing the same, in fitting the shooe vnto the horses foote, in making nayles of good stuffe and fashoning of the same, and finally, in well driuing of the said nayles, and clenching of the same. But sith neither paring nor shooing is no absolute thing of it selfe, but hath respect vnto the foot, or hooue, (for the shooe is to be fitted to the foot, and not the foote to the shooe) and that there be diuers kinds of hooues both good and bad, requiring great diuersity as well of paring as shooing. Of hooues some be perfect and some be voperfect The perfect Hooue is that which is round, smooth and short, so as the Horse may treade more on the Toe than on the Heele, and also right, and some∣what hollow within, but not ouer hollow, haue∣ing a narrowe frush, and broade Heeles. The vn∣perfect Hooue. is that which lacketh any of these propertyes beforesayde, belonging vnto a perfect Hooue. For as touching the first point marke. If the Hooue be not round but brode, and spreading out of
the sides or quarters, that horse for the most part hath narrow héels, & in continuance of time will be flat footed which is a weake foot, and will not cary a shooe long, nor trauell far, but soone surdate, and by treading more on his heeles, than on his toes, will go low on his pastorns and such feet through their weaknesse be much subiect to false quarters, and to grauelling. Secondly, if the hooue be not smooth, but rugged, and full of circles, like Rammes hornes, then it is not onely vnseemely to the eye, but also it is a signe that the foote is in no good temper, but to hot and dry, and thereby per∣hppes maketh the hooue to be brittle. Thirdly, if it be long, then it will cause the horse to tread all vpon  heeles, and to go low on his pastornes and thereby to breed windgalls. Fourthly, if e hooue be not right, but crooked, that is to say, brode without, and narrow within, whereby the horse is splay footed, then it will cause the horse to treade more inward, than outward, and to go so close with his ioynts together, as he cannot well trauell without en∣terfering, or perhaps striketh one Leg so hard agains another, as he becometh lame. But if he be broad with∣in and narrow without, that is not so hurtfull. Notwith∣standing, it will cause him to graueil sooner on the out∣side than on the inside, Fiftly, if the hooue be flat and not hollow within, then it breedeth such inconueniences, as are before decla∣red in the first vnperfect hooue. And againe if it be ouer hollow, then it will drye the faster, and cause the horse to be hoouebound. For the ouer hollow hooue is a strait narrow hooue, and groweth vpright, whereby though the Horse treadeth vpright, and not on his heeles, yet such kind of hoous will dry ouer fast, vnlesse they be con∣tinually stopt, and cause the horse to be hooubound, which lameth them, making them to halt. Sixtly, if the truth be broad, then the heeles bee weake, and so soft as you may almost bend them together and then the horse will neuer tread boldly on the stones or hard ground. Seauenthly, & lastly, if the heels be narrow, the be ten¦der & the horse will grow to be hooubound.
Chap. 13. Of paring and shooing the perfect hooue and forefeet, and how to make the shooes and nayles. FIrst pare the feat of the shooe, so euen and plaine as may be, to the intent that the shooe may sit close and not beare in one place more than in an other and take more of the toe, than of the heele, to the intent that the heeles be higher then the toe, because all the waight of the horses, fore-body lyeth vpon the quar∣ters and heeles of the forefeete. And therefore those parts should be most mayntained, and taken off with the butter as little as may be. For the paring of the héels, being naturally thinner, and more tender than the toe, doth greatly weaken them: but the toe being naturally thicke and hard, would be pared so thinne almost as the edge of a knyfe. But in paring of the hinder féet, a clean contrary order is to be obserued.
Then make your shooe of spruse or spanish Yron, with a brode webbe, fitting it to the foote, and let the spongs be thicker, and more substanciall then any other part; of the shooe, yea, and also somewhat broade, so as the quarters on hoth sides may disbord, that is to say, ap∣peare without the hooue a strawes bredth, to gard the coffin, which is the strength of the hooue, and onely beareth the shooe, and when you come to the piercing thereof, speare not to pierce it from the quarter to the hard toe, but not backwards toward the heele and pierce it so as the holes may be wider on the outside than on the inside, and that the cyrcle of the piercing may be more distant from the edge of the toe, then from the edge of the quarter, whereas it beginneth, because the hooue is thicker foreward then backward, and there∣fore more hold to be taken. And as touching the nayls then make them also of the same Iron beforesaid, the heads wherof would be square and not fully so brode beneath as is aboue, but answerable to the piercingholes, as the head of the nayles may enter in and fill the same, appearing aboue the shooe no more than the bredth of the backe of a knife, so shall they stand fast without shogging, and endure longer, and to that end the stamp that first maketh the holes, and the perschill that pierc∣eth them, and also the necks of the nayls, would be of one square fashion and bignes, that is to say, great aboue and small beneath, which our common Smithes doe lit∣regard, for when they pirce a shooe, they make the holes as wide on the inside, as on the outside, and their nayls with so great a shouldering by drying them ouer hard vpon the nayle toole, as the heads or rather necks of the sayd nayles, can not enter into the holes, for to say the truth, a good nayle would haue no shouldering at all, but be made with a playne and square necke, so as it may iustly fit and fill the piercing hole of the shooe. For otherwise the head of the nayle standing high, and the necke thereof being weake, eyther it breaketh off or else bendeth vpon euery light occasion, so as the shooe thereby standeth loose from the hooue and is quick∣ly lost. Moreouer, the thankes of the nayles would be somewhat flatte, and the pointes sharp without hol∣lownesse or flaw, and stiffer towards the head aboue, than beneath. And when you driue, driue at the first with strokes and with a light hammer, vntill the naile be somewhat entred, and in shooing fine delicat horses it shall not bee amisse to grease the pointes of the nayle with a little soft grease, that the nayles may enter the more easily, and driue the two Talon nayles first. Then looke whether the shooe standeth right or not, which you shall perceiue in beholding the Frush, for if the spongs on both sides, be equally distant from the Frush, then it standeth right, if not then amend it and set the shooe right, and standing right, driue in ano∣ther nayle, that done, let the horse set downe his foote againe, and looke round about it to sée whether it fit∣teth the horses foot in all places, and whether the horse teradeth euen and iust on it or not. And if you sée that the shooe doth not furnish euery part equally, but per∣hapsappeareth more of one side than of another. Then make the Horses other foote to be lifted vp, to the in∣tent he may stand the more stedily vppon that foote, and so standing, strike him on the hooue with your hammer on that side that the shooe is scant, and that shall make the shooe to come that way. The shooe then standing straight and iust, driue in the rest of all the nayles to the number of eight, that is to say, foure on the on side, and foure on another, so as the points of the nayles may séeme to stand in the out side the hooue euen and iust one by another; as it were in a Cyrenler line, and not out of order, like the teeth of a saw whereof one is bent one way and clinch them so as the clinches may be hid∣dn in the hooue, which by cutting the Hooue with the point of a knyfe, a little beneath the appearing of the nayle you may easely doe. That done with a ape, pare the hooue round, so as the edge of the shooe may be séene round about. Chap. 14. Of paring and shooing the hinder feet. FOr the paring of the hinder féete, is cleane contrary, to the forféete, for the weakest part of the hinder foote is the toe, and therefore in paring the hinder foote, the toe must be alwayes more spared than the héeles. Then make the shooe fitte for the hooue in such forte as is before said, sauing that it would be always strongest towards the toe, and it must be pierced nigh∣er the héele than the toe, because as I haue said before, that the toe is alwayes the weakest part of the hinder foot. Also let the out side of the hinder shooe be made with a Calkin, not ouer high, but let the other sponge be a∣gréeable vnto the Calkin, that is to say, as high in a manner as the Calkin, which Calkin is to keepe the horse from flyding, But then it may not be sharpe poin∣ted, but rather flatte and handsomely turned vp∣ward.
Chap. 15. How to keepe the hoove of a horse moist in the stable, and the receit of the oyntment. AS Horses hoous do many times take harme through the necligence or vnskilfulnesse of the Ferrer, in euill paring or shooing the same, euen so they take no lesse harme many times through the necligence of the kéeper for lack of stopping, and kéeping the foreféete moyst, for the hinder féete most commonly are kept to moyst, by meanes that the doung and stale is suffered to lye continually at their héeles. But the forféete stand continually dry, whereby the horse becommeth brittle hooued, yea, and many times hoouebound, which a good keeper will not suffer, but be mindfull to sto them of∣ten, either with horse doung, or Cow doung, yea, and also to wash them cleane without, with water, and then to anoynt them with some good supplying oyntment, as this here following prescribeth. Take of Turpentine, of sheeps sewet, of each halfe a pound, of vnwroght wax halfe a quarterne, and of Sallet oyle halfe a pint. Boyle all these together in a potte, sturring them continually vntill they be through∣ly mingled together. Then take it from the fyre, and let it coole, and being cold, preserue it in the same pot, or else in some other, to the intent that you may haue it ready euery second day to annoynt all the coffins of the Horses Hooues round about, but first wash their hooues faire and cleane and suffer no durt to remaine vpon them, then being dryed with a cloth annoynte them.
The siixt Chapter. Approved remedies for the curing of all kindes of diseases, hurts, maimes, or malidies, or griefes in Horses. For the Galling of a Horse-backe. TAke Butter, vineger and Bay-salt, and melt them together, and lay on the horse backe warme: then strow vpon it sut, or the poulder of a clay wall. Another for the same. Take ob. of turmericke, bruise it, a handfull of Bay-salt, and a handfull of Sut, with two handfuls of Oatemeale, mingle it with Vrine, and make it into a Cake as well as you can, and then vpon a hot harth bake it till it be burnt blacke, then beate it in¦to poulder; and when you haue washed your horse∣backe with Lee very hot or Chamber Lee, then strow on the poulder: and when the poulder is almast gone, dresse it as aforesaid. If it bee festred, take Yeest, Honey, the white of an Egge,, and sut; mingle them together, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the dead flesh: then straw on Verdigreace, and renew it once a day. Another for the same.
Take a pottle of Vergis, two penny worth of gréene Copris, and boile it to a pint and a halfe: wash depiction of a man on horseback
and search the hole therewith, and fill the hole▪ with Red Lead, so let it remaine thrée dayes vntouch∣ed, then wash it with the same, and fill it againe with Red Lead: and so euery other day wash it with that Water, not made so strong of the Copris; and lay thereon Red Lead, this will heale it though it be gal∣led to the body. To heale any canker or sore in a horse. Take of the strongest Beere a pint, put it into a quarter of a pound of Allum: and halfe a hand full of Sage: Seethe it to the one halfe, then take out the Sage leaues: this will heale any Canker or Sore in a horse. To heale any cut in a Horse. Take a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, of tarre and blacke Sope, halfe so much of each, and a little turpentine: boyle them altogether (but the Sope) and as soone as you take it from the fire, put in the Sope and then use it. For a horse wrung in the wales. Take Butter and salt, and boile them together till they are blacke, then powre it on hot: then take vp a flake of Horse doung that is hot, and loy it on the sore backe, and so dresse him till he be whole. For fretting on the belly which com∣meth with galling of the foregirt.
This commeth with the fore Girt, and it stoppeth the blood which is in the principall veines, called the plate Veines, which doe runne length wayes, take Oyle of Bayes, and Oyle of Balme, twoounces of Pitch, two ounces of tarre, one ounce of Rosen: mingle them altogether, and annoynt the fore bowels, then take Flaxe and lay vpon it, and seare it with a hot Iron, but take héed it be not too hot, for feare of burning. For Thistulaes. When you first perceiue it to swell, then scald it with Honey and shéepes suet, but scald it very much, this will keepe it from bréeding. Then take and slit it in the ueather end of the sore and put as much Mercury Sublimatum as a Pease, a∣bate it with Sallet Oyle, laying it on with a fea∣ther; after that take verdigreace foure penny worth, Vitriall ob. Lead thrée penny worth, beate these to∣gether and euery day wash the wound with Copris water made with Copris and Elder leaues in Sum∣mer, and with the inner gréene barke in Winter: af∣ter washing, take the powder, and put it on the sore, and after it droppe on a little Oyle. Another for the same. Take the outtermost gréene shels of Walnuts, and put them in a tubbe, strowing thrée or foure handfull of Bay-salt upon them, some on the bottome, some on the middle, and some on the top, and so kéepe them all the yeare: and when you will vse them, take a pint of them, and a little bay salt, and halfe a quarter of a pound of blacke Sope, with halfe a spoonefull of May butter (and for want thereof, other butter and incorporate them together, and then spread it on the sore: but two houres before you lay it on, annoynt the Sore with a little Venice-turpentine. A medicine to kill the thistula cleane, cankers, or foulesores
Take vnguentum Egyptiacum which is made of Ho∣ney, a pint, Vineger halfe a pint Allum a quar∣ter of a pound, and verdigreace an ounce and halfe, see the them altogether, till they be thicke and a tawny colour; this is called Egyptiacum: And to made it the strongest way, is to put Subl. an ounce make in pow∣der and Arsnicke two scruples, and boyle it together. This strongest is for thistulaes, Cankers, and foule Soares: and the first may be used in the Mouth, but not that which is made of Sublimatum and Arsenicke; for they are poyson. A Tent to put into the hollow place of Take of Sublimatum well powdered, one ounce, the middest of well leauened Bread stake baked iiii. or of Neuin fenne drammes; mingle them together with a little Rose-water, and make Tents thereof▪ and drie them vpon a tile, and then take it to use. To make a Lee for the same, or water to kill a Thistula at the bottome. Take Lée, honey Roch Allum, and Mercury, and séethe them together: and apply it to the thistula at the bottome thereof, Another for the same. Also to drie a thistula, take Rew, Wine, Goats doung, and Beane flowre, and seeth  together, and lay it on, and this will dre it vp. To sinck-a Thistula. Take first and seare it with this marke O or such
like, and then take Rosen, Sheepes fallow, and brim∣stone, and boyle them together, and lay it on very hot with a Cloth: this will sinke it downe againe. This is good also for a Windgall: take and picke it out (but beweare of Sinnewes) and then lay it on; but not so hot, but very reasonable: and this will kéepe it cleaue. For a Thistula in the head. Take the iuyce of house-léeke and dippe a locke of Wooll in it, and put the locke of Wooll in his Eare and bind it fast, vse this once a day. Another for the same. If there bea any inflammation in the Eares, or that it groweth to an inpostumation in that place, you shall boyle the rootes of Mallowes in water till they waxe tender, then bruise them, and straine out the water cleane and being warme giue it the Horse to drinke. To know the Bottes. When you thinke that your Horse hath the Boss, looke in his mouth: and smell on his breath, for it will stinke, and his mouth will be full of slime. To cure the Bottes. Take as much blacke Sope as a Walnut, as much Brimstone beaten, and a little Garlike, and put it in good Ale, and giue it to the Horse blood warme: but for a Mare with foale, then take brimstone, sut, and Garlike, with out sope. Another for the same.
Take a handfull of new Hens doung▪ and a quart of good stale drinke, and all to bray it with your hands: than take a good handfull of bay Salt, and put two Egges to it, and bray them together, and giue it your horse to drinke in a horne. Another for the same. Take a pint of milke, of Saffron, ob of Allum ob. beate them together, and giue it him to drinke. To kill the wormes in the maw. Take the crops of young broome, and of Sauin and Grunsell, of each a quantity: then crop them small, and giue it him with his provender euening & morning let him and not drinke for a good space after. If he have the long wormes, take milke, brimstone and honey, and giue him to drinke. For the wormes in the Coddes. Take the guts of a young Pullet; and cast it in∣to his mouth fasting, and make him to swallow them downe: doe this thrée mornings together, but let him not drinke nor eate in fiue houres after. Some vse to giue him fresh broome in his prouen∣der, and salt water to drinke. Others doe giue him of gréene Willow, or greene Réed so eate, and in disgestion of the meate, he shall cast out the Wormes. Another for the same. Take the Garbidge of a young henne or Pigeon while it is warme, rowle it first in a little Sope, and and after in Bay-salt, and force it downe his threate: and it will helpe him. Probatum.
To know when a Horse hath the wormes. Take vp his vpper lippe, and you shall see many small blew veines, greater and bigger than the worme veines by a great deale. For a Horse that hath the Trunchions. Let him drinke Heunes doung, Mint, Sage, and Rue: and let him blood in the Nostriles▪ or else giue him Sauin or Sothernewood to drinke; and it will cure him. Another for the same. Take ob. of Arment, ob. of Honey, ob. of ve∣niricke, ob. good stale Ale: mingle them together, and tie vp the horse head on high, and giue it him to drinke with a horne. For Blisters. Take the suyce or ground Iuie, with so much Brimstone, a quantity of tarre, and so much Allum: put it altogether, and lay it to the sore. For the Bards. If they grow long, they will hinder his féeding: they doe vse to clippe them with a paire of sheares, and then wath his Mouth with water and Salt: and that will cure him. For the Staggers. You shall perceiue them by beating his head, and he will be as though he were hlind. Take garlike, rue, and bay-salt, and beat them grosly put vineger into it, & put it into the horses eares, & then
wet wooll in his mediciue, and stop his eares therewith and bind them close, and let it bee so 24. houres, and then pull out his tongue and wash it with vineger, to make him haue a good stomake. Another for the same. First take a wispe of wet hay, and burne it vnder his nose that the smoake may fume into his head, then take halfe a handfull of Salandine, and as much hearb∣gace, thrée or foure cloues of Garlike, and a little Salt, and stp them together, and put thereto or fiue spoonefull of vineger or vergis: then  it into the horses Eares: and tye the Eares close that no ayre may come in: let it continue in his Eares a day and a night, and then let him blood. Or else take Rue and Salandine, of each alike, and white Salt, and stampe them together, and put into his eares, and binde them vp for two houres. Another for the same. Take oyle of bitter Almonds, i. oz. di. of Oxe gall, ii. Drammes of blacke Ellebor stamped, ob of graines of Casterum, of Vineger, and of veriuyce five drammes▪ séeth them altogether till the vineger be consumed, then straine them, and put it into his Eares. For the paine in the head, or stifeling.
Keepe his head warme and let him drinke warme water mingled with wheat-meale, or Fennel-seede, and blow it into his Nose with a quill, and some powder of Ellabar, Snéesing powder, mixed together with some pepper: then take a pint of malmesie, the whites and yolkes of fiue new layd Egges, one head of Gar∣like bruised, small pepper, Cinamon and Nutmegs beaten fine, and a quantity of sweet butter: mingle them together, and giue it him to drinke three dayes af∣ter:but let him not drinke in foure houres after. For the wanders. Take halfe a bushell of Barly, and set on the fire in a panne, and put treto running water, and euer as the water wasteth, put in more, so that the Barly be couered with water, and let it seeth till the Barley be broken: then take a little Poke or Sacke, and put the Barley therein, and lay the same on the Horse ridge on length from the Maine to the Cropper, all hot: and let it lye till it be cold, and there let it lye a nigh and a day, and put the Horse into a greene Yard some xxiiii. houres, and there he will wallow: and then take him in, and he will be whole. For the Yellowes. You shall know them by the white of his Eye, which will be yellow, or else by his tongue, which will haue yellow veines, or put vp his vpper Lippe, and you shall sée veines yellow. Take two races of Turmericke, and ob. of Saffron and put to it a pint of strong Beere or Ale, and warme it blood-warme, and giue it him. Another for the same. Take Turmericke a cloue and di and di. a dozen thaines of Saffron, one or two Cloues, and sixe spoone∣fuls of vineger or vergis: and put each in Eare three spoonfuls, and stop his eares with blacke wooll: and then tye them fast seven or eight dayes. Another for the same. Take long Pepper, graines, turmericke, and Licoris beaten in powder: put them into strong Beere and giue it him to drinke.
For the paines or Crotches, which com∣meth by heat, and sudden cold upon it, The paines appeare aboue the Hoofe: you shall know them by the Haire standing right vp, you must take vp the shackle veine on both sides, then take the soft Row of a red Herring, and Mustard, and blacke Sope, and boile these in vineger and make a Paster, and lay it to the sore. There is no Veine betweene the Posterne and the Hoofe but the Shanke Veine, and the Veine which serueth for the Crotches must bee taken vp on the in∣side and the outside. Wash it first with warme Vrine, then drie it with a Cloth, and cippe away al the hayres o the scab∣by place; then rubbe and chafe it all ouer, and make fast his feete, and rubbe the pace grieued with But∣ter and tarre boyling together vpon a Clout tied on a stickes end and bae it well therewith: vse this once or twice a day, till it be whole. Butter and honney molten together, is good to an∣noynt an Horse for paines, or Crotches▪ Anther for the same. Tke a pound of Hogges greace, i. d. worth of ver∣digreace ii. oz of mustard. di a pound of oyle de bay, a quarter of a pound of Naruell, di. a pound of Honey di. a pound of English Waxe, i. oz. of Arsenicke, ii. oz of Red Lead, halfe a pint of : boyle all these together, and make an Oyntment of it: Cippe the Horses legge bare, and lay this medicin to it very hot. For Courded legges, or scratches.
Take vp the sheines beneath the knee, and lethim blood as much as you thinke good, then knit the Veine aboue and beneath, and annoynt the legges with this oyle following. Another for thesame. Take Frankinsence, and Rosen, and fresh greace, and boyle them together, and straine it: and keepe it to your vse. A Drinke to raise a Horse, or for a Horse that is sicke. Take two penny-worth of Pepper, two penny worth of Saffron, two penny-worth of Annis-seedes two penny worth of turmericke, a penny-worth of long Pepper, two penny-worth of treacle, a penny∣worth of Licoris, a good quantity of penny reyall and Archangell: Giue him these with the yolkes of Egges in milke to drinke, And for Neate Cattell, giue these to drinke. For a Scurfet Horse. Take a quart of Beere or Ale, two penny-worth of Sallet oyle, and as much Dragon water, a penny-worth of treacie: make them warme vpon the coales and put into it a penny-worth of Horse Spices: and giue it him. For a Hide-bound Horse. This commeth by ouermuch working, ill dyer∣ing, and naughty dressing take Fen-creeke, turme∣ricke, Annis seedes, Bayes, Licoris, and Cummin beate all these together, and giue him one spoonefull of all these in Ale or Beere blood warme. this is also good for the cough: this will also keepe him from it, If you use to giue if him before the disease commeth.
Another for the same. Take away some blood with the Flem; then giue him some warme meashes morning and euening, and giue him Malt sodden in water together, or branne and water, or some wheat sodden with Barly in water and it will helpe him. For the hoofe-bound. You shall raise the hoofe aboue from the toppe to the soale in foure or fiue places, that the Water may come out: Some doe raise it round with a sharpe knife, and along downeward, and then rubbe it well with Salt once or twice. For a loose Hoofe. Take Tarre thrée spoonefull of Rosen, a quarter of a pound of Tansie, Rue, of red Mints, of Sothern∣wood, of each halfe a handfull: beate all them together namorter, and put there to halfe a pound of butter, i, d. worth of Virgins wax: then fry them altogether, and binde it to the Hoofe for eight dayes, and it will eure him. For a brittle hoofe. If your Horse haue a brittle Hoofe, it is because it is too hot or too dry; and doth stand a day in the Sta∣ble unstopped. Take Oxe-doung and temper it with Vineger, and binde it warme all ouer vnto the Féete, and vnder the soales of the Féete, on the next day use him so againe; so use it for a wéeke together, and it will helpe him: vse to stoppe his Féete with Oxe or Cow doung, or his owne; and let him stand so a moneth.
Or, take the fat of Bacon, and temper it withTurpentine, and annoynt his Féete therewith; which is very good. A Medicine for the Cough, or morn∣ing in the chine. Kéepe your Horsemeatlesse ouer night, then take a a pint and a halfe of milke, thrée hēads of Garlike plled and stamped, boyle them to the halfe: giue it to your Horse, and some at his nose, then runne a quar∣ter of a mile, then rest him; and after that, runne him thrée times more, euery time resting him: then put him into a stable, and keepe him very warme, giue him no water till ofternoone, then giue him good Mesh and so vse him with Meshes three dayes, and giue him no water but alwayes warme, for three dayes. Another for the same. Take Hornehound. Licoris, and Annis seeds, in powder make Balles thereof with fresh Butter and giue it your Horse. Another for the same. Take wheat flowre, Annis seeds, and Licoris, being stamped in a morter. Fiue or sixe cloues of gar∣like being bruised: mixe all these together, and make a Praister of them, and rowle them in balles as big as a Walnut: then pull out his tongue, and cast the balles downe his throate three or foure of them at a time: and giue him two new layd Egges after them shels and all. For the Glaunders. Take swines greace cleane clarified, and as much oyle of bay as a Walnut: giue it him to drinke with faire water, luke warme.
Another for the same. Take of Ellecampana, Annis seeds, and Licoris of each i.d. worth, boyle them in three pints of strong Ale or Beere, vnto two pints or lesse: then put into it a quarter of a pint of Sallet oyle, and giue it him to drinke blood warme Then take Enfordium in a Quill, and blow it up into his nose, and within three dayes after, take mus∣tard, Vineger, and Butter, and boyle them together: put thereto halfe an ounce of Pepper, and giue it him to drinke. Use the one Medicine one weeke, and the other another; and ride to worke him easile. Another fer the same. Take a quantite of Annis seeds, Kicoris, and Elle∣campana roots; ong pepper and Garlike, of each a like, with three Egges, and some butter, a quantity of malmesie, and some strong Ale mixt together; and make it warme, and so giue it him, and keepe him warme. Another for the same. Seeth a handfull of pilled Earlike in Milke, and put a peece of Butter thereto, and some Ale: and stirre them all together, and giue it him fasting, and ride him softly a while after, and then set him vp: but keepe him warme nine dayes after. For the strangies.
Cut him betwéene the Iawes, and take out the Kernels and wash the place every day with béere and butter, and stoppe it vp as long as you can, and giue him new milke and Garlike to drinke, and the iuyce of the leaues of Birch withall; or in winter, the barke of Birch: also smother him with the fume of Mast∣ickeor Frankinsence. For the Farsey. Take blacke Sope, Arsenicke, vnstaked Lime, verdigreace, and Red Lead: worke these together, and lay them to the sore. Another for the same. Take thrée ounce of Quicksiluer, and put it into a bladder, with two spoonefulls of the iuyce of O∣range or Lemmons, and shake them together to coole the Quicksiluer: then take halfe a pound of fresh Hogges greae, and of Vergis and ounce: put all these in a Tréede dish, and worke them well together: then anoynt the Knots with this Oyntment till they rot▪ then let them out with a sharpe Knife, and anoynt them still: and put into his eare the iuyce of Rag-wéed, and they will dry vp. Probatum. A drinke for the Farsey: Let him blood in the necke of both sides, foure fingers from the head, and giue him this drinke. Take a Gallon of faire water, and put therein a good handfull of Rue, and a spoone full of Hempséeds and bruise them into a morter altogether, and seeth it till the halfe be consumed: and when it is cold, giue it him to drinke. For the Farsey. Take blacke Sope, Mustard made of sharpe Wine or Vineger, and Red Lead, mixe all these together, and anoynt the veines all along, rubbe it euer with an hot Iron made of purpose, but very thicke: rubbe the Medicine much in with the Iron, being red hot.
To destroy the Farsey, Take the iuyce of hemlocke a good quantity, and bray them together, and put into the eares, & pricke the knots and put in salt, and giue him drinke with swéet Wort, Fennell and Treacle. For a Horse foote, that is wronged in the foote locke. Séeth a quart of brine till the foame rise, then straine it and put thereto an handful of Tansie, as much of mall∣ows a saucerful of hony, & a quarter of a pound of shéeps Tallow: stir all these on the fire til the Hearbs are well sodden, and all hot, lay it to the Ioynt, & then lay a cloth ouer it, and it will be whole in three dayes. For a wrench in the foot-locke. Take Pompilion, naruile, & black sope, of each alike. & heate them hot on the fire and then a noynt him therwith. For a horse that is Stiffed or hipped, Take a pound of Bolearmoniacke, on quarter of red wine vineger, six egs beaten shels and all, two penny-worth of English honey, as much Venice Turpentine, one quart of flowre, one good handfull of bay-salt, and put all these in a pot, and kéepe it close all night, and the next day ap∣play some of it to the hurt, dressing it once a day for nine dayes together. For a horse that is foundred. Take verdigreace, Turpentine, and sallet-oyle, two or thrée spoonefuls of Hogs greace, and bées wax one oz∣boile a together, and so dip flax or towin it, and stuffe his féete there with, and let him blood in the toes. Another for the same
Plucke off his shooes, and pare hollow his Féet nigh to the quicke, then race him with a crooked Launce from the héele to the toe in two or thrée places on both sides of the Hoofe, and let him bléed well: then clap two or thrée hard Egges to it as hard as hee may suffer it: and as they coole, lay on more: and then lay hot horse dung vpon them and about his féete, and hee will soone recover if you giue him rest. For a horse that is foundred in his feet. Take tarre, neats-foot oyle, and the yolkes of egs, i.d. worth of verdigreace, and some Wheat bran, and boils these together, and bind them vnder his foote very hot. If he foundred in his body. Take ob of Garlike ii, d. worth of pouder of Pepper-ii. d. worth of powder ginger .ii. d. worth of graines brut, sed, and put into a bottle of stale ale the best you can get and giue it him to drinke, and litter him to the belly and lay-clothes on him as many as he can beare: and let him blood on the sides. For blindnesse Take two dry tile stones, and rubbe them together and blow the powder of it with a quill into his eyes thrée or foure times. For the webbe in the eye. Take the lean of a gammon of bacon, and dry it, & ther∣of make powder, and vse the powder, and it will cure it. For the pearle in the eye, Take the iuice of ground-iuy, the iuice of salandine, and womans Milke, and put it into the eyes, and it wil also cure him. For the Maw in the eyes.
Make a plaister of the iuyce of ground-iuie, and of I∣uie-berries stamped in a Morter, beaten with wine or water: and plaisterwise lay it one the eye or eyes even¦ing and morning. Another for the same. Some take a Néedle and a double thréed, and thrust the needle through the filme of the eye wherein the Crush groweth; which pull out, laying it on your fingers end, and holding the Needle and thréed straight, and so cut away the hard matter a penny bredth, but beware you cut not away the hard fat, which is the wash of the eye: neither cut the Filme wherein the Eye groweth; but cut betweene the filme and the crush, and then squirt in beere. For a Canker in the Eye. Take roch Allum & gréene copris, of each alike boyle them in thrée pints of running water, vntill the one halfe be consumed; then take it from the fire, and once a day wash his eyes therewith, being made luke-warme. For a stroake in the eye. Lay thereto the iuyce of Smallage, Fennell, and the white of an Egge. For a windgall. Take and cut the Skinne, then take a spoonefull of Oyle de. bay, one spoonefull of turpentine, i. d. worth of Verdigreace the white of an Egge, and a quarter of an ounce of Red Leade: boyle them toge∣ther, and it will make a Salue, lay the same to the place where you did cut him. Probatum. Another for the same. First clppe off the Haire bare, then cut it the length of a Bane, and let it out: but beware of
Sinnewes that you cut not them: then haue ready molten Rosen, Sheepes tallow, and brimstone, boy∣led together: then lay on this medicine, but beware it bee not too hot. For the Spauin. Take Mustardseede, and Oyle de Bay, and Cow doung, the rootes of Mallowes, a quantity of Turpentine, di. oz. of Bolearmoniacke, beate them to powder, and worke them together, and binde them hot to the Spauin. For the blood Spauin, and bone Spauin. Take vp the veine aboue and beneath the ioynt, and let it bléed well, then knit vp the veines, and annoynt them with butter till they bee whole. For the bone Spauin. For the Bone Spauine, pricke it with a sharpe pointed Knife, then take a peece of candle, and lay a peece of browne Paper vpon it, and with a hot Iron melt the tallow, and after annoynt it with butter. For inflammation of the Coddes. Boyle Groundsell in wine and vineger, and so bath him therewith, and vse to ride him into the water. Another for the same. Take a quart of good alewort, and set it on the fire, with the crums of brown bread strongly leauened, and a handfull of Commin (or more) in powder: make a plai∣ster of all these and beane flower, and apply it to the griefe as hot as it may be suffered.
Another for the same. Take new cow doung and séeth it in milke; then make a Playster, and lay it vpon the greife as hot vpon the swelling as may bee: For swelling in the Coddes. Let him assaile a mare, and give him no prouender, and let him blood aboue the great veine betweene the Hippes, and lay thereto hard egges in his owne doung and make a plaister of the same, and lay it to the Cods, and if it helpe him not, let him stand in the water halfe an houer. For the Strangullion. Take bread and bayes, of Laurel, and temper them together with may butter, and giue him there of three dayes together, and he shall bee whole. For festring of the sore. Take lime and tough horse doung, and temper them together with Pepper and the white of an egge, and lay it to the sore fiue dayes, and it will cure him. A drinke for the stone. Take a pint of white wine, halfe a pint of bur feede and beate them small, ii oz. of Parsely seede, halfe a handfull of hysope, halfe an oz. of blacke sope: mingle these together, and warme it, and giue it him. For the stone Collicke, and fret. Take vnset leekes, and stampe them small, and Sope, milke, and butter, and give it the horse: it will make him pisse.
For a horse that cannot stale. Take a Nutmeg, and a handfull of parsely, séed, beate them in powder, and a handfull of butter, and heate it in good Ale, and giue it him blood-warme, and hee shall stale at ease. For the stone and to make him pisse. Take the seede of Smallage, Parsely Saxefrace, the rootes of philudendula, Cherrystone Kernels, Grun∣sellseedes, and broome seede, of euery one alike much: make them in fine powder, and giue it him in white Wine. For a Horse that cannot dung. Take eleuen leaues of Lorell, and stampe them in a Morter, and giue it him to Drinke in strong stale Ale. Another for the same. Take Barly and seethe it in the iuyce of Gum∣folly, and giue him the Barly to eate and the iuyce to drinke. Another for the same. Or else, take and let him blood, and boyle the blood with the powder of the pill of Pomgranats, and put in some Wheate: hen straine it, and giue it him to drinke three or foure mornings, but let him not trauaile. Another for the same.
Take the powder of Licoris and Annis seedes, depiction of the farrier's profession diagram of a farrier's tools
depiction of a man on horseback
rouled vp in Honey and giue him thrée or foure bals of them at a time, pulling out his Tongue, and put∣ting it in his throat: It looseth his breath and setteth his winde at libertie, and purgeth the cold and stiff∣nesse, and expelleth the Glaunders. Brused Licoris, Annis seedes, Garlike bruised, a little Sallet oyle, and Honey giuen blood warme in Milke cureth many diseases and kéepeth him from more. For a Horse that is broken winded. Take a Hedgehogge and split him and take out his guttes, and dry them vp in an Oven untill you make powder of them, giue it to your Horse to drinke in a pint of strong Ale, a part thereof: then take Bals of Annis seeds and Licoris rowled in butter, and cast them downe-his throat, and wash his Oates in good Ale or Beere, then take Commin, Annis seedes, Li∣coris and Sentalie, and make powder of them, and strew thrée spoonefull in his Oates, being moist: use this same Fourtéene dayes. Another if he be pursey. Take Molline or Long wort; and make a powder thereof, and giue it him to drinke with water, and it wil heale him. Or you may take the Powder of Gensian at the Apthe∣caries, and that wil heale him also. For a horse pricked with a Naile. Take out the hoofe til you come to the bottome, or Veine; then take Turpentine. i. oz. Tarre i. oz. Pitch i. oz. Beefe Sewet i. oz. and one head of Garlike: Boyle them altogether, and lay them to it so hot as may bee suffered: and if it chance to breake out aboue the Hoofe, then take the said medicine, and annoynt it therewith.
To heale a Mangie Horse. Let him blood on both sides his Necke, then cutte the Skinne in the middest of the Fore-head two fin∣gers broad, then raise the Skinne on both sides, and put in slices of Angelica roote, or Elecampana; leaue them til it rot, then thrust out the matter, but leaue the rootes; they wil come out as hee healeth, annoynting the Mangie places with Oyle Oliue. Another for the same. Take Lampe Oyle, fine powder of brimstone, of blacke Sope, Tarre, barrow Hogges-greace, and the Sutte of a chimnie; of each alike, and then mixe them altogether, and annoynt the place therewith so hot as may be suffred, and it wil helpe him. For the mangie of a dogge. Take Vinegar, Gunpowder, blacke Sope, Brim∣stone, burnt Allum, and Verdigreace: boyle altogether with Honey and rubbe ouer the mangie place. For the strangle-halt. Take vp the Master-veine aboue the knee, and vnderneath the same Veine lyeth a string, cutte it away: then cutte him below the nostrils, and take away two strings, and then annoynt him with but∣ter and Salt. For the Mares Evill. Take Milke, Oate-meale, Mallowes, Worme∣wood, Horehound, and Smallage, wring these toge∣ther with your hands, and boyle them together till they bee soft, and lay it to the griefe, which will bring it
to a head: then you must lance it; then take Red Lead, burnt Allum, and Rosen, beate these to pow∣der, and cast upon it. To take away the bones, Knobbe, or Ringbone. Take a pound of strong Lée, and Sope, a quarter of Vitriall Rom i. oz. of Salarmoniacke, as much of Roch Allum, and boyle them together till they are thicke, and so vse it for an Oyntment. Gypsiacum the strongest kind, lay it to with Cotten thrée or foure times, will take it away. This is good also for a splint: and though it bee a Thistula in the Crowne it will sinke it. For the Powle-evill; which commeth of a bruise behind the Eares. Take a hot Iron, but first take vp the haire all the whole compasse; then search it with a hot Iron, and then take Leade and blacke Sope, and mingle them with water, and make it thicke, and anoint him therewith till it bee whole. To make water for the same. Take a quart of water, halfe a pound of Roach Al∣lum, iiii, d. worth of Mercury, a quarter of a pound of verdigreace: and when you sée the horse curbe his head, wash him with this water. Another for the same. Lay a Plaister of Hogges greace on, to ripen
place, and when it is rive, launce it, and thrust through a hot Iron, if it bee very deepe, and keepe it open wi tents made of Spunge, and dippe it in Hogges greace: vse this for foure dayes, then take Turepen∣tine, and the yolkes of Egges and Saffron and minglethem together, and dippe your tents of Spung therein, and bee sure they goe to the bottome, and Plaister it with Hogges greace: and this will cure him. For the Canker. You must take out his tongue, and let him blood in fiue or six places; and like wise on his vpper lippe that hee may bléede well, and all berubbe his tongue and lippes with salt, then the next day wash his tongue and lippes with vineger, and rubbe it againe with Salt, and give him warme drinke and new Béere a day or two. For a colt-Evill. Take the iuice of Hemlocke, and wash his yard and rods therewith. Another for the same. Take beane flowre, vinegar, and Bolarmoniacke, and worke these together, and lay it to the codde. Another for the same. You may wash his shedde with warme vinegar, and draw forth his yard, and wash it also: then ride him in∣to the water: let him swimme, and there tosse ond turne him: vse this two or thrée weekes. For the coying. If he halt, pull off his shooe and open the place prick∣ed with a Knife, and powre in Turpentine, War, and Sheepes suet, being molten together: then close it vp, and set on the shooe againe: let him rest, and come in no et ground.
Some doe vse to burne the hole with a hot Iron, when they haue puld out the Naile; and some doepowre in boiled butter in the hole once a day, and it hath cured it. Another for the same. Take a handfull of nettles, of blacke sope, of vine∣gar, of each of them a spooneful, and three times so much Boares greace or Bacon greace; then stampe them wel together, and stoppe the Sore therewith, and it wil not rot any further, but heale, although you la∣bour him. Some doe stoppe vp the hole when they draw forth the naile, with tallow and horse-dung, and then set on the Shooe. For the Cordes. The cure is to flit it, and with a Bucks horne to take it vp, and tye it in two places, and cut it away. Another for the same. Take Mustard, and Aquavity, and Sallet Oyle, and boyle them on the coales, and make a Plaster, and hind it hot to the place. It is good also for any straine, so it be new done. Another for the same. Take the Grounds of Ale, and being made warme, bathe his Legges therewith, and wispe him with a Hay rope. Another for the same. Take smallage, and an hearb called Oxeye, and some Sheepes suet, choppe them altogether, and boyle it in mans vrine, and bathe the place therewith, and wet a Hay-hand in it, and rowle vp the legge there∣with,
Probatum. For the Curbs. Fret his Legges with thy hand, and then take red Colewort leaues, and Barrage, and bray them toge∣ther, and lay it thereto fiue dayes. Seethe a pound of blacke Sope in a quart of strong Ale, til it looke like Tarre, and anoint the Sinewes therewith, and it wil supple them, and bring them to the right course. It is good for a man, if hee bee stiffe in the Ioynts. For the Enterfeeting. Hee may bee much holpen by shooing with a skil∣ful Smith: But if the Skinne bee off, take May∣butter, with a quantity of yellow Rosen, as much Naruel; then fry them together in a Panne, and let it stand til it bee cold, and put it in a Potte, and put to it a little new Cow dung, and make Plasters there∣of and binde it to the place. This wil heale also the pricke of a Naile. For the Narvell galled. Take Sut of a Chimnie, and Yeest mixed together, and Plaster it on: but shift it once a day. Another for the same. Take nettle séeds, & mixe them with Sallet oyle and anoint the sore, or chafe it therewith. Some vse to wah him with warme water, and then anoint the place with Greace and Salt mixed toge∣ther. Another for the same.
Take hearbe bittony, brimst one in powder of Elibory, pitch, and old greace, and stampe them together: and when you haue washed them with Chamber-lée, anoint him with this medicine. A water for a Galled backe, or any foule sore. Take a pottle of veriuyce, thrée penny worth of greene Copris, and boyle it to the one halfe, or more, and wash the Sore with that, and then fill the Sore with red Lead; and let it not bee dressed of three dayes: and then dresse him againe, as you shalsee cause. For a greene wound. Take white Wine and make it warme, and wash the Wound therewith, then take Turpentine, Mp, and a little Waxe, and me it them together, being stir∣red, continually til they are wel mixed, and then vse it. If it bee a cut, Take Tow, and dip if therein, and fil the wound with it: If it bee a hole, make Tents for the place. Another for the same. Take Hogges greace and Venice Turpentine▪ and melt them together: and if it bee a Cut, take Tow and dippe therein, and fil the wound therewith. If it be a hole make Tents, and dresse it therewith. For a hot impostume in any outward part. Stampe Liverwort, and mix it in the Grounds of Ale Mallowes, and Hogges greace, being made hot, and lay it thereto. Another for the same.
Bruise Lettice séedes, and Poppie séedes, and mixe them with Oyle of Red roses, and plaister-wise lay it on the sore. For a cold Impostume. Take the hearbe Baulme; stamped and mixed with Hogges greace, and Plaister-wise lay it to it. Another for the same. Séethe white Mint in Wine or Ale, with Oyle or butter and lay it hot to the place. To ripen any Impostume. Séeth Mallowes rootes, and Lilly rootes, and then bruise them, and put therto Hogges greace, and Lin séed meale: and Plaister wise lay it to it. For the Rheume. Let him blood in the Veine vnder the Taste, and rub his Gummes with Sage tyed to a stickes end, and giue him for a while, the tender Crops of blacke Bryers in his Prouender. For loose Teeth. Pricke the Gummes with a Knife, and then rubbe them with Honey, Sage, and Salt, beaten together. The Sorrel Horse is most subiect to this Disease. For the Feaver. Let him blood in the Thigh in the middle veine foure singers vnder his Tuell: or else, take the Veine in the Necks, and giue him a drinke.
Another for the same. Take Water and Honey, the iuyce of Purselaine, Gumme Dragone, and Frankinsence in powder, with a few of damaske Roses, and mixe them altogether and giue it him to drinke. Another for the same. Take of Germander foure ounces, of Gumdragonet, and of dried Roses, of each one oz. beate them all in fine powder, and put them in a quart of Good Ale, adding thereto Oyle of Oliue foure oz. of Honey as much: and giue it the horse luke warme to drinke. If hee draweth his breath short, and sigheth with all let him blood in the Necke: and then take a pint of Wine, with di oz. of Sallet Oyle, and mixe therewith Frankinsence: and with the iii. part of the iuyce of Mug∣wort, give it him to drink. For the Fronce or Fronts. You must cut or burne them out: then wash them with Beere and Salt, or Ale and Salt, and so they goe away. For the Gigges or Flappes. Gigges or Flappes, are Pimples, or Teats in the in∣sides of the mouth: you must cure them as you cure the Camery or Fronce; either wil helpe him. It is good to pull out the Horses Tongue very often for feare of bréeding any Blisters or Blaines, vnder his Tongue, or for feare of Hay-seed, which wil breede to some of those diseases. For the Gorge, or to bring Haire againe.
Seare him with a hot Iron a handfull aboue the knée▪ then rope him round about with a soft Rope of Hay, and powre on cold water, and let it remaine a night and a day. To bring Haire againe. Take the dung of Goates, some Honey, and Allum, the blood of a Hogge: mixe them together, and heate them til they are ready to boyle, and being hot, rubbe the place therewith. Another for the same. Take the soot of a Cauldron, mixed with Honey and Oyle and anoint the place therewith. Take greene walnut shels, and burne them to pow∣der, and mixe them with honey, Oyle, and Wine, and anoint them therewith. For Gravelling. Thou shalt take off his Shooes, and pare out all the Gravell cleane (for if you leave any Grauell it wil breede to a sorenesse called a Quitterbone,) then must you stuffe him with Turpentine and Hogges greace melted together, and dip in Tow or Flax, then clap on the thooe, and keepe it stopped, and shift it euery day til it bee whole, and let him come to no wet: If you stoppe it not vp well, it wil rise aboue the hoofe: then you shall haue more businesse, and put your horse to more paine. For the molt-long. It is an ill sorenesse aboue the Hoofe, which wil bréed out in Knobs and bunches, with a watry humour.
If it be in Summer, take blacke snayles, and burre rootes, and beate them together, lay itthereto. If it bee in Winter, take the scraping of the bottome of the shagges of the Burre rootes, and put to it a handfull of the inner barke of El∣der, and beate them together, and plaister-wise lay it to. Another for the same. Take Garlicke, Pepper, and honey, and stampe them together, and anoint his Tongue therewith, and thereof lay some to his Pasterns. To stop a Laske of a Horse. Take Beane flowre, and Bolearmoniacke, of each a quart: mingle these together in a quart of Red Wine, and giue it him luke-warm: let him rest and kéep warm let him drinke no cold water, but luke-warme: and put in Beane flowre, and let him drinke but once a day, and not ouer-much, for the space of three or foure dayes. Another for the same. Take ob. of Allum, beaten in fine powder, and Bolearmoniacke, beaten small: and a quart of good milke: mingle them together til the milke bee of a curd, and giue it him to drinke, and diet him as afore said: and this will stoppe him. Probatum. For the Vines. Take Eremonic, honey, and violet leaues; stampe them together, and slit the sinnew vnderneath the eare and lay a Plaster thereto thrée dayes. For the Canker in the Nose or Mouth.
If you see the Canker hee of greate heate, and burning in the Sore with exceeding paine, you shall take the iuice of purslaine, Lettice, and S, or Night-wade, and wash the fore with a fine clout, or spout it on with a squirt, and this will kil it. Another for the same, most singular. Take Hy, Sage, and Rue, of each a good hand∣full, and seth them in drine and Water, to the third part of them: straine them out and put in a little white Copris and Honey, and a quantity, and so wash the place with it. (It is a singular thing to remooue the molles) which done, you shall make a water to heale it, as thus▪ Take rib-wort, bitonie, and Daisies, of each a hand∣full: then seeth them in Wine and Water, and wash the sore thrée or foure times a day. Some say, that christall made in pouder, is specially good to kill the canker. For any swelling of a Horse. Take hemlocke and stampe it, and mingle it with shéepes doung and vinegar, and make a playster, and lay it to the swelling. To heale the wound in the Lampas. Take a sawcerful of Honey, and 12. Pepper∣tornes, and bray them together, and temper them with vineger, and boile them a while, and then lay it on the wound thrée or foure dayes: and then let him blood in the Lampas. For the Ring-bone mallender
Take a paring of a chéese, and rost it wel, and lay it to the mallender as hot as hee may suffer it. Or else chafe it wel til the blood follow, and anoint it thereon: chafe it with a hot Iron, so that it hold to the mallender: then take ten flowres of Gillyflowres, set well, and henne-mucke, and temper them wel together and lay it on. FINIS.
depiction of the farrier's profession diagram of a farrier's tools
diagram of the veins of a horse I B The 2 temple v The 2 eye. v The 2 forhead. v The 2 pallet. v The 2 necke. ve The 2 plate. ve The 2 fore shanke. ve The 2 side. ve The shanke. ve The houfe. v The hanch. ve The taile. ve
