11290 S116494 99851710 17001
A TRƲE DISCOƲRSE OF an ouerthrow giuen to the armie of the Leaguers in Prouince: By Messieurs D' Esdiguieres and Lauallette. ¶ Translated verbatim out of the French Copie, Printed at Tours by Iamet Mettayer. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, dwelling in Saint Nicholas shambles within the New-rents.
A true discourse of an ouerthrow giuen to the armie of the Leaguers in Prouince, vpon Monday in Easter vveeke, being the 15 day of Aprill last past. 1591. OVr gratious God seemeth to sleepe for a season and to be carelesse of his chosen people, that he may bee glorified in his woonderfull workes, by bringing them which trust to much in humain strength into the consideration of his vnspeakeable power, who taketh pleasure in ye strength of men, but scattereth the great hosts and squadrons of such as arme themselues contrarie to his will, euen as chaffe before the winde, and in the twinckling of an eye (as it were) dooth so abate their pride, that by the hand of a few of his people he bringeth them to nought, ma∣king them equall with the dust, and leauing them as a preie to be deuoured of woolues, and such lyke rauenous beasts. The enemies had great confidence in the King of Spaine (now called out of this worlde to render an account before the soueraign Monarch, of the manifold extorsions and no∣torious cruelties committed by him) who assured thēselues that he would send so many men of warre into all partes of Fraunce (as he hath done, though in vaine) that in shorte time he might vanquish and subdue the king and gaine his Crowne. For the same cause, vpon the death of this Arch-tyrant king, the duke of Sauoy is gone into Spaine, and hath giuen ouer the enterprise he purposed against the towne of Marseilles, which by sundrie waies and meanes he had prac∣tised
with diuers of the inhabitants who receiued into their town some store of corne, causing such men as they suspected and would not be conformable to their wils, to forsake the town, which things they had done by so much the more wil∣lingly as they suffered thē to slip easilie into the nets of their rebellion, some of their owne accord, some others by yt helpe and assistance of a puissant armie of the Spaniards, Sa∣uoiens, and Prouincials which marched within the coun∣trey vnder the conduct of the Count Martinēga, of Monsieur de Vitelli Colonel of the duke of Sauoies horsemen leaguers, and of Mons. S. Romani general of the footmen who know∣ing that Messieurs D'Esdiguieres and Lauallette, were ioined on that side which Riez lieth on, and that Mons. Lauallette was departed for the same intent from Cisteron the 13 daye of Aprill, hauing caused certaine peeces of ordinaunce to bee brought with their troopes, and seing likewise yt they might greatly hinder their enterprises, resolued to approach neare vnto them, not so much to prouoke them to a battle, in that they were foure to one, as thinking to keepe them at a baye, and so cause them to retire. But they could not bee ignorant hauing had so great proofe of the wise conduct, singular watchfulnes, and prosperous successe of this valiant Cap∣tain Mons. D'Esdiguieres, who being aided by the venterous champion Seigneur Lauallette, and armed with a iust cause in defence of their king and state, not fearing the great num∣ber of the enemies, whome with courage and resolution he valiauntly charged so oft as there was occasion, as maye more euidently appeare by this discourse ensuing. Sparron is a village and a castell in Prouince, about fyue leagues from Aix, the Lord whereof in times past held him∣selfe newter, taking neither partie: neuerthelesse hee enter∣tayned in his Castell the Lord gouernour of the partie roy∣all and his troupe. A great number of the Sauoien horse∣men
went to lodge in the same village of Sparron. Now Mes∣sieurs D'Esdiguieres and Lauallette receiuing aduertisement of the enemies being there, without delay they marched thi∣ther also with their forces, and on monday in Easter weke being the 15 of the same moneth did assaile them with such fury and resolution that in a short space recouering the best aduantage, they gaue them an vtter ouerthrow: they tooke 15 Ensigns, foure Cornets from the horsemen, 500 horses whose owners lay dead in the place, & aboue 250 gentlemen wel mounted were caried away prisoners by a composition made at the same time in the village. The Seigneur of Vitelly, collonell of the duke of Sauoies horsemen leaguers, and Mons. S. Romani, generall of the enemies footmen did yeelde themselues prisoners also. The Frenchmen of Prouince wer sent home to their houses by the said Lordes D' Esdiguieres & Lauallette with each one a white stick in his hand. More then 500 Sauoiens were sent to Tollon to Mons. Lauallette his gallies, therein requiting the duke of Sauoy with such mea∣sure as he had meated vnto some of ye kings troups before. The most part of the forts & strong holds of Prouince, wher∣of the rebels had commaundement, hearing of so great an ouerthrow to be giuen their side, are reduced & brought vn∣der the kings obedience excepting only the citie of Aix which ye said Lords haue with al diligence enuironed & blocked in The Count Martinenga who had the leading of 800 Horse∣men perceiuing that there was nothing to be gayned but blowes, & that the said Lords & their troups spared not to lay on loade, resolued therefore to trust to their legges and to saue themselues by flight with 300 horse which were al yt could escape from that encounter: the rest were all either slayne or taken: & our souldiers & men of war, besides ma∣ny riche prisoners, got in this conflicte about 350. horsses of seruice, there were also thirtye Captaynes taken besides the two commaunders. Mons. Lauallette hath armed two galleys at Tollon: & these two noble Lords prosecuting their notable victory haue wonne ye towns of Digne and Lines, and it is said that Mouglon is now in parle to render vnto the king and to shake off the rebellious yoke.
Thus we see that humaine forces withstanding the ordi∣naunces of God, are in a moment ouerwhelmed. The King of Spaine is dead, who was the greatest suppor∣ter of the league, & the rebellion in Fraunce. The Leaguers haue lost a puissant armie of Spaniards, Sauoiens, and other strangers in Prouince, which is now God be thanked almost all subdued. Italy is disburdened sundrye waies, by the death of this tyrant. The King on the other side is proui∣dent in his affaires, which the Lord doth daily prosper with his heauenly blessing. Moreouer there are two regiments of VVallons defeated in Picardy. God exerciseth his iustice more and more vpon his enimies, seeing that the clemencie of the Prince whome hee hath giuen vnto vs serueth to no purpose to bring them to reason, and that now at this in∣stant they are so stubborne, that vnder the Duke of Maines authoritie, they will at a certaine day of the moneth haue a conuention of all their partisans rebels in the town of Reins there to hold an assembly of estates to consult of the affairs of the league, which are in a pittifull taking vpon the vnex∣pected death of the king of Spaine, which is so preiudiciall to their rebellious faction. Mounsieur de Nemours to counterpoise a matter so wor∣thy of regard by the rebels in Prouince, & thinking to mende vp that which was so torne on their side, being at Lions a little after this ouerthrow giuen, sent into Daulphine three or foure hundred horsse, carrieng with them good store of ladders and Petarts, and hauing passed the Liser towards la Roche, and leauing their horsses on this side, marched a league on foot being armed, and would haue planted their ladders, and giuen a skalado to Valence, but they came not within musquet shot thereof: for returning in hast beeing pursued, they left 37 ladders in a barne, within a quarter of a league of Valence. They had so ill surcesse through their
long retreat that they lost 80 or 100 of their horses, wherof some were woorth 800 crownes, and yet were constrained to returne againe without doing any seruice. The Leaguers being but a few which could escape at the ouer throw of Sparron haue sente to seeke their maister the duke of Sauoy in Spaine, and are in great perplexitie because they heare no newes of his Excellencie. He hath lost more by his departure than he shall gaine at his returne. We are to giue God thanks for so many blessings wher∣with it pleaseth him to endue the King and his affairs to re∣comfort in the end his good subiects so much oppressed, and almost burnt as it were with the fire of ciuill wars, kindled by the rebels, who go about to continue it: howbeit the king of compassion vpon the poore & miserable estate of his sub∣iects, more than of desire to establish himselfe in that which appertaineth vnto him, doth enforce himselfe by all meanes and chiefly by his mildnesse, mercifulnesse and clemencie towardes the vanquished rebels, to quenche and put out wholy this fire which they sought to entertaine, where∣by his people and commonwealth might florish in an vniuersall peace. FINIS.
