11475 99838523 2905
The Flovver Of Fame. Containing the bright Re∣nowne, & moste fortunate raigne of King Henry the viii. Wherein is mentioned of matters, by the rest of our Cronographers ouerpassed. Compyled by Ulpian Fulwell. ¶ Hereunto is annexed (by the Aucthor) a short treatice of iii. noble and vertuous Queenes. And a dis∣course of the worthie seruice that was done at Hadington in Scotlande, the seconde yere of the raigne of king Ed∣ward the sixt. Viuit post funera virtus. 1575. Imprinted at London in Fleete streate, at the Temple gate by VVilliam Hoskins.
To the ryght honorable and his singuler good lorde, sir William Cecill Baron of Burghleygh, Knight of the moste noble order of the Garser, Lorde high Treasorer of Englande, master of the courtes of wardes and Liueries, Chauncellour of the Uniuersitie of Cambridge, and one of the Queenes Maiesties priuie Counsaile, Ulpian Fullwell wisheth long health with encrease of honor. BEeing at stryse with my selfe, (Right honorable) whether I might presume to exhibite the dedication of this my vnpolished labour vn∣to your good Lordship or not, I was as oft abashed as I vewed the homelinesse of my style, and eftsons vtterly discomfited. But contrary wise, while I considered with my selfe (as it were waying in the other Balaunce) your noble nature in accepting the good will of the geeuer aboue the valure of the gift, I am againe recomforted, And in the ende of this conflict, the noble curtesie of your ho∣nour wonne in mee the victorie: whereupon I was not onely en∣boldened my self, humbly to desyre your L. Patronage, but also (as muche as in mee laye) encouraged my Aucthour, master Edmunde Harman, to offer vnto you the grosse fruites of this our labours. The matter meriteth the Pen of the best writer, although it hath nowe happened to the handes of an vneloquent Compyler. But if it may please your honour to accept the pro∣tection hereof, I doubt not but bothe the matter, and the wor∣thinesse of the Patrone, will stirre vp some of exquisite skill to furnishe my defect by the renuyng of this my begonne attempt. VVhich I confesse to be by mee taken in hande, more willingly
then wittilye, respecting more the truthe of the woorkes then the eloquence of wordes. Thus ceasing to trouble your good Lordship any longer at this present with my rough and ragged style, In moste humble wise I submit my selfe and this my sclender trauaile, vnto your honour, praying allmightie God to preserue and prosper you in all your noble affaires to the great comfort of this Realme. Your honours most humble, Vlpian Fulwell.
A Table of the contents of this booke. A Commendations of King Henries noble ver∣tues. Fol. 1 A Resitall of King Henries fortunate raigne. 2 A briefe discourse of the vnyting the two noble houses of Lancaster and Yorke. From whych vnyted house, King Henrye was the first kinge that proceaded. 4 Of the Battaile fought at Bosworth betweene King Henry the seuenth and king Richarde. 8 Of the byrth of King Henry the eyght. 10 Of King Henry the eyght in the tyme of his mi∣noritie. 12 Of his ryding to the Tower of London before his Coronation. 13 Of his Coronation. 14 Of the winning of Turwin and Turney. 16 The Historie of King Iames of Scotlande that was slayne at Branxston fielde. And of his la∣mentation. 22 The Historie of King Iamies sonne, who after the death of his father was king of Scottes being but a chylde. That tooke his death after the ouerthrowe of his menne at Solomos, and of his Complaint. 24 How the Kinges of England and of Fraunce met at Morguison. An. 1532. 29 Of the winning of Bullaine. 32
Of the death of King Henry the eight. 36 An Epitaph of his death. 37 A Treatice of iii. noble & vertuous Queenes. 39 The Historie of the noble seruice that was at Ha∣dington in Scotlande. 49 A Commendation of the English Souldiers that serued at this siege of Hadington, with the Ca∣pitaines names, as neare as coulde be called to remembraunce. 56
To the frindly Reader Vlpian Fullwell wisheth health. THE wyse & sage Philosopher Solon, noting the insolencie of Cressus, who esteemed him self the happiest man ly∣uing, because of his abundant welth, tolde him, that no man is to bee re∣puted happie during his lyfe tyme, because he kno∣weth not whether it shall ende with renowne or infamie. Concluding hereby, that a goodly lyfe, & a godly death maketh a perfect happie man. Nowe, seing our late soueraigne Lorde Kynge Henrye the eyghth, hath hit the marke of trewe felicitie, and wonne the game of ioyfull immorta∣litie: what ruthe were it, that so singuler an ex∣ample shoulde not be recorded in the golden booke of perpetuall Fame. His noble lyfe, his Godly pro∣ceedinges, his inuicted raygne, his fortunate suc∣cesse, his whole race of lyfe, and ende of the same, deserueth to be engraued in letters of pure Golde. If Alexander (the myghtie Monarche of Mace∣don) was offended with a Schoolemaster in whose Schoole he founde not the fame of Vlisses (written by Homer) howe much more maye wee deeme he woulde checke and reproue all Englyshe Gentlemen, that laye not before their faces the
booke of King Henryes lyfe, if he were nowe a∣mongst vs. But happely it will be sayd vnto mee, Sir, if you weare as good an Englyshe Poet as Homer was in Greeke: or if the worthinesse of your style were comparable to the matter, wee would the better esteeme of your woorke. If that bee thy obiection (gentle Reader) I cannot ex∣cuse my selfe. For I confesse I haue not the gifte of flowing eloquence, neyther can I enterlace my phrase with Italian termes, nor powder my style with frenche Englishe or Inkhorne Rhethoricke, neyther cowche my matter vnder a cloake of cu∣rious inuentions, to feede the daintie eares of de∣licate yonkers. And as I cannot: So if I could, I woulde not. For I see that manye men are so affected with these premisses, that manye good matters are obscured, the Aucthors encombred, the woorkes but meanely commended, and the Rea∣der deceaued. For while he coueteth to come to the purpose, he is lead amasked in the wylde Desert of circumstance and digression, seeking farre and fin∣ding little, feeding his humor on pleasant woordes of slender wayght, guyded (or rather giddyed) with plaucible eloquence. I do not herein condempne, neither discomende the noble Science of Rhethorike, nor the eloquent Rhethoritian, but rather wishe that excellent skill to be employed onlye on such matters as may both commende the speaker, and the thing spoken, or the writer and the thing written: hauing alwayes
the cheefe respect to tyme & place. For as it would sounde verye absurde to the eares of the skilfull Musitian to heare a gallyard, or any other daunce playde on the solemne Organs: So no lesse con∣trarie is it, to daunce after an Hymn or other cun∣ning voluntarie. Thus (gentle Reader) I desyre at thy handes, that thou accept the matter, & beare wt my crabbed meeter. Considering well that of∣ten tymes is founde good graffes vppon a Crab tree stocke. Take then the fruite, and accepte my good will. And if thou list bestowe anye fyling vpon the roughnes of my phrase, I shall bee beholding vnto thee. If not, yet shall my desyre be satisfied with thy good worde. Vlpianus Fulwell.
Vlpian Fulwell to his Booke. WHen lustie Ver beginnes to decke eche bushe and bowe with greene: And Flora faire in flaunting wise is gorgeous to be seene: Then Natures Impes tryumphes with ioy till horie Hyemps frowne: Whose frostie face with blastes bedewde Turnes all these vpsy downe. His stormie stoutnesse dryues the byrdes their warbling notes to seace: He keepes as captiue, flowers faire, till spring do them releace. Yet can his vysage not preuaile The Flower of Fame to vade: Whose growing greene shall not be shutt in griesely winters shade. As Hedera with hawtie head doth scorne syr Boreas blast: Euen so this pierlesse Flower of Fame shall stande as firme and fast. Out of which stately Blossom breedes a Bud of Eglentine Note.
Whose worthinesse adornes the stocke of natures noble lyne. Not euery whiffling taunting wynde that flyes from scornefull tong: Sall shake the stalke, ne yet the Flower to do it any wrong. For why (my booke) thy Patrons name Such noble sownde doth yelde: That thou maist thinke thy selfe well bleste, to shrowde vnder his shielde. Before whose feete, wee bothe will lye and hope such grace to fynde: That wee with ioye may passe abrode to please thy Readers mynde. Which thing God graunt.
In Vlpiani Fulwelli operis laudem Richardi Coppoci Carmen. SI tibi cognitio rerum, si nuntia veri, Possideant aliquem pectore pressa locum, Si studium pacis, seu te laus inclyta belli Incitet: huc celerem ferto referto pedem, Hic res non rerum species, hic viuida virtus: Hic flos conspicuus, conspicienda ferens. Non hic aiacis flos est Telamone creati Qui domino dignum nil nisi nomen habet Nec flos quo Phaebus genutus inscripsit acerbos, Cum suus Oebalides, morte peremptus erat, Sed flos hic famae merito regalis habendus, Henrici octaui regia facta ferens Fulwello meritas igitur persoluite grates Florem virtutis praemia iusta manent.
The Flovver of Fame. A manifest description of king Henryes noble vertues. PRepare your pennes ye Poets fyne, Your wittes & curious heddes now showe: In fyled phraes of flowing ryme, Your stately styles do ye bestow, On hym whose fame ryght farre doth flye, and lodged is in starrie Skye. To whome whyle lyfe in corps did laste, The myghtie Ceasar would geue place, The conquerors of worldes past, may yelde vnto Kyng Henryes grace. whose onely name was such a shield As feard his forrein foes in field. His kyngly Maiestie was such, As ioyed eche faithfull subiects hart: And Rebells proude he foret to couch, By dint of Sworde to feele the smart. A second Alexander hee, In valianties appeerde to bee. And that which Princes best beseemes, Gods glorie he did much aduaunce:
Repressing Error that had bene of many yeres continuaunce. The chiefest thing belong¦ing to a king is to set forth gods glorie. This was his cheefe ioy and delyght, Whereby Gods gospell shyneth bryght. His carefull hed in this respect, A chaire of state in heauen hath woon: Where he soiurnes with the elect, A mate with heauenly fathers sonne. whose seat is set in lasting blisse, and crownd with crowne that endlesse is. The fower Vertues were so well within his sacred brest yfraught: Too simple is my pen to tell the giftes that nature to him taught. My skillesse quill is farre too bace, To paint the prudence of his grace. A Salomon for Godly witt. A Solon for his constant mynde: A mirror for all Princes. A Sampson when he list to hit the furye of his foes vnkynde. Unto his fryndes a gentill Lam, A Prince that loude a valyant man. Whome God by dyuers meanes did blesse, As one well worthie of the same: With victorie for to represse His enemies to his great fame.
And many yeres to rule and raine, To Englandes ioy, to Scotlandes paine. Yea, and a blessing more then this, That doth ryght farre surmount the rest: Which is to English hartes a blisse, wherewith this happie Realme is blest. Elizabeth Queene. His daughter doth him so reuyue, as though the Father were alyue. In whome such vertues rare are seene, As makes farre countreis maruaile much: That shee a virgin and a Queene. In godlynes and wit is such. Though lyfe from father be exylde. His giftes are left vnto his chylde. As worthie Prince, by due discent, The regall Scepter for to guyde: And Christ his foes for to preuent, By Godly zeale shee doth prouyde. The fathers steppes shee treades so ryght, As doth eche English harte delyght. So that though Royall Henry bee Returnde to earth from whence he came: Elizabeth, yet may we see, doth bewtifie her fathers fame. Whome God preserue in Regall seat, Til Nestors yeres be full complete
A briefe resitall of king Henryes Fortunate raigne. AMong the most fortunate kynges & Princes that euer raigned: let the Fortunes of king Henrie the eyght haue a speciall place, whose happie successe in all his affaires was com∣parable vnto the euents of the mightie conque∣tor kyng Phillips sonne of Macedon. There were in his tyme raigning more puissant Princes together, then euer were lyuing in any age before, and yet among them all, not one of them equall to the Kyng of Englande iin prowes. In so much that the Iewes were in good hope that one of these noble Champions should be ordeined of God to be their Messias, whose comming they haue long in vayne expected, refusing the trewe Mes∣sias and sauiour of the worlde Iesus Christ, loo∣king for a Champion to bring them home again vnto their destroyed Ierusalem. These were the names of the most famous go∣uernours of the world at that tyme. Firste Henry king of Englande. The Emperour Max∣imilian. And Frauncis the Frenche king, with the valyant Princes that then were in Germa∣nie, and Selimus the Emperor of Turkie, with Barbarossa his great capitaine, besydes a nom∣ber
more, mentioned by Paulus Iouius & other good Aucthors. And among them all, the same of king Henry shyned farre brighter then the rest, as hereafter followeth. But first I will note of the blisse and happines that came vnto Englande by his byrth. It is manifest that he was the first braunche of the tree of concorde, after the any∣ting of the two noble howses of Laucaster and Yorke, that long had beene at discention & open hostilitie for the imperiall Diadem of this realme. For although his brother Prince Arthur were the elder, yet because he liued not to enioy his fa∣thers seignories, neyther left behynde him anye Issue: I recken him that brought forth the fruite to be the cheefe and principall braunche. He was also elect and chosen of God to be that Ezechias that should sinsearly set forth his sacred lawes. Yea he was the verye Hercules that was borne to subdue the Romysh Hydra, against whyche many hedded monster, neyther kyng nor Keysar could preuayle, vntill this puissant Hercules tooke the matter in hand, to the glorie of God, and his perpetuall fame. He was also endewed by God with inuincible Fortitude, alwayes preuaylyng with glorious victorie. And lyke as when moi∣ses Exod. 17. helde vp his Rodde the Israelites had the bet∣ter hande, and while he helde downe the same their enemies had hope of victorie. So likewyse on whose syde so euer king Henry helde vp his Sworde, that parte had alwaye prosperous suc∣cesse.
As the warres betweene the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Frauncis the French kyng may sufficiently shewe. More ouer the lyke bles∣sing of God happened vnto him, as seeldome, or (rather I thinke) neuer chaunced vnto any kyng. For where as hee hauing three chyldren and no mo, at his departure out of this worlde: they haue all three succeeded the father. Not as priuate per∣sons, but successiuely in the regall seate: Gouer∣ning his landes and territories. Also his noble magnanimitie was such, that he being Lorde of Ireland, was by the Erles, Lordes & Piers of the same Realme, desyred to take vpon him the name of their king. And they of their owne accordes, (in the name of the whole Realm of Ireland) did vnto him Homage and Fealtie. Besides all this, when Maximilian the Empe∣ror was dead, the Princes Electors of the Empire of Rome, with generall consent, committed their full aucthoritie of Eleccion, for the space of foure daies vnto kyng Henry, eyther to take the Em∣pire him selfe, or els to nominate whom he would, who thankfully accepted their good willes, ren∣dring vnto them againe their aucthoritie, and re∣fusing to be Emperor him selfe. Thus we may saye (and that trewely) that he wan a kingdome without battaile or bludshed. And he was of power, not onely to be an Emperor, but also to make an Emperor. And thus I may boldly as∣seuer, that he was blest of God aboue all kynges
and Princes that euer I haue read of. And happy was that Prince that might stande moste in his fauour. For the which dyuers made great suite, & specially when they stoode in neede of ayd against their enemies, because they perceiued that For∣tune followed his power, as handmayd to all his proceedings. A rare example (no doubt) it is, & me seemeth most strange, that one king should raigne 38. yeres, and that (almost) in continuall warres, and neuer take foyle, but alwaies preuailed as a victor inuicted, which without the assistaunce of almyghtie God, he could neuer haue atchyued. An euident token that God was on his syde, and therefore who coulde stande agaynst him. But to write at large of his worthinesse and in∣comparable actes, would fill a bigg volume, and were too great a charge for my vnskilfull penne. Finally, he was a Prince of singuler Prudence, of passing stoute courage, of inuincible Fortitude, of dexteritie wonderfull. He was a springing well of Eloquence, a rare spectacle of Humanitie. Of ciuilitie or good nurture, an absolute president. A speciall paterne of Clemencie and moderation, a worthie example of Regall Iustice. A bottom∣lesse spring of larges and benignitie. He was in all the honest Artes and Faculties profoundlye seene. In all liberall disciplines, equall with the best. In no kynde of literature, vnexperte. Hee was to the worlde an ornament. To Englande a treasure. To his frendes, a comforte. To hys foes, a terror.
To his saythfull and louing Subiectes, a tender Father. To Innocents, a sure Protectour. To wilfull malefactours, a sharpe scourge. To his Common weale and good people, a quyet Hauen and Aucor of safegarde. To the disturbers of the same, a Rocke of Extermination. In haynous and intollerable crymes against the comon welth, a seuear Iudge. In the lyke offences committed against him selfe, a redye porte and refuge of mer∣cye, except to such as would persist incorrigiblye. A man he was in all gifts of nature, of Fortune, and of grace, pierles. And to conclude, a man a∣boue all prayses. Suche a kyng did God set to raigne ouer England, whereof this Realme may well vaunt aboue other nations, whose worthi∣nes is more treated of by forreyn wryters, then by any of our owne countrey men. Which may iustly redownd to the reproche of all our English Poets and Historiographers. ¶ A Discourse of the vnyting the two noble howses of Lancaster & Yorke, from which vnyted howse, king Henry was the first king that proceeded. WHen mightie Ioue from heauenly throne, Behelde the blody broyle, That Mars had made through ciuill sworde, within this countrey soyle.
And pitying the ruthfull rage that on this Realme did rayne: Most louingly did bend his eares, to heare our moane and plaine. The earth that earst was brewd with blood, beginneth now to ioye: By the Bore is ment k. Ri∣chard. The Bore is chaced that was wont this Realme so to annoy. The Lady Concord came from Heauen, To stablysh this decree: That Lancaster & Yorke henceforth, vnyted shall agree. Meethought I hearde the golden wordes That Concorde did resite: And eke mee seemde myne eyes behelde, This noble heauenly wighte. Who pierst the Skyes with warbling winges, and Scepter in her hande: Uppon her hed a Diadem ycompast with a bande. Whereat my mynde was all amazde, To muse I coulde not ceace: Till at the last I myght perceiue, It was the bande of peace.
Her face as bright as Phebus beames, Her heares, lyke burnisht Golde: Concord a heauenly wyght. Her feature like an Angell shape, As ioyed mee to beholde. With comly grace shee did commaund that scylence should be synde: To rule the prease that then was thear, Till shee had saide her mynde. When all was whusht, and euery man with listning eares was bent: To heare her speake, then with these wordes, shee shewd forth her intent. Oh noble lande, since first the tyme that Brute in thee did raygne: The wordes of lady Con∣corde vnto Englande. Whose lyne intestine warre did ende, As fame doth yet remaine. Turmoilde and tost with ciuill Sworde, Thou sundry tymes hast bene: Such was thy lott and such mishap, as yet in thee is seene. Thy noble peares haue yeld their soules When fatall Sworde had slayne: Unto the Theater of Ioue on Mars for to complayne.
Thy vulgar sorte in hugie heapes do prease their plaintes to showe: With humble sute that perfect peace, in English land may growe. And Ioue that long haue rewde thy cace, hath sent mee for to ceace These bluddie broyles, and now to turne thy warre to perfect peace. Where discorde raignes and breedes debate, Subuertion is at hande: And dayly proofe doth shewe that hate confoundeth many a lande. Let Troyans testifye the same, Let Pryam witnesse beare: What Seignorie cannot bring forth Examples bought too deare. Desire of rule doth oft tymes dymme Ambition an enemie to all common wealthes. And clips the fame and lyfe: When Subiects touche the Princes seate, by sowing seede of stryfe. The Romaine rowt can well declare, The smart of Pompeies broyle: Numidia remembreth well, The brunt of Iugurthes spoyle.
With thousandes more, whome to resite, were tyme but vainly spent: But ryght shall sit in Regall seate, The Tyran to preuent. And God that all these turmoyles vewes, at last will worke his wyll, When false vsurper shall take foyle, then ryght shall florish still. To thee (oh famous Realme) I speake, whose brute doth pierce the Skyes: Which for thy wealth, the Heauenly heste, This order doth deuyse. And I, of Ioue the messenger, this newes now bring to thee: With bande of Peace, as faithfull pledge, If thou thereto agree. What losse and languor thou hast had, Thy selfe caust witnesse best: And Mischiefe hath not sparde to spurne, To purchase thy vnrest. Wherefore the God that guydes all thinges, doth charge thee that with speede Thou ioyne in knott of Mariage, as thus he hath decreede.
There is a lande in Westerne soyle, That Britaine hath to name: Which coast doth now retayne the wyght that must thy quyet frame: A proper youth, of pregnant witt, A description of k. Henry the vii. To whome with speede repayre: Of Lancaster that noble house, He is the ryghtfull heire. His Princely porte doth well deserue, To wear thy Regall Crowne: By due discent to wield the Sworde, with fame and bryght renowne. This worthie wight shall turne the warre That long thy wealth hath wast: This Earle Henry shall redresse Thy wayling woe forepast. Now see the sequell of this hest, That God appointed hath: Marke well the meane against Syr Mars, To pacifie his wrath. A noble spouse within thy lande, Of ryght must now be found: To linke in sacred wedlockes state, And Queene for to be crownde.
Beholde a Uirgin bryght of hue with vertues force bedect: Of personage surpassing all that Nature hath elect, Dianaes peere for chastitie, A seconde Susan shee: Her godly nature well deserues A Goddesse for to bee. The daughter of a Royall king, That rewlde thy lande of late: The heyre of Yorke, that long hath beene with Lancaster at bate. Elizabeth this Lady hight, The late king Edwardes chylde: The daugh¦ter of king Edw. 4. Shee shall bring forth a peerlesse Prince, thy people for to shylde. Now sith these houses twaine hath causde Such ruyne for to raygne: Which bluddie broyle hath forced thee to feele the smarte and paine. With speede repaire to Britaine lande This Henry home to call: And place him in thy regall seate, Be ye his Subiectes all.
As for his Foes take ye no feare, For God his frende doth stande: He is annoynted of the Lorde, to rule thy famous lande. Which being done, let sacred state The ende of lady concords Oration. of Wedlocke ioyne these twayne: Then be thou sure in perfect peace, hereafter to remayne. When Concorde had these wordes rehearst and all her message tolde: To see the ioye that men did make, was wonder to beholde. With clapping handes and cheerefull shoutes They shewde foorth great delyght: And thought eche day to bee a yere, till he shoulde come in syght. And when that Fame had blowne her blast that hee had taken lande: Determining to chace the Bore with force of myghtie hande. Eche man him selfe do then addresse, This royall Prince to place: With courage stoute and loyall hartes, They serue his noble grace.
Of the Battaile fought at Bosworth, betweene King Henry the vii. & Richard that then vsurped the Crowne. AFter long cōtinuance of blody warre (through ciuill contention) betweene the two ble houses, of Lancaster & Yorke for the imperiall Diademe of this Realme, to the great effusion of English blood, as well of the nobilitie, as also of the Comons: It pleased Almightie God to put into the mindes of the nobilitie of this Realme, a meane how to preuent this eminent subuersion, by ioyning in knot of Mariage the heires appa∣rant of these two noble houses (as is aforesaide) to the perfect securitie of this noble Nation. And here is to be noted; that when kyng Edward the fourth dyed (who was lineally discended from the house of Yorke, whose variable chaunces of For∣tune I ouer passe.) He lefte behynde him two sonnes, and fyue daughters. The elder of his sonnes was named Edwarde, who was after∣wardes k Edward the fifth. proclaymed Kyng, being of the age of xi. yeres. His yonger brother had to name Richarde who was Duke of yorke. Now by reason of the nouage of the yong king: Richard Duke of Gloucester, being vncle vnto the yong kyng, in∣truded him selfe to the Protectorship of the kyng
and the Realme, and also wrested into his tuition the kinges brother, taking him from the Queene his Mother, who then laye in the Sanctuarie at Westminster for doubt of the cruell tyrannie of the Protector, whose Ambitious mynde shee knewe to bee insatiable of honor and dignities, & wholly A lambe vn∣der the kee∣ping of a Wolfe. bent to cruell tyrannie, which shortly after he put in practyse. For when he had got into his clawze these two yong Princes: Like a cruell Tyger, and rauenyng Wolfe, moste vnnaturally, he caused them to be pittifully murthered within the To∣wer of London. And caused one Doctor Sha, (who better deserued to be called doctor Shame) A doctor for the deuill. to preach at Paules Crosse, perswading the people that king Edwarde the fowerth, late deceased, was not ryghtfull king: Affirming that he was a Bastarde. And that the Duke of Cloucester (being lawfully begotten) ought to haue beene king when his brother was, and therefore myght nowe iustlye challenge the Crowne. Was not A good sonne. this a graceles sonne, that caused his owne natu∣rall and vertuous mother, to be proclaimed at Powles Crosse a Harlot? This and his vnnatu∣rall homicide, sownded moste abhominably in the eares of all honest men. Notwithstandinge by this beastly and detestable policie. (wherunto he also added the death of the Lorde Hastinges and other noble men, whome he supposed woulde by all meanes possible haue hindered his vngodlye proceedinges) he hitt the marke whereat he shot,
which was the Crowne of Englande, and in fine was crowned king, by the name of king Ry∣charde the thirde. But ere he had raigned little more then two yeres, it pleased God to stir vp the nobilitie of this Realme, to the ayde of Henrye Earle of Richemond, to set him in his ryghtfull inheritaunce of the Imperiall Diadem of this Realme. The large discourse wherof, is exquisite∣ly written by Sir Thomas More, as appeareth in the Cronicle, written by Edwarde Hall. In conclusion this noble Earle of Richemonde after manye doubtfull casualties & harde euents, arryued at Milforde Hauen in Wales, wyth an armye of Britons, and by the ayde of the Welsh∣men, his power encreased. And manye of the no∣bilitie of Englande with greate strength came to hys ayde, vntill he came to a place in Leycester shiere called Bosworth, where he met with kynge Richarde & his armye, and betweene them was fought a sharpe battaile, in which conflict, the king himselfe was slayne, and his bodie caryed to Leycester on horsebacke, as a Butcher caryeth a A condigne reward for such a tyraun Calfe to the Market. After whiche victorie won by this noble Earle, he was proclaymed kyng of England, by the name of king Henry the seuenth, & consequently he maried ye lady Elizabeth daugh∣ter An. Do. 1485. vnto king Enward the iiii. & they bothe crow∣ned king and Queene of Englande, to the greate ioy of the whole realme. And thus were the noble houses of Lancaster & Yorke vnited in one whiche was the finishing of long warre.
¶ The Byrthe of the puisant Prince King Henry the eyght, which was in the yere of our Lorde God. 1490. the xxii. of Iune. WHen Lady Concorde quencht the broyle, That cyuill Sworde long tyme had bred: And calmed eke the warlyke toyle, wherewith this Realme but earst was fed: Our thraldome then shee did remoue, And freedome sent from God aboue. The houses wayne that long had beene At deadly foode for regall throne: Of Lancaster and Yorke I meane, were then by God conioynde in one. This Mariage made, Sir Mars geeues place, And eche man thankt God for his grace. But he that doth all thinges foresee, And knowes the sequell of the same: Knewe that a Braunche of that same tree, Shoulde bring forth fruite of endlesse fame: And yelde such sapp as should delyghte, The Heauens and eke eche English wyght.
The natall day by Gods decree, Approched on with luckie speede: When as the blossome of this tree Should shewe the fruite of happie seede: Whereat both heauen and earth reioyce and shewe the same with cheerefull voyce. The fower vertues myght you viewe, Descend from Heauen in Golden Cloude: And to beholde the heauenly crewe, that ioyed this birthe with voyce full loude: Did sounde suche tryumphes in the skyes, That through the worlde rounde it flyes.
Then Iustice tooke the Diadem That shee her selfe was wont to weare: Her Ballaunce eke and ioyned them, whereby shee wonts eche cause to heare: And yeldeth them vnto his grace, In equitie to run hys race. When Iustice had her selfe thus yelde, Came Fortitude with cowrage stoute, And deckte this Babe with Sworde & shyelde, To conquere all the raging rowte, That shoulde attempt or take in hande, His princely power to withstande.
Then Temperance and Prudence eke, So decked there his sacred mynde, As neuer earst was seene the lyke, Such grace from God to him was synde. For Solon there did yelde his fame, And Salomon eke did the same. The Muses all obeysaunce made, And echeone gaue a Lawrell crowne: Sir Mars did there him selfe disgrade, And yeldeth vp his large renowne. This Prince did Ioue himselfe ordaine, In endlesse fame on earth to raygne.
And though he were a seconde sonne, yet God foresawe what shoulde ensue: The Royall race that he should run, Ere he was borne ryght well he knewe. And in the wombe did him appoint, with sacred Oyle and king annoynt. When tract of tyme had brought this Prince, Unto the age of eyghteen yeres, His raygne began in this prouince, whose noble courage then appeares. That English hartes great ioy did make, And forayne Foes then gan to quake.
¶ Of Prince Henries towardlynes in the tyme of his Minoritie. AS this noble Prince grewe in age, so he encreased in vertue and princely demeanure. Using suche exercises as was commendable in so noble a per∣sonage: wherein he excelled all other of his tyme. As in Learning, Rydyng, and mar∣tiall feates. In so muche, that when he was the onely hope of this Realme, he was no lesse feared of forreine foes, then entierly loued of his owne countrey men. And had he not set the feare of God before his eyes, with speciall regarde of obedience towardes his Father: no doubt but he had bene seduced by the wicked suggestions of faccious flatterers, that often tymes inueagled him to take vppon him the gouernaunce of this Realme (his Father being alyue) As he him selfe hath reported after he came to the Crowne. But he alwayes abhorred their vngodly instigations. At last it pleased God to call his Father from the Earth to dwell with him in Heauen, when he had raygned 23. yeres. And then this royall Prince his sonne succeded him in this Realme, as hereaf∣ter foloweth.
¶ King Henry the eyght being proclaimed king of Englande the xxii. day of Aprill 1509. goeth to the Tower of London. BEholde the happie day at hande, For him to weare the Regall crowne: Whereby to rewle this noble lande, And wield the same with high renowne. Which was declarde by Tromp of Fame, That all Europa hearde the same. Unto this blast of golden sounde, Did forrein Princes bende their eares: The noyse to heauen eke did rebounde, That Englandes Foes then quake in feares. And frendes vnto the English Roye, with clapping handes gan shewe their ioye. Then as the auncient custome was, To London Tower is he brought: With Regall porte he so did passe, That all men ioyde in worde and thought. His countinaunce of Regaltie, shewde forth a kingly Maiestie.
So that if thousandes in his way had right resemblance of his face: Yet euery man myght iudge and saye, Lo this is hee, God saue his grace. He did the rest excell so farre, as doth the Sunne the dimmest Starre. Within this noble Castle nowe This Royall king his seat hath take: Whose speciall carke and care is howe In order good his Realme to make. His whole desire and studye is for to reforme that was amisse. Where Prudence rules with good foresyght, The common wealth doth prosper well: Where wisedome guydes eche thing aright, Thear Commons seeldome do rebell: But serue their Prince with loyall hartes, And nothing slack to do their partes. The stately porte that Princes beare, With Iustice ioynde ryght to mayntaine: Both holdes the Subiect in due feare, And trewe allegeance doth rem ayne. This king did his affaires so frame, As made men feare and loue his name.
¶ Of the Coronation of king Henry the viii. IF Fame foresawe what woulde ensue, As well as thinges forepast: Shee woulde not rashly sentence geeue, In blowing vp her blast. Ne woulde shee iudge eche tryumph then at first for to excell: But that another might succeede to beare away the bell. What meanst thou Fame in auncient tyme to call the learned trayne: To paynt the Pageaunts that were shewde, when Caesar gan his raygne. And cause them then with painfull toyle, the same so to commende: As though it neuer shoulde take foyle, but last vnto thé ende. If thou hadst knowne as now thou doest, Of this moste happie day: I doubt not but thou wouldste haue causde their painfull Pennes to staye.
Yet is this thing not so far past, but that thou maist reclayme: If thou recant thy former blast, by calling backe againe. Reuoke therefore thy rashe exployt, whereat I must needes grudge: And when thou hast perpended well, Thy selfe shalt be the Iudge. And plainly see that Caesars gestes Ne his tryumphing fame: Nor yet his blased pompouse daye, was equall with this same. Against the tyme this pierles Prince, The stately towne shoulde passe, That London hight, whose gorgious stretes, So richely decked was. That Rome whereof so many write, In pompe for to excell: Was neuer yet adornde so braue, Nor furnisht halfe so well. More lyke a pleasant Paradice, That noble Citie seemde: Then lyke a place of earthie moulde, As men might well haue deemde.
So sumptuously the stately streates, were deckt with euery thing: As though that Ioue from heauen were come to be their earthly king. So ioyde men in this Royall Prince, when he his Crowne should take: That Sorroes all were set to sleepe, and solace did awake. The worthie Pageaunts that were shewde, My Pen cannot discharge: And to descrybe the same aright, will fill a volume large. Which passing sightes so seemely were set forth to view of eye: That Rome and Greece with all the rest would let their fame go by. And Caesars frendes that so aduaunce his tryumphes and renowne: Would come from graues if that they myght, their Pennes thear to throwe downe. Thus as he passed through the streates, vnto the crowning place: Eche man erectes his cheerefull voyce, And sayes God saue your grace.
His noble trayne of worthie Pieres, Eche one in his degree: Attende on this most royall king, A worthie sight to see. In fine, no shewes of Princely pompe At this tryumphe did want: The Conduites all gush out with Wine, wherof there was no scant. To Westminster thus gan he passe, To take the Crowne his ryght: Where bothe his Queene and he were crownde To Englandes great delyght. ¶ From the tyme of this kinges Coronation, vnto his going into Fraunce to the siege of Tur∣win & Turneie, I referre thee (gentle Reader) to peruse in Edwarde Hall his Cronicle, who hath largely displaied the courtly exersises, wherein he passed the firste iiii. yeres of his raygne. Wherin also thou maist read of sundry Ambassadours that came vnto him from foreine countreys, with the successe of his noble Captaines that he sent into Spaine, and into Gelderland and Fraunce, and to scoure the Seas. I will treat onely of such mat∣ter as appertaineth to his own person, and of the two famous voyages that he made into Fraunce in proper person.
When king Henry purposed his Iorney into Fraunce, he firste entred in league of frendship with Iames king of Scots (who had maryed Margaret the kynges Sister) for the confirmation of which league, they both receiued the Sacra∣ment, with solemne vowe to keepe the same vn∣uyolate. But what ensued hereof, you may here∣after read more at large. Now let vs go forwarde with setting forth of this Royall voyage.
Of the winning of Turwin and Turnay. WHo list to reade of Martiall actes, And of Bellonaes trayne, Bellona, the goddesse of warre. May in the eyghth kyng Henryes lyfe, A Myrror see most plaine. Of warre shee is the Goddesse stoute, on whome doth still attend, The noble crewe and armed rowte that fatall bowe doth bende. This direfull Goddesse here rehearst hath at a call alwaye Three handmaydes euer readye prest, her pleasure to obey. Whereby shee Princes doth correct and Cities stoute subdue: That lyue and raigne disorderly, and rule by meanes vntrue. The firste is Blood by dynt of Sworde, The seconde Fyer fierce, The thirde is Famyn worst of all, that cruelly doth pierce. And eyther of them by her selfe is able to throwe downe The myghtiest king and Conquerour that euer yet waer crowne. But if they all conioyne in one, what Prince, what realme or lande:
Or else what worlde might remaine, their powers to withstande: So puissant these Damsels are, That on this Goddesse wayte: And being by their Lady calde, they then addresse them strayte, To shewe dame Natures dyrefull kynde, that shee to them hath yelde: With terror then they shewe their force on Castle, Towne or feelde. This Goddesse and her handmaydes three with all their myght and mayne: Alwaies attendant myght you see vppon king Henries trayne. The Scottes can well reporte the same, who felt therof the smarte: when all the cheefetaines of their Realme were slayn by deadly darte. Now let king Iames his griesly ghost awake from fatall sleepe: And shewe his hap and rufull fall that causde all Scotlande weepe. Let all the Scottish noble peeres, bewayle the wofull hower: when they agreede on Bramston hilles to meete king Henryes power. But sith from Earth they may not ryse this dolefull tale to tell: I will for them declare the trueth in order as befell.
His foes of Fraunce, whose faithlesse leagues, he euer found vntrue: Can witnes beare of his great force, They all his stoutnesse knewe. And Turwin first shall testifie his puissance and myght: Who felt the smart of Fyers rage with losse of many a knyght. Now see the sole and onely cause that he this siege did laye: In proper person with his power vnto this townes decaye. When tract of tyme had tryde the truth, that Frenchemen wonts to holde, Whose breache of truce and Princes peace, No wight could yet witholde. This Roiall king sent foorth his Shippes, with hoysed Sayles aloft: whose force did scoure the coast from foes, and quaylde their courage oft. But yet he thought his presence myght accomplysh many thinges: That coulde not so in absence bee, Such is the porte of kinges. A comfort to the Subiectes all, A terror to the foes: A Princes person in the fielde doth seeledome conquest lose. His person in the fielde was suche, As made his Souldiours stoute:
His onely name woulde feare his foes And make them stande in doubt. His counsell graue so prudent was, his wytt so wisely stayde: That all the rest myght leaue consultes when he the woord had sayde. When thus his prudence had perceiude with iudgement and foresyght: How that his antique foes of Fraunce, deteyned his due right. He causde his noble Nauie then in readynesse to lye. And he himselfe determined, Sir Neptunes chaunce to trye. The Shipmen take their tackles then, and all thinges redy makes: With gladsome hartes the Soldiers all this cheerefull voyage takes. The Shippes are rygde with all thinges meete For such a royall trayne. This noble king is nowe embarkte, his ryght in Fraunce to gayne. With noyse of Gunnes and sound of Trumpe, and stroke of rollyng Drum: They cut the rage of foming waues, tyll they to Fraunce are come. With marching foorth in warlyke wise, to Turwin towne they bende: who then perceyues it is hye tyme, herselfe for to defende.
Her wailes and Towers they are deckt with tooles of Vulcanes frame: No thundring noyse of Gunne was sparde, No flashe of Fyers flame. But when their eyes could witnes beare, this king encamped then: And sawe the siege so stoutly set with lustie valyant men: Their hartes began to quake and quayle, their courage then abate: They knewe his presence in the Campe was to his trayne a gate And strong Portculleys to defende his lusty Soldiers stoute: Whose faithfull hartes vnto his grace for Foes did neuer doute. A Harolde then with blast of Trumpe, was sent out of the fielde: To summon them obediently vnto their Prince to yelde. Or else to stande vnto the lot, that myght to them befall: By dint of Swoord or Fiers flame, or Famine worste of all. Who aunswerd then that they were bent, the chaunce of warre to trye: And to defend their furnisht walles, and theron lyue and dye. Which messadge being then returnde, it was a wondrous sight:
To see how soldiers hasted then, with Turwyn men to fight. The Trumpets blewe, the Drummes stryke vp To shewe Sir Mars his lore: A terror sure it was to heare the thundring Cannons rore. The king right lyke a ventrous knight did nothing balke the brunt: He comforted the Souldiers all through euery Bande and Front. Saint George Saint George they all gan crye, and fiercely do assayle Their enemies within the towne, with hope for to preuayle. No engin was omitted then that myght their purpose gayne: The battry was so fierce and sharpe, that they in thende were fayne To parle, and to entreat for peace, their states for to maintayne. In fine they craude for mercye then, Acknowleging their faulte, Desyring his most noble grace▪ to cease his sharpe assault. And they his vassayls woulde become, and faithfull to his Crowne: In token of their loyaltie, they yelde to him their towne. And all the furniture thereof, to vse at his owne will:
Desyring that he will vouchsafe, their bloods not for to spill. Whose noble aunswer was againe, Sith you for mercy craue: We mercy graunt you for your lyues, from bloody Swoorde to saue. With Trump and Banner then displayde, he entreth this his towne: Saint George his flagg is then aduaunst, And all the rest throwne downe. An. Re∣gni. 5. Anno Domini. 1513.
KIng Henry being confederate with the Em∣perour Maximilian, and manye of the nobilitie of Brabant, Flaunders and Holland, hauing the sayde Emperor in wages vnder his Banner, in∣uaded Fraunce, and first assaulted Turwin with a puissant Armye. Whiche towne (in the ende) was enforced to yelde it selfe vnto the mercye of king Henry, who mercyfully graunted them par∣don of their lyues, and free leaue to departe in safe∣garde, yelding vp their towne with all their fur∣niture and munition vnto the king: who entred the sayde towne with Banner displaide as a con∣querour. And hauing taken the ordnaunce, with the rest of the spoyle, within a whyle after he con∣sumed the towne with Fyer, which thing plea∣sed the Emperor very well, for that the sayd town was oftentymes a scourge vnto him. The king at this tyme to solace him self, rode to Lisley (which is a town of the Emperours) where as he was nobly entertained. And at his entrie in to the towne, the keyes of the gates were of∣fered vnto him to dispose at his pleasure: who re∣ceiued them thankfully, rendring them againe to him of whome he tooke them. And when he had recreat him selfe thear three dayes, he returned vn∣to his campe againe. Whose returne was ryght ioyfull vnto his Souldiers. For as his presence encreased their ioyes, so his absence augmented their dolours, so entire he was vnto all his loiall Subiectes.
Shortly after, he marched forwardes with his whole Armie towardes the great Citie of Tur∣ney, which Citie is saied to haue as manye To∣wers in it as be dayes in a yere, which is in nom∣ber. 365. And in fine, after sharpe assault, he ob∣tained the towne, and after possession taken, hee built there a strong Castle. In this meane season, he enuyed the Emperour and the Empresse his wyfe to this his new wonne towne of Turney. Turney. who ryght ioyousely came thither, and were there royally feasted, and his trayne had both greate entertainment and bountifull rewardes. In these warres were manye feates of Armes tryed, and sundry noble exploites atchyued, and in conclusion, the cheefe power of Fraunce discom∣fited. But among the tragicall euents that there happened, one pretie accident chaunced by master Henry Norace, who at that tyme being a yong Henry Norace. Gentleman, and one of the kinges Henchemen, hauing on his head the kinges Helmet: was by the fiercenesse of his horse caryed from the kings Campe into the middest of the Frenche armye that then lay without the towne of Turnay in battaile ray. And being thus among his enemies against his will: at laste founde the meanes to turne his horse hed againe, and so by good happe came backe vnto the king: wherof the king was ryght glad. And being thus escaped, the king of∣fered to make him knight for this aduenture. But he tolde the king, that his horse rather deserued
that dignitie, which caryed him among his ene∣mies against his will. Whereat the king plea∣santly laughed, for he loued this yong gentleman verie well. And because my Aucthor was brought vp vn∣der this saide Gentleman, and by him preferred vnto the king, I am occasioned somewhat to di∣gresse by remembraunce of his worthinesse. This forenamed master Norace grewe in suche fauour and grace with the king, that he became to be the chiefe gentleman of his priuie Chamber, and also was master of the blacke Rodd: Which is an of∣fice to the noble Order of the Garter, which office hath a large Prerogatiue. He was rightfullye termed the father of the Court (nexte vnder the king) for his singuler order of education in courtly ciuilitie: As dyuers noble men, and gentlemen, by him brought vp, can full well witnesse. Namely The Lorde Henry Dudley, the Lord Sheafield, The Lorde Edmund Shandos, with many more. His nature was to do good to as manye as hee might, and harme to none. His pursse was neuer shut from the needie. Finally, he was endued wt all godly and vertuous condicions: liuing in the courte in great fauour and estimation, vntill enuye (who alwaies pursueth vertue) threw at him her spytefull and poysoned dartes, to his decaye. After whose death, the king (to shewe his good will to∣wardes him) shewed him selfe gracious Lord vn∣to as manye as were seruauntes vnto the sayde
master Norace in his lyfe tyme, and to expresse the same more at large: he bestowed his daughter (mistresse Marie Norace) in Mariage on Sir George Carew, which mariage was solempnised in the Court, at the proper costes and charges of the king, to the same and furtherance of the saide knight and the yong ladye his wife. Now to returne to my matter againe. Whyle the king was in Fraunce, king lames of Scot∣lande An. Do. 1513. (notwithstanding his league and solempne vowe before mencioned) made an inuasion vppon the Borderers adioyning vnto Scotlande. And sent an Ambassadour vnto the kyng into Fraunce, accusing the Borderers for breache of the truce be∣tweene them taken. When the king vnderstoode by the Ambassadour, of the king of Scottes pre∣tence: He rewarded the Ambassadour, and so dis∣missed him. Nowe the king of Scottes supposed that all the power of Englande was in Fraunce with king Henry: knowing also that king Henry could not, nor woulde not breake vp his Campe to come against him, And thought that nowe he had a plaine gappe opened vnto him, to enter into Eng∣lande, and there to woorke his will. But by the prouidence of the Queene, who was left Regent of the Realme by the king at his setting foorth, & by the balyanties of the Earle of Surrey the kinges lieftenaunt, he was preuented of his pur∣pose. For when he thought to haue entered this
Realme with all his power, he was mett by the Earle of Surrey at a place called Brampston, This field was it that we call flod∣den fielde, where betweene them was fought a cruell bat∣tayle not without great effusion of blood on both parties: but in the ende (by Gods prouidence) the victorie fell vnto the englishe men. The King of Scottes himselfe being slayne in this fielde with xi. of his noble men being all of them Earles, be∣sydes a number of his knyghtes and gentilmen of name, and his whole power made very weake. This battaile being ended to the renoune of the Queene, the Earle the kinges lieuetenant, and the whole Realme: The dead bodye of the king of Scottes was founde among the other carcases in the fielde, and from thence brought to London, and so through London streetes on a horsebacke, in such order as you haue reade before of king Ri∣charde, and from thence it was caried to Sheene (neere vnto Brainford) wheras the Queene then laye. And theare this periured carcas lyeth vnto this daye vnburied. A condigne ende and a meete Sepulker for such a forsworn Prince. This shame∣full ende of the Scottish king, kindled the Fyer of malyce in the breastes of the Scottes, the flame whereof (in the ende) consumed also their yong king that then was lefte vnto them, as followinge you may reade. But first I haue taken vpon mee to introduce king Iames vnto thee, informe of the Mirror for Magestrates, to vtter his complaynt & tell his owne tale as followeth.
The Lamentable complaint of king Iames of Scotlande, who was slayne at Scottish fielde. Anno. 1513. AMong the rest, whom rewfull fate hath rest, whose shrouding sheetes hath wrapt their wo∣ful lyues why haue not I a place among thē left, whose fall eche tong with dayly talke reuyues. Such is the wheele that froward Fortune driues To day a King of puisance and might, And in one howre a wofull wretched wight. A happie life by happie end is tride A wretched race by wofull ende is known: Though pleasant wind the Ship do rightly guyd At last by rage of stormes tis ouer throwne. The greatest Oke with tempest is fyrst blowne. Though fortune seeme a loft to hoyse thy sayle, Yet fortune ofte tymes smyles to small auaile. I thought my Bower buylt on happie soyle, Which vnder propped was with tickle staye: Wherfore on sodayne chaunce I tooke the foyle In hope for to haue had a noble praye. In search whereof I reapt my fatall daye, With shamefull death my fame was forcte to bow A gwerdon meete for breach of sacred vow.
A Prince his promise ought not to be broke, Much more his Othe of ryght obserude should be: But greedie gayne doth oft the mynde prouoke, To breake both othe and vowe, as seemes by mee. Ambicion blearde myne eyes I coulde not see. I fynd, though man with man his faith forgoe Yet man with God may not do so. I was a king, my power was not small, I ware the Crowne to wield the Scottish land: I raigude and rewlde, the greater was my fall, The myght of God, no kingdome can withstand, An Earle wan of mee the vpper hande. With blodie Sworde my lucklesse lyfe to ende, By shamefull death without tyme to amende.
Such was the force of Atrops cruell spight, Unlooked for to cut my farall lyne: My wretched carcas then was brought in sight, Through London slrears, wherat ye Scots repine The endeles shame of this mishap is myne. Like butchers ware, on horsbacke was I brought The king of kinges for me this end hath wrought. Let Princes all by me example take, What daunger tis to daily in such cace: By periurie their faythes for to forsake, Least seate of shame shall be their endles place, Foule infamie shall their renoune deface: Offalsed faith such is deserued hyre, And he must falle that will too hyghe aspyre. e noble Peeres whose liues with myne did end, Send forth frō graues your griesly ghosts ech one To wayle the chaunce that Fortune vs did sende. Let all the Scots powre out their plaints & mone That we to hedles haste were apt and prone. Which rashe beginning voyde of Godly awe, Had lyke successe for breach of sacred lawe. I thought that Englande had beene far to weake, For my strong powre when Henry was away: Which made mee light regarde my vow to breake But yet I founde they were left in good stay, With force and strength to purchase my decay.
Thus my aspiring minde had guerdon due, Which may a Myrror bee for men to vewe. Whereby to shun the breach of sacred vow, And not to seeke by lawelesse meanes to rayne: For right will force vsurped rule to bow, And reape repulst in steade of noble gaine, Thus truthe in tyme doth turne her foe to paine. And GOD him selfe doth shield the rightful cause Then let men learne to lyue within his lawes. ¶ Nowe that king Iames hath tolde hys tale, and vttered his complainte, let vs see what befell vnto his Sonne, whom he lefte to succeede in his kingdom. Whose history I haue annexed vnto this (although it folowed not immediatly) that the iust iugdement of God againste periurie, maye the playnelyer appeare. The notable example wherof may bee a terror vnto the large & careles conscience of man. Fyrst reade his storie & then bestowe the perusing of his complaynte,
The Historie of king Iamies sonne, who after the death of his Father, was king of Scottes being but a chylde. YOu haue hearde before of the death of kinge Iames and the maner therof, who left behynde him a sonne named after his father, Iames. This yong king of Scottes, was both Neuew and Godson vnto king Henry, by meanes where∣of the king was lothe to do anye annoyance vnto the Realme of Scotlande. But the Scottes be∣ing greedie of reuenge for the death of their late king, prouoked him to be doing with them, by meanes wherof, many incursions were made into Scotlande, to the great detriment of the Scottes and destruction of many of their Castels and vil∣lages. An. do. 1523. But at the laste, by the mediation of the Queene of Scottes, an abstinence of warre was taken, and shortly after a peace concluded, whiche continued vntil the yere of our Lorde 1542. at whiche tyme king Henry tooke his Progres to∣wardes the Citie of Yorke, where he made great preparation for to haue mett with his Nephewe the king of Scottes, who promysed vnto his vn∣cle king Henry, that he would verye gladly meete him at Yorke, and accordingly prepared so to doo. Wherefore king Henry laye at Pipwell Abbey
while great prouision was made at Yorke, for the meeting of these two noble kinges, to the greate charges of the king of Englande, at whose pro∣per costes, a sumptuous lodging was ordayned for the king of Scottes in the Abbay of Yorke, with offices and furniture accordingly. Whyle the king laye at Pipwell Abbay aforesaid in a readynesse to come vnto yorke by the day ap∣pointed: the Secretorie vnto the king of Scottes came vnto king Henry, who was at his handes noblye entertayned, and returned againe into Scotlande, enforming the king his maister, what great cost the king of Englande was at, in pre∣paring for his cumming. The king of Scottes was as desyrous to see his Uncle king Henry, as he was to haue seene his Nephew. But when he was in a readinesse to come towardes Englande, the Cardinall of S. Andrewes, who was then newely come from Rome, made haite vnto the king of Scottes (as he was setting forth toward Yorke) and threatned him, that if he proceeded to go into Englande, that another shoulde bee pro∣claimed king of Scotlande before he shoulde bee iii. Myles out of his Realme. Wherat the kyng was sore abashed, and not without good cause: For a kingdome deuyded in it selfe, cannot be qui∣eted without great trouble and bloodshed. And the saide Cardinall bare so great a swaye that the king durst not come into Englande according to his appointment. It is thought that ye Cardinal
feared lest the king of Englande would haue per∣swaded the kinge of Scottes to abolyshe the Popes aucthoritie out of Scotlande, and to alter the state of Religion, and therefore was not wil∣ling that this meeting shoulde be betweene the two kinges. King Henry perceiuing him selfe to be thus deluded by the king of Scottes, concei∣ued therof great discurtesie (as he myght ful well) Notwithstanding he went forwarde him selfe with all his trayne to yorke, and made Procla∣mation, that if any man had any matters to exhi∣bite vnto his grace, that they shoulde be heard, and haue Iustice administred, which accordingly hee accomplished to as many as came before him. And whereas there had bene an insurrection in the same countrey a little before this tyme: The king comaunded that all the Rebelles which were apprehended shoulde be placed before him on the lefte hande of his waye as he passed thorough the countrey, and hauing set the countrey in good or∣der, he returned to London againe. The Cardinall of sainct Androes, who (as is be∣fore saide) caused the king of Scottes to breake promise with his vncle king Henry (for doubt least that discourtesie might be reconsiled) to make hys matter sure: set the two kinges at open warre, and caused the Scottes to make a roade into the borders, who spoyled and did much harme. Wher∣of when king Henry hearde, he sent the Duke of Norffolke with an Armie into Scotlande, who
burned and spoyled muche of the countrey. But when the Duke was departed from thence into Englande: The Scottes inuaded the borders againe, & did theare muche harme. But at the last Sir Thomas Wharton (beeing warden of the marches there) with Sir William Musgraue and a fewe of the borderers, met with the Scottes the 14. of Nouember, and ouerthrew them: In which conflict the Lorde Maxwell, the Earles of Glen∣carue and Sassiles, with all the captaynes of the Scottish Armie were taken: and on S. Thomas eeuen the Apostle, they were brought to the Tower of London, where they laye that night. The next day following they were brought into the starre Chamber before the Lorde Chaunceller of Eng∣land and the Counsaile, being by the kinges char∣ges rychely apparailed, and vsed more like Prin∣ces then prisoners, which they did full euil requite. For after they were dismissed vppon agreement Unthankfull Scottes. vnto certein articles, they not only refused the per∣formance of their promises, but (notwithstanding the benefites on them bestowed by the king) they rebelled against him. But nowe to returne againe vnto their kinge: It is thought of some men, that he him selfe was in the Battaile, and thear receiued his deathes wounde, but escaped vntaken, but it was not so. This con∣flicte was at a place called Solomosse. True it is, that this conflict stroke him to the hart, wherof he dyed incontinently. Whereby we may bee sure that God strooke the stroake. And whe∣ther
it were, that God (who stryketh to the thirde and fourth generation of them that hate him) did it for his fathers offence, or for his owne, I maye not, nor will not iudge. But no doubt his fathers vngodly periurie was heauily in his mynde: since whose death the Realme of Scotlande hath bene sore plaged, and haue had little good successe in any attemptes, and especially against Englande. The tirste that brought newes of the kinge of Stottes death vnto king Henry, was the Earle of Angoes a Scott, who was banished out of Scotlande, and lyued here in Englande by a pen∣cion that the king gaue vnto him. This Earle came into the Courie (the king then lying at hys house of Sainct Iames) betweene tenne and xi. of the clocke at nyght, and desyred to speak with the king, which being vnto him admitted: he rehear∣sed vnto the king the whole circumstance of the king of Scottes death. Whiche when he hearde, he was so sorie of that newes (that notwithstan∣ding he warred against him) yet he let fall teares from his eyes for sorrowe of his Nephewes death.
¶ The Lamentation of king Iames, Sonne vnto king Iames before mentioned. WHat hard mishap haue I among the rest, Whose froward fate vntimely deth hath wrought While youthfull yeres did harbour in my brest, My wretched corpes to lodge in claye is brought. By haples chaunce contrary to my thought. But who is sooner trapte by witched wyle, Then he whose harte is free frem craltie guyle. Shall I exclayme on fortunes frowarde face, Or on the wombe that life to mee fyrst gaue: Or on my Fathers facte whose foule deface Hath caused mee this luckelesse lot to haue: Would god my mothers wombe had ben my graue Or els the Ayre that yelded mee fyrst breath, With sodayne dampe had rendred present death. Woulde God my Fathers facte had beene vndon, When he made vow a faythfull leage to holde: Or els I woulde I had not beene his Sonne But rather borne to pen the Sheepe in folde. My Father in this poynt was far too bolde Whereby he moude almighty GOD to spill Him selfe and me his Sonne that thought no ill.
What may I deeme of this my Fathers deede, Whereof I grounde the chiefe cause of my playnte What stonie harte for pittie will not bleede, To see how death this pageaunt doth depainte, In floure of age, our liues so to attainte: The Father and the Sonné sucessiuelie The Realme eke plagde for one mans periurie. I can not scuse his rage and hautie pride, That forced mee my vnkle to offende, Who courteousely my comming did abide, In frendlie wise a time with ioye to spende. I was constraynde my owne minde to vnbende The Prelasie then bare so great a swaye, That king and keiser must their mindes obaye. I was constraynde contrarye to my will, Reuengement on the English Realme to take And eke of Mars his lore to learne the skill Where I lyke Phaeton my match did make, My foes mee rulde, my frendes I did forsake. Though I was king, another bare the sworde, Whome I durst not offende in deede ne worde. I call for vengeaunce on thy wretched lyfe, Thou Prelate proude that hast procurde my fall: Thou were the cause and aucthor of the strife I was thy Prince and yet I was thy thrall, Take heede therefore by mee ye Princes all.
Where enuious subiects beares so great aswaye, The Princes state is like for to decaye. Such men they are as fyrst do stier vp stryfe, But they them selues of sauegarde will be sure: Their deedes are scant, their words are very ryfe, They rayse the broyle, the brunte they not endure, Yet bloody warre they dayly do procure. And prease foorth Princes to auenge their yre Whyle they them selues with gredy minds aspire. Lo by this meanes my fatall shrouding sheete, Is now my weede no other robe haue I, The graue is eke my Courte a Pallas meete: Wherein my wretched corps for aye must lye. Wo worth those subiectes that aspire so highe, To rule the Prince whome they ought to obay, Such subiectes rule hath purchast my decaye. ¶ Now that I haue passed thorow these tragi∣call histories of the. ii. kinges of Scottes: I will returne to the declaration of the ioyfull meeting of the kinges of Englande and Fraunce betweene Callis and Bullaine whiche was in the yeare of our Lorde 1532. And althoughe there was a solemne meetyng betweene the Kynges of these sayde Realmes, and also betweene the Emperoure and Kyng Henrie in the yeare of oure Lorde 1520. Yet
because my Anothor was not there to note anye thing more then is already mentioned by Halle in his Cronicle, and was present at this that folo∣weth, I haue vsed his enstruction herein referring thee to the aforesayd Cronicle to reade of the other whereas it is very well described.
¶ Howe King Henry and the King of Fraunce met together betweene Calice and boloigne by a place called Morguison 1532. My glauncing Pen nowe glyded ys From Mars his bluddie broyle: And eke my muse desyres to rest a whyle in frindships soyle. As way warde warre bereues the breath of many worthie wyghtes: So frindly peace preserues the lyues of noble valyant knyghtes. And Tully doth preferre that peace which grounded is on yll: Before the warre whose quarell ryght, The blood of man doth spill. In faithfull league of frindships force where Princes knitt the knot: Unto those realmes whyle it doth last is sure a happie lott. The Princes sleepe is not vnsounde, For doubt of forraine foes: The Souldiérs werye wounded limmes to rest do then repose. The Marchant sendes hys hoysed sayles the surging Seas to sheare: Which scowreth through the wandring waues deuoyde of doubtfull feare. The publyke state of common wealth then lyues in quyet rest,
So that recourse from sundrie soyles worke all for the best. ey helpeth other then and what one lande doth want Another doth supply the same, no needefull thinges are scant. And the through concorde sclender thinges to  great encrease: dcorde both consume as fast men set vs praye for peace: Which causeth worldly wealth to ryse dly  to flowe: As horher hath contrarye force, and makes wealth ebbe as lowe. Nowe  that long tyme had sought to kni within her bande: The king of Fraunce vnto the no∣ble King of this oure lande: Fonde o a tyme conuenient, and eke indifferent place: Whereas these noble Princes bothe together myght embrace. To treate of faithfull frindships lore with one consent they meere: Where they with ioye and tryumphes greate eche other then do greete. The thing that bothe Realmes long desyrde, at that tyme myght you viewe: The order of which ioyfull sight, hereafter doth ensue.
¶ The declaration of the meeting of these two noble kinges at the place aboue mencioned. ALthough there was bluddie warre and mor∣tall hatred betweene the realmes of Englande and Fraunce, in the fifth yere of this kings raigne: in whiche yere, the king of Englande wan from the Frenche men the towne of Turwin and the great citie of Turnay as is before declared, yet for the concluding of a perfect peace betweene bothe the Realmes, the same yere a Mariage was made betweene the king of Fraunce and the Ladye Marye (sister vnto the king of England) but short∣ly after the saide king of Fraunce dyed, and the Duke of Suffolke maryed the Queene his wyfe. A peace also was concluded betweene the young king of Fraunce and the king of Englande. And within a whyle the Citie of Turnay was rendred vnto the Frenche king: For the whiche he shoulde paye to the king of Englande a notable summe of Money. But this amitie did not long continue: for the Frenche king refused to paye his tribute to the king of England, and also detayned the Queenes dowrie. And moreouer, caused all Englishemens goodes to bee arrested at Burdeaux, whereupon the Frenchemens goods were arrested at London and they cast in Prison. But in fine in the xix. yere
of the king his raigne, a generall peace was pro∣claymed betwene the kinges of Englande and Fraunce during bothe their lyues. And defyaunce sent vnto the Emperour from bothe the kyngs, and a great power sent into Italy againste the Empe∣rour (who then warred with the Pope and con∣stayned him to take a Castell, wherein he remai∣ned as prisoner, vntill the Armyes that the kinges of Englande and Fraunce had expelled the Em∣perours power out of that parte of Italye. The circumstance whereof ys very largely declared by Sleydon.) This peace taken betweene the kinges of Englande and Fraunce, continued a good whyle vnuiolate. In whiche meane-tyme, the Ambassadour Ledger of Fraunce (that then laye in London) grewe in suche fauour with kynge Henry, that he was often tymes admitted to sit in presence with the king. This Ambassadour made humblesuite vnto the kinges grace, that hee woulde vouchesaue to meete with the kynge of Fraunce his Master in some conuenient place, to salute eche other, declaring that it woulde bee an occasion to knitt them togeather in the insoluble knott of perfect frindship and amitie. Whereunto the king of Englande willingly condiscended and agreed. And the rather because the Frenche king appointed to haue met with the Pope at Marsiles by meanes wherof, king Henry hoped that the Frenche king might perswade the Pope to some conformitie in the controuersie of his deuorce from
the Ladye Katherin, wherefore he requested the sayde Ambassadour so to informe the kynge of Fraunce (his Master) which he nothing slacked to do. And in conclusion, a tyme was appointed when these twoo noble kinges shoulde meete by a place called Morguison whiche is betweene two greate hilles, and the midway betwixt Callice & Boloigne. According to the apointment, the king of Englande set forwarde and came to Callice. The Frenche king lykewise lay at Bolloigne, and on the appointed day, they bothe met by the sayde place called Morguison with a noble trayne of Dukes, Earles, Lordes, Knightes & Gentlemen on both sydes. And while these noble Princes em∣braced eache other, a Bishop of Fraunce threwe off a cast of great Hawkes called Sakers, which Hawkes being cast off, killed a Kyte ouer the kinges heades, to the great pleasure of bothe the kinges. Then passed they forwarde with Prince∣ly pastymes vnto the towne of Boloigne, where was greate preparation and noble tryumphes to entertaine and welcome the King of Englande. When king Henry had passed certaine dayes at Boloigne with moste royall solace and pleasure, he Inuited the King of Fraunce to the lyke at his graces towne of Callice, who in lyke maner came vnto Callice with king Henry, where as his for∣mer entertainment vnto the king of Englande & his trayne, was noblye acquyted. And whyle these two royall Kinges were thus at Callice,
the king of Heraldes came vnto king Henries grace, declaring vnto him that (according to the auncient custome, and also being parcell of hys othe) he had set vp in the market place the Em∣perours Armes, and the Frenche kinges Armes (for so is the custome, when kings meete together) and desyred his grace to enforme him what might please him to bee erected in his behalfe, to whom the King aunswered, that nothing shoulde bee set vp for him, neyther I care not (quod he) for anye suche matter. Then sayde the Heralde, it is my duitie to erecte somewhat in your graces name. If it be so (quoth the King) I will that you de∣paint an armed Arme rysing out of a clowde, hol∣ding in the hande a naked Sworde with thys Poesse vnder it: Celuy au quel ie m'adiouincts (Dieu aydant) vaincra. Whiche is as muche to say: Whether parte I take (by Gods helpe) shall haue victorie. This was set ouer the Em∣perours and the Frenche kings Armes, as in this Portraiture appeareth. And full truely did this Poesie proue: As in Sleydon his Commentaries ye may reade at large.
Celuy au quel ie m'adiouincts (Dieu aydant) vaincra.
¶ The Historie of the winning of Bulleyne by the moste victorious King Henrye the eyghth in his owne person. YF townes subuerted coulde declare, with tong or paynting Pen, Their rufull falles and finall fate their losse of worthie men: Or if the ruinous Castels olde that flatt on grounde nowe lye, Or else the walles that earst were deckt with lofty Turrets hye, Coulde shewe their wofull ouerthrowes by any kynde of waye: And eke what Captaines them subdude to take the spoyle and praye: Then Bulleyne that was wont to bragg in brauery of her myght: Woulde clips her fame of large renowne, that earst did shyne so bryght. This stately Forte, whose furnisht walles felt neuer yet annoye: Nowe playnly shewde the auncient tales that Poets tolde of Troye. Prince Agamemnon with his Greekes that wan olde Ilions towne: In all his toyle of tenne yeres siege gat neuer such renowne.
The mighty Monarke Macedon that conquerd Darius soyles Wonne neuer greater victorie, thoughe many greater spoyles. But as king Henries courage stoute alwayes his foes subdude: So mercy matcht his manly mynde who bloodshed still eschewde. He neuer brewde his sworde in bloode on them that mercy craue: His face with fauour still was fraught, submissiue men to saue. And Bullein men among the rest, can testifie this case: Who tasted both his force, and eke his fauourable grace. What mischiefe myght his hand haue wrought, if tyrannye had raygnd: Or rage had harbourd in his brest which he alwayes refraynd. Though pleasant prayes do oft entice the mynd that gapes for gayne: To passe the boundes of princely fame, great spoyle for to obtayne: Yet no such crime of greedy mynde from mercy might him moue: The towne of bulleyne can right well this fame of him approue. Theyr towne, theyr lyues, theyr goodes and all, lay in his might and power:
For to haue spoylde and ouerthrowne, and destroyde in one hower. But piety prickt his Princely hart, in mercy to excell: Whose noble nature doth deserue for prayse to beare the bell.
THe Realmes of Fraunce and Scotlande per∣ceiuing that they neuer coulde preuayle against the king of Englande in any attempt, neyther by dissembling peace, nor yet by open warre: ceased not to followe the example of the Scarabe, who presuming to contende with the Eagle, and being farre vnable to encounter with him, deuysed to annoye him, though it were but with the filthye dung, wherin he accustometh to welter and tom∣ble. So these two Realmes, to obtaine their de∣syred purposes, namely for that they coulde not bring vnder yoke the king of Englande, they al∣way shott at him a farre of, to annoy him as much as they durst: which king Henry well perceiuing, And calling to mynde the dammages that some of his predecessours had sustained after the death of the right valyant king Edward the thirde by the Realme of Fraunce, and further waying with him self the feythlesse leagues of ye frenchmen: who al∣wayes when they entreated for peace, had theyr Swordes readye to fight, and theyr dissembling mindes wholy bent on treason & mischiefe: thought with him selfe, that it was better to haue them hys open foes, then his fayned friendes, and determy∣ned to inuade the Realme of Fraunce, and in the ende was fully mynded to passe into Fraunce ve∣ry secretly with a mightie & puissant power, which in deede was wrought so priuily, that he imparted his minde in this matter vnto no man, sauing on∣ly to the Duke of Suffolk, but caused a rumor to be
spread that hee was determined to goe ouer vnto Parys. The Duke of Norfolk lay (by the kinges apointment) at ye siege of Muttrell, who hearing of the kinges pryuie passage into Fraunce, maruailed with him selfe what shoulde bee hys pretence: And thought some vncurtesie yt he might not haue been made pryuy therof, he being one of the kings pryuy counsail. Wherupon he sent a letter vnto Sir An∣thony Brown the maister of y• kings horse, wherin he declared that he mused what the kinges purpose shoulde bee, desiring Sir Anthony Browne to re∣solue him by his letters of this doubt. This let∣ter was brought when the kinge lay at Calyce to passe into Fraunce. And because the custome is in the tyme of warre, that all letters which are sente vnto anye noble man or other of the campe, shall fyrst be presented vnto the king to breake them opē and to read them, if he be in the campe him selfe: the messenger brought the letter vnto the maister of the Postes, who exhibited it vnto the Kinges grace. The letter that was sent from the Duke of Norfolk vnto Sir Anthony Brown being in the packet of letters, which the king tooke & opened. And when hee had reade it, hee sayde vnto master Edmunde Harman one of his pryuye Chamber who then was in presence with him and none els: Lo (quoth hee) the Duke of Norfolk seemeth by this letter to thinke him selfe not well dealt withal because hee is not made pryuye to our pretence in this voyage, I assure thee Fdmund (quoth he) no
mortall man in this worlde doth knowe the cause hereof, but onelye Sir Charles Brandon: And thou shalt bee the second, vnto whome I will re∣ueale this matter. My purpose is (sayd the Kyng) to lay siege vnto Boloygne, and I doubt not but to win it, by Gods help. May it please your grace then sayde maister Harman, it will bee a noble vic∣torie to win: But it will bee more noble to hold it when it is wonne. Well (sayd y• king) I nothyng doubt the holding of it, by Gods grace, if I may winne it. Now was the Duke of Suffolke before Bullaine, and had layde siege vnto it on the Easte syde ofit, who thear remayned vntill the king him selfe came and encamped on the North side. After whose comming the towne was so sore battered with gunshot, and so sharply assaulted, that after a Moneths siege, the captayn, whose name was Mounsier Dese, shot out an arrowe with a letter tyed to the shafte, wherin hee offered the King, to render vp the towne vnto his graces behoote, so that he woulde graunt pardon of lyfe vnto all the people of the town, and licence to depart with bagg and boggage. Whiche the king mercifully graunted on this condicion, that none of them should departe with any Gonne charged. And the Bulleiners departed the town with as much of theyr goodes as they could cary with them. After which departure, king Henrie with hys nobilitie entred the towne with Banners displayed lyke a conquerour. And after hee had taried there by the
space of fyue dayes, or there about, he returned a∣gaine into Englande, leauing behinde him to de∣fende the towne, the Duke of Suffolke that most valiant Capitayne. But when the kings maiestie was vppon departure, newes was brought vnto him yt the Dolphin of Fraunce was determined to come downe and repell him from thence and hys power, whereunto the king aunswered that hee shoulde be verie welcome. For (quoth he) the Dol∣phin is my God sonne: and if he come, he shall haue my blessing. But he made no haste to come, as he vaunted? Wherefore the Duke of Suffolk and the Earle of Essex perswaded the king to returne home to Englande againe, for that he had wonne as much honour theare, as was to be had at that tyme. Wherupon the king committed the defence of the towne to the Duke of Suffolke and the Earle of Essex ioyntly. But before his departure, he being doubtfull whether the Duke of Norfolke had any neede of help at Muttrell, called vnto him syr Anthony Browne, & appointed him to go thi∣ther to the ayde of the Duke of Norfolke with all his power. But Sir Anthony Browne answered that he had dismissed many of his souldiers by rea∣son of sicknesse, & the rest were either wounded or wearied with trauaile, and many of their Horses tyred. Then the king demaunded of the Earle of Essex, In what estate his bande was: who had This earle is he that was after Lords marques of Northapton. vnder his charge 1500 horsemen, he aunswered the kyng, that of his whole power he wanted not
60. And that hee was ready to fulfill his graces pleasure. Wherupon the king thought to haue sent him to Muttrell, but in the end yt king hauing a spe∣ciall regarde for the keeping of Bullaine, leatte the Earle with the Duke to defende the towne, and sent Sir Ihon Gage to Muttrell to the ayde of the Duke of Norfolk. And then the king returned into England againe with great triumph. After whose departure out of Fraunce, y• frenchmen began to be verye busie against the englishmē. But when they could preuaile nothing at all, they began to entreat for peace, always hoping to haue Bullayne againe by some meanes or other. But king Henry was so affected to that towne, that neyther strengthe of warre, nor force of money could win it from hym. And he would oft times saye, that no true subiect of his woulde perswade him to yelde it vp. Which towne he helde in despight of the Frenchmen du∣ring his life. ¶ And thus I ende this discourse of the wyn∣ning of Bullayne: Omitting to treate of the large circumstaunce heereof, least I might seeme to rob Grafton or Halle of their laboures, concluding this commemoration of king Henry, with his con∣quest of Bullaine. After which triumphant victo∣rie, no special warre happened vnto him, till death the conquerour of all mortall men subdued his bo∣dy, whose soule liueth with God in his Heauenlye kingdome.
KIng Henry, in his life time would often tymes saye, that if it woulde please God to endue hym with life vntill he might see three thinges brought to passe, hee woulde not desire to liue anye longer. The fyrst was, to confirme true religion in this Realme. The seconde, to establish the Crowne. The thyrde, to see hys Sonne a man. Also hee would say: that if he knewe any one to bee a man of GOD, and meete to gouerne a common welthe: he would rather yelde his Crowne vnto him, then weare it himself, so that hee myghte doe it to the pleasure of God & the weale publyke of his people.
¶ An Epitaph of the deathe of the moste valyant and renowmed Prince King Henry the eyghth. AWake ye worthies nyne, that long in graues haue rest: Powre out your plaints with wayling teares Let langor be your geast. Do off your shrowding sheetes, that clads you in the claye, and decke your selues with black attyre, your mourning to displaye. Bedewe with saltie teares your manly faces stowte: Laye downe those weapons that were wont to quell the raging rowte. For nowe that pierlesse Prince that neuer yet tooke foyle: The eyghth king Henry hath resynde his bodye to the soyle. Recorde your dolefull tunes, ye noble Peeres eche one. Let gryping greefes gnawe on your breastes to shewe your pensiue moane. With bryndie blubbered teares, ye commons all lament: Sende forth your sobbes from boyling breast, let trynkling teares be spent.
For our Achilles nowe hath left vs in the fielde: That wonted was with valiant force from foes our lyues to shylde. And this hath death deuysde to wrecke his wrathfull spyght: Wherefore (O Mors) wee curses yelde on thee both daye and nyght. Oh noble Brutus lande, howe much was death thy foe: when he with cruell darte constraynde this Gemme from thee to goe. But though the cursed dame that cuttes the fatall lyne: So muche enuyed thy happie state in making him declyne: Yet God through mercy great in spyght of death his darte Hath left a Blossome of his braunche to ease thy pensiue smarte. For whome now let vs praye, that shee the race may runne of Nestors yeres, with like successe as yet her grace hath done. And that his royall Impe Elizabeth by name: May weare the Crowne and wielde the sworde with ioye and endlesse fame. Whose, lyfe doth render lyght vnto her fathers fame:
whose noble harte doth plainly shewe the stocke from whence shee came. Though death hath done his woorst with drift of dyrefull darte: By stryking of that valyant king and piercing of his harte: Yet hath he not the powre his fame to ouercast: which shall remaine in mouth of man whyle Pen and ynke doth last. And eke the shyning Sunne shall cease his running race before king Henries worthie fame shall suffer one deface. And as his soule is lodgde with Ioue in starrie Skye: Euen so remembraunce of his name on earth shall neuer dye.
¶ A Preamble to this parte of the Booke following. LYke as the auncient Greekes haue painted out at large, Their noble ladyes worthie lyues and therof taken charge: And as the Romaine dames had writers of their actes, Euen so the trowpe of Englysh trayne haue some to tell their factes. Whose bryght and shyning fame deserues to haue a place, Coequall with the best that hath runne on in vertues race. Then let not Englande blushe to blase their ladies lyues, Which no whit is inferiour vnto the Romayne wyues. Let them vaunt if they list of Lucrece chastitie, I prayse the greekes Penelope for her fidelitie. A nomber myght be namde that wryters pennes haue praysde, Who for their lyues and noble actes an endlesse fame hath raysde. And yet among the rest that retche their fame so farre:
Let English dames shewe foorth their shyne lyke Venus twinkling Starre. Whose nomber sure is greate, although I name but fewe: But yet as tyme will lycence mee I shall more largely shewe. The lyues and noble actes of Ladyes in those dayes: Whome noble vertue hath aduaunsde to winne immortall prayse. For lyke as valyant men therof do gayne renowne: So worthie actes of weomen kynde may not bee quite throwne downe. Fame may not parciall bee but as desertes requyre: Must yelde to euery worldly wyght their due deserued hyre.
¶ A Commemoration of Queene Anne Bullayne. YE noble Imphes of Parnas hill, e Muses all arowe: Resownd your pleasant melodie, your warbling notes bestowe. Take wrest in hand to tune those stringes that render Siluer sownd: And let the voyce of Musikes lore vnto the Skies rebownde. Blo vp with ioye the chearefull blast of Englandes blissefull state: In prayse of this most noble Qneene king Henries lawfull mate. Let Poets decke their sacred heds with leafe of Lawrell bow: And take their painfull Pennes in hande their skill to publishe nowe. A gracious Queene and lawfull spowse King Henry (lo) enioyes: who earst was helde from wedlockes lawe by shewe of Romysh toyes.
Her vertuous mynde and Godly harte Gods worde doth so embrace: As well deserues in Bibels tome her noble name to place. Whome loue hath fedde with heauenly foode and knowledge of his truth: And eke adornde with sacred giftes in this her tender youth. Anne Bolloygne (lo) this ladye hight, whose praise for to depainte: My quaking Quill in trembling fist, doth quayle and gins to fainte. Lest that the rudenesse of my style myght Clips her noble fame: Whose praise, the best that handels pen of ryght shoulde fynely frame. Let Virgill leaue dame Didos actes and fate of Priams towne: And take of mee this charge in hande to purchase him renowne. Or else vouchsafe (O Sulmose Imphe, to lende thy Pen awhyle To furuishe forth with eloquence the basenesse of my style.
But well I see it is but vayne for helpe of them to craue: In whome no ayde is to be had, that long hath lodge in graue. Wherefore my Muse, although thy skill be rude and farre too bace: Yet take thy Pen to write somewhat of her most noble grace. Her harte did harbour heauenly giftes that in her brest was bred: And Pallas for her wisedom seemde to soiurne in her hed. Her face and featurde shape was fraught by Nature passing well: Her inwarde giftes and outwarde grace all others did excell. Thus loue ioynde with Minerua here, this noble Queene to frame: So that it playnly did appere, from heauenly throne shee came. A Phenix right, whose course of kynde ys singuler alwaye: Whose ashes yeldes another byrde, So one remaynes for aye.
This noble Phenix in lykewise hath of her sinders sent Note A noble Impe, a worthie Queene ere shee from worlde went. Whose Princely praise hath pearst the pricke and price of endlesse fame: And hit the marke of regall race from whence her highnesse came. e noble dames that do delyght for vertue praise to gayne: Desire to know this Princes lyfe and learne for to retayne: Those vertues that you then may viewe, as Mirrours to you all: Then shall you reape the right renown, that neuer shall take fall.
¶ An Epitaph on the death of Queene Anne Bullayne. YF wayling woes might win thy life, to lodge in corpes agayne: Thy bodie should O noble Queene, not thus in graue remayne. For if that death might life redeeme, and life were bought with death: Ten thousande to restore your lyfe, woulde render vytall breath. But sith that may in no wise bee, for death woulde worke his spight: With yernefull voyce and dolefull domps we shall expell delight. And shew our greefes with secret sighes , and langour of the breste: The flodds of teares shed for thy sake, declares our harts vnrest. And were it not thy royall Impe did mittigate our payne: The sorrow for thy fatall day, wee vneth could sustayne.
Yet this somewhat recomfortes vs for that we be moste sure Thy blessed soule is lodge with God Foreuer to endure. Also thy noble splendent fame O noble Prince Queene Anne Shall liue on earth till worldes ende within the mouth of man. And eke thy lyfe shalbe a lore for Ladies all to learne: Wherin they may, as in a glasse Dame Vertues path desearne.
¶ A Commemoration of Queene Iane. AMong the rest, whose worthie lyues hath runne in vertues race: O noble Fame peruse thy trayne, and geue Queene Iane a place. A nymphe of chaste Dianaes trayne, a vertuous virgin eke: In tender youth, a Matrons hart, with modest mynde most meeke. So that dame Vertue may reioyce for breeding such a wight: Whose nature shewde the fayre bright beames of vertues shyning lyght. Whereby shee was elect and chose to bee the linked mate of valyant Caesars equall Peere, till Atrops shewde her hate. Whose whirlyng wheele doth wander still, and runne with restles race: And is as frendly to the Page as t him that beares the Mace.
Thus till the Sisters did agree, to cut the fatall lyne: This noble Lady euermore to vertue did enclyne. Whose Godly lyfe and finall ende, I wish ech lady vew: That Fame may in her Register, for aye her name renewe.
¶ An Epitaph on the death of Queene Iane. YF dart of death might be repeld, by fame of verteous life: And fatall Sisters would with hold, the blade of bloody knife: From cruell cut of vitall lyne, to spare the worthie wight: This noble Queene shoulde not haue felt, the rancor of theyr spyght. But sith in exorable they, for euer will remayne: The body though they cause to couch, good fame they cannot stayne. The valiant men, the verteous dames, that on the earth hath raygnde Haue yelded to their cursed knyfe, yet endles fame hath gaynd. They haue subdude stowte Caesars hart, they forcde not Helens hewe: Of Cressus wealth they no whit carde they ioye all to subdue.
And eke among the rest that hath sustaynde their cancred hate: This noble Queene hath felt the flame of her vntymely fate. Whose worthie fame shall not be shutt with bodye in the claye: But lyue and florishe on the earth whyle Phebus guydes the daye.
¶ In Prayse of the renowned Ladye Queene Katherin Par. DAme Vertue longing to behold her troupe of noble trayne: Determined to take the vewe of them that did remayne. Appointing Fame with sound of trompe, to sommon and assite: Ech one that in her booke was namde to be a worthy wight. Of weomen sect (as for the rest) another tyme should bee: For famous menne to shewe theyr selues, ech one in theyr degree. This noble troupe assembled was most goodly to behold: And eche one called by theyr names as Fame had them enrold. The Goddesses sate in there seates, the Graces placed were: The Muses nyne, the noble Nimphes, in theire degrees sat there. Dame Vertue being cheefest iudge and lady of the place: Decreed that one among the rest, should beare the cheefest mace. Commaunding euery lady theare, to answere to theyr name:
As they in order should be calde, by voyce of noble Fame. When this decree proclaymed was, and all thinges whusht and still: My greedy eyes to view this sighte, coulde neuer gase their fill. Then Fame calde for Vlisses wife, whereto one sayde strayght waye: That dyrefull death with cruell launce, had lodgde her corse in claye. Then heard I good Cornelia namde, and many other calde: Some aunswerde here, and some by fate in earthy clod were stalde. At last by lot the Cryer sayd, where is that noble Dame: That was the eight king Henries wife, and had K. P. to name. Wherto a noble English Queene, that then was in the place: Made aunswere that her mortall lyfe, had run the fatall race. Then vertue sent foorth saltie teares, and bad the Cryer pawse: And sayd shee lost the worthiest wight, that euer kept her lawes. Dame Pacience with wringing handes, her dollor did declare: And prudent pallas, for her parte, no paynefull plaints did spare.
The Muses mooude with mestiue moode, resounded dolefull voyce: The Graces all with rented heares , in langor did reioyce. In fyne the whole assembly there, in sodayne sorowes were: For ech one thought this noble Queene, dame Vertues Mace shoulde beare. At last stoode vp Virginitie, attyred all in whyte: Whose countenaunce lyke Phebus beames, did yelde a heauenly lyght. Unto the iudge dame Vertue shee, her minde began to showe: with Angels voice and Heauenly grace, eche worde shee did bestow. O noble Dames leaue off (qd shee) your dumpyshe dolors staye: And licence mee, O rightfull iudge. somwhat herein to saye. With that it was a ioye to see How sorowes were resynde: And Vertue bad Virginitie proceede to say her minde. Eche one attentiue eare gan bende to heare this noble voice: Whose prudent wordes and graue deuyse, made all the rest reioyce. This was the tale the Goddesse tolde, O worthie wightes drawe neere:
And see the only cause, that wee are nowe assembled heere. Ye are the troupe and noble trayne that vertue hath embraede, Whose endlesse fame for vertues sake, shall neuer be defacde. Here haue you hearde that auncient dames by fatall stroke are flayne: And yet theire names in booke of Fame for euer shall remayne. Among the rest Queene Katherin Par, (so was her Parents name:) Hath yelde her soule vnto the heauens, yet left on earth her fame. Unto whose lot it shoulde haue lyght dame Vertues Mace to guyde: But cruell Atrops all too soone, her noble race enuyde. Yet one among this worthie crewe must take the charge in hande: whose due desertes, for vertuous praise, in chiefest place must stande. Here is a royall Queene in place, whose lyfe I knowe right well: within whose brest, euen from a babe, vnto this day I dwell. Whome you (O Lady Vertue) fyrst committed to my charge: When nature made her perfect moulde, her skill to shewe at large.
And whyle vpon this Princely babe in Cradle I attende: You Lady Pallas came in haste, your heauenly giftes to spende. And Caliop with all her Nimphes, made haste from Pernas hill: For to adorne this peereles peace, with perfect learned skill. You lady Graces know right well, and beare it yet in mynde: What haste you made vnto this babe, ye fearde to bee behynde. In fyne her grace was theare adornde, with all your giftes so well: That outwarde shape and inwarde giftes, Panthora did excell. Her father was a royall king graund Captain of the trayne: Of all the worthie warlike wights that fame did euer gayne. Her noble Mother bare the bell for vertue in her dayes: Whose worthie fame with toung and Penn: hath reapte immortal prayse. And shee a virgin (lo) doth were the Fathers regall crowne: And prudently doth wyeld the sworde, with lardge and bright renowne. She hath repressed errors blinde, and causde Gods worde to shyne:
Whose noble lyfe from vertues lore, did neuer yet declyne. Shee best deserues to haue the Mace, that vertue meanes bestowe: Elizabeth of England Queene, you all her grace do knowe. And let Queene Katherin Par enioye Fame for her vertuous race: And vnto Queene Elizabeth dame vertue yeld thy Mace. No sooner had virginitie, this sentence vttred tho: But all the reste with one consent, sayde Lady be it so. Then Vertue prayide the noble Mayde, that thus this tale declarde: Commaunding scilence to be synde that iudgement myght be harde. Then saide the Iudge, this is the doome, and sentence in this case: Queene Katherin Par in booke of Fame shall haue a speciall place: And noble Queene Elizabeth as cheefest of my trayne: Shall take this Scepter at my hande, as meetest for to raygne. Hereat this noble heauenly crewe brake vp with greate delyte: And I yet holde my Pen in hande Queene Katherins lyfe to wryte.
¶ It will happely seeme somewhat straunge vnto thee (Gentle Reader) that I haue so sclender∣ly past ouer the treatise of these noble ladies before mencioned, whose lyues and noble vertues, I can at large descrybe. And peraduenture I may bee deemed parciall, for mentioning of these, and o∣mitting the names of king Henryes other wyues. I confesse I haue in my handes a Treatise of all their lyues, so farre foorth as tendeth to the com∣mendations of their noble and princely vertues, worthie the immitation of all Ladies and gentle∣weomen. But it fareth with mee, as with the soare Hauke, that keepeth her selfe aloofe from the Faukners fist, vntill acquaintaunce hath breed a further familiaritie. So if I maye perceiue this beginning to haue thy frindly fauour: Thou shalt win mee to thy lure, and encourage mee to mount as hygh as I may, not bolting aboue my reache, lyke rashe Icarus, whereby to come tumblinge downe, and be drencht in the flood of follye. And thus I ende, desyring at thy hands nought else, but thy good worde in lewe of this my labour. Finis.
¶ THE HISTORY OF the winning of Hadington in Scotlande. An. 2. Reg. Edwardi. 6. WHen I had ended this treatise of the moste famous king Henry the eyght, and readie to put the same in prynte: I chaunced into the company of cer∣taine Capitaines that had serued in king Henries warres, & in king Edwardes, and euersince, as often as they haue bene called there∣unto. And after talke ministred: They seemed greatly to lament, that so noble a piece of seruyce as was done at Hadington, shoulde so sleyghtlye passe thorough the handes of Cronographers. Whereupon I (being by them earnestly reque∣sted) haue taken on mee to discourse therof, by the instruccions of these sayde Gentlemen, who were theare present during all this worthie seruice, which well deserueth the name of noble and wor∣thie. In so muche that the Frenchemen (that then were there to the ayde of the Scottes) saye vnto this daye, that there are fewe good Soldiers in Englande (except those that were at this siege of Hadington) preferring the seruice that was then 1548 thear, before any other that euer they knewe or hearde of. The maner whereof ensueth.
The Lorde Graye being at Barwike & the kings liefetenaunt theare: After the ouerthrowe of the Scottes at Muscleborow fielde, made a roade into Scotlande in the Lent, in the seconde yere of the kinges Raigne, to take a viewe of the towne of Hadington, and returned to Barwike agayne without any assault geeuen. The Sommer fol∣lowing he came with his armye and entred the towne without anye resistaunce, and then made preparation for the fortifying therof. In whyche meane space, he laide siege vnto a Castell that was three myles from the towne named Ester Castell, which Forte was furnished with Scottes and Spanyardes, who stoode at their defence, refu∣sing to submitt them selues, vntill the Lord Graye had with the great Cannons made a breach, and was readie to enter the saide Castell. Then they yelded and desyred Pardon for their lyues onely, which the lorde Gray graunted vnto them all, ex∣cepting one: who (during the siege) had reuyled the King in woordes, and abused his graces name with moste opproprious termes. Then they all came forth of the castell in their thurtes onely, sub∣mitting them selues to the mercye of the Lorde Gray. And vpon strayt examination, who should be the tayler that was excepted out of this Par∣don: it was knowne to be one Newton a Scott. But he, to saue him selfe, put it to one Hamelton. Thus these two Gentlemen accused one the other. For the decysing wherof, a Cumbat was appoin∣ted
betweene them, and by the Lorde Gray ad iudped so to bee. The tyme came for this Cumbat to be accom∣plyshed, A Cumbat. and the listes made in the Market place of Hadington. And these saide gentlemen entred in their dubblets and hose, weaponed with sword, buckler and dagger. At the firste entrie into the listes, this Hammelton kneeled on his knees, and made his hartie prayer vnto Almyghtie God, to geeue the victorie vnto the truthe: with solempne protestation, that he neuer vttered any such words of King Edward of Englande, as his aduersarie Newton accused him of. And on the other syde, Newtons conscience being troubled with his false accusation, argued vnto all the beholders his guilt: For there oppeared in him great timerousues. The beholders prayde God for Hammelton, for the Souldiers knewe right well that it was newton, for his voyce bewrayde him. Nowe were the Sticklers in a readinesse, and the Combatours drewe their weapons, and be∣tweene them was fought vi. or vii. blowes verye lustely. But Hammelton being meruaylous fierce and eager vpon the truth of his quarell, con∣strayned Newton to geeue grounde, almost to the ende of the listes. And if he had driuen him to the The lawe of Armes. verye ende, then (by the lawe of Armes) he had wonne the conquest, and his enemy shoulde haue bene hanged, if he had not slayne him. Newton perceiuing him selfe to be almoste at the poynt of
hanging, stept forwards againe, and gaue Ham∣melton such a gashe on the legg, that he was not able to stande, but fell downe, and then Newton fell on him, and slewe him with his dagger. Thus the Cumbat was ended, but the English men that knewe Newton to be the rayler, and the false accuser (although by more happ then hardi∣nesse, he had the vpper hande) were very desyrous to renewe Combat againe with him. For there were many Gentlemen theare, that woulde wil∣lingly haue ventered their lyues on him, man for man, but he challenged the priuilege of the lawe of Armes, which was vnto him graunted. And the Lorde Gray gaue him his owne gowne of his A good re∣ward yli be stowed, but to maintains the lawe of Armes. backe, and the Chayne that he theu ware. Thus was he well rewarded, that better deserued to haue bene hanged. But he escaped not so: For af∣terwardes, as he was ryding betweene the Bor∣ders of Englande and Scotlande, he was slayne and cutt in pieces. Nowe I will speake of the seege that the Frenche Armye, and the power of Scotlande layde vnto the towne of Hadington against the Englishe men. When the foresaide Castell was wonne, and the Cumbat finished, the Lorde Graye departed towardes Barwike, leauing behynde him Syr Iames Wilford as generall of the garryson, and 2000 chosen Souldiers vnder him to defend the towne, whiche was not halfe fortifyed before it was besieged of the Frenchemen and Scottes.
For our menne had not bene viii. weekes in it be∣fore Mounsier Dassey the Frenche kinges lieete∣nant, and the Ringraue of Fraunce, came to the siege with twentie thowsande Frenchemen, Al∣mames and Scottes, beeing all of them lustye & gallant Souldiers. And at their firste comminge there was a hoat skirmishe betweene them and the Englishe men. And because the Gates of the towne were not of anye strength for defence, our men were constraynde to ramme vp the Gates with earthe, and so mayntaine the defence of the towne vppon the Walles. There were many assaultes geeuen to the losse of bothe parties. And in the ende, our enemies did so beat the towne with shott, that they lefte not one whole house for our men to put their heads in: Whereby they were constrained to lye vnder the walles, (for other lodging was there none.) They looked for helpe to haue come out of Eng∣lande, but none came: So that they were in mise∣rable case for lacke of succour. For they were dry∣uen to so narrow pushe, that they rent their shurts A hard shift for lacke of Matche, for other shifte had they none. And also their Enemies had taken awaye their Flankers, whiche was their whole defence of the walles, to expelle them from approching neare whereby to scale. So that by this meanes, the Frenchemen came close vnder the walles of the towne, and were their ouerthwart neyghbours so neare: That the Englyshmen on the one syde, and
the Frenchemen on the other, laye close togeather, that there was no more distaunce of grounde be∣tweene them, then the thicknesse of the walle. Also one of the Bulwarkes was beaten downe so flatte, that a man myght ryde in and out at the breache, but the Frenchemen durste not venter in therat. It greeued the Englishe men not a little, to see their euill neyghbours so neare their noses: where∣upon, a blunte cuntrey man that was one of our Souldiers, and by his occupation, a maker of Flayles, inuented to beate them from the walles with slayles, and tyed a heauye plummet of lead at the ende of a rope, fastening the other ende of the rope vnto a good truncheon to holde in hys hande, and with suche flayles they slewe and mai∣med a greate many of them. This Mounsier Dassey captaine generall of the Frenche Armie, was complayned on to the kynge his Maister, for his too muche rashenesse, whereby hee lost manye of his best Souldiers: so that hee was sent for home in great displeasure, and in his place was sent Mounsier de Termes, who remo∣ued the siege, and came not neare the towne by three myles. But he punished our men worse then the siege, for he layde all the straytes and passages with watche, whereby no victuales coulde bee brought vnto the towne. All this whyle (beeing about xi. weekes) came none out of Englande to the rescue of our besieged menne: Sauing that
syr Wadam Selinger, and master Windam with a rewe Gentlemen, and three hundreth Souldiers verie ventrousely brake thorough the ende of the Frenche Armie, and brought with them Matche and powder, which was to our men greate com∣forte. The scarcitie of victuals among them was so greate, that they were constraynde to eate horses, dogges, cattes, and rattes. And yet neyther the want of clothes, nor the extremitie of the plague, (which was hoat amongst them) nor the lacke of munition, nor the sharpe sawce of hunger coulde beate downe the stowt courage of the Englyshe men, to yelde vp the towne. And yet these extre∣milies before mentioned, made them looke more lyke owgle Monsters, then humayne men. But their worthie and valyant capitaine Sir Iames Wilford was such a one, as was able to make of a cowardly beaste, a couragious man. During this tyme, the Lorde Graye being at Barwike, was very carefull for them that were at Hadington, but wanted powder to sende to the ayde of them. Notwithstanding he sent xiii. hun∣dred horsemen vnder the conduction of Sir Ro∣bert Bowse, and Syr Thomas Palmer, not mea∣ning that they shoulde offer any battayle, as some (being deceiued) affirme: but to make a showe to comfort the Englishe men withall, that then were comfortlesse. And thinking that vpon the syght of them, the French & Scottish armie would remoue farther of.
But they, presumyng further then their commissi∣on, gaue a charge on their enemies, and they be∣ing all horsemen (as is aforesaide) were by the Frenche and Scottishe footemen enuironed, and euery man of them (one onely excepted) slayne, & taken prisoners, to the great greefe of our men at Hadington. And yet coulde not all this subdue the hartes of them, but lyued in hope. And at the laste came the Earle of Shrewsbery with xvi. thowsand freshe Souldiers to Hading∣ton: At whose comming, the Frenche and Scot∣tishe armye left the siege & went to Edenborovv. But to see the order of this meeting, would moue A mournfull meeting the harte of anye man to vtter affeccions with teares. The Earle let fall teares from his eyes, to see that suche valyant men shoulde suffer suche dis∣tresse, whose stowt hartes coulde not bee conque∣red with any afflictions. On the other syde, our wearied Souldiers sent out the fountaynes of their eyes, for ioye, to see their deliuerance at hand. Thus with mournfull and ioyfull embrasinges they met. And the Earle came into the town, and supplyed the want both of menne, munition, and victualles, and shortlye after retourned to Eng∣lande againe, leauing the towne well prouyded. Now it fell out, whyle the Frenchemen were at Edenborovve, there grewe such debate betweene them and the Scottes, that they fell to bickeringe within them selues, and the Frenchemen flewe certaine Scottes. Whereof, when the Englishe∣men
hearde, they thought that then they myght betake them selues to a little rest, for they had none a great whyle. Then they sent out their Scoutes and a Watche, and so went to suche lodginges as they had. But Mounseur de Termes (to recon∣sile the matter againe betweene his men and the Scottes) promysed the Scottes that he woulde winne vnto them the towne of Hadington with∣out any more delaye. And when the Englishemen A lustye Canuasado. thought least of their comming: they came, and killed the watche & the Scoutes, & were entred in at the bace courte of the towne before the Larum was geuen. The Englishemen perceiuinge this soddeine irruption, made no delayes to encounter with them: But went thorough a priuie Posterne gate into the bace courte among them, & with the blacke Bill slewe of them (by estimation) v. hun∣dred or more, and droue the rest that escaped ouer the walle, as Sheepe before a Dogge, that happie was he that coulde tumble ouer firste. Thus they retourned with great losse, and no lesse shame, ma∣king no boste of their bargaine. I should haue no∣ted before, of a pretie accident that happened at this siege, which is this. When Mounsieur Dassey came firste to the Note. ayde of the Scottes, he was enformed by the Scottes, that there were but a fewe Rascalles & white cotes at Hadington, and neyther Gentle∣men nor good Souldiers. Whereupon he reque∣sted the olde Queene of Scottes that then was
at Edenborovgh, to go to a little Nunnerie that was but a myle from Hadington, and thear shee shoulde see the slaughter of all the Englishemen. So shee went to that Nunnerie to beholde the performaunce of this promise. And when shee came thither: shee might see the verye streates of the towne (for it standeth verye lowe.) The En∣glishe men vnderstanding of her being in the To∣wer of the saide Nunnerie, shott off a great Iron peece they had, (which Gunne they called Roring Megge, for the terrible noyse that it rendered) and the Pellet hit part of the Tower that the Queene was in, whereat shee made haste downe (as it was hygh tyme) & rode posting to Edenborough without seeing anye harme done to the Englishe menne. And Mounsieur Dassey founde other ma∣ner of fellowes theare, then Rascalles and white cotes (as him selfe reported) geening greate com∣mendations of the Englishemen theare. Nowe to returne againe to the Canuasado be∣fore mentioned. When our menne had geeuen the Frenchemen that ouerthrowe in the nyght, they gaue the nexte Morning three sharpe assaultes to the towne, and yet tooke the repulse with greate losse of their menne: For they caried away xvi. Cartes and Wagons laden of dead carcases, be∣cause they should not be known, besydes three hun∣dred that were founde in the base court afore men∣cioned. You haue reade what scarsitie of victuales was
among them before, and what pennurie they sus∣tayned: Wherefore at the laste, there was made sufficient prouision to victuall the garrison, but not without greate charges, for it was alwayes brought by conuoye, whiche was with greate strength conducted, and neuer without skirmishe. For it was alwayes brought thorough the towne of Dunbar, and in the Castell of Dunbar laye a garrison of our enemies. And on a tyme, our Ca∣pitaine Sir Iames Wilforde went to meete with the conuoy at Dunbar, whiche is viii. myles from Hadington, and had with him but xii. menne. And when he had saluted the Lorde Wardon (who then came with the conuoy) the garrison of Dun∣bar Castell came forth & made a shewe in the field. Then sayde the Lorde Warden vnto Sir Iames Wilforde, beholde how prowdly your neyghbours stand before vs. Yea (quoth Sir Iames) if I had but a fewe of my men more with mee, I woulde offer them some playe. If you will geeue a charge on them (saide the Lorde Warden) you shall haue as many of my men as you will. But because sir Iames had no experience of their hardinesse, hee was lothe to trust vnto them. Notwithstandinge in fine he saide, that if they woulde followe him, hee woulde make a gappe thorough them. They promised not to shrinke. So there were about 300 appoynted vnto him, and he went before them ga∣loping thorough the town in the face of the Castel,
And the shott came so sharpely from the Castell vppon them, that all the menne that professed to followe him durst not, but shrunke backe: sauing onely his owne xii. men. And when he and his small nomber was in the myddes of theire ene∣mies, he behaued himselfe very valyantly. But in the ende his horse was slayne vnder him, and hee taken prisoner. But his twelue men being lustie Souldiers, went thorough them againe (being to weake for lacke of nomber to rescue their captain) and so retourned without anye hurte vnto them done. Thus was this noble Captaine taken, and had to the Castel of Dunbar, thorough the cowar∣dise of them that professed to followe him. This did so kindel the brestes of our Garrison that laye at Hadington, that the Captaines had muche a doo to perswade them from leauing the towne to fetche him from them againe. For they sayde that they woulde dye on them euerye man, but they woulde winne the Castell of Dunbar. And the Scottes knewe right well that they coulde not keepe him thear without great daun∣ger: Wherefore they sent him to Edenborough, & theare was he kepte prisoner till he was redee∣med by Raunsom. He was so noble a capitaine, that he wonne the hartes of all Souldiers. Hee was in the towne among his Souldiers & frinds, a gentle Lamme. In the fielde among his ene∣mies, a Lyon. To his men, beneficiall. To al men liberall. After whose misfortune, was sent vnto
Hadington in his steede, Syr Iames Acroft, a va∣liant Gentleman: whose worthie commendati∣ons I omitt, because he being alyue, and in deser∣ued estimation, I myght bee suspecte of flatterie. He was theare by the space of one whole yere, du∣ring which tyme, manye noble actes were atchy∣ued. And in fine, when the king perceiued howe chargeable a thing it was to keepe Hadington, he sent the Earle of Rutlande with vi. thousande men thither, who caused the towne to bee rased, and brought awaye all the munition to Barwike. And thus was this noble peece of seruice ended.
The names of the Capitaines that were at Hadington, as neare as coulde be called to remembrance. THe Earle of Shrewsberye. The Earle of Rutlande. The Lorde Graye. Sir Iames Wilforde. Sir Iames Acroft. Sir Wadam Selinger. Sir Oswalde Wolstrap. Sir Robert Worsley. Capitayne Pellam. Capitayne Dethick, who was my cheefe instructer in this matter. Capitayne Wood. Capitayne Windam. Capitayne Tayler. Capitayne Collbie. Capitayne Fitzwilliams. Capitaine Tiberio an Italian. Capitayne Whitton. Capitayne Boothe. Capitayne Pikeman. Capitayne Gam. Capitayne Garton. Capitayne Bagshot. Capitayne Ashley. Capitayne Lawson.
A Commendation of the Englishe Souldiers that serued at this siege of Hadington. THe frowning furious dame, that hight bellona fierce: That grieflie Goddesse, whose outrage doth Kinges and Countries pierce: Drewe forth her bluddie blade, Sets vp her Stander blacke: And fenced with her fyerie Flagg, to worke her wrakefull wracke. Who can scape scotfree then, that dares abyde the broyle: The noble harte for honour fyghtes, the Tyran huntes for spoyle. The Cowarde crakes with woordes, and hopes for happie daye: Yet is he not the firste that strykes, nor last that runnes away. At point of harde distresse, a hardie man is knowne: At ratling shott or hunger sharpe a dastarde is downe throwne. But when Bellona sawe the warlyke Englishe wyghtes: That at this siege, in Marciall actes affied their whole delyghtes:
Shee wondred as shee myght, to see that all her rage: Coulde by no meanes, the haughtie hartes of Englishe men asswage. Tryumphing Garlandes then with speede shee gan prepare: To crowne those lustie Captaines all that had of her no care. The nobles that were theare Shee gaue eche one a Crowne: Adorning them by due desert with large and bryght renowne. And then shee calles by name the rest to take their hyre: Whiche was, that they shoulde to the toppe of mounting Fame aspyre. Sir Wilforde come thou first, Receiue thy iust rewarde: Thy hautie harte, of furious foe had neuer yet regarde. Sir Croftes come forth also to clayme thy worthie name: Controll eche misse, for so thou maiste, Thou winnest the forte of Fame. Sir Sellinger approche Thou setst thy Foe at naught: Sir Wolstrap in the Arte of warre hath worthelye bene taught. Sir Worseley was not worste, but of the worthie wightes:
And thus Bellona made an ende of talking to her knyghtes. Now Pellam that hath charge of Pellet and of Shott: A Garlande had by due desert, as lyghted to his lot. And Dethicke dreading nought the daunger of his foe: By polecie with prowes ioynde, gaue oft the ouerthrowe. Wood woulde not take the foyle at anye equall matche: And Windam well coulde wynde the twist his wylye Foes to catche. Fitzwilliams woulde not slacke to fyght for countrey soyle: And Taylers trustie diligence sparde not for any toyle. But Collbie knowes the cast the craking Scot to trayne: His name in Scotlande is well knowne, but to their often paine. Tiberio tooke no care for his Italia lande: But manfully among the rest, did in the quarell stande. And Whitten whet his witt, eke playde his parte full stowte: And Boothe woulde neuer balke the brunt of Frenche or Scottish rowte.
Pykeman past thorough the Pykes and proude a valyant man: And Gam by prowes wonne the game that Frenchemen woulde haue wan. So Garton he coulde guyde and garde his menne full well: And Bagshot was no whitt abasht what chaunce soeuer fell. As Ashleyes Auncent came with honour from the fielde: So Aslaby wan good reporte to Foe he woulde not yelde. Nowe Lawson is the laste, yet not of lowest name: But equall with his captayne mates that hath deserude good fame. Thease Captaines and their men them selues so stoutly showde: That Garlandes of still lasting Fame is now on them bestowde. A Garlande is small gayne, wheare lymmes and lyuing lacke: I wishe the Souldier as my selfe to feele no kynde of wracke. And suche as flowe in wealth and seese a Souldier pore: I woulde he were in forefrunt set when rattlyng Canons rore. Finis.
The Aucthor. WHen Fame rang out her Larum bell of glorious golden sounde: And blewe the blast of Princes actes whiche in her booke shee founde: By her enrolde and Registred in Scroll of endlesse brute: Whose memories shoulde neuer quayle vntill eche tung were mute. This sownde of Bell and blast of Trompe was hearde to Parnas hill: Where as Queene Caliop and her trayne do vse their cunning skill. Theare myght you see these noble Nimphes throwe downe their Lawrell crownes: With ruffeled heares, outragiously to fling through Dales and Downes. And gad, more lyke to wandring wyghtes, Then learned Ladies sure: And euery one a Poet sought her Pen to put in vre.
At last (by chaunce) I met the Muse that wonts my quill to guyde: who is the symplest of them all, and when shee mee espyde: All haile (quod shee) euen thou art hee whome I do nowe requyre: Take Pen in sist without delaye to finishe my desyre. For nowe it lyghteth to thy lot King Henryes faine to write: And though thy Muse be verie base, shrinke not for to endyte. When thou hast done thy diligence The learnedst of our trayne: To polyshe this that thou hast done, will not shunne ne disdaine. Alas (quoth I) my louing Muse, Tis far for mee vnfitt: To write his due deserued Fame, requyres a learned witt. Shall Coridon take Harpe in hande, where Orpheus is in place: Arions pleasant melodie doth Pannes rude pype deface.
But all this myght not moue the Muse to alter her request: Shee forced mee to take my Pen and so to do my best. Thus brought shee mee to Hermon hill, where heauenly dewe doth dwell: Note And thear I wrote as shee mee taught God graunt it be Ful well. FINIS. 1575. Imprinted at London in Fleete streate, at the Temple gate by VVilliam Hoskins.
