12928 99854979 20447
AN APOLOGIE OR DEFENCE OF THE WATCH-VVORD, AGAINST THE VIRVLENT AND SEDITIOVS WARD-VVORD published by an English-Spaniard, lurking vnder the title of N.D. DEVIDED INTO EIGHT SEVERALL Resistances according to his so many Encounters, writ∣ten by Sir FRANCIS HASTINGS Knight. PSALM. 122. O pray for the peace of Ierusalem, let them prosper that loue thee. PSALM. 109. Though they curse, yet thou wilt blesse; they shall rise vp and be confounded, but thy seruant shall reioyce. LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Ralph Iacson. 1600.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. I Haue obserued (gentle Reader) from the words and writings of the learned, that it is a Maxime or Rule in Philosophie; Finis est primus in intentione, The end aymed at is first setled in the intention of man: And finding this Romanist to boast and brag much of his learning, it is not vnlike, that like a cunning Clerke (whatsoeuer his lear∣ning be) the ende of this his worke was the first ground of his writing. He proclaimeth Temperance in his title, he pursueth the Art of Rayling in the whole processe following, and in the end of all, he perswadeth ruine both to Church and Com∣mon-wealth: In the first dissimulation, in the second scurri∣litie, and the third trecherie is contained; for he shakes handes with Temperance at the verie first, and leaueth her to rest and remaine with his title, and the leafe being tur∣ned he plungeth presently into his vaine of rayling, which (if he had affected Temperance) he would neuer haue done, and the end sheweth his intention to be to bring in either a tolleration or flat alteration of Religion. But wilt thou know (Christian Reader) what forced this fellow to become so suddenly distempred? My Watch-word
presented vnto thee to prepare thee with a couragious heart, and readie hand, to resist forraine malice, and home treason, plotted and purposed by Rome and Spayne, a∣gainst our Soueraigne and Countrie, hath wakened him be∣fore his time, and out of the lightnesse of his braine (through ouer-watching of himselfe to deuise and worke mischiefe) he tearmeth this my booke (in the beginning of his Preface) an iniurious Pamphlet and a biting Libell: my la∣bours therein he calleth a base exercise of calumniation and rayling, and in the matter thereof it pleaseth him to say; I spare neither God nor man, So farre forth as they con∣cerne the Catholike cause, or the cause of them, and for this I must receiue my checke and refutation at his pleasure. The iniurie he chargeth me to haue done is to his Catho∣likes, of whose doctrine and dealing I confesse (in my former booke) I warne thee to beware: as for the tearme of a byting Libell, thou wilt say (gentle Reader) when thou hast peru∣sed him and me both ouer, that it is a more fit addition to the title of his temperate Ward-word which is byting, be∣cause it is full of rayling, and is a Libell, because it is slaun∣derous against her Maiestie, and the seat of her Iustice, and is thrust out without name: as for the basenes of the exer∣cise imputed to me for writing and publishing that booke, and the cause thereof, indeed it is a verie base thing to ca∣lumniate, and rayle as he doth; but to lay before Subiects the doctrine and deeds of disloyaltie, and to warne them to take heed thereof, as I haue endeuoured therein to doe, will proue neither calumniation nor rayling. If any simple seduced Catholike stand free from subscri∣bing to the disloyal doctrine of Rome, & from doing that it directeth and teacheth, he is not touched by me; therefore
this Champion that draweth all Catholikes within the com∣passe of my words wrongeth them more then I doe: but he might haue spared to name the God of heauen, as a partie in his Catholike cause, till he can proue the cause warranted from God, and his truth, which he shall neuer do; yet I must receiue this worthie Gentlemans checke for my labour, but he shall find it is farre from a mate, and that his Bishops are too weake to bring it to that. The Gentleman saith he is verie loath to be ouer eager and sharpe with me in his Encounters, not onely in his owne worshipfull disposition, but also for the reuerent respect he carrieth to the house and family I come of, and the particu∣ler affection he feeleth towards some of my name and li∣nage; but this is no sooner vttered then that he breaketh out presently into these words: Who will not confesse but that lying, forging, and falsifying, ignorant vaun∣ting, odious scoffing, malicious calumniations, se∣ditious interpretations, bloudie exaggerations, bar∣barous insultations, ouer them that alreadie are in af∣fliction and calamitie, ought to be farre from the na∣ture, pen and tongue of a Knight or Gentleman? And who would haue thought that so temperate a title could haue afforded so vntemperate a stile? Againe, who would haue expected such raging and rayling Rhetoricke a∣gainst me from one of so milde a disposition, as he professeth to be of, and that caried so reuerend a respect to the family whereof I am a braunch, and such a feeling affection to some of my name as he would perswade? But he hath cut the throate of his temperate title, and proclimeth intempe∣rance in his whole booke, and I doubt  breake the strength of his chiefe wards (for all his fencing skill if he meane to play the fencer) and to leaue him altogether to his
hanging-ward, which proueth alwaies a dangerous ward if it be sharpely followed by the assaylant, but for his reuerent respect to my family and his affection to some of them (which surely I thinke it verie slender and scunt sounde to any of them) I would aduise him not to lie so open, but to betake him to a stronger and sounder ward least be catch a double venue for his labour. But he is prouoked by me to breake out into choler for that I not onely (saith he) Touch the honours, states, and liuings of home-borne subiects, and bring them into question, vniustly being no waie tollerable, but rush further to the open assault of forraine Monar∣chies, also their honours, fame and reputations which is lesse tollerable, and consequently hath neede of some more sharpe and forcible reiection. The former persons meant by him are made apparant before, and there∣fore of them I onely say this in this place, I wish them all from my heart, that as they are home-borne, so they may be home-hearted Subiects, that their Soueraigne and countrie may enioye them sound English Subiects indeed: as for his Monarches of Rome and Spayne hee hath no cause to carpe at me, but to blame themselues, for it is they, and not I that haue teinted their honours, fame, and reputations, the first of them hauing long sought to depose her Maiestie from her regall and supreame right within her owne Domi∣nions, the other hauing made attempts to inuade and make a conquest of her land, and both of them hauing conspired the death of her Maiestie by setting on both bastard borne, English and bh strangers to depriue her of life, this I confesse I lai  in my former booke, and for this am I fiercely assaulted by this fous Romanist in his vntempe∣rate Ward-word; but we in discouering, or he in de∣fending
deserue more blame, I leaue (gentle Reader) to thy wise and indifferent iudgement. The violence of the Puritane spirit is added by him for a reason why he is prouoked by me, by which words (for all his difference made betweene Protestant and Puritane) both of them are apparantly knowne to professe Christ Iesus crucified in religion, and in true Christian pollicie to condemne Subiects that shall denie or breake their oath of fealtie; and alleageance to their Soueraigne, for the pleasing of any earthly power or Potentate whatsoeuer, and not to fa∣uour eyther Prince or Pope that shall vsurpingly challenge our Soueraignes princely titles from her, or ambitiously seeke by inuasion to dispossesse her of her kingdome, or trecherously practise by violence or any waies else to depriue her of life; so that though he disioyne vs in tearmes and names, yet he shall assuredlie finde wee all ioyne in condemning disloyaltie in subiects, ambition in forraine Princes and Potentates, and trecherie, and treason in any of them all against the State and person of the Lords annoynted: and of this num∣ber that carrie this minde, I professe my selfe most willingly and gladly to be one. This Encounterer seemeth to glorie that the yeares of her Maiestie growe on fast, but the God of mercie I trust will prolong her daies to the holding out stil of the Popes vsurped authoritie, and superstitious doctrine, to the suppressing of traitours, and treasons, and to the daunting and ouer∣throw of any, that shall attempt by fraud or force to bring in or maintaine either; for from these onely come the gar∣boyles by which our State hath beene disquieted, and our Soueraigne endangered, and from these gers the Lord of might and mercie preserue her still. fore (gentle
Reader) you may see that neither Sir Francis nor any Pro∣testant nor Puritane are fit subiects for this seditious fellow to worke vpon, to set on foote his desired garboyles, as this Machiuilian witted Romanist seemeth propound (but most iniuriously) to put his owne, and his adherents traite∣rous practises out of memory, which are so plentifull in num∣ber, and so manifest in fact as they can neuer be forgotten. After all this he layeth extreame flatterie to my charge, both of the State, and her Maiesties person in particular, which extreame charge of his (for he is all in his extreames) because it is redoubled vpon me, giue me leaue to referre thee (gentle Reader) to my answere thereunto, in my resistance to his first Encounter, only where he termeth this flattery by him supposed against me) to be a fit bait for such hooks as angle after popular fauour for a further fetch: my popularity onely consisteth in this, to haue loyalty, stand sound and vpright, and all trechery and treason suppressed. But if it please thee (Christian Reader) to obserue well this Gentlemans smooth Remitter to the Lords after his thun∣dring Encounters against me, with his fawning perswasion of peace, and crouching sute for tolleration or alteration of Religion (which before I affirme to be the first matter in his intention, and iustly call the ruine of our Church and Com∣mon-wealth) thou wilt easely perceiue what baytes he hookes withall, and what good he angles after vnder the sugred and sweet names of peace, & vnity, wheras the good of our peace standeth vpon a good peace, & vnlesse our peace may be free from present and plaine danger, it can promise little present or future good: and for his vnitie if it be vnity in veritie (as his is not) eligious Christian man can, or will refuse it; but praise  for it, and (if our vnthankfulnes bereaue
vs not of it) we enioy that already by and vnder her Ma∣iestie with great comfort, and both of her and it would this masked Romanist most gladly see vs depriued: Notwith∣standing all his fawning and crouching to the Honoura∣ble Lords in his Remitter, their wisedomes (I doubt not) will easely finde out this subtile Synons intention, who shameth not with a brasen face to seeke to bring in his brasen horse, loaden with armed calamities for Englands ruine. I haue vndertaken this Popish Champion not with any purpose to follow him in his vaine of rayling, for therein I finde him not matchable, nor hauing a disposi∣tion or desire to be stirring in matter of this nature, being more fit to be dealt in by men qualified with farre greater giftes of learning and art then I am, but being called as it were into the field by him, I haue aduentured vpon the height of his swelling pride, and haue shaped him a plaine and sound answere to all the materiall points culled out of my former booke & excepted against by him, in which (how vainegloriously soeuer this proud Encounterer promiseth to himselfe victorie) I hope (Christian Reader) thou shalt find me fully cleared and freed from the force and fury of his false imputations, and byting blowes, and him directly pro∣ued a blind superstitious Papist in Religion, a false hear∣ted subiect to his Soueraigne, and a man wholy degenerate from the honest affection of a true Englishman. And this being performed and finished, (which I held my selfe bound in duty to doe, for thy satisfying and mine owne cre∣dit) my full resolution is not to toyle any more by contending with such rayling and wrangling spirits. And so (retur∣ning all his vniust imputations against me, with his tearmes of fictions and calumniations set downe in the end of his
Epistle to himselfe, from whom they came) I leaue the scope and ende of vs both to be found out by thy Christi∣an wisedome, and the carriage of vs both to be censured as in the vprightnesse of thy iudgemen, thou shalt finde we deserue. To our good God I commend thee, and will now hasten to ioyne the combate with this proud Romanist touching his Encounters seuerally, and as shortly as possibly I can. By him that wisheth your blessed proceeding in the profession of Christ his truth and Gospell, FRANCIS HASTINGS.
AN APOLOGIE OR DEFENCE OF THE WATCH-VVORD. Resistance to the first Encounter about the manifold bles∣sings, from God, through her Maiesties happie Raigne, powred vpon this Land. THough my intent is not to make answere eyther to the immo∣dest raylings,The scope of this Apologie. or friuolous ex∣ceptions, or vagrant excursions of this Encounterer; but onely to set downe a short defence of my speeches by him impugned (because my state of health, and disposition of my bodie will not beare to write vo∣lumes:) yet, because both in the entrance of this Libell, and in other places of his processe, he doth so hainously charge me with the odious crime of flat∣terie (which I hate naturally as a badge of a base mind, much more through Christian knowledge as most contrarie thereto,) I haue thought it not a∣misse to shape a short answer vnto it. In suspition of heresie Ierome (as Bishop Iuell alleadgeth) would haue no man to be patient, & though I will not burst
out into any impatience (as considering more what is fit for me to speake then for him to heare) yet I hold that in the grieuous accusation of flatterie I ought not to be silent. Flatterie false∣ly charged vp∣on me.Therefore I allow it not onely for wittie, but worthie to be imbraced for truth, that which you al∣leadge concerning flatterers, & I hold the answere to the question no lesse true in the whole, then in part. The question was, What beasts were most perilous? And the answere is, Of all wilde-beastes a Tyrant, & of tame-beastes a flatterer; and if you can as easily free such as you seeke with might and maine to defend, from the iust imputation of tyranny, as I shall be able to cleare my selfe from any the least intention to flatter, you shall doe more then euer any could doe for them before. Antisthenes is reported to be wont to say, he had rather haue rauens resort to his house then flatterers, yeel∣ding this reason, that rauens do but pray vpon the carcasse being dead, but flatterers deuoure both bodie and soule aliue. To enterprise the enumerati∣on of great States and Princes through flatterers vt∣terly ruinated, were to vndertake an endles labour but as the verse hath: Blanditiae plusquam dira venena nocent, Sugred and sweet flatter teth more, Then deadly poyson thgh thou drink great store. So were it not hard to hew more seigniories and kingdomes subuerted by secret flatterie, then by o∣pen hostilitie: by how much the more earnestly I beseech the Lord, that if her Maiesties Court can∣not be altogether free from flatterers (who as burres
doe commonly hang vpon the sleeues of Princes,) yet by her princely wisedome she may alwaies espie them, and finde them out, saying as the Philosopher is reported that was Nephew to Plato. Define adu∣lari, nihil enim proficis cum te intelligam, leaue thy flea∣ring and fawning, thou preuailest nothing, for I per∣ceiue thee well enough. But I pray you (Sir N. D.) where learned you that skill to take vpon you to affirme and proue, that to publish the commendation of Princes vpon iust desert is flatterie?What flatte∣rie is. I doubt me for all your desire to be thought a great Clerke, it will trouble you and all your colleagues to fortifie this position But not to dwell long vpon this point; disdaine not to heare what Democritus will tell you. Rectè quidem facta lau∣dare honestum est, mala verò laudibus vehere adulterini est animi & impostoris. To giue due praise to good de∣serts is honest; but to praise and extoll euill deeds ar∣gueth a corrupt and a couzening mind: and there∣fore I doubt not with farre more ease to free my selfe from flatterie, wherewith you falsely charge me for commending the good things of our land, then you shalbe able to auoid the iust imputation of an adulte∣rous and deceiuing mind in deprauing Gods bles∣sings with your Macheuilian wit, and false inter∣pretations. And if I had leasure to stand vpon iust retortion of vniust accusations,Arch flatte∣rers at Rome. I could send you to the Popes Pallace where a man may finde more shamelesse flatterers, then (I thinke) were euer to be found in any Christian Princes Court. Panormitan (as is by
sundrie learned men alleadged) shameth not to flat∣ter your Pope so farre, as to make him almost equall with God. Excepto peccato Papa potest quasi omnia fa∣cere quae Deus potest: Sinne excepted the Pope can in a manner do all things that God can doe: Againe a∣nother clawbacke: Non minor honor debetur Papae, quam Angelis, &c. No lesse honour is due to the Pope then to the Angels, for which cause he receiueth of Christian people adorations, prostrating themselues on the ground, and the kissing of his feete, which the Angell would not permit by Iohn the Euangelist to be done to him. Another, Imperatoria Maiestas tantò est inferior Papa, quantò creatura Deo: The impe∣riall Maiestie is so much inferiour to the Pope, as the creature is to God. Others, that he is Ens secundae in∣tentionis compositum ex Deo & homine: And in a word, the Canonists roundly in the Glosse: Dominus Deus noster Papa: Our Lord God the Pope. Which blas∣phemous flattering speech Doctor Raynolds noteth that the Cardinals, and others deputed by Gregorie 13 to reuise, correct, and purge out, such things as by er∣rour had crept into the Glosses, & annotations in the booke of decrees and decretals, &c. yet haue not on∣ly not remoued this blasphemie, but not so much as giuen the least castigation vpon it: belike because they thought that could not fit the Pope, which the Apostle writeth of Antichrist, that he doth sit as God in the Temple of God, shewing himselfe that he is God, vnlesse they should suffer a place to be extant, wherein he is plainely called, Lord God, in a popish worke, by the Papists themselues corrected, printed
at Rome, and that at the Popes own speciall comman∣dement: and so much concerning your accusation of flatterie. The which yet you labour to enforce, because I take vpon me to speake of infinite blessings from Al∣mightie God,About the blessings of this land. by her Maiesties gracious gouernment powred vpon this land, and yet my selfe (you say) confesse a thousand feares and frights, and imminent perils which hang ouer vs in these words. I doubt not but you are men of wisedome, and can easily conceiue what dangers we stand in, by that which hath beene said before. And againe, The life of Religion, Queene, and Countrie is at the stake. Verely if I should speake of the great blessings be∣stowed vpon this land in the happie establishing of true Christian Religion amongs vs, and should think the contrarie, I should iudge my selfe worthie to be taxed with so odious a crime as flatterie is. For I will say as he in the Poet: Odi etenim ceu claustra Erebi, quicun{que} loquuntur, Ore aliud, tacito{que} aliud sub pectore claudunt: I hate as gates of hell, who euer thou art That one thing say'st, another think'st in hart. But (good Sir) what contrarietie is there in my words?No contrarie∣tie betwixt our present daun∣gers and our former bles∣sings. May not a land be truly blessed from God, in hauing a gracious Prince, by whom Idolatrie is remoued, and true Religion planted: and yet (for want of due acknowledgement of the Lords good∣nes, and true fruits of thankfulnes) be by forraine e∣nemies maligned, or by home-traitors hazarded?Eccle. 49. The remembrance of Iosiah (saith Iesus Syrach) is like the composition of perfume, that is made by the Art
of the Apothecary, it is sweet as hony in all mouthes, and as Musicke at a banquet of wine. He behaued himselfe vprightly in the reformation of the people, and tooke away all abomination of iniquitie, he di∣rected his heart vnto the Lord, and in the time of the vngodly, he established Religion. Highly was Ieru∣salem blessed by the raigne of good Iosiah, rooting out Idolatrie, and restoring to the people the booke of the Law, (as is this land likewise by the like bles∣sed Raigne of our gracious Iosiah,) and yet euen in his time, for the Idolatrie committed vnder his Father, and Grand-father, and for their affections declining to Idolatrie, and not truly esteeming the blessings in Iosiah their king powred vpon them, the Lord threat∣neth to bring euill vpon that place, and the Inhabi∣tants thereof. Which he did by suffering Iosiah to be slaine by the souldiours of the king of Egypt, and within few yeares after his death, selling his owne people into the hands of the idolatrous Babilonians. For as darknesse naturally followeth light, and night the day, so do great punishments accompanie rare blessings, when they are not duely esteemed as they ought. Blessed was Ierusalem by the testimonie of the Lords owne mouth when he said: My beloued had a Vineyard in a very fruitfull hill, and he hedged it, & gathe∣red out the stones of it, and he planted it with the best plants, and built a Tower in the middest thereof, and made a wine∣presse therein: But when he looked for grapes, and it brought forth wild-grapes, the Lord threatned from the height of this blessed estate, to cast them into the gulfe of miserie, to take away the hedge from his
Vineyard, that it might be eaten vp, and breake downe the wall thereof that it might be troden downe, &c. The Lord hath not therefore been lesse beneficiall to vs in placing so gracious an head vpon the bodie of this Realme, because you, and some such as your selfe are, doe yet remaine to God in∣grate, and to your Prince, and Countrey vnnaturall. Onely I beseech God, that whereas by his appoint∣ment the Oliue is yet ouer vs with her fatnes, and the Figge with her sweetnes, and the Vine with her fruit∣fulries, that (amongst many other sinnes of our land) for our vngratefull contempt of so great a blessing, a Bramble be not set ouer vs, which is good for no∣thing, but to burne and consume vs: and so much concerning my supposed contradiction. Now (Sir N. D.) it is your pleasure to heare my manner of speech in these words, If I should take vp∣on me to enter into the enumeration of all the benefits and blessings that from the Almightie haue beene powred vpon this little Iland of England, &c. And hauing thus vnperfectly repeated them, you passe the ouer with this sleight exception, saying: That in mentio∣ning our little Iland, I must take Scotland with me, else I erre in Cosmographie, as though England were not de∣uided in gouernment from Scotland, though both rest vpon one continent, and as though your selfe did not tearme this Realme an Iland,Encounter. 3. pag. 39. euen where you do distinguish it from Scotland. Therefore Nodum in scirpo quaeris, and to this shift you are put very often for want of matter. But if seemeth that Scotland was named here by you, chiefly to make way for your purpose to giue a glaunce at battels, murders, destru∣ction
of Countries, Prouinces, Townes, Cities, Hou∣ses, and particular men that haue beene in Scotland within these fortie yeares; as though Scotland had neuer tasted these or any of these before: and then you come in with Ireland, wherein you seeme to be∣waile the death of the noble Desmons; whose trea∣sons yet liue by succession in one of the same name, who (it is said) wrote  treason full letter, stuffed with most intolerable opprobries and slaunders against her Maiestie and the state to the King of Spaine: And this I hope is no great proofe of your sondnes to Queen or State. France and Flaunders follow to fill vp the number. But had you any respect of truth or care of modestie, you would neuer haue made the true Religion wee professe the cause of murders, tumults, and garboyles, which teacheth dutifull obedience, and condemneth all mutinies, seditions, and re∣bellions. Our Christan Religion no cause of tu∣mults.You should do well to haue told vs, who murdered the King; the Lord Iames, the Lord Russell in Scotland? In France who murdered the Prince of Conde, after he was taken prisoner, which (I thinke) the law of Armes will not well beare? Likewise who they were that laid bloudy hands vpon the Admiral Chattilion, being first shot in with a Pistoll with three bullets in the streetes, and afterwards slaine in his chamber: And so of Marlret slaine in his garden, and of the famous learned man Ramus, who hauing paid monie to ransome his life, was beyond all humanite most cruelly quelled. And generally who were the Au∣thors, not onely of the bloudie massacre in Paris, but also of the like vprores in other Cities, and quarters
of the Realme, principally at Lyons, Orleans, Roan, Tolouse; in which Cities (within the space of one moneth) there are numbred at the least thirtie thou∣sand godly Protestants to be slaine: your holy father at Rome (to shew with what spirit he is led, and with what meanes he sticketh to maintaine his Religion, which otherwise would fall to the ground) so soone as he heard of this bloudie tragedie, maketh great ioy with his Cardinals, with their procession, with their gunshot and singing Te Deum: Yea in honour of that Act proclayming a Iubile with great indulgence and solemnitie. For Flaunders tell vs who murdered the noble Prince of Orange against whom it was proclai∣med, that who soeuer could bring him aliue or dead, or slaie him should haue fiue and twentie thousand crownes. You shall finde that such a Catholike-faith as yours is, hath still sought to maintaine it selfe by such Catholike means as these are, treasons, tumults, seditions, secret murders, and such like. As for our true Christian Religion, it is so cause of tumults, gar∣boyles, and murders, as Christes birth was of the murther of the poore infants, in which neither Christ nor the infants ought offended, the madnes was in Herod and all Ierusalem, to be for this cause in an vp∣rore. In a word it is Herods Religion which seeketh to murther Christ, and the Christes, and annoyn∣ted of the Lord. I proceed to your aduertisement,A short view of blessings spirituall, and temporall from God by her Maiestie powred on this land. for a better di∣rection to mens iudgements, that all blessings of a Common-wealth may be reduced to two heades, the one spirituall belonging to the soule and consci∣ence, the other temporall concerning the bodie and
weale publike: and that the Lord hath richly bles∣sed this land since her Maiesties Raigne, I doubt not to proue to all that haue iudgement and indifferency following your owne methode. Vnitie in veritie.And first there hath beene in England since this happie alteration & change from popish superstition to Christian veritie, One God worshipped in spirit and truth, one faith, one belief, one forme of seruice in praier and praises to God, one number of Sacraments (which are onely two by the word of God) one head of the Church which is Christ the Lord, as the holy Ghost testifieth by the Apostle. Him hath God appoin∣ted to be the head of the Church. And his substitute an∣nointed, & appointed ouer vs is our Soueraigne and Queene, who is to commaund and be obeyed in Christ and for Christ in all causes aswell ecclesiasti∣call as ciuill, and not your proud vsurping Priest at Rome; and if you can like to looke vpon the harmo∣nie of confessions you shall find all the Churches of Christendome, where the Gospel and truth of Christ Iesus is embraced, to be of the same iudgement; and in this blessed vnitie grounded vpon veritie, the Lord for euer keepe vs. A scornefull reproach.And how scornefully soeuer you tearme this to be our Parliament Religion, be it knowne to you, that the reuerent assemblie of States, and Commons in Parliament, haue cause to praise God for their ioy∣ning to present such lawes, and for her Maiesties con∣senting to establish such lawes, as tende to so holy a purpose, as to hem in the ignorant, that they may fre∣quent the holy assemblies to learne to professe and o∣bey the truth, and to restraine the headstrong hu∣mors
of Papistes and Atheists, who are forward to runne astray from God and all godlines. As for your tricke of cunning often grated vpon,The termes of Puritanes and Protestants. with a desire to disioyne our affections, by calling some Puritanes & other Protestants, this malicious pur∣pose of yours, I hope the Lord of might & mercy will turne to the good of his Church, and I trust it will please him by his grace to direct the hearts of our Church-men, to see how needfull it is for them to ioyne heart and hand together to defend the do∣ctrine of faith (which they all hold) against the ca∣lumniations and slaunders, wherewith you, and men of your sort, seeke to load the truth of our pro∣fession: and to crosse the cunning and most dange∣rous plots, laid also to mingle (at the least) our bles∣sed, and most holy profession, with a toleration of cursed Poperie, if not to alter all to Poperie, to the rooting out of Gods true Religion wholly from a∣mongst vs. And howsoeuer some dissent hath appea∣red, about the toleration or abrogation of some things: yet (I doubt not) it doth, & shall wel appeare, that the dissention is not such (as this turbulēt spirited fellow would faine haue it) and that all sides will ma∣nifest to the whole world, that howsoeuer they may in these outward things dissentire, yet it shal be concordi discordia: and so much for your cunningly deuised di∣stinction of Puritane and Parliament Religion, not without a setled and grounded malice to both. But (Sir) your vaunt of a generall vnitie,Vnitie vntruly vaunted of by the Papists. before alteration of Religion amongst vs, if I had leasure to sift it, would proue more boldly then truly vttered: for how worshipped you one God, when you ser∣ued
so many Idols? Or how glorified you the Crea∣tor, when you gaue his glorie vnto creatures? not onely to his true Saints (as to the blessed virgin whom you call the Queene of Heauen, as God is King of Heauen,De Idol. Ecc. Ro. lib. 1. ca. 1. and one of your greatest pillars af∣firmeth (as Doctor Raynolds alleadgeth him) that the King of kings hath giuen halfe his kingdome to this Queene, and of the chiefest treasures of this king∣dome, namely Iustice, and Mercy, hath reserued Iu∣stice to himselfe, but his mercie he hath granted to her,) but euen vnto vile, base, and dumbe creatures, as when they pray for their crosse of mettall, that as by Christ his crosse the world was deliuered from the guilt of sinne, so by the merit of this crosse (of mettall) they that offer it, may be freed from all the sinnes they haue committed: and to the crosse they pray, crauing that of a dumbe creature, which the Creator onely can giue that is God, blessed for euer. O Crux aue, spes vnica, Hoc passionis tempore. Auge pijs iustitiam, Reis{que} dona veniam. All hayle (O Crosse) our onely hope, In this time of the passion. In faithfull people grace increase, And grant of sinne remission. Lact. li. 1. ca. 19.If Lactantius should iudge of your Religion he would scarce allow you to worship God at all, who denieth that creatures may be worshipped with him: yeelding this reason, Si honos idem alijs tribuitur, ipse omninò non colitur, cuius Reltgio est, illum esse vnum, ac
solum Deam credere: If the same honour be giuen to others, he is not worshipped at all; whose Religion is to beleeue that he is one, and the onely God. The best that probablie may be made of your worship∣ping is, that it is like the Religion, that the Gentiles learned, which were brought from Assiria to inha∣bite the Cities of Samaria;2. King. 17. who worshipped the Lord and Idols together. Likewise of your owne faith and beliefe might be shewed how vaine a presumption it is, when as you are so miserablie rent in sunder into so innumerable diuersities and sects of Friers, and Munkes, putting holines in diuers institutions of life, some being white, some blacke, some wearing linnen, some wol∣len, some going shod, some bare-foote, with infinite diuersities more which are by learned men handled: It shall be sufficient for me, onely to remember you of the stirre betwixt the Franciscans and Dominicke Friers, about the conception of the blessed Virgin; the Franciscans or gray Friers affirming that she was neuer Subiect one moment in her conception to originall sinne; the Dominicke or blacke Friers teaching that she was conceiued in sinne, as are all the children of Adam, which controuersie occupied all schooles and vniuersities almost throughout the whole Christian world, which was at the length doughtelie decided by Pope Sixtus the fourth, quite contrarie to that Word which shall iudge all at the last day. Of your one head your vaunt is the like, which being the Pope, how can you haue one head, vnles you reiect Christ? If you meane one visible and mi∣nisteriall
head;Matth. 28. how can that be when as Christ hath promised to be with vs to the end of the world? And in the Reuelation Iohn saw him walking in the mid∣dest of the seuen golden Candlesticks:Reuel. 1. if he be thus alwaies present with his Church, by his spirite to guide the whole, and euery member thereof; how shall any presume to take vpon him to be a ministe∣riall head of the Church, because Christ is not vi∣siblie present? Againe how haue you had one vi∣sible head, when there hath been so many Anti∣popes? So often? Such tumults and schismes about the Papacie? Which though your men would de∣riue vpon the Emperours intermedling with the e∣lection (though very falsely) yet (as a learned man proueth) of thirtie schismes in the Church of Rome, (so many as no Church can boast of besides) the worst, and the longest hath been since that time, that the election was deuolued onely to the Cardinals, euen the 29. which lasted for the space of 50: yeares, first with two Popes at one time, and then with three, &c. So that to cease any further to examine your assertions (who intend onely a defence of mine owne by you carped at, and traduced) your great brag of vnitie in your Religion, the like whereof you deeme is not amongst vs to be found, is in deede no∣thing but meere vanitie. But to returne from whence I digressed. Libertie to reade Scrip∣tures.Secondly, by the establishment of true Christian Religion amongst vs, this great blessing we haue ob∣tained, that the Scripture and word of God, which is the incorruptible seede whereby we are begotten to God, the sincere milke that as children nourisheth
vs with the knowledge of the Rudiments, and prin∣ciples of Religion, the foode of the soule, which doth farther strengthen vs with increase of deeper knowledge, is no longer (as of late times) like a sea∣led booke, which being deliuered to one that can reade, and he willed to reade it, he answereth he can∣not because it is sealed: but we haue it in our owne mother language permitted vnto vs, that euery one may priuately exercise himselfe in the reading there∣of, and for the confirmation of his faith, in the points that he is taught publikely by the mouth of the Prea∣cher, may with the men of Berrhea daily search the Scriptures to see whether those things be so or not; which triall the doctrine of Rome will hardly submit it selfe to. And this dutie of searching the Scriptures at home priuatly, Chrisostome requireth at the hands of his Auditors:Hom. 3. de La. Idque semper hortor, &c. and this I alwaies exhort, and will not cease to exhort that you be not onely attentiue here to those things which are taught, but that when you are at home you daily in∣tend the reading of the holy Scriptures; and so I take it that Saint Iohn setteth down three steps, or degrees, whereby we are to climbe vp to blessednes: first pri∣uat reading; secondly publike hearing; thirdly fruit∣full practising of those things which by reading and hearing we learne.Reuel. 1. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that heare the words of this prophesie, and keepeth those things that are written therein. Thirdly, this is also a great blessing,Publike prayer with vnderstan∣ding. that we haue our publike prayers in the Church in our owne tongue, that the people may vnderstand what the Minister prayeth, and keeping silence while he is
speaking, may still haue their minds and vnderstan∣dings accompanie the voice of the Minister, and in the end may ioyntly answere Amen, Euen as not a Clerke alone for the people (as New Rome hath taught) but the whole people for themselues were accustomed in Saint Ieromes time, as he witnesseth,Hier. in prolo. 2. in comment. in Gal. Tota Ecclesia instar tonitrui reboat Amen: The whole Church like a mightie thunder doth sound out A∣men. This also Augustine acknowledged to be a great blessing,Aug. in Psa. 99. Beatus populus qui intelligit Iubilationem, &c. Blessed is the people that vnderstandeth the ioyfull song; let vs runne to this blessednes, let vs vnderstand the song, let vs not sing it without vnderstanding: Of this the Apostle most diuinely treateth in the 1. Cor. 14. which though the Rhemists doe miserablie striue to shake off (as Master Whitakers learnedly sheweth) yet Cardinall Caietan, ouercome with the euidence of truth, plainely confesseth; as in the end of that Controuersie Doctor Whitakers alleageth him, Ex∣hac Pauli doctrina, &c. By this doctrine of the Apo∣stle we haue to vnderstand, that it is better for the e∣dification of the Church that the publike praiers which are made in the hearing of the people, should be vttered in a tongue common both to the Clerkes and people, then to be vttered in Latine. Exercise in true holines.Hence it followeth, that we learne to exercise our selues in workes of true pietie, such as by the word of God we are assured are acceptable with him, not putting holines in workes of mens deuising, as super∣stitious obseruation of daies, with like difference of meates, in gadding on pilgrimage and such like, of which may be said, that which the Lord spake in E∣say:
Who hath required these things at your hands?Esay. 1. Whence it hath come to passe, that many liuely members of Christ Iesus, being colde, naked, and hungrie haue been neglected, while it was thought an holier worke to shrine in gold and siluer the bones of dead men, as Erasmus in his Colloquie or dialogue of peregrination for Religion sake doth note;Erasmus. That the golden shrine of Thomas Becket, was beset with Diamonds, Carbuncles, with pearles and rare preci∣ous stones, Vilissima pars erat aurum, the basest part was gold. But we (blessed be God) haue learned to make the will of God reuealed in his word, the Rule and Squire of our obedience, studying to walke in his waies, and to keepe his commaundements both of the first and second table, according to that of our Sauiour,Two extremi∣ties in our good works to be auoided. If you know these things happie are ye if you doe them: wherein we are taught to striue against two ex∣tremities. First proud presumption before God, that we put no opinion of merit in our workes, but re∣ferre1 them partly to the glorifying of our good God, according to that, Let your light so shine before men, &c. partly to the assuring our selues of our election by the fruits thereof, as Peter exhorteth, Make your e∣lection sure by good works, acknowledging that of Ber∣nard, Bona opera sunt via regni, non causa regnandi: Good workes are the way wherein we must walke to the kingdom of Heauen, but not the cause where∣fore we shall obtaine the kingdome. Secondly, be∣fore2 men we must auoide hypocriticall ostentation, that we vaunt not of our vertues as the Pharisee: O God I thanke thee I am not as other men, extortioners, vn∣iust, or euen as this Publican, &c.Luk. 18. But according to the
rule of the Apostle in meekenes of minde euery man to esteeme other better then himselfe,Phil. 2. we must turne our eyes inward, looking vpon and censuring our owne imperfections, and indeuoring to prac∣tise that good lesson Nosceteipsum. For very true it is, that Chrisostome hath speaking of Christian humility: Esto, multum adifices, habeas elecmosynas, preces, ieiu∣nia, &c. Be it you build much, you vse almes, fasting, and prayer, and all other vertues: without this foun∣dation of humilitie they are all in vaine; yea adde continence, virginitie, contempt of riches, Omnia prophana sunt, impura, abominabilia absque humilitate: They are all prophane, impure and abominable without humilitie. Freedome from persecu∣tion.Father, the entrance of our peaceable Salome to the Crowne, what Halcyon daies hath it brought to the poore afflicted Church of Christ  The little barke of Christ Iesus before tossed with the waues and stormes of furious and bloodie persecution, hath now found some repose and rest vnder her gra∣cious and benigne protection: so mercifully hath Christ rebuked the stormes and windes, when the shippe was in danger of drowning, and there is fol∣lowed a great calme. Not onely they that were o∣penly knowne to abhor the Romish Idolatrie, refu∣sing to bowe the knee to their blocke-almightie (as some then called them) and to honor a peece of a Cake as their Creator, were by heapes brought to the fire: but so violent was the furie of that Wool∣uish Sinagogue, against the poore Lambes of Christs fold, that through inforcement and by vertue of their oath, were compelled to accuse, (against the law of
nature) the wife the husband, one brother another, &c. as in a table of persecution vnder Bishop Long∣land of Lincolne doth appeare, the bloody rage of this persecution sparing neither man, woman, nor child, wife, nor maide, lame, blinde, nor creeple. But of this what should I say more, of which nothing can be said sufficiently? but as a paineful compiler of the ecclesiasticall Historie thinketh, all places considered where the Romish Phalaris hath intermedled, France Flanders, Italy, Spayne, and whersoeuer the gripes of this greedie griffin (as Chaucer compareth him) could rach: it would be hard to say, whether the Romane heathen Emperors in the prime-daies of the Church, or the Romish Bishops in the latter, had caused more Christian bloud to be spilt. And whereas this Encounterer wringeth out a malediction from hence, pretending by this chaunge of Religi∣on, the torturing, hanging, and racking of so many learned Priests, &c. he shall neuer be able to proue (so farre as euer I could learne) that any one, either Priest or Lay-man, learned or vnlearned, hath in this land these fortie yeares, beene put to death onely for being a Recusant, and of a contrarie Religion; as the libertie and home-dwelling of so many Recu∣fants, without dread of any such daunger, may proue sufficiently. The Wolfe persecuteth the Lamb, not the Lambe the Wolfe. As for those fewe which haue suffered in these fortie yeares, not comparable to the number of those which were martyred in Queene Maries fiue yeares, I am so farre off from reioycing at their death, that with all my heart I wish, they had neuer sucked the poyson of treason
from your Iesuites breastes, that so they might haue preuented the due and iust shedding of their owne bloods. To these may be added other corporall blessings in a short view,Deliuerāce from intolle∣rable exacti∣ons. among which this is not the least, that the establishment of true Religion hath quite remo∣ued from our neckes the yoke of popish bondage How miserablie this poore land was oppressed and impouerished by the Popes dispensations, exactions, contributions, besides his continuall subsidie of Pe∣ter-pence (nothing being able to satisfie his greedie appetite, and insatiable auarice) our stories in sundry places make lamentable mention. Now he must haue the tenth of all the moueables in England, Wales and Ireland, then foure markes of euerie able Church; and where one was not able to reach, there the other poore Churches must ioyne to make vp the money: shortly by a new Mandat all beneficed men must pay the first part of their reuenues, then prouision of En∣glish benefices for boyes of Rome 300. at a clappe, and what not? Poore England was continually pil∣led and polled, and almost suckt drie, whereof (to vse one example for many) the Nobles ioyntly with the Commons, complain in the Raigne of Henrie the third; in which their complaint hauing made menti∣on of the continuall subsidie of Peter-pence,To Pope In∣nocent .4. in the Counsell at Lyons. &c. 1245. and o∣ther contributions they adde these words. And now see, wee beseech you, (which is lamentable to behold) what iniuries we sustaine by you and your predecessors, who not considering those our subsidies, and contributions before re∣membred, doe suffer also your Italians and forrayners (which be out of number) to be possessed of our Churches
and benefices in England, &c. And immediatly, which forrayners neither defending the said religious persons, nei∣ther hauing the language, whereby they might instruct the flocke, take no regard of their soules, but vtterly leaue them of wilde beastes to be deuoured: Wherefore it may truly be said of them, that they are no good shepheards, for that neither they doe know their sheepe, nor the sheepe doe know the voice of their shepheards; neither doe they keepe any hospitalitie, but onely take vp the rents of those benefices, carrying them out of the Realme, wherewith our brethren, our nephewes, and our kinsfolkes might be sustained, who could and would dwell vpon them, and employ such exerci∣ses of mercy and hospitality as their dutie required, whereof a number for meere necessitie now are lay-men, and faine to flie out of the Realme. And now to the intent more ful∣ly to certifie you of the truth, you shall vnderstand, that the said Italians and strangers receiuing of yeerely rents out of England not so little as threescore thousand markes by yeare, (besides other auailes and exises deducted) do reape in the said our kingdome of England more emoluments of meere Rents then doth the King himselfe, being both Tu∣tour of the Church and Gouernour of the land, &c. they further proceeded in their complaint which for bre∣uity sake I omit. The conclusion is, miserably was this land oppressed vnder the Romish Pharaoh, not onely the skinne flayed from the flesh, but the flesh in a manner rent from the bones, from which by this hap∣py chaunge of Religion wee are deliuered, the Lords name be praised therefore. The name of peace is sweete,Long peac. and the thing it selfe both pleasant and profitable, with which blessing the Lord hath also greatly blessed this land these fortie
yeeres, that in this respect her Maiesties raigne hath beene as the raigne of Asa, of whom it is written, that he had no warre in those daies, for the Lord his God had sent him peace round about. For, as for the late tumults and stirres of Ireland, it is euident to whom they are to be ascribed by the sending thither of Saun∣ders and of Italian bandes by the Pope, who is the common Trumpeter of Sedition in all Christian Common-weales, which seeke to shake off the yoke of his tyrannie: There kindled (vpon the like occa∣sion) the flame of Rebellion in the North, but (bes∣sed be God) it vanished quickly like a smoke, Spayne likewise attempted an inuasion, but with such suc∣cesse, as neither hath he cause to boast of his win∣nings, nor wee to complaine of our losses; for as the starres fought in their course for Israel against Sisera, so did the windes for England against Spayne: other warres to speake of, we haue had none, but such as we haue voluntarily vnder-taken, for the reliefe and sup∣port of those that were oppressed. And this it selfe is no small blessing, that England in the raigne of a Woman,Power in forraine coun∣tries. hath beene the common refuge to all Christian nations, eyther rent asunder with ciuill warres, or oppressed with forraine forces: so that a Queene hath sit as Arbitrer of peace and warre amongst Christian Kings, France is witnesse hereof. What should I speake of Suethland &c.? what of Flaunders, being receiued into our tuition, and so∣cietie? yea the Turke himselfe (who happily before the renowmed raigne of her Maiestie, had neuer heard the name of this little Island) moued with the Maiestie of her name, hath laid armes aside, and
through her intercession, hath granted peace to the Polonians being almost brought to extremitie. To these I might adde the blessing of riches,Wealth of the land, plen∣tie, and aboundance, such as hath not lightly beene knowne in this land before, which God hath aboun∣dantly sent vnto vs. Whereby we haue beene ena∣bled to minister to the necessities of so many oppres∣sed, and to sustaine such voluntarie warres, as honou∣rable respects haue moued her Maiesty to vndertake, for the needfull succour of others, which who so seeth not is blind, and who so acknowledgeth not is verie ingrate. I may also adde the multitude of people increased mightily since her Maiesties first enterance to the Crowne,Multitude of subiects. a great blessing of God powred vpon this land, which, God at the least hath seuen-fold increa∣sed to the number, that at her enterance she found. And if the Encounterer in his affected shew of poli∣ticke wisedome, shall scorne this blessing, and say (as he doth) that I descend to very poore ones: yet I will rather subscribe to the wisedome of Gods spirit no∣ting it a great blessing vpon Ierusalem, and the contra∣rie a great curse: How doth the Citie remaine solitarie that was full of people?Lamenta. 1. her blessing was fulnesse of people, her plague solitarines; as also to the wisedome of wise Salomon who thus plainly auoucheth, In the multitude of people is the honour of a King, and for the want of people commeth the destruction of a Prince.Prou. 14. I cease (because I desire breuitie) to stand vpon the enume∣ration of any more, only I wish we may dulie esteeme the Lords mercies vouchsafed to vs, and bring forth the fruites of true thankfulnesse as the princely Pro∣phet
teacheth vs. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his louing kindnes and declare his wonderfull workes amongst the children of men.Psal. 107. As for your buil∣ding of Castles in the ayre, by supposall of blessings that might probably haue ensued, if Religion had not beene altered, because I meane not to take the paines to follow you in your extrauagant discourses, and because they are indeed nothing but the imagi∣nations of an idle braine, I leaue them to Master Moores fictio Vtopic. Resistance to the second Encounter, about some absurd Principles of the Papists. HAuing proposed to my selfe a resolute determi∣nation, not to follow this fellow (in mine an∣swere) in his vaine of Rayling against me: it shal suf∣fice, that such as be wise, honourable, and honest shall iudge betweene vs, whose satisfaction I desire and doubt not of, and to such I appeale to iudge of the scantling he hath taken (as he termeth it) of my fol∣lie and flatterie, wherein he glorieth so much, and I rest assured he shall find that it falleth out too sant in∣proofe against me in their iudgements, so as his ray∣ling tearmes of folly and flatterie must returne to his owne custodie againe.Lying falsely imputed to me. But now must follow a fuller view of my cogging and lying which are bitter termes I confesse, yet shall they nothing trouble me, because I know mine owne freedome, and I will take occasion hereby to indeuour to make such vse thereof, as is taught me by an ancient Father. Per∣mittitur detracti, vs caueatur elatio: God suffereth
slaunders to assault vs, that pride may not surprize vs. And therefore take your pleasure (Sir N.D.) follow your rayling humour and spare not, I like better to beare your hard tearmes, then that you should loose your occupation. Onely let me tell you, that if I were disposed to play at Tennise with you, and bande backe the balles that you deliuer, I could so returne this charge of lying vpon your trades-men, that all the skill you haue could not saue them from a fault: Walsingham an ancient Chronicler writeth of Friers in Richard the seconds time, that they were of long time so infamous for lying,Friers and Pa∣pists braue liers. that it was counted a good argument holding both in matter and forme, This is a Frier, ergo a lier. And it should seeme the Ro∣manistes keepe still their olde wont, by that famous lye that of late they haue sent vs ouer, not onely in print, but in picture too, namely that some for the maintenance of their Catholike Religion, haue been by vs here put into Beares skinnes, and so bayted to death with Mastiues. A lye printed in the english Colledge at Rome 1584. with Gregories 13. priuiledge: so great a lye as no place was fit to vtter but onely Rome; but I let them passe, and come to your charge against me. And here first you except against my speech of the clouds, and darknes, that ouershadowed this land in Queene Maries time, and in former times of Poperie, cyting these my words. It is not vnknowne to many yet liuing, neyther can it be hid from the yonger sort that liue with them, what a darke misty cloud of Igno∣rance (which brought in popish Idolatry and all manner of superstition) did ouershadow the whole land, &c. And a∣gaine
after, In these dark and cloudy daies least the sunshine of knowledge should disperse the mists of ignorance, and giue light to the dimme of sight, &c.Poperie iustly charged with darknes. The which I then tru∣ly affirmed, and doe againe auerre it; neither fee I a∣ny cause for ought that you alleadge to retract it, sith it is euident that the people, neither hauing liberty to read the Scripture (which is as a light shining in a darke place) priuately at home, neither in Chur∣ches read in a tongue that they vnderstood: must needs be destitute of the light of Christian know∣ledge. For if Babell could not be built,Scripture nei∣ther at home nor at Church permitted to the people in a knowne tongue. because each one vnderstood not anothers tongue: how can it be deemed, that the Church of Christ can be built vp in spirituall knowledge, by an outlandish tongue, which was no better vnderstood of the people, then if they heard a tale in Irish or Spanish tolde them? As for preaching, (a great meanes in deede to breede knowledge, though not the onely meanes) I wil omit the matter of Sermons in those daies,Preaching, what it was in Poperie. which was (for the most part not Gods word, but mens tra∣ditions,) the necessitie of auricular confession, the benefit of pardons, and indulgences, of pilgrimages, of applications, of masses, of giuing to religious hou∣ses, of dirges, trentals, &c.2. King 6. so that as Elisha led the Sy∣rians stricken with blindnes into Samaria amiddest their enemies; so the people being debarred the light which maketh all things manifest, (I meane the rea∣ding of the Scriptures, in which they might see, whe∣ther those things taught them were so, or not) were carried by their teachers euen to the enemies of their saluation, to trust in buying of pardons, gadding on pilgrimage, hiring masses to be said for them after
their death, falling downe and praying to dumbe I∣dols, to forged relickes, with a number of lying mi∣racles, beleeued through them; in steed of Christ Immortall, worshipping a peece of bread, yea in steede of Christs blood, worshipping the blood of a Ducke, for so the blood of Hales was plainely pro∣ued to be, and openly shewed at Paules Crosse. So that no man neede doubt of the truth of the Pro∣uerbe that then was vsed in those times:Preaching how rare. Once Christi∣an men had blind Churches, and light hearts; and now they haue blinde hearts, and light Churches. But this o∣mitted, the very exercise of preaching, (such as it was) alas how sildome was it? now and then a Fri∣er trotting sometimes to one Church, sometimes to another, and scattering here and there a strawberrie Sermon. It was no common thing for Bishops, in times of Poperie, to be Preachers, though they tooke vpon them to be Pastores Pastorum. Boner Bishop of London,Boner. who burned so many of Gods Saints, bles∣sed Martyrs, faithfull, and painfull Preachers (so long as they might) when the valiant Souldier of Iesus Christ, Thomas Hawkes was before him, and allea∣ging against the Popish manner of baptising, both the addition of many ceremonies deuised by man, as their oyle, creame, salt, spittle, candle, coniuring of water, &c. as also that they wanted the chiefe thing, meaning preaching, alleaging the text: Goe teach all Nations baptising them, &c. by and by replieth vpon Master Hawkes,Matth. . and taketh this exception against that allegation. Thou speakest that because I am no Prea∣cher. And as if to taxe a Bishop for being no Prea∣cher had been so hainous a matter, (though the man
of God answered, that he spake the text, and meant not of him) yet all his Doctors and seruants present spake with a loude voice, making a great noise, he speaketh it of you my Lord. And yet the latter part of King Henries raigne, and the short, but happie raigne of King Edward, helped you to farre moe Preachers by their faint yeelding; then in former times of Poperie haue been accustomed to be, as is not onely apparant in this kingdome, but in others, if I had leasure to inlarge. The onely example of Doctor Bassinet, a man of great learning and authoritie in France, shall suffice me at this time, who in his first answere to the orati∣on of the Bishop of Aix; (perswading to set vpon the Merindoians,Act. and Mo∣numents vol. 2 pag. 862. and as heretikes to destroy them) con∣fesseth his owne ignorance of true Religion, till of late he fell to reade the Scriptures (and yet he was a Iudge of heresie) and with all his rash condemning of those whom they call Lutherans to death,D. Bassinets Oration. al∣though he was content so farre to yeelde to punish them with fines, and banishment, which should speake too intemperately against the constitutions of the Church, and of the Pope: his words are thus Englished. The cause why in conscience I am thus disquie∣ted is this, that now of late, since I haue giuen my selfe more diligently to the reading and contemplation of the holy Scriptures, I perceiue that the most part of those Articles which they that are called Lutherans doe maintaine, are so conformable and agreeing to the Scriptures, that for my part, I can no longer gainsay them, except I should euen wilfully and maliciously resist and striue against the holy or∣dinances of God: albeit hitherto, to maintaine the honour
of our holy Mother the Church, and of our holy Father the Pope, and of our Order, I haue consented to the opinions and doings of the other Doctors, as well through ignorance, as also because I would not seeme to attempt any thing a∣gainst the will and pleasur of the Prelates, and Vicars gene∣rall. Against which his confession; when the Bishop of Aix replied thus, Is there any difference thinkest thou, betwixt heresies and blasphemies spoken and maintained a∣gainst the holy Scriptures, and opinions holden against our holy Mother the Church, and contrarie to our holy Father the Pope, a most vndoubted and true God in earth? Art thou a Master in Israel and knowest not these things?O blindnes. O blasphemie. Doctor Bassinet more fully layeth open the generall and common blindnes and darknes of those times in these words. Are not they those which haue forsaken Iesus Christ the fountaine of liuing water, and haue dig∣ged vnto themselues pits, or Cesterns which will holde no water? Truly euen those they are, which vaunt themselues to be the salte of the earth, and yet haue no sauour at all, which call themselues Pastors, and yet are nothing lesse then true Pastors: for they minister not vnto the sheepe the true pasture and feeding, neither deuide and distribute the true bread of the word of life, and (if I may bee bolde to speake it) would it not be at this present as great a wonder to heare a Bishop preach, as to see an Asse flye? Are not they cursed of God, which glorie and vaunt themselues to haue the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen, and neither enter in themselues, nor suffer them that would enter to come in, &c. By which and infinite other euidences may appeare, that there is in a manner as great diffe∣rence betwixt kingdomes professing the Gospell of Christ (as this land now doth through Gods bles∣sing)
and those that are subiect to Poperie, as was sometimes betweene Aegypt and Goshen. This Land li∣ued not in for∣mer times in such darkenes, as lately vnder Poperie.As for your allegation against those my speeches, to passe by your bolde assertion, that England had continued aboue a thousand yeares vnder that darkenes of Poperie, (the vanitie whereof is by sundry learned men discouered) it is euident by Beda his plaine te∣stimonie in these words, Haec in praesenti iuxta nume∣rum librorum quibus lex diuina scripta est, &c. This I, land at this present, according to the number of the bookes in which the lawe of God is written, doth search out and confesse one and the selfe same know∣ledge of the highest truth, and of the true height in liue tongues, namely of the Angels, of the Brittaines, of the Scots, of the Picts, and of the Latines, which in meditation of the Scripture is made common to all the rest. Wherein he meaneth that the Latin tongue was common to all the learned of those foure peo∣ples, as the vulgars were to the vnlearned. So that in former times this Iland had the Scriptures in their owne tongue, to be a lanterne to their feete, and a light to their steps, and delighted not in ignorance of the Scriptures, and in darkenes (as of late) as also the most and chiefest points of your blinde errors haue been hatched long since the time you pre∣scribe, as in the particulars of the patching together of the Masse by degrees, and successiuely, of the ab∣surd doctrine of Transubstantiation, with other like, is by men of great learning and iudgment manifest∣ly proued. Yet by the way this I note, that by your secret confession you yeeld almost 600. yeares to the truth we professe, before your Religion was hatch∣ed,
seeing both your selfe and others commonly make claime for a 1000. yeares. But to passe by this,A fond Argu∣ment. doth not this Encounterer strongly (thinke you) refute mine assertion of the darkenes in times of Poperie? when he saith (spea∣king of the state of this kingdome in those times,) And it was accounted then as wise, learned, valiant, noble, and flourishing a kingdome, as France, Italy Spayne, &c. An argument by which the Religion of the heathens may aswell be freed from darknes and ignorance. For was not Rome when it had those lightes of lear∣ning and eloquence, Cicero, Crassus, Hortensius, and others; as also those famous and wise both Counsel∣lors, and Captaines Marius, Scilla, Pompey, Caesar, Ca∣to, Scipio, and such like, was not (I say) Rome then ac∣counted as wise, learned, valiant, noble, and flou∣rishing a kingdom, as France, Italy, Spaine, or any other Christian kingdomes be at this day? and yet it is true, that their knowledge was ignorance, and their light darkenes, vnlesse the Apostle be deceiued, who saith of them all generally,Rom. 1. Their foolish heart was full of darkenes, and when they professed themselues to be wise, they became fooles. Arnobius sometimes an heathen,Arnobius. afterwards a Christian saith of his former state. Venerabar (O cae∣citas) nuper simulachra modò ex fornacibus prompta, in incudibus Deos, & malleis fabricatos, &c. I worshipped of late (O blindnes) Images newly taken out of the fornace, Gods forged on the Anuiles, and framed with hammers: so truly may it be said of the Papists, they worshippe (O blindnes) Images newly taken out of the fornace, crucifixes forged on the Anuiles,
and framed with hammers, and to blocks, and stocks without sense, (as if there were some power pre∣sent in them) they kneele, they pray, they craue grace of them. Another Ar∣gument of the Papists peere∣lesse learning examined.Your vaunt of the peerles, and vnmatchable lear∣ning on your side, doth neither ouerthrow mine as∣sertion, (if it were true) and yet all men know it to be vaine and childish boasting. Our ministers (as you say) dare not open their mouthes, (if they should appeare with you) in schooles, or matters of learning, yea they scarce vnderstand the verie ordinarie termes of the learned sciences which you professe: not one∣ly our students, and young men, but our Doctors of Diuinitie, yea our publike readers (as some of you boast and crake) (as you can stoutly do no men bet∣ter) doe scarce vnderstand your course of Diuinitie what it meaneth. Is it not thinke you a clowdie, and Owle-like Diuinitie, that is couered with such mistes of subtilties, and sophistications, as that professed de∣uines, men richly furnished with deepe knowledge of tongues, and artes, are scarce able to vnderstand the ordinarie termes. I will say more for you (which in my conscience I am perswaded is true) that if Pe∣ter and Paule those blessed Apostles were now aliue, and should come into your schooles, to heare your Lectures of scholasticall Diuinitie, and the rest, to∣gether with your other exercises, and disputations: they would maruel and be astonished at your strange Diuinity which they vnderstand not, & say (as the A∣postle speaketh of those which heare praiers,1. Cor. 14. & prea∣ching in an vnknown tongue) yt you are out of your wits: surely they would neuer acknowledge it to be
consonant to that diuinity, which they in their diuine Epistles commend to the Church of Christ. For it is true, that a learned man hath written, that of two di∣stinct good things, Diuinitie and Philosophie, your schoolemen haue made a third bad compound, be∣ing neither sound Diuinitie, nor pure Philosophie. But (Sir) I haue granted onely by way of suppo∣sition (that which in truth is not to be granted) that your men are so superiour to ours in learning,Papists lear∣ning is not ve∣rie great, or their cause is bad. that a few of yours are able to hold at schoole all our sun∣shine Clergie at this day (as you please to terme them) for terme of life, and after. A proud asserti∣on without any shadow of proofe at all, for reproofe whereof I will take a short view eyther of the depth of your learning, or goodnes of your cause. Iohn Hus commeth voluntarily to the Councell of Constance,Iohn Hus. there to tender a reason of his Do∣ctrine, and to defend publikely his assertions: How learnedly doe these graue Fathers refute him? they clap him fast in prison, load him with chaines, and fetters, not onely not being conuicted, but not so much as heard, yea though he came vnder the Em∣perors protection, and had his safe conduct, the Pope himselfe hauing likewise consented vnto it. Martin Luther goeth to Wormes by disputation to defend his Doctrine,Martin Lu∣thers offer to dispute at Wormes. aud though his friends per∣swaded that he should not expose himselfe to so ma∣nifest perill, because the Papists had oftentimes bro∣ken their promise; yet so assured he was of the good∣nesse of his cause, that he neither feared the learning, nor might of his aduersaries, though neuer so many, but he answered his friends, that he would enter that
Citie in the name of the Lord Iesus, though he knew there were as many diuels set against him, as there were tiles vpon al the houses of the Citie: Afterwards before the Emperor himselfe, and the whole states of the Empyre, he maintaineth his doctrine, answereth the aduersaries, and with the Emperors fauour de∣parteth in safetie, though full sore against the minds and wils of sundrie Papists. Againe vnder safe conduct he goeth to Augusta,He goeth to the same end to Augusta. there to render a reason of his assertions to Cardinall Caietan, who on the Popes behalfe, and at his com∣maundement proposeth three things to Luther. First that he should be better aduised, & reuoke his errors; secondly, he should promise hereafter not to publish, or repeate them; thirdly, he should abstaine from all things which might trouble the Church: Luther stan∣deth to iustifie his assertions, & offereth there, and else where to defend them, sendeth in writing a defence to the Cardinall, iustifying his opinions by the Scrip∣tures. In a word, the Cardinal would not heare Scrip∣ture; but willeth him to come no more in his pre∣sence, vnlesse he would recant; yet staied he there fiue daies after, expecting whether the Cardinall would call him to any further disputation, whereof when he heard nothing in all that space, he de∣parted. Simon Grinae∣us at Spire.At the assemblie at Spire, when Simon Grinaeus heard Faber Bishop of Vienna vtter sundrie absurd errors in his Sermon: he goeth friendly to him, and telleth him he was sory, that a man of such learning and au∣thoritie, should openly maintaine such errours, as were both contumelious against God, and might be
refuted by the manifest testimonies of the Scrip∣tures: and as he would further haue proceeded to the refuting of his errors, Faber breaketh off his talke, faineth as though he had been sent for by the King, and had now no leasure to reason with him in the matter, but maketh shew that he was desirous of ac∣quaintance and longer talke with Grinaeus, and to that end prayeth him the next morning to come to his Chamber. Now what was the sequele of the dis∣putation, or conference appointed by this learned Bishop? The Bishop complaineth to the King, the Serieants were sent to apprehend Grinaeus and carrie him to prison, whereof he being warned a little be∣fore, by a reuerent aged man, was by his friends im∣mediatly conueyed ouer the Rhene, and so escaped; who if he had been taken (as the Serieants were to search the house for him almost assoone as he was out of doores) what would further haue ensued of this pretended conference is not hard to gesse. To be short, you may not forget in what a pittifull taking your Cardinall of Lorrayne was in the Col∣loquie of Poissy,Colloquie of Poissy. when he wished that either our side had been dumbe that day, or all they deafe: and these few examples, either proue your vaunt of your lear∣ning to be so farre greater then our side, to be but fri∣uolous and vaine (which you can hardly yeeld vn∣to) or at the least our cause to be better then yours, which we rather challenge. The truth of the generall proposition concerning the darkenes of those times being thus opened: I shall the lesse need to insist vp∣on the particular absurdities, wherewith this fellow faith they are vniustly charged.
Particular ab∣surdities of Poperie.For his preface, he pleaseth to see and examine how I goe forward in my tale (as he tearmeth it) which I hope to the equall reader shall appeare no fable  a iust charge: my words which he setteth down a thee, Vnto which clouds, mists, and darknes, was added, and wherewith was mixed, all bloodie and sa∣uage crueltie against those that desired knowledge, and were any may  by Gods grace with a glimme∣ring at small insight into true Religion: for though it were but onely a desireth reade vpon the booke of God, either olde or new Testament, then Hereticke was his title, heresie was his ault, and for this was he called before the Romish Cleargie to receiue their censure, and such neuer departed from their cloathes till they had branded them to the slaughter. To which after many scoffes he saith, That he is sorrie the writer of that booke calleth himselfe Knight, to whom in law of Chiualrie a man should not giue the lye, but with obligation to defend it in the fielde. Whereunto I brieflie reply for this time, that if this masked com∣panion will put off his vizzard and shew his face, that I may know who speaketh to me, I will (through the assistance of my God) not onely lay before him his shameles reprochfull slaunders, against my So∣ueraigne and her gouernment, and words of disgrace to my selfe, but also make him such further answere, as fitteth his demerits and my place: in the meane time I list not to fight with a shadow, nor to howte at the Owle that flieth by night. To come to the matter, out of this one period this artificiall Vulcan forgeth two vntruths properly cal∣led lyes (as he saith) which he imputeth to me: the first, that I say To reade on the booke of God, was held to
be part of an heretike: The second, That for this cause (onely) men were called before the Romish Cleargie in England and branded to the slaughter. But soft Sir, you shall finde it harder to conuince me of one lye, then to charge me with many, for both in making and gi∣uing lyes, you haue a singular gift, and rare dexteri∣tie. For concerning the first,Heresie with the Papists to reade the Scriptures in vulgar tongue the people were not on∣ly forbid to reade, or heare read the Scriptures trans∣lated by such as the Romanists call Heretikes; but the Papists are witnesses against themselues, that they forbid the reading of the Scriptures, translated by their owne Catholikes, vnles the Bishop or Inquisi∣tour with aduise of their parish Priest, or confessour, giue them speciall licence thereunto in writing: and was it not obiected to Iohn Lambert as an hereticall opinion, that heads and rulers are bound by necessi∣tie of saluation, to giue the holy Scriptures to the people in the mother language? Doe not your Rhe∣mists in the preface of their translation of the new Testament say, they doe not publish it vpon erro∣nious opinion, of necessitie, that the Scriptures should bee alwaies in our mother tongue, or that they ought or were ordeined by God to bee read indifferently of all? Now if to thinke the Scrip∣tures may be read indifferently of all, be in your iudgement an hereticall opinion; then for men so to read them is in your iudgement an hereticall action, whereof I would wee had not so many proofes. But in any of the three learned tongues, Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine (saith the Encounterer) none was euer debared to reade them: this Sir is but a flou∣rish
to face out the matter, and a coppie of your countenance to make as though you were willing Scripture should be read of all;An obiection answered. onely that you fea∣red hereticall translations: Where as first of laymen and women, not one of a thousand vnderstand ei∣ther of those three tongues; secondly, yourselues in those times sent not abroad any vulgar translations of your owne refining, which the people, without danger of hereticall corruption, might reade; and thirdly, what your iudgement is concerning the v∣sing of such as you doe send forth, is partly shewed alreadie: you should deale plainely and confesse, that (whatsoeuer you say for a glosse) your opinion is, that not onely those few laye men which vnder∣stand any of those three learned tongues should for∣beare reading the Scriptures; but euen many men of your Cleargie profession. D. Rayn de Idol. eccl. Ro. lib. 1. cap. 1.An Italian Bishop tolde Espencaeus a great Diuine of Paris, that his Countrimen were terrified from reading the Scriptures least so they should become hereticks: Espencaeus then demaunded, What studie then doe your Countrimen professe? The Bishop answe∣red, The studie of both the lawes Ciuill and Canon, but principally of the Canon law. Doe some Bishops a∣mongst you iudge the reading of the Scriptures so dangerous, that they abstaine from it for feare to be made heretickes, and yet will you face vs out with permitting laye men to reade them in Hebrew, Greeke, or Latine? Let Sorbon it selfe be witnes, how your Cleargie men were wont to be exercised in the reading of the Scriptures. For amongst the many conflicts which Robertus Stephanus had with diuers of
these learned Sorbonists about the newe Testament printed by Collinaeus, when he asked some of them in what place of the new Testament it was written, they would answere they had read in Ierome, or in the de∣crees, but what the new Testament was they could not tell: and againe another great Clerke of that Colledge was wont about that time verie often to say. I wonder that these young men alleage to vs the new Testament, by this day, I had spent more then fiftie yeeres,The Sorbo∣nists oth. ere I could tell what the new Testament was. What should I stand further eyther to prooue that ye account it he∣resie for lay men indifferently to read the Scriptures (which all men know ye doe) or to disproue the grossenes of your opinion in so forbidding the rea∣ding of the Scriptures, which out of the Scriptures themselues, and sundrie testimonies of godly Fa∣thers, as also examples of ancient times translating the Scriptures into vulgar tongues, is by sundrie eui∣dently proued, ye ought not to doe. To passe therefore to the second supposed vntruth which you set downe to be this,For reading of the Scriptures in vulgar tongues, men were called before the Bishops. that for this cause (onely) men were called before the Romish Clergie in England, and branded to the slaughter. To iustifying whereof before I proceed, giue me leaue to tell you, that this word (onely) by you thrust into my words, is one lye of your coyning, though not the onely one lye: for what though to some of their charges were laid other like articles? Doth that make that this was not accounted a point of an heretike to read the scrip∣tures in English? and that for this men were called before your Clergie? As for example, Thomas Moore a poore and simple man of the age of 24. yeeres, was
at Leicester in the yeare 1566. accnsed, coudemned, and burned, onely because he said his maker was in Heauen, and not in the Pix, no other thing being laid to his charge: If at his iudgement some other ar∣ticles had been obiected to him, would it not haue been true for all that, that to say his maker was in Heauen, and not in the Pix, was counted heresie and for that cause men were called before your Clergie, and branded to the slaughter? Our stories are full of examples out of your owne Registers, that reading of Scriptures, was accounted heresie, not to stand vp∣on many, vnder Longland Bishop of Lincolne, Agnes Welles was conuented, and amongst other things ex∣amined whether Thurstan did euer teach her the E∣pistle of S. Iames;Act. & Mon. ex Regist. Lin. or the Epistles of S. Peter, and S. Paul, in English: Thomas Earle was likewise chaeged for hearing the Epistle of S. Sames read in English: Agnes Ashford of Chesham for teaching Iames Norden cer∣taine sentences of Scripture, as Teend ye not a can∣dle, and put it vnder a bushell, but set it on a candle∣sticke, that it may giue light to all in the house, & such like. To Robert Pope, Iohn Morden and his wife was obiected, that they recited the tenne commande∣ments in English. To Iohn Phips was obiected that he was very ripe in the Scriptures. Ienkin Butler appea∣ched Iohn Butler his owne brother for reading to him in a certaine booke of the Scripture, and perswading him to hearken to the same: what should I stand to number vp any more, which vnder this one Bishop for reading them selues, or hearing read some part of the Gospels, Acts or any the Epistles, or Reuelation were called into question of life?
The like proceeding was vsed by other Bishops, and namely by Tunstall then Bishop of London,Act. & mon. ae testim. D. Outredi. before whom many were conuented for that holy heresy of reading the Scriptures: In number of whom, one going to be burned for an heretike, and seeing the booke of the Reuelation bound to the stake, to be burnt with him (which happely he had diligently read, being thereto moued with that sentence: Bles∣sed is he that readeth, and they that heare the words of this prophecie) spake with a lowde voice these words, O blessed Reuelation, how well is it with mee, that I shall be burnt with thee! Infinite such examples might be shewed not onely in our owne countrie, but in for∣raine kingdomes. I will alleadge onely one example of a godly Bookeseller of Auignion in France.Ibidem pa. 863. The Bishop of Aix with other Prelates passing through the streets, euerie one leading his Minion vpon his arme, and buying vp such filthie pictures and rimes as were then to be sold,A godly Booke seller in France they came where there was a Booke∣seller setting out French and Latine Bibles to saile: at which sight they being much moued, said to the Booke-seller, darest thou be so hardie to set out such marchandise to sell here in this Towne? Dost thou not know that such bookes are forbidden? To whom the Booke-seller answered, is not the holy Bible as good as these goodly pictures that ye haue bought for these Gentlewomen? Which speech so offended the Bishop of Aix, that he brast forth into these words: I renounce my part of Paradice if this be not a Lutheran. So commaunding him to be apprehended, he was by the Prelates attendants most despitefully
handled, some crying out, a Lutheran, a Lutheran, to the fire with him, to the fire with him: some bea∣ting him with their fistes, some pulling him by the beard, others by the haire, that the poore man was all embrued in blood before he came to the prison. The next morning being brought before the Iudges in the presence of the Prelats, the selling of bibles in French was laide to his charge, & he was asked, whe∣ther he knew not the Bible to be forbidden in all chri∣stendome, saue onely in Latine. To which he answe∣red, that he knew the contrarie, and that he had sold many Bibles in the French tongue with the Empe∣rors Priuiledge, with other words reprouing their forbidding of Gods most holy bookes, which he or∣dained for the instructing of the ignorant, and for the reducing againe into the way such as haue gone a∣stray: the charitable Prelates cried out, haue him to the fire without any more words; the Iudge yet pau∣sed, willing him to acknowledge those Prelates to be true Pastors of the Church, which he denying that he could doe with a good conscience, sith they reie∣cted the holy bookes of God, he was immediatly con∣demned to be burned, and the selfe same day execu∣ted, and for a signe and token of the cause of his con∣demnation, he carried to the place of his execution two Bibles hanged about his necke: and so exhor∣ting the people to read the Scriptures, he was for this cause onely cruelly put to death. Who then can doubt, but that the Romish Cler∣gie are the true heires and successors of those cruell Tyrants, Antiochus, Dioclesian, Maximinus, &c. Who like them haue burned in the fire not only the Scrip∣tures
of God, but also the bodies of them that read therein, and that to them it may be applied, that which is written in the Machabees.1. Mach. 1. The bookes of the law which they found, they burnt in the fire and cut in peeces. Whosoeuer had a booke of the Testament found by him, or who soeuer consented vnto the law, the kings commandement (the Bishops may we say) was, they should put him to death by their authoritie. I had thought this gentleman had runne himselfe out of breath in charging me with lies and fictions: but now follow foure more (saith he) but (I say) his loude quadruple lye shall cleare and discharge me of all. The first is that I say Ignorance was held by them to be the Mother of Deuotion:Ignorance with Papists the mother of Deuotion. a strange accusation, and grieuous slaunder (no doubt) to charge those men with nourishing the people in ignorance, whom all the world knoweth to haue vsed strange meanes to bring them to knowledge. For what meant they by the costly setting vp of many faire and well guilded Images in Churches? Was it not that they might be laye mens bookes, and by reading on them they might attaine knowledge? What? Pius the fift (good∣man) was he not most carefull the people might be edified, when (as it is written in his high commenda∣tion) in a procession he was not carried on mens shoulders, as Popes vsed to be, but he went on foote to the great edifying of the people? Now if the Pope will vouchsafe to goe on foote, to the end to e∣difie the people thereby, how can it be thought he would haue them bread in ignorance? But (Sir) if you will not forceablie writhe and wrest my propo∣sition, to extend it to ignorance absolutely, but vn∣derstand
it (as it is euident to be meant) of the igno∣rance of the Scriptures, yourselfe (I hope) will free me from any fiction herein, and will acknowledge that Doctor Fulke doth iustly charge your Rhemists,Doctor Fulke. who setting forth the new Testament in English (if that which is pestered with so many obscure words, may be called an English translation) and yet excu∣sing themselues, for being of that erronious opinion that the Scriptures should be alwaies in our mother tongue, or that they ought or were ordeyned by God to be read indifferently of all: That Doctor Fulke (I say) doth iustly charge them, that they are a∣fraide to giue ouer their olde impudent proposition, That ignorance of the Scriptures is the mother of Popish deuotion. For what meant the so strict forbidding to laye men the reading of the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue?Scripture for∣bidden to be read. but that their deuotion should not growe of the knowledge, but of the ignorance of the Scrip∣tures; flat contrarie to our Sauiours commandement giuen to the vnlearned multitude of the Iewes,Iohn 5. Search the Scriptures, for in them you thinke to haue e∣ternall life, and they are they that testifie of me; where the reason annexed to the Commandement, sheweth to whom the Commaundement appertaineth, euen to as many as it concerneth to seeke after eternall life, and to know Iesus Christ and him crucified, which is the laytie no lesse then the Cleargie; contrarie also to the Apostles exhortation to the Colossians being laye men, Let the word of Christ dwell plenteously in you. Whereupon Chrisostome noteth,Coloss. 3. Chrisost. in epist. ad Coloss. om. 9. Audite seculares, om∣nes comparate vobis biblia, animae Pharmaca, &c. Heare you secular or laye men, euery one get vnto you
Bibles, the Phisicke of your Soule; if you will no∣thing else, at the least get you Testaments, the epistles of Paul, the Gospels, the Actes, to be daily and dili∣gent instructors to you. In a word, contrarie to the spirite of the same Apostle in the Epistle to the He∣brewes, who reproueth them that they were like vn∣to Children, and vnexpert in the word of righteous∣nes, whereas they ought to haue their wits exercised therein, But ignorance of the Scriptures better plea∣seth you in the people, and shall leade them to such deuotion as maketh more for your aduantage. Hence hath growne your deuice of fides Implicita,Fides implicita. a faith wrapped and folded vnder the obedience of the Church, namely that it is sufficient though they knowe not distinctly what they ought to beleeue, but obediently submit their vnderstanding to the Church, beleeuing as the Church beleeueth, though what the Church beleeueth they knowe not. This Carbonaria fides is highly commended by Cardinall Hossius, who farther teacheth the simple laye man, that he should thinke it went very well with him, if he could say by heart, the Lords praier, the Articles of beliefe, and the ten Commaundements, though he knew not the meaning of the words. As for o∣ther knowledge, if any asked him a question hee should answere, that hee did beleeue the Catholike Church. And this ignorance of the Scriptures,Ignorance a fruitfull Mo∣ther for the Papists. as a fruitfull mother, hath brought forth many a blinde daughter of gainfull deuotion to your kitchin: what greater deuotion was either then esteemed to be? or indeed what acte more for your aduantage, then the buil∣ding
of Monasteries and Nunneries, and the endow∣ing them with great lands and reuenues? And this deuoute daughter, mother Ignorance of the Scrip∣tures brought forth, which as for the most part they were builded by Kings and great States vpon some great murder, either by wane in the field, or priuate∣ly committed at home: so the cause was as in stories may be seene,)Act. & Monu. pag. 139. Pro remedio animae meae, pro remissione, & redemptione peccatorum meorum, &c. For the reliefe of my soule, for the redemption and forgiuenes of my sinnes, &c. Which blasphemous derogation to the death and passion of Christ Iesus, the knowledge of the Scriptures would haue quicklie discouered. Deuotion se∣parated from knowledge in many of the Popish Clear∣gie.Yea how Deuotion hath been separated from knowledge, not in your laye people alone, but in your Priests too; whilest deuotion hath been so tyed to their daily saying of their Matins and euensong, which without deadly sinne they may not leaue vn∣sayd, whiles in the meane time they vtterly cast aside the Apostles commaundement,1. Tim. 4. Giue attendance to reading, exhortation, and doctrine, in the answer of Iohn Lambert to the 25. Article to him obiected may part∣ly appeare. I will onely adde this one testimonie, that by the confession of some of your owne coate, which haue made any conscience of their carriage may appeare, how carefullie your deuoutest Fryers haue been to couple knowledge with their imagi∣ned deuotion.D. Rayn. de Eccl. Rom. lib. 2. cap. 5. Franciscus Sampson generall of the or∣der of the Friers Franciscans, reprouing both their ig∣norance and carelesnes hath these words. Pratres mei dilectissimi, à primordio nostrae Religionis floruit conscien∣tia, &c. My beloued brethren in the beginning of
our Religion there flourished conscience,Conscientia. but our beauty by little & little sliding away, the first sillable was taken away, and there remained Scientia,Scientia. science or knowledge; but now our sinnes so deseruing, the first sillable is againe taken away, and we remaine Pura entia, & stipites & statuae,Entia. meere things which haue a being, euen very stockes, and blockes. To adde further proofe in a case so manifest, were to light a candle at noone day; yet this I will adde ex abun∣danti,Publike praier or deuotion in an vnknowne tongue. If publike praier in the Church and congrega∣tion of the faithfull be a chiefe and principall part of Deuotion, made you not Ignorance the mother of their Deuotion, when as ye would not allow their publike praiers in a tongue that the people vnder∣stoode? Yea your Cardinall Hossius vseth this reason,Hossius de sacro vernacule le∣gendo. to proue that the Church seruice should be in the Latine tongue rather then the vulgar, because (saith he) since some vsed the vulgar and knowne tongue in Church seruice, Deuotion hath not onely not been increased, but diminished: And our Countrey man, but the Popes Champion,Art. 3. pa. 75. D. Stapleton in an English booke that he writeth against Bishop Iuel, confidently affirmeth, that Deuotion is not furthe∣red, but hindered by a tongue that is vnderstoode. In a word, D. Cole Deane of Paules, and one chosen not onely to maintaine the Papists assertions against the Protestants, in the disputation at Westminster, but appointed by the Bishops and other his Colleagues to be the mouth for them all, whose speech in the end (they all being asked) did auow to be the mind, and saying of them all: euen he in that honorable as∣semblie of the Councell, and Nobles, and frequent
concourse of the Commons, did with great vehe∣mencie maintaine this proposition in these words, I say Ignorance is the mother of Deuotion.See the 27. ar∣ticle betwixt B. Iewel and Harding. And so (Sir Encounterer) you must be forced to take it both for a maxime, & minime, though minimè tibi placet to con∣fesse a truth. The second fayned position, wherewith it plea∣seth this deepe Clerke to charge me, is because I say your Syde holdeth, that it is not for lay men to meddle in matters of Religion, &c.How the Pa∣pists allow lay men to meddle with matters of Religion. And for this (after your olde railing fashion) you charge me with subtiltie, and im∣pudencie, my subtiltie you say I shew in this word (meddle) which may either signifie, that lay men must not determine, or define of matters of Religion; or else not to meddle or care for Religion at all. And surely (Sir) though I may giue you good leaue to take it in which fence you will, for in the former sence you will not deny, but that euen Princes are re∣strained to doe any thing in causes of Religion, with∣in their own dominions without your generall Vic∣cars warrant, which Romish conceite you shall finde learnedlie confuted by Doctor Bilson, who is now Bishop of Winchester: in the latter sence, I need not to labour any more proofe, then that before is set downe, touching your breeding of Gods children in blindnes and ignorance, and withholding the keye of knowledge from them, and how will you haue them meddle with, or care for that which they know not? Though I say I may well iustifie both, yet let me tell you, that you doe not well distinguish the word (meddle) for as to meddle may signifie to be present in Councels, &c. (in which sence you se∣clude
the Laytie from medling with Religion) so likewise it may signifie to trie, and examine by the touchstone of Gods word the doctrine there taught,To meddle with Scrip∣tures, is to ex∣amine by Scriptures the doctrine taught. Act. 17. and not to beleeue without farther discussing what∣soeuer their superiours teach them: And in this sence likewise you will not haue them meddle, yet the men of Berrhea are much commended for medling thus in Religion, in that hauing heard the Apostle they searched the Scriptures daily, to see whether those things were so as he deliuered; and to this med∣ling doth the Apostle exhort all.1. Iohn 4. Deerely beloued be∣leeue not euery spirit, but trie the spirits whether they be of God or not. And Chrisostome thinketh it an absurd thing, that all men should not thus meddle with Re∣ligion, Quomodo absurdum non est, &c.Chrysost. in 2. Cor. hom. 13. What an ab∣surditie is that, for money we trust not other men, but count it and tell it after them; but for more ex∣cellent things simplie to follow other mens sayings, especially sith we haue the exactest rule and ballance of all, the testimonie of the lawe of God, therefore I pray and beseech you, that you will leaue what this and that man thinketh, and enquire all these things of the Scriptures. Now how doe you permit lay men thus to meddle with matters of Religion,Papists forbid Lay men thus to meddle with Scrip∣tures, and why. when as ye take from them the vse of the Scriptures; which (as the rule or leuell serueth the Architect to direct his building by, & the ballance trieth the true waight of euery thing) plain∣ly sheweth what doctrine is true, and to be imbraced, what false and to bee reiected. But no maruell that you haue forbidden them thus to meddle with mat∣ters of Religion, when you haue broached such doc∣trines,
and maintained such opinions, as some of your selues confesse cannot be iustified by the Scrip∣tures. It is recorded that some of the learneder sort of your Cleargie, haue vsed to say amongst their friends:Paraleip. Abb. vrsperg pa. 448 Sic diecrem in Scholis; sed tamen, (maneat inter nos, &c.) I would say so in the schooles, but yet (let it be kept secret amongst our selues.) I thinke the con∣trarie; we say so in the schooles, but yet it cannot be proued out of the Scriptures, &c. Howsoeuer it may be, you will generally be loath to confesse thus much of the Scriptures, yet the Fathers you haue not one∣ly mangled, and depraued, where their testimonies were pregnant against your errors (as for example that plaine place of Gregorie Nissen, Eam solummodo naturam quae increata est, colere & venerari didicimus we haue learned to adore and worship, onely that nature which is vncreated, where your Spanish Diuines in their Index expurgatorius set down this direction, De∣leatur dictio, solummodo, put out the word (only) & sun∣dry such places as both our learned men haue disco∣uered, & in your Indices are to be found out. But you plainly professe,In lex Expurg. cu vt si Ber. &c (thinking it should haue remained secret among your selues, and neuer to haue come to our knowledge,) that in the auncient Fathers you do very often deny very many errors (meaning such sen∣tences as make for vs against you,) by inuenting some comment or exposition, and that you doe faine and deuise some conuenient sence, when they are by the aduersaries in disputations and conferences obiected against you: which things considered, should stir vp the spirits of all men thus to meddle with matters of Religion, and not by and by to beleeue and receiue
euery doctrine, because your Church teacheth it. And now are we come to that high and capitall slaunder against the holy Pope-made Saint Thomas Becket,About Tho∣mas Becket. whom I call a traitour, at which, the gall of this Popish Saint-seruer is so moued, that he taketh on, fretteth, & chafeth and (as another mad Aiax Fla∣gellifer) threatneth that I shal rest with a broken head, as in another place he speaketh of cudgelling with blowes, and bastinadoes wherewith he supposeth to haue wrought a manly peece of worke. But (Sir) pause a while, the more rage, the lesse reason; and the the greater haste, commonly the worse speede. It were good aduise for you that threaten the breaking of other mens heads, to looke warily to your own, for the olde verse may happily be verified in you. Saepe sagittantem didicit referire sagitta, In{que} virum plagae, conuersarecurre re plaga. The arrow oft vpon the shooter doth rebound, And he receiues ye blow yt others thought to wound, To examine a little the state of this Becket, who was a traitor (as I affirme, & not I onelie but many before me) against Henrie the second, but (to vse the words of mine Author) taken vp and shrined for a newe Saint made of an olde Rebell, fiftie yeeres after his death, which was in the fourth yeere of Henrie the third. I doe openly professe (to auoide all such car∣pers and quarrell-pickers as this fellow is) to separate betweene his punishment and death, and betwixt his cause and carriage against his Prince. The first being outragious against all law and order, by priuate per∣sons, not publikely authorised therto: the second trai∣terous and meritorious of death, the king hauing to
that end iust matter enough, if he had pleased by lawe to prosecute the cause against him, which by sundrie euidences may be shewed, but some fewe shall serue. The ground of Beckets quar∣rels with his King.And first if Ciprians rule be true, Non poena, sed causa facit Martyrem. It is not the punishment, but the cause that maketh the Martyr, what was the maine ground of the controuersie betwixt the King and him? was it not (as they terme them) the liber∣ties of the Church, as this Encounterer granteth? li∣berties not spirituall, but carnall, not of Christes gi∣uing, but of Antichrists deuising. There were as Au∣thors affirme in that time of Henrie the second, more then a hundred murthers, besides other felonies pro∣ued vpon the Clergie, which when the King would haue punished according to the lawes of the land, Becket opposeth himselfe, and beardeth the King in this so iust an action, vnder title of standing for the li∣berties of the Church: a holy quarrell no doubt, but such a Martyr, such a cause. Becket goeth inta France a∣gainst the kings will.From this straunge ground these proceedings en∣sued, there was a law and constitution, that neither Bishop nor Clerke should goe out of the land, with∣out the kings licence, and then he should take an oth, not to procure any hurt against the king, or any of his: notwithstanding this proude Prelate, who durst protect felons and murtherers against the King and Iustice of the land, neither reuerencing King, nor obeying his lawes, passed ouer without licence to the King of France. Further being adiudged to prison, by the King, for refusing to giue accounts of great summes of money receiued by him, and Reig∣nold
Earle of Cornewall, and Robert Earle of Leicester, being sent to him, to tell him of the iudgement set downe against him; this meeke Martyr, and holy Saint was so farre from the obedience of a subiect, that he told the earle of Leicester in these words:Beckets words to the Earle of Leicester. That how much more precious the soule is then the bodie, so much more ought he to obey Becket then his terreine King: So no∣torious and euident was the rebellious opposition of this Popish Prelate against his lawfull Prince, that he was openly by the king, and his Nobles called Trai∣tor, in that he refused to giue earthly honour to his King (as he had sworne to do) and therefore they ge∣nerally agreed, that he was wel worthy to be handled as a periured Traitor and rebell,The King and Nobles ad∣iudge Bec∣kets a traitor. and therefore most impudent is this Ward-worders assertion, that neyther the King nor his Officers did charge him with treason. If you please to adde hereunto, the arbitrement of this controuersie put into the French kings handes,The contro∣uersie between Becket and the King put into the French Kings hands. with king Henries large offer, and Beckets proud refu∣sall: there is no man (I hope) that knoweth what it is to be an obedient subiect, but will condemne him for a rebellious Traitour. The kings offer in that ar∣bitrement was this, There haue been (saith he) Kings of England before me both of greater and lesse puissance then I am,The Kings officer. likewise there haue been ma∣ny Bishoppes of Canturburie, both great and holy men; what the greatest and most holy of all his pre∣decessours before him, hath done to the least of my predecessors before me, let him doe the same to me, and I am content. Which offer though it were in it selfe, and so deemed by all that stood by, not onely
reasonable, but more then reasonable; so that they all cried with one voice, the king hath debased himselfe enough to the Bishop:Proud Beckets refusall. yet the rebellious spirit of this Archbishop would not yeelde vnto it, nor accept peace with his King vpon so fauourable a condition. What a Giant-like pride & traiterous presumption is this, to refuse to yeelde so much obedience to his Prince and Soueraigne, as the greatest and holiest of his place haue alwaies yeelded to the meanest kinges of this land? what needeth any further proofe of Bec∣kets treason? Yet if you will, you may remember the letter of Maud the Empresse to him:The letter of the Empresse. Wherin she char∣geth him, that in as much as in him lay, he went about to disinherit the king, & to depriue him of his crown: and if the Empresse might be thought to speake par∣tially on the King her sonnes behalfe; yet the two Cardinals, sent by the Pope to heare all this contro∣uersie, out of question will not condemne him with∣out iust cause. And yet in a letter sent from them to the Pope, they do condemne him of exciting & stir∣ring vp forraine Potentates to make warre against his naturall liege Lord, the words of which letter were these.Two Cardi∣nals censures of Becket. William and Otho Cardinals of the Church of Rome, to Alexander the Pope, &c. comming to the land of the king of England, we found the controuersie be∣twixt him, and the Archbishop of Canterburie, more sharpe and vehement then we would; for the King and the greater part about him, said, that the Archbi∣shop had stirred vp the French King grieuouslie a∣gainst him, as also the Earle of Flaunders his kinsman; (who was verie louing and kind to him before) he made his open aduersarie, readie to wage warre a∣gainst
him, as is by diuers euidences most certain, &c. Now for a subiect to stirre vp forraine States to make warre vpon his Soueraigne and countrie, was at all times high treason; but that Becket did so, (by the Cardinals confession) was by diuers euidences most certaine, therefore Becket (not now his enemies, but his brehren, the sonnes of his owne mother being Iudges) was a traitor. Who then but such a one as hath sold himselfe to all impudencie and shamelesse gainsaying the truth, would seeke to couer Beckets rebellions,About Beckets sainting. by the facts of Iohn Baptist, Ambrose, Hillarie, of Athanasius, Chryso∣stome, which haue as much agreement with the cause of Becket, as hath light with darkenes good with euill, sweet with sower? concerning whose Saint-being I will say nothing, sith my purpose is not to search what he is with God after his death, but what he was towards his Prince in his life, neither am I priuie to his repentance, which might be secret at the last gaspe, or to Gods iudgements, into which I presume not to presse. Yet you may remember, that long since, it was a generall Prouerbe of your Pope-made Saints, That many are worshipped for Saints in heauen, whose soules are burning in Hell:Ex. Auentino. and that in particular concerning Becket, great doubt was moued, as is by writers alleadged, out of Caesarius the Monke, whose words are these; Quaestio Parisijs inter magistros ventila∣ta fuit, vtrum damnatus, an saluatus esset ille Thomas, &c. There was a question debated amongst the masters at Paris whether Thomas Becket was saued or damned. To this question answereth Roger a Norman,Disputation a∣bout Becket at Paris. that he was worthie death and damnation, because he was
so obstinate against Gods minister the king. Peter Cantar a Parisien disputed on the contrarie,Argument of miracles. that his miracles were great signes and tokens of saluation and of great holines in him, &c. Which argument this Encounterer likewise vrgeth. Popish mira∣cles threefoldBut behold what strength is in it. For one of these we shall find to be true, that either they seemed only, and were no miracles indeed,Onely in shew. such as many by the craft and conueiance of idle Monks haue been shew∣ed to the people, as namely those miracles of the Do∣minicke Friers, in their hot contentions with the Franciscans about the conception of our Ladie,Act. & Mon. pag. 733. who thinking by sleight to worke in the peoples heads, that which by open preaching they durst not now attempt, deuised a certaine Image of the Virgin,Ex Pencero. Munst. Caione, & aliis so artificially wrought, that the Friers by priuie gynnes, made it to stirre, to make gestures, to lament, to com∣plaine, to weepe, to grone, and to giue answeres to them that asked, &c. vntill the Franciscans seeing by this meanes their credits to decay, and all the almes to be conueyed to the Dominickes boxe, and not be∣ing vnacquainted with such cousening practises, espi∣ed their iugling, and discouered their feined & frau∣dulent miracles. For which cause foure of the chie∣fest actors, in this iugling miracle were burned at Bern. Wrought by Sathan.Or secondly, if they were not counterfeite but done in deed, they were not wrought by God, but by the power of Sathan to draw men from Christ to Antichrist. Of these the Apostle foretelleth vs (that whenso∣euer it commeth to passe it might not trouble vs,)
That the comming of Antichrist should be by the working of Sathan, with all power, and signes, and lying wonders.2. Thess. 2. Wonders then Antichrist shall worke, but they are lying wonders, both in forme, because many of them are but counterfait; and in the end, because the end of all is to draw men from the truth, to lies & falsehood. For what was the end of these miracles? was it not to draw men to Idolatry? to the worship of the relicks of dead men? to shrine their bones in gold and siluer, and precious stones, as this Becket was vsed? was it not to drawe men to Canturburie, with their vowes, and offerings by heapes, out of which the Couent sucked no small aduantage? Of this dangerous temp∣tatiō by miracles to draw vs away from Christ to An∣tichrist, our Sauiour Christ hath likewise graciously forwarned vs, saying:Math. 24. That there shall arise false Christs and false Prophets, and shall shew great signes and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceiue the verie elect. The miracles therefore which the munkish generati∣on hath wrought by the power of Sathan, to draw men to Idolatrie, and to enrich themselues, I hope shall not much moue vs, being forewarned of this temptation, and therefore well armed against it, es∣pecially if we remember that the Lord willeth the people of Israel,Deut. 13. not to credit the Prophets (though they worke miracles) if thereby they seeke to draw them to Idolatrie, because the Lord doth this to proue them, whether they will loue the Lord their God, with all their heart, and with all their soule. Or else thirdly, they were neuer wrought,Falsely deui∣sed. neither indeed, nor in apparance, but were deuised by men of leaden hearts, & brasen faces, (as one termeth the au∣thor
of your Golden legend) for the infinite inriching of their purses, and so are they onely the shameles in∣uentions of the Munkes idle braines,Beckets mira∣cles. and this see∣meth most true in the miracles ascribed to Becket: which as by the number they discredit themselues, amounting to the number of 270. said to be wrought by him after his death (who neuer wrought any one in all his life:) so likewise by the qualitie of them, be∣ing farre off from all truth, and reason, some ridicu∣lous, some monstrous, vaine, absurd, some also blas∣phemous, and some so impudent, that not only they deserue no credit, altogether sauouring of meere for∣gerie, but also for very shame wil abash an honest pen to write of them:Act. & Mon. pa. 204. As namely, that three daies after his death he appeared at the Altar in his pontificalibus, cō∣maunding the Quire not to sing, but to say this office of his Masse, Exurge quare obdormis domine, &c. Againe that it was shewed a Munke in a vision, that Becket had his place appointed in heauen, with the Apostles a∣boue Steuen, Laurence, &c. Also that a Knights sonne being two daies dead, was reuiued againe, so soone as he had a little of the water of Canturburie put into his mouth, and had by his parents foure peeces of siluer bended to be offred at Canturbury in the childs behalf: And further most blasphemously, that Becket in a visi∣on did appeare and say that his bloud did crie out of the earth to God more then the bloud of righteous Abel; as also that Becket, appearing to a Priest named Thomas, told him that he had so brought to passe, that all the names of the Munkes of the Church of Can∣turburie, with the names of the Priestes and Clerkes, and with the families belonging to that Citie and
Church of Canturburie, were written in the booke of life. These and many more absurd then these are the miracles ascribed to him, to proue him a Saint, dying in so holy a quarrell, and to fill the purses and fat the panches of idle Monkes. But miracles are not rare at Rome,Miracles not rare amongst the Papists. the thing which may iustly bee thought most vntrue, shall bee confir∣med with a miracle: Aquinas Diuinitie rules in all their schooles, will you doubt of the truth of it, and trie it by Scripture? that shall not need, it is confir∣med by a miracle, and that a sound one. When hee was once praying to the Image of Christ crucified, the Image spake to him, Benè scripsisti de me Thoma, quā ergo mercedem accipies?D. Rain. ex bre∣uiario Rom. & ex vita Th. ius operi. Ro∣mae editis pre∣fixa. You haue written well of me Thomas, what reward wil you haue for your labour? of which that no man may doubt, it was testified by the oath of a deuout man, which hid himself there of purpose; belike the Image had spoken to him before, to be present secretly, & to bearewitnes of the matter. Hiacinthus a Polonian, who dyed in the yeare 1257. was lately canonised for a Saint,D. Rain. ex. seuerin. doe ye doubt whether the Pope did well therein or not? consider the miracles hee wrought, A young man that brake his necke from his horse being carried to Hiacinthus Tombe presently reuiued, and was restored whole and sound. Againe, a mayde hauing a calfe suddenly dead, runneth to his graue and prayeth him to reuiue her calfe againe: when shee came home, and found the Butcher skinning of it, the calfe mouing the leg that was fleyed, lifted vp the head, and was by and by as whole as a fish. And that ye may know it is no great noueltie with these fellowes, to haue stockes
and stones to speake when this Hiacinthus was aliue, and at the sudden irruption of the Tartarians, was readie to flie out of the Church, the Image of the Virgine Marie being an huge one, and of Alabla∣ster called to him.Large talke betweene Hia∣cinthus and an image of Alablaster. O sonne Hiacinthus, dost thou flie from the hands of the Tartarians, and leauest me, with my sonne to be torne in peeces and trampled vnder their feete? there∣fore take me with thee: At which he being somewhat amazed, answered: O glorious Virgin, this Image of yours is too heauie, how can I carrie it with me? But she replied, take it, for my sonne shal lighten the burden. Where∣upon he tooke it, and carried it in one hand, as if it had been as light as a reede, through the great riuer Borysthenes, on drie foote. Here is a tast of your strange miracles of Rome, but it is most strange that men should bee so bereft of reason and iudgement to be∣leeue them. If Calphurnius were liuing of whom the Poet writeth, Pleno ridet Calphurnius ore, and should reade the wonderfull miracles to the Popes Saints attributed, I suppose he would not onely laugh with open mouth; but euen breake his bellie with laugh∣ing at these their ridiculous follies. The Lord giue vnto vs grace to loue the truth, that we may be saued: least otherwise in his iust iudgement he send vs strong delusions to beleeue such loude, and lewde lyes. And so I leaue Becket with all his miracles (as in stories I finde him recorded) the Kings rebell, and the Popes Saint. The residue of the exceptions in this Encounter a∣gainst me are altogether to false and friuolous, as I might well spare the labour in giuing any answere thereto, but that this foule-mouthed fellow (who
sayleth in a Sea of words) painteth them out by the name of slanders, yea impudent and shameles slan∣ders, that by such mightie words he might blinde the eyes, and steale away the affections of the simple rea∣ders; therefore a word or two of each of them. The next fained position wherewith he chargeth me is, that I holde The Pope and his Cleargie are to bee obeyed though they commaund blasphemies against God and dis∣loyalties against Princes, which though you (Sir En∣counterer) without all shame, and contrarie to your owne knowledge (if you haue knowledge in any thing but in rayling) do tearme a shamelesse slander: yet to as many as know Rome in any measure, it is well knowne and will be found a true accusation and iust charge.The Pope will be obeyed, commanding either disloy∣altie or blas∣phemie. For proofe whereof, that which your owne men haue written of the infinite power of the Pope, may aboundantly suffice; namely, Though all the world would iudge in any matter against the Pope, yet wee ought to stand to the iudgement of him; for he seemeth to haue all lawes in the chest of his bosome; therefore whatsoeuer the Pope either al∣loweth or disalloweth, wee are bound likewise to al∣low or disallow the same. And whosoeuer is not o∣bedient to the lawes of the Church of Rome, must be deemed an Heretike: and againe, it was as great a sinne as sacriledge, to reason of any of the Popes doings; and further that the Pope is said to haue an heauenly iudgement, therefore in such things as hee willeth, his will standeth for a reason; and though he draw infinite soules with him to hel, yet no man may presume to say to him, Why doe you thus? to whom whosoeuer denieth obedience, it is all one, as if hee
did denie the Almightie power of God. These are all alleadged out of your owne decrees, and out of your owne doctors; and your holy M. Harding sha∣meth not to tell vs in his Inuectiue against Bishop Iewell of blessed memorie, that Christ now requireth of vs, not to obay Peter and Paul, but him that sitteth in their chaire: so that by this diuinitie, we must obay the Pope, whatsoeuer Peter and Paul teach to the contrary. This (I hope) is a sufficient iustifying of my accusation. But if you will answere me, as Blasi∣us did Laelius, demaunding whether if Gracchus did bid him, he would set the Capitol on fire: Nunquam voluisset id quidem: Surely he would neuer bid me so to do: that the Pope likewise would neuer com∣mand blasphemies against God, or disloyalties a∣gainst Princes: For proofe against the first, I need go no further then our example of Thomas Becket, for whom the Pope not only commanded a solemne festiuall day to be kept, but in honour of him,Blasphemy by the Pope com∣manded. this blasphemous prayer to be vsed in that day. Portiforium ad vsum Sarum in festo S. Tho. Caenuar.Tuper Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, Facnos Christe scandere quo Thomas ascendit. By the blood of Thomas which he for thee did spend, Make vs O Christ to climbe whither Thomas did ascend. Then which what greater blasphemie can be vt∣tered? to make any other Mediatour betwixt God and man, then the man Christ Iesus; and that by the blood and wounds, which is the proper preroga∣tiue of him, who was wounded for our sinnes, and done to death for our transgressions? But as if this
were not blasphemie enough, behold yet a greater; euen Gods honour giuen to this Pope-holy Saint in this prayer made vnto him. Opem nobis ô Thoma porrige, Rege stantes, iacentes erige, Mores, actus, & vitam corrige, Et in pacis nos viam dirige. Thy helpe ô Thomas vnto vs extend, Rule such as stand, raise them that fall, Our manners, deeds, and sinfull life amend, Into the way of peace eeke guide vs all. Shall I adde hereunto another like example which in part I haue alreadie touched? Sixtus the fourth ta∣keth vp the controuersie betwixt the ranciscans and Dominicks, about the conception of the blessed Vir∣gin, and against manifest Scripture, plaine testimo∣nies of fathers, and the streame of his owne Doctors, decreeth her conception without Originall sinne (so taking from Christ his prerogatiue) commaundeth the solemnizing of the feast of her conception, ex∣communicating and condemning them for here∣tikes that did gainesay it, and granting to as many as would heare Masse deuoutly, from the first euensong of that feast, to the Octaues of the same, as many daies of pardon, as Pope Vrbane the fourth, and Pope Martin the fifth did grant for hearing the seruice of Corpus Christi day. Yet here he staieth not, but not on∣ly abusing that as a praier to the Virgine, which was onely the Angels salutation, and rather the Angels praier for her, then to her; for the better establish∣ment of his new blasphemie, addeth to the expresse words of Scripture, commaunding the Aue Maria
to be said with this addition, and giuing release of sinnes to as many as would inuocate the blessed Vir∣gin with the same addition. Hayle Marie full of grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongest wo∣men, & blessed is the fruite of thy wombe, Iesus Christ, and blessed is Anna thy mother, of whom thy virgins flesh hath proceeded without blot of Originall sin. Amen. From hence did spring these & such like points of doctrine offered to the people, that she was not obliged to any punish∣ment due for sinne no more then Christ, that she had no need of remission of sinnes, that if a Sauiour be taken for him, which saueth such as haue merited condemnation, then was not Christ her Sauiour, but onely in this respect might be counted her Saui∣our, for preseruing her from all sinne, and so sustai∣ning her from falling into condemnation; these and such like new found blasphemies al mē must receiue, and hold her immaculate conception vnder paine of excommunication. Disloyaltie by the Pope com∣maunded.Touching their commaunding of disloyaltie a∣gainst Princes, I wish wee had not had too many proofes thereof, then should not our gracious Soue∣raigne haue been so often endangered, to the ex∣treame griefe and feare of all true English hearts, and to the hazzard of vtter ouerthrow of true Religion, and the bringing in of a Chaos of temperall mise∣ries vpon vs: which being sufficiently knowne and conceiued of all (but such as carrie in their bosomes the like false and flintie hearts that you doe,) I will spare to repeat any, the rather because I shall haue oc∣casion to speake of them hereafter. But how like a Clerke you apply your three places of Scripture, al∣leadged
to prooue simple obedience due to your Prelates, the first out of Heb. 13. ver. 8. the second out of the Ephes. 6. vers. 6. the third out of Rom. 13. vers. 5. I referre to the godly learned; yet if you will needes straine obedience to your Popish superiours out of these places of Scripture, I pray you intreat them (for I will spare here to except against their offices, and authorities) to ground their commaundements vpon Scripture, and not to send ouer their Pupils to perswade subiects not onely from obedience due to their Soueraigne, and to absolute them from their oath taken to obey, but to lay violent and bloudy hands vpon the Lords annointed, wherby they shew to be guided rather by the spirit of Sathan that harte∣ned Kaine to kill Abell, then by the spirit of God that taught Dauid to spare Saule. There remaineth now onely the fourth and last charge against me in this Encounter briefely to be dis∣charged,About Par∣dons and In∣dulgences. namely, that I lay to your charge (vn∣truly as you say) that yee prescribe a meanes of deliuerie from all daungers (euen when men sin∣ned immediately against God) which is a pardon from the Popes holines, and absolution from his ho∣ly Priestes. In which accusation what say I more then all the world knoweth to be true? Is it not strange that these men either so vnconscionably pra∣ctise that openly, and generally, which they dare not auow, and iustifie? or so impudently denie, that, which they doe so commonly practise the Catho∣like doctrine is (saith this Champion) that the Popes and Churches Indulgences auaile not to remooue mortall sinnes, &c. neither doth the pardon remit the
guilt of sinne, &c. But (Sir) whatsoeuer your do∣ctrine is in this point, your practise is quite contra∣rie; neither is it any rare thing with your almightie Pope, to practise that generally by his infinite autho∣ritie, which all his Doctors and schoole-men are a∣shamed to defend.Indulgences grounded nei∣ther vpon Scripture, nor vpon ancient Fathers. For as for the authoritie wherup∣on your indulgences are grounded, your owne men confesse, as namely (amongst the rest) Durandus, De Indulgentijs pauca dici possunt per certitudinem, quia nec scriptura expressè de ijs loquitur, sancti etiā patres Am∣brosius, Hilarins, Hieronymus, Augustinus minime loquun∣tur de indulgentijs: Little can be certainly affirmed of indulgences, because neither the Scripture speaketh expressely of them, and the ancient fathers, Ambrose, Hilarie, Ierome, Augustine make no mention of them. Thus your selues truly confesse that ye haue neither warrant of Scripture, nor of auncient fa∣thers for your Popes pardons, yet goe they cur∣rant. The notorious abuses whereof, euen councels haue condemned, as the Lateran Councell,Councels con∣demne the a∣buses of the Popes pardons a Coun∣cell held at Vienna, and euen your Councell of Trent too, doth in generall termes condemne all abuses in these pardons, which by superstition, ignorance, irre∣uerence, haue crept in; though in speciall it name none, because (it seemeth) it intended not to re∣forme any. Notwithstanding whatsoeuer eyther your Doctors pressed with truth doe write, or your Councels for shame are forced to decree, the Pope hath forced for no shame to make marts and mar∣chandise of mens soules by his pardons, and to sell sinne for money, as flesh is sold in the shambles.
Whereof let those verses partly beare witnes, which are written in an auncient stone in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Stephen, amongst the Bituriges in A∣quitania, a few whereof I will here set downe. Hîc des deuotè, caelestibus associate,Ex Chemnicio de Indulgentijs. Mentes aegrotae per munera a sunt tibi lotae, Ergo venitote, gentes à sede remotae; Qui datis estote, certi de diuite dote, Te precor accelera, spargas hic dum potes, aera; Et sic re vera, securè caelica spera. Giue francklie here, in Heauen a place prepare, Your sicklie soules by gifts cleane purged are, Come people then which dwell far from this place, Ye that doe giue, rest sure of mickle grace. I pray thee haste, giue money while ye may, Then surely hope for Heauen, at the last day. And againe. Hic si largè des, in coelo fit tua sedes, Qui serit hîc, parcè comprendit in arce, Cur tardas? tantùm nummi mihi des aliquantum; Pro solo nummo gaudebis in aethere summo. If thou giue freely here, Heauen is thy hire, He that giues little, shall little there acquire, Why staiest thou then? onely some money giue, For onely money, thou in Heauen shalt liue. To which wee may adde the complaint of the Princes of Germany against the Pope,The complain of the Ger∣maine Princes exhibited in the Councell at Norremberg, the third complaint be∣ing this; But especially the burden and grieuance of the Popes pardons and Indulgences are most importable. When as the Bishops of Rome vnder pretence of
building some Church in Rome, or to warre against the Turke, do make out their Indulgences with their Buls, perswading and promising to the simple peo∣ple, strange and wonderfull benefits of remission à Culpa & paena, from the guilt of their sinnes, and pu∣nishment due for the same: and not in this life one∣lie, but also after this life to them that bee dead bur∣ning in the fire of Purgatorie. Through the hope and occasion whereof, true pietie is almost extinct in all Germanie; While euery ill disposed person promiseth himselfe for a little money licence and impunitie, to doe what him listeth: whereupon followeth fornication, incest, adulterie, periurie, homicide, robbing and spoyling, rapine and vsurie, with a whole stood of mischiefes, &c. By which what was the generall and currant vse of the Popes pardons, is euident to be seene. Tecelius.Tecelius the Popes Marchant, who set to sale Pope Leo the 10. his Indulgences in Germany for ten shil∣lings the peece, doth so praise and set forth his ware, as that his pardons not onely reached to the remit∣ting of mortall sinne (which this Encounterer would faine deny) but that his Indulgences were of such validitie, that there was no sinne so great (though a man by impossible supposition had defloured the mother of Christ) but by them might be pardoned; and that a man by vertue of them is freed both from the guilt and punishment of his sinne. What should I adde, that it sufficeth them not to sell pardons for sinnes past,Pardous for sinnes to be committed. but that this mysterie of iniquitie preuai∣led so farre, as that it stretched to pardon sinnes to come. The sundry formes of which Buls, I could out of good authors here set downe, whereof (as is
reported) fell out a prettie experiment with the same Tecelius, to whom a certaine Noble man commeth, confessing that he had a purpose to commit an hay∣nous sinne, and heartely praieth to haue a pardon graunted him for hereafter: Tecelius setteth a great price vpon that ware, but yet the Noble man payeth the money: shortly after, this Noble man laying waite for Tecelius in a wood, brake open his Coffers wherein was all his treasure that hee had gotten by fale of his pardons, and robbed him. Tecelius threat∣neth and curseth sore, but the Noble man sheweth him the Bull which he bought so dearely of himselfe, and merilie telleth him, this was the sinne which he purposed to commit, from which I am fully and in good forme absolued. I would the opinion conceiued of the Popes ple∣narie pardons, did not induce Subiects to commit most hainous treason against the Lords annointed, to satisfie the Popes desire. Whereof an example may be seene in Parry,Parry. who vndertooke the murdering of her Maiestie, (as himselfe confessed) whereunto hee was the more strongly resolued by the Pardon from the Pope of all his sinnes, whereof Cardinall Como in his letter assureth him, the words to this purpose I haue thought good here to set down, translated into English out of the Cardinals letter.Caines spirit. And to the end you may be the more ayded by that good spirite, which hath induced you to this: his blessednes graunteth you full par∣don and remission of all your sinnes, as you requested: assu∣ring you that besides the merite you shall receiue in Heauen, his holines will make himselfe debter to acknowledge your deseruings in the best manner that he may.
Now how ignorant soeuer you presume me to be of the difference betwixt the Popes pardon, and the Priests absolution, because I make mention of them both together; I would your wisdome should well knowe, that for this deepe point of Catholike doc∣trine, I am as well acquainted with the speculation (though not practise) of it as your selfe. Howsoeuer they haue some differences, yet herein they concur as Simeon and Leui brethren in euill, that both are vsed as inducements to most hainous sins, thereby to satis∣fie the Popes pleasure. Sundry chronicles make men∣tion of Simon the Monke of Swinested,Absolution. Simon a Monke. who poy∣soned King Iohn, that before the fact hee confessed his purpose to his Abbot, who highly commended his zeale, and gaue him absolution before-hand, for the committing of this wicked acte: whereunto I might ioyne the example of Iacobus Clemens who murdered the King of France,Iacobus Clemens being also before-hand confessed and absolued of it. But what neede I adde more, when as almost the whole world know∣eth and crieth out, of the horrible abuses both of your Pardon-mongers, and absoluing Priests, to the strengthning of sinne, and decay of vertue? The conclusi∣on.That my conclusion seemeth absurd in the eies of your proud folly, I neither maruell, nor grieue at it: notwithstanding I do again affirme; that the blasphe∣mie & blindnes of your Popish superstition is most aparant herein. And God be praised, that hath clered the spirituall sight of our English Nation, to hate and abhorre them, and with your gibing & railing I leaue you to disport your selfe, because I scorne to be a companion to men of those occupations. But if your
needels eye be no straiter then to passe through con∣fession, & to be enioined your popish penance, your high way to heauen is broad enough, especially when a pardon may be had in store (for some mo∣ney) by vertue whereof any Priest may giue full re∣mission of all sinnes at the hower of death.Iustification by faith. As for that which you blasphemously cal the open cart-way of onely faith, you shall finde a straiter, and narrower passage, then you would beare the world in hand, if you conceiue not an historicall faith which may be dead, but a true, liuely, & iustifying faith; for though we be iustified by faith onely, apprehending Christ his obedience, & merits, who was made sinne for vs, that we might be made the righteousnes of God in him: yet are we not iustified by an onely faith, such as is voide and destitute of good workes; but in the person of them that are iustified faith and good workes are vnited, and coupled together, though in the Act of iustifying they are seuered, it being the proper dutie of faith alone, as a hand to appehend, and take hold of Christ, who is made to vs of God, wisedome, and righteousnes, sanctification, and re∣demption, that according as it is written, He that re∣ioyceth, let him reioyce in the Lord. Heate and light are both inseparable in the fire, though it be the proper∣tie of the heat onely to warme, and not of the light: so are faith and good workes coupled in as many as are iustified, though we be iustified through faith onely. Therefore we are necessarilie to exercise our selues in good works, dying to sinne and liuing to righteousnes, if wee hope hereafter to liue with Christ eternally. For it is true that Ambrose hath,
Sicut sancti sunt membra Christi; sic impij sunt membra Dioboli: As those that are holy, are the members of Christ; so are the wicked ones the limmes of Sathan: and so with the words of the Prophet I conclude. This is the way, walke in it,Esay. 30. and God almightie for his Christes sake giue euen you grace to finde this way in time. Resistance to the third Encounter, about her Maie∣sties marueilous deliuerances from dangers, in Queene Maries time, and since. IT is the Common and vsuall practise of wrangling and cauilling spirits, for the preuenting of iust ac∣cusations against themselues, first to begin and chal∣lenge others of the same crimes whereof themselues are most guiltie. So dealt Sathan the accuser of the brethren with Iob,Iob. 1. saying vnto God, That if he were touched in all that hee had, he would blaspheme God to his face, and yet there is nothing more common with that olde Serpent, then to curse and blashpheme God. In like manner this parasite and slaunderous Encoun∣terer, being priuie vnto himselfe of his guiltines in flatterie, and bloud-thirsting, of both which he hath giuen sufficient proofe throughout this his whole Ward-word, would yet notwithstanding in the en∣trance of this his third Encounter,This bloudie mate falsely chargeth me with bloud-thirstines. perswade the rea∣ders, that I like a Parasite doe both flatter the State and Prince, and also exasperate both the one and the other against the Recusant Papistes who liue a∣mongst vs. How vniustly he hath charged me with flatterie
and forging, is made apparant (I trust) to euery indifferent reader in my answeres before to his two first Encounters: and how farre I am from a bloudie mouth, a poysoned tongue, and an earnest desire to haue all his Catholikes destroyed (for so he tearmeth the Recusant Papists amongst vs) shal by Gods grace be made plaine & euident in that which followeth. Let the beast that hath two hornes like a Lambe, but not of the Lambe delight in his hornes, and let the whore of Rome, that is drunken with the bloud of Gods Saints delight to gorge in bloud: but the true Church of Christ, and her children, shall be alwaies found gentle, peaceable, and merciful, without either the sauage cōdition of beasts, or the barking & bloud-thirstie condition of dogs and hounds, how reproch∣fully, maliciously & dishonorably soeuer this Encoun∣terer doth write of ye house of Huntingdon & my selfe. But before I come to the particulars handled in this Encounter, what moued you (Sir Encounterer) thus ha∣stely and fiercely to charge me in this place with a bloud-thirstie humor, & to paint your margent with Sir Francis his malignitie? doe you vncharita∣blie suspect my thoughts? or doe you frowardly peruert, and misconstrue my words? the secret thoughtes are knowne onely to God; but if my writings doe any where bewray such a sauage dispo∣sition, why did you not frame your inditement vpon mine owne words? what, were you moued because I did truly and thankfully acknowledge the maruel∣lous deliuerance and preseruation of her Maiestie in the daies of her sister Queene Marie, which is the first thing in this your Encounter you find fault with
all? Or were you mooued, because I haue faithfully related the Popish practises of bloudie Prelates, and home-borne Traitors against her Maiestie both be∣fore, and since the beginning of her Raigne? Or was it because in setting downe the iust iudgement of God, and the punishment of Iustice iustly inflicted vpon Doctor Storie, I doe in the ende thereof desire that al they which wish to Queene Elizabeth as he did (for those be my words, pagina. 27.) may speed as he did? Other matter I am sure you can find none from the 18. page vnto the 49. of my booke, which all in this Encounter you take vpon you to answere. And I pray you (Sir) are these such matters as may iustlie prouoke anie to such furie, outcrying, opprobrious names, and grieuous accusations, as in this your En∣counter you haue vsed against me? the matters are all iustifiable, as shall after more fully God willing ap∣peare, and as well might Cushi (who bringing newes to Dauid of the ende of Absolon said,. Sam. 18. the enemies of the Lord the King, and all that rise to doe thee hurt, be as that young man is) be charged with a bloudie mouth, the worme of heresie, woodnes; and furie, as I for desiring, as I did, against her Ma∣iesties enemies. My heart (I thanke God) is free from thirsting after the bloud of anie, and the true conuersion, & reformation of my countriemen who are deuoted to the Bishop of Rome, and the Romish newe faith, should be more ioy and com∣fort to me, then anie worldlie thing; which both doe argue that I loue their persons, though I detest their Popish Religion, and traiterous practices. I wish that Papistes may liue, and that Poperie may
dye; and I ioyne with Saint Augustine concerning Papists in generall, who are not particularly tainted with actuall treason:Aug. in Psal. 37 Non oramus vt moriantur inimi∣ci, sed vt corrigantur, sie mortui erunt inimici, iam enim correcti, non amplius erunt inimici: Wee pray not for the death of our enemies, but for their correction and amendment; so our enemies shall bee dead, for being amended they shall bee no more our e∣nemies. But now to the seuerall parts of your Encounter as they follow in order with as much breuitie as I may:Her Maiesties marueilous deliuerance in Queene Ma∣ries time. It offendeth you greatly, that I impute her Ma∣iesties deliuerance from great daunger in the time of Queene Mary, to bee wholly and onely wrought to her from Gods goodnes, and this (out of the madnes of your idle braine) you blasphemously call a mi∣racle of Milne-wheeles; but with all the craftie wit you haue (how greatly soeuer you vaunt thereof, imagining that I cannot vnderstand plaine humane reason) you shall not be able, either to make her de∣liuerance lesse strange and admirable then I haue said it was, or to cleere any of those that I haue accused to hunt after her life at that time. But I pray you (Sir N.D.) why should this matter so much displease you, as to vrge you to write so ma∣ny lines in seeking to disproue my saying? Is it be∣cause you would flatter her Maiestie and perswade her, that she was better beloued, then she thought she was? Or is it because you are vnwilling to heare, that God should so honour the Gospell, as to bring in the free publishing and profession thereof into this our Land, by one that was marueilously preserued to be
a Prince and nourse vnto vs? Or is it because you would free those daies from such malice and cruel∣tie, as her Maiestie did sensiblie perceiue? Or for that you would shew your skill in carping at my sayings? Whatsoeuer occasion you did take (for iust cause had you none) you might haue done better to haue spared your labour and to haue said as we doe with the Church in Dauids time vpon the like occasion in preseruing Dauid to be King of Israel. This is the Lords doing, and it is marueilous in our eyes. Her Maiesties deliuerance and Dauids compared.If any Israelite then discontented with Dauids gouernment, should haue said, you are miracle-ma∣kers, and framers of miracles of Milne-wheeles, be∣cause in humane reason there may bee imagined di∣uers pregnant and potent causes, which did concur to the preseruation of Dauids life, and his admission to the kingdome; as namely that Ionathan was his friend, he was beautifull and valiant, he had married the Kings daughter, and the people did honour him; should not such a one haue shewed himselfe a blas∣phemous deprauer of Gods worke, and an enuious repiner at Dauid his safetie and honour? Yes out of question. Looke then to your selfe (Sir Encounterer) and learne to speake more reuerently of Gods mar∣ueilous workes, and in charitie reioyce with them that reioyce: Iubemur (saith Bernard) colligere frag∣menta ne pereant, id est, ne minima beneficia obliuisci, We are bidden to gather vp the very fragments and crums, that is, not to forget the least benefits. How much more then should wee magnifie the power of God in his wonderfull workes? But how doth hee disproue my sayings? First hee laboureth to proue
that her Maiesties life and blood was not sought af∣ter, neither was shee in such danger as I haue affir∣med: next hee sheweth certaine humaine causes of her Maiesties preseruation. That she was subiect to suspitions; and that she was had in ielousie, and did hold the Queene and state in suspence and care, this Encounterer denieth not, alleaging cunningly some such reasons thereof, as namely her inclination to true Religion, the attempts of Wyat, Courtney, Ca∣row, &c. and the condition of the Queene of Scots, thereby endeuouring (after his cunning manner) both to leaue her Maiestie to be suspected at the least of some disloyaltie to her Sister, as also to cleare the chiefe pillers then of Poperie from doing her wrong, and the Queene of Scots from working of treason a∣gainst her since that time. But let him write neuer so cunningly,Her Maiestie vniustly trou∣bled in Queen Maries daies. seeking to leaue the matter doubtfull by way of presumption, as he shall neuer be able to tainte her Maiestie with the least shew of disloyaltie in those dayes, who wit∣nessed with her Diamond the soundnes of her heart and innocent behauiour in these words, Much suspec∣ted by me, nothing proued can be: So shall he neuer bee able to free either the State then from troubling and wronging of her Maiestie vniustly, neither to cleare the Queene of Scots of such treasons as she was iust∣ly condemned for. But how proueth he that she was in no danger of life? euen because shee was preser∣ued.A ridiculous argument. For (saith he) there being power in them to put her to death, and no power at home or abroad to hinder them; if there had been such a seeking after her death as I haue af∣firmed; then by forme of argument iustified by Cicero in
his Rhetoricke  have been effected. Alas poore fiie Encounterer, must my speech which onely accuseth the Romish Cleargie then in place of credite to seeke her life, include the King and Queene? Or must it needs follow where there is a soueraigntie and outward strength (for that I ke you meane by power) ioyned with will, there ye mat∣ter must needs be effected? If this reason were good, how was Moses preserued, there being power and will in Pharaoh to kill him? How was Dauid preser∣ued from Saule, or the Prophets from Ierob, or the Israelites from Hams malice, Peter from Herods cru∣eltie, or our Sauiour Christ (for a time) from the con∣spiracie of the chiefe Iewes? For in all these there was will ioyned with outward power for a time; and yet the things desired not effected. Cicero his argu∣ment holdeth where there is nothing supposed to hinder, and where the will is fully bent to doe a thing: but in all Soueraigntie and inclination of the will it holdeth not, because there may want strength, and continuance of the partie, and the will may not be throughly setled; as that of the Iewes, they would faine haue put Christ to death, but they feared the people. God no doubt did strangely keepe Queene Marie from consenting to the bloodie practise of the Romish Cleargie against her Sister; and though some of the Cleargie did seeke her death, yet it might bee hindered by others, and their desires by some considerations so crossed, that though they did de∣sire her death, yet they could not effect it, for which the Lord of Heauen onely is to be praised. But what a shameles forehead hath this Encounte∣rer,
who against so manifest a truth, so plainely, and sensiblie to bee proued, doth not blush to denie that her Maiesties life was at that day earnestlie and mali∣ciouslie sought after? Why was she so hastelie sent for when shee was sicke, to bee brought vp to the Court, either aliue, or dead, presently vpon Wyats ri∣sing? why was she falsly accused and burdened with Wyats insurrection; yea so far that he was brought a∣gainst truth and conscience to accuse her? Why was she committed to the Tower to be a close prisoner? Why did she say Tanquam ouis, when she remoued from the Tower to Woodstocke? Why was she in many feares, and so often enforced to bewaile her estate, and to pray to the mightie God to preserue her? Was there not a report that there was a warrant out for her execution, and did not M. Bridges Lieute∣nant of the Tower go in haste to Queene Marie, and so by certifying her preuent the bloodie execution? When the sword of iustice could not by any meanes be drawne forth against her, what extreame dealings were vsed, and what secret conspiracies plotted, for the bringing of her to an vntimely death, and the shedding of her innocent bloud? I spare to write more in so plaine a matter, that reuerent learned man Master Foxe hath at large in his Monuments of the Church set downe, the miraculous preseruation of her Maiestie at that time from extreame calamitie and danger of life, which who so readeth, shall with inward compassion and watrie eyes rather lament her pitifull estate, then with a hard heart and shame∣les face deny so manifest a truth as this Encounterer doth.
Causes con∣curring to her Maiesties pre∣seruation.As for the causes which he alleageth did concurre to the preseruation of her Highnes, it is not denied but that some of those by him alleaged, and many o∣thers which in probable reason might be imagined, might well concurre for the working of her Maie∣sties securitie at that time; but that any of thofe was so potent and mightie, as of necessitie to make her safe from daunger, or that they or any other can bee certainely alleaged, to be necessarie causes and pro∣curers of her deliuerance, with all his wit, and insight into matters of State, (of which he seemeth much to brag) he will neuer be able to shew. Certaine it is that her Maiestie when she was in that trouble and daunger, vsed these words when shee protested her innocencie at her landing at the Tower. Before thee O God I speake it, hauing none other friends but thee alone: and as certaine it is that neither wise States-man, nor any other can definitelie say of these, or any other supposed causes, in these respects, or for these causes chiefly shee was preserued: what though shee were gracious, amiable, and vertuous, and much fauoured of the Spanish King (who in policie it may be did by that meanes seeke to win the peoples hearts vnto him,) must it needs follow hereupon, that therefore her innocent behauiour could not bee called into question, nor her bloud shed by any wicked conspi∣racie? The King of Spaine was farre from her in her greatest trouble, and neither you, nor any other can say that hee pleaded her cause or stoode openly for her freedome at any time. If hee sent the Duke of Feria to visite her, or secretly did speake for her to Queene Marie, as Master Foxe seemeth to confesse,
he did that which was seemely and honorable in a King, and that which her place and innocencie iust∣ly deserued. As for the generall hope which you say most men had of her Maiesties being a Catholike: if it had been either so vniuersally conceiued as you imagine, or by such outward tokens had appeared as you haue set downe, how can it be true that she was presumed by many to be inclined to a different Religion from yours, as you a little before in this Encounter doe con∣fesse? If shee had been deuoted so earnestly to Po∣pish Religion, why needed commaundement to be giuen that shee should haue Masse within her house, within two daies after her committing to the Tow∣er? and how happened it, that her men were so vnskilfull to helpe the Priest, that the first day there could be no Masse for want of a Clerke, and the next day one of her yeomen at Kyrieleson made a stop, and set the Priest being not able, or not willing to pro∣ceede any further? Her sound affection to true Re∣ligion was the cause of all her trouble and danger in her Sisters daies, and her willing and ioyfull embra∣cing of the true Christian faith, and of God his true worship and seruice, hath so sufficiently been witnes∣sed euer since the beginning of her Raigne, that no man of common sense or Christian charitie hath the least cause to suspect that her heart should bee vn∣sound in the present profession of God his true Reli∣gion and Gospell. The last cause which you alleage to concurre to the preseruation of her Maiestie, is but a thing ima∣gined by you seeing the matter of depriuing her Ma∣iestie
of life neuer came to any such stately consulta∣tion as you your selfe in handling this point, doe plainelie graunt; and seeing also that in such a case they could haue found out other meanes, for pre∣uenting such a potent pretender: whatsoeuer you say of the Spaniards affection to the Queene of Scots at that time, I am sure all England had like to haue ta∣sted by so lamentable an experience, that this Lady of Scotland was so affected by Spaine, and sundrie of our English Espagniolized traitours, as (if through Gods goodnes shee had not been cut-off in time) hardly could our Soueraigne haue escaped with life long, being almost daily in daunger (whilest that Scottish Queene liued) through the practise of Rome, Spaine, and our home Traytors. Thus notwithstan∣ding all your flourishes and deuises, your potent cau∣ses are too weake to weaken my speech, the gracious worke of God in preseruing her Maiestie at that time appearing to euery Christian and indifferent iudgement, no lesse miraculous and strange, then I haue affirmed. God is the onely proper maker of mi∣racles, I onely acknowledge his worke in deliuering this my Soueraigne from daunger with thankfulnes, without either flatterie of any person, or ambitions seeking after honour, though you very maliciously and scornefullie do charge me with both; but by that time that veine of your carriage in this your rayling Pamphlet be throughly scanned and conceiued, nei∣ther your tongue nor pen will proue any great slaun∣der. I will shut vp this point with a speech of Master Iohn Hales vsed in his oration to her Maiestie at her first entrance to her raigne, which seemeth
fying of my sayings, his words are these. He that sit∣teth on high and laugheth at their madnes;M. Hales Ora∣tion. would not suf∣fer that the malicious purposes, and most cruell deuised In∣iustice should haue successe. He did take vpon him the pro∣tection of you, he onely hath been your Iehosheba, that preser∣ued you from this wicked Athalia: he onely was the Iehoia∣da that destroyed this cruell Athalia: he onely hath made you Queene of this realme in stead this mischieuous Ma∣rana: No earthly creature can claime any peece of thanks therefore, no mans face, no mans counsaile, no mans aide hath been the cause thereof. The second thing you finde fault with in this your Encounter is my affirming,The fretting of the Papists against her Maiestie now being Queene that when our Soueraigne was fullie possessed of her royall seat, then Sathan began to rage, and his ministers to fret and chafe; these my words you terme to be wicked calumniati∣ons, and tales of a tubbe, to entertaine fooles and ignorant people; but with how little truth and ho∣nestie, and with what abundance of malice and folly, that which followeth shall I doubt not make appa∣rant to the indifferent reader. You aske how it could be that the Papists did freat and chafe, seeing they as the greatest number, and chiefest persons did freelie, and willingly place her, crowne her, annoint her, take her oath, for preser∣uing the lawes of the Realme, and sweare fidelitie to her againe. To which question I returne the like for answere: how could it be that Haman commaun∣ded to honour Mardocheus in the sight of the people, should fret and chafe at his aduancement,Hester. 6. when as he was the man that arrayed Mardocheus with roy∣all apparrell, brought him on horsebacke through the
streete, and proclaimed before him: Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King will honour. This is no tale of a tubbe, as this carping companion would perswade, but a truth out of Gods booke, whereby we may see that some do yeeld vnto that outwardlie in shew, which in their hearts they yeeld not vnto, and at which, afterwards they fret & chafe. And could it otherwise be, but that they must fret and chafe, when as before her raigne in her sisters time one Ferrar that was defended by Storie and Bonner, said that he hoped that she and they that ho∣ped she should haue the Crowne should hop head∣lesse, or be fired with faggots before she should come to the Crowne: and also after her aduancement to the Crowne, the Bishops, and Clergie maisters as they shewed themselues in the conference at West∣minster, and in the Parliament assembled verie diso∣bedient, stubborne and malicious, (wherupon some of them were committed to prison,) so they had a consultation to haue excommunicated her, as your worshipfull Cardinall Allen affirmeth in his 52. page of his answere to English Iustice, and (as your Rishton saith) the Archbishop of Yorke, whose dutie it was to haue crowned her, Cardinall Poole being dead, refu∣sed to doe it, and so did all the Bishops, except one, and he almost the lowest. But I will proceed to peruse the examination of some particulars, of the hostilitie by me alleadged, willing the Reader by the way to consider deeply of your graue aduise, which (vpon my vsing the words Sacred and Annoynted, as honourable and rightly ap∣pertaining to her Maiestie) you offer to be aduised∣ly
thought of, as tending to the commendation of annointing Priestes and Princes,About an∣nointing. and concluding stronglie the great honour that her Maiestie had by Catholikes at her first entrance. What, must it needs follow that annointed must be taken for annointing with oile, or must her Maiestie needs be beholding to the Clergie for that she is called the Lords annoin∣ted? I had well hoped that your quoting in the mar∣gent diuers places of Scripture, for confirmation of the ceremony of annointing Priests and Princes, had been a better Bible-clerke then so foulie to be mista∣ken in the 105. Psalme,Psal. 150. which place hath been allead∣ged for Priuiledge of the Popish Clergie from the sword of Iustice, notwithstanding their filthie life. The Patriarches, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, are cal∣led annointed, and yet were neuer annointed with oile. In Esay. 45. Cyrus is called the Lords annointed, and yet a heathen Prince:Luke. 2. our Sauiour Iesus is cal∣led annointed, and yet it is not read, that euer he was annointed with outward oile. Princes are cal∣led the Lords annointed chieflie because God hath put them apart, and consecrated them to serue him in place of gouernment, because they are indued with wisedome, courage, strength, and feare of the Lord, and because they should be profitable to the people, gentle, and mercifull, the truth is more respected then the outward ceremonie in the word annointed. Priestes, Kings, and Prophets before Christes time were annointed with visible oile. I confesse, not for such cause as you imagine that Princes are, but to shew that they were appoynted of God, consecrated, and furnished with gifts from him, as
also to be types and figures of Christ, who vnder the law was represented by these three offices, estates, or orders of men. The ceremonie is not now of neces∣sitie to continue; Christ without outward annoin∣ting was called by Simeon the annointed of the Lord. So that hir Maiestie may be tearmed honorablie and deseruedlie the Lords annointed, and yet neither your superstitious, and Iewish ceremony of greazing your popish Priests commended thereby, nor her Maiestie made much beholding to your Clergie for that honour. The first particular of hostilities which you take vpon you to disprooue is my speech of your dar∣ling Doctor Storie,About D. Sto∣rie. whom because I call a bloudsuc∣ker, as Dauid calleth his persecutors Saul, Doeg, and others, bloudie men, you charge me to be light-wit∣ted, and foule mouthed;Psal. 5. & 59. you may take your pleasure (Sir N.D.) at me stil, as you haue done, but you know the reward of such as contemptuouslie reproach o∣thers with follie, or maliciouslie doe raile and speake euil of them vndeseruedly. You tell vs there are three things in my speech of Doctor Story to be considered; the words I charge him with, my interpretation of them, and the iudgement he receiued; in all which if you can either conuince me of vntruth, or iustlie condemn me for vncharitably censuring the speech, and his person, we will beleeue you another time, in your proud boasting. The words (you say) were ne∣uer sufficiently proued to haue been spoken by him, neither by sufficient witnesses,Stories words. nor by his owne con∣fession: and because the words could not serue to a∣ny purpose, but to his owne ruine (he being known
to be wise and no foole,) you would haue it belee∣ued that he spake them not at all. This is but a simple defence (Sir Encounterer) of your stout champion, seeing the words were spoken in the hearing of so many witnesses, both of your side and ours, in the Parliament house, and seeing that the speech being generally testified by them that heard him at that time, it was neuer, either by himselfe denied, or by others that were present controlled. If Doctor Storie had been so wise, as you would perswade he was, he would neuer haue vsed such impudent words, such shamelesse talke, such vnconscionable and cruell speeches, without anie pittie, of such as he had per∣secuted most cruellie, as it is certainelie reported he did also at that time. As for the interpretation which you call a bloudie commentarie,The interpre∣tatiō of them. it was not deuised to draw bloud, nor to presse him downe, see∣ing he long since receiued his iust iudgement, it doth onely descrie his bloudie and disloyall heart, which caused his tongue to vtter such furious and bloudie speeches. You would faine haue Doctor Storie not to meane the Queene by the roote, but either here∣sie it selfe, or the infected Nobilitie and Gentrie. But alas (Sir N.D.) your fained glosses are so farre from drawing his words to another sense, that they rather confirme the same, much like to Pilates superscrip∣tion, which being set vp to shew the cause of Christs condemnation, did yet notwithstanding proclaime his innocencie, and conuince them of crueltie: for doe not you a little before confesse, that these words could serue to no other purpose, but to his owne ruine? and doe not you here acknowledge that the
Nobilitie and Gentrie seasoned with true Religion (which you in the madnes of your idle braine call heresie) were but inferiour roots, both which things doe proue, that his words (which were these) They (meaning the Commssioners, and Counsellors in Queene Maries time) laboured onely about the young and little sprigs and twigs while they should haue stricken at the roote, and cleane haue rooted it out) cannot be meant of any other, but of the Prince and chiefe roote, from whom by the great goodnes of God, the gene∣rall and open profession of Christian Religion, hath againe sprung vp in this our land, and with whom it doth continue yet still, notwithstanding that Bacon, Cicill, Knowles and all those that you named are dead and gone. The words must needs aime at a person, and not an heresie; at one, and not at many; at a chiefe, and not at anie inferiour; howsoeuer this glosing and cunning Encounterer would perswade vs of our Queenes affection to Poperie, or denie that true Re∣ligion was willinglie and ioyfullie without compul∣sion and constraint from others established and maintained by her. Rishton one of your Masters, speaking of her before she was crowned, saith, Ani∣mum in eare suum statim patefecit, &c. 1. she presentlie shewed her mind in Religion, both by silencing Ca∣tholike preachers (as he calleth them) as also by suf∣fering all those that had liued in exile for Religion, to returne home: and by charging a certaine Bishop readie to celebrate before her, that he should not ele∣uate the consecrate host. For which respects (as he confesseth) the Archbishop of Yorke and the rest re∣fused to crowne her,
The iudgement which Doctor Storie receiued by the Iustice of our land, was most iust, not being iudged to death for these words (as you craftily, yet verie foolishlie, and falsely haue set downe) but for that he denied her Maiesties Supremacie in the land,Stories iudge∣ment. and Soueraigntie ouer him, and pleaded himselfe to be no subiect to the Queene, but to the king of Spaine: And this is it that your Martyr-maker Doctor Saun∣ders seemeth to insinuate in his title added to Doctor Storie, shewing that he suffered for the Primacie of your Bishop of Rome:Martyrium Io∣an. Stor. Angl. pro ecc. Rom. primat. but obserue the blasphemie of this Pope-holy Encounterer against Christ, and his heinous accusation out of a trecherous heart against the Magistrates, and Iustice of our land, in compa∣ring such a traitour as Storie was, with our Sauiour Christ, and our Iudges with Pilate. Leaue your blind zeale (Sir Romanist) which carrieth you so violent∣ly to such impieties, and begin at length to imbrace true Religion with vs, in the feare of God, and in all loyaltie, and dutie, reuerence and commend the true Iustice of your Countrie. Whatsoeuer your Catholikes doe imagine Storie to be worthie of, hauing made him a Martyr, who indeed was a traitour, howsoeuer your selfe blinded with partiality & heresy cannot find out any trespasse of moment committed by him, (though he denied our Prince to be his Soueraigne and Queene) yet to euerie Christian and in different reader his iudge∣ment will appeare to be iust, and his offence no lesse then treason. Doctor Saunders indeed hath made him a Martyr in his booke of the visible Monarchie of the Church, and it may be you haue a purpose to cano∣nize
him for a Saint, if there might be found a Suriu that by his Legions or Legend of lies would faine vn∣to him a better life, & some strange miracles; but it be∣ing true that the cause, & not ye punishmēt doth make a Martyr, and that some things had in great estimatiō with mē, may be abominable in Gods sight, your trai∣terous Story shal be no better a Martir, then the Martirs of Montanus, Marcion, Nouatus heresies of whom Euse∣bius maketh mentiō. And so leauing your traiterous Doctor: let vs come to ye second hostilitie, wherwith you find fault, & that is the Bull of Pius Quintus with the excommunication of her Maiestie:The Bull of Pius Quintus. concerning which Bul, it moueth your patiēce greatly, that euery where in schooles, sermons, books & places of Iustice, this fact of your Pope should be produced, as a sound witnes and testimony, of the vnsound and disloyall hearts of such of your catholikes, as approue your Popes dealing therein, by which you would enforce that matter wanted wherwith to charge your traitors; at their arraignment for there was alwaies many and sufficient proofes, wee need not seeke farre for matter to conuict you of most grosse impieties, and cursed practises, you haue herein yeelded vs too great an haruest to labour in, and our hearts desire hath euer been that we might trulie speak better things of you: We charge none to be guiltie of ye fact, but such as ap∣proue it, or shew thēselues too forward to yeeld obe∣diēce vnto it: & yet (sir N.D.) I think you could hard∣ly resolue this doubt, how a papist acknowledging your Popes authoritie, and iustifying his proceeding therein, may acknowledge her Maiestie to be his true and rightful Queene. For in the title to that Bul, you
know the Queene is called a pretended Queene, by the Bull she is deposed, her Subiects are absolued frō their oath of fealtie & allegeance, and those that obay her are accursed. What though all Catholiks are not priuie to your Popes reasons, & informations? may it not be concluded necessarily (notwithstāding that) that such as acknowledge the Popes supreme autho∣ritie ouer Prices, and hold it for a maxime, that in a definitiue sentence he cannot erre, are enemies to Queene Elizabeth & the State? I know in deed some, as Master Hart, may deny that ye Pope hath any thing to doe with disposing of kingdomes, & deposing of Princes, and so the Bull may not any waie concerne them; but I doubt there be but a few that will affirme the Popes supremacy in tēporal things to be vsurped. But because you post ouer this matter to other treati∣ses, esteeming of me in matter of dispute, as Goliah did of Dauid whō he scorned,Master Iuel. Bullenger. I wil also referre the Chri∣stiā reader to such learned treatises as are extāt for this Pandora her box, & descrying the hurtful and vnhol∣some euils that lye in the bowels of ye seditious Bull. And because in this place (before you consider fur∣ther of this Bull) you take exceptions against a propo∣sition of mine which you terme ridiculous, & to pro∣ceede from deepe ignorance and a base breast, I will a little fortifie my saying, and make it apparant to the indifferent reader, either your grosse mistaking, or wilfull and malicious peruerting of my said speech: as for your Lucyfer-like pride it is more then apparant alreadie: my words are these,Whether any man may de∣pose Kings. As though it were in the power of any one mortall childe of man, to dispose of King∣domes, to depose Princes, or to dispense with subiects for not,
onely disobeying, but rebelling against their lawfull Soue∣raignes, &c. Is this such a ridiculous proposition (Sir Encounterer) or doe these words either make tempo∣rall Kingdomes matters of Godhead and immorta∣litie, or necessarily conclude that wicked Princes, such as Nero and Caligula, must bee obeyed in all things, with which flourishes, and false gloses you seeke to discredite my sayings? Your malice did ma∣ster your reason, and your will did ouerrun your wit in this your lewde construction. That which I said I may lawfullie still vphold, that Princes are not depriuable by any mortall man, nei∣ther can any man dispense with subiects for refusing to yeeld that obedience which the Lorde requireth them to yeeld. The Prophet Daniel acknowledgeth that it is God,Dan. 2. and 4. that hath this power to take away Kings, and to set vp Kings, and to giue the kingdome to whom hee will, and saieth that the Lord ordereth the States and Princes of the world at his pleasure: Marie the blessed Virgine reserueth this honor who∣lie to God.Luke 1. He putteth down the mightie from their seate, and exalteth the base: reade ouer the bookes of Kings, none euer disposed of kingdomes, but the Lorde of Lordes; neither were any throwne from their thrones, but by the Lords speciall appointment, as in the deiection of Ieroboam, Baasa, Elah, Achab and Io∣ram is apparant.1. King. 14. There was neuer any King of Israel or Iudah remoued from the Crowne, by any Priest or Prophet, though all the Kings of Israel were open Idolaters,1. King. 19. as also the most part of the Kings of Iudah, euen fourteene of them. But it may be you thinke, because the Prophets
denounced Gods iudgements, annointed some to be Kings, and some others by speciall commandement and authority did execute Gods iudgements, as Iehu vpon Ioram and Achabs children, that therefore my proposition is infringed; which cannot be (Sir En∣counterer) for it was done by Gods speciall appoint∣ment, as Iudge and superiour ouer Princes, and not by their owne motions, or in their owne name: No Priest, no Prophet, no Apostle, no Bishop euer had authoritie to depose Princes. Hee that saith,Prou. 8. By mee Kings raigne, doth challenge this power to himselfe, and it is plaine blasphemie to giue it to any other. Saint Augustine expressely resolueth that Kings neede not to feare to lose their Kingdomes, or that their Kingdome shall bee taken from them, as wret∣ched Herod feared, and therefore out of all question,August. in Psalm. 47. there is no such authoritie giuen to any mortall child of man to depose Princes. But although I thus confidently and vpon good grounde doe pleade against the Popes vsurped au∣thoritie, yet I am neither so seruily sottish, or so super∣stitiouslie conscienced, as either to adore earthlie Princes, or to denie that any Prince established may be touched or disobeyed in any matter: for as I haue learned to giue to Caesar that which is Caesars, and to God, that which is Gods, worshipping the Lord on∣lie with Religious worship: so I know vsurpers may be suppressed by rightfull inheritance, as Athalia by Iehoiada, and in our land Richard the third, by Henrie the seuenth: and to our Princes wee must yeeld such obedience as the Lorde alloweth, obeying them in the Lord, chusing rather with the Disciples to obey
God then man, when man commaundeth wic∣ked and vnlawfull things. And so leauing you (Sir Pope-Idolater) to your palpable flatterie, and to please and defend your Nero and Caligula, as a more fit fellow to flatter seriouslie, and to adore such saints then my selfe, I stand as becommeth me in loyaltie for my Christian, and religious Soueraigne, and so will doe (by Gods grace) whilest I liue to my last breath. Your three points which you would haue to bee considered vpon my speech of the Bull come next to be handled, by which you would gladlie proue, that not the malignitie of the Pope and Papists against our Prince brought forth this roring Bull, but some dealings of ours, and that the Popish Recusants are not to be accused for it, or inforced by meanes there∣of to change their olde beleefe about the Popes au∣thoritie. 1The first point to be considered, is that the Bull of Pius Quintus cam rth in the thirteenth yeare of her Maiesties raigne and not before, as by our owne Chronicles (you say) appeareth: Let it bee so (Sir N.D.) though the Bull was set vp in the thirteenth yeare of her Raigne, and dated 1567. 5. Calend. Martij, what conclude you hereupon? Must it therefore needes follow that the Bull proceeded not from any malignitie of the Pope, and Papists? but of some o∣ther cause, as out of mine owne words you would seeme to proue. Your argument is verie weake, your conclusion cannot bee inforced vpon such slender premisses. The malignitie of the Papists is most ap∣parant by their consulting to excommunicate her
Maiestie, as before I shewed out of Cardinall Allyn, by Doctor Stories words, by informations giuen a∣gainst her, which you confesse, whereupon the Pope in his Bull chargeth her with many things most vn∣truely and falselie. The hatred of the Pope is most euident, calling her a pretended Queene and an vsur∣per, euen in the title, and beginning of the Bull. And though the Bull was not published till the 12. yeare, being yet concluded vpon about two yeares before, as the date sheweth, yet both the Pope and his adhe∣rents might as well fret and storme at her enioying of the Crowne, as at her Christian and Religious gouernment. Buls are not hastelie procured, your Pope must be sued vnto, and false informations must be giuen, and it might be as they had vaine hopes for a time to feede themselues with, so (those hopes fay∣ling) the fittest season for publishing of the Bull, was thought to be when others were prepared to raise re∣bellion. The second point is a matter of as deepe conside∣ration2 as the former, wherein hee telleth vs by enu∣meration of diuers hard vsages offered by her Maie∣stie and the Protestants, against the Pope and Popish Catholicks, that it must needs be, that not malignitie of the Pope and his adherents against her, but diuers iniuries and cruelties offered, inforced the publicati∣on of the Bull. I will not vouchsafe to make an Apo∣logie for defence of those things, which you (Sir En∣counterer) recken vp as wrongs and iniuries offered to your Pope and Pope-worshippers; this onely I say for answere, that as her Maiestie hath done nothing in the reformation of Religion, in requiring an oath
of her people for acknowledgement of her authori∣tie, in inforcing her Subiects to the true seruice of God, in punishing offenders, and obstinate persons, and such like proceedings, but that which God com∣maunded her, and the godlie zealous Princes haue done before her: so it doth not necessarilie follow, that notwithstanding all those things haue been done in godlie zeale and louing care for the saluati∣on of the soules of her people, therefore you are free from malignitie, your faultines wherein I haue eui∣dentlie proued before, though in your deepe and cunning flatterie you would gladlie denie it: you fawne vpon her Maiestie, and yet accuse her most falselie of breach of promise in altering Religion: you seeme to free her from a desire to publish Gods Gospell, and yet affirme that your Pope had great cause to proceede against her. Other Princes as Ed∣ward the first, Richard the second, Henrie the fourth, haue made lawes against the Bishop of Rome, his au∣thoritie and vsurped iurisdiction, and yet haue not tasted so much of his malice, which sheweth the malignitie of your Pope and his adherents against her Maiestie. As for your Poperie and superstition rooted out of this land, it was not of so long conti∣nuance as you boast, for but little before William the Conqueror, Kings were Gods Vicars for gouer∣ning his Church, Ecclesiasticall liuings were be∣stowed by the Princes, they made Ecclesiasticall lawes, Priests were married, and your Transubstan∣tiation was not then knowne: You blasphemouslie scoffe at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and ye glorie in the dissention betweene vs and the Luthe∣rans,
but as the Lord is of will and power to mocke mockers, so can hee make the infirmitie of his ser∣uants, worke to his glorie and their good. I passe ouer many things willinglie in this your Rhetoricall flou∣rishing, contenting my selfe to haue shewed the non sequitur of your allegation. The third point which you would haue conside∣red, is that it was an acte of iurisdiction from an Ec∣clesiasticall superiour, as also an auncient kinde of proceeding against Princes in our land, as well as in other places without any trouble to the people for the same, and therefore you would not haue your Catholikes to be charged with it, or troubled for it. For answere thereunto this I affirme, that as wee ac∣knowledge not your Popes superioritie, or Ecclesia∣sticall iurisdiction ouer vs, he playing the vsurping Tirant, in censuring our Prince; so we neither yeelde that this his proude and malicious cursing and ex∣communication of Princes hath been of long con∣tinuance; or that those his adherents, who iustifie his proceedings are to bee freed from blame. We ac∣knowledge that Princes the annointed of the Lord,Rom. 13. are the higher powers ordained to execute Iustice, and Iudgement ouer the good and euill: We knowe no other Superiour in nations and kingdomes, next and immediatelie vnder God, but such as the Apo∣stle Peter willeth vs to be subiect vnto, when he saith, Submit your selues vnto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be vnto the King, as to the Su∣periour, &c. he speaketh of one not of many superi∣ours, where a Monarchie is established. The time was when your Bishop of Rome was far
from hauing a superioritie euen in Rome and his do∣minions; for both Charles the great, and Otho the great, had right soueraigntie, and royaltie of the Countries giuen to your Popes, with acknowledge∣ment to bee their Soueraigne Lordes, in regarde of which they yeelded tributes, and other seruices vnto them: as also in former times, the Emperours had their Lieutenants and deputies in Rome,Valentinian Theodosius. euen to Gregorie the seuenths time; and your Popes obtained not the Soueraigntie which now they challenge, till it was almost 1200. yeares after Christ, in the daies of Alexander the third, and Innocentius the third, both Bishops of Rome. Your vsuall engine of ex∣communication, and depriuing of Princes of their Crownes, is likewise far short of that antiquitie, by which you would seeme to mitigate the rigour and crueltie thereof. For as there was neuer any Romane King or Emperor excommunicated and depriued of his kingdom by any Bishop of Rome before Henry the fourth Emperour of Rome, who was excommunica∣ted & cursed by Gregory the seuenth, the brand of hel, who being a Necromancer, a periured person, and a most wicked man, confessed at his death to a Cardi∣nall that he was set on by the Diuell to raise vp dis∣cord, and warres in Christendome: so in England from the conquest vnto King Henrie the eight, there was no Prince of this land deposed by your pope, but onely King Iohn.Sigebert. in Anno 1088. It is a noueltie (Sir N.D.) and not a matter of antiquitie (as Sigebert telleth you,) to teach that people owe no subiection to euill kings, &c. As for that you say that Subiects heretofore in our land haue not beene troubled, or forced to al∣ter
their beliefe concerning the Popes power, not∣withstanding his cursing and depriuing of Princes is more then you know, and it maketh no great matter whether it were so or no, seeing that your vse of ex∣communication hath not been so frequent in our land, and your dealings were neuer so treacherous and desperate as they haue been of late. Our English Nation did neuer at any time since the first recei∣uing of the faith vnto this day, acknowledge the v∣surped power of your Pope to depose Princes, much lesse hath it been anie matter of our faith: your Pope Nicholas, and Boniface the eight, may put in tran∣substantiation to be an Article of our beliefe, and make your popes supremacie of the necessitie of sal∣uation; but wee haue learned to ground our faith vpon the Scriptures of God, which teacheth no such absurd and diuellish points. The lawes of our land haue heretofore in King Richard the seconds time, and Edward the thirds time, made it treason to bring in any excommunication from Rome, to im∣pugne the lawes of the Realme for benefices and pa∣tronages, to compasse or imagine the death of the King, to leuie warre against the Prince, or to be ad∣herent and fauourers of the Kings enemies, all which lawes doe verie neerly concerne such amongst you, as vouch the Popes wicked claime to depose Prin∣ces, and are perswaders, aiders, and comforters of in∣uasion and rebellion: Your affections wee deale not with, but with your confessions, wee punish you not, for your faith, but for your works. What punishment did the lawes of our Realme in the first twentie yeeres of her Maiesties raigne inflict
vpon anie Recusant for his recusancie, but either im∣prisonment, or amercement? If your aduentures had not been most audacious, and your attempts most dangerous, being as men perplexed and enraged to see her Maiestie liue, and gouerne in so long happi∣nes, you might haue been stil vsed with as much mer∣cie and clemencie, as it is possible for a Christian Prince to offer to vnrulie, and vndutifull subiects Princes for their safetie, and repressing of rebellions, may temper their lawes with seuerity, and make that treason which to some seemeth a matter of Reli∣gion; as wee see in Augustines time,Aug. contrali∣terai Petil. lib. . ca. 92. it was treason to say that Emperours perished for persecuting, which yet Petilian and his companie thought they might say trulie and zealously. You desire a reconciliation betweene your Pope and our Prince, longing to see the daie when you might againe imbrue your handes in the bloud of Gods Saints; but as wee know there can be no agree∣ment betweene light and darknes, so wee doubt not but the powerfull and mightie God will continue our Prince all her daies to be a true defender of the faith; and will preserue his poore flocke from the sa∣uage crueltie and bloudines of woluish tirants, and Romish Prelates. Our sinnes indeed doe hasten vp∣on vs the seueritie of Gods iustice; but our hope is, that the God of heauen will for his mercies sake be fauourable vnto his Sion, and continue his truth, and true worship amongst vs, wherein standeth our chie∣fest happines:Psal 140. our praier shall be to the Lord as Da∣uids was. Let not the vngodly haue his desire ô Lord, let not his mischieuous imaginatiōs prosper, least they be too proud.
It may be the Lord himselfe will correct vs in mercie,Iere. 10. as he hath done manie times alreadie, and not deliuer vs into the handes of our enemies to be punished by them. It may be the mother of Sisera shall looke out at the window, and crie out at the casement,Iudges. 5. Why is his Chariot so long in comming? Why tarry the wheeles of his Chariot? So let thine enemies O Lord, & the enemies of thine annointed perish, but let them that loue thee, and thy truth continue as the Sunne when he riseth in his might, & as Oliue plants in the house of God that flourish for euer. Amen. The third and last hostilitie, against which in this Encounter you take exception,Traterous practises of some Papists. is the rebellion and traiterous practises of diuers of your Catholikes a∣gainst our gracious Soueraigne, where with I charge them, which though you labour with all your skill and cunning to excuse, will appeare to be no lesse im∣pious, and hainons in them, nor lesse daungerous to Prince and Countrie, then I haue affirmed. Your colours and cloakes wherewith you would gladlie couer and hide, the rebellious hearts and seditious minds of sundrie your Romish Catholikes are spe∣ciallie these: the onely actuall rising of two Earles, (as you say) the great pressures wherewith you haue beene burdened, being the common griefe of all Common-wealthes, and cause that they are troubled with commotions, and rebellions, the admirable pa∣tience of Papistes and Catholikes, the practises of Protestants at home and abroad, and lastly, the light and small offence of such as are charged to haue been rebels and traitors to her Maiestie: all which being throughly considered will appeare either most
false,  too slender o coue such treacherous hearts, and rebellious practises. And to giue the reader a taste thereof (although I will not long insist vp∣on them) hath there been but one actuall rising of your Catholikes in fortie yeeres? and haue not the wicked counsels of Romish traitours burst out more then once into open hostilitie? what say you to the rebellion in Ireland vnder Doctor Saunders their chiefe encourager? what of the alienating & mouing of the people by your open Masses in Lakashire and else where? what of your other attempts with armes so neere the quicke, procured by your Iesui∣ticall Masses of reconcilement? what of the cano∣nizing of the Northren Rebels for Martyrs, and proclaiming such warres to be godly, iust and hono∣rable? Lastly, what is to be thought of your resol∣uing, directing and encouraging Babington, Parrey, Somerfield and sundrie others, that with violent hands sought to abridge our Soueraignes life? Are not these open hostilities, and open and actuall proofes that there is in you a resolution to doe anie thing that you can, for the ouerthrow of the present State, vnder which (through Gods mercie) we happily and bles∣sedlie liue? That we had but one commotion in this Realme we may thanke our good God, and not you and your Catholikes, who haue done your best by procuring inuasion from abroad, and ripening rebel∣lion at home, to multiplie that one to many; but that the mightie hand of God did alwaies disioynt your deuises, praised be his name for it. Fond amplifi∣cations of pu∣nishments in∣flicted on pa∣pists.You complaine of the bloudie listes of Lawes, rigorous execution and incredible molestations,
amplifying the correction which is here laid on you for your good, with words of the highest, and ho∣test degree; but looke backe (Sir Auditor) to your owne accounts, and view with shame enough both your cruell and bloudie persecution with fire and sword, as also the mildnes of her Maiesties Regi∣ment, whose twentie yeeres together pressed you with no heauier burthens, then the penaltie of a shilling by the weeke, or some restraint of libertie: your Marian persecution yeelded in foure yeeres more effusion of Christian bloud, by hanging, hea∣ding burning, and prisoning, then euer was heard of in anie Princes raigne in this land before, or I hope will euer hereafter. It is no new thing with you and your adherents by outcries, tragicall exclamations, and most slaunderous vntruthes, to seeke to blemish her Maiesties milde gouernment, and the iust exe∣cution of Iustice amongest vs: there is a God that knoweth all, and will iudge betweene vs; how light a matter soeuer you take it to be, to rayle vpon his annointed, and to vilifie and reuile the reuerent Iudges and wholesome lawes of the land, by the odious names of Atheists and bloudie lawes. The third colour wherewith you would dasell our eies,A vaine co∣lour. in beholding your traiterous practises, is no lesse vaine and foolish, then the other two before are slan∣derous, and false: for what though it be incident to all Common-wealthes to be troubled with commo∣tions, shall it therefore not follow that your rebelli∣ous, and seditious practises moued onely for the maintenance of the Romish primacie, and saith, doe manifest the dangerousnes of your doctrine, and
treacherie of your hearts against the State of Chri∣stian Princes? you cannot defend your selues by so sleight a reason. Those troubles that were in King Henrie and King Edwards raigne proceeding chiefely not from your onely suffering with groaning (as you say) but from the treacherous disloyall hearts of Pa∣pists, who were the chiefest actors therein, doe con∣uict you of such crimes as I haue charged you with. And euen these rebellions so often attempted in the latter end of King Henrie the eight, and the raigne of King Edward the sixth, doe testifie of your admira∣ble patience and loyaltie. I maruaile with what face you can commend your Catholikes, and compare them with Protestantes for loyaltie, and willing subiection to Princes, when with your owne penne you shew your forwardnes in euerie Princes raigne to rebell, and yet cannot trulie charge vs with any one rebellious practise in the maintenance of true Religion. Protestants not to be com∣pared with Pa∣pists in rebel∣lion.As our doctrine is farre different from yours, in the honouring of Magistrates; so are our behauiours loyall, and obedient: what doctrine did euer attri∣bute so much to publike authoritie of Magistrates as doe the Protestants? or who euer attributed lesse to Magistrates, or deposed moe Princes, then you Pa∣pistes? you may crie with Athalia, treason, treason, but wise men know who be the traitours indeed.2 King. 11. You would faine perswade your reader, that in Queene Maries time we shewed our disposition and for∣wardnes to rebell; and to this purpose you compare her short & bloudie raigne, with the long and peace∣able gouernment of our gracious Soueraigne. But
as both Wyat and the rest were carried by other per∣swasions, then the maintenance of true religion, to deale so rashly and vnsoundly as they did: so there is no reason that some priuate actions, and opinions generally condemned by our doctrine should preiu∣dice all Protestants. You haue great cause to com∣plaine of our rebellions, when you can recken vp, but one poore insurrection, and that vpon other grounds then religion, and such a one as was suppres∣sed without the spoile or hurt of anie of the Queenes side. But you that blush not to affirme that our chiefe Protestants in Queene Maries time were not troub∣led, when our soueraigne that now is, was then much vexed; and that none were then forced to renounce their olde Religion, when scarce anie suspected of true Religion could be suffered to liue quietlie, though they shewed publikely no dislike of Po∣pish Idolatrie: no maruaile though you slaunde∣rously doe charge vs with rebellious disposition. As for your commotions and reuels you say haue been made in other countries by those of the Re∣ligion, I leaue both you and them to their Apo∣logies in print, wherein you shall finde, that none of them did holde, that eyther Pope or other might depose Princes, or dispence with Subiectes for their obedience to their lawfull Soueraignes. And be∣cause it pleaseth you to disport your selfe, after your gybing manner with me Sir Francis, and your not Saint Francis, let me in earnest tell you, that Sir Francis would not for all his worth, that you could proue him to carrie so turbulent, seditious, and trai∣terous a mind against Queene and Countrie, as
this your Ward-word sheweth you to doe; and so well instructed is he in the doctrine of the Gos∣pell which teacheth obedience, as if his dearest friend in affection, or the neerest of kinne to him in bloud should lift vp an hand of disloyaltie a∣gainst his Soueraigne, they are neither friends, nor kinsfolkes to him, and hee professeth himselfe a mortall enemie to them:Lib. conform. in initio. And for your blasphe∣mous Saint Francis seeing it delighteth you to name him; let me call to your remembrance what you may finde in the booke of conformities of him, in which he is made another Iesus, in type and figure, and is matched with Christ from point to point, and his miracles with Christes miracles: of whom it is there also written, that he repented him for deuising of his habite, because God had reuea∣led to him, that out of his order Antichrist and his sect should come: and so Sir Francis leaueth you to honour your Saint Francis at your pleasure, as a fit Saint for you to adore in your Pope-holie worship. About the two Earles insur∣rection.Your last colour and excuse, for defence of your Rebels, and Traitors, is as simple as the rest; you would gladlie perswade vs, that the two Earles did but defend themselues, when there was no force they needed to feare, if they had feared God, and continued to liue like good subiects, and had not dis∣loyallie intruded themselues, not onely to controule, but to correct the godlie gouernment of the Queene and State. But they were set on by the Bull of Pius Quintus, and Doctor Mortons peswasion, seeking by force to set free the Catholikes, and to restore Ca∣tholike
Religion, Doctor Saunders confesseth no lesse. They fled presently (you say) without blowes, or bloud shed, but that might be thought the badnes of their cause, and the feare that God did strike into their hearts, at the sight or hearing of the Queenes Armie, and not for want of desire to proceede fur∣ther; but as I lament their fall, so I wish from my heart they had neuer been so misled. As for the two next Traytors by you mentioned,Francis Throgmorton and Charles Paget. Francis Throgmorton, and Charles Paget, whom you labour likewise to excuse; the first receiued his iust censure by the course of Iustice, and that is a iust proofe to all honest men of his treasons; yet seeing you seeke so shameleslie, and vnhonestlie to extenu∣ate his fault, I heartilie praie the reader to way your owne confession against him: You say he had the de∣scription of certaine Portes found in his Chamber, that hee had some intelligence with the Queene of Scots, & with Barnardin Mendoza, the King of Spaines Ambassadour. Why (Sir Encounterer) haue you for∣gotten that Mendoza in steede of performing the honorable parts of a well accepted Ambassadour, did most treacherouslie seeke to betraie both the Queene and State, by practising all that he could to set vp the Queene of Scots? and doe you not remem∣ber, that it was high time to cut off this Scottish Queene, who ceased not dailie to practise the death of our deere Soueraigne? and doe you thinke there could bee any good meaning in Throgmorton to col∣lect Plots, and descriptions of our Portes, hauing in∣telligence with the Queene of Scots and Mendoza, and an Inuasion being plotted and purposed against
vs from Spaine? And if nothing else had been proued against him, can the height of your wit, and iudge∣ment in State matters (whereof you so much glorie) cleare him from being a Traitor? But it is well known to the Honorable of our land, and those whom they employed to examine him, that his owne confession conuinceth him of more then it pleaseth you to set downe: and by this all the world may see and per∣ceiue your disloyall, and dishonest meaning both to Queene and State, in thus colouring treasons, and defending Traitors. But you will needes free Charles Paget also another traitour, and whose fault you say was nothing, but that he went beyond the Seas, for that he could not liue with his Couscience at home: But (Sir Encounterer) you shall finde that with more conscience he might haue kept home, for whereas you say hee went ouer to free his Conscience, you shall well perceiue that at his being beyond the Seas, hee made shipwracke of Conscience and common honestie. Caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt. They change the ayre that Seas doe passe, But minde remaines the same it was. I will not stand vpon that hath been reported of his stealing ouer hither for little goodnes, changing his name (which is seldome the note of an honest man) and calling himselfe Mope: but bee it knowne to you (Sir N.D.) he was at the consultation when Yorke and Williams had their dispatch to goe kill her Maiestie, and againe hee and Thomas Throgmorton should haue furnished Michael Moodie with mo∣ney to come ouer to the same wicked ende: This
sheweth a worthie Conscience, and yet no man knoweth what conscience meaneth but your selfe, although you shew very little conscience or none at all in this your traiterous Apologie for them. The other two Earles you will also defend,About the late Earle of Nor∣thumberland, and the Earle of Arundel. how iust occasion soeuer they gaue of iust proceeding a∣gainst them. You seeke not onelie cunninglie to ex∣cuse them (though with slender proofe and lesse rea∣son) but also maliciouslie and falslie to lay and leaue a suspition of crueltie vpon the State, for the vntime∣lie death of the one, which sheweth to bee the prac∣tise of your Catholikes in their cruell murdering of Richard Hun, and not ours in this or any the like, and iniurie to the other for being iustlie proceeded a∣gainst, for whom you blush not to affirme, that no∣thing could bee laide against him but flying for his conscience, and either hearing or causing a Masse to be saide in the Tower: when as hundreths can wit∣nes that (besides diuers other dangerous conferen∣ces by letters and speeches) it was directlie proued, that he made a prayer for the prosperous successe of the King of Spaine and his forces, being raised against her Maiestie, who were thought to be vpon the Sea, comming on to attempt an Inuasion, and to con∣quer our Land, and tendred the same to be said by o∣ther prisoners as well as himselfe; and therefore his fault was more then flying for Conscience, or hea∣ring a Masse, which also hath ioyned to it a reconci∣liation to the Chruch of Rome: Yet this in your Ro∣mish and traiterous vaine-glorie, you recken to bee a glorious and holie treason, which is not strange in men of your sect, who often thinke you doe God
good seruice, when you commit great wickednes and impietie; yet in this you might haue shewed your selfe more wise and honest to suspend your iudgement, when ignorance doth conceale from you the faultes for which by course of Lawe and Iu∣stice men are condemned (if you were in deede ig∣norant of them) and not to be ouer hastie to iustifie the wicked. But you are so forward to be a patron for such actors, and actions, traitors and treasons, as it is not vnlike you would proue your selfe a very sound man to Queene and State, if you were in place to be throughlie sifted. The substance of the En∣counterers conclusion.For your conclusion and shutting vp of this En∣counter, as you would perswade vs that all that can be alleaged against your Catholikes, are but trifles and triuiall things, though they bee no lesse then rebelli∣ons and treasons; so (according to your ordinarie cu∣stome) you straine out Gnats, and swallow downe Camels: you call euill good, and not onelie breake the commaundements, but teach men so, that you may be the least in the Kingdome of Heauen, that is, none at all: you commend your patience as admi∣rable and worthie to bee canonized, which is the highest honor with Papists. You say that the Realme and her Maiestie are happie to haue such subiects: but as you knowe emptie vessels sound loudest, and the commending of your selues is not seemelie; so the often perils that her Maiestie hath been in, and the continuall troubles which you haue brought vp∣on the Realme, doe crie aloude that you glose and slatter most lewdly: You would gladly haue the leafe turned against vs, that we might againe be persecuted
with fire and sworde, and beaten with the rodde of Scorpions: but our hope is that the God of mercie will not performe the desire of the wicked, but ra∣ther correct vs in mercie: If the State were such (as thankes be to God it is not such) that wee were pres∣sed with griefes and afflictions, yet our doctrine and former example of obedience, doe moue a farre bet∣ter expectation then you will conceiue of vs; but with the Apostle wee affirme, We recken little to bee iudged of you, &c. You continue to impute to me to haue a rayling and slaunderous tongue; but as I haue sufficientlie cleared my selfe from wrongfull charging of any, so I had rather in your account to be so deemed for speaking sharplie against Traitours and treason, then out of a disloyall heart (as you doe) to darken and smoothe both the one and the other. And so neither feeling any of your blowes giuen (whereof you proudelie and vainely brag) nor re∣garding your threatned bastinadoes so long as you dare not appeare & shew your face I rest assured, that (whatsoeuer your railing tongue writeth of me, or your malicious heart iudgeth of me) the Honorable and wise of the Land will iudge mee to haue more truth and Charitie, then you loyaltie or common honestie: for it cannot stand with loyaltie to smooth the faultes of traitours, or with honestie to rayle at a∣ny that giueth warning to Subiects to take heede of their treasous.
Resistance to the fourth Encounter, concerning Bishop Gardiner, and Cardinall Allen. I Haue been the longer in my resistance to the three former Encounters, because they are most materiall, and of greatest importance: the first concerning the blessings of almightie God powred vpon this land, through the happie raigne of his handmaide and our Soueraigne Elizabeth: the second about the absurd Popish positions which this wrangler saith (but saith onely without iust proofe) are falselie imputed to them: the third touching the person of her Maie∣stie, and her marueilous deliuerances from many daungers, both before her obtaining the Crowne, and since her establishment in the same. The rest that follow in his other Encounters are of smaller mo∣ment, and of all that are indifferent and not partiall amongst vs, generallie knowne and acknowledged, and therefore shall neede the lesse my labour and paines to laie them open. But for orders sake to take a short view of them, as they are by him headed out: In this Encounter hee bringeth in a yoake of Popish Prelates, Bishop Gardiner and Cardinall Allen,Bishop Gardi∣ner and Car∣dinall Allen compared. whome he supposeth to be greatlie wronged, and in∣iured by mee vpon whom he looking through the spectacles of a partiall and Popish affection, imagi∣neth greater giftes of learning and vertue in them then were in deede, making them a peereles paire of Prelates, and verie sagelie compareth their qualities together, as Plutarch doth the most famous worthies of Rome and Greece: which his comparison I passe
ouer, as nothing concerning any thing said by me in my former booke against them. Onely I yeelde they were birdes of a feather, and therefore fit to slie to∣gether, and according to our English prouerbe, like will to like, (you know what followeth) and in deede milke is not liker milke, nor one egge another, then were these two statelie Prelates, each of them being brides of the Popes owne hatching, and as it is in the Prouerbe, Mali corui, malum ouum, and both of them for the Popes sake being false and treacherous a∣gainst their Soueraignes. Cardinall Allen against her Maiestie (as hereafter shall bee shewed) Bishop Gardiner against her renowmed Father, when he was Ambassadour for the King to the Emperour, hauing secret intelligence with the Pope, then the Kings o∣pen and professed enemie, in so much that the King in euery generall pardon that he graunted by Parlia∣ment after this practise, he did still except all treasons committed beyond the Seas: meaning thereby (as it was supposed) that the Bishop should not take any benefite by any generall pardon, if his Maiestie would at any time call him to account: and further minded (as it seemeth) to haue vsed extremitie of lawe against him, (if the Lord had lent his Highnes longer life) vpon iust matter not taken away by any pardon, commaunding thereupon often the Lorde Paget (being then his Secretarie) to keepe safe cer∣tain writings which he had against him. But the pari∣ties, or disparities of your two Prelates by you com∣pared together, I passe ouer as matter impertinent, and come to your exceptions against my speeches vttered of them in particular. And first concerning
Bishop Gardiner he setteth downe these my speeches. Gardiner that most proude and bloodie monster, left no corner of his wit vnsought, to shorten her Maiesties daies, and preuent her by the bloodie slaughter of her sacred per∣son, from being our Queene. And againe, The Recusants of our age cannot professe, nor make greater shew of loy∣altie and loue to our dread Soueraigne, neither, &c. Bishop Gardi∣ner.This my charge against Gardiner this sturdie En∣counterer seeketh to beate backe, first, by commen∣ding him for a most tender hearted, and milde man, that no one great man, in Queene Maries time, was farther from bloud and bloudines then he; and that any good natured Protestant that liued in that time, and had wit to iudge, and indifferencie to speake the trueth without passion, would confesse as much. Which because himselfe cannot but know to bee a shameles vntrueth, and therefore doubting how the generall commendation of his milde nature would be intertained, he for a particular instance, telleth vs a long tale (of like authoritie) concerning his ten∣der affection towards the Duke of Northumberland, after hee was condemned, &c. which as it nothing concerneth our matter in hand, so hauing onely his bare worde to warrant it, the indifferent reader may credite and regard as he seeth cause. A short view of Gardiners milde nature.And for the better direction of thy iudgement (gentle Reader) and fuller iustifying of my accusati∣on against him, it shall not be amisse to take a short view of a few particulars, by which the gentlenes of this Bishops nature may appeare to all men: I will not here stand vpon the secret, intestine, and deadlie hatred which he alwaies bare to the fauourers of the
Gospell; and how through his wilie craft he so farre preuailed with the king to proceed in such sort a∣gainst the worthy Martir of Christ Iohn Lambert as he did:Gardiners hard dealing with Marbeck. the only example of Marbecke, for that kings time, shall suffice. Who being conuented before Gardiner, for the concordance in English (now extant,) which he then had begunne, was by all meanes (by men sent from the B.) sifted to detect whom he knew to be fauourers of the Gospell: with which importunities the man of God being wearied, he burst forth into these words; O Lord, what will my Lord doe? will his Lordship compell me to accuse men, and wote not wherof? After this the Bishop himself talketh with him, & asketh him whether he wil cast away himself? To whom he answering, no my Lord, I trust: yes quoth the Bishop, thou goest about it, for thou wilt vtter nothing. What a diuell made thee meddle with the Scriptures, thy vocation was another way; &c. and why the diuell diddest thou not hold thee there?Heresie for lay men to meddle with the Scripture. And after hard pressing him to detect and accuse some, and his de∣niall to accuse anie for heretikes, because he could not iustly: the milde Bishop told him, Sith thou art so wilfull and stubborne, thou shalt goe to the diuell for me. And so, whereas Sir Anthonie Wingfield Captaine of the Guard, had before sent word to the keeper of the Marshalsey, that it was the Counsels pleasure, he should intreat Marbecke gently: this charitable & ten∣der hearted Gardiner sent word to the keeper, to lay yrons vpon him, to keepe him fast shut in a chamber, alone that (when he came to meat) he should speake to no man, nor no man to him; and further that he should suffer no manner of person (no not his own
wife) to come to him, or minister anie thing to him, and in this streight and hard sort continued he about three weekes. His wife made often sute to the Bi∣shop to be permitted to visite her husband, but his bowels wanted compassion, till at length she meeting him at the Court, was bold to pul him by the Rochet and said to him: O my Lord these eighteene daies I haue troubled your Lordship, now for the loue of God, and as euer you came of a woman, put me off no longer, but let me goe to my husband: One of the kings seruants, and her next neighbour standing by, besought him to be good Lord to her; which had her owne mother ly∣ing bedredde vpon her hands, besides fiue or six chil∣dren. I promise you (quoth the Bishop) her husband is a great heretike,Gardiners ar∣gument to proue an he∣retike. and hath read more Scripture then any man in the Realme hath done, and he knoweth a great sort of harlots and will not vtter them, but at length gaue her leaue to go to her husband, willing her to aduise him to vtter such naughtie fellowes as hee knew, &c. In Queene Maries time when he was now Lord Chancellor, & ruled the rost, how far not onely from tender pittie, but euen from ciuill humanitie, hee shewed himselfe to bee, the examples are too many, and experiments too plaine; and therefore needlesse here to be inserted. But a taste must be giuen to the Reader, for which this may suffice: when that reue∣rent learned man, (and afterwards a most constant Martyr of Iesus Christ) D. Rowland Taylor,Doctor Tailor a Doctor professed in both the lawes, and withall a right per∣fect diuine, appeared before Gardiner vpon his sum∣mons; how vngently did he intreat him? nay how fu∣riously
did he at the very first sight rage against him?Gardiners milde Rheto∣rike. not reasoning with him mildly (as he came a Bishop) but barking at him like a mad dog, calling him knaue, traitor, heretike, villaine, varlet, beetlebrow-foole, &c. and afterwards committed him to prison, where he lay a yeere and three quarters, till the Papists had gotten certaine olde tyranous lawes (by King Hen∣rie and King Edward before put downe) to be reui∣ued againe; vpon which Gardiner cyted him and o∣thers ex officio before himselfe and his colleagues, and pronounced against him, Master Bradford and Ma∣ster Saunders, three worthie learned and painefull preachers, the sentence of death. His dealing with Master Philpot Archdeacon of Winchester,Master Phil∣pot. a Gentleman of a good house, being a Knights sonne (though rayling Storie cried out a∣gainst him, he is a vile heretike knaue, for an here∣tike is no Gentleman) I aske not of what compassion and mercie, but of what equitie and iustice, did it sauour? when he committed this valiant Souldier of Iesus Christ prison, and kept him there a yeere and a halfe, taking all his liuing from him, without all lawe, onely because he spake his mind freely of the questions proposed to be disputed of in the Con∣uocation house; whereunto besides the libertie of the house they had the Queenes warrant for their se∣curitie. But it booted not to pleade priuiledge of the house, or warrant from the Queene, tender hearted Gardiner of his dissolute (I would say) absolute pow∣er kept him so long in prison, and afterwards sent him to his slaughterman Boner to be branded to the fire:Boner vn∣willing to meddle with Master Phil∣pot. In whom this is worthie the noting, that he
seemed as if he had been vnwilling to haue medled with Master Philpot, saying, I maruaile why other men will trouble me with their matters, but I must be obedient to my betters, and I wis men speake o∣therwise of me then I deserue, (as if he should haue said, that the bloudie affection of Gardiners heart must be executed by Boners hands:) And when in that time of Master Philpots captiuitie with Boner, Gardiner died,Boners speech concerning Gardiners be∣ing dead. Boner perceiuing that Master Philpot would by no meanes recant, burst forth into these words, Now ye thinke because my Lord Chancellour is dead, we will e no moe. Which wordes what doe they argue else? but that howsoeuer some Bishops and other Clergie Masters were the inferiour exe∣cutioners, yet Gardiner the Lord Chancellour was the Arch-Dedalus and chiefe master of the worke, and he that did blow the bellowes to kindle all the fires wherein the bodies of so many Martyrs were consumed to ashes. The which will appeare more plainly, if we consi∣der a memorable storie set downe by Master Foxe of him, reported by two credible persons of worship in the house of a worshipfull Citizen bearing then office in the Citie of London, from Master Mundaie secretarie sometime to the old Lord Thomas Duke of Norffolke; namely, that the same day Master Ridley and Master Latimer were burnt at Oxford, the olde Duke of Norffolke with this reporter his secretarie at∣tending on him, came to Bishop Gardiners house; the olde aged Duke wayting there for his dinner, the Bishop was not disposed to dine, till at length a∣bout foure of the clocke commeth in his seruant in
all post haste from Oxford, assuring the Bishop most certainly that he saw fire put to them. Then com∣meth out Gardiner reioycing to the Duke,Gardiners ioy for Bishop Ridley & ma∣ster Latimers death with God his sud∣daine stroke vpon him. and cal∣leth for dinner, and began merely to eate; but the bloudie Tyrant had not eaten a fewe bits, but the suddaine stroke of God his terrible hand fell vpon him, in such sort as (to vse mine Authors own words) immediately he was taken from the table, and so brought to his bed, where he continued the space of fifteene daies, during which time he could not auoid by vrine or otherwise any thing that he receiued, whereby his bodie being miserablie inflamed with∣in (who had inflamed so many godly Martyrs be∣fore) was brought to a wretched end. And thereof no doubt (as most like it is) came the thrusting out of his tongue from his mouth, so swolne and blacke with the inflammation of his bodie. A specta∣cle worthie to be noted and beholden of all such bloudie burning persecutors. But not to stand vpon the deuotion of this your milde Bishop, who would not eate till he were sure of the death of these two worthies (a deuotion matchable with that of the Tyrant Richard the third, then but Protector, who sware by Saint Paule that he would not dine till the Lord Hastings head were off, and would needs stay so long for his oathes sake) nor vpon the great ioy this Bishop conceiued at the certaine report of their deaths, as if the shedding of Christian bloud had been to him as the obteyning of great treasures; nor yet vpon the fearfull iudgement of God, so vpon the present, and on the suddaine inflicted vpon him: I will remember this one thing,
how that the Dutches of Suffolke espying him in the Tower, (being the prisoner) inking Edwards raigne: said it was merrie with the Lambes, now the Wolfe was shut vp: which speech, this your gentle natured Bishop, and nothing vindicatiue (as you terme him) well remembred in Queene Maries time, and ther∣fore in the first lent of her raigne, studied an holie practise of reuenge, first by touching this Dutches in the person of her husband Master Bertye, for whom he sent an attachment to the Sherife of Lin∣colneshire, with a speciall letter, commaunding him most strictly to attach him, and without Bale to bring him vp to him to London, whereas he had no cause at all to send for him. Afterwards examineth him of the Dutches his wiues Religion, whether she was now as readie to set vp the Masse,Gardiners de∣sire of reuenge against the Duches of Suf∣folke. as before to pull it downe, with further obiections to the same purpose: by which Master Berty fully perceiued the cruell minde of the Bishop set vpon bloudie reuenge, and therefore obtained leaue of the Queene for his vr∣gent and important affaires to passe the Seas, secret∣ly appointed how the Dutchesse should come after, who with her daughter of a yeere olde, with a fewe of her meanest seruants, in great danger tooke barge at Lion Key, in the mistie morning, chusing rather to commit her selfe to the winde and waues, then to your Gardiners gentle, and nothing vindicatiue disposition. What should I stand vpon any further matter to lay open the nature & disposition of this your milde Prelate? Boner who knew him better then you (Sir Encounterer) doth more then iustifie me in that large
description of Gardiners nature, & disposition,Boners de∣scription of Gardiner. which he wrote to the Lord Cromwell, wherein he tearmeth him to be of an hard heart, and cankred malicious stomacke, that he spake with a Pilates voice, and char∣geth him that in talke had with him, he bad turde in Boners teeth againe and againe, that the flesh of his cheekes beganne to swell and tremble, and that hee looked as if he would haue runne through him, that he behaued himselfe bedlemly, that in malice and disdaine he might be compared to the diuell of hell, not yeelding to him in pride at all: with sundrie other notes of such speciall commendation, which in that letter of Boners to the Lord Cromwell are to be found. And this (I hope) is sufficient to cleare me from malignitie, and sycophancie, for calling so vnworthie a man a bloudie monster. After this flourish to make shew in generall of the Bishops milde mature (whereof by these fewe)About Gardi∣ners seeking Queene Eli∣zabeths life. particulars the reader may more soundly iudge) this his Proctor proceedeth to cleere him of seeking her Maiesties life in the raigne of her sister: but it see∣meth his conscience gaue him a secret checke, when he set pen to paper about this defence. For how weake an Apologie doth make for so haynous an accusation?A weake Apo∣logie. the lines are few in which he wrappeth vp the handling of this weightie case, and the rea∣sons as weake as water that he alleadgeth for the Bishops clearing. It was so farre off from Gardiners con∣dition and nature (saith this forward Proctor) that he dareth say I doe him apparent and wilfull wrong. What (Sir) if for malice he might be compared to the di∣uell, (as Boner witnesseth) what could be more a∣greeable
to his nature, then to seeke the bloud of so gracious and innocent a Ladie? And seemeth not (trow ye) his case to be verie good which so wood∣die, yea so hot, and fierie a Patrone seekes to main∣taine with so slender and cold a defence, as I dare say he doth him apparunt and wilfull wrong? But he ad∣deth, she was an obiect rather of loue and compassion, then of enuie, and hatred: But what loue could proceede from him that was of an hard heart, and cancred ma∣licious stomacke? what compassion could he shewe whose verie bowels were cruell? As for the misteri∣ous bracelet of which this brabler talketh, in which all the secrecie of Wyats conspiracie was said to lie hidden, which Gardiner farther pierced then any o∣ther, but neuer vsed or vrged the knowledge gotten thereof, to the Ladies perill: I answere, that the mi∣sterie of this Shemeis treacherie against that innocent Ladie,The misterie of his tale of a misterious bracelet. & his now Soueraigne, may hereby appeare to all men; who to grace his client with the commenda∣tion of a deepe politike, to pearse further into the mi∣sterie of that conspiracie, then anie other, and of a tender harted man, in not vsing nor vrging his know∣ledge gotten thereof to the Ladies perill: layeth the highest disgrace vpon his Soueraigne that can be imagined; as if she had been secretly confederate with Wyat in his rebellion against her sister; and that this Eagle-eyed Bishop had spied so much in a miste∣rious bracelet, but of pure good will did neuer vrge it to her perill. Whereas for euer finding any suspiti∣on against her, through so manie hard and earnest sif∣tings, his owne mouth is a witnesse against him, who (kneeling downe to her Grace, after long triall
had of her loyaltie and integritie,) said,Gardiner con∣fesseth the wrong impri∣sonment of Ladie Eliza∣beth. Then hath your Grace the aduantage of me, and other of the Lords, for your long and wrong Imprisonment. As for his concealing of any thing that hee might finde a∣gainst her, or desire to free her from daunger: who knoweth not how farre both hee and the rest of the Clergie were from any such inclination? For when Wyat at his death cleered the Ladie Elizabeth, Doctor Weston cried,D. Weston. Beleeue him not good People, &c. Which being related to Sir Thomas White then Lord Maior, he was moued at the bloudie humour of this Popish Doctor, and said of him with indignation, In sooth I neuer tooke him but for a knaue. But was your Bishop more mildlie affected then the Doctor? Nay hee was so vnwilling to haue her cleered, as hee chafed exceedinglie at a poore Apprentise in Lon∣don, for saying that Wyat had cleered her, and the Lord Courtney,Gardiner vn∣willing to haue the Ladie Eli∣zabeth clee∣red. and caused the Lord Maior to bring this poore youth to the Starre Chamber, where hee vttered a speech vpon that occasion, and pronounced the innocent Ladie guiltie, and commaunded the Apprentise should be punished. And if Master Brid∣ges then Lieutenant of the Tower had not (as is re∣ported) most honestly aduentured to Queene Marie, to informe her of a warrant that was out for the exe∣cution of this her worthie Sister, the innocent Ladie had lost her life, poore England had been depriued of so gracious a Soueraigne, and the light of our Candlesticke had been put out. But blessed bee the Lorde who gaue not the Soule of his Turtle Doue to the beasts, nor his darling to the power of the dogges.
The bringing in of the Spa∣niard.With this, for good fellowship may walke hand in hand, his plea for the Bishops freedome concerning the bringing in of the Spaniard; of which I affirme, that Gardiner and his complices neuer rested, vntill they had brought in the Spaniard, and matched him with Queene Marie: by which they betraied God, her, and the whole Realme: from which this Proctor first would cleare him, by imagining in him a partiall affection to the Earle of Deuonshire, whom he would haue married to the Queene. But it were strange that in a man of Gardiners place, there should bee so great ficklenes and mutabilitie, that in so short a space, so great loue should bee turned into such extreame ha∣tred; a little before in his loue he would haue made him (as you say) as a King, by matching him to Queene Marie: within a while after he would haue made him worse then a caitife, and to suffer as a Trai∣tour, accusing him earnestlie in the Starre Chamber, when as Wyat had cleered him. Secondlie, hee de∣maundeth if this had been so (as hee saith it was not) why did they betraie therein both God, their Queene and their Countrie? To which his de∣maunde I briefelie answere. God was betraied be∣cause his true Religion was exiled, (which Queene Marie, before her obtaining the Crowne, promised to the Suffolke men to maintaine,) and in steede there∣of Idolatrie was established. The Queene they be∣traied, because they matched her to an vnhusband-like husband, who estranged both his affection and companie from her, which was thought to be a great cause of the shortning of her daies: for when the cause of her often sighing a little before her death
was asked, of her selfe she confessed this to bee one (though not the onelie) cause, that she could not en∣ioie the companie of her husband. The Realme they betraied, because they sought to make it subiect to a stranger, though yet (blessed bee God) doe all they what they could, or the Queene herselfe, they could neuer set the Crowne of England vpon King Phillips head: And that the temporall inconueniences by that match were not more fullie felt, God is to bee praised, who gaue him here so short an aboade. Fur∣ther by this match they bringing in the Pope, and re∣signing the Supremacie to him, did wrong to the Crowne: for by the Lawe of God, the King in his owne Realme is chiefe gouernour, both in causes Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill; the Pope contrariwise will not onelie be aboue the King in all causes Ecclesiasti∣call, but also in some Ciuill, challenging all Bishops and Cleargie men for his subiects, exempting them in things Ciuill from the Kings authoritie, whereby he robbeth the King of a great part of his Subiects, and in the Realme doth gleane out another Realme to himselfe: yea challengeth to haue power to de∣pose the Prince. Againe, the auncient Lawes of the Realme were hereby made to stand for cyphers; the Lawes of the Realme will haue a Priest for debt to bee sued before a temporall Iudge, but the Popes Lawe commeth and crieth the contrarie: Patrones by the Lawes of the Realme should giue Benefices; but the Popes Lawe setteth them besides. All the dangerous consequences threatned to this Realme by that match, it is not my purpose to set downe: I will onelie adde a fewe verses made long since con∣cerning
that marriage, by which the Reader may partlie see what is to be iudged of it. Regi, non Regi, nupsit, non nupserat, Angla est, Non Angla est, grauida est, non grauida est, grauius est. Parturit atque parit, sic vos voluistis ouantes, Nil tamen illa parit, sic voluit dominus. Duxerat ad paucos menses, mox deserit idem, Sponsa est, mox vidua est, sic voluit Dominus: Irrita frustrentur semper sic vota malorum, Perniciem patriae, qui voluere suae. A King she matcht, yet not a King, scant doe her married call; English she is, not English, yet great; not with childe at all. She breedes and beareth in her wombe, as ye triumph and braue, Yet brings no childe into the world, euen so the Lord would haue. Philip a few moneths married her, then leaues her with great speede; A wife she is, a widow straight, the Lord had so decreed. Euen so confounded be th'attempts of wicked Papists all, Which of their natiue Countrie seele the ruine and the fall. Now I come to the great fume and chafe of this hot Encounterer, for that I say the Recusants can∣not professe more loue and loyaltie to the Queene that now is, then did Gardiner, Boner and Tunstal to her noble Father and Brother, which they did con∣firme by Printed bookes: for Gardiner in his booke
de vera obedientia, &c. where like a graue States-man,Gardiners booke de vera obedientia, with Boners pro∣face. and another Nestor, hee takes vpon him to taxe mee either with ignorance in the matters of our owne Realme, or with forwardnes to tell vntruthes. His al∣legations are two, the first that Gardiners booke de ve∣ra obedientia was written for feare of the Kings vio∣lent proceeding, or not being well instructed per∣haps in the controuersie of the Supremacie; and that shaken with the frailtie of humane infirmitie, hee shrunke with Saint Peter: But he may remember that first Gardiner with sundrie others, did take a volunta∣rie and solemne oath against the Pope, as by the co∣pie thereof yet extant may appeare, wherein he swea∣reth purely of his owne voluntarie accord, and abso∣lutelie in the word of a Bishop, &c. Then he stayeth not heare but writeth his booke de vera obedientia, for the Kings, and against the Popes Supremacie: which hee professeth to doe with long and mature deliberation, and Boner in his preface before that booke, perswadeth the reader to esteeme Gardiners censure and authoritie, to be of more weightie cre∣dence, in as much as the matter was not rashlie, and at all aduentures, but with iudgement and wisedome examined, and discussed, saying, that a man may rightly call him Fabius, that with his aduised taking of leasure restored the matter. The second allega∣tion is, that for King Edwards Raigne it is a flat fable and fiction that I tell of Bishop Gardiners fol∣lowing the sway also of that time. Gentle (Sir En∣counterer) did not Gardiner againe in the Raigne of King Edward, take a solemne oath against the Popes vsurped authoritie, and subscribed to the Kings law∣full
Supremacie,  in causes Ecclesiasticall within his owne Realme. Yea did he not before King Ed∣ward flatlie preach against the Popes Supremacie, as also against Images, Ceremonies, Munkeries, Chauntries, &c. Therefore doe no more blasphe∣mouslie compare Saint Peter fall to Gardiners dissi∣millation Saint Peter denied vpon the sudden and within few houres : Gardiner sware solemn∣ly, preached publikelie, and wrote vpon long and ad∣uised , and so continued many yeares, till  authoritie  another course. Gardiners Sermon in Queene Ma∣ries time vpon Rom. 13.Concerning his sermon made at Paules Crosse vpon this text, Hora est amp de somno surgere It is time for vs now to arise from , I shall neede little to answere, because it  concerneth my for∣mer booke: but how fire soeuer your wisdom thinketh, that the time since King Henrie shaking of the Popes tirannie might be compared to a sleepe, and the resuming of the Pope withall his wares to be an awaking; yet what more like might then Poperie, and the liuing  vnto a sleepe For as darkenes co∣ereth all things in the night, and men cannot walke safelie for want of light: so Ignorance preuaileth in Pope, and the people are misled therein, so that they cannot see which way they ought to walke, be∣cause they are not permitted to exercise themselues in the Word, which is a lanterne to our feete, and a light vnto our steps: and as in sleepe the hungrie man dreameth that he careth, but when he awaketh his soule is emptie; so in Popere the people being fed with mens traditions, thinke themselues in good plight, but when they are truelie wakened (as Io∣nah)
by Gods spirite, they perceiue that they were hunger-starued, for want of the true foode of their soule, the word of God. In stead of all which large comparison of those times of King Henrie and King Edward to a sleepe, and commending the Bishops wisdome for the choice of so fit a text: I will set by way of opposition, another euigilate (or caueat to a∣wake) made to the Pope and his Clergie, long before the profounde Sermon of this you Bi∣shop, euen in the time of Henrie the fourth, called the A.B.C.The A.B.C. to the Pope and his Cler∣gie in Hen. 4. time. AWake ye ghostlie persons, awake, awake, Both Priest, Pope, Bishop, and Cardinall: Consider wiselie what waies that ye take, Daungerouslie being like to haue a fall: Euery where the mischiefe of you all, Farre and neere breaketh out very fast, God will needes be reuenged at the last. How long haue ye the world captiued? In sore bondage of mens traditions, Kings and Emperours you haue depriued, Lewdly vsurping their chiefe possessions. Much miserie you make in all Regions, Now your fraudes be almost at the last cast, Of God sure to be reuenged at last. Poore people to oppresse you haue no shame, Quaking for feare of your bloudie tyrannie, Rightfull Iustice you haue put out of frame, Seeking the lust of your God the Bellie; Therefore dre you holdlie cetifie, Very little though you be thereof agast, Yet God will be reuenged at the last.
But to looke backe a little vpon this famous Sermon, in the long narratiō that you set down by occasion of this Sermon, I must examine some few points, wher∣in either this Proctor belieth the Bishop, or the Bi∣shop the King. And first if it be true that he affirmeth that King Henrie the eight appointed Gardiner to be one of the sixteene Counsellors in his testament to gouerne his Sonne, and the Realme: how happe∣ned it that Sir Anthonie Browne was so earnest and importunate a sutor to the King, to haue Gardiner put into his Will againe when he was put out?Gardiner put out of King Henries Will. And why did the King bid him holde his peace, and trouble him therewith no more? For if hee were in, he would trouble them all; and if hee moued him a∣ny more for Gardiner, he would also put him out. Is not this an argument that the King reposed great trust in Gardiner for the gouernment of his Sonne and the Realme? Another thing you say Gardiner vttered in his Sermon, that King Henrie in his latter time was inclined to reconcile himselfe to the Pope. But I would the Bishop had had more wit to speake truth, and lesse skill in lying:King Henrie the eyght not minded to re∣concile him∣selfe to the Pope as Gar∣diner saith, but quite contra∣rie. for it is apparant that not long before the Kings death, hee with his owne mouth answered the Ambassadour of Frederick Duke of Saxonie, that if the quarrell of the Duke his master were nothing else against the Emperour but for Religion, he should stand to it stronglie, and hee would take his part. Nay more then this (as the wor∣thie Archbishop of Canterburie Doctor Cranmer, a man farre more inward with the King then Gardiner was, doth testifie) the King but little before his death resolued, talking with the Archbishop, and French
Embassadour, that he and the King of France within one halfe yeere, would not onely change the Masse in both the Realmes to a Communion, as it is now vsed, but vtterly to haue banished the Bishop of Rome & his vsurped authority: Yea they were so throughly and firmely resolued in that behalf, that they minded also to exhort the Emperour, to doe the like in Flaun∣ders and other his Countries and Seigniories, or else to breake off from him. A third thing in this discourse you alleadge, that Bishop Gardiner was wont to say of King Henrie, that after he left to loue that person which by Gods law, and mans law, he was bound to loue aboue all others (to wit his first wife and Queene) he ne∣uer loued anie person heartilie, and constantlie after. Whereunto I shortly answere, that concerning his often changes of his wiues putting som to death,About King Henries di∣uorce from his first wife with Gard. iudge∣ment of it. and others away, I will not take vpon me to answere at all. But to Gardiners report I answere, that this his mutabilitie proceeded not hereof, because he ceased to loue the first, but because he first loued where he should not, namely his owne brothers wife, against the voice of God and nature: as crouching and glo∣sing Gardiner, who flattered with the issue of this vn∣lawfull match, not in word onely, but in publike writing professed to the whole world, vtterly con∣demning the former mariage, with his brothers wife, and approuing & iustifying the second with Queene Anne. In his booke De vera obedientia, he writeth of that point to this purpose. And amongst these, Sith there is commaundement that a man shall not marrie his
brother's wife, what could the King: excellent Maiestie  otherwise then he did? by the consent of the people and iudgement of his Church, that is, be diuorced from vn∣lawfull marriage, and vse lawfull and permitted ∣tion: and obeying (as  it ) conformablie  commaundement, cast off her whom neither law, nor right permitted him to haue, and take him to chast and lawfull marriage? Wherein although the sentence of Gods word (whereto all things ought soupe) might suffice: yet his Maiestie was contented, to haue the assisting consents of the most notable graue men, and the censures of the most famous Vniuersities of the whole world: and all to the intent, that men should see he did both that he might, & ought to do vprightly, seeing the best learned, & most worthy men haue subcribed to it, shewing therein such obediēce, as Gods word requireth of euerie good and godly man; so as it may be said that both he obeyed God, and obeied him truly, &c. Hitherto Gardiners words. Who reading this discourse of Gardiner, concerning the kings first vnlawful, & his second lawful mariage, would euer haue suspected such mutability in ye man? so suddainely to turne the Cat (as the Prouerbe is) in the panne, approuing that which before he openlie condemned, and condemning that which before he publikely approued? or who noting this his incon∣stancie, and not this onely, but the other of condem∣ning and abiuring the Popes Supremacie, and ear∣nest maintaining of it againe; will not thinke him a verie Proteus, which can change himselfe into all shapes, serue all times, sooth all Princes affecti∣ons, with, it, aio, negat, nego? And so I leaue, your
wauering Bishoppe, and come to your constant Car∣dinall. About whom you professe to be verie briefe;Cardinall Allen. but if you had not spoken in his defence at all, you had shewed yet some loue of truth, and hate of trea∣son: for as wicked Sheba blew the trumpet of sediti∣on against Dauid; so hath this your Cardinall done against her Maiestie. In my former booke, I charge him that though he seemeth to wish that Doctor Saunders, and Doctor Bristow had spared to speake so much in defence of Puis Quintus his Bull against her Maiestie: yet he both affirmeth, that these two lear∣ned men, of great zeale, and excellencie, had their speciall reasons to doe so. And in another treatise, Viz. his defence of Sir William Stanlies act in giuing ouer Deuentre to the King of Spaine, he doth as ful∣ly approue the Bull, as anie of the other: which though I condemne (as good cause I should, being a point of so high treason, as that the Queene being by the Pope deposed, is no longer Queene no to bee obeyed) yet you answere for him smoothly, that he must needs be of like iudgement, with Saunders and the rest: and that he might speake his mind plainely, (being in the place and dignitie that he was) when occasion should be offered.Allens iudge∣ment of Pius Quintus Bull. Which in other words is as much to say, as your Cardinall must needs be of the iudgement, that the Queene was no longer Queene after the Bull published, neither might her Subiectes obey her: But yet it was good pollicie to speake spa∣ringly of that point, and for the Papistes to yeeld for a time outward obedience, to auoide the daunger of the law, till a fit time might come, either by open
force, or secret treason to put the Bull in execution. And so much doe the faculties granted by Gregorie the thirteenth to Parsons, and Campion import:Parsons and Campions fa∣culties. which is further warranted by Saunders going after into Ire∣land with Italian and Spanish forces,Saunders Re∣bellion in Ire∣land to haue depri∣ued her Maiesty of that kingdome: which fact as you cannot deny, so will you not shew to detest in a sub∣iect against his Prince, because it was for your Pope. For a further defence yet of your Cardinall, you alleadge the example of childrens sorrow,A similitude alleadged for Allens de∣fence exami∣ned. to see their parents at iarre, that the yonges sort are fitter to weepe and mourne, then to determine the controuersies, and that the elder sort may speake more freely, and interpose their iudgements also, (but euer with due reuerence to both parents, &c.) All which by way of similitude you ap∣ply to our Queene as a mother, and your Pope as a father; and to your Saundrs, Allen, Bristow, Stapleton, &c. as elder brethren, and to the Priestes and lay men in England as yonger brethren, &c. which simi∣litude consisteth of nothing but dissimilitudes. For first the Pope is no way our father, and therfore our obedience, reuerence, & loue, not to be deuided be∣twixt the Queene and him,The Pope no way our fa∣ther. as the childrens betwixt the father and mother: the Queene is our mother, both nourishing vs as a tender parent in things tem∣porall, as also in taking care for the Church of Christ in this land, in things spiritual, according to the Lords promise by the Prophet to his Church. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queenes thy nurses: So did Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Iosias, amongest the Iewes; Constantine, Iustinian, Charles the great, with other like Princes amongst the Christians, commaund and
make lawes in causes ecclesiasticall, and acknow∣ledged no vniuersal father-hood of your Pope. I wish he did discharge the dutie of a true spirituall father within his owne Diocesse and Bishopricke, but it is an hard testimonie that Laurentius Valla giueth him. Papas dici nomine Patres, re Parricidas, that the Popes are called fathers in name, but in deed they are Parri∣cides.Your elder brethren yeeld not due reue∣rence to the Queene their mother. Againe, if the elder brethren interpose their iudgement betwixt their Parents, by your own con∣fession it must euer be with due reuerence to both partes: this reuerence your elder brethren haue not shewed towards the Queene, (too good a mother for so vngracious Impes,) whom they not onely call he∣retike, pretended Queene, vsurper, &c. but haue by all meanes sought the murthering of her sacred person. Thirdly, the yonger children (you say) must holde their peace and mourne for the contentions, but not inter∣meddle:Your yonger brethren are the elders a∣gents against the Queene. But (Sir) your elder brethren, (whom you allow to speake) are farre enough from reach, they may safely define what they will against the Queene, and cast abroad their iudgements in railing bookes to yonger brethren, to settle in them a consent therto: Which being done, they must yet make shew not to intermeddle, to the end they may the better auoide perill to their persons, & secretly hearten the people against her Maiestie. Take an instance hereof, from one of your yonger brethren, one Paine a Priest:Paines pra∣ctise against her Maiestie. who walked no lesse closely for his safetie, then he was directed; nor lesse cunningly to corrupt the peoples hearts, then he was commanded: who from his owne mouth discouered to one Eliot, a bloudy platforme laid to destroy her
iestie, and diuers of her Honorable Councell with armed men: the effecting whereof stayed onely the comming ouer of certaine Priests which were expe∣cted, & in the meane time (through Gods goodnes) this horrible treason was discouered, and preuented. And Paine being asked, how they durst practise or at∣tempt any such mischieuous action? his answere was; that to kill the Queene, or to vse anie crueltie against her, or any that would take her part, was no offence to God, and that they might doe it as lawfully as to a brute beast; and to approue himselfe a fit messenger to be sent on such a bloudie errant, he affirmed that himselfe would be one of the first that should exe∣cute the same: here is one of your yonger brothers, whom all the world must confesse to be a fit son for such a father as your Pope is. Besides this, your Cardinall Allen, Doctor Wor∣thington and others (as elder brethren) sent Richard Hesketh a Gentleman of Lancashire and a younger brother,Heskets trea∣son. to induce the Lord Strange late Earle of Der∣bie to make a suddaine rebellion in England, and to take vpon him the title of the Crowne; assuring him from them and others, of treasure and forraine for∣ces to maintaine the same: which treason the Hono∣rable Earle dutifully detected, Hesketh himselfe con∣fessed, and bitterly cursed his elder brethren, to make him a yonger brother, to aduenture the danger of the treason, that they as elder brethren doe teach and deuise, farre enough from reach. Is this the weeping of your yonger brethren without intermedling? are these the teares? then are they of a right Crocodiles brood, which seemeth to weeepe, but it is to this end,
that they may sooner kill and destroy. Nay further then this, these elder brethren commend to their yongers, treason against her Maiestie, for a point of their faith, namely, that if the Pope say the worde, none of the Papistes ought to obey her Maiestie, nor to account her Queene of England:Treason a∣gainst the Queene made a point of the popish faith and religion. for in the cases of conscience (as Doctor Bilson now Bishop of Win∣chester noteth) wherewith the Iesuites that came in∣to England were furnished, to the 55. Article, when they be asked whether the Bull of Pius Quintus, that was giuen out, or any Bul that the Bishop of Rome can hereafter giue out, all Catholikes be bound to yeeld obedience, faith, and loyaltie, to Queene Elizabeth, as to their lawfull Prince and Soueraigne? the reso∣lution is, he that demaundeth this question, asketh (in effect) whether the Pope might doe it or no: to which demaund, what a Catholike should answere it is playner then I need here to explicate. If therefore a Catholike be asked, do you beleeue that the Bishop of Rome may depriue Queen Elizabeth of her crown? he must answer (not regarding any danger of death) I beleeue he may; for this questiō is a point of faith, and requireth a confessiō of (our) faith. Do not these elder brethrē (think you) dutifully put in their iudgements between these two imagined Parēts, the Queen & the Pope, when they teach their yonger brethrē treason a∣gainst the Queen, for an article & point of their faith? To ende with this Cardinall, who (thanks be to God) ended his life before he could attaine the ex∣pected end of his traiterous dessignments: doth he not perswade that it is not onely lawfull, but honora∣ble to murther Princes for Religion? for (saith hee)
There is no warre in the world, so iust, or honorable, be it ciuill, or forraine, as that which is waged for Religion:Allen perswa∣deth it to be honorable to kill the Queene. Now if it be true that ciuill warre (which is the warre of Subiects against the Prince) be iust, and honourable, then is it an honourable act for Sub∣iectes to kill the Prince; for the ende proposed in warre is victorie, and the way to victorie is bloud∣shed, and slaughter, not so much of the people (who are not impugned, but for partaking with the Prince) as of the Prince himselfe, whom you seeke to depose and place an other in his steed. And this doctrine of your Cardinals, Parrie himselfe confesseth vnder his owne hand writing, did throughly resolue, confirme and strengthen him, in his diuellish purpose to kill the Queene. Doctor Allens booke (saith he) was sent me out of France, it redoubled my former con∣ceipts, euerie word in it was a warrant to a prepared mind:Parrey resol∣ued by Allens booke to kill the Queene. It taught that Kings may be excommunicated, de∣priued, and violently handled: It proueth that all warre ciuill, or forraine, vndertaken for Religion, is honorable. All which things considered, I appeale to any good natured Papist, who hath in him any sparke of loyaltie in his heart to his Prince, & loue to his na∣tiue countrie, whether this Cardinall not only by se∣cret practises seeking to stir rebellion against her Ma∣iesty, but by publike writing earnestly perswading the same, yea animating, & encouraging her Subiects to lay violent hands vpon her sacred person, were not indeed a cardinall and arch-traitor: and for this his Proctor I answere him, and conclude almost with the very words wherwith himself shutteth vp this his En∣counter, let all men iudge of this mans treacherie.
Resistance to the fift Encounter, concerning the Iesuites. THe sundrie occurrents in his last Encounter about Bishop Gardiner and Cardinall Allen,The grouud of this Encoun∣ter. did draw from mee moe lines, then either at the first entrie I purposed, or these two worthie Prelates were wor∣thie of: Now for the ground and foundation of his long and tedious prattle in this fift Encounter, he saith he will set downe my accusation in mine own words which are these that ensue. I doe not heare that the Popes holines is so purged from ambition, or so reconciled to Religion, as he meaneth not to continue his clayme for the Supremacie, or will cease to settle the dregs of his poysonfull and superstitious doctrine amongst vs. I cannot perceiue that the thirst of Parsons and his Pew-fellowes is yet quen∣ched, for seeking the bloud of our deare Soueraigne, and in her the destruction of vs all, the cause remaining still, for which heretofore they haue sought it, &c. And here first like a right Hicke-scorner (as in deed scorning and rayling are the flowers wherewith hee doth garnish all his speech) hee noteth the fond and ridiculous manner of my fantasticall writing (as it is his pleasure to censure it) and because his note, if it were not worth noting, men would thinke it worth nothing: therefore hee also painteth his margent therewith, that ye might not faile to remember it, in these words [Sir Francis ridiculous.] Festus called Paul a madde man, who yet spake the words of truth and sobernes, the madnes was in Festus himselfe: e∣uen so (gentle Sir) I doubt not, but to sober men I
shall appeare to write soberlie, howsoeuer you iudge me ridiculous, and the follie shall rest in your owne bosome. And therefore I say againe, that I doe not heare, (nay more then that, I doubt I shall neuer heare) that the Popes holines is so purged from am∣bition,The Pope will not disclaime his title of v∣surped Supre∣macie. or so reconciled to true Religion, &c. or that the thirst of Parsons and his Pew-fellowes is yet quenched, for seeking the blood of our deere Soue∣raigne, &c. And in the first you giue me a good satis∣faction, for you assure me, that your holy Pope will neuer leaue his claime for Ecclesiasticall Supremacy; because when he doth that, he must leaue to be Pope. In this I easilie beleeue you, and for this I will neuer put you to your oath, for it is hard for the Pope to cease to vsurpe other mens rights: but if you should take a solemne oath vpon your holie Masse booke, that your Popes Popedome or Supremacie was or∣dained by our Sauiour; I could not beleeue you. Therefore looke not that your bare word shall goe for a currant proofe with mee in this behalfe, seeing you haue no one title of the word of God to war∣rant it, it being manifestlie to be proued thereby, that he is wholie opposite to Christ, both in faith, man∣ners, and gouernment, which long challenge of his, and leane proofe of yours, is largelie confuted, and ouerthrowne by sundrie learned. The Pope will be no Prote∣stant, but may be an here∣tike.Neither is it like (you say) that he will be so pur∣ged to become a Protestant: and I confesse this is ra∣ther to be wished, then hoped for; but if your reason be, for that the Pope cannot erre in doctrine, or be∣come an heretike (such as you mistake Protestants to bee) your error is great in the Popes prerogatiue
wherein not onely your owne friends, will bee your enemies: but the examples of sundrie Popes which fell into heresie will disproue you. For Marcellinus fell not onelie into heresie,Marcellinus. but into Idolatrie, for he sacrificed to Idols: Honorius held & taught the here∣sie of the Monothelites, and was therefore accursed by the sixt generall Councell, Honorio haeretico Anathe∣ma; Cursed be Honorius the heretike:Honorius. Liberius became an Arrian heretike:Liberius. Stephen fell into the error of the Donatists:Stephanus. and to be short, Iohn the 22.Iohan. 22. did so notori∣ouslie erre about the state of the Soules after death, that his error was by the Diuines of Paris, with sound of Trumpets openlie condemned, in the presence of the King himselfe, who beleeued rather the Parisien Diuines in that point, then the Court of Rome. I would they were not so prone to heresie, nay authors of heresie, but that they would returne from whence they are fallen, that is, to that truth of Christian Reli∣gion which we professe, which also many Bishops of Rome for the space of some hundreths of yeares after Christ, religiouslie professed. But though you thinke the Iesuites much honoured by mee, in that I ioyne them (as you say) in slaunder and calumniation with the Pope himselfe; yet you please not to ioyne them in defence with the Popes holines, whom for a pre∣rogatiue you will handle by himselfe. And in deede I mislike not your method, for it were absurd to make the worke equall to the workeman, and to ioyne the Creator, and the creature together: for so a learned man writeth of the sect of the Iesuites, that it is Crea∣tura Papae nouissima & nequissima, The last and worst creature of the Popes making.
The Iesuites.You therefore enter your plea for the Iesuites, de∣ferring the Popes cause to the last saue one, that hee might bee accompanied with the King of Spaine fol∣lowing in the last: whom yet you might, if you had followed your Booke of ceremonies, haue sent be∣fore the Pope to leade his horse by the bridle, that the Pope in his pontificalibus might haue come all behinde. But your method be at your owne choice, for defence of your Iesuites you labour and sweate amaine, but it is like Sisyphus toyle; Saxum sudans nitendo, neque proficit hilum. In rouling vp the stone he takes great paine: But all for naught, it tumbles downe againe. Your tedious and irkesome prolixitie, I will recom∣pence with all conuenient breuitie. You run a long course about the contradictors of the Iesuites, which you acknowledge to be not onely those whom you account heretikes, but sundrie Pope-Catholikes, and to them you applie the saying of the Iewes against the Christians: That the sect of the Christians was euery where spoken against, with a long idle dis∣course to the same purpose. But (Sir) all this is be∣sides the purpose, and it is apparant that all this while you doe extra chorum saltare. If you had first by Scrip∣ture proued, and strengthned the originall of your Iesuiticall societie together with their doctrine and institute of life; these places might haue seemed to serue some turne: but to seeke to raise vp a building without a sure and sound foundation, is to climbe high for a certaine, and dangerous downefall. There∣fore vnles you can fetch their foundation from the word of truth, these places of Scripture shall neuer
be proued to concerne them any thing at all. A wor∣thie sect it must needes be that was so lately sounded by Ignatius Loiola, a lame Souldiour, who when hee would tricke vp these Nouices (as the Beare licketh her deformed whelpes) and send them abroade into the world, offered by himselfe and his friends 3000. hoastes or propitiatorie sacrifices to God (so many horrible blasphemies against that alone true propitia∣torie sacrifice of Christ Iesus, which was offered once, and onely once for our sinnes) thereby to ob∣taine grace and fauour to his new erected societie. Concerning the profession of these Iesuites, their doctrine, their life, name, and conuersation, what is to be obiected against them, whether they be seditious troublers of Common-wealths, and seekers of Prin∣ces deaths, I neede not say any thing, since they are by so many, so plainelie handled, and laide open, and almost all the Christian world seeth, and abhorreth their treacheries. The Sorbonists of Paris will tell you,The Sorbo∣nists iudge∣ment of the Iesuites. that their name is vsurped without warrant: for in deede, what presumption is it, that not being con∣tent with the auncient and honorable name of Chri∣stians, which was first giuen to the saithfull at Anti∣och, drawne from Christ the name of our Sauiours office, who hath made vs Kings and Priests to God his father: they will speciallie bee called Iesuites, of Iesus, which is our Sauiours name of nature, and so (as much as in them is) diuide Iesus from Christ, or ouer presumptuouslie by a speciall priuiledge in∣trude vpon that name: their profession they shew to be different from all others, consisting in practising as deepe politikes against Princes and States; their
doctrine that it is lawfull in some cases for Subiects to kill their Princes,Iesuites prac∣tises. labouring by stirring vp sediti∣ons, and authorising treasons, to holde vp and strengthen the tyrannie of Spaine. This hath been by the way proued in part in my Resistance to the fourth Encounter, by the example of Cardinall Allen, who publikelie teacheth that there is no warre, whe∣ther forraine or Ciuill, so honorable, as that which is vndertaken for Religion. By whose perswasions Par∣rie confessed that hee was animated and encouraged to kill the Queene; as also by the cases of conscience, which the Iesuites brought with them into England, in which they teach that it is a point of faith, that if the Pope depose her Maiestie, she is no longer to bee obeyed nor acknowledge for our Queene. Parrie harte∣ned by Iulio Palmio a Ie∣suite.To which may be added, that Parrie was hartened and resolued likewise by Iulio Palmio a Iesuite, to put in execution his intended treason against her Maie∣stie. And besides this, Edmund Yorke, and Richard Wil∣liams (who being apprehended confessed the same) were by Iberra the King of Spaines Secretarie, hired to murther the Queene, the assignation for the pay∣ment of 40000. Crownes for the performance of this notable exploite, was deliuered (as in deposito) to one Holte a Iesuite an olde English Rebell:Yorke and Williams set on by Holte a Iesuite. Many were the conferences held about this villanie, in which Holte the Iesuite did sit in a sort as a President, or head of all these conspiracies, and did vehemently perswaded Yorke and Williams to enterprise the matter, not onelie receiuing of them both an oath to per∣forme it, but also ministring to them the Sacrament thereupon (himselfe kissing it) and swearing to them
solemnly for the assurance of their reward; shewing also to them the bill of assignation signed with the King of Spaine his Secretaries hand for the more as∣surance of the payment. Yea further, that the insa∣tiable thirst in this Iesuite after her Maiesties bloud, may be more manifest; he tolde Yorke, that seeing the English had often failed to perfourme this enterprise, if now it should not be perfourmed by Yorke and his Companie, he would afterwards imploie Strangers in it: Which in deede before this he attempted, by perswading one Patricke Cullin an Irishman,Patricke Cul∣len. and a Pencioner of the King of Spaine, to come secretly in∣to England to kill her Maiestie, and being his ghostlie Father gaue him absolution to this purpose: which Cullin being at his comming apprehended, and exa∣mined, confessed the whole, and was accordinglie condemned and executed. Whether Doctor Guifford be a Father amongst the Iesuites,Sauage per∣swaded by D. Guifford. or a simple Priest I cannot affirme; sure it is by Sauage his owne confessi∣on, that hee perswaded this Sauage to vndertake that most barbarous and sauage acte of shedding the in∣nocent bloud of our gracious Soueraigne. The fa∣mous Iesuite Posseuine exhorteth the Souldiours of Pius Quintus,Posseuine. sent into France against those of the Religion, that it is their dutie to kill all Protestants, o∣therwise they breake their faith, and lose their sal∣uation. And to leaue forraine matters, and to ende with our owne (because to prosecute all particulars in this kinde were infinite) Wal-poole a Iesuite did by oath latelie binde Squyre, Stanley,Wal-poole. and others, either by poy∣son or stabbing to kill her Maiestie: By which and
sundrie other examples it is euident, that this Iesuiti∣call broode is of Caines humour, who had a bloudie heart and hand to shed his brothers bloud, and that they follow, nay runne farre before Chore in conspi∣racie:France iudged the Iesuites. For farther insight into this new foundation, I referre the Reader at his leasure to the Bishop of Winchesters booke before named, to Doctor Hum∣freyes Iesuitismus, to Kemnicius, &c. The profession, practise, and vertues of this sect was so fully sifted, and tried by the Catholikes of France (that it may not be thought to be done by enemies) that the vniuersity of Paris wholy opposed it selfe against them, and by the mouth of their aduocate, pronounced thē worthy of Banishment; and after that, vpon farther search into them, the Parliament of Paris by a publike decree condemned them and cast them out of the whole Kingdome of France into perpetuall Banishment. A worthy example of the wise and politike Kingdome of France, to try out their treacheries, which I wish all Christian Kingdomes would follow, that so all Iesu∣ites might be perpetually banished, into Terra Virgi∣nea, or Terra Florida (with which this fellow in the entrie of his libell disporteth himselfe) from whence no daunger of them might redound to any Christi∣an Monarch. The chiefe vow of Iesuits.Whereto the consideration of the principall vow of this new-found sect might serue to perswade. Their principall vow is (as a Catholike Frenchman setteth it downe) to obey their generall or superiour, who is alwaies a Spaniard, or one of the King of Spaynes Dominions) the words of which vow are set downe to be these. That in him they must acknow∣ledge
Christ to be present (as it were,) and if Iesus Christ should commaund to goe kill, they must doe so. In which vow to omit the intollerable blasphemie, that they make a sinfull man equall with God: for Gods will is the Rule of Iustice, and God doth not commaund things, because in themselues they are good; but they are therefore good and lawfull, because he com∣maundeth them; so that if God commaund Abra∣ham to kill his owne sonne, he must yeeld simplie o∣bedience, and be content to doe so:Sacriledge to vow simple o∣bedience to man. but it is high sacriledge for any man to vsurpe this piuiledge of God; all men may and oftentimes doe erre. So that we may not thinke any thing lawfull to be done, be∣cause our superiours commaund it, but we must exa∣mine all their commaundements whether they be consonant to the reuealed will of God, which is the Rule to trie right and wrong, good and euill. Cicero an heathen man, and ledde onely by the light of na∣ture, condemneth as most wicked the resolution of Blasius, who professed that he so highly esteemed Gracchus, that he held himselfe bound to doe what∣soeuer he badde him, who being asked (as before is noted) whether if he should bidde him set the Ca∣pitole on fire? answered he would neuer bid me do so, but if he would, I would haue done it. But (I say) to omit this blasphemie, is it obscure by the example set downe in this vow,The scope of their vow. (if Iesus Christ should com∣maund to go kill, they must doe so) whereto this sect tendeth? If Christ commaund to kill, we must doe so; they must acknowledge Christ to be present in their superiours, and yeeld obedience to them as to Christ: If then the superiours please for the enlar∣ging
of the Spaniards territories, or for other reasons pleasing themselues, to commaund to kill, where is the safetie of Princes liues? The Iesuites are sworne men to stirre Rebellion, yea and to execute murther vpon Princes, if their superiours bid them: Is not the Princes safetie made to hang vpon the slender twine-threed of the fauour, and good liking of the superi∣ours of this sect? And do not the Punies teach to our English Papists for a point of faith, in their cases of Conscience, that the Queene is no longer to be obeied as our lawfull Soueraigne if the Pope de∣pose her? The conclusi∣on.Therefore leauing your Iesuites branded with Cains bloudie worke, which is proued (not by my words) but by their owne, out of their speciall vow, and by their many bloudie practises: I wish that as England breedeth no Wolues, and Ireland will beare no Snakes & venemous Serpents; so these two kingdomes may neuer harbor, or foster Iesuites: who pretend the sweet name of Iesus, and come in sheeps cloathing; but inwardlie are rauening wolues, and as serpents doe hisse into the eares of Subiectes sedition and rebellion against their lawfull Soueraignes. As for Parsons, because I obiected not against him any speciall, or personall matter, but the generall impu∣tation of English Iesuites, I will in that generall con∣clude him, without spending any more words about his person.
Resistance to the sixt Encounter about Re∣cusants. TRue is the saying of Tully, Qui semel modestiae limites transilijt, &c. He that hath once broken the bounds of modestie, must be lustily and outragious∣ly impudent: so fareth it with this masked and dis∣guised companion (who being vizoured cannot blush) he hath runne a strange veine of immodest and impudent rayling in the whole course of his pro∣cesse,Te rayling of N.D. in which praise he passeth all that euer I haue read; but in this Encounter he is outragious, and doth here ouercome himselfe: He hath left no corner of his wit vnsought, how he might calumniate and slan∣der me, he termeth me an Herodian, without con∣science, and readie to pawne my soule for pleasing the Prince and State. He chargeth me with a diuellish and detestable disposition against Catholikes, that either I haue plaied the part of Iudas to betray and take them, or of Caiphas to condemne and afflict them. And not content here∣with (because happely he knoweth no step of anie bloudy action can be shewed in me, that I euer whip∣ped, stocked, fettered, or sought to bring any to death, yea when one Hanse a Priest was by authoritie com∣mitted to me, it is well knowne, I vsed him withall humanitie, and courtesie, letting him fare no worse then my selfe, and lodge as might haue seemed a bet∣ter man then himselfe) he chargeth not onely my selfe, but also my honourable brother that dead is, with a supposall of wishes against her Maiesties safe∣tie, hauing perfectlie learned the olde lesson of the
schoolemaster of rayling, Calumniare audacter, &c. Rayle and slaunder boldlie; for though the wound may be cured, yet a blemish or scarre will remain. But it is well written of Plinie, that the nature of the Loadstone is to draw Iron to it, but an Adamant set against it doth withstand it that it cannot draw: so though this intemperate & vnbridled tongue, would draw vpon me ignominie, reproach, and hatred; yet against all his calumniations I will oppose the cleere∣nes and freedome of a good conscience, and that shal be as a fenced Tower and wall of Brasse, to breake and blunt the forces of all the sharpe arrowes, that this vnrulie tongue hath or shall shoote against me. And so bequeathing all his rayling in his whole li∣bell to the diuell from whence it proceeded, (as Saint Iames teacheth vs, speaking of such a tongue as his,Iames. 3. that it setteth on fire the whole course of nature, and is set on fire of hell) and commending his person to the Lords mercie, if it may please him at anie time to in∣due him with a better spirit: to the substance and matter of his exceptions against mee, I will shape a short, yet (I hope) a sufficient answere. The first exception or rather meere cauill is a∣gainst these my words that I direct to the common sort.An outward ciuill conuer∣sation. That though some Papistes doe shew a good out∣ward ciuill carriage in ciuill matters; yet let not that possesse you with too great a regard of them, tearming it afterward a deceitfull bayte. Whence you gather, or rather wring out two things, first that I make little ac∣count of good life in Catholikes: secondly, that I leaue good-workes to Catholikes, and reserue onely threed-bare faith to our selues. But (good Sir) there
is no such matter, you misse your ayme verie much: as I know & grant that not the hearers of the law but the doers shal be iustified, and that if we be not doers of the word, but hearers onely, we deceiue our owne selues, hauing no interest in those three benefits spe∣cified in our Creed by Christ purchased to the faith∣full, Forgiuenes of sinnes, Glorious resurrection of our bodies, Eternall life: so I did neuer so much as by dreame imagine any the least forwardnes to good workes in Papistes aboue vs, to whom (God forbid) that herein we should be inferiour. It seemeth you are possessed with Narcissus folly, to fall in loue with your owne shadowe, take heede of his end. But I pray you are not the vulgar and common sort easilie deceiued by and outward ciuill carriage of men? Who when they see a man keepe good hospi∣talitie, giue almes to the poore, performe his word, and such like; (which are all commendable vertues) they pronounce such a man, without further enqui∣rie to be a good Christian, and a religious man: whereas many times they that doe such things, not onelie are not true Christians,Ciuill honesty to be found a∣mongst Infi∣dels & Turkes. but professe no Reli∣gion at all: may not these then be truly said to be de∣ceitfull baites in such a man? It is written of Iulian the Apostata, that he caused almes-houses to be erected, in sundrie places of his Empyre, appointing that poore Christians aswell as others, should be there re∣lieued: yeelding this reason, that sith the Christians taught to doe good not onely to friends, but to our enemies, it were ashame for them to be inferiour to Christians in doing good. Amongst Turkes, Iewes, Pagans, many things are done wisely, valiantly, iustly,
and according to ciuill honestie; yet are but deceit∣full arguments to perswade to be of their Religion, and (as Chrysostome I trow tearmeth such mens out∣ward good works) as gaye apparrell put vpon a dead carcase. I haue ascribed no more to the Papists in this point, then may trulie be yeelded to the heathen: and yet the Papistes especiallie of the wealthier sort, when now the streame and course of the law goeth against them, vsing for policie much kindnes, cour∣tesie, affabilitie,True faith not without good workes. to the inferiour and common sort; may by this meanes winde themselues into their bo∣somes; and as a Mirmaiden with her sugred song, and the Scorpion with his fawning and smiling, meane destruction in the ende: fo by this plausible courtesie they seeke to drawe and induce to their religion, by which sugred baite many are ensnared, with the wordes of our Sauiour, Beware of false Pro∣phets, by their fruites ye shall know them, &c. I gladly agree and subscribe to them, as also to the testimony of Saint Iames: Thou hast faith, and I haue workes, shew me thy faith without workes, and I will shew thee my faith by my workes. For as wee see not the soule of man (it being a spirituall substance) yet whom we see to walk, to speake, to haue sense and feeling, wee know the soule to be in that man: so faith being an inward qualitie of the soule, cannot be seene of anie but by effectes, namely good workes. And as a painted fire is no fire, because it wanteth heate, and an Image is not a man, because it wanteth sense: so no more is that faith indeed (but onely in name) which doth not fructifie by good workes; as the Church of Sardi had a name that it liued, but indeed it was dead,
it was called spirituall, but was carnall. The true iusti∣fying faith must be accompanied with an holy con∣uersation: Iustification, and sanctification cannot be seuered. But being my selfe in the ranke of learners, I confesse it becommeth me to referre you, for a full answere to your blasphemy against our true doctrine of iustifycation to those that haue both learnedlie and diuinelie handled it, to the true comfort of all Gods children. Now to bring you out of your wonder, for my speaking so much of deceipt and dissimulation in your Catholikes,Dissimulation taught by Pa∣pistes. seeing of all other people in the Realme, these men (say you) dissemble least, &c. I must pray you with patience to peruse some of your Iesuiticall instructions, discouered by one of their owne crew, some few yeeres past, in the Northparts, to a godlie learned man, who by authoritie was im∣ployed in the examination of them, and tell me how you can cleare your Recusants, I meane such of them as haue been taught these holy lessons, and apprehen∣ded them for fit to be followed, and follow them (as too manie doe) from deceipt and deepe dissimulati∣on? A seducer being sent ouer to play his part a∣mongst vs, when he was taken, did reueale (amongst many other things) to his assigned examiner these three positions following. First, that the Recusants1 should reserue themselues both in bodie and goods in plenitudinē temporis: secondly, that they should not2 make doubt to present themselues to our Churches; for it should not only not be imputed to them for sin, but takē to be as meritorious, as if they did sit so long in the stockes for Christ his cause: Thirdly, that in all3
their answeres and other behauiours, they should shew themselues as dutifull Subiects, till such time as there were certa spes victoriae: these be brought with speciall direction to be taught and perswaded, and how farre these lead wide from deepe dissimulation I appeale to the indifferent Reader, but this is no no∣ueltie in Poperie, though your dimme sight cannot discerne it.Dissimulation of some Pa∣pists mani∣fested. And I pray you (Sir) what meant sundry of your Recusants the last sommer (when all the land was in armes) to sell away their goods, and to slide out of the way themselues, when order was gi∣uen to dsarme them? did not this arguea reseruing of themselues in plenitudinem temporis, and that, they had some hope, that their certa spes victoriae was not farre off? The threefold accusation examined.You proceed further to my triple accusation (as you terme it) against them, which yet is rather an admonition for due prouidence, then an accusation to draw on anie heauie punishment. I note three things. First, the harme they continually doe; se∣condly, the hurt they would doe; thirdly, their deep dissimulation:The hurt Recusants do. for the first, I onely insist in this one hurt, that when the Gentleman recuseth, and is borne withall, the meaner sort receiue infection and draw backe also: Likewise though the husband come to the Church, if the wife refufe, the danger redoun∣deth to the whole household, and wiues of the mea∣ner sort are by them likewise infected. Of which you make light, but it ought to be of more moment to vs; and therefore more heedfully to be seene vnto, then you desire to haue it. For how shall the child, the ser∣uant, the tenant, be forward to know the truth, when
the Parent, the Master, the Land-lord refuse know∣ledge? The wifes recusancie was not so common, till men infected with popery were perswaded, that they could not be drawne by law to pay the penaltie for the wiues: and the Popes holines had a dispensation readie for the husband to goe to Church. Now that the meaner and poorer sort of women are infected by these of the wealthier, and that they when they come home, labour also to peruert their husbndes, it neither need seeme strange to you, and we that liue to serue in the countrie, finde too lamentable experi∣ence of it. For commonlie and for the most part, men proue to be such, as are they whose companie they frequent: and daily experiēce doth teach vs the tiuth of the old saying: Cum boni, cum malis conuer santur, &c. When the good conuerse and keepe companie with the euill, sooner are the good by the euill corrupted, then the euill by the good conuerted. Heresie is by sundrie writers compared to the plague, as for sundry other respectes; so for this, that as the plague doth spread it infection to manie, oftentimes infecting the whole house, and reaching the venome thereof to neighbour-houses, so that it sometimes filleth the whole Towne or Citie with dead corpses: so heresie feeketh to infect manie, and to spread the poyson of it from one to another. Now those that are sicke of the plague, by a laudable policie, we seclude from companie, that so they may not infect others: grea∣ter care ought (in my opinion) to be taken of here∣tikes, that they may not raunge whither they wil, and keepe companie with whom they please, for that the danger is greater of heresie, then of the plague: for
the plague killeth but the bodie, heresie killeth the soule; the plague threatneth temporall death, here∣sie eternall. But you aske from what these wiues, children, ser∣uants, tenants, and husbands doe fall? and I answere, as manie of them as become Papists, fall from true Religion, and manie of them also from loyaltie and sound loue to their countrie. But you say conscience is cause of this fall, and not euill will or rebellion? and I answere, it is fancie that leadeth them rather then conscience; for conscientia must be cum scientia, conscience must be grounded vpon knowledge, and knowledge is to be fetched not from your traditio∣nall doctrine of Rome, and vnwritten verities, but from the written word of God, which is able to make a man wise to saluation, through faith which is in Ie∣sus Christ. Forcing to do against Con∣science.The long idle discourse that you runne, about for∣cing men to doe an act contrarie to their conscience, maketh nothing against vs, but much against your selues: for we neuer taught it, we doe not practise it, we subscribe to the whole discourse of Saint Paule, concerning the meates sacrificed to Idols, as also to the generall proposition; whereupon he groundeth that particular argument, that what soeuer is not of faith is sinne. Therefore we first tender instruction to informe the conscience, and if that be obstinately refused and reiected (as the fashion of the most Re∣cusants is to answere:Moderate pu∣nishment for Religion law∣full. They will not conferre with anie, they are setled:) then moderate punishment we hold fit to be inflicted, by the Christian Magistrate, there∣by to reclaime them from their Idolatrie, by which
God is dishonoured, and to bring them to the true honour and worship of God. Moderate correction of heretikes, accompanied with due instruction, was neuer accounted consciencelesse, and vnmercifull dealing, but alwaies practised in the Church. Au∣gustine commendeth it by experience, Cùm doctrinae vtili, disciplina salutaris adiungitur, &c. When whole∣some discipline, is ioyned to godlie doctrine, that not onely the light of truth, may expell the darkenes of errour, but the force of feare may breake the bands of euill custome, we reioyce at the conuersion of manie. This point the same father in sundrie places teacheth. But what punishment is laid vpon Recu∣sants, by the rare clemencie of her Maiestie, any way comparable to those that Christian Emperours haue made against Recusants, or such as refused to com∣municate with the Church of Christ? They were discommoned from buying and selling, from be∣queathing their goods or lands to others, or recei∣uing anie Legacies from others, yea they might not inioy their fathers inheritaunce, &c. What like thing is done to English Recusants?Comparison tweene our punishment of Recusants, & those of for∣mer times. or rather what not vnlike? they buy, they sell, they bequeath their goods at their pleasure, they receiue legacies, and inioy inheritances. The most that for many yeers was done to them for their recusancie, was some re∣straint of their persons, but with free vse of their goods, and open resort of their wiues, and friends: and after the daungerous attempts of manie, yet the greatest increase of penaltie is a Multe of monie, which also is easilie passed ouer; for scant the tenth Recusant doth either pay the whole penaltie of mo∣ney,
or suffereth the restraint of his person, but li∣ueth at home,The Papistes hands deepe in this trans∣gression. and at libertie. But (Sir) you that make such a pitifull complaint, or rather outragious outcrie, against the gentle and motherlie chastice∣ment wherewith her Maiestie correcteth Recusants: what say you to your whipping, and scourging, to your torturing, and tormenting, to your holy house in Spayne, (because I perceiue you are so addicted to Spayne?) what to the infinite fires you kindled in Queene Maries time, wherein so manie hundreds of Gods Saints, young and olde, learned and vnlear∣ned, men and women, without respect of age, or sex were burnt to ashes? what to your sundrie massacres? namely of the Albigenses, Calabrians, Merindolians, &c. May your Prelates whip and scourge those that refuse to come to your Idolatrie, as Boner did diuers with his owne hand? May you torture, and torment men, because they will not beleeue your vnwritten verities, as Boner burnt Tomkins hand, and Tirrell a Iu∣stice of peace did Rose Allens hand? May you put men to death for refusing to acknowledg a peece of bread to be their maker? contrarie to the iudgement of the ancient fathers, as Augustine testifieth: It ne∣uer pleased anie good man in the Catholike Church, that he∣retikes should be put to death: nay may you kill both young and olde without difference, (as in the former Massacres) without euer perswading them, or giuing them respite to aduise vpon your doctrine? and may not your selues be punished? may not moderate cor∣rections be inflicted vpon you? shall it be sacriledge to touch the hemme of your garments? but God giue you grace to repent your owne bloudie mur∣thers,
and to take benefit by her Maiesties gentle cor∣rection, who sucketh not your bloud, but seeketh your benefite and endlesse saluation. Touching the hurt Recusants would do,The hurt Recusants would doe. I say, who doubteth but they would haue vp their Masse againe &c. And here he fareth like a mad man, saying: That the Turke, nor any Prince in the world, vrgeth men vpon vaine points of inward wishes, & secret cogitations, & that I, contrary to al reason & humanity, would haue it vr∣ged vpō Catholikes in England; what they wish, & what they desire. But I pray you of what secret wishes speake I? Do I presume to sit in the consistory of mens harts, & to iudge their inward thoughts? or rather folowing the rule of our sauiour, by their fruits shal ye know thē, do I only speak of such as are by outward actiōs opēly discouered? or what vrging would I haue of these wi∣shes? of punishment for their smart? or of prouidence for our own safetie? when he hath answered me this, then let him tell me, whether not only Turkes, but all christian Princes in the world, wil haue an eie to such subiects, as are by their masters abroad, & by new In∣mates & intruding Iesuits at home, taught yt it is not only lawful, but honorable to rebel against the prince, vpon ye Popes command; and from whō the forraine enemy & inuador, doth opēly professe that he expe∣cteth aide. This needeth no further answer because he hath no further mattter to build his calumnious in∣uectiue vpon. This is a point of rare & most insolent barbarity, that cōdemning my few words of the hurt Recusants would doe (though by open effectes be∣wraied) as more then Turkish, he doth himselfe (and I am perswaded contrary to his own cōscience, onely
vpon an innate and naturall engrafted inclination he hath to be mouthed like the diuell) burst forth into such a malignant presumption of inward thoughts, against my honourable dead brother and my selfe, as no barbarous Scythian would euer offer the like. We will examine it in a word. He is not onely contented to hold on his rayling fit at me,Barbarous rai∣ling against Henrie Earle of Huntingdō. but he must steppe in∣to the graue of a dead man, my honourable dead bro∣ther, and such a dead man, as thousandes yet liuing did know, and will witnesse him to haue been a most religious man, both in knowledge, and practise, and a most loyall and dutifull subiect and seruant to his Soueraigne, which he expressed by his care, dili∣gence, and paines, in all her seruices, and in sifting out all perils that might impeach her safetie: He was precise and straite in his gouernment for his Soue∣raignes good, and in the execution of Iustice in his place, in all causes betweene partie & party, he was of a most vpright and indifferent carriage, and that will manie Recusants yet liuing, witnesse for him against this calumniatour: He continued President of Yorke for many yeeres by her Maiesties commission, who hath giuen manie a most gracious testimonie in his life time of his approued fidelitie, and her well-liking of his seruice to his great comfort and commendati∣on, and since his death in her princely affection to him, hath often bewailed the losse of him; and yet this base railing companion blusheth not to strike, at this religious honourable Gentleman, with his mali∣cious penne, by imputing vnto him vndutifull and disloyall wishes against her highnes; for whom all our English world knoweth, he neuer held his patri∣monie,
nor his life too deare to be spent: As for so much as expecting what person should succeed her, so delightfull a thing it was to him, to see the end of her daies, as he would often verie heartily pray, that he might not liue to see her daies ended; which his prai∣er the Lord heard, in whom he died assuredlie, and therefore is blessed for euer. Therefore thou blasphe∣mous mouth against God and man, cease anie more to barke at this blessed dead mans graue. As for my selfe, I liue to set my foote against anie that dare ac∣cuse him or me, of the least disloyall thought; and if thou darest not shew thy face, I neither will offer nor desire anie better clearing, then the course of my du∣tifull carriage hath done, and shall doe to my dying daie: I will onelie adde this one sentence, written heretofore by a true hearted Englishman, wherein I ioyne with him from my heart. I like better the honest wisedome of those that studie how the Queene may stand and not fall, then the reaching pollicie of those, that deuise how themselues may stand, when the Queene is fallen: And from such reaching Polititians, God deliuer and dis∣burthen her Maiesty, and her kingdome, and increase the number of such religious honest hearts to her, as will pray daily to God for the prolōging of her daies, employ their wits wholy to preserue her person, and put backe all perils that may come towards her, and will not thinke their liues too deere to stand in the gappe to withholde daunger from her. The third imputation against the Papistes is their dissimulation,Dissimulati∣on in sundrie Papists. of which somewhat hath been alreadie shewed: but here you proceed againe to raile, cauill, and misconstrue my words: your railing I still passe
ouer, in which kind I list not to contend with you: your cauilling and misconstruing shall briefely be laid open. My words you set downe; These ciuill ho∣nest men that vnder pretence of Conscience rebell against God in religion, and refuse to yeeld a loyall obedience to their Liege-Ladie, seeme to carrie a most lamentable resolution lurking in their bosomes against Queene, Countrie, and vs all, &c. And if this be conscience, I know not what con∣science meaneth, and yet this conscience they fetch from Rome, &c. You beginne with the last wordes, from which you pike out this conclusion against me, that I know not what conscience meaneth, either in nature and definition, or in practise and feeling; the first you say is past my vnderstanding, by reason my bring∣ing vp hath hnot been in schooles; the other you take vpon you to make plaine I am voide of, by my manner of writing against Catholikes, &c. Surely I willingly confesse my wants in learning to be verie great, and doe bewaile my losse of time in that be∣halfe, yet this I hope I may say without suspition of vanitie or ostentation, that I laid the grounds of lear∣ning in one of the best schooles in this land, namely Winchester, and added some further building in one of the best Vniuersities in Christendome, namelie Oxford, studying there in Magdaleine Colledge vnder that worthy Doctor Humfrey, where besides my pri∣uate study, I wanted not such furtherance, as the cōfe∣rence with sundrie of the best learned in the Vniuer∣sitie could afford me; and since I left the Vniuersitie, I haue not spent so much time in hunting & hawking, as you presume, although I hold them for lawfull re∣creations moderatelie vsed in the feare of God. And
therefore I did long since know (I praise God) that Conscience is a part of our vnderstanding, determi∣ning of our particular actions, either with them or a∣gainst them: I knowe also that of this Conscience God onelie is Lorde, and his words and lawes, doe onely binde the same properlie; and from hence must we fetch the direction and warrant of our prac∣tise of Conscience which will not admit vs to de∣pose, and set vp, and to obey & disobey Soueraignes at our pleasures, yea and to kill Princes (as your Pope giueth warrant to doe) and then to say we doe it of Conscience, but will giue me a sufficient warrantise, to condemne all such Schoolemasters and Schollers; and so Sir (not as a teacher in our Israel, but as a Scholler) I haue tolde you what Conscience is, and by that touch I haue giuen of the practise and feeling of Conscience (which must bee warranted by the word of God, and not by mens dreames, and traditi∣ons) I haue cancelled the warrant you would take to your selues, to disobey and resist the authoritie, giuen to her Maiestie from God. The rest that you snarle at in these words, or in those that follow, concerning my speeches against Recusants, or any thing materiall thereto belonging, I will briefelie answere: First my tearmes of falsehoode; disloyaltie, wicked treasons, and lurking resolutions against Queene and Countrie, calling them the Catilines of our time, &c. This doth moue your patience much, and for this I must vndergoe the bitter biting of your ve∣nemous and slaunderous tongue, and bee called a monstrous lyer, and calumniatour, which by a bricke wall will hazard to light vpon your selfe. For why
should I be blamed to charge them with falsehoode, disloyaltie, treason, and lurking resolutions against Queene and Countrie, and to bee the very Catilines of our age, when your Popes doctrine teacheth no∣thing else, and they frame themselues in all things to obey him? When Rebellions haue been raised with∣in our owne bowels? When her Maiesties life hath so many times been shot at, and her Kingdome at∣tempted to be inuaded? And in the first two, sundrie of your Recusants false fingers haue been set on worke, and in the third the Inuaders haue promised to themselues (and so published) great assistance from them, and both for Inuasion, Rebellion, and taking away of her Highnes life; who haue been the very Catilines of our Countrie, but they? Doth not your Captaine and Cardinall Allen,Cardinall Al∣len inciteth to Rebellion. openlie blow the trumpet of sedition against her Maiestie, teaching all English Papists this Catholike doctrine, that, since her excommunication, and deposition by the Pope, she hath no iust title or interest to her Crowne and Kingdome; and that no Acte done by her authoritie, since the publishing of that excommunication and deposition, hath been or can be lawfull, by the lawe of God, or man? and therefore that no man may lawfullie serue her in any action, bee it otherwise ne∣uer so iust? If Catiline himselfe were aliue, could hee more pestilentlie perswade to sedition then doth this Cardinall? And are not they Catilines mates, so ma∣ny as yeelde to the perswasion of this Catilinarian Cardinall? And what doth the dispensation graun∣ted to Parsons and Campion teach our Papists? Doth it not teach them to dissemble? Consider the wordes
of the dispensation:Dispensation of Gregorie 13 to Parsons and Campion. where in the Bull of Pius Quin∣tus all her Subiects are commaunded not to obey her, and she being excommunicate and deposed, all that doe obey her, are likewise innodate and accur∣sed (which point is perilous to the Catholikes, for if they obey her, they are in the Popes curse, and if they disobey, they are in the Queenes danger) therefore the present Pope to relieue them hath altered that part of the Bull, and dispensed with them to obey and serue her, without perill of excommunication, which dispensation is to endure, but till that it please the Pope otherwise to determine. First, they teach generallie that all which obey the Prince, by the Pope deposed; are accursed, which if it be not a sedi∣tious and Catilinarian Doctrine, let the Reader iudge. Secondlie, Papists are dispensed with, that without daunger of the Popes curse, they may obey th Queene; but is it, that the Queene may be safe? N care of their owne safetie procured this dispensatio or are they taught to obey of Conscience, and fro the heart? Nay, flatlie for feare, because (saith the pensation) if they disobey they are in the Queen daunger: and this is contrarie to S. Paules Doctrin who teacheth to obey the Magistrate not onelie for wrath, that is feare of punishment, but also for Con∣science sake. Lastlie, how long are they permitted to obey in this sort? No longer then the Pope please o∣therwise3 to appoint: if the Pope send in secretlie some Iesuites, to whispher in their eares, that hee hath cancelled this dispensation, or otherwise publikelie signifie it; then by your doctrine, they must disobey, and rebell, or else they are accursed.
All Recusants not charged with dissimu∣latiō or rebel∣lious mindes.And yet your corrupt construction cannot hereby hold against me, that I accuse all Papists to be guilt, of these crimes, I neuer said it, I neuer thought it: for though it be euidēt, yt your Popes doctrine doth teach it generallie to all men, yet I assure my selfe we haue many of that professiō in recusancy, who are in simpli∣city led by the line of their superstiiton very far, which yet will not shake hands with them in their treasons, either against her Maiestie, or their countrie, to please Pope, or anie forraine Potentate whatsoeuer. For that some Papists are not so perswaded of the Popes power, that he hath authoritie to depose Princes we haue examples:e Papists  at the  de∣ Hart plainelie writeth (as before was touched) that the opinion of them who hold the Pope to be a temporall Lord ouer Kings and Princes s vnreasonable and vnprobable altogether, and that e hath not to meddle with them and theirs ciuillie, ch lesse to depose them, or giue away their king∣mes, that is no part of his commission. Yea fur∣r he confesseth that we giue no more to the eene, by the title of Supremacie, then Augustine th giue to all kings, and to this Supremacie of her aiestie he subscribed. Besides this, there is a booke written by one Iohn Bishop a Recusant Papist, prouing that the Pope cannot depose her Maiestie, or release her subiectes of their alleageance to her: In which 1he handleth these sixe propositions. 1. That the Pope and all the Bishops and Priestes are subiect by the law of God to the temporall Magistrate, in whose 2Realme and Dominion they do dwell. 2. That they cānot depriue christian princes of their principalities. 33. That the Pope cannot loose subiectes of their na∣turall
faith and obedience to their Prince. 4. That it4 is no determinatiō of faith, that the Pope may depose Princes. 5. That the Canon made at the Councell5 of Lateran, touching the deposing of Princes (the which hath bred the greatest scruple in our English Romane Catholikes) neither is, nor euer was of force within this land. 6. That the sentence pronoun∣ced6 against her Maiestie, was neither lawfully, nor orderlie done, according to the Laterane Ca∣non. Therefore I am farre from imputing the crime of sedition to all Recusantes, and as I doe not accuse all, so can no man trulie excuse all; for it can∣not be denied, but that verie manie haue been ouer∣taken with this humour, by the perswasions of Iesuites and Seminaries, as hath been proued before; and from hence you may pike out your hard and heathenish hearts, wherof you make mention: As for the bare sense of an English heart, which you snatch out of my words, it is such an heart, as hauing onely the light of nature (without anie knowledge of the true God at all) would not so brutishly seeke the life of their lawfull Soueraigne, to the betraying of their countrie into the handes of straungers, and such an honest heart, I wish you at the least. After this iangling railer hath vngorged his mali∣cious stomacke against me,The truth of my position iustified. for this my triple accusa∣tion (as he will haue it) he proceedeth, and that with the gal of bitternes (for the Ethiopian cannot change his blacknes) to inuey against me, for setting downe a position, which both religion and nature it selfe doth teach vs; the position is this, That euerie Chri∣stian man ought to striue to keepe these three things sound
within his breast, his conscience before God, his loyaltie to his Prince, and his loue to his countrie: Which after he hath frowardly and peruersely wrested to his owne fantasticall sense, he breaketh forth into this excla∣mation, what Atheist would euer say so? and I say, who but a wretched wrangler would euer cauill so? for may not men be loyall to their Princes, except they obey all their commaundements? Or can they not be louing to their countrie, except they obey all the lawes ther∣of? Inward loyaltie differeth from outward obedi∣ence, the first we owe alwaies, the second in all things we may not yeeld. I hope (Sir) you will not accuse the Apostles of disloyaltie, who yet obeied not all the commaundements of their Princes? nor of want of loue to their countrie, though they yeelded not to all the lawes thereof?Rebellion cunningly broached. But you will proue by sundrie examples, and that of the Scripture, that we are not bound alwaies to loue our countrie, as by the exam∣ples of Abraham and Lot,Abraham and Lot. yea that we may rebell a∣gainst Prince and Countrie by the example of Ie∣remie,Ieremie. Ieroboam and Iehu. Did Abraham or Lot cease to loue their countrie, because at Gods speciall com∣maundement they left it? or did not the Prophet Ie∣remie loue his countrie,Iere 9. because by speciall Reuela∣tion, and appointment from God, he perswaded the people to deliuer vp Ierusalem into their enemies hands? for whose destruction foreseene, and by God reuealed vnto him, he breaketh forth into that pathe∣ticall exclamatiō: Oh that my head were full of water, and mine eies a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe daie and night for the slain of the daughter of my people! For whoe deliuerance he so often & so heartily praied, and was
forbidden by the Lord to praie any more for them: whose destruction, after it happened, he bitterlie be∣wailed in his mournful lamentations? do these things proue he loued not his country? Or because the Lord himselfe did rent the kingdome out of the hands of Salomon, & gaue ten Tribes to Ieroboam from Rheboam Salomons sonne?Ieroboam. And because he also expreslie com∣manded Iehu,Iehu. to destroy the whole house of Ahab his master, doth it hence follow that subiects may be dis∣loiall, and rebell against their Princes? who but a Po∣pish Parasite would make such conclusions? The ge∣nerall proposition (I trow) holdeth true, that no man may commit murther, though Abraham, by Gods commaundement, speciall and extraordinarie, might lawfullie haue slaine his owne sonne: and that no priuate man may vsurpe the sword, though Phinehes extraordinarilie moued, did execution vpon Zimri and Cozbie. A priuiledge is no law. In summe, God might commaund Ieremie to will the Iewes to yeeld to the Chaldeans, and Ieroboam to take tenne tribes from Rehoboam, and Iehu the kingdome from Ioram, because he alone beareth rule in the kingdomes of the earth, and he may giue them to whom he will, he may set vp one, and pull downe another; but this proueth not, that at the Popes bidding, anie may play the lustie swash buckler, and pull the Princes by force from the Throne, which your defender of Catho∣likes laboureth stronglie to proue. Therfore this po∣sition is not (for ought this wrangler can alleadge) to be controlled, that euery Christian ought to striue to keepe these three sound within his brest, his consci∣ence before God, his loyaltie to his Prince, and his
loue to his countrie. And that his owne example of Athanasius will verifie, who was farre from disloyal∣tie to his Prince, or want of loue to his countrie, for to shew his loyaltie to his Prince, he departed at his Princes commaundement, from his countrie, which he ceased not to loue, though for a time he did leaue it:Athanasius. I neuer resisted the commaundements of your highnesse (saith he) no, no, God forbid I should. Obedience in temporall Princes.But will you yet further see the liuely picture of an impudent cauiller? because I say, that all obedi∣ence is due to the Soueraigne Magistrate, alleadging the wordes of the Apostle; That we must subiect our selues to all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be vnto the King, as to the superiour, &c. And first he exclaimeth, all obedience is due to Princes, yea all obedience, &c. crying out of the conscience of an A∣theist, or of a seruile minde, &c. If I had said we must obey our Princes in all things, I had vsed the Apostles phrase, concerning the obedience of children to∣wardes their parents, Children obey your parentes in all things: shall anie Atheist then crie out against the A∣postle; Children must obey their parentes in all things, yea in all things; a conscience of an Atheist, a seruile mind? &c. But as the Apostle by all things, meaneth all such things as are not contrarie to Gods commaundement, as he elsewhere expoundeth him∣selfe: Children obey your parents in the Lord: so is my meaning as cleare as the light, that we must obey Princes in all things, that imply not disobedience to God: generall and vnlimited obedience, we teach not to vow and performe to anie man, it being due onely to God, who cannot erre in the things he com∣maundeth.
Wee neuer held our selues in that sort bound to any King or Emperour, though your Ie∣suites vow such obedience to their Superiours. The very Poet may teach, that Omne sub Regno grauiore Regnum est, Each kingdome here, a greater hath aboue. Therefore sith earthlie King, are vnder the King of Kings, wee must so obey the inferiour, as wee diso∣bey not the Superiour. The highest King hath set downe his law to earthlie Kings, as well as others, in the two tables: if they presume to make a law, con∣trarie to this lawe, therein we are not to obey. It was not disloyaltie in the AEgyptian Midwiues, in for∣bearing to murther the male-children of the Israe∣lites at Pharaohs commaundement; nor in Obadiah in hiding the Lordes Prophets, contrarie to Achabs will; neither in the Apostles in not forbearing to preach in the name of Iesus, at the Rulers commaun∣dement; they did (as they ought) preferre obedience to God, before obedience to man, when they cannot both stand together. By all obedience then, it is plaine that I meant, true and sincere obedience from the heart, not dissembling obedience onlie for feare; as the Apostle when he perswadeth the Philippians to walke worthie of the vocation whereunto they are called, with all humblenes of minde, meaneth by all humblenes, true, sincere, inward humilitie, not counterfeite, and hypocriticall. And if mallice had not here lost both her eyes, and her wits, this scoul∣ding cauiller might haue seene that in the very entrie to this point of obedience, I doe manifestlie affirme it; for I say these three things euery man ought to
keepe sound within his breast, first, his Conscience before God; secondly, his Loyaltie to his Prince; thirdly, his Loue to his Countrie: Now how is it possible a man should keepe sound his Conscience before God, which I set in the first place, if hee obey his Prince in things against God? nay, that I place first, because it must be the director of vs in our Loue and Loyaltie both to Prince and Countrie. If the Lawes of the Prince or Countrie commaunde any thing contrarie to it, wee ought in such things not to obey our Prince, and for such things we may flie our Countrie; but yet not rebell or fight against them, as you seeke to perswade, saying that Christ alloweth greatlie of them that despise Father, Mother, Coun∣trie and Kinred, yea they are willed to hate them and make warre against them, for his sake; and conse∣quentlie also the like is willed against Princes in the same cause,This is N.D. his spirituall conceite as you may reade in his booke pag. 83. and this out of your conscienceles hart, made fit for Rebellion, you falselie and impudentlie affirme: but we say, we must hate Father and Mother as we must our life for Christ, not to doe violence to our selues, or to make warre vpon them, nor to doe a∣ny thing against either, but in comparison of Christ, and for his sake, not to regarde the losse of either; and therefore that which you adde of warring against our Countrie and Prince for Religion, as it is not in any text of holie Writ, so doe you plainelie discouer your traiterous minde, against Queene and Coun∣trie, and what was the marke you aime at, in all this wrangling against the point of obedience. The translati∣on of S. Peters words freed frō corruptionHis friuolous exception against my translating Saint Peters words, which I alleage to proue, That all
obedience is due to Ciuill Magistrates for the Lords sake, is not worth the answering: he cauilleth first because I translate to euerie ordinance of man, where hee would haue it, to euerie humane creature, which I thinke would affoorde but a colde sense: But he saith I translate it to euery ordinance of man, because it serued more to my purpose: what purpose? forsooth a pur∣pose that I detest more then himselfe, and those of his sect, that we should obey euerie decree of man. Ma∣ster Beza translateth it Ordinationi, that is, ordinance, shewing that by humane ordinance is ment that forme of policie and gouernment which is in euerie Common-wealth: and that this policie or forme of a Common-wealth is called an humane ordinance, not because it was inuented by men (for it is the gift of God) but because it is proper and peculiar vnto men, to liue vnder Magistrates and Lawes. The next exception hath lesse colour, that I transtate to the King as to the superiour, and leaue out, or vnto gouernours, as vnto them that are sent of him, &c. by calling the King the Superiour, he dreameth that I meane the King to be absolute, and all obedience due to Su∣periours, which I haue alreadie answered. But (Sir) if Saint Peter doe adde (in the leauing out of which words you suppose a mysterie) or vnto Captaines, and vnder Magistrates sent from him (as you trans∣late) is not the King rightlie termed Superiour, in re∣gard of the Inferiour, and vnder Magistrates sent by him? I suppose that Saint Peter doth first set downe a generall proposition, to liue obedientlie to that pol∣licie vnder which wee are, whether in Monarchie, Aristocracy, &c. and then commeth to the speciall
forme vnder which the Iewes did then liue, vnder the Romane Emperours, and their deputies. There∣fore I referre to the indifferent reader to iudge either of the falsehoode and treacherie (he saith) I haue v∣sed in corrupting and translating this little peece of Scripture, or else of his vntemperate humour of ray∣ling and cauilling; his long digression about Spiritu∣all Magistrates, and formall speeches to Catholike Recusants, I let passe. But if you please to resolue all Recusants, that they are bound in conscience to yeelde all ciuill obedience to her Maiestie as to their lawfull Soueraigne, though the Pope send forth ne∣uer so many Buls to depose her; you shall deserue thankes of them, in teaching them so godlie a lesson, and free your selfe from no small suspition giuen, that you are of a flat contrarie minde, which will sticke neerer your conscience (if you continue that mind) then any prophane flatterie (wrongfullie vr∣ged by you against me) shall euer doe to mine; for God be blessed the truth of his Gospell hath taught me a farre better lesson, then to flatter with any. Resistance to the seuenth Encounter, about the Pope. FRedericke the good Duke of Saxonie, requested ear∣nestly that great learned Clarke Erasmus, that hee would plainelie and truelie tell him what he thought of Luther and his writings; to whose request Erasmus answering, and that sincerelie, and with great iudge∣ment, yet began his answere merilie, saying, that in Luther were two great faultes, the one that he spake
against the Monkes fat panches; the other, that he pre∣sumed to touch the Popes triple Crown.The Popes Crowne may not be touch∣ed. But though each of these is a sore that may not be touched, and an euill against which no man may presume to speak, amongst the Papistes; yet the least word vttered a∣gainst the Popes extrauagant and vsurped authoritie, is deemed an offence almost inexpiable: for father Bellarmine himselfe doth teach vs, that to call the Popes Crowne in question, is to take the foundation from the building, the shepheard from the flocke, the Generall from the armie, the Sunne from the firma∣ment, and the head from the bodie. This conceit hath so farre preuailed with this libeller, that he re∣uelleth and raileth against me, for a few words vpon most iust occasion spoken against the Pope, namelie, that I call him the proud Priest, and Archprelate of Rome, bloudie monster, Antichrist, the man of sinne, &c. that thereupon he outrageth, crying that these are but rauings of a lunaticke braine, and belchings of a burthened stomacke with the surfet of heresie: and charging me with audacitie (or impudency rather) that I presume to vse opprobrious speeches against the sacred honours of annointed Princes, and the greatest Monarches of Christendome, &c. And here he imagineth (as imagination is strong) that he hath gotten a marueilous aduantage against me, and therfore proclaimeth, that I haue herein done contra∣rie to the law both of nature and nations, and am to be checked and restrained, euen for the verie honour of England it selfe and our Nation. Yet all this winde shaketh no corne. I doubt not but the wise and discreete reader will follow the
counsell of Pythagoras who ght that the Muses were to be preferred before the Syrens or Mirmaids, comparing falshood, varnished to the shew with a gay flourish of words, to the Syrenes; and the plaine and naked narration of truth, to the Muses: which bare narration I will in verie few words here set downe, and oppose it against all his Rhetoricall am∣plifications, furious exclamations, and railing ca∣lumniations, which is the Iue bush he hangeth forth to make his wine seeme worthie the vtte∣ring. Archprelate.To come then to a briefe declaration of these points, I call the Pope proud Priest and Archprelate of Rome: whereto he answereth, that the words Priest and Prelate, are names of his dignitie, as they were in Christ and the Apostles themselues,How Christ and his Apo∣stles were Priests and Archprelates. who were both Priestes and Prelates; and Archprelates also, in that they were more principall then others. That Christ was, and is an high Priest, for euer, after the order of Melchisedech, is by vs confessed; and by you his priesthood by a consequent disanulled, in that you haue ordained another Priesthood to offer propitia∣torie sacrifices to God: that the Apostles were mas∣sing or sacrificing Priestes, all the Priestes in Rome and Rhemes shall neuer be able to proue: that they might be called Archprelates, in that they were more prin∣cipall then others, being sent with ioynt and equall commission ouer all the world, and others by them ordained ouer particular congregations, we gladlie yeeld; but then were they all Archprelates in com∣parison of those whose calling was not Apostolik, but Pastorlike, and limited to a certaine congregation.
Peter onely was not (as ye would haue him) an Arch∣prelate ouer the rest of the Apostles, but they all were equall with him, which thing Saint Ciprian plainely testifieth. Hoc vti{que} erant & coeteri Apostoli quod erat Pe∣trus, pari consortio praediti & honoris, & potestatis: the rest of the Apostles (out of doubt) were the same that Peter was, endewed with the same fellowship both of honour and power. But (Sir) why seeke you to shrowde your Popes Archprelacie vnder that of the Apostles?Christ gaue no Superiority to Peter. for it is manifest that Christ gaue no such supremacie to anie one Apostle aboue the rest, nay he forbad it saying: That the Kings of the Gentiles raigne ouer them, &c. but ye shall not be so.Luke. 22. And whereas the promise of this V∣niuersall iurisdiction, seemeth to be made to Peter in these words: To thee will I giue the Keyes of the king∣dome of heauen, &c. it is plaine, that where this pro∣mise is performed Iohn 20. Peter hath no more au∣thoritie giuen him, then the rest of the Apostles, and the keyes to open and shut heauen, to loose, and bind sinnes, is a like giuen to them all: neither did that most humble seruant of Christ, the blessed Apostle, euer chalenge anie such preeminēt authority;Peter neuer challenged anie such. for as he entituleth himself an elder, which is a title of dignitie, so he calleth himselfe a fellow elder, which importeth an equalitie with, & not a superioritie aboue the rest. And when they of the circumcision contended with Peter about his preaching to the Gentiles, vsing (as it might seeme) rough tearmes, Thou wentest into men vncircumcised and hast eaten with them: he answered not as his intruding successor, that he is to iudge all men, and to be iudged of no man, but made a iust
Apologie for himselfe, and yeelded a sufficient rea∣son for his fact.Act. 15. As for that councell spoken of in the Actes: the primacie of place, to be as it were mode∣rator, seemeth to be giuen at that time, not to Peter, but to Iames, as one of your owne side confesseth:The Apo∣stles acknow∣ledge no supe∣rioritie in Pe∣ter. Postquam Perus dixisse, &c. After that Peter had spo∣ken, Iames by his Bishoplike authoritie gaue the de∣finitiue sentence. The rest of the Apostles did not acknowledge in him anie such preeminence of iu∣risdiction, they shewed themselues to haue power to dispose of Peter, as of anie other, for the good of the Church; and therefore when they heard that Sama∣ria had receiued the word of God, they sent vnto them Peter and Iohn: Yea one Apostle Saint Paule, publikelie reproued and withstood Peter to his face, because he was to be blamed: and to take away all occasion of stumbling from those that doe not wil∣fully blinde their eyes, the same Apostle with∣out tainte of pride, saith of himselfe, that he was nothing inferiour to the chiefest amongst the Apo∣stles. If then neither Christ granted, nor Peter chalen∣ged, nor the rest of the Apostles acknowledged a∣ny singular Primacie of authoritie in Peter aboue them, wee may safely subscribe to Cyprians con∣clusion before alleadged, and the Popes vsurped Archprelacie shall remaine (as it is indeede) not a title of dignitie, but a touch of intolerable inso∣lencie. The Popes spirituall su∣premacie without good warrant.The spirituall supremacie, wherewith you infeofe your Archprelat, as it is not grounded on Saint Peter, who had no such (& if he had it, yet the Pope shall ne∣uer be able to proue himself Peters heire more then all
other Bishoppes) so began it long after Christ to be challenged, and wanteth the testimonie of antiqui∣tie. The Councell of Nice, which not the Bishop of Rome, but the Emperour Constantine assembled, in which himselfe was present, and at his right hand sate the Bishop of Antioch, which is called the chiefe or president of that Councell, mentio∣neth foure Patriarches; of Alexandria, of Rome, of Antioche, of Ierusalem, and appoynteth equall priuiledges to each of them: Now where there is an equalitie of foure, there is not an vniuersalitie of one aboue all. The Councell of Chalcedon stan∣deth for the dignitie of the Bishop of Constanti∣nople, and (because that was now the Emperours seate, and was called new Rome) defined that it should haue equall priuiledges with olde Rome, and in Ecclesiasticall matters bee of equall power with it. By which it is apparant, that to Rome, and af∣terwardes to Constantinople, some respect of honor was giuen in regarde of the Emperours seate, but neither had primacie of power ouer all: Iohn Bi∣shop of Constantinople, first challenged this vniuer∣sall spirituall Supremacie, about 600. yeares after Christ; against whome Gregorie of Rome did migh∣tilie oppose himselfe, expostulating with him in an epistle, Quid tu Christo, &c. What answere wilt thou make to Christ the head of the vniuersall Church in the account of the last iudgement, that thus goest about by the name of vniuersall Bishop, to make all his members subiect to thee? But that which Constantinople sought, Rome shortly after obtained; and whereas Constantinople in seeking it, did shew himselfe
to be the forerunner of Antichrist, (as Gregorie of Rome then professed) Rome in getting and maintai∣ning it, sheweth that Antichrist hath there setled his seate. The Popes temporall Su∣premacie.But this is not the highest Arch, to which this your Archprelate of Rome mounteth, he claimeth a ciuill Monarchie and authoritie ouer all Kings and Kingdomes, vnder this title of Supremacie, saying, that Princes hold not their Crownes immediately of God, but of him; and that he hath power to set vp and pull downe Princes, and to giue away their King∣domes at his pleasure: So one of his Chaplaines saith, that the authoritie of Christ is principallie in the Pope, and that the Pope doth call the Emperour to be coadiutor to him in temporall things. By which we may see, that vnlesse it had pleased the Pope, there should haue been no King nor Emperour; yea of that counterfeit Donation of Constantine, they saie (imagining it to be true) that he gaue therein no∣thing to the Pope, but restored his owne, sith the Pope is Christes Vicar, whose is the earth and the fulnes therof. And Boniface the viij. in the yeere 1300. one day came forth arraied in his pontificalibus like a Pope, the next daie in Imperiall Robes with a naked sword carried before him, causing it to be proclai∣med that he was both Pope and Emperour, and had the Empyre both of heauen and earth. Wee haue onely taken a short scantling of the Popes Archprelacie, which is so farre from being grounded vpon Peter, that his spirituall Supremacie, was not knowne till aboue 600. yeeres after Christ, and his temporall ouer Kings, and Kingdomes to de∣pose
and alter them, hath not been acknowledged of anie Christian Prince to this daie.His temporall Supremacie neuer acknow∣ledged. Philip King of France writeth to the same Boniface the viij. claiming both spirituall and temporall Supremacie (as it may seeme) with small reuerence, Philip by the grace of God &c. To Boniface bearing himselfe for chiefe Bishop, little health or none at all: Let thy foolishnes know, that in temporall things we are subiect to no man, and that the giftes of Prebends and Benefices, made, and to be made by vs, were and shalbe good both in time past, and to come: And that we will defend manfully the possessours of the said Benefices, and we thinke them that beleeue or thinke otherwise to be fooles or madmen. Charles the 5. Father to King Philip of Spayne, for a lesse matter then with∣drawing his subiectes from loyaltie, or attempting to depose him and make him no King, rang an hot A∣larum at Rome gates by his Souldiours, and did take the Pope himselfe prisoner. And for all his claime of Monarchie, let him offer to thrust the King of Spaine from his throane, and see if (as Catholike as he is,) he will acknowledge this his Supremacie, or rather will not seeke by all meanes to bridle his furie. Therefore (gentle Sir) I must make bold to returne your impu∣tation of lunacy vpon your selfe and your colleagues. Thrasilaus a frenticke person, who (poore man) was not in anie proportion worth one ship, yet thought all the ships that arriued in the hauen of Athens to be his, he would tell them, suruey them, and set downe accounts of them: In like sort a melancho∣like impression hath so deepely setled it selfe in these mens braines, that though indeed they be destitute of the testimonie of Antiquitie, yet they boast that
the fathers make with them, and that all antiquitie is on their side, forsooth, euen as all the ships of A∣thens belonged to poore Thrasilaus. The Popes in∣tollerable pride.From his Archprelacie, let vs briefely come to his pride, which we shall not need to seeke in his inward disposition (as this Popeling imagineth) it sheweth it selfe apparantlie in outward actions. Neither in iudging by the external shew, may I as wel cōdemne all other Princes and great men in the world, for ad∣mitting honour according to their degrees (as hee would perswade) there being great difference be∣twixt the outward honour due to Priestes, and that which appertaineth to Princes, and this Luciferian Priest challenging such honour as no prince or mo∣narch the like. The Pope will haue the Emperour to holde his stirrope, whilest he mounteth on horse∣backe, and Pope Adrian was angrie with the Em∣perour Frederike for holding his stirrope on the wrong side, when he is mounted: the Emperour must lead his horse by the bridle, and Kings walke along before; yea when he is carried on mens shoulders, the Emperour (they say) must helpe to carrie him for a space. Pope Caelestine the 4. Crowned Henrie the 6. Emperour lying prostrate before him, with his feet. Gregorie the 7. made Henrie the 4. Emperor with his wife and young child to waite at his gate three diaes, bare foot & barelegd to sue for absolution, and at the length made him to surrender his Crowne in∣to his hands. Franciscus Dandalùs the Embassadour of the Noble State of Venice, was faine with a chaine about his necke to lie vnder the Popes table like a Dog, to pacifie his indignation conceiued against
the Venetians. What should I speake of his blessed feete, which hee maketh Kings and Emperours to kisse? What speake I of kissing his feete? (which bar∣barous pride yet scarce any heathen Emperour is read to haue shewed towards inferiour persons, but towards Kings I thinke none) Alexander the third did treade on the necke of Fredericke Barbarossa the Emperour, and caused that verse of the Psalme to be song, Thou shalt walke vpon the Adder and Cockatrice, and shalt tread the Lyon and Dragon vnder thy feete. These (I take it) are sufficient euidences of Pride in∣tolerable, and more then heathenish. Leauing to set downe further proofes of his pride,The Pope a bloudie mon∣ster. we will now shew how iustlie hee is tearmed a blou∣die Monster. Cyrus, whose head Queene Tomyris cut off, and cast into a bole of bloud with this re∣proach, Satia te sanguine quem sitijsti, i. Glut thy selfe with bloud after which thou hast thirsted; was but a milke soppe to the bloud sucker of Rome. Valla pro∣fesseth of the Popes in his time that they were called Fathers in name, but in deede were murtherers, that the Pope maketh warre vpon people that liued in peace, and soweth discord amongst Christian Prin∣ces. Iulius the second plaied the gallant warriour in his owne person, and casting aside Peters keyes, did betake himselfe to Paules sworde. Sundrie Popes haue sent their Cardinals to be generall of their Ar∣mies, and to shed Christian bloud: Pope Adrian set Pipine and Charles Kings of France against them of Lombardie: Boniface setteth the King of England a∣gainst the French King, and another time they haue set the French against the English. The examples of
this bloudie humour in sowing dissention betwixt Kingdomes are so many, that the Popes owne Secre∣tarie Platina confesseth, Pontifices Romanos inimicitias non secus ac saeuissimos Tirannos exercuisse. i. That the Popes of Rome did exercise hostilitie and hatred no lesse then the most cruell Tirants? What should I speake of his bloudie trecheries? The Emperour Fredericke being in warre against the Turke, the Pope did take from him his lands in Apulia, and Lombar∣die, perswadeth the Turke by letters not to yeelde vp the holy land to him, but to kill him, gaue a pardon to whosoeuer would fight against him. The Hospi∣talers and Templaries by letters shewed the Turke how Fredericke might be betrayed; which treason the naturall honest Turke detested (in this point ho∣nester then the Pope) sent the letters to the Empe∣rour, and said in contempt of Christ and Religion, Eccefidelitas Christianorum. i. Beholde the fidelitie of Christians. Gregorie the seuenth, how many waies sought hee to destroy Henrie the fourth Emperour, and namelie once when the Emperour was at his Prayers at Saint Maries Church in Rome, hee ap∣poynted by a Nouice hired to that purpose, to haue the Emperour murthered, by throwing downe a great stone vpon him? Henrie the sixt Emperour was, by a Frier hyred thereto, poysoned in the Sacra∣ment; how barbarouslie Stephanus dealt with his pre∣decessor Formosus after his death; how many Popes Gregorie the seuenth poysoned to get the Popedome; how Vrban the sixt sowed diuers Cardinals in sackes, and drowned them in the Sea; generallie of how ma∣ny massacres the Popes haue been authors, and how
they haue reioyced at the effussion of Christian bloud; these things to set downe, were either to write Iliades after Homer, or at the least chiliades after Eras∣mus. In a word, Alexander the sixt, the Papists them∣selues condemne for a bloudie monster, of whome after his death these verses were publikely scattered. Mirum cur vomuit nigrum post fata cruorem Borgia? quem biberat, concoquere haud poterat. Borgia dead much bloud did vomit from his brest, What maruaile that? the store he dranke, could not digest. But these happilie were the faultes of olde times,The Popes bloudie hu∣mour against the Queene. the Worlde is nowe amended at Rome? euen as sower Alemendeth in summer: view the dealings of our moderne Popes, and those onely which con∣cerne our owne State. First, the Pope most iniurious∣lie deposed her Maiestie from her Royall Crowne, dismissed her Subiects from their obedience due to her, yea cursed as many as did obey her: further hee sendeth Murton into England to stirre vp Rebellion a∣gainst her, and consequentlie (as much as in him lay) to fill the land with dead corpses, and to make our flouds run dyed with English bloud: when this suc∣ceeded not, hee sent Saunders with sundrie forces to inuade Ireland, not onlie to increase Rebellion there, but to winne it quite from her Maiestie if hee might. The bloud by this occasion shed in Ireland, could not yeelde his holines an heartie draught, and therefore hee setteth on and abetteth the Spanish King in the yeare 1588. to make Inuasion for a full Conquest; and to the ende he might throughlie speede and not
faile, he lendeth him all the helpe he could, but espe∣ciallie, (as hee that writeth the Canonization of Di∣dacus affirmeth) because by diuine helpe he thought this Conquest might quickelie be atchieued, Sixtus Quintus then Pope, in that fittest opportunitie of time did Canonize Didacus a Spaniard, and placed him in the number of Saints, in whose merites the Spanish King did so greatlie trust. And that no pro∣pertie of a bloudie monster might bee wanting in him, hee suborned Parrey, and armed him with full remission of all his sinnes, besides other promises, murtherouslie to kill her Maiestie and to shed her guiltles bloud. If these euidences cannot make this popish Sycophant to see and abhor the Popes blou∣die humour: I can yeelde no other reason in his ex∣cuse, but that which a Poet of their owne setteth downe; AEthiopes vna quoniam nigredine sordent, Ille color nulli vitio datur, omnibus idem Vultus, & alterius si quis reprehenderet ora, Et sua damnaret, &c. i. Blacknes for that it dyes each AEthiops face, Blacknes with them, is held for no disgrace: All are like faced, who so doth others blame, His proper visage he perforce must shame. If this fellow were not an horseleach, that is, bloudie minded himselfe, he would easilie acknowledge the bloudie humour of the Pope. What iudge∣ment is to be had of this Encounterer.To shut vp this point, whereas he saith that for my speech against the Pope (which is both iust and true) I am to be restrained and checked, euen for the very honour of England it selfe, and our nation; I referre it
to the honorable iudgement of the higher authori∣ty, what checke and restraint is fit for this fellow, who so stifly standeth for her Maiesties professed enemy, and will not endure to haue him accused of a bloudy humour, who hath pronounced her no Queene, stir∣red rebellions in her Realme against her, sent an In∣uadour to conquer her, and authorised bloudie trai∣tors secretly to kill hir; and that for the honour of England it selfe, that it may be freed from the igno∣minie of breeding such vipers, and of our Nation, that the people of our Nation may not be so inchan∣ted by the poysoned cup of this Cyrce, as to degene∣rate from Christian loyaltie to Antichristian trea∣cherie, whereto the Antichrist of Rome this Encounte∣rers halfe God doth call them. Whether the Pope be that special Antichrist,Whether the Pope be Antichrist wher∣of Daniel, our Sauiour Christ, and his Apostles doe speake, I will not stand here to dispute, specially be∣cause all the notes set downe in the Scripture of An∣tichrist, are by sundrie learned men fully prooued to concurre in the Pope, and in none other; and that by Babilon in the Reuelation is meant Rome, not onely as it was when the heathen Emperours held it, (as the Papistes say) but as now it is, the Pope raigning in it. The tenne reasons (sillie ones as they be) which you alleadge to proue the contrarie, with three times tenne more set downe by your Captaine Saunders, are by Doctor Whitakers throughly sifted, and refel∣led: as also whatsoeuer the great Iesuite Bellarmine could say for his master to free him from this impu∣tation, is by diuers notablie learned fully examined and confuted, whose bookes, with others of the same
argument in English, because they are extant, and al∣most in euerie mans hand, I refer the reader to them, contenting my selfe with a cōpetencie of knowledge for the instruction of mine owne conscience, and not presuming to take vpon me to be a teacher of others. How farre England stan∣deth behol∣ding to Rome.To conclude, whereas this Romane aduocate saith, that this lande ought to beare more reuerence to the sea of Rome then other Nations, for that it hath recei∣ued more singular benefits from thence, namely that it was conuerted from Paganisme to Christian Re∣ligion, by the speciall diligence, labour, and industry 1of the same Sea. I answere, first that it is apparant by sundrie testimonies, that this land was conuerted to the faith long before the time by you specified, and not by the Bishop of Rome: Guildas testifieth that Britanie receiued the Gospell in the time of Tiberius the Emperour, and that Ioseph of Arimathia was sent by Philip the Apostle from France hither, where he remained till his death. And Beda (our countriman likewise) doth testifie that in his time this land kept Easter after the manner of the East Church: by which may be gathered: that the first preachers came hi∣ther from the East parts of the world, and not from Rome: more proofes might be set downe, but I spare 2them. Secondly, though it be granted, that Eluthe∣rius sending hither preachers from Rome in king Lu∣cius his time, did first conuert this land to the Chri∣stian faith; I say there is not now the same faith in Rome, that was then: there was then no Masses said, the partes of it were not then found out, no tran∣substantiation, no setting vp of Images in Churches, the communion was then in both kindes admini∣stred
to the lay people, no vniuersall Pope, &c. Elu∣therius writeth thus to King Lucius: Yee haue recei∣ued of late through Gods mercie in the Realme of Britanie, the law and faith of Christ; ye haue with you within the Realme both the parts of the Scrip∣tures,Elutherius ac∣knowledge the Kings Gods Vicar in his owne king∣dome. out of them by Gods grace with the counsaile of your Realme, take ye a lawe, and by that lawe (through Gods sufferance) rule your kingdome of Britanie, for you be Gods Vicar in your kingdome, according to the saying of the Prophet, &c. Thirdly,3 the latter Popes haue been more beholding to this land for our money, then the land for anie good re∣ceiued from them: our kings haue often complained that the dropsie thirst of these late Romanists cannot be quenched: The Priour of Winchester one Andrew being expulsed, was faine to giue to the Pope 365. markes yeerely, to be restored againe to his place; this and manie such like were but slender gleanings, in comparison of the mightie haruest that from this land they yeerelie gathered. In a word,1. Thes. 1. the Apostle saith of the Thessalonians, that they were examples to all that beleeue in Macedonia and Achaia, and that from them sounded out the word of God, not to Macedonia and Achaia onely, but that their faith was spread abroad in all quarters. Thessalonica was, but is not: and those quarters of the world, that re∣ceiued the faith from thence, must not follow Thes∣salonica as it is now. And this I leaue to the godlie and faithful Reader to determine and iudge of, whe∣ther (because we haue receiued Christianitie, and be∣nignitie from Rome in ancient times) we ought to embrace the heresie that in these latter times Rome
teacheth, and submit our neckes to that yoke or ty∣rannie, which it now practiseth. Resistance to the eight Encounter, touching the Spanish Nation, and the King. CHrist Iesus our supreame Soueraigne and Lord, that hath the Key of Dauid which openeth and no man shutteth, shutteth and no man openeth, hath made the Ward of his truth so strong, as neither pa∣pisticall nor satanicall force can preuaile against it; so that your counterfaite Ward is too weake to keepe in safetie, and strength your Romish Babell or the Bi∣shops thereof, being not onely shaken by the wise∣dome of our watchman, who keeping our Israel, doth neither slumber nor sleepe, but beaten downe by the power of his might: Therefore you vaunt before the conquest, and triumph before the victorie. As for the bickering you begin now about your Spanish King (placed as your second great Monarch before spoken of) it consisteth rather of the ordinary blowes of your biting and rayling tongue, then of anie sound matter of defence for your Kings clearing, which your foule mouthed Rhetoricke I haue spared hi∣therto to encounter, and so will I still, carrying the same mind that Cato senior did, who being abused by one of a like intemperate spirit with slaunderous and reprochful tearmes, made this answer: Impar mihi tecū est certandi cōditio, nam vt malè audire, & malè dicere tibi facillimū simul & promptissimū est; sic & mihi malè dicere & insuaue est, & insuetum: i. My encountring with you is not on euen ground, for as to you it is verie facile
and prompt both to be euill spoken of, and to speake euill: so to me to speake euill, is both vnpleasing and vnusuall. This second Monarch of yours I acknowledge of farre more regarde in his place then your former without comparison,The cause of libertie of speech vsed a∣gainst Spaine. and of such persons bearing the iust titles of Monarches, I desire in mine owne disposition, to speake and write with all reuerence; but when I found how Rome had incited this Mo∣narch to take holde of Ambition, and vpon this hu∣mour to seeke the ruine of our Soueraigne and Countrie, and that he bent himselfe accordinglie to giue his attempts daily to that end, both by fraude and force: and when I saw how dangerouslie their practises and platformes had preuailed in the hearts of many simple superstitious Subiects, I thought it high time to possesse my Countriemen with a true taste of her Maiesties worthie parts, of the many blessings we had from God by her, and of the infi∣nite wrongs done to her, both in person, profession, and gouernment; as also to collect somewhat for their warning, of the nature of the Spanish Nation, whensoeuer and wheresoeuer they attained the So∣ueraigntie to commaund; that both the profession, person, and gouernment of our liege Ladie, might be imbraced, honoured, and obeyed; and the peoples hearts might be held free from forsaking their loyal∣tie to a lawfull Queene, and betraying the libertie of their natiue Countrie to the making way for an vsur∣ping stranger, and the bringing of this our noble na∣tion into perpetuall thraldome. And if by this occa∣sion I haue been drawne to lay this Monarches parts
more plainelie and sharplie open, then is either your desire to heare, or my delight to vtter: yet my hope is, that the wisdome of euery true English heart, will either wholie cleere me, or else censure my fault ve∣niall and pardonable; seeing the iust defence of my Soueraigne did perforce draw me to taxe this potent enemie with vniust dealing towards her, and the ten∣der care of my Countries good, enforced me to put our men in minde of the Spaniards humours, that they might be armed against the plots and perswasi∣ons of Iesuites sent to seduce them, which being hearkened vnto and obeyed, might leade them to ex∣pose themselues to a most certaine and irrecouerable miserie. It is not vnknowne that the Iesuites gene∣rally are agents for the King of Spaine, and their ar∣rants commonly tend to the raising of sedition and treason, (as their practises haue shewed many waies amongst vs) to the hazard of our Prince and daun∣ger of our state; and to this end hath hee called into his Seminaries too many of our English youthes qualified with fine naturall wits, to their lamentable downefall. Notwithstanding this iust and important occasi∣on drew mee to set downe that short admonition or cautele of the Spaniards nature, and Spanish Kings intention: this Encounterer (whom all men may see to carrie a Spanish heart in an English bodie) not on∣lie seeketh to holde the Spaniards credite vpright,The Encoun∣terers iniuri∣ous rayling. a∣mong the simpler sort of our Country men, (whose further fetch therein, the godlie, wise, and politike of our Land will I doubt not more easilie find out then I can conceiue,) but belcheth out against mee from
his malignant stomacke, all manner of spitefull and iniurious opprobries, thinking thereby to lay a blot of disgrace vpon mee. But welfare the Poet whose olde verse is verified in this new Rayler. Non semper feriet quodcunque minabitur arcus. The marke forsooth whereat your ayming is, You hit not still, but shoote full oft and misse. And therefore whereas the wiser sort of our nation haue learned by the lawes of morall ciuilitie, that a man must speake moderatelie of his enemie (a lesson which Papists haue not learned, no though it be their naturall Prince whome they account their enemie) yet he that speaketh truly, speaketh moderately, espe∣cially where the enemies carriage is so immoderate and outragious, as if a man had an hundreth tongues, hee were neuer able sufficiently to set it sorth. That this moderation I haue kept in speaking truly that I haue said, and saying farre lesse then the enemie de∣serued, I will shew with all conuenient breuitie: first in the Spanish Nation generally; then particularly in the Spanish King himselfe. It needeth not to be so strange to you, to haue your Spanish nation noted to be proude,Of the Spa∣nish Nation. ambitious, blou∣die, tyrannicall, rauening, and voluptuouslie giuen, all which properties are imputed to them by sundrie imprinted bookes: and yet that concerneth not eue∣ry particular person in that nation,Not all Spani∣ards charged. to bee infected withall and euery of those faultes, (as you absurdlie collect) for in it (I rest assured) God hath his rem∣nant reserued to himselfe, as in other nations; but that these humours are in the generalitie of them: France, Italie, Germanie, the Low-Countries, Portugale,
England, and the very Indiaes are by experience wit∣nes; and of this many proofes might be yeelded, but for a taste (so as it may not offend your taste) take these fewe. Experiments of the Spani∣ards pride, crueltie, &c.You shall finde in a Catholike Frenchman intitu∣led the Anti-Spaniard, that the pride of these Spani∣ards was great, when they durst presume to take a prisoner violentlie from the Parliament Sergeant of Paris, who was conuicted and condemned of mur∣der, making him to passe through the chiefe Cham∣ber of that high and honorable Court: adde vnto that a villanous attempt offered by them (recorded in the same booke) to rauish a young damosell left worth an hundreth thousand crownes, the stopping whereof (some thinke) did hasten the Countes Ed∣mond and Horne to their deaths, who would not in∣dure such a villanie to be committed. Read you also the estate of English Fugitiues, and there you shall finde how kinde (or rather how cruell) they are to those, that haue aduentured their liues (and more then their liues) with them and for them: for when they had discontented Rowland Yore, (who betrayed the Sconce of Zutphen to them) by putting him be∣sides the gouernment of Deuenter, doubting what might ensue thereof, by reason of his great stomacke, they found the meanes at a dinner to requite him for all his seruices with a Spanish figge, killed his Lieu∣tenant, and ransacked all that they had: when the poore Souldiours had their Captaine and Lieute∣nant murdered, and had no meanes of reliefe, they made an humble suite to Verdugo and humblie be∣sought his helpe, who for a gentle rewarde charita∣blie
cashiered them all, not giuing them one peny. You shal also reade there, that when there had been a great slaughter of the English at Rosendale without pittie, or mercie (which was more then enough) they did deale most barbarouslie with the English that were prisoners to the Italians and Burgognians, who being led quietly by those that had taken them, towards their quarter, the Spaniardes spying them cried kill, kill, and drawing their Rapiers, ranne furi∣ously vpon these naked poore soules, and killed them euerie man. Further it is worth the noting that which is written of the west Indian people (though not without remorse, and griefe) who by the faw∣ning and flattering of the Spaniard were drawne to accept his gouernment, and for a time (the poore soules) did honour them like Gods, but when they had tasted of their insolent customes, hu∣mors, and cruelties, they did so deepely and despaire∣fully detest them, as men might see the poore wret∣ches goe by companies together vp to the rockes, and throwe themselues downe into the sea. Now (Sir) I pray you tell me, whether this will not satisfie you for sufficient instances to proue your Spaniards proud, ambitious, bloudie, tyrannicall, rauening, and voluptuous? if not, then call to mind one example more of their barbarous crueltie execu∣ted by Don Iohn, after the battell of Ieblours, where hauing taken neere 2000. Wallons, he caused them to be tied by two and two, and to be tumbled headlong ouer the bridge of Namures into the riuer of Mewse. If neither this doe suffice you, (for to a partie so par∣tiall what proofe can seeme sufficient) for the satisfy∣ing
of the indifferent Reader, I will onely adde the testimonie of Paulus Iouius both a Papist, and there, fore one that will not slaunder them, especially when he compareth them with Protestants, & who was an eie witnes of the thing he writeth, and therfore could not be deceiued through other mens information. He writing of the taking of Rome, by the armie of Charles the 5. (consisting of Spaniards and Italians, Papistes, and the Germane Protestants) saith, that the Germanes after the slaughter of their armed enemies at the first Encounter, laid aside their swordes, with so calme a carriage, that they set their prisoners at liber∣tie for a verie small ransom: their rage they turned a∣gainst the Churches and Images, defacing them be∣cause they were Protestantes; and did deride the Popes lawes: then speaking of the Spaniards he ad∣deth; Hispani autem astuta & implacabili crudelitate acerbiores, vt abdita arcaná{que} familiarium eruerent, tor∣mentis atque supplicijs in nobilissima corpor a graffabantur, tanta auri cupiditate vt Iulij Pontificis Cadauer, multa exesum carie, eruere, & anulo spoliare non dubitarent: But the Spaniardes being more bitter with a subtile and implacable crueltie, did assaile the bodies of honou∣rable personages with tortures and tormentes, to get their secret and hidden treasures, though they had beene before that, their familiars, with so great desire of gold, that they doubted not to dig vp the bodie of Pope Iulius almost consumed with rot∣tennes, and to spoile it of his ring. Is this the dealing of Spaniardes with men of their owne Religion? and that in the seat of the holy father himselfe, whom they professe so highlie to reuerence? Then (Sir)
though you wash them with nitre, and take to you much soape, yet their crueltie is marked, and their bloudie staine will not be done away. But, what a bad bird is this that so defileth his own nest where he was hatched and bred?N.D. malici∣ously slaun∣dereth his na∣tiue countrie: a few wordes, and such as all the world knoweth to be true, spoken of the Spaniardes, euen then when they seeke the conquest of our land, doe mightily offend him, and driue him into marueilous passions: but what slaun∣der doth not he heape vp on his owne countrie? The English (saith he) did abuse themselues intollerablit in of∣fering most inhumane and barbarous iniuries to the Spani∣ardes, whiles they were here in Queene Maries time, vil∣lanous words were ordinarie Salutations both in streets and Churches, our victuals we solde to them at a double price; their water they did drinke, we did not onely make them buy, but diuers wels we poysoned of malice to destroy the Spaniardes: that our men sent their wiues and daugh∣ters of purpose to allure them by that meanes to spoile them of their money; and a number of such other heroicall actes and honourable histories, which (he saith) Spaniards and others doe recount of our ciuility, &c. If the Spani∣ardes speake so euill of our Nation,No cause to except against our free speech of Spaniards. as it would make modest Englishmen ashamed, and their eares to burne, in respect of the dishonour of our countrie, (as this good fellow reporteth) why should this fel∣low be so enraged? or can anie Spaniard be in reason offended, that we vse the like libertie of speech con∣cerning them? Lex talionis lex aequa, and like shall haue like, why should they complaine, if the measure they haue mett to others, the same be remeasured to them againe? And yet it is not altogether the same mea∣sure:
they speake of our land vntrulie, and wee of them report nothing but knowne truth. And if af∣fection to Spaine preuailed not more with you then truth, you might remember and report, that manie outrages were by the Spaniardes at that time com∣mitted against our countriemen; as namely, that great tumult at Westminster betwixt our men and the Spa∣niards, whereof great mischiefe was like to haue en∣sued. What was the ground of it? in whom was the fault? was it not about two harlots? and was not the fault wholie in the Spaniardes? for whiles some Spa∣niardes committed wickednes with those strumpets, others with dags and other weapons kept the entrie of the cloistures; some of the Deanes men came in the meane space into the cloyster, at whom the Spa∣niardes discharged their dagges and hurt some of them, whereof great busines was like to follow: But you shew your selfe worse then one of the broode of Cham, who was cursed for vncouering his fa∣thers shame, for you seeke to lay shame vpon your mother England before she deserue it, to please a for∣reiner, and a sworne enemie to her. Now let all men of conscience, yea of common reason iudge, whether of vs two hath the malignant spirit by you named, I in discouering the daungerous humours of the Spaniardes for my countries good, or you in not onely concealing them, but seeking to cleare them, for your countries harme, and hazard of ruine, yea in labouring in your censure to lay so odious a blot of disgrace vpon your natiue countrie? Concerning their late King, and that before allea∣ged and proued by me in my former booke against
him out of the letter of discouery which I cited, this Encounterer promiseth himselfe great aduantage a∣gainst me, the vanitie of whose conceite shall appeare by that which followeth for all his great paines ta∣ken, and his leauing no stone vnmoued whereby he might discredite either me in cyting such a letter, or the discouerer in writing it, or both. Sometimes hee seemeth to doubt whether there were any such let∣ter of discouerie sent, or whether the tale bee not wholy forged by my selfe; nay he perswadeth him∣selfe to discouer both treacherous cogging, and shameles forgery in my heart and hand. Concerning which obiection of forgerie, I doubt not but to all men indifferent it might bee sufficient for me to an∣swere, as one AEmilius Scaurus did, who being by one Varius accused of treason, made this short and plaine answer, Varius dicit, Scaurus negat; vtri creditis? Varius saith it, Scaurus denieth it, whether doe you beleeue? In like sorte if I should answere concerning this odi∣ous crime of forging and inuenting this letter, N.D. a Iesuiticall scholler and sworne Spanish obiecteth it, Francis Hostings a Christian and true hearted Eng∣lishman denieth it; whether doe you credite? The iudgements of as many as were not more then halfe Spanish would acquite mee. But yet for further eui∣dence I adde, that this discouerie was written in na∣ture of a letter from a true hearted Englishman, dwel∣ling at that time with a great man in Spaine, the name of the writer was one Iohn Bradford (not Bradford whom Boner put to death, but Bradford a Papist;) the Nobles to whom this letter was directed, were the Earles of Arundel, Shrewsbury, Pembroke with other
Nobles, and these named I trust you will cleare them from being infected with the humour you imagine to be fed by him. Hauing little hope to perswade the indifferent rea∣der that I forged this letter of mine owne head, hee proceedeth to seeke to discredite the certificate in it selfe. For short answere whereto, there be two things materiall of which I must say somewhat, the marri∣age it selfe of this King to Queene Marie, with the conditions thereof insisted vpon by this English Spaniard, and made a speciall colour to crush the cre∣dite of Bradfords aduertisement, and the secret intent of the King by this letter discouered. By the first, viz. the conditions of the marriage together with the Kings vsage, towards the English for a space, hee would ouerthrow the second, namely the certificate of the Kings secret meaning. But (Sir) your infe∣rence hereupon is very feeble and weake, in taking vpon you hereby to controule the aduertisement of Iohn Bradford to be false. The world hath not found it strange for some politike men to make semblance of loue when they meane nothing lesse; I will not hunt far for proofe touching the argument in hand, or for disproofe of this Encounterers wrongfull ex∣ception against me: Let the Anti-Spaniard and Mercu∣rius Gallo-Belgicus both Papists, and Emanuel Lewis a Portugal, in his open confession at the Guild-hall, and sundrie others suffice for my clearing, not to haue written that I did without ground of proofe in my former booke. It were not amisse to remember and consider, what moued your Popish Prelates and o∣thers to bee so busie in hand to haue Ladie Elizabeth,
now our most worthie and happie Queene, married to some Spaniard, and to bee posted ouer with her portion much about the time, that it was said, Queen Marie was with childe, and when your Catholike King was concluded to bee Protector and gouer∣nour to the issue hoped for. I dare not say (for offen∣ding your Worship) that I feare it should haue been the best of our sweet Queenes fortune, (if that match had gone forward) to haue liued with her husband in Spaine, whilest your King Catholike enioyed by v∣surpation the possession and gouernment of her Kingdome in England, to the killing of all true Eng∣lish hearts: but I dare boldlie say that many thou∣sands in England doe praise God from their hearts, that she so happelie escaped so daungerous and base a match, and that we so happelie enioy so worthie and blessed a Queene. The conditions of the Marriage and vsage of the King for a space being too weake an inference to dis∣proue the certificate concerning his secret meaning,The person of the discouerer considered. let vs in few words consider somewhat both of the person of the Discouerer, and the substance of the discouerie: I pray you (Sir) what should moue Brad∣ford to write this; but that an honest true English∣mans heart incited him thereunto? he was by profes∣sion a Papist, by habitation a Spaniard, for his Master on whom he attended was one, and being amongst them his perill was great in writing this; for if he had been discouered, his life must haue paide for it: he did it not then for hatred to Poperie, as you would sur∣mise, nor for malice to his Master with whom it ap∣peared he was in good account, nor for any hope of
rewarde being farre enough off from receiuing any, but neere vnto daunger it is plaine he was, only when he heard of such a perilous plot to the vtter rooting out of his Countrey men, and ouerthrow of his flourishing Countrey, hee was forced out of the re∣morse of a true English mans heart to expose him∣selfe to the hazard of his life, by his setting downe, and sending this aduertisement to these Lords. But to fill vp the discredite you desire to lay vpon Bradford for this his aduertisement so honestlie giuen to the Nobles of England, you aske How he could in Spaine discouer so great a secret that lay in the Kings breast in England? For answere I must tell you, that I hope it is not vnknowne that there was some intermission of time betweene the Kings marrying of Queene Mary and her death; besides that, when the King was in England I trust he had not all his Nobles and Coun∣sellors with him: if this were consulted on, and con∣cluded before the marriage, he might then get notice of it; if it were concluded on after the marriage, why might not this be brought to his Master and others into Spaine, by letters from some of the Nobles that were with the King here? So that this is but a poore shift to discredite Bradfords aduertisement, and the circumstances considered that I did set downe be∣fore of his being a Papist in profession, in dwelling a Spaniard, and in place not to write this without pe∣rill, I doubt not but to euery one in whom reason ru∣leth and not passion, it will proue probable enough that there might bee a iust cause of such an aduer∣tisement. When Lewis the French King his sonne was by
our nobles called into England, and set vp for their King against King Iohn, the Vicount Melun (falling deadly sicke) vpon remorse of conscience, secretly confessed to diuers of the Barons, what was the pur∣pose of Lewis to doe when he had once obtained the Crowne, namely that Lewis with sixteene of his Counsellors (whereof this Vicount was one,) had compacted after possession of the Crowne obtained to depriue our chiefe Nobles of their lands and pos∣sessions, and driue them into perpetuall exile. And so farther proceeding, and with many teares pittying the extreame miserie this land was like to come vnto, he brake out into these words: My friendes, I counsaile you earnestly to looke to your selues, and to prouide the reme∣die in time, least it come vpon you vnwares; your King for a season hath kept you vnder, but if Lodowicke preuaile he will put you from all. &c. Had Lodowicke so treache∣rous an intent when our Nobles so highly fauoured him, and shal it seeme strange that King Philip should haue such a secret meaning? did a Frenchman and an enemie vpon very remorse of conscience bewray this secret? and might not Bradford an Englishman (though a Papist) hazzard his life to discouer King Philips daungerous plot against his countrie? Or may our Chronicles recorde this purpose of Lodowicke and publish it to posteritie? and may it not be law∣full for me to set downe the discouerie of your Ca∣tholike Kings secret determination, to admonish my countrie men, to take heed how they lend aide to bring in a forraine ruler into the Realme, least per∣haps it follow that they be displaced themselues, and be made straungers in their owne land?The Taxes. But the taxes
set downe by me as intended to be brought vpon this land you call childish toyes, such as one would not imagine that a man of Sir Francis name, house, and cal∣ling, would euer publish: But such childish toies they are, as euerie sound & true Englishmā, hearing of the ser∣uile gonernment of Spaine, and feeling the freedome we liue withall in England, will from his heart praise God for the blessed freedome we liue vnder, and pray to God for euer to deliuer vs from Spaines bon∣dage, and this doe many other Nations besides vs, wherof some haue been so miserably taxed, that they haue been forced (as one doth crediblie report) to sell their beds they lie vpon to pay taxations imposed vpon them. In the cloze of this, when I set downe what you say of your kings determination concerning the La∣die Elizabeth, as well as the rest after, you haue refer∣red vs to that you haue set downe before of his kind∣nes to her, when she was prisoner (to which I haue made you alreadie a full answere:) you runne into your common place of railing againe, and adde; That no modest man can cease to wonder how so infamous a libell could be suffered to passe to the print, especially contai∣ning diuers personall, reprochful, contēptuous calumniations against so great & potent a Prince. &c. I like you wel (sir) you are fast to your friends, I wish I could find you as faithfull to your Soueraigne; then should I find you as hot (if not more hot) in raging against those of your side that haue most wretchedlie railed against her Maiestie your rightful Soueraigne,Papists the only contem∣ners of princes (if you proue worthie to be her Subiect) wherin they haue sought to impugne her right, to defame her faith, to discre∣dit
her gouernment, to touch her honour, to violate and abate the Maiestie of her place, &c. But as A∣thalia fled into the Temple and cried out, treason, treason, whereas her selfe indeed was the traitour, and Hercules furens in the tragedie raged, and threat∣ned to be reuenged of those that had slaine his chil∣dren, himselfe indeed hauing slaine them, in his mad moode: so these good fellowes crie out against those that vtter opprobrious speeches against Princes, whereas themselues are the peerles and matchles men of all Christendome, in whom the saying of Saint Iude is verified: Which despise gouernment and speake euill of them which are in authoritie. I protest I am abashed and my pen trembleth to set down those intolerable calumniations that not onely forreiners, but home-borne Papistes haue vttered against her Maiestie. I know not how to compare them herein, but to the diuell the father of all slaunder and calum∣niation, for as it is written in the Reuelation,Reuel. 52. That the Serpent did cast out of his mouth water against the women like a floud, that he might cause her to be carried away of the floud: so haue these hell hounds spued forth whole flouds of reprochfull and calumnious slaunders, thereby to darken and drown the honour of her Maiestie if they could possiblie. Remember (Sir) in what sort Bartholomaeus de miran∣da master of the Popes Pallace, behaueth himselfe to∣wards your Soueraigne, and with how villanous re∣proches he doth load her in his admonition set be∣fore the Epistle of Osorius directed to her. Remem∣ber how he raileth at her that wrote the cononiza∣tion of Didacus, who being a Spaniard, was of spe∣ciall
purpose sainted by the Pope to further the King of Spaine in his intended conquest of England. And though the wiser sorte of our Nation haue learned euen by the lawes of morall ciuilitie (as your selfe confesse) that a man must speake moderately also of his enemie, yet the learned'st of our English Papistes haue not learned to speake moderatelie of their So∣ueraign, whom they ought not to reckon their ene∣my: you know how immoderatly & immodestly Sta∣tion, Saunders, and Rishton (to omit others) doe raile against her, as against the Turke himselfe they could not doe worse. Now (Sir) how should that which vpon vrgent occasion (if to inuade, and seeke to con∣quer the land, and to make way thereunto by see∣king the shortning of my Soueraignes life through treasons may be reckoned an vrgent occasion) I say how should that I haue set downe against your Ca∣tholike King, anger you, if so manie opprobrious and contumelious reproaches (as you know) vttered a∣gainst your Soueraigne; and that not alone by for∣rainers, but by such as should be subiects, doe not moue you? I write against a straunger, truly; these against their Soueraign, falsely: I, to confirme sub∣iects hearts, in loyaltie and obedience to their law∣full Soueraigne; they, to corrupt Subiectes heartes, and to make them disloyall and disobedient to their Soueraigne: I, to free my countrie from all vsurpers, they, to fill their countrie with forraine go∣uernment: I, to preserue vnto vs the sincere truth of Gods Gospell; they, to thrust vpon vs a false worship by Poperie and superstition. And this shall suffice to shield and deliuer me from being harmed, or grie∣ued
by your slaunders, and for all your malice to me, I am sorie you should carrie so vilde and villanous a mind, as not to be vexed to see your Soueraign so dis∣pitefully and disloyally dealt withall. But I haue now so good cause to guesse the vnsoundnes of your heart to my Soueraigne, by this your wrangling, and wic∣ked Ward-word, as I cannot expect or hope for anie good fruit of a loyall heart towardes her Maiestie from you. And to confirme me and all true Subiectes in this opinion,About Lopus. you close vp this your last Encounter with a doubt, whether Lopus euer ment to kill our deare So∣raigne; and why you should doubt I see not, but be∣cause it was not done, and with a deniall that your Catholike King should be priuie thereunto, (and yet all the Agents in it doe plainely confesse so) by the first whereof, you lewdlie labour to taxe the seat of our Soueraignes Iustice; and by the second you abuse her Maiestie and her people: and by both you offer to discredit the honourable testimonie in print, of the proofes and proceedings, by examinations be∣fore the Lords of her Maiesties Councell. In which you may finde, how Lopus was first solicited by An∣drada from Mendoza the King of Spaines Embassa∣dour in France, to poyson her Maiestie: Secondly, by the same Andrada, he was solicited by a token from Christophero de Moro (one of the Kings priuie Councell,) Thirdly by one Roderoquo Marques a Por∣tugale, vnto whom Lopus did vndertake to doe the abominable fact, for which he was profered and pro∣mised fiftie thousands crownes (which I hope can∣not be taken to be the gift of anie Subiect:) fourthly
for this purpose, Lopus sent Andrada ouer to Callis to conferre with Counte Fuentes about this practise; and caused Stephano Ferrera de Gomo another Portugale to write letters to Stephano Iberra the Kings Secretary at Bruxels, to assure him & Fuentes, that the detestable fact should be performed if the 50000. crownes were paid, which letter Lopus himselfe sent by one Gomes Dauila a Portugale. But Andrada not being thought fit to follow so great a cause, Ferrera was chosen to manage it, by whom the Doctor did againe assure the performance of this villanie; and then there were bils of exchaunge for the mony deliuered by the Counte Fuentes, the one from Gonzalo Gomez to Pedro de Carreras, the other from Gomez to Iohn Pallacios: And if (through the merciful prouidence of almigh∣tie God) these had not been lingered, and that in the meane time by the diligence and carefulnes of one of the Lords of her Maiesties priuie Councell the mat∣ter had not been discouered, the villanie had been at∣tempted and acted, and so brought out of doubt (as this Espaniolized champiō seemeth to haue wished) to the vnauoydable hazard of ruine in mans iudge∣ment to our Countrie and State. So haue you here vpon honorable credence plainely proued, that Lo∣pus should haue been the Actor of this villanie, that Andrada, Ferrera Gomez Dauila, and Manuell Le∣wes (all Portugales) were Agents and Messengers to him about it; that Mendoza your Kings Embassador in France, Christofero de Moro, Count Fuentes, and Se∣cretarie Iberra (all Councellors to your King) were Directors to these Agents and Messengers, and how farre your King himselfe did direct herein, let the
booke tell you: And therefore haue you no cause to doubt of Lopus his bloudie meaning in this bloudie busines. To returne to your selfe (Sir) I make no doubt but you desire to be beleeued in all that you haue scattered in your Libell, and not least in this last part; for if you could creepe into the secret bosomes of our English Nation, and winne credit to be beleeued, that all that you say is Gospell, you might then hope of some likelihood to preuaile in your shameles sute for toleration,His sute to the Lords. or alteration in Religion tendered to the Lords in your Remission immediatly following. But as it is well knowne to them all, that we haue been much blessed of God by her Maiesties gouern∣ment (although you inuert all out of your popish and traiterous affection into cursings) so I doubt not, but they all see and will acknowledge, that the true worship of God erected and established amongst vs by her Maiestie, is the verie assured and principall ground-worke of all our blessings: Religion and pie∣tie must be our safetie, and so long as wee keepe God by imbracing his truth without halting; so long shall God keepe this land safe from all malice of all our e∣nemies whatsoeuer. Therefore farre shall it be from them, so much as to lend an eare to so impudent and euill affected a Sutor, as you shew your selfe to be, in daring with shameles face to slaunder and scorne our Religion, to depraue our seat of Iustice, to harten disobedience, to excuse traitors, to darken and some∣times to defend ye malice of your two Monarches of Rome and Spaine against our Soueraigne & Queene; contrariwise when her iust commendation was set
out, for being God his good instrument of many great blessings brought vnto vs, you maliciouslie turne them (as I said before) into cursings: when to the praise of almightie God mention is made of her wonderfull and happy deliuerances, both in the time of Queene Marie, and in her owne time, you doe in derision call the first a miracle of Milne-wheeles, and the second you shameleslie seeme to perswade, they were things rather feared by vs, then intended to her. When I vrge Stories traiterous and bloudie words a∣gainst her, you cunningly seeke to turne his meaning to other persons and purposes. When I condemne Cardinall Allin and Bishop Gardiners proude and pernitious dealing towards her, you fall into extraor∣dinarie high commendations of them, as if the trum∣pet of their praises for so dealing had been worthie to bee blowne ouer all the world: when I say, that we should keepe these three things safe in our breast; first our Conscience to God; secondly, our Loue to our Countrey; thirdly, our Loyaltie to our Prince, you earnestlie labour to proue that wee are not bound al∣waies to loue our Countrey, and to beare Loyaltie to our Prince, but that for Religions sake, wee must hate them and warre against them: and when I lay downe the many, and manifold wrongs most vnchri∣stianlie and vnkindly offered to her Maiestie by Rome and Spaine, you bend your whole force to couer all, and to proue wrongs offered by her Maiestie and our Nation to them, such is your speciall loue to these your two Monarches, and to all treasons, and Traytors plotted and encouraged by them; and so little and key-colde is your loue and dutie to her Ma∣iestie,
to whom you owe all loue and obedience. But this is the fruite of Pius Quintus his Bull, the perill of which curse you will not incurre; and such is the force of your Catholike Religion and Spanish Crownes, as you will rather worship Dagon, then serue the liuing God, and giue your faith to an vsur∣ping stranger, then keepe yours giuen, and due to your lawfull Soueraigne. Yet for all this you doubt not to tender a remission of your whole answere to the iudgement of the Lords of her Maiesties Coun∣cell, by which your answere, and remission (if it bee well scanned in matter and manner) you will bee found iustlie to deserue all the titles contained in this one verse, Vafer, detractor, mendax, elatus, iniquus. A subtile, railing, lying, proud, & treacherous man. And thus much haue I aduentured to offer to the view of my Christian Countrymen in defence of my former Watch-word, collected by me out of my Christian affection to them for their benefite, that they may know I stand still constant, and confident to defend the truth of my God, against Poperie and all other heresies, to performe my Loialtie to my So∣ueraigne against all Popish Espaniolized Traytours, and treason, and to stand for the libertie of my Coun∣trie against Rome and Spaine, and all forraine Poten∣tates whatsoeuer; as also that my silence should not cause them to conceiue, that this masked Champi∣ons rayling tongue hath any way distempered me, or his threatning brauadoes any whit dismaied me, the first whereof I passe ouer, with little regard, accor∣ding to the Counsell of wise Salomon: It is the glorie
of a man to passe by offences: the second I scorne, being sent out by a cowardlie Companion that speakes big, and dares not shew his face. To conclude,The conclu∣sion. I delight not in warre and hostili∣tie betweene Princes, I wish peace in all States and Common-wealths, from my heart, so farre forth as may stand with the glorie of almightie God, who is the supreame author of all authoritie and gouern∣ment, and is onely to bee serued both by Prince and people, as his word prescribeth. For I confesse, Dulce est nomen pacis; res verò ipsa, tum iucunda, tum salutaris. And yet can I not subscribe to this blinde Peace-makers desire, that longeth for a Peace to the disho∣nour of God, and laboureth by a Peace to bring in his Idoll worship againe amongst vs: but I heartelie pray to my God, to preserue vs from such a Peace, and with Erasmus I affirme, Melior est talis pugna, quae Deo proximum facit, quàm pux illa quae à Deo separat. But if such a Peace may be had, as may not preiudice a good Conscience in the truth of Religion we now holde, nor impeach the safetie of our deare Queene, nor hazard bondage to our Countrie, by the gouern∣ment of forrainers and strangers; blessed bee that Peace-maker, and God almightie graunt vs such a Peace all our daies. And this haue I presumed to say in answere to this Champions Peace prayed for in the Conclusion of these his Encounters, with a minde rather to raise vp the power and pride of Rome and Spaine, then for any good minde or meaning he hath to our Queene Elizabeth or England. And now to knit vp this my Resistance to euery of your rayling Encounters, (Sir N.D.) I assure my selfe
you shall finde all the Protestants and Professors of Gods truth in England, as also many of those that are infected with the Romish Religion, so well resolued from your owne pen of your want of ciuilitie in ray∣ling beyond measure, and your want of a found heart to your Soueraigne and Countrie, in so highly ex∣tolling your two greatest Monarches of Rome and Spaine, to the preiudice and touch both of Queene and Countrie (so farre forth as the power of your wicked wit and words can deuise, and perswade) as your glosing shall gaine little credite to worke my condemnation in any of their iudgements, either for any thing that was in my former booke, or for any thing contained in this latter: For I meane none o∣ther in all that is said, but a desire of confirmation to the one in a holy profession, and a reformation to the other of their being any longer seduced, and misled by Romes inchantments, and a care in both to stand firmelie and faithfullie to defend their Soueraigne and Countrey, against forraine malice and home Treason; whereunto if way should bee giuen, God should be dishonoured, our Queene endaungered, our Countrie depriued of it auncient and most com∣fortable liberties, and then what can either one or o∣ther looke for but miserie, and desolation. For what befell both to Guelphes and Gibellines when the Gibel∣lines brought in a friend of theirs called Facinus Ca∣nis, who was to haue the goods of the Guelphes for his paie? He was no sooner gotten in, but that without sparing of either, both sides were spoyled; whereof when the Gibellines complained, saying that their goods were spoyled contrarie to agreement, this
their friend by them brought in answered, That themselues were Gibellines, and they should bee safe; but their goods were Guelphes and they must pay for it: Your selues can make the application; and so to your wis∣domes I leaue it, beseeching God to continue his wonted mercie towards our Queene and land, and to giue to this my aduersarie and all of his faction a better minde, if it stand with his good will and pleasure. Amen. FINIS.
