13067 99839705 4151
The Way of lyfe. A Christian, and Catholique Insti∣tution comprehending principal poincts of Christian Religion, which are necessary to bee knowne of all men, to the atteyning of Saluation. First delyuered, in the Danish language for the instruction of those people, by Doctor Nicolas Hemmingius, Preacher of the Gospell, and Professor of Diuinitie, for the Kynge of Denmarcke, in his Vniuersitie of Hafnia: And about three yeares past, (for the commoditie of others) translated into Latine, by Andrew Seuerinus Velleius: And now first, and newly Englished, for the com∣modity of English Readers: By N. Denham, this yeare of our Redemption. 1578. Imprinted at London by Richard Jones, and are to bee sould ouer agaynst S. Sepulchers Churche.
To the Right woorshipful, Maister Henry Sadleyre Esquyer, Sonne of the right Honorable, Sir Raphe Sadleyre Knight, (one of her Maiesties, most ho∣norable priuie Counsayle, and Chauncellour of her Duchy of Lancastre:) And also to Mistrisse Dorothy, wife of the said Henry: Nicolas Denham: wisheth the fauour of God, with the increase of the knowledge of assured saluation, in IESV CHRIST. AMongest those seuen speciall Sages of the Gréeks, there was one, which béeinge desirous to leaue to a certayne follower of his sect, some speciall token woorthy of remembraunce: commen∣ded vnto him (as the special∣lest thing yt hée could deuise) this Symbole  (that is) Follow thou God. Wherby it is to bée perceiued, that euen the very heathens, indowed onely, with the lighte, and wisdome of nature, and not able to pearce farther, than their reasoninges, and argumentes taken of the visible creatures, which they saw, and perceyued with their senses) would stretch: did not only conclude, that there was a God, which was the woorkemayster, and disposer of all those thinges, and that hée was im∣mortall: but also that hee was to bee feared, and honou∣red, and the sight, and presence of him, to bée desired. For whilest that they considered, the globe, and compasse of the Firmament, and the earth, with all the noble, and variable furniture therof, as the Sunne, the Moone, the
Starres, and vnder them, the varietie of the other crea∣tures in their kindes, and lastly, the excellencie of the woorkemanshippe of the frame of the body of man: they were induced to gather therof, this conclusion: that the woorkemayster, of these thinges, was, not onely much more beautifull, and excellent, but that hee was, also, to bee honoured, and to bee wished for, by presence to bee inioyed. Hereof spronge vp many contentions, and sundry deuises amonge them, concerninge the way, as well how to woorship him, here vpon the earth, as also to seeke some shorte, and ready meane, to come to the sight, and beeholding of him. But notwithstandinge, in as∣much as they wanted the direction of him, which is the leader into all trueth:Rom. 1. they tyred themselues in their owne fonde immaginations, and, not onely in steade of the true woorshippinge of him, frequented Idolatries, most horrible, and execrable: but also, to come (as they supposed) to the sight of him, attempted meanes, moste pernitious, and dampnable. In so much, that diuerse of them, willinge to hye themselues apace, to bee in presence, with that immortality: could finde no better, or readier way, then speedily, to murder, and kill them∣selues. Which dooinges of theirs, notwithstandinge they were heynous, and wicked, and missed of the ende, and purpose, for which they were doone, (for this is cer∣taine,Ihon. 3. that Hee which beeleeueth not in the Sonne of God, the anger of God doth abyde vpon him: And agayne the Apostle sayth:Heb. 11. & Rom. 14. It is impossible without fayth to please God: yet it is apparaunte thereby, what earnestnesse was a∣mongest thē, both to séeke (according to their owne blinde iudgementes) what this God should bee: and also, which should bee the waye, not onely to walke, but rather to make haste, and speede vnto him. Which, if they that do professe the name of Christ, would consider, and but compare themselues in these circumstaunces, with these
men, beeinge but Heathens, and voyde, both of the true knowledge of God, the creatour, and also of him,Ioh. which is the onely way, and would, but sumwhat considerately conferre together, the blynde diligence of the one, with (as it may bee very well termed) the diuelish, and secure necligence of the other: their forwardnesse in seekinge after that, which by all their toylinge, and tyringe of themselues, they could not truely finde out, with our backwardnesse, in not keping, and imbracing that which (without our laboures) is fréely geuen vs, and sayed be∣fore our eyes: their feruency, in desiringe to finde and runne the way, to that which they wished for, with our coldenesse in walkinge the right way, which is playnely drawne foorth, and delineated béefore vs: to bee shorte, their perswasions of themselues, by this visible Sunne, with our dulnesse: who, by that true, and bright shining Sunne, which is the brightnesse and wisdome of the Fa∣ther, will not bee instructed, nor mooued: If (I saye) they would with some earnestnes, consider these things: it were not to bee doubted, but as they doo detest, and ab∣horre, the name and conuersation of the Heathen: so they would loathe (in such matters as séeme, to bée the weigh∣tiest of all others) to bee eyther by others accoumpted, or in their owne consciences to bee condempned, for in∣feriours vnto them. But, to leaue all other partes of comparison, and onely to speake of one poyncts, which concerneth our present purpose: it was taught amongst them, and practised by such as were of the best, and most reasonablest amongest them, as a moste necessary, and principall doctrine: that they shoulde not alwayes heere continue, But passe from hence: and that there was an im∣mortalitie of the Soule, which beeinge seperated by death, from the body, should, eyther, for the well, and vertuous walkeinge heere, (accordinge to their accompting of a ver∣tuous lyfe) bee gathered into a certayne place of pleasure,
with the Goddes, or els, for not followinge the morall pre∣ceptes in following vertues, and eschewing vices, should not inioy the sight of the Goddes, but should by them bee pu∣nished. This was the Summe of (as I may terme it) their naturall, and blinde religion. Thus much euen nature her selfe, in that her corruption, had taught them. And therefore the better to stirre vp their hearers, to walke vertuously, and with the more desire, in that path, which they supposed to bee the right waye: they vttered, and commended vnto them, and their posterity, many pithy, and sauoury sentences, as: Philosophia continu mortis meditatio, that is: the loue or studie of wisdome, is the continuall meditation of Death: And, Ad Ens Entiū sem∣per contendendum, that is: Wee must euer bee walkeinge towarde the cheefe beeing of beeinges, (whereby is ment, God himself,) with infinite such others, to tedious, here to be recyted, as in their bookes dayly handled, are plen∣tifully to bee seene. But wee, which do beare the name of Christians, which liue at these dayes, in which (by the great mercy of God) such infinite treasures of Heauenly wisdome, and knowledge of Christian doctrine, is pow∣red foorth vpon vs: yea wee which haue, for their shado∣wed, and false, a cleare, and perfecte religion: for their crooked, and vncertayne by path, a streyght and most as∣sured highway: for wisdome naturall, the wisdome De∣uine: for Plato, Aristotle, and their Schollars, the Pro∣phetes, Christ, and his Apostles: for the doubtfull ende of the pathe, which they taught, the certayne, and assured ende of the way which wee are instucted to walke in: are yet notwithstanding, in respecte of them so dull, and so carelesse of all these thinges, yea, and so litle ashamed of this comparison with them: that wee are litle, or no∣thing pricked forward, with the consideratiō of our more plentifull blessinges; litle, or nothing consider our owne
contempt, and ingratitude: seeme to make lesse accompt of Christ, his Apostles, and Ministers, then the heathen did of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and their Sectaries, and dis∣ciples: seeme, neyther by the promises of God to bée al∣lured, nor, by his threatninges to bee feared: to be short, seeme neither to feare to runne headlong into that path, which leadeth to destruction, nor to regarde to walke in that way which guideth to saluation. It is therfore to bée feared, least that come to passe, in this comparison, which our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST himselfe pronounceth in the 12. of S. Math. comparinge, the dili∣gence, and regarde of the Quéene of the South, in com∣minge from the farthest partes of the world, to heare the wisdome of Salomon, with the negligence, and contempt of the Iewes: in refusinge to bee taught by Christ him∣selfe, comming amongest them: and likewise in compa∣ringe the repentaunce of the Niniuites, at the hearinge of Ionas: with their obstinacy, and rebellion, in refusinge to heare the Sonne of God himselfe: namely, that as hée there cōcludeth of them both: that aswell the Queene of the South as also the Niniuites, béeing prophane people, and heathens: shall rise in the last iudgemente, and con∣dempne that adulterous, and obstinate nation: so that these heathens, shall then also arise, though not to theyr own saluation, yet to the condempnation of those, which (glorying in the name of Christians) haue so litle regard to walke the right way of eternall saluation. Which way of Saluation, forasmuch, as it hath beene, by di∣uerse woorthy instrumentes, of the Church of Christ, in these our latter times, and ages of the world: tryed, and disseuered from that bypath, which leadeth to destruction and is (by the woorde of God, wherin that right way is set foorth, and offered) sufficiently cleansed, from all brambles, and weedes of incombraunce, which both for wante of good husbandinge, and walkinge in, had ouer∣growen,
and hidden the same from many: and is now at the length, made so playne, and visible, that it may bee seene of all those, which doo not wilfully eyther cloase vp their eyes, that they will not see it, or if they doo see it, yet will not suffer their foote once to treade within it: a godly man (considering this) may, with sorow, and gréefe of minde, iustly meruayle, why there bee so many, which will not know it: so fewe, that doo regarde to know it: and why, fewer hauing found it, and beeing set into it, do so sclenderly goe forwarde, and continue their course in the same. That wée may the better conceyue the causes of these thinges: let vs first consider, wherin this waye of Saluation doth consist. The knowledge therof con∣sisteth, in the right vnderstanding of these two thinges, namely of the Law, and the Gospell. Wheras the Law therefore setteth foorth vnto vs the Iustice of God, and is set before vs, that wee may playnely sée therein, as it were in a glasse, both what God requireth of vs, and also how weake, and vnable wée bée to fulfill the same, that wee seeinge our owne, both deformitie, and imbecillity, should seeke for a cleanser, and a stronger, that may hath cleanse vs, and fulfill it for vs: and by this meanes to bée ledde to the Gospell, which setteth foorth the same vnto vs: here, the first sorte, hauinge beene trayned vp, and noozeled in another manner of doctrine, concerning the Lawe and the Gospell, and hauinge not learned, the true endes, and right vses of them, for the which they were geuen: are so obstinately bente agaynst this true knowledge of the right way, which is in them conteined: that they will suffer themselues by no meanes, to bee brought, once to enter their foote into it. The seconde sorte of people, are méere Athaeistes, and such as hauinge beene alwayes full fed like Epicures, and thorowly pam∣pered vp, with all kindes of worldly volupteousnes, and pleasures of the flesh: are so lulled a sleape in them, by
the subtilty of the Deuill, who holdeth them fast snarled: that they haue no leasure, once to bethinke themselues, nor to regarde, eyther what GOD is, or his Lawe, and Gospell, neyther yet, what nor where they themselues bée, nor how they came, or for what cause they are placed in the worlde, nor how they shall departe foorth of it, nor what shall become of them after this lyfe, and so neyther passe for Heauen, or Hell, GOD, or the Deuill: and therefore, no woonder, though they care not, for the in∣quiringe, and much lesse for walkinge in this way: bee∣ing (as they suppose themselues, (in such a way, as there neyther is, nor can bée any better. The thirde sorte, which doo finde it, and doo enter, and walke into it, and yet are oftentimes stayed, and hyndered in their course: are euen the most holyest in this lyfe, and the very electe of God: who hauing entred into it, and purposing with a good Conscience to walke forwarde in the same: are notwithstandinge oftentimes, through the malice of the Deuill, (continually warring against them, and séeking to plucke them foorth of that way, into the bypathe of de∣struction with him, and through the frailty of their own flesh, and the continuall allurementes, and baytes of the world, are oftentimes so drawne aside, and hindered, yea so bewitched, and dazeled: that it oftentimes séemeth vnto them themselues: that they néede not so earnestly, and so dilligently regard, to continue still their walking in the same. Hereof it commeth to passe, that, (by the permission of God) they béeing eyther drawne backe, or stayed from going forward, or pluckt for a season beside the way: ma∣ny heynous, and horrible offences, are by them commit∣ted: which aduauntage (as long as they héedefully kept themselues, within the limittes of the right way of Sal∣uation) the Deuil could not haue of them. When Dauid demaūded of the Lord, Wherwithall, a young man should cleanse his way, and the answere of the holy ghost within
him was this: By rulinge himselfe according to the worde of GOD, was then no doubt, both mindefull of this way, and diligently troade, and walked in the same: but, beeing a litle stayed therin, hée was drawne aside, and commit∣ted the most horrible offence of Murther, and Adultrie: but God hauing compassion vpon him, and not suffering him, vtterly to loose the right way of his Saluation: ioy∣ning his Mercy, and Iustice togeather, and sending them vnto him, by the Prophet Nathan, did both mercifully set him in the right way agayne (after hée had repentauntly acknowledged his declining from the same) and also ther∣withal, iustly scourged him for his wandring & digression. The lyke may bée found of Ezechias, Manasses, Peter, and diuerse others: which (in reading of the holy Scriptures) are almost euery where to bee found, and here, for expel∣ling of tediousnesse, are omitted. So that albeit, the godly man, or woman, bée sometimes hindred in the wal∣king of this course, from goinge forward, or be plucked backewarde, or séemeth (as it were) set quite beside the way, wherby (as the examples aboue recited do declare) many horrible offences, and wicked actes, pleasant to the Deuill, are by them committed: yet, this hope they haue lefte them: that God will not suffer them (with the obsti∣nate wicked, & carelesse vngodly,) to perish vtterly from the right way, but that hée will reatch forth his mercifull hand of direction vnto them: which (they hartily repen∣tinge, and taking holde of) will set them in the streyght, and right way agayne: wherin if they shall perseauere, and continue vnto the ende: they shalbe sure (as our Sa∣uiour Christ himselfe hath promised) to bée vndoubtedly saued. For, so hée himselfe sayth in Math. Hee that con∣tinueth to the ende, shalbe saued: And agayne: Continue vnto the ende, and I will geue thee a Crowne of lyfe. Thus wée sée the diuersity of the people, which lyue, & remaine, euen amongest vs which professe the name, and religion
of IESVS CHRISTE, how, and in what manner they bée affected, to the knowledge of this way of eternall lyfe, and Saluation. Whereof, some, (by meanes of a for∣mer false receiued opinion déepely rooted in them) bée ob∣stinate, and wilfully will not learne it: some, are negli∣gente and carelesse, that they passe not for it: the thirde sorte yet imbracing it, and reioysing to walke in it: are notwithstanding (through diuerse, and infinite impedi∣ments, and hinderaunces) either stayed, or plucked back, or aside from it: and yet notwithstanding, by the mercy of God, are called backe againe by earnest repentaunce, and are agayne set therin: wherein they walke here vp∣on the earth, and continue their course in the same vnto the ende, depart this life in walkinge in the same, and at the ende of this way, enter into the Citie of eternal rest, and saluation. The true doctrine wherof, béeing in this litle Treatise both learnedly, and also clearely, & plainly set foorth, by this godly learned man, béeing such a one, as by the iudgement, and opinion of diuerse of the best lear∣ned of this our time, hath deserued, not the least cōmen∣dacion, of the Church of Christ: when I had perused, and conferred with my fréend, I thought very méete, and pro∣fitable, to conuert into our vulgare spéeche, for the com∣modity, & comfortable instruction of all those, to whom it shall please God, to geue eyes to sée, eares to heare, hearts to conceiue, and féete to walke aright, in the ready way to lyfe, therin set downe, and deliuered: as in the diligente reading, and meditating of the same, shall (I hope) to the comfort & sound instruction of the Christian Conscience, more playnely appeare. For, as the Doctrine therein conteyned, is, both necessary (and as touchinge the sub∣staunce therof) is such, that the true Christian man, or woman, may not bée without the knowledge, and practise therof, in this life, if they desire to attayne to the know∣ledge, and vnderstanding of their saluation in the lyfe to
come: so is it (asmuch as is requisite therunto) both pi∣thily, very playnely, and also familyarly, aswell in plain spéech as easy Methode, set downe, and deliuered: & fur∣ther, with good aduisement, and deliberation handled, and diuulged. Touching the Author himselfe, it is sufficient∣ly knowne amongest the learned, what hée is: as béeinge such a one, which hath not the lowest roome, amongst the best, and moste approoued Christian writers of this our age: brought vp from his infancy, in the studies, and ex∣ercises of learning, and godlynesse, notably qualified, and furnished aswell with liberall artes, and languages: as principally in the study, & profession of Diuinitie: which profession hée hath woorthely and diligently executed (as by his owne testimony set downe in his Epistle before this booke, is to bée séene) by the space, and continuance of thyrtie yeares: béeinge therunto called, by the Kinge of Denmarcke, to supply the place of his publique reader, and professour of Diuinitic, in his vniuersitie of Hafnia, where with great fame (as I heare) hee at this day con∣tinueth. Touching the perticuler matters, conteyned, and handled in the booke, ther are such (as I haue already sayd, and in the diligente perusinge therof shalbe better perceiued) that the knowledge of them in a Christian, may not bée wanting. And I doubt not but the Christian reader (if hée haue any desire to aspire to the knowledge of Iesus Christ) hauing a while busied himselfe therin: shall freely in his owne conscience confesse, as much as I haue héere spoken. For, if hée desire (in short summe, and bréefely, and yet sufficiently) the perfecte, and right vnderstanding of the Law of God, what it is, how many, and what the true vses therof bée, to what end it is geuē vnto men: also, what the Gospell is, and to what ende it is geuen, what wée must necessarily beléeue of Christ, (as it is consonant to our common fayth:) How hée is our Mediatour, Redeemer, and Sanctifier: by what meanes
hée declareth and setteth foorth his benefites vnto man∣kinde, what his benefits be toward vs: what is to be con∣sidered & learned of the Sacraments, aswel of Baptisme, as of the Supper of the Lorde: besides diuerse other ne∣cessary doctrines, of the right woorshippinge, and seruice of God, of prayer, and diuerse other places which (as I haue sayd) in the diligent perusing of the same, shall more euidently appeare, to the Christian reader. If hee desire (I say) to bee instructed, exhorted, or comforted, in these thinges, hee may here finde them, both soundly, & plainly expounded. All which poinctes, being by other most god∣ly, & learned pastoures of the Church of Christe, notably, and pithily in these latter times set abroade vnto the be∣holding of the worlde, to no small benefit of the Congre∣gation of Christ: yet by reason of their buckling with the aduersaries of the trueth, in refelling their corruptions, and cauilling obiections, they were forced, to write with greater stile of woordes, and more Schoolelyke, whereby their woorkes became more conuenient (in some poincts) for studentes in Diuinitie, then for the common peoples perceauerance, and Capacitie. Which things I speake, not that I would dehorte any from the reading, and dily∣gent exercisinge of them: yea I doo rather most hartely exhorte them therunto: but this I say, to the ende, to take away the offence, which (as I my selfe haue heard (some haue taken (though vndeseruedly) when they perceyue thē in some places (for the causes afore recyted) to write eyther somewhat longer then they thinke méete, or sum∣what more artificially then they doo conceyue. Which offence, (not geuen, but vniustly taken,) they should easi∣ly let fall, if they woulde consider the causes aforesayde, which violently drew those learned men, and by an ine∣uitable necessity, enforced them so to doo. From which tediousnesse, (if they will needes so accompte it) they
are in this small treatise delyuered: where so sundry great occasions were not geuen to the Author: For as hée aunswereth here but to few obiections, so, writinge his booke for the common sort, hée frameth his answeres and solutions, bothe shorte, and easie. Which woorke (af∣ter sundry other learned, and fruictfull laboures written of Diuinitie, by him, which are extant, and set abroade in the Latin tongue:) the sayde Author wrote, and deliuered abroad, at the first, in the Danish language, for the instruc∣tion, and consolation of the people of that nation, and spe∣cially for such of them, as could not gather ye knowledge of godlynesse, foorth of other languages, wherein it was written: which béeing so written, and set abroad, it was, by diuerse learned men of the same Region concluded vpon, for the woorthynesse thereof, to bée turned into the Latin spéeche, to the ende, that other faithfull heades, and teachers of the Church of Christ, séeing thesame, and per∣ceiuing it to bée, both sound, and comfortable, might the sooner conuerte, or cause the same to bée conuerted, into their owne seuerall languages: and commend the same, to those porcions of the Church, and flock of Christ which are to their seuerall charges committed. Which Treatise béeing now at the last, conuerted in∣to our common language, by mée, for the causes aboue rehearsed: I here dedicate, and present (Right worship∣full) vnto you both: beséeching you to accept the same, as an argument, and testimony of that well willing affecti∣on, which (by sundry your gentlenesses exhibited, and shewed) you haue, deseruedly, raysed vp in mee. And albeit, I can not iustly auouche it, to bée any recompence for any parte of the same: neither yet doo proffer it to that ende: yet rather then I would incurre the compasse of that sentence of the Philosopher, Perit quod facis ingra∣to: That is loste which is doone to an vnthankefull person: I had leiffer by proferinge that litle, that I may make
auoydaunce therof. I beseeche almighty God preserue you bothe, and confirme, and increase in you, vnto the end, those good giftes of his grace which hée hath already béegun in you: and so illuminate you with the light of his holy spirit, that yée may both sée the right way, and seeing it, you may haue a desire to walke in the same: and that walkeing daily forwarde in the same, and so conti∣nuing vnto the end: you may passe, in at that gate, which leadeth from the sourginge, and daungerous Sea of this transitorie lyfe, into the Hauen of perpetuall rest, and quietnesse, there quietly, peaceably, & ioyfully, to beholde the glorious face of IESVS CHRISTE to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, bée prayse and dominion for euer. Amen. Your Woorships humble at commaundement: N. Denham. From London this XXV. of Oc∣tober, the yeare of our Redemption. 1578. FINIS.
To the Christian Reader. WHeras in this booke (good Christian Reader,) certaine faults are committed in the Printinge thereof, though they bee not many: which haue come to passe, for want of directing the Prin∣ter, in some such places of the written copie, which were eyther blotted, or obscurely penned: & in reading might be some trouble, or hinderance vnto thee: my counsayle is, that (beefore thou setle thy selfe, to the diligent reading thereof) thou shouldest looke vp∣on these faultes here followinge, and as thou findest them here set downe, and noted by the Pages, & lynes: so thou shouldest turn vn∣to them, and with thy pen, amend them, which beeing doone, thou shalt reade it (I hope) to thy instruction, and comforte. I ceasse here to speake further of the dignitie, of the woorke: wishinge thee, first to reade it, and then after, to reporte the dignitie ther∣of to others: and in my simple Iudgemente thou shalt finde in thy conscience, cause sufficient to commend it, and thanke God for it. So fare well. Faultes escaped in Hemmingius his Epistle. Page. Lyne. Faulte. Correction. 8. 25. appeerations, apparitions. 9. 3. Aegypticall, Aegyptiacall. Eodem. 30. varitie, varietie. 12. 23. Prophet, Prophetes. Eodem. 26. vnifosme, vniforme. Eodem. 31. althefull, healthefull. Faultes escaped in the Booke. Page. Lyne. Faulte. Correction. 17. 13. admonish, admonished. 19. 23. Ceremonicall, Ceremoniall. 22. 30. natiue, natiuitie. 25. 9. first, fifte. 28. 12. as, all. 35. 27. punished, vnpunished. 44. 23. cleane, cleaue.
¶To the magnificent, and worthy Gen∣tleman, excellent in wisdome, vertue & godlinesse, Biornone Kaaes, Lord of Starupgaarde, most prudent Se∣natour of the kingdome of Denmarke, president for the King in the Tower of Malinogien: And to his welbeloued wife, the noble, chaste & godlie Lady Christine Nicolai Fil. Nicolas Hemmingius wisheth grace and peace from God the father, through our Lord IESVS CHRIST. OF all the things which are in the worlde, there is nothing either more better, or more precious, either yet more profitable: than to know God, & his will aright, and to worship and reue∣rence the same. For, as this whole world is momen∣tanie, and shall passe away: so in like manner the trea∣sures thereof, with how soeuer beautiful and magni∣ficent titles they be named: Yet (to be all fleeting & falling away) dayly experience may shew and teache vs: vnlesse we would suffer our selues to be blinded, or (as it were) to be bewitched of the same. But, to knowe God (Aright) and (hauing gotten the know∣ledge of him) to worship him aright, according to his will, reuealed in his word: that continueth for e∣uer, and leadeth man (from the vnstedfastnes of this vnconstant world) the right way to eternall life and saluation. Therefore in Iohn, Christ saith:Iohn. 17, verse. 3, This is e∣ternall
life, to knowe thee to be the onely true God: and Iesus Christ whome thou haste sent. And in another place: What doth it profit a man to gaine the whole worlde, and loose his owne soule? Therefore Dauid iudgeth aright, in Psal. 84.Psal. 84. where he saithe One day in thy courts, is better than a thousand: I had rather bee  doore keeper in the house of my God, than to dwel in the tents of vngodlynesse. For the Lord God is a light and defence, the Lord wil giue grace and glorie: and no good thing will he withholde from them, which walke in innocencie. In these wordes, Dauid putteth a diffe∣rence betwene those, which are without the church, and those (whiche beeing within the Church of CHRISTE) haue the true vnderstanding of the BEEING and VVILL of God. This difference, he placeth in fiue thinges, moste specially to bee remembred: by the contraries of which, both doe appeare the more euident: namely, bothe how great, the honour, and high blessed estate of the children of GOD is: and contrarywise, how great the miserie and calamitie is, euen of the moste mightie of this world, which be not citizens of the Church of God. The first good thing, and commoditie of the children of God, or of the Church is, That God himselfe is in her as a moste lightsome Sun. For, euen as from this visible Sunne, there commeth vnto the worlde, Light, Heate, and Shining beames, wherby al things are quicke∣ned and cherished: so, frō God, (which is the Sun in∣uisible) there cometh vnto the Church, Light, (that is to say) cleere knowledge of GOD: there commeth Heate,1, Cor. 13. that is, affections burning with Faith, Hope, and Loue: and shining beames, which are the mani∣folde
consolations, whereby the faithfull soule is re∣leeued, cherished, and comforted. This Sunne, as it ri∣seth to such as feare God: so it setteth to the negli∣gent, the wicked lyuer, and the carelesse. It is therfore (with great diligence) to be taken heede of: that the godlie (through a certaine sluggishnes of their owne, in hearing, or reading the word of God, wherin this Sunne brightly shineth) doe not suffer this Sunne to be, either darkened, or hidden from them. For, as this visible Sunne, if it shall seeme to a sicke body in his dreame, to be hid, or darkened, there is daunger (as Hippocrates affirmeth) of moste certaine death, to the sicke body, to be at hand; so, if our Sunne Christe be darkened vnto vs (his doctrine beeing either abo∣lished, or obscured) not onely darcknes hangeth ouer vs, but also the death of the soule, and moste assured eternall condemnation. Furthermore, we may heereby perceiue, the mi∣sery of them, as many as are destitute of this Sunne the worde of GOD. For, they beeing blinde, doe, bothe grope in the darknesse of ignorance: and beeing ig∣noraunt of God, are stricken with dreadfull amased∣nesse of minde, when sinne sheweth foorth it selfe in their consciences. And albeit, that Conscience see∣meth in many, to be (as it were with an hot yron) feared, as though it were voyd of all feeling of sinne: yet notwithstanding it will at sometime be wake∣ned vp, at the least in the extreame agonie of death, and will driue the miserable soule into desperation: than the whiche thing, nothing may happen vn∣to manne, either more heauy, or more bytter: as hauing leather, that hee had neuer beene created
and brought vnto light. The second good thing, or commoditie of them which knowe the Essence and will of GOD, and yeelde themselues obedient to the same, is: that God is a defence, or sheeld vnto them, wherwith they are compassed, defended, and sheelded, against the king∣dome of darcknesse. Of this sheeld speaketh Dauid in Psal. 5.Psal. 5. when he saith: All they which hope in thee shall reioyce, they shall euer be giuing thanks, and thou shalt dwell in them: all they which loue thy name, shall reioyce in thee. For thou Lord shalt blesse the righteous, and with thy fauourable kindenesse, shalt thou compasse vs as with a sheelde. Item Psal. 18.Psal. 18. And thou haste giuen me the defence or sheelde of thy saluation, and thy right hand doth vpholde me. In this man∣ner, it is the good pleasure of God, that he wil not on∣ly, (with the crowne of his fauourable kindenesse) compasse his about: but also, will haue them to bee happie, with perpetuall blessednesse. Paule, when he writeth to the Ephesians, thus: (Take vnto you the sheeld of Faith,1, Tim. 1. wherewith ye may quench all the fiery dartes of the wicked:) Signifying, that we are thē compassed about with the sheeld of faith, when we fight a good fight, holdeing a stedfast beleefe of the doctrine, with a sure confidence of mercy, & a good conscience. This sheelde, forasmuch as the enemies of God doe want: what (I pray ye) can be more miserable then they? For in asmuch as they be naked and vnarmed, they are not able to resist the diuel the prince of darkenes: but he obteineth ful dominion in them, & throweth them headlong out of one wickednes into an other, vntill he haue brought them to vtter destruction. The third good thing or commoditie, which the
godly haue by the healthfull knowledge, and feare of the true God: is called of Dauid Grace. This Grace, is the fauour of God, forgiuing sinne to the beleeuers, for the death of his sonne,What this grace is. and garni∣shing them with a most pure garment, which is, The obedience or righteousnesse of Christe:Roma. 5. VVhereby they are in such wise reputed righteous in the sight of God, as if they them selues had fulfilled the lawe. But they which are out of the congregation, are voide of this grace of saluation: and doe remaine vnder sinne, the wrath of God, and eternall damnation, for their ini∣quitie. The fourth commoditie which they (that know and feare God) doe inioy: is called of Dauid, Glory,What this glory is, and wherein it consisteth. This Glory is, The adoption of the adopted sonnes of GOD: The inhabiting of the holy ghoste, and the he∣reditary Possession of eternall blessednesse, by Iesus Christe. But contrarywise, they whiche doe not knowe God, are the bondslaues, and dwelling places of the diuell, are mooued by his spirit, and to eternall ignominie, are they reserued. The fifth good thing or commoditie, which God (by the Psalmist) promiseth vnto the godly, is cōtei∣ned in these wordes: He will withholde no good thing from them which walke in innocencie. O, how great is this promise? It is all one as if he should say: They which walke in innocencie, (that is to say) they which by faith doe yeelde obedience vnto God, shall be abun∣dantly indewed with all good thinges: so, that they may perpetually inioy them, and shall neuer stand in feare of any euill to come vnto them. And albeit, that all the Children of God, shal in this world suffer
persecution: yet notwithstanding they are certaine of the good things promised, which heere they ob∣taine by hope, and in the life to come, shall (without all impediment) for euer possesse. But contrarywise, they (which haue neither learned to knowe God by his worde, neither yet to feare him according to his will: vnto them ignominies, sorowes, and calami∣ties, shall neuer be wanting: but vnto the Diuell, (whome they haue serued) they shall be thrall and subiect for euer. Heereby now euery one may easely vnderstand that to be moste true which I propounded in the be∣ginning, namely: That of all things which are in the world there is nothing either more better or more precious, neither yet more profitable, than rightly to know the ESSENCE and WIL of God: and that this knowledge is drawne forth of the word of God, in the which word, he hath opened bothe him self and his wil. But least any man should suffer himselfe to be seduced by the deuill & his members: it is to bee knowne, that the worde of GOD is not any other where to be sought, than in the writinges of Moses the Prophetes, the Euangelistes and Apostles, whiche are beautified with the testimonie of the omnipo∣tent God, which is the eternall veritie, and can not lye,Rom. 3. as Paule speaketh. But some may obiect, or, at the least thinke with himselfe in his heart, (as many doe, although they expresse it not by their mouth) af∣ter this manner: If wee were certaine, that that worde were in very deede, the worde of God him self, doutlesse, it were of all things farre the most pre∣ciousest: but, the world, for a great parte therof, is a∣gainst the same, and fewe there be which imbrace it,
& fewest of those which liue according to the same: yea, there be also very many, which verely with their mouth confesse the same to be the word of God, but yet by their liues and manners (contrary to the same worde, whereof they doe so commonly boast) they deny the same. This (without all dout) is that temp∣tation, which the Diuell breathed into our first Pa∣rents, whereby he also seduced them, neither doth he at this day ceasse with vnwearied study, by this his olde deceitfull subtiltie, to circumuent and destroy very many. It is therefore cheefely necessary for all Christians, to haue in a readinesse; (touching the cer∣titude of the word of God) firme arguments & sure demonstrations, which (in the olde and new Testa∣ment) are euery where to be found. There be in generall two kindes of testimonies, by which it is cōuinced, that the doctrine of the church in the bookes of the Prophets and Apostles deliue∣red: is verely proceeded and inspired of GOD him selfe. Of these, the first is, An outwarde testimonie: but the other is Inwarde in the heartes of eche of the godly. I call that the Outwarde Testimonie, which runneth into the sences of men, that it may send to the minde,What the out warde testi∣monie is. the bright∣nesse of the Heauenly veritie. Of this, there be six partes, of which partes, albeit euery one by it selfe, might suffice, to euince the infallible certitude of the doc∣trine of the Church: yet not withstanding it pleased the moste mercifull God, by so many meanes to sus∣taine our infirmitie. The firste parte therefore, of the Outwarde testi∣monie is, The Diuine manifestation, by the whiche God him selfe, (proceeding from his secret seat) hath,
(with his owne voyce) reuealed his wil, touching the doctrine of the Lawe and the Gospell. And, al∣beit that God hath often, and at diuerse times mani∣fested himself, repeating with other, & other words, the selfe same doctrine: we notwithstanding, wil re∣cite certaine of the more selected appearings of God. First of all therefore, hee appeared to Adam after the fall, and deliuered first with his owne voyce, the doctrine of the Lawe and the Gospell. For in that that he layd punishments vpon our first parentes, for their rebellion (in perpetuall testimonie of his anger against sinners) it perteineth to the lawe: and in that that he promised:Gen. 3. The seede of the woman, to crush the Ser∣pents head, it is the voyce of the Gospell. Furthermore, God appeared vnto Noah, and by a wounderful deede confirmed bothe the doctrine of the law & the Gospel. For, when with the flood, he destroyed the vnrepentant: he executed the sentence of his lawe: but when he deliuered Noah beleeuing his word, & (by faith) beeing obedient vnto him, he established a testimonie of the promise of his grace reserued, which is of the Gospell. After the flood, GOD appeered vnto Abraham ten times, to Isaach his sonne twise: and to his Ne∣phew Iacob, seuen times. In which appritions, was propounded not diuers, but one, and the same doctrine alwayes, of the Seede of the woman, (that is to say) of Christe Iesus our Sauiour. After these thinges, God appeered to Moses in Aegypt, repeating bothe the doctrine of the lawe and the Gospell, and with wonderfull doings confirming the same. For the iust plague & calamitie of Pharao,
and his ministers, is to be referred to the Lawe: but, that glorious deliuerance of the people, with Moses, foorth of that Aegypticall house of seruitude: is to bee referred to the Gospell. All which things are, figures of the last Iudgement, wherein God will condemne the Diuell, with all his traine: and receiue to himself, into euerlasting Tabernacles, as many, as with a true, and liuely faith, shall constantly cleaue vnto Christe. In the new Testament also, the same GOD hath sounded his word from Heauen, and hath commen∣ded vnto vs Christe the teacher, with his owne mouth, saying; This is my beloued sonne, in whom I am well pleased: heare him. As if he should say: In time paste,Matth. 3. I promised the Seede of the woman to crush the head of the serpent, & to repaire againe my image in man, (the cursse of the Lawe beeing taken away) beholde, he is heere present, heare ye him, which hartely loue life, and saluation: for in him am I wel pleased (that is to say) by this my sonne, am I reconciled to the world, that is, to all them, which (by faith) shall re∣ceiue him. Let vs oppose all these apparitions, with many others (in which one, and the same doctrine is alwayes repeated) against the Deuill, and all wicked Sophisters, Mahometistes, vnbeleeuing Iewes, and pro∣phane nations: and to conclude, against our owne prudence, and carnall wisdome, ascrybing vnto God alone, the praise of the veritie. The second parte of the Outwarde testimonie is, The varitie of miracles, (that is to say) of the peculiare, and extraordinarie workes of God, which can not bee doone, by any creature. All these thinges hath God
done, that he might help our imbecillitie: that when these outwarde miracles should present themselues to our eyes, we should decree in our minde, that to be the doctrine of God, which (with such manner of woorkes,) as with seales is confirmed. And, albeit that these miracles (from the begin∣ning of the worlde, foorth vntill the times of the Apostles) be innumerable: yet notwithstanding the scope, and end of them all, is one: namely, that they might confirme the trueth of God, (that is to say) the doctrine of the Lawe, and the Gospell. In the olde Testament are found miracles done be fore the flood, in the flood, and after the flood. Like∣wise in Aegypt, and after the gooing out of Aegypt, and in the wildernesse, by the space of 40. yeeres. In like manner, in the time of Iosua, of the Iudges, of the Kings, of the Captiuitie of Babylon, and of the Macchabees, vn∣to the comming of Christe: all which, did seale the same doctrine, beeing oftentimes repeated. The miracles also, of the new Testamēt, wrought by Christe, are no lesse wounderfull: concerning which, he saith to the Iewes: If ye beleeue not mee, beleeue my woorkes. Cheefly this is woorthy to be considered, that Christe the third day rose again from death, and afterwarde, in the beholding of fiue hundred bree∣thren, did ascend visibly into heauen: and so accom∣plished the first promise made vnto Adam.Gen. 3. All these, yea or one of these miracles might be sufficient for vs, that we should beleeue the word of God: but it so seemed good vnto God, by the varietie of these, to sustaine our infirmitie. The third parte of the Outwarde testimonie, is
The moste certaine fulfilling, (or accomplishment) of the Prophets: which witnesseth, that God himselfe spake, by the mouth of his ministers. For, we haue an vn∣moueable foundation of our faith, when (to the fore∣sayings concerning the Messias, or Christe, prophecied by Moses, Dauid, Daniell, and other Prophets) we see the History Euangelicall, to aunswere. The stedfastnesse of faith (saith Augustine) consisteth in this: that all thinges which came to passe in Christe, were tolde of before. Heereof our faith concludeth on this manner. He alone, without all doubt, is the true, and onely Messias and Sauiour of the worlde, in whome alone doe meete together whatsoeuer hath beene foretolde, touching the Messias, by Moses, and all others the Prophets of God. In Iesus, the sonne of Mary alone, mee∣teth together, whatsoeuer hath beene (touching the Messias) foretolde by Moses, and all the rest of the Prophets of God: Therefore: Iesus alone, the sonne of the virgin Mary, is, (without al doubt) the Sole, true, and only Messias, and Sauiour of the worlde. Vpon this foundation, the Apostles of Christe, Peeter and Paule, builded the faith of the Gentiles: whiche would neuer haue beleeued in Christe, vnlesse they had shewed them, this agreemente of the foresayinges, and their fulfillinges in Christe. Touching this mat∣ter,
let the 17. Act: and 2. Peter. 1. bee reade. In like manner also, the foretellings of the Pro∣phets (touching the moste greeuous persecutions of the Church, which at this day, we finde that Romish Antichrist, and Mahomet, to fulfil) are extant. Heere, let vs comforte and lifte vpp our selues against the king∣dome of the Pope, & the raging of Mahomet, when we confer the euent, with the Prophecies shewed long time before. Of the tyrannie of the Roomish Bishop, and Mahomet: Ieremie, and Daniel, foreshewed: when we therefore doe see these things to haue come to passe, what letteth, that we should not thorowly perswade our selues, that those thinges shall come to passe, which are foretolde of the Aduent, or comming of the kingdome of IESVS CHRISTE, wherein, namely in the last day, he will appeere, and will raise vp all people from death, those whiche haue doone good, to the Resurrection of life: but those which haue done euil, vnto the Resurrection of damnation, as the whole sacred Scripture, touching this matter, doth euery where moste plentifully teach vs. The fourth parte of the Outwarde testimonie, is, the consent of Moses, the Prophetes Christe, the Apostles, and of the whole vniuersall Church, in doc∣trine and worshipping of God. For, all these, with one vniforme agreement, haue holden the same doc∣trine of The Lawe, and The Gospell, and the same manner of worshipping God. Neither hath the diuersitie of ceremonies (which for the cōsideratiō of times, haue beene changed) troubled this agreement, one, & the same foundation of the true and althfehull doctrine, euery where remaining. But if this doctrine had not
beene inspired by God, so greate an agreement had neuer beene in these Ministers of God: whome, (both in teaching, and propounding the same matters, it is conuenient, that their successours should imitate. VVhere that thing is accomplished, there must needs be the true Church of Christe, and without this not else where. The fifth parte of the Outwarde testimoninie, is, The Induraunce, and conseruation of the Churche, from the beginning of the world, vnto this time, and so farther, vnto the last day of Iudgement. Heerunto appertaineth that, which is in Acts. 5. when the Scribes, and Pharises rose vp and went together to counsaile, to suppresse the Apostles of Christe: that auncient Gamaliell, a Doctor of the Lawe rose vp, and said:Acts. 5. If this counsell, or this woork, be of men, it shall be dissolued: but, if it be of GOD, ye cannot dissolue it. This is it which Christ him selfe affirmeth, that against his Church,Matth. 16. The gates of Hel shall not preuaile. The sixth parte of the Outwarde testimonie, is, The bloody confession of many Martyres, from Abell vnto this present day. For, they are called Martyers, because they beare witnesse to the trueth of the Heauen∣ly doctrine, not onely with their mouth, but also with their blood. A matter worthy to bee remem∣bred, is reported of Ignatius the Scholer of Saint Iohn: that, when at a certaine time, the Tyrant would by threatnings haue constrayned him to deny Christe, hee answered: How can I deny him, whose name I doe beare written in my heart? VVhich thing beeing heard, the Tirant commanded the body of Ignatius, to be cut in sunder, and the heart beeing taken out, to be deuided
into small peeces: which thing when it was accom∣plished, in euery peece so cut of the heart, the name of Iesus was found manifestly discrybed. The other kinde of testimonies, wherby the cer∣taintie of the doctrine of the Church is confirmed, is: The inwarde certification (or assurance made) by the ho∣lie Ghoste, sealing the heartes of faithfull people, touching the veritie of the Gospell. Of this thing, Paule 2. Cor. 1. speaketh: It is God (saith he) which hath annoin∣ted vs, and sealed vs in Christe, and hath giuen the earnest of the spirit in our heartes. This Certification, the godly doe feele, cheefely, in feruent & earnest prayer vnto God. For, when Prayers doe proceede from a true faith: we feele in our heartes the answere of God, whereby we are made the more assured of the diuine promises. Hetherto, I haue numbred breefely, the testimo∣nyes whereupon, as vpon foundations, the vnmo∣uable certaintie of the Christian doctrine, is stayed. God graunt, that these things may be effectually con∣firmed in the mindes of He vseth this phrase of speeche as S. Paule doth when hee saith, Many became sin∣ners. Rom. 5. many, that they wauer not any more, but that they may dayly, more, and more abound, in all sence, and knowledge. This word of God, beeing by so sure testimonyes approued: God hath commaunded to be spread abroade, through the whole compasse of the world, and by the Ministerie of the same, gathereth out of all mankinde, a Church vnto himselfe: which (through Christe) he hath pre∣destinated to eternall life and saluation.Ephe. 1. & 5. It, therefore becommeth godly Magistrates, to promote this selfe same worde, that it may be purely, and sincerely deli∣uered in Schooles, and Churches, and set ouer to the posteritie. The charge whereof, when the moste
godly, and wise Princes, and Kings of Denmark, per∣ceiued to appertain vnto them: they founded this no∣ble vniuersitie of Hafnia, and moreouer enriched the same, with moste bountifull stipendes: that in the same, they (which in deliuering the pure doctrine of the Gospel, might in time to come, with fruite, serue their countrie) might be instructed and learned. I, beeing called vnto this Vniuersitie, that with my laboures, I might assist the studyes of Learners: forasmuche as I had hethervnto, bothe with liuely voyce taught, and also committed to open monu∣ments of letters, many things of the moste sacred di∣uinitie, in Lattin: it seemed good to me now, by this writing, set foorth in the common language, to set forwarde the studyes of godlinesse in them, whiche are ignorant of the Lattine speech. I haue drawen to∣gether, into this litle boke, out of the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, all those things which are neces∣sary to be knowne of a Christian man to the attey∣ning of saluation. And I will, this same little booke to remaine in place of my confession of euery article of the Christian Religion, which hetherto, about the space of 30. yeeres, I haue, in the Church &, Schoole of Hafnia, openly propounded. That it hath semed best to me, to establish the same (moste woorthy Gentleman) vnder your name: that thing is doone, that I might declare my self to be mindeful of very many benefits, which haue beene by you, to mewards perfourmed, these 21. yeeres now together, from that time, wherin, that magnificent, and gentle Gentleman your brother Nicolas Kaaes, was first com∣mitted to my fidelitie, and discipline.
I beseeche God, that for his only begotten sonne our Lorde IESVS CHRISTE, he will con∣serue the puritie of his worde, in this Kingdome of Denmarke, to the glory of his name, and the saluation of many: and that, with his holy spirit, he would go∣uerne the indeuours of those which, either in the ec∣clesiasticall, or politicall estate, which shall go about to set forewarde his Gospell: that the kingdome of the Deuill beeing destroyed, the Temple of Christe, may in our hearts be builded, Amen. That ye also, (by the fauour, and goodnesse of GOD) may long time be preserued safe, and in good health, I wish of God from my whole heart, through Iesus Christe our Lord. From Haffnia the feast day of Martin, in the yeere of our Lord. 1570.
A CHRISTIAN AND Catholike Institution, compre∣hending, principall pointes of Christian Religion, which are neces∣sarie to be knowen of man, to the attayning of saluation. THe Princely, and diuine Prophete Da∣uid, in the 119. Psalme, (sheweth, that al man∣kind is so blinded with the darcknesse of igno∣rance, that he cannot perceiue the right way of saluation, vnlesse he bee, of God himself, by his healthfull worde, brought into this right path,) in these words: Thy word is a Lanterne vnto my feete: as though he would say, euen as without thy word (O LORD) I must of necessitie goe a∣stray: so by the benefite of thy word, (whiche I esteeme to be as a Lanterne to me, to my salua∣tion) I tread the right way, and as long as I followe this light going before me, that is to say Thy worde, I cannot goe astray or be deceiued. Which thing happeneth alike to al other people in the world. For which cause also they are not amisse compared vnto straying Sheepe, which wandring farre from the Shephearde, & sheep∣folde, must (if they will be brought back againe) heare the voice of their Shepheard, and (as a
burning light) followe the same. Forasmuch therfore, as I haue determined, in this present writing, to dispute of the VVay of Saluation, it seemeth good vnto mee, first of all, to followe this counsell of Dauid, and to shewe foorth this healthsome Lanterne, whiche lea∣deth all people into eternall ioy, and saluation, as many as perseuering vnto the last hower of death, shall followe the same, going before them. And because this same Laterne, whiche we call The worde of God, is diuided into two partes, namely into the Law and the Gospel: I will in the beginning set downe a text out of the 22. Chapter of S. Matthew, which, (as it were in a Tableture) shall set before our eyes, these two kindes of doctrines, which are moste specially needefull to be knowen, vnto saluation. More∣ouer I will in such wise declare these two prin∣cipall fountaines, with the other articles com∣prehended vnder these, (particularly, but yet somewhat plentifully & plainely,) that nothing at all may be let passe, which is behouefull for them to knowe, beleeue, or doe, which desire to be made partakers of eternall saluation. The wordes of the Euangelist are these. Matth. 22. THE Pharises (hearing that he had put the Sa∣duces to silence) they came together, & one of them, a certaine Doctour of the Lawe,The questi∣on of the Pharisie. asked him a questi∣on, tempting him, and saying: Maister, which is the
greatest commaundement in the lawe?The answere of Christe. IESVS saith vnto him, THOV shalte looue the LORDE thy GOD, with all thy hearte, and with all thy minde, and with all thy soule: This is the firste, and the greatest commaundement, and the second is like like vnto this: THOV shalt loue thy neighbour as thy self: In these two commaundements hang all the LAW, & the PROPHETS. VVhilst the Pharises were gathered together, Iesus asked them saying,The question of Christe. what think ye of CHRISTE? whose Sonne is he? They say vnto him, The sonne of DAVID:The answere of the Pha∣risies. He saith vnto them, How then doth Dauid in spirit call him LORD saying, The Lord said vnto my Lorde, Sit thou on my right hand, vntill I make thine enemies thy footestoole: If Dauid therefore cal him LORD, how is he then his SONNE? And no man was able to aunswere him any thinge, neither durst any man from that day foorth, aske him any moe questions. In this text of the Gospell recited, are con∣tained two questions, most cheefe and weightie of all others, which may be brought forth of the scripture, touching the attayning of saluation. The first question is propounded by the Pha∣risies, the other by our Lorde Iesus Christe. The Pharisies, through notable malice of hart, and vnmeasurable hatred, wherwith they pursued Christe, doe mooue a question concer∣ning the lawe, and demaund of Iesus, which is the greatest commaundement in the Lawe: for in asmuch as Christ condempned the Pharisies, which esteemed them selues to liue according to the lawe, and would bring in Baptisme, whereof
there was no mention made in the Lawe: they thought that he would speake somthing, rashly against the Lawe of Moses, that they, (by this meanes) might haue occasion to accuse him, and take him out of the way. CHRIST, on the other side, hauing cōpassion on the great blindenes of the Pharises, asketh thē, what they thought of Christ, & whose sonne he is? and that thing he doth, with this intent, that an occasion might bee giuen him, wher∣by he might instruct, and teach them forth of the Scripture, what they should esteeme of Christ, (that is to say) of him, whom God promised to Adam, Abraham, and the rest of the holy fathers, to be the Sauiour of the worlde. Furthermore, that these questiōs of the Law, and of Christe, may the more cōmodiously serue vs to the furtheraunce, & instruction of saluati∣on: I wil chuse frō hence three doctrines, which (the grace of GOD assisting) I will declare in order. FIRST, of the causes, by whiche the Pharisies beeing mooued go about to take Christe out of the way, and what crafts they vse, to bring this wicked purpose to effect. SECONDLY, of the true vnderstanding, and vse of the Lawe. THE THIRD, of CHRISTE, namely, what we ought to esteeme of him: And howe wee obtaine saluation through him.
The first Doctrine. THE IEVVES, and cheefly the Pharises, went about this thing with great indeuor,Matth. 22. That they might tangle Christ in his wordes, & be∣ing caught, they might quarell with him, and, at the length deliuer him to death. Behold ther∣fore how great the diuersitie of minde is of the one towards the other, in Christe & in the Phari∣ses. IESVS sought this only thing, yt they bee∣ing deliuered from sin, he might saue them: but the Pharises craftely catch his words, wherby they might accuse, and oppresse him. This way∣wardnes of mindes is at this daye (alas for sorowe) found in many, which persecute those, which wish well vnto them, and shew them sel∣ues very carefull of their saluation. But wherof commeth this so fyery and insatiable hatred of the Pharises towarde Christe? CHRIST reprehended their great & mani∣folde sinnes, namely, Arrogancie, Hypocrisie, Co∣uetousnes, & erronious Doctrine, wherby they led awry both them selues & others. Arrogant, and proude people, are of such malice of minde, that they take it greeuously, that they should be ad∣monished, & do with great contention persecute those, which dare be so bold as once to minish or hinder their false conceiued opinion of the great estimation of thēselues. Wherfore it is the lesse to be meruailed, that these so proude & arrogant Pharisies doe with hatred persecute Christe: which euery where, and continually, tolde them to their teeth, and condempning them, obiected
vnto them, this their filthy pride: especially whē as they in the meane time, considered not, that this was doone of Christe, for their profit, and saluation. But, forasmuch as these are Hypo∣crites, which repute thēselues to be righteous before God, and man, albeit they bee inwardly filled with all filthynesse and malice, yea altoge∣ther like vnto dead mennes graues, whiche al∣though they shewe outwardly whited, and gar∣nished, yet inwardly they abounde with poyso∣ned, and abhominable filthynesse: therfore, they doe not gladly suffer those, whiche reprehende, and condemne them of sinne. And, for this cause these Hypocrites, will not graunt vnto Iesus Christ this glory, (That he alone is righteous, and that whosoeuer wil be made righteous, doe obtaine the same, by this our onely Lorde Iesus Christe. Therefore, in the 21. of S. Matthew, Christe saith vnto them: Publicanes, and sinners, shall enter into the kingdome of God, before you. Moreouer, if you inquire, why these things be so? the cause is in a redynesse: for Hypocrites doe presume, that they are without all sinne, and trust to their owne righteousnesse whiche they haue not: but Publicanes, and sinners doe knowe and confesse them selues to haue sinned, and to haue no righteousnesse of their owne, wherby beeing vpholden, they may make their boast. When they therefore doe heare sinne re∣prooued, they doe foorthwith very easily (in com∣parison of the Hypocrites) acknowledge their sinnes, and imbracing with ioy the preaching of
grace, doe repent, forsake the conuersation of their former life, conuert them selues vnto God, by faith in Iesus Christe, & bring foorth fruites of faith. An example of this thing is to be seene in Luke Chap. 18. in the Publicane, & the Pha∣risie, of the which two, the Publicane standing in the Churche afarre of prayed: the Pharisie with great pride boasted of his owne righteous∣nesse. Likewise Luke 7. In Simeon that hooste of Christe, and in that sinfull woman, whiche, there hauing washed the feete of Christe with her teares, wiped them with the heary lockes of her head. This waywardnesse is moreouer very like vnto couetousnesse, for that it suffereth it selfe to be reprehended of no body, but indeuoureth to couer it selfe, with the cloke of wisdome, seduli∣tie, and sparefulnesse: when as notwithstan∣ding it is in very deed, (as Paul teacheth) meere Idolatrie: for, the couetous man reposeth more hope, in these momentanie goods of the world, than in the liuing God. Therefore, it is not to be meruailed, that the Pharisies hated Christe, and with all their power persecuted him, which iustly reproued their wicked couetousnesse, and execrable Idolatrie. That Christe also did in like manner reprehende their errours about the heauenly doctrine, neither did they take yt with quiet mindes: For they dreamed that the keyes of wisdome, were in their powers alone, where∣with, euery of them supposed, that he might o∣pen, and shut vp heauen at his pleasure: wher∣as
they notwithstandinge were, in the meane time, voyde, both of the true vnderstandinge of the Lawe, and of the true knowledge of the Messias: this their blindenesse, they could at no hand suffer, to bee reprooued of Christe. LASTLY. The Pharises toke this thinge also greeuously in Christ: that hee not onely re∣prooued them of their owne wandringe out of the way: but that they also, (through their er∣ronious Doctrine) did leade other awrye, from the true shepheard, and way of Saluation. Of these so great offences, Christ accused the Pharises, that either (amending themselues) they might bee saued: or els (continuing in their sinnes,) they should looke for, both here in this worlde, the iuste punishmentes of God: as also after this life, euerlastinge dampnation. But, howe did the Pharises take these thinges of Christe? Euen altogeather after the same man∣ner, as a madde man is affected agaynst him: which goeth about to delyuer him from his dis∣ease, and madnesse. For, euen as a man di∣straught of minde, doth with feete, nayles, and byting, enemylike assayle him, which laboureth to laye medicinable handes vpon him: so the Pharises with handes, and feete applye to this thinge: that they maye sclaunder Christe, and take him out of the waye: and therfore they so∣lempnely sent their messengers thrise vnto him, the tuesday next beefore they crucifyed him. In the first Embassage were the Pharises, with the Herodians, which demaunded whether it
were lawfull to giue tribute to Caesar, or not? And that thing they doe with this intent, that if Christe did affirme the question propounded, the common people might forsake him, and so it might be easily lawful, to deliuer him to death: but if he did deny it, he might fal into the hands of Herodes seruaunts, who hauing taken him, might kill him as a seditious man: But in vaine doth the craftinesse of man wery it selfe, against the wisdome of God. Christe answereth neither affirmatiuely, nor negatiuely, but the coyne be∣ing shewed by them, he saith, whose Image, and inscription is this? They answered him Cae∣sars: And hee said vnto them: Giue vnto Caesar, the things which are Caesars, and vnto GOD, those things whiche are Gods: so, that of this answere of Christe, neither ye Herodians, nor the common people found, why they might iustly be offended. THE SECOND Embassage was of the Saduces, which deny the resurrectiō of the dead. These men thought that (out of the doctrine of Christe, teaching that all people should rise a∣gaine in the last day) they might inferre some absurditie, in this maner: There were (say they) with vs seuen bretheren, and the firste hauing maryed a wife, deceased: and hauing no seede, left his wife vnto his brother: likewise the se∣cond, and the thirde, vnto the seuenth: laste of all the woman also dyed: In the resurrection therefore, whose wife shall she be of the seuen? They supposed now that Christe would ap∣pointe
her either to one of them, or to al of them together, whiche if hee had doone, they would haue cryed out, that ye coulde not be conuenient, for the coutentions, hatreds, and abhominable filthynesses, that would followe therof. By this way, they hoped, that they should confute the doctrine of Christe, & to deliuer Christ to iudge∣ment,Matth. 22. as gilty of vntruth, to be punished. Let vs heare what Christ answereth vnto them: Ye erre (saith he) not knowing the Scriptures, nor the po∣wer of God and are ignorant what is the diffe∣rence to come, betweene the condition of this life, and of the life euerlasting. In these words Christe sheweth three causes of the erronious Doctrine of the Saduces. THE FIRST IS, that they knew not the Scriptures, which alone teacheth vs to try the trueth, from falshod, in all those matters, which concerne the businesse of saluation. Therefore Dauid faith,Psal. 119. Thy word is a lanterne vnto my feete. THE SECOND CAVSE, that they knewe not the vertue and power of God, by the which, he was able as easily to raise vp ye dead, in the last day, as it was not hard to him, to cre∣ate all things, of nothing, in the first day. Ther∣fore, when we thinke vpon the resurrection of the dead, reason is not to be admitted into coun∣sail, which is onely occupyed about these corpo∣rall things: but we must looke back to the scrip∣ture, and knowe that nothing is impossible be∣fore God, the omnipotent creator of all things. THE THIRD CAVSE of the error of
the Saduces, Christe assigneth to bee this, that they did not consider the difference of the condi∣tion of man in this worlde, and in the life eter∣nall. In this life there is neede of wedlock: but in the life eternall they shal neither mary nor be maryed: for they shalbe as the Angels of God, in heauen. And the loue of the other life, doth by a thousand degrees excel the loue of this world, yea, that will darken this: euen as the sunne ri∣sing in the morning, taketh away the light from all the other starres, and alone with his owne brightnesse lightneth the world. THE THIRD EMBASSAGE was of the Iewes, beeing made vnto Christe the very same day: this is the same, whereof the present text of the Gospell maketh mention. VVhen the Pharises had heard that Iesus had in this wise stopped the mouthes of the Saduces,Matth, 22. they came vnto him, and asked him which was the grea∣test comaundement in the Lawe? That was doone of them, not because they would learne, but that they might haue some occation to destroy him. For they thought thus with them selues: because this fellowe bringeth in Baptisme, and accuseth vs, which liuing ac∣cording to the Lawe, doe boast our selues to be righteous by the woorks of the Lawe: surely, and without al doubt he contemneth the Law, and doth far lesse esteeme it thē his Baptisme which if he doe, there wil lye a iust action for vs against him, as against one blasphemouse a∣gainst God himself, as one which hath the law
of God, in no estimation, which the Lorde him selfe gaue vnto vs by his seruaunt Moses. To these things Christ answereth, saying: the grea∣test, and the first commaundement is: Thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God, with all thy heart, with al thy soule, and with all thy mynde. And the seconde is like vnto this. Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe: In these two Commaundements hang all the Lawe and the Prophets. Doubtlesse the Pharises looked not for such an answere to be giuen them, therefore none of them could say any thing against him. And so we see, that neither wisdome nor prudence can preuaile against the Lorde, which bringeth to naught the wisdome of the wise, and confoun∣deth the vnderstanding of the prudent, as it is in Esay. Chap. 29. The seconde Doctrine. TOVCHING THE LAVVE I will explicate these three things. FIRST, I wil speake in generall of the two cheefe Commaundements and heads of the Law, (that is to say) Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soule, and with all thy minde: And: Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. SECONDLY, of the foure principall errours about the doctrine of the Lawe. THIRDLY, of the true vse of the Lawe.
¶ Of the first. THE Lawe in this place setteth bee∣fore vs, the two cheefest commaunde∣ments: the first of the louing of God: the other of louing our neighbour. And in what manner God is to be loued, it expoundeth say∣ing: Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soule, and with al thy minde: In what manner also thy Neighbour is to bee loued, it by and by addeth: Thou shalt loue thy neighbour (As thy selfe.) But what is it to loue God, with all thy hart, with all thy soule, and with all thy minde? This word of (LOVE) comprehēdeth three things.Ignoti nulla cupido. Firste, it comprehendeth a knowledge of the thing that is to be loued: for of a thing vnknow∣en there is no desire. Moreouer it comprehen∣deth all the affections and motions of the hart, which do accompany pure loue. Thirdly, it com∣prehendeth all workes whiche are required to this loue. Therefore the lawe of God ioyneth these three together, when it saith: Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soule, and with all thy minde: so that there be in the heart, that is to say, in the vn∣derstanding of man, a cleere light and know∣ledge of GOD. Whome (he assuredly perswa∣deth him selfe) to bee the moste beste, and moste excellente, namely the Fountaine of all goodnesse.
Moreouer, VVith all thy soule, that is, all the affections, motions, and desires of the heart, shoulde tende to this end: that thou maiest loue God, cleaue vnto him, & place in him the sound∣nesse of thy loue, whereby thou mayest keepe him moste sure in thy heart, and, for euer inioy him. LASTLY: thou shouldest loue him, VVith all thy minde, or, with all thy strength: so that thou shouldest conuert all thy cogitations, inde∣uours, and studies, to set forwarde, and defend whatsoeuer thinges doe appertaine vnto God, and to fight against those thinges, whiche are contrary vnto GOD, namely, by resisting the Deuill, Sinne, and all their troupe, and garrison. And so we see here, in what manner the three cheefe naturall powers, or abilities, ingrafted into the soule of man, namely, REASON, APPETITE, and or Zeale. ANGER doe shewe foorth thier strengthes. For, REASON in∣quireth for the cheefest good (that is to say.) GOD: APPETITE, desireth that same principall good, and by loue ioyneth it selfe vnto it. ANGER (or Zeale) is kindled to vpholde, and defende that principallest good, GOD, and enemy like fighteth against the Deuill, sinne, and the occasions thereof, and all other things what soeuer are contrary vnto God. MOREOVER, when thou hearest, that thou art commaunded, to loue God, with all thy heart, with all thy soule, and with all thy minde:
heere thou must consider that God doth require a loue, PVRE, and PERFECT, ETER∣NALL, and SPIRITVALL, so, that thy loue should bee, pure, without spotte: perfecte, with out all faulte: eternall, without all inter∣mission: and spirituall, without all affection, and leuen of fleshly concupiscence. THE OTHER great Commaundement is this. (Thou shalt loue thy Neighbour, as thy selfe.) Heere God appointeth the rule of the loue of our neighbour, to bee, the loue of our owne selfe. But, that this may be the rightlyer vn∣derstanded, two thinges doe come to bee consi∣dered. FIRST, we must discerne betweene two manners, after which man loueth himselfe: for, of these two, the one is dampnable, and vnlawfull, the other is accompted good, and lawfull. Furthermore, wee must discerne al∣so, betweene the person of man, and that cor∣ruption whiche sticketh in man. Man is some∣time affected towardes him selfe, with a blinde, vnwise, and hurtfull loue, springing from the corrupte and depraued nature, (that is to say) from the fountaine of sinne, which by our sinne of heritage dwelleth in vs. This loue shall not be the rule of the loue of thy neighbour: for, to loue him after this maner, were plainly before God to hate thy neighbour. There is besides this, a nother manner of louing him selfe, and the same is lawfull, and graunted, whiche springeth from the holie Ghoste, and faith in IESVS CHRISTE:
when a man directeth all his counsailes to that end, that he may doe those things which are ac∣ceptable vnto God and healthsome to himselfe. This loue beeing lawfull, and lawdable, shalbe the rule, of the loue, wherewith we should loue our neighbour: so that from the very heart we should reioyce with him, ouer all those things, which may redounde, to his profit, and saluati∣on, by godly desires wishing him, all goodnesse, and, by faithfull counsailes, labour, goods, and prayers, setting him forwarde: and on the o∣ther parte, by turning away studiously with all the minde, and heart, what soeuer, either to his life, or soule: or, (to be short) either to his goods or fame: may be hurtful. In another Iohn. 13. & 15. place, our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christe, setteth bee∣fore vs his owne example, in place of a rule to be followed: Loue ye (saith he) one another, euen as I haue loued you: And therfore Christ calleth this, (A newe Commaundement.) Whereby he would teach vs, that we should helpe our neighbour, if necessitie require, euen with the peril of our life: not hauing so great regarde of our owne com∣modities, as of the health, & profit of our neigh∣bour. In what manner Christe hath loued vs, Paule sheweth in the 5. Chap. to the Romaines: as heereafter, in the thirde Doctrine, shalbe saide more at large. The second thing, which I gaue warning of, to be considered, in this chiefe commaundement of the loue of our neighbour, is, The difference be¦tweene the person of the man, and that corruption
which cleaueth vnto him. The corrupt and wic∣ked man, (as much as appertaineth to his cor∣ruption, and wickednesse it selfe) it is lawfull to hate: but, as much as appertayneth to the per∣son, as farre foorth as it is man, partaker of hu∣mane nature with vs, the same is to be loued: so, that what we hate in him, namely sinne, and corruption it selfe, that wee should reprehende: and againe, we should loue in him, that whiche deserueth loue, that is, yt beeing man, he might be conserued, as Augustine teacheth. Let these things suffise touching the first member, which I admonish in the beginning to be obserued con∣cerning the law. Of the second. ANother thinge which I propounded, was touching the errours, which false teachers sowe abrode, aboute the doc∣trine of the lawe. Of these, there be foure sortes. In the first order are they, whiche flatly reiect the lawe, and vtterly deny it, to be taught in Christian Churches. In the seconde are they, which in deede retaine the Lawe: but they teache, that man is able through his owne power to satisfye the law. Next vnto these are they, which affirme, that man is not able to ful∣fill the whole lawe: but yet some parte thereof. They occupy the fourth rome, which say, that e∣uery religion hath her law, which is sufficient to saluation, to him that fulfilleth it.
Theese foure errours, through their poyso∣ned contagion, are very mischieuous: neither are they staied vpon any other foundation, then vpon the deceiptes, and lyinge subtilties of the Diuell, which stirreth vp men, to seduce one another, from the puritye of the true Doctrine of the Lawe and the Gospell. I will therfore re∣fute these erroures one by one, in the same order as they were beefore, of mee rehearsed. THE ANTINOMIANS which flatlye reiecte the Lawe, and denye it to bee taught in the congregations of Christians, are scant wor∣thy, that their opinion should bee refuted with many wordes, as agaynst whom not only, true reason of man: but also CHRIST himselfe, and his Apostles, and as many as haue beene faythfull teachers in the Church of Christ, doe resist. The Argumentes wherwith they vphold their opinion, are these. Christians (say they) haue nothing to do with Moses: Therfore, neither are they subiect to his Lawe. Item: Christians are made free by Christe: Therfore: Christe commaunded the Gospell to bee preached to all creatures, of preachinge the lawe hee commaunded nothing at all. Lastly: The holy Ghoste (say they) is the teacher of Christians: what vse then shall there bee of the law, amongest them? With these, and other like reasons, they suppose themselues to proue, that the Law is neither to bee reteyned, nor taught in the congregation of Christians.
But a man may first demaund of these men: Doth it beecome Christians, to loue GOD, and their neighbour? I beleeue, there is none so pos∣sessed of the Diuell, that hee dare denye this. Seeinge then that Christians must loue GOD and their Neighbour, why shall it not bee also lawfull for them to knowe, in what sorte they ought to perfourme the same? For, what thing shall the woorke of loue bee, vnlesse it bee di∣rected by some certayne manner? But, foras∣much as the Lawe of God, (that is to say, the tenne Commaundements) doth teach vs both: namely, that wee should loue GOD, and our Neighbour, and also, in what manner the same should bee doone of vs: what is hee that seeth not these men manifestlye to erre, which would abolishe the Lawe of God, and forbidde that it should not sounde in the Christian congrega∣tions. 1. Where as they obiect, and say: Christians haue nothing to doo with Moses, that is true, as farre as apperteyneth to the ceremoniall, and forensicall lawes of Moses, the sacrifices, Circumcision, and such like outward ceremonies, which ought to endure vntill the comminge of Christe onely, and afterwarde to cease: but it is not true, as touchinge the lawe of GOD, that is to say, the Decalogus, which was giuen vnto man in his first creation, and afterwarde repeated, and written in two tables of Stone, that the remembraunce therof might bee perpetuall.
I will ceasse heere to speake, howe that Christe him selfe bothe taught the lawe and expounded it at large: as did also the holy Prophets, and their successors. 2 But, that which the Antinomians affirme in the second place: Christians not to bee vnder the lawe but vnder Grace: I graunt this also, so that it be rightly vnderstoode, as Saint Paule himselfe expoundeth it: Christians are not vnder the Lawe: that is to say, they which beleeue in IESVS CHRIST are not vnder the condemnatory sentence of the law, because there is no condem∣nation to them which are ingraffed into Iesus Christ, Rom. 8. But the Christian hath neede of the Doctrine of the lawe, whiche must bee the rule of his life; shewing him what doth please God, and what is contrary to his godly will. Furthermore, where they say: Christians are made free: Therfore, They are not vnder the Lawe. To that, I answere thus: True it is, Chri∣stians are made free, from the Condemnation of the Lawe, from sinne, and hell: but not so, that in the meane season, it may be lawfull for them to doe what they list: they are for this cause made free, that they should serue God alone, loue him, and their neighbour asmuche as lyeth in their whole powers, as the Lawe exhorteth, and teacheth. If moreouer they go forwarde to say: Christe gaue commaundement touching the preaching of the Gospel to euery creature: but, touching the Law
he commaunded nothing at all: I answere, Christ commaunded forgiuenesse of sinnes to be prea∣ched, but what is sinne, but transgression of the lawe? Now then, If Christians haue no lawe, then it must needs be, that they neither haue a∣ny sinne. Beside this, Christe himselfe, and the Apostles doe exhorte all Christians, to bringe foorth frutes of repentance, (that is to say) good works, according to the lawe of God. The laste argument of the Antinomians is such: The holie Ghost (say they) teacheth Christi∣ans: Therfore, They neede not the lawe: O, how foolishe, and friuolous an argument is this? They should rather haue cōcluded thus: The holie Ghoste teacheth Christians, Therefore we neede teachers, and the worde, namely The Lawe, and The Gospell. For, the holie Ghoste, doth then teache, and mooue the heart of man, when the word is receiued by ye eares, in which word the Holie Ghoste will be of force, in those which heare it, and by faith imbrace the same. We see then, how, not onely folishly, but wic∣kedly they doe, whiche dare snatch away from vs the lawe of GOD, and throwe it out of the Christian congregations, and affirme, that the same is not to be taught. Leauing therefore, the contagions mischeefe of this errour, let vs giue thanks vnto God, for communicating vnto vs his Holie Lawe, and let vs further beseech him, that he would giue vnto vs his holie spirite, by the which, many thinges acceptable, and plea∣sing vnto him, may be doone of vs. For if the
Diuell had obteined this victory of vs, that hee had spoyled vs of the lawe of GOD, as hee had successe therin, in Paradise: what should let, yt hee should not againe, make vs giltie of death and eternall dampnation? For, hee which lear∣neth not to acknowledge his sinnes, by the Law, the same, doubtlesse, knoweth not how to em∣brace, grace by the Gospell. Hee which can not esteeme his sickenesse, or the greeuousnesse of his disease: the same, must of necessitye haue a negligente care, of seekinge foorth a holsome medicine. IN THE SECOND ORDER of those which erre about the doctrine of the lawe; are they, which, in deede, doo reteyne the lawe, and doo rightlye affirme, that it is to bee taught in the Churches of Christians, but this they false∣ly affirme, That whosoeuer will, may by his owne power, and minde fulfill the Law: & by this meanes attaine righteousnesse beefore GOD, and merite eternall life. The falsenesse of this opinion, I will in such wise shewe by manifest demonstrati∣ons, that euery one may easily perceyue, that no man amongest all men (the onely man Iesu Christe excepted) is able to fulfill the Lawe of GOD. The Condition of humane nature in all men yeeldeth vnto vs, the first argument of this our asseueration. The same is such, that all men e∣uen frō the very natiuity, are vnpure, vncleane, and thrall vnto sinne. Forasmuch then, as it is euident, that from a rotten, and stinking foun∣tayne,
no water can bee drawne, but rotten, and stinking: it is manifest that man beeing vnpure and defiled with sin, cannot yeeld pure, syncere, and vndefiled obedience, vnto GOD. There∣fore Salomon sayth Eccle. Cap. 7. There is not a man righteous vpon the earth, which dooth good, and sinneth not. And Iob. Chap. 14. VVho can make that cleane, which commeth of an vncleane seede? truely no mortall man can bring this to passe. For wee do all draw our beginning, from a sinfull lumpe, and an vncleane roote: and is it possible that the fruicte should bee better, than the Tree it selfe? therfore, this demonstration of the proofe stan∣deth sure. VVhosoeuer are vncleane, can not yeeld cleane, and pure obedience to the lawe of God. But, all men, (only IESV CHRIST excepted, which from the lawes of byrthe customable, and common to nature, is exempted) are by nature vncleane: Therfore, No mortall man can fulfill the lawe of GOD. The second argument wherby it is conuinced, that no man can fulfill the lawe of GOD, is ta∣ken of the vniuersall experience of man. For, there is no man found in the vniuersall worlde, who (askinge his owne heart, and examining his owne conscience,) shall not straighte waye finde himselfe to bee farre of from that perfecti∣on, which the Lawe requireth.
Who perceiueth not him selfe, to haue doone of∣tentimes things not to be doone, and againe, to haue left vndoone, things to be doone? And al∣beit some dare boaste much of fulfilling the law, doone by themselues, or by others: yet notwith∣standing the iudgement of their owne heartes, is against them selues, whiche although it lye hid from the sight of men, yet it is euident, and lyeth open vnto God, which seeth, weyeth, and tryeth, all the cogitations, and affections of the heart of man. The third argument, whereby it is proued, that no mortall man can fulfill the lawe of God, is required, Of the iuste Iudgement of God, who condemneth onely the giltie, and the transgres∣sors of his diuine lawe, and commaundements. Forasmuche then, as no man is free, from the iudgement of God, and punishmentes, namely, sicknesses, aduersities, and at the laste death it selfe: which do all fal in, by reason of sinne: (that is to say) for transgression of the law of God: who doth not heereby easily perceiue, and with∣out doubt concludeth, that al men are giltie, and transgressours of the law of God, so that by the workes of the Law they can attaine no righte∣ousnesse? The fourth argument is taken, Of the con∣trarietie of the Lawe, and the nature of man. For, the lawe is Spirituall, but the nature of man is Carnal, which thing Paul proueth Rom. 7. where he saith: VVe knowe that the lawe is spirituall, but I am carnall solde vnder sinne: that is to say, I am
so subiect vnto Sinne, that I am neuer so free from it, that I may fulfill the spirituall lawe of God: but I giue thankes vnto God, by IESVS CHRIST, which for my sake hath aboun∣dauntly perfourmed all that, which I my selfe coulde not perfourme. This argumente Paule handleth at large, in the Chapter euen now ci∣ted of vs. The first argument wherby it is prooued, that no mortall man can fulfill the lawe of God, The voyce of GOD himselfe doth offer vs, in Moses, the Psalmes, and the Prophetes, and so foorth in the whole Euangelicall, and Apostolical Scrip∣ture. Genes. 6. GOD saw, that the mallice of man was greate vpon the earth, and all the thoughtes of his hearte were alwayes bente vnto euill. Iob. 9. I know for a truth, that it is so, that manne shall not bee iustified in the sighte of GOD, if hee would contende with him, hee shall not bee able to aunswere him one for a thousande. And a litle af∣ter Iobe sayth of himselfe, If I would iustifie my selfe, my mouth will condempne mee. Psalm. 14. They are beecome corrupt,Verse. 2. and abho∣minable in their dooings, there is none which doth good, no, not one. The Lorde looked downe from Heauen vpon the children of men, that hee might see if any did vnderstand, and inquire after GOD. They haue all gone out of the way, they are alto∣geather become vnprofitable, there is not one that dooth good, no, not one.
Psalm. 130. If thou, Lorde, shalte marke our iniqui∣ties, (O LORDE) who, may abide it? For this cause Dauid, in the 143. Psalme, prayeth on this man∣ner: Enter not into Iudgement with thy seruaunt O LORDE, for none lyuinge shalbee found righte∣ous in thy sight. Poruerb. 20. VVho can say my heart is cleane, I am cleare from sinne? Esaye. 64. VVee are beecome vncleane all the sorte of vs, and our righteousnesse is as a steyned Cloath: VVee haue all fallen awaye as a leafe, and our iniquities haue, as the winde, snatched vs a∣way. CHRISTE in the thirde of Iohn sayth: That which is borne of the fleshe, is flesh. Paule. Rom. 3. VVee haue shewed (causes beeing rendred) that both Iewes, and Greekes are all vnder sinne. Ephe. 2. VVee are by nature the Children of wrath. Out of theese now recyted, and many o∣ther testimonies of the Scripture, it is many∣festlye conuinced: That no mortall man can fulfill the Law of GOD. The sixte Argument of this our asseuerati∣on is set downe by Paule, to the Galathians. Chap. 2. In these woordes: If righteousnesse come by the Law: then CHRIST dyed in vayne. For, Christe came into the worlde, to fulfill the Lawe, which was impossible for all menne in the whole world to perfourme: But as many
as beeleeue in him, to them shalbee imputed the righteousnesse of the Lawe, which, Christ, in his owne person, hath doone, and obtey∣ned. Thus I haue prooued, by sixe moste firme, and euident Argumentes, the opinion of the Papistes to bee false, who, in teachinge, writing, and declayming, dare affirme, against their owne conscience, that, man is able to ful∣fill the lawe of God, and so, by woorkes, to bee reputed righteous in the sight of GOD. AMONGEST THOSE, which teache not rightly of the Lawe, they are to bee placed in the thirde roome, which doo graunte, that man can not in parte satisfie the Lawe of God: yet notwithstandinge hee may in many thinges perfourme obedyence to the Lawe. And ther∣fore (say they) by how much, the more stoare of good woorkes bee doone accordinge to the Lawe, by so much the greater shalbee mannes righteousnesse by the Lawe, and that which lacketh, is to bee borrowed by Prayer, of Christe. This opinion, although it sticke in manye, chiefely in politique menne, it is, notwithstan∣ding, false, and contumelious agaynst the sonne of God, our Lorde IESVS CHRISTE, who alone taketh away the sinnes of the world, and iustifyeth those which beeleeue in him. And, that this opinion also, was not the leaste cause of the castinge awaye the Iewes, Paule teacheth Rom. 10.
They (sayth hee) beeinge ignoraunt of GOD his rightuousnesse, and seeking to establish their owne righteousnesse: haue not been obedient to the righ∣teousnesse of GOD: for CHRIST is the ende of the Lawe, to iustifie all that beeleeue: (that is to say) whosoeuer beleeueth, hath that thinge which the Lawe requireth: namely, Righteousnesse, which Christe imputeth to the beleeuer. Like∣wise, Phillip. 3. Paule geueth a difference, bee∣tweene the righteousnesse of the Gospell, and the righteousnesse of the Law. The Righteous∣nesse of the Gospell, as the faythfull do obteyne: but the Righteousnesse of the Lawe, none can at∣teyne by his owne woorkes, Christe onely ex∣cepted. Besides this, no man can beginne any good woorke according vnto the Lawe, wherby hee may bee able to stande sure beefore the Iudge∣ment seate of GOD: beefore hee be made righ∣teous, through fayth in CHRIST. For, (as Paule witnesseth in an other place,) It is impossi∣ble to please God without fayth.Hebr. 11. Some woorcks (in deede) may bee doone, which amonge men haue a shewe of goodnesse, and which are also profitable for the life, and conuersation of man, in this world: but, that rightuousnesse should bee atteyned vnto by them, it is impossible: for, hee which offendeth agaynst one Commaun∣dement, hee is made giltye of all, sayth Iames: Iacob. 2.Neyther can any thinge please God, which is doone of him, which is not a member of Christ, and made righteous by the obedience of him.
For, as by the disobedience of onely Adam, wee are all made gilty of damnation: so all wee, as many as beleeue in Iesus Christ, are made righ∣teous, by the onely obedience of him. It is e∣uident therfore, that they doe erre, which wilbee made righteous, partly, by their owne woorkes and partely, by the merite of Christe, so, that by how much the more, a man doth abounde with good workes: hee may by so mutch the more boaste himselfe, to bringe of his owne, and to seeke at Christe, the reside we which are wanting. THOSE VVHOM I haue named in the in the fourth place, to erre about the doctrine of the Lawe, haue spronge from the Schoole of Mahomet. Mahomet, (to the ende, that he might the rather keepe his disciples and vnderlings addicted to his diuelishe subtilties:) did teache,Matth, 22. that euerye man was saued by the keepinge of that law, to which hee was a subiect: That is, If the Iewe did keepe his Ceremonies, and Circumcsiion: hee should by that his obedience, merite saluation. And if the Turcke, or Maho∣metist: (sayth hee) dooth keepe his law, by the same reason, hee also shalbe saued. So in like case, the Christian, obteyneth saluation, by the Law of the Gospell. Some politique men there bee, which are full stuffed with this wicked opinion, which neither rightlye consider the heauye weighte of sinne, nor the benefites of CHRIST. Agaynst all these, which in this manner, doe
seeke saluation, by their Lawe, to which they bee subiecte, in what place so euer they leade their lyues, I set theese playne woordes of the vnmooueable veritie. Iohn 3. Hee which beelee∣ueth in the sonne, hath eternall lyfe: but hee which beeleeueth not in the sonne shall not see lyfe, but the wrath of GOD abydeth vpon him. Of the thirde. THE THIRDE THINGE follo∣weth which I propounded concer∣ninge the Lawe: namely: to what ende, the lawe auayleth, and what ye true vse therof is: amonge menne chiefly in the Christian congregation? Wee haue hearde beefore, what the lawe requireth, and, that none is able to fulfill: It is therfore, third∣ly demaunded, what the vse thereof is? seeinge no man can fulfil it, nor any man, by the works therof, can obteyne righteousnesse in the sight of GOD. The vse of the Law is of three sortes: name∣ly, Externall, Internall, and Spirituall. Of the Externall (or outward) vse of the Lawe.
THE EXTERNAL, (or outward) VSE of the Law, is, by discipline to go∣uerne ye people, that in outward honesti of manners, they might liue quietly, according to the Law, and that they should not commit any heynous wickednes, openly, which is forbidden in the law of God. Here, Parents, Magistrates, Maysters, and Tutors, yea, and the Ministers of the woorde of GOD also, must dillygently take heede, that such as bee committed to their charge, doo liue, in outwarde honestye of life, soundly, and shamefastly. For, the law of GOD is therfore called, MORAL, bycause it is a cer∣taine common rule, according vnto which euery manne should direct, and frame his manners. FIRST OF AL, this externall discipline of the Law, is commaunded vnto parents, that with the same they may instruct their children, and keepe them, vnder outwarde honestye of manners. And, that they may the more easi∣ly bringe that thinge to passe, let them vse, doc∣trine, examples, quyet, and also seuere admo∣nitions, yea, and moreouer (if the matter so re∣quire) the rodde: which thinge whosoeuer shall not doo, let them looke for the iuste plagues of God, as despisers of the most seuere commaun∣dementes of GOD, which hath commaun∣ded Parentes, that they shoulde, (accordinge vnto the leuell of the Decalogus,) godlily, and honestly bring vp, and instruct their Children. First, let them vse doctrine, that is so say, let thē accustome their children (so sone as they can
speake, and vse reason) to learne thorowly, and with a memorable minde to recite morning, and eueninge all the partes of the Christian instruc∣tion. Moreouer they themselues should walke be∣fore their children, with their owne example of an honest led lyfe, so that the life of the parents may bee aunsweareable to the doctrine which they taught, which life, the Children might afterwardes follow. For, they which laboure with woords onely in the education of children, doo seeme, (in my iudgement) to doo very foo∣lishlye, and I can not tell, whether I may call this a teachinge, or rather a hindering of them. For that thinge which by teachinge, by their woord, they buylde vp: the same through euill lyuinge; by their deedes, they pull downe. And what a sincke of myschiefes doo followe hereof, as well in the ecclesiasticall, as in the politicall estate, who is it, which seeth not, and hath dai∣lye experience. Besides this, parentes should somtime, vse gentiller woordes vnto their Chil∣dren, that by them, as by entisementes, their mindes might the more easely, bee allured, and stirred vp to the dueties of vertue. But if the children will not obey the fatherly admonitions, here the parentes must prouoke them with more seuere speach, & countenaunce, and with wisedome, and grauitye forewarne them, what punishments for their disobedience, they shall at the length susteyne. Fiftlye, when as the parentes, can (neyther
by gentle, or sharpe admonitions) profitte any thing at all, and that no hope of amendment of manners is seene in the Children: here at the length as the last meane of the fatherly reme∣dy, the rod is to bee added. With the same they shall correcte them, when they accustome them∣selues to swearing, lying, theeuing, filthy, or, by any wayes, vnhonest talkinge. For Syrach sayth Chap. 30. Hee that loueth his Childe, doth often mooue the rodde toward him: that in the last dayes of his life hee may reioyce. And Salom. Pro. 23. VVithholde not discipline from the childe: for if thou strikest him with the rodde, hee shall not die: strike him with the rod, and thou shalt delyuer his soule from Hell. They which doo ouermuch cocker their chil∣dren, and winckinge at euery of their faultes, do suffer them to liue as they list: are to bee estee∣med the authors of their destruction. Pontanus sheweth, that a certayne wanton beeing spilled, through to much licentiousnes graunted by the Mother, at the length (beeing of ripe age) was, (for a heynous offence committed) adiudged to dye: when hee was brought by the tormentor to the place of punishmente, hee, with a lowde voyce, mournefully vttered these woordes: Thinke not (O ye beeholders) this tormentor to haue brought me to this so infamous a kinde of punishment, but rather mine owne Mother. It standeth Parentes therfore greatly vpon, to accustome their Children, to direct the course of their life, according to the leuell of the Decalogus.
By this meanes they shall make a way of more easy instruction for those, to whose fidelitye, and discipline, they shall afterward committe their children. This outwarde discipline of Moses lawe, is likewise committed to the Magistrate: For Paule calleth the Magistrate, The Minister of GOD,Rom. 13. to the promoting of goodnesse, and to the punishing of euill. And forasmuch as Ma∣gistrates are ordeyned of God: therefore they are bound to set forwarde the glorye of GOD, and to turne backe, whatsoeuer thinges are a∣gainst God: as far forth as apperteineth to the outward conuersation of men. The Magistrate is also called, a keeper of both lawes, bicause he should with a diligent care, conteyn his subiects vnder an honest discipline of māners, according to the Decalogus: and also trade ouer the course of his owne life in such sorte: that hee may be a patterne, and a glasse, into which his subiects li∣uing godly may looke into. Hee must also haue a diligent care, that his positiue lawes, and al his decrees may agree with the Decalogus, and bee as walles, and fortresses of the same. The Ma∣gistrate should moreouer punishe, the manifest transgressions of the lawe diuine: as are, blas∣phemings of GOD, Idolatries, periuries, vsual swearings, contempt of the woord of God, diso∣bedience, murthers, Adulteries, lying, false wit∣nesse bearing, theftes, and such like vices, which fight directlye against the woord of GOD: so, that if the Magistrate neglect his office in these
thinges, hee becommeth partaker, and giltye of all those offences, the not punishment of which hee hath graunted vnto others. There is tolde an Historye, of a certaine murtherer, which had slayn seuen men, whē hee was perforce brought vnto the Law, and was set beefore the Iudge∣ment seate, & accused of manslaughter, answere was made, that hee onely, had killed but one onely man, the other sixe the Maiestrate had killed, which did not punish that first murther in him. And verely the Magistrate is gilty before God, whē hee punisheth not such as stubbornly breake the law of God, & by his giuing of liber∣ty, hee oppeneth a window to others to offend. It is an vnmercifull pitty, to spare one, with the losse, and destruction of many. To the bringers vp of youth, this same care, doth also belong, that they should instruct those which are committed to their discipline, in such sorte, by doctrine, by example, by often admoni∣tions, and corrections, that in their outwarde manners, nothing might be seene, out of square, or contrary to the law of GOD. Which thing if they neglect to do, they sin against God, against the parents of the children, and the whole com∣mon wealth, neither shall they (for euer) beare this punished. For if (by right) hee bee hanged, which stealeth an Oxe, or a Cow from another: how much more is he worthy of a thousād hang¦ings, which committing this kinde of thefte, far more greeuous: doth vnfaythfully instruct the youth, vpon good trust committed vnto him.
Tutors, or gouernours also, which are in the steede of parentes, should wholy frame them∣selues, according to the rule, prescribed beefore to parentes. Therfore, they should not onely haue a regarde and studious care to keepe the goods of their pupilles, which fall to them by way of heritage: but they should haue a special care, that they might bee well, and honestly in∣structed, knowing, that they themselues, are as streightly bound, before the iudgement seate of GOD, by the promise which they made to the parentes of those children, as if they had coue∣naunted with God himselfe, that they would bee faythfull tutors, and patrones of those pu∣pilles. For this cause, GOD calleth himselfe, a father of the fatherlesse, and a defender of the Widdowes. But what is doone at these dayes by the common sorte of tutors, is euidente to all men, and the miserable pupilles, and widdowes (alas for sorow) to their great greefe haue expe∣rience. Last of all also, the Ministers of the woorde of GOD, are bound, to exhort their hearers to outward honesty of lyfe according to the law of God, by doctrine, examples, by admonishments togeather with chastisements set beefore them, as Christe himselfe did, and the holye Apostle Paule. But if they shall lay aside this due care of their duety, and deceiptfully doo the businesse of the Lorde, they shal not escape the iust iudge∣mente and punishmente, in that laste day of the Lorde. But how manye may wee see now a
dayes, which follow that verse of the Poet. The rauening Crow, is pardoned still: The simple Dooue, susteynes much yll. When as notwithstanding, God would haue thee to respecte the person of no man: so that thou bee moderate, after the example of most excellēt Nathan: It is better for the Minister of the woord of God, with Iohn, to bee beheaded: then with Herode to bee feasted: for there ought to bee had greater regarde heere, to the glory of God, and the saluation of man, than to our owne liues, and commodities. Let these things suffise to bee spoken, touchinge, the externall vse of the Lawe, and how farre the same stret∣cheth. There bee foure most weighty causes why, this outwarde discipline should bee exercised: First: The commaundement of GOD. Secondly: That the punishmentes might bee auoyded. Thirdly: That wee might liue peaceably, and quietly amongest our selues. Fourthly: That the same might bee an In∣struction, makinge vs the more apte, to heare the healthsome doctrine of ye Gospel of IESVS CHRISTE. Of the Internall (or inwarde) vse of the Lawe.
AS THE FIRST VSE OF THE LAVV, is externall, and concerneth the societie of man, so, that whosoeuer expresseth, in outwarde conuersation, in woord, and deede, the letter of the Lawe, is Iudged of the people, to bee good, and honest: so, the seconde vse of the Lawe is, INTER∣NALL in the heart, and Conscience of man, that hee might bee staied before the Iudgement seate of GOD, and render a reason, whether with all his power hee hath fulfilled the lawe of God, or no? Here, if hee can boast of the fulfil∣ling of the Law, which is impossible for all men, (Christe onely excepted:) hee may then vnder∣stand, that vnto him belongeth, blessinge, and mercy vnto thousandes, accordinge to the pro∣mise annexed to the Lawe: but if hee perceyue himselfe to bee a transgressour of the Law: hee heareth the vengeaunce, and iudgement of God propounded agaynst him, vnto the thirde, and fourth generation. Deut. 27.Likewise, hee heareth: Cursed is euery one which fulfilleth not whatsoeuer things are written in this booke of the Lawe.Gala. 3. This sentence was first giuen in Paradise, and moreouer, in manifeste woordes expressed by Moses. Besides this, the conscience of each man confirmeth the same, and in like manner, all the calamities of this life, and at the last, death it selfe prooueth the same: Lastly, the eternal tor∣mentes of Hell shal punish as many, as shal not be deliuered, by our Lord IESVS CHRIST.
Caine, when hee weighed his sinne in an euen Ballance according to the Law, sayde:Gen. 4. My ini∣quitie is greater, than may be forgiuen. The same thinge befell vnto Saule also, despairinge,1. Reg. 31. and throwinge himselfe into eternall damnation. But Dauid when hee examined his deed, by the Lawe, and knewe his sinne, sayde: If thou (O Lorde) shalt marke what is doone amisse: O Lorde who shall abide it? But there is mercye with thee,Psalm. 130. therfore shalt thou bee feared. Manasses, likewise, Mary Magdalene, and the Theefe vpon the Crosse, confessing their sinnes, repented, and did flye to the mercy of GOD. And thus wee see, what the INTERNALL (or inward) VSE OF THE LAVV is, name¦ly, to examine the deedes of our liues, by euery precept of the Law of GOD, &, as often as we finde our selues to haue offended: so often wee should holde for a suretie, that the curse of the Law, and the punishmentes of God his anger, are denounced against vs. What counsayle shall wee take in this case? onely two wayes are set beefore vs: the one, by desperation, to eternall death, and malediction: the other, by the throne of grace, to eternall life, and benediction. THE THRONE OF GRACE is CHRIST IESVS, which reconcileth vs to his father, and giueth lyfe euerlasting. For hee which beeleeueth in Iesus Christe, obteyneth by him, both righteousnesse, and forgiuenesse of sinnes, by which righteousnes he entreth into euerlasting life. For, Christe hath fulfilled the
lawe, to iustifie all that beeleeue in him. This Fayth in Christe, is the foundation of our salua∣tion,Rom. 10. as all Christians do confesse in the Creed, when they say: I beleeue the forgiuenes of sinnes: that is to say, although my sinnes bee innume∣rable, and the greatnesse of Gods anger is in∣finite, and the punishmentes which fall in, by reason of sinne, be horrible: yet notwithstanding forasmuch as I am vnder grace, and not vnder the Law, I doo assuredly beleeue the forgiue∣nesse of sinnes, through the merite of the death and passion of Iesus Christe, who, not onely clenseth mee from all Sinne, by his precious bloud, but also imputeth vnto mee his righteous∣nesse: so, that the Lawe, with her sentence of condemnation, hath no right ouer mee at all. This fayth springeth out of the knowledge of the Gospell, which offereth to all the faythfull, GRACE in Iesu Christ: Wherfore Augustine sayth: Christe hath made our sinnes his: that hee might make his righteousnesse oures. Also, when Caine sayde:Gen. 4. My iniquitie is greater, then that I may bee forgiuen: Augustine answereth: Thou lyest Caine, for the mercy of GOD is greater, than the wretchednesse of all Sinners. This is that which Iohn sayth: Beholde the Lambe of GOD, which taketh away the sinnes of the world:Iohn. 1. Item: CHRIST is the propitiation, not only for our sinnes but also for the sinnes of the whole worlde. This fayth resteth in the obedience of GOD alone, and trusteth to no creature beside, eyther in hea∣uen, or in earth. But, concerning the nature of
fayth, it shalbee sayd more at large, beneath in the third doctrine: now let vs passe to the third vse of the Law. Of the spirituall vse of the Lawe. THE THIRDE VSE of the Law which is called SPIRITVALL, hath place in the regenerate, which beleeuing in Christe, haue obteyned (by the death, and intercession of Christe) remission of their sinnes, and are coun∣ted righteous in the sight of GOD, through the righteousnes of Christ, imputed vnto them. Where this faith is liuely, and voyde of hypocri∣sie, there withall dwelleth the holie ghost, which both worketh faith in the harts of men, by hea∣ring the healthfull doctrine of the Gospell, and regenerateth man, and stirreth him vp, to thank fulnesse towards God, whereby, it commeth to passe that man more esteemeth the will of God, and his commaundements, then all the goods of the whole world, how beawtifull, and preci∣ous so euer they may be esteemed, and continu∣eth in purposing good, keeping faith, and a good conscience. Then, because the man that is borne anew, would shew obedience vnto God,1. Tim. 1. he loo∣keth againe into the lawe, and setteth the same as an infallible rule before him, that he may vn∣derstand, what hee shoulde doe, and what hee
should leaue vndone, in ye right seruing of God. And although no man doth fulfill the Lawe by his owne woorks, yet notwithstanding, the obedience of the faithful pleaseth God, because he is set free from the malediction of the Lawe, and is,Rom. 8. (by the meanes of Christe) vnder grace. For so Paul saith: There is no damnation to them, which are in Iesu Christe, which walke not after the fleshe but after the spirit. This obedience is  onely acceptable vnto God, as who of his fatherly goodnes, cōmaun∣deth, & willeth the faithfull, to loue him, and, to exercise charity toward their neighbour: but hee also, addeth a promise of rewarde, that hee will recompence all good doinges, so, that he which shall giue a cuppe of colde water, in the name of Christe, shall not bee voyde of his reward. Hereof it commeth to passe, that examples do remayne of many of the godlye, which for their obedience perfourmed to God, through fayth: haue receyued, both spirituall, and corporall blessinges. But they which say, they do beleeue, and yet notwithstandinge, purpose not, to es∣chue sinne, but suffer them selues to bee ruled, by their owne corrupt concupiscence, and to bee drawne away of the desires of the fleshe: these treade not in the steppes of Abraham, which had leiffer kill his onely Sonne, and heyre, then by turninge backe, to commit any thinge, against the commaundement of God. They doo also, agaynst the doctrine of Sainct Paule, which com∣maundeth the beleeuers, and such, as with Abraham
would bee made partakers of the grace of God: that they should declare their fayth, by obedience towardes God, which hath set foorth his vnmeasurable grace towardes all men, in that, that hee hath deliuered his only begotten Sonne for them. But how wicked, and not to bee vttered is this argument, which some (bee∣inge gone forwarde vnto that state of vngodly∣nesse) dare vtter. VVee are Iustified, and made free, freely by fayth: to what end then shall we neede to apply our selues to doe good woorks? Hearken what Paule answereth to these peo∣ple, whose damnation (saith hee) is iust yea, truely,Rom. 3. Iust, forasmuch as they, by this errour, doe draw sinnes, vnto them selues (as dark cloudes). For, first, they are coutemelious against God: more∣ouer, they treade vnder their feete. the precious blood of Christ. Furthermore, they expell the ho∣lie ghost. Besides this, they reproue themselues of vntrueth. Lastly, by giuing offēce, they offend many and instraunging their mindes from the doctrine of the Gospel: obediēce them foreward to perdition, and destruction. First of all (I say) they are cōtumelious against God, which by his infinite mercy desireth to haue them free from sinne and condemnation. These ontruely, are to be compared, as it seemeth to me, to disobedi∣ent children, which hauing beene sometime; (for their manifolde malice & wickednesses) excluded frō all hope of successiō in their fathers riches: & yet notwithstāding, being againe becōe suppliāt,
and receiued into fauoure, haue returned backe againe to their former disposition, and contem∣ning their fathers commaundement, haue a∣gaine abused his goodnesse, and gentlenesse: what other thing heere shall the father put in practise, but to deale with them, by extreme iu∣stice, euen as their stubbernesse requireth? Moreouer, these do tread vnder their feete, the pricious blood of CHRIST, which was shed vpon the crosse, for the remission of sinnes. As though Christ, had therfore shed his blood, and stretched foorth his hands, armes, and feete, yea and his whole body imbrewed with blood vpon the gibbet of the crosse: that it might bee lawfull for vs to prostitute our hartes, our handes, our feete, and our whole body, to all filthinesse, wan∣tonnes, tyranny, vnrighteousnes, craftines, de∣ceipt, subtiltie, & (as I may speak in one word,) to all these together, to the which, the corruption of the world, and the lust of the flesh prouoketh vs: and yet notwithstanding in the meane time to say: CHRISTE is my sauiour, I will be∣leeue in him, and I will wholy cleaue vnto him. Who so in such sorte frameth his life, is altoge∣ther like to an vnfaithfull traitour, which doeth his businesse hypocritically, vnto his Lorde, whose wages he taketh: and in the meane time fauoureth his enemie, and laboureth by all the meanes that hee may to please him, and with his diligence to serue him. Euen in like manner, to boaste of faith in Christe, and in the meane time, to liue loocely and wickedly: what other
thinge is it, then to speake outwardely, those things with our mouthes, from which, both the heart it selfe, and all the studyes and actions of our whole life doe disagree. The Iewes boa∣sted them selues to be the sonnes of GOD, and the seede of Abraham: but what saide Christe to these things? Ye (saith he) are of the Deuil,Iohn. 8. because ye doe the woorkes of him, from which Abraham was farre of. It is therefore, an horrible thing, and ioyned with extreame daunger of damna∣tion, to cary Christe outwardly in our mouth, and priuely to hide his enemie in our heart, and with all our members aswell inwarde, as out∣warde, to frame our selues to obey him. What is this els (I say) then to spurne with our feete, the precious blood of Christe, & to set at nought his bitter passion, and death, which he suffered for our sinnes, not that there might lye open for vs a libertie to sinne: but, that we (by faith) re∣ceiuing forgiuenesse of our sinnes, might keepe him in our hearts: and denying the diuell with all his woorkes, namely, sinne, and iniquitie, should yeelde pure, and continuall obedience to this our onely Lord and redeemer. Thirdly, whosoeuer (by hearing of the health∣full doctrine of the Gospel,) are iustified by faith in CHRISTE, and doe againe fall back into manifest wickednesses, & are led and gouerned by the rule of the flesh, the world, and the Diuel, these doe make sorowfull the holie Ghoste, and expell him foorth of their heartes, and admit, and receiue into his place, the spirit of the deuil,
whose dwelling places they are become againe, as they were before. What other thinge is heere to be looked for, than that which Christe hath pronounced in the 12. of Matthewe. and in the 11. of Luke: VVhen the vncleane spirit is gone foorth of a manne, hee walketh through dry places seking rest, and findeth none, and then hee saith: I will returne into my house, whence I came foorth: and when he commeth, he findeth it swept, and gar∣nished: The goeth he, and taketh with him, seuen other spirits worse then him selfe, and they enter in, and dwell there, and the ende of this man becom∣meth worse, then the beginning. Heereby it may be easily perceiued, of howe great importaunce it is, either, to imbrace, and beleeue the worde of GOD: or, in our heart, and lyfe to decline againe shamefully from it, and to expell the holie Ghoste beeing sorowfull, from his habitation. Furthermore, whosoeuer doe boaste of fayth, and yet doe in the meane season liue wic∣kedly: doe moste impudently, reprooue, and conuince themselues of vntrueth. For inas∣much as they boast those thinges whiche they haue not, they are like vnto babling Thrasoos, which stick not with their mouthes to promise golden mountaines, when is very deede, they, of all other, be moste bare, and needie. The errour of these people is confirmed by this, that they thinke, that GOD doeth not more inwardely searche, and looke into the
heartes of men, then men them selues. But they are much deceiued: For man se∣eth onely the outwarde appearaunces, but GOD seeth not those thinges onely, but hee also looketh into the hearte it selfe. GOD, therefore can not bee deceiued, although thy heart thinketh otherwise then thy mouth spea∣keth. Therfore it is, that Iames requireth an agree∣ment of the woorde, and thought, so that the outwarde works of the life, should bee aunswe∣rable the faith, which is saide to be in the heart: euen as it is to bee seene in the example of Abraham. For it is certaine, that the hearte, and the woorkes doe agree, and are aunswerable one to the other: so, that wheresoeuer there is an e∣uill heart, the woorkes of the same must in like case, of necessitie followe euill, according to the rule of Christe: A good tree bringeth foorth good fruites. Wee see therefore manifestly, how impudent∣ly they reproue them selues of vntrueth, which boastinge of faythe, in the meane time neither haue, nor passe for good woorkes: dooing there∣in, as if a man had a Crowne set vpon his head, hee would therefore straightway bee esteemed, and called a King. These are such, whome in name onely, (but not in very trueth, and deede) a man may call Christians. To conclude: who soeuer boasteth of Christe, and will bee accoumpted, and called a
Christian, whiche is baptized, and bosteth his faith, and vseth the Supper of Lorde, and not∣withstanding doth in the meane season liue wic∣kedly: the same doth, by open offence, plucke away the mindes of many from the GOSPEL and is vnto them an occasion of damnation. Paule in the 1. Corin. 8. where he intreateth of those, which abuse Christian libertie in thinges lawfull to the offence of others, affirmeth, that they, by abusing of their knowledge, and Christi∣an libertie doe destroy the weake brother, for whome Christe dyed. Howe much more then shall he bee in faulte, which, through his corrupte wickednesse giueth occasion to others to think euilly, and to speake blasphemously of the moste holie Gospell, and Christian Religion? In Rom. 2. Paule accuseth the Iewes of the wickednesse of their life, and saith, that through them, the name of God is therefore blasphemed among the Gentiles. And in the 1. Timo. 6. He giueth commaunde∣ment to seruants, which are beleeuing, and re∣generate, that they should esteeme their may∣sters (not yet cōuerted, nor beleeuing) worthy of all honour, That the name of God, & his doctrine be not euill spoken of. And, that there shoulde come such people in the laste times, the holie A∣postle Peeter foretolde, in the 2. Pet. 2. Thou feest therefore, howe great the heuy∣nesse of this sinne is, whereby, a man is author, not onely of his owne destruction: and also gi∣ueth occasion to many, (with the hurte of their
owne saluation, and blaspheming of the name, and doctrine of God,) to refuse and contemne the GOSPELL of Christe. There is no doubte, but many amonge the Turkes, at this day, doe for this cause also, pur∣sue with hatred the Gospell of Christe, for that, they see Christian people to liue so loosely, and and wickedly. And who may doubt, that there be not many amongst the Papists, which per∣secute the Gospell of Christe, or nothing at all esteeme it: for that there bee so many, whiche boast of the Gospell, but so fewe which liue ac∣cording to the Gospell? But what should I say of those, which haue receiued with vs the pure doctrine of the Gospell, whose mindes are yet weake, and wauering? Doubtlesse, thou mayst see many of these, either to withdrawe their mindes, or, to preferre the manners, and times, vnder whiche wee liued in the Papacie: before the manners of this age, so wanton, and laciui∣ous. What other thinge thinkest thou would these doe, if any persecution, or chaunge of Reli∣gion should fall in, then, that (not vnwillingly) they would suffer Idolatrie, and the olde moc∣keryes of the Roomish Antichriste to be againe thrust vppon vs? But through whose faulte commeth this to passe, but only of those, which should be as leaders, and lightes vnto others, and according to the counsaile of Paule, shoulde in all things, (that is to say) in woorde, woorke, and life, set foorth the doctrine of the Lorde, and our Sauiour Iesu Christe. Heereof there∣fore
wee conclude, that it becommeth all those which beleeue in Christe, to set the Lawe of GOD before them, as the glasse of their liues, according vnto which, they should direct al their doings, to the glory of God, their owne commo∣ditie, and the edification of others: whereby it may be brought to passe, that the woorks of the deuil might be destroyed, and the woorkes of God might increase, to the glory of God the fa∣ther euerlasting, who of his owne meere mercy, through faith, without any our desertes, or works, hath saued, & regenerated vs, that we should liue vnto him, & walke in all good works. Ephe. 2. The thirde Doctrine. THE THIRD DOCTRINE whi∣che in the beginning of this little boke I proponed to bee explicated is, con∣cerning, Our Lord Iesu Christ, in the true know∣ledge of whom alone, consisteth life euerlasting, as he himselfe saith Iohn. 17. This is euerlasting life, to knowe thee to be the true God, and whome thou haste sent, IESVS CHRISTE. After that Christe had answered the Phari∣ses to the question propounded by them, to him: hee againe demaundeth of them, what they thought of Christe. This question he moueth, that occasion might be giuen to them, to searche the scriptures, out of which they might learne, what they should certainly holde, concerning Christ. Beholde therfore with how great diuer∣sitie
of minde these things are doone, on either part. The Pharises goe about this busines, not because they would learne, but with a desire to quarel, and to destroy: but Christ, by his questi∣on, intendeth this thing, that he might thorow∣ly bring them to the knowledge and possession of assured saluation. Let vs heare therfore, what is done on either side. Christe demaundeth: VVhat think yee of CHRISTE? whose Sonne is he? They fay vnto him,Matth. 22, The Sonne of Dauid: this answere they gaue, be∣cause they knew yt Christe should be borne of the seed of Dauid, according to ye promise made vnto him. But forasmuch as this suffised not to the true knowing of Christ: Christ, by this question inferreth another, by the which hee indeuoreth to lead them into a fuller knowledge of Christe. Therfore he saith: How then doth Dauid in spirit call him LORD? saying, The Lorde saide vnto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, vntill I make thine enemies the footestole of thy feet: If Dauid therfore call him (Lorde) how is he then his (Sonne?) As if Christ would say: The father is superiour to the sonne, and, the sonne must bee subiect to the father: And, the Lord is superiour to the seruant, and, the seruant must be subiect to his Lord: How then commeth it to passe, that Da∣uid acknowledgeth Christe to be his Lorde, to whome with all lowlinesse of minde, he wholly submitteth himself? Heere, if the Iewes had ad∣mitted to counsaile the holye Scripture decla∣ring of Christ, and had a little while considered
with them selues, what the office of Christe should be in the worlde: they had easily founde this answere: Christe in respect of the humane nature which he tooke vnto him, is, the sonne of Dauid: but, in respect of the deuine nature, he is the sonne of GOD. As farre foorth therefore, as appertaineth to the humane nature, he is in appearance base, and poore: but as farre foorth as appertaineth to the deuine nature, hee is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, to whome Dauid must giue place, and humbly bowe his knees: yea, of him only, and by this onely one, receiue forgiuenesse of sinnes, righteousnesse, and life euerlasting. Of this CHRISTE his Lord, Dauid spea∣keth in the Psalme. 51. where he saith: Thou shalt purge me with Hisope, and I shall be cleane, Thou shalt wash me, and I shalbe whiter then snowe. Likewise, Psal. 130. If thou Lord, wilt marke what is done amisse. O Lord who shal abide it? But there is mercy with thee, therefore shalt thou be feared. By this MERCYE (or peopitiation) hee vnderstandeth Christe, which after the humane nature should be borne of him: but after the de∣uine nature, very GOD, from euerlasting. After this manner, Christe, (by the question propounded by him) would reduce the Iewes, to the true knowledge of Christe, wherein (as I haue saide) consisteth eternall life, and the wis∣dome of saluation: as Paule teacheth, 1. Corin. 1. where he saith: For asmuch as the worlde, knewe not GOD, through wisdome: (that is to saye
through vnderstanding and reason, naturally ingraffed in man, by God): In the wisedome of God, (that is, in the meruelous woorks of God, which are wrought by him): It pleased God, by the foolishnesse of preaching, to saue those whiche beeleeue. For the Iewes require signes, and the Greekes seeke wisdome, but wee preache Christe crucifyed, vnto the Iewes an offence, and vnto the Greekes, foolishnesse: but vnto bothe Iewes, and Greekes which are called, we preache Christ, the po∣wer of GOD and the wisdome of GOD. Paule in this place disseuereth the wisdome of the worlde, or mans wisdome, from the wis∣dome of GOD. For in that, that GOD sent his sonne, borne of a woman, made bonde vnto the Lawe, and subiecte to moste bitter passion, and death: it seemed vnto men, not wisdome, but foolishnesse: forasmuch as GOD, by his omni∣potencie, could easily finde another way to saue mankinde. But it seemeth farre otherwise vn∣to God, yea, that which men esteemed foolish∣nesse, that GOD esteemeth and accompteth for wisdome. But, that wee may more fully vnderstande these things, let vs seek As farre as the holie scriptures set foorth the same vnto vs. the foundation of this the so wounderfull counsaile of GOD, where∣vpon we may builde safely. Although, GOD, if we consider the great∣nesse of his power, coulde doe whatsoeuer hee would: yet notwithstanding, it seemed good to him, to attempte nothing in this matter, but that whiche was agreeable to the iustice, and
glorye of his maiestie diuine, (that is to saye) that, whiche all Angels, aswell good as euill, and all people, yea, and all creatures shoulde acknowledge to bee in very deede, iuste, and praise worthy:Luke. 2. saying: Glory bee to GOD on hyghe. For, euen as any Kinge, or Tyrant, when he graunteth vnto one, that which hee hath ta∣ken away from another, may be said to play, the part, partely of an vniuste, and partely of a lybe∣rall man: Euen so, GOD, if vsing his power on∣ly, he had restored man, it had beene, on the one parte derogation to his Iustice: and on the other parte too muche had beene graunted to mercy: therefore it was needefull to finde suche a way to saue man, that these foure properties in GOD, (without the whiche GOD coulde not (BEE), or be called GOD), might stande together, and consent in the hyest degrees, namely, MOSTE HIGH, or PERFECT POVVER, PERFECTE RIGHTE∣OVSNESSE: PERFECT MERCIE, and PERFECT VVISDOME. Suche a secret purpose, pleaseth God therefore, That his onely begotten sonne should take vnto him mans nature, and dye: to the ende, that who so beleeueth in him may obtaine saluation, and life euerlasting. So, that if GOD had vsed his omnipotencie, and Iustice, hee had for euer con∣demned all men, who through their rebellion, had offended the eternall maiestie of God, and were therefore subiect, & giltie of eternall death,
and Hel. But what had then beene the praise of his mercy? Where then shoulde the glory of his wisedome haue had place? Man, without all fauour condempned, had perished: and the wis∣dome of GOD, of the ende of his counsaile, (whereby, hee had appoynted manne, beeing made according to his owne Image, to eternall saluation) had beene voyde, and frustrate. That nothing at all therefore might be de∣rogated, from the PERFECT IVSTICE of God. It pleased him, that euen as by the disobedience of one man, wee are all made gil∣tie: so by the obedience of one, many should be made righteous: God him selfe should bee sa∣tisfyed: and, wee beeing deliuered from guil∣tynesse, shoulde bee indowed with life euer∣lastynge. Heere also shineth foorth the PERFECT and great MERCIE of GOD, whiche so loued the worlde, that he would giue his owne onely begotten Sonne, that All which beleeue in him, should not perishe,Iohn. 3. but haue life euer∣lasting. Heere withall is also seene the PER∣FECTE POVVER OF GOD, in that, that by the death of his Sonne, hee hath o∣uercome Death, Hell, Sinne, and all the po∣wer of the Deuil. Heere also appeareth the PERFECTE VVISDOME of God: in this thinge cheefely, that by his Sonne, whi∣che is the naturall Image of him selfe, and co∣eternall with him: hee reneweth his owne I∣mage in vs, and giueth vnto vs eternall life,
wherevnto wee beeing in the beginning by his eternall wisedome apopoynted) hee hath crea∣ted vs. All which things are offered, with this con∣dition.1. Ioh, 3.36. IF VVE BELEEVE IN HIM. For so saith Iohn Baptist: He that beleeueth in the Sonne hath eternall life, but hee that beleeueth not in the sonne, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth vpon him. This is that wisdome of sal∣uation, which all the Prophets, Christe himself, and the Apostles, and their successors, haue he∣therto taught, and doe yet at this day teache: but the wise of this worlde, whome fortune fos∣tereth as it were in her bosome, haue the same in derision, and contemne it, to their owne dam∣nation. Forasmuch therfore, as the whole wisdome of the Church of Christe is founded in this on∣ly IESV CHRIST: I wil set downe, what euery one of vs ought to esteeme, and knowe of him, as many as desire to obtaine saluation by him. Which thing that it might the more com∣modiously be doone, these six poynts, with their questions and answeres, are to bee diligently considered. Firste, that IESVS the sonne of Marye, is, that promised Messias: (that is to say) CHRISTE. Seconde, That this CHRISTE is, very GOD, and, why it was needefull he should be GOD. Thirde, That this CHRISTE is, very Man, And, why it was needfull he should be Man. In the fourth place is, to bee considered in this
CHRISTE, the vnitie of Person, wherein, albe∣it there bee two natures, yet notwithstanding, not two persons, but one onely, and why it was needefull it should be so. Fiftly: That this CHRISTE is, the Sauiour of the worlde, and by what meanes he declareth him selfe to be the Sauiour of the worlde. Sixt: Howe we are made partakers of the benefites  of CHRISTE, and obtaine euerlastinge life, through him. ❧Of the firste point or Chapter. THE FIRST THING which I haue set downe concerning Christe,1. is, that IESVS the sonne of the vir∣gin Mary, borne in Bethlehē, is Christ, and that Sauiour, which God promised to Adam and Eue our first Parentes. The same thing all Christians doe beleeue, and with one minde confesse, when as in the articles of the Symbole we say: I beleeue in IESVS CHRISTE, the onely begotten sonne of GOD, which was conceiued by the holie Ghoste, borne of the virgin Mary, suffered vnder Pontius Pilate, &c. Of this our faith we haue this immoouable foundation, against the which, no not the gates of Hell are not able to preuaile: viz. Hee onely, (without all doubt, and truer than trueth it selfe, and so by the confession of all) is the true, and onely Messias, in whome all
the Prophecies of the Prophetes doe meete together, and to whome only agreeth, what soeuer hath beene foretolde touching the Messias, by the holie Prophets, Moses, and others. In IESVS the Sonne of the virgin Marie, the Prophecies of all the Prophetes doe meete together, and agree, to this IESVS alone, whatsoeuer hath beene foretolde touching the Messias, by the holie Prophets of GOD, Moses, and others. Ergo: Onely IESVS the sonne of the virgin Mary, is the true and onely Messias, that is to say, Christe, the Sauiour, and redeemer of the worlde. This is the foundation of the Christian Church, firme, and vnmoueable, whereof Au∣gustine speaketh on this manner. The stedfast∣nesse of faith is in this, that all those thinges which haue come to passe in Christ, were spoken of before. Of this foundation, Paule disputed with the Thessalonians (as it is written in the 17. Acts) three dayes together, and proued IESVS to be CHRIST, whome it behoued to suffer, and to rise againe from death, according to the scriptures. In which place Luke addeth, that a great multitude of the nobler sorte aswell men as women, did with great greedinesse receiue the gospel, dayly searching ye scriptures, whither those things were so or not, (that is to say) they cōferred together those things, which in Moses and the Prophetes were foretolde of Christe,
with all those things which came to passe in Ie∣su the sonne of Marye, and prooued in euery of those things, in both, a most iust agrement. And hereof it commeth, that whersoeuer in the histo∣ry of the Gospel, we reade any thing concerning Christ, it is alwaies added: So was it long before, foretolde of him. If therefore, we haue respect to the place, and time of his birth, to his mother, and to his miracles, to the ingratitude of the Iewes against him, to be short, to his death, re∣surrection, and ascention, and to the sending of the HOLIE GHOST accomplished in the day of Pentecoste, and to the state of the church of Christe, and so foorth, to the persecution, and discorde in the same: wee shall finde all these things to bee foretolde by the holie Prophetes of God, foure thousand yeeres back, before that Iesus was borne in Bethlehem. Touchinge whiche thinges, who so will knowe more, let him reade our Commentaryes vppon the 84. Psalme. I thought it good to note these thinges on this wise, breefely at the leaste, that euery one might haue occasion to conferre betweene themselues, the olde Testa∣mente, (that is to saye) the Prophetes: and the newe, (that is to saye) the Euagelicall Hi∣storye, of IESV CHRISTE: whiche thinge, who soeuer shall doe diligently, shall, not a little, strengthen his fayth, against the contempners of GOD, the Iewes, against the forsakers of the fayth, the Mahometistes, and to bee shorte, agaynste all Idolatrous
nations, yea, against mans owne reason, which cannot comprehend, this so infinite a benefite of Christe,1. Cor. 2.24 as Paule saith: The naturall man percei∣ueth not the thinges whiche are of GOD. Let vs stick fast therefore, with a firme faith vnto the word of God, and captiuing our reason, let vs yeelde vnto God this glory, that he is farre wi∣ser than all creatures, and that he is able to per∣forme his promises, albeit to our reason, it seeme otherwise. A certaine man saide wisely: That there is a greate strife, betweene FAITH, and REA∣SON, and that neither of them, will leaue of, or giue place, before that the eye of one of them is plucked out. Forasmuch therefore, as faith, hath her eye, of the woorde of God, and of the holy Ghoste: and, Reason hath her eye of the fleshly wisdome: euery Christian must indeuour with all study, and diligence, by the holy Scrip∣ture, & by feruent praier vnto God, so to streng∣then his faith: that with the same alone he may see, in the matter of saluation: and that the eye of Reason might bee shut vp, least it leade vs a∣way, from the fountaine of our saluation, that is, from our Lord Iesu Christe, our onely redee∣mer, and Sauiour. Let these thinges suffice to be spoken, in the first place, concerning Christe, whome I beseech with my whole heart, to illuminate vs with his holie spirite, and leade, and keepe vs in his veri∣tie. Amen.
Of the second Chapter. THE SECOND THING which I proponed concerning Christe our Medi∣atoure, and Sauiour, is, that hee is verye GOD, and why, it was needeful, that the Mediatour should be God. There bee ma∣ny euident, and firme testimonyes, whereby the diuine nature of our Sauiour is prooued. The first of which testimonies, is taken of the mani∣fest worde of God, in which, he is called GOD. The second is taken, of his diuine woorkes. The third, of the worship, which is deserued∣ly giuen vnto him, by all creatures. The fourth, of the vnited consente, and experience of the whole Church of Christe. FIRST, by the manifest testimonies of ho¦lie Scripture, it is prooued, that our Media∣tour, and Sauiour, is, true, eternall, and omni∣potent GOD. Esaie. 54. The Lord of hostes is his name, and thy redeemer, the holie one of Israel, shalbe called GOD of all the earth. Iere. 23. This is the name whiche they shall call him, IEHOVAH our righteousnesse. Psal. 6.8. IEHOVAH is his name, reioyce ye be∣fore him. Iohn. 1. In the beginning was the VVORDE, and the worde was with GOD, and GOD VVAS THE VVORDE. Heere, he calleth Christe, the worde of God, because the worde of God doth sounde of him.
Rom. 9. Of whome (according to the fleshe) Christe came, which is abooue all, GOD blessed for euer. 1. Iohn. 5. And wee are in the trueth, in his sonne, the same is very GOD, and life eternall. It is to be noted, that as often as Christe is called the onely begotten Sonne of GOD: so often he is prooued to bee very God together with the father, and the holie Ghoste: beeing three persons, in one diuine essence, euen as all Christians, according to the diuine manifesta∣tion, doe confesse, one God, and three persons of the Godhead. THE SECOND kinde of testimonies, wherby the deuine nature of our sauiour is pro∣ued, is taken, of his diuine works. For, these are the works of God alone, viz. to create, to quicken the creature, to conteine all thinges vnder the hand of his power, by his owne power to raise the dead againe, to see ye hearts of men, to heare the inward mournings, and desires of the heart of man, to be present euery where, and to be, at one, and the same time, in the hearts of all Chri∣stians. These diuine woorkes and properties, are in the holie Scriptures, attributed to Iesu Christe: wherefore, it is heereof rightly conclu∣ded, that he is true and essentiall God. This ar∣gument is of force, by this rule: VVhen soeuer a∣ny thing, is truely affirmed of some thing, and artri∣buted vnto it, which appertaineth to our nature on∣ly: then, of necessitie, the same nature must bee also attributed, vnto that same thing.
THE THIRD kinde of testimonies, wher∣by the diuine nature of the Messias is proued, is required of the honor, and worship, which is gi∣uen, and ascrybed to him, in the holie scripture. God saith in the Prophet: My Glorie (that is to say) my diuine honor, and worship, which is dewe to me alone, I will giue to none other. I onely, am that fountaine, from whence all good things doe flowe: I onely am hee whiche wipe out your iniquities: I onely doe iustifie, and sanctifie the people: I onely am the Saui∣our, in me alone all people should beleeue, and call vpon me alone: Let all creatures, Heauen, and earth, Angels, and men, honour me alone, yea, and whosoeuer are in Hell, let them bowe their knees vnto mee: Such honour, and wor∣ship which is dewe vnto GOD alone, is in the Scriptures attributed to our Lorde Iesu Christe. 1. Corinth. 1. Christe is made vnto vs of GOD, VVISDOME, RIGHTEOVSNESSE, SANCTIFICATION, and REDEMP∣TION, that hee whiche reioyceth, shoulde re∣ioyce in the Lorde, (that is to saye) in Iesu Christe. Hebru. 1. And let all the Angels of God wor∣ship him, (that is to say) Iesus Christe. Stephen Actes. 7. sayeth: Lorde Iesu receiue my spirite. 2. Thessalonians. 2. Our Lorde Iesus Christe, and GOD, and our Father, whiche hath loued vs,
and giuen vs eternall consolation, and good hope, comforte your hearts in grace, and strengthen you in all good saying, and doing. Paule likewise in all his Epistles, wisheth to them to whome he writeth, Grace from our Lord Iesu Christe. 2. Cor. 13. He saith: The Grace of our Lorde Iesu Christe, and the loue of GOD, and the felowship of the holie Ghoste, bee with you all. THE FOVRTH KINDE of testimo∣nyes, whereby Christe our Lorde is prooued, verye GOD, is, the vnited consente, of the Christian congregation, and the sure experience in the harts of all those, which with a true, and liuely faith, doe imbrace Christe, our Lord, and Sauiour. Athanasius in his Simbole, speaketh on this manner: This is the Catholike faith, that we wor∣ship one GOD in trinitie, and trinitie in vnitie: Neither confounding the persons, nor deuiding the substance: For, there is one person of the Father, and another of the Sonne, and another of the holie Ghoste: But, the Godhead of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holie Ghoste is one, the glory equall, the maiestie coeternall: Such as the Father is, such is the Sonne, and such is the holie Ghoste: The Father vncreate, the Sonne vncreate, and the holie Ghoste vncreate: The Father incomprehensible, the Sonne incom∣prehensible, and the holie Ghost incomprehensible:
The Father eternall, the Sonne eternall, and the holie Ghoste eternall: And yet they are not three eternals, but one e∣ternall: As also there be not three vncreated, nor three in∣comprehensible: but one vncreated, and one incom∣prehensible. Likewise, the father is almightie, the Sonne al∣mightie, and the holie Ghoste almightie: And yet, they are not three almighties, but one almightie: So the father is God, the Sonne God, and the ho∣lie Ghost, God: And yet, not three Gods, but one God. So the Father is Lord, the Sonne is Lord, and the holie ghoste is Lorde: And yet not three Lords, but one Lorde. For, like as wee are compelled by the Christian veritie, to acknowledge euery person by himselfe, to be God, and Lorde: So, are we forbidden by the Catholike Religion, to say there be three Gods, or three Lordes. The Father is made of none, neither created, nor begotten: The Sonne is of rhe Father alone, neither made, nor created, but begotten: The holie Ghoste is of the Father, and of the Sonne, neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding. Therefore, there is one Father, not three Fathers, one Sonne, not three Sonnes, one holie Ghoste, not three holie Ghostes.
And in this Trinitie, none is afore, or after other, none is greater, or lesse then other, But the whole three persons, are coeternall to∣gether, and coequall. Agreeable to this in all poyntes, is the con∣fession of the vniuersall Church, set foorth in the Nicene Creede: I beleeue in one GOD, the father almightie, maker of Heauen, and Earth, and of all thinges visi∣ble, and inuisible: And, in one Lorde IESVS CHRISTE, the onely begotten Sonne of God: begotten of the father be∣fore all worlds: GOD of GOD, Light of Light, ve∣ry God, of very God, begotten, not made, beeing of one substance with the father, by whome all things were made, &c. That addition to the Himpnes, now vsed ma∣ny yeeres in the church of Christe: (Glory bee to the father, and to the Sonne, and to the holie Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now, and euer shalbe world without end:) proueth the same thing. Likewise, the whole Greeke, & Latine church, for continuall agrement sake, do vse this Greek Prayer:Lord haue mercy. Christe haue mercy. . And, by this little forme of prayer, Christian people, doe confesse one GOD, and three persons of the Godhead, therefore all whiche are truely Christians, beeing taught by their owne expe∣rience: doe knowe, and confesse, Iesus Christe, to be very, and omnipotent GOD. For, in the time of their praying, they feele the presence, and power of God, by whiche he comforteth them,
and, not onely sealeth the trueth of his most ho∣lie Gospel in their hearts: but also maketh them couragious, that they may boldely triumph o∣uer Death, Sinne, Hell, the Deuill, and all his bondslaues, and members. Of this thing, many examples of holy Mar∣tyres are extant, of whome euen many noble matrons, and virgins, and innumerable others, dyd, with greater reioysing, and desire couet to dye for the name of Christe: than to flowe, and abound, with the delicates, honours, riches, and pleasures of this world. But, from whence pro∣ceedeth this so great fortitude of minde, and re∣dines to receiue punishments: but from that on∣ly efficacie, of the power of Iesus Christ, which hath manifested his diuine strength, present in them. Let vs in like manner at this day keepe fast, this same Iesus Christe, whiche will alwayes be at hand, so that with a sure faith, wee craue his ayde, earnestly, and feruently. And, thus, by sure, and euident testimonies, I haue shewed, that IESVS CHRISTE our Sauiour is VERY GOD. Now let vs see, why it was needeful, the me∣diatour should be GOD? That it was neces∣sary, that the Messias, and our Sauiour should bee GOD, there bee two moste weightie causes. The first is: The greatnesse of the euil, wher∣with the nature of man, was pressed downe, which, by any creature, could not be taken away.
The other is: The weakenesse, or infiirmitie of the creatures, to the restoring againe of those good things, which were lost, by sinne. Of these two causes, I will speake somewhat, that the bene∣fites of Christe towarde vs, might the more shine forth, and that we may be stirred vp ther∣by, to the honouring of his name, with due thankfulnesse of our whole life, and minde. THE GREATNES OF THE EVIL, wherwith the nature of man was oppressed, is perceiued in foure things cheefely: namely, In the VVEIGHT OF SINNE, In the IVSTICE OF THE ANGER OF GOD: In the POVVER OF DEATH: and in the MOSTE CRVEL TYRAN∣NIE OF THE DEVILL. THE VVEIGHT OF SINNE was greater, then that any finite, or bounded pow∣er, (such as is the power of Angels, and men) might beare the burthen thereof. For, in asmuch as ye guiltinesse was infinite, by reason of the infinite good whiche was offended, namely GOD, whose maiestie was offended, by the sinne of our first parentes:Ye iusticiari∣es, and merit∣mōgers, note your owne abilities, and the sweetnes of your doc∣trine in this article. It was needefull, that this sin, should, either with infinite paines, be punished, according to the rule of the deuine Iustice: or els that satisfaction, to the deuine iu∣stice, should be made for the same. But, because this satisfatiō must be the price of infinite good∣nesse, and equiualent to the same: it coulde not, by any creature, no neither by all creatures to∣gether, be accomplished. It was needfull there∣fore,
that the clenser of sinne, should bee GOD: for onely GOD, as he is infinite, so, he is able to abolish, and ouercome infinite euill. THE IVSTICE OF GODS ANGER required a proportion of reuengement, accor∣ding to the offence. Forasmuch therefore, as the offence was infinite, the anger was also in∣finite: which, the first creature, was not able to pacifie, nor sustaine: wherefore it was needeful, that the Mediatour, which shoulde pacifie the anger of GOD, should bee GOD. Of this matter Paule Rom. 1. speaketh thus:Rom. 1. The anger of GOD is reuealed from Heauen, vpon the vngod∣lynesse of all men, &c. That these things could not be taken away, without the mediatour, this saying of Iohn Bap∣tist, in Iohn. 3. teacheth: Hee which beleeueth not in the Sonne, the wrath of GOD abided vpon him. And, that this anger of GOD is vnmeasura∣ble, and infinite, by reason of sin (in which these euils doe concurre, namely, contempt of the di∣uine maiestie: proude rebellion against the lawe of God, vnwoorthy of the Image of God, wherevnto man was created, defilyng, follow∣ing of Sathan the enemie of God, filthy decly∣ning from the tents of God, to the Deuill, and intollerable ingratitude) is knowen by the pu∣nishments of our first Parentes, by the punish∣ments following vpon all ye posterities of Adam, by the threatnings of God, by the calamities wherewith mankinde is kept vnder, by the de∣uils tyranny against man, by the tokens of the
anger of God in Heauen, in earth, in the sea, by the greatnes of the paines euerlasting, whiche they shall sustaine, which are not conuerted: to be short, by the infinite price paide for the redee∣ming of the paines for sinne. Who seeth not heere, that it was impossible that the anger of GOD could haue beene taken away, but by a Mediatour, whose power should be infinite? THE POVVER OF DEATH was greater, than that it might be ouercome, by any creature, insomuch that Plinie saide, (how beit falsely) that it was not possible vnto God to raise vp the dead. Now forasmuch, as the chee∣fest office of ye mediatour is TO DESTROY DEATH, it was needfull that he should excell with a power diuine, whereby, as to giue life, so he might be able to abolish death: For with him no word is impossible. THE MOST CRVEL TYRANNY OF THE DEVIL, (vnder which mankinde was holden captiue, for sin) was also to be sup∣pressed by ye mediator. But how impossible this was to the nature of man, the history of the worlde, with the experience of all people doth testifie: wherfore it was needful, the mediatour should be GOD, which might suppresse the ty∣ranny of the Deuill, by his owne power. Heere∣by it is euident, that to the taking away of the greatnesse of the euil, wherwith mankinde was oppressed: it was requisite, that the Mediatour should be GOD. Now heerewithall let the greatnesse of the
loue, in the euerlasting father, the sonne, and the holie ghost, towards mankinde, bee considered:A heauenlye and ioyfull meditation. The Father spared not his owne sonne, but would haue him subiect vnto paines, that hee might deliuer vs from euerlasting paines.Iohn. . The Sonne willing, and obedient to the father, is made a sacrifice, deriuing the guiltinesse of sinne into himselfe. The holie Ghoste, himselfe will dwell in the hearts of the reconciled, and kindle in vs motiōs agreeing to the wil of God. These things wil stir vp in vs faith, Inuocation, and thankfulnesse towards God, and will defende our mindes against the terrour of death, against the tyrannie of the deuil, yea, against all things, which are bent to ouerthrowe the hope of our saluation, which we haue in our Lord, and Sa∣uiour IESV CHRISTE. THE SECONDE CAVSE, why it was needefull, that the Mediatour should bee GOD, is, THE VNABILITIE, AND VVEAKENESSE OF THE CREA∣TVRE to the restoring againe of those good things, which through sinne we haue loste. And albeit in this one woorde of, (THE IMAGE OF GOD,) these good thinges be comprehen∣ded: yet many things to the reparation of the same, are necessarilie required, whiche Paule. 1. Cor. 1. reconeth vp, where he saith: CHRIST is borne vnto vs of GOD, VVISDOME, RIGHTE∣OVSNESSE: SANCTIFICATION: and RE∣DEMPTION, that he which reioyceth, should re∣ioyce in the Lord,
These foure kindes of good thinges, no crea∣ture, or finite power was able to restore againe vnto men: as we shal se of euery of these things in order. FIRST, therefore, the Mediatour must re∣store VVISDOME, not such as that of the worlde is, whiche is shut vp within certaine li∣mites: but such as is hid from the Princes of this world: which wisdome, is, of Zachary defi∣ned to be:Luke. 1.77.78. The knowledge of saluation, for the re∣mission of sinnes, by the bowels of the mercy of our God. Of this wisdome speaketh the Euan∣gelist Iohn in his first Chapter, when he sayth: No man hath seene God at any time: but the sonne which is in the bosome of the father, he hath decla∣red him vnto vs. But some man may saye: Coulde not God haue reuealed this wisdome vnto men, by An∣gels, and Prophets? I aunswere, It is one thing, to giue, and to teach wisdome as Mini∣sters: and another thing to bee the wisedome, (that is to say) effectually to bring to passe, that the harts of men may receiue,Or the wis∣dome of sal∣uation. sauing wisdome. The voice of man striketh the eares of the bo∣dy: but the Sonne of God, which is the wise∣dome it selfe, of God, replenisheth the minde of man, with the wisdome of saluation. For, the worde of the Prophets, and of other Ministers of the woorde of God, doth then at the length, bring fruite: when as God, by the worde, ope∣neth the hearte, and instilleth the seedes of true wisdome, whiche thing doubtlesse is not in the
power of any creature, but of the Creatour a∣lone: whereof it followeth, that the Mediatoure must be GOD. SECONDLY, The Mediatour must restore againe RIGHTEOVSNESSE. For, without per∣fect righteousnesse, no man may come foorth in∣to the sight of GOD. But no man is able to giue, Perfect Righteousnesse, which should be suf∣ficient for all people, except GOD. For, that man might be perfectly righteouse before God, two things are required: Of which, the first is, To be set free from vnrighteousnesse, and sinne, which euils men bring with them into the world. The other: To bee indowed and garnished, with a full obedience of the lawe of GOD, which is the mea∣sure of righteousnesse, whiche is before God a∣uaylable. Of the former we haue spoken before, where we shewed, the enormitie of sinne, and the iu∣stice of the angre of GOD. Touching the o∣ther, which is: To be indowed, and garnished with righteousnesse, whereby the lawe of GOD is satis∣fyed: It is euident, that the righteousnesse of no creature, forasmuch as it is (finite): can bee sufficient to saluation, for infinite numbers of people, which thing doubtlesse in the Mediatour is required. For, as hee must with a sufficient sacrifice of clensing, make satisfaction for sinnes, and so take away all guiltinesse: So must hee, by his owne obedience towarde the lawe, set all those righteous in the sight of God, whiche be∣leeue in him. For so Paule saith: Him whiche
knew no sinne,2. Cor. 5. he made sinne, (that is to say, God cast vpon him the guiltinesse of all sinners, that he should suffer and die for them:) that we might be made the righteousnesse of GOD in him (that is to say) that the righteousnesse of him, might be imputed to vs, for righteousnesse in the sight of GOD. Therefore in another place Paule saieth:Rom. 10.4. Christe is THE ENDE OF THE LAVVE, to saue all those whiche beleeue in him. Heereby it may be seene, that the Medi∣atour must of necessitie be VERY GOD. In the third place, followeth, SANCTI∣FICATION, which the Mediatour must bring. Which thing, forasmuch as no creature can per∣forme the Mediatour must needes bee GOD. For it is the propertie of God alone, to giue the holie Ghoste the sanctifier, without whome our Sanctification, can not bee broughte to passe. Moreouer, forasmuch as SANCTIFI∣CATION, is set against SINNE, and in Sinne are two things, namely, the formalitie, as the guiltinesse: and the materiall parte, as the corrupt qualities, and actions? the Sanc∣tification must be also double, one, whiche is set against guiltinesse, whiche is, The cleansing of sinne, by the blood of Christe: the other, whiche is set against the corrupt ualities and actions, which is, aswell the separation of man from the prophanitie of the nations, by the morti∣fying of the flesh, which is doone, by resisting
corrupt cogitations, affections, and desires of the flesh, and, with the whole power, abstay∣ning from euill woorkes: as also, the ioyning together of man with GOD, by the quicke∣ning of the spirite, by obeying vnto God, and by following purenesse of the minde, of affec∣tions, and innocencie of the whole life: breefe∣ly, that man, might renounce the Deuill, and and his woorkes, and cleaue with the whole heart vnto GOD alone. This Sanctification, is also called of Paule Phillip 3. (SPIRITVALL CIRCVM∣CISION.) VVe (sayeth hee) are Cir∣cumcision, whiche serue GOD in the Spirite, and reioyce in Christe, and haue no confidence in the flesh. Therefore, Spirituall Circumcision,Spirituall circumcision what it is. is a cutting awaye of the truste of the flesh, after whiche succeedeth a reioycing in CHRIST, and a pure desire to worship GOD. And this, true∣ly, is that SANCTIFICATION, which GOD, and Man, our Mediatour, doth bring. THE FOVRTH GOOD THING, which our Mediatour should restore vnto vs, is PERFECTE REDEMPTION. This Redemption requireth, firste, a con∣tinuall presence of the Mediatoure, in the Churche, (or Congregation:) (that is to say) in all the godly euery where dispearsed, through out the whole worlde. But who can bee toge∣ther, and alwayes present, in so many places, excepte he bee GOD?
Secondly, it requireth, a preseruation of the congregation (that is to say) that the Mediatour should be a keeper, or preseruer, not onely, of the whole Church, but also, of euery member of the same, against infinite subtilties, and lyinges in waight, of the Deuil, and man. Thirdly: it requireth that, the Mediatour should looke into the heartes of men, least hee should be deceiued, by the outwarde disguising of hypocrites. Now, forasmuch as it is the pro∣pertie of GOD onely, to looke into the hearts of men, and to beholde the inwarde secretes of their affections: surely, the Mediatour must of necessitie be GOD. Furthermore, to the office of the Mediatour, this also appertaineth: that he doe euery where, heare the gronings of such as doe call vpon him, whiche, doubtlesse is the pro∣pertie, of the diuine power alone. Fiftly: it requireth, that, the Mediatour, in the last day, should rayse vp, all the deade: whiche work, is aboue the powers of all creatures. Yea, all the creatures of God, by their owne power, are not able to rayse vp, a deade Flye againe, muchlesse all people, whose bodyes haue beene by diuerse meanes, and in diuers places scatte∣red abrode: But, forasmuch as the Mediatour must doe this, and that in the twinckling of an eye, he must of necessitie, be GOD. Sixtly, and lastly, it requireth, that, the Me∣diatour doe giue to those whiche are raysed vp, (which in the true faith haue departed this life) eternall life, perpetuall glorie, and conformitie
with GOD. But who can bring this to passe, but onely GOD? Wee haue therefore aboun∣dantly shewed: That our Sauiour, and Mediatour is GOD: And, why it was needefull, that hee should be very GOD. Of the third point or Chapter. IN THE THIRD PLACE, wee haue proponed of Christe, that hee is VERY MAN, And, why it was needefull, that the Mediatour should bee man. The whole vniuersall Churche, as it beleeueth, Christe, to be borne, very man: So, that he al∣so, at this day, is, and for euer shall remaine, ve∣ry man, it doth, godlyly confesse. Genes. 3. The seede of the woman, which shall breake the head of the Serpent, is promised. By the name of, THE SEEDE OF THE VVOMAN, without all doubt, the nature of man, which our Mediatour, at the time appoin∣ted by the father, should take vnto him, is signi∣fyed. GOD promised to Abraham, that in his seede, all nations should be blessed. Hee promised also, to Dauid, that his sonne should sit vpon his seate, and reigne for euer. Esaie. 7. Beholde a virgin shall conceiue, and bring foorth a Sonne, and thou shalt call his name EMA∣NVEL, (that is to say) which shalbe GOD and MAN.
Luke. 1.With these Prophecies agreeth, the whole History Euangelicall. The Angel, beeing sent to the virgin Marie, saith: Beholde, thou shalt con∣ceiue in thy wombe, and shalt bring foorth a Sonne, and thou shalt call his name IESVS, he shalbe great, and shalbe called the Sonne of the hyest. VVhiche thing when she had heard, she meruayled, and saide, How can this thing bee, forasmuch as I knowe not man: And the Angell aunswered vnto her: The ho∣ly Ghoste shall come vppon thee, and the power of the moste hyest, shall ouershadowe thee: (that is to say.) Thou shalt conceiue, and bring foorth, not, by the seede of man, or, after, the common lawe of nature: but, by the power and wise counsaile of GOD. And, so the Angell conclu∣deth his oration, with this sentence worthy to be remembred: with GOD, nothing shall bee im∣possible. The eight day, after his natiuitie, hee was Circumcised according to the lawe, after, the manner obserued in other Infantes of the Iewes. He was brought vp, by Ioseph, and Mary, hee greewe in wisedome, and in fauour, with GOD, & men, & was he found altogether, a naturall man, hauing body, and soule, and all condition and properties of humane nature, sin onely excepted. This is the summe of the Christian fayth, touching the manhood of Iesu Christe, as wee confesse in the articles of the Symbole, when we say: I beleeue in IESVS CHRISTE, our Lorde, which was conceiued by the holy Ghost, borne of
the virgin Mary. But why was it needfull,The seconde parte of the prepostion. that the Mediatour should be VERY MAN. Foure causes may be rehearsed, out of the holy Scrip∣tures, why it was needefull, that the Messias should bee man. 1. The Iustice of GOD. 2. The restoring of the Image of GOD, in man agayne, which, through Sinne was lost. 3. The manner of Adoption. 4. The assurance of our Resurrection, frō death. First, THE IVSTICE OF GOD re∣quired, that the disobedience, in our flesh com∣mitted, should bee amended in the same. For it was agreeable, to the order of the Iustice of GOD, that in asmuch as mankinde, in one A∣dam, had firste offended: so some body in man∣kinde, fre from sinne, should sustaine the paiues, whiche should bee the price for the rest. Our Lorde therefore tooke mans nature vnto him, & was made man, shewing forth, as it were,1. Cor. 15. the person of Adam himselfe, whose name is also at∣tributed vnto him: yt he might thorowly satisfie the punishment of sinne in the flesh, beeing in flesh committed. Therefore Paule Rom 5. saith: If, by the sinne of one, death reigned, by the meanes of one, (namely Adam:) much more, they which receiue abundance of Grace, and of the gifte of Righteousnesse, shall reigne in life, by the meanes of one Iesus Christe. Item: As by the disobedience of one, (Adam), ma∣ny, (All men) became sinners: So, by the obedience of one (of Christe) many are made righteous.
Item 1. Corin. 15. For, by a man (Adam) came death: And, by a man (Iesus Christe) came the resurrecti∣on from Death. Hebr. 2. Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of flesh, and blood, he himselfe also, in like case tooke parte with them: that through death, he might abo∣lish him, which had the rule of death, (that is to say) the Deuill. Heerevnto also appertaineth that saying of Irenaeus: It behoued him, whiche should begin, to slea sinne, and to redeeme man, which was guiltie of death: to be made the selfe same thing, (that is to say) Man. And Augustine saith: flesh, had blinded thee, flesh doth heale thee: because Christe came in such wise: that by fleshe, he might quench the corruptions of the flesh. The second cause is, THE RESTORING OF THE IMAGE OF GOD, according vnto which, man was created: This thing could by no meanes bee doone, but, by the naturall Image of GOD (that is) the euerlasting and onely begotten sonne of GOD: which therfore tooke mans nature vnto him, that he might a∣gaine restore the Image of God, in all those, which, through a liuely faith, are, into his body, ingraffed Whereof Athanisius saieth: It was conuenient, that the Sonne should take man his na∣ture vnto him: that this person whiche is the sub∣stantiall Image of the Father, might restore againe, the Image of GOD in vs. The thirde cause was, that the reason of
our ADOPTION did require the same. For the Sonne of God, did therefore take the na∣ture of man vnto him: that hee might make vs the Sonnes of God. He would therfore, by the societie of nature, bee ioyned vnto vs, and be∣come our brother: that we, beeing become his members, might be made the sonnes of God. For, we are therefore called, and are the Chil∣dren of God: because wee are, (by faith) in CHRIST, whiche is the naturall sonne of God. For, in him alone, wee are beloued,Ephe. 1. and Sonnes. Iohn. 1. To as many as beleeued on his name, hee gaue power to be made, the Sonnes of GOD. Gal. 4. VVhen the fulnesse of time was come, GOD sent his Sonne, made of a woman, & made bond vnto the lawe, that he might redeeme those, which were vnder the lawe, that we might receiue the Adoption of Sonnes. Because ye are the Sonnes of GOD, therefore GOD hath sent the Spirit of his Sonne into our hearts, crying Abba Father. In this sentence also speaketh Irenaeus: VVe could not be (saith he) partakers of the Adoption of his Sonnes, vnlesse, we had receiued the same, by his Sonne, (that is to say) vnlesse his Sonne had beene made man. The fourth cause: THE ASSVRANCE,The cause & assurance of the rysing againe at the last day. force, and efficacie of OVR RESVRREC∣TION consisteth in this, that our Mediatour is man. For, the only hope and assurance, which we haue of the Resurrection of our bodyes, is, that Christ our Mediatour, hath taken vnto him
our flesh. For, the fleshe which wee doe now beare about vs, subiecte to corruption, is al∣ready,1. Cor. 15. raised vp in Christe, as in the first frutes: and is entred into the possession of the king∣dome of heauen, and is there become immortall. By the vertue therefore, of that societie, which we haue with the gloriouse body of Christe, we shall be raysed vp in the last day, and shalbe in∣dowed Or, in our flesh. after the flesh, with immortalitie: so, that beeing like vnto Christe our brother, wee may enioy with him, eternall ioy, and saluation. This thing Paule purposeth to showe 1. Cor. 15. when he sayth: CHRISTE is risen from the dead, the first frutes of them which sleepe: for by a man came death, and by a man came the resurrection of the dead: for as in Adam all men dye, so in Christe shall all men be made aliue. Therefore when so∣euer temptation falleth in, willing to driue vs to doubt of the resurrection of the fleshe: let vs lifte vp our heartes to Iesus Christe, already raysed vp from death: hee bothe can, and will raise vp vs also from the dead, forasmuch as he is God almightie, and also our brother, fellowe of the same humane nature with vs. Therefore Paule sayth, Philip. 3. Our conuersa∣tion is in Heauen, from whence also wee looke for the Sauiour, euen the Lorde Iesus Christe, whiche shall transforme our vile bodye, that hee may make it like to his glorious body, by the mightie worke∣ing, whereby he is also able to subdue all things vn∣to himselfe. Thus, I haue recited, foure moste weightie
causes, whereby it is shewed, that it was highly needefull, that the Mediatour betweene GOD and man, should haue beene Man, and haue ta∣ken humane nature vnto him, and in the same, be made like vnto vs. Let vs continually in our heart, beare about with vs these causes, that we may be stirred vp to earnest thankfulnesse towards GOD, which would haue his sonne, whē he was riche, to be∣come man, and verely a pore man: that through his pouertie, wee might be riche, in the posses∣sion of saluation, and life euerlasting. Of the fourth point or Chapter. THE FOVRTH THING whiche I said, is to be considered in Messias, is, that HEE IS ONE PERSON, and why this thing was needefull. That our Mediatour is one person, (beside many other) these things do confirme. Iohn 1. The woord became flesh: (that is to say) Man. But Iohn addeth: And wee sawe the glorie of it: But if there had beene two persons, with∣out all doubt, he would haue said: VVe sawe the glory of (Them): and, not the glory of (It). In the 3. of Matth. the voice of God soūdeth vpon Iesus ye sonne of Mary, beeing baptized of Iohn: This is my welbeloued Sonne, in whome I am wel pleased. In this place, & (the same god) also in the moūt, Mat, 17. acknowledgeth this sonne of Mary,
to be his sonne also, & saith: (HEARE HIM,) but if there had beene two persons, without all doubt, he would haue said (HEARE THEM.) And in the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians, Paule saieth: Hee whiche descended, is euen the same which also ascended aboue all Heauens, to fulfill all things. The whole Church also confesseth the same thing, euen as the Symbole of Athanasius hath, in this manner. The right faith is, that wee be∣leeue, and confesse, that our Lord Iesus Christe, the Sonne of God, IS GOD, and man. GOD, of the substance of his father, begotten be∣fore the worlde, and MAN of the substance of his mother, borne in the worlde. Perfect GOD, and perfect MAN, of a resona∣ble soule, and humane flesh subsisting. Equall to the Father, as touching his Godheade, and inferriour to the father, as touching his Man∣hoode. VVho, although he bee GOD, and MAN, yet, he is not two, but ONE CHRISTE. One, not by conuersion of the Godhead into flesh: but by taking the manhood into GOD. One altogether, not by confusion of substance: but by vnitie of person. For, as the resonable soule, and flesh, is one Man: So, GOD, and MAN, is one CHRISTE. But, why it was necessary, that the Media∣tour, should be one person, and not two, as there be in him two distinct natures: there bee many weightie reasons, certaine of the cheefe of which
it may suffise to note in this place. First, Our Mediatour, GOD and Man, must be one person, that he might make GOD, and Man (ONE): therfore, he is ioyned to the father, by his true God head, & vnto Man, by true Man∣hood, that so he might couple bothe together. The seconde cause: The Mediatour shoulde bring nothing to passe, betweene the parties at variance, if he cleaue to the one, and differ from the other: Wherefore, it was needefull, that the Mediatour by a certaine necessitie, should be ioy∣ned to bothe parties. To GOD therfore (who, by our sinne was offended:) our Mediatour is ioyned by true diui∣nitie: And vnto MAN he is associated, by true humanitie: that through the societie, which hee hath with bothe partes, hee might ioyne bothe partes together: according to that saying of Ire∣naeus lib. 3. Cap. 2. where he intreateth of the cau∣ses, why the worde of God became fleshe. It must needs bee (saith he) that the Mediatour betweene GOD, and MAN, by reason of the nighe affinitie to bothe partes: muste reduce bothe into freendship, and concorde: and bringe to passe, that God should take man vnto him: and man shoulde yeelde ouer himselfe vnto God. And Theodoretus saith: Euen as he,Dialog 1. which would reconcile some two persons, ioyning handes bee∣tweene themselues, putting himselfe in the middest betweene, and holding the one by the right hande, and the other by the lefte, bringeth, & ioyneth them in freendship together: So he when hee had vnited
the diuine nature to the humane: made a peace inui∣olable, and which cannot bee broken. The third cause: If the Mediatour were not one person: then the workes of the redemption, wrought in the humane nature, should not be a sufficient price for sinne, through which the infi∣nite goodnesse was offended. For, Death was due debt for sinne, but pure GOD coulde not taste death: neither, Man alone could ouercome death. Therfore GOD became man: that GOD and MAN, bothe should, and might make satis∣faction for eternall death, whiche was due to mankinde. The eternall sonne of God there∣fore, tooke mans nature vnto him, into the vni∣tie of person: that the works done in the humane nature, might be of infinite power, and merite. For, through the indiuisible vnion of the diuine, and humane nature in one person, the dignitie is infinite, the perfection moste absolute, and the price of the blood, death, and so of all the actions and sufferings of Christe in his moste holy hu∣manitie, inestimable. And thereof, is the might, and force of blottinge out sinne, and the pow∣er of remitting offences, of iustifying, quicke∣ning, and sauing the beleeuers. And albeit, Christe suffered in the flesh onely, as Peter saith: yet notwithstanding, the suffring is attributed to the person,1. Pet. 3. by reason of that moste stricte vnion of the two natures in one person. That these things may somewhat more easily be vnderstanded, I will ioyne heerevnto
a similitude, whiche the Catholique deuines in the olde Church haue vsed. MAN consisteth of two substaunces, of a soule, and of a body: and doth many things by the power of the Soule, as, to vnderstand, to reason, to number &c. and againe doth ma∣ny thinges, by the strength of the bodye, as to builde, to write, to walke, and suche other like deedes either well or euill. All these things whiche in this manner, hee doeth, either by the power of the soule by it selfe, or by the strength of the body by it selfe, or by the woorke of bothe together: are attributed to the person of the man. Euen in like manner, Christe doth certaine woorkes according to his humane nature, and certaine according to his diuine nature, al which notwithstāding are attributed to whole Christ, which is GOD, and MAN. So, the death of Christe which he sustayned according to his humane nature, is ascrybed to the whole per∣son, which is GOD and MAN. Therefore Luke rightly affirmeth,Acts. 20.28. that GOD hath purcha∣sed a Congregation to him selfe, with his owne blood: And againe he sayth rightly, that IE∣SVS the sonne of Mary hath created Heauen, and Earth: For, Iesus, and the eternall sonne of GOD, is ONE person. In the same sentence also, speaketh Cyrell: Beecause (sayth hee) that bodye, which hee made his owne, did suffer: therefore it is sayde, the worde it selfe suffered for vs.
And heereof it is, that all the workes, and bene∣fites of redemption in Christe, are counted di∣uine, infinite, sauing, and so inestimable: that vn∣to them, nothing, neither in Heauen, or in earth may be compared, as wee haue somewhat tou∣ched before. From this fountaine, an infinite, and vnspea∣kable consolation, to the conscience afflicted, tremblinge for the multitude of her sinnes flo∣weth foorth. For, if the death of Christe bee so precious, that there is no price of equall value, which may be compared to it, much lesse prefer∣red before it: What should let, that it should not abound farre aboue the heape of my sinnes, al∣though Or albeit they exceede in number, greatnesse, &c. Rom. 5. exceeding. Whereof Augustine saieth: The mercy of GOD is much greater, then the mise∣ry of all sinnes. And Paule saieth: VVhere sinne did abounde, there grace did superabound. Of the fifte point or Chapter. IN THE FIFT PLACE, we haue proponed of Christe: that he is, the Sa∣uiour of Mankinde: And in what manner, he executeth the businesse of Mannes saluation. Al∣though, in the matters before handled, we haue oftentimes touched somwhat, concerning this parte: yet notwithstanding, a iust explication of eche article, as it was conuenient, hath not he∣thervnto
beene accomplished. Therefore I will now speake of these things more at large: and, first, I will recite the testymonyes of the scrip∣ture, which testifie, Christe to be the Sauiour of the worlde: Furthermore, I will declare, how he is the Sauiour of the worlde. Moses saith:Gen. 3. The seede of the woman shall crush the Serpents head: (that is to say) CHRISTE shall destroy the woorkes of the Deuill, and de∣liuer man, from Sinne, Death, dampnation, and Hell, and shall iustifie, quicken, blesse, and bring them into the kingdome of GOD. After the same manner, GOD speaketh to Abraham: In thy seede shall all nations bee blessed, (that is to say) shall bee deliuered from all maledicti∣on, and saued. And, the Angell Gabriell sayth to Ioseph: Thou shalt call his name IESVS, for hee shall saue his people from their sinnes. In like manner, the Angell to the Sheepe∣heards: Beholde, I shewe vnto you great ioy:Luke. . this day is borne vnto you a Sauiour, whiche is Christe the Lorde, in the citie of Dauid. Paule also, 1. Timo. 1. sayth: This is a sure saying, and woorthy of all receiuing: that Iesus Christe came into the worlde, to saue sinners. And what should I bring many testimonyes? the whole scriptures euery where affirmeth, Iesus Christe to be the Sauiour of the worlde. But, by what meanes then, doth Christe de∣clare himselfe to be the Sauiour of the worlde, and the redeemer of mankinde?
This thing is seene, cheefely in fiue benefites towardes vs, namely: First, in giuing vnto vs, the true vnderstan∣ding of the wisdome of saluation, of which wee were destitute. Moreouer, in taking away our sinnes, where∣with we are laden, and oppressed. Thirdely, in imputing Righteousnesse vnto vs, which, of our selues we could not haue. Fourthly, in sanctifying, and regenerating vs, by his holy spirite, so, that wee which were the children of wrath, may become the children of GOD. Fiftly: in deliuering vs from the paines of hell, which we had deserued, and in giuing vnto vs the possession of euerlasting life, which he, by his owne death hath purchased for vs. Of these fiue benefites, wherby Christe per∣fourmeth the whole woorke of our redemption, and bringeth it to perfection: I will breefely, out of the holy Scripture, adioyne a more plentifull explication. The firste benefite. COncerning the first benefite of Christ, namely, that hee giueth vnto vs the true vnderstanding of the wisdome of saluation: which, by the sharpnesse of our owne wit or reason, we are, by no meanes able to at∣tain vnto: the Euangelist Iohn speaketh in these words:Iohn. 1. No man hath seene GOD, at any time, the only begotten sonne, which is in the bosome of the
Father, hee hath declared him vnto vs. This wis∣dome Zachary calleth: The knowledge of saluati∣on, for the remission of sinnes,Luke. 1. by the bowels of the mercy of GOD. And Christ saith:Iohn. 1. This is eternall life: that they may knowe thee to be very GOD, and whome thou hast sent IESVS CHRISTE. All the wisedome of the worlde, compared to this wsedome, is none at all, or, as if a man would compare one small drop, with the whole Ocean, or a small grauell stone, with the sands of the whole sea, or the whole worlde. For what cōparison shall there be of a thing momentany, to a thing euerlasting? Or of a thing humane, to that which is deuine? This heauenly wisdome, namely: The moste sacred Gospel, is that Perfecte VVisdome, which wee boaste our selues to haue, of our Lord, and Sauiour Iesu Christe. The seconde benefite. TOuching the seconde kinde of the be∣nefits of Christ, namely: That he taketh away the heape of our sinnes, wherewith we are oppressed: Iohn Baptist preacheth Ioh. 1. Be∣holde the Lambe of GOD, whiche taketh away the sinnes of the world: (that is to say) this IESVS will offer that sacrifice, wherby he wil make sa∣tisfaction, for the sinnes of the whole worlde. But, that we may come to a fuller knowledge of this testimony of Iohn, concerning Christe: I wil heere vnder set downe the questions, which the woords them selues doe minister.
First, VVhy Christe is called a Lambe: And wherfore he is surnamed the Lamb of GOD. Secondly, VVhat this Lambe doth. Thirdly, For whose cause he doth. 1. There be two reasons, why Christe is cal∣led A LAMBE: The first is, that Iohn might put the Iewes, and vs in minde, of bothe these thinges, namely of the shadowe, which went be∣fore in the olde Testament: and the fulfilling of the promise (which, Iohn calleth (The Trueth) in the newe Testament. Hebr. 10. Paule sayth: The lawe hath the shadow of good things to come, but not the very Image of the things themselues, (that is to say) The trueth, or fulfilling of the promise. Therefore, the Lambe of the Iewes Passeo∣uer, in the lawe, was, bothe, a putting them in remembrance, of benefites receiued, and also a warning, and shadowing of a thing to come. For as it admonished the Iewes, that euen as the sacrifice of the Lambe in Aegypte beeing fini∣shed, the people went out of Aegypt, and were deliuered from bondage: so it signifyed, that by the sacrifice of Christ, mankinde should be recon∣ciled vnto GOD, and brought vnto libertie. The name of the shadowe, (that is to say) of the Lambe, is therefore attributed vnto Christe, the Trueth: that it might be knowen that Iesus Christ is he, whom the paschall Lamb in ye olde Testament did shadowe. For, it is a thing custo∣mable in the Scriptures, to giue one, and the same names, to the signes, and the things signi∣fyed:
that by conference of the shadowe, and the trueth, we way the more fully be instructed. So, the Rocke, whiche was a shadowe of Christe, is attributed to Christe: because in him, the trueth, which was shadowed by the Rocke in the wildernesse, is fulfilled. The Sacrifice, which was onely a figure of the cleansing sacrifice, then to come, was called, , (that is to say) Propitiation, which name, bothe by Iohn, and Paul, is attributed to Christ, who alone offered the true propitiatory sacrifice. Moreouer, when Iohn calleth Christe a LAMB, he signifyeth, that he was to be killed for sacrifice. And so Iohn, in one worde expres∣sed the end of all the sacrifices of the law, name∣ly, that they shoulde shadowe the sacrifice of Christe: and, which beeing finished, all the sacri∣fices of Aaron, should ceasse. Therfore, he saith: Beholde the Lambe of GOD. As though he should say: ye Iewes haue hetherto many yeeres past offered the Paschall Lambe, but, beholde this is, that true, immaculate, and pure Lamb, with out all faulte: whiche is woorthyly called, The Lambe of GOD: because hee is a Sacrifice suffi∣cient, for the sinnes of the whole world. Ther∣fore, rightly sayd Bernard: VVho could better take away sinne, then hee, in whome sinne falleth not? He without doubt, is able to wash mee, who, as it is manifest, is not defyled: Let this hand wipe mine eye couered with dyrt: which hand alone, is with∣out dust. We haue said, why Christe is called a Lambe:
and cheefely, why hee is called the Lambe of GOD. Now it is to be opened in few wordes: VVhat this Lamb hath done. Beholde (saith Iohn) the Lambe of GOD,Iohn. 1. which taketh away the sinnes of the world: (that is to say) That Lamb of God this IESVS, namely, which is to be offered: by his death and passion taketh away the sinne of the world, (that is) dischargeth the worlde from sinne, which he translateth into him self, that, by the mirit of his sacrifice, that is, of his passiō and death, he may abolish the same. And so vppon this Lambe of GOD, our Lord Iesus Christe GOD, and MAN, are easte the sinnes of the whole worlde: that as he alone should sustaine the guiltinesse, so the same should also susteyne the malediction. For albeit that Christ was free from fault: yet notwithstanding, the guiltines, and payne, hee, in very deed, receiued into him∣selfe. And this is that which Esay sayth: Hee hath layde all our iniquities vpon him. Esay. 5. 3.Therfore Paule, calleth CHRIST (ACCVR∣SED,) or (EXECRATION,) when hee sayth: Galla. 3. Christe hath redeemed vs from the cursse of the lawe, beeing made ACCVRSED FOR VS. Herevnto also it maketh that hee nameth him (Sinne), when he fayth: 2. Cor. 5. Him whiche knewe not sinne, he made SINNE FOR VS: that is to saye: GOD hath so embased his owne Sonne: that he should be counted, in the sight of GOD, guiltie of all sinne: that we might bee indowed with his righteousnesse, whereby wee might be reputed righteous, in the sight of God.
By these things already saide, it may easily be perceiued, what is to bee thought of the death, and passion of our Lord Iesu Christe, which in one word and other, I wil shew more at large. CHRIST him selfe. Iohn 17. with his owne voyce, (beeing now ready to suffer,) explicateth, what manner of work his passion is, when hee saith: I sanctifie mine owne selfe for them, that they also might be sanctified in the truth. I sanctifie, saith he, that is, I beeing seperated from sinners, by perfect purenesse: and ioyned vnto God by per∣fect loue, and obedience, doe offer vp my selfe to the father vpon the Altar of the Crosse,Heb. 10. through the eternall spirite, for a sacrifice of pacification, that by the merit of my sacrifice: the people bele∣uing in me, might be seperated from the defiling of ye worlde, might be ioyned vnto God, through a liuely faith, and so offred, for an holy sacrifice, that they might be truely sanctifyed for euer. In this manner CHRIST speaketh in this place, of his passion, which he defineth to be a Sanctifi∣cation: (that is to say) A holy oblation, of himself for the Disciples: that is, for. All which shall be∣leeue: that they by the merit of his passion may be sanctified, as an holy sacrifice offred vnto God. Let vs therefore, in fewe woordes conclude, what is to bee considered, of the passion of Christe, namely: That it is a sacrifice propitiatorie,What the passion of Christe is. wherein, the Sonne of GOD offered vp him selfe to the Faher: that he might merit for all which be∣leeue in him, eternall sanctificatiō, deliuerance from sinne, and death, eternall, and euerlasting Saluation.
And so, in this definition is contayned, that which may be answered, to euery of these seue∣rall questions: VVho offred? The euerlasting Priest IESVS CHRIST. VVhat offred he? Him selfe. VVhere offred he? In the Altar of the Crosse, by his moste bitter passion and death. To whome offered hee him selfe? To the father, whose wrath, (by the merite of his precious sa∣crifice,) he pacifyed. For whose cause did hee offer him selfe? For man. VVho shalbe partakers of this offering? All, which beleeue in him. Because we haue heard, what this Lambe hath doone, namely, that he hath receiued into him selfe, the sinnes of men, and hath made sa∣tisfaction for them: Let vs nowe discusse this worde, (OF THE VVORLD). Iohn saith not:Iohn. 1. Beholde the Lambe of GOD, which taketh a∣way the sinnes of man: but, which taketh away the sinnes of the VVorlde:He meaneth, that the passi¦on and sacri∣fice of Christ, is (in it selfe) infinitly pre∣cious & pro∣fitable, offe∣red to God the father for all men, ex∣tended and proferred to all sinners and for all sinnes whatsoeuer (of his parte) indifferently & suf∣ficiently: though indeed, The elect penitent beleeuer only can, and doe receiue and inioy it effectually and auayleably. According as the Schoolemen say (and the best learned like, and allowe of it) Christus pastus pro omnibus sufficientur, sed pro elec∣tis efficienter &c. To say, Christe suffered for all sufficiently, but for the elect (only) effectually or auayleably &c. This is the Authors iustified meaning, in many pla∣ces of his worthy woorkes els where. Though here, in wordes, hee seemeth some-deale harshe and harde: and is warely to bee readde. that hee might signifie, whereunto the price of the oblation of IESV CHRISTE, doth stretch it selfe. There haue beene in time past, and are also at this day, two sortes of men, whiche by teaching falsely in this place haue fowlely offended. Of these, the first are, which are of opinion, that the passion, and sacrifice of Christe profiteth not all
men, but a certaine fewe peculiar elected. Ano∣ther kinde of them is: which suppose that there be certaine sinnes, which, euen by the merite of the death, and passion of Christe, cannot be re∣mitted. These two false, and erronious opinions I will in this place breefely refute, and throwe downe by manifeste testimonyes of the woorde of GOD. They, whom I named in the first place, are Stoickes, and such, as going about to fain tables of desteny out of testimonyes of the Scripture, not rightly vnderstanded, doe teach, that GOD hath created men, appoynted partly, to eternall Saluation: partely, to eternall condempnation, howsoeuer, they either beleeue, or liue. This peruerse opinion, is, not onely blasphemous a∣gainst GOD: but also seduceth many: that ei∣ther they despaire of the forgiuenesse of their sinnes, or nourish securitie: thinking it to bee a matter of no force, how they liue, forasmuch as they attaine saluation, because, that they are e∣lected. Against this opinion is to bee set, The mercifull will of GOD, which hath made man, after his owne Image, and hath promised to Adam, the restoring againe of the same. Of this will of GOD, the Prophet speaketh in these woords: As surely as I liue saith the Lord GOD, I will not the death of the vngodly, but that the vngodly should bee conuerted, from his way and liue. Therefore, if that these woords, that GOD will not the death of a sinner, bee true, of which thing, there is vtterly no doubt: It must,
of necessitie, bee false, that they say, That GOD hath destinated certaine to saluation, certain to con∣dempnation, and that, if we respect the counsaile of the creation, & redemption of mankinde. For, as farre foorth as appertaineth to the rebellion of man: there it is said, that GOD hath created many to condempnation, whome notwithstan∣ding, hee would, should haue beene conuerted, should haue sought and obtained saluation. For, euen as an earthly father, is in such wise affected towarde his children, that he woulde haue euery one of them, to come to thriftines, &, be honest, and woorthy successors to him of his goods, and substance, and yet notwithstanding, beeing made frustrate of his hope, findeth the stubbernnesse, and disobediēce of them, whereby they also at the length, do cast them selues with great ignominie, into destruction, and some infa∣mous kinde of punishmente: Of this father it may be said, that hee hath brought vp children, kept to this so great mischeef, (not, that the will of his purpose, was not farre other) but that the children through their owne rebellion, haue called this mischeef vnto them selues. So, GOD verily, would haue all men (made after his owne image) to be saued: but, if any of these being rebellious wil not imbrace his word, and, by faith, be conuerted, but fauouring securi∣tie, and madnesse, doe dye in their owne wicked∣nesse: those, God, suffereth to perish, that they might sustaine the iust punishmentes, aswell of their owne offēces, against ye law of God, as also
of their contēpt of attayning saluation through Christe. Here we may say, with the scripture: That God hath created suche rebellious vn∣thrifts, to eternall condemnation, not, that he is delighted, with their destruction: but, that, they through their owne malice haue drawen ye same vnto themselues, preferring the vanitie of this world, before the grace, & mercy of God, in Iesu Christe. Of this eternall & vnmouable will of God: Paule speaketh on this wise: GOD would haue all men saued, & come to the trueth, for there is one GOD, and one Mediatour between GOD, and MAN, euen the man Iesus Christ, which hath giuen himselfe a redemption for all men. And Peter saith: GOD is longe suffering, which would haue no man loste, but will receyue all men to repentaunce. What can be more plainly spoken? And, what shall he be that dare set himself against this? If God therefore, would haue no man perish, but wold haue all men, by the knowledge of ye truth to be saued, their vntruth is manifest, which say, God would not haue all mē saued, but hath cre∣ated many to euerlasting damnation. But, that our cōsciences may the more cōmodiously be as∣sured out of ye word of God, touching this father¦ly will of him: I wil set downe, foure most firme argumēts, which may aboundantly assure vs, of the fauour of God, which stretcheth it selfe to all men, in eueryplace of ye earth, without al respect of persons, regions, sexes, & outward conditiōs. The first Argument is, The vniuersall cōmaun∣dement of GOD: vnto all men: GOD himselfe
speaketh with his owne voyce from Heauen, and sayth:Mattth. 3. This is my beloued Sonne, Heare him. And Christ sendeth foorth his Disciples into all the world,Mar. 16. with this commaundement: Goe yee into all the world, and proclayme the Gospell to eue∣ry creature, (that is) To all men. Who then is so impudent, that hee dare say, GOD in deede, hath commaunded all men, that they shoulde heare the Gospell, but in the meane season, hee would certaine to be saued by faith, but certaine to be hardened, and condempned? They which doe so think of God, doe make him worse, then any Tyrant, whiche shoulde commaund those thinges which he neither willeth nor thincketh: and this is to haue two heartes, which GOD him selfe, highly detesteth, and hateth. The second argument, is, The free, and vni∣uersall promise of GOD. Come vnto mee (sayth Christe,Matth. 11.) all which labour and be heauily laden, and I will refresh you.Mar. 16. Likewise, Hee which shall be∣leeue and be baptised, shalbe saued: but he which be∣leeueth not shall be condemned. And Paule saith: Euery one whiche beleeueth shall not be confoun∣ded. Heereunto is to bee referred the whole mi∣nistery of the Gospell, which is therefore institu∣ted of GOD, to bee in this worlde, that by the same, men might be brought vnto ye true know∣ledge of God. Christe him selfe confesseth, that he came into this worlde, to saue sinners: The Sonne of man (saith he) is come to seeke, and saue that which was lost. The third argument is taken, Of the price of
the Passion and death of Christe, whiche sufficeth for the sinnes of all men: He hath giuen him selfe,1. Tim. 2. a redemption for all men. Iohn saith:Iohn 1. Beholde the Lambe of GOD which taketh away the sinnes of the worlde. And Christe himselfe sayth: I, when I shall be lifte vp from the Earth, will drawe all men vnto me. Therfore Paule sayth:Rom. 5. Grace aboun∣deth aboue sinne: because the precious sacrifice of Christe, is esteemed of so great force, that it wi∣peth out all sinne. Iohn sayth:1. Iohn. 2. Christe is the propitiation for our sinnes, and not for ours only, but also for the sinnes of the whole worlde. The fourth argument, whiche assureth vs of the will of GOD, is: The sealing of Grace, which is done by the Sacrament of Baptisme. Goe ye (sayth Christ) and teach all nations,Mar. 16. bap∣tizing them: In the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holie Ghoste. This sealing hee hath confirmed with his power, and presence in this worlde. Of the first he sayth: All power is giuen vnto mee, in Heauen, & in Earth. Of the last, when he sayth: Beholde I am with you, vnto the ende of the worlde. If therfore, we looke back, to the power of Christe: hee is able to bringe to passe all thinges, what so euer hee will, in Hea∣uen, and in Earth: Againe, if we looke vpon the commaundement: Christe willeth, all nations to be baptised, that this might bee a testimonie, that God will remit sinnes, to all those whiche beleeue, and turne them selues vnto him. To conclude, if we fasten our eyes vppon his
presence: Christe himselfe will appeare heere, who, baptising with the holy Ghoste, woorketh that inwardly, which, the water, outwardly ap∣plyed, doth signifie. By foure vnmouable arguments, therfore, we haue proued, this to be the wil of God: That he would haue all men to be saued, as many as turne them selues vnto him, by faith in Iesus Christ. Whosoeuer, therefore inwardly regardeth his saluation: let him stedfastly rest in this will of GOD, which God hath not onely manifested in his woorde: but also, by many meanes effec∣tually proued and shewed. Let vs therfore conclude, that they teach false∣ly, which to the slaūdring of the death, and pas∣sion of Christe: doe say, that his sacrifice made for the forgiuenesse of sinnes, is not profitable for all men, but for a certaine few elected. The second errour is, of those, which defend that there be certaine sinnes, which cannot bee remitted, for the mirite of the passion and death of Christe. To this opinion these wordes of Paule are contrary:Rom. 5. VVhere sinne did abounde: there Grace in Iesu Christe, did superabound. Like∣wise Iohn, when he affirmeth, Christe to take a∣way the sinnes of the worlde: giueth to vnder∣stande, that the sacrifice of Christe is of farre greater force to saue: then the sinnes of the whole worlde are to destroy. Therefore let vs thinke, that there is no sinne greater: then to thinke, that there is any sinne greater then the grace of GOD in Iesu Christe.
Such was the sinne of Cayne, who beeing ouercome with the conscience of his wicked∣nesse, and dispayring sayde: Greater is myne ini∣quitie than that it may bee forgiuen.Gen 3. But rightly doeth Augustine aunswere him.Augu. Gen. Thou lyest Cayne, for the mercy of God is greater, than the misery of all sinne. He therefore argueth God of vntrueth, who∣soeuer despayreth of forgiuenesse, for the heape, and greatnes of his sinnes: he contemneth the othe of GOD, who by an othe confirmeth, That hee will not the death of a sinner, but that he should be conuerted and liue. For, when GOD beholdeth thy sinne, he therwithall considereth that an infinite price is payde for the same, namely, the Lords passion. From whence also peceedeth that voyce of the conscience, reioycing in Bernarde, concerning the remission of sinnes: I holde (sayth hee) a moste strong argument, THE PASSION OF THE LORD: for his voice was of much more force, than the voyce of the blood of Abell, cry∣ing in the heartes of the elect, the forgiuenesse, of all offences. For, hee was betrayed for our sinnes, neither is it to be doubted, but that his death is mightyer, and of more force vnto good, then our sinnes vnto euill. I haue sinned (saith Manasses) aboue the sande of the Sea: but thou, (O LORDE) according to thy greate mercie, shalt saue mee though, vn∣woorthye. But heere some body may obiect, and say: I
haue oftentimes promised amendment of my life, and yet notwithstanding, wittingly, and willingly, I haue againe oftentimes sinned: and doone against my conscience. To this I aunswere thus: This kinde of sin is, in the sight of God, horrible, and dangerous, and many, for the same are condempned, as Saule and many others, who, by soudaine death are caught from hence, without repentaunce: but notwithstanding:Rom. 5. Grace, in our Lorde Iesu Christe, aboundeth aboue, bothe this, and all the sinnes of the whole worlde. For, whosoeuer doe rise againe from sin,1. Iohn. 2. by earnest repentance: they all, for the death, and passion sake of Christe, doe obtaine forgiuenesse of sinnes. This temptati∣on did so assaulte the Iewishe people, that des∣payringly brusting foorth into this voyce, they cryed out, in Ezechiel 33. Our sinnes, and iniquities, are gone ouer vs, and wee are waxed faynt in them, How then can we liue? Tell them, sayth the mighty Lorde: As truely as I liue, I will not the death of a sinner,Ezechie. 18. but that he be conuerted, and liue: Turne ye, turne yee from your most wicked offences, O yee house of Israell, wherefore will ye dye? Whosoeuer therfore is afflicted with the con∣science of his owne wickednesse: let him remem∣ber the greatnesse of the mercy of GOD, excee∣ding all ye works of God: Let him consider, that the will of God is, not to will the death of a sin∣ner, but his conuersion, and life: Let him beholde the raunsome, throughly payd by Christe, which is farre greater, than the sink of all the sinnes of
whole worlde: Let him consider the examples of suche as haue beene turned, after moste hor∣rible offences: as the example of the Theefe, of Manasses, and of many other. Let him be∣ware, leaste vnto the greatnesse of his sinnes, he ad desperation: wherby, the trueth of God is denied: than the which sinne doubtlesse, none can be more greeuous. And so let him approche to the Throne of Grace, and with an earnest heart, for Christ his sake, aske forgiuenesse: nei∣ther let him ceasse, by faithfull prayer to knock, before that he feele in his heart, an aunswere to be giuen him, by the holie Ghoste: which thing without all doubt shalbe accomplished, so that he cast from him, earnestly, the purpose of sin∣ninge. When the minde is, by this meanes strengthened, perceiuing the aunswere of God, by the consolations of the heart: then, a confir∣matiō by the voice of ye Ministers of the Gospel, and the vse of the Lordes Supper, is rightly required. But, he which asketh forgiuenesse, and neuerthelesse keepeth still a purpose to sinne: is a damned hypocrite, which thinketh, God to bee like to himselfe, as which should be mooued, and delighted, or els deceiued through hypocrisie. To the same as long as he shal be such a one: aswell the absolution, by the ministerye of the Church, as also the vse of the Lords Supper, doth stretch to his greater dampnation, so farre of it is, that he should hope, that any commodity shall thereof come vnto him.
Of the sinne Jrremissible, com∣monly called the sinne against the holie Ghoste. BUt, what is then to be saide, touching Christ, which maketh mention, of ye 12. of Matt. of a sin not to be forgiuen: when he saith: All sinne & basphemy shalbe remitted vn∣to men: but the blasphemy against the spirite, shall not be forgiuen, neither in this worlde, neither in the worlde to come. In like manner Mar. 3. Verely I say vnto you, that all sinnes, and blasphemies shall be forgiuen to the children of men: but he which shall blaspheme against the holy Ghoste, shall neuer be forgiuen, but shall be guiltie of eternall offence. 1. Iohn. 5. He which knoweth his brother to sinne, a sinne not vnto death: let him aske, and life shall be giuen him, for him, which sinneth, not vnto death, there is a sinne vnto death, for the which (say I) not that a man should pray: All vnrighteousnesse is sin, and there is a sinne not vnto death. Hebr. 6. It is impossible, that they whiche haue beene once lightened, and haue tasted of the heauen∣ly gift, and haue beene made partakers of the holie Ghost, and haue tasted of the good worde of GOD, & of the power of the world to come: If they fall a∣away, (and as touching thē selues crucifie the sonne of God againe, and make a mock of him) that they should be renued againe by repentance. Heb. 10. If we sinne wilfully, (that is to say, If
any doe fall away from Christe) after the know∣ledge of the trueth receiued: there remaineth now no more sacrifice for sinne. 1. Tim. 1. I, which before was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, & reprochful, haue obtained the mercy of GOD, because I did it ignorantly through vnbeleef. These testimonyes of the holy Scripture, doe speake of a certaine kinde of sinne, which, (nei∣ther in this world, neither in the world to come) is forgiuen. This sinne is commonly called, THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOSTE. Of the same, diuerse, doe speake diuersly, and do therby driue many into desperation: whilest beeing vncertaine, they knowe not, what they shall beleeue, or doe. Yea, many supposing them∣selues to bee guiltie of this sinne, are vexed in their mindes, and beeing intangled, in horrible sorowes of conscience, doe liue without repen∣taunce. But, he whiche shall diligently consider the scripture, and conferre amongst themselues, those things, which in the holy Scriptures are expressed, touching this sinne: he shal easely vn∣derstand, what the substance, and difference of this sinne is. I will therfore explicate, the pla∣ces of Scripture euen nowe cited, and thereout I will conclude, and drawe foorth, a plaine, and full definition of this sinne. EIRST, the saying of S. Iohn distingwish∣eth, THE SINNE VNTO DEATH,1. Iohn. 8. (which is otherwise called, the sinne against the holy Ghoste) from other sinnes.
All vnrighteousnesse (saith hee) is sinne, but not vnto death.. Item: If any man sinne, wee haue an aduocate with the father, which is Iesus Christe the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes, and not for ours onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole worlde. Whiche two testimonyes, doe aboundantly teach vs, that the Sinne against the holy Ghoste, is not, a transgression of the Lawe of God, (that is to say) of the Decalogus. For,. the word of (VNRIGHTEOVSNES) which Iohn, in this place, vseth: doeth signifie, what soeuer is committed against the lawe, which, Iohn, verely, calleth sinne: but, not vnto death, that is, not against the holie Ghost. Therefore, heere hence we conclude: That, the sinne against the holie Ghoste, is not any transgression of the lawe of God, neither v∣niuersall, nor particular, albeit, otherwise, the leaste offence whiche is committed against the lawe (through his owne nature and malice) de∣serueth death euerlasting. Matth. 12. Mar. 3. Luke. 16·But Matthew and Marke doe shewe, that the matter of the sinne against the holy Ghoste, is THE CONTEMPT OF CHRISTE, AND HIS GOSPEL. But yet in that, this sinne is not finished: For Peter in the day of Pen∣tecost,Actes. 2. receiued 3000. men repenting, which, had before persecuted Christe, vnto the death of the Crosse. Paule therfore maketh a difference, betweene two sortes of men persecuting Christe: One, of those whiche doe it ignorauntly: The other of
those, whiche knowe, them selues to doe euilly, and wickedly. I (saith Paule) was a persecuter,1. Tim. 1. and blasphemous against Christe: because beeing ignorant, I did it through vnbeleefe. After this manner, others also, haue persecuted Christe, and his Gospell, and yet notwanding haue ob∣tayned mercy, because they doe it ignorauntly, through vnbeleefe. Furthermore, Paule, to the Hebrues sheweth,Heb. 6, 10. what goeth before this sin, before it be commit∣ted: namely, To haue bene illuminated by the holy Ghoste: To haue had the true knowledge of the person, and office of Christe: To haue tasted the good worde of GOD: And to haue beene partaker of the holy Ghost. The Turke, & the Pope, which otherwise are execrable sinners: (forasmuch as they neuer possessed the holie Ghoste,) haue no such sinne, whereby the testimony of the holie Ghost, by whome the trueth of the Gospel was sealed: is caste foorth of their hearts. Therfore Paule also sheweth in whome this sinne is: so, that he is to be sayd guiltie thereof, which hath not onely, beene abundantly taught, and lightned in the true doctrine of the Gospell of saluation: But also, which manifestly setteth himselfe against Christe, and obiecting against him, the reproch of his crosse despiseth him, and with all his power persecuteth his doctrine, nei∣ther can abyde the name of him: but ascrybeth the woorkes of Christe vnto the Deuill, as the Pharises did, to whome Christe imputeth this sinne of blasphemie, against the illumination of
the holie Ghoste. For the Pharises, albeit, they had beene taught, concerning Christe, by many prophecies, and were moreouer conuicted, by the doctrine, & miracles of Christe: yet notwithstan∣ding they witting, and willing, did persecute Christ, and his gospel, which, by the lightening of the holy Ghost, they knew to be of God: and, that which is more, they beeing rebellious, did not only oppungne Christe, by quarrellinges, ty∣ranny, and hypocrisie, setting themselues against his word, which to be true, their owne hearts did testifie: but also trusted to their owne righ∣teousnesse, and heape of sacrifices, reiecting the righteousnesse, and sacrifice of Christe, which sa∣crifice alone, taketh away ye sinnes of the world. What the sin against the holy ghost isHeereof therfore, we conclude, that the sinne against the holie Ghost, is not a transgression of the Decalogus, nor the cōtempt, or persecution of Christ, and the Gospell, through ignorance & in∣credulitie: but, one is then said to sin against the holy Ghost: VVhen (through wilfull rebellion) he setteth himself against Christ, being truely knowen beefore: and departeth from the Gospel, which (by the holy Ghost illuminating him) was sealed in his heart: And persecuteth the Church: with a cōfidence of his owne righteousnesse, and sacrifices, the sacri∣fice of Christe (which alone is the cleanser of sinne) beeing FINALLY reiected and contemned. Why it is called the sin against the holy Ghost,This is the ful definition of the sinne against the holy Ghoste: which hath therefore obtained this name: because, that the man whose heart was before illuminated in the true knowledge
of Christe, by the holy Ghost: doth now set him∣selfe against the holy Ghoste, and expelleth him, from him, and attributeth his workes vnto the deuil. For what cause this sinne is not forgiuen. Paule sheweth to ye Hebrues, when he saith: There remaineth no other sacrifice for sinne: than that of Christe alone. Forasmuch therefore as these haue FINALLY renounced Christe, despising his sacrifice, and trusting to other sacrifices: It is no merual, though they obtain not grace, which on∣ly is giuen by ye sacrifice of our Lord Iesu Christ, Furthermore: If any man demaund, and say: VVhat if a man beeing guiltie of this sinne against the holie Ghoste, doth againe turne him selfe vnto Christe, & doth earnestly repent him of his former rebellion, and with his whole hart aske forgiuenesse for the merit of the passion, & death of the Sonne of GOD. To this, I answere thus with Paule:Rom. 5. Grace aboundeth aboue sinne. Neither is the hugenesse of this sinne so great, but the grace of GOD in our Lord Iesu Christ, is a thousand folde grea∣ter. And forasmuch as it is moste certaine, that, GOD would not the death of a sinner,Ezechic. 28. but that hee should be cōuerted & liue. I affirme, this sinne a∣gainst the holy Ghost to be forgiuen, to all those whiche doe earnestly repent, and desire forgiue∣nesse, for the merite of Christe. But heere it may bee obiected, that Christe doth manyfestly teache: this sinne not to bee remitted, neither in this worlde, neither in the world to come: therfore, this sinne seemeth to be greater, than the Grace of God, GOD forbid,
yea, farre of be that: It is moste firmely to bee beleeued, that ye Grace of God, doth farre abound aboue the sinnes of the worlde. Why then is it not forgiuen? To this, Paule Hebr. 6. maketh aunswere: Be∣cause they cannot be renewed againe by repentance. And that, for this cause: because they haue vt∣terly denyed the true foundation of repentance, namely, The sacrifice of Christe: without the which, neither any healthfull repentance, or con∣uersion by faith, can be made vnto GOD: nei∣ther is there any other sacrifice, which (without this alone) is able to take away sinne. Repentance, and Remission of sinnes (sayth Christe) must bee preached in MY NAME. Wherefore, whosoeuer doth repent, and, with a sure faith, embrace Christ, and his sacrifice, doth moste assuredly by faith, obtaine forgiuenesse. This sinne is therefore called IRREMIS∣SIBLE, because, that they which commit the same, doe, for the moste parte continue in their wicked purpose, and neuer flye to the Grace of God, by Iesus Christ our Lord. For, he which imbraceth the grace of GOD: hath not FI∣NALLY renounced the sacrifice of Christe: which alone remaineth the cleanser away of all sinne. These thinges I purposed, breefely to speake concerning the sinne against the holie Ghost, because I perceiued, many in this behalf, to be not rightly instructed: and fewe, hether∣unto to haue rightly iudged, and plainly to haue written, of this matter.
The thirde benefite. IT hath bene spoken hethervnto, of the seconde benefite of Christe, namely: That hee cleanseth vs from all sinne: but this sufficeth not, vnlesse: VVee also become Righteouse For, inasmuch as (Righteousnesse) is, the very way to euerlasting life: no man euer obteyneth the same, but he which is Righteous. Therefore Christe saith: If thou wilte enter into life, keepe the Commaundements. But, to keepe the Commaundementes is, to declare him selfe Righteous, according to the Lawe. And albeit, no man fulfilleth the law of God, as we, before haue shewed: neither obtayneth Righteousnesse by the workes of the lawe: yet, the will of GOD remaineth vnmouable: That none is admitted to the possession of eternall life, but he which hath that righteousnesse, whiche the Lawe requireth. The Sonne of GOD therefore, came into this worlde, and tooke mans nature of the vir∣gin Mary, and made himselfe subiect to the lawe, and fulfilled the same: so, that he hath obtayned Righteousnesse by the woorkes of the lawe. This Righteousnesse of Christe, GOD and MAN, suffi∣ceth in the sight of GOD, beeing imputed to all those, which beleeue in him. For as by the disobedience of one, we all are giltie:Rom. 7. so, we all, as many as beleeue in Christe, by the righ∣teousnesse of one, are reputed Righteous.
This is the same thing which Paul saith, Rom. 10. Christ is the end of the law, to saue all those which beleeue in him. The ende of the lawe, is called, THE FINAL VVIL OF THE LAVV, that those things may be done, which shee wil∣leth, and commaundeth: She willeth Righte∣ousnesse, which, when she hath gotten, shee re∣steth: neither condemneth she any man, whiche obtayneth the same. Christe is the ende of the Lawe, not for his owne cause: but for theirs which could not fulfil the lawe: so that he imputeth his owne righte∣ousnes, which he hath obtayned by the law, to all those which beleeue in him: that the lawe can not by any right, either accuse, or condemne them. Therfore Paule saith: Christe is the ende of the Lawe, to saue all which beleeue: (that is to say) whosoeuer beleeueth, hath that whiche the Lawe requireth: namely Righteousnesse, which is the way of saluation. Heerevnto it maketh, which Augustine saith: That which the lawe commaundeth: Faith obtay∣neth. And againe: Christe hath made our sinnes his: that hee might make his righteousnesse ours. Therefore, there is now no condempnation (as Paule saith) in them, whiche are in Iesu Christe, because in them, satisfaction is made to the Righteousnesse of the lawe. It is therfore dili∣gently to be obserued, that we fulfil the law, but not by our woorks, but by the works of Christe, which imputeth the righteousnesse of the law to vs which beleeue. For this cause Paul saith: VVe
are not vnder the law: but vnder grace. Vnder the law, wee are not, because, the law findeth not in vs, what she may accuse: forasmuch as we are in dowed with the righteousnesse, which she requi∣reth. Christ hath redemed vs from ye curse of the law, first, by deriuing into himself, the paines, vpō the Altar of the crosse, which wee had deserued. Furthermore, by fulfilling the law: and impu∣ting vnto vs his owne righteousnesse, with the which, we beeing indowed, may appeare, in the last day righteouse, when Christ cōmeth a righ∣teous iudge of the quick and the dead. Of this Righteousnesse Paul intreateth 2 Cor. 5. Him which knew no sin, God made sinne for vs: that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him.Rom. 5. This Righteousnesse of GOD, is, The obedience of Christe, whereby, he satisfyeth the lawe for vs. Therfore, when we heare, or read, That man is iustified by faith, without the workes of the law: in the sight of GOD: that is so to be taken, not, that man by ye works of the law, done of himselfe, is iustified: but, that by faith he imbraceth Christe, who, by his own obedience, or works, is perfectly righteous in ye sight of God, & imputeth this his righteousnesse of the lawe, to all those which be∣leeue in him. Moreouer, this righteousnesse is called the Righteousnesse of faith, because it is im∣puted to the beleuing: Of Christ, because he hath satisfied the lawe: Of GOD, because, with the same, he is pleased, and contented. Let these things suffice to be spoken, concer∣ning the third benefite of Christe: namely, his
Righteousnesse which he imputeth to the faithfull, whereof mention is also made before, where we haue disputed of the true vse of the Lawe. The fourth benefite of Christ. THe fourth benefite of Christe, is, HO∣LINESSE, or SANCTIFICA∣TION. For, when Christe forgiueth vs our sinnes, and taketh vs out of the King∣dome of the Deuill, and imputeth vnto vs his owne Righteousnesse, hee doth also therewith, sanctifie vs, and imputeth his holinesse vnto vs, which are made ye mēbers of his body. For this cause it is, that Iohn: 1. Iohn. 1. calleth the comany of all such as beleeue in Iesus (THE COM∣MVNION, OF THE SAINCTS.) Whereon also dependeth the article of the Sym∣bole, when we say: I beleeue in the holie Church, The Communion of Sainctes. But not idle talkers of Christianitie.Of this Sanctification, Christians may boast, against, the kingdome, and members of the De∣uill, so that they may worthyly say: that they haue fellowship with GOD the father, the sonne, and the holy Ghoste, and are seperated from the Prince of darcknesse (that is to say) from the Deuill, and his members. VVee de∣clare vnto you (saith Iohn) that yee also haue fe∣lowship with vs: and our fellowship is with the fa∣ther, and with the sonne IESV CHRISTE. With this Sanctification Dauid comforteth him selfe, Psal. 86. where he prayeth in this ma∣ner:
Keepe thou my Soule, for I am holie: O my GOD, saue thy seruant, which hopeth in thee. Heere, first of all, Dauid affirmeth himselfe to be Holie. Furthermore, how this Santification commeth, he sheweth: namely, when, by a sure faith we rest in GOD, and trust in him alone. For he which doth this: hee is spiritually in∣graffed into our Lord Iesu Christe, of whome he obteineth, perfecte, and personall Sanctifyca∣tion of the whole man. For, as I haue said, the Sanctifycation of Christe is imputed to the bele∣uer, as Christe himselfe teacheth in Iohn. 17. I Sanctifie my selfe (saith he) for them: that they al∣so might bee holie. This HOLYNESSE therefore, consisteth, in the forgiuenes of sinnes: in the imputation of the righteousnesse of Christ in renouncing the Deuil: breefely, in faith it self: whiche taketh fast holde of Christe, with his RIGHTEOVSNES, and HOLINESSE. With this holynesse of man, is also ioyned, the holynesse of the thing it selfe, which, for the measure of faith, hath also her increasements, and, in some is founde greater, in some lesser, euen as faith it selfe is greater, and lesser. For, when man conceiueth faith by the holy Ghoste, by whose woorkmanship he is also borne anew, there foorthwith is felt the efficacie of the holie Ghoste, whiche dayly innouateth the minde, the affections, the hearte, and to bee shorte, by little, and little, the whole life of the man. He deliuereth the minde, by the woorde, from the darcknesse of ignorance, from errours, and cor∣rupt
cogitations: and afterwarde, shineth into, and lighteneth the same, with the true know∣ledge of GOD, with the doctrine of saluation, and good cogitations: whereby it commeth to passe, that the affections beeing purged, doe by little and little, free themselues, frō the vncleane desires of the flesh, and, by ye effectuall working of the holy ghost, are inflamed to good motions, according, as the mind it self, shalbe illuminated. The heart of man in like case, waxeth meeke, and beginneth to molifie, and putting away that naturall stubbernesse, sprong from originall sin: it beginneth to yeeld, and obey vnto God, accor∣ding to the knowledge, infused, into the hart, by the holy ghost. To this obedience of the hart, al∣so, aswel the inwarde, as the outwarde workes of the man, are answerable. Breefely, this Sanc∣tification consisteth, in true repentance, and in a right holy purpose: so, that the man doth to this ende direct, all the indeuours of his heart, and minde, that hee might obay God, & not to com∣mit any thing vpon knowledge, and wilfulnes, which is forbidden of GOD: more esteeming the will of GOD, then all other matters of the whole worlde. Furthermore, this Sanctification, is sharply as∣saulted with moste greeuous temtations, as be∣ing that thing, which of moste mightie enemies, the deuill,The secret helpe of the holy ghost in our strang∣lings. the flesh, and the world, is oppugned: wherby it commeth to passe, that oftentimes in this spirituall battail, of the spirit, and the flesh, the Christian feeleth the weakenes of his owne
power, so that somtimes he semeth to fal vnder, yea rather to be cast downe to the grounde, and vtterly as it were thrown downe prostrate: but, in the meane time, by the ayde, presence, and po∣wer of the holy ghost, he is lifted vp againe. Af∣ter this maner Dauid beeing ouercome of ye flesh was subdued: & defiled himselfe with adulterie, and murther: but when hee heard the admoni∣tions of the Prophet Nathan (by the working of the holy Ghoste) hee was lifted vp. The same thing doth in like case happen to many other the holy ones of GOD: so that Paule saide not in vaine: Let him which standeth take heede least hee fall.1. Cor. 10. Therefore hee exhorteth the Galathians Chapter 5. saying: VValke in the spirit, and fulfill not the lustes of the flesh: for the flesh lusteth con∣trary to the spirite, and the spirite, contrary to the fleshe. And so, the life of a true faithfull Chri∣stian, is nothing else, then a perpetuall warfare:Prosper. as Prosper showeth in his Epigrammes, when he sayth: Vnto the good, both battails sharpe, and daungers great, are alwayes rife: The godly minde, eke euer hath, with whome to fight, and holde the strife. The whiche thing dayly experience witnes∣seth, and also Christ himself, when he commaun∣deth vs dayly to pray: Forgiue vs our trespasses,Matth. 6. as we forgiue them that trespasse against vs. Salomon sayth: The iuste man sinneth seuen times in a day, and ryseth againe. For this difference is betwene, the children of God, & the children of the deuil.
The children of the Deuill through stubbern∣nesse doe sinne, and continue in their sinnes: but the children of GOD, doe sinne through infir∣mitie, and are sometime seduced, by the worlde, by their owne flesh, and by the Deuill: but they rise againe, and apprehende the right hande of GOD the father: that is to say, they imbrace, with a stedfast faith Iesus Christe. The fifte benefite of Christe. THe fifte benefite of Christe, where∣vnto al these former are directed, is, FINALL, DELIVERANCE, and REDEMPTION, so, that afterwarde no manner of euill, either of the worlde, the flesh, the deuill, or any other thing, either in Heauen, in earth, or in hel, is to be fea∣red. This finall Redemption is called in the Scripture, SALVATION, wherevnto, GOD, in the beginning created man, and after∣warde, by the death, and passion of his Sonne, redeemed him. This Saluation hath foure conditions. The firste is: That wee are vtterly deliuered, from all miserie, aduersitie, and euils. The second is: That heereafter, wee may not feare of any euill to come vnto vs. The third is: That wee obtaine so great good things, that we are not able to wish greater. The fourth is: That wee inioye these good things FOR EVER: without all impediment
and mutation. This Saluation with her Conditions, we obtaine in Christe alone. These fiue benefites of Iesu Christe already rekened: these two names, IESVS, and CHRIST, do contain. The first name, sheweth him to be GOD and MAN, and the Sauiour of the worlde. The other sheweth, by what meanes he is the Sauiour. For CHRIST, that is to say, annointed: sheweth that Christ, is A PRIEST, A KING, and A PROPHET. A Prieste, which by his sacrifice wipeth out our sinnes, by his prayer maketh intercession to our heauenly father for vs: and by his innocencie sanctifyeth vs. A Prophet, whiche teacheth vs the way of saluation: And lastly, a King, which taketh vs out of the kingdome of the Deuill, and leadeth vs into saluation, and ioy of life euerlastinge. Of the sixt point or Chapter. THE sixte thinge which I proponed, to bee knowen, of our Lorde Iesu Christe, is, of the applycation of his benefits: namely, How wee (beeing made partakers of them) are brought vnto euerla∣stinge blessednesse. Our Lord, and Sauiour Iesus Christe, be∣ing moued, through his deuine goodnesse to∣warde vs, and with a feruent care of our salua∣tion: maketh vs partakers of his benefits: By the Gospell: by Faith, and By the holy Sacraments,
with whiche the holy Ghoste is effectually pre∣sent, and giuen. Of these three instruments ordeyned by GOD, I will speake in order. The first is THE GOSPEL, which he hath commaunded to be promulged through ye whole circle of the worlde: by the ministery wherof he is effectuall, through the holy Ghost, and (out of all mankinde) gathereth vnto himselfe, a church, which he gouerneth, and conserueth, by the doc∣trine of the Gospel, the Sacraments, Discipline, and Ceremonies: so, that whersoeuer these foure (the foūdation beeing vncorrupt) are found sound, & perfect, there must of necessitie, be the Christian congregation, although in that outward compa∣ny, certaine dead members be adioyned, whiche doe boast of the title of the Church in vaine. In this his Church, Christe offereth, (by the ministery of the gospel) his Grace to all men, ac∣cording to this his commaundement: Go yee in∣to all the world,Mar. 16. & preach the gospel to al creatures. Item: Luke. 24. Repentance and remission of sinnes must be preached in my name, to all nations. Ther∣fore, when thou hearest (by this voice of the gos∣pel) forgiuenesse of sinnes, and life euerlasting through Christe, to be offred vnto thee, thinke thus in thy minde with thy selfe: Heere Christe offreth me Grace, and Saluation in his woorde, which he himselfe, by the voyce of a man spea∣keth vnto me: If I therfore shall obey vnto the same, it turneth to may saluatiō: but if I shal shew my selfe disobedient to this his voyce: this hea∣ring (vnlesse I repēt) turneth to my destruction)
and condempnation. For, euen as a murtherer guiltie of death, contemning the fauour, whiche he heareth to be offered vnto him, of a most mer¦ciful king, calleth vnto himself ye more greeuous punishment: so in likecase if, any hearing the gos∣pel of grace, imbraceth not ye same, is to himselfe the author, of heauier punishment, and condem∣nation. Diligence is therfore to be giuen of all Christians, that with high reuerence, and atten∣tion they may heare, the healthfull Gospell of Christ, and by faith imbracing the same, declare themselues thankful, towardes our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christe. I will in this place set downe, a breefe definition of the Gospel. The GOSPEL (as I may speake in fewe words) is, a vniuersall preaching of Repentaunce,What the Gospel is. and remission of sinnes, in the name of Christe. As he himselfe saith: So it is written,Luke. 24. & so it behoued Christ to suffer, and rise againe, from death the third day, and repentance, and remission of sinnes among all nations to be preached in his name. This preaching, Christe calleth, The Gopell, (that is to say) A ioyfull message, by the which are offered vnto all men beleeuing in him, aswel Iewes, as Gentiles, these good things: name∣ly, deliuerance from the curse of the law, and the wrath of GOD: Remission of sinnes: saluation, and life euerlasting, and that without all merite of man, for his death, & passion, that whosoeuer are made partakers of these benefites, might with heart, mouth, and life, set forth the honour of GOD.
This definition of the GOSPEL, contay∣neth  foure members: The first is: The vniuersal commaundement of GOD, to all men, which who so will not heare, contemneth God, and maketh himselfe giltie againe, of death euerlasting. The second is: That as the Gospel doth offer vnto men, forgiuenesse of sinnes, righteousnesse, saluation, and eternall life: so they, whosoeuer shall not receiue the same, doe remaine in sinne, vnrighteousnesse, condemnation, and eternall death. The thirde is: That these benefits are offered freely vnto all men, without al respect of persons, nations, and humane conditions. For Christe would haue all men saued, as many as desyre to obtayne saluation, leaste any shoulde despayre, eyther for his owne vnworthynes, or multitude of his sinnes. The fourth sheweth, To whome these good things doe come: namely, to those, which in a true fayth, turne them selues vnto GOD, as now shalbe further said touching the same. Let these things suffice concerning the firste instrument, namely, the GOSPELL, by the ministerye whereof GOD offereth saluation to all men. It is at large saide before, How the lawe is to vs,Galla. 3. a Scholemaister vnto Christe, whiche deli∣uereth vs from the curse of the lawe. The seconde meane whereby Christe apply∣eth his benefits vnto vs is FAITH. For, euen as on Christes part, the Gospell is in steade of a hand, by which he reacheth foorth his benefits
vnto vs: so, on our parte, Faith is in place of a hand, whiche receiueth Christe, beeing offred, with all his benefits. But, that it may bee vnderstoode, what the true nature of Faith is, I will first set downe so manifest a definition of the same, that doubte may be lefte vnto no man, what the true, and Christian faith is. Furthermore, I will rehearce, the naturall properties of Faith, by whiche euery one may easely perceiue, whether he hath the true, and naturall fayth, or no. When Iohn Baptist pro∣nounceth him which beleeueth in the Sonne,Iohn. 3. to haue eternall life, he giueth warning, that the same is not els where to be sought. For hee which hath the sonne, hath the way to euerla∣sting life. The sonne is the VVay, as he himself saith: I am the way. Moreouer, He which hath the Sonne, hath the gate of life, according to that saying: I am the doore. Furthermore, hee which hath the sonne, hath the merit of eternall life. For, the sonne did not merit eternall life for himselfe, to whom, by right, it was due: but for his, (that is to say) for those whiche beleeue in him. Besides this, he which hath the Sonne, hath, with the Sonne all things. For,Rom. 8. he which spared not his owne sonne, but gaue him for vs all: how should hee not also giue vs all things with him? To conclude, hee whiche hath the sonne, is one with him: therfore, it can not bee, but he is veryly, and with the Sonne heyre of eternall life. He which hath the sonne, hath eter∣nall
life it selfe, as hee himselfe sayth, I am the lyfe. Therefore, whether thou seekest the way of life, or, the Doore, or, the merite, or, the Foun∣taine, and Lord, or euerlasting life it selfe: thou haste euery one of these in the Sonne,Iohn. 3. when thou beleeuest in him. And contrarywise: Hee which beleeueth not in the Sonne, shall not see life, but the wrath of GOD abydeth vpon him. Heereby we may esteeme, what the excellen∣cie, and vtilitie of Fayth is, whiche no man can obtayne, but hee, whiche beeing first admoni∣shed (by the Lawe) of his sinne: doth feele the greatnesse of the anger of GOD, and iuste condempnation. Therefore, the Scripture teacheth vs to be sory for our sinne, so that we would, that we had neuer sinned, or offended GOD: and that we should feele, a true greefe, & sorrowe of heart for our sinnes committed. Hee which is gone so farre forwarde, hee at the length rightly ac∣knowledgeth, how ioyfull that message of the Gospell is, which offereth to the beleeuers, Re∣mission of sinnes, the fauour of GOD, Righ∣teousnesse, and life euerlasting. But, what is FAITH? These two manners of speaking, namely: To beeleeue in Christ: And, To beleeue in the name of Christe, will plain∣ly declare vnto vs, the substance of Fayth. The former sentence, namely, To beleeue in Christe, sheweth, Christe onely to be the obiect of Fayth, or sure confidence: so, that Saluation is
not to be hoped for, but in him alone. The latter, namely, To beleeue in the name of Christe, sheweth the qualitie of Fayth, (that is to say) that our confidence in Christe, should be such, as his name is in the Gospell, and as his doinges are, which testifie of him. When as Christe therefore, is, in the Gospell named the Sauiour of all whiche beleeue in him, very GOD, very MAN, one true and e∣ternall person, and, the Lambe of GOD, ta∣king away the sinnes of the worlde: And ma∣ny examples doe testifye, that the dooinges of Christe, doe aunswere vnto this honourable name, (as the example of the Theefe vpon the Crosse, the example of Mary Magdalen, of Paule, Peeter, and innumerable others) it appeareth: that, true Fayth in CHRISTE is, A liuely,The definiti∣on of the liuely and iustifying Fayth. and constant confidence of the heart, whereby it is surely decreede, that CHRISTE is the Sauiour of all those whiche beleeue in him, as hee whiche is able to bring to passe all thinges whiche hee will, as GOD: whiche wylleth the beste vnto vs, as MAN, by the societie of nature ioyned vnto vs: whiche muste, as the Mediatour betwene GOD, and vs, appointed of the Father: whiche hath gi∣uen himselfe a pryce of redemption for vs, that euery one whiche beleeueth, might bee cleansed from Sinne by his bloode, might bee iustifyed by his obedyence, regenerated to euerlastinge lyfe, by his spirite, through the vnmeasurable mercie of GOD the Father, which so loued the worlde,Iohn. 3. that hee woulde giue his onely begotten Sonne,
that ALL VVHICHE BELEEVE IN HIM, should not perish, but haue life euerlasting. This fuller description of a constant faythe, may bee drawne more narowe, and that out of the words of Iohn Baptist: (Hee which beleeueth in the Sonne, hath eternall life): in this manner: Faith is a knowledge of Christe, and a sure cōfidence of obtayning eternall life through him. Such was the faith of the Theefe vpon the crosse,Luke. 23. which from a sure trust sayde: Remember me Lorde, when thou commest into thy king∣dome: To whom it was answered of the Lord: This day shalt thou be with me in Paradice. Such was the faith of the sinfull woman in the 7. of Luke, which heard of the Lord: Thy faith hath sa∣ued thee. In like manner of the Publicane, Luke the 18. praying on this wise: God bee mercifull vnto me a sinner: And of Dauid, Psal. 25. Be merci∣full vnto my sinne (O Lord) for thy name sake.A generall rule. All these doe agree to the rule in Psal. 2. Blessed are all they which put their trust in him. Now, after that we haue described FAITH, we wil recite fiue properties of ye same: by which, as by infallible notes, euery one may knowe, whether he hath the True Faith, or no. The first propertie of faith is: That it is felte in the heart. The second is: That it offereth it selfe to bee seene, in the outwarde deedes. The third is: That it suffereth it selfe to be try∣ed vnder the Crosse. The fourth: That it ouercōmeth the world.
The fift: That it perseuereth vnto the ende,1. Pet. . which is (as Peter witnesseth) The salua∣tion of Soules. The first propertie of Faith is this: That it liueth in the heart of man, so, that there may bee felte, an vnspeakeable consolation, against the malediction of the lawe, the power of death, and the tyranny of the Deuill: that there may bee felte, a ioy, vnable to be tolde, of the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and a spirituall securitie, of the fauour, and freendship of God: that the dwelling of the holy Ghoste, and his presence in the heart of the man, may be perceiued: that the force of the ho∣ly Ghoste, stirring vp fayth to call vpon God, may be perceiued: that a burning desire, to obey the will of God, and to resist the Deuil may bee perceiued: that a spirituall ioy of the beginning of the life eternall may bee felte: that thankful∣nesse towarde God, may be perceiued: Breefely, wheresoeuer a Christian faith is in man, there it must needes be, that she must shew foorth her selfe, by true godlynesse, by a holy porpose of ly∣uing well, and by reioycing in the holy ghost. Secondly, I affirme this to be the property of Faith: That in outwarde woorkes shee offereth her selfe, to be seene: For the outwarde woorkes doe beare witnesse of the affections of the heart. Therefore Christe sayth: By their frutes ye shall know them. It is therfore impossible, that wher∣soeuer true faith florisheth in the heart, by the holy Ghoste dwelling in the heart of man, that there should not therewithall bee present, good
woorks testifying of the hart. These workes of faith, are in generall, to eschue euil, and to doe good: so, that faith be the foundation, the begin∣ning, the leader, and gouernesse, of all vertues, and good actions. For first of all, Fayth is the pil∣ler, or foundation wherupon is stayed, and vpon the whiche is builded all obedience, vertue, and euery good woorke. Furthermore, it is the be∣ginning, from which, as from a liuing fountain, the riuers of all honest workes, and doings, doe flowe out. Moreouer, It is the leader, whiche holdeth man in the right way, least hee shoulde decline either to the right hand, (that is to say) to good intentions of men (as they call them) which wil worship God according to their owne wisedome, and traditions: or, vnto the left, that is to say, to the workes of the Deuill, whereun∣to this worlde, with the members of the Deuil, hath wholy giuen, and bound it selfe. Yea, Eayth beeing the Captaine of all vertue, and Christian works, neuer resteth it self, in any deede obiected, or set before it, before yt it heare this worde: So the mouth of the Lorde speaketh: Therfore Dauid through fayth prayeth in the 25. Psal. Shew me thy wayes (O Lord) and teach me thy pathes: And Psal. 119. he sayth: Blessed are the vn∣defiled in the way: that is, they whiche through faith shew obedience vnto GOD, so that they goe forward in the right way, declining neither to the right hand nor to the left. Last of all, faith is also the Gouernesse, directing the whole life of man, and all his works, to this marke: namely,
to the glory of God, the edificatiō of the church, and ye vtilitie of his neighbour. All these works of Faith, already remembred, may bee called backe, to these foure pointes following. The first is, a declaration of godlynesse in the outward workes of this life: namely, in the con∣gregatiō, & felowship of the Christians, to heare the word of God, and to cal vpon him, openly to professe thy faith, & vse the sacraments: In like maner with thy counsail, substance, and diligēce to set forwarde the glory of GOD, in such sorte, that thou maist be knowne, to bee earnestly af∣fected in the businesse, & cause of God. This is that, which Dauid saith Psal. 122. I was glad, when they said vnto me, we will go into the house of the Lorde. Item: Because of the house of the Lorde our GOD, I will seeke to doe thee good. In which wordes Dauid sheweth, that hee bent himselfe wholy vnto this thing, that his subiectes might vnderstand, that he went about this thing, with greatest indeuor: that he might shew himself to be a minister of God, in the publique congrega∣tion of the godly, Which example of Dauid, it be∣cōmeth Kings, & princes, magistrats, & subiects, to imitate, that by this meanes, they might de∣clare, their faith and pietie, towardes God. The seconde is: The innocencie of the pri∣uate life, so, that euery one of vs, euen when he is alone, doe thinke himselfe, to be conuersaunte in the sight of God, and therefore, to abstayne from all wantonnesse, and iniquitie. Hereof it is,. that God sayd to Abraham: VValke before mee.
For, God doth not onely see those thinges, which are set foorth to the sunne light: but, hee also looketh into the inwarde cogitations of the hearte. The third is, Iustice, and Loue, to be exerci∣sed indifferently, towardes all men: So that e∣uery man doe, with a good conscience, the dutie of his vocation, that the inferiours to their ma∣gistrate, and to others placed in authoritie, doe yeelde due reuerence, and obedience: againe, the superiours and potentates, doe, with counsaile, and diligence, assist their equals, and with a fa∣therly care, and discipline defend their subiects: and moreouer, as much as in them is, comforte the afflicted, and releeue, with their plentie, the poores necessitie: yea, doubtlesse, they should e∣steeme al men, to be members with them in our Lord Iesu Christe. And, therefore, let them be of this minde towardes others, that whatso∣euer they would to be doone to them selues, the same they should do to them: and neuer witting∣ly, and willingly, by any meanes, through iniury and iniustice oppresse others: Breefely: that thou doe liue in such wise among men, that thou maist haue among all men, an honest testimonie of the fayth, and life of a Christian. The fourth is: Diligence in eche mans voca∣cation, whether it bee in the Church, or in the householde, or in the common wealth, or in what soeuer kinde of office, which beeing, with fedeli∣tie, and honestie performed, doth serue to the commoditie of the weale publique, and common
societie. In this behalfe, the rule of Paule Rom. 12 is to be followed, by whiche he commaundeth euery man, to shewe in his office, faithfulnesse, and diligence. And, that no man should forsake, his lawfull vocation, bothe Paule and Iohn Bap∣tist doe giue counsaile: the Commandement of Paule is this: Let euery man abide in that vocation,1. Cor. 7. to the which he is called. Iohn counsayleth: that euery one bee iust in his calling: When the Ro∣mane souldiers flocked together vnto him, that they might be baptized of him, and demaunded, what they should doe: he had them not forsake their offices of warfare, or withdrawe themsel∣ues into the wildernesse, or, to put a Coule vpon them, the common couering of slouthfull vn∣thrifts: but he answered vnto them: Hurte not,Luke. 1. nor quarell with no man, and be content with your wages. Beholde here, what fruites of faith among men, Iohn requireth of the Souldiers? Let eue∣ry Christian set before himselfe this example, e∣uery one in his kinde of life: neither let them vn∣iustly oppresse any man, but rather bestow their diligence, to doe iustly the works of their vocati∣on, which may be accomplyshed, with the com∣moditie and, and vtilitie of others. I wil ther∣fore collect fiue things, as it were poynts, to the whiche euery one ought to haue respect, in his vocation, that he wander not out of the way. FIRST: Let the vocation be grounded vpon the worde of GOD, according vnto this rule: Euery office promoting the glory of GOD, and
making to the vpholding & beautifiyng of the states ordayned by God, (as the politicall, oeconomicall and Ecclesiastical states) is commaunded by the first and fourth Commaundements. Secondly: Fayth and Charitie, are the rules of all actions, in eche vocation. Thirdly: If any aduersitie chaunce: we must looke back to the word of God, where vpon the vocation is founded, and from thence consolati∣on is to be required. Fourthly: let the vocation, be alwayes refer∣red to the glorye of God, and the profit of the common wealth, wherein eche man liueth. Fiftly: God is to be continually called vpon, for, whether the vocation be more honorable, or more profitable: without the ayde of God, no∣thing can be either hapily begun, or brought to perfection.Some read Et victum quere ho∣neste. All these things Dauid in the 37. Psal. comprehendeth, in these wordes: Hope thou in the Lorde, and be doing good, dwell in the land, and verely, thou shalt be fedde. The thirde instrument, or meane, whereby Christe applyeth his benefits vnto vs, are, the Sacraments, and seales of his grace, and will. But, before that I come to ye handling of the sa∣craments of the new Testament, I will weigh two things, moste necessary to be knowne. The first is, What the custome of God hath beene, in opening his will vnto men. The other: Why God hath giuen to the signes, and sacraments instituted by him, their names. First, therfore, it is to be knowne, that God,
from the beginning of the worlde, hath accosto∣med to make open his wil, vnto men, by two meanes, namely, By manifest VVord, and By out∣ward Signe: that by this meanes, he might assist the saluation of man. When God had created Adam, and placed him in Paradise, he opened his will vnto him, by ex∣presse worde, to the which he added, a double signe, namely, the tree of life, & the tree of know∣ledge of good, and euil: so that if he did obay the worde, he should not waxe olde, but should eate of the tree of life, & liue blessed for euer: but if he did transgresse the cōmandement of God, & eate of the forbidden tre of knowledge, he should die. To Abraham likewise he proponed his worde, wherunto he adioyned the externall signe of cir∣cumcisiō, which he called his couenant. Further∣more, he promised vnto Moses, yt he would bring his people out of the seruitude of Egypt into the land of promise: to this his promise, he added a signe: namely, the paschall Lamb. Afterwarde God promised, yt he would giue vnto his people the lande of Canaan to possesse, as long as they shuld obey him, & kepe his testament, & his coue∣nant: to this his word, he also added an outward signe, namely, ye blood of the red Cow, wherwith the Priest sprinkled the people, and many other signes which he named by ye name of couenant. Altogether after the same manner, Christ in the new Testament, promiseth to the beleuers, for∣giuenesse of sinnes, and regeneratiō by the holy ghost, & addeth an outwarde signe, which in the scripture is called The Baptisme of Repentance.
He promiseth also that he would offer his bo∣dy, vpon the Altar of the Crosse, and shed his blood for the remission of sinnes: and heere hee also adioyneth an outwarde signe, which he na∣meth his body, and blood, and the newe Testa∣ment. And so it is manifest, what custome God hath kept, in opening his wil vnto men, namely, BY VVORDE, and BY SIGNE: bothe which he hath set foorth, to be perceiued with the minde, and sences, that we might be the easilyer and fullier of his wil instructed. Secondly: It is to be considered, why God hath giuen to the Sacramentall Signes, the names of the thinges themselues, for whose cause the Sacraments are instituted. Doubt∣lesse, for this cause: that when wee doe vse the outwarde signes, wee should lift vp the eyes of Faith, to the cōtemplation of ye heauenly things, of which the outwarde signes haue obtayned their names. When Abraham circumcised his sonne, the name set vpon Circumcision, by God, (wherwith, he named the same, his couenaunt with Abraham, and his seedes,) came into his minde. And Moses when he sprinkled the people with the blood of the red Cowe, thought vpon the name of TESTAMENT: whiche God had giuen vnto this signe. So in like manner, our Baptisme, is called, The Baptisme of Repen∣tance: that wee might lifte vp the eyes of our hart, from the element of water, to the promise, wherewith GOD sealeth vnto the repentant, his MERCIE and GRACE. For whiche
cause, Baptisme is called, the Fountaine of Rege∣neration: that we might consider,Iohn. 3. that those which are baptized, are spiritually borne again, by the holy Ghoste. After the same manner Bread is named, the body of Christe, and wine the blood of Christ, in the Lords his supper: be∣cause they doe note foorth, that secret meate, which Christe, reacheth foorth, vnder the bread, and wine. To be short: God of his infintie wis∣dome hath giuen to the Signes, and Sacra∣mentes, the names of the spirituall things, and giftes which by the Sacraments are signifyed: that wee should not stick in those things, which are seene with the eyes only, but in those things rather, whiche Fayth seeth, and beholdeth in the Sacraments. After that wee haue expounded these two things of the substance of the Sacramentes in generall: wee may now be the easilyer brought vnto the knowledge of the Sacraments of the new Testament, of which I will now speake in order. Of the Sacrament of Baptisme. THat wee may the more profitably vnderstand the reason of our Bap∣tisme: let vs heere in the beginning, see the cause why our Lorde Iesus Christe would be baptized. Why Christe would be baptized, aswell the
voice of the father from heauen vpon him, doth shew: as also, the appearing of the holy Ghost, doone in the shape of a Doue.Matth 3. The voyce of the Father vpon Christe, nowe newly baptized, was this: This is my beeloued Sonne, in whome I am well pleased. Of this voice, Baptisme witnesseth. For, this is the cheefe, and principall end of baptisme: that it is a testi∣monie, or seale of the fauour of GOD, towarde the Baptized. It is therefore to be noted, that wee which are cloathed with Christe, through Baptisme: are gratefull, and acceptable vnto God, through Christ. Wherunto Paule also hath respect, Ephe. 1. when hee sayth: VVee are belo∣ued,Matth. 3. in the beloued: Yea, God himselfe sayth: In him I am pleased. CHRISTE therefore, would be baptized, and vse this outwarde seale of the grace of God: that (according to the voyce of the father) we which are baptized, and ingraffed into his body, by Baptisme, may knowe, that we haue GOD mercifull, and pleased, through Christe. Therefore all the efficacie of our Baptisme de∣pendeth on Christe. The appearing of the holy Ghost, in the shape of a Doue, signifieth that spirituall Baptisme, wherwith Christ doth inwardly baptize: When the minister of God worketh the outward Bap∣tisme of water, according to the commaunde∣ment of Christ. This is that which Iohn Baptist saith: I baptize you with water: but amongst you standeth one, which baptizeth with the holy Ghost.
That the holy Ghoste appeareth in the shape of a Doue: the same is a shewing of peace, and reconciliation, made betweene God, & the partie baptized: that therewithall we might be admo∣nished, what the Arke of Noah did signifye, out of which the Doue beeing sent, returned, bring∣ing a Braunche of an Oliue. Heereof, there∣fore wee make vp the definition of Baptisme, in this manner: BAPTISME is an outwarde signe,What Bapt. is. signifying the inwarde Baptisme, which Christe woorketh by his holie Spirite, to seale in VS, THE MERCY, and GRACE of God. Furthermore, that we may, with the more frute, be occupyed, in the meditation of this our Baptisme: a threfolde signifycation of the same is to be obserued. The first is: that Baptisme is, A testimony of Grace. The second is: that it is, A Symbole, (or token) of secret and spirituall things. The third is: that it is the Cognisance of our outwarde profession, and Christianitie. Of this threefolde signifycation of Baptisme, I will speake in order. Firste, that Baptisme is A testimonie of Grace, wee haue proued before. For, it is an outwarde seale of the grace of God, testifying, that the partie which is baptized, is sanctifyed, and (as a sacrifice) consecrated vnto GOD: who regenerateth vs, beeing cleansed and sepe∣rated, from the deuil, & his societie, that we may
be made new men, yea, the sonnes of God him∣selfe, whome he adopteth in his beloued sonne, our Lorde Iesu Christe. Secondly: Baptisme is A Symbole, (or token) of things, which by his proportion, or compari∣son teacheth vs.August. Epist. 13. Whereof Augustine saith: If Sacraments had not a certaine cōparison with those things whereof they be Sacramentes, they were no Sacramentes at all. So our Baptisme, in the which, man is dipped vnder the water, and is drawne foorth againe, hath his spirituall signi∣fication, for whiche, it is called, A Symbole, or token of things. Baptisme is A Symbole or token of two thinges, cheefely: namely, Of the doinges of Christe: And of our dutie. Concerning the doinges of Christe, it tea∣cheth vs foure things: namely. VVhat hee hath doone: VVhy hee hath doone: VVhat he doth to them which are baptized: And moreouer, what he wil doe vnto them. How then, doth Baptisme teache vs, VVhat Christ hath doone? It putteth vs in minde of the history of the three dayes,Parasceues. namely, of the day of the preparation, in which Christe suffred: And of the Saboth, in whiche Christe rested in the Sepulchre: And of the day of Easter, in the which, Christe, (hauing ouercome death) rose from the dead. Therefore, Christe calleth, his death, buriall, and Resurrection, BAPTISME, Marke. 10.
where the sonnes of Zebedee, Iames, and Iohn, required, that the one might sit on the righte hand of Christe, the other on the left, in his glo∣ry: to whome Christe answereth: Are ye able to drinke of the Cup, which I shall drinke of, and to be baptized with the Baptisme, wherewith I am bapti∣zed? As though the Lorde shoulde say: yee all aspire to ioy, and glory, but ye must of necessitie suffer somewhat, before that it shalbe lawful to inioy this glory, and gladnesse. Moste bitter death falleth in, ouer whome we must triumph, before we come vnto this glory. Therfore, to be sprinkled with the water in Baptisme, noteth foorth the death of Christe: to tary vnder the water, shadoweth foorth his buriall. To bee drawne from the water: representeth the glori∣ous Resurrection of Christe. As often therfore, as we remember our baptisme, or be present at the Baptisme of others: let vs call to minde the history of the three dayes, Of the Death, Buriall, and Resurrection of Christe. But if you demaunde, VVhy Christe hath doone this? Paul aunswereth, and in two words knitteth together the whole matter, in Rom. 4. Christe (sayth he) dyed FOR OVR SINNES, and was raised againe, FOR OVR IVSTIFICATION. For, as Christe, by the merite of his death, wy∣peth out our iniquities: and by his blood clean∣seth our consciences from all mortall, sinne: So, in like manner, by his resurrectiō from death, he declareth himselfe to be righteous, and in all re∣spectes perfectly pure, according to the lawe of
God. Therfore Dauid in the 16. Psal. sayth: Thou shalt not leaue my soule in hel, neither shalt thou suf∣fer thine holy one, to see corruption. Christe also meaneth the same thing, when he saith in Ioh. 16 The holy Ghost shall reprehend the world of Righ∣teousnesse, because I go to the father: that is to say, Herode, Pilate, and the Iewes, deny me to be righte∣ous, and without all sinne: but when they shall see me, not to be ouercome of death: my resur∣rectiō from death, shalbe a testimony of my righ∣teousnesse, before them. For that cause Paule saith:Rom. 4. Hee was raysed againe for our iustifycation: that is to say: that by his rising againe he might declare his owne righteousnesse, which righte∣ousnesse, he giueth, and imputeth vnto all those which beleeue in him. Furthermore, VVhat Christe doth in Baptisme Iohn sheweth saying: He baptizeth with the holy Ghoste,Mat. 3. and with fyer. And Paule, when he saith: He cleanseth vs in the fountaine of water,Ephe. 5. through the worde. Whereas Iohn affirmeth, Christe, to baptise, VVith the HOLIE GHOST, and VVith FYER: he sheweth that Christe giueth in Baptisme, the holye Ghoste: who, by his pre∣sence is effectuall, in the worde, and Baptisme. What the holy Ghost woorketh in the partie which is baptized, according to the commande∣ment of Christ: is shewed by the word, Fyer: For as the Fyer altereth things sometimes by bur∣ning out, sometimes by inflaming: So the holy Ghost, altereth man by regenerating, burneth out by mortifying the olde man: inflameth by
quickening, and raysing vp the new man. And heereof it is, that Paule sayth: Christe clenseth vs in the fountaine of water, through the word of life.Ephe. 5. In which words hee ioyneth together three things, namely, Outwarde Baptisme, which hee calleth The fountaine of water. Then, Christe, who cleanseth vs inwardly with his blood, and holy spirit: And lastly, The VVorde, that is, The promise of Christe, whereupon the whole effica∣tie of Baptisme doth depend. For, Baptisme is not effectuall, for the water which the Minister of God sprinckleth, neither for the words, which are recited by him: but all the force of Baptisme floweth from the moste ample promise of Christ: who (with his holy spi∣rit, and with fier) baptizeth him, which, with the externall element of water, is sprinkled. But although this be the institution, and or∣dinaunce of Christe: yet notwithstanding, let vs not thinke, his hand to be shortened, to baptize spiritually without water, those which are parta¦kers of his promise, (that is to say) all the In∣fantes of the Christians: and those cheefely, whiche departing in the mothers wombe, doe not touche the outwarde Baptisme. Therefore godly Parents should not despayre of the sal∣uation of such Infantes, neither with vncome∣lynesse, and contempt, bury them in a grounde (which the common people call) not consecrated: but let them surely persuade themselues, yt these are in the same couenāt, with the children of A∣braham, as Paule in Gallath. 3. plainely teacheth.
Therfore, as Such as came of his flesh. the fleshely children of Abraham, which departed this life, before the eight day of Circumcision: were not condemned: but by the vertue of the promise, and couenaunt of GOD, were saued: so, also after the same manner, the spirituall Children of Abraham, (that is to say) the infantes of all the Christians, are not con∣demned, if they decease before baptisme: but are saued by the efficatie of the promise of God, and by inuisible baptisme, wherewith Christe bap∣tizeth them, who, (by his death, and precious blood) hath redeemed them. With this consolation, let christian Parents lifte vp themselues, whose Children, departe hence, either in the mothers wombe, or foorth∣with after the birth, before they be made parta∣kers of Baptisme. Yet, I would not, that any should heereof take occasion to protract to Bap∣tisme of Infants: yea rather, I am an exhorter, that assoone as they be newe borne, they should haue a regarde to haue them sealed, with this outwarde Symbole (or token) of saluation, and therewithall to be assisted, with the prayers of the godly, whiche shall bee present at the Bap∣tisme. It remayneth now to be explycated, VVhat Christe wil doe to those which are Baptized. This thing he himselfe sheweth in his last comaunde∣ment, which, ascending vnto heauen, he gaue to his Apostles in these wordes: Go, and Baptise all nations, whosoeuer beleueth, and is Baptized, shalbe saued, but he that beleeueth not, shalbe condemned.
For, euen as they whiche were in the Arke of Noah, were preserued from the floud: so, whoso∣euer doth earnestly stick to the couenant of this outwarde Baptisme, are deliuered from the e∣uerlasting floud, (that is to say) from the paines and torments of Hel, by IESVS CHRIST. Breefely, as he which is baptized is drawen frō the water, so Christe will take vs from all cala∣mities, and bring vs into his kingdome, where, with him we shall reigne in all eternitie. After that we haue sayd, How our Baptisme, is a Symbole, (or token) of the actions of Christ: we will now see, Howe it also admonisheth vs of our dutie (that is to say) what we shuld perfourme vnto GOD: what we owe vnto our selues, what we must suffer: And what we must looke for: How we must passe from miseryes to saluation: For of euery of these partes of our duetie, our Baptisme doth admonish vs. But, VVhat shall we performe vnto GOD? This Christe teacheth vs, when hee sayth: Baptize them, In the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoste. In which woordes, hee comprehendeth the principall end of Baptisme: which, (it were conuenient) we should alwayes, and continually haue in remembrance. For, this is the moste simple, and plaine meaning of these wordes: I Baptize thee, in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost: that is to say: I Baptize thee to this ende cheefely: that thou shouldest acknowledge, confesse, inuocate, wor∣ship, and honour, this only true GOD, namely:
The Father, the Sonne and the holy Ghoste: The Father, which so loued thee, yt hee hath deliuered his owne only begotten sonne, to death for thee: The Sonne, whiche dying for thee, clenseth thee from all sinne, by his precious blood, shed vpon the Altar of the crosse, for the forgiuenesse of thy sinnes, and, which, moreouer clothed thee with his righteousnes, yea, maketh thee a member of his owne body, so that by his meanes, thou art called the sonne of God. The holy Ghost also, who regenerateth, and sanctifyeth thee vnto life e∣ternall: that, thou beeing knit vnto God, mayst with him inioy saluation, without end. This is the most simple (and plaine) sentence, of ye words of Baptisme, which beeing gathered out of the holy scriptures, I comprehend in this one little forme of speech: I Baptize thee, In the name. For in the worde (NAME) is contayned, bothe, a confessing of GOD: and beside, whatsoeuer this Confession requireth of man. By these thinges it is easye to bee perceiued, what manner of couenant betweene God, and man, baptisme is God promiseth vnto man, for∣giuenesse of sinnes, righteousnesse and euerlast∣ing life, and this his promise he sealeth by Bap∣tisme, the partie which is baptized, doth againe, by faith, binde himself vnto God, and promiseth that he will deny the Deuil, with all his works: and, by a sure faith, inuocatiō, worshipping, fear, and, in all things, by due obedience, cleaue vnto GOD.1. Pet. 3. For this cause Peter calleth Baptisme, A COVENANT, wherin a mutuall promise is
made, of God demaunding, and promising grace to the partie baptized: and againe of him which is Baptized, answering and affirming, that hee will constantly abyde, in the mutuall knot and couenant. In the seconde place Baptisme warneth vs, VVhat we shoulde doe to our selues. As we are dipped in the water of Baptisme, and tary vnder the water, and are drawen from thence againe: so we should mortifye sinne, and choke the vitious affections, desyres of sinne and corrupt concupiscences in vs, & rise againe in newnesse of life. Of this thing Paule Rom. 6. doth admonish vs, where he inueigheth against those, which supposed, that libertie to sinne was graunted, because that Paule had sayd, VVhere sinne did abounde, there Grace did more abounde: Whom hee confuteth with these words: VVhat shall we say then, shall wee abide in sinne, that Grace may abounde? God forbidde.Rom. 6. Howe shall we which are deade to sinne, (that is to say) (whose sinne is deade) liue any longer therein? Knowe yee not, that wee whiche are Baptized into IESVS CHRISTE, are Baptized to dye with him? (that is to say, we which are baptized doe, in Baptisme put on Christe, whose death doth effectually, kill, and keepe vnder sinne in vs, that it shoulde not reigne in vs.) VVee are therefore buryed to∣gether with him by Baptisme, for to dye, (that is, that sinne might bee deade in vs,) that euen as Christ was raysed vp frō death, by the glory of the father, so we also shoulde walke in newnesse of life.
For, if we be ingraffed into death, like vnto him, so shall wee also bee partakers of his resurrection. Knowing this, that our olde man, (that is, the cor∣rupt nature) is crucifyed with him, that the body of sinne might be abolished, (that is, the corrupte affections) that wee should no more bee seruants vnto sinne. And so it appeareth, how Paule, by the rea∣son of our Baptisme teacheth vs, to mortifye sinne, to destroy the wicked concupiscences, and to walke in a new life. Whereunto he also di∣recteth the scope of his whole disputatiō, which he setteth downe in these wordes: And so doe ye also esteeme your selues to be dead vnto sinne: But, to liue vnto GOD, in Christe Iesu our Lorde. Let not sinne therefore reigne in your mortall bodyes, that ye should obay thereunto by the lustes thereof. As often therefore as the corruption of our na∣ture, shall prouoke vs to sinne, let vs call to re∣membraunce our Baptisme, which admonisheth vs of innocencie of manners, and newnesse of life, to the glorye of GOD, through IESVS CHRISTE. THIRDLY, Baptisme teacheth vs, VVhat we must suffer. For, euen as Christe, (whome, in Baptisme wee doe put on) was baptized with the crosse: so we also, as long as we remaine in this worlde, let vs prepare our selues, to the Crosse and aduersities. Yea, GOD will by this meanes haue his adopted sonnes, to be made like to his onely be∣gottē sonne: that they may reign together with
him in his glory. This is that which Paule saith in Rom. 8. If wee be sonnes, then are we also heyres,Rom. 8. the heyres I meane of God, and heyres annexed with Christe, so that if we suffer together with him, we shall also bee gloryfyed together with him. And Paule addeth there this consolation, that the Crosse worketh for the best, to such as loue GOD. Of this crosse of the godly, he also spea∣keth in the Epistle to Timothie: VVhosoeuer (saith he) will liue godly, in our Lord Iesu Christe,Time. shall suffer persecution. The history of the Passion of our Lord Iesu Christ, setteth before vs, three kindes of crosses, vnto which may be referred, the diuerse sortes of all calamities, which may happen vnto man in this life. The first Crosse, is the crosse of Christ, which is seene in the middle, betwene two others. The second, is, of the Theefe, hanging on the right hand. The third, of the Theefe hanging on the left hand. Christe, (asmuch as concerneth his owne per∣son) suffered, beeing innocent: but bothe these Theeues, suffred iustly, for their offences. But he which hanged at the right hand: repented vnder the Crosse, and beeing conuerted vnto Christe, obtayned comforte, and saluation. The other at the left hand, continued stifly in his ma∣lice, and dying without repentaunce was con∣dempned. After this same manner, it also goeth at
this day. The greatest parte of the godly Chri∣stians, doe suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake, which happeneth to many holie Martyrs, whome Christe pronounceth, blessed, in Matth. 5. Blessed (saith he) are they, which suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake, for theirs is the kingdome of heauen: Blessed are ye when men reuile you, and persecute you, and shall falsely say all manner of euill against you for my sake: Reioyce, and bee glad, for great is your reward in heauen: for so did they per∣secute the prophets which haue beene before you. Many doe also suffer, as the theefe, vpon the right hand. These are they, which, for their cer∣taine offences are punished of God, namely, by taking away their goodes, Children, powers, helth, body: or els doe fall into the hands of the Magistrate, and are drawen vnto punishment, as also vnto this Theefe, it happened. These beeing oppressed with calamities, and punishments, do confesse, themselues to be iust∣ly punished for their sinnes, and flying vnto Christ, doe (with a firme faith) desire forgiuenes of their offences. And by this meanes they ob∣taine pardon of God, whiche accepteth their crosse as a sacrifice pleasant vnto him, through Iesus Christe. The example of this Theefe, is, by the singular wisdome of God, set downe be∣fore, all wretched sinners, theeues, murtherers, and others whatsoeuer: whiche for their euill deedes are punished: that the same might be an euident testimony of the fauour of God, where∣with he receiueth al, with howsoeuer infamous
kinde of punishment, they bee punished in the sight of the worlde, so that they, with a constant fayth, doe flye vnto Iesus Christe. But, that the wretched offenders, whiche are to be punished for their offences, may know by what meane they may obtaine the fauoure of GOD: I will set downe certaine sure Arti∣cles according vnto whiche, they may directe their cogitations. FIRST of all, the wretched sinner, which is to be punished for his manifest offences, shall not hypocritically make sclender his sinne, nei∣ther by conferring of his sinne, with ye sinnes of other offenders, deceiue himselfe: but rather, he shall examine himselfe, and weigh (not in deceit∣ful ballances) the heuinesse of his iniquitie. Let him consider who it is, whom he hath offended, namely, GOD, a righteous Iudge, from whom nothing can be hid: therefore, let him esteeme himselfe worthy, who deseruedly, (for the inor∣mitie, and fylthynesse of his sinne) is vnwoor∣thy, the name of a man. Such manner of cogitations do breed in man, a knowledge of himselfe, and stirre vp a feeling, and taste, of the bitternesse of death, and hell. SECONDLY: Least (feeling the sorrows of Hel,) he should despayre of the grace of God, for the greatnesse of his sinne: as Cayne, Iudas, Saule, and many others haue doone: these fiue things are to be thought vpon. First: The promise, and good will of God, saying: I will not the death of a sinner, but that
hee may bee conuerted, and liue. Furthermore: the commaundement of God, earnestly commaunding repentance, vnder the rigour of obedience, whiche all creatures are bounde to performe vnto him. O yee Sonnes of men (sayth he) turne ye vnto me. Item: Let euery one be turned from his wicked wayes. And Christ sayth:Matth. 11. Come vnto mee, all yee which labour, and be heauily loden, and I will refreshe you. Thirdly: Let him set before him, the death and passion of Iesus Christ, who, with his suf∣ficient raunsome, hath made satisfaction, for the sinnes of all men. Augustine sayth: The mercy of GOD is greater, than the miserye of all sinnes. Fourthly: Let him set before his eyes, the ex∣amples of those, whiche beeing conuerted, haue beene receiued into grace: as Adam, Dauid, Ma∣nasses, the Theefe, and as many as euer haue re∣quired pardon: so, that God hath neuer reiected any, earnestly repenting. Fifthly: Let him consider, the testimonie of Grace, namely: Baptisme: whereby God testify∣eth that he will remit sinne to all those, whiche (by faith) turne themselues vnto him. It is written Marck. 1. that Iohn preached the Bap∣tisme of Repentance, for the remission of sinnes: that is, he taught, Baptisme to be a testimonye, and seale, by whiche GOD testifyeth, that hee (without all respect of persons) remitteth sinne, to all those (whiche by faith) turne themselues vnto Iesus Christe. THIRDLY: the wretched offender beeing
exercised, with these fiue considerations, let him now giue place to the worde of God: by the effi∣catie wherof, (the holy Ghost working) the spar∣kle of Faith, is conceiued, in the heart of man. FOVRTHLY: Faith beeing conceiued: forgiuenesse of sinnes is to bee desyred, for the precious blood of Christe, whiche he shed vppon the Altar of the Crosse, for the sinnes of the whole worlde. In this praying, faith (by little, and little) increaseth, and together therewith, man feeleth in his heart the answere of the ho∣ly Ghoste, which bringeth to passe that he most assuredly persuadeth himselfe that all his offen∣ces are forgiuen him. FIFTLY: Pardon of sinne in the sight of GOD, beeing obtayned: let him with a quiet minde submit himselfe, to the punishment deser∣ued: and together therewith, let him desire of God, fortitude of minde, that he may patiently suffer the paines, layde iustly vpon him, for his wicked deedes: yea, let him also giue thankes vnto God, whiche hath drawen him to tempo∣porall punishments in this world: that he shuld flye from eternall condemnation: and that he should heere in the body be punished, that with the Theefe hee may commende his soule vnto God. The thirde kinde of Crosse, whereof the hi∣story of the passion of Christe maketh mention is, The Crosse of the Theefe hanging at the lefte hand. After this manner they doe suffer, which repent not, neither call vpon God: but contem∣ning
the grace, and sacrifice of Christe, do dye in desperation, and are for euer condemned. They which in such sorte doo suffer for their offences, and fly not, by a sure fayth, vnto God: this tem∣porarie Crosse, is vnto them, as foreshowinges of the paynes eternall, wherewith they shalbee plagued, without all mitigation, and comforte in Hell with the Deuilles, and all the company of the condemned. Hetherto, we haue intreated of the three sortes of Crosses, wherof the history of the Passion of Christe, maketh mention. Now, let vs moreouer ioyne heerevnto, a ge∣nerall admonition: whiche may profit all the godly, in what soeuer manner they shalbe afflic∣ted in this worlde. Whosoeuer is oppressed with the crosse or ca∣lamitie, let him respecte these foure thinges in order. In the Deuill, let him consider, Lying and Murther. In himselfe let him weigh, Sinne, and VVret∣chednesse. In GOD, let him reuerence, Iudgement and Mercie. In the Gospel let him seeke counsaile, & helpe. First: Let him consider in the Deuill, Lying, and Tyranny, who as by lying he slewe our first Pa∣rents: so now euery moment, with lying, and tyranny, hee lyeth in waite for all mankinde. Peter.For, (as Peter sayth) Hee goeth aboute like a roring Lyon, seking whom he may deuoure. He ve∣rely seketh all, but he deuoureth only those, whōe
he intangleth in his snares of Lying. For this vncleane spirite continually indeuoureth, to make all other vncleane with him. Hee infec∣teth the minde with lying, and erronious doc∣trine: He shaketh the hearte, with the tempests of corrupt desyres: He bewitcheth the will, with the shadowe of commodytie: to conclude, he in∣deuoreth to defile, with wicked actes, the whole life of man, that he, that he at the length might haue man (beeing spiritually slaine) fellowe, and partaker of eternall damnation. This con∣sideration of the study of this wicked spirite, the enemye of GOD, and mankinde: shoulde stirre vp an hatred of sinne, and breede in the mindes of men, an abhorring of the filthynesse thereof. Secondly: Let him weigh Sinne, and wret∣chednesse in himselfe, in euen ballances, and let him thinke that the misery whiche he suffereth, is a deserued punishment, for his sinne. And, by the greatnesse of the misery, let him esteeme the enormitie, turpitude, & multitude of his sinnes. Let him consider, that hee by his sinne, hath of∣fended the cheefest, and infinite goodnesse: wher of let him conclude, the present calamitie, to bee away to euerlasting misery, vnlesse he be other∣wayes holpen. In this cogitation the whole man treembleth, of whiche thing we may see many examples, in many Psalmes, cheefely in those, whiche they call, the Penitentiall Psalmes, in whiche, Dauid plainely expresseth, the great dolors, and vexations, wherewith,
as with tempestes, he is ouerwelmed for his sinnes. Thirdly, Let him reuerence in God, Iudge∣ment and Mercy. It is the parte of the most iust iudgement of God, to punish sinne in all men: but of his Mercy to punish, not to destroy, but yt he might saue: so that we do not contempne the Medicine. Whereof Esaie saith: Trouble giueth vnderstanding. Item: The distresse wherein they cry, is a doctrine vnto them. Breefely, God puni∣sheth By IVDGEMENT, that hee might saue By MERCIE: as it may bee seene in Psal. 51. In the word of ye Gospel, Let him seeke coun∣sail and remedyes. The Gospell sendeth all af∣flicted sinners to this onely Physition Iesus Christe, which calleth vnto him, and saueth all offenders. This counsaile is moste excellent, be∣cause neither in Heauen, nor in earth, any is founde, which is able to heale the wounds of sin beside this onely Iesus Christe. Furthermore: this very worde which giueth vs counsaile, doth also minister helpe vnto vs, and healeth the woundes of sinne, in such wise, that we may be holpen by Christ, so that we be∣leeue in him, and with a constant Fayth, pray with Dauid, saying: Heale me Lorde, and I shall be whole. In this place againe, are to be called back into our mindes, the fiue Articles, of whome mention is made a little before. The Finall causes, wherefore GOD will haue his Church to bee subiecte to the Crosse,
are many, of which these are the cheefe. First, that wee may learne, that those good things whiche God hath promised to his Chil∣dren, are not to be looked for in this worlde: but that we should think of the true countrie, to the which we are called: so that wee might ease all the aduersities of this life, by the meditation of the ioy to come, and life euerlasting. For, if all things should succeed vnto the godly, in this life, according vnto their desires: they would not be affectioned with the desire of the good thinges promised by Christe. Secondly: that, man, (by the Crosse, as by a bridle) may be restrayned: who, through the corruption of nature, is otherwise prone to sinne. Heereof the Psalmist sayth: Holde their chawes with bit, and bridle, which drawe not nigh vnto thee. Thirdly: that the Crosse might be a sensible preaching of repentance. For, euen as the consci∣ence assenteth to the law, reprouing sinne: so al∣so by the Crosse, we are admonished to repent, that we may be saued. Fourthly: That the crosse may ouerthrowe al mans presumption, and confidence of the flesh, and teach vs to cleaue with a firme fayth vnto GOD alone, and to call vpon him,Psalm. according to his Commaundement: Call vpon me (sayth he) in the day of tribulation, and I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie mee. Let these things suf∣fice to be spoken touching the Crosse or calami∣tie, of which our Baptisme doth admonish vs.
IN THE FOVRTH PLACE Baptisme teacheth vs what wee should looke for. For e∣uen as the partie Baptised, (beeing sprinkled with the water) is drawen from the water, and as Christe himselfe (after his passion and death) entred into his glory: so wee also doe take our iourney from the straunge wandring of this world, vnto saluation, & life euerlasting: a moste euident testimonie wherof, Christe hath giuen, namely Baptisme, to all the beleeuers. IN THE FIFT PLACE, Baptisme tea∣cheth vs, that our life in this worlde, is nothing els than a Pilgrimage of three dayes. Wee suffer, we are buryed, and we shall ryse againe, at the sound of the last Trumpet, when Christe shall say, Aryse yee Deade. THE third signifycation, of Baptisme, wher∣of wee haue made mention aboue, is, that it is a Souldierly marcke (or Cognisance) whereby the Souldiours of Christe are knowen, whiche haue giuen their names vnto him, and taken an othe, that they will fight vnder his standerde, agaynst the Deuill, and his kingdome, namely, Sinne. The Souldiours of Christe, are discerned, by foure notes, cheefely, from those whiche are in wages vnder their Captaine, the Deuill. The first, and moste surest note of the Chil∣dren of God is, Faith, inuisible, and onely knowen vnto God, with her priuy, and inwarde frutes in the heart of the man. The seconde is, The open profession of Faith
in the mouth, before all the worlde. The thirde is seene, In Godlynesse, and Ho∣nestie of life, when the Christian doth so order his life, that ye same may be a manifest testimony of the faith which lyeth hid, in the heart of man. The fourth is, the note of the body, namely, Baptisme, whereby we professe our selues, to be the seruāts of Christ. Heervnto also maketh the sacrament of the Lorde his Supper, whereof we will now speake a fewe wordes. Of the supper of the Lord. I Haue sayd before, that the Sacra∣mentes of the new Testament, doe occupy the third place accommoda∣ting, or applying of the benefites of Christe. Forasmuch as we haue hetherto spoken of Baptisme, it remaineth now that we intreate of the other Sacrament, namely of The supper of the Lorde. God graunt that it may be to the glory of his name, and the wholesome instruc∣tion and profite of all the godly. I will remoue all, vnprofitable questions, and diuersities of o∣pinions, which doe more hurte, then profit: and set downe onely those things, touching the most holy Supper of the Lorde, which I haue lear∣ned, and drawen out of the fountaines of the sa∣cred Scripture. And that the same may be done to the greater fruit, & profit of the christian Rea∣der: I will comprehend this whole doctrine, in a fewe, and certaine assured poyntes, & Articles.
The firste, and cheefest thing, that wee must knowe, concerning the Supper of the Lorde, in∣stituted of Christe himselfe, vnder the visible Symboles of Bread and Wine, is: That Christe, (in the same night in which hee was betrayed) did institute this Sacramente, that the same might bee (amongst all his) an euerlasting monument of his Passion, in whiche hee deliuered his body to death, and shed his blood vpon the Altar of the Crosse, for many, for the remission of sinnes, as he himself saith: This is my body, whiche is giuen for you: This is my blood, which is shed for many, for the remission of sinnes. Item: Doe ye this in REMEMBRANCE of mee. Secondly: The Supper of the Lorde testi∣fyeth, that they which vse the same rightly, are vnited, and as it were incorporated into Christ, and that spiritually, according to the woords of Paul.1. Cor. 10. The Cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the partaking of the blood of Christe? The Breade which wee breake is it not the participating of the body of Christ? That is to say, whosoeuer doth eate the body of Christe, and drinke his blood, he (so that a lyuing fayth be not wanting) aby∣deth in Christe, and Christe in him. Thirdly: the Supper of the Lord teacheth, a spirituall education in the body of Christe, which is accomplyshed, whilst we vse his Sup∣per. For euen as we are, by the blood of Christe, cleansed, and, by the holy Ghost in Baptisme, re∣generated: so wee beeing cleansed, and regene∣rated, are spiritually fed, and nourished, by the
benefite of the body, and blood of Christ: rightly vsing the Supper of the Lord, according to his owne institution. Fourthly: the Supper of the Lord is, a testi∣monie of the new Testamente, (that is to say) of A NEVV COVENANT, betweene God, and man, touching remission of sinnes, wherby God testifyeth that hee will receiue into fauour, and forgiue sinners, (for the merite of the death, & passion of Christ) to All which beleeue in HIM. Therfore he himselfe sayth: This Cup is the new Testament in my blood: that is, This Cuppe is a firme, and vnmoueable seale of the moste ample promise of god cōcerning ye forgiuenes of sinnes. Whosoeuer therefore, (with a true, and liue∣ly faith) vseth this Sacrament: receiueth the testimonie of God himselfe: whereby he testify∣eth, that he hath deliuered his sonne, shedding his blood vpon the Altar of the Crosse, for the remission of sinnes, that through him, as many as beleeue in him, may obtaine saluation. Fiftly: The Supper of the Lord, admonish∣eth vs of the secret, and spirituall communion, whereby we, whiche doe partake this Sacra∣ment together: are vnited, (as it were) into one body. Of which thing Paule saith:1. Cor. 10. Because wee beeing many, are one bread, and ONE BODY: inas∣much as we are all partakers of one breade. This knitting of the Christians into one body, depen∣deth heereon: that we all, (as it is already said) are vnited to the body of Christe, by the parta∣king of his body, and blood.
Sixtly: The Supper of the Lord requireth, mutuall loue betweene the Communicantes: whereby the misticall members of the same bo∣dy, (as we haue said) shoulde, with heart, word, and worke, performe duetyes one towardes the other. This Loue of Christian people, which, (from the head CHRISTE) floweth into the rest of the members (that is to say, the Citizens of his Church) doth not take away the degrees of persons, but rather confirmeth the diuersities of callings in the Congregation: of all whiche, there is one marke, namely, The Glory of God, and the commoditie of thy neighbour. Whoso∣euer feeleth, not in his heart, the sparckle of this mutiall dilection, and, (without a purpose of well dooing to his member, (that is to say to his neighbour) commeth to the Supper of the Lorde: it were better for him, to abstaine vtter∣ly from the Sacrament. For who would not affirme that manne to bee mad, and out of his minde, whiche would set his owne members at strife one with another amongest themselues, so that the handes might plucke, out the eyes, or cut of the feete? I woulde to GOD, that Christians could, after the same manner, marke their owne madnesse, whiche they doe mani∣festly betray, and showe forth, whilste (through mutuall hatreds, and contentions of minde,) they set themselues, one against another. Seuenthly: The Supper of the Lord is a pledge, and signification of our resurrection, life, and eternall saluation, and that by the power of
Christe risen againe from the dead. For, what∣soeuer hath beene hetherto spoken, of the Sup∣per of the Lord, are al to be referred to this prin∣cipall end: that they may bee vnto vs in steade of a pledge, & sealing of life euerlasting through Christe, whose members we are made. And so that is fulfilled which Christ saith:Iohn. 6. He which ea∣teth my flesh, and drincketh my blood, hath eternall life, and I will rayse him vp in the last day. By these Articles, which we haue brought a∣broade out of the holy Scripture, to the decla∣ring of this doctrine of the supper of the Lorde: euery man may easily vnderstand, how needeful it is (with a hygh godlynesse of minde, and reue∣rence) to approch to this supper, & to proue him selfe, before he eate of this bread, or drinke of the Cup of the Lorde. For,1. Cor. 10. (as Paule saith) He which eateth, and drincketh vnworthyly, eateth and drinc∣keth his owne damnation, because he discerneth not the Lords body.Mar. 16. Christ affirmeth the same thing of the Gospell: Hee which beleeueth not (sayth he) shalbe condemned. And Augustine sayth of Baptisme: Euen as he whiche vnworthyly eateth the body of the Lorde, and drinketh his blood, eateth, and drincketh his omne damnation: so he which receiueth Baptisme vnwoorthily (which thing many Iewes doe at this day) receiueth to himself damnatiō, & not saluation. Furthermore, Least any man shoulde com∣municate the Supper of the Lord, vnworthy∣ly, let him followe, the counsayle of Paule 1. Corinth. 11. Let a man proue himselfe,1. Cor. 11. and so let
him eate of that Bread and drinke of that Cuppe, for he which eateth and drinketh vnworthyly, eateth, and drinketh damnation to himself, not descerning the Lords body: (that is to say) hee calleth vnto himselfe the punishment, and Iudgement of GOD. What therefore is the true manner of pro∣uing himselfe? The same Paule prescrybeth, 2. Cor. 13. when he saith: Try your selues whether ye be in faith or no, proue your owne selues. Knowe yee not your selues, that Iesus Christe is in you? Heereby it appeareth that the true tryall of proouing consisteth in this, that a liuely faith bee truely felt, and the presence of Christe in vs, by the vertue of his spirit, stirring vs vp to the stu∣dy of godlynesse. Breifely: he is truely prooued, which (reuerently in the feare of GOD, in true repentance, in true confidence, and with an ho∣ly purpose,) commeth to this Supper. And con∣trarywise, he which is without the true feare of God, and earnest repentance, and wanteth liue∣ly fayth, and an holy purpose: the same eateth, and drinketh iudgement to himselfe bothe tem∣porall, and eternall, vnlesse he be againe (by faith in Iesus Christe) conuerted. And I nothing doubt, but the greatest parte of moste heauy ca∣lamities, euery where reigning in many places, is therefore sente: because they bee so common which participate the supper of the Lord, with∣out true, and earnest repentance. Paule writeth, that the Corinthyans were plagued, because they touched vnreuerently the
holy Supper:1. Cor. 11. For this cause (sayth he) many are feeble and weake among you, and many are fallen a sleep: For if wee had iudged our selues, wee should not haue beene iudged: but when we are iudged of the Lorde, we are instructed, that we should not bee damned, with the worlde. I would to God, that many at this day, would not builde vpon a fee∣ble foundation, and be much deceiued with their owne opinion: which then suppose themselues to come woorthyly to the Supper of Christ, when they haue confessed their sinnes before the preist and obtayned absolution of him. He which be∣leeueth, him God absolueth for the death, and passion of Iesus Christe. For, he which belee∣ueth (saith Iohn) hath eternall life.Iohn. 3. If therefore the beleeuer hath eternall life, hee is also (with∣out all doubt) absolued from all his sinnes. For, Absolution, is no other thing, than a deliuerance from sin, which is in the power of GOD alone. Therefore, the Ministers of the woord, can∣not absolue him, (which is without the feare of God, a liuely faith, and a purpose of good liuing) from the least offence. And he which is such a one, & yet notwithstanding, dare require abso∣lution of the Minister of the worde: to him (for∣asmuch as hee is before God a lyer, and before the Minister of God, and hypocrite) the absoluti∣on turneth vnto damnation. For, this outwarde absolution answereth to the faith, and purpose of the innermoste heart. The Priest is the mi∣nister of God, therefore let him behaue himselfe according to the commaundement of his Lord,
neither let him arrogate greater power vnto himselfe, then hee hath receiued of the Lorde. He hath power to shew foorth, aswell, remission of sinnes to all the beleeuers, as also euerla∣sting condempnation to those whiche turne not themselues vnto God. These are the keyes of the Church of Christe, so that if any Minister of the Gospel, should goe beyond these bounds, he shall not cary this rashnes, vnpunished of God. What is then to be thought, of priuate confes∣sion, and outwarde absolution? There be many, and weightie causes, why the holy fathers did institute this talke, or Colloquie, whiche is had betweene the partie confessing, and the Mini∣ster of the woorde. The first: that the rude, and ignoraunt, might be the more profitably instructed, beeing deman∣ded,Meaning as∣wel the hea∣ringe of the holye Scrip∣tures, as the interpretatiō of them. of euery principle of the Christian Religion. For, when as many, doe many yeeres, heare the holy preachings, & yet doe very little or nothing at all profit: such, verely shal with greater profit, talke together with the learned, and godlye minister of the woorde, whiche may inquire of what matters they stande in doubte, and may teache them those thinges, whereof they bee ignoraunt. Secondly: That in this talking together, the profiting of the youth, and younge persons might bee tryed. For it is the parte of a good Pastour, not onely to teach openly: but also (ac∣cordinge to the example of Paule,) to make a tryall at home, how farre euery one of his hea∣rers
haue gone forwarde in the course of god∣lynesse. Thirdly: that a reason of the fayth might be required of those, of whose Fayth, and Religi∣on, iust doubte might be had: and that vnto such as in any heresie were stubbernely obstinate, the Supper of the Lord should be prohibited. Fourthly: that in this Colloquie, the doubtful consciences, and such as for the scruple of their sinnes were vnquieted, might by doc∣trine, counsaile, and consolation, be releeued. Fifthly: that in this priuate talke, they might heare the voyce of the Gospell, pronoun∣cing forgiuenes of sinnes to those which beleeue in Christe. For in asmuch as Christe sayth: Hee that heareth you, heareth mee: it is much auayle∣able to heare the Minister of the worde, (in the name of Christ according to his cōmandement) shewing foorth the remission of sinnnes. ¶ Priuate Absolution may be made in this manner. Because (my Brother) thou doost not only con∣fesse thy selfe to be a sinner, and guiltie in the sight of God, And art sory that thou haste offended God, but also beleeuest the promise of the Gospel, concer∣ning forgiuenesse of sinnes, namely, That vnto the beleeuer is giuen eternall life: I declare vnto thee (in the name of Christe) the forgiuenesse of thyne offences, In the name of the Father, of the Sonne,Iohn. 8. and of the holy Ghoste, Amen. Goe in peace, and sinne no more.
Hetherto we haue heard, of the last thing, which I propounded was to bee considered in the Messiah, our Lorde IESV CHRISTE, namely: How we are made partakers of his bene∣fites But because there be many founde, whiche protract repentance vnto the last breath of lyfe, I will yet ad hereunto, and declare two things. First: touching the causes, whiche should in∣uite vs, to the ripening (or hastening) of Repen∣taunce. The other, by what meane a Christian may perseuer vnto the ende, that hee loose not faith, and the benefites of Christe. VVhat then shall inuite vs to the hastening of Repentaunce. Albeit there bee many, and moste weightie causes, which should mooue vs, that we should not delay repentance, which (alas for sorowe) many doe at these dayes with great securitie: yet notwithstanding, I will at this season bring foorth tenne Argumentes at the leaste, wherby euery man may woorthyly bee moued, betymes to repent. The first is, The vncertaine end of this life, For, no man knoweth in what hower, in what mo∣ment, or in what manner he shall departe from hence. This vncertaintie shoulde woorthyly mooue vs to hasten repentaunce. Christe going about to exhorte his disciples to watchfulnesse, taketh an Argument hereof, when he sayeth: VVatch, and pray, because yee knowe neither the day nor the howre. And in Luke the 12. the Lorde
propoundeth a Parable of a rich man beeing carelesse, and delaying Repentance. The ground (saith he) of a certaine rich man,Luke. 12. brought forth plentiful fruites, therfore he thought with himselfe saying, what shall I doe, because I haue not rowme wherein to gather my fruites to∣gether? and he sayde, thus will I doe, I will destroy my Barnes, and builde greater, and thither will I ga∣ther together my fruites and my goods, and I will say vnto my soule: Soule, thou haste much goodes layde vp in store for many yeeres, take thine ease, eate, drincke, and be mery. But God sayd vnto him, Thou foole, this night will they require againe thy soule from thee, whose then shall those thinges bee which thou hast prepared? So is it with him that hoordeth vp riches to himselfe, and is not riche towards GOD. Heereof afterwarde the Lord inferreth this: But rather seeke yee the kingdome of GOD, and the righteousnesse thereof, and after∣wards all other things shall be giuen vnto you. Item: In such an hower as ye think not, will the Sonne of man come. And Augustine saith: God giueth thee a space of amendement, but thou more louest delayment, than amendement: Thou draw∣est the time a long, and of the mercy of GOD, thou promisest vnto thy selfe many things: as though he whiche hath promised thee saluation through re∣pentaunce, had also promised thee long lyfe, How knowest thou what the morrowe day will bringe foorth? Thou sayest well in thine heart, when I shal amende me, God wil forgiue me all mine offences: VVe cannot deny, but that vnto the amended, and
conuerted, God hath promised fauour: But in what Prophet readest thou, that because God hath pro∣mised fauoure to the amended, doost thou also reade, that he hath promised thee long lyfe? This vncertaintie therefore of the tearme of this life, should admonish vs of the ripening (or hastening of repentance, leaste sooner then wee thinke, we fall vpon the darcke mountaines, as Ieremie speaketh, and so be ouerwhelmed with the iuste Iudgement of GOD. There haue been many which hoped, that they might conti∣newe foorth their life vnto olde age: but in the middle flower of their age, they haue fallen downe flat. Many haue looked for a quiet ende of life: but haue perished in exile. Many haue purposed to haue the comforts of their freendes and acquayntaunce in the agonie of death: but they haue miserablye perished amonge e∣nemyes. Many haue promised to themselues a time, in which, (lying in their bed they would mourne, & repent: but they haue beene soudainly taken foorth of this life. Seneca very notably admo∣nisheth: when he sayth: Truste not to this quiet calme, for the Sea is turned backe agayne in a mo∣ment: and in the same day, where the shippes haue played, they haue beene drowned. Briefely: seeing no man knoweth whether he may call backe a∣gaine the breath sente foorth of his nosethrils: they doe very foolishly, whiche (with the contu∣mely of God) doe procrastinate repentaunce,
as if they had the momentes of time in their hands. The seconde is: A moste pernitious heape of wicked offences, of the anger of God, and of pu∣nishmentes, is, (by delaying of repentaunce) ga∣thered together. Whereof Paule Rom. 2. sayth: But thou after thy hardnesse, and heart which can∣not repent, heapest vnto thy selfe, wrath, against the day of vengeaunce. For, the sinne, which is not suppressed by repentaunce, foorthwith, by the weight thereof, draweth into another, and a∣gaine from that into another: vntill an infinite heape of sinnes be layde together. And as a moste naughtie roote, beeinge not plucked vp out of the grounde, doth continual∣ly growe, and budde, more, and more: Euen so sinne, when thou cherishest it, dooth get dayly new strength vnto it, vntill a monstrous floud of sinnes haue ouercome thee. For he whiche in this sorte abuseth the mer∣cie of GOD: is wicked agaynst GOD: as he which hath purposed to serue the Deuill a lōger time, than GOD. By this his securitie he also offendeth the Aungels of GOD. For as they doe reioyce at the repetaunce of the vngod∣ly: so with out doubte they are sorowfull for their vnrepentaunce. It greeueth them that so noble a Creature of God should perish through her owne faulte. Hee is also cruell against himselfe. For hee will rather bee euill than good, or rather bee sicke than sounde, or rather bee the bondslaue
of Sathan, than the freeman of Christe, or ra∣ther be a begger in heauenly good things, than rich: Briefly, he wil rather perish, than be saued, than the which crueltie, doubtlesse none can bee greater. I ceasse to speake, that he is iniurious against the creatures of God:Rom. 8. Whereof Paule affirmeth, that the creatures doe mourne, be∣cause the wicked doe abuse them, and doe wait for the freedome of the glory of the Children of God. Oedipus perceiuing the incest committed with his owne mother, plucked out his owne eyes, that by this meanes he might at ye least, auoyde the sight of the Sunne, and all the creatures. For he sawe that all the creatures of God, were beholders of his vnspeakeable, and moste filthy wicked acte: and that they all, with one consent did condemne him. In like manner at this day whosoeuer doe liue wickedly, do perceiue them∣selues to bee accused of all the creatures before the tribunall seate of God. The third is: The enstraunging of the minde from God, And finall Induration. For by howe much ye longerrepentāce is differed: by so much is it become the harder. For euen as the matter goeth in the diseases of the body: so is it also in the disease of the minde, which is sinne. For, by how much the longer the medicine of the body is differed: by so much the disease is made the more daungerous, and is the hardlyar cured, yea sometime, through continuance it becom∣meth vncureable, as it appeereth in the disease
of a Canker: where if the malady bee not forth∣with in the beginning kepte vnder by fire, or iron: it is to bee feared, least by little, and little, it will growe so strong, that it will vtterly take the man away. This is the same thing whiche Salomon sayth: A young man walking after his owne wayes, when he is olde, shall not goe backe from the same. And Ieremie sayth: If the man of India may chaunge his skinne, and the Cat of the Mountaine her spottes:Consuetudo diuturna, al∣tera fit na∣tura. ye also may doe well when yee haue doone euil. For dayly custome is made another nature. This daunger of Induration should woorthyly mooue vs to the ripening, (or hastening) of repentance. The fourth is: An euill conscience, than the which, there is nothing more greeuous, nothing more heauy, nothing more miserable. They whiche are delighted in the myre of sinne: are compelled, to beare about with them, this wit∣nesse of their owne wickednesse. An euill con∣science (sayth Bernarde) is her selfe a witnesse of our offences, she is the Iudge, she is the tormentour, she accuseth, she Iudgeth, she punisheth, she condem∣neth. Albeit the same be cut of for a time, and as it were, seared with an hot iron: yet notwithstan∣ding she will sometimes shew foorth her selfe, and (if not before) yet (at the leaste) in the agonie of death, she wil be present as a thousand witnesses: she will accuse, she will condemne, she will punish. For, an euill conscience is a certaine diuine testimony, imprinted in the mindes of men, of the Iudge∣ment heereafter to come vppon the obstinate,
and of the punishments which they shall iustly sustayne. The fifth is: Offence, and guiltinesse of the sinnes of others. For in an offence giuen, there is a double euill, namely, The deede, and the exam∣ple. As through the fact by it selfe, the lawe of God is violated: so by the example thy neigh∣boure is hurt, for immitation, or following ther∣of. Heereof proceedeth that lamentable excla∣mation of Christ: VVo be vnto the man, by whom the offence cōmeth. And againe: He which offen∣deth one of these little ones, which beleeue in me: it were better for him, that a milstone were hanged a∣bout his neck, & that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. Paule pronounceth those to sin against Christe, & to destroy the weake brethren, which vse indifferent thinges with offence. But what is to be thought of him which (either through erronious doctrine, or wicked life) leadeth ma∣ny into destruction? That so great wickednes∣ses doe abounde in the worlde at this day, com∣meth it not hereof, that one thincketh that law∣full for him, which he seeth another doe? whom by and by another immitateth, and him ano∣ther, vntill (through the scabbednesse of one member) the whole body almoste of the Church beeing infected is deformed. The sixth is: The priuation of spirituall riches, of which, onely the holie in the Church of Christ are partakers. For, so longe as manne lyueth without repentance, hee is without the ioy of the holie Ghoste, hee is destitute of the peace of
conscience, hee is depriued of spirituall consola∣tions, in his misery: neither is hee partaker of the prayers of the godly Christians. The seuenth is: The delicates (or daynties) of the Diuell. For, as the Aungels in heauen, doe reioyce ouer man when hee repenteth: so the Diuell is throughly imbrewed, with highest de∣lights, and (as it were) with moste pleasant pleasures, when he seeth men, (specially those which haue giuen their names vnto Christe) to liue without repentaunce. For, the sinnes of men are (as certayne of the fathers say) the de∣licate dishes of wicked Diuels. The eight is:. The consideration of the tra∣gicall examples of many menne, whiche, for their contumacie haue beene caste, of GOD into paines eternall. In the number of whome, are Cayne, Pharao, Saule, Achitophell, Iudas, Iulianus, and infinite others. We see also how many na∣tions, which haue heard Christe, and his Apo∣stles haue perished: beeing turned away to per∣nitious errours of the Deuill, the Turke, and the Romaine Antichriste. Ninthly: Let this cogitation also enter into thy minde: That Repentaunce is not so the worke of man, as the the gifte of GOD: which if thou contemnest, whiles it is, (day from day, and of∣ten) offered vnto thee, of God: it is to be feared, that hee dooth oftentimes caste his precious pearles before swine. The tenth is: The condition of late Repen∣taunce: For it is oftentimes rightly sayde:Sera peeniten∣tia raro vera. Late
Repentaunce is seldome true. Hee is not to bee iudged to repent, whiche after he is not able to sinne, doth feigne repentaunce. And Augustine sayth: The repentaunce whiche is required of him, onely which is about to dye: I feare mee leaste that same repentance doe also dye. I say this, (not that I doe denye the mercy of God to be giuen vn∣to those, which beeing about to departe forth of this life) doe repent: but that we may consider how daungerous it is to protracte repentaunce vnto the laste gaspe of this lyfe. It seemeth good vnto me to collect breefely, these reasons: the consideration of whiche, will keepe euery of vs in the feare of God, that wee abuse not the greatnesse of his mercie to our owne destruction. Almightie GOD bende our heartes vnto true, constant, and healthfull Repentaunce, that wee may be the Children of God: and that wee may all, and singuler (with olde Symeon, from the botom of our heartes, when wee shall departe foorth of this lyfe,) ioyfully sing: Now Lorde let thy seruaunt departe in peace, according to thy worde, &c. Howe shall a Christian perseuer vnto the ende, that he loose not Faith: and the grace obtay∣ned in our Lorde Iesu Christe. Wise, and prudent Physitians, beeing cal∣led to the sick patient: doe apply themselues to doe two thinges. First, they bend all their dili∣gence, (by their arte, and counsayle) to take a∣way the present disease. Furthermore, that
(vnto the patient restored to his former health,) they may prescribe an order of liuing: least they fall back againe into their disease, & so become the authours of their owne destruction. The ex∣amples of these, wil I follow: & because I haue hetherto brought (forth of the worde of God, the worde of saluation) remedy against sinne, death, & damnation: I al now also bestow counsayle, by what meane it may bee accōplished, That hee which hath receiued Christe with his benefits, may also continue, and obtayne those euerlasting good thinges, whiche Christe hath merited for all those which repose their confidence in him. If I shall therefore saye with Paule: (Fight thou a good fight, holding fayth and a good conscience:1. Tim, 1.) I haue comprehended the whole matter. But if any man goe forwarde further, to saye: Nowe is Fayth and a good Conscience to bee retayned? I aunswere: The Scripture nameth The feare of God, The hyeste, and cheefest,Eccleae, 1. wisdome of the Children of God. For, this feare contayneth vs in duety, and obedyence towardes GOD: in whose sight wee walke. It hath foure con∣ditions. First: It is heedeful, leaste it should offend God. Secondly: It doth diligently execute the things which are commaunded it. Thirdly: It carefully auoydeth all lyinges in waite, deceiptes, and subtilties. Fourthly: It seeketh and imploreth ayde, a∣gainst his enemyes. First of all, he which feareth God, doth busily
take heed, that by any meanes, hee offend not GOD. For this cause The feare of the Lorde is called in the 19. Psalme; PVRE: because that he whiche feareth God, considereth what euils he was subiect vnto by reason of sinne: hee con∣sidereth, ye Christ hath suffered his most bitter death, to take a way sinne: hee considereth that whether hee wake, or sle o, or walke, eate, or drinke &c. he is cōuers at harthe sight of God. Furthermore hee remembreth that infinite glory, whereby he is adopted into the societie of the Sonnes of God, that hee might shew him∣selfe in all things obedient, to his moste louing father: he considereth that sinne is the marke of the Children of the Deuil: he considereth him∣selfe to bee a member of Christe, and partaker of that holy fellowship with GOD the father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoste, and so foorth with all the electe of God: hee considereth that Sinne is spirituall Adultery, breaking the ma∣riage knotte, whiche is betweene the Soule of man, with her Bridegroome our Lorde Iesu Christe: hee considereth, that it is not comely, that hee shoulde turne the Temple of GOD, into the habitation of the Deuill: neither that hee oughte to expell the holy Ghoste foorth of his hearte, whose benefites so exceeding, and many he hath effectually prooued: Hee is at a point, that he wil not deale traiterously against his Lorde and redeemer Christe, to gratifie the Deuill: Hee considereth that hee must so trade ouer his life: that (through any manifest wic∣kednesse)
he bee not an offence to any, or that through him, the Gospell be not euill spoken of. These, and suche other considerations will breede in the hearte of man, the feare of God, and a study to auoyde sinnes, and fallinges a∣gaynst the conscience. GOD graunt that e∣uery one of vs, may continually beare aboute with vs, in our heartes, these considerations. Secondly: He which feareth GOD, Obey∣eth the Commaundements of the Lorde: For, as the Psalme sayth: He hath great delight in his com∣maundements: (that is to say:) He yeeldeth due reuerence, and obedience vnto GOD, acccor∣ding to his Commaundements, with his grea∣test pleasure of minde. From this true worship, (or seruice) of GOD, the Papists haue many yeeres hether vnto, fowlye erred: whiche doe rashly teache, that God is to bee worshipped with the precepts of men: and doe bynde all the worshipping of GOD, to the Priestes, and Monckes of their order: whom (with manifest deceiptes, notwithstanding and for lucre sake) they doe bouldely affirme, to serue God aright, only: and to haue also saleable works of supere∣rogation. I will therefore adde somewhat concerning this matter, whereby euery man may learne, rightly to frame his iudgement: touchinge the true worship (or seruice) of God.
Of the worship (or seruice) of GOD. The definiti∣on of the true seruice of God.THE VVORSHIP, (or seruice) of God is, A woorke commaunded of GOD, wrought through Faith, (prin∣cipally) to the setting foorth of the glo∣ry of God. In this definition, there bee three thinges, whiche in the true worship of God, are necessaryly ioyned together. First: The matter (or materiall parte) which is, A worke commaunded of God. Secondly: The cause namely, That the same worke be doone of faith, in Iesus Christe. Thirdly: The end, namely, The glory of God, which the worker respecteth, that by this meanes he may declare himselfe obedient, to his heauenly father. That this worship must bee, A worke com∣maunded of God,The proofe of the defini∣tion. he himselfe in the 20. Chapter of Ieremie teacheth vs: VValke yee in my Com∣maundements, and not in the Commaundementes of your Fathers. And Christe when he sayth: In vaine doe they worship me, teaching the doctrines, and Commaundements of men. That is to say: They thinke mee to bee worshipped, when they goe busily aboute those thinges, wherein man iudgeth the worship of God to consiste: but they wander farre wide, and loose all their laboure. And Paule manifestly condemneth all wil wor∣shippings,Collo. 2.23. that is to say, all those worshippings, which men inuent, of a good intention, as they
call it. Heereby, this rule is established: That no worship, (or seruice) is acceptable vnto God,A generall rule to bee obserued. but that which GOD himselfe, in his owne word, doth ordayne, and commende vnto man. For, on the worde dependeth the purenesse, and holynesse, of eche woorke. Furthermore, that Fayth is necessaryly re∣quired, to the substaunce of this worship, is eui∣dent heerby: because God requireth a pure, and sincere worship: which cannot be yeelded of any man, whose hearte is with all abhominable fil∣thynesse defyled and corrupted in the sighte of God. Paule affirmeth, the hearts of the vnfaith∣full to be vncleane, and defyled: therfore it must needes be, that their works (albeit they appeare fayre, and beautifull in the sight of the worlde) are abhominable in the presence of God.Rom. 15. Wher∣fore, to the Romanes Paule sayth: VVhatsoeuer is not of Fayth, is sinne. And to the Hebrues. It is im∣possible, without Faith, to please God. But,Heb. 11. what then woorketh Fayth? Fayth purifyeth the heart of man: for so sayth the Apostle: By Fayth purify∣ing your heartes. But this thinge commeth to passe, (not that Fayth of her owne nature ob∣tayneth that efficatie:) but that the consciences of the faythfull (as the Apostle speaketh) are sprinckled with the blood of Iesu Christ:1. Pet.  wher∣with they are cleansed from all their deadlye offences, Moreouer, that the worship (or seruice) must (principally) respect the glory of God: Paule tea∣cheth saying: Doe ye all things to the glory of God
For, inasmuch as we are created, and also more∣ouer redeemed, that wee should worship God: doubtlesse it becommeth vs to yeelde due wor∣ship vnto God, for his commaundement sake. A woorke therfore which is doone after this man∣ner, (According to the commaundement of God,) (proceeding from Fayth) and (vnto the glory of God): is called a holy, a pure, & so a worship, (or seruice) pleasing God. Whether therefore, this sorte of worke, be inwarde, or outwarde, a high kinde of worke, or a base: it is notwithstanding iudged a spirituall seruice of God, because it pro∣ceedeth not from the flesh, but from the spirit of faith, which hath respect to ye glory of God. But wheresoeuer any one of these three is wanting: there the worke of man deserueth not to be cal∣led a seruice, or worship grateful, and acceptable vnto God. That Pharisie of whome the Gospell maketh mention, & that Courtior Cornelius, of whom it is written in the Actes of the Apostles, gaue almes: by the benefit wherof, many were releeued and comforted. Heere, bothe of them do one & the same workes, yet notwithstanding of ye almose of these twaine, ye differēce is great. The almose of the Pharisie, were not ye worship∣ping of god, because they neither proceeded from Fayth, neither tended to the glory of God. But Cornelius, albeit he was not fully instruc∣ted in the knowledge of Christe: yet notwith∣standing, forasmuch as he beleeued, & hoped for saluation, and bestowed his almes through the commaundement of God, vnto God his glory,
and the comforte of the poore): his almes were, a pure, holy, and acceptable worship, (or seruice) vnto God. Therefore the Angel sayth, to Corne∣lius Acts. 10. Thy prayers and thy almes are come vp into remembraunce in the sight of GOD. Dauid, and Scipio, doe bothe fight agaynst their ene∣myes: the warre of Dauid was a worship, or seruice of GOD, but not the warre of Scipio. For Dauid hauing the Commaundemente of God, beleueth, and holdeth battayle, to the glory of God, and the defence of his people. But Scipio (inasmuch as he wanted both the commaunde∣ment of God, and Faith, neither sought the glo∣ry of God) his battails were only wicked, and cruell butcheryes of men, in the sight of God. After the like manner two Maydens (of the which two, one fearing God, the other indewed with no feare of God (albeit they two bee occu∣pyed about one, and the same woorke, as clean∣sing of garments, yea, or wyping of shooes, or doing any other commandement of their Mai∣stresse: yet notwithstanding, onely the works of the maiden which feareth God, are the worship∣ping or seruices of God, forasmuch as they are doone of fayth, according to the precept of God, commaunding obedience of seruants towards their Maysters: but the woorkes of the other, beeing the woorks of a wicked life, (albeit they doe outwardly appeere more excellent) are not the worshippings (or seruices) of God, foras∣much as they are defyled, with the vncleanesse of the heart, and inwarde filthynesse.
The like iudgement is also to bee had of other dooings. And verely, no worke (albeit it be glo∣rious, & beautifull) may bee called The worship, or seruice, of God, vnlesse, the same be 1. Com∣maunded by GOD, and 2. be doone of him whiche beleeueth, and feareth God, 3. vnto the honouring of his name. Let this suffice to be spoken concer∣ning The woship (or seruice) of God: whereby it is easye to vnderstand, what is to bee thought of the Masses, Vigilles, Rosaryes, and many suche innumerable trifles, and inuentions of that An∣tichriste of Rome: which he dare vtter, vnder the title of holynesse, and the worship of GOD, against the manifest veritie of the whole Scrip∣ture. THE third condition of The feare of God, is, that he which feareth God, Doth studiously be∣ware of deceipts, and lyings in waite for him. Here∣vnto maketh that sayinge of Syrach, Chapter. 33. No euill shall come agaynst him, that feareth the Lorde, but in the time of temptation, GOD wil vp∣holde him, and deliuer him from euill. Amongst many enemyes, with whome a Christian must haue conflict, there be three cheefe, which bend themselues to hinder his saluation, namely, The Flesh, The worlde, and the Deuill. The Flesh, (that is to say) The prudence, and wisdome of man, will take in hand, either to re∣forme God himselfe, and prescribe a manner of worshipping him: or els by her concupiscences, & pleasures, goeth about this thing, yt shee may vtterly turne away the whole man from God.
Fleshe, and Bloude is sayde, to will to reforme God, and to prescribe an order of worshippinge him: when man appoynteth anye woorship for God, which is not commaunded of God, as it is doone in the papacie: and will haue this to be obserued, as a rule vnmoueable. (That whatso∣euer is doone of a good intente, pleaseth GOD.A common rule of the Papistes. Agaynst these, the feare of God doth set it selfe: and considering such manner of suggestions, to be deceipts of the Deuil: acknowledgeth GOD to bee wiser, than that hee needeth, or will bee taught of duste, and ashes. Hee therfore, which feareth God, thinketh thus, of good intention, as they call it: If so bee, that good intention be directed by the woorde of GOD, it proffiteth: but if not, it is daungerous, & if it fight agaynst the woorde of God, it is then, playnely hurtfull, and pernitious. Whosoeuer therfore instituteth a woorshippe, (or seruice) diuerse from the com∣maundement of God, hee sinneth fower folde. First, hee becommeth guilty of declininge a∣way from God, because hee forsaketh the rule of the true woorship of God, namely, the woord of God. Furthermore: Hee incurreth the faulte of rashnesse: for that he dare bee so bould, to bring in a woorship not commaunded by God. Thirdely: Hee imprinteth into himself a note of horrible presumption: in that hee supposeth himselfe to increase the woorship of God, bee∣yond that which god himself hath cōmaunded. Fourthly: Hee sinneth in giuinge example,
whereby others are inuited to the lyke supersti∣tions. If any man doth require examples of of this matter: hee may finde great plenty, not onely among the Papistes, but also, peraduen∣ture, among our selues. Let euery man therfore take heed, that hee attempt not, or institute any thing, without the cōmaundement of God. Furthermore, Flesh, and Bloud do also vse the Counsaile of their inward, and household guest, and the sundry delightes, and pleasures of the body. Intemperantie, and Incontinentie indeuou∣reth to turne away the whole man from God. But against these things, THE FEARE OF GOD opposeth it selfe, and on the one part, re∣peateth often the examples of our Lorde Iesu Christ, and his holy ones, and on the other part reconeth vp the vnhappy falles, and miseries of those which haue declyned from God: of which matter, wee haue euen at these dayes manifest examples. THE VVORLDE in like manner, lyeth in wayt for the Children of GOD, whom, (by wicked counsailes, and examples, by honoures, pleasures, ritches, and prosperity of thinges) it goeth about to seduce from God: and vpbray∣deth to the Churche of Christe, not onely her Crosse, and tribulations: but also persecuteth, and killeth as many as doo confesse Christe. Agaynst the priuy deceiptes, and open iniuries of the world: the feare of GOD, setteth, The Counsayle of GOD, The example, and will of Christ, Efficatie, and ioy in the holy Ghost, The
heauenly ritches of lyfe euerlastinge, The Conso∣lations of the holy Ghoste, vnder the Crosse, and the victory of saluation in Christe Iesu: which all the godly shall fully obteyne, when Sathan with his members shal bee cast into the paynes, of Hell, euerlasting. Moreouer THE DEVILL, with ly∣inge, and murther assayleth Christian people. Agaynst him fighteth the feare of GOD, with the swearde of the Spirite, namely the woorde of God: beeinge assured to obteyne the victory through our Lord IESVS CHRIST, as in this fourth member shall now further bee sayde. THE FOVRTH Condition of the feare of God is, That it requireth ayde agaynst these his enemies, The Flesh, The VVorlde, and the Deuill. Of this matter Syrach: in Chapter 40. ma∣keth mention: The Feare of the Lorde (saith hee) wanteth nothinge, neyther needeth it any helpe. The most notable, and chiefest refuge agaynst all the enemyes of the Christians, is earneste, and feruente inuocation of the true, and omni∣potent GOD. Which thinge Salomon con∣fesseth, when hee sayth: The name of the Lord is a most stronge Tower, the righteous flyeth vnto it, and shalbee exalted. And GOD himselfe in the Psalme sayth:Psalm. 50. Call vpon mee in the day of tribulation, and I will delyuer thee, and thou shalte glorifie mee.
Because therefore the cheefest forte of Chris∣tians, in all aduersities is, faythfull Prayer: I will shewe in few woordes, what is to be estee∣med of CHRISTIAN PRAYER. Nei∣ther doe I thinke it to bee needefull to refute that deuelishe errour, whiche the Pope hath brought in, of the Inuocation of Sainctes, which is nothinge els, than a meere blasphemy of Iesus CHRISTE, the Sonne of GOD. For inasmuch as GOD in his woord, hath ex∣pressely commaunded, that wee should trust vn∣to him alone, and call onely vpon him, and that wee should not giue this honour vnto any crea∣ture: doubtlesse they which doe otherwise, doe greeuously offend, and suffer themselues to bee fowly seduced, by the instigation of the Deuill, from the true Mediatoure, and Intercessour, IESV CHRISTE. But hee which feareth GOD,Ihon. obeyeth the commaundemente of GOD, (whereby hee chargeth, that hee himselfe onely, be called vpon,) and trusteth to the promyses of God, and first of all to that of Christe, promising that VVhatsoeuer wee shall aske in his name, wee shall receyue it, so that wee aske in a sure fayth, nothing at all doubting of his promises.
Of Christian Prayer. VVhat then is Christian Prayer? CHRISTIAN PRAYER (is not a bablinge of many wordes,The true de∣finition of Christian Prayer. or much talke, as Christ in Math. 6. sheweth, that the hipocrites falsely supposed:) but, It is an inwarde groninge of the heart, wherby the minde of man is lifted vp vnto GOD: And ey∣ther geueth thankes vnto him, for benefits (through Christe) receyued: Or requireth somewhat in the name of the onely Mediatoure Iesu Christe, surely perswadinge himselfe to bee hearde of God. Moses prayeth, his handes beeinge lifted vp vnto Heauen, no moouing of his lippes beeing seene. For, hee cryed in heart, and the Lord answered him saying: VVhy cryest thou vnto mee? And Dauid sayth: Vnto thee (O Lorde) haue I lifte vp my soule. By these two examples it appeareth, that true prayer is not a vayne noyse of the lips: but a feruent groninge of the heart, requiringe helpe of GOD. To what ende then doe wee vse a recitall of wordes, wee bende the knees, knocke the brest, and in the time of praying, lifte vp our eyes vn∣to Heauen? Wee vse these outward gestures, that the heart of man may bee stirred vp to pray earnestly: that our cogitations maye bee the more bente, to the requiring of the things: that GOD, with soule, and body togeather might
bee honoured: and that publiquely, (with body, and mouth) wee might professe our fayth in GOD. Wherof Augustine sayth: Although the inuisible will of him which prayeth be knowne vnto God, neyther needeth hee any tokens to open the minde of man vnto him, which knoweth the speaking of the heart: yet notwithstanding, man v∣seth the voyces, and members of his body, that by prayinge in such sorte, the affections of man maye grow the more humbler, deuouter, and feruenter. How is the heart of man in the time of prayinge lifted vp vnto God? That is doone (as it were) by two winges: of the whiche two, one is THE CONSIDERATION OF THE MER∣CY OF GOD,The two winges wherby wee are lifted vp in prayinge. the other is, THE SVRE CONFIDENCE IN THE MEDIA∣TOVRE our Lorde IESV CHRISTE. The Consideration of the Mercy of God consisteth in this, that GOD himselfe hath commaunded this woorship of Inuocation, and hath promised, that hee will heare them which call vpon him: and also (after his hearinge, and delyueraunce) requireth thankfulnesse. These three poinctes are ioyned together in the saying of the 50. Psalme: Call vpon mee in the day of tribulation (that is the Commaunde∣mente) And I will deliuer thee, (the promise of hearinge) And thou shalte glorifie mee, (whereby thankfulnesse is required). Therefore, when wee pray, wee must not only haue respect to the Commaundement, and promise of GOD: but wee must also thinke vpon thankes geuinge, which
consisteth in yeelding obedience vnto God. Hereby it is euidente, that whosoeuer prayeth, keepinge a purpose to sinne: the same may not thinke, that hee shal obteyne any goodnesse: but rather, by his prayer to call vpon himselfe the plagues of God, for his vnthankfulnesse. For so sayth the Psal. 66. If I had inclined vnto wicked∣nesse with my heart, the Lorde had not heard mee. And in the 1. Iohn. 3.1. Iohn. 3. If our heart reprooue vs not (that is to say, if wee bee free from an euill conscience and purpose of dooinge euill,) VVee haue trust to Godwarde, and whatsoeuer wee aske, wee shall receiue of him. Iames t  Yee aske, and receiue not, because yee aske e, euen that yee may consume it vpon your c scences. Therfore, let the Christian w about to pray, follow the rule geuen of Paule in the 2. of Timoth. 2. viz. Let euery one which calleth vpon the name of the Lord, depart from iniquitie. THE OTHER VVINGE wher∣by in the tyme of prayinge, the heart of man is lifted vp vnto GOD, is, ASVRE CON∣FIDENCE, in the Mediatour our Lorde Iesus Christe, which hath Or layed downe, viz. in the 16. of Iohn. geuen vnto his Disciples this moste sweete promise: VVhat∣soeuer yee shall aske the Father in my name, hee will geue it you. In this moste ample promise of Christe, two things are chiefely to bee obserued namely, the vniuersal signe (VVHATSOEVER) and the māner of Inuocation, (IN MY NAME.) The vniuersal promise is to be restreyned, to a
certayne kinde, that the sentence of Christe may bee this: VVhatsoeuer yee shall aske, (that is,) Whatsoeuer yee, beeing the Children of GOD shall aske of your heauenly Father, (that may be proffitable for your saluation, and Commoditye) the same hee will geue vnto you. So S. Ihon also declareth the same, in the 1. Ihon 5. when he sayth: VVhatsoeuer wee shall aske ACCOR∣DINGE TO HIS VVILL, hee heareth vs. For, it beeseemeth not good Children, to require any thinge of their Father, which might bee contrary to the fatherly will. For, if a sonne doth require of his Father a Scorpion, or a ser∣pent, or, a thinge any way hurtfull, surely it is agaynst the will of a father, neyther will the father giue that thing, which the sonne requy∣reth. Let the Children of God therfore, keepe these two rules: The first is this: VVhen wee require of GOD, those good thinges, which we may vse eyther well, or yll: let vs aske those things, with Condition, saying: Graunt mee (O Lorde) this, or that thinge, (if it bee, auayleable for mee,) and if it hinder not, those thinges, which are far more bet∣ter, and excellent. So in times past, the holy Martyres prayed, and wee also at this day, after the same manner, doo submit our selues to the diuine pleasure: when wee pray agaynst, eyther pestilence, war, or other punishments of GOD: or beseech God, for the obteyning of health, and the necessaries of this lyfe. The seconde rule is this: VVhen wee desire of GOD those good thinges, which wee can not a∣buse:
those thinges are to bee required without all Condition. Of this sorte of good thinges, are, The knowledge of God, the increase of fayth, true godlynes, patience vnder the Crosse, & other giftes like vnto these. The foundation of this rule, is, the knowledge of the will of God, who would haue al men to be saued, and come to the know∣ledge of the truth,1. Tim. 2. as it is at large shewed bee∣fore. THE OTHER THINGE which I said was to bee noted, in that most sweet promise of Christ, is, THE MANNER OF INVO∣CATION, which is expressed when he saith: (In my Name,) that is to say, VVhatsoeuer yee shall aske in the knowledge, and Confidence in mee: the same, the Father will geue you, for my sake, which am your aduocate, intercessour, and Media∣toure, with my Father, and your Father: yea, the Father loueth you, for my sake, because yee are my members, yea rather, my brethren, and his adop∣ted sonnes. Furthermore, of what sorte the knowledge of Christe should bee, and what manner of Confi∣dence, our cōfidence in him should bee, wee haue declared before: therfore, I will now, only giue admonition of this thinge, namely, How wee should be affected, as often as we do heare this pro∣mise of Christe: (VVhatsoeuer yee shall aske the Father in my name, hee will geue it you:) For it conteyneth, both, manifolde doctrine, holsome admonitions, and effectuall consolations. The Doctrine is manifolde: For, first, it
teacheth, that all immagination of our owne woorthynesse, is to bee excluded from our prai∣ers. For, when, wee praye in the name of Christe: wee acknowledge, Christe to bee only woorthy, for whose sake wee are heard of God. Moreouer, wee learne a difference, betweene a Christian Prayer: and the prayers of all o∣ther sectes. For, Christian Prayer is grounded vpon the Confidence in the Mediatour: whom, forasmuch as prophane men doo not confesse, their praier is voyd, & destitute of al foundation. The admonitions are these: that this man∣ner of prayinge, admonisheth vs, of our blinde∣nesse. For, when wee must aske in the name of Christ: it is not to bee doubted, but, that those thinges are very great, which must bee asked. Wee must therefore open our eyes, and looke diligently about vs, what thinges publiquely, what priuately, are greeuous vnto vs: what inwarde, what outwarde, what Corporall, what spirituall thinges are lackinge: that in all these thinges, wee may lifte vp our heartes to our most mercifull Father, and aske of him, in the name of our Mediatour IESV CHRISTE surely, and without doubt, trusting, that he wil giue vs those things which are necessary for vs (so that wee praye in a firme fayth,) and that those thinges which wee require, may be hole∣some for vs, as it is already sayd. The Consolations are: that this manner of praying comforteth those which praye, agaynst two most great impedimentes of Inuocation:
namely: Fleshly Distrust: and, Our owne vnwor∣thynesse. For, vnlesse when wee pray, we were stayed vpon the confidence of the Mediatour: our Fleshly distrust, (which the remembraunce of the manifolde sinnes of our whole lyfe, dooth aug∣ment) would feare vs away from praying, and wee should all the sorte of vs, be easily subdued, beeinge throwne downe prostrate with the con∣sideration of our vnwoorthynesse, who of our selues are vnwoorthy to come into the presence of GOD, but the confidence in the Mediatour, healeth these maladies. For, it both ouercom∣meth fleshly distrust, and boasteth not her own woorthynesse, but the woorthynesse of Christe. Hereunto apperteyneth that sayinge of Paule Rom. 5. By fayth we haue peace with God, through our Lorde Iesus Christe, by whom also wee haue accesse, through fayth, vnto this grace, wherin wee stande. &c With these thinges notably agreeth, the an∣swere of our Lorde, geuen to the Woman of Samaria, in Iohn 4. For, so hee sayth: The hower commeth, and now it is, when the true woorship∣pers, shall woorship the father, in Spirite, and in the truth, for such the father seeketh to woorship him. The Woman of Somaria thought, that the effi∣catie of Prayer, depended vpon the dignitye of the place: for, (sayth shee) Our Fathers woor∣shipped in this Mounteyne, and yee saye, that at Ierusalem is the place, where menne ought to woorship.
From this opinion, Christe calleth backe the Woman, and propoundeth vnto her, the true manner of woorshippinge, namely: That shee must worship the Father, in Spirit, and in the truth. When hee sayth, IN THE SPIRITE, hee maketh a difference, beetweene that prayer, which proceedeth, onely from the mouth, and that which proceedeth from the Spirite: which Spirite worketh fayth in the heart of man, wher∣vpon dependeth and from which proceedeth, true adoration. When hee sayth IN THE TRVETH: he interpreteth two old figures: the former of the mountayne, in which Iacob prayed: the latter, of the place, which was at Ierusalem and was called THE PROPITI∣ATORIE. For, that Mountayne of Iacob did put vs in minde, that when wee praye, wee should not respecte anye dignity of places in the worlde: but, that (from all the lowe valleyes of this world) wee should lifte vp our heartes, vn∣to the Hilles, that is to say, vnto Heauen. And Christe willeth the same thinge, when hee com∣maundeth those that praye, to say: Our Father which art IN HEAVEN. The latter figure Christe expoundeth, when hee sayth: They shall woorship the Father IN THE TRVETH. This Trueth is set against this place at Ierusalem, which was called THE PROPITIATORIE. For this place was a figure of the true propitiatorie Iesus Christe our onely Mediatoure, without whom, there is no entraunce open for anye to enter into the
Holy of Holyes, that is to say, into Saluation, and lyfe euerlasting. By this reason is also ex∣cluded from Christian prayer all hypocrisie, and therewithall is necessarily required, true, and feruent Zeale of minde in the time of prayer: so that there must bee a consonancie, and agree∣ment of the heart, and mouth, that the one say or speake not otherwise thā the other thinketh. Thus it is shewed, that THE FEARE OF GOD, is the beste keeper of fayth, and of a good Conscience in vs: as beeing that thinge, which studiously auoydeth Sinne, obeyeth the Commaundementes of God, dilygently bewa∣reth the deceiptes of the flesh, the worlde, and the Deuill: and, (beefore all thinges,) seeketh (in these manifolde daungers of the worlde,) helpe at the handes of GOD, by earnest, and Christian prayer: and, by this meanes, perse∣uereth constaunt vnto the ende, (that is to say) endureth so longe vntill GOD calleth vs from this vale of misery, and receyueth into Heauen to himself, the soules of the godly, which depart from hence, in the inuocation of Christe: their bodyes in the meane season restinge in the duste of the earth, subiect to corruption, in testimonye of the iuste Iudgemente of God: which shall rayse vp agayne our bodyes in the last day, and (beeinge agayne restored to their soules) shall quicken them, that we his Children may enioy eternall lyfe: and beeinge finally taken awaye from all chaunges, and daungers of this world, may remaine in perpetual ioyes, with the Lord,
and our only Sauiour IESV CHRIST, to whom, with the Father and the holy ghost, bee prayse, honour, and glory for euer, and euer, Amen. These thinges I purposed to write, of the principal poinctes of our religion, for their sakes which do vnderstand, our common Language. Which I also will to remayne, in place of the Confession of my fayth, and doctrine, which I haue taught, and professed in this Schoole of Hafnia, about the space of 30. yeares. I bee∣seeche the Christian Readers, that of this, and other my writinges, they would iudge, not by the quarellings of vnlearned, & prowd spirites, but by the woord of GOD. GOD bee mercifull vnto his Church, and with clemency turne away the dissentions, and corruptions of the pure Doctrine; and assist vs all with his holy spirite: by whose assistaunce, wee may in such sort daily increase in the know∣ledge of the true God, in fayth and newnesse of lyfe: that in the last day wee may bee founde in the number of the elect children of God, through IESVS CHRISTE our Lorde. Amen.
A small forme of Daily Prayer, to bee daily vsed. A Thankesgeuing for all God his giftes, and Benefites in generall. O Eternall God, and mercifull Father, I giue thee thankes, by thy welbeloued Sonne our only Mediatour, Lorde, and Sauiour Iesus Christ, for all thy giftes and benefites, aswel Corporall, as Spirituall, temporall, and eternall, which are moe, and farre greater, than that they may bée, either in minde cōceiued, or with woords expressed. For the preseruation of the Church, or Congregation of Christe. I I béeséeche thée, most mercifull God, and heauenly Father, by the name of thine onely begotten sonne, to defend thy Church, and Congregation in all partes of the worlde, and conserue the purity of thy woorde: that the kingedome of thy Sonne may bee increased throughout all the worlde, and that many may declare thy goodnesse, and mercy for euer. For the Realme, Prince, Counsayllours, and euery estate of lyfe. O Almighty God, and heauenly Father, geue vnto this Land, safe, and peaceable gouernaunce, vnder thy protection: gouerne with thy holy spirte,1. Tim. 2. our most mercifull Soueraigne, the Counsayllours of the Realme, and euery one in his estate of lyfe: that wée may leade a quiet lyfe, in all godlynesse, and honesty, to thy glory. For the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and obtey∣ninge of grace.
WIpe out (O Father of mercies) all mine iniqui∣ties, through, and for thy Sonne his sake, cruci∣fied and raysed vp agayne for vs▪ (with the righteous∣nesse of thine onely begotten Sonne) make mée righte∣ous: cleanse my hearte with thy holy Spirite: teache mée thy waies, and lead mée in thy trueth: make clean my minde, that all wicked cogitations, corrupt affec∣tions, and vnhappy counsayles, carelesse stubbernes, and (to conclude) all wicked factes, may departe farre from the same: illuminate the same with the light of thy grace, that it may couet, will, desire and doo those thinges only, which are pleasaunt vnto thée, and hole∣some, and proffitable for the Church of Christ. For the ayde of God in the needefull businesses of our vocation. GIue mée vnderstanding (O Lorde) and assiste mine indeuoures, that I may faithfully, and diligently perfourme the woorkes of my vocation, to the glory of thy name, the edification of thy Church, and the com∣modity of my neyghbour. For the grace of God to lyue well, and dye well. GRaunt mercifully (O Lord) that, (by thy assistance) I may perseuere in holding fast a liuely fayth, and a good conscience, vnto the last breath of this lyfe: that when my hower shal come, I may quietly sléepe in the Inuocation of my Lord Iesu Christe, and that I may obteyne eternall life through him: in the which life, I may (with all the electe) for euer, honour, and glorifie thée: To thée alone bee honour, prayse, and glory with thy Sonne, which lyueth with thee in the vnity of the holy Ghost, one God, world without ende. Amen. FINIS.
