13923 99849463 14611
AN EXPO∣sition of certayne words of S. Paule, to the Romaynes, enti∣teled by an old wry∣ter Hugo. A TREATISE OF the Workes of three dayes. Also an other Worke of the truth of Christes naturall body. By Richarde Coortesse Doctor of Diuinitie, and Bishop of Chichester. (∵) ¶ Imprinted by Wylliam Brome. 1577.
¶ To the Christian Reader. HAVING INTEL∣lygence of a certayne worke done out of laten into English, by the lear∣ned Father, the lord Bi∣shop of Chichster, at the request of a learned & vertuous Ladye. And also vnderstanding of an other treatise touching the truth of Christ his naturall body, made by him, both of them secretly going among some good men, who were greatlye delighted with the reading of the same: We labored by al¦meanes possible to obtayne the coppy of the sayd oke, as well for the singr commendation that went of the exceliē∣cie of the matter as also for the worthi∣nesse of the person, who had trauailed therein, whose iudgement we know, to be such, as could make best choysy of ar∣guments, and learning so profound, as might most clearckly bewtify the same. And perusing the sayd worke exactly,
as we found it both in substaunce & also in handling, aunswerable to the reports geuen abroade thereof: so we thought it very meete, that the same should be pub∣lished to the commodity of many, which now being shutte vp in certayne mens kéeping, did profyte but a few. In the said worke there is notably set forth, the maiestie, the power & might of the eternall and euerlasting GOD, the whole discourse whereof séemeth to bee grounded vpon the words of S. Paule, in his Epistle to the Romaynes, the first Chapter. That the inuisible thinges of God are from the beginning of the world, knowen by the visible things made of God. his e∣uerlasting power also and diuinitie. So it conteineth very delightfull & also much profytable matter to the Christian and Godly reader, in these dayes. The other treatise, intreating of the true presence of the most sacred, blessed and natural bodie of our sauiour Christ, is a Jewell so precieus, of so great esti∣mation and value, with each true Chri∣stian,
that we thincke al men will more desyre to reade the worke, then to heare the commendation thereof. Now touching the person, the fruites of whose study and paynes, we haue of∣tentimes heretofore, and doe now also reape to our great comforte, we thought good both for truth sake, which euerye man is bound in cōscience to mayntein, & also for confutation of such bad & slaun∣derous spéeches, as by some lewde and euel disposed people are spred at tables, Alehouses, and such other odde places, agaynst so graue, wyse, learned, & ver∣tuous a pastour, & also to set downe such good vertues to the view of the world, as we of our assured and proper knowe∣ledge haue experienced to be in him. And for that the glory of God is chief∣ly and principally to be set forth, by ex∣tirpation of strange and irronious opy∣nyons, and by planting of true religion, through dilligēt preaching, and teaching of the word of god: Fst ouer and besids his ordinary preaching vpon Sondayes and Holidayes, he hath gone thrée times
through this whole Diocesse of Chche∣ster (which is almost fourescore myles in length) preaching himself at the grea∣test townes, and many learned Prea∣chers with him in other places: And this last Sommer was accepted of the sub∣staunce, both of gentlemen preachers and people of the whole shire excéeding well, and in such sorte as the like hath not bene seene in the memory of man, to any of the calling in this countrey: Notwithstanding, that there wāted not some, though not many, which priuily both by fayre meanes & foule, laboured the contrary. And whereas it was a rare thing be∣fore his time, to heare a learned Sermō in Sussex, now the pulpittes in moste places sounde contynually with ye voyce of learned and Godly Preachers, he him selfe as Duxgregis, geuing good example vnto the rest in so graue & learned man∣ner, that the people with ardent zeale wonderfull reioycing, & in great num∣ber take farre and long iorneyes, to bée pertakers of his good and godly lessons.
We are assured, and the most irreli∣gious and backwarde persones that are acquaynted with his proceedinges, can∣not but confesse (excepte they will wil∣lingly speake agaynst their owne Con∣setences) that the ooting out of bad and vnlearned Curattes, and the planting of zealous and learned Preachers, hath bene occasion to him of great expenses & charge: And so within these sixe yeres, he hath brought into this Diocesse, and preferred, or ben the meanes of the pre∣ferring of twenty Preachers, which be well able to preache in anye learned Audience in this realme: And by the dil∣ligent preaching and other excercisyng of himself, and these in the scriptures, hath trayned vp a. xl. more, in such sort, that they be sufficiente ynough to preach to any ordinary Audyence: and almoste euery minister by hearing of these and such trauayle in the Scrip∣tures, as they haue bene by the sayd pas∣tour, and other his officers put vnto, be growne so rype in the Scriptures, that they can and doe, so painfully, diligent∣ly▪
and competently instructe the simple sorte in the principles of Religion, that euen children can now geue a better an accoumpt of the true fayth, thē in times past such as were reputed great clearks could haue done. But because it is not ynough to deli∣uer vnto the people of GOD holsome and godly doctrine, but also to confirme the same by example of good and vertu∣ous life, how well he hath trauayled in both the suppressinge of Macheuils, Pa∣pistes, Libertines, Atheists, and suche other erronious persons, the mayntey∣ning of pore fatherlesse children against the oppressor, y• proecting of widdowes from the vyolent, the releasing of stran∣gers for the Gospels sake, the punishing of Fornicators & adulterers, the with∣standing of robbers and Pyrates, the restrayning of such as vnnaturally car∣ry away grayne, victuals, and other the commodities of the Realme, to foster such as be knowen enemies to GOD, and doubted to this gouernment, and the méeting with smoniacall practises
are a sufficient testimony. For the which good déedes (such is the malice of Sathan and is s) most bitter and bad spéeches are throwne out against hym: yea, and certayne hyred and suborned to go from Noble man, to Noble man, from Justiciaris, to Justi∣ciaris, from common table, to common table, and to be briefe, from place and person, to place and person, to carrye such tales & surmises as the enformer knoweth to be false, and the reporter is méere ignorant of. But the scholler is not aboue hys master, and the worlde is such that dis∣sembling Pharises, godlesse Saduces, Epicures, and such other offenders and fauourers of offenders in the premis∣ses, will euer hate those that serue God and their prince dutifully. And surely we for our partes, haue oftentimes wondered at his constancie and pacience, that wheras we see others so ouercome with importunity of slaū∣derous and infamous reportes, & great enemies, when he heareth any lowde
and opprobrious spéeches spreade of him, he is no whitt mooued, but onely aunswereth, it is for doyng my duetie: My mayster Christ escaped not euill tongues, and saint Paule counselleth vs to go on by good reportes, and euill reportes, malis vituperari laudai est, And Benediit michi Deus propter malictiones isas. God will blesse me for these curses, & neuer thinketh more of the matter. It is also apparant to the eies of mē, what co he ah and doeth from tyme to tyme bestowe, in repayring of hys houses, and hospitalytie to men of all dgrs, a especially vppon the pore, whom he doth often and in great num∣bers seede in hys Hall, after his Ser∣mons. Neyther can we but earnestlye charge lche, wheresoeuer they be, as long haue heard wyth their eares, and sawe wyth theyr eyes, hys learnyng and good conuersation, and nowe so ea∣sely eyther credite or giue eare to such reportes as knowen and iudicially cō∣uicted bad persons carry vp and down▪
repining at his bolde and frée preaching of the Gospell, and suppressing of vice. And here we moste earnestly beséech almighty god, so to increase in him these good giftes which he hath already besto∣wed vpon him, that neyther he lake in furthering his Gospell, nor be discoura∣ged with the straunge attemptes of bad persons, from suppressing of sinne and wickednesse. For Goliath may vaunte himselfe in his helmet, his Armour, and his speare, forty dayes, the wicked may glory in their fine deuises, and prating practises, in their slaunders and ratings for a sea∣son, but yet let not Dauid, let not the beloued of the Lord faynt or feare: For the eyes of the Lord, are vpon such as put their trust in him, and they shall be safe vnder the winges of his Maiesty. And the God of all comforte and con∣solation, grant vnto vs al the assistance of his holy spirite, that we may feare God, be dutifull to our moste gracious Prince Quéene Elizabeth, loue Godlye and learned men, embrace vertue, and
hate and treade downe vice without re∣spect of persons to the glory of God, and the comforte of his people. In Sussex. 16. December. 1576. Your beloued in the Lord, the Preachers of the Dyocesse of Chi∣chester. Henry Blaxton Mayster of Arte, of Clare hall in Cambridge and preacher. Thomas Gillingham Mayster of Arte of Corpus Christ. Colledge in Dr. forde and Preacher. Danyell Gardner Mayster of Arte, of Clare hall in Cambridge, and preacher. Will. Coell Maister of Arte, of Saynt John his Colledge in Cambridge. Ric. Fletcher sacrae theologiae Baccha∣laureus, nuper socius et praeses Coll. Cor. Christi in Accad. Cāt. nunc Minister. Ec∣clae
Dei, quae est Reiae. Willyam Hoskinson Mayster of Arte of S. Johns in Cambridge, and Prea∣cher. Thomas Kickebye Graduat of brasen∣nose in Oxforde, and preacher. Iohn Motley Mayster of Arte, of Tri∣nity colledge in Cambridge, and Prea∣cher. Thomas Mawdisley Graduat of Lin∣coln Colledge in Oxfórd, and preacher. Stephen Bathurst Graduat & preacher. Richard Burnoppe Preacher, and Ui∣car of Gast Gréenested. Iohannes Beeching, in Artibus Maii∣ster. Thomas Large, Person of Mestéene Preacher.
Edward Rogers Preacher. Willyam Ridley, Graduat in the Quéenes colledge in Oxford & preacher. Thomas Frenchham Preacher. Henry Oliuer, Parson of the churche at Dalington Preacher. Iohn Myles Pastour of the Church at Heithfeld Preacher. Iohn Wharton, Pastour of the Church at Tishurst, and Preacher. Iohn Dodde Preacher of the word of God. Thomas Smith Preacher, and Pa∣stor of the Church of Henfeld. Denis Hurst, Preacher and Minister of Alfrion.
Iohn Coortesse, Preacher and Mini∣ster of the church of Yapton. William Smith Preacher, Parson of Foord. Edward Tickridge, Preacher and mi∣nister, in the Church at Nitimber. Thomas Willyamson Graduat in the vniuersity of Diforde in the Colledge of Brasennse Preacher. Richard Whealakar, Preacher, Mini∣ster of the Church of Auberly. Richard Strong, Minister of the church of climping and Preacher. Anthony Hobson Preacher, Minister of the Church of Lymistar. By mee Christofer Wraye, Par∣son of stwithring, and Preacher. Thomas Godlyf Preacher, Minister of the Church of Garneley. Henry Wisman, Curate of Bsham and Preacher.
Richarde Hickes, Batcheler of Arte of Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge Preacher. Iohn Goodman, Minister of Ferring and precher. Matthaeus Allen minister, & concio∣nator Horshamiae. Phillip Mustian minister, Preacher of Slindfolde. Iohn Lkyn Preacher, and Pastor of the Church of I chingflde. Samuel Norden, mayster of Arte of Peterhouse in Cambridge & Preacher. George Sympson, Uicar of Syndon and Preacher. Thomas Michell, Parson of Hurst; and Preacher. Iohn Hudson, mayster of Arte, of Brodegates in Oxforde, and Uicar of Patcham. Anthony Dowglas, Parson of Sowth∣wike, and Preacher.
¶ The inuisible thinges ofRom. 1.  GOD, that is, his eternall power and Godheade, be seene by the Creation of the worlde, beyng consydered in hys woorkes. ❧ The `Préface. THE INVISIBLE or not to be séene graces in GOD, be playnely knowne by the thinges, which haue béene made, and done since the ma∣king of the worlde. The sayde graces be thrée, Power, Wisdome and Mercy. From these three doe all things spring, in these thrée do all things stande, by these thrée be al things guyded. Power maketh, Wisdome guydeth, Mercie preserueth. Which thrée as they be in God after a maner, which cannot be vttered, so in working they cannot be sundered. The power by the mercie doth wifely make▪
The wisdome by the power, doth mer∣cifully guyde. The mercye by the wysedome, doeth mightely preserue. The infinitenesse of creatures doth shewe the power. The bewty doth shewe the wisdome, and the profitablenesse the mercie. The infinitenesse of the Creatures, reeth in the number and greatnesse, the number consisteth in lyke thinges, vnlyke things and mirte. The greatnesse is in the bignesse and space, the bignesse is in the lumpe, and weight, the space standeth in the length, bredth, depth, and heigth. The bewtie of the creatures, lyeth in the sight, moouing, shape, and qualitie: the sight in the framing and order: the order in the propernesse, the tyme and the place. Mouing is of fower sortes. The first of place, the second of nature, the thirde of lyfe, the fourth of reason. The mouing of place is forewarde and backwarde, to the right hande, and to the left hande, vpward, downeward,
and rounde aboute. The mouing of nature is in growing and decaying. The mouing of lyf is in sence, and appetite. The mouing of reason is in déeds and counsell. The shape is in the séene forme, which the eye beholdeth, as colours and shapes of bodyes. The qualitie is in the inner propernesse, which is perceiued by other sences, as pleasantnesse in the sownde, by the hearing of the care: swetenesse in sauorie, by the tasting of the mouth: de∣lightfulnesse in smelles, by the smelling of the nose: Softnesse in the body by the touching of the hande. The profitablenesse of the creatures doth stande in that, that is delight some, fitte, commodious, and necessarie. Delightsome is that which pleaseth. Fitte, is that which agréeth. Commodious is that which profyteth. Necessary, is that wythout the which a thing cannot be. Nowe let vs runne ouer againe from the beginning, the foresaide braunches,
and let vs search in euery one, howe ey∣ther the power of the maker is plainely knewne by the number of things made, or hys wisedome by the beauty, or hys mercie by the profitablenesse. And by∣cause the number was the first in par∣ting, it ought to be the first in searching. Therfore marke well what I shall say. ❧ The first branche. WHen there was nothyng, to make somthing, how great power was it? yea, what sence can perceaue, what power it is, so of nothing to make some∣thing, yea some one thing, although ve∣rie little? if then it be such power of no∣thing, to make some verye little thing, that it cannot be taken by anye sence, what power is it to be thought to be, to make so many things? Howe manye? Number the starres of the skie, the sande of the sea, the dust of the earth, the droppes of water, the feathers of birdes, the seales of fyshes, the heires of beasts, the grasses of fields, the leaues or fruites of trées, and thou∣sandes thousandes moe, that cannot
be reckened. Things that cannot be numbred, be like things, vnlyke things, or both toge∣ther, which be lyke things. Things of one kinde: As man and man, Lion and Lion, Egle and Egle, Babion and Ba∣bion, euerye of these, and other such in their kinde be like. Which be vnlyke things? such as be indued with diuers qualities, as a man, and a Lion, a Lion & an Egle, an Egle and a Babian: these be one vnlyke to another. Which be of both sortes? All things vewed together. Nowe marke howe there be innume∣rable in things like, things vnlyke, and things of both sortes. Man is one kind, but there is not one onely man. for who can sette downe the iust number of men? Lyon is one kind, but there is not one only Lyon, for who can set down the iust number of Lions? And so there be infynite kinds of things in other things without number, and in euery kinde, infynite lyke things. And altogether infynite & without number.
But peraduenture some will say, that he yt made so manye things, made them little things, but coulde not make many and great together. Let him consyder, what it is to measure the hugenes of the mountaynes, the courses of the waters, the spaces of the feyldes, the heyght of heauen, the depth of the sea. Thou mar∣ueylest that thou canst not doe it. But thou shalte doe better to espye that occa∣sion is ministred vnto thée, to prayse GOD in that thou canst not do it. To those that consyder of the number of the creatures, we haue giuen a kind of tast. Nowe will we go about to set forth the beautie of the same. Although the beautie of the creatures resteth in many and diuers pointes, yet there be some chiefely, in the which all the beautie of the same doeth stande. Sight, mouing, shape, and quality. The which if a man were able fully to search out, he should fynde with all them, the meruaylous light of God his wisdome. And woulde God, I coulde as plainely spie them, and as fully set them downe, as I doe earnestlie loue them, for it de∣lighteth
me greatly, bicause it is excée∣ding sweete and pleasant, often to deale about those things: for both the sence is taught by reason, and the minde deligh∣ted with swéetenes, and the affection stirred vp with further desire, insomuch that amazed and meruayling, we crye oute with good King Dauid: How mar∣uaylous are thy workes, O Lorde, in thy wisdome hast thou made all things, thou hast delyghted me with thy handye workes of thy hands, and in the works of thy handes wyll I reioyce. An vn∣wise man doth not knowe this, and a foole doth not consider of it. For the whole world which is knowne by sence, is as it were a booke written with the fynger of God: That is to say, made by the power of God: And euery y• creatures be, as it were certaine letters founde out not by the skill of man, but ordeyned by the iudgement of God, to make knowne, and as it were after a certaine maner to signify the inuysible wisdome of God. And as an vnlearned man sée a booke open, he looketh vpon the letters, but knoweth not what they
meane: So a foolishe man and carnall, doth not vnderstande the things that be of God, but in these séene creatures, he beholdeth the outwarde shape, but doth not perceyue the wisedome of God in them. But he that is of the spirite, and can giue true iudgement of all things, in that, that is outward doth beholde the beautie of the worke, and inwardlye spyeth how marueylously the wisedome of the maker is. And therefore there is none but he meruayleth at GOD hys works. For the foolish and vnwise man doth wonder at only the outward shape: but the wise man by that which he séeth outwardlye, doeth picke out the déepe knowledge of God his wisedome, as if in one and the selfe same wryting, one man praise the colour and proportion of the letters, and an other the sence and meaning. Therfore it is very good continually, to beholde and looke vppon the workes of God, but so him which cannot tourne the beautie of bodily thinges to an hea∣uenlye vse, for therefore the worde of God doth so often moue vs to think vp∣on
the wonderfull workes of God, that by the outward things which we sée, we may come to the knowledge of inward truth. Wherevpon King Dauid doeth tell it often, as a great matter, that he hath so done, and promyseth styll so to doe, saying: I haue remembered thy dayes of olde, and haue mused vpon the workes of thy handes, and will be exer∣cised in thy wisedomes. Herevpon also the Prophete Esay doth say to certayne, which not knowing their Creator, doe giue vnto the creatures the honor due to God. Who hath measured the waters in his fyst, and compassed the Heauens with his spanne? and comprehended the dust of the earth with his fyngers? or hath weyghed the Mountaynes in hys skayles, and the hilles in ballances? He that sitteth vpon the circle of the earth, and before whom the inhabitants ther∣of be as Grashoppers, he that stretcheth out the heauens as a Curtaine, & sprea∣deth thē out as a Tent to dwell in. And agayne, King Dauid sayeth in another place, reproouing the worshipping of I∣mages: All the Gods of the gentyls be
Deuils, but the Lorde hath made the heauens. Why then doe you thinke, that the workes of God be so plainly aduouched to maintaine the true goohead, and that it is saide, the Lorde made the heauens: but bicause the creature well cōsidered, doth teach a man to know his Creator. Let vs also therfore note the wonder∣full workes of God, & by the bewtyful∣nesse of the things made, let vs seeke out that bewtiful, most bewtiful of al bew∣tifull things, which is so merueylous, & vnspeakable, that al bewty in respect of it is nothing. And if it were any thing in déede, yet in no poynt to be cōpared to it. And bicause we haue sayd before, that all bewtie of things séene, doeth consist in fower pointes. Let vs nowe runne ouer euerye one of them in order, and learne how by them the hid wisdome of God doth appeare. I know truely, that I can speake no∣thing worthy enough: yet notwithstan∣ding it is not méete, that we shoulde be altogither dumbe in that point, of the which we are most bound to speak most,
❧ The second branch. I Made mention of fower: Sight, moo∣uing, shape, and qualitie. Let vs fyrst discusse the fyrst. Sight is in compownding and order, that is to say, in setting things together, and placing them in order. Compownding ought to haue two pointes, fitnesse & fyrmnesse, that things to be compownded or put together, may fittely, & méetely agrée, and beyng com∣pownded or put together, may fyrmely sticke together. Such compownding is verie commendable. Fitnesse is reputed to be in the quan∣titie & quality, In quantity, lesse things very thin and smale be ioyned to things thicke and corpulent. In qualitie least things verie moyste, be mirt to things dry, very hote to colde, very light to hea∣uy, and so forth without discreation. Marke if any of these fower be wan∣ting in the beautifulnesse of GOD hys works, and if thou fynde nothing wan∣ting, now hast thou somthing, wherupō thou mayest in this behalf glorify God.
And fyrst truely, if you note the frame of this whole worlde, you shall sée howe maruaylously, & wisely the compown∣ding of all thinges is perfected. Howe fyttely, agréeingly and fyrmely, and in all poyntes absolutely. In the which not only lyke things do agree: but also those which the power hath made diuers and differing, the wisedome hath tyed & linc∣ked as it were in one friendshyp & true. What can be more contrarie then fyre and water? which yet in the nature of things, the wisdome of God hath so tem∣pered together, that not onely they doe breake the common band of friendship, but also yéelde liuely nourishment to all things newly born, y• they may cōtinue. What should I speake of the frame of man his bodye, in the which eche parte ioyned together, do so agree among thē∣selues, that no member at all can be founde, which doth not helpe an other. So euery nature, loueth the selfe, and y• agréeing of many, and diuers thinges merueylously pacte together in one, ma∣keth one harmony in all. I graunte say you, that the compoun∣ding
of thinges is fit and agréeing: but how is the same fyrme and strong, who doth not wonder at it? Behold the Hea∣uens which imbrase all thinges, howe firme and strong they be, and as it were spred and powred downe round aboute of molten brasse. The earth ballanced with her weight in the middest, doth e∣uer continew vnmoueable, that on the one syde the fyrmenesse of the Heauen, and on the other syde, the stablenesse of the earth, may kéepe together, and as it were, binde together all other thinges flowing in the middest, least they run∣ning out of their bowndes, breake the concord of the world. Behold, how the vaynes of water in∣wardly spred through the bowels of the earth, and outwardly brought forth by Channels or streames into diuers pla∣ces, do inwardly giue together the earth thinking, least it should be seuered, and outwardly water it being drye, least it should hinke or choppe. Beholde how in the frame of mans body, the bondes of the sinewes, do bind together the ioyntes of the bones, and
the Marowe being inwardly dispersed by the pipes of the bones, the Conduites of the vaynes, doe carry liuely blood, through the whole body, and then wrap∣peth the tender fleshe within the skin, that both the strength of the bones may inwardly beare vp the body, and the fence of the skin may outwardly defend and kéepe harmelesse the same. Who can expresse the hardnesse of the stones? or the fyrmnesse of Mettals? the strength of Okes? the holding faste of Glue? and infinite such others: where∣by it appeareth how fyrme the bondes of thinges be, and how all thinges very strongly coupled together do mainteine their nature and being. Neither can they euer be seuered at once, from the concord of their fellowship. Now that we haue spoken of the com∣pounding & putting together of thinges: Let vs speake of the disposing and set∣ting of them in order, for this must needes bréede great admiration, if any will dilligently marke, that the wise∣dome of GOD hath appointed to euery place, to euery time, to euery thing their
course, so that the order of thinges in no poynt is broken. Behold, the Firmament is aboue, and the earth beneath, God hath set the Sun and the Moone, and the Starres in the Firmament, that they may geue lighte to all thinges belowe: God hath made pathes in the ayre, for the windes, and the clowdes, that they being dispersed through their mouing mighte poure rayne downward. God hath commaunded the heapes of waters to be kept in the bosome of the Earth, that at his becke they might run any whether. God hath appoynted the ayre for the Byrdes, the water for the Fishes, the earth for the Beastes and Serpentes, and infinite thinges that créepe, and Wormes. God hath inryched some Countreyes with Corne, some with Vines, some with Rootes, some with Cattell, some with Hearbs of great vertue, some with precious Stones, some with monstrous Beastes, some with diuers coloures, some with the knowledge of dyuers
Artes, some with Mettalles, some with diuers kinds of Spices and perfumes, in so much, that there is no Country in the world, that hath not some rare, and speciall thing, that the other haue not. And yet maye each Countrey receaue some other rare and spectall thing from another. What néede I tell howe the proui∣dence of God hath layde those thinges o∣pen, which be necessary for mans vse, but those thinges which nature doth not desyre for necessity, but appetite for pleasure, it hath hid in the secret bowels of the earth, that whome the loue of ver∣tue cannot restrayne, the tediousnesse of laboure might bridle. ❧ The thirde branch. THus much of the disposing of the pla∣ces. Now to the disposing of times. Who can sufficiently commend and set forth the prouidence of God? that hath so exelently distinguished tymes. Behold, after the nighte commeth the day, that laboure may excercise such as haue bene sluggish, after day followeth
night, that rest may comfort and refresh the weary. Neyther the day is euer, or the night euer, nor the day and the night euer equall. Leaste eyther to much la∣bour should il the weakned, or to much case bréede diseases, or the same conti∣nuing ll, should grow tedious, and yrkesome to the minde. Also, euen as the mutuall rechange of day and nighte, doth refreshe all liuing thinges: So the fower seasons of the yeare, following one an other in course, dee alter the te of the whole yeare. First, by warmnesse of the Spring, the world is after a sorte, borne againe. Then by the heat of Sommer, it gro∣weth as it were, into strong youth. Afterward in the fall, it wareth rype. Last of all in Winter, it doth as it were dye. Therefore it doth euer decay, that af∣ter the decay, it may be amended agayn. For except the old should firste wyther, the new could not spring, y• old keeping the place. Also, this disposing passeth all prayse, that the times so chaungeable doe kéepe
their course, and seasons so vnchaunge∣ably, y• not at any time, they leaue their offices vndone, or breake the order of their course or appoyntment. ❧ The fourth braunch. AND thus much shall suffice for the discourse of times. Now will I set down that order, which is in euery thing according to a meete disposing of y• parts, one inwardly, mo outwardly, according to the time and place. And in this poynt appeareth the most excellent force of the wisdom of god, which hath placed euery thing in this world so fity, y• the ioining together of parts doth not at any time breede any disagréeing of qualities. As of many, for examples sake to set downe few. In the ioyning together of the parts of mans body, how clearely doth y• wise∣dome of the maker shew the selfe. Vp∣ward man is of one sorte: Downeward of two. For the ground of the mind, that is reason, is of one sorte, and respecteth Heauenly thinges. But the soule hath two qualities, anger, and desyre, which looke downeward to carthly thinges.
Moreouer the frame of mans body, is streatched out in breadth by the armes, and pitched downwarde by the legges, for both the excercise of working doeth stretch out the mind, and the affections of desyres doth pitch it. Also the same body of man is streat∣ched forth, and bownded according to the bredth one way, by the fingers of the handes, and downwardes another way by the toes of the féete into fiue. Because that whether the minde doeth couet to work abrode by intention of the worke, or desyre to looke downward by affecti∣on, there be fyue sences by the which it may worke the purpose. Also the fingers, and the toes haue ech one their ioyntes seuered in space, which in the hands grow out of one palme, and in the feete out of one sole. Because that out of one Fountayne of sence, doe fyue sences spring, in y• which by thrée steps, rst the force of féeling, next the action of féeling, thirdly the thing to be felte is ound. Last of al the head or end of euery ird ioynt, either of fynger or toe, hath nayle as it were an Helmet, that ey∣ther
the hand being reached out, or the foote set forward should hit agaynst any thing, i might keepe the self whole, and defend the selfe with the own helmet. So also these earthly thinges which claue to the sences outwardly, accor∣ding to the resemblaunce of the nayles, doe as it were necessarily helpe vs in some pare. But further and aboue the necessarie vse, they ought to be pared away, as growne aboue the fleshe, and without sence. Note also in man his face, behold how plamely the instrument of the sences be placed. The sight in the eyes is highest, next the hearing in the care, then smel∣ling in the nose, and after that tasting in the mouth. And we knowe that all other scnces worke by receauing outwarde thinges in warde. Dnely the sight wor∣keth outwardly, and being set a farre of doth much more quickly then any of the rest perceaue and sée. And therefore like a good watchman, vpon good considera∣ion, is set in higher place, that it mighte forsée the danger, which may happen to the other sences.
The hearing is second, both in place and quicknesse, then the smelling, but the tast which can feele nothing, but that it toucheth, as slower then the other sen∣ces, is iustly set beneath them all in the bottome. Touching hath no special seat or place, and is made vniuersall, because it wor∣keth with all the sences, and therefore the Thumbe, which representeth tou∣ching, whereas the fingers be all rooted together, aunswereth them all, because none of the sences can be without tou∣ching. Note also in mans body, how ye bones be placed within, because the strength of them, doth beare the weight of the bo∣dy, then the flesh doeth cloth the bones, that the hardnesse of them, should not hinder touching. Last of all, the skinne doth couer the flesh, that after a sort with the fyrmenesse it might defend the body from things that would outwardly hurt it. And marke wel this, that that which is soft and weake, is placed in the mid∣dest, as in a safe place, least either in∣wardly it wanting stay should fall, or
out wardly not hauing defence, shoulde decay. And that y• I haue set down in one, is true in all kind of things, for the barke defendeth the trées, and the feathers and beakes, the Byrds, and scales the fishes, and God hath appoynted to euery thing a defence, according to the propriety of the nature. ❧ The fifte branch. THus farre of the sight. Now let vs come to the mouing: Mouing is of ower sortes. Place, Nature, Life, and Reason. Of the which seuerally I cannot speak much, but briefely I will run ouer each one. Weygh how the wisdom of the ma∣ker doeth appeare in the mouing from place to place. Consider how the waters runne stil from y• spring. Consider from whēce y• motion of the winds doth come. Who canne measure the perpetuall course of the starres? Who doth commaund the Sunne to goe downe by the Winter signes? and to goe vp agayne by the summer signes
and starres. Who bringeth the Sunne from the East to the West, and from the West to the East agayne? onely God can do these meucyleus thinges. What shall I speake of the mouing of nature? Who doth nurish all thinges growing, and bring them Ludding as it were out of a certayne secrete wombe of nature, in ight agayne? And agayne when they wither, doeth cause them retourne from whence they came: He that pondreth these thinges well, shall fynd them to too wonderfull. Now the mouing of life, which consi∣steth in féeling and desyring. Thinke with your selfe, how mighty he must néedes be, which geueth sence to euery liuing thing, & ordreth what euery one shall desyre. In breefe, the moouing of reasen in déedes, and counsayles passeth al prayse, if a man will marke how notable that wisedome is, which doth frame all the déedes of men, and temper all the willes and thoughtes of hartes so to the owne purpose that  can be done in the
whole worlde, wherewith Wisedome doth bewtify her workes, either by com∣maunding or suffering. ❧ The sixte branch. NOw followrth the shape, which is the seene forme, conteining fygures and colloures. The figures of things be merueylous, sometime for the greatnesse, sometimes for the littlenes, somtimes for the rare∣nesse, sometimes for the be wilfulnesse, sometime because they be ill suoured, sometimes be in one is many, sometime because many be in one. Let vs speake of ech one of these in or∣der. And fyrst the greatnesse is, when a∣ny one thing is bigger then any other thing of that kind, as a Cyau among men, a Whale among Fishes a Griffin among Byrdes, a Elephaunte among Beastes, a Dragon among serpentes. Littlenesse is when a thing is lesse then all other of that kind, as the When and the Moth, the Flye & the Gnat, and such like which liue as other things do, & yet be the least of all other.
Tell me which is more straunge, the téeth of the Bore, or of the Moath, the winges of the Griffin, or of the Gnat: The head of the Horse, or of the Grasse∣hopper: The thigh of an Elephaunt, or of a Flye: The snowte of a Sow, or the beake of a Wrenne: An Eagle, or an Ante: A Lyon, or a Gnat: A Tiger or of a Snayle: You muse at the bignesse of the one, & the littlenesse of the other. A little body made with great wyse∣dome. Great wisdom in the which there is no ouersight, but hath geuen them eyes, which the eye can scantely spye, and in so little bodyes, all the partes be so fitly, & fully fynished, that there wan∣teth nothing in the least of all the same thinges, wherewith nature hath bewti∣fyed the greatest. ❧ The seuenth branch. NExt followeth thinges rare, which therfore bréede meruayle. For there be foure things, y• therfore men y• rather wōder at, because they sée them seldom, eyther because there be fewe of yt kind, or else because they be farre of, or hid in
the secrete places of nature, which the wisedome of the maker setteth alone: that the followship of man, shoulde not be hurte, with those that be noysome: that the desyre of man, should be tryed with the bewty of such as be precious: that the slownes of mā should be quick∣ned with ye nouelty of such as be strange to consider the wisedome of God. Laste of all, that these both good and euill sette together, as it were a far of, might after a sorte speake vnto man, and councell him earnestly to flye eternall euill, and desyre eternall God, sith that he taketh so great paynes to get fading goods, and flye the euils that last not long. Now follow such as be reckned of, for he bewtifulnesse. Of certayne thinges the proportion is liked greatly, because that they be so seemely, and properly fra∣med, that the very proportion doth shew a speciall care in the maker. Agayne, some things we like, because they be monstrous or ridiculous, the making whereof, the more straunge if is to mans vnderstanding, the lesse force it hath to cause man to prayse God: As
that the Codrill eating, doeth not moue the lower iawe, nor the Salamander burne the fyre. Who gaue the Hedghogge prickes, & taught it to wallow it self in apples sha∣ken downe with the winde, with the which being loden, and going, it maketh a noyse like a carte. And the Ante which sore séeing winter to come, fylleth her barnes with corne: And how the Spyder weaueth her web out of her bowels to take her praye in. These be witnesses of GOD his wyse∣dome. There is yet an other true and plaine argument of God his wisedome, that euery like bréedeth the like, and that one likenesse dispearsed into so many doeth kéepe stil the fourm of the fyrst original. An Ewe doth not bring forth a Calfe, nor a Cow a Lambe, nor a Do a Hare, nor a Lyon a Fore, but ech thing doeth extend the propagation into the like. This order kéepeth nature that wan∣teth sence. The Ashe is of one kinde, the Béech of another, & the Oke of the thire, and euery one of them hath their seue∣rall
kinde, and euery one kéepeth y• like∣nesse of the kinde. Marke the leafe, how it is rounde a∣bout, as it were iegged like the téeth of a saw, how within it is wouen with cer∣taine res or lines. Tell the one, tell the other, euerye one that is of the same kinde is a like, so many teeth in the one as in the other, such forme in the one as in the other, such colour in the one as in the other. Behold the Mulberies, & the Straw∣beries, howe being knit together, they are distinguished by certayne heades, such as the one is, such is the other, and ech nature, as though it followed the commaundement of some inwardly di∣recting, at no time goeth about to break their bondes. This also is merueylous, that in one body, there be so many partes, and so many shapes, places, and offices of the partes: As in mans body, the eare, the tongue, the eye, the nose, the foote, the hand, and ech one of those, hath a seue∣rall shape, place, and office. And though they be so diuers one from another, yet
they together make all thinges. ❧ The eyght branch. AFter the figure, followeth y• coloure. It is not néedefull to speake much of the collour of things, séeing that sight proueth what nature getteth, when she is bewtifyed with sundry colloures. What is goodlier then lighte? which though it haue no collour in it, yet after a sorte by lighting, it doth colloure the collour of all thinges. What is more pleasaunt to beholde then the skye? when it is fayre, which shineth as the Saphyre, and doth much delight the eye with the most pleasaunt cléerenesse. The Sunne glistreth like Golde, the Moone shyneth lyke Amber, the starres some of them looke as red as fyre, and some of them be as bright as the Rose, and some of them séeme sometimes red, sometimes gréene, and somtime whyte. What shoulde I speake of precious stones, whose vertue is profytable, and collour goodly? The earth be set with flowers, howe
pleasant is it to the sight? how swéete to y• smel? how doth it comfort the spirites, to sée the Rose red, the Lilly white, the Uyolet purple, in all the which, not one∣ly the bewty, but also the springing is wonderfull, how the wisedome of God shall fetch so good a thing out of the dust of the earth. Fynally, aboue all the rest, gréenesse delighteth the mind of such as looke vpon the earth, when as in y• new spring, buddes come forth, as it were in a new life, and rearing them selues vp∣ward in spyndales, and afterward tro∣den downe, as it were by death, shew an Image of the resurrection to come. But what should we speake so much of God his workes? sith that we doe wonder at the subtilties of man: when by a coun∣terfeyte shew, he doth deceaue the sight. ❧ The ninth branch. NExte to the shape, I am to speake of the quallity. For this cause hath the prouidence of GOD giuen so many di∣uers qualities to thinges, that ech sence of man might fynde some thing to de∣light it.
The sight perceaueth one thing, the hearing an other, the smelling the third, the taste the fourth, and the feeling the fyfte. The bewty of colloures doth féede y• eye. The pleasantnesse of Musicke deligh∣teth the eare. The excelency of sauours the smeling. The sweetenesse of that that is sauory the taste. Softnesse the féeling. And nowe who can recken vp all the delights of the sen∣ces, which be so many in ech one, that if a man do consider euery one by it selfe, he shall fynd euery one by it selfe very rich, for we fynde so many delightes, in diuersities of sounds for the eare, as we fynde diuersities of collours for the eye. Among the which the chiefe is y• sweete conference of speeches, by the which mē breaking together their minds, declare thinges past, shew things present, fore∣tell thinges to come, open things hidde, in so much, that if mans life wanted these, it were no better thē the beastes. hat should I speake of the singing of Byrdes? of the swéetenesse of mans
voyce? of the pleasaunte tunes of all sowndes? for the sortes of the harmo∣nies be so many, y• neyther the tongue can expresse them, nor the thoughts con∣ceaue them, which all feede the hearing, and are deuised to delight the same. And so in smelling, Perfumes haue their peculyer pleasauntnesse, Oynt∣ments another, and so borders of Ro∣ses, and likewise bryars, Mountes, Me∣dowes, Woodes, flowers, and fruites, and all thinges which bréede a pleasant smell, and make the ayre swéete, doe feede the smelling, and are created for the same. In like manner the tast and touching haue their delightes, which may easilye be conceiued by the likenesse of the first. ❧ The tenth branch. I Haue spoken of the infinitenesse of creatures and bewty, as I could, but not as I would. Now must I intreate of the profyta∣blenesse of the same. The profytablenesse looketh to four things.
Néedefulnesse, Commodiousnesse, Con∣ientnesse, and Delightsomnesse. That is necessary to euery thing, without the which the same cannot wel be. As in the diet of man, bread and wa∣ter, in his apparell, cloth or leather, or some such Garmentes. That is commodious, which although it carry with it sometimes a further de∣light, yet without that a man may liue: As in the diet of man, wyne and Flesh, in his apparell, Silke and fine Linnen, and such other softe apparell. That is méete and conuenient, which though it be not profytable to the vsers, yet it is séemely to the vse, as colloures, and precious stones, and such like. That is delightsome, which is not to any great vse, and yet is pleasaunte to the shew, as hearbes, and flowers, cer∣taine beastes, and fyshes, and such like. It is worthy searching out, why God would make those thinges, which he foresaw would not be necessary for the vse of man, for whō he made all things. But this will soone appeare, if we con∣sider of the cause and manner of mans
estate. God made man for himselfe, and al o∣ther thinges for man. God made man for him selfe, not be∣cause he néeded man, but to geue him∣selfe to be inioye of man, because he could geue no better thing. Ech other creature is so made, that both it is subiect to man by the state, and lyable to his profyte. So man being set as it were in the middest, hath God a∣boue him, & the world vnderneath him. And by body is ioyned downeward to the world, but by the spirite he is lifted vpward to God. And therefore it was necessary that the state of thinges seene should be so appoynted, that man might by them outwardly see, which a thing the vnséene good were, which he ought outwardly to desyre, that is to say, that he might see in the world below, what he should desyre in heauen aboue. Therefore it were not conueniente, that there should be any want of things seene, to this end and purpose, that the plentifulnesse of the same, might shew the inestimable abundaunce of euerla∣sting
good thinges. This is the cause, why as I haue sayd, God would also make thinges, which he foresaw, should not be necessary for the vse of man. For if GOD had geuen man one thinges necessary, he should haue shew∣ed himselfe good, but not rich. But now that he geueth ouer and aboue necessary thinges, also commodious, he sheweth the riches of his goodnesse. But when e putteth to thinges necessary, and com∣modious, also thinges conuenient, he sheweth the aboundaunt riches of his goodnesse. And fynally when to those thrée, he addeth thinges delight some, what doth he else but make knowne the aboue aboundant riches of his goodnes. ❧ The eleuenth branch. AND thus much briefely shall suffice for the profytablenesse of the crea∣tures. But for the better setting forth of the prayse of God: Let vs marke wel, how merueilously god doth stil kéepe togither those thrée thinges in his worke, which we shall so more easily sée, how meruey∣lous
it is, if afterwards we view, w the same cannot be together in mans worke. Truely, as man doth desyre to do ma∣ny things, so he cannot do great things, for so much the lesse he doth preuayle or prosper in euery one, as the thinges be more in number, vpō the which he doth imploy the force of his indeuour. Agayne when he coueteth the great∣nes, he is hindered by the number, for he is not able to bestow strength vppon many, which he hath spente vpon one. Likewise he may afoard the lesse labor to the bewtifying of the worke, ye more he beateth his minde vpon the dispatche eyther of the number, or of ye greatnes. We fynd by common experyence, that the Scriuener doth more readily write little letters, and is more payned with the greater, and the faster the Pen run∣neth, the worse the letters be, that be written. Also in making of Garmentes, such as séeke to haue them to fine, often loose the profyte, and they that séeke profite▪ often want hansomnesse.
But in the workes of God, neyther the number doth hinder the greatnesse, nei∣ther the greatnesse the number ney∣ther the number and the greatnesse, the bewtifulnesse. But they all be made so fully, as though, that but one were made, that when man doeth looke vpon all, he may wonder at euery one of thē. But it may be that some will thinke this to much of séene thinges: it maye please them to consider, that so large a matter cannot be easily comprysed in few wordes. For wheras the Apostle doth say, yt by thinges séene in the world, the inuisible, and the not to be séene graces in God be playnely known: It is necessary, that whosoeuer would come to the know∣lege of the not séene by the séene, should fyrst know the séene. And therfore I, according to my smal ability, thought also this the best way, to fynd out the not thrée séene thinges, set downe in the beginning by the thrée thinges séene, apposed agaynste them, that first, I shoulde somewhat make knowne the thinges séene, and after∣wardes
when the dore of contemplation were as it were opened, then to goe on to find out the thinges not séene. And now for that I haue made an end of that I had to say of the thinges séene, it remayneth to sée, how by these we maye goe vp to the knowledge of the thinges not seene. ❧ The twelfe branch. THE graces in God not séene, I sayd were Power, Wysdome, and Mer∣cy. Therfore it is to be sought, which of these is fyrst to be knowne in contem∣plation, and I think, that that not séene grace, will fyrst appeare in contempla∣tion, which is most liuely and playnly resembled, or expressed in the séene I∣mage. And the séene things be called the Images of the not séene, as the number of creatures, is the Image of the not séene power: The bewty of ye creatures is the Image of the not seene Wisdom: The profytablenesse of the creatures is the Image of ye not séene mercy. And euery creature ye nearer it commeth to the likenes of the creator, so much more
plainly doth it resemble and expresse the creator. So that, the séene Image ought fyrst to shew the not seene patterne, which holdeth in himselfe, the Image of the Godhead more liuely set out. The number of the creatures doth ra∣ther expresse the substaunce or matter. The bewty of the creatures doth rather expresse the fourme and the substaunce, or matter immagined without form, is formeles. And that that is formlesse in respect of the substaunce, is like vnto God. But that, that hath forme is more like vnto God, thē that, yt wāteth forme. Wherevpon it is playne, that the bewty of creatures, which resembleth fourme is a more euidente Image, then these the number of creatures, which resembleth substaunce. Also the bewty of creatures, through the naturall forme, belongeth to the ha∣bite, the profitablenesse to the action, for in that his creatures be profytable, that they be lyable to the vse and commodity of man. But that, that belongeth to the habite
is more proper, that is more certayne, then that that belongeth to the action. Because nature hath ingraffed the ha∣bite, but excercyse hath bred the action. Therfore ye Image of bewty doth excell in knowledge both the number, and the profytablenes. And therfore as fyrst in knowledge, because it is more euydent in representation, or resemblaunce. Fyrst therfore in this Image, ye foun∣dation of contemplation is to be layd, that when we haue layd the foundation of searching thorow the direction ther∣of, we may more strongly, and readily buyld the rest of the worke. And now in searching out wisedome, the beginning of the searching is excel∣lently well taken from the very Image of wisedome, because the father is made manifest thorow his wisedome, not on∣ly, when he sent his wisedome to take flesh vpon him, but then also, when by his wisedome he made the world. The bewty of creatures, which we haue eftsoones sayd to be the Image of God, his wisdome, doth consist in foure thinges.
Sight, Moouing, Shape, and Quality. But in these foure thinges, it is many∣fest, that Moouing hath the preheminēce, for that, things that can mooue, are nea∣rer vnto life, then thinges that cannot mooue. Moouing is of foure sorts, Place, Life, Nature, and Reason. But moouing of Nature, is better thē moouing of place, because that in mo∣uing of nature, not only y• Image of life is expressed, but lyfe it selfe after a sorte is begone. Agayne mouing of lyfs, doth so farre out goe mouing of nature, as that, that cā foele, doth passe that that cannot féele. Last of al, mouing of reason doth sur∣mount all, because in that, not only the sences be moued to quicken, and geue life, but also reason to vnderstand. A∣mong all creatures, there is no Image more euident then this, because that, which sauoureth of wisdome, doth most playnly shewe the not séene wisedome. Therefore the fyrst & principall Image of wisdome unmade, is wisedom made, that is the creature indewed with rea∣son,
which because it is in some respecte séene, and in some respect not séene, it is both the gate of contemplation, and the way. The gate in that, that it is seeue, the way in that, that it is not séene. The Gate because it doth shewe the entry to the mind, that entreth into con∣templation. The waye, because it bringeth tho minde running in contemplation to the ende. The Gate, because after a sorte, it doth shew thinges inuisible; visibly. The way, because it doth bring man going by the visible to the inuisible, to see the maker of both visible; a inuisible. This man may sée in himselfe. For fyrst none can be reckned to haue any witte, that doth not▪ sée that he is, and yet if a man will wrigh with himselfe, that that he is, he shal fynd that he is no∣thing of the thinges, which eyther bée séene, or can be séene in hym. For that which in vs is partaker of reason, and as I might say poured into vs and mixed with the flesh, doth yet of it selfe∣seuer
the selfe from the substance of the flesh, & iudge the selfe to be diuers from f. Why then should man doubt of the thinges not séene? which séeth that, that is not séene, which in deede man is, of the being of y• which he doth not doubt. Therefore a Gate of contemplation is opened to man, when he beginneth to enter to know himselfe by direction of his own reason. And when he is en∣tred in the way, to run to the end, doeth remayne that euery one may come by the knowledge of his maker. For that in vs, which hath not the substaunce of flesh, hath no matter from the flesh, but as it is parted from y• flesh. And yet it doeth most certeinly knowe, that it hath a beginning in that that it doth know that it is, and doth not re∣member that it hath bene euer, where as the knowing vnderstanding cannot be certayne. Therefore if the vnderstanding can not be, except it doth vnderstand, it fol∣loweth that those thinges, which we knowe, haue not euer vnderstoode, we should belee haue not euer bene, that
is to say, at sometimes haue had a begin∣ning. But euē as I sayd before, that which hath a spirituall substance, cannot haue a bodily beginning. For whatsoeuer is brought from the former matter, is ap∣proued to be bodily. Therefore if that which is not séene in vs haue a begin∣ning, it must néedes fal out, that it was not made of a former matter, but of no∣thing. And that which is nothing, cannot geue substaunce to the selfe, and there∣fore, whatsoeuer hath had a beginning, certaynly hath receiued substance from another. And that which is not of it self, cannot geue being to an other: And therefore whosoeuer he is, that hath ge∣uen being to other thinges, hath not receiued his being of an other thing. Which may be euidently proued thus, if that we beléeue that euery thing that is, is a creature, there will neuer be end founde. Therefore our nature doth teach vs, that our Maker is euerlasting, which hath hys owne and proper: that is to
say, he is of himself. For if he had taken his being from an other thing, he coulde not be called truely the first originall of things: For if at any time he were not, he had not beginning of himselfe, ney∣ther can be called first, if he toke his be∣ginning of an other. Therefore if he be the fyrst maker, he was euer. Also that, which is of the lesse, muste néeds be. For whosoeuer is of the selfe, to that it is one thing to be, & that that it is. This is playne, bycause nothing can be parted or seuered from the selfe: That therefore, to the which it is the same, the being, and that that it is, must néedes be euer, because nothing can be seuered from the selfe. If therfore what∣soeuer be of the selfe, to the same the be∣ing, and that that it is be all one, he that hath not receaued his being from an o∣ther, must consequently of necessitie be euer. Neither can be taken away from another, that was not giuen of another. So that it must néeds follow, that the thinges, which we beleue the maker to be, that we confesse the same, can ney∣ther haue beginning or ending: for that
hath no beginning which was euer, and that hath no ending, which endeth ne∣uer. Then neyther is there eternall be∣sides the maker, neyther can the maker be but eternall. This knowledge haue we founde in the mouing of reason, which we haue according to the eternall maker, which lacketh beginning, because it was euer. The other mouings doe confyrme this knowledge, I mean the mouing of life, nature, and place. For in the mouing of lyfe, be féeling and desyre, and eche na∣turall desyre may be satisfyed, neyther is there any ordinary desyre, but it may compasse the desyre. For example sake: Lyuing thinges hunger, and they finde thinges which lake their hunger, they thirst, and finde things which quenche their thirste, they be colde, and fynde things to warme them. Therefore thys is plaine, that the prouidence of God is gon before, by whose aduise this is de∣créede, that no necessary reliefe shoulde be wanting. For he that made the desyre, hath pre∣pared nourishment for the desyres, ney∣ther
coulde it in any wise be, if thinges went by chaunce, that the coutentations should so iustly & fully satisfy the desires The mouing of nature proueth the same, for as it is vnpossible, that anye¦thing by the selfe should be made of no∣thing, so is it altogether vnpossible, that any thing should take increase of the selfe, I meane yt, that, which cānot giue it self beginning, cannot giue it selfe in∣crease, for whatsoeuer doth increase a thing growing, must néedes be an other from that, which by it selfe before onely was without increase. Then if nothing can grow, except there be put to it some∣thing, which it had not before, it is ap∣parant, that nothing growing taketh increase of it selfe▪ Therfore he that gi∣ueth increase of thinges growing, gaue the increase of things being. The mouing of place doth proue thys also, for we sée, that certaine creatures moue continually, and some by tymes, & some after one sort, & some after ano∣ther. And although thinges moue in so dyuers maners, yet the order of thinge is neuer broken. Wherevpon it is eui∣dent,
that there is inwardly some direc∣tion of the Gouernour, which doth mo∣derate all the things by a certaine law. Howe then can we denye the prouy∣dence? if that euerie natural desyre find foode prepared for it naturally. Neither falleth it out, at any time, that nature desireth that in one thing, but it maye haue it in an other. Likewise sythe that mouing and in∣crease, grow outwardly by sundry and diuers wayes, doe neuer yet breake the generall order, howe can we denie that there is in them some direction: Ther∣fore it cannot be doubted, but the inui∣sible Gouernor doth rule within, which both by his prouidence doeth foresee the sequels of all thinges, and by his wise∣dome doth order the same. ❧ The thirteene branch. ONe Gouernour I say. For this na∣ture also teacheth, that there is in substaunce one workeman of al things, and one ruler. For if there were diuers determinations of the inward rulers, the effectes, or sequels of thinges would
somtimes also differ amōg themselues. But now all thinges doe so agréeingly run to one end, that they playnlye shew that there is one spring, & original from whence they come. But bicause one is takē diuers waies, it is to be declared, how the maker of all things is one. There is one by gathering together, and one by compounding, and one by likenesse, and one by substance, and one by identitie or samenesse. One by gathering together is, as we call that one stock in the which be many shéepe. One by compounding is, as we cal it one body, in the which be many partes. One by lykenesse, as we call it, one voyce, which is vttered of many. But of all those things, none is truely one: but they be called one after a sorte, be∣cause after a maner they resemble vni∣tie or onenesse. It is not tollerable, that we shoulde thinke the maker of thinges to be one, eyther by gathering together of diuers, or compounding of partes, or likenesse
of many, séeing that, that, which in vs is pertaker of reason, can fynd none of the foure it selfe. For that in vs which is made of diuers parts, is proued by rea∣son not to be pertaker of reason, but ioy∣ned to that, which is pertaker of reason. If therefore that in vs, that is perta∣ker of reason be one truely, howe much more ought we to beléeue, that the ma∣ker of the same is truely one. And that is truly one, which is one in substance, to the which it is all one, to be one, and to be simply, that it is. Therefore whatsoeuer is truely one, is simple, and cannot be in any respecte cut into partes. It cannot be cut into partes, because it was neuer made by ioyning of partes together. Therefore it is true, that the maker of thinges is truely, that which is, because his being is all one, and simple. ❧ The fourteenth branch. AND yet we are to marke, that some thinges there be, that be one truely, yet not one absolutely, and altogether. For the liues or soules, which be one
substauntially, are not one interchaun∣ably, but that, which is truely and fully one, is substauntially, & interchaunge∣ably one. Therefore it remayneth that sith we beléeue God to be truely one, we learn whether also he may be called ab∣solutely one, which we shall playnely shew, if we proue him to be altogether interchaungeable. But because, we cannot knowe how God is interchaungeable, excepte we first know, how many wayes thinges may be chaunged, we are fyrst to sette downe all the kinds of changeablenesse, and then to declare how that not one of them doth agrée vnto God. ❧ The fifteenth branch. CHaungeablenesse is in thrée poynts. Place, Forme, and Tyme. Ech thing is chaunged in Place, whē it is remoued frō one place to another, that is to say, when it leaueth to be in the place, in the which it was, and be∣ginneth to be in the place, in the which it was not. And this chaunging is out∣ward, and doth not alter any whit of the
substaunce, or being of the thing. For although it leaue to be where it was, it leaueth not to be that which it was. And although it beginne to be where it was not, yet it doeth not begin to be that which it was not. In forme ech thing is chaunged, when as a thing continueth in the same place according to the substaunce, and yet ey∣ther to the increase getteth some thing, which it had not before, or to ye decrease looseth something, which it had before, or else according to the altering begynneth to haue something, that it had before, o∣therwise then it had it before. I wyll not speake of chaunging in tyme, because that is bredde of the two first. For nothing can be chaunged in tyme, but it must be chaunged eyther in forme or place. If therefore it shall ap∣peare, that God can be changed neither in forme nor place. Then it wil be most certaine, that GOD is altogether vn∣chaungeable. We shal easily proue, that God is not chaunged, according to the chaunging of place, if we proue yt he is euery where.
For that which is euery where, is in e∣uery place. And that which is in euerye place, cannot go from place to place. There be many profes that God is eue∣ry where: And fyrst our owne soule, the which both reason doth playnely fynde, that it is a symple substaunce, and sence doth proue, that it is dispearsed through all that which doeth quicken the bodye. For whatsoeuer parte of the quick body is hurte, it is one spirite, to the which feeling of ech payne is caryed, the which coulde not be, if the one and the same spirite where not dispearsed thorow the whole. If therefore the reasonable spirite of man being symple, is dispearsed thorow the whole bodye which it guydeth, it is not conuenient, that that creating spi∣rite, which guydeth and possessetth all things, shoulde be tyed, and bounde to some one place, but rather shoulde be thought to fyll all places. For the very mouinges of all thinges which doe run euery where, with so cer∣tayne and reasonable moderation doth shew life quick within. Yet may not we
in any case beléeue, that as the spirite of man is personally ioyned to the body, which it quickneth, that so ech creating spirite to be coupled personaly to the bo∣dy of this sensible world. For God fil∣leth the world one way, and the soule the body an other. The soule fylleth the body & is contey∣ned in it, bicause it maye be compassed about. God fylleth the world, but is not con∣teyned, because being presente euerye where, he cannot beholden any where. ❧ The sixteenth branch. FUrthermore, sythence we sée the ef∣fect of God his power to be wanting no where, why shoulde we not thinke, that the same power of GOD is in all thinges. And if Gods power be euerye where, and if also God his power, and God be all one, it is most playne that God is euery where, for God doeth not néede any others ayde to doe any thing, as a manne doeth, for man often tymes doth that by the helpe of another, which he cannot do by his own power. Wher∣vpon
after a certaine maner of spéeche, man is oftentimes saide to doe a thing, in that place, where it is manifest, that he is absent bodily. As the king oftentimes making hys aboade in his owne citie is reported, to fyght in another place with his eni∣mies, and to ouercome, or be ouercom∣med: bicause the kings souldiours vpon his pleasure or commaundement, doe fight, & do ouercome, or be ouercommed. Likewise, when a man hitteth with his staffe, or with a stone, a thing farre from him, the man is sayd to hit that, which his staffe or stone did hit. There be many of this sorte, but none of these be spoken properly: because, that which the one doth is ascribed to the other. But God which thorow his own ver∣tue, by his own selfe doeth all thinges, wheresoeuer he is presente in worke, must néedes be there also presente in Godhead. Now if any man would aske, howe God being a symple substaunce, can be euery where? He is to vnderstand that the spirite is called symple one waye,
and the body simple another way. For the body is called simple for ye lit∣tlenesse, but the spirite is called simple, not for the littlenesse, but in respecte of the vnity or onenesse. Therfore the ma∣ker both is simple because he is one, and euery where, because he is God. And be∣ing in euery place, can be holden of no place, for fylling all thinges, he doth cō∣tme, and is not conteyned. Therefore because he is in euery place, he cannot be moued from place to place, and be∣cause he is holden in no place, he is not locall. But the chaunging that is according to forme, is eyther meresed, or deciesed, or altered. But none of these canne be found in the nature of God, which the seuerall discourse of each will make playne. Whatsoeuer groweth or increaseth, taketh some thing besides it selfe. And whatsoeuer taketh any thing more, thē that which is in it selfe, must néedes take it from another. For nothing can geue to it selfe that which it hath not. And of whome can the maker of all
thinges take any thing that it hath not, seeing that euery thing that is, commeth from him. Then he cannot increase, be∣cause he cannot take any thing more then himselfe. Neyther can he decrease or be dominished. For whatsoeuer can be made lesse then it selfe, is not truely one. For that which deuideth it selfe in seuering, was neuer the same in com∣miction. Therefore God to whome it is all one to be that which he is, can by no meanes be made lesse thē it selfe. Neyther there∣fore ye perfectnesse of God can be increa∣sed, nor the vnity deminished, nor the immensity comprehended, nor he, that is present in euery place, can be chaun∣ged from place to place. Now I am to teach, how God cannot be altered, and because the altering of bodyes is one, & the altering of spirites another, and because also it is playne by that, which is sayd before, that God is no body, but a spirite, si we intreat of God, it is néedelesse to speake much of the alteration of bodies, and yet I will much the same briefely, because I may
more commodiously come to the altera∣tion of the spirites. The alteration of the bodies doth con∣sist in the compounding of the parts, and mutuall chaunge of the qualities. The alteratiō of spirite is by knowledge and affection. The spirits be chaunged according to affection, in becomming somtimes mer∣ry, sometimes sad, according to know∣ledge, to be sometimes more, and some∣times lesse wise. There be two thinges chiefely, which alter the affection of the worker, eyther if he hath done any thing heretofore to be repented of, or doe appoynt to do any thing hereafter out of order. But that God doth nothing to repent of, doth this vnchaungeable course of thinges plain∣ly proue, which do so kéepe by a perpetu∣all law, the order of their fyrst appoynt∣ment. And that God doth purpose or co∣uet to doe nothing out of order. Doeth the reasonable sequell proue, which in the whole body of nature doeth in no poynt disagrée vnto it selfe. Therefore God his will is vnmoue∣able,
because he doth neuer chaunge ey∣ther his councell of that, which is past, or his purpose of that which is to come & so we ought to beleeue that God is vn∣chaungeable in knowledge. ❧ The seuententh branch. MAns knowledge doth chaunge three wayes: By increase, decrease, and ech after other. By increase, when we learne that we know not. By decrease, when we forget that we know. Ech after other happeneth iiij. wayes. Substaunce, Forme, Place & Time. In substaunce when we thinke nowe this, now that, because mans sence can∣not comprehend all thinges at once. In forme, when we learne fyrst one quality of a thing, and then an other be∣cause we cannot learne both at once. In place, when our mind is now fix∣ed vpon one place, and afterwardes vp∣on an other, because it cannot be vppon all places at once. In time, when we at one tyme view
thinges past, and at an other tyme thinges to come, because we cannot doe all together. Then also our knowledge is chaun∣ged in tyme, when we doe leaue of for a while our studye, and afterwardes begin the same agayne, because we be not able to study euer. But none of these is found in God his knowledge. ❧ The eighteenth branch. GOD his knowledge is not increased because it is full. For neyther can he be ignoraunt of any thing, which ma∣keth, which guideth, which séeth thorow which beareth all thinges, and being present to al by vertue of his Godhead: must needes see and behold all. It cannot be diminished, because it is not of other, whatsoeuer it is, but the whole same, what soeuer it is, it is of the selfe from one, and one all that it is. What shoulde I speake of mutuall chaunge. How can that wisedome be subiect to mutuall chaunge, which doth comprehend all thinges together, and at
once vnder one beame of sight, I say to∣gether, because it comprehendeth eche substaunce, ech forme, ech, place, and ech time. I say at once, because it doth ney∣ther sée agayne, that it hath lefte to sée, nor leaue to sée that which it seeth. But that which it is once, that it is euer, and that it is euer, that it is whole. It séeth all thinges, and seeth all thinges in all thinges, and in euery time, and in eue∣ry place. There is nothing new vnto it, there is nothing straunge, there is no∣thing departeth vnknowne. It doeth foresée all that is to come, when it is present, it beholdeth it, when it is past, it holdeth it, and to it al is one, to foresée, to behold, and hold still. That, that falleth out in tyme was in prouydence, and that that is past in tyme remayneth in knowledge. Euen as if your whole body were an eye, & your being and seing were al one, whether soeuer you should tourne you, you must needes see your selfe, and with one twinckling of the eie neuer mouing you should sée round about, whatsoeuer could be séene. Nay rather you should sée
styll before your selfe, whatsoeuer were any way, the thing might passe awaye, but the syght shoulde stande still, and whether soeuer the thing shoulde tnrne the selfe, you shoulde be present to your selfe standing. But nowe because you sée in part, ye see chaungeably, and when the thing goeth out of sight, eyther it leaueth to be seene, or it is sometimes seene, and sometymes not séene. But if you were all an eye, ye should not so sée, & not sée. Therefore what soeuer is in parte, is chaungeable, and whatsoeuer is not in part, cannot be chaunged. But God to whome it is the same to be, to lyue, and vnderstand, syth neyther he can be in parte by substaunce, neyther in part by wisedome, but euen as he is vn∣chaungeable in substaunce, so he is vn∣chaungeable in wisedome. And thus much for the knowledge of God. ❧ The ninetenth branch. BUt we are to vnderstande, that this knowledge is called sometimes Vi∣sion, sometimes wisedome, sometimes
foreknowledge, and sometymes pro∣uydence. Vision bicause it seeth. Wisdome, bicause it vnderstandeth. Foreknowledge, because it preuēteth Prouydence, because it ordereth. Of the which there arise to to harde, and o to doubtfull questions, the which I am afearde to set downe in thys treatise, and therefore will go to that, which re∣mayneth. And nowe that I haue entred by the eye of knowledge, and gone frō thinges séene, to thinges not séene, thus far this method hath led vs, that we are sure that the maker of all thinges is one, without beginning, without ende, and without chaunge, and these thinges we haue found, not without our selues, but within our selues. ❧ The .xx. branch. LEt vs therefore now yet sée whether this the same our nature, doth teach vs any further thing of our maker. For it may be that it doth not only shew him one: But also eternall.
Truely the reasonable minde is one, and being one, ingendreth of the selfe one vnderstanding. Which oftentimes, whiles it doth beholde, how subtile, how true, how agréeing, how pleasant it is, by and by, it loueth it, and pleaseth the selfe in the selfe, it seeth together and wondereth, and doth marueyle, that it hath founde out any such thing. The whole ioy is euer to delight in it, euer to haue it, euer to inioy it. It pleaseth for the selfe, it pleaseth by the selfe, neyther is there any thing, that is desyred besids it: bicause it is wholy loued in the selfe. In that the sight of truth is pleasaunt to behold, swéete to haue, and moste de∣lightfull to inioy: the mind resteth, and ioyeth in it, and with it, as the selfe, neither euer is weary of the owne se∣crete, which delighteth in one only, and yet no solitary company. Weight therefore these together, the mind, the vnderstanding, the loue. Of the mind commeth the vnderstan∣ding, of the mind together & vnderstan∣ding, springeth loue.
Of the onely minde commeth vnder∣standing, because the minde hath be∣gotten of it selfe vnderstanding. But of both, the mind is first, and the mind and vnderstanding, and thirdly the minde, vnderstanding, and loue. And this is thus in vs. But in the maker, reason is of ano∣ther nature, for because we beléeue, that he hath ben euer. We must néedes con∣fesse that he had euer wisedome: For if he hath ben at any time without wis∣dome, who made him wise afterwards? or of whome he receiued wisedome can∣not be founde. And as this is most ab∣surde, and contrary to all reason, to be∣léeue that he that is the fountayne, and and originall of all wisdome was some∣times without wisedome: So must it néedes be, that wisedome was euer in him, wisedome euer came from hym, and was euer with him. Wisedome was euer with hym, for he had wisedome euer, which was wise euer, wisedome euer came from him, because he begat the wisdome, which he hath. Wisedome was euer with hym▪
because the begotten neuer leaueth the begetter. Wisedome is euer begotten, and is euer in begetting, & yet neyther beginning, when it is begetting, nor ending when it is begotten. It is euer in begetting, because it is eternall, it is euer begotten because it is perfect: so there is one that begetteth, and one that is begotten. The Father begetteth, the sonne is begotten, and be∣cause he that did beget, did beget from e∣ternall, the Father is eternall. And be∣cause, he that is begotten, is begotten from eternall, the sonne is coeternall with the father eternall. He that had wisdome, euer loued wis∣dome euer, and that which loued euer, had loue euer. Therefore loue is coeter∣nall with the eternall father and sonne. For the father is of none, the sonne is of the father alone: But loue procéedeth from the father and the sonne together. Because we haue auouched before, that the maker of all thinges is abso∣lutely and truely one, we must therfore confesse, that these thrée be one substan∣tially. Therefore because he that is be∣gotten,
cannot be the same of whom he was begotten, neyther he that procee∣deth from the begetter and the begotten can be, eyther the begetter or the begot∣ten, the inexpugnable ground of truth doth compell vs to acknowledge in the Godhead both the trinity of the person, and the vnity of the substance. Ther∣fore to thrée in one Godhead is commō both equal eternity, and eternall equal∣lity. For that cannot be diuers in euery one, which one Godhead maketh com∣mon to euery one. Then threée be one, because in thrée persons there is one substaunce, but the thrée persons be not one person. For euen as the distinction of ech per∣son doth not deuide the vnity of ye God∣head: so the vnity of the Godhead doeth not confound the distinction of the per∣sons. ❧ The. xxj. branch. BUt I thinke good a little more dilli∣gently, to weigh this former spéech: That the father loueth his wisedome. For men be wont to loue their know∣ledge
for the profyte, not the profyte for the knowledge. As the knowledge of husbandry, of weauing, of paynting, &c. where the knowledge is reckued, alto∣gether vnprofytable, except the profyte followeth of it. If it were so about the wisedome of God, then should the worke be better, then the workman. Therfore we must bold that wisedome is euer to be loued for the selfe. Now if it sometimes falleth out that the worke is preferred before wisdom, it groweth not of the iudgement of the truth, but of the errour of man, for wis∣dome is lyfe, and the lous of wisedome is the blessednesse of life. Wherefore when it is sayde, that the father of wisedome, delighteth himselfe in wisedome, God forbid, that it should be thought that we beléeue, that God lo∣ueth his wisedome for the workes sake which he made by it: Nay rather he lo∣ued none of his workes, but for his wis∣domes sake. And therfore he sayd this is my beloued sonne, in whome I haue set my delight, and not in the earth or in the
heauen, or the Sunne, or the Moone, or the Starres, or the Aunpeis, or in any of the most excellent creatures. For al∣though these things he after their man∣ner delightfull, yet they cannot delight but in him and for him. For so much more doe I loue them, as they come ∣rer to his likenesse. Not therefore God loueth his wisedome for his works, but his workes for his wisedome. For in that is euery thing bewtifull, and true, and is wholy his desire. ight vnuisible and life immortall, whose ight is so much desyred, that it maye delight the eyes of God. Simple, and perfect, not redundant, and yet full: Sole, but not solitary: One,  conteyning al thinges. ❧ The. xxij. branch. BEcause we beléeue thrée persons in one Godhead▪ it is to be ought out. whether that, which agreeth to any of these agréeth to the other. It was saide, that the father loueth the sonne. Let vs nowe consyder, whe∣ther it maye likewise be saide, that the loue of the father, and the sonne, loueth
the sonne: That the sonne loueth hym∣selfe, that the father loueth hymselfe, that the sonne loueth the father, that the loue of the father, & the sonne loueth the father, that the loue of the father, and the sonne loueth it selfe, yt the father loueth his loue, & his sonnes, that the sonne lo∣ueth his loue & the fathers. And to make an ende, whether it be one, and the same loue, with the which euerye one loueth himselfe, and that, with the which euery one loueth another. But this will be more easie, if we call to rememberaunce the thinges, that be spoken of before. For in ye former trea∣tise it is proued that GOD is the fyrst cause, and originall of all good things, neyther can there be anye Nobler good, then that, which is the Fountaine and beginning of all. So that it followeth, that God is the chiefe good. Therefore God is blessed alone, and properly, and principally. And how can he be blessed, which loueth not the same, which he is. Whosoeuer therefore is blessed, bothe loueth the selfe and the substaunce. If then the father and the Sonne be one,
and be one God, sithence, that true bles∣sednesse is in God alone: It is vnpos∣sible, but ye both ech one should loue the selfe, and eche one should loue another. For it were no true blessednesse, nay rather it were the chiefe vnhappinesse, if they should parte themselues by con∣trarie will, and could not be parted one from another for the same substance. As therefore the father and the sonne, and the loue of the father and the sonne, by nature, and substance be one: so al∣so by will and loue, they must néedes be one. Ech one loueth the selfe with one loue, bicause they be one. Neyther is it any other thing, yt eche one loueth in an other, but that, which eche one loueth in the selfe: bicause it is no other thing, that eche one is, but the same, that the other is. That which the Father loueth in the sonne, the same the sonne loueth in him selfe, and that which the loue of the fa∣ther & the sonne loueth in the sonne, the verie same the sonne loueth in himself. Agayne, that which the sonne loueth in the father, the verie same loueth the
father in himselfe. And that which the loue of the father, and the sonne, loue in the father, that the father loueth in him∣selfe. Also that which the father, and the sonne loue in their loue that the loue of the father, and the sonne loueth in the selfe. Last of all, that, that she father loueth in himselfe, the very same doth he loue in the same, & in his loue. And y• which the sonne loueth in himselfe, the very same doth he loue in the father, and in his loue. And that which the loue of the father, and of the sonne loueth in it self, the verie same doth it loue in the sonne, and in the father. ❧ The. xxiij. branch. MArke whether the voyce of the Fa∣ther doth confyrme this? Thys is (sayeth he) my beloued sonne, in whom I haue together delighted my selfe. He did not saye, alone, I haue together de∣lighted my selfe, neyther did he saye a∣lene he hath together delighted me, ney∣ther did he say both, I together haue de∣lighted my selfe, and he together hath
delighted me. But he saide, I together haue delighted my selfe in him. That is to say, that which lyketh me in my seife, is in him, & without him no iote of it, for that, that I am, he is, and because I am nothing, but that which he is, I cannot lyke my selfe without him. Then this is my beloued sonne, in whome I haue together liked my selfe. Whatsoeuer pleseth me, the same in him, and for him pleaseth me. He is the wisedome, by the which I made all things, and in him did I dispose eternally, that, which I made temporally. And so much the more do I loue euery my worke the liker I sée it to the fyrst course. Thinke not that he is onely a media∣toure for the recōciling of men, because thorow him the condition of eache crea∣ture is made commendable, and plea∣saunt to my sight, in him doe I eramine all my workes which I doe. And I can∣not but loue that, which I sée like vnto him, which I loue. Onely he misliketh me, which is vnlike vnto him. If therefore you wil please me, heare him. And if you become vnlike vnto him
thorough your euell deedes, retourne by following him. In him is geuen the commaundement, and in him councell. The cōmaundement tht you should go on. Councell that you should retourne: I would you had kept the commaunde∣ment. But because ye haue broken the commaundement, follow the councell, heare him. He is sent vnto vs, as the Aungell of the great councell, that as he was geuen vnto vs fyrs made to glory, so should he be vnto vs lost, a medicine: Heare him. He is your maker, he is your redée∣mer, he y• sayd God made you with me, which with you man alone cōmeth vn∣to you: heare him. He is the forme, he is the salue, he is the example, he is the remedy: heare him. It had bene better to haue kept still his likenesse: But now it wilbe no lesse glorieus to retourne to the incitation of him: heate him. O man why doest theu blame thy ig∣noraunce, beholde thy nature doeth reproue thée, the same doeth confounde théee,
thou knowest which a one thou art, whēce thou commest, what maker thou haste, what Mediatour thou needest, and doest thou crye agaynst the Lord impu∣denty defending thy selfe? Thou knowest thou arte naught, and waste made good, of a good workeman, and doest thou cease and not crye to him that made thee, to come & repayre thee, which made thee, to redeeme thée, doubt not of his power: Sée his workes how great they be. Doubt not of his wisdom: See his works how faire they be. Doubt not of his mercy: See his workes how profytable they be. So God doth she we his workes, how mighty he is in thy re∣demption. He doth also shew thee, how dreadfull a Judge thou arte to looke for, if thou refuse him for thy redéemer. None can withstand him, for he is al∣mighty. None cā deceue him, for he is most wise. None can corrupt him, for he is best. None can flye from him, because he is euery where. None can take him away, because he is eiernall.
None can bow him, because he is vn∣chaungeable. If therefore we like not to haue such a Judge, let vs séeke and imbrase him as our redeemer. ❧ The .xxiiij. branch. WHen of late I begone to learne thinges not seene, by things seene, I went from the creature hauing body, to the creature that had no body, I mean the creature pertaker of reason. And then from the creature pertaker of rea∣son, I came to the wisedome of God. But now going backe agayne, I meane to procéede, fyrst from the wisedome of God, to the creature, pertaker of reason and next from the creature pertaker of reason, to the creature hauing body. The one is the order of knowledge, the other of condicion. For the bodilye creature, which is séene, is first known, then by the bodily creature, we learn to know that without body. Fynally this way of knowledge opened, leadeth vs to the Creator and maker of both. But touching condition and state,
for the fyrst steppe. The creature perta∣ker of reasō was made after the Image of God, afterwardes was made the bo∣dily creature, that the creature pertaker of reasō should acknowledge within it, outwardly that, which inwardly it had receaued of the maker. In the wisedome of God is trueth, in the creature pertaker of reason, is the Image of truth. In the creature hauing body, is the shadow of the Image. The creature pertaker of reason was made after the wisedome of God. The creature hauing body was made after the creature pertaker of reason. And therefore all mouing and tourning of the bodily creature is after the becke of the reasonable creature. And euery mo∣uing and tourning of ye bodily creature, should be after the beck of the wisdome of God. That whilst ech one doth still o∣bey the superioure, they shoulde neuer leaue the order of the first condition, nor the similitude of the fyrst example. So that whosoeuer will followe the method of knowledge frō thinges seene, to thinges not séene, must goe by know∣ledge
of the boily creature, to the rea∣sonable creature: And by the knowledge of the reasonable creature, to the know∣ledge of the maker. But he that retourneth from the not seene, to the seene, must fyrst goe downe from the Creator, to the reasonable cre∣ature, next frō the reasonable creature, to the bodily creature. The course of knowledge in mans mind, doth goe before the order of condi∣tion. For we that are without, cannot retourne from the thinges within, ex∣cept fyrst we Pearce the thinges within with the eye of our mind. The order of condition, doth follow the course of knowledge, for although mans weaknesse doth somtimes a little enter in, to consider of inward thinges, yet his infyrmity is such, that he cannot long continue in the same. ❧ The .xxv. branch. AFter that I haue made knowne the things not séene, by the things séene, so farre forth as GOD hath giuen mée grace. Nowe let the minde retourne to
the selfe and see, what prsye it maye reape by this knowledge. For what doth it preuayle, if we knowe the high∣nesse of God his maiestie, and take no profyte thereby. And therefore beholde, whiles we re∣tourne from that  deepe secrete of the contemplation of God▪ what bring we thence with vs, hat b t, com∣ming out of the region of light, this is both conuenient and necessarie, that comming out of the region of lighte, we shoulde carry light with vs, to dryue a∣way our darknesse, and who can know, that we haue bene there, except we re∣tourne lightened? Let it therfore appeare, that we haue bene there, let it therfore appeare what we haue séene there. If we haue séene power, let vs carry away the light of the feare of God. If we haue séene wisdome, let vs car∣ry away the light of truth. If we haue seene mercy, let vs carry away the light of loue. Power doth stirre vp sluggish to loue. Wisedome doeth lighten these that
were blinded with darkenesse of igno∣raunce. Mercy doth kindle the cold, with the heate of loue. Now consider I pray you, whether light be any thing else, but day, & darke∣nesse but night: And euen as the eye of the body hath the daye, and the night, so the eye of the mind hath the day and the night. ❧ The. xxvj. branch. THere be thrée dayes of the not séene light, by the which, the course of the spiritual life is inwardly distinguished. The fyrst day is feare, the secōd truth, the thirde loue. The sunne of the fyrst day is power, of the seconde daye wise∣dome, of the thirde day mercie. Power belongeth vnto the father. Wisedome to the sonne. And mercie to the holy ghost. Our outwarde dayes, and our inwarde dayes differ much. Our outewarde dayes passe awaye a∣gainst our will. Our inward dayes may returne for
euer, if we will. Of the feare of God it is written, that it abideth for euer, and euer. Also there is no doubt, but truth may continewe for cuer: For albeit, it beginne in this life, yet then it shall be full, and perf in vs, when after the end of the worlde he, which is truth shall more manifestly appeare. Likewise of loue, it is written that loue neuer dyeth. These be good dayes, that neuer haue ende, the other dayes be naught, which not onely, not abide euer, but cannot stay a little. Of these the Prophete speaketh, the dayes of man be as grasse. The fyrste dayes be the desert & rewarde of sinne, the second be the gifte of mercy. Of the second speaketh the Prophete. In my dayes will I call vpon God. For if hee ment of the other, why doth he not saye, I will call vpon him in the night, seeing that he sayeth in an other place. At mid∣night did I rise to prayse thee. But he calleth these his dayes, because hée doth not loue the other. According to the saying of Jeremy.
Lord thou knowest that I neuer cared for the day of man. Those be the dayes of the which Jobe was full. Of whome it is written that he dyed old, and full of daies, for he could not be ful of the other dayes which were not yet past. Onely euil men know the dayes that be outward, and good mē the dayes that be inward. Good men doe not onely not loue the outward dayes, but curse them. Cursed be that day, sayeth blessed Jobe, in the which I was borne, and the nighte in the which it was sayd, a man childe is conceaued, let that daye be tourned to darcknesse, and be had no more in re∣membraunce, nor see light. Then we ought rather to loue the in∣ward dayes where light and darcknesse goe not together where the beames of the eternall sonne doe lighten ye inward eyes of the heart of the world. ❧ The. xxvij. branch. KIng Dauid spake of those daies say∣ing, declare his sauiour from day to day▪ What is his sauiour but his Jesus,
for Jesus is expounded Sauyoure. And he is called sauyoure, because he doeth saue men from sinne and death, to lyfe. For of him so sayeth Saint John, the law was geuen by Moyses. But mercy and truth came by Jesus Christ. Like∣wise Paule calleth Christ Jesus the po∣wer of God, and the wisedome of God. If therefore Jesus Christ be the wis∣dome of God, and truth came by Jesus Christ, it is euident, that truth came by the wisedome of God. So truth is ye day of wisedome. Wisedome it selfe speaketh to the Jewes thus of this day: Your Father Abraham did desyre to sée my day, he saw it and was glad of it, for the trueth of God is the redemption of mankinde, which he fyrst promised, which séeing he afterwardes performed, what did he else, but shew himselfe true. Then truth was fulfilled by this wisdome, from the which all truth doth spring, neyther was any other sente to fulfill truth, but he in whom the fulnesse of al truth was. Therfore did Abraham well reioyce at the day of truth, because
he desyred trueth to be fulfilled, which daye then he saw by the holy ghost, whē he did beleeue that the sonne of GOD should be incarnate to redeeme man. Let it be saide: Declare his saluati∣on from day to day, the second day from the fyrst daye to the thirde, the daye of truth, from the day of feare, to the days of loue. First there was but one day, the day of feare. Then came the seconde daye, the daye of truth. It came I saye, it dyd not succéede, for the fyrst did not depart, so haue you two dayes. The third sprang out, the daye of loue. But when that thirde day came, it did not dryue away the two fyrst. Blessed are these dayes, in the which men maye growe to perfecti∣on, where things to come doe come, and present doe not depart, where the num∣ber is increaste, and the brightnesse multiplyed. First men being vnder sinne, were reproued by the lawe, and beganne to feare GOD as the Judge, because they sawe their owne guiltinesse. Then  feare him, is to know him, for truely
they cannot feare him, excepte they know him. Now this knowledge was some light. Nowe was it daye, but not bright day, for they were yet dimme thorowe the darkenesse of sinne. Then came the day of truth, the day of saluation, to destroy sinne, to lighten the brightnesse of the fyrst daye, and to engender feare, & not to take it away, but to turne it into better. Neyther was the brightnesse yet full, till loue was ioyned to it. For the truth it selfe sayeth. I haue many thinges to say vnto you, but you cannot yet beare them, but when that spirite of truth shal come, he shall teach you all truth. So all truth is to this end, to take away the e∣uell, and to rectify the good. Behold there be thrée dayes, the daye of feare, which maketh the euell knowe the day of truth, which taketh away the euell, & the day of loue, which restoreth the good. The daye of truth doeth make bright the day of feare. The day of loue doeth make bright both the day of feare, and
the day of truth, vntill loue shall be per∣fected, and all truth known manifestly, and the feare of payne be tourned into the feare of reuerence. Declare there∣fore his saluation from day to day. ❧ The. xxviij. branch. THe Prophete Osea spake of these dayes: He shall quicken vs after two dayes, and in the third day he shall rayse vs vp. For euen as our Lord Je∣sus Christ rising the third day from the dead, did himselfe quicken vs, and raise vs vp: So we hearing and being glad of this, it is conuenient that we shoulde be thankefull vnto him for this greate benefite. And like as we haue risen a∣gayne, with him rising againe the third day, so we rising agayne this thirde day for him, and thorowe him shoulde cause him to rise agayne in vs. Neyther may we thinke, but that he would haue that payed agayne, which he fyrst lent vs. Therefore euen as hee would haue thrée daies to worke in him selfe, and by himselfe our saluation. E∣uen so he hath geuen vs thrée dayes to
worke in our selues by faith in his mer∣cy our saluation. But because that which he did, was not onely a medicine, but also an exam∣ple, and a sacrament, it was to be done outwardly, to teach vs what we should doe inwardly. So his dayes were out∣wardly, but ours are to be oughte in∣wardly. ❧ The .xxix. branch. WEhaue thrée dayes inwardly, in the which our soule may be light∣ned: Death doth appertayne to the first day, Buryall to the second, and rising agayne to the third. The first daye is feare, the seconde is truth, and the thirde loue. The day of feare is the daye of power, and the day of the father. The daye of wisedome, is the daye of truth, and the day of the sonne. The daye of loue, is the day of mercie, and the daye of the holye ghost. Surely the daye of the father, and the daye of the sonne, and the day of the ho∣lye ghost is all one in brightnesse of the
Godhead, but in lightening our minds, the father hath one daye, the sonne an other, and the holy ghost the thirde. Not that in any respect we ought to beleeue, that the trinity which in substance can∣not be seuered, in working maye be se∣uered, but that the distinction of the per∣sons maye be vnderstoode, by the diffe∣rence of the workes. When the consyderation of the Al∣mightie power of God doth stirre our hartes to prayse God, it is the day of the father. But when the wisdome of God, doth light our harts with ye séene know∣ledge of the truth, it is the day of the son. And when the mercy of God consydered doth fyre our hartes with loue, it is the day of the holy ghos. Power doth terrify, Wisedome doth lighten, Mercy doth glad. In the day of power, we die by feare. In the daye of wysedome, we be bu∣ryed from the noyse of thys worlde, by the contemplation of truth. In the day of mercie we rise agayne, by the loue and desyre of eternall ioy. For therefore Christ died the sixt day,
laye in the graue the seuenth daye, and rose agayne the eyght daye, that in sem∣blable maner, first power in that day by feare, should outwardly kil vs from car∣nall desyres, and then wisedome the next daye shoulde inwardly burie vs in the graue of contemplation: And last of all mercie in that day, should cause vs quickned to arise agayne by Fayth, and by the desyre of ye loue of God. For that the sixt day is the day of labour, the seuenth day, the day of rest, and the eyght daye, the daye of rysing againe.
❧ A Prayer. SHyne we beséech thée, O almighty and mercifull God, of our Lorde Jesus Christ that father of glo∣ry, vpon our minds, and hearts, with the beames of thy heauenly grace, and geue vs the spirite of wise∣dome and vnderstanding, thorough the knowledge of thee, that the eyes of our heartes being lighted, we may knowe what is the hope of the calling, and howe riche is the glory of the heritage of thy sayntes, and that excellent greatnesse of thy power towardes vs, which beléeue according to the might of ye force of thy strength, which thou shew∣ed in Christ, whē thou diddest raise him from the dead, and diddest set him at thy right hand in heauen, farre aboue all Empyre, power, aucthoryty, and do∣minion, and euery name that is named, not onely in this world, but also in the world to come. Graunt this moste mer∣cifull father, for thy best beloued sonnes sake our onely aduocate and sauioure Christ Jesus. So be it.
❧ Whether the naturall aud glorifyed body of Christ, is in all or manye places, at one, and the same time. NIcpherus doeth write yt Vtiches and Dioschorus the greate enemyes of the councell of Calcedon, went to Alamordaru a King of the Saracenes, a little before conuerted to the fayth, and babtized, to infect him with their herisyes. But the good King well instructed, and strongly propt vp, with the grace of God, conty∣nued a zelous and constant professour of Christ. At the last when by no meanes he could rid himselfe of the crafty, and importune souldyours of Sathan, he fayned, that he must needes goe speake with certayne straungers, & soone after retourning to Vtiches and Dioschorus, tould them that he had receaued strange newes, that Michaell the Archaungell was dead: Vtiches and Dioschorus cry∣ed out, and sayd they were lyes: For it was vnpossible yt an Angell should dye.
Then sayd the King what mad men be yee, that confesse that Christ was crucifi∣ed, and dead, and yet denye that he was a man. The same in déede, though not in eue∣ry respect falleth out with them, which graunt that Christ hath a natural body, but deny that the same body is compri∣sed in one place. Vtiches denied that Christ was a mā, but he doeth not denye that he was cru∣cifyed and dead: These doe denye that Christes body is bounded, or in one place, but they doe not deny that it is a naturall body: I doe not therefore sée how they can shifte their selues of the utikian heresy, or the confounding of the two natures in Christ, which take away place and circumscription from the naturall body of Christ: In worde they say, that the two natures in Christ be distincte, and that the seueral proper∣ties of ech of the natures be distinct, but in déede they confound them all in trās∣ferring the whole force of ye Godhead in∣to the body. Truth it is that the glorifyed body is
moresubtill and nimble, then the not glorifyed body, as S. Augustine doeth wel say. But yet a body, and a body boū∣ded with the boundes of place. Aristotle doth say, and very truely,August▪ ad Darda∣num. that euerybody muste needes be as it were hedged about with a place, & the same S. Austen writeth to Dardanus, take away spaces of places frō bodyes, and they shalbe no where, and because they shall be no where, they shall not be at all. But if the nature of the body of Christ be weighed by it selfe, it is so as you say. Notwithstanding if you looke to the po∣wer of God, by that and from that, it may haue force to be euery where. For who can set any bounde to the power of God, which made the heauens, ye earths, the seas of nothing: The aunswere is easie, no manne calleth in question the strength and power of God, but we in∣quire what his will is, our question is not, whether God coulde haue the natu∣rall body of Christ to be in euery place at one time, but whether God woulde haue it so. Wherefore, that I maye be
frée from al quarels and slaunders, euen at the dore of my spéeche, I doe openly and plainely protest, that we doe not thrust or binde the bodye of Christ into any straight prison of the Firmament, but that we beléeue and confesse, that the same is in the most large and noble Countrie of the lyuing, farre aboue all the heauens, subiect to the sences. Also that we do not part the manhood frō the Godheade, or the Godheade from the Manhood, but that we doe most certain∣ly beléeue that these two natures be e∣uer knitte and lincked together, in one parson of Christ, perfyte God and per∣fyte man. Thirdly, that we doe not in any respect diminishe that great and in∣finite power of the great and mightye God, but that we do honour him as god almightie and eternall. And yet we are loth to be reckned in ye number of those which the Poet Horase doeth speake. Whilst Fooles doth auoyde one faulte, they fall into another, I meane, that I would neither speake more narrowly, nor more nobly of the most noble & bles∣sed body of Christ, there the word of god
doth teach me. For our mayer Christ geueth the same for a rule. Searche the scriptures: For they beare witnesse of me. And truely the aunciente Fathers doe playnly teache, that argumentes drawen from the power of God, be both very weake and to to daungerous, firstTertullia∣nus adur∣gus Prax∣am. Tertullian against Praxias the Heretick sayd, it is not hard for God to make him selfe both Father and sonne contrary to the course of nature, as it was not hard for GOD to cause the barren to bring forth a childe, and the virgin an other. Certaynly there is nothing harde vnto God, but and if we shall vse these pre∣sumptions and gesses so abruptly & ha∣sely. We may surmise any thing of god that God hath done it, because he coulde doe it: But not because God can doe all thinges, therefore are we bounde to be∣léeue, that God hath done that, which he hath not done, but it is our duety toHiron▪ tomo. 1. epist. ad Eustoch. serch out by Gods worde, whether he haue done it or no: Secondly S. Ierome, writing to Eustochius of the kéeping of virginity, doth say (I speake boldly) al∣though
God can doe all thinges, yet can he not rayse vp a Ʋirgin after her fall. Thirdly saint Austen against Faustus,Aug. lib. 26. cap. 5. whosoeuer sayth, if God be almighity, he can cause, that those things which be done, be not done, he doth not sée, that he sayth thus much in effect, if God be al∣mightie, he can cause, that the same things which be true, in that, that they be true be also false. Last of all Theo∣doreteTheodor. in. 3. dial. in his thirde Dialogue, which is called Impatibilis: doeth saye, that we ought not to say definitely and absolute∣ly, that all things be possible vnto God. By the which it appeareth that we may auouch without impechmente of Gods almighty power▪ that God hath not done all thinges which he coulde haue done, neyther doth the word teach yt, but this, God hath done whatsoeuer hee would, yt is to saye, whatsoeuer it séemed good to his wisdome to haue done: Thē we are to séeke out, whether it be Gods will & pleasure that the humayne and natural body of Christ should be in euery place, at one time. For if Gods will be so, it is without all doubt, but if Gods will bée
not so, it is great sinne to teach or thinke the contrary. If Gods will be to haue the naturall body of Christ, a made bo∣dy, an humayne body, and a natural bo∣dy, a body distinguished with partes, then Gods will is not that Christes na∣turall body should be in many places at one time: For then it should breake the boundes, marckes, and limmittes, and should leaue to be an humayne and na∣turall body. Nowe nothing can at the sawe time be a humayne body, and a not humayne body, a naturall body, and a not naturall body. But you will say, you may not leaue to reason in matters of religion: Truth it is, if the booke of God teach otherwise: But the body of Christe hath this peculier and priuate grace, to be in many places at once, not locally: it is as much to say, as it hath this peculier grace, to be a body and not bodily: Wherefore I will goe on thus: It can by no meanes be, that a thing made should be euery where, but the body of Christ is a thing made, then it can by no meanes be, that the body of Christ should be euery where.
Basillus the great doth proue the pro∣positionBasillius lib. de . 5. in his booke of the holy Ghost: The Aungell that stoode by Cornelius, was not the same tyme with Phillip, neyther he that spake to Zachary at the Aulter, was the same time in heauen. But the holy ghost did work in ye same moment in Abacuck and in Danyel, and was at the same time with Ieremy in the dungen & with Ezechiell in Choua: For the spirite of the Lord hath filled ye whole world. But he that is in all pla∣ces,  pesst with God, of what nature or condition oughte he to be beléeued to be, of that, which contayneth all things, or of that which is contayned in some perticuler place. Vigillius doeth proue the same, spea∣kingVigilius in dall. in the person of Athanasius in his Dialogue, in the which, the speakers be Sbllius, Photinus, Arius, and Athana∣sius: Thereby it is playne, that the holy ghost is God, because it is euery where, and is contayned in no place, as the Prophete speaketh to God the Father: Whether shall I gee from the spirite? For to be euery where, and in one and
the same momente to fill the heauens, the earthes, the Seas, and lowe places belongeth not to any creature, but only to God: And a little afterward, it can∣not be in one nature to lye in the bosom of the Mnger, and to be shewed by the starres, to be subiecte to men, and to bee serued by the Aungels, to flye frō place to place, and to be presēt in euery place, to dwel in Earth, and not to leaue a∣uen. To cōclude Cirillus proueth it thus,Cirillus lib.  cap. 1. if God fill all places, and that by the ho∣ly ghost, the holy ghost is God, and not a creature. These may be briefely knit vp thus, according to Basill, the body of Christ or ther is of that nature and condition, which contayneth all thinges, that is to say, diuine, or God, or of that nature and condition, which is contayned in some perticuler place: But it is not the diuine nature or God, therfore it is con∣tayned in some perticuler place. Accor∣ding to Vigill, if it be euery where, and contayned in no place, it is God, but it is not god, therefore it is contayned in some place: According to Cirillus, if it
fyll all places, it is not a creature, but it is a creature, therefore it doth not fil all places. I grant say you, that a creature should be God, if by the owne power it could be euer where, but the body of Christ, hath not that of the selfe, but by the maiesty of the Godhead adioyned to it. The hereticke graunted the same of the holy ghost, and therefore the auctho∣rity of these ancient Fathers doth presse you as much as them. No save you, I doe not speake of the body of Christ, as of a simple and common creature, but as of a creature coupled to the godhead by vnion or oning of person, and ye same also being glorifyed by resurrection and ascention, which I saye hath by force of the godhead this grace geuen to it, that it should be in euery place present with the Godhead, and neuer parted from it, and so cannot be comprised in any one place. Then heare what TheodoreteTheodo. dial. 2. doth say in his secōd Dialogue. The bo∣dy of our Lord is risen againe, frée from corruption and destruction, and is im∣patible and immortall, and glorifyed & worshipped of the heauēly powers, and
yet it is a body and hath the same cir∣cumscription which it had before. Here Cirillus in his second booke of the Trini∣ty,Cirillus lib. 2. & tom . de Trinitate if the Trinity coulde be parted, it should be a body, and if it were a body, it should be absolutely in place, and it should be great, and haue quantity, and if it had quantty, it could not auoyde circumscription. Here Austen in his thirteth TreatiseAugust in Iohan. tract. 30. vpon saint John, the Lorde Jesus is a∣boue, but here is also the truth, ye Lorde. For the bodie of the Lorde, in the which he rose againe, must needes be in one place, but the truth is dispersed. I reason thus out of Theodorete, theTheodo∣retus. incorruptible, the impatible, the im∣mortall, the glorifyed, the worshipped body of the Lorde is circumscribed as it was being vpon earth: Therfore what∣soeuer bodye of Christ you meane, it is comprehended in one place: Out of Ci∣rill thus: If the Trinity be a body, it isCirillus. in place, it hath quantitie, it hath cir∣cumscription. But the humaine natureAugust. of Christ ioyned with the Godhead, and being glorifyed and made immortall is
a body. Therefore it is in place, it hath quantitie, it hath circumscription. Out of Austen the body of the Lorde in the which he rose againe, must be in one place: Ergo the immortall and glo∣rifyed bodye of Christ, is contained in one place. Neyther is this to part the natures of the manhoode and Godhead of Christ, but to set downe the seuerall properties of eche nature: For I doe not meane, that the humane nature is in place seuered from the deuine na∣ture, but is euer ioyned to it. But yet the humanitie doth not fyll all places, which the Deity doeth fill. This maye well appere by this similitude, although it be not like in all pointes, for you be to vnderstande, that a symilitude néedeth not to be like in all pointes, but onely in those properties, the which is vsed to make plaine. The bodie of the sunne abydeth euer in the globe or circle in the Firmamēt, but the beames of the sunne doe walke thorow the whole worlde, the vertue of the sunne doth comfort, féede, and nou∣rishe euerye lyuing creature vppon the
face of the whole earth, and yet neyther the beames nor the vertue of the sunne be parted from the bodie of the sunne. Euen so the body of Christ is placed in heauen, as in a most bewtifull and gor∣gees Throne, but ye godhead of Christ doth not onely fill the heauens, the ayre, the sea, the earth, and the places vnder the earth, but also doeth comfort & nou∣rishe all and euerye creature, in all and euery the saide places, and yet the god∣head is not parted from the bodye, al∣though the body fyll not so many places as the godhead doth. That famous and learned prince Iustinian spied thys, that two thinges might be ioyned together, and yet the one not to fyll so manye or the same places, as the other. And ther∣vpon in his most excellent booke: Called the Institutions of Iustinian, doeth most wisely and discreetely order, that whenIustinia∣nus. lib. institut. the bodies & bowes of the trée hang ouer one mans close, and the roote of the trée hangeth in an other: That the trée should be his in whose close the roote groweth. For this purpose then the body & bowes of the trée be in Muius his close, ye roote
of the trée groweth in Titius his close, and yet the body and the bowes be not seuered from the roote, but ioyned to the roote, although the roote doth not fill any place in Mes his close, as the body and bowes doe: Euen so then the body of Christ resteth in Heauen, but the god∣head doth fyll al other closes & places, & they be not seuered, but remayn ioyned together. For although the Godhead be∣ing of much more excelly and efficacy than the beames of the sunne, and more fruitefull then the rootes of trees, doe poure the force vppon all places and thinges, notwithstanding the body is not present, neither doeth il al the same place. This is a more familier resem∣blaunce. The body of the Candle is set in the Candle sticke, but the light of the Candle fylleth the whole house. The bo∣dy of Christ abydeth in heauen, the light of the Godhead fylleth the whole world: The light of the Candell is not parted from the body of the candle, nei∣ther is the Godhead of Christe parted from the body of Christ, but as the light shineth ouer all the house, and is not se∣uered
from the Candle, being onely in the Candlestick, for the godhead shineth ouer the whole world, and yet is not se∣uered from the bodye, being onely in Heauen. Neyther be these my deuises, but that great Clearke S. Augustine doth plain∣ly distinguish the two natures of ChristAug. ad Dard. in the selfe same manner, writing to Dardanus. We do not think that it was sayd according to the humayne nature, which God the word tooke of the Virgin Mary. This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise, for Christ as man was not that day in Paradise, but in Hell accor∣ding to his soule, in the graue according to his flesh. Nowe if by S. Augustine. Christ according to his Godhead were in Paradice or heauen, according to his flesh in the graue, and yet his Godhead and flesh not parted, what partition should this bréede of the Godhead and Manhood, to say that the naturall body of Christ is now only in heauen, and his Godhead both in heauen, and all other places. Also it is right to beleeue, and without any partitiō of ye two natures,
that when his naturall body was here vpon earth onely, and not in Heauen: (For according to that Christe sayd, I haue not yet gone vp to your God, and my god, your Father, and my Father.) His Godhead was then both in Earth, and in Heauen. And why doth it not as well stand with right fayth, and with∣out any particiō of ye two natures: Now to beleeue that his body is onely in Hea∣uen, according to the saying of the Aun∣gell, in the Acts of the Apostles: Whom the Heauens must holde, &c. and yet his Godhead to be both in Heauen and in Earth, and in euery place. For the same S. Augustine sayeth a little afterwards to the same effect: Doubte not that man Christ, that is christ according to his hu∣mayn nature is now there, from whēce he shall come, by the testimony of the Aungell in the same sorte, as hée was séene to goe, that is in the same fourme and substaunce of fleshe. According to this fourme we may not beleue ye Christ is euery where. For we must take great héede, that we maynteyne not the deity of the man so, that we take awaye
the truth of the body. Neither doth it fol∣low, that euery thing that is in▪ GOD should be euery where, where as God is: For the Scripture speaketh mosteAct. 17. truely of vs, that we liue, mooue, and be in God, and yet be we not euery where, as God is. Albeit, that man is an other way in God, for God is an other way in that man after a certayne proper and peculier manner. For god and man is one person, and both be one Christ, one euery where according to his godhead, in Heauen according to his Manhood. And in the ende of ye Epistle, assure your selfe that Christ is euery where as god, and in some place of Heauen for theAug. in Ioh. tract. 56. truth of his body. And vppon S. Iohn, according to the presence of maiesty we haue Christ euer, according to the pre∣sence of his flesh it was well sayd to his Disciples: Yée shall not haue me euer with you. In his booke intituled of the substanceAug. liber de essente diuinite. of Godheade, which is also ascribed to S. Augustine, we ought to beléeue and confesse that the sonne of God according to the substance of his godhead is inuisi∣ble
without body, without circumserip∣tion, but according to his manhoode, we ought to beleeue and confesse that he is visible hauing body, hauing place, and all the parte of man truely. LikewiseCirill. tract. 59. Cirillus wryting vpon saint John, doth distinguish the same two natures in the same sorte, saying: Christ is not here by the presence of the flesh, which notwith∣standing is euerywhere by the presenceGrego∣rius. of maiestie. And Beda in a certaine Ho∣mely at Easter. The same God & man was taken vp in body, which he toke frōBeda. the earth, but remaineth with the saints vpon earth by his godhead, by the which he fylleth both the heauen & earth. And Fulgentius to Thrasimundus. Christ oneFulgenti. ad trac. in. and the same man locall of man, which is God infynite of the father, one and the same, according to his humayne na∣ture, absent in heauen when he was in earth, and leauing the earth when he went vp into heauen, but according to his deuine and immeasurable nature neither leauing heauen when he came downe from heauen, nor leauing earth when he went vp into heauen. And Vi∣giliusVigilius.
agaynst Vtiches, it differeth very much to be circumscribed wyth place, & to be euery where, & bicause the word is euery where, but the fleshe is not eue∣rye where, it is manifest that one, and the same. Christ is partaker of both Na∣tures, and that he is euerywhere accor∣ding to the nature of his godheade, and contayned in place according to the na∣ture of hys manhod Saint Austen doth name the maner of Christes true body, and doth call Christ locall. Cirillus affir∣meth that he toke away the presence of hys body. Gregorie denyeth that he is in this worlde by the presence of his flesh. Beda doeth auouche that he was taken vp according to his manhood. Fulgentius doth affirme him to be a man locall, and to haue a humane nature local. Vigilius doth most euidently saye, that his fleshe is not euery where. But you will say, all these thinges be vnderstode visibly, and of a visyble pre∣sence. Truely, that is more absurde, then the other, which doth plainely ap∣peare by viewing the Antithesis, or set∣ting of the sentences one against ano∣ther.
Vigilius doth say the worde is eue∣ry where, the fleshe is not euery where. Put to visible, & the sence will be most absurde, for you must say the worde is euerye where, the fleshe is not euery where visybly, neyther yet the worde is euerye where visibly, and so Vigillius hath set downe no difference of the two natures: For his sence muste be, the word is euery where inuisybly, the flesh is euery where inuisybly: Waigh that of saint Gregorie, Christ is not here by the presence of his humayne nature, you expound it by the visyble presence, for you make this the Antithesis, Christ is not here in visible presence of his fleshe, which is euery where by the in∣uisyble presence of his godheade: For the not visyble presence, and the inuy∣sible presence be al one: So there should be no Antithesis, no fyght nor repug∣nauncie of these sentences, but that the ancient fathers ment a manifest Anti∣thesis, & a great repugnancie, who is so dull, that he doth not vnderstande, or so blinde that he doeth not sée, sythence by the same they auouch and establish two
diuers natures in Christ. The one of perfyte God, the other of perfyte man. Whereby it is euident, that the iudge∣ment of the auncient fathers is, that Christ his body is not at al in earth, but sittteth on the right hande of God the father in heauen, not in an Juri or golden throne, or in kingly or costly ap∣parel, as the symple fansie: but in great glorie and power, as the faythfull be∣léeue. This is proued by that of Christ, in the twenteth of saint Mathewe, I leaue the worlde, and I go to my Fa∣ther,John. 16. and agayne, ye shall haue the poore euer with you, but ye shall not haue me euer. Also I go to my father, and your father, to my GOD, and your God. Likewise saint Marke wry∣teth, that the Lorde Jesus is taken vp into heauen, and sytteth at the right hande of the Father. And S. PauleColoss. 3. exhorteth all men to seeke Heauen, where Christe sitteth at the righte hand of GOD the Father. Euen so the au∣thour to the Hebrewes. 10. doeth saye. we haue such a high priest, which sitteth in Heauen at the right hand of ye throne
of maiesty: And a little after he had of∣fred one Sacrifyce for sinne, he sitteth for euer at the right hand of God, from henceforth looking, that his enemies beActs. 2. made his footescoole, whome the heauens must hold, vntill the time of restoring of all thinges, as it is in the seconde of the Actes of the Apostles. All this is spoken to set down the di∣uers properties of the two natures in Christ, his deuine nature and his hu∣maine nature, and to shew that a man may well expresse the seuerall proper∣ties of eche nature, and yet in no case part the one from the other. But I pray you, is there no supernaturall proper∣ty in the body of Christ, hath it no pre∣rogatiues? Did the wonderfull vnion of the most holy godhead, poure no ver∣tue: no force into it? Verie many, but yet not suche, as cannot agree with the humaine nature, as saint Austen doth excellently say, he gaue to it immorta∣litie, but toke not awaye the nature of it. And againe, we muste take great héede, that we do not affirme the deitée of the man so, that we take awaye the
truth of the body. Therfore the naturall body of Christ is made immortall, glo∣ryfied, sanctified, quickned, but it is not made eternall, vnmeasurable, increat, or infynite, for these ouerthrowe the humaine nature. And that certaine things be so pecu∣liar to the godheade, that at all they doe not agrée to the manhood, but be applyed only in phrase or speech, and contrary, that certayne thinges be peculiar to the manhood, and doe not at all agree to the godhead, but be applied to it onely by phrase or speech, is manifest: In ye firste of John. He it is which comming after me, was before me. Neyther to be be∣fore John, doeth agrée to the manhood of Christ in déede, neither to be after John to the godhead. This is also manifest by these sayings, before Abraham was, I am, and the fa∣ther is greater then I, neyther doeth it agrée to the manhood in déede to be be∣fore Abraham, nor to the godhead to be lesse then the Father. Of this point be the Fathers, Irencus, Ambrosius, Ierononius, Vigilius, Augu∣stinus,Irenens.
and almost all the rest, most suffi∣cient witnesses. As sayth Irenens, the soule is present to the flesh dying, and suffreth nothing, so ye godhead of Christ is present with the manhood suffring, and suffering nothing, onely rested.Ambrs. Ambrose of that vpon S. Iohn. Here∣after you shall see the sonne of man sit∣ting on the right hande of the vertue: This sitting doth so appertayne to the man, sayeth he, that in no case it is ap∣plyed to the Godhead which is infinite, for God that is euer euery where, can∣not goe from place to place: Ierme,Ieron. Vigilius. Christ did die according to that he could die: Vigilius agaynst Vtiches, he one, and the same sonne of God the Lord Je∣sus Christe both died according to the fourme of a seruaunt, and died not ac∣cording to the fourme of God. AustenAug. vpon that of S. John. None went vp in∣to heauen, but he that came down from heauen, the sonne of man, which is in heauen▪ he was here, sayeth S. Austen, by flesh, in heauen, by Godhead, yea e∣uery where by Godhead, and a little af∣ter, shall not man (Christ) be called the
sonne of God, which his fieshe alone de∣serued to be called in the graue: For what else doe we confesse when we say that we beléeue in the only begotten son of God, which was crucifyed, and suffe∣red vnder Pontius Pilate, died, and was buryed, what was buryed of him, but his flesh without his soule. And more playnly afterwardes, who is he, by whome the world was made? Christe Jesus, but in the fourme of God, who was nayled to the crosse, vnder Pontius Pilate, Christ Jesus: but in the fourme of a seruaunt. Who was net lefte in Hell? Christ Jesus: but in soule alone. Who lay thrée dayes dead in the graue, and rose agayne? the same Christe Je∣sus, but in flesh alone. Christ is sayd in ech one of these, but all these be not two or thrée, but one Christ. Whereby it is playne, ye certayne properties, or pecu∣lier graces of the one nature, may be as∣cribed to the other, in word thorough the vnion of the person, but cannot agree in déede thorow the difference of the two natures. The which Vigilius doth most playn∣ly
expresse agaynst Vtiches: Then ac∣cordingVigillus lib. 2. con∣tra Ety. to the property of nature, onely the flesh died, only the flesh was buried, but according to the vnion of the person God dyed, and was buryed: For the person of the word is in the flesh, which died. Also, according to the propertie of the nature, the word came downe from heauen, not the flesh: And according to the property of the nature, the flesh died and not the word, but according to the vnion of the person, both the flesh came downe from heauen, and the word dyed and was buried. Then when we saye, that God died and suffred: Let not Ne∣storeus be afrayde: For we speake ac∣cording to the vnion of the person. Againe, when we say, that God ney∣ther died, nor suffered. Let not Vtiches dreade, for we speake according to the proprietie of the nature. To this pur∣pose writeth Theodorete: you are to vn∣derstande,Theodo∣retus. that the vnion of the two na∣tures doth make the names and propri∣eties common: you will not say (I sup∣pose) that the fleshe of God came downe from heauen: For it was made in the
Virgins wombe. Howe then, doeth the Lorde saye, if you shall see the sonne of manne go vp the ther, where he was be∣fore? And againe, none goeth vp into heauen, but he that came downe from heauen, the sonne of manne which is in heauen, this he meaneth not of the flesh, but of the godhead. And the godhead is of God the father, how then doth he call him the son of man? They be reckned common to the person, thorowe the vni∣on, which be peculier to the seuerall na∣tures. So we are to expounde the rest in this sorte as the Fathers do. The wordIohan. pr. became fleshe. What is the mind? what is the meaning of this spéeche: was the deuine nature made the humayne na∣ture? God forbidde. Naye, it did take & vnite to the selfe the humaine nature. God did purge his church by his bloude. What meaneth this? hath the deuine nature bloud? God forbidde, that anye body should so think, but God did purge his church by the bloude of that nature, which he did appropriate by inarnati∣on, or taking our flesh vpon him. They nayled to the crosse the GOD of glory,
what is the the sence of these wordes? was the godheade pierced, or nayled to the woode? God forbidde. Nay, that na∣ture was so affected, which the godhead did take to the self of ye virgins wombe. Wherefore thorowe the vnion of the person, such things maye be spoken in worde, but they cannot agrée in déede. Neyther doth that of saint Basill of the birth of Christ disagrée with these. How is the godheade in the fleshe, as the fyre is in the yron, not transitiuely, but dis∣tributiuely. For the fyre doth not runne into the yron, but abyding in the place, doth imparte and bestowe the peculier facultie vppon it. Howe then was not God the word fylled with bodily weak∣nesse? as the fyre doth not get to it selfe the proprieties of the yron. Irō is black and colde, and yet fyred, it becommeth bright and hotte. So the humayne na∣ture of the Lorde, was made partaker of the denine nature, but did not poure into the dee nature the owne weak∣nesse. And so I see certaine proprieties dispersed, but I doe not vnderstand all, for after the vniting of the godhead, the
body of Christe was hungrie, coulde, thirstie, wearie, and gréeued, and this isMath 26. true of Christ the voyce. My Soule is heauier, euen vnto death. And nay∣led vpon the crosse he sayeth: I am dry. He suffred truely, he dyed truely, hée was compassed about with place truly. I would therefore gladly learne, why the two natures should be sayd to be de∣uided, because the seuerall proprieties of ech nature be set downe after his ry∣sing agayne, rather then they were, whē the seuerall proprieties of eache nature were set downe before his death. For I reasō thus, the body of Christ liuing vp∣on earth was in one certayne and pecu∣lier place, but the Godhead was in eue∣ry place. And yet none will say that the person of Christ was then deuided, why then may we not likewise say, that the body of christ being in heauen, is in one certayn and peculier place, and yet not deuide the person of Christe: For in Christes person being vpon earth, per∣fecte God, and perfect man, were coup∣led together: As S. Paule doth excelēt∣ly say to the Colossians. In him doeth
dwel all the fulnesse of the Gohhead bo∣dily.Coloss. 1. The true, full, and absolute God∣head did dwell in the true, full, and ab∣soluteColoss. 2. body comprised in one certayne and peculier place, and yet was there no renting of the person of Christ. What ground then haue these lamē∣table and bitter outeryes that the per∣sō of Christ is denided, that his godhead and manhood be plucked asunder? be∣cause we auouch that the naturall body of Christ is in heauen, at the right hand of God the Father and yet his godhead to be euery where, did not his godhead then fill heauen and earth? when his naturall body was in a corner of the earth, whē it lay in the graue. And may not nowe the Godhead fill the whole world? and his naturall body be onely in heauen, and the two natures not se∣uered. Away then, away with quarrels and let truth preuayle and tryumphe, by the which the two natures of christ tyed togeather with the merueylous bonde of the vnion be distinguished, but not seperated. And truely to continue in the same
resemblance of saint Basill, the fyre doth not chaunge all the properties of the I∣ron, for the Iron fyred and hotte is hea∣uy, falleth downward, is a solidde and thicke body. This is S. Basils meaning, that theseSimile Basill. forces of the fyre be transferred into the Iron, of the which the nature of the yrō is capable, not those, which ouer throwe the nature of the yron. And in like man∣ner that those forces and proprieties of the godhead be transferred into the body of Christ, of the which the nature of the body is capable, not those, which ouer∣throw the nature of the body: For we must uer haue recourse to that worthy shying of S. Austen, he gaue immortal∣lity to his body, but he tooke not awaye the nature of the body, neyther is the godhead of the man so to be mainteined, that the truth of the body be destroyed. But why do I stand vpon this poynt, why doth my spéech so long wāder? why doe I not open the spring of this contro∣uersy? For al this contētion floweth frō the question aboute the presence of the naturall body of Christ, being in the sa∣crament
of the body and blood of Christ. For if that matter be once ordered and adiudged, the other will soone be ended. But that is a matter of great impor∣taunce, of the greatest in the worlde, it oughte not to be handled but warely, and reuerently, most warely, and most reuerently. Your good name shalbe rent with the bad spéeches not only of the e∣nemies, but of the enuious. I refer that to God. The matter is very hard: The questyon to too darke, discoursed in Ser∣mons: Jossed in disputations, vary∣ed of through all Christendome, and as it should séeme of passing great difficul∣ty. God will helpe out with that, whose both helpe we most humbly pray, and busines most faythfully do, out of whose most blessed, and most certayne, & most true wordes, all the reste of our spéeche shall grow. It is written in the .26. Chapter ofMath. 26. the Gospell after S. Mathewe, in this wise, when Jesus had taken bread, and blest, he did breake and gaue to the Dis∣ciples, and sayd, take ye, eate ye, this is my body: And taking the Cup, after he
had geuen thanks, he gaue to them say∣ing, drink all ye of this: For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the forgeuenesse of sinnes. And in the .14. after S. Marke, whenMarck. 14. Jesus had taken the bread, and geuen thanks, he did breake and gaue to them and sayd. Take yée, eate yée, this is my body, and when he had taken the Cuppe and geuen thanks, he gaue to them and sayd. Drinke ye all of this, and he sayde to them, this is my blood of the newe te∣stament which is shead for many. And in the .22. after S. Luke, when heLuke. 22. had taken bread, and geuen thankes, he brake, and gaue to them saying: This is my body, which is geuen for you, doe you this in remembraunce of me. Like∣wise also the cuppe, after he had supped, saying. This cuppe is the new testamēt in my blood, which is shed for many. Lastly saint Paule to the Corinthians1. Cor. 11. the .xj. Chapter, and the fyrst Epistle. The Lorde tooke breade, and when he had giuen thankes, he brake, and said. Take ye, eate ye, this is my body, which
is broken for you, do ye this in remem∣brance of me. Likewise also the cup af∣ter he had supped, saying: this cup is the newe testament in my bloude: Doe ye thys, as often as you shall drinke in re∣membraunce of me. For as oft as you shall eate this bread, and drinke of this cup, you shall shewe the Lordes death vntill his comming. I haue set downe the whole words of the holye ghost, done out of greeke into Englishe, worde by worde: That so good a foundation being layde, the rest that foloweth, myght be the more fyrm∣ly builded thervpon. Let vs nowe view and waigh all these things. Christ toke the same bread in his hande, which was vpon the table: Christ gaue to his Dis∣ciples the same breade, and whiles he was giuing the breade to his disciples, he speaketh as before: whiles his Dis∣ciples eate this breade, whiles they did broose it with their téeth, and swallowed it into their stomaks, where was christ? was be not at the table? did he not speak to thē? did he not both eate & drink with them? was he not séene, hearde, and
touched. In which place was the bodye of Christ: In the mouth and stomack of his disciples, or at the table, where they both sawe Christ, and heard Christ? if you say in both places: Then this follo∣weth: That eyther Christ had two bo∣dies, or else that there was two christs, both which aunsweres be very vngodly and absurde. But you wil say the words be plaine, for Christ saide plainely and distinctly. This is my body: This is my bloude. Neyther is it lyke, that Christ woulde speake doubtfully, in the last talke, that he had with his disciples. I graunt the words be plaine after the maner of mi∣steries, in the which things subiect to the sense, doe represent and shewe things, which be taken onely of a godly minde, and by a religious fayth. I graunt that Christ gaue his bodye and that his Dis∣ciples toke it, and eate it, not after a na∣turall and grosse maner, but after a su∣pernaturall, that is he heauenly and spiri∣tuall. What then doe you denie, that the breade is the bodye of Christ: That the wine is the bloud of Christ? not I true∣ly.
But I saye, that they be so in truth of religion, sacrament, and mistery, and not by chaunging of nature, element, or substaunce. For Christ doth call the breade his body, but he doth not say that it is chaunged into his bodye. Then you call it breade, and the holye writer of this holy Storie doth himselfe call it breade, the wordes be these. He toke breade: he gaue thankes: he brake: he gaue: doth he not meane by this cir∣cumstance of wordes, to make the mat∣ter plaine: I praye you, what toke he? bread. What brake he? the same bread. What gaue he the same bread? For that that he toke, that he brake: and that that he brake, that he gaue to hys Disciples: and that that he gaue to his disciples, that did his disciples eate. But bicause it is a mistery, which is in hand. Therfore it representeth the great and heauenly things, which the holy words of the high priest of our Lorde and Sa∣uiour Christ Jesus doe declare. This is my body sayth he: which is broken for you, doe this in rememberance of me. Againe, of the Cup of wine: This Cup
is the newe Testament in my bloude, which is shedde for you. What meane these wordes? what sence haue they? what signifye they? some prodigious thing, or newe thing, or light thing, or thing of smale value? No. But the most certaine testifycation and assurance of the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, saluati∣on, & life euerlasting, which we obtaine by the death of Christ, and which is ex∣hibited by the outwarde elementes of bread and wine, but receiued only by y• inward hand of fayth, and séene onely by the inwarde eye of Fayth. Christ gaue to his disciples bread and wine, ye, he gaue also vnto thē his body and blood, that they by fayth being fed, with this heaēnly bread & this heauen∣ly drinke, might haue life euerlasting, which to printe more surely in their harts, he playnly telleth thē, of his bles∣sed body y• was to be rent for them, and his precious blood that was to be shedde for them, and for many other, that God the Father being pacified with this rich sacrifice, might forgeue thē there sinnes. Therfore he called this a new league, &
a new testament often promised by the holy Prophets, which was to be confir∣med not by the blood of beastes, but by the sheadding of his holy and precious blood: wherefore his will and pleasure was that this mistery of so great things should be celebrated euer in publique assemblies, both that the remembrance of hym might euer be freshe with hys, and that often thankes might be geuen to God the father, & that his louers and professo might be stirred to mutuall loue, by so godly a presidēt, & also signed wyth the holy seale of eternall blisse. But thus much at large, the rest more briefly, that truth may be sooner picked out and more plainely appere: For as Marcus Tullius saieth of Philosophers. So I thinke Deuines bounde to briefe arguments. That which christ toke, he brake: that which he brake, he gaue to his Disciples: that which he gaue to his disciples, he called his body: Therefore he called breade his bodye. For he toke breade, brake breade, and gaue it to his Disciples. But that which is breade by nature,
is not the substance of Christes bodye. Except we will prodigiously confounde the substance of things, and so by conse∣quente the naturall bodye of Christ, is not really, and bodily, in the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. But here is made a stoppe: that Christ blessed the bread after he had takē it, as S. Mathew and S. Marck sayeth, by vertue where∣of there followed such a chaunge, that although he tooke bread, yet he neyther brake bread, nor gaue bread: This so∣phistication is called of the Logitians: Petitio Principij: For fyrst S. Marcke doth not say, that Christ blessed ye bread but that when he had taken, he blessed. Secondly, the gréeke word , doth as well sygnify to geue thanks, as to blesse, and that it sygnifyeth there to geue thankes, because the holy ghost is the best expounder of it selfe: Both S. Luke & S. Paule, declare, which both for that worde , vse this word , which signifyeth so geue thanks, and not to blesse. Thirdly, as it was mēt touching ye bread. So was it
mente touching the Cuppe and Wyne: But both Mathew and Marcke them∣selues, speaking of the Cuppe or wyne, vse not thys worde , but the saide worde  Therfore it is manifest, that both they ment, hée gaue thankes, after that he had takē the bread, and he gaue thanckes after he had taken the Cuppe. Briefely thus: that that is true about the bread, is true also about the Cuppe of wyne, but the cuppe or the wyne haue ioyned vnto them, no wordes of consecration, or transubstan∣tiation, or chaunging of one substaunce into another, as it appereth by S. Luke and S. Paule. Therefore the first prin∣ciple is God, that breade was taken, ye bread was broken, and that bread was geuen to the Disciples. Adde to these that S. Paule in the xx. Chapter, and fyrst Epistle to the Corin∣thians, aduisedly & purposely speaking of the Lords supper, sayeth, is not the bread which we breake the partaking of body of Christ. And Luke in the secōd of the Actes. They did continue together
in the doctrine of the Apostles, & in per∣taking and breaking of bread, & a little after he sayeth, that the Disciples came together to breake bread, by the which it is necessarily concluded, that the same was broken which was taken and that that was broken was geuen  and of that that was geuen did Christ say this is my body. Therefore christ did say of bread, this is my body. For as Christe ment of the bread, so he ment of ye wine, but he ment of wyne to be drawen and drunke, as it appeareth by Marcke and Mathew, where he sayd, I will drincke no more of the fruite of this wyne, &c. Therefore he ment also that bread, that was eaten. Agayne if the substaunce of the bread be chaunged into the substaunce of the body. Then the substaunce of the wine should be chaunged to the substaunce of the blood, but in the second place, not the substaunce of wyne, but the substaunce of the cuppe should be chaunged into the new Testamente, by the wordes of cō∣secration, as their terme is: For wher∣as Mathew and Marck briefely saye:
This is my blood, Luke and Paule doe set downe at large, this cuppe is the new testamēt in my blood. But you will say that the cuppe doth signify the wine in the cuppe, by a fygure called Meto∣nomia: Then you graunt that the holy Ghost doth speake fyguratiuely in the matter of the Sacrament, but let that goe, and let it be, this wyne is the new testament in my blood, if the wyne should be chaunged, it must be changed into the newe Testamente of Christes blood, but that spéech cānot stand, except it be vnderstood fyguratiuely and spiri∣tually thus. This Wine is a visible signe of mine new inuisible league, couenaunt, will, grace, and mercy, which shall be confir∣med and sealed with the sheadding of my blood. Then neyther the fyrste wordes tou∣ching the bread, implye any chaunge of substaunce, but haue a spirituall and fi∣guratiue meaning: For whether you say the cuppe or the wyne, the spéech must needes be fyguratiue. For neither the cuppe or the wyne eyther is or can
be properly called a testamente. Nowe if the second spéech of the wyne do neces∣sarily imply two figures at the leaste, why should it seeme so strange to saye, yt the first spéech of the bread deth also im∣ply a figure. Doe you then, saye you thinke, that Christ spake doubtfully? and woulde in his last departure leaue hys Churche doubtfully? Not I truely. Why then do you talke of figures and troupes? and figuratiue speeches, and spirituall sen∣ses▪ Not euerye figuratiue speeche is doubtfull, and it is as great a faulte to refuse a figure, when the place geueth it, as to force a figure when there is none. And it is most manifest by Saint Luke and saint Paule, that the second speech of the Cup or wine is figuratiue, and hath a spirituall sence. For bothe they expounding the briefe wordes set downe by saint Mathew, and S. Marke expressely saye, that Christ saide, this Cup is the newe Testamente in my blood. And what sence or meaning can these wordes haue? but this, that in
this sacrament there is deliuered vnto Christians a visible and most certayne signe or seale, of that new inuisible, truse, will, grace, and mercie, which God hath made and assured hys church of, in these more mylde and gracyous dayes, and would seale and ratify with the bloude of his sonne. For the words in S. Luke doe proue this sence, which he addeth of Christ, saying: Doe this in rememberance of me, and also of saint Paule. Ye shall thewe the Lordes death vntill he come. Neyther here do I doubt that the true, godly & learned wil thinke that I haue not spokē reuerently of this most holye and blessed misterie. For I geue more honor and reuerence to it by a great deale, then any that doth fansye a grosse and carnall presence. But some will saye that I ouerthrowe all, & bring all to naught, and make the holy sacra∣ment nothing else but a péece of bread, and a little wine: that is a most false and malicious slaunder. For I most cer∣tainely beléeue it to be one of the most precious Jewels that Christ left to hys church, and that both the body and blood
of Christ is truely and effectually exhi∣bited by the power and grace of God, and truely and effectually receaued by the fayth of the christian receyuer. But such men deale with me, as they & such other deale with good preachers, which to pull downe the pryde of mans harte, telleth him, that he is nothing but dust, earth, ashes, and smoke and grasse, and then a worldling wyll saye, that, that preacher maketh a man no better then a beast. Whereas the preacher mente this onely of the one parte of man, that is, his body, wisedome, beautie glorye, pompe, and porte, which in déede be no∣thing else but dust, and grasse & smoke, that fade and perishe away, and not of the seconde parte of manne, that is hys soule, which is immortall and eternall, and certainly as man hath two partes, the first the bodys which is visible & fa∣ding, the seconde his soule which is in∣uisible and eternall, euen so this holye and blessed sacrament hath two partes. The fyrst of the element of breade and wyne, which is visible and fading, the second, the grace, and fruites, and be∣nefites,
of the bod of Christ rent, and his blood shed for the raunsome of man. And as he, that sayeth the body of man is meere flesh, and fading flesh, and no∣thing but flesh, deeth not deny the im∣mortality of e so de therby, nor make whole man nothing the but body and flesh, for he meaneth onely of the fyrste and fading parte of man, which is sen∣sible, and not of the second part of man, which is insensible, euen so he, that sayeth that the elemente of breade and wyne, be nre bread and wyne, fading bread and wyne, and nothing but bread and wyne, doth not therby deny or take away the grace and benefyte of the bo∣dy and blood of Christ, nor make that blessed sacramēt nothing else but bread and wyne. For he meaneth onely the fyrst and fading part of that sacrament, which is sensible, and not of the seconde which is insensible. And let any indif∣ferent man iudge, whether he speaketh more honourably, or doth more set forth the maiesty of that sacrament, which sayth that free forgeuenesse of all our sinnes and a sure possession of eternall
life, springing frō the free mercy of God is deriued and poured into christian heartes by that sacrament, and as a Conduite thorough the force of a true & liuely fayth, in the death and merittes of our only Sauyoure Christ Jesus, or he which by fancying of a real, carnal, or corporall presence, doth binde and tye al the grace and power to creatures. I confesse with all my harte,  Christ hath left vnto his church nothing, eyther if a man consider profite more fruitfull, or if swéetenesse more pleasant, or if ho∣nour more glorious, then the most holy and blessed sacramente of the body and blood of Christe, by the which the moste aboundaunt grace and mercy of God, is dropped into holy and faythfull soules, but to speake otherwise of creatures, then can be iustified by the word of god, is wicked and damnable. And such as would haue al things lit∣terally vnderstood, let them view the wordes well, and neyther this worde Cuppe, nor Is, can be litterally vnder∣stood,Thomas Aquinas. which also Thomas Aquinas there Archscholeman doth confesse, saying. By
that that is contayned in this Cuppe, is remembred the new Testamente con∣fyrmed by the bleed of Christ: For this worde cuppe he sayeth, that, that is con∣tayned in the Cuppe: For this worde Is, he sayeth, is remembred, is represen∣ted or is sygnifyed. And although in o∣thers they condemne necessary & plaine figures, yet they themselues be forced to immagine vnnecessary & to to straunge fygures, fyrst where the Tert sayeth: Hoc, meaning this bread, they will not haue it so, but theyexpound it to be indi∣uidium vagū, which is not any certayne determined thing, but onely one cer∣tayn thing at large in generality: where y• text doth say, Est is, they saye transub∣stantiatur, transelementatur, is chaunged into the substaunce, the nature of the e∣lement is changed. These wordes take ye, eate ye, this is my body, they turne thus, this is my body, take ye, eate ye, by a fygure called Husteron Proteron, which setteth that behind that should goe before. He blessed sayeth the text, he transubstantiated, he chaunged the substaunce saye they, he
brake sayeth the text, the accidentes, the formes or sheaues of bread say they. Do ye, sayth the text, sacrifyce ye, say they. This word (bread) hath a Quatermon of fygures. Fyrst, because it was bread. Secondly, because the Infydell taketh it onely to be bread. Thirdly, because the fourme and shewe of bread remayneth stil. Fourthly, because the forme or shew of bread, doth nortish as perfectly, as though it were bread: Frangitur is bro∣ken sayth the Texte, frangebatur it was broken, or videtur frangi, séemeth to bée broken say they. Now seemeth to be bro∣ken, is as much as is not broken. Then the word of the Text, Is, is broken, their word or expositiō, Is, is not broken, and this is a to too straunge kinde of fygure. For, Is broken, and is not broken imply a playne and full contradiction. Much like as the glose expoundeth the Texte, statuimus, &c. we do decree, enact, or de∣termine. Whē the glose hath made ma∣ny expositions of this law, & none of thē to the meaning of the law, well sayth it, Statuimus. We doe decrée or deter∣mine, is as much to say, as abgamu,
we doe abrogate or disall, which ap∣position unplyeth a playne and ful con∣trariety. So they obscure & deuine the playne words of this blessed sacrament, the heauenly foode of our soules, & dasill our eyes with Indiuidium vagum, tran∣substantiacon, transelementacon,▪ Conco∣mitontia, pendula in aere, accidents with∣out subiectes. Quantum sine modo quā∣ti, and such other chaffe of their own. Stories doe tel, that Lisander picked out a great summe of Golde out of the bottome of a bagge, and sowed it vp a∣gayne cunningly. But Lisander his do∣inges were spyed by a Billet, that was lefte in the Bagge. And the Billet that Christ hath lefte vnto his church, that is his holy word, doeth shewe the subtill seames of these crafty sophisters, which so subtilly haue picked christ his bagge, that is the institution of his most blessed sacrament. And as the sacrament of the old law, had a spiritual & heauenly mea∣ning, and not a litterall, euen so haue ours: For they differ only in respectes and not in substaunce. And to this purpose sayeth S. Augu∣stine
right wel: Tune Christus venturus,Augusti∣nus. modo Christus venit, venturus et venit diuersa verba sunt. Sed idem Christus. Then was Christ to come, now Christ is come. To be to come, and to be come, be Verbes of diuers times, but the same Christ. The Jewish sacrifices or sacramentes, did represent and signifye to them the blood of Christ that should be shed for the forgiuenesse of our sinnes. And our sacrifices or sacramentes doe represent and signify vnto vs the blood of Christ that hath bene shed for the for∣geuenesse of our sinnes. And euē as we be saued, and the gates of heauen ope∣ned vnto vs for that we certainly do be∣léeue that Christ dyed for vs, euen so were they saued, and the gates of Hea∣uen opened vnto them, for that they certaynly beléeued that Christe shoulde dye for them. So that the same fayth carryed them vp into heauen, which now carryeth vs, as the same Aucthour doth playnly declare writing vpon S. John. Videte side mauente signa variata. Marke how the same fayth continuing the signes or sacramentes be varied or
become diuers. In diuers signes or Sacraments the same fayth is, but most playnly in the 2, Tractat vpō S. John, S. Augustine setteth forth this differēce, showing that our acramentes be fewer, easyer, more signifying, and of more maiesty, then the Israeletica, sed quod significa∣ta paria, but equall as touching thinges signifyed. Chrisostome doth set out the matter by this simillitude. A Paynter sayeth he, that is to paynt the story of some famous victory doth fyrst draw the Line amentes of men, Horse, Citties, and Castles in obseure lines, and then he that would discerne them must both know them perfectly, and view them earnestly. Secondly, he addeth to the colloures and due proportion to eache, and then any that knew them, shall dis∣cearne them at the fyrst syght. GOD is this Paynter that paynteth the Sto∣ry of the famous victorye of his deare sonne, which he had ouer the Deuill, Death, Hell, and sinne. The Sacra∣ment of the Israelites be like vnto the fyrst draught. The Sacramente of the
Christians, be like vnto the seconde draught. The same Aucthour compareth their sacraments to the lighte of a Can∣dle, and ours to the brightnesse of the sunne. Saynt Paule compareth them to a childe, and vs to a ful perfect man. So that Christ that is seene, or signified is al one, the séers or the thing signifying be diuers. For the Jewes sawe Christ in the law, we in the ghospell. The law is a darke shadowe: the ghospell is a perfect Image. The Jewes saw Christ in the sea, in the clowde, in the rocke, in Manna, in the bloude of Eoates and Calfes. We sée Christ in the sacrament of baptisme, in the sacrament of hys bodye and bloud by himselfe ordayned. The difference is this, they sawe hym somwhat darkly, we sée him very plain∣ly. They saw the same light that we do, but not in like quantitie, they sawe the same Image that we doe, but not with lyke colours and furniture. And if he would also then inferre, that the sacra∣mentall breade by this reason were no better then common breade, I vtterlye deny that too. For they differ as much
as heauen and earth, as the spirite and the bodie. For the common breade is earthly foode: the sacramentall bread heauenly foode: the common breade hath force onely to foode the body: the sacra∣mentall breade hath force to féede bothe bodye and soule: and to vnite and make them partes of Christes misticall body. For by the faithfull recepte of it, our bo∣dies and soules be made cleane by hys bodye and soule, and there to spiritually ioyned. But yet euen as old bread when it is set vpon the table, is in substaunce the selfe same that it was, when it was taken hotte oute of the Ouen, but in qualitie muche differing, as the one time colde, stale, and drye, at the other tyme, hotte, newe, and moyse. Euen so the sacramentall breade in substance is the selfe same, when it is eaten of the faythfull, that it was when the mini∣ster tooke it fyrst into his handes, but yet in qualitie excéeding much diffe∣ring, as at the one time earthly, and bo∣dely, at the other time heauenly and spi∣rituall. So yt this matter doeth consist chiefly
in faith as our master doth tel in the xt of S. John the Euangelist, to whō when the people had sayd, what shall we doe, that we may worke the workes of God, Jesus aunswered, and sayd vnto them, this is the worke of god, that ye beléeue in him whom he hath sent, and it is thus substantially cōcluded out of the words of our sayd mayster, out of the sayd sixte chapter, whosoeuer hath life euerla∣sting, eateth the flesh of the sonne of mā, and drinketh his blood, but he that belee∣ueth in Christ hath life euerlasting, therefore he that beleeueth in Christ ea∣teth the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinketh his blood, but then you wil say, to what purpose is the sacrament? to ve∣ry great. For man néeds not only to be taught by the eare, but also by the eye, and the teaching by the eye is more effectuall thē by the eare, as the Poet wel sayeth.Horatio. Signius irritant animos dimossa per au∣res, quam que sunt oculis subiecta fide∣libus. Such thinges doe moue the minde lesse which doe enter in at the eare, then
those which be layde downe before the eye, as for example when Marcus An∣thonius moued the people of Roome to reuenge the murther of Caius uius Caesar: He did set forth the valiantnesse, wisedome, learning, liberallity, and o∣ther good giftes of uius Caesar to the vt∣termost that he could, both in words and iesture, he stirred the people somewhat, but had not his purpose, then he plucked forth the shirt of Iuius Caesar all to bée sprinckled with blood, and sayd ye forth before the eyes of the people, which as soone as the people behealde with their eyes, they were inflamed by and by as it were with the sēsible old loue of their good Soueraigne, and ran fourthwith & fyred the houses of the traytors, and kil∣led them. Euen so when the Preacher setteth forth the graces and mercies of God obtained to man, by renting of ye blessed body, and shedding of the precious blood of the vnspotted Lambe Christ Jesus, it moueth man much, but when the said Preacher doth pluck forth the shirte of Christ be sprinckled with blood, that is
by breaking of bread sheweth to ye eye, how his body was broken, and by drin∣king of the Wyne, how his blood was shed, it inflameth man as it were with the sensible old loue of his grand Soue∣raigne Christ Jesus. The like example is drawen out of the holy writ, whē the Leuites wife was killed by the wicked∣nesse of the Sabionittes, he the said Le∣uite cut his wife into twelue péeces, & sent one péece to eche Tribe of Israell with this message, that one might vpon necessity be lodged in the Citty of Ga∣bia, where his wife was not only most vngodly abused, but also cruelly mur∣thered, which moued thē somewhat, but when the messenger plucked forth the parts of the woman, and shewed the head to one, the arme to an other, and so forth, all the people by & by were mo∣ued, as one to reuenge that fact, euen so, when the preacher telleth the people of the whipping & scourging of Christe, of the nailing to the Crosse, of the pearsing of his heart, of the sweating & dropping of water & blood, it moueth man much, but when he sheweth vnto the eye in the
wine as it were the droppes of Christes blood, it moueth man a thousande times more to the remembraunce of his death and thanckfulnesse: So that the Sacra∣mentes be both most necessary for in∣struction and also for vse. For he that contemneth to be renued by water and the holy ghost, contemneth eternall sal∣uation, & he that contemneth to eate of the sacramental bread, and drinke of the sacramentall wyne, contemneth to bée pertaker of the death & passion of Christ. For albeit ye grace of God is not tyed to these ordinances, yet because they were ordayned of our sauyour for the comfort and instructiō of his people, and to moue them to be thankfull for the great bene∣fites, which they haue receiued frō God in christ, to despise the same, is to despise God, and to run and to get eternal dam∣nation, and yet to bind God to the out∣ward elementes and rytes, is méere su∣perstition. And that this is not my doctrine, but the ancient fathers. I shall show briefe∣lye and plainely, by the most famous of them.
Origin which liued aboue xij. hundred yeares agoe, writing vpon the .xv. chap∣ter of saint Mathew, saieth thus: it is not the materiall substaunce of bread, but the worde which is spoken ouer it, that is profitable to the man that eateth it worthely. And this I meane of the Tupical and simbicall body of Christ. Origin ascribeth all grace to the force of the word, the worthinesse of the Recea∣uer, nameth the materiall substaunce of bread, and calleth it the Tupical, that is figuratiue, and simbolical, that is sacra∣mentall body. Before the bread sayeth ChrisostomeChrisost. to Cesarius the Monke, be hallowed, we call it bread, but after the grace of God hath sanctifyed it by the meanes of the Minister, it is deliuered new from the name of bread, and estéemed worth to be called the body of Christ, although the nature of bread remayneth still. Theodoreto in his first dyalogue wri∣tingTheodo∣retus. against Vtiches saieth thus, he that calleth his naturall body Corne & bread and nameth himselfe a vine trée, euen he the same hath honored the sacramen∣tall
signes, with the names of his body & bloud, not chaunging in déede the nature it self, but adding grace vnto the nature. Theodorete doth saye, that Christ didTheodo∣retus. not in déede chaunge the nature of bread and wine, but added grace vnto the na∣ture, by vertue whereof they receyued force to féede the soules of the faithfull receyuers, which naturall breade and wine cannot doe. Augustine vpon the 89. Psalme, spea∣kingAugust. in the name of our Lorde and Sa∣uiour to his Disciples, and recyting and expounding the wordes of the instituti∣on of this blessed sacrament, sayth thus. It is not this body that you doe sée, that ye shall eate, nor the bloud that the soul∣diours shall shed, that shall crucify me, that ye shall drinke, but I doe commend vnto you a misterie, which spirituallye vnderstoode, shall giue you life. Saint Augustine doth say that they did not eate of his naturall body, for that was séeneAugust. of them, nor drinke his naturall bloode, for that was shed of the souldiors. And he addeth further, to refute the bald glo∣ses of the Scholemen, that that is a mi∣sterie,
and is to be vnderstood spiritual∣lye, not really or corporally. And al∣though he take away the litterall sence, and corporall pertaking, yet doth he not take awaye the heauenly blessing and grace. For he addeth, which spiritually vnderstoode geueth life. So that, that is plaine slaunder, that manye doe vrge against those, that deny the reall and corporall presence, & make an heauenlye spirituall foode, that they make nothing of this blessed sacrament. For saint Augustine teacheth to vnder∣stande the wordes spiritually, and yet affirmeth that spirituallye vnderstode, they geue life. The fyre simplie and na∣turally is adustine, that is, hath force to burne, to the stone called Amanthos, to the Vermine called Salamandra, it is not adustie, nor doth burne them. Euen so the sacramentall breade and drinke be simply and properly spirituall, but after a sort, and by accident, that is vn∣to the vnworthy receyuer, it is not spi∣ritual, nor the body and bloud of Christ. And ye S. Augustine doth teach vs, say∣ing:August. That Iudas did eate spiritual bread,
and he did eate the Lorde his bread, but it was not to him spirituall, it was not to him the Lorde. Some also say, we do make nothing of this most blessed sacra∣ment. Let any indifferent person consi∣der who doeth more. They ascribe and binde al the graces of the sacrifice, to the intencion of the sacrificer. For Gabriell Biell doeth saye, that it belongeth to theIabriel Biel. priest to determine and limit the force, vertue and grace of this sacrifice, that it may be bestowed vpon such, and suche néeding it, as a rewarde to be geuen. And Summa Angelica in the Masse. The Masse, sayeth he, is auaileable vn∣to them vnto whom it pleaseth ye Priest in his intencion to apply it. We know, teach, beléeue and confesse in and by the faithfull recept of this blessed sacramēt, that Christ his body is rent for our sins, and that by his woundes we were all made whole, that Christ in his bodye caryed our sinnes vpon the trée, and by the oblation thereof once made vpō the Crosse, hath sanctifyed vs for euer, and hath purchased for vs euerlasting re∣demption, and that there is none other
name or sacrifice vnder heauen, wherby we can be saued, but only by the name of Jesus christ. That these things ought to make the heart to tremble. For that therin is laid forth the mistery that was hidde from worlds and generations, the horrour of sinne, the death of the sonne of God, that he tooke our heauinesse, and bare our sorrowes, and was wounded for our offences, and was rent and tor∣mēted for our wickednesse, that he was carryed like an innocente Lambe vnto the flaughter, that he cried vnto his Fa∣ther: O God, my God, why haste thou for saken me? There we call to remem∣braunce the shame of the Crosse, the darckning of the ayre, the shaking of the earth, the renting of the vale, the clea∣ning of the rockes, the opening of the graues, how Christ came to his passion, how he was wounded in the syde, howe blood and water issued and streamed frō his wounde. They thinke it ynough to bow the knées of the body, to stretche forth the handes of the body, to lifte vp the eyes of the body, and to looke vppon the sacramentall bread, and the sacra∣mentall
Cuppe, and that they thinke might serue once a yeare. We teach quarterly, monthly, weekely, dayly, to bow the knées of the body, and the knées of the seule, to stretch forth the handes of the body, and the handes of the soule, to lift vp the eyes of the body, and the eyes of the soule, and by farth the mouth of the soule to feede of the blessed & glorious body of our Lord & sauiour christ Jesus. They teach that in it, they doe eate the naturall body of Christ, and drinke the naturall blood of Christe naturally and sēsibly. But by this spiritual, faith∣full and heauenly receipt of the blessed sacramēt we say, teach and beleeue, that we receaue though not naturally and corporally, yet spiritually, truely and effectually our Lord and sauyour Christ Jesus the true and naturall sonne of God, consubstantiall and coequall with the Father in all poyntes, and that hée is made vnto vs the fulnesse of all grace and truth. The Lambe of God that ta∣keth away our sinnes, the ladder & gate of heauen, the aduaunced Serpent that healeth our poysoned soules, the sonne
of God that reconsileth vs to the father, the bread of life, the light of the worlde, the dore, the way, the truth, the life, & to be briefe a full and perfect helth, wis∣dome, rightcousnesse, redemption, satis∣faction, and saluation. They thinke they doe much aduance she omnipotent power of God, & great∣ly exercise their faith, for that they teach and beleue that the substaunce of the breade is changed into the substance of the body of Christ, and the substaunce of wine into the substance of the bloude of Christ naturally, corporally, and really. We knowe that we doe a great deale more aduaunce the omnipotent power of God, and more mightily exercise our faith, and further carrie our selues from sence and reason in beleeuing the inuist∣ble, but most marueylous graces & bles∣sings that God hath graunted and ap∣pointed to this most blessed sacrament: For we beleue, that we spiritually, hea∣uenly, truely and effectually eate the fleshe of Christ, and drinke his bloude: Dwell in Christ, and Christ in vs, be one with Christ, and Christ with vs,
that our sinneful bodies be made cleane by his body, and our soules washed tho∣rowe his most precious bloude, that we be assured of the forgiuenesse of oure sins, and all other benefits of the death and passion of Jesus Christ, that we be filled with heauenly grace, and benedic∣tion, that we be assured of God his fa∣uor, and goodnesse towarde vs, that we be liuely members incorporated in the misticall bodye of Christ Jesus, and be beyres thorowe hope of his euerlasting kingdome. The Lorde Jesus for his mercie sake graunte vnto vs his heauenlye grace, that we may abandon sence, reason, and our owne fansies, and so by fayth builde vpon the rock of his worde and institu∣tion, that we maye be partakers of the fruits and ioyes purchased by his death, and geuen, graunted, sealed, deliuered, and possessed of the Christian heart, by the true and faithfull re∣cept of that most holye and blessed Sa∣crament. FINIS.
