14295 99854618 20045
THE PIOUS PRENTICE, OR, THE PRENTICES PIETY. Wherein is declared, how they that intend to be Prentices, may 1. Rightly enter into that Calling. 2. Faithfully abide in it. 3. Discreetly accomplish it. 4. And how they may be satisfied in con∣science in such doubts as may arise upon some particular occasions and occurrences proper to that Calling: By A. J. LONDON, Printed by E.G. for M. Sparke and Joh. Hardisty, and are to be sold at the signe of the blue Bible in Green-Arbor. 1640.
To all such as in∣tend to be servants or Apprentices. WHosoever you are that in the pur∣pose of your parents and friends; or by the bent of your own
inclination; or ur∣ged by necessity; or by the concurrence of all these motives; or by any other in∣centive) are to un∣dergoe the conditi∣on of a servant or prentice, to the end that you may live well and happily in that Calling; my purpose is in this
little treatise, to set down such precepts & rules as J thoght most profitable to conduce thereunto. These precepts I reduce to 4. heads. I. In the first of which, J shew you what you are to doe, before you enter in∣to that Calling. II. Jn the second,
how you ought to be∣have your selfe in it. III. In the third, what course to take after you have ac∣complished it. IV. And in the fourth, how to be sa∣tisfied in some par∣ticular doubts that may trouble your conscience. I. First then, be∣fore you enter into
that Calling, you are 1. To pray unto God you may be placed with an honest & religious Ma∣ster. p. 3 2. To peruse such precepts, promi∣ses, threatnings, and examples as are recorded in the holy Scrip∣tures, touching
servants, pag. 4 3. To consider some sayings and wri∣tings of men to that purpose. 25 4. To read over a∣gaine and againe this little manu∣all. p. 33 II. Secondly, when you are actually pla∣ced in this Calling, you must be carefull
to perform such du∣ties as become you in respect both of matter and man∣ner. p. 37 In respect of mat∣ter, you are to per∣forme some duties towards God; some towards your selfe; some towards your Master & Mistris; some towards their
children, if they have any; some to∣wards your fellow-servants; some to∣wards those you are to deal with in your Masters businesse; some towards your neighbours and ac∣quaintance; and some towards your parents, kinsfolks & friends. p. 37, 38
I. Your duty to∣wards God, is set downe in the first Table of the Com∣mandements, and declared more at large in divers ex∣positions upon the Decalogue, and something touched upon in this Trea∣tise. p. 39 II. Your duty to∣wards
your selfe are, 1 Sobriety. p. 43 2. Chastity. 49 3. Contētment. 53 III. The duties you owe to your Master and Mistresse, are, 1. Reverence. 57 2. Feare. 60 3. Subjection. 62 4. Faithfulnes. 66 5. Obedience. 73 IV. Your duties to∣wards
your Masters children, are, 75, 76 1. Sincere love. 2. Circumspect carriage in their presence. 3. Discreete re∣proofe. V. Towards your fellow-servants you ought to beare true affection, and to ma∣nifest the same by
indeavoring to help thē the best you can for their good p. 78 VI. With your Ma∣sters chapmen you must deale upright∣ly and justly. p. 83 VII. Towards your neighbours and ac∣quaintance, your cōversation must be harmlesse, discreet, humble, peaceable, plaine,
and modest p. 86 VIII. Towards your parents and kins∣folkes, you must shew your selfe thankefull by orde∣ring your conversa∣tion so, that they not only heare well of you by others, but heare from you of∣ten by your owne letters. p 92
Neither is it sufficient that you performe these du∣ties in respect of the matter, unlesse you doe them in a right manner, that is to say, 1. In Sinceritie. p. 96 2. With Con∣stancie, p. 101 3. With Alacri∣tie,
p. 103 4. With Pray∣er, p. 104 III. Thirdly af∣ter you have ac∣complished the time of your apprenti∣ship, you ought not to set up for your selfe, but upon se∣rious deliberation, p. 104 IV. Fourthly and
lastly, you have here the resolution of some doubts wch may, perchance, up∣on some occasions trouble your con∣science, p. 109 Now the God of Heaven, that powred his blessings upon Eliezer, la∣cob and Ioseph, and upon other god∣ly
& religious ser∣vants, so blesse this little Treatise un∣to you, so fill you with his grace and heavenly benedi∣ction; so guide, di∣rect, protect, and defend you, that not only your Ma∣sters bussines may prosper in your hands; but that
you also may grow more and more in favour with God and with all good men. To this end let it be your care so to behave your selves in your Cal∣ling, as that it may appeare to them with whom you converse (but espe∣cially to your own
conscience) that you believe indeed, that the eye of God is upon you, imagi∣ning that you see every where writ∣ten in capitall let∣ters, CAVE, DEVS VIDET. And so I rest, Your wel-wisher in the Lord Jesus, Abraham Iackson.
THE PIOVS PRENTICE OR THE PRENTICES PIETY. CHAP. I. How he that intends to be a servant or apprentice ought to prepare him∣selfe for that calling. BEfore yee actu∣ally enter into the calling of a servant, or of an ap∣prentice
these foure things are seriously to be performed by you. First, Pray to God, that you may be placed with an honest and re∣ligious Master. Secondly, Peruse such precepts, promises, threatnings and exam∣ples as are recorded in the holy Scriptures tou∣ching servants. Thirdly, Consider the sayings and writings of men, to that purpose. Fourthly, Read over againe and againe this little Manuall.
SECTION. I. FIrst then pray to God upon the ben∣ded knees both of your soule and body,A Jove principi∣um, that by his fatherly providence you may be placed with a religious master; So shall you have liberty to serve God both private∣ly in the family, and publikely in the con∣gregation. And withall remember that you im∣plore his Majesty to be∣stow
upon you an un∣derstanding heart, and to furnish you with such gifts and graces, as are specially requisite for the due performance of all your employment. SECTION II. THe next thing that I commend unto you, is the perusall of such precepts, promises, threatnings and exam∣ples as are found in
Gods booke touching servants. For if David a king that had singular wisdome in himselfe, and had a wise coun∣saile also to consult with made the word and lawes of God his coun∣sellors,Psal. 119.24. much more ought you, that are but young and unexperien∣ced in the course of the world, and but a pri∣vate person depend up∣on Gods word for coun∣sell. Wherefore as the Is∣raelites in the Wilder∣nesse being ignorant of the way to Canaan, yet (following the directiō
of the pillar of fire by night, and the cloud by day) came at last to the promised land: so though you bee igno∣rant what course to take in the managing of any trade in respect either of matter or man∣ner: yet if you make the word of God your direction, and day and night fixe the eye of your meditation there∣upon, you shall not only make a lawful entrance into that calling which God hath prepared for you, but you shall con∣tinue in it with a bles∣sing.
To the end therefore that you may with pro∣fit in this point peruse the word of God, con∣sider First, The precepts directing servants how to behave themselves. Secondly, The promi∣ses encouraging them to walke according to these precepts. Thirdly, The threat∣nings terrifying them if they walke not accor∣ding to these precepts. Fourthly, The exam∣ples of good servants to imitate: and of bad ser∣vants to avoid.
1 The pre∣cepts are given. 1 By Paul 1 Cor. 7.20.21.22. Eph 6.5, 6, 7, 8. Coloss 3.22.23.24, 25 1 Tim 6.1.2. Titus 2.9.10. 2 By Peter, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21. 2 The pro∣mises are made. 1 By Salom. Prov. 14.35. Prov. 17.2. Prov. 27.18. 2 By Ioel, Cap. 2.29. 3 By Christ, Lu. 12.37, 38 42.43.44. 3 The theat∣nings are denounced 1 By Salomon. Pro 14 25. 2 By Christ. 1 Math. 24 48. Luk. 12 45 46. 2 Luk. 12.47. 4 Ex∣am∣ples are 1 Of good servants are 1 Eliezer, Gen. 24 5.9. 12, 13 14 33.56. 2 Iacob, Gen 31.38.40. 3 Ioseph, 39.4.5, 6. &, 9, 10.21.22, 23. 4 Sauls servants, 1 Sam. 22.17. 5 Davids servants. 2 Sam. 15.15. 2 Of evill ser∣vants are 1 Hagar, Gen. 16.4.5, 6. 2 Doeg, 1 Sam 22 18. 3 Davids serv 2 Sa. 11.4. 4 Ioab, 2 Sam. 11.15. 5 Absolons servants, 2 Sa. 13 29, &c. & 2 Sa, 14.30. 6 Gehezi, 2 Ki. 5 20, 21, 25 7 Ioash his servants, 2 Cron. 24.21. 8 Nehucadnezzars servants Dan. 3 19.20. 9 Assuerus his servants, Est. 3.3.
1 Precepts. Let every man abide in the same calling,Paul 1 Cor, 7.20, 21, 22. wherein he was called. Art thou called being a servant? care not for it, but if thou mayest bee made free, use it rather. For he that is called be∣ing a servant is the Lords free man: like∣wise hee that is called being free, is Christs ser∣vant. Servants be obedient unto them that are your Masters according to the flesh with feare and trembling;Ephes. 6, 5, 6, 7.8. in single∣nesse
of your heart as un∣to Christ. Not with eye-service as men-plea∣sers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, with good will doing service as to the Lord, and not to men, know∣ing that whatsoever good thing any man doth the same shall hee receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Servants obey in all things your Masters ac∣cording to the flesh:Colos. 3.22, 23, 24, 25. not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in sin∣glenesse of heart, fea∣ring
God. And whatso∣ever ye doe, doe it hear∣tily as to the Lord, and not unto men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. But hee that doth wrong, shall receive for the wrong which hee hath done, and there is no respect of persons. Let as many servants as are under the yoake,1 Timoth. 6.1.2. count their owne Ma∣sters worthy of all ho∣nour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. And they that have belee∣ving
Masters, let them not despise them, be∣cause they are brethren, but rather doe them ser∣vice, because they are faithfull, and beloved, partakers of the bene∣fit. Exhort servants to bee obedient unto their owne Masters,Titus 2.9.10. and to please them well in all things, not answering again: Not purloyning, but shewing all good fi∣delity, that they may a∣dorne the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things. Peter. 1 Pet. 2.18.19, 20, 21.Servants bee subject to your Masters withall
feare not onely to the good and gentile, but also to the froward: for this is thanke-worthy, if a man for conscience towards God indure griefe, suffering wrong∣fully. For what glory is it, if when yee be buffe∣ted for your faults, yee shall take it patiently? But if when ye do well, and suffer it, ye take it patiently, this is accep∣table with God. For e∣ven hereunto were yee called, because Christ also suffered for us. Lea∣ving us an example, that yee should follow his steps.
2 Promises. The kings favour is towards a wise servant.1 Salomon Pro. 13.33. A wise servant shall have rule over a sonne that causeth shame,Pro. 17.2. and shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren. Upon the servants,2 Ioel. Ioel. 2.29. and upon the hand-maides—will I power out my spirit. Blessed are those ser∣vants whom the Lord when he commeth shall finde watching.3 Christ. Luke 12.37, 38. Verily I say unto you, that hee shall gird himselfe, and
make them to sit downe to meat, and will come forth and serve them. And if hee shall come in the second watch, or in the third watch, and find them so blessed are those servants. — Who then is that faithfull and wise steward,v. 42, 43, 44 whom the Lord shall make ruler over his houshold, to give them their portion of meate in due season. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he commeth shall finde so doing. Of a truth I say unto you that hee will make him ruler over all that hee hath,
3 Threatnings. The kings wrath is a∣gainst a servant that causeth shame.1 Salomon. Pro. 14.25. The evill servant that shall say in his heart,2 Christ. Mat. 24.48 Luke 12.45, 46. My Lord delayeth his com∣ming, and beginnes to smite his feow ser∣vants, and to eate and drinke with the drun∣ken; The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when hee looketh not for him, and in an houre that hee is not ware of, and shall cut him a sunder, and ap∣point him his portion
with the hypocrites: there shall bee weeping and gnashing of teeth. The servant which knew his Lords will and prepared not himselfe,Luk. 12, 47. neither did according to his will, shall be bea∣ten with many stripes. 4 Examples. 1 Of good servants to imitate. First, Eliezer Abrahams servant, who 1 Before he undertook his journey pro∣pounds doubts,Gen. 24. and desires to be advised
by his master what he should doe in case, such and such things should happen: v. 5. 2 Promised to follow his masters directions and did so, v. 9. 3 Prayed for good suc∣cesse upon the im∣ployment committed to his care, v. 12, 13, 14. 4 Would neither eate nor drink, till he had done his message. v, 33. 5 Would not be intrea∣ted to tarry longer then was necessary. v. 56. Secondly Iacob,Gen. 31. who
served his unkle La∣ban truly and faith∣fully. v. 31.38, 39, 40. This twenty yeares have I beene with thee, thy ewes and shee goates have not cast their young, and the rammes of thy flocke have I not ea∣ten. That which was torne of beasts I brought not unto thee, I bare the losse of it. Of my hand didst thou require it, whe∣ther stolne by day, or stolne by night. Thus I was in the day, the drought consumed
me, and the frost by night, and my sleepe departed from mine eyes. Thirdly Ioseph,Gen. 39. 1 Who pleased his ma∣ster so well by his dis∣creet and faithfull carriage, as that hee was made overseer of all his affaires, v. 4.5, 6. 2 Who would by no meanes wrong either his master, or his own conscience by yeel∣ding to the lascivious motions of his un∣chaste mistresse, v. 8.9.10. 3 Who being cast in
prison without cause, took it patiently and behaved himselfe so well, that the Iaylor put him in trust with all the prisoners un∣der him, v. 21, 22, 23. 4 Who being advanced to the highest place of dignity under Pha∣raoh,Gen. 41. served the king truly and faithfully. Fourthly,1 Sam. 22.17. Sauls servants who refused to mur∣ther the Priests at his Commandement. Fifthly,2 Sam. 13.15. Davids servants who said unto him, behold we are ready to doe whatsoever Thou shalt appoynt.
2 Of evill servants to avoid. First Hagar,Gen. 16.4, 5, 6. who when she conceived, despi∣sed her mistresse, and when shee was corre∣cted for her fault ran away. Secondly Doeg,1 Sam. 22.18. who was as ready to murther the Priests of the Lord as Saul was to bid him. Thirdly Davids servants that went to fetch Bathsheba unto him.2 Sa. 11.4. Fourthly Ioab,2 Sam. 11.15. who o∣beyed the kings di∣rections
for the mur∣ther of Vriah. Fiftly Absolons servants, who at their masters command 1 murthered Amnon.2 Sam. 13.23. 2 burnt Ioabs barley. Sixthly Gehezi,2 Sam. 14.30. who went to Naaman with a false message in his masters name,2 Kin 5.20.21. tooke a bribe of him, with a purpose to convert it to his owne use.vers. 25. And when his master ex∣amined him, denyed what he had done. Seventhly Ioash his ser∣vants who at their masters command,2 Cron. 24 21. stoned the prophet
Zachariah to death. Eighthly,Dan. 3.19, 20. Nebuchadne∣zars servants, who at the commandement of their master, cast Shadrach, Mesach, and Abednego, into the fi∣ery furnace. Ninthly,Est. 3.3. Assuerus his ser∣servants who accused Mordecai. SECTION. III. THirdly for your better preparati∣on. Consider the sayings
and writings of prudent men to this purpose: And in particular, I will commend unto you: 1 The verses of Io∣hannes Campanus, an ele∣gant Latin Poet, where∣in he sets downe how a good servant ought to be qualified. 2 The fancy of Apel∣les, a famous Painter, wherein he delineates with his pensill, an Em∣blematicall picture of a good servant.
Campanus expresses himselfe thus: SCis mihi quâ Polydore, potes ratione placere, Si quae praescribam praecipiamqne facis. Lex igitur sit prima, fidem servato: deinde A domini mundas rebus habeto manus. Odi mendacem, non possum ferre protervum, Nc tu lusorem crede placere mihi. Odi qui multum sese mihi jactat: & odi Alterius famam, qui lacer ando premit. Displicet indocilis: nimium mihi displicet ille,
Qui sine non duro murmure jussa facit. Non est quod durum non est quod litis amantem Contactum non est invidiâ, quod amem. Assentatorem plane non diligo, nec qui Desidiae fuerit deditus, atque gulae. Quis toleret famulum domini secret a volentem Scire? quis elatum, multiloquum{que} ferat? Fallaecem fugio ceu tartara: denique cultum Ingenuis hominem moribus esse volo.
In English thus: COme boy, I'll tell thee how thou shalt me please, Marke well my words and precepts which are these: First be religious, then be true to mee, From thievish pilfring let thy hands be free. Lying I hate, I hate all impudence; All thriftlesse gaming, and all vaine expence: I hate Thrasonicke boasting, and I blame The scandalizing of anothers name. I like not blockish indocility,
Nor him that doth his businesse grudgingly. No stubborne heart, no lover of debate Can I indure; The envious I doe hate: I doe abhorre all glozing flatterie, All idlenesse, and all gulositie: All prying into secret businesse, All swelling lookes; all multiloquiousnesse; All guile as hell: If therefore thou'lt serve me, Thou must be grac'd with Christian honestie.
2 Apelles, to signifie the properties of a good servant, set him out in a Table thus: he painted a man, 1 With the eares of an Asse. 2 With the nose of a Sowe. 3 With his hands ful of sundry sorts of tooles or instruments. 4 With broad shoul∣ders. 5 With a lanke and empty belly. 6 With Hindes feet. 7 With two pad∣locks upon his lips. 1 With the eares of an Asse, to signifie,
that a servant ought to be very diligent in hear∣kening to the counsell and direction of his Ma∣ster. 2 With the nose of a Sowe, to shew, that he ought to be of a quicke sent, to smell out what may conduce to his Ma∣sters profit. 3 With his hands full of sundry tooles or instruments, to note, that he ought to be furnish'd with a prompt and rea∣dy minde, to doe any thing for his Master that hee can. 4 With broad shoul∣ders, to intimate, that
he ought to be ready to beare what burthens his Master shall impose up∣on him. 5 With a lanke and empty belly, to signifie, that hee must not be a man given to appetite; but oftentimes content even with an hungry meale, and a slender di∣et. 6 With Hinds feet, to shew, how speedy he ought to be in doing his Masters businesse. 7 With two pad∣lockes upon his lips, to note, that he ought to keep all the secrets of the house close locked
up in the closet of taci∣turnitie. SECTION IIII. FOurthly, read over againe and againe these directions follow∣ing, which I have ga∣thered for you to be put in practice, when you are in service, by this meanes you shall make them so familiar unto you, as that you shall not be to seeke for di∣rections how to behave
your selfe as a Christian in all your occasions, and relative respects. Many good natured children, even at their first entring into service have beene plunged o∣ver head and eares in the Ocean of many er∣rours and offences, for want of the Rudder of precepts and directions to guide the ship of their behaviour; which otherwise might have made a good voyage, and ancord in a safe haven. Wherefore, that you may make good use of others errors, I thought
fit to furnish you with such instructions as are most necessary for the accomplishment of that end I aime at;Optimum est alienâ insaniâ frui. which is an happy passing of the time of your appren∣tiship to Gods glory, your Masters content, the comfort of your cō∣science, and the good estimation and opinion of all those that shall observe your godly and civill behaviour.
CHAP. II. How an Apprentise ought to behave himselfe, du∣ring the time of his ap∣prentiship. WHen therfore you are in service, if you have happened on such a Master as you desired of God to be placed with, account it as one speci∣all token of his love to∣wards you; and be care∣full
to expresse your thankfulnesse, not one∣ly by words in your dai∣ly orizons, but by per∣forming such duties as becommeth you in re∣gard of both, 1. Of matter, and 2. Of manner. 1. The materiall parts of an apprentices duty. The matter or sub∣stance of your duty is various, according to the divers objects you have relation unto. These objects are: 1. God. 2. Your selfe. 3. Your Master and Mistresse.
4. Their children, if any. 5. Your fellow ser∣vants. 6. Those you are to deale with for your Master. 7. Your neighbours, friends and acquain∣tance. 8. Your Parents and kinsfolkes. SECTION I. His duty towards God. TOuching your du∣ty towards God,
howsoever it is contai∣ned in the first foure Cōmandements of the Decalogue, and more largely expressed in di∣vers expositions upon the same; to which I referre you. Yet my ad∣vice is this, that 1. Upon week daies, when you have any lea∣sure from your parti∣cular imployments, you spend it in reading of Gods Booke, and the bookes of Holy men, tending to piety and de∣votion: And that every morning and evening, you not onely offer up unto God the sacrifice
of praise and thanksgi∣ving, for all his benefit bestowed upon you, begging withall, a wise & understanding heart to perform the duties of your calling to his glo∣ry, your Masters profit, and the comfort of your own conscience; but al∣so that you commend your selfe, your affaires, and all that you have relation unto, to his mer∣cifull providence, gui∣dance, and protection. 2. And upon the Lords day, and other holy daies, that you ex∣ercise your selfe as is presented in the 13. Ca∣non
of the Church of England. But in any case doe not thinke you have performed your duty towards God suffici∣ently when you have said your prayers in private, and heard the Word of God in pub∣lique, unlesse your heart be set upon the practice of those graces you pray for, and are exhorted unto by the Word of God. You must labour to be so indeed, as you professe your selfe to be, and would have men thinke you are: For the praise of a circumcised
heart is not of men, but of God. And it is one of Gods peculiar pro∣perties to discerne and know the thoughts and intentions of all mens hearts. He is also a spi∣rit, and therefore is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth. Take heed therefore of hy∣pocrisie in Gods ser∣vice; shewes of piety without substance, is abominable in his eyes.
SECTION II. His duty towards himselfe. Touching your duty towards your selfe, I commend unto you these three vertues: 1. Sobriety. 2. Chastity. 3. Contentment. 1. Of Sobriety. If your Master allow your plenty of meat and drinke, let sobriety mo∣derate your appetite.
1. In eating, observe these rules: 1. Eat not to saciety, but ever arise with an appetite:Fiat mode∣ratè, quod faciendum est saepe. Remember, that nature is content with a little; that in ful∣nesse there is forgetful∣nesse; that a full sto∣macke sets up a Wind∣mill in the head: Consi∣der also, what a disgrace it is to be counted a glutton, and such a one as hath his minde whol∣ly set on his meat. 2. Bee not daintie mouthed; for the Pro∣verbe is, That hee that hath a liquirish mouth is of a wanton disposition.
2. In drinking ob∣serve these rules: 1. Let the end of your drinking be the quen∣ching of your thirst, which will best be done with ordinary drinke. 2. If you may have ac∣cesse to strong beare or wine, be a faithfull ste∣ward of it, when you are commanded; and not a lavish waster of it, when you are not al∣lowed. 3. Above all, take heed you habituate not your selfe to the love of strong drinke of what kinde soever by often sippings; for by that
meanes you may come at length to swallow downe whole draughts with delight.Praemoni¦tus, praemu∣nitus. Fore∣warn'd fore-arm'd. 4. But that you may for ever detest the vice of drunkennesse, con∣sider. 1. That it is a Paga∣nish sin 1 Pet. 4.3. a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.21. a worke of darknesse, and of dishonesty, Rom. 13.13. 2. That it takes a∣way the heart, 1. From a mans own selfe, Es. 28.7. 2. From Gods ser∣vice, Hos. 4.11.
3. From the consi∣deration of Gods judg∣ments. 1. Present, Es. 5.11. 2. To come in death and judgement, Luk. 21.34. 3. That it causeth, 1. Rage and fury, Prov. 20.1. 2. Lust and filthy desires, Prov. 23.29. 3. Vomiting & vile uncleannesse, Es. 28.8. 4. Mocking & con∣tempt, Psal. 69.13. 5. Poverty and fa∣mine, Pro. 21.17. 6. The wrath and curse of God in gene∣rall, Es. 5.11.
7. Damnation in the end, both of body and soule, 1 Cor. 6.10. Hitherto may be re∣ferred that which the author of the book cal∣led Theatrum diabolorum hath left in writing, viz. That that Divell which is said to be the presi∣dent of drunkennesse, hath the leading of all the rest, or is set formost in the traine of Divells, because he begetteth in the drunkard inconside∣ration and contempt of himselfe, of his neigh∣bour, and of God.
2. Of Chastity. The second vertue you are to preserve in your selfe is Chastity, which extends as well to the minde, keeping it void of unchaste cogi∣tations, consent, motion, or any manner of lasci∣vious purpose; as to the body, restrayning all fil∣thy speech, words and actions that are contra∣ry to the holy Will of God. St. Paul expresses it thus. This is the Will of God,1 Thes. 4.3, 4, 5. even your san∣ctification, that you should abstaine from
fornication, That every one of you should know how to possesse his ves∣sell in sanctification and honour, Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles, which know not God. To the end then that you may endeavour to performe this duty; consider, 1. That God hath made a promise of love and favour to all those that doe so. Seeing we have these promises (to wit,2 Cor. 7.1. that God will receive us, and be a father unto us, and wee shall be his sonnes
and daughters, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.) let us cleanse our selves from all fil∣thinesse of the flesh and spirit. 2. That Inordinate lusts and affections (if you entertaine them) will make head and fight against your soule. Hence is that exhortati∣on of Saint Peter.1 Pet. 2.11. Deare∣ly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstaine from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soule. 3. That if they be not cast out, they will serve as a foundation for Satan to build his,
strong holds upon wch nothing but the mighty power of God can throw down. They will hinder the efficacy of the Word. They will weaken your trust on the grace of God. And in the end they will bring you to shame in this world, and to endlesse misery in the world to come. Wherefore, as you desire to live in the love and favour of God, to be freed from a trea∣cherous enemy of your soule: to hinder Sa∣tan from building his strong holds in your
heart, possesse your ves∣sell in holinesse and chastity. 3. Of Contentment. The third vertue is contentednesse in your present cōdition, wher∣by you ought to be pleased with that estate wherein you are pla∣ced. This is that vertue which S. Paul learned of God, Phil. 4.11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. And this is that I desire you should learne of S. Paul, who in rhe 1 Cor. 7.20. saith, Let
every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. To this end consider, that the calling you are placed in, was appoin∣ted unto you by Gods particular providence, as knowing better what was fit for you then you your selfe. To be discontented therefore with your cal∣ling, is to repine at Gods Providence, which is a cursed effect, proceed∣ing either, 1. From envie: or, 2. From ambition: or, 3. From impatience. 1. From envie, when a
man grieves to see him, that was sometimes his equall or inferiour, pla∣ced (to outward seem∣ing) in a more profi∣table, eminent, or easie course of life. 2. From ambition, when a man thinking better of himselfe then there is cause, falls into dislike with his present estate, and by all the meanes and friends hee can make, seekes for a calling of more emi∣nency. 3. From impatience, when a man meeting with crosses & troubles in the affaires incident
to his imployments, and being not able to brook them, resolves to relin∣quish his place, and ei∣ther to live in another calling, which is ill; or in no calling, with is worse. Let it therefore be your care to shut the dore of your heart a∣gainst these evill guests, envie, ambition, impa∣tience, and whatsoe∣ver else tends to the dis∣turbance of your con∣tentment in your present condition, esteeming al∣waies that calling best for you, wherin by Gods providence you are pla∣ced.
SECTION III. His duty towards his Ma∣ster and Mistresse. TO your Master and Mistresse, you owe 1. Reverence. 2. Feare. 3. Subjection. 4. Faithfulnesse. 5. Obedience. 1. Of Reverence. You are to behave your selfe reverently in
your Masters presence, and shew it: 1. By gesture. 2. By words. 3. By action. 1. Your gesture must shew your reverence: 1. By lowlinesse of countenance, free from supercilious pride, dis∣contented sullennesse, hatefull swelling, dis∣dainful cast of your eye, and the like. 2. By not presu∣ming to sit or cover your head in his pre∣sence, unlesse your trade require it, or hee com∣mand it. 2. Your words must
testifie your reverence: 1. By giving him such titles, and using such formes as are fit: as Sir, and forsooth, &c. 2. By not presu∣ming sawcily to contra∣dict his sayings, or to in∣terpose your owne opi∣nion, unlesse he bid you speake. 3. Your actions must manifest your reve∣rence: 1. By not daring to doe that behinde his back, which you would not doe in his presence. 2. By avoiding all rude and unseemly be∣haviour towards any
(as at all times, so) espe∣cially, when hee either doth, or may behold you. 2. Of feare. Secondly, you ought to feare and stand in awe of your Master, so saith Saint Paul, Eph. 6.5. Servants, be obedient to them that are your Ma∣sters, according to the flesh, with feare and trembling: so saith St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.18. Ser∣vants, be subject unto your Masters, with all feare, not onely to the good and gentle, but al∣so to the froward.
And this feare you must expresse: 1. By avoiding what may offend; as is all stubborne and sullen si∣lence, when you are found fault with; this is noted by Salomon, Prov. 29.19. A servant will not be corrected by words: for, though hee understand, he will not answer. 2. By not giving a crosse or disobedient answer, Tit. 2.9. Exhort servants—not to an∣swer againe. 3. By using the best meanes you can to pa∣cifie his anger: which
may be effected by an humble acknowledge∣ment of your fault, and promise of amendment. 3. Of subjection. It is your duty to be subject to your Masters 1. Correction. 2. And restraints. 1. You must subject your selfe to your Ma∣sters correction, though you deserve it not: so saith St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.19. This is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience towards God, indure griefe, suffering wrong∣fully: For, what glory
is it, if when yee be buf∣feted for your faults, you shal take it patient∣ly? but if when you do well, and suffer for it, you take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. The meaning is this; that thogh your Master should be so froward, as to beat you without cause, yet you ought to be subject for Consci∣ence sake unto God: be∣cause this is a Christian mans case, and a great praise, when out of con∣science to God, he doth his duty, and suffers wrongfully.
2. You must be sub∣ject to your masters re∣straints in respect: 1. Of diet. 2. Of place. 3. Of company. 4. Of apparell. 1. In respect of diet; you must not be your owne carver; you must not grudge or repine, or finde fault, either with the kind or measure of your fare, but take all in good part, and give God thankes. 2 In respect of place; you must keepe the bounds of the family, and not at your plea∣sure be gadding out, ei∣ther
by night or day, upon any pretence, without leave. 3. In respect of com∣pany; you must not without your Masters liking, either bring in any company to the house, or keepe compa∣ny with them abroad, though never so honest, or neere, or deare unto you. 4. In respect of appa∣rell; you must be con∣tented to wear such ap∣parell, both for stuffe and fashion, as your Master likes. Your will and fancy must be sub∣ject to his restraints in
all these things. 4. Of faithfulnesse. The fourth duty you owe unto your Master, is faithfulnesse: so saith Saint Paul, Tit. 2.10. Ex∣hort servants—that they shew all good fide∣lity, And that in respect 1. Of the goods of the family. 2. Of the secrets of the house. 3. Of labour and paines taking. 4. Of trustinesse. 5. Of dispatch. 1. In respect of the goods of the family,
you must not purloyne the least peny from your Master: as Saint Paul adviseth, Tit. 2.10. Exhort servants that they be no purloyners. If you chance to find any mony, or Jewells, or any other thing of va∣lue in any part of the house, which may seem to be lost, doe not hide it, or conceale it, with a purpose to convert it to your owne use; but bring it presently to your Master or Mistris, and aske if it be theirs, and tell them where you had it. Be carefull that no∣thing
be spoiled or lost, or miscarry by your de∣fault or negligence. To this purpose, let the ex∣ample of Iacob be ever before your eyes, who out of a good consci∣ence, told his uncle La∣ban how carefull he had been in all the businesse he was imployed in for his profit, Gen. 31.37, 38, 39, 40. 2. You must not blaze abroad the secrets ei∣ther of your Master or mistresse of the family, or of the trade. 3. You must not eate the bread of idlenesse, but you must be dili∣gent
in all your imploy∣ments, as well when your Masters eye is off you, as when he looketh on. It is a wretched fault in many servants, that as long as their Ma∣ster or Mistresse are pre∣sent they will be won∣derfull diligent in their businesse, and take a great deale of paines, even to the sweat of the browe; but when their backs are turned, they grow slack and re∣misse. From this eye-service Saint Paul de∣horts in two of his Epi∣stles, Ephes. 6.5, 6. and Colos. 3.22, 23.
4. You must expresse your faithfulnesse, by discharging the trust committed unto you when your Master is from home. If your Ma∣ster have occasion to go from home, and leave directions with you what hee would have dore in his absence, you must be as carefull to performe his commands as if hee were present: some servants have bin so wicked, as when their Masters backs are turned, or when they be gone from home, then they take meat, drinke, and leisure; then they
fall to loytering, or get them out of doores, or (which is worse) fall to wantonnesse, drunken∣nesse, filching, quarrel∣ling with their fellow-servants. This is a grie∣vous sinne, and such as shall be punished in the day that Christ shall come to Judgement,Math. 24.48, 49, 50, 51. Math. 24.48. If the evill servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delay∣eth his comming; and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eate and drinke with the drunken: The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when hee
looketh not for him, and in an houre that hee is not aware of; and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 5. You must be faith∣full in the dispatch of those businesses you are imployed in abroad; you must not be sloth∣full, but speedy; you must not stay longer forth than is necessary. It is a wretched fault in many servants, when they are sent forth of the family about bu∣sinesse, they cannot find
the way in againe in any time. 5. Of obedience. It is your duty to o∣bey your Master in all things: so saith S. Paul, Col. 3.22. Servants, obey your Masters in all things. In all things, I say, that are not plainly opposite to the Cōman∣dements of God. If they seem to crosse but your credit, your profit, your liking, your ease, &c. you must be obedient. Some servants are so head-strong, that they will doe but what they
list, and as they list, both in respect of time when; and of the manner how. If (in the pride of their hearts) they conceit the thing commanded be not agreeable to their birth or breeding, they will either not doe it at all; or if they doe, it will be so unseasonably, and in so ill a manner, as it would have beene better they had never meddled with it. In any case take heed you be not guilty of such diso∣bedience.
SECTION IIII. His duty towards his Ma∣sters children. IF your Master and Mistresse have any children, it shall be your part, to expresse your hearty love towards them, and that accor∣ding to their age. 1. If they bee but babes & sucklings, and it be your lot sometimes to attend them, take
heed you repine not at the office, but accept it cheerefully, and tender them as Jewells com∣mitted to your trust, and use all means you can to keepe them quiet. I have heard of some iron-hearted servants, that being put to hold such infants, not liking the office, have pricked them with pins, to make them cry all the while they are in their armes, to the end they might be delivered of that im∣ployment. Farre be it from you to practice such cruelty. 2. If they be of pret∣ty
understanding, and prone to imitate the actions they see, and learne the words they heare; let it be your care neither to doe any unseemly action in their presence, nor speak any evill word in their hea∣ring, but let all your words and gestures be such as savour of good manners and religious integrity. 3. If they be of yeeres of discretion, and for want of experience all into some errours, and commmit some faults, doe not presently complain of them to your Master
or Mistresse; but lo∣vingly admonish them of their slips, and tell them of their faults, and withall, advise them how to doe better. And if notwithstanding all this, they stubbornely persist, then threaten to tell their parents; yet do not so, except you per∣ceive them incurable by your warning and good counsell.
SECTION V. His duty towards his fel∣low servants. IF in the family there be other servants be∣side your selfe, take heed you disdaine not to be of their fellowship and society; but make your selfe equall even to them of the lower sort. And let it appeare that this you doe in∣deed,
1. By your true af∣fection towards them: and, 2. By helping them in what you can for their good. 1. First, you ought to beare a sincere and true affection towards your fellow-servants, and not from the teeth out∣ward, as is the fashion of too too many now adaies, who speake faire to their fellowes faces, but (by secret plots and whisprings) never leave till they have wrought them out of their Ma∣sters favour; hoping thereby to screw them∣selves
the faster into his liking and good opi∣nion. But by the just judgement of God it falls out oftentimes to the contrary: For, when time shall discover their false-hearted treachery, and manifest the inno∣cency of their fellowes behaviour,Sibi parat malum qui alteri parat malum. in stead of gaining their Masters favour, they deserved∣ly purchase his just dis∣pleasure. 2. Secondly, you must indeavour to help them in what you may by wholesome counsell, by good example, by ex∣hortation to vertue, by
dehortation from vice: which is contrary to the practice of many lewd servants (as heretofore in all ages, so now also) who labour to draw their fellowes to evill by evill counsell; to cor∣rupt them by wicked example; to disswade them from subjection and obedience; and to allure them to all kinde of lewdnesse and wan∣tonnesse, whence it is, that as one scab'd sheep infects a whole flocke,Vnica pra∣va pecus in∣ficit omne pecus. so one wicked servant doth oftentimes cor∣rupt and marre a whole family.
SECTION VI. His duty towards those hee is to deale with in his Masters businesse. IF your Master shall imploy you to deale with chapmen, you must observe the rules of par∣ticular justice: which is to perform the office of an even paire of scales between them, that you may wrong neither the one nor the other. There is no Trade or Calling,
but there are some sins of deceit or fraud pro∣per unto it. When you come to the knowledge thereof, you must avoid them as Satans baits to intrap your soule. And howsoever you may be perswaded that by min∣gling bad commodities with good, and by set∣ting a glosse upon ill-conditioned wares, you may rid the shop of them and get a good rate promised for them, and so ingratiate your selfe with your Master; yet the issue in the end will be naught: For, be∣sides that, the chapman
to whom they are sold, may never be able to make his mony of them, and so be disabled to pay your Master accor∣ding to covenant: even your Master also him∣selfe (if he be an honest man) will in his heart think the worse of you; that to please him, you would so wrong your conscience. Thus much in gene∣rall I thought good to warne you of in this point. But touching par∣ticular trading with chapmen, I can say no∣thing, as being out of my Element. And there∣fore
I leave you here to the honest directions of your religious Master, who I am perswaded, will command you no∣thing that shall dero∣gate from Gods Com∣mandements, or be pre∣judiciall to a good con∣science. SECTION VII. His duty towards his neighbours and ac∣quaintance. YOur neighbour prentices and ac∣quaintance
with whom you shall be conversant, or dwell neer unto, will not, perhaps, be all of a sort or disposition in re∣spect of piety and reli∣gious conversation: for though some will love you the better for your vertue; yet others, per∣chance, will deride you and scorne you for it; others will wonder, that you run not with them in the same course of riot & vanity that they doe: others it may be, will devise wicked things against you; and cunningly bring it so a∣bout by the help of the
father of lies, that it shal come to your Masters eares, to the end he may conceive an ill opinion of you, and so be aliena∣ted in affection from you. If it doe so chance, know and remember that it is fallen out no otherwise to you then it happened to Ioseph. And therefore continue still faithful and upright to∣wards God & towards all men as he did, and be sure that all will come to a blessed and happy issue. And if at any time you come to know who
this is, that hath so ma∣liciously abused you, do not recompence evil for evill, nor rebuke for re∣buke, Rom. 12.17. But persist still in your inte∣grity and honest carri∣age, that whereas they speake against you as an evill doer; they may by your good works, which they shall he hold glori∣fie God in the day of vi∣sitation, 1 Pet. 2.12 that is, in that day, when God in mercy shall looke up∣on them with the eye of pitty and compassion; and translate them out of darkenesse into his marvellous light.
Howsoever, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father wch is in heaven, Math. 5.16. that is, Let the light of religion, which you car∣ry in your heart, so shine in your conversation, that men walking even in the darknesse of ini∣quity, may see your good workes, viz. your harm∣lessenes, free from cour∣ses of injury and re∣venge; your discretion free from speeches rash and foolish; your humi∣lity free from pride and vain-glory; your peace∣ablenesse
free from bu∣sie meddling with other mens matters; your fi∣delity and plainnesse free from subtilty and worldly wisdome; your temperance and mode∣ration free from the sin∣full and excessive use of any of Gods creatures, and so may glorifie your Father which is in hea∣ven; that is, praise and magnifie his name, that hath given such graces unto men.
SECTION VIII. His duty towards his owne parents, kinsfolkes and friends. IF you have any Pa∣rents and kinsfolkes living, or any friends that have expressed their love unto you, ei∣ther by gifts or good counsell, take heed you requite them not with ingratitude and neglect of acknowledging their beneficence and good will towards you. Give
them no occasion to say, that they have cast their fish into a dry poole, or sowne their seed upon the sand.Non est dig∣nus dandis, qui non a∣git grates pro dotis. Gregor. in Moral. But be care∣full you returne them such recompence as you can, which is thankes at least. And to this end, visit them as often as you meet with a conve∣nient messenger, (and have time from your Masters businesse and religious exercises) with letters; yea, rather then faile to performe your duty in this kind, make use of some of that time that is allowed you for your owne rest in the
night, or recreation in the day. But in any case do not blot your paper with the discovery of domesticall secrets, or the least complaints of your Master or Mistris, or any of the family, though you should be hardly used, or any way ill intreated. Yet, if you finde more favour at their hands, thn you can for any desert ex∣pect, do not silence that, but by all meanes ac∣quaint your friends with it, that they may rejoice with you, and praise God for his goodnesse towards you in that re∣spect.
Thus of the Matter of your duty, in respect of it's divers objects. 2. It followes now, that I shew you in what manner you are to per∣forme these duties. It is not sufficient for you in the outward view of men, to per∣forme your duty to∣wards God your selfe, your Master & Mistris, their children, your fel∣low-servants and ac∣quaintance, your Ma∣sters chapmen, your neighbours & acquain∣tance, your Parents and kinsfolkes; except you have the approbation
of God and your owne conscience in the doing of them: which, that you may have, be sure that whatsoever you do in any of these respects, you doe it: 1. With sincerity. 2. With constancy. 3. With alacrity. 4. With Prayer. 1. You must doe all these duties in sincerity and singlnesse of heart: you must perform them really and truely, even with your very heart, and inward intention of your minde, with all your power and best in∣deavour, out of meere
conscience, because God hath commanded them, and not onely out of hope of reward, or feare of punishment. This is that perfecti∣on which God requires to be performed in his worship, Deut. 18.13. Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God. And this is that which was practised by Za∣chary, and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. They were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandements and Ordinances of the Lord blamelesse: And this is that which must com∣fort
you in all your acti∣ons, when you can truly say with St. Paul. 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoycing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sin∣cerity, not with fleshly wisedome, but by the grace of God wee have had our conversation in the world. The soule of this sin∣cerity in the practice of holy duties is humility which will discover it selfe three waies. Nisi humi∣litas omnia, quae bene sacimus, & praecesserit, & comite∣tur, & con∣secuta fue∣rit, & prae∣posita quam intuemur, & opposita cui adhaere∣amus, et im∣posita qua, reprima∣mur, &c. August. Epist. 56.1. Before the do∣ing of any duty. 2. In the doing of it. 3. After the doing of it.
1. Before you do any of these duties, you will be sure that the end you propose unto your selfe be Gods approbation, and not humane praise, or selfe profit onely, or chiefely. 2. In the doing of them you will not trust your selfe, but you will be affected with a through sense of your owne infirmity, and rest wholly upon the power of God, acknowledge∣ing, that what good so∣ever you doe, is by the strength you receive from him. 3. After the doing of
them, if men commend you, humility will prōpt you to give this modest answer: If I have done well, I was but the In∣strument in Gods hand; and therefore all the praise is to be ascribed unto him. But if I have done any thing amisse (as I doubt not but I have, for in many things we offend all) that was from my selfe, and through my owne in∣firmity, which I beseech God to pardon in me. 2. The second thing required in the manner of well doing is Con∣stancy, so saith St. Paul,
2 Thes. 3.13. Be not wea∣ry of well-doing. It will not be sufficient for you to performe these du∣ties for a fit, and by starts, to be off and on, but you must continue in wel-doing: you must continue in prayer;Col. 4.2. you must continue in faith;Act. 14.22. you must continue in love.Heb. 13.1. And in a word you must continue in the performance of all the duties you owe to any in any respect, so doth Saint Paul exhort Timo∣thy,2 Tim. 3.14. Continue thou in the things which thou hast learned, and hast been assured of, know∣ing
of whom thou hast learned them. God hath made a most mercifull promise of life everlasting, wch is the comfort of all comforts, and without which the case of Gods children were of all most miserable: But this promise is made to them, and to them alone that continue faithfull unto the end: Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithfull unto the death, and I will give thee the crowne of life: As therefore you tender the eternall sal∣vation of your soule, be constant in the perfor∣mance
of al holy duties. 3. Thirdly, you must perfome all these duties with cheerfulnesse and and alacrity; not by co∣action or constraint; not for feare of punishment, or shame of men, but freely, willingly, and gladly. You must with David delight to doe the Will of God,Psal. 40.9. and keepe his Law with∣in your heart. And if you will follow St. Pauls direction;Col. 3.23. Whatsoever you do, you must doe it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men. 4. Lastly, you must sanctifie all the duties of
your calling with praier, which is the Christians key to open the mor∣ning, and shut in the evening. CHAP. III. How hee ought to behave himselfe after hee hath accomplished the time of his apprentiship. AFter you have ac∣complished the time of your apprentiship, and are become a free-man, it may be (though you
would never so faigne) you will not be able by all the help your friends can make you, to set up for your selfe. Where∣fore my advice is this, that in any case you give not over the trade, and betake your selfe to some other calling or course of life, as too ma∣ny out of discontent or selfe-willednesse have done, to the utter ruine of their estates; but if your meanes will not fall out answerable to your minde, you must labour to frame your mind according to your meanes. And therefore,
either continue with your old Master as a journeyman for compe∣tent wages, if he will en∣tertaine you, or if not, then place your selfe with some other honest religious man of the same trade upon the like conditions, till by the fruits of your owne industry (added to that which your friends ei∣ther have already, or will bestow upon you) you have raised such a stock as with which you may be able to set up for your selfe. And all the while you are in this condition, be sure that
with sincerity, constan∣cy, cheerefulnesse and prayer, you exercise and practise all the former duties towards God, your selfe, your Ma∣ster, &c. But if you have such helpe from your friends as shall inable you to set up for your selfe, and to be your owne Master, then doe so in the name of God, and in such a manner as is usuall to men of your calling. In which I will not take upon me to direct you, as presuming you have attained the knowledge of it by the experience
of your seven yeeres service. Yet so far forth as is proper for a Divine to counsell you in that your change of conditi∣on and state of life, I will not be sparing to the uttermost of my power when time shall serve: For the present I commend to your di∣ligent perusall and con∣stant practice, these few precepts, contained in this little Manuall, which if you doe, then may you expect Gods blessing upon your en∣deavour, which will so sweeten your service, as that the seven yeeres
of your Apprentiship will seeme but a few daies. CHAP. IV. Containing the resolutions of some doubts which the conscience of a ser∣vant may desire to be resolved in. 1. Quest. WHat if my Ma∣ster cōmand mee to doe that which is unseemely, and unfit∣ting,
may I not refuse to doe it? Answ. Saint Paul bids servants obey their Ma∣sters in all things. If therefore your Master command you to doe that which in your opi∣nion may seeme to be unmeet or unfit, if he in his owne judgement do thinke it fit and expedi∣ent, though it seeme to crosse your credit, pro∣fit, ease or liking, you may not refuse to obey. 2. Quest. What if my Master command me to doe a wicked or sinfull thing, must I obey? Answ. 1. A thing may
seeme evill in your opi∣nion, which is not so in it's owne nature, where∣fore, unlesse the thing required doe appeare to be sinfull and wicked, either by the expresse Word of God, or by necessary consequence, you must obey. 2. If the thing com∣manded doe evidently appeare to be wicked, then know, that it is bet∣ter to disobey your Ma∣ster than offend God: but in refusing to obey, you must take heed of sturdy and insolent be∣haviour; you must be∣ware of provoking
words; you must ex∣presse your unwilling∣nesse in milde speeches, and intreat him not to urge you to that which goes against your con∣science to doe: as being expressely forbidden by Gods Word. For know this, that though God free you from actuall obedience of your Ma∣ster in this case, yet hee frees you not from re∣verence in the manner of your refusall to obey. Though in this case it be warrantable to dis∣obey, in respect of do∣ing, yet you must obey by suffering.
3. If the thing com∣manded be of an indif∣ferent or doubtfull na∣ture, it is better to doubt and obey, than doubt and disobey. 3. Quest. What if my Master or Mistris should have a purpose to doe any act, which, if it were done, in all likelihood would tend to the ruine of him or them, or the whole family, if it be not hindered by timely prevention; is it my part to discover it? Answ. Yes, if it be apparant in reason, that the discovery of the husbands intents to the
wife, or the wives to the husband in time, may be a means to preserve him or her, or the whole fa∣mily from destruction, or discredit; it is your duty so to doe; after the example of Nabals servants, who (by ac∣quainting their Mistris with their Masters chur∣lish answer to Davids messengers) preserved them & the whole fami∣ly from imminent de∣struction, 1 Sam 25.14. 4. Quest. If after I have served out my time, and upon triall had of the trade, I like it not; may I not law∣fully
betake my selfe to another calling that likes me better? Answ. If the calling (in which you are brought up) grow out of request, so that you cannot get an honest li∣ving in the practice of it, you may lawfully take upon you some other honest imploy∣ment, or if (for the gifts of nature and educati∣on observed in you by those that are in autho∣rity) you be called to be either a publique Ma∣gistrate or Officer, or Captaine of an army, or the like, you may in
like manner give over the trade you were brought up in. But take heed of a∣bandoning your calling upon every idle fancy, or fond conceit, or sud∣den occasion, or humo∣rous dislike, or male-contented sullennesse. The Conclusion. I Have now (by Gods helpe) finished what at first I intended. If therefore, according to these few precepts you passe the time of your Apprentiship, you shall certainly attaine the end
of your obedience; wch is to live a good and comfortable life; and even in the bonds of servitude to injoy a blessed freedome. FINIS.
Imprimatur. Guil. Bray. Novemb. 22.
