14750 99854869 20324
THE True and perfect de∣claration of the mighty army by sea, made and prepared by the generall States of the vnited Prouinces, purposely sent forth to hinder the proceedings of the King of Spaine, vnder the conduct of Peter Vander Does Generall of the said army: Together with all whatsoeuer hath bene done by the said army against the Islands, Townes, Castels, and Shippes, belonging to the said King of Spaine. As also what the said army hath gotten and wonne in the said viage; with the whole discourse of the aduentures of the said army, both in their going forth, and returning againe, from the 28. of May, 1599. vntill the 6. of March, 1600. Collected by Ellert de Ionghe, Captayne of the Artillery in the said Viage. Printed at London by Iohn Wolfe. 1600.
The true and perfect declaration of the mighty Nauy by Sea, prepared & set forth by the States of the vnited Prouinces (to hinder the pro∣ceedings of the king of Spaine) vnder the leading and conduct of Peter Vander Does, Generall of the said Nauy, shewing what the said army hath done against the Islāds, Townes, Castels, and ships of the said king, with the riches and prizes by them taken and gotten during their whole viage: as also what the said army hath performed by Sea, as wel in their viage outward, as homeward. From the 28. of May 1599. to the 6. of March 1600. gathered & col∣lected by Elbert de Ioughe, Captaine of the Artillery in the said Nauy. VPon the 28. of May 1599. The States ar∣my put to sea, out of Zealand, being in all 73. shippes, holding their course between Calis and Douer, the wind being East Northeast. The 29. of May, hauing past Calis, with an East wind, & cleare weather, in the e∣uening they had a calme, then the Generall cast ancker vnder Swartnes, which done, all the nauy did the like. The 30. of May, hauing hoysed anker, they set sayle with a North Northwest wind, keeping vpon the coast of England, and about twelue of the clock, they passed Beueside, the wind being East Northeast, they holding their course West South∣west, being close weather, which caused the Generall to sayle Westward, the better to haue the coast of Englād in sight, but all the day continued close weather, yet in the euening they had a sight of Goutstaert, and so sayling til night, they ankered not farre from Plimmouth. The 1. of Iune early in the morning, making towards land, about sixe of the clocke they arriued at Plimmouth, where the Generall sent a Pinace to land, to know if any of their ships
had arriued there, because certaine of them had sailed out of the Tassel not long before, which they thought to haue found at Plimmouth: but not finding any, about noone they set saile & departed, holding their course South Southwest: & about e∣uening hauing a side wind, they sailed West Southwest, with such darke & close weather, that they could hardly see ye lēgth of a ship from them, which caused them sometimes to shoot off muskets, somtimes slings, to let the other ships know that they were not farre frō thē, that they should not separate thēselues. The 2. of Iune, hauing a calme with close weather, they met al together, and holding their course South southwest, ha∣uing the wind East Northeast. The 3. of Iune, still hauing an East Northeast wind, they sai∣led very slowly sometimes on the lee, sometimes in the wind, to stay for certaine of their ships that were somewhat behind, and in the end being all together, the Generall held his course South southwest, all the Nauy following him, in the night ha∣uing a Southwest wind. The 4. of Iune, the General put forth 2. flags, & shot off two peeces, for a signe to call all the Captaines & Masters, to come aboord of his ship, there to hold a Marshall assembly, which was presently performed, each of them putting foorth their boates, to boord him, hauing as then past Heyssant about ten miles, with a Southwest wind, running South southeast: and in the euening hauing a Southeast wind, all the Nauy held their course South southwest. The 5. & 6. of Iune, it was calme with great clappes of thun∣der, sailing then vnder 47. degrees. The 7. of Iune, they had a West wind, whereupō the whole Nauy set their course South southwest: after that, the wind cō∣ming North, they sailed Southwest, yet very slowly, by reasō yt some of the ships were so far behind, that they could hardly be discerned, whereupon the rest of the ships staied for thē: at the same time the Generall made an order for the diuisiō of their meat, euery 6. men to haue amōg thē 5. li. of bisquit for a day. The 8. of Iune, still hauing a West wind, they held their
course South southwest: and about euening the wind falling somewhat sharpe, the whole Nauy woond about: then the wind cōming West againe, they were constrained to abate some of their sayles. The ninth of Iune, they espied the coast of Galisia, as then hauing a North-west wind, holding their course South-west, and about three of the clocke in the after noone, the whole nauie hauing turned about, & made to sea-ward, not lōg after they made towards the land again: but being too low from La Corougie, ye General caused the whole Nauie to put to sea again. The tenth of Iune, the Nauie sailing again towards the land, they had a South-west wind, and in the euening a Northwest wind, wherwith they sayled west, being not far from the land. The eleuenth of Iune, earlie in the morning, the whole Na∣uie making towards the shore, & being vnder the land, percei∣uing themselues to be as high as the Corougie, they set their course West South-west, the wind being East North-east, & a∣bout noone came before the Corougie: where being come, and staying for three of their ships that were behind, which were the ships of Cornelis Claus. Captaine Ians. and a Pinace: In the meane time they made all the preparation they could, and about one of the clocke spreading all their sayles, they put into the heauen, all together casting anker, very neere within the shot of the town: wherupon those of the Corougie shot di∣uers great peeces at thē: which dangerous ankering the nauie well perceiuing, and finding no conuenient place to land their men, about 5. a clocke in the euening they hoysed anker: which the town perceiuing, began to shoot more fiercely, but did not any hurt vnto the ships. The ankers being vp, there fell such a calme, that the shippes were in great daunger, for that the towne shot vpon them so mightily, although they could not reach them, and the shippes by reason of the calme, not well to be stered, that they had much paine and labour to hold them from the land, and the towne shot so mightily, that in a short space they had shotte at the least aboue two hun∣dred and thirtie shot, and yet could they not reach the ships,
although it seemed vnpossible, for that the ships, by reason of the calme, were driuen so neere vnder the towne, that they might haue shot into them with a musket: and the Generals ship was driuen so neere to the towne, that Captaine Rem E∣uarts, and brother Ianson, with their Pinnaces were forced to go and help him: yet in the end with great danger the whole Na∣uy got to Sea. The 12. of Iune, in the morning being somewhat distant from the land, the ships draue before the calme. The 13. of Iune, in the morning about 9. of the clocke be∣ing at the cape Finisterre, they had a Northeast wind. The 14. of Iune, hauing a stiffe Northwind, they held their course South, and South & by East, and the wind continuing, in the euening they tooke in all their sayles, letting the ships driue before the wind without sailes. The 15. of Iune, the wind lessening, they began to hoyse sailes, holding their course Southeast, & the wind still continu∣ing North, about 9. of the clocke in the morning, they discried cape Roxent, & therewith they made towards the land, purpo∣sing to do some exploit vpon Lisbon, but in the euening, the whole Nauy woond about, holding their course South, South-west. The 16. of Iune, in the morning the wind being North, they held their course South Southwest, & about the same time, the Admirall Iohn Garbrants. put forth a flagge in his sterne, de∣siring to haue certaine Pinnaces, that were vnder his quarter, to come on board of his ship: but none went aboard, but kept with the whole fleet to Leeward. The 17. of Iune, hauing a West wind, they set their course South Southwest, and about euening they perceiued among their fleet a straūge ship, & a barke with three bases, wherupon presently the Generall cōmaunded 4. of the best ships of saile in the whole Nauy to make chase after them: which ships ha∣uing taken thē, brought them before the General, who hauing spokē with them, in the end they departed friendly from each other, for it was an Englishmā. About that time Captaine Ca∣ters
ship lost the fleete, by reason that the fleete in the night time changed their course, and woond about. The 18. of Iune, the Nauie driuing before a calme, the Ge∣nerall put forth his accustomed token, to call all the captaines and masters aboard his ship, there to consult with him. The 19. of Iune, still hauing a calme, with a South-winde, order was taken by the Generall, for the landing of certaine men, whensoeuer they approached any coast. The 20. of Iune they had a calme, and helde their course South South-west. The 21. & 22. of Iune, hauing a good swift forewind, they held their course South South-west, at which time the Gene∣rall caused the whole Nauie to bee aduertised, that euerie man should behaue and rule himselfe, according to the Articles in that case prouided, and especially following the 41. and 42. Articles, the contents whereof do follow. NOTA. Whosoeuer without special cause, & that first made known vnto his officers, shal breake out of his array, where he shal be appoynted to abide, or that shall seeme to flie out of any bat∣taile or enterprise, whether it be before a towne or otherwise, he shall and may presently bee slaine or stabbed by any man whatsoeuer; & being takē and imprisoned, shal be proclaimed traitour, and in that case punished with death, without any fa∣uour. Any man being placed and set to defend any fort, sconse, or trench, whether hee be captaine or souldiour, eyther by wa∣ter or by land, shall defend and keepe the same, to the last ex∣tremitie, both with words and workes, not doing any thing to the contrarie, whereby the same should be lost without extre∣mitie, vpon paine of death, without fauour or exception. No man must giue himselfe to take any spoyle, without charge or commission, vpon paine of death. Hereunto adding, that no man should venture or be so bold to defile or deflowre any maide or woman whatsoeuer, vpon paine of death.
It was likewise commaunded by the Generall, that no man should kill or murther any woman or children, (vnlesse they were found in armes to resist) vpon paine of death. Also it was determined by the Generall, and the rest of the Captaines, the better to encourage the souldiours, as also for other causes and respects, that what prisoner soeuer should be taken, able to pay a good ransome, the tenth part of the said ransome should be giuen to the saylers and souldiours, the rest to him that tooke him prisoner. Also that when they determined to assaile the first Castle or fort, they should cause a pike with a fane to bee set vp vpon the land, and as long as the fane stirred with the wind, they should cease from shooting out of the ships against the fort or Castle. The like token should be set vp before a towne, when they would not shoote any more against it. The 23. of Iune, hauing a good fore-wind out of the North, they held their course South South-west, sending out a pin∣nace to seeke for land, for that as then they were of opini∣on not to be farre from it, which pinnace about euening retur∣ned backe againe. The 24. of Iune, still hauing a North winde, they held their course South south-west, and the sunne being South-east, they sent out three pinnaces to discrie lād, at which time the Vice-admirall of the red flag put forth another flagge, desiring cer∣taine captaines to come board his ship, whereof some boar∣ded him, & about six of the clocke in the euening they discried lād, wherunto they made, holding their course East southeast. The 25. of Iune, in the morning very earlie, they were vn∣der Lanserottes, and then held their course South South-west and by West, and in the euening discryed the Island of great Canaria, keeping the whole night vnder the Island. The 26. of Iune, in the morning very early being close vn∣der the Island, they made to the shore, meane time making preparation to land their men in small boates, approaching neere vnto the Castle, yet without danger of their shotte,
they of the castle began to shoot, but the Hollanders esteemed not thereof, but to the contrarie went so close vnto the Castle, that they might reach it with a musket. Vnder the Castle there lay three Spanish ships, whereof the greatest was by the Hollanders shot vnder water and sunke. The Castle shot hard against the Hollanders, and the ships in like sort against the Castle, especially out of the Generals ship, as also out of many of the other shippes, in such sort, that the Island seemed to be compassed about with fire: during the which shooting, the souldiours were put into small boates, and so rowed to land. The Spaniards vpon the downes neere the shore, had cer∣taine bases, wherewith they shot hard vpon the Hollanders boates, at their entring vpon the land, but the Hollanders stayed with their boates, being readie to land: for it was so appoynted, that not any man should seeme to set foote on land, but must stay hard by the Generall: also that not a∣ny of them should spread any colours, before hee should bee landed, and yet they must not doe it, before the Generall should bee on shore, who onely had an ensigne in his Pin∣nace. Those of Zealand and North-Holland were appoin∣ted to land towardes the Towne, and those of Amsterdam, and of the Maze, towards the Castle, and all at one time. The Castle perceiuing so many boates manned, beganne to shoote slowly, for that the Captaine of the Castle made his souldiours beleeue, that they had not aboue halfe a barrell of powder left, whereupon they left off shooting: whereat the Spaniards that lay in the downes, beganne to flie, and then all the boates that lay ready manned, rowed to land. First the Generalles boate: which being close by the shore, the Spaniards perceiuing, to (let him from landing) skip∣ped into the water vp to the chin, against the Generals boate, and fought so boldly with the Hollanders, that the Generall himselfe standing valiantly in the boate fighting, and ready to leape on the shore, was in the end forced to returne, and the Spaniards made so hot an assault, that a Captaine standing by
the Generall, was thrust into the arme, but diuers of the Spaniards were shot, so that in the end not many remained to make resistance. With that the Generall valiantly leaped into the wa∣ter vp to the middle: and after him followed Albert Iansen Cox ensigne, who hauing spred his colours, all the rest of the boates rowed to land, hauing giuen a great vale of shotte against the Castle. The souldiours being landed, and standing in order of battaile, being about foure thou∣sand men, the Generall caused Dammas Verloo, one that could speake good Spanish, to aske them of the Castle, if they would yeelde it vp: and hauing parled for the space of an houre, in the meane time the Generall sette vp a vane vpon a pike, to warne the shippes not to shoote against the Castle; which shooting presently ceased: and being in parle, in the end they of the Castle agreed to deliuer it vp, vpon condition, that the Spaniards should depart without a∣ny armes, which was presently done. In the which Castle the Generall placed Captaine Iohn Allerts. of Amsterdam, who entring into it, found therein fifteene great brasse pee∣ces, and sixe Iron peeces, well prouided with powder and munition, being so strong, that in a manner it was impregnable: the walks beeing at the least thirtie foote thicke. Captaine Iohn Allerts. with his companie being placed ther∣in, and the Spaniards to the number of sixtie persons gone out, the Hollanders souldiours being about foure thousand strong, marched towardes the towne: but by the way, being come to a valley not aboue a quarter of a mile from the towne, they stayed all night vntill the morning: in the meane time diuers companies of the souldiours marched to the towne, & went so close vnder the walles, that they spent the whole night in skir∣mishing with the enemie, specially the company of Dammas Verloo, where hee lost many of his men. The twentie seuenth of Iune, in the morning, their ensignes wauing in the wind, they marched towards the towne: but be∣ing
within Cannon shot of the Castle, that stood before the towne, the Castle shot mightily vpon the Hollanders, and spoyled many of their men, for they could not faile one shotte: for although they could hardly see the Hollanders, yet they shotte at the ensignes: whereby the Hollanders were con∣strained to march somewhat aside to shunne their shot: which was easie to be done, being round about cōpassed with downes: but the souldiours stayed close vnder the walles of the towne, where they stood out of danger of the enemies shotte, for that the downes were so great, that they might easily defend themselues from the shot. The Hollanders in that sort keeping themselues close, the enemie supposed that they were in minde to retire backe againe; so that beeing before fled out of the Towne, they returned into it againe, (as it was certified vnto the Hollan∣ders) to resist them, and to that end placed Ordinance vpon the hil, that lay vpon the right hand of the way vnto the shore, wherewith they did much hurt vnto the Hollanders, for that from the sayd hill they shot many of their men, and likewise shotte mightily from the Castle with diuers woodden bullets, which did much mischiefe. The Generall perceiuing no meanes to winne the Towne, vnlesse some great shotte were planted before it (for they from the hill shotte so hard, as also from the Castle, who for the want of Iron bullets, shotte bullets of Tinne and Lead, that no good on his side could bee done) vsed all the speede that might bee, to plant a batterie, and to place Ordinance before the Towne. Whereupon sending for the great peeces that lay in the Castle that Captaine Iohn Allerts. kept, placed as many of them as they could before the Towne, not without very great labour and paine: for that many times the peeces beeing drawne halfe way forward, brake their carriages, whereby that day they could bring but three peeces before the Towne, whereof two were ap∣poynted to shoote towards the hill, and therewith, (although very high to shoote vp) draue the Spaniards to such a poynt,
that they left shooting, not daring to stand close together, as they did before the Hollanders planted their Ordinance: and when the Hollanders were drawing the peeces towardes the towne, many times shot some of their men. The Hol∣landers, hauing shot eight times, did likewise cease; meane time preparing their batterie, in the night placing two De∣mie Cannons among their batterie: but in the meane time the Spaniards conuayed all their goods and treasure out of the town, not many men remaining within it, perceiuing that the Hollanders minded to winne it by force; so that they conuey∣ed all their goods vpon the hilles. The twentie eight of Iune, earlie in the morning, the two demy Cannons being placed in batterie against the Ca∣stle, Captaine Rem Euartson was appoynted with his shippe to sayle before the Towne, and to shoote at it, and they on land battered the Castle, with two peeces of Artillerie. Meane time there were three demy Cannons more pla∣ced in batterie, which were likewise appoynted to batter the Castle, so that as then they beat it with fiue peeces toge∣ther. Then they sent two companies of souldiours vpon the hill, who as then had a right path vnto the towne, the one be∣ing the companie of Monsieur Meerkercke, the other of Coro∣nell Stoem, the companie of Damas Verloo compassing be∣neath about the foote of the hill. In this sort the Generall battered the Castle with fiue peeces, so that in the end the Spaniards within the Castle forsooke it, and fled, after that the Hollanders had dischar∣ged fortie foure times vpon it: which the Generall percei∣uing, presently sent a companie of men into it, and with∣all sette fire vpon the Towne gate, thereby to make passage for the Souldiours to enter: but while the gate burnt, the Saylors could by no meanes enter into the Towne. But the two companies of Souldiours that went vp the hill, had a right path vnto the Towne, as also the companie of Damas Verloo, that compassed about the foote of the hill:
but the Saylors could not enter before the fire was ceassed and the gate emptied, for that the Spaniards had filled the gate with stones vp to the middle: but the Generall behaued himselfe so valiantly, that hee caused certaine companies with lathers to scale the walles, he himselfe in person entering with them: in the meane time, the three companies from the hill with their colours displaid, marched towards the towne, and entering, went into the market place, where they stayed to see if any re∣sistance would be made. The fire at the gate being quenched, and the stones borne away, the troupe of Amsterdam were appointed to bring 4. demy Cannons into the towne, which they must do before that any of them should enter; which was speedily performed, euery man being very diligent to worke, that they might enter into the towne, hoping to get great ri∣ches, each man thinking to do his best, but all in vayne, for the Spaniards had conuayed all their goods out of the towne. While the Demy cannons were drawing into the towne, there came a Saylor being of Flushing, out of the towne, who for the space of fiue yeeres had beene kept therein the holy house, who perceiuing Cornelis Leinsen Admirall of the Zealād ships, and for that he knew him, he fel downe at his feet, calling him his deliuerer (next vnder God) out of prison, wherein he had remained for the space of 5. yeeres: which done, hee was led before the Generall. The cōpany of Soldiers being entred into the Castle, they found in it 5. great peeces of ordinaunce. The ordinance being brought into the towne, & the troupe of Amsterdam, whose Coronell was Cornelis Remmisen, hauing vnder him 3. companies of Saylors, being entered, after him followed the troupe of Zealād, with the troupe of the Maze in Holland. Whereof one part being entered, they were com∣maunded to stay in a plaine field, vntill the Generall had ap∣pointed euery man his quarter: wherby it was very late, before the Captaines entered into their quarters, where they found the houses empty, except it were here and there some women: for the Spaniards were all fled away with their goods.
The 29. of Iune, hauing throughly searched throughout the towne, & not finding any man, the General caused certain cō∣panies of Souldiers to present thēselues before the castle that stood vpon the South side of the towne, & to sommon them to yeeld: but when they approched it, they found no man within it. Which done, one cōpany entred, wherein they left 20. soul∣diers, and in it they found 3. great peeces of ordinance, but all stopped with nailes, stones and other such like things, to make thē vnseruiceable. The rest of the cōpanies reētered the towne. This castle stood about the length of a Cānon shot southward without the towne, being very strōg, for that the one side ther∣of stood in the water, so that in a manner it was inuincible. But God, in whose power all conquests consist, had stric∣ken the Spaniards hearts with feare, for it was not wonne by force: for assure your selues, if they had holden the first castle, it would haue beene a very daungerous way to haue passed to the towne: and againe the castle that stood vpon the strand, where the ships entered, could shoote crossewise one from the other, so that not any man could haue passed without great danger. God be praised for this victory. But to returne againe vnto the matter, the company of soul∣diers being reentered, in the euening the Generall sent 10. saylors of Captaine Harman Michtels. company, & 10. of Cap∣taine Rem Euarts. cōpany their ensigne, being lieutenāt of the said captaine Rem Euarts. and euery night they were releeued, for that they lay therein in great daūger, because the Spaniards might easily haue hidden themselues in the vineyards, and se∣ing conuenient time either in the entry or issuing of the Hol∣landers, might haue cut them off. For that (as it is said before) the castle stood a Cannon shot from the towne. The 30. of Iune, there was a parle with the Spaniards touch∣ing the ransoming of the towne, or els to suffer it to be burnt: the Spaniard would giue no money, but proffered the Gene∣rall to furnish his whole Nauy with sufficient wine, saying that they had no money, wherewith they departed for that time, not effecting any thing.
The 1. of Iuly, the word of God was preached within the towne of great Canaria, in S. Annes Church, where there as∣sembled great nūbers of saylors & souldiers, as also the Gene∣rall, with al his Marshal coūsell & other Captaines: the preach∣ers text being taken out of the 103. Psalm, the people singing the 100. Psalm, thanking and praising God for the victory, all with one consent calling vpon the name of the Lord. The 2. of Iuly, a Marshall court was holden to punish two malefactors, whose sentence was to be hanged. The 3. of Iuly, the malefactors were brought forth to exe∣cutiō, & being in the market place, one of thē had his pardon, the other was hanged: at the same time there was a small mur∣muring amōg the cōmon souldiers, being desirous to chase the enemy that had fled vp into the hilles with their goods, yet no man made the Generall acquainted therewith. This murmuring still continuing, the Generall was content to permit 6. companies to go vp vpon the hilles, to chase the enemy, the companies being Captaine Iohn Lambertsen Hoy, Captaine Iochem Hendricks. Swarten hondt, Captaine Cornelis Claesen: the Ensigne being Claes Cornelisen, the sonne of Cor∣nelis Claesen, captaine Knooper, captaine Quack, and the com∣pany of captaine Moye Iaques of Rotterdam, which companies vpon the hill lost many of their men, most dying by reason of the great heat, some of them went aside to winne some pray, but before they could be releeued, many of them were slaine by the enemy: in this fury was slaine captaine Moye Iaques of Rotterdam. Coronel Cornelis Remmisen, with the company of Captaine Rem Euarts. and Captaine Harman Michelsen, had the reare∣ward, but were constrained to retire backe with losse of ma∣ny of their men, being sent forth in the hotest time of the day, and about euening returned backe againe, without doing any exploite. The 4. of Iuly, the Hollāders with their colours displaied is∣sued out of the towne, who by the Generals cōmandemēt set it on fire in diuers places, taking with thē al the great shot, bels, &
whatsoeuer the Spaniards had left behind them, but great shot was the best prize that was found within Canaria: for they found in the Island of Canaria 19. brasse, and 6. yron peeces, which were all ladē aboord the ships, without any hurt, or mis∣fortune to any man. The 6. of Iuly, the Generall put forth two flags, for a signe that all the Captaines, and Masters should go aboord his ship, that he might consult with them. Where it was ordeined, that each Captaine either of Soul∣diers or Sailers, should bring forth all the prizes, that they had gotten in the Island of great Canaria, & that vpon their oath. And that the same goods whether it were victuals, drink, or any other thing, should by the Pursers of euery ship, together with an officer of the Souldiers, and one of the Saylers, be re∣gistred, and by them openly sold, alwaies prouided that no Souldier should bestow more then the value of one moneths pay, vnles the Captaine gaue his word, or bought it with rea∣dy money. That the victuals and drinke should not be sold, but onely registred; and whosoeuer should be found, to haue concealed any thing, should be punished according to the contents of the article in that case prouided; and further, to be dismissed of his part of the prizes taken, as also that should be taken during the whole viage. Each Prouost, or any other person, that should haue intelli∣gence of any such concealed goods, or that could name any man that had concealed any thing, the said Prouost, or other person, should haue the one halfe thereof, the other halfe to be kept, for the vse & commodity of wounded men in that viage, whether they be Souldiers or Saylers. Each Purser should keepe a perfect register of all the goods found within their ships, how much they were sold for, which they should deliuer vnto the principall Secretary, to the end that the monies proceeding thereof, might be iustly and truly imployed to the vse and benefit of the whole army. It was to be vnderstood, that all the goods sold at that time, should be
brought forth, and that the buiers thereof should seeke their warrants of the sellers. The great shot found in the first Castle.   li. dz. One brasse peece, waighing 6833. 17. one brasse peece waighing 4254. 17. one peece 4142. 17. one brasse peece w. 6961. 17. one brasse peece w. 2162. 6. one brasse peece w. 4500. 38. one brasse peece w. 2115. 6. one brasse peece w. 4450. 17. one brasse peece waighing 4780. 40. More, as they entred, they found vpon the strand one field peece waighing about 2100. pound, with 2. basses of brasse. all 40197. li. Great shot found in the second Castle on the North side of the Towne.   li. One brasse peece waighing 6772 one brasse peece w. 1800 one brasse peece w. 4254 one brasse peece w. 3506 one brasse peece w. 1680 Found vpon a hill a field peece and two basses of brasse 1400   17412 Great shot found in the castle on the Southside of the Towne.   li. One brasse peece waighing 6068 one brasse peece w. 4653 one brasse peece w. 1377 and some bullets.     12098 Also all the belles, which they tooke with them.
They likewise sunke a ship lying before the first castle, that lay to be laden for the west Indies: there was also an other Spa∣nish barke, which they tooke with them, & of all the great shot taken in Canaria, one peece was sunke, & by captaine Bankes meanes, there was an other brasse peece left on shore. There was other goods brought aboord the ship (which by the Generals commaundement) was sold before the mast of e∣uery ship. They had in the towne 140. pipes of wine, and a great number of pottes of oyle. The men they lost in Ca∣naria were 1440. dead, and 60. wounded. The 6. of Iuly, the Generall commaunded captaine Ruyts ship of Rotterdam to be vnrigged, because it had a great leake, and was wholy vnseruiceable, which being on land was burnt, and in stead thereof rigged a barke by them taken in Canaria, wherein captaine Ruyt put his men, and was one of them that was appointed for the longer viage. The 7. of Iuly, lying still before Canaria, the townes-men came forth with a flagge of peace, desiring to redeeme some of the prisoners, for the enemy had taken 4. of the Hollanders, who vpon the 3. of Iuly were left vpon the hill, sicke & wholy vnable to trauell: & it appeareth that one of those 4. prisoners came from a Spaniard that had his sonne prisoner in the ship called the Orange, wherein the Generall himselfe sayled, be∣ing one of them that went out of the castle. But vpon delibe∣ration takē, answere was made them, that they should returne againe the next day. The 8. of Iuly, very early they came againe vnto the Gene∣rall, shewing him that the principall of the towne had taken their prisoners from them, as it was true. For the Spaniards would not agree to any ransome. Then the Spaniards that were prisoners, being about 60. persons, were deuided into diuers ships: which done, the Nauy put to sea, from the North end of the Island of Canaria, with a Northeast wind, and in the euening cast anker againe vnder the South end of the Island. The 9. of Iuly, being yet vnder the South end of the Island
of Canaria, many of their mē bestowed their time in lading of fresh water, & whersoeuer they went on shore, burnt al before them. The same day the Generall made a signe, that all the Pursers should go aboord his ship, there to deliuer the Regi∣sters of the goods that were sold, which they deliuered vnto Wieringhen the Generals Secretary. The 10. of Iuly, they set saile from off the South end of great Canaria, hauing calme weather, and variable ayre, but in the e∣uening they had a stiffe wind out of the Northeast, wherewith they held their course West Southwest, & by night the wind being high, they were constrained to take in their Marssailes, & to runne Northwest, holding their course to Teneriffa, min∣ding to do some exploite vpon Geracico, but not long after, they altered their mindes. The 11. & 12. of Iuly, hauing strange & hard weather, they vsed all the meanes they could to get to Gommera, the wind be∣ing as then North Northeast, with foule weather. The 13. of Iuly, hauing calme weather, they yet sought to get vnder Gommera, which they did, about 12. of the clocke at noone: with that the Generall put forth his accustomed to∣ken, to call all the Captaines and Masters aboord his shippe, where it was agreed to send three companies of souldiers into a creeke, there to take land, which was about halfe a mile from the towne, which companies should march ouer the hilles, & they in the meane time with the whole Nauy would vse all the diligence they could to get before the towne, which they did: the cōpanies being gone, the Nauy made towards the towne, where being come, they prepared themselues to land the soul∣diers, which with great diligence was done. Now lying at ancker before the towne, presently the soul∣diers and saylers were put into the small boates, attending a signe from the Generall. Then the Generall putting forth his colours, all together at one instāt they rowed to shore, which was done with great ex∣pedition, they of the towne not once making any resistāce: but as they of Canaria did flee vp into ye moūtains, not leauing any
thing behind them, and whatsoeuer they could not carry, they hid it so well that it could hardly be found. The companies of souldiers & saylers being on land, & Sen∣tinels placed, the 3. companies that were sent ouer the hilles came vnto them, who had sent 20. muskettiers out of each cō∣pany, (to see if the Spaniards would make any resistance) who descending downe the hill, perceiued certaine Asses laden by the Spaniards, which they made after, thinking to get a good prize, & to be the lighter left all their muskets: which the Spa∣niards that lay hidden in the vineyards perceiuing, left their ambustadoes, and comming forth slewe them all: in this ouer∣throw there were 58. slaine, who being dead the Spaniards stripped off all their clothes, & went away with the pray. In the meane time the three companies hauing lost 60. or at the least 58 men, entered into the towne. The 14. of Iuly, by great labour & paines taken in digging, the Hollanders found 8. pipes of wine within the groūd, which were presently laden in the Captaines ships that were appoin∣ted for the longer viage, the pipe valued at 7. pound Flemish: meane time many of the saylers brought fresh water aboord, the better to be prouided in their viage. The 15. of Iuly, being yet busied to lade water and other balast, they found two Demy cannons, which the Spaniards had buried in the earth. The 16. of Iuly, in the morning, the Generall put forth his accustomed tokens, to call the Captaines & Masters aboord his ship, where it was agreed, that the ships appointed for the lon∣ger viage, should be prouided as need required, and that they should take out of the ships appointed to returne againe into Holland, as much victuals as the said shippes could well spare: which was done, and presently thereupon laded all the wheat and rie out of the one ships into the others, against they should haue neede to bake it, for the preseruation of their liues, if the viage happened to be long. It was also concluded, that all the companies of souldiers should marche vp the hilles, to chase the enemy: meane time
the saylers should stay within the towne. So vpō the 17. of Iuly, in the morning about 2. houres before day, with a still drum they marched vp, hauing very cold and fine weather, but returned againe the same day, not doing any exployt: which done, the saylers were sent on board the ships. The 18. of Iuly, vsing great diligence in digging, they found another demy cannon and two belles. The 19. of Iuly, all the souldiours being shipped, the Ge∣nerall gaue commandement to sette the towne on fire: and at that present the souldiours were deuided and placed in the ships that should goe the longer viage. The 20. of Iuly, the Generall put foorth his accustomed signes, to call all the Captains and masters aboord his shippe, where the shippes that should goe the longer viage, were ap∣poynted, separated, and made readie to set sayle. The 21. of Iuly, all the Nauie put to sayle from Gommera, hauing the winde North-weast, and being somewhat off from the land, departed from each other, the shippes for the long viage being in all 34. The ships appoynted to returne to Holland, vsed all the meanes they could to passe betweene Teneriffa and Gomme∣ra, being in number 37. shippes great and small: but percei∣uing it to bee impossible to passe betweene the Islandes, for that beeing there it blue so stiffe, that they could hardly beare any sayle: they stroue to passe betweene Palma and Gommera, which they likewise could not passe, so that the 22.23. and 24. dayes of Iuly, they kept thereabouts: at that time the Admirall Iohn Garbrits. the Vice-admirall Logier Pe∣tersen, and the scout Cornelis Clausen, with most of the com∣panie, separated themselues from the rest of the shippes. The 25. of Iuly, holding their course South and by west, they were vnder 21. degrees. The 26. of Iuly, they held their course South and by west, with little winde, the wind being North-east and by east, with a good pleasing gale. The 27. of Iuly, the allowance of bread among the soul∣diours
was abated, because they supposed the viage would be longer then it fell out. The 28.29. and 30. of Iuly, their course beeing South-west, and by West, the wind North-west, the Captaines and Masters went all aboord the Generals ship, which dayes they mist the shippes of Brother Iansen, because it had sayled forward, and the rest of the ships changed their course: and the same day likewise, they discryed the Island of Saint Nicho∣las, being from them South-west and by west. The 31. of Iuly in the morning, they were right vnder the Island, and had almost sayled round about it, because they could finde no anker ground, so that they lette their boates sayle close vnder the Island to seeke a road, where they found two roades, wherein all the shippes might lie, about a Coluerin shot distant from the land, and twelue fadome water, and there stood three houses. The first of August, they discryed the Island of Saint Luce, distant from them West north-west: all that day they stayed by the Island of Saint Nicholas, and with their Pinna∣ces went on land, to see if they might finde fresh water for their Nauie, but they found not any. There they saw ve∣rie great Torteauxes, whereof they tooke one that weighed al∣most three hundred pound. The same day all the Captaines and Masters met on boord the Generall, to take counsell whether they should sayle to get fresh water: at last it was concluded to sayle to Isola de Maio, where certain of their sha∣lops went on land for fresh water: but by reason of the vn∣seasonable heate of the ground, they lost seuenteene men, and certaine of their shalops ouerturned. The second of August, they helde their course South-east and by east, with a calme all the day long. The third of August in the morning, they discryed the Island of Saint Iames: and the same day they took a Torteaux, hauing at the least fiue hundred egges in her belly, a hundred and fiftie of them hauing shelles, the rest without shelles, as hennes vse to haue in their bodies, beeing very great, as big as
a ball of a stiuer; with the which egges they made tanseyes, which tasted very well: of the flesh of the Torteaux, they made hodge-podge, and it tasted like bacon. The egges that were shelled, had shelles like winde-egges, wherewith they played at tennis aboord the ships, which rebounded like a tennis ball, and you must strike very hard with them before they would breake. The fourth of August in the morning they made towardes the land, and about noone ankered vnder the Island de Maio, where Generall went on shore, and there stayed till the next day at noone. The fift of August, there came a shippe vnto them, that had beene vnder fiue degrees Northward of the Equinoctiall line, to sayle to Brasilia, and was constrayned, hauing a leake, to put to the shore with them, beeing a Venetian. The Captaines name was Antonie Bolorio; the shippe was laden at Calis Malis, with wine, oyle, and other goods: which shippe and goods hee auouched to bee his, but it was found to bee contrarie, for that the Marchant beeing a Spaniard, was there present, meaning to sell their wares at Brasilia, so that both the goods and Marchant were found good prize; and the Captaine with his shippe and thirtie Pipes of wine for his necessarie prouision, let depart, because hee was a Venetian, balasing his shippe with certaine pipes of salt-water. The same day they sent out a Pinnace, with a man of warre, beeing of Zealand, to chase a shippe that they e∣spied: which shippe beeing taken, was found to bee a Por∣tingall, laden in Porta Port, with wine, oyle, linnen-cloath, Silkes and Veluets, which amounted vnto (as the Captaine of the saide shippe testified vnto them) 20000 duckets. The tenth of August, they put to sea againe, to meete the Portingall with their two shippes that went to chase him, for that the prize was so euill of sayle, that it could not make to them, but by night both shee and their two shippes came
among the fleet: and at that time also brother Iansens shippe, which had beene missing thirteene dayes, came likewise to the fleete. The 11. of August, they returned again vnto the rode, from whence the day before they had departed, where they began to vnlade their prize, which by their Marshal court was foūd lawfull; the ship and goods both being forfeit: the ship had in it eight Iron peeces. The 12. of August, there boorded thē foure men out of the Island de Maio, shewing them that in the Island there dwelt no more but foure Moores, & fiue white men: in the Island were very faire horses, that ranne about the country, and great hennes, that went as fast as a dog, and being weary with going, flew away: they are commonly taken by night in the trees, and thousands of goates. The 15. of August, the blacke dog, & Albert Ians. returned again vnto them as they lay at anker, bringing with them two Spanish barkes, each hauing three bases in them, the one vn∣laden, wherein they put diuers prisoners, and let them sayle to Saint Iacobs: the other was laden with cotten wooll, and came from Ciuill: they brought likewise a ship of Marsellis, of 100. tunnes, laden with wine and oyle. The same day there came vnto them two Netherland ships, which set sayle out of the Weelings, hauing bene fiue weekes and a halfe vpon their viage, they brought them newes that the enemie was gone to lie three miles from Bommel, and that being vnder Goutstrat, they spake with three of the ships that went for the East Indies, and with them was a pinnace, all be∣ing of Amsterdam, very richly Iaden: the two Netherland ships were sayling to the west Indies for salt. The same day they put to sayle, and departed from the Island de Maio, holding their course South South-east: the winde Northeast, with a good gale of winde. The same night the barke taken by the blacke dogge, lost both her maine mast, and her forke mast. The 21. of August, holding their course South-east, with a
good gale of wind, in the night time they lost one of their Pursers, he was sick, but no mā knew what was become of him. The 31. of August, in the morning, they fell close vpon the land of Gommera, by a high peece of ground reaching into the sea, which is called Cape de Monta, where they an∣kered, about three small miles from the land, at sixteene fa∣dome water, where, vpō the one side of the ship they foūd the water to be fresh, & on the other side salt, & East and by south from them, they saw a great riuer, all the coast of the land be∣ing full of trees; the riuer was called Rio Noua. The 1. of Septēber, they fetched fresh water out of the riuer. The fift of September, the Generall entered into a Riuer, called Rio de Puntes, where they found about thirtie wilde men, most of them naked, and amongst them was their kings sonne, who stayed alone with them in the Generalles pinnace for the space of an houre: hee brought them a tinne vessell full of sodden rice, with two sodden hennes, and the Generall gaue him a potte of twelue gallons of wine, and a boxe of Marmalade. The 6. of September, they put to sea, and that day eight Cannoes of wilde men made towards their ships, some with three, and some with foure men in a Cannoe, whereof some boorded their shippes: they held their course that day South south-east. The tenth of September in the morning, they discryed the Cape de los Palmos. The 11. of September, to the 19. they draue vpon the sea with calme weather: in the which time all the Captains & ma∣sters consulted with the Generall, about the landing of the Island of Saint Thomas, with 1400. men. The 22. of September in the morning, they discried the Island of S. Thomas, being South and by west from them. The 23. of September, they held their course Eastward, not to be discouered by those of the Island, being of opinion, that they could not enter into the roade: so that after noone, they sailed by the shore (determining to lād) to the Cape de Loupes
Gonsalues, and so to come againe on the South side of Saint Thomas, for that the roade was on the South side, but they could hardly sayle from the North side, because of the calme∣nesse vnder the land. The 24. of September, they discryed the land called Isola de Prince, distant Northeast. The 25. of Septēber, the aire being very thick and darke, as if some great tempest would haue followed, as the aire vseth to be so darke about the line, which neuer could be found other∣wise by any sayler: but where they perceiue a darke cloude in the aire, presently they take in all their sayles, for that there commeth a sodaine and terrible blast of wind, thundering and lightning, which continueth for the space of 2. or 3. houres, and by saylers is called Trauades: which gone, it is presently faire weather again: but God be thanked, they had all faire weather, not hauing any Trauades all the way vnto the Cape. The 27. of September, all the Captaines went aboord the Admirall, who gaue thē their charge to follow him, if the next day they might land in the Island of Saint Thomas. The 30. of September, all the Captaines were againe called aboord the Admirall, to appoynt good order to be holden be∣ing on land: halfe that day they sayled before the wind, that they might reach the slowest ships, and the same day there was such a number of fishes about the Admirals ship, that no man could number them, whereby they tooke them in with baskets, being as bigge as Smelts, and after them followed 2. or 3. hundred great fishes to deuoure them: whereby there rose such a noyse in the water, as if it had beene a tempest: yet was the weather very faire and calme: but there ordinarily the sea is ful of fish. One of the saylers had hanged a paire of bree∣ches ouer-boord for the space of an houre, and when hee drew them vp againe, he found in them at the least 700. fishes. The same day as diuers boates lay on boord the Admirall, one of them had the rother broken off by a fish, & diuers of the fishes leapt into the boates. The first of October at noone, they were about a mile from
the land, that is, three miles, sayling from the Cape of Loupes Gonsalues. The third of October they sayled with a good gale of winde. The fift of October in the morning, they set sayle, and by night lay vnder the land. The same day they let a prize driue vpon the sea, hauing set it on fire, but first vnladē al her goods. The sixt of October they sayled with a South-wind. The tenth of October they ankered vnder the land, hard by the Cape, where they found a ship of Amsterdam, beeing the ship which they before had discried. The same day the Admirall sent his pinnace to a riuer a∣bout foure miles from the Cape de Loupes Gonsalues, for fresh water, where they sayled about foure miles vp into the Ri∣uer: whereon there stood a great village, which with their pinnace they could not approach, by reason that the trees stood so thicke vpon the shore: and as the Pinnace sayled forward, great numbers of Monkies leaped in, and about it; at the last they shotte off a musket, whereupon present∣ly there came diuers wilde men in Cannoes of sixe foote long that brought them (hauing a little Iron and linnen-cloth which they had taken with them, to prouide some fruite, egges, and flesh for the Admirall) to the village, where they found a companie of wilde men standing with their Cap∣taine, the Captaine hauing a rustie sword vpon his shoul∣der, with an olde cappe vpon his head, which brought them presently into the village, and to their kings house, whome they found sitting making money of mother of Pearle: which money (as they sayd) he onely vsed when hee meant to buy himselfe a wife of his enemie, and no man might make such money but hee. The Hollanders beeing there, the King presently layde downe his tooles, and sate still in his seate verie stoutly, af∣ter their maner, hauing a long beard with diuers rings, paynted about his armes, and about his eyes of diuers co∣lours, with a hatte vpon his head, beeing all stucke round
about with great pinnes, in maner of a crown, in such sort, that at the first the Hollanders were abashed, for that hee seemed like a diuell: behind him sat two of his wiues, the one all black, the other all red painted, and were naked, onely that they had certaine cloathes about their priuities. Now the Hollanders standing before the King, the King spake fiue wordes one before the other: which words both they, and all the wilde men that were present, must speake af∣ter him: but the Hollanders vnderstood not what they meant: and when the words were ended, they all together clapt their hands; whereupon the Hollanders had free libertie to goe in∣to the village to bartle and buy what they would. They brought some of the Hollanders into their Temple, where they perceiued a very old blacke leane man, with a gray beard, sitting as still as if hee had beene dead, at whose feete the wilde men fell downe, for they held him for a great Pro∣phet: it is to be supposed that hee was a south-sayer, and that hee dealt with the diuell, for there they knew not what God is: when it lighteneth & thūdereth, as there it doth very sore & often, then they pray vnto their Prophet that it may cease: for their opinion is, that as then the diuel tempteth them, and that hee is supposed to bee a South-sayer: the reason was, for that one of the Hollanders had lost a peece of linnen, about tenne elles long, which some of the wilde men had stolen from him, & there was one of the wilde men that could speak Portingall, that as the Hollanders were going out of the village, shewed them thereof, and went and shewed the Captaine: where∣upon the Captain went presently backe again into the village, & to the temple, where he vnderstood who had stolen it, so that he brought the peece of linnen to them againe. In the village you shall not finde any handi-crafts men, but onely two Smithes, which made nothing else, but heades for pikes and darts, for there the wilde men make great warres against their neighbours: euerie seuen or eight miles they haue a king, by the parting of certaine riuers within the land.
The women of this village seeme to be very desirous of the company of white men, as it appeared at the Hollanders departure from them, by a Gentelman, called Lanscroen, who being compassed about by many of the women, euery one sought to haue their wil of him: but he not being willing there∣unto, got away from them. The 17. of October in the morning, they saw the Island of S. Thomas being Northwest from them, all that day with little sayle, holding Northwest, they compassed about, the better to know the land. The 19. of October in the morning, being arriued in the road of S. Thomas, presently the Generall landed, with all their souldiers, and at their landing found no resistance: & so march∣ing orderly towards the towne, they met a cōpany of men cō∣ming from the towne, who for the space of an hower shot at them, but the Hollanders lost not aboue 2. or 3. men: which done, they marched forward, and they of the towne fled into the moūtaines, so that the Hollanders were presently masters of the towne, and at their pleasures laded the goods which they found there, into their shippes. The same day, Ellert de Ionghe, Captaine of the artillery for the viage, in the name of Graue Maurice, the states of Hol∣land, & the General, summoned the castell to yeeld, their liues saued, but they refused the condition: whereupon the said El∣lert was by the said Generall sent againe, to will them to yeeld vp the castle vpon the aforesaid conditions, or if they refused, & would stay the plāting of ordināce (which was ready) before it, that then they should expect nothing but death. Which they againe denied: saying, that they had takē an oth vnto the King, so that they could not so lightly yeeld vp such a castle. The same night the battery was prepared, and by day two peeces of ordinance were planted, which they of the castle per∣ceyuing, in the morning put forth an Ensigne of peace, desi∣ring that two of their men might speake with the Generall to agree with him about the deliuery of the castle, which was graunted them, each party meeting: meane time the Hollan∣ders
placed seuen peeces to batter it. The 21. of Octob. in the morning, by agreement made, the castle was yeelded vp, the men that were in it being prisoners, vpon condition that they should be ransomed, euery man ac∣cording to his ability. The 22. of October, 200. men being sent to the second ca∣stle about an houres going from the towne, on the North side, they within the castle being afraid, fled and forsooke it, wher∣in they found three brasse peeces, which castle they presently manned, and at their departure threw it downe. The 23. of Octob. the captaine of the Artillery & captaine Loe, were appointed to march into the Island, who riding vpon two horses sent them by the enemy, presently set forward, for it was the enemies desire, and in their places two of the enemy remained as pledges: and being in the land they found a troupe of about 600. men all naked, with peeces on their shoulders, except about 40. Portingales that were among them, who notwithstāding shewed to be very weake of com∣plexion. In this Island are many slaues, some of the Portin∣gales haue 150. and he is but a meane man, that hath not at the least 3. or 400. slaues. The same day they departed, & it was on both sides agreed, that the next day they should meet againe. The 24. of October, the said captaines went againe into the Island, hauing aduertised the Generall what they had done, & within 3. houres after returning againe to make report vnto the Generall of their proceedings, they found him dead: for that when they spake with him before, his sicknes was no other but a kind of weaknes, which had continued two daies, yet did he not leaue walking and standing: whereupon hee caused himselfe to be let bloud in the arme, which being done, & fee∣ling himselfe very weake, said vnto those that were present by him, This sicknes taketh me very sore: & so laid him downe in his clothes vpō his bed, where he had not layne long, but pre∣sently being striken with death, without vttering any words he died. The same euening, certaine of the Captaines put him
in a coffin, and gaue it out, that the Generals body should be throwne into the Sea, because it should not be knowne by the enemy where they meant to bury him: wherupon he was pre∣sently conueyed into a boate, & so rowed from the land, and about midnight brought againe to land: where being ariued, without any noise they buried him in a house within the towne of S. Thomas, which house after that, with all the houses about it was burnt to ashes. Touching the ransoming of the castles, the towne and Churches were not cōprehended therein, for that their highest offer was not aboue 10. thousand Duckets. The 25. of October, they made a trench within the towne. The 27. of Octob. the peeces appointed for battery being brought thither, presently they lodged their mē in the trench. The 28. of October, in the euening the Spaniards set the towne on fire in three places. The 3. of Nouember, the Hollanders issued out of the town onely to set the country on fire. The 4. of Nouember, they shipped their men, and set all the towne on fire. The great ordinance that they found in the first castle were 21. brasse peeces great and small. First, two Double cannons, each waighing 10000. pound, their bullet being 57. pound. Ten brasse peeces waighing one with the other 3300. li. Nine basses of brasse being most of them red copper. There was likewise 3. basses of brasse, and certaine yron peeces found in the towne. The goods in the towne were certaine thousand chests of suger, and a great number of very great Elephants teeth, very much wool and silkes, with other wares, & many other things, with all the belles. Also in the road they found 2. ships ful laden with suger, ech of them being of 180. tunnes: in one of the ships there was a broken peece of ordinance of 10000. li. waight, red copper, which they meant to haue molten in Lisbon.
The 5. of October, they set saile, all the prisoners of the ca∣stle being ransomed, onely the Gouernour of the Island, & him they tooke with thē: which done, they made towards the cape de Loupes Gonsalues. The 7. of Octob. captaine Cloyer died, being Vice Admiral. The description of the Island of S. Thomas. THe Island of S. Thomas, is an Island lying right vnder the Equinoctial line, almost round, and in compasse 15. Dutch miles. In the middle of this Island stādeth a great hill, compas∣sed about with many trees, aboue, & betweene the which trees there is continually a dropping clowd, which yeeldeth so much water, that it maketh all the land about to continew moist, and very apt to bring foorth suger, by which meanes the whole Island aboūdeth so much in suger: the Island is most inhabited by Moores that gather & dresse the suger: in it there is but one small towne called Poroasan. The ayre is very vnwholesome, wherby such strangers or their issues, as dwell or come thither, commonly euery 8. daies are troubled with an ague, and lose many of their men. In it there groweth not any corne, nor wine: the principall meate of the inhabitants is a roote called Ignamo, their drinke being water or wine of Palme trees: in this Island are many trees, but fewe that beare fruit, they haue many birds of diuers colours, and some straunge beasts, as muskcats, and in the sea an innumerable number of Whales. The 8. of October, brother Iansen was chosen Vice Ad∣mirall. The 29. of October, in the morning, an assembly was made in the fleet, and it was determined among them, presently to sayle homeward, for that in the space of two dayes, that they had sayled from S. Thomas, there died in their shippes about 1032. or 33. men, and had aboue 1000. more sicke, in such maner, that they could hardly rule their ships, being as then one degree Southward from the lyne, and from S. Thomas Westward 180. miles, holding their course Northwest. The 30. of October, they draue with a calme vpon the Sea: then the Captaines of the ships agreed, that 6. of their shippes
should saile towards Brasilia, to see if they could fetch any ships from thence: the ships appointed were captaine Broer of Memelike, Admirall, captaine Leefhebber of the Maze, cap∣taine Cat of Horne, captaine Hart of the Maze, captaine Al∣bert Iohn Coxe, captaine Andreas of the Maze, the Pinnace of Peter Verdoes of the Maze, which ships the same day de∣parted. The 7. of Nouēber, the fleet not being able to passe by the salt Islands, because they lay too farre Northward from them, they were constrayned to saile almost to the Flemish Islands, hauing as then the sunne at 13. degrees. The same euening, as some of them sat eating in their ship, the captaine asked if they should haue any fresh fish that night? answere was made, no: but presently God sent them a flying fish aboord, and fell close by them as they sat at meat, being as great as a common Haddock: and because God sent them the fish so miraculously, therefore they commaunded the cooke presently to broyle it: and before it was washt & made cleane, God sent them an other, which fell against a stoole as they sat at the table. The 16. of Nouember, the captaines assembled, the shippes bearing to Leeward. The 20. of Nouember, in the morning betimes they disco∣uered a strange ship, but could not ouertake it, being the first sayle that they had seene in their returne homeward, the wea∣ther being still and cleere. The 20. of Nouember, they held to Leeward, to stay for 11. of their shippes, thinking they were behind, but could not heare any newes of them. The 23. of Nouember, in the morning, being 25. shippes together, the wind began to rise high and higher. The 24. of Nouember in the morning, they were but foure ships in company. The fiue and twentieth day of Nouember, they sayled be∣fore the wind, after three ships that lay to Leeward from
them, being of their owne company. The 31. of December, they were 5. ships in company. The first of February, the ship wherein captaine Ellert de Ionghe was, found it selfe alone without company, and so conti∣newed til the 6. of February, when it found an Englishmā that had taken a barke, wherein they were, for that their owne ship was suncke, which Englishman for the space of sixe dayes be∣fore, had had no drinke, so that the Hollander gaue them both water and wine. The tenth day the ship draue in great danger to be lost, if God had not holpen it. The 14. of February, there came to Plimmouth the shippe called the Golden Lion, wherein died III. men. Eight daies after, the Orange tree, being the Generals ship, arriued there, hauing cast 120. of 150. men ouerboord that died in her, and in the ship were but 6. sound men, the rest sicke. Being in England, the Lion and the Orange tree tooke in fresh men. The 1. of March, the ship that was left alone, went to sea, and the 9. of the same moneth it arriued in the Tassell. And all the shippes that came in either before or after it, had but few men, and were in great danger. Touching the great death of men that happened among them, was partly that there is a great heat, and an vnwhole∣some aire in the Island of Saint Thomas, because it lieth right vnder the Equinoctiall line, so that many of their men died of burning feauers, through the heate of the sunne, which bred great paine in their heads, so that in three or foure dayes they were aliue and dead, which is there called la Madorre: for by experience they found in one that died sodainely, that all the fat in his belly and guts was wholly molten, and lay at the bottome of his belly like water: this cutting of him vp was done, because diuers of their men complained of a pain in their bellies: some of them going and standing, without any sick∣nesse to bee perceiued in them, fell out of their wits, so that
foure men had sufficient to doe to hold them vntill they died▪ this madnesse proceeded from the heate of the sunne, that caused the braines in their heads to stirre or moue. Many died with eating too much of the blacke sugar, and of the great Palme-tree nuts, which haue much sweete liquor within them, wherewith they drunke themselues giddie, and thereby got a loosenesse in their bodies, as also by the blacke sugar, whereof presently insued the bloudy flix, so that many died of that disease. Many also spoyled themselues by lying naked vpon the hatches in the night time when the Moone shined (to coole thēselues) which thereabouts yeldeth a venimous vnwholsome aire, specially when men sleepe. Some vsed the companie of the blacke women, and there∣by many of them lost their liues: the women being so hot of nature, that they are wholly contrarie to the nature of white men, and not to bee esteemed as naturall heate: let an inha∣bitant therein dwelling haue to do, or accompanie with one of their women, (although she be a white woman) and the next day let himselfe bloud, hee dyeth without fayle, although he were a King. Many also died of loosenesse in their bodies, which com∣monly happeneth by long viages, specially, when they were halfe seas ouer, vnder 45. and 46. degrees: for then it was cold, such as were sick, not being able to endure it: for there they had a side winde for the space of fiue weekes, in the which time many of their men died, so that they thinke in all, that there died about a thousand eight hundred men, of loose∣nesse in their bodies, when they were in the height aforesaid, being vpon the sixt of Ianuarie 1600. It is not to be maruailed at, that they lost many men by the sicknesses aforesaid (seeing the Portingals themselues doe the like, being men of hotter conplections then we are, & borne vnder a warmer climate) & by that means haue lost many mē, as Americus Vespucius himselfe witnesseth, who not onely
writeth of the vnwholsome ayre of this Island, but also sayth that it is strange, that a man of Europa should be found in that place with gray haires, or beeing aboue fiftie yeeres of age. The Portingales are of opinion, that this sicknesse among men of Europa, commeth, because they vse to drinke often to coole their bodies, and without eating, and specially because there is little winde, whereby the ayre is more infected. FINIS.
