16619 99844418 9229
THE CONSENT OF TIME, DISCIPHERING the errors of the Grecians in their Olym∣piads, the vncertaine computation of the Ro∣manes in their Penteterydes and building of Rome, of the Persians in their accompt of Cyrus, and of the vanities of the Gentiles in fables of antiquities, disagreeing with the Hebrewes, and with the Sacred Histories in con∣sent of time. Wherein is also set downe the begin∣ning, continuance, succession, and ouer∣throwes of kings, kingdomes, States, and gouernments. BY LODOVVIK LLOID Esquire. PROVERB. 24. Vir sapiens est fortis, & vir doctus robustus. ¶ Imprinted at London by GEORGE BISHOP, and RALPH NEVVBERIE. Anno 1590.
TO THE MOST REVE∣rend, IOHN Archbishop of CANTER∣BVRIE, Primate and Metropliotane of all England, and of her Maiesties most honourable priuie Counsell. I Am bold (most reuerend) to de∣dicate the fruits of this my tra∣uaile, such as they be, vnto your Grace, who can and will defend my rash attempt in so great a cause, and yet not so great an en∣terprise of me to accuse errours, as is necessary to your Grace to defend al writers in the prouing therof. I haue presumed to write of the Consent of time, a charge wherein I confesse my selfe farre inferiour to those that haue herein much erred. Howbeit, I am the bolder en∣couraged by the assurance of my warrant which I take from the Sacred Histories the Centre and grounde of all begin∣nings, and the onely proofe of all antiquities, without which (sayeth Eusebius) no Historie can bee true: For  10. Praep. . The errours are infinite in the computation of Rome, of the time of Cyrus, of the destruction of Troy, and specially in the accompts of the Olympiads, which made all Greeke and Latine writers to go farre amisse, and to faile in consent of time very much, sometime twentie or thirtie Olympiads, sometime more, sometime lesse: the deceiptfulnes thereof, not onely holy Histories haue confounded, but whole successions
of liues haue disproued: for the Greekes (saith Iosephus) Nō tam studio & notitiaveritatis quàm suis opinionibus, mul∣ta prodidere falsa: And therefore Thucydides vsed rather to accompt the time by the Peloponesian warre, per aesta∣tes & hyemes, then by the Olympiads. Seeing then (right reuerend) that prophane writers are thus wrapped in errors by missing the true warrant of time, I tooke this my best course to prooue consent of histories by succession of Patri∣arkes, by continuance of Iudges, and by the gouernment of kings, euen from the creation of man vnto the deluge: from the deluge to the promise made to Abraham: frō the promise, to the Law giuen to Moses: from the Law giuen, to the buil∣ding of the Temple: from the Temple to the captiuitie: and from the captiuitie to the MESSIAS, truely prooued by Moses, and by the Chronicles of the kings, and last by Da∣niel, who made a perfect abstract for all Chronographers: VVherein he doeth instruct all writers, how to finde the or∣der and time of histories, for the three last Monarchies, whose Methode I followe, as much as my simple capacitie suffered me: alleaging such authorities as wrote best of euery Coun∣trey, endeuouring to auoyde the name of the Olympiads as the enemie of trueth and time. Thus I yeelde your Grace mine accompt of my proceeding for Consent of time, most humbly beseeching your L. to accept herein my good will, as one, that is to my small abilitie desirous to amend things amisse. Your Graces most humbly to vse, LODOVV. LLOYD.
TO THE READER. I Thinke my labour well bestowed, my rewarde sufficient, if my trauaile and good will be herein of the reader accep∣ted: I accuse my selfe of some rashnesse to wade into those strong streames that haue caried the best learned to a labi∣rinth of errors, who in seeking consent of time by vncerteine computations of the Gentiles, haue missed the square and perfect frame of the Pro∣phets, the streight and perfect line from Adam vnto Christ, without the which all prophane writers most grosly erre: for can any true accompt of time be made by the Romanes com∣putation, either from the building of their Citie which was from yeere to yeere, or by the censure of Lustrum, which the Grecians call Penteterides, which was from fiue yeere to fiue . yeere, or by the computation of their Indictions, which was from fifteene yeere to fifteene yeere, when neither the time of the building of Rome, or of appointing of Lustrum, or of the instituting of the indictions, are not yet knowen or agreed vpon? In like maner the olde Grecians from the time of Ninus, from the destruction of Troy, and last from the Olympiads so erred and became so fabulous in histories, and since frō their Olympiads, that Greece it selfe is called Grecia mendax: for the Olympiads is the generall cause of all errors, euen in the best learned: for Xenophon, who florished in the chiefe time of the Olympiads, yet fallax in his accusatur. The like grosse error is in the computation of the Persians of the time of Cyrus. To speake of the Egyptians accompt from the one flowing of Nilus vnto another, from one Dynastia vn∣to another: during which time they say, 340. kings reigned from the first Pharao called Amasis, vnto the last Amasis named also Pharao, farre from any true consent of time, it were super∣fluous: by this meanes Hellanicus accused Acusilaus, Acusilaus Ephorus, Ephorus Timaeus, Timaeus Herodot, and Herodot accused Hesiodus. In briefe one so accused another, that all erred in
consent of time, and that by reason of their false cōputation, without looking to the succession of the Patriarches, conti∣nuances of Iudges, reignes of kings, and without respect of the Iubilees which the Hebrues so obserued, that they coulde not erre: which if Plinie, Halicarnassaeus, Polybius, Diodorus, and the rest had obserued, they had not so disagreed, in a hundred, two hundred, three hundred, foure hundred yeeres, more or lesse from the sacred histories. Had they looked to the histories of the Hebrewes, they had found howe to auoide many inconueniences: for prophane writers of the Assyrian, Chaldean, Egyptian, and Persian histo∣ries can not but erre, for that they wrote long after the time of these kingdomes. I haue therefore for the more assu∣rance of sound warrant answered the time with the hi∣storie of the Church, and haue withall followed the best authorities both in sacred and in pro∣phane histories, as farre as my simple iudgement can reache. Lodowik Lloid.
¶ A briefe Table contayning the Argu∣ments of the histories of this Booke, with the authorities of euery Historie therunto annexed. THE HEBREVVES. OF the creation of the world, and of the continuance of the first age therein from Adam vnto Noah. Fol. 1. CHAP. 1. Of the most auncient and true historie of the Hebrewes, after cal∣led Israel: of their lawes and originall gouernment called Oli∣garchia 2 from Abraham to whome the promise was made, vnto Moses to whom the lawe was giuen. 17. Of the birth of Moses: of his fauour with God: of his gouernment ouer Isra∣el for 40. yeres in the wildernesse, and deliuerance of them from Pharaoh, 3 by the direction and instruction of God: of Ioshua his successour, and of his warres and victories, and of his good gouernment ouer Israel for 32. yeres, and of the common wealth of the Hebrewes, during the time of Moses and Ioshua, which was 72. yeeres. 26. Of the third change of common wealth of the Hebrewes, first from Oligar∣chia vnder the Patriarches: secondly from Aristocratia vnder the 4 Iudges, nowe to a Monarchie vnder kings, which Israel cried out and ne∣uer ceased vntill they had a king. 41. Of the taking away of the tenne tribes from Iuda to Samaria by Ieroboam, in the fourth yeere of Rehoboam, Salomons sonne: of the first diuision of 5 Israel: of their warres and last destructions of the kings of Israel by Sal∣manasser. 54. Of the continuance of the kings of Iuda, after the kingdome of Israel was 6 destroyed, Samaria taken, and the tenne tribes of Israel caried capitue by Salmanasser into Assyria. 68. Of the returne of the Iewes into Ierusalem after the captiuitie first by the decree of Cyrus, after by Darius, and last by Artaxerxes: of the seconde 7 building of the temple by Esdras, Nehemias, and Zorobabcl, and of the gouernment vnder the high Priest. 76. Of the Machabees, and of the last kings of Iuda, and of their gouernment 8 vnder the Romanes, and of their last destruction of Ierusalem by Titus the Emperour. 85. ¶ I haue vsed in the historie of the Hebrues for my authorities these many writers, whose names are vnder written. Moyses. Berosus. Iosephus. Eusebius. P. Eberus dereb. Iud. Sigonius. Glareanus. Melancthon. Io. Freigius de vitis patrum. M. Beroaldus. Io. Functius.
THE CHALDEANS. OF the first originall of the Chaldeans, first called Arphaxades after the CAP. 1. name of Arphaxad the third sonne of Sem, which was the first kingdome of the world: of their continuance, gouernment and last destruction by Da∣rius Medus, and Cyrus. Fol. 102. Of the rest of the kings of Assyria, from Ascatades the 18. king vnto Sarda∣napalus 2 the 36. and last king of the Assyrians, which is since the Israelits left Egypt vntill the first Olympiad, at what time Iotham raigned in Iudea. 117. Of the kings of Babylon againe called new Assyria, frō Sardanapalus which 3 the Greekes call Tonoscon Coleros, vntill Balsaar the last king of Ba∣bylon. 128. Moses. Eusebius. Berosus. Iosephus. Manethon. Tro. Pomp. Orosius. Xenophon. Zonaras. Bucholcerus. Ruffinus. Iustinus. THE EGYPTIANS. OF the originall beginning of the Egyptians, and of their continuance: 1 of their kings and gouernments: Why Egypt was called Oceana, or Nilea. 141. Of the kings of Egypt after Ramesses time, firnamed Egyptus, at what 2 time Oceana was called Egypt after the name of Egyptus before called Mizreia. 153. Of the last kings of Egypt by the name of Pharaos, which continued 1200. yeeres: and of the first conquering of Egypt by Cambyses the second king 3 of Persia. 165. Of the second conquest of Egypt by Alexander: of their kings afterward cal∣led 4 Ptolomeis, vntil the time of Caesar Augustus, by whom al Egypt was last conquered & made a prouince subiect to the Romane Empire. 177. Manethon. Herodotus. Cheremon. Diod. Sicul. Io. Annius. Blondus. Appion. Iustinus. Ruffinus. Iosephus. Melan∣cthon. THE SCYTHIANS. OF the antiquitie of the Scythians, of their lawes, gouernment and life, 1 of their hardines in warres, and of their victories ouer the Persians and Egyptians, and their often inuasions into Asia. Fol. 191. Herodo∣tus. Dio. Siculus. Plini. Melancton. Iustinus. Berosus. Strabo.
THE PARTHIANS. OF the originall of the Parthians, and of the beginning of their kingdome CAP. 1. and how long it continued: of their kings, gouernment and last destru∣ction by the Romanes in the time of Augustus Caesar. Fol. 199. Strabo. Iustinus. Solinus. Plutarchus. Liuius. Val. Max. Linus. Diodorus. Melancthon. THE MEDES. OF the antiquitie of Media, of the originall of their kings, and of their 1 common wealth, gouernment and continuance. Fol. 209. Of the first kings of Media: of their gouernment, lawes and continuance from Deiocis vntill Astyages the last king of the Medes. 214. Strabo. Zonaras. Diodorus. Orosius. Iosephus. Pomp. Mela. Trog. Pomp. Ruffinus. OF LYDIA. OF the antiquitie of Lydia: of the originall of their kings, and of their 1 common wealth and gouernment. Fol. 223. Of the rest of the kings of Lydia, from Ardis the sixt king, vntill Croesus the last king of Lydia, and of their destruction by Cyrus, and the kingdome brought subiect to Persia. 229. Eusebius. Ruffinus. Herodot. Diodor. & Functius. Trogus Pompeius. Strabo. Pomp. Mela. Melancthon. Appianus. OF PERSIA. OF the first originall of Persians: of the antiquitie of their kings, of their 1 common wealth and gouernment: of their continuance, and howe they haue bene called the great kings by the meanes & dignitie of Cyrus. 238. Of the two Magi that vsurped Persia after Cambyses time: of Darius Hi∣staspis, 2 and his good gouernment of Xerxes the great, and his warres in Greece: of his ignominious flight from Greece, and of his death in Per∣sia after his flight. 249. Of the successors of Xerxes in Persia: of their warres, victories and gouern∣ment: of the state of Greece, and of the prosperities, victories and fame 3 they had in Xerxes time. 258. Of the tyrannie of Darius Ochus: of his sonne Arsames, and of the vtter 4 confusion and last ruine of the Persians in the time of their last king Da∣rius, sirnamed Codomanus, by Alexander the great. 267.
Of the state of the Persians vnder the Romans after the time that they were conquered by Alexander the great, vntill the time of Alex. Seuerus Em∣perour 5 of Rome 550. yeres after, at what time began the new kingdome of Persia, by one Artaxerxes, and of his successours, vntill the Persians the fourth time were vtterly destroyed by the Saracens. 278. Xenophon. Iosephus. Io. Functius. Dion. Zonaras. Strabo. Herodotus. L. Florus. Q. Curtius. Iustinus. Io. Monachus. Dio. Halicarnas. OF MAHOMET. OF the originall of Mahomet in Arabia: of his greatnesse and credite not CAP. 1. onely among the Saracens and Arabians, but also in the East kingdoms: of the inuasions of the Saracens: of their scattering warres in Asia, Eu∣rope, and in Affrike, and of their continuance. Fol. 289. Pau. Aemilius. Blondus. Maspeus. Iornandus de Get. Chron. Pol. Bonfinus de Hung. Functius. OF THE TVRKES. OF the great Turke, and of his kindome from Othoman the first, vntill 1 Selimus the 11. of the two Empires of Constantinople and Trapezun∣tium, which nowe the Turkes doe gouerne: of their beginning, and of their first seruice vnder Basilius Macedo Emperour of Constanti∣nople. 302. Egnatius. Paul. Iouius. Chromerus Pol. Blondus. Bonfinus. Functius. OF GREECE. OF the antiquitie of Greece: of the beginning of their cities and Com∣mon wealth, of their lawes and gouernments by degrees, during yet the 1 infancie of Greece. 311. Of the building of Athens: of their beginning, and of their first lawes vnder 17. kings, being the thirde kingdome of Greece in antiquitie after the 2 Sicionians and the Argiues. 320. Of the originall beginning of the kings of the Lacedemonians, and of the kings of Corinth, who at one time beganne their gouernment vnder the 3 state of Monarchie, and also ended about one time: of their gouernment and continuance. 327.
Of the generall gouernment in all the cities of Greece from Lycurgus time the king and the lawmaker in Sparta, vntill the comming of Xerxes the 4 great, the 4. king of Persia into Greece: of Lycurgus lawes among the Lacedemonians, and of Solons lawes among the Athenians. 333. Of the huge armie of Xerxes, of his preparations both by lande and by sea, of 5 the pompe and pride of Xerxes in his iourney to Greece, of his shamefull great ouerthrow and ignominious flight from Greece againe into Persia, and of the flourishing state of Greece at that time. 339. Of the ciuill discention in Greece after Xerxes time: howe euery citie was 6 in armes one against another: of their Peloponesian warre which conti∣nued 27. yeeeres, to the ouerthrow of Greece by Philip, and after by his sonne Alexander the great. 347. Of the last destruction of Greece by the Macedonians, by meanes of ciuill discord and the Peloponesian warres, the onely cause of their ruine and 7 confusion: at what time king Philippe brake their backes, and his sonne Alexander their neckes. And after them last of all the Romanes kept them in perpetuall seruitude. 362. Eusebius. Iosephus. Zonaras. Theo. Bibliander. Strabo, & Xenoph. Thucydides. Herodotus. Plutarchus. Archilogus. Diod. Siculus. Functius. Orosius. OF THE MACEDONIANS. OF the kingdome of Macedonia: of their continuance, lawes, and go∣uernment, of their kings, and of their warres, vntill the time of Alex∣ander. CAP. 1. Fol. 372. Of the renowme and fame of Macedonia, during the raigne of Alexander 2 the great, of his conquests and victories ouer all the East: of his dangerous warrs in India, Egypt, and in Scythia, and of the subduing of Darius, and the taking away of the Monarchie from Persia into Macedonia. 382. Of the diuision of Asia and Syria after the death of Alexander the great, be∣tweene his captaines: for hee left no king to succeede after him but the 3 sword. So many kingdomes were voyde by his death, that his captaines that fought then vnder Alexander for wages and spoiles, fought now for king∣domes and Empires. Of their warres, and of their continuance. 393. Of the Romane warres with king Philip, and his sonne Perseus, the two last 4 kings of Macedonia: of their ouerthrow by Paul. Aemilius, and of the ouerthrow of false Philip and counterfaite Andriscus, by Q. Metellus in his last conquest of Macedonia. 404. Glareanus. Theo. Bibliand. Plutarchus. Q. Curt. & Liui. Plinius. M. Scotus. Orosius. Florus.
ASIA AND SYRIA. OF the warres of the kings of Asia and Syria with the Romanes: of their succession in the warres, and of the continuance of their kingdome after CAP. 1. Alexanders death. Fol. 413. Of that wicked and most blasphemous king Antiochus Epiphanes, sonne to Antiochus the great, and the type of Antichrist: of his vsurpation and ty∣rannie 2 of the kingdome: of his sacking and crueltie in Ierusalem: of his bloody warres, and persecutions of the Christians. 420. Of the last destruction of Asia and Syria through their ciuill dissention and long warres one against another, the onely cause of their bondage after∣ward 3 to the Romanes, vnder whom they liued as subiects, and all Asia and Syria made prouinces vnto Rome. 429. Eusebius. Appianus. Eutropius. Valerius Max. L. Florus. Liuius. Functius. and the Machabees. AFFRIKE AND LIBYA. OF the first Affricane warres betweene the Carthagineans and the Ro∣manes, 1 which continued 24. yeeres, and of the victories of the Romanes ouer them. Fol. 436. Of the second Affricane warres betweene the Carthagineans and the Ro∣manes, 2 which endured 17. yeeres: during which time Hanibal held terri∣ble warres with the Romanes, which brought the Empire of Rome well nigh to Carthage, but at last by Scipio Affricanus the warres were en∣ded, Carthage ouerthrowen, Affrica wonne, and Hanibal forced to flee. 443. Of the thirde and last Affricane warres betweene the Romanes and the Carthagineans, which endured foure yeeres: of the ouerthrowe of Car∣thage 3 and Numantia: of the ruine and last conquest of Affrica by the Romanes. 453. Liuius. Appianus. Plinius. Polybius. Orosius. Eutropius. Dionys. Halic. Val. Maximus. L. Florus. Frontinus. And all the Ro∣manes. OF ITALIE. OF the antiquitie of olde Italie first called Ianicula, and then Saturnia: 1 of the beginning of the kings of the Latines, the first kingdome of Ita∣lie:
of their lawes, and gouernment from Faunus vnto Aeneas, and from Aeneas vntill Romulus. Fol. 459. OF THE ROMANES. OF the first building of Rome by Romulus: of his gouernment, lawes, and CHAP. 1. appointing of Magistrates after he had founded the Citie: of his warres with the Sabines: of his conquestes and victories ouer these Sabines, Fi∣denates, and of his triumph ouer king Acron. 467. Of the gouernment, lawes, and orders of Rome after Numa Pomp. time, 2 vntill the ende of Tarquinius the proud, the last king of Rome: of their warres and victories during this time ouer their neighbours about them: of the enlargement of the Citie of Rome, and of their territories, and last of the banishment of their king. 480. Of the first change of gouernment in Rome from a monarchie vnto Aristo∣cratia, at what time one Dictator and two Consuls were appointed to go∣uerne 3 the people in the roome of kings: of their good gouernment, lawes, warres, and victories, vntill the Tarentine warres where Pyrrhus began to ayde the Tarentines against the Romanes. 493. Of the warres and victories of the Romanes ouer king Pyrrhus called the 4 Tarentine warres, vntill the Carthaginean warres: of their victories and triumphs had ouer Italie, with diuers other forraigne nations and king∣domes. 507. Of the Romane warres, and of their conquest ouer Carthage, Numantia, 5 and all Asia, and of their diuers victories and triumphs ouer other nations, during the time of this Affricane warres. 514. Of the conspiracie of Lucius Catilina, and of the two ciuill warres, the first 6 betweene Marius and Silla: and the second betweene Pompei the great, and Iu. Caesar, during which time Carthage and Numantia were sub∣dued in Hispaine, and the last conquest of Affrica by Scipio the younger, and also surnamed Affricanus the younger. 524. Of the alteration and change of the common wealth of Rome from Aristo∣cratia to Monarchia againe: as before from kings to Consuls, so nowe from 7 Consuls to Emperours, the state was altered by Iu. Caesar the first Empe∣rour and last Dictator of Rome, and so from Iu. Caesar vnto the ende of Nero, which was the last of the progenie of Augustus. 536. From Nero the tyraunt the sixt Emperour of Rome, vntill the time of Lu. 8 Antoninus Commodus the cruell the 18. Emperour, a match meete for Nero, in the one the stocke of Caesar was extinguished, in the other the blood of Antoninus ended and quite failed, two Emperours of like condi∣tion and maners: of the gouernment of them ouer Rome from Nero to Commodus, during which time reigned 12. Emperours. 550.
Of the good Emperour M. Antoninus, surnamed the Philosopher, and of his 9 sonne Cōmodus: of the difference in their gouernment: of the loue which the father had in Rome, and of the hatred and contempt which the sonne had: of the murthers and slaughter of diuers Emperours from M. Antoni∣nus the 17. Emperor, vntill the time of Dioclesian the 38. emperor. 562. Of the rest of the Emperours of Rome after Dioclesians time, at what time 10 their Empire at Rome beganne to decay: for that the dignitie of the olde Emperours were diminished by reason that Constantinople whom Con∣stantine the great had so enriched and beautifiedwith their auncient mo∣numents of Rome, that olde Rome was hereby defaced, and newe Rome thereby florished, so that the Empire was diuided betweene two Emperours, the one to be at Constantinople, the other at Rome. 576. Liuius. Trogus Pomp. Florus. Valerius Max. Eutropius. Suetonius. Egnatius. Tacitus. Voriscus. Cassiodorus. Blondus. Iosephus. Plinius. Appianus. Sabellicus. Orosius. Beroaldus. Polybius. Dionys. Halicar. Herodianus. Fūctius with others. THE TRYALL OF MARTYRS. OF the try all of the Martyrs of God in the primitiue Church, from the first CAP. 1. persecution vnder Tiberius the third Emperour, in the which Stephen was stoned, Iames beheaded, Philip hanged, with infinite more tormented and persecuted, vntill the third persecution which began vnder Domitian the twelfth Emperour of Rome. Fol. 587. From the third persecution vnder Domitian the 12. Emperour, vnto the sixt 2 persecution vnder Sept. Seuerus the 22. Emperour: of the constancie of faithfull Martyrs euery where in the Church of God: of their godly liues, their deaths, and their glorious victorie ouer Satan. 593. Of the tyranny of time frō the sixt persecution vnder Seuerus, vntil the ninth persecution vnder Dioclesian the Emperour: of the zeale and constan∣cie 3 of the godly in their martyrdome, and of the tyranny and wickednesse of the kings of Persia, and of the Emperours of Rome at that time in the persecution of the Church. 600. From Dioclesian vnder whom the vehementest persecution of any reigned, 4 vntill the reigne of Alexander Seuerus: by whose good meanes and great traueile persecution somewhat slakt, at what time diuers heresies began fresh in many places of Asia and Europe. 608. Eusebius. Euagrius. Ireneus and Functius table.
OF SPAINE. OF the antiquitie of Spaine, and of the originall of their kings, and of their continuance from Tubal vntill Hispanus: during which time they were CHAP. 1. called by diuerse seuerall names, as Caetubales, Hiberi, Celtiberi, and Hispani. Fol. 617. From the time of Hispanus, by whom they were called Hispaniards, vntil the 2 monarchie and the names of kings ended, after what time Spaine was di∣uided into peculiar prouinces and seuerall dominions, after the reigne and gouernmēt of 24. kings frō Caetubal the first, vnto Mellicola the last. 626. From the dissolution and change of the kingdome of Hispaine into prouinces and dominions, vntill they were subdued by the Carthagineans and Affri∣canes, 3 vnder whom they were subiects, vntill Scipio Affricanus time, at what time both Affrica, Carthage, and Hispaine were made tributaries vnto Rome. 633. From the time that the Romanes conquered Hispaine, vnto the time of the Vandales the third conquest of Hispaine, and from the Vandales vnto 4 the Gothes victorie ouer Hispaine, the fourth conquest from the Gothes vnto the Saracens the fift conquest of Hispaine. 641. From the time that the Saracens possessed Hispaine, vntill the time of Ferdi∣nandus the great, and Alphonsus king of Aragon, which were the onely 5 first two kings that possessed all Hispaine, from the first monarchie of their kings, which was 2400. and odde yeeres: so base a countrie was Spaine, and conquered so many times, vntill Ferdinandus time. 647. For the histories of old Hispaine fewe haue written of it, as Annius, Ma∣nethon: but since they were conquered by the Romanes, all Romane writers speake of them by the reason of the Affricane warres, as Liui. Trogus Pomp. Lu. Florus. Blondus. Beroaldus. Functius and ma∣ny more of late But of olde His∣paine Io. Annius. Manethon. Diodorus Siculus. Ritius. Iornandus. Boufinus. OF GALLOGRAECIA. OF the beginning and original of the natiō which was called Galgreekes, 1 or Gallograecians: of their inuasions, spoile, and slaughter in many coun∣tries in Asia: and of their ouerthrowe by Cn. Manlius, who with great pompe triumphed ouer them at Rome. 655. From Francus the 16. king of Fraunce, then called Sicambri, vntill the time 2 of Farabertus the 12. in number after Francus: of the warres, inuasions, and victories: of the enlargement of their kingdome from one king to ano∣ther,
vntill Farabertus gouernment, during which time they were called Franci, after the name of Francus. 669. Of the continuall warres which the Frenchmen had still in seeking for the quiet possession and the whole gouernment of all Fraunce, from the time of 3 Farabertus, vntill the time of Pharamundus, during which time they were called Franci: for as they were before called Sicambri from Marco∣mirus vnto Francus foure hundred and odde yeeres: so nowe from Fran∣cus vnto Pharamundus they were called Franci foure hundred and odde yeeres, that wellnigh nine hundred yeeres they were before they coulde pos∣sesse the kingdome of Fraunce. 675. From Faramundus the first king that had all Fraunce in his hand, and from 4 whom al Historians and Chronographers beginne the historie of Fraunce, who beganne his reigne in Fraunce in the yeere of our Lorde and Sauiour 420. of the lawes, gouernment, and warres from that time vnto Clodo∣uaeus the first Christian king of Fraunce, and so vnto Clodouaeus the se∣cond of that name, and the 12. king after Pharamundus. 684. From Clodouaeus the second who began his reigne 645. vntill the reigne and gouernment of Charles the great, the patrone and onely mirror of France, 5 by whom chiefely the Frenchmen florished in famous renowme, and in whō all the lawes, relikes, and monuments are established. 697. From Charles the great, the onely king of Fraunce in fame, of whome all the states of Fraunce holde their lawes, monuments, and other ceremonies be∣longing 6 to their inaugurations, crowning, and their seuerall pompe: of his warres and victories against the Saracens: of his diuers conquests euery where, and of the taking of the Empire into Germany. 703. Tritemius. Pau. Aemilius. Arnol. Ferronus. Io. Tilius. Ritius. Blondus. Beroaldus. Plutarch. Functius. T. Liuius. Diodor. Siculus. The briese for Britaine I gathered out of these Authors. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus. Diodorus Siculus. Strabo. Gildas. Giraldus. Guidonius. Ponticus Verrunnius. Iu. Caesar.
OF THE CREATION OF the world, and of the continuance of the first age therein from Adam vnto Noah. IN the beginning of all be∣ginnings, The creation of the world. when GOD had made the vniuersal frame of the whole world of nothing, the earth being without forme or shape, couered with water, and the water couered with darke∣nesse: The first creature that was made, was light, of some lear∣ned Isido. lib. 5. men supposed to bee the creation of Angels: for the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres were created the fourth day, the rest of the sixe daies workes is set foorth by Moses in Genesis, all liuing creatures, all creeping wormes, all things in heauen aboue, and all things in earth below were created to set foorth the glory of God, and to magnifie his name, and God sawe that all which he did was good, and therfore bles∣sed them, and by vertue of his eternall word commaunded them to multiplie and to engender. He commaunded both fish and fowle, the one to flie aboue in the aire, the other to swimme belowe in the water, for fish and fowle had one be∣ginning.
He commaunded all the rest of his creatures to o∣bey man, because man should serue and obey God: all crea∣tures were created for the vse of man, and for the glory of God, such was the loue of God towards man. When God had made this great tabernacle of the world in such perfect frame, in such wonderfull perfection, that the very perfecti∣on thereof (as the Philosopher saieth) might see and say, Ex effectis, There is a God, the workemanship hereof is aboue farre the reach of man, Quia ipse dixit, & facta sunt, and there∣fore Paul to the Hebrewes saieth, that wee must vnderstand through faith, that the world was ordained by the word of GOD, and the things which wee see were not made of things that did appeare: for God made all things of no∣thing, against the rules of Philosophie, Ex nihilo nihil fit, though Plato did his best to make some comparison (as farre as his sence could see) of this great worke with Art, ap∣plying to the earth, to the water, to the aire, and to the fire, the most perfect kindes of squares, and most exquisite frames and formes of Geometrie, which the learned may read to satisfie himselfe: and the whole vniuersall frame by the saedri. Tetraedri. Octoedri. names and qualities of sensible Elements, the earth her forme, the water, the aire, and the fire to haue theirs, com∣pared to Dodecaedri. Cicero likewise, to whom I referre the Reader that is desirous to heare a full praise at large in parti∣culars, Dodecaedri. Read Plato, and Io. Phrig. the varietie, beautie, perfection, harmonie, and the diuine excellencie of this worke, deuised and made by God to man: but let sence sleepe in so great a matter, let Plato and Cicero lib. denat. deorum. Cicero keepe silence of that they know not, let Moses the man of God, not with sence but with faith, certifie you in this, and heare what God sayd to Iob concerning his workes: Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Iob 38. who hath laid the measures thereof? or who hath stretched the line ouer it? whereupon is the foundation of the earth set? or who laid the corner stone thereof? or who hath shut vp the sea with doores and set barres on it? who said to the sea, Hitherto shalt thou come, and no further? where is the
way where light dwelleth? or where is the place of darke∣nesse? hast thou perceiued the breadth of the earth? or haue the gates of death opened vnto thee? Read the whole chap∣ter, and there you shall read of the weakenesse of man to find out the workes of God, & of the power of God in his works: which worke being finished with all creatures therein sauing MAN, of whose creation hee taketh councell of his Wise∣dome & Vertue, purposing to make a more excellent crea∣ture of man then the rest: and to the intent that man should not glory in the excellencie of his owne nature, he sheweth whereof mans body was created, of the slime and dust of the earth. God saieth, Let vs make man to our owne likenesse, in The creation of man. righteousnesse and holinesse, in all innocencie and perfecti∣on. So Manilius saith, Exemplúmque Dei quisque est in imagine parua, and for that man should not bee alone without helpe or comfort, God made a woman to liue in societie of man for euer. And God said, Let man rule ouer the fish of the sea, and ouer the foules of heauen, and ouer the beastes of the earth, and ouer euery thing that creepeth or mooueth vpon the earth: and this great liberalitie of God towards man, ta∣keth away all excuse of mans ingratitude, sith God left all things to man, and created man to his owne image, and na∣med him Adam the last creature made: and as hee was the last, so was he the best creature made: for in man God rested Tanquam in suo templo & domicilio, in man God so delighted, that hee endued him with Wisedome, Iustice, felicitie on earth, that God might be serued and glorified by man, for all creatures were made to serue man, that man might serue God in his creatures. God laied before man good and bad, life and death, God made man lord ouer all the earth, and to haue soueraigntie ouer the whole world, God placed man in a sweete, pleasant, and a delicate garden, in the Man placed in Eden. garden of Eden, named so of the Hebrewes for the delica∣cie thereof, of the Graecians named , for the aboundan∣cie of pleasure therein, and in the Persian tongue called Pa∣radice, for so the kings of Persia doe name their delicate gar∣dens
and pleasant orchardes, there might Adam liue for e∣uer without feeling of sinne or tasting of death, had hee not oph. i . disobeied God. This Paradise was set in the East part of the earth, a place by report of the best learned most temperate and fertile. So Aristotle and Hippocrates affirme, saying, Omnia pulchriora in Asia nasci & meliora. This place is of the Prophet Ezechiel thus commended, Quòd facie ad orientem conuersa ado∣rarent: and Esay saieth, Iustitiam ab oriente proficisci, that is, Righteousnesse should come from the East, meaning the Messias to come. In the East the starre appeared to the wise∣men, in this place the pleasant riuers which commonly are called the foure fluds of Paradice, doe spring in this gar∣den. Hence doeth Euphrates take her course and runneth through Babylon and Mesopotamia: hence doth Ganges spring to India: and compasseth all Aethiopia, from this garden doth Nilus ouerflow all Aegypt, and from this place doeth Tigris, so called for her swiftnesse, passe through Assyria. Moses na∣meth them in the Hebrue tongue otherwaies, which I laied downe in the margent. This garden did much excel the gar∣den Pishon. Gion. Childekel. Phrat. of Alcinois, or the Orchard of Hesperides, or the delicate valeys of Thessalie, Tempe Thessalicum, or the Isles Fortunate. This pleasant place and the fame of Paradise, and the report of the pleasure of that place, was heard of amongst the Hea∣thens: for it is written of Iohn Freigius, that the figure of Py∣thagoras letter was put vp in Samo to signifie the state of man Pytlgo. letter. as a figure of the tree of knowledge. In this happie place God commanded Adam and Eue to dwell, and there all crea∣tures were brought before Adam, and he named them vpon the sight: a true argument to prooue the wisedom and per∣fection of Adam by his creation, a thing more proper to God then to man. So Plato could say, , That Plato in Cra∣. God gaue to euery creature his owne name in the begin∣ning. In trueth God gaue him that great wisedome, that he could and did name all liuing creatures, and God gaue him soueraigntie and dominion ouer all the earth, and all the creatures therein, saying, Subijcite vobis terram & dominamini.
The possession of Adam was much, to be an Emperour of the whole world, a commander of all the whole earth, but in the midst of this great blisse, the contempt of God and vnthank∣fulnesse to God ouerthrew Adam: for Satan taking vpon him the forme of a serpent, a murtherer from his originall, Iohn 7. and a lier from the beginning, the ancient enemie of Man, enuying the happy estate and the great felicitie of Adam, fell in friendship with Eue, entising her to eate of the forbidden fruite, saying: If thou eate of the tree of knowledge, your eies shall be open, you shall know both good and bad, and you shall bee as GOD himselfe. Eua streight conceiued by the wordes of the serpent the destruction of man, and was enti∣sed to say with the Poet, Vt vidi, vt perij, vt me malus abstulit error? tooke the fruite, ate it, and gaue it to Adam to eate. Here sinne entered into man, here death entered into the world. This disobedience Ingens malorum Chaos, brought A∣dam and all his posterities into bondage: by this transgressi∣on man lost the fauour of God and the possession of Paradise for not keeping Gods commandement. The image of God was obscured in man, and for sinne sake the whole earth was cursed, that Hinc infoelix lolium & steriles dominantur auenae. thus by one man sinne entered vnto the world, and death by Rom. 5. sinne. This contempt of God through vnthankfulnesse, lost all the benefites of God which he gaue to man in his creation. The commandement broken by Adam, the church deuided by Cain, marriage corrupted by Lamech, that which should bee a testimonie of mans obedience towards God in man, was broken by man, all the blessings of God which God cre∣ated for man, in sixe dayes Adam lost, in sixe houres: and for that I wrote sixe houres, some of the best learned affirme The opinion of the learned concerning Adams conti∣nuance in Paradise be∣fore his fall. that Adam fell within sixe houres after his creation, some nine, some twelue: but all conclude that Adam fell the same day wherein hee was created, and was the same day put out of Paradise: for as the first man sinned and disobeyed God, and became equal to the beast, Caluine. Plinie saith that Adam
and Eue fell the same day that they were created, 27. I thinke that out of Moses it may be gathered, that Adam and Eue did Clemens fol. 128 not long retaine the dignitie they had receiued: for as soone as Moses said they were created, without any mention made of any other thing, he passeth to the fall, which was before that Adā knew his wife, which is to be in Genesis read, for had he dwelled with his wife any long time, surely the blessings of God should not haue bene in vaine, and therefore Moses Gen. 4. signifieth they were depriued of Gods benefits before pro∣pagation of issue: whereby it seemeth streight after the crea∣tion before they had accompanied, their transgression fell, by which they were commaunded to depart from the place of happinesse, for the deuill who hath bene a murtherer, a li∣er and a sinner from the beginning, euen in the first man played his part to hasten the fall immediately after the crea∣tion of Adam, and from thence neuer ceased to spred abroad his poison amongst men. Diuers of the Iewes Rabbies were of opinion that Adam in Paradise continued not a night: and first Abba a great do∣ctor Loar fol. 109. of the Iewes saieth, when Adam and Eue were planted, they were as it is written, a spring of my planting, the worke of my handes to be delighted in. Againe it is written, what day thou wast planted, thou diddest wander from me: for in that day they were planted in the world, they were vnited, and the same day they rebelled. Againe, in the Sabboths eue Adam was created, in the which day all these things fell out in order as the Rabbie Midras setteth downe, that the Sab∣both Midras  Psal. 92. comming on, hastened Adam out of Paradise. First, God purposed the making of man: Secondly, that he should raigne with Angels: Thirdly, God gathered his clay, God formed it, framed and breathed life vnto it. God set man in Paradise, charged him with a commaundement, but Adam transgressed the same day, he was condemned the same day, and driuen out of Paradise the same day, for God came in the coole of the day to giue sentence against Adam, and the Sabboth comming on, did rid him thence: for the Angels
cried concerning him, Adam in honour and dignitie will not continue a night, but he became like the beast that peri∣sheth, Rabbi Mena∣hem, fol. 9. vpon Moses. for the same day in the which the first man was crea∣ted, it was committed to the extremitie. The same words or the like doeth doctor Bochay rehearse. The first houre Adams mould was gathered, and so with those termes as Midras be∣fore rehersed, the eleuenth he was iudged a transgresser, the twelfth he was driuen out of Paradise, and so concluded as is sayd before, Adam in honour did not lodge a night, he be∣came like the beasts that perish. So the Iewes Rabbies handle this in their booke called Drash, at large, agreeing in one o∣pinion. But some of them were more curious then need re∣quired in seeking out the very houres of Adams continuance in Paradise. Some would haue it the fixt houre as Augustine Theoph. & August. sixe houres. writeth and holdeth it so, and of this opinion is Theophilactus who saieth, As man was formed the sixt day, so he did eate of the tree the sixt houre. Some would haue it the ninth houre, as Thomas Aquinas, & some would haue it the twelfth Thom. Aquinas nine houres. Bochay twelue houres. houre as doctor Bochay, but the day is agreed vpon, and their opinion hath bene euery where receiued. I will bring two or three more testimonies to confirme the wordes before. Rab∣bi Nathan writeth thus: the same day that Adam was formed: Rabbi Nathan. the same day that his members were knit, and his veines o∣pened: the same day that life was put in him: the same day that he stood first on his feete: the same day that Euah was maried vnto him: the same day that hee gaue names to all the creatures: the same day that hee entered into Paradise: the same day that God gaue him the commaundement: the same day Adam disobeyed: and the same day he was driuen out of Paradise. No doubt as soone as man was created, Sa∣tan sought mans destruction, and had a wicked desire to hate him, he went with all his might to destroy man, and working errour and rebellion in our first parents Adam and Eue, hee slew all mankind. The same murtherer within a while after armed Caine to destroy his brother Abel. Because Adam tru∣sted too much in his owne aboundancie, and thought neuer Cedrenus.
to be mooued, the Lord turned away his face from him, and therefore the same day wherein Adam was made, he trans∣gressed Mariaenus Sco∣tus. Gods commaundement. And Beda our owne coun∣triman sayd, that Adam was formed the sixt day in which he sinned, and therefore died: for it was meete in reason, that the same day the second Adam for the saluation of mākind should sanctifie vnto himselfe his spouse the Church, in which he had created the first Adam the father of mankind, & taking a ribbe out of his side, made a woman: for as man was formed the sixt day, and did eate of the tree the sixt houre, so the Lord Iesus reforming man, is fastened to the tree the sixt day, and sixt houre: and that day wherein Christ was kil∣led and slaine in the flesh, and in the which day he was made a redeemer and a Sauiour to man that had perished, It is so euident that that day the Lord obeying his father, suffered death, wherein Adam being disobedient vnto God died: for as Adam by eating of the forbidden fruit of the tree of know∣ledge, brought death to the world, so Christ our Sauiour dy∣ing vpon the tree of the crosse, gaue life vnto man. And a∣gaine, as Christ was crucified in Golgotha for the sinne of man, so Adam was dead and buried in that place before, by Adam was bu∣ried in Golga∣tha. transgressing the commaundements of God. Looke in what day Adam transgressed, in the coole of the day was hee con∣demned and put out of Paradise, so faith Rabbi Isaac, that the Rabbi Isaac. creating of Adam, and the commandement, and the fall, and the driaing out of Paradise, all befell the selfe same day. Ma∣ny of these Analogies seeme probable for the confirming of these opinions afore spoken. For as it was kept in the tree which was the instrument of life and death, so is it also kept in time and place. But thanks be vnto God who deliuered vs from the fal, from the curse, from death, hell, & damnation, and from going out of Paradise which was our portion held Our portion held by the first Adam. by the first Adam: but now all things are made manifest by the second Adam, by the appearing of Messias, who hath a∣bolished sinne and death, and hath brought life and immor∣talitie Paul. vnto light through the Gospel: for as Eue being a vir∣gin
and incorrupted, when she had conceiued the words of the serpent, brought foorth by disobedience death: so the virgin Mary full of faith and gladnesse, embracing the salu∣tation of the Angel Gabriel, restored life through Christ, who redeemed man from thraldome. So was the promise of God before Adam was brought out of Paradise, that the seed of the woman (the Messias and Sauior in whom and by whom we haue eternall life) should tread the Serpents head. This comfort was very great vnto Adam, and continued from A∣dam the first man vnto Abraham, 1949. yeeres, the first Pa∣triarch, Gen. 3. wherein the children of God were instructed by this promise, and saw through faith the redemption of man. Now by the sentence of God Adam was sent from the gar∣den of Eden to till the earth whence he was taken, and being cast out at the East side of the garden of Eden, the Lord God set Cherubins and the blade of a sword shaken, to keepe the way of the tree of life. Afterward Adam knew his wife which conceiued and bare Caine, an argument to prooue of no long continuance of Adam in Paradice. And againe, Eue concei∣ued and had another sonne and called him Abel, for yet the blessings of God, the state of mariage, and mans nature were not vtterly abolished through sinne, but the qualitie and the conditions thereof was chaunged. Caine was a tiller of the ground, and Abel was a shepeheard: they offred both to the Lord sacrifice, and it is plaine by their oblation, that how A∣dam The first sa∣crifice vnto God. instructed his children in the knowledge of God, and how God gaue them sacrifices to signifie their saluation: for so Adam confessed the Lord to be God, saying, I haue obtained a man by the Lord, when Caine was borne. God tooke not his spirit frō his elect, neither did absent himselfe frō the church. For the first godly Fathers had the law writē in their hearts by the spirit of God. The first table where the cōmādemēts were grauē, was flesh, which was in Adam, the secōd was giue in tables of stones to Moses. But as cōcerning their oblations, Caine offered vnto God of the first fruite of the groūd, & Abel likewise offered the first fruit of his shepe. Gen. 4.
Abel with his sacrifice was accepted of the Lord, and Caine with his oblations was reiected. For so Paul saieth, that Abel Heb. 1. offred vnto God a greater sacrifice then Caine, by the which he obtained witnesse that he was righteous, because GOD receiued him to mercy, and therefore imputed righteous, God testifying of his gifts, by the which being dead, yet li∣ueth, wherefore Caine was angrie and exceeding wroth, and his countenaunce fell downe, because he was an hypocrite, and offered onely for outward shew without sinceritie of heart, yet God gaue vnto Caine the dignitie of the first borne ouer Abel. But Cain contemning & despising God, whē he was repro∣ued of God for the murthering of his brother Abel, whom he entised to walke to the fields to be killed, whose blood euen from earth cried vp vnto heauen for reuenge at Gods hand, at that time the curse of God was pronounced against Caine, and he went from the presence of the Lord, wandring from place to place with tortures of a guiltie conscience, accor∣ding to Gods sentence, as domesticall furies night and day, seeking meanes to hide himselfe with the like guiltie consci∣ence, as Adam had when he fled from the face of God, when hee was called of Iehoua in Paradise, Where art thou Adam? Caine went to the land of Node, thinking by being farre from God, he should haue lesse occasion to feare him. Caine had some visible marke to be knowen of all men: for God said he should not be slaine, not that he loued him, but for that God abhorreth murther, and would haue a murtherer knowen. Caine knew his wife which conceiued and bare Henoch, and Henoch was borne. builded a citie and called it after his sonnes name Henoch: this was the first citie of the world, there hee dwelt with his wife. To Henoch was borne Irad, and Irad begate Mehimal, and he begate Methushael, and Methushael begate Lamech: these children grew vngodly and wicked, as most naturall and like children to Caine, the last worse then the first: for this contemptuous Lamech tooke to him two wiues, the one named Adah, the other Zillah: thereby he first corrupted the
lawfull institution of mariage, which was that two should be one flesh. Afterward he mocked & scoft at Gods sufferāce in Cain, saying: If Cain shal be auenged seuen fold, truly Lamech shall be auenged seuentie times seuen fold, as though God would suffer none to punish him, albeit hee was most con∣temptuous of good liuing, most vngodly and wickedly ha∣uing 76. children in adulterie, as Iosephus writeth, but by A∣dah Gen 4. he had a sonne named Iubal, who was the first that taught to make tents and to dwell therein, and he was the first father of such as had cattell. Lamech had a sonne named Iubal, who was the first inuenter of Musike, as the harpe & the organes, and other instruments. Zillah bare him a sonne named Tubal Caine, he found first the vse of iron and brasse, he was the first author of cunning craft in grauing. Here is Plinie much de∣ceiued to name Amphion the first Musition: here was Diodo∣rus Diodorus lib. 5. ouerseene to preferre Apollo: and the most part of pro∣phane histories doe greatly erre, attributing to Mercurie, to Orpheus, to Linus and to others which are read in Genesis in the first age found, for Propheticall histories are farre more auncient then prophane, by 2000. yeres, beside the first age, and first Fathers liued so long a time therein, they must of necessitie be first acquainted with all things: for the chiefest cause of long life in the first age, was that all men vniuersally might praise the Lord God in magnifying his name, ac∣knowledging his workes in his creatures. Thus did Adam, Seth, Enos, Henoch, Methusalem, Lamech and Noah see, yea and foresee the workes of God in his creation, in his Church, in his redemption, in his promise, and in his election: for Iose∣phus writeth that the creation of man, the commandement, the state, the Church institution of mariages, all other go∣uernments fit for the children of God, were by Adam in two tables of stones: and some olde ancient writers affirme, as Melancthon, that the first age was called , for that they excell in wisedome, iustice, gouernment and authoritie, full of inuentions, full of of artes and sciences, and therefore a long life was by God granted vnto them: for no doubt Adam
before his fall had that full and perfect knowledge of God in his workes, that he & his posterities taught afterward in the Iosephus. word. The second age was called  wherein began the magnanimitie and fortitude in warres, force, and violence. In vvarres Empires and kingdomes tooke beginning in the vvorld, and this second age began in Nimrode, and continu∣ed vntill Iulius Caesars time. The third age , endureth the vvhole time of the fourth monarche, giuē to delicacie & pleasure: for though the vvorld be full of secret contention and hidden enuie, full of open vvarres, one kingdom against another, yet not accomplished as in the fore ages. But to re∣turne to Caine and his posterities, hovv they grevv from the beginning in idolatrie, in superstition, & in outvvard pompe of vaine ceremonies, framing to themselues a nevv kind of religion, not in sinceritie and trueth, but in externall forme and fashion, being ignorant of God and of his vvord, Christ the Messias that vvas to come. This idolatrie began in the house of Caine, from Caine himselfe vnto the time of Belus 150. yeere after the flood. This Belus being dead, his sonne Ninus erected vp his fathers image or statue vvith such ho∣nour and vvith such priuiledge, and vvith such solemne pompe, as he that vvas guiltie of any great crime, might flee Adstatuā Beli, to the image of Belus, as to a sure sanctuarie of Belus Image a sanctuary to all wickednes. his safetie vvhat fault soeuer he committed. Here began the second cause of idolatrie, here images vvere made idols, set vp, and all kind of grauen vvorke in stones or trees, vvere ho∣noured as gods amongst the Gentiles, deriued frō the name of Belus, some calling them Baal, some Bel, some Belcebuc, ac∣cording to the varietie of tongues as Eusebius vvriteth. And this idolatrie continued frō Belus vntill Alexander the great, to vvhom at the siege of Babylon certaine Astrologers called lib. 10. cap. 3. de prae. Magi signified vnto Alexander, vnlesse hee vvould restore the tombe of Belus, being spoiled and defaced by the Persians, he should haue no good successe at Babylon: but Alexander litle esteeming their Chaldaicall diuination, as Diodorus at large doth report, marcheth forward with his siege. At what time Diodorus lib. 11.
vvas Lucius Cornelius & Quintus Pompeius Consuls at Rome, so the first idolatrie of Cain and his posteritie, vvere vvel and iustly revvarded by the flud. The second age vvhen idolatrie began in Belus, ended in Sardanapalus 12. hundred and odde yeeres, being the 36. king and last king of Assyria, as Eusebius affirmeth. All this vvhile God had his Church for his elect, the Lord had appointed another seede vnto Adam for Abel, vvhich vvas Seth, in vvhose time men began to call vpon the name of the Lord, and the Lord did moone the hearts of the godly to restore religion. The posteritie of Seth vvhich vvas by Caine and his familie, suppressed and continued seuen ge∣nerations, vntill such time that Naema the daughter of La∣mech Genes. 4. and sister of Tubal Caine, taught men the vse of fine flaxe to be soft clothed, and to be trimme attired vvith cloth and linnen, vvhere before men vvere clothed vvith leather and skinnes. Novve the posteritie of Caine became right vvorldlings in follovving their fancies and pleasures from vice to vice, The sonnes of God maried with the daughters of men. nothing acquainted vvith the afflictions and crosses of the true Church: so vvhen men began to bee multiplied vpon earth, and had daughters borne vnto them, then the sonnes of God, as Moses calleth them, vvhich Iosephus calleth the an∣gels of God, meaning the seede of Seth vvhich began to for∣sake the godlines and simplicitie of their forefathers, & savv the daughters of men vvhich issued out from Caines house, that they vvere faire, tooke them to their vviues of all that liked them: of this vnlavvfull and vvicked mixture of the good vvith the bad, of this holie seede vvith profane blood, of godly men vvith vvicked vvomen sprang vp an huge people, much like vnto the gyants, or as Homer saith in his sixt Odysse, speaking of the Cyclope Poliphemus, to vvhom Mo∣ses Melancthon. compareth them, alluding the course of their life ad Cy∣clopicam vitam, men more to be feared then to be follovved: Fregius in histo. Adami. yet Seth a man singularly beloued of God, endevved much vvith Gods blessings, studious to please God, desirous to plant true religion, and giuen to all kinde of vertuous pra∣ctising
all godly exercises, and liuing in all felicitie, left be∣hind him godly children, as Enos, godly and vertuous like Seth his father, vvhome Moses preferreth to be the first that Fregius in histo. Adami. earnestly called vpon the Lord Iehouah, detesting the house of Caine as dead. Then Henoch a godly sincere man, led an vpright life be∣fore God, the seuenth from Adam, prophesied of such wicked men, saying: Behold the Lord commeth vvith thousands of his Saints to giue iudgement against all, and to rebuke all Iud. 1. the vngodly of their vvickednesse, and of their cruell spea∣king against him: for euen that Henoch saieth Paul, vvas taken Heb 11. avvay, to shevv that there vvas a better life prepared, and to bee a testimonie of the immortalitie of soules and bodies, and that hee shoulde not see death for his faith towardes God: for before he vvas taken avvay, he vvas reported that he had pleased God, & he was seene no more, for God tooke him avvay. Henoch vvalked vvith Lamech the father of Noah, Henoch walked with God. hauing respect to the promise, desired to see the Messias vvhich should be sent, and yet he savve but a figure thereof, he said by the spirite of prophesie, that vvhen his sonne Noah vvas borne, this should comfort vs concerning our vvorke and sorovv of our hands as concerning the earth, vvhich the Lord hath cursed. The last man of the first age vvas Noah a iust and vpright man in his time before God, hee likevvise vvalked vvith and obeied GOD in all things, and therefore found fauour vvith God, vvith vvhom God made his coue∣nant, & established the same vvith a signe, for thee only haue Genes. 9. I found iust and righteous in this age vpon the earth, for No∣ah Noah the righteous preacher. vvas called the righteous preacher, preaching vnto the vvicked for amendment of life, and because they vvere luld in all kind of securities and feared not God, Noah departed from them and vvent to another land: for hee vvas vvarned of God of things that vvere not seene as yet concerning the Arke, God vvas so much offended vvith the vvickednesse of the vvorld, that his vvrath vvas kindled to see such iniquitie vpon earth, for the whole world was corrupt before God, and
vvas filled with crueltie, all flesh had corrupted his way, and all imaginations of mans thoughts were so euil and wicked, that it repented the Lorde to haue made man, and as it were disauowing man to be his creature: they were so addicted to intemperancie, lust, gluttonie, and securitie, the foure prin∣cipall causes of the flood, which for sinne destroied man and beast, and yet in mercie God spared man 120. yeeres to re∣pent, before he woulde destroy the worlde. No dout many things haue bene written of the olde Patriarches in the first age, and thought of many writers that Adam and his sonne Seth, had made two tables of stone, wherein they wrote ma∣ny goodly things to their posterity. The best warrant is read in Iosephus, for that he trauailed much in the historie of the  lib. 1. Iewes, and their other histories called Drash: for their Rab∣bies Zonaras lib. 1. heape many fables beside the historie of Moses, in their Chronicles called Drash: so Philo Iudaeus, Herodot, and Melan∣cton, from them affirme. It is written againe, that Adam and Seth foreseeing the deluge of the world, caused two pillars to be set vp, the one of brickes, the other of brasse, one to resist the violence of the water, the other to endure the rage of the fire: but I see no reason that Adam should prophecie the same to be from God, and yet he being man, sought meanes by naturall reason, and waies by arte, to preuent the euerla∣sting decree of the Almighty. Iosephus might wel erre in that. I thinke that many things are written of the Iewes, which doe not agree with the purpose of Gods prouidence, nor his counsell: for the Iewes recorded in their bookes of histo∣ries, called Drash, any thing that might be coniectured true, and which they themselues supposed in opinion to be true, as the maners of their Talmudists were. Talmudists. Iosephus a great writer of the Iewes antiquities, the best Historiographer of Chaldean histories, who wrote more, and is more to be commended then any other, and because he thinketh much amisse for any man to seeke recordes of anti∣quities amongest the Graecians, men of late knowledge, ha∣uing their beginning and first originall from Egypt, and Chal∣dea,
specially Assyria and Chaldea, the first seate of man after the flood: for the Greekes began to flourish in the declining age of the world, when that Assyria, Chaldea, Egypt, and other places of the East, were wasted & consumed with sword and fire: for so it seemeth by the Philosopher Calisthenes report, then being with Alexander the Great at the siege of Babylon, writing vnto his cosin Aristotle, who had bene his preferrer vnto Alexander, to that purpose he might search out the Li∣braries of Babylon, and to certifie Aristotle of those antiqui∣ties, specially of Astrologie, wherein the Chaldeans past, and of their monuments, wherein the Greekes were ignorant: for Calisthenes sent vnto Aristotle, howe that Babylon was farre more famous for all kind of learning and knowledge twelue hundred yeeres past, then it was when Alexander the Great did besiege it, certifying him with recordes of 19. hundred yeeres before Alexanders time. Berosus an ancient writer, and a man of great authoritie a∣mongst the Chaldeans, saith, that Arphaxad one of the sonnes Ioseph lib. 1. cap. 14. of Sem, whose birth vvas 2. yeeres after the flood, christened Korus lib. 1. cap. 4. the first name of this Countrey after his ovvne name: after∣vvarde it vvas called Cephem, and novve last named Chaldea, of the situation of this Countrey, and the seate of Babylon. I vvill let the reader reade of it in Ptolomus, and in Pomponius Tabula 4. Asiae lib. 3. Mela. I vvill goe on vvith my historie. When Cham the second sonne of Noah, had begotten a Genes. cap. 10. sonne named Chus, and Chus had begotten a sonne, named Nemrad, this began to take armes, and to become great in his doings: he became mightie in earth, vsing violence and force against all people, framing himselfe to be first Empe∣rour of the vvorlde, so full of crueltie and tyrannie, that it grevve vnto a prouerbe, as it is in the Genesis, as Nemrod the mightie hunter before the Lorde: his oppression vvas such, that he passed not to commit crueltie euen in Gods pre∣sence. This Nemrad began to rule in Babel, in the land of Shi∣near, aftervvard called Chaldea, vvhere he and his companie returning from Armenia, vvhere they after the flood began
to build vp an high tower, whose top should reach vnto hea∣uen to get them a name vpon earth, least they should be scat∣tered Genes. 1. ouer the whole earth, thinking through pride and am∣bition to preferre their owne glory before Gods honor: but vaine is the helpe of man, their wicked enterprise was ouer∣throwen, for God sawe their follie, and so confounded them in their deuises, & in their speach, that one could not vnder∣stand another. Then were they deuided and scattered, then confusion of tongues began, which was then in the house of The confusiō of tongues in the time of Peleg. Heber onely the Hebrew tongue, then began people to seeke out countries and to inhabite the earth: The posteritie of Sem to great Asia, Persia, Assyria and Chaldea, and all the regi∣ons about Euphrates towards the East part of the world: The posteritie of Cham went to Egypt, Aethiope, Libya, and posses∣sed all places about Nilus, and reached towards the South vnto the furthest part of Affrica: and the posteritie of Iaphet possessed all the Westcountrey, the lesser Asia and all Euro∣pa, of whom all the Gentiles sprang out. Thus much for the first age from Adam vnto Noah, 1656. Now I meane parti∣cularlie to follow my historie, as the reason is offered vnto me by following the sonnes of Noah, their children and po∣sterities frō the land of Senaah, vnto euery part of the earth. CHAP. I. Of the most ancient and true historie of the Hebrewes, after called Israel, of their lawes and originall gouernment called Oligar∣chia, from Abraham vnto Moses. THE historie of the Hebrewes, for that it is most ancient from Hebers time the fourth from Noah, and most true, for that it is written by Moses and confirmed by the Prophets, but most of all in dignitie and honour, for that lineally from Sem which first builded Hierusalem, the Messias and Sauiour of the world according to the flesh descended, though the historie taketh no beginning but frō the calling
of Abraham out of Chaldea into the land of Canaan, so called first, after, the land of Israel, thirdly, of Iudea, fourthly & last, called after Christ our Sauiours death, The holy land, or the land of Palestina: the inhabitants thereof were called accor∣dingly, Cananites, Hebrewes, Israelites, Iewes, of whom either to speake or to write, of their lawes, their Iudges, their Kings, or of their ceremonies, or of their common wealth, it was not lawfull neither for the Graecians nor for the Romanes, and so affirmed by Iosephus, that Demetrius Phalerius did auere be∣fore Philodelphus king of Alexandria, that the Greekes nor the Sabellicu lib. 3. Latinists might translate, handle, or so much as to presume to write of any Hebrew historie being but prophane men, as Theopompus, Theodecta, with others, which were made blind by their arrogancie, and became mad. An other cause doeth Eusebius alleage, that neither Greekes nor Latines were in time The antiquity of Greece. to write of the Hebrues histories: for the greatest brag of the Greekes, as Iosephus saieth, and the most ancient historie of the Graecians, is Homers worke: they began to flourish in the time of Cyrus, after that the Assyrians, the Chaldeans and the Egypti∣ans, and many other kingdoms of the East were decaied, and their empires lost, at which time the temple in Ierusalem was by Cyrus permitted to be reedified 80. yeeres before the last permission by Artaxerxes surnamed Longimanus: for Plato of The praise of Plato. whom Numenius the Pithagorean doth report, & is called of him Moses Attica lingua loquens, euen that learned Philoso∣pher doth confesse, that the Graecians had their knowledge frō the Chaldeans and from the Egyptians, and began to be famous and great after these great kingdomes were destroyed. The seuen Sages were the first wise men knowen or commended in Greece, which was in Cyrus time, at what time Solon liued 200. yeres before Plato, which was the infancie of Greece, and The infancie of Greece. the first schoole of their Philosophie. Now the Hebrewes being the most auncientest people, e∣uen from Hebers birth vntill Christes death, which was after Christes death 2000. yeeres & odde, they inhabited the land called Syria, called likewise Phoenicia, and now in latter yeeres
called Iudea: of this countrey doeth Iosephus write at large both of the nature of the people and of the goodnesse of the Ioseph. lib. contra. soile. Hecateus the Abederit, a good Philosopher and a great writer, flourishing in the time of Alexander the great, made a booke in describing and commending of Iudaea. I wil them to read the 16. booke of Strabo that would know the situation of Reede Stabo 16. booke. Iudea, where the Reader shall be satisfied with the ful descrip∣tion of Iudea. Iosephus a Iew borne, being taken prisoner by Vespasian the Emperor at the last destructiō of Ierusalem, at the which time he wrote a great volume containing 20. bookes of the anti∣quities of the Iewes, & he wrote other 7. bookes of the warres of the Iewes, a man of great industrie, learned in the Hebrew and Greeke tongue, and very expert in the Iewish histories, saieth, that Egyptians were enuious to the children of Israel, for so were they called after Iacobs time, which by long wrast∣ling with the Angel of the Lord, was named Israel: for first First He∣brewes. 478 they were called Hebrewes from Hebers time vntil Iacob, which was 478. yeeres and odde: secondarily, Israel from Iacob, vntill the destruction of Samaria, at what time ten tribes of Israel were by Salmanassar king of Assyria Senacheribs father, brought cap∣tiue Then Israel. 1026 vnto Assyria in the time of Osea the last king of Israel 1026. yeeres, as Bucholcerus affirmeth, and from the destruction of Sa∣maria Thirdly Ie∣wish. 786 vntill the last destruction of Ierusalem by Titus Vespasian they were called Iewes 786. yeeres. Now the malice of Egypt towards Israel was such, that A egyptians most enuious to the Iewish. they kept them in bondage 430. yeeres, and euer after they were by God deliuered, they still wrought euil against them, and persecuted them with continuall hatred, disliking their The mercie of God to∣wardes his people. religion, abhorring their ceremonies, disdaining and much enuying the felicitie of the Iewes, with the which the God of Israel by power and great miracles, did aduance them to the abolishing of idolatrie, and contemning of their false gods, which the Egyptians, the Chaldeans & the Assyrians did adore, and therfore the blessing of God was according to the pro∣mise vpon the Hebrewes first, afterwards called Israel & Iewes,
and continued frō Abraham, to whom the promise was made vntill the time of the Messias, the full accomplishment of the promise. So these people bathed in blisse, and being but a li∣tle countrey, few people, from Dan to Berseba, and of no esti∣mation, became by Gods fauour strong, mightie, & conque∣rors The goodnes of God to his people. of the greatest kings of the world. So, he said (the Lord of all) out of Sion shall my Law proceed, and from Ierusalem my word. This litle citie of Ierusalem, chosen of God to be his seate, though often for sinne destroyed, and the people pla∣gued, yet still comforted to the stay of Gods Church. It is written that Dauid the second king of Israel, gaue these words to Salomon his sonne before he died. Behold, Praeparaui impensas domus Domini auritalenta centum millia, & argenti mil∣le 3. Regum cap. 10 millia talentûm. And againe it is writtē in the Chronicles, that gold and siluer were as plentie in Ierusalem, as stones in the street in the time of Salomō: for there was in the temple of Sa∣lomon, as Budaeus noteth 27. millions, in ready coyne. This De Asse 4. made other kingdomes to enuie the prosperitie of the He∣brewes: for by iust account of Budaeus, there was left before vn∣to Salomon by Dauid his father, ten times more treasures and substance in Ierusalem, then Darius the great king of Persia left Ioseph. 8. vnto Alexander the great in Babylon when he conquered it: this was the promise which God performed to Abraham, and to his seed for euer. This godly Patriarch to whom the promise was made, was 50. yeeres of age when Noah died, 40. yeeres before So∣dome Abrahams age when Noah died. and Gomorrha were destroied. At 75. yeeres was Abra∣ham called from Vr a towne of Chaldea, in the last yeeres of Ninus the first king of the Assyrians. Now while Abraham o∣beied Gene. 18. 20. 47. God from time to time, from place to place, exerci∣sing himselfe in the obedience of GOD, famine grew in the land of Canaan, so that he with few Hebrewes were forced to flee into Egypt, where hee continued three yeeres, at what time he taught them knowledge of the starres, read Abrahams go∣ing to Aegypt Astronomie, and taught in Egypt Artes and Sciences, as Iosephus saieth: for Abraham was brought vp in Astrologie
with the Chaldeans, where hee dwelt with his father Thare in Vr, and from whence the Egyptians had their learning and knowledge: for Egypt was as yet scant in the world knowen, where some of the Hebrewes staied after Abrahams departure and multiplied, in so much that the kings of Egypt troubled, molested, and brought them in such bondage, as they were The bondage of Israel in Aegypt, 430. yeeres. Moses the fift from Abra∣ham. made slaues and bondmen of the Egyptians vntill the time of Moses which was 430. yeeres after Abraham, euen then God deliuered them from their bondage by the handes of Moses, which was the fift man in discent from Abraham, for Moses was the sonne of Amri, the sonne of Cath, the sonne of Leui, the sonne of Iacob, the sonne of Isaac, the sonne of Abraham. But to returne to Abraham, who attending the voyce of the almightie, was most diligent with care and feare of God to performe his dutie to his God: for God had blessed Abra∣ham and promised also to blesse them that would blesse Abra∣ham, saying, Benedicā te benedicentibus, &c. I will blesse thē that blesse thee, & I wil curse them that curse thee, for in thee all the kinreds of the earth shall be blessed. For God had promi∣sed Abraham three great blessings, that is, First, the land of Canaan flowing with milke and honie: Secondly, the incar∣nation of Messias tobe out of the tribe of Iuda: Thirdly, that his seede should be as the starres in the skies, or the sands in the sea. After God had blessed Abraham by the mouth of Mel∣chisedech the high priest of God, saying: Blessed art thou A∣braham of God most high possessor of heauen and earth: to Gene. cap. 14. this high priest Melchisedech, Abraham paied tithe of all that he had, for God was with Abraham, he defended him, and he rewarded him. About this time were the kings of Sodome The kings of Sodom and Gomorrha o∣uerthrown by the king of Shinar. and Gomorrha ouerthrowen by Amraphael king of Shinar, and Lot taken prisoner, but rescued by Abraham: this was not the last destruction of Sodome. Now raigned in Sicionia a king called Apis, of whom the countrey was afterward named Apia, and since called Pelo∣ponesus, and now Morea. In Assyria raigned Ninus the hus∣band of Semiramis. In Egypt this time was a forme of gouern∣ment
called Dinastia, fifteene principall magistrates to go∣uerne the Egyptians. About this time Ismael was borne of A∣gar the bondwoman, when Abraham was of the age of 86. Ismael borne by Agar the the bondwo∣man. of whom many nations doe come. After this time Abrahams name was changed to confirme him in the promise. Cir∣cumcision then was instituted, and Isaac was likewise promi∣sed by the Angels that lodged with Abraham, as they went to destroy Sodome and Gomorrha, who opened to Abraham, how sinne cried vp vnto heauen for vengeance vpon the So∣domites, which Abraham with his eies sawe: he saw Sodome, Gomorrha, Seboim, Adamah and Segor, fiue great cities of Cana∣an burned with fire and brimstone from heauen, and all men, women and children destroied, Lot onely with his wife and Lot with his two daugh∣ters escaped. two daughters saued. In that soile where these 5. cities were burned, there was left a lake of such terrible sight, being one and twentie miles long, that Strabo in his booke, and Iose∣phus at large describeth, which in another place shall be spo∣ken of. But much deceiued for that they attributed vnto the ef∣fects of nature, which was the worke of God whom they knew not at that time. Lots wife by disobedience, looking Iosephus lib. 1. cap. 12. backe against the commandement, became a pillar of salt, a terrible monument of Gods vengeance to all passers by: but marke how by drunkennes Lot sinned with his daughters, a horrible exāple of drūkennes whom the wickednes of Sodom could not ouercome, yet wine caused him to commit most abominable incest with his two daghters, who making their Lots incest with his two daughters. Genes. 19. father of purpose drunk, became both with child by their fa∣ther, the elder bare a sonne and she called his name Moab, the first father of all the Moabites, the yonger bare a sonne, and she called his name Ammon, from whom sprang the Ammonites a people of great natiōs, who as they were born in most horri∣ble incest, so were they & their posteritie vile & wicked ene∣mies to God and his church. About this very time Isaac was The birth of Isaac. Isaac the child of promise borne 14. yeres after Is∣mael. Ioseph. lib. 1. cap. 15. Sara died, and is buried in Hebron. A ficide doth cotune 4. Dachmes. Lib. cap 16. borne when Agar and her sonne Ismael was cast off. For God said vnto Abraham, In Isaac thy seed shalbe called, and not in
Ismael, for Isaac was a figure of Christ. Not long after Sara the wife of Abraham when she had liued 127. yeeres, euen iust the double yeeres of the virgin Marie. Sara was buried in Hebron, where Abraham bought a field of an Ephronit for 400. sickles of siluer, where Abraham and all his posterities were after bu∣ried. Abraham after Sara maried a woman named Kaetura, by whom hee had sixe sonnes prudent and very discreete men, their names you find in Iosephus, and the seueral nations that issued from them. Now Abraham waxed olde, for he was an 100. yeere olde when Isaac was borne, and he liued after the birth of Isaac 75. yeeres, and then died, and was buried by his wife Sara in He∣bron. Abraham dieth. In the time of Abraham and of the first Patriarch, the Church of God was gouerned by a state called Oligarchia, vntill Moses time, to whom the law was giuen on mount Si∣nai by God, for before the law was written in the Patriarchs hearts. But first he saw his sonne maried with Rebecca, he was the 10. from Noah, as Noah was the 10. from Adam, and liued fiftie yeeres with Noah: he liued with Sem, Arphaxad, Sela, He∣ber, Peleg, Regu, Serug, Nahor & Thara which was his father. He was vertuous and godly, he was blessed of God, and in his seed the whole earth was blessed after him. Isaac had two twinnes borne together, Esau which is also Esau and Ia∣cob birth. called Edom, of whom the Idumeans came, & Iacob called like∣wise Israel, of whom the Israelites came. Iacob was the true tipe Iacob was the true tipe of the Church of the church of God, Christ being the head therof. Esau like∣wise the figure of the synagogue of Satan, ouer whom Anti∣christ is the head. Isaac loued better Esau thē Iacob, but Rebecca loued Iacob, as by her coūcel, though needlesse, to Iacob to de∣feat Esau of his fathers blessing appeared, being therein faul∣tie to preuent the Almightie. But as Caine neuer loued Abel, so Esau neuer loued Iacob: for Iacob euer feared his brother E∣sau, but God from his eternall purpose neuer changeth, but standeth to his people, & comforteth his church. The histo∣rie of these two brethren you shall read in Iosephus at large, Lib. 1. cap. 18. 19. & in Genesis 27. & 28. In the time of Iacob raigned in Niniuie
Amatrites the 9. king of the Assyrians, a voluptuous wic∣ked prince. Atlas the great Astronomer, and thereby fained of the Poets to sustaine the skies vpon his shoulders, flouri∣in these dayes. Osiris who is thought to bee called Mirzaim, Diodo. de fab. . lib. 2. and of Berosus is named Oceanus, and Diodorus names him Me∣nam the first king of the Egyptians, he gouerned Egypt, taught the people to worship their gods, instructed them in many faculties and sciences, which then few of the Egyptians knew: the daughter of Iacob named Dina, was rauished of Sichem, the sonne of Hemor, afterward she is supposed by Philo Iudaeus to Functius in ta∣bula patrum. be the wife of Iob, by whom hee gate fourteene sonnes and foureteene daughters, but some thinke it an error, saying: Iob was two discents after Iacobs children, but as I sayd before, hard it is to correct an errour of such antiquitie, for where true records want, then coniectures of men doe grow. About this time Isaac died and was buried in Hebron hard Isaac dieth and is buried in Hebron. by Rebecca his wife, hee was accepted of God and walked in his wayes vertuous and godly, he liued one hundred eightie yeeres, three yeeres longer then his father Abraham liued. Which Isaac liued With Sem 110. yeeres. With Sara his mother 37. Arphaxat 48. Sarug one yeere. Salah 78. Iacob his brother 120. Heber 139. Ismaeel his halfe brother by Abraham liued with Isaac 75 Agar 123. Thare his grandfather 35. Ioseph 29. Isaac sawe the prosperitie of his sonne Esau, which gouer∣ned all the land of Seir, for the appointment of GOD was, Isaac saw the prosperity of Esau and the affliction of Iacob. Maior seruiet Minori, when Iacob had no certaine place in the world, but tossed from one affliction to an other. Isaac before he died saw the trauell and triall of Iacob. About this time was Ioseph sold by his brethren, and laied in prison in E∣gypt, euen then Tiphon the Egyptian conspired the death of his brother Osiris, with the helpe of certaine tyrants Busiris of Phoenicia, Antens of Lybia, Melinus of Creete, with others, hee killed the king, vsurped the kingdome, and was called there∣by,
as Berosus affirmeth, Tiphon tyrannus, but he was well re∣quited, Diodo. lib. 1. and all his confederats: for they all were slaine by O∣rus Magnus, Osiris sonne, in a towne of Arabia named Anteos. Iustin. lib. 36. Bsius lib. 1. cap 8. Rhodes was builded about this time, which was named be∣fore Opheinissa: the great famine of the 7. deere yeres in Egypt, and in all the world, began likewise about the time of Isaacs death. In Assyria reigned Baleus the 11. king, a man of the Iustine lib 36. Orosius lib. 1. cap. 8. greatest fame: after Semiramis in the 41. yeere of this Kings reigne, Hercules surnamed Lybius, draue all cruell tyrants and gyants out of Italy, for he with continual warres for 10. yeres space wearied them, and subdued them, and afterward reig∣ned peaceably 20. yeeres, as both Berosus and Functius doe affirme. In the 18. Dinasteia of Egypt, began the Kings of Egypt to The 18. Dena∣sna of Aegypt be called Pharaones, a name of great dignitie, not proper names, but as the Romanes, Alexandrians, the Latines, with o∣ther kingdomes vsed to name their kings Caesars, Siluij, Ptolo∣meis, Arsaces, so like wise the Egyptians named their kings Pha∣raones, which began about the latter end of Isaac. Sparta a fa∣mous Sparta buil∣ded. towne amongst the Lacedemonians, was builded of Pha∣roneus sonne, whose name was Sparta, and therefore after his owne name named it Sparta. Alitle after this time, the going The going of Iacob vnto E∣gypt. of Iacob vnto Egypt, was in the 130. yeres of his age, where he continued with his sonne Ioseph 17. yeeres in great fauour with Pharaoh, and then died, after Abrahams being in Egypt, 215. yeeres, and before Moses went to Egypt to deliuer the children of Israel out of bondage 215. yeeres. Nowe while Iacob and his familie were in Egypt with his sonne Ioseph, who was solde by his brethren, and by his father thought to be slaine, then dwelled in Iudea Hethits, Iebusites, Amorites, Cha∣nanites, Amalakites, and Pheresites, this land flowed with milke and hony, fertile, and full of all plentifulnes: for after Ioseph died in Egypt, Moses was borne within 65. yeeres: and in the Ioseph died 65. yeeres before Moses was borne. fourescore yeere of Moses age, the 145. after Ioseph died, and were in the wildernesse fourtie yeeres, and after had the possession of the lande of Chanaan, as it shall bee here∣after
said. But for that the histories of the Patriarches are written in the Genesis at large, and in Iosephus, and specially Frigius Mosaicus, in his booke De historijs patrum, leaueth no∣thing vntouched, I will forward to the birth of Moses. CHAP. II. Of the birth of Moses: of his fauour with God: of his gouernment o∣uer Israel for 40. yeeres in the wildernes, and deliuerance of them from Pharaoh, by the direction and inctruction of God of Ioshua his successor, and of his warres and victories, and of his good go∣uernment ouer Israel for 32. yeeres, and of the Common-wealth of the Hebrewes during the time of Moses and Iosua, which were 72. yeeres. MOses the sonne of Amri, being borne in E∣gypt, in the time of Israels bondage, and throwen according to the commande∣ment of Pharaoh vnto Nilus: but by the The maner of Moses birth. prouidence of God, Pharaohs daughter named Thermutis, walking for her plea∣sure with her maides about the bankes of Nilus, beheld a thing houering vpon the water, commaunded her maide to see what it was: there Miria Moses sister tended to see what should become of the childe: when Pharaohs daughter sawe that it was a goodly child, she much delited in him, and caused an Egyptian wo∣man to giue him dugge, which the childe refused: his sister Miria said, Ifan Hebrew woman were there, he would sucke. Thermutis willed her straight to bring one, and she brought Thermutis Pharaohs daughter. the mother of Moses: to whome the Kings daughter saide, Take this childe, and bring him vp for me. and she adopted him her sonne. This childe grewe both goodly and godly, of whom ma∣ny things are written of: while yet he was in Egypt, being but a childe in Thermutis armes, she put the Kings diademe vp∣on the childes head, and he threwe it to the dirt, not estee∣ming Moses threwe the diademe of Aegypt to the dirt. pompe and regall shewe. But after he grewe to be a
man, he was made a Captaine ouer the Egyptians against the Moses made captaine ouer the Aegypti∣ans against the Aethiopi∣ans. Aethiopians, and he ouerthrewe the Aethiopians: where the kinges daughter of Aethiope, called Tharbis, beholding his magnanimitie, with admiration of his great actions, fell in loue with Moses, offred him mariage and to be a kings sonne, Reade Fregius of Moses life. and a king himselfe afterward of Aethiope: the condition he accepted, vpon yeelding vp of the towne to spare blood, which was done. But enuie of the Aegyptians against Moses, disgrasing and disdaining his fortune, and threatning him to the death, af∣ter the killing of the Aegyptians, fearing it should come to light, fled vnto the Madianits, wher he maried Iethroes daugh∣ter, and continued fourtie yeeres, vntill the Angell appea∣ring in a flaming bush, commaunded him to goe to Pharaoh, to deliuer Israel from captiuitie, with whome Aaron his bro∣ther which was the first Priest after the lawe giuen, was ioy∣ned Moses & Aa∣ron sent by God to Ae∣gypt. with Moses in commission to execute the commaunde∣ments of God: for to Moses was granted wisedome, counsel, and power to doe miracles: to Aaron eloquence, learning, and power to speake what he would. Nowe by Gods mercie which to the Israelites was alwaies great, and by the which they were nowe deliuered from the handes of Pharaoh, after many miracles done which Nazianzenus setteth forth in few Greeke verses, & in Latine by Frigius Mosaicus briefly written in two lines the ten plagues of Egypt, in these wordes: The tenne plagues of Aegypt. Sanguis, Rana, Culex, Muscae, Pecus, Vlcera, Grando, Vermes & Tenebrae, Pestis primogenitorum. Euen then Moses caried the bones of Ioseph to be buried in Iosephs bones brought by Moses out of Aegypt. Hebron, by his progenitors, as Ioseph had commanded, when he prophecied of an other Pharaoh which shoulde entreate Israel euill. This singular man of God Moses, to whome the lawe in Mount Sinai was giuen, and by whome the lawe had full execution, with whome GOD talked so famili∣arly, that hee alone continued with GOD fourtie dayes in Mount Sinai: the moste auncient Chronographer of the worlde, the verye light of prophane Histories,
and the onely teacher of time, as by his 5. bookes appeare: but for that Moses must be spoken of almost in euery place, for the recourse and triall of time, I will nowe goe forward with the historie. Nowe reigned ouer the Assyrians Ascatades the 18. king in Niniue, and in the 8. yeere of this Ascatades, Cancres Pharaoh the king of Egypt, with all his great armie were drowned in Cancres king of Aegypt drow∣ned in the red sea. the red sea. In Moses time happened two great floods, the one called Deucalion flood, 784. yeeres after Noahs flood, the o∣ther in Thessalia, after which followed such earthquakes in Deucalion flood. Thessalie, that many thousands of beasts, men, women and children, townes and cities, were destroied, as both Berosus and Xenophon doe agree. After which earthquake fire wasted many townes and cities in Greece, called incendium Phaeton∣tis. In Moses time the kingdome of Athens beganne, wherein The king∣dome of A∣thens. Cecrops was the first king of Athens 350. yeeres before the de∣struction of Troy. From Abraham to Moses 450. from Moses to the first building of the Temple 480. yeeres. Thus farre Bero∣sus writeth, euen from the beginning of Noah out of the arke, Berosus endeth his hystory. vntil the going of the Israelites out of Egypt, yet a litle farther vntill the falling of Dathan, with 250. more which held with Abiran and Chore, for their murmuring against Moses. After this went Moses vp from the plaine of Moab to mount Nebo, where the Lorde shewed vnto Moses all the lande of Canaan, according to his promise, saying: thou shalt see the lande of Moses death. Canaan with thine eies, but thou shalt not goe ouer thither, and there Moses the seruant of the Lorde died, for whome I∣srael wept 30. daies, and after whome Iosua succeeded. Moses was 120. yeeres of age when he died. Nowe you must vnderstande that when Ioseph was dead, and the Hebrewes began to be multiplied, the Egyptians both feared and hated them, oppressed them as you heard with all toile and slauerie, and not yet contented, but a law was made Israelites toile and sla∣uery. among the Egyptians, that euery male childe of the Hebrewes should be throwen to Nilus. This lawe continued from Mo∣ses birth, and before, vntill their God deliuered them by Mo∣ses.
God had appointed with Moses, and after with Iosua, wise and graue men, as Elders, Iudges, Magistrates, to gouerne the Common-wealth of the Hebrewes vnder Moses, (as Iethro his father in lawe had councelled him,) the head of any tribe or of any citie, Conuocauit populos Israel, & Senatum eorum, & principes eorum, & iudices eorum, Ios. 23. Hee had also the Le∣uites, the Priest, and the high Bishop: a state of Common-wealth chaunged from Oligarchia, which was in Abrahams time, into Aristocratia, by the expresse commandements of God, in all the lawes of the Hebrewes Morall and Iudiciall. And after God gaue the Ceremoniall Lawes to Moses at mount Sinai: for the Common-wealth of the Hebrewes were of all others most principally to be allowed, for that God ordeined all their lawes, ordered their Iudges, al their Kings, and their high Priestes: for these three states gouerned the Hebrewes from Moses the first Iudge, vntil the last high Priest, though by Moses other officers were appointed, as Tribunes, Centurions and Captaines, some ouer a 1000. some ouer a 100. some ouer 50. by the Greekes named Chiliarchi, Heca∣tontarchi, Chiliarchi. Hecatontarchi. Pentecontarchi. Decatarchi. Pentecontarchi, Decatarchi. The offerings which were gold, siluer, and brasse, blewe silke, purple and scarlet, fine linnen, Goates haire, and Rammes skinnes coloured red, oile, spices, perfumes of sweete sauour, the Tabernacle, the Arke, the stone table, and the rod of Aaron, and Manna which were testimonies of Gods presence. Read of these Ceremo∣niall lawes in Exod. 25. About this time reigned in Egypt Ramesses: afterwards hauing vanquished his brother Danaus from Egypt, Egyptus Ramesses was surnamed E∣gyptus. vsurped the kingdom of Egypt, & named it Egyptus after his owne name. Amongst the Argiues, Stelenus their 9. King, and after him succeeded Danaus, being driuen out of Egypt by the Cornelius Taci∣tus lib. 2. foresaid Egyptus, his brother giuing that name to the Coun∣trey of Egypt, being before named Mizraim. Nowe in Creete gouerned Axit, and in Athens the 4. king Ericthonius in these daies. Nowe Memphis in Egypt, of one Epaphus, as Eusebius doth
name, was builded. Dardanus builded Dardania, in the sixt yeere of this king Egyptus: this afterwarde was called Troy-Cyrene at this time was likewise builded in Libya, and Nisa a great citie in India, by Dionysius. In Niniue Amintes the 19. king of the Assyrians gouerned. It is written by Orosius, that Crosius lib. 1. cap. 11. Danaus king at this time of the Argiues, hauing fiftie daugh∣ters, who being married to fiftie brethren, sonnes to his owne brother Egyptus, wrought meanes by these his daugh∣ters, to requite the iniurie of his brother: they agreeing with their father, conspired the deathes of their husbandes, and slewe them all in one night. This historie is diuersly written, which I leaue to euery mans iudgement. After that Moses had gouerned the people of God 40. yeeres in the wildernes, hee made choise of Iosua (as you heard) to be their Gouernour and Iudge: for there was no succession of Gouernors, no election of states, no Prince, no Iudge to claime right amongest the people of Israel, but the lawe of God was the Iudge that gouerned Israel. So Gedeon saide: Non dominabor vestri, nec dominabitur vestri filius meus, sed Dominus, he was the onely ruler, so they prospered all the time of good Iudges. This Iosua the second Iudge of Israel, whome God raised after Moses, was adorned with excellent giftes, as with counsell to gouerne Israel, and with strength to defend Israel: this bringeth them after all difficulties vn∣to the land of Canaan: which Iosua diuided among the people, he appointed their borders, he established lawes and ordi∣nances, Iosua deuideth the land of Chanaan. Iosua made or∣ders & lawes. assuring them of Gods fauour, if they would obey God, and contrariwise of his plague and vengeance by dis∣obedience. To this good Iosua God saide, my seruant Moses is dead, nowe therefore arise, goe ouer Iordan, thou, and all this people, vnto the lande which I gaue them: for euery place where you shall tread vpon, haue I giuen you, there shall be no man able to withstande thee all the daies of thy life: bee thou strong, and be of good courage, I will not leaue thee, nor forsake thee. This was great comfort to Iosua, to haue God to be with him, to assist him, to strengthen him, & to defend him.
Then Iosua commanded his hoste, with their Captaines Iosua cōman∣deth his host to passe Ior∣den. and officers to passe ouer Iordan, he exhorteth the Rubenites, the Gadites; and the halfe tribe of Manasses, to execute their charge, saying, the Lord your God hath giuē you this land, which was somtime in the possession of Sihon king of the A∣morites, and in the hands of Og, king of Bashan, goe you for∣ward, God shal go before you, and cast out the Cananites, the Hittites, the Iebusites, Girgashites, Perisites, and the Amorites: so Iordan gaue place to Iosua and to the Arke. they passed ouer Iordan drie, the water staied, and gaue them place in like sort as the red sea did. The walles of Iericho fell downe, and gaue them place, to enter vnto the citie without The walles of Iericho fell. strokes. Nowe Iericho being burned, diuers kings, countreies and cities, hearing how Iericho and Ai were destroied, gathe∣red their forces together, one to helpe an other, but in vaine, for the Lorde fought for Israel: for fiue kings rose against Io∣sua, which were destroied and discomfited: and as it is writ∣ten in the 12. of Iosua, thirtie kings were vanquished, ouer∣throwen, and slaine, whose names you may reade in Iosua. Iosua cap. 12. This godly Iosua was an other Moses, ruled Israel in all obedi∣ence of the Lorde, conquered and possessed the land of pro∣mise, and kept Gods people all his time in peace, liued 110. yeeres, and gouerned Israel two and thirtie yeeres. Eusebius Melanthon. saieth thirtie, and hee died two hundred yeeres after Iosephs death. CHAP. III. Of the Iudges of Israel after Iosuas death, vntill Saul the first king of Israel: of their gouernment, warres, and continuance. THe Hebrewes had none to gouerne them 8. yeeres after, (so long inter regnum con∣tinued,) whereby the Israelites euer rebel∣ling against God, cōtemned the lawes, de∣spised religiō, quiteforgat Moses & Iosua, & the benefits of God toward thē: a thing almost incredible, that so soonefrō God
they would fall, hauing tasted of his goodnes and mercie so  de He∣brerū admin. long: for after they had entred into the lande of Canaan, and had seene the promise of God performed, (insteed of thanks for the same) they rebelled and prouoked God to anger: for The mutabi∣liue of the Is∣raelites. he suffered them to be vexed and tormented by tyrants, he tooke their libertie away from them, and left them destitute of all comfort and helpe: yet God raised from time to time such as should defend them, if they would be obedient and thankefull vnto God: and although the Israelites fell to ido∣latrie after Iosuas death, and thereby were giuen vnto their e∣nemies handes, as the tribe of Beniamin 1005. in one day slaine, and so the tribe of Dan, with others: yet God left them not for all their ingratitude, but stirred good and godly Iud∣ges, as Othoniel, Ehud, Gedeon, and others, to deliuer them in extremities. The Lorde pitied them, and raised Othoniel of the tribe of Iuda, the yonger brother of Caleb, which gouerned the Israe∣lites 8. yeeres, animated them againe to goe to warre against the king of Syria, whom God deliuered to the hands of Otho∣niel, and brought them to the fauour of God, that Israel had rest 40. yeeres, 32. vnder Iosua, and 8. vnder Othoniel: yet still Israel offended God, and committed wickednes before the Lord so long, vntill that Eglon king of Moab, was by God ap∣pointed Eglon king of Moab affli∣cteth Israel. to bee their scourge. Hee smote them and afflicted them, and kept them vnder him 18. yeeres, vntill Ehud of the tribe of Beniamin, a man whome God appointed to defende and to deliuer his people, euen he ouerthrewe the Moabites, slewe 10000. at one time, and killed Eglon the king of Moab, Ehud killeth Eglon. and caused Israel to haue rest 80. yeeres, the whole time of his gouernment. But when this good Iudge died, the chil∣dren of Israel againe fell from the Lord. Then Iabin the king Iabin against Israel. of Canaan had them in his power, troubled and persecuted them extremely: for God had sold them for their wickednes vnto the handes of Iabin and Sisera his Generall, yet still his mercie continued with them: for Debora and Barach of the Debora and Barac ouer∣threw him. tribe of Nephthali, were of God appointed to defend the He∣brewes:
for Israel preuailed against Iabin king of Canaan, and prospered vnder Debora and Barach, while Debora and Barach gouerned, which was fourtie yeeres. Some writers doe in∣terpose Shamgar to be the thirde Iudge of Israel, compting Othoniel to be first Iudge that deliuered Israel after Iosua, E∣hud Functius and Rfin. the seconde Iudge that killed Eglon, and then Shamgar, which slewe of the Philistims sixe hundred with an Oxe goade. Nowe while these thinges were done amongest the Israe∣lites, reigned in Niniue Pannias, in Athens reigned Pandion the 8. king of the Athenians. About this time Bithinia was buil∣ded. Gedeon the first Iudge, one of the tribe of Manasses, after Gedeon. that Israel committed wickednes, was sent by God to deli∣uer them from the Madianites, who at that time oppressed Israel miserably: but they alwaies in great extremities, at the Iosephus lib. 5. cap. 7. last pinch, when necessitie forced them, and miserie oppres∣sed them, according to their wonted maner, cried vnto the Lorde, and he heard them, and helped them by Moses in E∣gypt, and in the wildernes by Iosua, to come to the lande of Canaan, and in the lande by Othoniel, in often deliuering Isra∣el from the king of Syria, by Ehud, in sauing them from Eglon Othoniel. the king of Moab, whome Ehud most boldely and zealously killed in his priuie chamber, by Shamgar, in defending them Shamgar. from the Philistims, of whome he slewe sixe hundred with an Oxe goade, by Barach and Debora from Iabin king of Canaan, Barac and De∣bora. and Sisera, and nowe by Gedeon, whom God raised to defend them, and to deliuer them from the Madianites, who preuai∣led much against Israel: for both the Madianites, and the A∣malekites, brought Israel into so great misery, that they made The great mi∣sery of Israel. them dennes in the mountaines, and caues to hide them∣selues from the Madianites. After seuen yeeres oppression and affliction, then they cried vnto God, when they were most afflicted and persecuted, and not before. But the mercie of God was with them for all their vilenes and stubbornes. Gedeon was called by God to be their aide, who ouerthrewe the Madianites, and ouercame the Amale∣kites, Iudg 7.
not by strength or force of Israel, but by the workes and wonders of God, as you may reade in the Iudges at large: for with three hundred, Gedeon slewe one hundred and twentie thousand of the Amalekites, Madianites, and Arabians. And though Ephraim murmured against Gedeon, yet he appeased them, and reuenged him selfe on them of Succoth and Penu∣el. Reade the 8. of the Iudges, you shall be satisfied. By Ge∣deon nowe againe Israel was restored to the former libertie and dignitie, hauing vanquished the Madianites, and slaine Oreb and Zeeb, two of their princes, and their heads brought Oreb and Zeeb 2. princes of Madianites slaine. to Gedeon beyond Iordan. Nowe reigned Panninas in Niniue, the fiue and twentieth king of the Assyrians. Pandayon of that name the second king after Cecrops, reigned in Athens. Euristheus the first king of Euristheus. Mycena: this was that king, whose fame was great in Greece: he brought the Argiues and their kingdome subiect vnto My∣cena, which kingdome continued from Iacobs birth, vntill Ge∣deons time, fiue hundred and fiftie yeeres, during which time reigned foureteene kings ouer the Argiues. About this time reigned in Troy, Ilus the fourth king: of Diuers names of Troy. Dardania. this kings name Troy was called Ilion, being first called Dar∣dania by Dardanus, who first builded it, in the last yeere of As∣catades the eighteenth king of Assyria, at which time Moses di∣ed in the plaine of Moab. Then Tros altered the name of Dar∣dania after his owne name, being the third king of Troy, and called it Troia, and nowe last of all by Ilus the fourth king, cal∣led Troiae. Ilion. Dedalus, of whome the Poets fained much, flouri∣shed likewise about this time, and fled with his sonne Icharus Ilion. from Greece vnto Creete, vnto king Minoes. Mydas gouerned nowe in Phrygia. This was he, of whome the prouerbe is made, Midas eares, &c. And in Sicyonia reig∣ned Polybus their second king in Gedeons time. Cadmus, who for ielousie of his wife Armonia the sister of Iasius, brought letters first into Greece from Phenicia, as Xenophon sayth, 17. Zeneph. de equiuecis. letters. Nowe after Gedeon had gouerned Israel fourtie yeeres, he
likewise died, hauing left behinde him three score and tenne sonnes, lawfully gotten by wedlocke, and one bastard by his concubine Druma, a woman of Sichem. This bastard was na∣med Abimelek, a wicked and a cruell tyrant, full of all mis∣chiefe, The tyrannie of Abimalec. and bent to all wickednes: hee slewe by his treache∣rie, conferring with his mothers kinsfolkes, all his bre∣thren, onely Iotham by fleeing escaped, who a little after∣wards Iotham esca∣peth. tolde the people of Sichem the parable of the trees, of the figge tree, and of the vine tree, and of the bramble. This Abimelek, when hee had vsurped the kingdome, and put all his brethren to death, vsing all kinde of tyrannie in such sort of wickednes, that after he had slaine all the Sichemites, and taken the Citie, and burned a thousand of men in the Towre, he then destroied the Citie, and sowed salt there∣in, that it might bee vnfruitefull, and neuer serue to any vse. Thus was Sichem destroied for their vngratitude to Gede∣ons sonnes. Then Theber and Abimelech besieged it, where a woman threw a peece of a milstone vpon Abimelechs head, and slewe him, after he had vsurped three yeeres the gouern∣ment. Thus God taketh vengeance on tyrants, by such mise∣rable death: for marke the calamitie that fell vpon the po∣steritie of Gedeon, a man of singular fauour with God, and yet three score and tenne of his sonnes by wedlocke slaine, and his bastard the tyrant that slewe them, to succeede him. The sinne of Israel was the cause thereof, and of many more plagues. Miletum, a towne in Miletia the Countrey of Thales, one Miletum buyl∣ded. of the seuen wise men of Greece, was about this tyme buil∣ded, and Tyre an other famous towne was builded in Pheni∣cia: Tyre is builed. this was builded 240. yeeres before the Temple of Salo∣mon was builded. Thola of the tribe of Isachar, nowe iudged Israel three and Thola Iudge in Israel. twentie yeeres, during which tyme, the people liued in tranquillitie and peace in the beginning of the fourth
Iubile, at which tyme flourished Orpheus the Thracian, and the great Musician. Sosarinus the 26. king of the Assyri∣ans, reigned in Niniue at this time. Hercules the sonne of Am∣phitrion, Hercules borne. was likewise in this age borne. After Thola, succeeded not by succession (as I wrote be∣fore) but by the election of God, (for the will of the Lorde should be a lawe to his people) Iair the Gileadite, of the tribe Iair the 8. Iudge of Is∣rael. of Manasses, the 8. Iudge of Israel, vnder whom likewise the I∣sraelites liued quietly all the time of his gouernment, which was 22. yeeres: who ruled Israel in prosperitie, hauing 30. Iairs 30. sonnes. sonnes that rode on 30. assecoltes, men of great authoritie: and they had 30. cities in the land of Gilead. As soone as Iair Iairs 30. sonnes posses∣sed 30. Cities. died, Israel wrought wickednes in the sight of the Lord: they serued Baalim and Astaroth, the gods of Syria and Sidon: and God was angrie, and gaue them to the handes of the Phili∣stims, and the children of Ammon, who vexed and oppressed Iuda, Israel oppres∣sed. Beniamin, and the house of Ephraim, against whom the children of Ammon went ouer Iordan to fight with them: so that all Israel, specially they that dwelt in the lands of the A∣morites beyond Iordan, were sore tormented. 1. Reg. cap. 10. Then they cried, then they praied, then they confessed their sinnes, and sayde, they had serued Baalim. God most mercifully heard their crie, and appointed them Ieptha a va∣liant Ieptha is ap∣pointed their captayne. Captaine, the sonne of a stranger, and therefore was chased away by his brethren, and nowe by God appointed their Captaine: whome they reiected before as no body, nowe God hath chosen to doe these enterprises. Men of∣ten desire helpe, euen of those, whome before they haue re∣fused. This poore abiect, exiled and banished by his bre∣thren, slewe and destroied the Ammonites, and tooke twen∣tie of their cities, for the which fact, Ieptha was much enui∣ed by the men of Ephraim, in the like sort as they of Sichem did enuie Gedeon: notwithstanding, he killed 42. thousand Ephramites. Thus Ieptha ruled Israel 6. yeeres, and ended his gouern∣ment Ieptha ruled 6. yeeres and died. most happily. Tantanes reigned and gouerned the
Assyrians about this time: and Theseus the 10. king of A∣thens ouercame the monster Minotaurus. The historie you Minotaurus. shall reade in Plutarch, in the life of Theseus: for the Athenians paied tribute to Minoes king of Creete, for the death of Andro∣gius Androgeus sonne to Mi∣noes king of Creete slaine. his eldest sonne, who was by treason slaine in the Coun∣trey of Attica: for the which cause Minoes pursuing the re∣uenge of his death, the Athenians by entreatie of peace, to appease Minoes wrath, sent to Minoes, which peace being granted vpon condition, that the Athenians should be bound to sende him yeerely vnto Creete 7. yong boies, and as many yong girles, some say, to feed Minotaurus the huge monster; others say they were shut within the Labyrinth, wandring vp and downe, and could get no place to come to, vntil such Theseus sayled to Creete. time as they died: some others say, that king Minoes kept these youthes of Athens as prisoners within the Labyrinth, in memorie of his sonne Androgeus. Howsoeuer it was, The∣seus, after he had fortified Athens with people, to whome he gaue lawes, and coyned money, with moe things, sailed from Athens vnto Creete, and wanne the citie of Gnosus, slewe Deucalion with all his Garde and Officers, and killed Mino∣taurus. Minotaurus slayne. About this time, Hercules instituted certaine games or ma∣steries, called afterwards Olympiades, in respect of Mount O∣lympus, The games of Olympia. the place where these exercises were appointed. This was 430. yeeres before any Olympiade began. Likewise in the time of this Iudge Iephthe, Theseus rauished Helene Menelaus Theseus raui∣shed Helen. wife, & was by Aedoneus king of the Molossians, taken and im∣prisoned: but by his companion Hercules he was rescued and deliuered. Hercules tooke Ilion, killed Laomedon the king, and gaue the kingdome to Priamus his sonne. At what time, the Amazones, a people of Scythia, mooued warres against the Thebans: here is the first mention made of them in histories, of whose originall you may reade Iustine, Iustin. lib. 2. where you shall see more. Nowe after Ieptha had gouerned I∣srael 6. yeeres, obeying God in all thinges, saue in his rashe vowe, in sacrificing his daughter, he died, and was buried in
one of the cities of Gilead. Abesan the Bethlemite, of the tribe of Iuda, gouerned the I∣sraelites Abesan suppo∣sed to be Boaz the husband of Ruth. 7. yeeres. Certaine writers suppose this Abesan to be the Prophet Dauids Grandfather: for Ishai Dauids father, was borne in the time of Iair, in the which time happened in∣ter regnum for 18. yeeres, whereby the Hebrewes were com∣pelled to serue the children of Ammon, and the Philistims. They were in great miserie this time, vntill Israel repented, Iudic. 10. which was the onely repentance & acknowledging of sinnes we can reade of Israel, described in the Iudges at large. This Abesan had 30. sonnes, and 30. daughters, and he sent his 30. daughters to bring other 30. more for his sonnes, and when he had gouerned 7. yeeres, he died, and was buried at Beth∣lehem. Then Elon came in steede of Ieptha: he was of the tribe Elon. of Zabulon, and he iudged Israel 10. yeeres, and died, and was buried in the Countrey of Zabulon. After him Abdon of the Abdon. tribe of Ephraim, iudged Israel 8. yeeres. Of these three last Iudges there is nothing left in memorie woorth the wri∣ting. During this time, in Niniue gouerned Tanteus, the 29. king of the Assyrians Mezentius gouerned the Tuscans: but be∣ing driuen by the people, called Vitulones, out of his chiefe Herodot. lib. 2. citie, he fled vnto an other citie of his, called Carites, and from thence gathered a great armie, and went in armes a∣gainst Aeneas with Turnus. Protheus the Egyptian, a Priest of great Ianus, flourished this time. Likewise happened this season, a great deluge in Egypt, called diluuium Pharaonicum, in Diodo. lib. 2. so much that the Isle of Pharaoh was drowned with water. A∣gamemnon reigned nowe in Mycena, of whom Thucidides doth make mention in the preface of his first booke. About this time, Helene againe was taken away by Paris: hereby the Grecians did gather a great armie for rescuing of The second rauishment of Helen. Helene: after, Messengers being sent vnto Priamus, and being denied of restoring of Helene, the Greekes prepared for warres 1210. nauies, as Dares Frigius writeth. After this greatwarre, the Latines beganne their kingdome, ouer whome Aeneas
after Latinus time was the first king, hauing married Laui∣nia, Latinus daughter. All these things were done in the be∣ginning of the sixt Iubile, at which time reigned in Athens, Demophon the 12. king of the Athenians, and one Mopsus reigned in Cilicia, of whome they were named afterwarde Mopsecrenae. Then after Abdons death, Israel had no Iudge for fourtie Eusebius. yeeres, but continued in their wickednes, and offended the Lorde, whereby they were oppressed by the Philistims, vntill the birth of Samson, of the tribe of Dan, whom God had bles∣sed with many vertues, as strēgth, courage, godlines, & zeale to reuenge the people of god vpō the Philistims. This was the last Iudge of Israel: but for that the historie is written in the 13. 14. 15. and 16. of the Iudges, I will omit other things: for during the time of Samson, which was twentie yeeres, Isra∣el Samson 20. yeeres. was by the Philistims much molested, and fourtie yeeres af∣ter Samson, when the Israelites were gouerned vnder Ely the Elie 40. yeeres. high Priest. Nowe the Iudges of Israel ended that gouern∣ment, which God deliuered them euen from Moses death, vntill the birth of Samuel, 357. yeeres, adding thereunto 40. yeeres of Moses gouernment, doeth make the continuance of the Iudges of Israel to be 380. and 17. About this time, Orestes the sixt king of Mycena, slewe Pyr∣rhus Orestes slewe Pirrhus. the sonne of Achilles, in the Temple of Apollo: for after Orestes time, there reigned no more kings in Mycena, but O∣restes sonne, named Tisamenus, after whome succeeded Pen∣thilus, and after him Cometes, the last king of Mycena. After this Cometes, descended the stocke of Heraclides, which after∣ward Heraclides. came from Peloponesus, and tooke Mycena. Thus ended the kingdome of Mycena, who beganne their gouernment in the time of Gedeon, at what time the king∣dome of the Argiues was translated vnto Mycena, where reigned 10. kings, whose names are these.
Perseus. Stelenus. Euristheus, who was ac∣compted a second Her∣cules for his worthines. After him Atreus. Theistes. Agamemnon. Orestes. Tisamenus. Penthilus. And Cometes the last king. The continuance of these kings was from the beginning of Gedeon, vntil the beginning of Elie the high Priest, which was 157. yeeres: so long continued the kingdome of Mycena. Mycena. Now after Samsons daies, the house of Israel began accor∣ding to their vse, not to thanke God for his benefites, but stil discontented, murmuring against God, seeking newe Magi∣strates, newe lawes, wearie of their gouernment and of their The vilenesse of the Iewes. Iudges, most desirous of change, stubborne people, and a wilfull nation, idolaters, rebellious and factious, alwaies by disobedience offending their God. God followed their hu∣mors, they had what they would, and they did what they li∣sted: Their crie for a prophet and for a king. they had Elie the high Priest for their Iudge 40. yeeres, in his time the Arke was taken by the Philistims, his sonnes slaine, and himselfe fell from his stoole, and died. After Elie the high Priest died, they had Samuel for their Prophet, but they still cried out for a king: for neither Iudge, Priest, nor Prophet might please them, but a King: and therefore God commanded Samuel to anoint Saul to be their king. But first I Samuel anoin∣ted Saul. will lay downe the names of all the Iudges that iudged Israel, from the first vnto the last. After Moses and Iosua succeeded 1. Othoniel of the tribe of Iuda. 2. Ehud of the tribe of Ephraim. 3. Debora of the tribe of Ephraim. 4. Barach of the tribe of Nephthal. 5. Gedeon of the tribe of Manasses. 6. Abimelech the bastard of Ge∣deon, the tyrant that slew his 70. brethren. 7. Thola of the tribe of Issachar. 8. Iair of the tribe of Manasses. 9. Iephthe of the tribe of Manasses. 10. Elon of the tribe of Zabulon. 11. Abdon of the tribe of Ephraim. 12. Samson the last Iudge of the tribe of Dan. After these, Ely the Priest, and Samuel the Prophet.
Now God had commaunded Samuel to annoint Saul their king, saying vnto Samuel, They haue not cast thee away, but they haue cast me away euer since I brought them out of Egypt to this day, because they were not content with the order that God had appointed, but would be gouerned as the Gentiles were. CHAP. IIII. Of the third change of the common wealth of the Hebrewes, first from Oligarchia vnder the Patriarchs: secondly from Aristo∣cratia vnder the Iudges, now to a Monarchie vnder Kings, which Israel cried out and neuer ceased vntill they had a king. NOw Saul was king of Israel in the begin∣ning Saul was cho∣sen king of Is∣rael. of the 7. Iubile, at what time Tineus gouerned the Assyrians, and Melanthus gouerned Athens: for though Saul & Sa∣muel gouerned together 40. yeeres, yet Saul gouerned as a king (as both Iosephus and Ruffinus affirmed) not ten yeeres. He had good successe in the beginning of his warres, for God gaue him the spirit of strength and courage against the Moabites, Edomites, Ammonites, and against the Philistines, till Saul disobeied God in sparing of Agag, for the Saul spared Agag, and was reprooued by Samuel. which Samuel reprooued Saul, and the lord reiected Saul, and his kingdome was gluen to Dauid. For after the great victo∣ries of Saul of those afore rehersed nations, he was comman∣ded by Samuel to take armes against the Amalekites, & to spare neither man, woman, or child, cattell or beasts: but for sa∣uing of Agag the king, and few of the fattest beasts for sacri∣fice, Saul lost his kingdome: disobedience was the cause thereof. Some may thinke the cause to be small that Saul did, to be reiected from his kingdome, the sparing of a kings life: So 50000. Beth∣shemites slain forlooking in∣to the Arke of the Lord. likewise may they iudge of the men of Bethshemesh, who be∣cause they had looked into the Arke of the Lord, he slew 50. thousand, three score and ten men: for it was not lawfull for any either to touch the Arke, or to looke within it, saue only
to Aaron the high priest: and to difobey GOD, and to breake Gods commaundement, is a thing most terrible. Now though Saul spared Agag, disobeying God, yet Sa∣muel Samuel hewed Agag. most zealously without any further delay hewed him in pieces. After this, Samuel returned to his house to Bethleem, where he was commaunded to annoint one of the sonnes of Ishai king of Israel: and hauing all the seuen sonnes of Ishai before him, saue the yongest which was Dauid, who kept his fathers sheepe in the fieldes, Samuel commaunded Dauid to be sent for: at whose comming the Lord said to Samuel, Arise, an∣noint him: for this is hee. And Samuel tooke the horne of The first a∣nointing of Dauid king of Israel. oile, and annointed him king in the middest of his brethren, and the spirite of the Lord came vpon Dauid from that time forward, and the spirite of the Lord departed from Saul. And now though Dauid was annointed king by Samuel the Prophet, yet GOD would haue Dauid to be exercised in many things before hee should haue the vse of the king∣dome. After this Samuel went to Ramah to his house, and came no more to see Saul vntill Saul died. Samuel loued Saul much, and mourned much for him, and God therefore reprooued Samuel. Samuel was a godly Iudge ouer Israel, who with great care and diligence serued God, and gouerned his people, keeping his circuite once euery yeere, from Bethel to Gal∣gala, and from Galgala to Masphat, and from Masphat to all townes vpon his wayes to Ramah, where Samuel dwelt, and there hee set vp an altar vnto the Lord and iudged Is∣rael. Euen so did Debora sit vnder a Palme tree betweene Debra. Ramah and Bethel, iudging and determining causes of the people. This Prophet gouerned Israel fortie yeeres. Saul be∣ing deposed and throwen from his kingdome, hee fell vn∣to great melancholie, imagining how he might compasse and bring things to passe with troubled minde: for the e∣uill spirite of the Lord came vpon him, that hee often∣times
was molested and vexed with troublesome thoughts. And to ease the king of these agonies, instruments of Mu∣sike, with all kind of harmonie were thought very neces∣sarie of his counsell. Dauid was called and sent for by Saul Dauid sent for by Saul. to plaie vpon the harpe before Saul: for hee was skilfull in Musike: so Saul loued Dauid and made him his armour bearer. While Saul was in this melancholie moode, the Phili∣stines were againe in armes against Israel, wasted their coun∣trey, destroyed their Cities, and prouoked the Hebrewes to warre. Saul made readie his hoste: but while yet they were preparing for the battell, Goliah a mightie huge man, a great Giaunt, vaunted forward from the hoste of the Philistines Goliah. by himselfe, cried and called for a combate, if any one man of the Hebrewes durst, defying Israel, and blaspheming their God. But GOD prepared Dauids heart mightie and vali∣ant, Dauid slue the great Giant Goliah. and with a sling to bee able to ouerthrowe this Gi∣ant: for Dauid by the experience which hee had in time past by Gods helpe, nothing doubteth the danger of Goli∣ah, sithence hee killed a Lion and a Beare before this time, being but a shepeheard in the field. Hee was fullie per∣swaded by Gods spirite to haue the victorie ouer Goliah, being mooued with a feruent zeale to be reuenged vpon this blasphemer. But true it is, Comes virtuti inuidia. Here Saul began to Sauls enuie to Dauid. enuie Dauid, and to laie snares to kill him: for great acti∣ons are full of dangers. But there is no danger where God defendeth and saueth: the vertues of Dauid purchased much enuie, much daunger, which Dauid escaped by the proui∣dence of God. But Saul still deuised his destruction, vsing all policies, and inuenting many stratagemes to ouerthrow Dauid, promising Dauid his daughter Michol to wife, see∣king at Dauids handes nothing but valiant courage and ser∣uice agaynst the Philistines. But the more victories Dauid wanne, the more danger ensued him: the greater seruice
he did, the more he was enuied and hated: for Saul feared Dauid seeing the Lord was with him, and Ionathan the sonne of Saul told Dauid the wicked purpose of his father, so that Dauid was driuen to flee from Saul, and to hide himselfe in a Caue. Samuel the Prophet about this time died, and was buried Samuel died at Rama in his own City. in Ramah his owne citie. Dauid being still persecuted of Saul, wandred and fled from Saul to Achis king of Gath, where hee should haue a charge vnder the king to fight against Israel, which troubled him not a litle: yet such was the infirmitie of Dauid, that he durst not denie the king. Now Saul all this 1. Sam. 2. 8. while following his wicked purpose, consulted with a witch to know of Samuels spirite the successe of his kingdome, by whom, I meane not Samuels spirit, but the spirit of Satan, he was fully certified of his ruine and of the end of his kingdom which happened to Saul and to his children: for it fell out that Saul killed himselfe, and his children were slaine in the Saul killed himselfe iu Gilboa. 1. Sam. 31. 2890 The triumph of the Phili∣stines ouer Saul. battell, a cruell life hath a desperate end. After, the Philistines found Saul, Ionathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua his three sonnes lying dead in mount Gilboa after the victorie, and the Philistines cut off Sauls head, and stripped him out of his armour, and they laied vp his armour in the house of Ashtaroth their idole, and hanged his bodie on the wall of Bethshan in token of victorie and triumph. Saul died after the deliuerance of Israel from Egypt 473. yeeres, after the calling of Ioseph into dignitie in Egypt 660. yeeres, and after the flud 1234. yeeres. Thus the wicked in their pompe and pleasure consider not the iudgement of God. During this time raigned Dir∣cillus ouer the Assyrians, the 31. king, and Aeneas Siluius the 4. king of the Latines. In Athens this time raigned Codrus the last king of the Athenians, betweene whom and the Peloponesians grew great warres, and continued vnto the last destruction of all Greece. In the time of Saul certaine people were driuen out of Thessalia called Boeotij: they found a land to inhabite, which at this day is called Boeotia, before named Cadmeia. The
The kings of Sicyonum, called otherwise Peloponesus, ended in Sauls dayes, euen when Israel began their kingdom. About this time the kingdom of Lacedemonia began, where first raigned Euristhenes, of whom descended Leonidas and Cleomenes, two valiant captains, which ouerthrew the Persi∣ans in the great battell at Thermophila. About this time de∣scended the stocke of Heraclides into Peloponesus. Read of this further in Herodotus. Homerus surnamed Chius, a great Magi∣tiā, flourished in Sauls time, the kingdom of Corinth together with the Lacedemonians began a litle before the eight Iubi∣lee, in the yeere of the world 2865. But to goe forward in the historie, Saul being dead, and Dauid the last time after Sauls death a∣nointed king ouer all Israel. 2. Sam. cap. 5. Dauid the last time annointed, the kingdome of Israel not yet came to Dauids handes: for some of Sauls sonnes liued and withstood Dauid, as heires to Saul, and held all the tribes of Israel saue the tribe of Iuda, ouer whom Dauid was the second time annointed king, and Dauid dwelt in Hebron 7. yeeres: Ishboseth the sonne of Saul was likewise annointed king ouer the house of Israel: hence grew great warres betweene the house of Saul and the house of Dauid: for Abner the chiefe captaine of Saul, and the master of Sauls horses, thought it not fit that any should gouerne Israel but Sauls sonne, who was right heire to the kingdome, perswading the people thereunto, and gathering force together, and would by the sword make Ishboseth king of Israel, who kept then his court at Manahim, vnder whom all the Hebrewes sauing the tribe of Iuda were ruled. Dauid this time lying in Hebron, and hearing of Abners pre∣paration to warres, consulted with the Lord, and sollicited A battaile be∣tweene Abner the chiefe captaine of Saul, and Ioab the chiefe captaine of Dauid. his owne cause carefully: he appointed Ioab to be his Lieute∣nant. These two great captains Abner and Ioab, full of indig∣nation, and willing to trie the kingdome by battell, they met by the poole of Gibeon where Abner and Ioab fell to the sword, and the battell was exceeding sore that same day. But Abner and the men of Israel fell before Ioab, so that 360. men were slaine. Thus God would confirme Dauid in his kingdome by
ouerthrowing of his aduersaries. These warres continued long, for Abner made all his power for the house of Saul. But God wrought otherwise to bring his purpose to passe: while Saul liued, hee had a concubine named Rizpha, with whom Abner kept companie, and consumed more time with Rizpha then he did in the seruice of Ishboseth. The king being moued with some choler, charged Abner with his fault con∣cerning his fathers concubine: this checke could not be wel disgested of Abner, and therefore he communed with the el∣ders of Israel, and perswaded them to take Dauid for their king: and after that, Abner went to Hebron to Dauid, and pro∣mised him that he would bring all Israel vnder his gouern∣ment: and all this Abner did rather for malice & hatred that he bare to Ishboseth, then for any good will he bare to Dauid. Notwithstanding, Dauid accepted in good part his cōming to him, thogh Ioab would haue had the king to slay Abner for his priuate grudge, which was the killing of Asahel Ioabs bro∣ther, which within a while after Ioab reuenged, for he killed Abner vnknowing to Dauid, whose deth Dauid lamēted much. Ioab killeth Abner. When these newes came to Sauls sonne that Abner was dead in Hebron, he was discouraged, and all Israel was afraid 2. Sam. cap. 3. with him, and so within a while after he was slaine by Banah and Rechab, two men that were captaines of bands: this they both did in hope of lucre and fauour with Dauid, and they were rewarded, as he that slew Saul: for in as much as neither the example of him, nor dutie to their master, nor innocen∣cie of the person, nor the reuerence of the place did feare them, they died for it. Now Dauid was made king ouer all Is∣rael, after he had raigned seuen yeeres ouer Iuda in Hebron: he went with all his armie to Ierusalem vnto the Iebusites the in∣habitants of the land at that time, and tooke the forte of Zi∣on, and dwelt there, and builded round about it. Hiram king The Moabites and the Phi∣listines are o∣uerthrown by Dauid, and are tributaries to Israel. of Tyrus sent Cedar trees, and carpenters and masons, they builded a house for Dauid. Againe, the Philistines came vp a∣gainst Dauid, and he smote them from Geba to Gazer. The arke was not yet come from the house of Abinadab in Gibeah, whi∣ther
Dauid with 3000. chosen men of Israel went, to bring 2. Sam. cap. 8. the arke to the citie of Dauid. When Dauid had subdued the Iebusites, Philistines, & other diuers nations, as the Syrians, Phoenicians, Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, and Mesopotamia, vntill the riuer of Euphrates, so that Dauids fame spred farre, his kingdome prospered, his people grew strong, and himselfe in all his enterprises most happy: Then Dauid ruled and raigned ouer all Israel, and executed iudgement and iustice to his people. And being at rest from his enemies with great quietnes in Ierusalē, behold, both his 2 Sam. 11. 12. fortune and his great fame forsooke him: for he committed adulterie with Bethsabe Vrias wife, and wrote his letters to Ioab Ioab was sisters sonne to Da∣uid. his lieutenant, with Vrias in this sort. Put Vrias in the forefront of the battell, and cause the souldiers to recule backe from V∣rias, that he may be smitten and die. Which being done, the king was glad, and tooke Vrias wife to his house, and maried her: but the Lord was angry with Dauid, and sent Nathan to Nathan the Prophet sent to accuse Da∣uid of adultery and murther. accuse him of adulterie and murther. What grew of this? cru∣ell dissention betweene Dauid and his children. God gaue o∣uer Dauid to be afflicted and tormented on both sides, inward and outward. For Amnon defiled his sister Tamar, and Absalon killed Amnon: such was the wrath of God vpon the house of Dauid, that one wickednesse fell on the necke of another: Ab∣salon fled vpon the killing of his brother, and went to Geshur, and then Absalon practised to aspire to the kingdom, and laid snares to entrap his father the king. Absalon gathered force to dispossesse Dauid, for Achitophels councell is alwayes readie Ahitophels councell. in matters of treason. Now Dauid felt the anger of God for sinne, hee confessed that he had deserued this plague: for Dauid was faithful and obedient to God, and shewed himselfe contented with these afflictions. Absalon goeth forward with his armie, and Dauid fled ouer Iordan to Mahanaim: Absalon passeth likewise ouer Iordan and followed fast, as Achitophel had councelled him: so Israel and Absalon pitched in the land of Gilead. God raised fa∣uorers vnto Dauid in euery place where he came: for certain
of the Reubenites and Gadites could not beare the insolencie of the sonne against the father, and therefore with all the power they had, they ioined with Dauid, and the battell be∣gan, so there was a great slaughter of Absalons side, to the nū∣ber of 2000. Israel fled before Ioab, and Absalon was caught by the haire of his head vnder a bough of an oke, where he han∣ged till Ioab came and killed him, and so Dauid againe was re∣stored Absalon killed. to his kingdom, being persecuted of Achitophel for his counsell, of Semei for his threatning and cursing, and of Ab∣salon for his treason. Now this warre being ended, new warres againe began betweene Iuda and the tenne tribes of Israel, more cruel then the warres of Absalon: for Sheba a man of Ephraim, he now a∣gain raised Israel against Dauid, and made the Israelites to for∣sake Dauid, and to follow Sheba: but his head was caried by Ioab to Dauid. After this, Dauid had foure great battels with Foure battels with the Phi∣listines. the Philistines, slew them, and subdued them vnto the last. Thus was Dauid deliuered by God from all daungers, ty∣rannie and treason, and saued from Saul, Absalon and many o∣thers. When Dauid had gotten by the sword peace and qui∣etnesse, and brought all nations subiect vnto him, hee tooke his rest and thanked God in Psalmes, Hymnes, Odes & Ver∣ses, which Dauid sang vnto God in praise of victories which God gaue him. But yet more troubles came on Dauid: The Lord so suffered Satan to tempt him, that Dauid commaun∣ded Ioab nombred all Israel by the comman∣dement of Dauid. 2. Sam. 24. Troubles in Israel againe. Ioab to number all Israel and Iuda, from Dan to Beersheba, which Ioab did: the people were in number of able fighting men, 1100000. Gods wrath was kindled against Israel, so that much it offended God that Dauid should trust in mē, sithence onely God had oftentimes deliuered him: and the Lord sent Gad, Dauids seer, with three things to take his choise: Pesti∣lence, Gad the pro∣phet sent to Dauid. Famine, or Warre. Dauid chose rather to fal to Gods mercy, then to trust to man. Then fell pestilence in Israel from the one side of the countrey to the other, and there di∣ed 70000. men. Now after this, Dauid waxed old, and hee caused Salomon
his sonne to bee annointed king before he died, whom hee charged to walke before God vprightly, exhorting him to serue God, to vse iustice and iudgement in Israel. Dauid com∣manded Dauids coun∣sell to Salomon. Salomon his sonne to kill Ioab for his murthering of Abner and Amasa, and to take the like punishment of Semei which railed & cursed me, when (saith he) I was at the worst. Dauid left to his sonne more welth in Israel to build a temple to the Lorde, then Alexander the great had in Babylon by the conquest of Darius: for Iosephus doth write, that Hircanus the high priest a 1000. & odde yeeres after Dauids death, opened the graue of Dauid, and brought 3000. talents to satisfie the rage of Antiochus Demetrius sonne, who laying siege to Ierusa∣lem, was contēted to returne with some of these talents with∣out any harme done. And Dauid died being 70. yeres of age, Dauid dieth. after he had bene 40. yeeres king of Israel: seuen in Hebron, and 33. in Ierusalem. Dauid died 803. yeres after the death of Abra∣hā, after the death of Adam 2000. after the birth of Christ 1070. During this time of Dauid, raigned in Assyria Eupales the 32 king, in Lacedemonia Argis the second king of the Lacedemoni∣ans. Now failed the state of kings in Athens, and there began a new forme of common wealth gouerned by Iudges, which The kings of Athens en∣ded. now began by Codrus sonne named Medon, after whose name they were named afterward, Medontidae for a while. Latinus Sylaius raigned the 6. king ouer the Latines, & in Corinth raig∣ned Ixeon the second king of Corinth. About Dauids time there was builded in Asia a citie called Magnesia, and another in I∣talie called Misene, now called Cuma. Salomon the sonne of Dauid, & the third king of Israel, of the Salomons raigne. tribe of Iuda, a man endued with singular wisdome, & in great fauour with God, as soone as he had sit on his fathers throne, he remembred the words of Dauid, and with care and zeale he followed his fathers steps in seeking to please the Lord Not∣withstanding, the Israelites being froward and stubborne, e∣uer reuolting from their GOD, were alwayes forgetfull of Gods benefites, as after the death of Dauid fell out: for in Dauids time, Israel flourished, and all things prospered in Iuda.
But scant had Salomon bene annointed king, but Adoniah Sa∣lomons Adoniah Salo∣mons elder brother aspi∣red to the kingdome. brother aspired to the kingdome secretly and subtil∣lie, seeking the good will of Bethsheba Salomons mother, and by her meanes to haue Abishag, which Dauid his father loued tenderly, to wife. But his craft was found out, and his preten∣sed treason spied by Nathan the prophet, and by Salomon him∣selfe: who perceiuing that Adoniah was the elder brother, and Salomons sen∣tence vpon Adoniah. had Abiathar the priest on his side, and Ioab who tooke Adoni∣ahs part when he would haue vsurped the kingdome: Salomon hereby was mooued to make sure waies, and remembring his fathers charge before he died concerning Ioab and Semei, he executed iustice first vpon Adoniah, afterward commaunded Adoniah slaine Benaiah to fall vpon Ioab for the murthering of Abner Sauls Ioab slayne. chiefe captaine, and Amasah a nigh kinseman of Dauid, who enuying their fauour & credite with the king, slew them, and was now iustly punished for sheading of bloud. Now Adoniah and Ioab two great enimies of the king, be∣ing Abiathar the priest bani∣shed. dead, Salomon banished Abiathar the priest, and called to be a priest Sadock in the roome of Abiathar: & so the office of the high priest was taken away from the house of Eli, and re∣stored to the house of Phineas. After that, Salomon called She∣mei, The office of the high Priest was ta∣ken from E∣lies house. and charged him with the breaking of his othe in passing ouer the riuer of Cedron being forbidden by the king, & char∣ged him further with wickednesse against his father Dauid, in reuiling and cursing of him, and he was likewise slaine by the sonne of Iehoida called Benaia. By this meanes the kingdome of Israel was established in Salomons hands, and Salomon obeied Salomon mari∣ed the daugh∣ter of Pharaoh. God in all things, and then he taketh Pharaoes king of Egypts daughter to wife. Iosephus in his eight booke and 2. chapter, saieth: that the kings of Egypt were al called Pharaones from Minaeus time that builded Memphis, vntil the time of Salomon, which was 1300. yeeres: for Minaeus raigned in Egypt many yeeres before Abra∣ham came to Egypt, & this is the cause why Herodotus doth o∣mit the names of the kings of Egypt, euen 330. kings. Salomon repaired the wals of Ierusalē, and went to Gibeon, to sacrifice:
for there their tabernacle was at that time, there was no tem∣ple yet builded to the Lord in Ierusalem. In Gibeon the Lord appeared by dreame to Salomon, and gaue him wisedom more Salomon flori∣shed. then any prince of the world had, as by his sentence vpō the two harlots appeared. Salomon flourished and prospered, and farre excelled all the kings of the world: for his wisedom was so abundant, as the sand that is on the sea shore: No Philosopher, no Astro∣loger, no Chaldean magi, no Egyptian priest might apprehend Salomons iudgement, for God was his schoolemaster. Salomon was famous throughout the whole world: hee wrote 3000. Salomon wrote 3000. pro∣uerbs and pa∣rables. Prouerbes, and bookes of Odes and Verses 1000. and made fiue and twentie songs which perished in Ierusalem when Is∣rael was taken captiue vnto Babylon, the temple then being burned, and the citie destroyed. He wrote of all kind of trees, He wrote of trees from the highest to the lowest, Ioseph. lib. 8. cap. 2. from the Cedar tree that is in Libanon, vnto the Hysope that groweth on the wall. He spake of beastes, fowles and fishes: He wrote of incantations and of other secret artes, which Io∣sephus affirmeth at large. And there came of all countries to heare the wisedome of Salomon, and all the kings about him sent vnto him and sought his fauour. Now coucerning the princes, rulers and officers which were vnder Salomon, the purueiance for victuals, the number of his horses, and the order of his house, they were almost vn∣credible, were it not written in sacred histories. Salomon raig∣ned ouer all kingdomes from the riuer of Euphrates vnto the 1. Reg. cap. 4. land of the Philistines, and vnto the border of Egypt. And to speake of the hospitalitie of Salomon, and to set it downe as it is in the Bible read, it exceeded: for euery day he had 30. mea∣sures of fine floure, and 60. measures of meale for bread: he had ten fat oxen, and 20. oxen of the pastures, and one hun∣dred sheepe, besides Hartes, Buckes, and other diuers fat foules. Salomon had 4000. stalles of horses & chariots, in eue∣rie 40000. horses. stall tenne horses, which in all amount to 40000. and he had 12000. horsemen. This blessing had Salomon at Gods 2. Cron. 9. hand: for the which benefits he was much bound to set foorth The hospitali∣tic of Salomon.
Gods glory, which had giuen him such wisedom to gouern, such rest and peace in his gouernment, that he sent to Hiram king of Tyrus an old friend of Dauid his father for Cedar trees and Firre trees to build a temple to the Lord his God, & Hi∣ram The building of the Tem∣ple. 1. Reg. cap. 7. satisfied Salamon to his full desire. Salomon had 7000. men that bare burdens, & 80000. masons in the mountaine, and he had three thousand and sixtie, whom Salomon appointed officers and vnder officers of the worke. As for the forme and frame of the Temple, the height, the bredth, the length, and the deepe foundation thereof, with al things belonging thereunto, as Cherubins, caldrons, bases, cups, pillars, can∣dlesticks, pots, vessels, altars, tables, bowles and basons, it is in order written in the kings. The Temple being fini∣shed, the Arke was brought to the Temple, where the tenne Commaundements were written where Salomon made his praiers to God, to accept their sacrifice, to sanctifie the tem∣ple, and to continue with Israel for euer. Salomon all this while The Lord ap∣peared to Sa∣lomon the se∣cond time. followed the Lord, and therefore God appeared vnto him the second time, as he appeared vnto him first at Gibeon, pro∣mised him that hee would establish the throne of Israel, and defend his people for euer, if they would walke in his wayes: in token whereof the glory of God filled the temple, fire came downe from heauen and consumed their sacrifice, and Gods presence was with Salomon. Saba. Now the renowne of Salomon went farre, so that Saba Queene of Aethiope came to Ierusalem to heare Salomon, and to see his porte: but after, Salomon fell from God, hee loued many outlandish women which were idolaters, he followed the women of Moab, of Edom, and of Ammon, and of Sy∣don, that hee had 3. hundred Queenes and Princes that were Salomon had 300. wiues, 700. concu∣bines. his wiues, and 700. concubines: these women turned Salo∣mons heart from GOD after the gods of the Gentiles, so that hee worshipped Ashtaroth and Milcom, the gods of the Ammonites, his God forsooke him therefore, and raised vp Salomon an Idolater. aduersaries, euen Ieroboam a seruaunt of Salomon, but an o∣uerseer of his worke, whom Salomon sought by diuers
meanes to kill. But Ieroboam fled to Egypt, where he kept him∣selfe till Salomon died. Thus Salomon, whom God with so many blessings had exalted aboue all the kings of the world, left to his sonne Rehoboam whom he loued best, the kingdom of Israel to gouerne: after he had raigned in Israel 40. yeeres, he died before the natiuitie of Christ 1000. yeeres, before the Salomon died. birth of Romulus the first king of Rome, 231. before Alexander raigned king in Macedonia, 666. and before the last destructi∣on of Hierusalem by Titus Vespasian, 1070. While Salomon gouerned Israel, Laostanes the 33. king of the Assyrians raigned in Niniuie, Labotes raigned in Lacedemo∣nia, What kings raigned in o∣ther coun∣treis. and Agesilaus in Corinth. This time gouerned the Atheni∣ans, Agastus the second Iudge of Athens, and Alba Syluius raig∣ned ouer the Latines the 7. king. In Salomons time was Ephesus builded by Andronicus, as Eusebius affirmeth, and in Egypt go∣uerned Simendes called in the scripture Sisac, to whom Ierobo∣am (as you heard) fled from Salomon for feare in the 21. Dina∣steia of the Egyptians. The sonne of Hiram called Baleastartus succeeded in Tyrus, and liued but 7. yeeres. Sadock and Ahiah Salomon be∣gan his king∣dome in the yere of the world, 2930. were now prophets in Israel. Salomon began his kingdome in the yeere of the world, 2930. After the going of Israel out of Egypt 480. yeeres, 12. yeeres before the beginning of the 9. Iubilie, Salomon began to build the temple in the 4. yeere of his raigne, before the building of Rome, 300. yeeres, after the calling of Abraham from Chaldea, 910. yeeres. Salomon buil∣ded to himselfe in Libanon a house for his pleasure, and this was in making 13. yeeres, and was finished 20. yeeres after the building of the Temple, before the monarchie of Ma∣cedonia gotten by Alexander the great, 700. yeeres, and before Augustus Caesars empire 1000. yeeres. Salo∣mon died before Romulus birth, 231. yeeres be∣fore Christ, 1000. yeeres, and before the last destruction of Ierusalem vnder Titus Vespasian. 1070.
CHAP. V. Of the taking away of the ten tribes from Iuda to Samaria, by Ie∣roboam: of the first diuision of Israel, of their warres and last destructions of the kings of Israel by Salmanasser. NOw after Salomon, raigned Roboham his sonne borne of an Ammonitish woman named Noma. Ieroboam now being in E∣gypt when Salomon died, he was sent for by some of the elders of Israel: God brought it to passe, that when Ieroboam came from Egypt vnto Sichem, the people followed Ieroboam, and fled from Roboham: for hee despised the counsell of the ancient wise men which folow∣ed Roboham de∣spised counsel. Salomon his father, and hee onely esteemed rash and yong counsell, whereby Ieroboam being strong and stoute, and subtile amongst the people, perceiuing the nature of the people to be drawen from the sonne of Salomon, God suffe∣ring Ieroboam sent for into Egypt these things to goe forward for the sinnes of Israel, Ie∣roboham builded him an house in Sichem, and not long con∣tented Ioseph. lib. 8. cap. 3. with that, he builded another house for his dwelling in a towne called Penuel. Now about this time in Ierusalem, approched the feast of the Tabernacle, which Ieroboam considered of, and sawe it was dangerous to let the people to goe to Ierusalem, least the people should take pleasure with the rites and ceremonies of the Temple, with their solemne pompe and dignitie in religion, with their sacrifices and feastes, and therefore he erected two altars, the one in Bethel, the other in Dan, and caused two golden calues there to be worshipped. Here the tenne tribes of Israel committed idolatrie, forsooke their God, and they followed Ieroboam in all wickednesse. Thus Dan and Bethel with all the idolatrie of Israel, continued till Idolatry in Dan and Be∣thel. Iosias time. Roboham this while hauing but the tribe of Iuda and Ben∣iamin vnder his gouernment, repaired his Cities, fortified
his countrey, and gathered an armie of an hundreth and foure score thousand to fight against Ieroboam, and to bring Israel againe to Roboham. But they were warned by the Pro∣phet Shemaiah not to fight, saying, This is done by GOD, who of his iust iudgement will punish offenders: all this happened for Salomons sinnes. Now the kingdome was de∣uided The people of Israel deuided to two names: Israel which continued two hundred sixtie two yeeres, and Iuda which continued three hundred ninetie three yeeres, but both Iuda and Israel forsooke God, and followed idolatrie, vntill GOD at length by his iust iudgement destroyed them vtterly: for the rigour of Robo∣ham in following of lewd counsell, made the people to re∣bell, the house of Dauid against the house of Israel: hee fo∣lowed women, and had eighteene wiues and threescore con∣cubines, Roboham had 18. wiues, 60. concubines. hee had eight and twentie sonnes, and three score daughters. Roboham forsooke the Lord, and therefore Susack king of Susack came vp against Ie∣rusalem. Egypt came vp against Ierusalem, ransackt the Citie, spoyled the Temple, and tooke the treasures of the Citie, and of Ro∣bohams house: this was the first destruction and affliction of Ierusalem: for Roboham had transgressed the commandements of God: for no calamities could come to Israel, no countrey might annoy them, no king could hurt them. But when the Lord gaue them ouer for sinne, this Susack king of Egypt Susacks armie. came in the fift yeere of Roboham, with twelue hundred cha∣riots, with three score thousand horsemen, and the people were innumerable that were with him, as Iosephus saieth, foure hundreth thousand footemen came from Egypt with him, Lubins, Sukimes, people of Affrica, called also Troglo∣dites, The first time that Ierusa∣lem was taken by Susack. he had Aethiopians, Egyptians, with diuers other more nations, & he tooke the strong cities of Iuda, and caried their treasure to Egypt. After the time of Roboham, who raigned 17. yeeres, suc∣ceeded Roboham died. him in Ierusalem his sonne Abia: against whom Ie∣roboam straight after Robohams death, came in armes with great expedition: they both prepared for the battell, the
greatest armie that euer was in Israel. Abia had foure hundred Abia moned wars against Ieroboam. thousand chosen men: Ieroboam had eight hundred thousand men, and the battell met and fought: and for that Abia tru∣sted in the Lord, who is the stay of all kingdomes, and the gi∣uer The greatest battaile that euer was in field, and the greatest slaughter. of all victories, hee had such a victorie ouer Ieroboam, that Israel fled before Iuda, and God deliuered them vnto the hands of Abia being yong of yeeres, and too tender to exe∣cute such a charge, and to gouerne such an armie, so that the slaughter was great, euē fiue hundred thousand chosen men slaine, so that Iudea preuailed against Israel at that time, be∣cause they depended vpon the Lord of their fathers: so Ie∣roboam was brought vnder at that time. Hee was so pursued by Abia, his strong Cities taken, his men slaine, himselfe hardly escaped, the Lord plagued him that he could not re∣couer . Cron. cap. 13. strength in Israel againe all the dayes of his life. For because God made him a king of a seruant, and he neglected the seruice of God and forgot his benefits, therefore he was iustly punished, for Dan and Bethel was the first and the grea∣test cause of his fall. I neuer read in prophane histories of such a number, neither in the historie of the Church foure hundred thousand souldiers in one armie, and eight hundred thousand in the other. Ieroboā after he had raigned in Israel 22. yeres, died. See you the anger of God for idolatrie in seruing & worshipping the calues of Dan and Bethel: for God gaue Israel ouer vnto their last destruction, which was in the time of Sal∣manasser Senacheribs father: for Iuda deuoured Israel, and Israel deuoured Iuda, that both at length were destroyed and ouer∣throwen: Iuda by Nabuchadonosor, & Israel by Salmanasser: both Ierusalem and Samaria made euen to the ground in the time of Zedechias the last king of Iuda, and Osea the last king of Israel. Then succeeded Ieroboham in Israel Nadab their second Ieroboam died. Nadab the 2. king of Israel. king, the naturall sonne of Ierobohā, wicked, malicious, cruel, following his fathers steps in idolatrie & all wickednes. But God stirred vp one tyrant to punish an other: for Nadab did offend in prouoking the people to commit idolatrie with his golden calues, and as hee was most busie in besieging a
towne belonging to the Philistims, named Gibbethon: he was slaine of Baasha, according to the Oracle of God before spo∣ken. The sinne of Ieroboam was great, and therefore Baasha was appointed by God to destroy all the house of Ieroboam: he slewe Nadab, and reigned in his steede. In Iuda nowe reigned Asa, a wise, godly, and discreet man, Asa the sixt king of Iuda. an obseruer of the lawes of God, a walker in his waies: and in Israel, Baasha the 3. king reigned, & warre grewe betweene Baasha king of Israel, and Asa king of Iuda. Ramah was builded by Baasha to that purpose, that none might goe in or out to Asa king of Iuda, who followed the example of Ieroboam. But Asa assembled all Iuda, and tooke the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, and builded Mizpah and Geba, two great townes in Iuda: & the warres continued betweene the house Warres be∣tweene Israel and Iuda. 2. Cron. cap. 15. of Israel, and the house of Iuda. But still the Lorde had respect to Dauid, and to his stocke: for Baasha and all his posteritie had the like ende, as Ieroboam had, and his house. But Asa wal∣ked right before God, he destroied idolatrie, tooke away the altars of the strange gods, and brake downe the images, and cut in peeces the groues: hee deposed his mother Maacha from her regencie, and threwe downe her idols which she had made in a groue. Asa brake it, stampt it, and buried it at the brooke of Cedron, & commanded Iuda to seeke the Lord, and to serue him: for he knewe like a godly king, that in a∣bolishing The praise of a good king. of idolatrie, and aduauncing true religion, the rest and quietnes of kingdomes stoode. For when Zareus king of Aethiopia came against him with an huge armie of ten hun∣dreth Zareus king of the Aethiopi∣ans great ar∣mie. thousand to Maresa a towne of Iuda, Asa praied vnto God when he should goe to fight, and acknowledged all vi∣ctories Asa his vi∣ctory. to come from God, and therefore obtained the vi∣ctorie ouer the Aethiopians, slewe them, and pursued them to Gerar, and there was no warre in Iuda vnto the 35. yeere of Asa. Yet he was reproued by the Prophet for his couenant with Benhadad king of Syria, and likewise offended God to trust in Physicions to helpe his disease, & not to seeke helpe at Gods hands.
About this time, Elias and Elizeus were borne in the mid∣dle age of the world. Capetus Siluius nowe reigned, the 9. king ouer the Latines: Eutropius calleth this king Epidus. In Assyria Eutrop. lb. 1. gouerned Ophrateus, and in Lacedemonia the fift king Doristus, at what time Smyrna was builded in Samos, in king Asas time, Nepher Cherres reigned in Egypt king, for 4. yeeres, and after him succeeded a king in Egypt, called Amenophis, who reig∣ned Nepher king of Egypt. 9. yeeres. In Athens gouerned Phorbas the 5. Iudge, and in Corinth ruled Basis the 5. king, after whom their kings were called Bacidae, as the Romane Emperours were named Caesares. In these daies, Hiel the Bethelite did build Iericho, which fel be∣fore Iericho reedi∣fied. in the daies of Iosua, at the sounding of the trumpets, and shouting of the Israelites. But the iudgement of God follow∣ed Ieroboams house, according to the Prophet, saying to Na∣dab, and to Baasha that slewe Nadab, That dogges should eate Nadab slaine by Baasha. him that died in the citie, and the fowles should eate him that should die in the fielde. After Baasha succeeded Ela his sonne, and reigned in Tirza 2. yeeres, and Zimri his seruant conspired against him: and Ela slaine by Zimri. when the people heard that Zimri had killed the king, they rose against Zimri, and made Omri their king. At that time Israel was in campe against Gibethon, and besieged Tirza, which siege continued from the time of Nadab, Ieroboams sonne, where Zimri kept him selfe in holde: and perceauing the citie should be taken by Omri, he burned him selfe, and Zimri burned himselfe. the kings house with fire. After this, reigned Omri twelue yeeres, sixe in Tirza, and Ioseph. li. 8. cap. 9. sixe in Samaria, a towne which he builded, and was the first king that was buried there, after the building of Samaria, and Omri buylded Samaria. after the burning of Tirza. After this, the seate and pallace of the kings of Israel were in Samaria, and they are often cal∣led the kings of Samaria, and the kingdome of Samaria, being so called of Samarus the lorde of that soile, or rather of that mountaine, where Samaria was builded. This was the iudge∣ment of God, to bring his purpose to passe, that one king should destroy an other king, vnto the last confusion of Isra∣el:
for such is the nature of idolatrie, that the elder it is, the more abominable it is, superstition doth encrease, and dan∣ger doth ensue. After that Omri was deade and buried in Samaria his owne Omri dyed. Achab his sonne succee∣ded him. towne, Achab his sonne succeeded, one farre worse, and more wicked then the rest: for hee mended no euill thing in Israel, but added euill to euill, and augmented the sinnes of Israel: he married that vngodlie and wicked wretch Iezabel, by whose meanes (being wicked before) he fell to all strange and horrible idolatrie, and cruell persecution: he reared vp Melancthon. Chron. 2. groues and altars to Baal, and prouoked the God of Israel more then all the kings before him. Yet the mercie of God neuer failed the faithfull: he stirred vp good and godly men in wicked and superstitious countreyes, as Abraham and Lot, among the Chaldeans, Tobi in Niniue, Raguel and Gabel in Media, and here amongest these idolatrous and wicked I∣sraelites, he raised Elias and Elizeus, Amos and Osea, faithfull Prophets to instruct his Church. Nowe in Iuda king Afa waxed olde and died, in the time Asa king of Iuda dyed. Iosaphat a good king. of this euill and cruell king Achab, after whome succeeded his sonne Iosaphat, who gaue him selfe wholy to serue the Lorde, and therefore preuailed against Israel. God gaue him a pure heart to seeke Gods glorie, that his enemies could not execute their rage against him: for Iosaphat trusted in the Lorde, and abolished idolatrie, and he prospered. Iosaphat builded in Iuda pallaces and cities, and hee taught the peo∣ple in Iuda, and all Iuda brought presents to Iosaphat. The Philistims and Arabians gaue him giftes, and brought him tribute. But let vs leaue Iosaphat a while, and returne to Achab in Samaria, where Elias was warned of famine that should come to Samaria: of which famine, Menander in his Chronicles of Menander in his Chroni∣cles of the kings of Tyre. the kings of Tyre, doeth make mention: for Elias was com∣manded to depart Eastward, and to hide him selfe in some place about the riuer of Cherith against Iordan, which for want of raine became drie, & the hunger grew great in Israel.
This famine was 800. yeeres after the famine of Egypt, in the time of Ioseph: yet the Rauens euery day fedde Elias, and The Rauens fed Elias. brought him bread and flesh euery morning and euery eue∣ning, and he dranke of the brooke Cherith; thence went Elias to Sarepta, and there mette with a poore widowe gathering stickes, of whom he asked a morsell of bread, and a little wa∣ter, and the woman said, I haue but one handfull of meale in a barrel, and a little oile in a cruse, which I am about to make readie for me and for my sonne, that we may eate before we die: for there was no hope of any more sustenance: yet of The famine of Samaria. that little she had, she gaue vnto the Prophet of God some part thereof, for the which afterward the barrell was full al∣waies of meale, and the cruse full of oile, vntill plentie of foode came, as Elias saide: hee restored the widowes sonne being dead, to life againe. He was sent to Achab to shewe Gods mercie to him, and to his people in Samaria: for the famine was great, and God pitied the wicked for the godlies sake, and strengthned Elias with his spirite, to doe great miracles, by sending downe fire from heauen to burne the sacrifice, which he had prepared to his God, to reproue Baals prophets, therefore 400. of Baals 400. false pro∣phets slaine. prophets were slaine by Elias, at the brooke Kishon, whome their god Baal could not helpe. But Elias was sought therefore of Iezebel Achabs wife: she thought to reuenge the deaths of her Prophets, yet her rage and furie failed, and her purpose missed of Elias. Achab by Ie∣zebels counsell, exercised all crueltie and tyrannie: Naboth was killed for his vineyarde by Iezabels counsell: and by the Wicked Ie∣zebel. wickednes of his wife, Achab became a vile Idolater, a cruell murtherer, and as one that wholy gaue him selfe to serue sinne. Nowe while Achab was in committing one euill vpon an other in Samaria, the peace ended which was made for three 1. Reg. cap. 22. Ioseph. lib. 8. cap. 8. yeeres, betweene Achab king of Israel, and Benhadad king of Sy∣ria: for after that Achab had victorie ouer Benhadad king of Sy∣ria, (for when Samaria was besieged by the king of Syria, and
the hostes of the Aramites filled the countrey, yet God gaue the victorie to Achab. God before went about with signes and miracles to drawe Achab from his impietie, and nowe he giueth him victories, whereby he should acknowledge the Lord to be his God) yet still trusting to his false prophets, he ioyned the second time with Iosaphat king of Iuda, & went to Ramoth Gilead, to fight againe with the king of Syria, where Achab was slaine, and he was brought to Samaria to be buri∣ed, Achab slaine and is buried in Samaria according to the Oracle of Elias. When the king was thus slaine, the battell was ended: Io∣saphat returned to Ierusalem, for Iosaphat had made affinitie with Achab: for Ioram Iosaphats sonne, had married the daugh∣ter of Achab, named Athalia, a wicked woman, such as her mo∣ther Iezabel was. Thus Iosaphat walked in Dauids waies, and sought not Baa∣lim: he was vertuous and godly, and followed the comman∣dements of God, and forsooke the trade of Israel: he aboli∣shed idolatrie from Iuda, and prospered in riches and honor, yet he was reproued and rebuked by the Prophet, for that he would helpe the wicked, and loue them that hated the Lord: for the wrath and iudgement of God is ouer all those that support the wicked. But in respect of his care and zeale The peace and quietnes in Iosaphats dayes. which he had ouer Iuda, he had happie successe in all his re∣giment. In the 25. yeere of his reigne, he called all the Elders and chiefe officers of Iuda before him, commanded them seuere∣ly to walke vprightly before God, and to reade the lawes of God to the people, and to acquaint them with the true religi∣on: his reward was therefore peace and quietnes within Iu∣da: praemium piorum pax. For the Philistims paied their ordina∣rie tribute euery yeere, and the Arabians (as Iosephus saieth) paied yeerely to Iosaphat 630. Lambes, and so many yong kids. The Lord gaue to Iosaphat victories ouer the Ammonits, Ammonites, Moabites, I∣dumeans, by Iosaphat ouer∣throwne. Moabites, and Idumeans: for the children of Ammon and Mo∣ab rose against the inhabitants of Mount Seir, and one slewe an other.
Thus God gaue vnto him marueilous victories ouer his enemies, and Iuda flourished 25. yeeres, the whole time of Iosaphats gouernment, the time of his father Asa, and the time of his Grandfather Abia, three good kings of Iuda, during the time of 69. yeeres, Iuda preuailed against Israel. After Iosaphats daies, his sonne Ioram succeeded, who of∣fended Ioram succee∣ded Iosaphat his father. the Lorde, and walked in the waies of the kings of I∣srael, and followed the steppes of his father in lawe Achab. Io∣ram made him selfe strong, beganne in his first entring vnto the kingdome, to play the tyrant: for hee slewe all his bre∣thren with the sworde, and therefore Edom rebelled against Edom rebel∣led against Iuda. Iuda, because he had forsaken the God of his fathers. The Philistims were stirred vp against Ioram, and the Arabi∣ans: The Phili∣stines were stirred vp a∣gainst Ioram. he was cruell, and became a tyrant euen vnto those, whome by nature he ought to haue most chiefly defended. But Elias prophesied to him the rewarde and iustice of God that would ensue thereof, as Ioram afterwards felt: for as he spared no blood, but made hauocke of his brethren, and of his countrey, with the sworde: so it happened to him, to his wiues, and to his children, by the Arabians, and other barba∣rous people of the Ethiopians, who inuaded his countrey, dis∣possessed him of his life and liuing, & such calamities which with his eies he sawe: he died most miserably, his guttes gu∣shing out, being in the displeasure of God and man. Thus is idolatrie rewarded: one onely sonne named O∣chosias, Idolatry re∣warded. and that the yongest, escaped the sworde, and he suc∣ceeded his father, as wicked as hee, a very Idolater, for hee could not be good, being the sonne of Ioram, borne of A∣thalia, the daughter of Achab: hee followed his mothers counsell, and walked in the way of Achab, and went with Io∣ram Achabs sonne, to fight against Hazael, king of Syria, and he Ioram fought against Hazael king of Siria. Iehu slue Ha∣zael. was in that warre wounded, and after taken by Iehu king of Israel, who hiding him selfe in Samaria, Iehu slewe him and Ioram king of Israel, for so he was of God commaunded, and after a while he brake the necke of Iezabel Achabs wife, and Iehu brake Ie∣zabels necke. reigned him selfe king in Israel, who was by God appointed
to execute iudgement vpon the house of Achab. This king Iehu was annointed king for that purpose: Ocho∣sias liued Ochosias liued but one yere. Athalia a cru∣el Queene. Athalia de∣stroyed all the kings seede only Ias sa∣ued. 2 Cron. 23. 2. The stocke of Salomon peri∣shed. but one yere: which when his mother Athalia heard of, she rose & destroied all the kings seede, to the intent that there should be none to make title to the crowne, that there∣by she might vsurpe the gouernment: onely Iosias was saued by Iorams daughter, who had maried Iehoiada the high Priest, and his owne sister. This time by the tyrannie of this wicked Queene, the stock of Salomon the sonne of Dauid perished, & the kingdom of Iuda fell to the posteritie of Nathan, an other sonne of Dauid, of whose house it pleased God that Messias should be borne, so that the posteritie of Salomon was altoge∣ther extinguished. This Queene restored the temple of Baal, & raised vp altars, & nourished false prophets and priests to False Pro∣phets nouri shed & priests to maintaine Idolatrie in Iuda. maintaine idolatrie in Iuda. This Queene reigned 7. yeeres, then was she slaine at the commandement of Iehoiada the hie Priest, the house of Baal destroied, and his altars broken, and Mattan the Priest of Baal slaine. Ioas nowe beganne to roote out all idolatrie, and to set in order all thinges in Iuda: hee Ioas began to roote out Ido∣latrie. pleased God, and walked in his waies, while Iehoiada the high Priest liued, who was a faithfull Counsellor vnto him. But after his death, Ioas wanted good councell: he follow∣ed Ioas wanted good counsell, and therefore followed flat∣terers. flatterers, and by them he was brought to idolatrie, and after to tyrannie, which alwaies ioyne together: for Ioas killed Zacharie the sonne of Iehoiada the high Priest, and a Prophet of the Lorde, who had saued him from the tyrannie of Athalia. Ioas killed Za∣chary the sonne of Ieho∣iada. This is that Zacharie of whom Christ maketh mētion in Luke, saying, that from the blood of Abel the iust, vnto the blood of Zacharie the Prophet, &c. But what came of this? The king of Aram, he came with a small company against Ioas, against Iu∣da, The king of Aram came with a small company a∣gainst Ioas, Iu∣da and Ierusa∣lem. and Ierusalem, and destroied all the princes of the people, and sent all the spoile of them vnto the king of Damascus, and Ioas him selfe was of his owne seruants slaine. In Ioas time, Elizeus the Prophet died, and Homer liued, the first and most ancient learned amongest the Grecians. While Elizeus the Prophet died. Ioram the sonne of Achab reigned king in Israel, and Ioram
the sonne of Iosaphat reigned king in Iuda, being ioyned in af∣finitie by marriage. In other countreies reigned Persusennis Persusennis & Cheopes, kings in Egypt. king in Egypt: from this king, and from Cheopes his predeces∣sor in Egypt, doeth Herodotus make mention, not of the nom∣ber, but of the names of the kings of Egypt. In Athens gouer∣ned Mezades 30. yeeres, the 6. Iudge, and in Corinth likewise Mezades. Agelas the 6. king. In the daies of Ioram king of Iuda, reigned ouer the Latines the 10. king Tiberinus Siluius 8. yeeres. This king being drowned in the riuer called then Albula, Tiber first cal. Albula. afterward named Tiber, after his owne name, Agrippa Siluius succeeded him the 11. king, and he reigned 40. yeeres ouer the Latines. In Lacedemonia, Archelaus the 7. king, who reigned 60. yeeres ouer the Lacedemonians. The people of Rhodes at this time were lordes of the seas. Pigmalion reigned king in Tyre 40. yeeres: and in the 7. yeere of his reigne, his sister Dido (as Iosephus saith) builded Carthage, 143. yeeres after the Carthage buyl∣ded. building of Salomons Temple, and before the building of Rome, 135. Error is in Functius, and in other, in the time of the building of Carthage. There was about this time of Ioas, a king that reigned o∣uer the Tuscans, named Felcinus: he builded the chiefe citie of the Tuscans, and named it after his owne name Felcina. The Romanes long after that, called that towne, and the countrey it selfe was called Gallia Aurelia. Nowe to the kings of Israel and Iuda. After that Ioas had bene slaine by his owne seruants, for the stoning to death of Zacharias: Amazias Ioas his sonne succeeded him: who in the Amazias king of Iuda. beginning of his reigne shewed him selfe godly, and did exe∣cute things vprightly, but not with a perfect heart, in respect of his predecessors: he was called a good king: he reuenged the death of Ioas his father, and putteth them to death that He reuenged his fathers death. slewe him: he made prouision for warres, and nombred all the men, and hired a hundreth thousand valiant men out of Israel, for an hundreth talents of siluer, though he was forbid∣den by God so to doe. He ouer com∣meth the E∣domites. But Amazias went forwards, and slewe the Edomites, and
Amalekites, euen 20000. But the men of Israel requited that slaughter: they fell vpon the cities of Iuda, from Samaria vnto Bethoron, as they returned from Amazias to Samaria backe: and Amazias after the victorie he had ouer the Idumeans, He commit∣teth Idolatrie. brought their gods and their idols of Seir, and set them vp to be his gods, and worshipped them. But the gods of Edom brought Amazias to the handes of Ioas king of Israel, and he was afterwards slaine by conspira∣cie, Amazias slaine by conspiracy. fleeing from Ierusalem to Lachis. While Amazias reigned in Iuda, Ioram liued in Samaria, and gouerned Israel, and Ioram also gouerned Iuda of that name, and at that time: so two Io∣rams reigned together, one in Iuda, the other in Samaria: af∣ter whome succeeded Ieroboam his sonne in Israel. In the time of Amazias king of Iuda, Sardanapalus reigned Sardanapalus. in Assyria their last king, after whom the Assyrians lost their Monarchie: for Belochus had Babylon and Niniue, the two chiefe seates of the kings of Chaldea and Assyria. Arbaces helde Media and Persia vnder his gouernment. Hitherto nei∣ther the Assyrians nor Chaldeans molested Israel: but after∣wards God stirred them vp for his scourges, to punish Iuda and Samaria for their idolatrie, and after them, the Medes and Persians were as though they were the hammers of God, to destroy offenders. After Amazias succeeded his sonne Vzias, named also A∣zaria: Vzias. him did all the people of Iuda make king in steede of his father: he was but sixteene yeeres of age when he began to reigne in Israel. VVhile he obeied God, he prospered in 2. Cron. cap. 26. all his enterprises. Hee ouerthrewe the Philistims, brake downe the walles of Gath and Ashdod, God helped him, and prospered him against the Arabians, and the Ammonites: hee builded towres in Ierusalem, and towres in the wildernes: his fame spread to Egypt, and all the nations about Ierusalem were vnder his winges: but he waxed proude, vsurped the Priestes office, and he was punished and driuen out of the Temple, and the leprosie rose in his forehead: for he trans∣gressed Vzias leprosie. against God, to presume to burne incense, which
was the Priestes office in the Temple, being forbidden and resisted by Azaria, and foure score other Priests. Therefore he liued afterwards as a leper vnto the day of his death, in a Esai prophe∣cied. house by himselfe. Vnder this king Esai began to prophecie, and he prophe∣cied 80. yeeres the fall of these great kingdomes, Egypt, Sy∣ria, Assyria, Chaldea, and Tyre. Hee likewise prophecied of Kittim, and of the Macedonians. This Prophet was by Ma∣nasses Kittims the Romans. king of Iuda martyred, & cut in his middle with a sawe. Nowe during the time of this king Vzias, ruled in Israel Zachariah, the sonne of Ieroboam, being the last king of Israel that had the kingdome by succession of Iehu: for hee was the fourth in descent from Iehu: for so the Lord said to Iehu, Thy sonnes shall sit on the throne of Israel, vnto the fourth gene∣ration after thee. Shallum reigned a moneth king in Samaria, and Manahem slue him, and reigned in his stead. In the 39. yeere of Vzia, be∣ganne Manahem to reigne in Samaria: he likewise sought not God, but with money sought the fauour of Phulasser king of Manahem. Ashur, the father of Salmanassar, and graundfather of Sanehe∣rib infidels, and enemies of God, and therefore God was wroth, so that Manahem prospered not, and his sonne Peka∣hia Pekahiah. succeeded him in Israel, and reigned two yeeres and died. Nowe after Vzias dayes, his sonne Ioatham succeeded him in the kingdgme of Iuda, a man of great vertue, godly, and iust, and seeking to please God. Hee builded many ruinous things, by reason still of warres, and he was carefull to mend things amisse, so that Ioatham became mightie, because he di∣rected Ioatham king of Iuda. his wayes before the Highest: he fought with the Am∣monites and preuailed, and they paied him tribute. The Olym∣piads of Greece began in the second yeere of Ioatham. The Olympi∣ads began. About which time, Romulus the first king and builder of Rome was borne: In Ioathams dayes beganne first the king∣dome of Lydia. Ezechias also was borne this time: some sup∣pose Ezechias and Romulus borne that in Greece Lycurgus the lawe maker of the Lacedemo∣nians florished in these dayes, after whom, the kings in Lace∣demonia
failed, and the gouernement was altered. Nowe when Ioatham had reigned sixteene yeeres, Achas succeeded in Iuda, wicked, vngodly, cruell, and a great Ido∣later, like his predecessours: hee made moulten Images for Baalim, he burned his sonne, and sacrificed him vnto Idols, and deuils, and therefore the Aramites smote him, and Pe∣kah 2. Reg. 16. king of Israel slue in Iuda sixe score thousand in one day, and tooke prisoners two hundreth thousands, and brought all the spoiles and treasures vnto Samaria. Thus Iuda was destroyed, & vtterly almost ouerthrowne at that time. Achas after this great slaughter, did sende to Salmanasser king of Ashur, gaue him golde and siluer, and promised him more money, but it helped him not: for A∣chas sacrificed to the gods of Damascus, and to the gods of Aram, or of Syria, which was the onely cause of his destru∣ction, which Esai the Prophet had warned him of. After hee had reigned in Iuda sixteene yeeres, hee dyed, 3215 in whose dayes Romulus and Remus beganne to build Rome. Dionysius writeth, that the walles of Rome were begunne in the one and twentieth day of Aprill, and in the first yeere of the seuenth Olympiad. After this spoile and great slaughter of Iuda, Salmanasser king of Ashur came vp against Samaria, after that Hosea had Hosea the last king of Israel. reigned nine yeeres, of the which he payed tribute for eight yeeres, and in the ninth of his reigne he was taken prisoner, and the Citie of Samaria giuen to the Babylonians, and to the Samaria ta∣ken 212. af∣ter it was builded by Omri. men of Hamath, and to the men of Succoth, and to the other strangers, which the king of Ashur brought to dwell in Sa∣maria in steade of the people of Israel: and the tenne tribes of Israel were caried away captiue vnto the Cities of the Medes. Thus was Israel dispossest from glory and libertie, and caried captiue by Nabonasser, vnto Assyria, after they had Israel caried to Babylon. continued two hundred fiftie and three yeeres after Salo∣mons dayes, and after the going of Israel out of Egypt seuen 262. hundred seuentie and nine yeeres, in the tenth Olympiad.
This last thraldome fell vpon them for idolatrie and blas∣sphemie, which Israel against their God committed, hauing so often tasted of his mercie, and seene his workes in defen∣ding them alwaies, euen from their going out of Egypt, where they were in slauerie and bondage 430. yeeres, vntill nowe againe they are caried captiues and bondmen from Samaria Sinne the cause of Gods wrath. their natiue countrey vnto Babylon, 779. yeeres after their go∣ing out of Egypt: for they so prouoked the Lorde to wrath, euen from Ieroboams time, who builded Dan and Bethel, and e∣rected golden calues therin to be worshipped, vnto the time of Osea the last king: during which time, 19. kings reigned in Israel, of the which not one walked before God sincerely, but with horrible blasphemie & most wicked idolatry, they wor∣shipped idols and images, wherefore God gaue them ouer one to kill an other, and one to destroy an other, vntil Nabo∣nasser, which is Salmanassers time, who caried them prisoners vnto other strange countreies, and set strangers to dwell in Samaria. CHAP. VI. Of the continuance of the kings of Iuda after the kingdome of Israel was destroied, Samaria taken, and the 10. tribes of Israel carried captiue by Salmanassar into Assyria. THis time reigned in Ierusalem Ezechias, a Ezechias. godly zealous king, who destroied idols, and brake in peeces the brasen serpent, he tooke away the high places, & cut downe the groues, the altars, their images and i∣dols, and walked before God vprightly, and in the 14. yeere of his reigne came Senaherib with an huge host to Iuda, spoiling and destroying Senaherib laid siege to Hierusalem. Libna, Lachis, and other cities, laide siege to Ierusalem, threat∣ned the king, and blasphemed God most horribly, challen∣ging the gods of the nations, and defying the God of Israel, preferring the armies of flesh, and the strength of his hoste. But his bragging & boasting was sharply punished by the Angel of God, who slew at that time of the Assyrians an hun∣dreth
foure score and fiue thousand, and Senacherib him selfe 185. thousand slaine of the Assyrians by the Angel. Sanacharib slaine by his sonnes before his Idoll in the temple. before his idoll Niseroch, whom he worshipped & preferred before the liuing God, was slaine of his owne sonnes Adra∣melech & Sarezer, the iust iudgement of God for blasphemie. After this, Ezechias fell sicke, and was restored to health, in signe whereof God brought the Sunne 10. degrees backe in Achas diall: this good king repaired the Temple, instru∣cted the Leuites in the religion: he and all his princes of Iuda frequented the Temple, sacrificed daily to their God oblati∣ons of thanks giuing, and he commanded all the Nobles of Israel and Iuda, from Dan to Bersheba, to repaire to Ierusalem to keepe the Passeouer to the Lorde, which Passeouer was so great, that the like was not in Israel. This Passeouer vnder Ezechias, was 775. yeeres after the 2. Cron. cap. 30. Ezechias Pas∣seouer. Passeouer of Moses, and 775. yeeres before the Passeouer of Christ our Sauiour in the Newe Testament. Now after that Ezechias had destroied idolatrie, and had appointed Priestes and Leuites according to the commandement of God, prai∣ed for his people, and prouided for the Leuites liuings, and ordained ouerseers to distribute to euery Leuite his portion: Israel prospered all the daies of Ezechias, and all things went well with Iuda. But Ezechias being deade, Manasses his sonne succeeded Ezechias died Manasses suc∣ceeded him. Manasses Ido∣latrie. him, not in religion, nor in godlines: (for he followed not his father Ezechias in vertue, but his Grandfather Achas in all kinde of vices:) for this most wicked king restored idolatrie in Israel, vsed great crueltie, and he erected altars to Baal, and set vp images in groues: he practised witchcraft and sorcerie, and frequented the companie of them that had familiar spi∣rits, and those that were soothsayers. This king did much euill in the sight of God, he martyred the Prophet of God Esay, and consecrated his sonne in fire to his idoll: he shed innocent blood, and filled Ierusalem with iniquitie. Beholde, such a good father to haue such a wicked sonne. But the Lord God stretched ouer Ierusalem the line of Samaria, & the plummet of the house of Achab, and promised
to destroy Iuda, as he had destroied Israel: so he did with Ma∣nasses, and gaue him to Assur, and to his Captaines, who brought him in fetters, and bound in chaines to Babylon. But when he was in tribulation in Babylon, he called then Manasses a∣gaine restored to his king∣dome. vpon God, and God heard him, and deliuered him, and resto∣red him to his kingdome: so merciful is God when he is cal∣led vpon: for by this God instructed him to know him selfe, and to humble him selfe before God, whome he much abu∣sed. You may read in the bookes of the Kings, & in the Chro∣niches, the histories of the kings of Israel at large. Manasses died, and left behind him Amon his sonne, who Amon king of Iudah. reigned 2. yeeres in Ierusalem: he forsooke God also, & wal∣ked in the waies of Achas, and he was slaine by his owne ser∣uants which conspired against him in his owne house, & the people made Iosias his sonne king ouer Iuda, who beganne to Iosias king of Iudah. reigne in Ierusalem in the 8. yeere of his age, and in that age he was instructed by God to haue care ouer the people of Isra∣el: he sent messengers vnto all the townes, cities, and coun∣tries, & territories, to cal the Priests, the Leuits, the Nobles, and all men of what degree soeuer, to come to Ierusalem, where he him selfe read the bookes of Moses vnto the people, with oblations and sacrifices vnto God for the sinnes of Isra∣el: and those Priests that were not of Aarons stocke, that ser∣ued idols and images, he commanded them to be slaine: and whatsoeuer he found in Israel of the reliques of Ieroboam, he destroied, and burned the bones of the false prophets vpon the altars that Ieroboam erected: his zeale was prophesied of by Iaddo, 300. yeeres before Iosias was borne. Iaddo the Pro∣phet. Iosias hauing repaired the Temple, and hauing found the booke of the Law, he maketh a couenant with the Lord, that he and his people should walke before God vprightly and iustly. After that, he killed their Priestes, he brought downe their idols, he slew the coniurers, sorcerers, and soothsayers, and he burned the Priestes of Baal called Chemarims, whome Chemarims Baals priests. the kings of Iuda had founded to burne incense in high pla∣ces; & euery place of Iuda to the Sunne, to the Moone, to the
planets, and to all the hostes of heauen. His zeale encreased more and more, he threw downe the altars of Achas, and the altars of Manasses: hee had put also downe the horses, the charets which the idolatrous kinges had dedicated to the Sunne: he ouerthrewe the abominable idolatrie of Salo∣mon 2. Reg. 23. in the mount of Oliues, called also in the Chronicles the mount of corruption, where Salomon builded vp altars and groues to Ashtaroth the idoll of the Sidonians, for Chemosh the Ashtaroth, Che∣mosh and Mil∣com. idol of the Moabites, & for Milchom the idol of the Ammonits. In Iosias time all Iudea flourished with the seruice of God, and the lawes of the Countreies were put in practise: for there was in euery citie among the Hebrewes a chiefe Magi∣strate, as a Prince or Iudge, to determine causes in equitie & iustice among the people. But in the Metropolitane Citie, which was Ierusalem, were 70. wise & graue men, whose court or consistorie was kept in Gazith. The Iewish Talmudists na∣med these Sanhedrin: these passed both in nomber & in dig∣nitie other Magistrates: these first gouerned in Silo, & after in Sanherin. Ierusalem elected by Moses, by the expresse word of God: these Silo. were Iudges for life & death, & according to the custome & lawes of the Hebrewes, they were to condemne offendors 4. kind of waies: by running vpon a man to death, by stoning, by burning, and by strangling. That day that these iudged any offender to death, they obstained from meate. These Councellers continued vntill Herods time, and kept their Court at Gazith. Beside these Sanhedrioth, which were 71. were also twelue Princes ouer the people, of euery tribe of Israel one, which gouerned the whole twelue tribes of the people. Some write, that in euery Citie were seuen of euery tribe. But this good king was slaine in Mageddo, by Necho king of Egypt, who went vp at that time against the king of Ashur, wherein Iosias did offend God, because he consulted not with the Lord, before he sought with Necho. In Iosias time, in the 13. yere of his reigne, Ieremie began to Ieremie began to prophecie the 13. of Io∣sias. prophesie the destruction of Ierusalem, & he foreshewed of
the captiuitie of Babylon, of the miserie of the Iewes, of the fa∣mine, and of the last ruine by Nabuchadonosor: and howe af∣terward that king could not be quiet, but was troubled with one dreame and other, seeking soothsayers, wise men of Ba∣bel, coniurers, sorcerers, to interprete his visions & dreames: his vision of the 4. beastes, of the 10. hornes, of the battel be∣tweene the Ramme and the Goate, of the great image whose head was gold, &c. In Iosias time reigned in Media Phaortes the 6. king of the Medes, and in Lidia reigned Ardis the 6. king of the Lidians: Media, Lidia, and Rome, welnigh o one continu∣ance. for (as I wrote before) Lidia, Media, and Rome, began welnigh together. In Babylon reigned Nabuchodonosor the first of that name, and the father of Nabuchodonosor the Great: yet some take exception against the first Nabuchodonosor, saying that there was none such, as Beroaldus affirmeth. He was the 3. king Beroald. lib 3. of the Chaldeans, after Merodachs time. In Rome gouerned Tul∣lius Hostilius, their 3. king, who was now in warre with the Sa∣bines, and in Macedonia, Philip the 6. king: about which time the Grecians vsed first the Oracle called Dodonium oraculum. Nowe in Locretia reigned Zaleuchus, a famous Law maker, and more famous for the keeping of his lawes being made, euen against his owne sonne that should succeede after him king, as in an other place you may read more. Sibylla which is called Herophila, was of great fame in Samos at this time. Hero∣dotus writeth, that Batius the first king of Cyrena builded Zoan, Herodot. lib. 4. and after builded Cyrenes, and furnished the same with peo∣ple of Tyre, and of Greece. In the beginning of Iosias gouern∣ment, florished the great Historiographer Archilochus, whose authoritie for time is with the best approued: for he wrote a booke entituled De temporibus, with whom at one time liued Simonides, and Aristoxenes the Musition. Iosias began to reigne in the 30. Olympiad, and died in the 37. Olympiad, and 16. Iubile of the Iewes. After Iosias, Ioachim his sonne succeeded: for Necho king Iosias slaine. of Egypt, after hee had killed Iosias in Mageddo, hee gaue the kingdome to this Ioachim, called also Eliachim, paying 100.
talents of siluer, and one talent of gold, for yeerely tribute Ioachim brought cap∣tiue to Baby∣lon. vnto Egypt. But Necho within a while was ouerthrowen in battell by Nabuchodonosor the great, and the tribute which the Iewes paied vnto Necho now being slayne in the field by Necho slaine by the king of Chaldea. the king of Chaldea, was paied to Nabuchodonosor. But I haue writtē of this Ioachim & of his sonne that succeeded him, cal∣led also Ioachin, or Iechonia, & of Nabuchodonosor, in the histo∣ries of the Chaldeans, how they were subdued by Nabuchodo∣nosor, Iere. 36. Ioseph. lib. 10. c. 8. 9. whom God raised to destroy the rest of Israel the tribe of Iuda and the tribe of Beniamin. With this Iechonia was Da∣niel, Ananias, Azaria and Misael, caried captiue to Babylon: of whom Nabuchodonosor had care to instruct them in the Chal∣dean tongue, whereby they might serue the king and be in fa∣uour. It was the kings will that they should bee of Zedechias bloud, of the best fauour, and of the best complection. Some write that this captiuitie began from the 3. yeere of Ioachim, vnto the 20. yeere of Cyrus. Some other write that it began Some varie a∣bout the time of the capti∣uitie. from the preaching of Ieremie, which was the 13. yeere of Io∣sias, vnto the first yeere of Cyrus: and others, in the eleuenth yeere of Zedechias. They would not heare Ieremie the Prophet, who did fore∣shew the calamitie and miserie that should come vpon Ieru∣salem: but they despised him, imprisoned him, and burned his bookes, vntill an huge infinite armie of the Chaldeans laid siege to Ierusalem 18. moneths, and that it was at length taken and destroied, after much famine and plague during the time of these 18. moneths, after that 21. kings of Dauids tribe raig∣ned in Ierusalem for the space of 500. yeeres and odde, coun∣ting 21. Kings of Israel. as Iosephus saith, beginning from Sauls raigne, which was of another tribe. The wonders which were seene, before Ierusalem was de∣stroied, Ioseph. lib. 7. cap. 12. besides the threatning of the Prophets, were such, as might well perswade the Iewes of their calamities and mise∣ries not then beleeued, but afterwards felt. The first time they The first won∣der. saw right ouer the citie of Ierusalem a firie burning Comete, most like a bloodie naked sword flourishing to and fro ouer
the citie, which continued for the space of one whole yeere. The 2. wonder was a sudden cleere shining light, as bright as day light being in the night time. This light onely shined The 2. won∣der. about Salomons Temple, and about the sacrificing altars, the which the Iewes construed to be their better fortune, wherin they were deceiued. The 3. wonder was, that an Oxe being brought to the The 3. won∣der. Temple to bee slaine and sacrificed vpon a festiuall day, ac∣cording to the Iewish maner, that it brought foorth against the course of nature a Lambe in the middest of the temple, which was terrible and monstrous. The 4. wonder was, that the East brasen gate of Salomons Temple being so great and so heauie with iron barres and The 4. won∣der. great brasen bolts, that Vix à viginti viris clauderetur, the very wordes of Iosephus, that 20. strong men could scant shut that gate, opened of it selfe most willingly. The barres loosed, the bolts yeelded, that some of the ignorant Iewes prognostica∣ted the opening of the Temple should bee some great good thing to come. The fift wonder was seene vpon the 21. day of May, which seemed to be an hoste of men armed running on horsebacke, The 5. won∣der. and in charets, aboue the Citie in the skies, a little before Sunne setting. The sixt wonder, when the priests went vnto the temple in the feast of Pentecost, as they were woont to do by night, to The 6. won∣der. celebrate diuine seruice, they vpon a sudden felt the ground quiuer vnder their feete, and the temple shooke, and a voyce speaking, Migremus hinc, let vs depart hence. Yet a more horrible wonder there was, the daily crying The 7. won∣der. and exclaiming of a countrey man Iesus the sonne of Ananus, who for 7. yeeres and 5. moneths before the destruction, cea∣sed not in euery corner of the Citie, in euery streete, and spe∣cially in the temple vpon the Sabboth day, saying, Vox ab ori∣ente, vox ab occidente, vox à quatuor ventis, vox in Ierosolymam & templum, & vox in omnē hunc populum, continuing still this cry, though he was punished by the magistrates, and brought be∣fore
Albinus the Roman, which was then Caesars deputie in Ieru∣salem, in somuch as he was thought to be some furious foole, that he was left after whipping alone, who cried, Vae, vae ciuita∣ti, vae phano, vae populo, and last of all he said, vae mihi. This Iose∣phus saw with his eies, & heard with his eares, who wrote this historie. A greater wonder then all these, The true Messias The 8. won∣der. Christ, 40. yeeres before told of this, & yet was not beleeued. Ierusalem (as it was oftentimes) was neuer destroied, but they were warned before by the prophets of God: but they would not know the time of their visitation, and therfore came these euils vpon the Iewes: the towne sackt and made euen to the ground, their temple burned, & themselues slaine, destroied and scattered from the face of the whole earth. Now Ierusalem being thus destroyed, the temple burned, the people slaine, and the king Zedechia taken prisoner and brought to Babylon where he died: Nabuchodonosor like a fierce Lion proceedeth forward, inuaded Syria, subdued the Ammo∣nites and the Moabites, brought his armie to Egypt, slew the king, subdued the countrey, and brought those Iewes backe to Babylon that had fled from Ierusalem to Egypt. This was the miserie of the Iewes, and the last confusion of The misery of the Iewes. Iuda. The historie of this king concerning the last end of the Iewes, no where may be better read then with the Prophets. Nabuchodonosor had a sonne called Euilmerodach, who after the Euilmerodach. death of his father enlarged Iechonia from prison, and vsed him princely: for Iechonia in respect of Ierusalem, and the people therein being by Ieremie the prophet perswaded thereto, yel∣ded himself, his wife, his children, his nobles, and all the two tribes, vnto the hands of Nabuchodonosor. Ieremie, Ezechiel and Daniel, haue laid downe the ful histo∣rie The captiuity of Babylon. of Nabuchodonosor and of Euilmerodach, and of Balthasar, the three last kings of the Chaldeans, in whose time the empire of Babylon was had away from the Chaldeans vnto the Persians by Cyrus. This was the stocke of Dauid, being 21. kings after Da∣uid, lineally from his bodie descending, ended, whose names are these,
1 Salomon. 2 Rehoboam. 3 Abia. 4 Asa. 5 Iosaphat. 6 Ioram. 7 Ochosias & his mother. 8 Athalia. 9 Ioas. 10 Amazias. 11 Azaria. 12 Iotham. 13 Achas. 14 Ezechias. 15 Manasses. 16 Ammon. 17 Iosias. 18 Ioachas. 19 Eliacim. 20 Ioachim. 21 Zedechias. The kingdome of Iuda caried capue by Nabuchodonosor into Babylon after it had continued After the death of Salomon 395. yeeres. After the flud 1709. yeeres. After the natiuitie of Abra∣ham, 1416. After the burning of Sodom and Gomorrha, and the other three Cities, 1317. After the departure of the Is∣raelites out of Egypt, 912. After the destruction of Troy, 577. From the natiuitie of Da∣uid, 505. From the dedicating of Sa∣lomons temple, 412. And after the taking of Sa∣maria, and the destructi∣on of the ten tribes of Is∣rael, 133. yeeres. CHAP. VII. Of the returne of the Iewes into Ierusalem after the captiuitie, first by the decree of Cyrus, after by Darius, and last by Arta∣xerxes: of the second building of the Temple by Esdras, Nehe∣mia, and Zorobabel, and of the gouernment vnder the high priests. AFter the captiuitie of the Iewes, Daniel grew in great fauour with Nabuchodono∣sor, being by God instructed to expound the dreames of the king, and to vanquish Bel and all his priests, and to conuert Na∣buchodonosor to acknowledge God after he saw a dreame of foure beastes which came vp from the sea one differing from another. The first was a Lion which had Eagles wings, and the wings thereof
were pluckt off, and a mans heart was giuen him, meaning the Chaldeans and the Assyrians which were strong and fierce, The Chalde∣ans and the Assyrians. and yet their power ouerthrowen by the Persians power. The second beast like a Beare, which had three ribs in his mouth betweene his teeth, meaning the Persians which were barba∣rous The Medes and Persians. and cruell. The third was like a Leopard, which had vp∣on his backe foure wings of a fowle: this beast also had foure heads, signifying, Alexander the great with his foure cap∣tains, which after Alexanders death had the empire among them: for Cassander was king of Macedone, and Antipater after The Macedo∣nians and Grecians. him. Saleucus had Babylon and Asia the great, and Antigonus had Asia the lesse, and Ptolomeus had Egypt. The fourth beast which Daniel sawe, was fearefull and ter∣rible: The fourth beast the Ro∣mans. it had iron teeth, it deuoured and brake in pieces, and stampt the residue vnder his feete. This was meant by their Romane empire, a monster exceeding all kind of beasts: for the tyrannie and greedines of the Romanes excelled the rest: for that which the Romanes could not quietly enioy in other countries, they would giue it to other kings, vpon condicion to take them again when it pleased the Romanes. To this Da∣niel was the vision of the 70. weekes opened by the angel Ga∣briel, . weekes. who enformed him and instructed him of the time of the Messias comming, saying: 70. weekes are determined vpon the people, and vpon the holy Citie, to finish the wic∣kednes, to seale vp sinnes, to bring euerlasting righteousnes, and to annoint the most holy. Now at what time the 70. weekes began, some contro∣uersie there is: some from the first edict of Cyrus: some from Darius: and some from the time that Daniel spake it: and o∣thers from the 7. yeere of Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was 80. yeeres after the first commandement of Cyrus. The captiuitie of Babylon fell at that time when Tarquinius Priscus raigned in Rome, after whom the Romanes had no more The kings of Iuda, and the kings of Rome, ended almost about one time. kings after but two, so that the Iewes and the Romanes were gouerned by a state called Aristocratia of the Iewes. The 70. weekes, and the very last yeere of the captiuitie, was likewise
the last yere of the Assyrians & Chaldeans: for euen they which saw the destruction of Ierusalem, sawe also the destruction of Babylon: and what spoile soeuer Nabuchodonosor brought from Ierusalem vnto Babylon, the same did Cyrus in the last yeere of The first re∣turne of the Iewes in Cy∣rus time. his raigne restore, with a commaundement giuen to all the princes that ruled vnder Cyrus, to suffer the Iewes againe frō all places where they were scattered, to returne to Iudea, to builde vp Ierusalem againe, and to repaire the temple: and if any were not able through pouertie to returne, king Cyrus commanded that they should be furnished with necessaries: for God raised vp Cyrus to bee a friend to his people, and hee called Zorobabel, who was the chiefe gouernour of the Iewes. The nomber of them that returned from the captiuitie of Iuda, with the bountifulnes of Cyrus towardes them, you may in the booke of Esdras reade at large: For after that Cyrus was slaine by Tomiris in the warres of the Massegits, his sonne Cambyses succeeded him: who by the Samaritans complaint, commaunded the Iewes to staye from the buil∣ding, Ioseph. lib. 7. cap. 3. and from their repairing of Ierusalem, which conti∣nued 9. yeeres after. Cambyses returning from Egypt died at Damascus, after hee had subdued Egypt: succeeded Darius the sonne of Histaspis. Hee againe in the 2. yeere of his raigne au∣thorized the Iewes to do as Cyrus had commanded them: for so Darius found in a coffer of Cyrus in Ecbatana, a booke wher∣in Ecbatana the chiefe citie of the Medes. the acts of the kings of Medes & Persians were written, and the decree of Cyrus which he also established, by the meanes of Zorobabel in pleasing the king for his probleame, as it is written in Esdras. Esdras cap. 6. But God still exercised his people with some crosses, be∣cause of their stubbernes: for from the time they came home vnder Zorobabel, they had maried with the Gentiles, and offen∣ded God vntill the comming of Esdras from Darius with au∣thoritie to build, to repaire, and to inhabite Ierusalem: for so doth Bucholcerus in his Chronicles write, saying, that Daniel doeth comprehend in two words, Ierusalem inhabitabitur &
aedificabitur, the whole summe of Esdras bookes. Nowe in the time of Darius, of Cambyses before him, and of Cyrus before Cambyses, God stirred vp diuers excellent men to helpe his people, to restore his Church, and to builde his city againe, as Zorobabel, Esdras, Nehemias with others, whose care, de∣light, and zeale are extant in their owne bookes which they Zorobabel. wrote. For after their returne from Babylon, there was peace and tranquilitie in Iudea vntil Ochus time, for Nehemias liued 130. yeres, and saw (being very old) a new broile, and a greater ca∣lamitie of his coūtrey: for though the posteritie of Dauid cō∣tinued vntil the time of the Machabees as gouernors & Iudges of the people, not naming themselues kings, for the reue∣rence and feare which they bare vnto the kings of Persia. Sala∣thiels sonne first gouernor of the Iewes after the captiuitie of Babylon: Zorobabel of whom mention is made in Zacharie, ruled Israel wisely & discreetly 50. yeres. Resa Mesulla the 2. gouer∣nour, in whose time Nehemias and Esdras came from Babylon to Ierusalem. After him succeeded Iohanna Benresa, the third Iudge who gouerned Israel 53. yeres. The 4. was Iudas Hirca∣nus the first of that name, and thought of Melancthon to be so Melancthon lib. 2. Chron. called, for that Ochus king of Persia brought with him a nom∣ber of the Iewes to Hircania, and therfore Iudas was sirnamed Hircanus. This iudged Israel when Alexander conquered Da∣rius, & raigned 14. yeres. Then Ioseph the first, ruled the Iewes 7. yeeres. The 5. ruler after Ioseph came Abner to gouerne the Iewes, in whose time Ptolomeus the sonne of Lagi the first king of Egypt after Alexander the great, vnder pretence to do sacrifice vpon the Sabboth day, tooke the towne, spoiled the temple, slew & imprisoned the Iewes, and brought to Egypt infinite treasure. Now after this Abner, the 6. Iudge since the time of Alexāder, succeeded of Dauids stock, frō Abner to Ianna Hircanus the 2. who was the last of 15. gouernors ouer the Is∣raelites Hircanus 2. the last of 15. go∣uernours. after the captiuitie: for they cōtinued euen vnto the time of the Machabees. After this, Haman plaied his part, and thought to haue al the Iewes slaine, & cōmanded a gallowes
to be made for Mardocheus: the historie hereof is found in the booke of Esther: for about the time of Cyrus death, the gouernment was then altered in Rome: Consuls were made after the building of Rome 244. yeres, & in the 67. Olympiad, in the beginning of the 9. Iubilie, at what time Cambises had subdued Egypt & brought them subiects to the lawes of Per∣sia. After Cambises Darius went against the Getes, and ouer∣threw Herodot. lib. 4. them, and his chiefe captaine Zopirus sonne Megabi∣sus vanquished the Thracians, and subdued the Peonians and Cambyses went against the Getes. tooke Perinthus. During this time the Lacedemonians had warres against Policrates, the tyrant of Samos. The Philosopher Pythagoras and Hippocrates the Phisition liued this time. While the Iewes (as you heard) were in plan∣ting themselues in Ierusalem againe, the Graecians were busie one with another: Tyrants ruled Greece, and gouerned by the bloodie law of Draco: for Hipparchus and Hippias vsed ty∣rannie in Athens, and were slayne both by Hermodius and A∣ristogiton. Aristagoras a tyrant, reuolted and rebelled against Darius, which mooued Darius in armes against the Ionians, and ouerthrew them, and tooke their chiefe citie called Mi∣letum. A litle after Miltiades the chiefe captaine of Athens, by the councel of Callimachus the famous Graecian, ouerthrewe Darius king of Persias lieutenant called Hippias, in the battell of Marathon, where he slewe 6300. Persians, as both Thucidides Herodot. 6. Thucidides 1. and Iustine doe report. This ouerthrow of the Persians was at that very time when Tarquinius superbus made his last battel with the Romane Di∣ctator Iustin. lib. 2. Posthumius, where he was put to flight, and after died in exile. Aristides surnamed the Iust, was banished this time from Greece, and Alcibiades called backe to Athens from his ba∣nishment. Now Nehemia causing the law of Moses to bee read, as an ordinance to serue God, and reproouing them for their disobedience in ioining themselues with strangers, they were in some quietnesse for a time: though sometime murther and slaughter were betweene themselues commit∣ted: for the which cause Bagoses the generall of Artaxerxes Ioseph. lib. 11. cap. 7.
armie, vnderstanding that the high Priest slewe his brother in the Temple, being a deare friend to Bagoses, he plagued the Iewes againe for the space of seuen yeeres, and reuenged his death with slaughter and tribute: he placed Iaddus in the of∣fice of the priesthood in his fathers place. This high priest had to his brother one named Manasses, which was sent to Samaria by Darius the last king of Persia. A little while after this, Alexander the great, after that his Alexander the great. father Philip died, hauing brought his armie ouer the Greci∣ans sea called Helespont, vnto the riuer of Granicus, hauing subdued the Lydians, Tyre besieged and taken, Thebes wasted and spoiled al Asia, he ouerthrew Darius the king of Persia, ca∣rying his souldiers through Caria, inuaded Pamphilia, came ouer Euphrates vnto Syria, tooke Damascus, besieged Tyre and Sidon, and he wrote to Hierusalem to the hie Priest Iaddus, that his souldiers might haue passage without interruption, and also requiring the tribute that was paied to Darius to be paid Tribute to Alexander. to him, and to the crowne of Macedonia, for that Alexander had vanquished Darius, and had caried the Empire of Persia vnto Greece: they of Hierusalem were frighted and much ama∣sed what to doe. But cōcluding among themselues, they opened the gates, and the hie Priest came out with all the Priestes, the Elders, The solemne receiuing of Alexander the great vnto Ie∣rusalem. and Nobles of the Citie in most solemne sort to meete Alex∣ander out of Hierusalem, vnto a place named Sapha, and salu∣ted Alexander most humbly, being in precious garments and pontifical robes, with his sacred mitre, whereupon was writ∣ten the name of the God Iehoua. The solemnitie and state whereof made Alexander to light The reue∣rence of Alex∣ander to the high Priest. from his horse, and to yeelde to the hie Priest more honour and reuerence, then his countreymen the Macedonians thought wel of, so great a king, so mightie a cōquerour, euen Alexander the great, to humble himselfe to a silie priest. Par∣menio demaunding the cause of Alexander why he honoured the priest somuch, he answered, that he reuerenced God, whom the hie Priestrepresented at that time: for I dreamed
of these men, euen as I behold them nowe when I was yet in Macedonia: This Priest exhorted me then to be of good cou∣rage, and bade me goe forward with my armie to Persia. Thus with great honor and solemne sacrifice was Alexan∣der The benefits and good turnes of A∣lexander. receiued vnto Ierusalem, where Daniels prophecies were brought vnto him, and where also it was read vnto him, that a king of Greece shoulde bring the Monarchie of Persia vnto Greece, which was himselfe. After all these things were done, Alexander shewed great courtesie, enlarged their common wealth, quieted the Samaritans their enemies, and brought all the Prouinces about vnder the Iewes. Againe hee graunted them what they woulde aske of him, permitted them to vse Alexanders be∣nefits. their religion, to obserue their owne lawes, and also promi∣sed that those Iewes which were scattered amongst the Calde∣ans, Assyrians, and Medes, should haue such libertie to vse their religion and lawes, as they had in Ierusalem: and this continu∣ed during the time of Alexander, which was but short. For when he died, the Empire was deuided betweene his No∣bles: The successi∣on of Alexan∣der. Antigonus had Asia: Seleucus had Babylon: Lysimachus had Hellespont: Cassander had Macedonia, and Ptolomeus Lagi had E∣gypt. These successors of Alexander, hauing continuall warres one with an other, which continued long, Ptolomeus king of Egypt came vpon the Sabbath day to Ierusalem, vnder pre∣tence Ptolome the sonne of Lagi. to offer sacrifice to the God of Israel, tooke the towne, vsed the Citizens hardly, handled the Iewes most seuerely and sharpely, (they mistrusting him not) imprisoned them, and brought them with him in heapes to Egypt. Thus still was Ierusalem exercised with tribulations and crosses: but God stirred vp this kings sonne Ptolome philadel∣phus to them a friende, louing and beneficiall, wise, learned, Ptolome Phila. and most desirous not onely to doe them good, but also most willing to admit their lawes, their Religion to come to Egypt, and made a decree, that all the Iewes wheresoeuer they were by his father imprisoned and captiuated, shoulde be enlarged, & be set at libertie, which were aboue 100000. Iewes, as Ptolome in his Epistle written to the high Priest E∣leazar doeth testifie: where lie entreateth Eleazar to send to
Egypt, sixe of euery tribe of the best, wisest, and skilfullest men, to translate the Bible then being onely in the Hebrewe tongue, into the Greeke tōgue: for that Ptolome was most de∣sirous to haue the Bible in Greeke to be in his studie, where The Bible first translated from Hebrue to Greeke. he had a hūdred & twentie thousand bookes in his Librarie. In the dayes of this Ptoleme Lagi, florished Theophrastus the Philosopher, and Theodorus Athenaeus: he sent messengers for this purpose to Ierusalem Aristaeus, and one Andreas captaine of the Kings garde, with whome he sent 100. talents of siluer, to honour the Temple, and to doe sacrifice therein, besides viginti phialas aureas, triginta argenteas, quinque crateras, & Ioseph. lib. 12. cap. 12. mensam auream, which in Iosephus all at large are described, and set foorth worth the reading: which things being most gratefull vnto the high Priest, hee receiued them most lo∣uingly, and vsed them with all humanitie and fauour, and sent with them 70. wise and discreete men which shoulde translate the Bible, as Philadelphus request was. These seuentie men came to Alexandria, where after much welcome, long feasting, great conference, and disputations, so much he ioyed of their comming, and delighted in their company, that the king Philadelphus continued his feast 12. Polot. Philadel. dayes: where wisedome and learning were exercised, dispu∣tations practised, arguments propounded, the questions whereof you may reade in a booke which Aristeus wrote on∣ly Aristeus. concerning the meeting and comming togeather of these learned men. These seuentie interpreters so named, tran∣slated 70. interpre∣ters. the Bible from Hebrue into Greeke, in the yere of the world 3695. in the 24. Iubile, and in the 127 Olympiad, in the 12. yeere of Philadelphus reigne. About this time Megasthenes Megasthenes. Aratus. the Persian writeth his histories, & Aratus the great Astrolo∣ger wrote his booke entituled Pheonomenon. Nowe when Phi∣ladelphus had this sacred booke thus in Greeke translated, he reioyced much, and thought himselfe happy to haue such a booke in his Librarie: and so conferring with Demetrius, mu∣sed greatly that neither Historiographers, Philosophers or Poets, had not translated this booke before. But Demetrius tolde the cause to the king, saying, that the Demetrius.
Heathens durst not attempt it: for diuers were punished for their rash enterprises to meddle therein, as Theopompus, who Theopompus. for writing of some sentences of the Scriptures amongst his owne prophane writings, was xxx. dayes depriued of his memorie, distracted of his minde, vntill by a vision in his sleepe, he was warned to knowe his faults, and to reconcile himself for the same. Euen so Theodecta the Poet, for putting Theodecta. a sentence of Gods booke presumptuously with his owne in a tragedie which he made, was mad for a time, and blind. This learned king Philadelphus rewarded these 70. inter∣preters The great li∣beralitie of Philadelphus. at their departure in this sort: euery one of them had two talents of gold, 3. sutes of costly and rich apparell, and a standing golden cup, which wayed a whole talent, which by Budeus computation is 600. crownes, if it be golde: and A talent of gold 600. crownes. euery of them had of him a precious, costly and delicate bed, wrought with all silke. Moreouer, he sent by them to E∣leazar the hie Priest 10. riche tables with siluer feete, with all things belonging thereunto, a Chalice of 30. talents, a dia∣deme or a crowne ful of precious stones, two golden cuppes to be dedicated to the altar, 10. sutes of purple, with 100. ba∣sens and censers of gold for sacrifice. Thus much doth Iosephus report of this Ptolomeus Philadel∣phus: but within a short time after this came Antiochus magnus, Antiochus Magnus. who had al Asia & Syria vnder his sword: he vexed the Iewes, spoiled the countrey, slue the Citizens, taketh the kingdome of Iudea, subdued Egypt: he full of all wickednes, setteth vp I∣dols, altars, groues, and Chappels of Idols: he polluted the Sanctuarie, defiled the Sabbath and the feast, hee offered vp swines flesh and vncleane beastes. Antiochus thus played the part of a tyrant, that Ierusalē was desolate, the Citizens fled, the women and their children taken captiues, and Antiochus forced Israel to forsake their God, and to doe sacrifice to his The diffe∣rence be∣tweene the great Alex. and Antio∣chus the great. Idoles, sending commissioners to all Iudea to see the execu∣tion of them: so great difference was betweene two heathen kings, Alexander the great, and Antiochus the great, the one honoring the hie Priest, sacrificed in the Temple, brought
all things vnder the Iewes againe, vsed great courtesie: the o∣ther, Antiochus the great, stealed, wasted, robbed the Temple, the Citie, & all the Cities of Iuda, vntill Mattathias a godly zealous man, borne in the citie of Madis, saw how Antiochus blasphemed God, committed idolatrie in all Iudea, somed in blood, and practised al mischiefe and wickednesse. He consulted with his fiue sonnes, Iohn, Iudas afterwarde The 5. sonnes of Mattathias. called Machabeus, Simon, Eleazar, and Ionathas, to whom hee opened the calamities of his countrey, the defacing of Moses lawes, the blasphemie and idolatrie that were vsed by Antio∣chus Antiochus ty∣rannie. in all Syria and Iudea: and where that their predecessours euen from Abrahams time defended the Church with their owne blood, so now it was as necessarie to stop the rage of this tirant, as Moses, Iosua, & Dauid did to the enemies of God. CHAP. VIII. Of the Machabees, and of the last kings of Iuda, and of their go∣uernement vnder the Romanes, and of the last destruction of Hierusalem by Titus the Emperour. THey tooke courage in God: they prouided Iudas Machab. to resist the violence of tyranny, and when Mattathias died after one yeeres gouerne∣ment, he appointed Iudas Machabeus whom hee knewe bestable in body, and most wil∣ling in mind, to be in armes with their God against this Antiochus and his idoles. And though these brethren were not of the stocke of Da∣uid, nor of the tribe of Iuda, as you may reade in the Maccha∣bees, and in Iosephus: yet they ioyned their force and power together, and appointed Iudas Macchabeus chiefe captaine and ruler ouer them: for in his actes he was liks a lion, for the Apolonius and Seron 2. prin∣ces of Syria slaine. wicked fled for feare of him, he killed Apollonius and Seron, two princes of Syria, and the most part of Antiochus armie, who gathered the Gentiles, and a great host of Samaria to fight against Israel, who were slaine and scattered like sheepe be∣fore Iudas sworde: and Iudas goeth forward against Gorgias, doth the like, he slue their souldiers, and putteth Gorgias and the rest of his armie to flight.
Lysias lieftenant general of Antiochus hearing of this, waxed Lisias lieuete∣nant to Antio∣chus the great. wroth, disdained his campe, gathered 60000. chosen foote∣men, and 5000. horsemen to fight against Ierusalem, came to Iudea, & pitched his tents in Bethsura, where Iudas came with ten thousand souldiers against him: who with confidence in God, and prayers made, slue fiue thousande, and put the rest to flight, and Lysias himselfe escaped to Antiochus. Iudas ha∣uing these victories ouer Antiochus the great, went vp to Ie∣rusalem to repaire the Sanctuarie which lay wasted, & made a new altar (for Antiochus had erected & altar, and the Image vpon it) where they sacrificed according to the lawe, and praysed God for their good successe. Now while Iudas had vanquished the Heathens that went about to destroy Israel, for they of Tyre and Sidon, of Ptolemais, Machab. lib. 1. cap. 5. of all Galile, of the Heathens & of the Gentiles were set in force against Israel: after that Iudas had fought with the Edumeans & Ammonites, & hearing of these newes, Iudas gaue to his bro∣ther Simon 3000. souldiers to goe vnto Galile, and he tooke his brother Ionathan with him to Galaad with 8000. and they had good successe and victorie in all their warres. Antiochus in the meane season traueiling through the countrey of Per∣sia, hearing of the riches and treasures of Ptolemais, besieged it, but was by the Citizens forced to flee, who died within a while after. Lysias hauing knowledge of the kings death, hee caused Antiochus Epiphanes, the 2. sonne of Antiochus the great, to be crowned king after his father: who vsed much Melancthon. 2. Chron. more extremitie in Ierusalem then his father did, killing, de∣stroying the Citizens, robbing the Temple, and putting Idoles and images vpon the altar. Being slaine in Persia, his brothers eldest sonne Demetrius being at Rome, came with all haste possible to Tripolis, a Towne in Syria: and hauing possessed the most part of Syria, being their lawfull king by descent, the people brought Antiochus Eupator and Lysias before Demetrius, who commaunded them to bee killed before they came to his sight. Now when that Demetrius was set on his fathers throne, a great enemie of Iuda waxed hote
to reuenge the slaughter which Iudas Machabeus made of his friends and fauourers, while yet Demetrius saued himselfe in Rome. Iudas perceiuing the cruell meaning of Demetrius, Iudas Macha∣beus sendeth to conclude peace with the Romanes. and knowing well the power and force of the Romanes, made them his friends through peace of mutuall friendship, sen∣ding messengers vnto them Eupolemus and Iason, brethrens children to Iudas Machabeus, which of the Romanes were most louingly accepted: and they sent to Ierusalem a letter written in tables of brasse, wherein they had a memoriall or monu∣ment of their friendship and peace. In the meane time Deme∣trius hauing heard of the death of Nichanor, sendeth his ar∣mie against Iudas: in the which battell, after many ioyfull victories which Iudas had ouer his enemies, he is now slaine Iudas Macha∣beus slaine. by his enemies: for he that was wont to pray & to ouercome, and now omitted to pray, trusting to his strength, and to the Romanes force, was left of God to himselfe. Iudas nowe being dead, his brother Ionathan succeeded him, and had present battell with Bacchides, one of Demetrius Machab. lib. 1. cap. 9. 10. captaines, and with Alcimus, and put them to flight. During these broiles in Iudea, Demetrius perceiuing he coulde gaine nothing by Ionathan, desireth peace with the Iewes: which be∣ing done, Ionathan gouerned Israel quietly. When Alexander the sonne of Antiochus had heard the promises which Deme∣trius made to Ionathan, and also hearing of the courage, ver∣tue, and manhood of Iudas, Ionathan, Simon, and of the two o∣ther brethren, hee sought the fauour of Ionathan, and friend∣ship of the Iewes. Then Alexander maketh warres against De∣metrius, Alexanders ar∣mie against Demetrius. Demetrius slaine. gathered a great host, and ioyned in battell with the armie of Demetrius, and the two kings fought it out, vntil De∣metrius was slaine. Then Alexander sent his Embassadors to Ptolomeus king of Egypt, signifying vnto him howe he wanne his fathers kingdome, and sate on his throne, requesting the kings daughter in mariage, & so to be in league of amitie, & to continue perpetual friends: wherein Ptolomeus gladly con∣sented, and maried his daughter Cleopatra vnto Alexander at Alexander maried Cleo∣patra. Ptolomais, and they continued friends, vntil discention fel be∣tweene Ptolomeus & his sonne in law Alexander: for Ptolomeus
tooke his daughter Cleopatra, and gaue her to Demetrius the Cleopatra giuen to Demetrius. sonne of king Demetrius, which Alexander slue a little before. When Alexander heard howe that his wife was giuen to his enemie Demetrius in mariage, hee came with an host a∣gainst Ptolomeus his father in lawe: for Ptolomeus had put two crownes vpon his owne head, the crowne of Asia, and the crowne of Egypt, and had driuen Demetrius after the ouer∣throwing of his army, vnto Arabia, where he had his head cut off by Zabelus, and sent to Ptolomeus to Egypt, who likewise died shortly after, and Demetrius reigned after him. All these kinges sought friendship at Ionathans hands: for as Iudas Ma∣chabeus Iudas victor. slue Nicanor, Apollonius and Seron, princes of Syria, ouerthrewe Lysius Antiochus generall, and his nigh cousin, and putteth Gorgias and his host to flight, as hee vanquished the heathens, and ouerthrew the Citie of Ephron, and wanne Bosorra, with many more victories which hee had of Coun∣tries, cities & townes: so Ionathan prospered against Bacchides Ionathans vi∣ctorie. Alcimus, against the children of Ambrie, against the princes of Demetrius, so that Demetrius the king sought the fauour of Ionathan, & Alexander entreated for friendship with Ionathan. Thus God blessed the sonnes of Mattathias, because they were zealous in the lawes of God: for after king Demetrius Ieseph. lib. 13. cap. 3. was slaine by Alexander, and Alexander slaine againe by De∣metrius sonne, named Demetrius, the Iewes all this while were quiet, and so peace in Israel continued vnder Ionathan and Simon, as in the Machabees you may reade, vntill contention grewe betweene the Samaritanes and the Iewes in Alexandria, Strife be∣tweene the Iewes and the Samaritans. concerning the religion and holines of their temples: which was with great malice followed, standing one with an other in defiance, vntill the matter was to be iudged before Ptolo∣meus Philometor king of Egypt, the Iewes hauing one Androni∣cus a learned Iewe to open the priuiledge & authoritie of the Temple of Hierusalem, & the Samaritans had also one Sabbeus, a wise discreete man to pleade for the Temple of Samaria. For there dwelled amōgst the Iewes at that time 3. sects of re∣ligion: 3. sectes of the Iewes. the first were called Pharises, the 2. Saduces, the 3. Esseni.
The Pharises acknowledged the iudgement of God to come, with the reward of good and euill, confessing the immorta∣litie of the soule. The Saduces cleane contrary, holding an opinion stoute against the Pharises in all points. The Esseni supposed al things to be gouerned by fate, and that nothing could happen to man but by destinie. After this Ionathan Lacedemoni∣ans came from Abra∣ham stocke. sent to Sparta, and to Rome, to renewe the couenant betwene the Iewes and the people of Sparta: for it was founde and knowen in their Chronicles, that the Spartians came of the generation of Abraham. In the meane time one Triphon that Triphon yong Antiochus tutor. was tutor to Alexanders sonne named Antiochus, a very yong man, expected to be king in Syria in the roome of his father, considering how falsly and traiterously he was slaine by the meanes of Ptolomeus his father in lawe, and Demetrius, to whom Cleopatra his wife was wrongfully giuen in mariage. This Triphon by the colour of this title to yong Antiochus The falshood of Triphon. Sedetes sonne to Antiochus Epiphanes, became very ambi∣cious of the kingdome himselfe, layd wait to kil Ionathan and take him by deceite: and hauing also heard howe Demetrius calamities encreased by the Parthians, sawe an easie way to obteine the kingdome by killing of the yong king Antio∣chus, to whome he promised faith and seruice to restore him to his kingdome, for that his father Alexander was wrong∣fully deposed and slaine. For as soone as Triphon had slaine Ionathan and his two sonnes, and also king Antiochus, hee Ioseph. lib. 13. cap. 8. 9. straight wayes maketh warres vpon Simon the brother of Io∣nathan, who succeeded in his roome to defend the Iewes, pro∣mising to followe the steps of his father and of his brethren: for Simon was well beloued of the Iewes, and therefore in great authoritie proceeded with the like courage as his bre∣thren did to warre vpon the enemies, and came in armes against Gazara, Iamnia, and Ioppa, wasted them, and spoyled them, layde siege to Ierusalem, and wanne the castle, pursued Triphon (which then vsurped the kingdome of Syria,) to the castle of Dora, from whence he secretly fled vnto Apania, a ci∣tie in Phenicia, where he was slaine by Antiochus friendes,
within 3. yeeres after he had falsly vsurped Syria. After this, grew strife betweene Antiochus and Simon, and therefore Cendebaeus was appointed Captaine by Antiochus against Simon: but Simon preuailed in all his actions, prospe∣red Ioseph. lib. 13. cap. 14. in al his warres, and conquered his enemies for the space of 8. yeeres, vntill Ptolome who maried Simons daughter con∣spired against him, slewe him and his 2. sonnes at a banquet, and sent secretly to kill Iohn named likewise Hircanus the sonne of Simon. But he hauing intelligēce that his father and Simon and his two sonnes slaine. his 2. brethren were slaine, and that Ptolome had sent to slay him also, he preuented that, and slewe them, and fled to a ca∣stle called Dagon. Now Hircanus possessing the office of his father, not forget∣ting the villenie and cruel murther of this Ptolomeus, thought Hircanus Si∣mons sonne. to reuenge it when time would serue. In the meane season, Antiochus sirnamed Pius, being mindeful of iniuries receiued of Hircanus father Simon, came with a great hoste to Iudea in the 162. Olympiad, compassed the Citie Ierusalem with his ar∣mie, kept Hircanus close within the citie, not daring to looke out: but after that Hircanus had promised 500. talents to An∣tiochus Ioseph. lib. 13. cap. 16. 17. 3838 to depart in peace, hee opened the graue of Dauid, where he founde 3000. talents of siluer, of the which he sa∣tisfied Antiochus, which within a short time after was slaine amongst the Parthians, in whose place succeeded his brother Demetrius Hircanus. When he had heard that Antiochus was dead, he came presently with an armie to Syria, destroyed the temple in Samaria which Alexander the great permitted to be builded, tooke Samega before called Samaria, with the citie Si∣cima and many townes beside, where the nations of the Cuthe∣ans dwelt, which Salmanassar brought with him to inhabite Samaria, in stead of the 10. tribes which he caried captiue a∣way to Babylon: for after that Samaria was destroyed, first by Salmanasser, the Samaritans were called Chutheans, a people of Babylon and of Caldea. Now it was plagued by Hircanus & be∣sieged by Aristobulus and Antigonus, the sōnes of Hircanus, that Aristobulus & Antigonus. after one yeres siege, they broght Samaria euen to the groūd,
and caused riuers & lakes to ouerflow the place where Sama∣ria Samaria the se∣cond time de∣stroyed. was, that no man knewe where Samaria stood, so wicked a seate, and so vngodly a towne, full of all horrible idolatrie and blasphemie: For Samaria had bene twise builded, first by Omri which was destroyed by Salmanasser king of Syria, after builded by Manasses the brother of Iaddus the hie Priest, by the meanes of his father in lawe Sanabalat chiefe gouernour vnder Darius, builded a Church to encounter with Hierusa∣lem in mount Garizin at Samaria, where from Babylon and from Assyria men and women came to dwell, willing to receiue the lawes of Moses, but not to forsake their Idols. At what time Onias builded the 3. temples in AEgypt: this was the sonne of that Onias which was the hie Priest at Hierusalem, whom Antiochus Epiphanes king of Syria slewe at his ransaking Ioseph. lib 7. of Hierusalem, at what time hee destroyed the citie, spoyled the temple, and put vp the Image of Iupiter Olympus vpon the altar of the Lord: this 3. temple continued at Heliopolis in E∣gypt 330. yeres. Reade more of this in the Machabees. Beside al 2. Macca. cap. 1. this (I meane the tabernacle, the hie hilles called excelsa, the 3. temples) they had certaine other meetings and seruing of God, though not in temples, yet in places that resembled the temple. Of this no mention is made, neither in the histo∣rie of the Iudges, nor of the Kings, and therefore it seemeth that after the Iewes were captiuated into Babylon, and their kingdome destroyed, many of them being dispersed, some to Egypt, some to Asia, and some to Europa, met together as many as were in one citie or countrey, hauing no temples The first vse of the Syna∣gogues after the captiuitie. but places by themselues, made like temples which were called after Synagogues, and so continued: for after the 70. yeeres of captiuitie, the Iewes being permitted by Cyrus to returne and to reare their temple for strangers that dwelt in other Prouinces, as at Alexandria, Silicia, Asia, and in diuers other places and yet Iewes borne, when they came to Hieru∣salem, either to the feast which was thrise a yeere, or vpon any other busines of their owne, they went into the Syna∣gogues appointed and made for them, and not into the
temple which was onely for the citizens of Hierusalem, for both were frequented in our Sauiours time, proued by him∣selfe, saying, I haue taught in the temple, and in so many Sy∣nagogues in Galilee & Asia mentioned: so that one temple was in Hierusalem, and many Synagogues, and so many, that I finde in an Hebrew cōmentary 480. Synagogues were within the city of Hierusalem, and diuers other Synagogues dispersed through all Iudea: but God commanded that he should be but in one place worshipped, which was first in Silo in the tribe and mount of Ephraim, after in Hierusalem in mount Sion in the tribe of Iuda. Of the vse of the Tabernacle after the temple was by Salomon builded, the Talmudists write many fables which I omit to recite. Samaria being thus the second time destroyed by Aristo∣bulus Samaria the seconde time destroyed. and Antigonus, the Pharisees, corrupt, euil, and seditious men, much enuied the prosperitie of Hircanus & his sonnes, perswading the people to hate him: but Hircanus after that hee had done great seruice for the Iewes, and brought all things in quietnes, he foresawe things to come: and after he had gouerned Israel 31. yeres, leauing behinde him 5. sonnes Hircanus died. he died. All this while there was no king in Iudea since the captiuitie of Babylon 481. yeeres: but now after Hircanus time Aristobulus his eldest sonne succeeded him in gouernment, who by report of slaunderers and backbiters, caused his bro∣ther Aristobulus slewe his bro∣ther Antigo∣nus, the first king of the Iewes after the captiuitie. Antigonus whom he loued very dearely to be killed, be∣ing most falsly accused of his enemies: he left his owne mo∣ther to perish for famine, and put the rest of his brethren in close prison. But after a while his conscience did accuse him, and tor∣tured him in such sort, that Aristobulus commaunded to bee brought to the place where Antigonus his brother was slaine: and being caried to the place, hee vomited blood in such a∣bundance that he cried and said, O corpus impudens quousque Aristobulus death. retinebis animam, quam materni ac fraterni manes flagitant? and so with torment hee died, leauing behinde him his wife So∣lome whome the Greekes call Alexandra: shee enlarged the
sonnes of Hircanus which Aristobulus layed in prison, one of them named Iannaeus, which was also called Alexander, not Alexander the third brother. well thought of by his father, but nowe made king after his brothers death by the meanes of Alexandra Aristobulus wife: he as soone as hee had obteined the gouernement, vsed the like tricke as his brother did before him: hee caused one of his two brethren to be slaine, and the other hee esteemed with honour. This being done, he went with an armie against the citie of Ptolomais, at what time Ptolome sirnamed Lathurus was dri∣uen by his mother Cleopatra out of Egypt, and being at Cy∣prus she forced him thence, so that Ptolome the sonne and Cleo∣patra the mother, vsed their policie and exercised their ty∣rannie The vnquiet state of the Iewes. one against another. When Cleopatra had gotten the citie Ptolomais after a long siege, her sonne againe being dri∣uen out of Egypt, Alexander king of the Iewes renewed friend∣ship with Cleopatra, for that her sonne Ptolome had plagued Iudea. Now being ayded by Cleopatra hee tooke Gadara, and a strong fort called Amathuta, to whome Demetrius Euserus gaue battell and discomfited his armie, and fled himselfe to the mountaines: hee straight gathered some strength, and hauing gotten 6000. souldiers againe in a readines, pursued after Demetrius, who for feare fled at that time. After this the Iewes being sundry times thus afflicted by their owne The tyranny of Alexander. crueltie and tyrannie, they conspired against Alexander, and were in armes oft times, but still ouerthrowne. Such was Alexanders hard happe, that sixe yeeres he was molested, afflicted and persecuted of his owne nations and subiects, that hee slewe of them from time to time about 50000. and yet still moued hee them to hate him, so that be∣ing demaunded by him of the people what they would haue him to doe, they with one consent saide, Hang thy selfe. Alexander hauing taken the citie Betoma, after much slaugh∣ter and blood, he brought the wealthiest and chiefest men of the citie, in bandes and fetters prisoners to Ierusalem, where he commanded before his face where he sate in a high rome
of his palace, 800. of the greatest and chiefest men to be han∣ged: and before they were hāged, he likewise cōmanded that 800 of the Iewes hanged. their wiues and children should be flaine before their eyes. While this tragedy was played at Ierusalem by Alexander, Antiochus Griphus was slaine by the falshod of Heracleon, after Antiochus Gri∣phus slaine. whom succeeded his sonne Seleucus, & made warres with his vncle Antiochus sirnamed Cizicenus, whom Seleucus tooke in Seleucus his sonne. battel and slew. Alexander was at that time called of the Iewes for his tyrannie for his sirname Thracida: for while Alexander liued, 8000. Iewes liued out of their coūtrey banished & came not to Iewry during the time of Alexāder which was 27. yeres. The Iewes were miserably hādled vnder this king: for Ptolome Lamyrus slew 30000. Iewes at one time: he made the captiues Ptolomeus La∣myrus slewe 30000. Iewes. and prisoners to eat the flesh of their own countreymen, be∣ing slaine in the warres of Alexander. Himself slew 600. of his subiects being moued & allured to seditiō against their king by the Pharisees a sect of the Iewes, that extremely hated Alex∣ander. Now his wife Alexandra called Salomine the time of her Alexandra. first husband Aristobulus, she raigned quietly after her hus∣band 9. yeres. Alexander had 2. sonnes, Hircanus and Aristo∣bulus: and though that Hircanus was the elder brother & heire to the crowne, yet did Aristobulus gather an army and inuaded Iudea, while yet Alexandra his mother liued. Antipater the Idu∣mean, and Aretas king of Arabia, tooke part to ayde the elder Aretas king of Arabia ayed Hirus. brother Hircanus. Alexander had giuen councel to his wife before hee died, to speake faire to the Pharisees, who could much perswade the people, and also to conceale his death vntill she had gotten the castle of Ierusalem, considering his life to be offensiue to the people, and to make no accompt of his burial, but let the people vse their discretion. She vsing this her husbands aduice, became in great fauour with the people: in the meane season Aristobulus fortified himselfe, (being by nature very quicke & industrious) made himselfe strong, and hauing corrupted the Romane Scaurus, then Pom∣peius the great Embassadour, to be his friend to the Senators. Hircanus againe sent to Rome, opening his iniuries, accu∣sing
and declaring the infidelitie and corruption of his Em∣bassador, crauing their ayde and helpe being the elder bro∣ther to haue his right. Vpon this cōplaint, Pompey being then in Armenia against Tigranes, and comming to Damascus (be∣ing newly by Metellus and Lolius taken) he repared to Ierusa∣lem with an hoste of souldiers, at what time Caius Anthonius restored to Hircanus the gouernment and the office of the high Priest: hee caried captiue with him to Rome, Aristobulus with his 2. sonnes Alexander and Antigonus. This furie of do∣mesticall Aistobulus with his two sonnes caried to Rome. sedition, this tyrannie and bloodshedding of bre∣thren brought all Iudea frō a kingdome to a prouince: againe by this meanes, strange magistrates gouerned them, and for∣ren strength feared them, that since the time that Aristobulus Hircanus sonne became the first king after the captiuitie, no∣thing prospered with him, as by the familie & stocke of Hir∣canus may appeare, one brother killing another, as before you haue read. Now Alexander and Antigonus prisoners at Rome with Aristobulus their father, their fortune was thus, that Alexander hauing escaped frō Rome to Cilicia, came to Iudea, and tooke a part of Galilee, where hee thought to haue more force, he spoiled that which Pompey spared, he tooke not only the 2000. talents which was left of Pompeius, but also spoiled, robd & ransackt the temple of treasures to the value of 8000. pounds. But he was taken with Gabinius, sent to Rome, and af∣ter slaine of Scipio Pompeius sonne in law in Antiochia. This was Alexander ta∣ken & brought to Rome by Gabinius. the end of Alexrnder one of Aristobulus sonnes. Antigonus the other sonne, was let loose by Iulius Caesar, after the ciuil warres betwene Pompey and him, he gathered an army of the Parthi∣ans & thought to recouer Iudea, the rather that Antipater was dead, and that the Iewes had rather haue Antigonus to be their king, then any of the sonnes of Antipater, he toke the old man Hircanus his vncle, to whom Antipater stood a friend while he liued, stirring the Iewes against this Antigonus father. So like∣wise Hircanus had both his eares cut off by his brothers sonne Anti∣gonus. the king of Arabia, Areta to whō Hircanus fled for aid, An∣tigonus after he had taken his vncle, being high Priest, & had cut off both his eares, & had caried him prisoner to Parthia,
euen hee was slaine by Marcus Antonius within 3. yeeres after Herod was made king, that was Antigonus ende. And Herod af∣ter that called Hircanus from Parthia, and caused him to bee slaine being 80. yeeres of age. This was the tragical ende of the Machabees, whome God The ende of the Macha∣bees race. endued with great haps and singular fauour to rule his peo∣ple: for the Iewes neuer prospered vnder kings, neither be∣fore the captiuitie, at what time raigned 22. kings in Iuda, of the which nomber there were but seuen vnder whome Iuda flourished. Dauid, Salomon, Abia, Asa, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Iosias. Neither prospered they vnder kings after the captiuitie, during the time ofseuen kings, as Aristobulus, Alex. Iamnaeus, Hircanus, Aristobulus, 2. Antigonus the sonne of the last Aristobulus, and last of the line of the Machabees. Herod the great whome the Romanes crea∣ted king. And Archelaus Herods sonne. After the Machabees race Antipater the Idumean and his Antipater the first gouer∣nour vnder the Romans. posteritie became great in Iudea, by the fauour of Iulius Cae∣sar, who at that time was in Egypt with an armie of souldiers, to whome Antipater stoode in steade by good seruice at that time done vnto Caesar: for he brought Memphis the great citie, with all the countrey about to obey Caesar, and therefore Caesar gaue him the regiment of Iudea, not yet as a king, but as chiefe gouernour. The Iewes could not well disgest the go∣uernement of strangers, which knewe by Moses and by the Prophets, that the tribe of Iuda should rule Israel vntill the Messias were borne: therefore they were mutinous and full ofsedition. Antipater perceiuing the enuie and malice to strangers, Antipater poy∣soned. ruled discreetely, and behaued himselfe wisely, and yet hee was poysoned by a Iewe named Malchus, whome afterwarde
Herod the sonne of Antipater slew at Tirus: this Herod sirna∣med Astalomites, grewe great in his fathers dayes, for the Iewes thought after Antipaters death, to shake off his chil∣dren, and not to admit any of them to gouerne. Now they had called Antigonus Aristobulus sonne, from the Parthians to Ierusalem, but Herod ouerthrewe their purpose, and forced Antigonus to flee from Ierusalem. Marcus Anthonius returning Marcus An∣thonius. from the citie Philippos, where he and Augustus ouerthrewe Brutus and Cassius the murtherers of Iulius Caesar, came to By∣thinia, where Herod and Phasaelus his brother were accused Herod and Phasaelus ac∣cused. Hircanus the high Priest. by the Ambassadors of Iudea, that Hircanus the high Priest gouerned as a sipher, and they as kings: yet notwithstanding Herods fortune and his brothers so encreased, that he and his brother were named by Marcus Anthonius, the Tetrarches of all Iudea, and within a while after Herod came to Rome in 185. Olympiad, where he was created king of all Iudea; and hee was Herode made king of Iurie. solemnly brought to the Capitol in the midst betwene Octaui∣us and Marcus Anthonius, with al the magistrats and Consuls of Rome accompanying him. In the 30. yeere of Herods raigne, was our Sauiour Christ borne. Herod had three sonnes, Archelaus whom he left king Herds 3. sonnes Arche∣laus, Herod Antipas, and Philip. by wil to gouerne Iudea: Herodes Antipas which he appointed Tetrarche to gouerne Galilee by whome Iohn Baptist was be∣headed: and Philippe which gouerned Ituria or Trachenitida. Herod after hee had raigned 37. yeeres, and had sent infinite treasure to Caesar and to his wife Iulia, died, & was with great pompe buried in a towne of his own name called Herodium. Ioseph. lib. 17. cap. 9. 10. 12. But though Herods testament was by Caesar first confirmed and pronounced, Archelaus king of Iudea afterward altered: he appointed to Archelaus, halfe Iudea for his regiment, and the other halfe betwene Herod Antipas & his brother Philip. Now while Archelaus was a gouernour of this people, they were much offended with him, and sent to Caesar great com∣plaints, with letters frō Sabinus, that he was seditious, cruel, and vnobedient to Caesar▪ which being thorowly wayed and Archelaus was banished Iudea. found true by Caesar, Archelaus was banished, and his part of
Iudea was made a prouince for Romane magistrates, the other two brethren Herod and Philippe gouerned their Tetrarchies with some care and feare of Caesar, and therefore to get the more fauour at the Emperours hand, either of them builded a towne. Philip to flatter Caesar builded a towne and named it Caesarea, and Herod Antipas builded another and named it Ti∣berias, for that the Emperours name was Tiberius Caesar, two townes for one name. The Romanes againe brought Iudea in subiection of the Empire, and sent these deputies folowing: 1 C. Coponius, the first lieu∣tenant. one yeere. These 3. were sent by Octauius Augustus. 2 Marcus Ambinius. 1. yeere. 3 Annius Rufus. 1. yeere. 4 Valerius Gratus. 2. yeere. 5 Pontius Pilatus, 10. yeere. Vnder whom our redeemer and Sauiour suffered his last passion vpon the Crosse, he was sent by Tiberius Caesar. 6 Marcellus. 3. yeere. Herodes was made king of the Iewes, by C. Claudius the Emperour which raigned 10. yeeres. After Agrippas time raigned ouer the Iewes Romanes depu∣ties againe, as after Marcellus, Caspius Fadus was 7. depu∣tie, and gouerned Iuda, 3. yeeres. 8 Tiberius Alexander. 2. yeeres. 9 Cumanus. 3. yeeres. 10 Antonius Felix. 10. yeeres. 11 Portius Festus. 11. yeeres. 12 Albinus. 3. yeeres. 13 Gersius Florus, being the last deputie ouer Iuda, at what time Ierusalem was destroyed by Titus. When Vespatian layed siege to Ierusalem, euen the last
ouerthrow and conquest of the Iewes, at what time Caius An∣thonius & Marcus Cicero were consuls at Rome, Hierusalem was three moneths besieged by Pompey the great, but taken at last by the Romans, Cornelius Festus, Sillas sonne, and Furus Centurio entred first the Citie, and after the whole Romane armie rushed in and slew 22. thousand Iewes, spared the temple and the sacred treasures therein, defiled not the Sanctuarie: nei∣ther touched Pompey the golden table, neither tooke away with him one penie of the 2000. talents which was the trea∣sure of the temple. But Crassus in short time after going a∣gainst the Parthians, in his voyage spared neither treasure nor the temple. Ierusalem was builded in Iudea by Sem the sonne of Noah, and was by him first named Solima or Salem, a citie most fa∣mous, and the soile it selfe most fertile, and so by God blessed and preserued from the first building in the time of Sem, vnto the last ouerthrowe of the same by Titus the Romane Empe∣rour being 2177. yeeres. Iosephus doeth describe the situa∣tion The continu∣ance of Hie∣rusalem. and building of this towne, that it was builded vpon two hilles, the one hill higher then the other: Dauid the first king of the tribe of Iuda, in whose time for that he fortified the higher hill, after his dayes it was called Castellum Dauid, the lower hil was called Acra: ouer against this hil Acra they began afterwards to drawe another hill to enlarge this citie, and to ioyne the temple within the same, for the temple was builded on a hard high rocke, for that it might the better be seene, that the state and magnificence thereof might be be∣holden and seene aboue the towne, and aboue the high towres of the walles: for Hierusalem was compassed with Ioseph. lib. 6. cap. 6. de bello Iudaico. three seuerall walles, fronted one against another, with such high strong towers, that some of them were 70. cubites higher then the walles, as the tower called Psephina, like∣wise the tower of Hippicos was fourescore and fiue cu∣bites Hippicos the third tower. high. The second towre called Phasaelis after He∣rods brothers name, was fourescore and tenne cubites high: the thirde named after his wiues name Mariannes, which
farre excelled the rest, whose large descriptions you shall reade in Iosephus, a Iewe borne and brought vp in Ierusalem Isephus a Iewe borne. vntil the destruction thereof, where he was taken prisoner by Titus: there it is set forth to the ful, the situation of the citie, the beautie of the temple, the strength of the walles, the height and largenesse of the towres, the port and state of the gates, the full description of the foure hilles which Hierusa∣lem was builded on, and other things which now I omit, for the circuite of Hierusalems walles, was no more but thirtie and nine furlongs. This towne was nothing like in bignesse to Babylon, or to Niniue, but farre greater in fame and in victories: for Hie∣rusalem had triumphed and sawe the ende and last destru∣ction The long con∣tinuance of Ierusalem. of the Caldeans, Assyrians, Egyptians, Arabians and Per∣sians: for litle Iudea endured the force and power of the three first Monarchies, which was the Assyrians, the Persians, and the Grecians, though it was before conquered fiue seuerall times by the iust iudgement of God for their transgression and sinne, yet by the mercie of God saued and preserued, as is before mentioned, vntil thirtie & eight yeres after Christs death. All that while that they serued God and followed the steppes of their forefathers, I meane Abraham, Isaac, Iaa∣cob, Daniel, Iosaphat, Ezechias and Iosias, they preuailed a∣gainst all nations, they conquered all Countreys, and brought all the kingdomes of the worlde to admire their vertues to feare their force, and to seeke fauour and friend∣ship at their handes, though they were sometime touched for their stiffenecked stubbernes and too much iniquities, as in Egypt, in the wildernes, and after they had possessed the land of Promes: for still they offended the Lorde, for the which these seuerall fiue conquests were had ouer them. The first was by Nabuchodonosor, the great king of Babylon: Fiue times Ie∣rusalem taken and destroied. the second by Asocheus king of Egypt: the thirde time by An∣tiochus the great king of Syria: the fourth by Pompeius the great: and the fift and last was by Titus Vespatian. In the which last subuersion and ouerthrowe of Hierusalem, wee
reade in Iosephus being then a present souldier in the warres, the calamities and great miseries that then fel on the citie of Ierusalem, and on the inhabitants thereof. Their hunger and The miserie of Hirusalem. famine was so great, that one did eate an others vomite: the fathers did eate their children, and the mothers fed on their owne babes in the cradle, in so much that stinking carions and dead bodies which died for hunger in the streete, was meate of great daintines in Ierusalem. They were constrai∣ned to eate beastes dung, dried leather, girdles, shoes, and skinnes which couered their shields, yea they sought their foode in Iakeses, many slewe and butchered one another in the citie. Besides this, the plague was so hote amongst them, that lodgings, houses, temples, and all the streetes in Ierusa∣lem were filled with dead bodies. The slaughter was such, as within 18. moneths siege Ioseph. lib. 7. cap. 7. 110000. were slaine within the citie, and most of them stran∣gers and Gentiles which came vp to the feast, according to the custome of the Iewes, where suddenly they were taken and besieged, you must thinke by famine and by the sword. During which time 97000. were taken prisoners and cap∣tiues: there were found of the Iewes in priuies and Iakeses, and hiding themselues in caues, sinkes, and holes of the earth, aboue 2000. Some sent of these to the nomber of 70. thousand to Egypt as bond slaues, there to moile like beastes in intollerable toile: some solde more cheape then dogs: for Egesippus witnesseth, that 30. Iewes were solde for a penie, and those were yong boyes vnder sixteene yeeres.
OF THE FIRST ORIGI∣nall of the CHALDEANS, first called Arphaxades after the name of Arphaxad the thirde sonne of SEM, which was the first king∣dome of the world: of their continuance, go∣uernment and last destruction by Da∣rius Medius, and Cyrus. NOw hauing ended the historie of the Hebrewes, the posteritie of Arphaxad the thirde sonne of Sem, I will followe Assur the se∣cond sonne of Sem, who buil∣ded Niniue, from whom and af∣ter whose name the Assyrians are called: whose history I haue now in hand. In the hundreth thirtie and one yeere after the flood, when people had multiplied in the land of Shinear, olde Noah taught the people to seeke new seates and dwellings, instructed the newe worlde (the first age after the flood,) in the course of the Sunne, the Moone, and the starres, and in all other things wherein Noah was most perfite: hee declared to his people what he knewe and sawe in the first age, and deuided the world into three parts,
Asia, Africke, and Europe, and sent his sonnes to seeke ad∣uentures. Cham to E∣gypt. Sem to Asia. Iaphet to Eu∣rope. Cham he sent to Egypt and to Africke with his com∣pany, Sem to Asia, and Iaphet with his people to Europe: of whom I will speake where their historie is handled. Now I will begin the historie of the Chaldeans, who after that the people were dispersed at the building of Babel, and had scattered into euery partes of the worlde, were the first that erected vp a kingdome, and was the first place that was inhabited, as both Zenophon and Berosus affirme: for the Calde∣ans knew that before the flood that men liued, and that the continuance of them were before the flood, one thousande sixe hundreth and fiftie yeeres and more, for that then Noah and his sonnes taught the second age, of things done in the former age, and how for sinne God had destroied the world: for the Egyptians and the Phoenicians long after the flood, were taught by the Chaldeans of the flood, and of the former time, and after more perfectly instructed by Abraham, Abraham read in Egypt. which in the time of famine trauailed from Canaan into E∣gypt, where for a time hee read Arithmeticke to the Egypti∣ans, then rude and ignorant of any great knowledge, that hearing of these things, they beganne very obscurely and darkely to set downe many things which they then not per∣fectly knewe, and yet are vnperfect, for that they were igno∣rant of the Genesis. The goodnesse of God spared Noah for 350. yeres and more, to instruct the second age, & to preach vnto them the wonderfull workes and mercies of God be∣fore the flood, and to warne the world after the flood from sinne, the onely cause of Gods wrath towards man, and to bring them vp in the true religion of God: not as prophane writers affirme, that hee wandered all the countreys of the world by diuers and sundry names, as by the name of Ogyges, Of Noah▪  after the flood. Ianus, Coelus, Oenotrius, Geminus pater, and many such fabu∣lous names, of his lawes in euery countrey, of his religion and ceremonies in euery kingdome, of his being in Italy, in Spaine, and in other countreys, cleane contrary to the na∣ture and trueth of the history, which came after the flood vn∣to
the place where he yet liued, with his forefathers, Lamech, Methusalem, Enoch, and so foorth before the flood, the land of Shinear where by the consent and opinion of the best lear∣ned he liued vntil he died. I wil not therefore follow Caldean fables, in the antiquities of their Caldean and Assyrian kings, for that they haue no sound warrant for their historie, but that which Berosus setteth downe, which Manethon an Egyp∣tian priest much commendeth, and maketh many supplies of Berosus lies, and so doeth Io. Annius a priest in Whitenberge, in his Commentaries vpon Berosus, and so doth Diodorus in his bookes of Fabulous antiquitie. But leauing Berosus, Menathon, and Annius to forge their fables, I wil as briefly as I can, runne through this historie, for that I can finde nothing true of them, but that which I reade in the Bible, from the time of Phul assur, vntill Balsaars time, which were but 10. kings, Thul assur. Tiglat Phul∣ssar. whose names I set here downe. 1 Phul assur, named in the Scripture, Tiglat Phul∣assur. 2 Salmanassar, which de∣stroyed Samaria, and toke the 10. tribes of Israel vn∣to Niniue captiue. 3 Saneherib, who came a∣gainst Ezechias to Hieru∣salem, with an huge ar∣mie, folowing his fathers tyrannie Saneherib. 4 Merodach, the first king of Babylon, againe broght Niniue vnder Babylon. 5 Berodach, his sonne. 6 Nabuchodonosor, which destroied Hierusalem, and tooke the tribe of Iuda captiue into Babylon. 7 Euilmerodach, Nabuchodo∣nosors sonne, this restored Iehoakim king of Iuda vn∣to his libertie againe, af∣ter that Nebuchodonosor his father died. 8 The last of these Kings was Balsaar: of these ma∣ny kings, in this the hi∣story of the Prophetes make mention, and so much of the historie is true.
I will therefore set downe the continuance, the nombers of their kings, the change and varietie of this Kingdome: for after that Nimrod had drawen people together, he first laide the foundation of the Empire, made lawes, began to builde a great Citie, and named it Babylon, the first Citie after the flood: which Citie though Nimrod began it, his sonne Belus Melancthon lib. 1. amplified it, and last of al Semiramis finished it in such forme and stately shewe, as he that is desirous to knowe the length, the breadth, the compasse, situation, the strength and beau∣tie of Babylō, let him read Herodotus Solinus, where it is largely Herodot. lib. 1. described. Though it is thought that Herodotus and others in this do erre: for Iosephus lib. 1. contr App. and Beroaldus 3. Chr. affirme, that the olde writers erred much about the building of Babylon, and of Niniue: for that which Nabuchodonosor clai∣med to be his owne, saying, Nonne haec est Babylon quam ego aedificaui in robore fortitudinis meae? Is not this Babylon which I haue builded? the Grecians and all olde writers attribute to Nimrod, to Belus, and to Semiramis. The like fable is of Nini∣ue, which was builded first by Assur, the sonne of Semi, by writers is attributed to Nynus. Herein both Greeke and La∣taine Historians are ouer seene aswell in the time, as in the persons, in that they were ignorant of the Prophetes histo∣ries: howbeit Babylon was begun by Nimrod and Belus, and somewhat enlarged and beautified by Semiramis: but the dig∣nitie and chiefe soueraigntie of Babylon must be graunted to Nabuchodonosor, vnder whom the Caldeans onely florished ouer all Kingdomes, and enioyed aureum seculum. So this Countrey florished first before all other Coun∣treis. Herodotus lib. 1. Babylon the first towne & the first seate of the Empire of the world, being the chiefest palace of the king: for so were they called kings of Babylon, and the first kings in the worlde after the flood, and so continued almost two hundred yeres, vntill the time of Ninus, who after he had builded Niniue, in Iosephus. the plaine of Aturia, a farre greater Towne then Babylon, though before it was begunne by Assur, one of the sonnes of Strab. lib. 16. Sem, yet fully by Nynus finished.
This Nynus waxed great and strong, layed siege to Baby∣lon, subdued it, and brought the Empire of Caldea subiect vn∣to Assyria: then both Caldea and Assyria became one Mo∣narchie, Herodot. lib. 1 and then the kings of Babylon were called kings of Assyria, and then Assyria hauing conquered Babylon, began to be chiefe, and continued from Belus time the first king of As∣syria, vntill Sardanapalus time the last king of Assyria, which as Eusebius writeth, was 12. hundred & fourtie yeeres from the first reigne of Nynus, vntill the last of Sardanapalus: so long the seede of Sem continued kings, and helde the Monarchie of Melancth. lib. 1. Assyria. As the kingdome of Babylon was translated then from the posteritie of Cham, after the first 200. yeeres, vnto the po∣steritie of Sem: so nowe againe Niniue is made subiect to Ba∣bylon, as it shalbe hereafter shewed, when the historie of the kings of Assyria is handled. Thus Assyria sometime subiect to Chaldea, and Chaldea to Assyria: Niniue to Babylon, and Babylon to Niniue, vntill both were subdued by the Medes, and after by the Persians: so God doth appoint, and God doth disap∣point states and common wealthes, according to the de∣cree of his eternall will, sinne being the onely cause of Gods anger and wrath, his wrath the cause of all calamities, de∣struction, and subuersion of kingdomes, as Sirach saith, Reg∣num à gente in gentem transferetur propter iniustitiam. Therefore Pompei the great, being a heathen man, and driuen to flight in the the battell at Pharsalia by Iulius Caesar, Chap. 10. desirous to know of Cratippus the Philosopher, the euents of the warres betweene Iulius Caesar and himselfe, demaunded of him, an sit prouidentia? whether the decree and purpose of God is vnchangeable? Cratippus answered him, though a hea∣then Melancth. lib. 2. Philosopher, yet like a true Christian, saying, Fatales esse imperiorum periodos, the prouidence of God is most sure and Chron. certeine: for then the Romane Monarchie beganne by Iu∣lius Caesar, the first Emperour of Rome, which Pompei founde true within a while after: and so Chaldea first, and Assyria after, so the Medes, so the Persians, so the Grecians; and last of all the Romanes came to destruction by not confessing God, nei∣ther
acknowledging his prouidence, as you shall reade in their seuerall histories. But nowe to speake of the rest of the kings of Assyria, for that they were at one time, and gouerned together, Belus the sōne of Nimrod, after he had (as you haue heard) laid the fundations of Babylon by his father Nimrod be∣fore appointed, a peaceable prince, quiet, gentle, & curteous vnto his subiects, vntil about the latter end of his reigne hee became to bee ambitious, most cruelly giuen to enlarge the Empire of Babylon, and (as Berosus saith) to bring all Nations . 5. in Belo. vnder the Chaldeans: he went about first to destroy a mightie great king in those dayes, which much hindred Belus purpo∣ses, named Sabatius king of Saga. This Sabatius perceiuing that Belus laid secret snares euery way for him, and seeing that he could by no meanes escape the hads of Belus, he hid himself in a secret place with the Caspiis. Annius saith in the 5. booke . vpon Berosus, that this Sabatius was Saturnus. Now Belus being old, hauing reigned 62. yeeres, grew so great and so mightie, that al the nations about honored him as a god: he comman∣ded Nynus his sonne a little before he died, by al meanes pos∣sible to destroy Sabatius Saga; and by the sword to compell all nations and countries, and al people to be vnder the Empire of Babylon, for that it was the first kingdome after the flood. When he had reigned king 62. yeeres, he died, to whom the Belus the 2. king was the first cause of idolatrie. Assyrians after his death erected his statue or image, & they made so many monumēts to Belus after his death, that there∣by they began to commit idolatry, to put vp images, naming them Baal, & Bel, after the name of Belus. Nynus succeeded his father Belus, the third king of the Assyrians, imitating his fa∣ther both by nature and by cōmandement, lost no time, but streight in armes, & where his father subdued the most part of Assyria and Asia, this king went further, hauing conquered euery where vntill the coasts of Libya, finding the people yet not able to resist him, not acquainted with wars, but seeking meanes to fortifie their kingdomes, being as yet weake and tender, without any great force, not so strong as to resist Ny∣nus being at that time the greatest king in the worlde, which ouercame Aricus king of Arabia, but some say king of Ellasar, 2. Gene. 15.
and after conquered Barzanes king of Armenia, as Berosus affirmeth. After he returned to Media, where Pharnus king Berosus lib. 5 in Nyno. Pharnus king of the Medes slaine. Iustine lib. 1. of the Medes, and his seuen sonnes were slaine with their ar∣mie, thence proceeded forward to Bactria, where Zoroastres remained as king, to whom Iustine ascribeth the first obser∣uations of the starres, naming him the first Astrologer of the worlde after the flood: this gaue Nynus a great ouerthrowe in the first battell, putting the enemies to flight after he had slaine 100000. of the Assyrians. Nynus hauing this foile returned with greater force, ioy∣ned againe in battel, ouercame the Bactrians, slue their king, & possessed the kingdome by the pollicie of Semiramis, whō Zoroastres king of Ba∣ctria slaine by Nynus. afterward he maried: which historie you shall finde in Diodo∣rus Siculus at large. This Nynus excelled his father, augmen∣ting the Empire of Assyria, by the conquestes hee did of all Asia, and of all the East kingdomes vnto the Indians: hee am∣plified the Citie of Niniue, which Assur the sonne of Sem be∣gan Lib. 3. de Fabu. antiquo. gestis. to builde, as Iosephus and Philo Iudaeus doe affirme: but Melancthon saith, that Nynus two hundred yeeres after buil∣ded Niniue: after Assur began it that Nynus enlarged it, beau∣tified and made it so great, that it conteined foure hundred furlongs of ground, which is fiftie miles after our accompt: it had a thousand and fiue hundred wonderfull great towres vpon the walles, it had the onely soueraignetie of the worlde, and there Nynus, and all the kings of Assyria kept their Courtes: this was called by Nynus after his owne name Niniue: it was builded in the valley of Aturia, not farre from the riuer Tygris: this Niniue was farre greater then Babylon, as you may reade in Herodotus at large, and was the chiefe seate The king∣doms of the Assyrians continued 1240. of the kings of Assyria a thousand and two hundred yeeres: some write one thousand, three hundred and more. Howe true Berosus writes of the pilgrimage and iourneys of Noah, I referre it to the reader: but hee sayeth, that in the tenth yeere of Nynus the third king of Babylon, after that No∣ah had trauailed many Countries, & had giuen them lawes, he came to Africa, from Africa after that heehad taught the
people for a time he came into Italie, in the nineteenth yeere of Nynus, at what time Noah was eight hundred and three score yeeres olde, and liued after in Italie and in Hetruria 92. yeeres: for so long liued Noah, which was in all 950. Many Monuments and Townes builded by Noah in diuers Coun∣tries, are set written by Berosus lib. 5. and by Annius in his Comentarie: Abraham was 57. when Noah died. After this Nynus had reigned 52. yeeres, he died, and was buried in his owne Citie of Nynus, where his wife Semiramis Nynus 3 king died. buried him so honorably, with such a sumptuous Toumbe, that it was the onely paterne which Artimesia the queene of Caria made for her husbande Mausolus, and counted for the rarenes thereof one of the seuen woonders of the worlde. Wee reade in Zenophon, that Semiramis caused an Epitaph to bee set vpon one of the pillars of this graue with these wordes, Mihipater Belus Iupiter, Auus Saturnus Ba∣bylonicus, Functius. Nynus Epi∣taph. proauus Chus Saturnus Ethiops, Abauus Saturnus Aegyp∣tus, atauus Caelus Phoenix Ogiges, repeating the petigree of Ny∣nus to be the sonne of Belus the sonne of Nimrod, the sonne of Chus, the sonne of Cham, the sonne of Noah. Archilogus wri∣teth, that he beganne to reigne a king ouer the Assyrians 250. yeeres after the flood. In this Nynus time Abraham was borne: Semiramis after her husband was dead, beganne to fortifie the walles of Ba∣bylon, Semiramis. ruled and gouerned most stoutly the Assyrians and the Caldeans 42. yeeres, adding to the Empire more Regions and Countries after her husbands dayes, subdued the Ethiopians, ouercame the Indians and their king Staurobates, which ne∣uer was done, or by any enterprised beside Semiramis, but onely by Alexander the great. Of this queene, and of her do∣ings, her warres and her great workes, you shall reade in Dio∣dorus Diodo. lib. 2. and Annius, how she became so great, so terrible, and so luckie in any warre she tooke in hand, that she excelled farre all the Assyrian and Caldean kings in victories and triumphs, vntil Nabuchodonosors time, but slaine at last by her sonne cal∣led Nynus, or Nynias, as Melancthon, and Annius, and Ruffinus
writeth the 5. king of the Assyrians, who liued with his mo∣ther, and had no gouernment, for that he was a simple man, and who succeeded his mother, being neither like to his fa∣ther Beros. Lib. 3. nor to his mother, a king giuen to slouthfulnesse, full of idlenesse, of whom we reade nothing worth the writing, sa∣uing that he repaired & beautified the temples of their idols, Anius in Bero∣so de Semira mide. and made much of the Chaldean magi which were accomp∣ted wise men, obseruing the turne of Astrologers who began then in those dayes to vse diuination: he reigned 38. yeeres, who a litle before he died, Camesenus being forced to flee frō all the partes of the world, came to Bactria, and there streng∣thened himselfe with the Bactrians, that he prepared a great army to inuade the Assyrians: but he was slaine, and his armie ouerthrowen euen of this king Ninias, as Berosus affirmeth: Berosus lib. 5. yet Diodorus, Iustinus, & Orosius say, that this was done by Ny∣nus the father of Ninias. Let the reader beleeue whō hee list: Many of the best writers vse Berosus, though he is had in con∣tempt. I had rather follow Berosus, (though he is supposed not to be Berosus, yet the best writer vseth him in this historie) for he is best to be beleeued, for that hee knoweth better the Chaldean histories, being a Chaldean borne, then others. This Ninias, or Ramisninias is takē to be that king, which is called Amraphel in Genesis, king of Shinar, which is Babylon: for in the daies of Am∣raphel came Arioch king of Ellasar, who came with the king of Shinar, against the kings of Sodom & Gomorrha, together with two other kings, Chedor king of Elam, and Tidal king of the na∣tions gathered of diuers countries. These foure kings made Genesis 14. warre with Bera king of Sodom, with Byrsha king of Gomorrha, with Shemeber king of Seboim, and with the king of Bela, in the Bela is Zoar. vale of Siddim. At this very warre Lot the nephew of Abraham (for hee dwelt then at Sodom) was taken with the king of Abraham res∣cued his ne∣phewe Lot. Sodom & the rest, was rescued by Abraham his vncle, he & all his goods, al his substance, men & women, Abraham recoue∣red frō Amraphel king of Shinar, & his company. By this time Egypt began to florish, and the kings of Egypt beganne to be strong: they were all named Pharaohs, as the Romanes called their Emperors Caesars, names of great dignitie. While this
conflict and these great armies of fiue kings against foure were in the field, you must vnderstand they were but gouer∣nors The ouer∣throw of the 5. kings of So∣dome, Gomor∣rha, and Se∣boim. The first kind of common weale. Melchisedec blesseth Abra∣ham. of cities: for in these daies skant the names of kingdoms were knowen, but a kind of gouernment called Oligarchia, by reason it was within 350. yeres of the flood. At that time A∣braham comming backe with Lot, Melchisedec king of Shalem came to meete him, & blessed him, to whom Abraham gaue tithe of al that he had. This Melchisedec is taken to be Sem the sonne of Noah king of Shalem, afterward called Ierusalem. Af∣ter this Ninias, succeeded his sonne Arius, the sixt king of the Assyrians, as Functius writeth: but Ruffinus the fourth, and yet they vary not, but in this that Functius beginneth from Nim∣rod, which Ruffinus saith began in Babylon, & not in Niniue. A∣gaine, Functius numbreth Semiramis reigne, for that she reig∣ned 40. yeres after her husband Nynus, which Ruffinus omit∣teth, coumpting Nynus reigne for both: for both the gouern∣ment of Semiramis and Ninus, & forward stil of the rest of the kings of Assyria, Ruffinus, omitting these two, Nimrod & Semi∣ramis, maketh Functius to say sixe, and Ruffinus to accoumpt foure, but in this I will follow Functius. This Arius after that Arius the sixt king of the Assyrians. his father Ninias was dead, hee gathered a great host of soul∣diers against the Bactrians and the Caspians, with whom his father and his forefathers were enemies alwayes: hee in∣uaded them againe, spoyled their countrey, slue their king, and brought Bactria and Caspia subiect to the Assyrians: in Caspians and Bactriās made subiect to the Assyrians. this kings time died Noah, about twelue yeres after Abraham was called from Vr in Chaldea, and came to Haran, where hee staied foure yeres. Thus florished the kingdome of the Assyri∣ans, being still augmented with more Prouinces, Cities, and Countries, by Arius and his predecessors: and when hee had reigned 30. yeeres, he died, and after him succeeded Aralius the seuenth king of the Assyrians a warlike prince, a man of Aralius the 7. king of Assy∣ria. great prowesse, skilfull in militarie discipline, full of martiall exploites, of whom Berosus affirmeth, that it was he that first vsed triumphs and pompes with great honor, dignitie, and rewards to souldiers that deserued praise, & began to be de∣licious in bankets and feastes, and inuented many engins of warres that then were not knowen.
In this kings fathers time, there dwelt in Celtiberia a great wise man, expert in many things, whose name was Druyas: of Lib. 16. cap. 44. whom (as Berosus writeth) the auncient priests and wise men were called Druyades: so doth Plinie write, and Caius Iulius Cae∣sar in his booke de bello Gallico. This Aralius ruled Assyria fourtie yeeres, and died. Then beganne in Niniue the reigne of Baleus, surnamed Xerxes, the eight king of the Assyrians: this surmounted farre his prede∣cessour Baleus the 8. king of Assy∣ria. Aralius: for hee brought vnder the scepter of Assyria twise asmuch people, Nations and Countries, as his prede∣cessour did, and therefore he was called Xerxes, that is, the conquerour, the triumpher, which long after were names of great dignitie among the Persians. This king was both fierce and fortunate, and enlarged the confines of his kingdome with many Nations: he conquered al Countries vnto India, Functis in fa∣bula Assyrioū. he made the kings to bee feared so much of all kingdomes, that he was named of the Assyrians, Xerxes victor & triumpha∣tor: this reigned (as Berosus doth write) thirtie yeeres. In this Baleus dayes, Inachus the first king of the Argiues, and their The kingdom of Argos be∣gan in these dayes. Armatrites 9. king of the As∣syrians. first kingdome began. After Baleus reigned in Assyria, a king named Armatrites the ninth: of him there is no great thing to bee read to his commendation: hee was giuen much to wicked lust and slouthfulnesse, consuming his time in feasting and banquet∣ting, from one pleasure vnto another, more cōuersant with women then with men, and more delicious in apparell then hardie in warres, and more giuen (as Berosus saith) to a lewde life then to vertuous exercise: he reigned 38. yeeres. In these dayes Sem the sonne of Noah died, and the king of Salem be∣ing sixe hundred yeeres olde, for Sem was a hundred yeere olde when the flood began, and hee liued before the flood with three of his olde fathers, with Noah, Methusalem, and Lamech: and after the flood he liued in the second age, vntill Iacobs time, and died in the fiftie yere of Iacobs age, seuen hun∣dred Sem dieth. yeeres iust before Dauids birth: hee liued thirtie fiue yeeres after Abrahams dayes.
The tenth king of the Assyrians was Belochus Priscus, and he Belochus Priscus 10. king of Assyria. reigned 35. yeres, a righteous king, of whō writers make no great mention: for most of the kings of Assyria be so ancient, & their histories by Berosus set forth so doubtfull, that autho∣rities sufficient cannot be found to write much, sauing those ten kings which are mentioned in Scripture, in whose time the Assyrians and the Chaldeans florished most: their histo∣ries and their tyrannies done in the Church, is set downe in the Prophetes by the Spirite of God, the touchstone of all trueth, and reserued by the holy Ghost to the vse of his Church and the members thereof, the keyes of all know∣ledge, of whom al prophane histories haue their beginning. Baleus Iunior succeeded to be the eleuenth king of Assyria: hee reigned two and fiftie yeeres, and was amongst the Assyrians of great fame: hee excelled the rest in all his warres: for his predecessors, euenthe best kings, as Baleus Xerxes, Aralius, Ni∣nus or Belus himselfe entred not so farre, conquered not so much as this king did, whom all writers so cōmended, and specially after Semiramis next in fame and greatnes: for shee conquered vnto India, this conquered India, and brought the Indians vnder the gouernment of the Assyrians, paying yerely tribute vnto the kings of Assyria, committing themselues and their countries vnder the tuition of this king Baleus Iunior. In this Baleus Iuniors time, Osiris being very aged, returning Baleus 11. king of Assyria. from all the Countries where hee had traueiled, into Egypt, erected vp a triumphant pillar, with this inscription set vp∣on it, I am King Osiris, the sonne of Saturnus, that taught in all partes of the world the vse of those things which I Osiris first found out. This Trophe was kept a long time by the Priestes of E∣gypt Diodo. lib. 1. in memorie of Osiris. About this time Iacob and his children went to Egypt, 215. Iacob and his children re∣moued to E∣gypt. yeeres after Abrahams being in Egypt: and they continued so long after Abraham, 215. yeeres, which was the whole time of the children of Israels bondage in Egypt: for from Abra∣hams being first in Egypt, where he left to dwell in Egypt some The misery of the Israelites in Egypt 430. yeeres. Hebrewes after his departing, vntill the comming of Moses, is 430. yeeres.
After this reigned Altads the 12. king of the Assyrians: this aboue the rest became epicureall, applying his whole Altades 12. king of Assy∣ria. studie to seeke out vaine men that could well instruct him to degenerate from his predecessours: for hee sawe so much wealth in Niniue, where the treasures of the kings of Assyria were, that he could by no meanes know how to spend them: hee gaue himselfe to all kind of vices, and to followe young councel: and moreouer he thought it a most miserable thing to toile, to traueile himselfe with continuall warres, hauing so much substance that hee coulde not foresee howe to con∣sume them: but by a decree of his young councelours so it was deuised, that the huge treasure & great substance which his predecessours by their conquestes had obteined, should be with most ease and lesse danger consumed: for this was Altades opinion, hee thought it most fit to liue in pleasure, and to enioy the benefites of his predecessours, noting the miserie to bee such of his elders, as coulde not spende them selues, but spare them to others: and therfore suum institutum Functius. Beros. lib. 5. fuit (saith the historie) to feede delicately, to vse insolent at∣tires, to followe riotous company, to frequent all kinde of pleasures, and to liue viciously while he liued. In this time li∣ued Prometheus, of whom the Poets make mention much, as Eusebius in Chron. Ruffinus in his comentarie doth note. This Altades reigned 32. yeeres: Berosus writeth, that one Hercules king of Celtiberia, in the 19. of Altades, brought his sonne named Thuscus vnto Italie, where hee was created king. After this, Hercules returned backe from Italie vnto Celtiberia, where hee died being very olde: hee was honoured with sta∣tues and images after his death as a demie god: this was be∣fore Hercules Amphitrion 500. yeeres: this reigned in the yere of the world 2275. When Altades had ended his riotous life, Functius. Mamitus th 13. king of As∣syria. one succeeded him named Mamitus the 13. king of Assyria, a man of a cleane contrary disposition to Altades. This king againe, assoone as he came to his kingdom, ex∣ercised himselfe with care & diligence to foresee the state of his kingdome, lothing & detesting idlenes, bent himselfe to warres, kept garisons, had diuers armies abroad, & himselfe
ready to performe in persō that, which Altades his predeces∣sor Sabel. lib 4. Eeadum. Plinie lib. 5. cap. 12. Strab. lib. 16. had neglected. This king grewe so great & so strong, that Egypt & al Syria stood in awe of him, which Syria (as Sabellicus affirmeth) was once the largest kingdom of the world, hauing within it self Palestina, Arabia, Iudea, Phoenicia, & Coelosyria: for the Syrians are people very anciēt: for so Plinie saith, that they were before the Assyrians. Strabo would haue Syria to be al one as Assyria is: for so the Grecians called them. This king Mamitus reigned 30. yeres, & was the first king of the Assyrians that be∣gan this warre in Syria & Egypt: for in his dayes Syria & Egypt florished. There is mention made of the Syrians in Genesis, where Moses saith, that the Syrians descended from Charmel the sonne of Nahor Abrahās brother, called also by the kings of Aram. Nowe after Mamitus succeeded Mancaleus, the 14. Genes. 22. Mancaleus 14. king of Assy∣ria. king of the Assyrians: this king did nothing worth the memo∣rie, for we reade of no warre in his time: for the kings of Assy∣ria being the first nations which had kings in the world, grew frō time to time so great & so mighty, that they held the Mo∣narchie of Assyria from Nimrod to Sardanapalus 1240. yeeres and more: during which time, fewe kings or none coulde hurt them or stand in field against them: for in the East part no king of any puissance was able to encounter with the As∣syrian kings: for then the Assyrians onely ruled: other coun∣tries Nothing worth the wri∣ting of the old kings of Assy∣ria. were not as yet populous, sauing Egypt, who began to be likewise strong: in processe of time, none coulde resist the strength of the Assyrians but the Egyptians. When Egypt grew strong, these two kingdomes began to warre one with ano∣ther, and therefore vntill the time of Phul, Belochus, Salmanas∣ser, Senaherib and Nabuchodonosor, mentioned in the Ecclesia∣sticall history, no great histories are written of the Assyrian kings, and then it was called new Assyria, therefore nothing may be read of the first kings of Assyria, for they helde their kingdome all this while without any great dangers, for yet the engins of wares were ot knowen: for as Berosus began to The begin∣ning of Bero∣sus historie, and the end of the same. write his histories from the going of Noah out of the arke: so he continueth his histor vn the childrē of Israel going out of Egypt: few could writ erteinly of this time being of
such antiquitie: for from Ninus the third king of the Assyrians vntill Spherus, the fifteenth king which nowe I haue in hand, as Archilochus doth gather, there is 451. yeeres. This Spherus after 20. yeeres gouernment died: the 16. king called of Be∣rosus Mameius, reigned 30. yeeres, and hee likewise died with∣out any great mention made of his name. Then folowed in Sparetus 17. king of Assy∣ria. Eusebius in the kingdome of Assyria one named Sparetus, vnder whom the Chaldeans warred vpon the Phoenicians, as Eusebius and Be∣rosus sayth, and brought the Syrians & the Phoenicians subiect to Sparetus. At this time happened such a terrible earthquake (as Berosus doth write) throughout al Assyria and Chaldea, that Babylon & Niniue were much thereby frighted: this Sparetus reigned 40. yeeres. Next folowed Ascatades, the 18. king of Assyria, of whom Berosus writeth, that in the eight yere of this Ascatades 18. king of Assy∣ria. kings reigne, reigned Centres king of Egypt, who with all his host were drowned in the red sea. This is that Pharao that re∣sisted Moses and plagued Israel, of whom I haue written in the stories of the Iewes. In his time he and all his peeres & nobles of Egypt were drowned in the red sea, at what time the He∣brewes had such a triumph ouer their long enemies, as nei∣ther the Persians had ouer the Assyrians, nor the Macedonians ouer the Persians, neither yet the proude Romanes ouer the Macedonians, as the Hebrewes had ouer the Egyptians, and therefore I will set downe the names of the kings of Assy∣ria in this sort from the first king vntill Moses. Nimrod. 56. yeeres. Belus. 62. Nynus. 52. Semiramis. 42. Zamhisninias. 38. Arius. 30. Aralius. 40. Baleus Xerxes. 30. Armatrites. 38. Bellochus Priscus. 35. Baleus Iunior. 52. Altades. 32. Mamitus. 30. Mancaleus. 30. Spherus. 20. Macaleus. 2. called of Bero∣sus Mameius. 30. yeeres. Sparetus. 40. Ascatades. 40.
Of the rest of the Kings of Assyria from Ascatades the eigh∣teenth King vnto Sardanapalus the sixe and thirtith, and the last King of the Assyrians, which is since the Israelites left Egypt, vntill the first Olympiad, at what time Iotham reigned in Iudea. CHAP. II. IN the last yeere of Ascatades, began Dar∣danus to gouerne the Troianes, himselfe being the first king and first builder of Dardania, then Ilion, and the third time called Troy, after the flood eight hundred and thirtie yeeres: for Berosus in the last yeeres of Ascatades the eighteenth king of the Assyrians, ended his historie, and went into Athens, and read the Grecians Astronomy, instructed them in the Chalde∣ans knowledge, concerning the first age before the flood: se∣condly, the genealogie of Adam, and the rest vnto the flood: thirdly, of the flood and of Noah, by the name of Ianus, of his long continuance, of his traueile, lawes, and monu∣ments in all Countries: fourthly, ee taught the antiquitie to the Athenians, of all Kingdomes & Nations, for the which the Athenians caused his statue to be made with a tongue gil∣ded in his head, and to bee put vp in the open schoole at Athens: thus was Berosus in Athens honored with a statue. I thinke it best therefore after that Berosus ended his historie of the kings of Assyria, briefely to passe them ouer, onely set∣ting their names, the time of their gouernment, and the con∣tinuance of the same, vntil their kingdome and Empire was taken away by the Chaldeans. I haue already from Nimrod the first king, vntil Ascatades the eighteenth king, set downe their names: & now from Ascatades vnto Sardanapalus the last king, I will likewise passe them ouer briefely. 18 Ascatades the eighteenth king of Assyria, reigned fourtie yeeres: in his time Dardanus builded Dardania, af∣terwarde called Troy, whose building was after the flood eight hundred and thirtie yeeres.
19 Amintes succeeded Ascatades, and reigned king of Assyria 45. yeeres: in this kings time Moses died in the land of Moab on mount Nebo, after he had brought the Israelites out of Egypt 40. yeeres. 20 After Amintes folowed Belochus Iunior, which reigned 25. yeeres in Assyria: he had a daughter named Ac∣tosa, otherwise called Semiramis, who gouerned with her fa∣ther 7. yeeres. The first Iubilee began in the fourth yeere of this king Bellochus after Moses: for from Moses death vnto the birth of Christ are 29. Iubilees. 21 Bellopares reigned 30. yeeres, in whose time the Is∣raelites serued Eglon king of Moab 18. yeeres, vntill Ehud the sonne of Gera slue Eglon, by whose death Israel had rest 18. yeeres. 22 Lamprides the 22. king of Assyria, reigned 32. yeres, in whose time Shamgar dged Israel, who slue 600. Phili∣stims with an Oxe goade, so God still raised either Priest, Prophet, Iudge, or a king to defend his people. About this time was the Leuites wife abused at Gibeah to death: for the which cause the Leuite cutteth her in 12. pie∣ces, and sendeth her to the 12. tribes of Israel: for the which Lamprides 22. king of Assy∣ria. Iudg. 19. villanie all the tribe of Beniamin were well nigh destroyed. After Lamprides had reigned 32. yeeres, hee had after him a king called Sosares, in whose time (as Cassiod. doth write) the flying horse Pegasus was inuented, and so called for his swiftnesse. Debora and Barac ruled Israel foure yeeres, at what Sosares the 23. king of Assy∣ria. Iudg. 4. time they fought with Iabin. Iael slue Sisera the chiefe cap∣taine of Iabin king of Chanaan, and his whole armie were ouerthrowen by Barac and Debora. The historie of Ruth was likewise about this time: some suppose that Obed the sonne of Boas was borne when Sosares had reigned twentie yeeres. Lampares succeeded him, and he continued thirtie yeeres. In the fifth yeere of Lampares sell the third Iubilee after Moses Lampares 14. king of Assy∣ria. 3. Iubilee. amongst the Iewes.
Many of the Assyrian kings might haue beene omitted for any memorie they left behinde, sauing that by the time of their gouernment, we know how euery kingdome and when euery nation began to florish: for truely they were more an∣cient then the rest, and were the first kings of the worlde, and were idle without any great warre, therfore is little written of them vntill Phul Belochus time: for Herodotus, Ctesias, and Dio∣dorus Siculus, wrote more liberally of the Assyrians, then ei∣ther More written of the kings of Assyria then can be pro∣ued. authoritie or reason warranted them therein. The grea∣test bragge that Saneherib, called Sargon in some histories, could make of his predecessours the kings of Assyria, at what time he laide siege to Ierusalem, hee boasted to Ezechia king of Iuda, the victories and conquestes of the kings of Assyria in these wordes, Tu audisti O Ezechia, omnia quae fecerunt reges Assyriorum? &c. Hast thou not heard (O Ezechias) what my predecessours the kings of Assyria haue done? haue they not 2. Reg. cap. 19. conquered Gozan, Haran, and Reseph? haue they not subdued the sonnes of Eden, which dwelt in Thalassar? what is be∣come of king Emath, and of king Arphad? where be the kings Sepharuaim, Hena and Iuah? are not these subdued and con∣quered Beroaldus lib. 4. cap. 6. by the kings of Assyria? all these kings dwelt in Syria. All this bragge of Saneherib, who was in the most florishing time of the Assyrians Empire, their kingdome, their victo∣ries, their glorie, and all these repetitions of Saneherib, ex∣tended not yet as farre as Mount Taurus: and therefore Dio∣nysius Halicar nassaeus, is in this to bee both beleeued and pre∣ferred before either Herodotus, or Ctesias, or Diodorus and others, who wrote more largely then truely of the Assyrian kings: for hee saith, that the olde Assyrian Empire possessed Dionys. Halic. lib. 1. but a litle part of Assyria, Modicam quandam Assyriae partem obti∣nuit, as Dionysius affirmeth: for during the time and gouern∣ment of the first kings of Assyria, euen from Nynus the first king, vntill Sardanapalus their last king, was fabulosum tempus: the trueth of their historie and the glory of their Empire ap∣peared from the time of Phul Belochus, which was father to Phul Assur, and in the sacred Scripture named Tiglat Assur.
This Phul Assur was father to Salmanasser, and Salmanasser was father to Senaherib. At this time it was called newe Assy∣ria, whose Empire was againe after the death of Saneherib by Merodach brought into Babylon: for in Babylon the first Empire began, after translated from Babylon to Niniue, and now from Niniue to Babylon againe, where it ended in Balsaar, as it shall be shewed when the historie commeth to it. In this kings time the Midianites preuailed much against the children of Israel for seuen yeres, and they were sore op∣pressed, vntill Gedeon was sent to be their deliuerer, and to be their iudge. Then Pannias, or otherwise Pannas, was the 25. Iudg. 6. 7. Pannias 25. king of Assy∣ria. king of Assyria, in whose time the kings of Argiues ended their kingdome, & their Empire was translated into Mycena, after they had gouerned as kings 540. yeeres. In this time reigned Here endeth the kingdome of Assyria. in Athens Pandion, and Mydas gouerned in Phrygia. About which time Abimelech the tyrant vsurpeth the king∣dome of Israel, and putteth seuentie of his brethren to death: Habuit mercedem: for at Thebes as Abimelech was besieging a Iudg. 9. high strong Towre, a woman did cast a piece of a milstone vpon his head, and brake his braine panne, after he had bene a iudge in Israel three yeeres. In the 24. of Pannias happened the fourth Iubilee after Moses. In this kings time likewise ru∣led The fourth Iubilee. in Israel Thola, a iudge of the tribe of Isachar, and gouerned the people of Israel 23. yeres. After this reigned Sosarmus 19. yeeres in Assyria. It is written that Orpheus the Thracian, the Sosarmus 26. king of Assy∣ria. most famous and most auncient musitian liued at this time. Iair the Gileadite gouerned Israel 22. yeeres: this iudge had thirtie sōnes that rode on 30. asse coltes, men of great autho∣ritie: for they had thirtie Cities in the land of Gilead, and they kept the land in peace 22. yeeres. Now Faunius Iunior gouer∣ned Italie, to whom Euander came from Arcadia, and had gi∣uen him certaine lands in Italie, which Euander called after∣ward Palatinum. Manethon writeth, that Hercules, Amphitrions sonne was borne about this time, of whom the Poets faine, that he was the sonne of Iupiter: of this man more shalbe spo∣ken amongst the Grecians, when I speake of their histories.
But againe to the Assyrians, who had after Sosarmus a king called Mytreus the 27. king, and raigned 27. yeeres: in the latter ende of this kings raigne Hercules killed Cacus the great Hercules killeth Cacus. giant, in mount Auentine, after Hercules ouerthrew Troy, and killed the king called Laomedon, and made Priamus his sonne king of the Troyans: who againe repaired and builded vp Troy to be one of the strongest townes of the worlde. This Hercules came to Italie fiftie and fiue yeeres before AEneas comming, and gaue to the Italians lawes. Reade of this more in Halicarn. lib. 1. In Israel after Iudge Iair died, it was 18. yeres interregnum, without a Iudge, and they wrought wickednes in the sight of The Lord pu∣nisheth Israel for sinne. the Lord againe, and serued Baalim and Ashtaroth, the gods of Syria, and the gods of Sidon, the gods of Moab, the gods of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and God was angrie with them, and deliuered them to the handes of their ene∣mies, who vexed and oppressed them 18. yeeres, vntill the time they put away the strange gods, and serued the true God with great repentance. Ishai the father of the Prophet Ishai borne. Dauid was borne about this time, three hundreth yeere after the Israelites going out of Egypt. Nowe with the Assyrians, Tautanes the 28. king beginneth to rule, about which time Hercules appointed the games of Tautanes the 28. king of Assyria. Olympia, where all the Grecians came to exercise feates of armes, running and wrastling, with all other kinde of exer∣cise, 430. yeeres before the Olympiads began. This time hap∣pened Hercules gamesat O∣lympia. in Egypt in the Isle of Pharao a great deluge called Dilu∣uium Pharaonicum, which did ouerflowe the whole countrey, which was seldome seene in Egypt, for that they haue no raine but onely the ouerflowing of Nilus which once a yeere hap∣peneth vnto them. By this time Iephtah was made Iudge in Israel, a valiant man: but for that hee was a bastard, sedition grewe in Israel Iudg. 12 against Iephtha by the Ephraimites, his brethren thrusted him out, and Iephtha fled to the land of Tob: but hee was made afterward captaine ouer Israel, and hee subdued the Ammo∣nites
from Aroer to Abel, 20. cities, and slew 42. thousand of the Ephraimites, and for the victorie here of he sacrificed his daughter vnto the Lord according to his vow, though it was rash & vnlawful. In this Tautanes time raigned 4. Iudges, Ieph∣tha 6. yeres, Ibzan gouerned 7. yeres: some thought this to be Abesan the 10. Iudge. Boas the husband of Ruth, the grandfather of Dauid: this had 30. sonnes and 30. daughters. After him Elon of the tribe of Zabulon, iudged Israel 10. yeeres: and after Elon ruled Abdon: this Iudge had 40. sonnes, and thirtie sonnes sonnes that rode on 70. assecolts, and he gouerned Israel 10. yeres and died. About this time Theseus rauished Helen the wife of Mene∣laus, The first ra∣uishment of Helen by The∣seus. which being by Adoneus king of the Molosseans taken, was rescued by his felow and alwayes his companion Hercules. In the kingdome of Assyria succeeded Tautanes, who raigned 40. yeres: of which we reade nothing worth the writing. At this Tautanes the 29. king of Assyria. time Samson the sonne of Manoah of the tribe of Dan, gouer∣ned Israel 20. yeeres: he plagued the Philistims who had kept Israel vnder hand for their sinnes & wickednes: for God was angrie with them: for notwithstanding all his goodnes, his mercy towardes them, and his miracles amongst them, yet they still rebelled, and moued the Lord to wrath: this Samson was the last Iudge of Israel. Then the state of the Israelites go∣uernment Sams the last Iudge of Is∣rael. was altered, and they were vnder Ely the priest. At this time raigned a king that gouerned the Thuscanes named Ocnus Beanor, this builded Mantua the coūtrey where Virgil was borne, which the Romans called after Hethruscanes. Ocn Bianor builded Man∣tua. Now that the race of the Iudges of Israel is ended which con∣tinued from Moses death, vntil Samuel 357. yeres, God suffred kings to gouerne his people, and appointed his Prophets to direct his kings: this came to passe in Samuels time, who an∣oynted Saul king ouer Israel, and they both together raigned 40. yeeres. By this time Tyneus the 30. king of the Assyrians raigned in Niniue 30. yeres, and in the 13. of his raigne the 7. Iubilee of the Iewes began. The kingdome of Hispane before The 7. Iubilee. Hispane deui∣ded into pro∣uinces. called Iberia, & before that time Celtiberia, is in this time de∣uided into prouinces, into seueral gouernmēts of cities and
countreis, hauing 24. kings by succession, which continued vntil 75. yeeres after the destruction of Troy, & continued so vntil the Carthaginians began to flourish, whom the Romanes afterward cōquered. At this time one Pypinus gouerned the Thuscanes, and raigned, as Manethon writes, 56. yeres. In the last yeres of this king Tyneus, the Prophet Dauid was borne, The birth of Dauid. 407. yeres after the children of Israels going out of Egypt, and in the 7. Iubile after Moses: then began to raigne in Assyria Der∣cillus, Dercillus the 31. king of As∣syria. he raigned 40. yeres. In his dayes began the kingdome of Lacedemonia, 83. yeres after Troys destruction: the first king of Lacedemonia was called Euristenes, who raigned 42. yeeres: The kingdom of Lacedemonia at this time beginneth. of him came lineally 2. noble and valiant captains, Cleomenes and Leonidas, who in their time were most famous, for they inuaded the Persians, and ouerthrew them at Thermophila. About the same yere the Corinthians began likewise to esta∣blish The begin∣ning of the kingdome of Corinth. a kingdome: for the Lacedemonians and the Corinthians began at one time to raigne: the first king of Corinth was Ale∣thes, and he raigned 35. yeres. In the 10. yere of king Dercillus the Arke of the Lord was taken by the Philistines, and caried vnto Ashdod, one of their fiue principal cities, & they kept the The Arke is taken away from Israel by the Phi∣listines. Arke 7. moneths. For when the Israelites were ouercome by the Philistines, and the arke taken away, Ely the priest hearing that the Israelites were ouerthrowen, the arke taken, and his two sonnes slaine, fel down frō his stoole & brake his necke: for so the Lord told Samuel before what should become vpō Ely & his house. Israel stil offended God, & now not conten∣ted with the gouernmēt which God appointed them, but cri∣ed Saul the first king of Israel: out for a king, God cōmanded Samuel to anoint Saul their king. About this time great warres grew betwene the Pelopo∣nesians and the Athenians. Codrus at that time liued, & was the last king of Athens: for after Codrus there was no king there, but gouernours called Metontidae. Codrus sonne called Medon was the first Iudge in Athens after the kings. Codrus according to the Oracle giuen, that the Athenians should haue no victo∣ries Codrus the last king of Athens. vnlesse their king were slaine in the battell, he disguised himselfe like a common souldier, rushed into the midst
of the battaile purposely to be slaine, that his countrey might haue victorie, being the last of the 17. kings, hauing ruled Athens 21. yeeres, ended his life and his kingdome. About this time Samuel was commanded to anoint Dauid king ouer Israel, and many learned men would haue Homer a∣bout Ruffin, in Com. this time to be borne: some controuersie is of Homers time: Eratosthenes thought it within 100. yeeres after the de∣struction of Troy, and so saith Aristarchus, and Cornelius Ne∣pos, both affirme that Homer flourished 100. yeeres before the first Olympiad. Budaeus saith, that Homer liued in the latter yeres Euphoreus lib. 4. de asse. of king Dauid, so they square about 80. yeres of Homers birth. During this time raigned ouer the Latines, AEneas Siluius their fourth king. After this raigned in Assyria Eupales 38. yeeres, in whose time the Peloponesians againe mooued warres against the A∣thenians. Now about this time the promise is made to Dauid that the continuance of his kingdome should for euer en∣dure, but with crosses and afflictions: for Absalon killed his brother Amnon a litle after, and fled vnto the king of Gessur, 2. Sam. cap. 7. and taried there three yeere. By this time Salomon was borne of Bethsaba the wife of Vrias: Nathan and Gad were in those dayes Prophets of the Lord. Now raigned in Athens Medon the first Iudge, the sonne of Codrus the last king of Athens: in Lacedemonia Argis the second Ruff. in Com. Medon the first iudge of A∣thens. Arcestratus the third king of Lacedemonia. king raigned one yeere, Arcestratus succeeded the third king of Lacedemonia, and gouerned the Lacedemonians 35. yeeres: in Corinth likewise Ixon the second king raigned 37. yeeres: for both these kingdomes had one beginning, and therefore their kingdome is accordingly to be handled: for in the last yeres of the kings of Assyrians histories, the Grecians began: for this vnderstand, that the Caldeans, Assyrians, Egyptians, and all the East part of the world, which were first inhabited af∣ter The antiqui∣tie of the Chal∣deans and As∣syrians. the flood, were euen consumed with sworde and fire, before the Grecians or the Romanes were acquainted with the world, and therefore the lesse to be spoken of these olde aun∣cient people for want of authorities: and had not the holy
Ghost lightened prophane histories with true records of the Scripture, all antiquities had almost bene put to obliuion: Moses the first Historiogra∣pher of the world. for all that are in trueth learned in histories, take their light from Moses: he is the grand scholemaster of all writers. About this time Nicius Fesulanus gouerned the Thuscanes Dilor. lib. 6. 47. yeres: he expelled the people called Phocenses out of Cor∣sica, and Nicius builded a towne, and named it Nicea after his owne name. By this time Salomon grewe great in Gods fa∣uour, 3. King. cap. 6. began to make the temple in Ierusalem, excelled all the princes of the world in wisdome & gouernment. Hiram king of Tyrus at that time sendeth to Salomon, and Salomon to him, purposing to builde the house of God: which temple began to be builded the fourth yeere of Salomons raigne, and the 12. of Hiram king of Tyre Salomons friend, who procured worke∣men to worke in Libanon, and after the going of Israel out of Egypt 480. yeeres. Some thinke that Carthage was builded by Charcedon at Carthage buil∣ded. that time: some thinke of Dido: others say otherwise, both of the building of Carthage, and of the time of building, as in the building of Troy, and in the building of Rome the like contro∣uersie Ioseph. contra Appionem lib. 1. is, that sub iudice lis est. Laosthenes the 33. king of the Assyrians is the next king after Eupales, and is now in hand to Laosthenes the 33. king of Assyria. be spoken of, in whose time Alba Siluius gouerned the Latines the sixt king: for the sirnames of the Latin kings were called Siluij, as the kings of Alexandria were called Ptolomei, as before The 9. Iubilee. I told you of the Caesars of Rome and Pharaos of Egypt. About this time the kingdome of Israel for the idolatrie of Salomon was deuided, and the ten tribes caried from Rehobo∣am The kingdom of Israel deui∣ded. the sonne of Salomon king of Iuda, vnto Ieroboam king of Is∣rael, who inuented many wicked things in Israel, idolatrie, new religion, contempt of the true God, putting vp for their god the golden calfe: thus he and his posterities continued Here the kings of Iudae beginne. from the fourth yeere of Rehoboam, vntil the 19. yeere of Na∣buchodonosor, which was 390. yeeres, at what time the last de∣struction of Ierusalem, and the captiuitie of Iuda was Archippus the third Iudge atthis time ruled Athens, where he gouerned
19. yeeres: vnder whom flourished Sextus Homerus a citizen of Athens: this man gaue new lawes to the Athenians. The Thracians were strong by this time, and became great on land and seas, & Smendes king of Egypt to whom Ieroboam fled, and with whome he staied vntil Salomon died: this Smendes is na∣med 1. King. 11. 14. in Scripture Sesac: this came vp against Ierusalem the fift Functius. yere of Rehoboam, destroyed the citie, spoiled the temple; and tooke all the treasures of the kings house away. Thus was The first de∣struction of Ierusalem. Iuda punished for sinne by Sesac king of Egypt a heathen man. At Corinth gouerned Pryminas the fourth king: he raigned thirtie and fiue yeeres at Corinth. In Assyria after Laosthenes raigned Pyrithides 30. yeeres, in the 10. yeere of the tenth Iu∣bilee, Pyrithides the 34. king of Assyria. which Iubilee was in the yeere of the worlde, two thou∣sand nine hundreth ninetie and three. Abia the sonne of Re∣hoboam raigned three yeres king of Iuda: after whom succee∣ded Asa. In Tyrus raigned now a king called Ascartus, who af∣ter he had raigned 12. yeeres in Tyrus, his brother Astarimus succeeded him, and gouerned Tyrus 9. yeeres, and hee was slaine by his brother called Phelletes: he raigned 8. moneths, and was likewise slaine by Ichobalus a priest of the goddesse Astarthes, of whome mention is made in the thirde booke of 3. King. 11. the kings and the 11. chapter. This goddesse Salomon honou∣red much: and in Egypt ruled Pseusenses. There rose against Asa king of Iuda, Sera king of AEthiopia about this time, and Sea king of AEthiopia. thought to inuade Iewrie: but he was not by Asa, but by God put to flight, and his armie scattered and slaine. Elias and Elizeus were borne this time, men singularly be∣loued Elias and Eli∣zeus borne. of God in the middle age of the worlde: for so it is set downe (as Melancthon saith) by Elias himselfe, accompting The middle age of the world. the age of the world, 2000. without the Lawe, 2000. by the Law, and 2000. by grace, which are the dayes of Messias, but for sinne shortened, and by that rule to be looked for before 6000. yeere. Nadab at this time was the second king of Is∣rael, Nadab the se∣cond king of Israel. Baasha the third king of Israel. and began to raigne after Ieroboam, whom Baasha slew in the third yeere of Asa king of Iuda. Baasha the third king of Is∣rael builded Rama, that it might bee a cause that they of the
kingdome of Iuda might not come within the territorie of Israel, neither they of Israel might trouble Iuda, for the which Asa king of Iuda for feare of Baasha king of Israel, maketh Asa the fifth king of Iuda. couenant with Benhadad king of Aram, and therefore is re∣proued by the Prophet, for that he trusted in the king of A∣ram, and not in God who had giuen him victorie before ouer the AEthiopians and Lubins. At this time Achia and Sameas prophecied in Israel: and Septimus Siluius was king ouer the Latins, after whome succeeded Capis Siluius the eight king of the Latins, and raigned 28. yeeres: by this Capis was Capua Capua builded. builded. In Lacedemonia gouerned the sixt king named Age∣silaus, and ouer the Corinthians Bacis the fifth king, of whome Eutropius lib. 1. The kings of Corinth after Bacis, were cal∣led Bacidae. the kings of Corinth were afterward named Bacidae: the names of these kings for the most part are seldome found amongst writers, for they did nothing worth the memorie. Now in Assyria raigned Ophrateus 20. yeres, he was the 35. king in whose dayes Zambri or Zimbri the seruant of Ela con∣spired Zambri killed Ela king of Is∣rael. against the king, killed him, and destroyed al the house of Baasha, according to the word of the Lord to Iehu, & after∣ward Zambri went to the kings house and burned the pallace of the kings, and himselfe with fire: then the people of Israel Zambri bur∣ned himselfe. were deuided, some folowed Tobni to make him king, others folowed Omri, and so Omri became the sixt king of Israel. He Omri the sixt king of Israel builded Sama∣ria. Nepher king of Egypt. builded first Samaria, 200. yeres before Romulus builded Rome. At this time raigned Nepher king in Egypt foure yeeres: and after him succeeded Amenophis, he raigned 9. yeres king in E∣gypt, of whom I wil speake among the kings of Egypt. Now died Asa king of Iuda after he had raigned 41. yeeres: then folowed in Israel after Omri, Achab the 7. king worse then Achab the se∣uenth king of Israel. all the other kings before him, a great idolater, and a tyrant: in the fourth yere of this king Achabs raigne, began Iosaphat to raigne in Iuda. In Achabs time Elias beganne to prophecie, whose history beginneth from the 17. of the first of the kings, vntill the 3. of the 2. of the kings, where he prophecied of the famine that was at hand to come, 800. yeres after the famine Famine. in Iaacobs time. In these daies Hiel the Bethelite builded Iericho.
Amongst the Latins raigned a king called Tiberinus Siluius of whome the riuer Tiber is nowe named after Tiberinus name, for Tiber was called before Albula. Then was in Co∣rinth Tber before called Albula. Agelas, and Archelaus gouerned the Lacedemonians: Eu∣sebius in his histories affirmeth, that in this time flourished Licurgus a lawmaker, and a great wise man amongst the Lace∣demonians. iuius lib. 1. After this raigned Ophraganeus Ascrasapes, and Sar∣danapalus, in whom ended the historie of the Assyrians. And now hauing ended the whole time of 36. kings raig∣ning in Assyria, from Belus time vnto Sardanapalus, and after him from Bellochus vnto Merodach, the raigne of sixe kings, du∣ring The first king∣dome of Assy∣ria ended vn∣der Sardanapa∣lus, which cō∣tinued 1350. yeeres. which time it was called the newe kingdome of Assy∣ria, and from Merodach vnto Balsasar, fiue kings gouernment, which was translated from the Assyrians vnto the Chaldeans, as you shall reade more: being of two gouernements, and yet one Monarchie, sometime vnder the Chaldeans in Babylon, sometime in Niniue vnder the Assyrians, vntill both Chaldea and Assyria became subiect, first vnto the Medes and after to the Persians. Of the Kings of Babylon againe called newe Assyria, from Sar∣danapalus, which the Greekes call Tonoscon coleros, vn∣till Balsaar the last king of Babylon. CHAP. III. SArdanapalus being giuen to all filthie pleasures, feasting, banqueting, a most riotous glutton, a great drunkard, dis∣guising him selfe amongst women in womens apparell, wading from one vice vnto another, so much subiect to beastly abuse, that his slouthfull life gaue great oportunitie to Arbaces a valiant captaine of the Medes, a man of such magnanimi∣tie, being generall of all Media, consulting with Belochus the lieutenant of Babylon, a man of great experience, that both
Arbaces and Belochus agreed, seeing such occasions offered, to ioyne both their forces together against Sardanapalus: which being done, after two great ouerthrowes giuen to The last ouer∣throw of the Assyrians by Arbaces. them, and Arbaces almost slaine, and his people scattered and fled, Sardanapalus was yet too strong for them both: but the thirde time hee was found with his Assyrians so full of wine, and his armie so sleepie after drunkennesse, (according to their wonted maners) that Arbaces againe by night with all his force entred vnto their tentes, found them in their beds full of surphets, slewe them in such heapes, that Sardanapa∣lus fled to his citie of Niniue, and his lieutenant was slaine: hee was then besieged in Niniue, his people forsooke him, and went to his enemies. Then he perceiuing his great dan∣ger, sent his three sonnes and his two daughters to Paphlago∣nia to his friend Cottus with great treasures, to auoyd the pre∣sent perill he was in: being full of all desperations, he made his owne graue so gorgeous and so sumptuous, of such high The maner of Sardapalus death. building, that hee brought 150. beds made of pure golde, so many tables likewise of golde, and after much feasting and banqueting with his Queenes and concubines, and with ma∣ny of his deare friends, being in the midest of their pleasures, he commaunded fire to be put to his pallace (I meane that pile of wood which he made for his graue) and so ended his life and the Empire together in fire, to escape his enemies: thus ended the monarchie of Assyria, after one thousand two hundreth and fourtie yeeres continuance. Behold the euents of the kingdoms of the world▪ how God gaue them alwayes vp to the enemies, when they flourished most in glory, and were most in force & power. Euen so was Chaldea and Assyria the only empires of the world, which farre excelled all other kingdomes, when it was ouerthrowen by Cyrus, insomuch that the great and mightie king Nabuchodo∣nosor the onely Hercules (by Megasthenes so named) of the East Nabuchodono∣sor named Hercules. kingdomes, who aduanced himselfe vp vnto the heauens, who was compared for his great magnificence and glorious pompe of his huge empire, for the pride of his minde, and
insolencie of his state, to the starre Lucifer, & for the bright∣nes, beautie and glorie of his Empire: his greatnes was such, that hee had diuine honours done vnto him: but his pride and pompe was layde in the pitte. For in the time of Nabu∣chodonosor, Isai. 14. the Chaldeans and Assyrians flourished: for they were kings of the Arabians, of the Egyptians, of all Syria: and for the glorie and greatnes of their kingdome, it passed all others farre: and being the first kingdome of the world, was called the golden kingdome, aureum seculum: the other three Monarchies were called Argenteum seculum: the siluer age, beganne in Cyrus time in Persia: the brasen age in Ma∣cedonia in the time of Alexander: and last, the Iron age a∣mong the Romanes beganne in Iulius Caesars time, described in Daniel by the foure beastes. For all Nabuchodonosors power, strength, states and kingdomes, lost all within threescore and tenne yeeres of this his great possession and power. Euen so the kings of Egypt which flourished in like strength, and clai∣med the like maiestie, lost their kingdome in the midest of their glory, and were ouerthrowen by Cambyses. To bee short, because God would bee knowen vnto his people, whom the wicked neuer confessed to bee the God of victorie, he deliuered Pharao and all Egypt into the handes of Nabuchodonosor: and for his pompe and pride herein, thin∣king that it was his owne strength, his owne force and power, hee deliuered Nabuchodonosor and his posterities, with all the Empire of Assyria and Chaldea, into the handes of Cyrus, whose kingdome flourished much aboue the rest, vn∣til Darius sirnamed Codomanus, whose wealth, force and king∣domes were such, that he made nothing of all the world be∣side, God gaue him ouer into the handes of Alexander the great, whose greatnesse continued not long, for the like vnthankefulnesse to God, for his kingdome passed to the Romanes. Thus God appointed the weakest sometime to vanquish the strongest, and raised vp the meanest to ouercome the mightiest. Thus was Egypt subdued by the Chaldeans, the Chal∣deans
by the Persians, the Persians by the Macedonians, the Ma∣cedonians by the Romanes, and the long empire of the Romans, their pompe and their glorie taken away by the Germanes, and the Germanes rather prouinces to be called then an Em∣pire: so wickednesse preuailed, that Turkes, Canes, Sophies, with such infidels of long time flourished. Then Arbaces and Phul Belochus deuided these Empires: Arbaces king of the Medes and Persians. Phul Belochus helde Babylon and Niniue, Arbaces possessed Me∣dia and Persia for his part. But to write of Chaldea: first this Phul Belochus though he dwelt in Babylon, and raigned asking there eight and fourtie yeeres, yet the name of the Monar∣chie continued still in Assyria, for that the most part of the other Kings had their mansion in Niniue, and therefore after Sardanapalus time, called the newe kingdome of Assyria. Nowe Belochus being settled king in Babylon, called also Belochus king of Babylon. the king of Assur, hee came against the lande of Israel, and mooued warres against Manahem then king: but being pa∣cified with a thousand talents of siluer, he returned to Baby∣lon without any harme done, and there died, when he had raigned eight and fourtie yeeres. After him succeeded his sonne Phul Assur, named in Scripture Tyglat Phul Assur: this infidel God stirred vp a∣gainst 4 Reg. cap. 15. Israel for their sinnes: hee tooke all these Cities and coastes, Aron, Abel, Bethmecha, Asor, Gilead, and Galilee, and all 4. Reg. cap. 13. the land of Nepthali, and caried them vnto Assyria: this king raigned three and twentie yeeres, as both Functius and Me∣lancthon write, yet Metasthenes would haue him to raigne twentie and fiue yeeres. After this succeeded Salmanasser the thirde king of newe Salmanasser the third king of Assyria. Assyria: hee likewise was by God appointed a scourge for the sins of Israel, and the idolatrie of Samaria: hee came from Niniue vnto Samaria, besieged it three yeeres and tooke it, and caried all Israel captiue vnto Assyria, and put them in Halah, and in Habor, cities of the Medes: for at that time the Medes and the Persians, were subiect vnto the Assyrians.
Thus were the 10. tribes caried captiue away from Samaria 4. king. cap. 17. vnto Assyria, in the ninth yeere of Hosea king of Israel, after the building of Samaria 210. yeres: the whole kingdome of Israel was destroyed, when it had continued from the first yeere of The kingdom of Israel de∣stroyed by Sal∣manasser. Roboam the sonne of Salomon, to the last yeere of king Hosea, two hundreth fiftie and three yeeres, as Functius affirmeth. Then Salmanassar filled al the cities of Samaria with men from Babylon, and from Hamath, in stead of the children of Israel: 262. by Buchol∣cerus. for the kings of Samaria enuied so much the kings of Iuda, the state of Ierusalem, the pompe of the high priest, and the mag∣nificence of Salomons temple, that the kings of Samaria buil∣ded temples, erected two idolatrous altars in Dan and Bethel, where they sacrificed vnto the golden calfe, and honoured idols of Baal: yet God raised good men, as Elias and Elizeus, Amos and Osea, by whom the Church of God in this wicked kingdome was still preserued. This king Salmanasser brought the Medes and Persians sub∣iect vnto Assyria, and destroyed the Moabites, as the Pro∣phet Esay afore tolde: there is mention made of this king Chap. 16. in the tenth chapter of Osea, where the Prophet sayeth, As Salmanasser destroyed Betharbell in the day of battaile, the mo∣ther with the children was dashed in pieces: so shall Bethel doe vn∣to Osea cap. 10. you. Vnder this king Salmanasser was Israel scattered like sheepe, for the Lyons dispersed them: first the king of Ashur that was Salmanasser, hath deuoured him, and last Nabucho∣donosor hath taken his bones: the one caried the tenne tribes of Israel, the other caried the two tribes of Iuda prisoners vnto Babylon. This Salmanasser is named of Ptolome Nabonas∣ser: Iere. cap. 50. he raigned in the eight Olympiad, when Romulus was king Melancthon lib. 2. in Rome. Ezechias was king in Iuda, and Osea king in Israel, be∣fore the captiuitie of Iuda, one hundreth thirtie and three yeeres: so long was betweene the destruction of Ierusalem and Samaria: for Salmanasser did raigne seuen yeeres king in Assyria before hee had besieged Samaria, which is to bee noted, to auoyde errours in accompt. From the first yeere of Salmanasser, vntill the first yeere of Nabuchodonosors raigne,
is 115. yeeres: hee raigned but tenne yeere in the whole, and then he died. And after him succeeded Saneherib who dwelt in Niniue, Saneherib. who following his fathers steppes in all tyrannie, and see∣king meanes to destroy the rest of Gods people, came with 2. King. 18. a mightie huge armie to besiege Hierusalem against king Ezechias, with most horrible blasphemies against God, pre∣ferring his owne force and power (being the arme of flesh,) before the Lord of heauen: but the prayer of Ezechias the king, and of the Prophete Esay was heard of God, and God sent his Angels to defend his saincts, and to destroy the ene∣mies of his Church. All the bragges of Sanneherib, and all his horrible blasphemies, the Lord at a moment with one blast blewe away: his force, his strength, and his huge ar∣mies, 2. King. cap. 19. being one hundreth fourscore and fiue thousand, were slaine by the Angell of the Lorde, and Sanneherib fled to Ni∣niue, where his owne sonnes Adramelech and Sharazer, slew him in the temple worshipping his god Nisroch, euen before Sannaherib slaine by his sonnes. that Idole whome hee preferred before the liuing God: the iust iudgement of God for blasphemie, to bee slaine of his owne sonnes before the face of his god. For this periured king Sanneherib sware vnto the Embassadours of Ezechias, if hee might haue three hundreth talents of siluer, and thirtie talents of golde, hee would peaceably depart without offe∣ring of any iniurie to the Iewes: this Ezechias by perswasions satisfied his demaunde, but Sanneherib perfourmed not his promise, but contrary to his othe, returning from Egypt, where hee layde siege to Pelusium in vaine, fearing Tharsicos king of AEthiopia, that with great power came to ayde the Ioseph. lib. 10. cap. 1. king of Egypt, hee came (as you heard) and layde siege to Ie∣rusalem: but he had his reward. Herodotus saith, that in Egypt in one of the temples, there was a statue made for Sannehe∣rib, with this sentence written in Greeke, . Herodot. lib. 2. This sentence is of some referred to Sethon king of Egypt. And thus this wicked king, after much mischiefe and harme done to the Church of God, in the seuenth yeere of his
raigne, and in the 12. Olympiad died: he and his father Salma∣nasser raigned in Assyria, when Romulus and Rhemus raigned in Rome: he had the ende you heard of: you shall reade more of him in the second booke of Herodotus. The Chaldeans. All this while Chaldea had their gouernours, their lawes, and all thinges free, fit for the common wealth: yet they payed tribute to the kings of Assyria. Hitherto newe Assyria raigned as the chiefe seate of the Empire, and held Babylon as subiect to their Scepter. Now while this Sannehorib had in hand to conquere Iudea, and thought thence to passe vnto Egypt as hee did, imagining fully to subdue all those regions which his father Salmanasser thought to haue done: when newes came to Babylon that all his armie was slaine at Ieru∣salem, Functius lib. 1. Comment. and himselfe killed at Niniue by his sonnes, the Chal∣deans being hereof aduertised, tooke present occasions to set in for the Empire of Assyria, Merodach being then gouernour of Babylon, considering that both his two sonnes fled to Armenia, after the murther of their father, (as Functius saith) for feare of their elder brother Asserhaddon, but Iosephus saith, Lib. 10. cap. 2. the yonger brother. Nowe Asserhaddon one of the three sonnes of Sanne∣herib, in whose time Manasses king of Iuda was borne, Asserhaddon succeeded his father Sanne∣herib. when his father was slaine and his brethren fled, he entred to his fathers seate, and gouerned the Assyrians tenne yeres: But Merodach the sonne of Baladan the gouernour of Baby∣lon, a discreete man, looking vnto the gouernment of Asser∣haddon, being full of contention betweene the brethren: the other two which fled before after they killed their father, returne with a great armie against the king Asserhaddon their brother, and helde ciuill warres within themselues so long, that the Monarchie of Assyria became so weake, that Mero∣dach translated the kingdome of Assyria vnto Chaldea, and brought Niniue againe subiect vnto Babylon. Nowe when Merodach had raigned twelue yeeres in Baby∣lon, Merodach. and after hauing the full dignitie and supremacie ouer the Assyrians and Chaldeans, hee was named the first king of
Babylon againe, and raigned fourtie yeres in Babylon. Of this Merodach there is mention made in Ieremie Capta est Babel, Ieremie cap. 50. confusus est Bel, victus est Merodach, which shalbe more spoken of, when the kingdome of Iudea is in hand. Ptolomey doth call this Merodach, Mardocempadus: for in the Egyptian histories He∣rodotus differeth frō Eusebius & others in the names of kings: men must reade with great diligence & with much care, and Eusebius from Herodotus doeth differ. weigh the computation of time, as here betweene Metasthe∣nes and Functius some controuersie riseth from the time of Belochus vnto Merodach. But Functius following the best au∣thoritie, is best to be beleeued: for he reproueth by prophe∣ticall histories, the errour of Metasthenes, which goeth about without warrant of Scripture to prooue histories of the Bi∣ble, as these partly be for the most part, both of Assyrian and Chaldean histories: for after Sardanapalus time, they do cōcurre with the time of the Prophets. Esay doeth make mention of Isai 39. Merodach the sonne of Baladan, who sent Ambassadours with Merodach sen∣deth vnto Eze∣chas Ambassa∣dors. letters vnto Ezechias, with great presents to intreat of friend∣ship, and to be in league one with another, where they were with all solemnitie receiued, shewing vnto them all the trea∣sures and pleasures of Ierusalem, and returning to Babylon Iseph. lib. 10. cap. 3. with rewards. After Merodach died, when hee had raigned fourtie yeeres in Babylon, leauing behinde him his sonne Bemerodach, who raigned one and twentie yeeres, of whome litle or nothing we reade of: After whom succeeded Nabuchodonosor the first, father of the great Nabuchodonosor: this king tooke warre in hand against Necho king of Egypt, and went from Niniue to 2. Chron. 35. the riuer Perath, which is likewise Euphrates, where Necho came in person to fight against a citie of the Assyrians named Carchemish. Iosias fearing Necho, lest he passing through Iudea Melancton lib. 2. would haue taken his kingdome, he not consulting with the Lord, fighting with Necho was slaine in the valley of Megiddo, or Magiddo, as Herodotus and Functius affirme. But to come to Nabuchodonosor. To auoyde tediousnes, I will ioyne him with his father, letting the reader to the
second of Herodotus, where hee shall reade of this first Nabu∣chodonosor and his warres: and for that hee ioyntly raigned two yeeres with his sonne, as Functius doeth write, the sonne being of greater fame and better knowen farre, then the rest of the kings of Chaldea or of Assyria: In the Ecclesiasticall historie, I wil set downe his actions, his warres, his greatnes, and his victories. After his father had raigned 25. yeres, this his sonne Nabuchodonosor the great, who in the eight yeere of his raigne subdued all Syria, Iudea onely excepted, conquered from Euphrates vnto Pelusium, and brought in subiection, euen from the riuer of Egypt vnto the riuer Perath, and all that pertained to the king of Egypt, so that the king of Egypt came no more out of his lande (as it is written) against the 2. King. 24. king of Babylon: hee layde siege to Tire, and wasted all the re∣gions Functius. there about: he brought vnder the king of Babylon, all Libya, the most part of Asia, vnto the land of Armenia. This Ruffinus. king grewe so great, that Philostratus doeth so set him in his histories, that he passed Hercules in force and power. Strabo Strabo lib. 15. Nabuchodonosor greater then Hercules. saith, that the Chaldeans esteemed more of Nabuchodonosor, then the Grecians did of Hercules. Nabuchodonosor made king∣domes to shake, the earth to tremble, and the whole worlde a forest, and left almost no where vnconquered but Iudea: where after all his other warres and conquests, hee sendeth his deputie Nabuzaradan generall of his armie: he commeth with a huge armie of the Chaldeans, a great band of Aramites, of Moabites, of Ammonites: for Nabuchodonosor had heard that Iehoiakim had rebelled after hee had payed tribute for The greatnes of Nabuchodo∣nosor. three yeeres. This was the cause of the destruction of Iehoia∣kim, after he had raigned three yeres: he was deceiued much, trusting to haue ayde by Necho king of Egypt, and so lost both the kingdome and himselfe. This was the iudgement of God for the sinnes of Manas∣ses, and the idolatrie of Iuda, not weighing the crying out of Ieremie, though night and day he perswaded them to yeelde vp the Citie, and to followethe Lorde: for Ierusalem was full of innocent blood, and therefore God vsed these wicked ty∣rants
to execute his commandement. After this Iehoiakin the sonne of Iehoiakim, when he had reigned three moneths, be∣ing 18. yeeres of age, Nabuchodonosor fearing least he shoulde become false, and so reuenge his fathers death, came against him: he and his mother, his princes, and his seruants yeelded to Nabuchodonosor by the councell of Ieremie. And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah king in stead of his nephewe Ie∣hoiakin, and changed his name to Zedechia, who likewise of∣fended 2. Chron. 36. the Lord, and would not be councelled by Ieremie, but hee and his people mocked the messengers of God, des∣pised his word, and misused his Prophets so long, that Nabu∣chodonosor came and slue their young men with the sworde, kild all, and spared none. But for the rest of Nabuchodonosors tyranny, his crueltie and slaughter, specially of Iewes, they are read in the fourth booke of Kings Chap. 24. and 25. in in Esai, in Ieremie: This king is euery where mentioned with The first com∣ming of Nabu. vnto Ierusalem. Ieremie 22. the Prophets and in Ecclesiasticall histories. Likewise Iose∣phus orderly setteth downe his seuerall warres against Ierusa∣lem, first in the eleuenth yere of Iechonias, he came with great force and slue the most part in Ierusalem, killed the king, and buried him in sepulchro asini, threw him dead vnburied out of the Citie, according to the prophecie of Ieremie saying, Ieho∣iakim shalbe buried as an asse is buried, euen drawne and cast foorth without the gates of Ierusalem like a carrion, neither shall any lament him, neither mourne for him: he tooke also the chiefe men of the Citie, euen 3000. and carried them vn∣to Babylon, amongst whom Ezechiel being yet a very young man was lead likewise captiue. This was before tolde of by Ieremie the Prophet, but not beleeued. The second time hee came against Iehoiakin, whom Nabuchodonosor aduaunced vn∣to his fathers seate: but fearing hee would reuoult by being mindfull of his fathers death, hee tooke him, his mother, his familie, his nobles, and others to the number of tenne thou∣sand The 2. com∣ming of Na∣buchod. vnto Ierusalem. Ioseph. lib. 10, cap. 9. eight hundred thirtie and two, and carried them vnto Chaldea: yet Nabuchodonosor sware to the king & to his coun∣sell, that he would spare them vpon their submission, to the
which the king by the perswasions of the Prophet Ieremie yelded: but the tyrant kept no promise. With this king, Da∣niel, Iosph. lib. 10. cap. 9. Anania, Azaria, and Misael, being of the kings stocke, were taken prisoners, and commaunded by the king that they shoulde bee brought vp in the Chaldean tongue, to serue the king afterward. The third and last comming of Nabucho∣donosor was against Zedechia the last king of Iuda: hee layde The third and last comming of Nabuchodo. siege to Ierusalem eighteene moneths: during which time, great famine and plague, with manifolde miseries more be∣fell them, and at last the destruction of the Citie: men, wo∣men, and children slaine before the King, his Princes and Nobles put to the sworde, the wealth and treasure of the Citie caried to Babylon, the Temple burned, the King him∣selfe Ioseph lib. 10. cap 10. 11. taken, his children killed before the kings face, & then his eyes put out, and caried in chaines to Babylon, where hee died most miserably in prison. Thus God did put his sworde in Nabuchodonosors hand as an instrument of his wrath, to punish sinne. Of this matter more is spoken of in the historie of the Iewes, otherwayes called the Hebrewes. When Nabuchodonosor had reigned fourtie three yeeres, (Metasthenes saith fourtie fiue yeeres:) the Chaldean historie reporteth, that hee prophecied the de∣struction of Babylon, being by Daniel taught, and by God cal∣led to bee one of his chiefe instruments in his Church. In a little before hee died, hee confessed the glory and maiestie of God, saying, I giue thankes vnto the most High, I prayse and honour him that liueth for euer, who restored vnto me my kingdome, my honour, and my vnderstanding, whose works Daniel 4. are all trueth, and his wayes iudgements: for nowe I confesse Bucholcerus. that he is able to abase those that walke in pride: he liued in Tarquinius Priscus time, the fift king of Rome, and in the eigh∣teene Ruffinus. Iubilee of the Iewes, and in the fourtie nine Olympiads. In the time of Nabuchodonosors father, Dracos lawes was writ∣ten in Athens. Solon, Thales Milesius florished, & the seuen Sa∣ges of Greece liued this time: the Prophet Ezechiel beganne to prophecie in Babylon, the fift yeere of the captiuitie.
For as you shall reade of the Medes and Persians, and of the Ieremie 51. Romanes, that they were made by God executours, instru∣ments and hammers: for so the Lord spake of them, saying, Thou art my hammer and weapons of warre: for with thee will I breake the nations, and with thee will I destroy king∣domes, All creatures obey God. by thee will I breake man and woman, and by thee will I breake young & olde: you shall finde this phrase often rehearsed by God in the mouthes of the Prophets: so God calles Nabuchodonosor his seruant & saith, I wil put my sword in Nabuchodonosors hand: so Senaherib, so Salmanasser, and so Satan himselfe is Gods seruant to worke his will, to obey his commandement, and to execute his iudgements. After this Melancthon lib. 2. Chron. Nabuchodonosor succeeded his sōne Euilmerodach, he reigned 30. yeres, he reigned one yere together with his father: it see∣meth that this Euilmerodach was instructed by Daniel to feare God: for after that Nabuchodonosor had turned to the Lord, & began to be a benefactor to the Church, & to the mēbers thereof, this his sonne likewise when he became king of Baby∣lon after his father, in the first yere of his reigne brought Ieho∣iakin king of Iuda out of prison, hee restored him to libertie, and aduanced him to honor, he gaue him princely apparel, Ieremie cap. 52. & did set his throne aboue the throne of the kings that were then in Babel, he had allowance in the Court for his diet, he had rest & quietnes, & continued in fauour with the king all the daies of his life. Thus by Gods great prouidēce the seede 2. Reg. cap. 25. of Dauid, which in king Zedechias was extinguished, yet in Iehoiakin was reserued euen vnto Christ: for after 37. yeeres imprisonment (so long was Iehoiakin, his wife & his children in Babylon) by the councell of the Prophet Ieremie he was of king Euilmerodach so esteemed, that hauing a sonne named Funct. Lib. . comment. Mesezabel surnamed Salathiel, who likewise had a sōne borne in Babylon, his name (as Philo Iudaeus saith) was Mesezebel: this Salathiel had a sonne called afterward Barachias or Zorobabel Barachias. surnamed Zorababel. a great man of authoritie amongst the Iewes, beloued of God, and by whom God brought his people againe to ree∣difie his temple.
This Euilmerodach is called in Herodot, Labynitus, where you Euilmerodach. shall reade that his wife Nitochris, being a discreete wise wo∣man, and of such commendations for her diligence, policie and wonderful great workes & buildings in Babylon, that she was coūted another Semiramis, & did much aduance her hus∣bands fame for her great actions that she did in Babylon, farre Herodt. lib. . otherwayes then Zenophon, Zonaras, or Iosephus writes: reade the first of Herodot. There reigned after this Euilmerodach the last king of Assyria, a great Idolater named Balthasar: this con∣temned God, despised his commandements, disdained the instructions of Daniel, though hee sawe the workes of God Daniel liued this time and sawe the de∣struction of Babylon. dayly, and heard by Daniel, of the wonders hee shewed vpon Nabuchodonosor: yet he feasted, he banqueted, and commaun∣ded to bring him the golden and siluer vessels, which his graundfather Nabuchodonosor had brought from the Temple in Ierusalem, that hee, his wiues and his concubines might drinke therein. This Balthasar did in great contempt of God, Daniel 5. commit all euill and all idolatrie, which for his ingratitude and forgetfulnesse, Daniel tolde him what should become of his kingdome, repeating the great goodnesse of God vnto Nabuchodonosor, the maiestie, honour, glory, and many king∣domes which God gaue him: yea all people, nations, and languages trembled and feared Nabuchodonosor, vntill he puft vp himselfe in pride, and hardened his heart against God: then his glory fell, his honor forsooke him, his kingdomes lost, himselfe made like a beast, and his dwelling was with wilde asses. All this did Balthasar knowe, and yet he hum∣bled not himselfe to God, for the which Gods iudgement Balthasar the last king of Babylon. fell vpon him, and vpon his kingdome: for he was slaine, and his kingdome had Cyrus king of Persia, for that was the full ef∣fect of this sentence, Mene, Thekel, Phares, written vpon the plaister of the wall of the kings palace by the finger of God, the last destruction of the Chaldeans, and the end of the seuentie yeeres captiuitie before told of Daniel, and prophe∣cied by the rest of the Prophets: here Nabuchodonosor and his posteritie ended, and the kingdome of Chaldea translated first vnto the Medes, and afterward to the Persians.
OF THE ORIGINALL beginning of the Egyptians, and of their continuance: of their Kings and go∣uernments: why Egypt was called Oce∣ana, or Nilea. NOwe I will goe from Assur the sonne of Sem, and followe Miz∣raim the sonne of Cham into E∣gypt: for from Chus and Mizra∣im came the Ethiopians and the Egyptians. After that Chus and Mizraim, and their children, at the building of Babel in the land of Shinear had come into Afrike, Chus went to Ethiopia with his companie, Mizraim possessed Egypt with all his familie: this Mizraim is called in histories Oceanus, after whose name E∣gypt was first named Oceana, though in the Scripture and in the Hebrewe histories it was named Mizreia, after the name of Mizraim the sonne of Cham. I reade in Manethon and in others, that from the first comming of Mizraim into Egypt vnto Osiris time, which was 280. yeeres, Egypt had three seue∣rall names: first Oceana, after the name of Oceanus in Berosus, in Scripture Mizraim: the second name was Aeria, after the
name of the riuer Nilus: the third Aeria which continued vn∣till Osiris time, and after Osiris time named Osiriana, accor∣ding to his name, at what time Abraham was in Egypt, vntill Ramesses time surnamed Egyptus, about the time that the Israelites left Egypt, after Abrahams being in Egypt, foure hundred and thirtie yeres. During which time of these foure Herodot. lib. 2. seueral names, Egypt was gouerned by states and potentates of Dynasteia, a forme of a common wealth like vnto the state of the Hebrewes gouernment by the councel of Sanhedrin, or like the Grecians ruled by their Amphictions. But first to speake of the fertilitie of the soile, the maners of the people, the an∣tiquitie of the countrey, the greatnes of their gouernment, & specially of many rare wonders which are in Egypt, more then in any kingdome of the world: for the description of E∣gypt I referre you (as you haue read before of other coūtries) to Strabo, Pomponius Mela, and Solinus. Egypt was diuided ito Strao. lib. 17. Pompo. Mel. lib. 1. Cap. 44. sixe seueral kinds of people: the first three which were kings, priests, and souldiers, gouerned the state and cōmon wealth of Egypt: the other three serued in the countrey, to vse things necessary for the kingdome & for the state, which were hus∣bandmen, craftesmen, & shepheards. Concerning the anti∣quitie Diod. lib. 1. . 3. of the Egyptians, they contended therein with the Sci∣thians, and with the people of Phrygia: for this opinion the E∣gyptians hold of their antiquitie, and that registred in ancient chronicles, that during their cōtinuance in Egypt, the starres haue foure times altered their courses, and the sunne twise: likewise they haue recorded 330. kings to haue reigned in E∣gypt before king Amasis time, which was king of Egypt, when Pompo. Mela. lib. 1. Cyrus was king of Persia. The vaine assertion that the Egyptiās held of their antiquitie, was of continuance aboue 13 thou∣sand yeeres (you must vnderstand Lunares annos) Of their su∣perstitious The old Egyp∣tians counted a moneth for a yeere, some∣time 2 some∣time 3. & some time foure mo neths. religion to their gods, it is set foorth by Hero∣dot in all pointes, howe two blacke pigeons, the one flying to Libya cōmanded them to builde a temple vnto Iupiter surna∣med Hamon, to receiue oracles, and to be instructed thereby, aswell by ceremonies in the religion of their gods, as also in
maners & liuing of their countrey: the other pigeon in The∣bes a Citie of Egypt in like sort cōmanded an other temple to be builded where the like oracles also should be deliuered to them of Thebes. The olde priestes of Egypt hauing these war∣nings Herod. lib. 2. (as they supposed by some power diuine) being of greater authoritie in the beginning then the kings of Egypt were, they began to worship as many gods as they thought good, and yet not to erect images & idols in their temples: for in the greatest & ancientest cities of Egypt, the princes & nobles of the countrie contended sundry times in the yeere to offer sacrifice, and to celebrate feastes to these gods, with such solemne rites and ceremonies, as were by the oracles commaunded: these great feasts were once euery yeere in these cities. The first was in the citie of Bubastis in honour of Diana, with such seruice and ceremonies due vnto her: the second in the citie of Busiris in the honor of Isis: the third in the citie of Sai in the honor of Minerua: the fourth in Heliopolis in the honor of the sunne: the fifth in the citie of Butis in the honor of Latona: the sixt in the citie of Papremi in the honor of Mars. Herod. lib. 2. The maner and order of their sacrifices were very strange: some wounding themselues, some beating and whipping themselues some with torches and lights al night, with pro∣cessions about the cities, and some with such ceremonies, as I may not well name them, so horrible and so beastly, as they were, and yet fit sacrifices for their gods. The greatest god that the Egyptians vniuersally worshipped, was an Oxe marked with white spots, which they called Apis. This Oxe is Pompo. Mela. lib. 1. accompanied with a hundred priests in the citie of Memphis, where he is halowed by these priests, & stauled as a god with yeerely feasts and dayly sacrifice. The people of Egypt solem∣nize the birth day of Apis, and that day is holden most holy and festiuall throughout all Egypt, and that feast continueth seuen dayes. Also in the citie of Heliopolis they worship ano∣ther Strabo. 17. Oxe, which they name Mneum, as Apis is in Memphis. In the citie of Aphodito Politana, they worship a white Oxe, as Strabo sayth likewise.
Concerning others of their gods, they are too many for me to write: as of Cattes, to whom they attribute much ho∣nour, Reade Diodo. lib. 1. cap. 4. for that they are vnder Vulcan, their chiefe god to de∣fend them from fire, and therefore Cattes in Egypt are much esteemed and worshipped as gods: for when any Catte is dead in Egypt, specially in Heliopolis, they weare mourning weedes, and shaue their browes, and with great solemnitie they are buried. And then next to Cattes, Rammes, for that The sundry gods of Egypt. Iupiter would not be seene vnto Hercules in the likenesse of a god, vnlesse Hercules would put on a Rammes skinne, there∣fore in diuers partes of Egypt none might kill a Ramme, but the Ramme was likewise honoured as a god. So also of the Crocodile, & of the bird Ibis, & of many other beasts which the Egyptians worship as gods, the which is not lawful by the lawe of Egypt to hurt, much lesse to kill them. In mourning for their dead, they besmeare themselues Their burials. with doung and dirte, specially the kinswomen of the dead, they be all bedaubed and bedirted, raunging the streetes howling and crying for the space of seuentie dayes: and then with great care & diligence they burie the corpes with great solemnitie, in stately and huge buildings, with sharpe spires of wonderfull great height, named Piramides: but of the ma∣ner of their buriall I haue set downe in my diall of dayes. The strange wonders of Egypt, of their fishes, beastes, and foules, of their trees, fruites, and of their riuers, they are such The wonders of Egypt. and so many, that if I should beginne, I should not knowe when to ende: as to write of bridges builded of stones thirtie foote square a piece, of lakes called Chimmis and Meris, bea∣ring woods & forests of 20. miles compasse about: to speake of many riuers, I shoulde wearie my selfe. What shoulde I speake but of one which is Nilus, the only riuer of the world? of which the Egyptians haue as great cause to bragge, as India had of Ganges, or Mesopotamia of Euphrates. This Nilus ma∣keth Egypt alwayes either to laugh or to weepe: for it is strange in Egypt to see raine. In Egypt women pleade matters in Courtes, and they
looke to forraigne causes, and the men spin and carde, and take charge of the house at home: the womē beare burthens on their shoulders, and men vpon their heads: women stan∣ding, and men sitting, doe make water in Egypt: also they eate and drinke openly without the doores, and doe their natu∣rall needes within the house. These with infinite more strange thinges shall you Herod. lib. 2. finde in Herodotus, but Chronicles doe contrary Hero∣dot in many things, and therefore I passe ouer diuers of his fables, and take asmuch of him as shall agree with Eusebius Broaldus lib. 4. and others of the soundest writers: for certainely the Greeke histories are farre more doubtfull then the Latine: for Hellani∣cus Iosephus lib. . in Appionem. differeth from Acusilaus, Acusilaus from Hesiodus, Hesiodus from Hephorus, and Hephorus from Herodot, and Herodot accu∣sed of al as most erronious and fabulous: for how can Greeke histories be true, when the Greekes (saith Iosephus) doe rather seeke fables to mainteine their opinions, then to traueile in antiquitie to verifie their histories? or howe is it possible for prophane writers, who were borne two thousand yeeres af∣ter the beginning of some kingdoms, to write truely of them, specially of the Chaldeans, Assyrians, Scithians, Egyptians, and others, whose kingdoms were long before scattered and de∣stroyed, if they be not by Moses instructed, or haue their light or warrant from the propheticall histories? such confusion Errors in all antiquities of prophane wri∣ters. is growen by their discord, that their errour is great, aswell for the number and names of kings, as also for the time of their continuance and gouernment. I said before, they that are desirous to bee acquainted with fables rather then histo∣ries, let them read Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, & vaine Berosus. But I will and must vse them sometimes, and especially in this historie of Egypt I must alleage Herodot, for he confesseth that he wrote nothing but what he himselfe had either seene or heard in Egypt of the priestes of Mmphis, whose bookes were full of olde fables, where it was written that 330. kings reigned in Egypt successiuely. Of these 330. kings, 18. were E∣thiopian 330. kings in Egypt. kings, the rest Egyptians, and one woman named Ni∣tocris,
not Nitocris Queene of Babylon, but an other as famous for her tyrannie in Egypt, as she was in Babylon. But when Abraham the Patriarch was in Egypt, then Egypt did not so flourish, at what time Pharao was punished by God for Sara Abrahams wife. This is the first king that we reade of in trueth with warrant of the sacred histories of the Bible, nesis cap. 12. which is taken to be Osiris by Functius, Melancthon, & others. Of this Osiris many things are written in prophane histories, as by his surnames doth appeare: for Osiris is called Dionysius, Olympicus, Iupiter, & Iustus: to follow further his genealogie it is vaine. This Osiris taught in Egypt first, and after in sundry Osiris. places of the world where he did traueile, to plow, to sowe, The sundry names of Osi∣ris. to plant vines, and to doe many things, which yet the world knew not. The Egyptians honoured this Osiris so much, that they caused his statue or image to be made at large in a table or pillar of Iuory, & his picture was made like a scepter with two eyes, with all foules, fishes, and beasts that were conse∣crated vnto the gods of Egypt, as monumēts of triumphs vn∣to Osiris, with this sentēce written: Ego sum Osiris Iupiter iustus, qui vniuerso imperaui orbi: diuers of these scepters were made & put in tables of Alabaster, Iuorie, & Ebony, in diuers coū∣tries where he traueiled, leauing behind him his sister & his wife Isis to gouerne Egypt. This time began the 16. Dynasteia of Egypt, which were potētates & states, who gouerned Egypt in many places: some endured 100. some 200. yeres, & some Diodr. lib. 2. Isis. 300. yeeres, some more some lesse: they were in Egypt as the Chiliarchi were with the Hebrewes, as the Amphictions with the Grecians, and as the Senators with the Romanes: but when the kings of Egypt began to be mighty & strong, the state of the potentates began to be diminished, but it stil continued vn∣der Polimarchi chiefe officers with the king in warres. the kings of Egypt as chiefe gouernours, which the Greci∣ans called Polemarchi. I will begin of Osiris the first king of E∣gypt: yet Diodorus nameth Mena the first king of Egypt, which Berosus cal Oceanus, which is Mizraim with the Hebrewes. This Osiris was maried to Isis called Iuno Egyptia: for prophane wri∣ters name the first kings & queenes of euery countrey by the name of Satur. Iupiter, Iuno, Ceres, &c. This Isis is supposed to
be called Ceres, for that she affirmeth of her self this sentence writtē vnder diuers pictures of Isis in tables & pillars set vp in Egypt, Ego sum Isis Egypti Regina, à Mercurio erudita, vxor Osiri∣dis, mater regis Ori: gaude Bubastia, gaude Egypte, quae me nutristi: these words were graued in a pillar of brasse called Columna Isidis: read of this more in Dio. Sic. Orus the 2. king of Egypt suc∣ceeded Diodo. Siculus. lib. 1. cap. 1. Orus the 2. king. his father Osiris: this taught the Egyptiās many things, read lectures of Astronomy, and the first that instructed the rude people to obserue the orders & course of the stars: like∣wise he made many good lawes amongst the Egyptians, and made them acquainted with the true God, whō Abraham be∣ing then in Egypt confessed & preached, with whō king Orus seemed to haue conference, & was taught by Abraham to ac∣knowledge Melancth. lib. 2. Chron. the power of God, hauing had sensible trial ther∣of, of his fathers punishment, & the plague thereby that hap∣pened by his iniurious dealing with Sara: this made this king to honour Abraham much, yet in his fathers dayes Abraham Of Abraham being in E∣gypt. made no long stay in Egypt. It seemed that Abraham had some liking to this Orus before he was king, to whō he reuealed in∣structions both to know God & his creatures, whereby after he was made king: and he taught in Egypt those good things which Abraham instructed him, whereby he was called in E∣gypt Orus the great. Melanthon saith, he had a sonne called Boc∣choris: Orus surna∣med the great. after Bocchoris, Busiris, who builded Thebes in Egypt, set∣ting forth the kings of Egypt, Herodotus doth not obserue line∣ally their succession, nor Functius in his table, nor Manethon an Egyptian priest, & onely chronographer for the kings of E∣gypt, wherein no true lineall successe may be set downe of the old kings of Egypt, vntil Amasis, where Herodotus omitteth ma∣ny things of Egypt, & beginneth to make relation of the kings of Egypt from Chiopes the first yere of Persusennes, which was in the beginning of the 11. Iubilee after Moses, Menathon the historie is mentioned by Iosephus, & the names of the Egyptiā kings laide downe to Ramases, which with him is Sethosis, be∣ginneth from Ramesses surnamed Egyptus, who vsurped the kingdome, hauing banished thence his brother Danaus. Hee setteth downe that the lande of Egypt was then the Lib. 2.
fourth time called Mizraim, at what time as Cornelius Tacitus and others say, the names of Pharoes first began: so Manethon affirmeth. But it doth appeate by Iosephus against Appian, a schoole∣master of Alexandria, that the historie of Egypt is patched and forged by Manethon & Cheremon, two chiefe ancient Chro∣nographers, Iosph lib. 1. in Apion. that for true histories generally remaine but fa∣bles: he laieth downe the errors of Manethon written by him∣selfe in these wordes: At what time Timaus reigned king in Manetn lib. 3. Egyptiaorū. Egypt (saith Appian) came certeine people a base nation from the East, and began to inhabit & to build, & to growe strong in Egypt, so that they made them a king to gouerne them, the which was called Saltis: this came to Memphis, & to Sais, two great townes in Egypt, seated himselfe in those townes, and brought the princes about to pay to them tribute, vsed great crueltie, slue & made hauocke of much people in Egypt. Af∣ter that Saltis reigned nineteene yeeres in Egypt he died, after Manethon lib. 2. Egyptian. whom succeeded fiue other kings, which in all were sixe, whose names I set downe to your viewe. 1 Saltis which reigned 19. yeeres. 2 Baeon which reigned 44. yeeres. 3 Apachnas which reig∣ned 36. yeeres. 4 Iamas reigned 50. yeres. 5 Apochis reigned 61. yeeres. 6 Assis reigned 49. yeres. These sixe kings reigned first ouer these base people (as Manethon writeth) which were called in Egypt Hicsos shep∣heards: they and their posteritie after them reigned in Egypt fiue hundreth and eleuen yeeres, vntill the time of Alisfrag∣mutosis, Alisfragmuto. by whom they wererepulsed and constrained to dwel within a place called Auaris, the proportion of tenne thou∣sand acres: this compasse they held, & fortified many strong walles and fortes: these shepheards (as Manethon saith) stood vpon their defence, vntil Temosine the kings sōne to Alisfrag∣mutosis laid siege to their fortes with foure hundred & eight 480000. score thousande readie in armes against these Hicsos, with whom the king of Egypt concluded peace, vpon condition
to depart whither they woulde without harme or hurt, so that they would depart out of Egypt. These people forced in this sort to the number of two hun∣dred & fourtie thousand, to passe through Egypt with al their possession with them, tooke their iourney through the de∣serts of Syria, and fearing the power of the Assyrians which at that time gouerned al Asia, they builded a Towne for them to dwell in in Iudea, called Ierusalem: this nation was called in Manethon, Hicsos Pastores reges: this squareth farre from the Manethon cal∣lth the He∣brewe, Hicsos. historie of Moses concerning their dwellings being of the Hebrewes in Egypt. After the departure of these Hebrewes out of Egypt, these many kings reigned successiuely, as Manethon orderly setteth them downe. 1 Alisfragumtosis. 2 Temusi. 25. yeeres. 3 Chebron. 13. yeeres. 4 Amenophis. 20. yeres 7. moneths. 5 Amesses the sister of Amenophis, gouerned Egypt after her bro∣ther 21. yeeres. 6 Mephres 12. yeeres and 9. moneths. 7 Mephramutosis reig∣ned 25. yeeres. 8 Thmosis 9. yeres and 8. moneths. 9 Amenophis the 2. of that name, reigned 30. yeeres 10. moneths. 10 Orus 3. yeeres and 5. moneths. 11 Acencheres Orus, daughter after her fa∣ther, reigned 12. yeres. 12 Rathotis reigned 9. yeeres. 13 Acencheres. 12. yeres. 14 Acencheres the 2. reigned 12. yeeres and 3. moneths. 15 Armais reigned 4. yeeres. 16 Armesis reigned one yeere. 17 Armesesmiamus reig ned 66. yeeres. 18 Amenophis the 3. of that name. 19. yeeres. 19 Sethosis was the 19. king of Egypt after the going out of these Shep∣heards out of Egypt, which was 393. yeeres from Tomusis, vntill Sethosis.
This Sethofis was mightie & strong on sea, and vpon land: he prepared an huge armie against the Cyprians, Phoenicians, and after against the Assyrians and the Medes, committing the gouernment of Egypt to his brother named Armais, which is also called Danaus: he deliuered all Egypt vnder his brother, charging him to abstaine from his concubines, and not in a∣ny wise to abuse himselfe in any thing belonging to the crowne of Egypt: but asoone as Sethosis tooke his voiage, so soone Armais rebelled, tooke the Diademe, imprisoned the Queene Sethosis wife, and did what he pleased in Egypt. Manethn lib. 3. Egyptian. The king being of this certified, returned in haste, draue his brother Armais out of his kingdome, and at that time named the Countrey after his owne name Egypt: (for so was Sethosis surnamed Egyptus.) Thus sarre Manethon in his owne booke of the historie of Egypt doeth write, wherein hee seemeth to be fabulous in the histories of the Hebrewes, and in the setting downe the names of the kings of Egypt, after the departure of the shep∣heardes (as hee tearmeth them) to varie much from others: but in trueth it is hard to set downe in order eyther the kings of Egypt or of Scythia, for the antiquitie of time, beside their close gouernment in their Dynasties, which the Egyptians had in number twentie & one, and therefore their three hundred and thirtie kings are written in Herodot not named, but past ouer in silence vnder the gouernment of so many Dynasteias: neither doeth Manethon name them. The like is written of Cheremon another olde writer of the Egyptian histories, to whom the goddesse Isis appeared in a Cherem. vision, finding fault that her temple was not rebuilded: and opening secrets and oracles to Cheremon. Concerning their kings of Egypt, of their fables and meere ignorance in their owne histories, I neede not much to stand vpon, but referre you to Iosephus, where hee at large vnfoldeth their folly, ope∣ning Iosephus lib. 12. contra Appio∣n. their owne Chronicles against themselues, and there∣fore I will let Manethon, and Cheremon, and others, as He∣rodot, and Diodorus Siculus, that write of the kings of Egypt,
to stand to their fables. Wee reade in Genesis of Pharao in Abrahams time, which Dynasteia p∣siorum. is sufficient to discharge them both. The kingdome of Egypt was (as I saide before) gouerned by a state called Dynasteia: for after Osiris which gouerned Egypt in the sixteene Dyna∣steia, which continued a hundred and ninetie yeeres, after O∣siris gouernment the seuenteenth Dynastia began, as Eusebius No mention of kings in their Dynast. setteth it downe, and continued a hundred and three yeeres: during that time of gouernment, potentates and magistrates reigned and gouerned in Egypt, without any mention made of kings as yet to any purpose. But as the priests of Egypt haue written in their Chroni∣cles as I saide before from Menes time the first king of Egypt, as Herodot saith, the priests haue recorded three hundred and thirtie kings, of the which many of them haue past obscurely without any speach made of them in that kinde of gouerne∣ment called Dynastia: for I find in Functius table twentie one Dynastias of the names of those that gouerned, and of their gouernment during that time: Eusebius and Manethon with others, omitted not to write the number of these Dynasties, and yet past with silence the names of their kings, vntill the eighteene Dynastia, the names of Pharaos were not knowen, then beganne the kings of Egypt to bee surnamed Pharaos. About the time of the going of Iacob into Egypt two hun∣dred The first names of Phares. and fifteene yeeres after that Abraham his graundfather had bene there, at what time reigned Baleus the younger, the eleuenth king of the Assyrians, then reigned in Egypt Amasis Amasis. the first that was called Pharao 25. yeeres, after him succee∣ded Chebron. Amenophis. Chebron, and Amenophis, the one reigned 13. yeeres, and the other 21. after these three kings reigned in Egypt Meph∣res Mephres. 12. yeeres, in whose time Ioseph died after hee had liued a hundred and tenne yeeres, and of that age hee ruled and go∣uerned all Egypt 80. yeeres. Then reigned in Assyria Mamitus the 13. king: after this succeeded in Egypt two other kings, the one named Mispharmutosis, who reigned 26. yeeres, the Mispharmuto∣sis. Thutemosis▪ other named Thutemosis, who gouerned Egypt 9. yeeres.
About this time Kittim hauing driuen his brother Hespe∣rus, who reigned then king in Celtiberia into Italie, vsurped his kingdome, and reigned thirteene yeeres after him ouer the Celtiberians: and after that Kittim left his sonne Sicorus in Cel∣tiberia, and passed into Italie, where hee reigned and was sur∣named Italus, whom the Greekes named Atlas, of whom I wrote in the historie of Italie more at large with sufficient warrant of the Bible: for hee is in diuers places of the Scrip∣ture spoken of by the name of Kittim. By this time reigned king in Egypt Amenophis the second king of that name, a cruel king and most tyranicall: for he made a decree in Egypt, that Amenophis. all the male children of the Hebrewes should be drowned in Nilus by a streight commandement giuen to the midwiues, who notwithstanding in all points obeyed not the king, for they were by God directed otherwayes, as it is read of the birth of Moses, and of the prouidence of God in sauing of Moses was borne 350 yeeres after the calling of Abraham from Vr. him. This Moses nowe borne within eightie yeeres after, was by God appointed to deliuer his countreymen from thraldome, slauerie, and tyranny, and to plague Egypt with most extreme punishment worthely. There is a historie written of this king Amenophis, called Functius. of some Memnon, that his image grauen in stone continued vntill the comming of Christ, which continually at sunne ri∣sing Diod. lib. 1. Herod. lib. 2. seemed to sound a voyce like a man. This tyrannie con∣tinued in Egypt almost one hundred yeeres: for when this cruell king Amenophis died, succeeded him a more cruell king then hee named Busiris, as Melancthon and Diodorus say, Busiris. who plagued the poore Hebrewes with death in like sort as Amenophis did, and kept them in slauerie and miserie, with toyle and taske to make bricke to worke monstrous huge Pi∣ramides, whipping and scourging them, vsing them with all bondage and slauerie: some say that Mercurius Trismegi∣stus, Mercurius. Trismegistus. a graue Philosopher of Egypt this time florished, though by Suidas affirmed that this Mercurius liued before Abrahams time in Egypt. After Busiris raigned king in Egypt Acengeres twelue yeres,
and after him Achorus raigned nine yeeres, vsing the like ty∣rannie Acengeres. to the Hebrewes as before, vntil the time of king Chen∣cres, Achorus. who farre excelled his predecessors in tyrannie and Chencres. blasphemie: this was that Pharao that resisted God & his ser∣uant Moses, and therefore was drowned in the red sea, and all the peeres of Egypt with him. Read of this king more in Exo∣dus: the most part of Egypt was at this time with Chencres Pha∣ro Exodus cap. 14. drowned, and Egypt was left very skant of any great states, and therefore began to rise diuers seditions for a time in E∣gypt, after the departure of the Hebrewes vntill Rameses time, which is sirnamed Aegyptus. This time began Dardanus his kingdome in Dardania af∣terward called Troy, at what time raigned in Assyria Ascatides Rameses. the eightenth king: in Athens Cranaus the second king. And ouer the Argiues Crotopas their eight king. CHAP. II. Of the kings of Egypt after Ramesses time sirnamed Aegyptus' at what time Oceana was called Egypt, after the name of Aegyptus, before Mizreia. NOw after the great ouerthrowe of the E∣gyptians in the red sea, after a while began to raigne in Egypt Ramesses, sirnamed Ae∣gyptus, after whose name Egypt was then called, as Manethon writeth: for at the first, Egypt was named Oceana, or Mizreia, The names of Egypt. and the second time it was named Aerea, and nowe the thirde time called Egypt, as you reade before. This Aegyptus after hee had vanquished his brother Danaus, he vsurped vpon the Egyptians, and raigned king of Egypt 68. yeeres: for Egypt had not recouered her former state as yet, since the ouerthrowe of Chencres and all the states of Egypt, who perished in the red Sea pursuing the Israelites. Of this, Manethon seemeth most ignorant, saying that the Manethon. shepheards were driuen out of Egypt, for some natural foule
filthie disease as leprosie, which the Israelites had, affirming Mos called Onarsyphus. that Moses was an Egyptian, borne in the citie of Heliopolis, and that he was named Onarsiphus, and became leprous and Manehon lib. 3. Aegyptio∣rum. then went to the Israelites, which euery where Manethon na∣meth Hicsos, shepheards or captiues, and became conuer∣sant with them, and was driuen out of Egypt with them. In the beginning of this Aegyptus raigne, Moses died, after whom succeeded Iosua the second Iudge of Israel. This time raigned in Assyria Amintes their 19. king. Also Dionysius other∣wise Bacchus, whom the Greekes call , subdued India, and builded a towne after his owne name called Nisa, in remem∣brance of his great victories that he had ouer the Indians. Now succeeded in Egypt Myris or Moeris, as Herodotus doth Myris. call him: this king restored Egypt againe, and recouered strength and great power, and builded many notable and fa∣mous monuments worthy to be remembred: he brought the riuer Nilus, being out of hope to be repaired, in course a∣gaine: he made the lake Miris of such wonderfull bignes, that he farre excelled the rest of the kings before him. This Myris made the Labirinths of Egypt, which after Dedalus taking an example of those Labirinths, made the like in Creete, imita∣ting Myris in all points: he builded such monuments for Vul∣can in Egypt, as Herodotus calleth them, Digna Vulcano vestibu∣la, Hrodot. lib. 2. where you may reade more. This king raigned fourtie yeeres in Egypt, and had a sonne Melanchon lib. 2. succeeded him, of no lesse fame then himselfe, named Seso∣stris, of whom the priestes of Egypt spake much: he began to augment the kingdome of Egyyt with diuers victories ouer Ssostris. the Syrians, Phoenicians, Thracians, Scithians, and the most part of Asia. This king onely conquered Aethiopia, and was king proclaimed both of Egypt and Aethiopia: this king waxed strong on land and sea: he made more monuments of his vi∣ctories in diuers strange kingdoms, leauing behinde him his statues and Images erected vp in forraine countreys: some of them Herodotus doeth affirme to haue seene in his dayes, Herod. lib. 2. which liued about Xerxes time: one he saw in Palestina cut in
a large stone with letters written round about his picture. And about Ionia he saw two statues or pictures of this king Sesostris, the one betweene Ionia and the citie of Ephsus, the other as men goe from Sardinia into Smirna: he was cut in two great high stones of fiue cubites length, holding in his right hand a speare, and in the left hande a bow, being in all Melancn lib. 2 Chron. points of his apparell armed like an Egyptian, with this sen∣tence written betweene his two shoulders in the Egyptian tongue, I haue caried this Countrey vpon my shoulders. Some take Srabo 17. these statues to be Memnon, but the priestes of Egypt affirmed that it was Sesostris in his returne from his victories into E∣gypt, euen he that caried kings captiues bound to his chariot from towne to towne, from countrey to countrey. In Aetho∣pia and Egypt he had many of these pictures, and many sta∣tues set vpon pillars and arches, according to the maner of Egyptian triumphes. This king was so honoured in Egypt, and his statues after Sesosris the onely Hercules of Egpt. his death so esteemed, that whē Darius Histaspis long after that time came into Egypt, being by his predecessor Cambyses con∣quered & brought into subiection vnder the Persians, yet he was not suffred by the priests of Vulcan to put his statue aboue the picture of Sesostris in Memphis, affirming that Sesostris had conquered as many countreis, and gotten as many victories as Darius had: and beside, Sesostris had ouerthrowne the strong and inuincible Scithians, which Darius neuer could: which speaches Darius tooke in good part, and would not reuenge, though well he might. This Sesostris is named in Functius table, Amenophis, imita∣ting Manethon the Egyptian writer, where he is set downe to be the thirde in that gouernment Dynastia. Larthes is a name likewise of dignitie, as were Pharaos, before the gouernours and potentats: for in the first gouernment of Larthes which endured 194. yeres, Zetus was the first (as Manethon affirmeth) 4. Larth. and raigned 55. yeres. After Zetus succeeded in this kinde of gouernment Ranses Larthes, which gouerned 66. yeres: after Dynastia Larthes 194. whom succeeded this king Sesostris the thirde Larthes, which raigned 40. yeeres.
The fourth Larthes was named Phero, the sonne of this Se∣sostris Larthes were gouernours and principa∣liie in Egypt. of which I spake last. Herodotus reciteth a historie of this Phero, that it happened to him to become blinde, and so continued 11. yeeres: at what time he was instructed by the oracle of Butis, to finde out a temperat chaste woman which had neuer knowen carnalitie, but onely one man, and that hee should wash his eyes with this womans vrine, and hee should receiue againe his sight. This Phero Larthes making great speach and search for such a woman, after many vaine trials, he found one woman whose vrine healed him, whom (after he had his sight) hee maried, and caused all those wo∣men whose water could not helpe him, to bee brought into the citie called Rubragleba red clay, where both they and the citie were commaunded by the king to be burned. After this Phero Larthes succeeded Thuoris, the fift and last Larthes of those Potentates: this king is named in Diodorus, Cetes, which the Greekes (as Melancthon saith) called Proteus, Proteus named Cetes. for diuers illusions which he vsed in magicke, whose temple was long seene after his death in Memphis. To this king came Paris Priamus sonne, at what time hee rauished Helen Menelaus wife, from Sparta to Greece, and was driuen of force into Egypt, of his hard welcome there, and of the kings-com∣mandement to Alexander to depart from Egypt, with threat∣ning of death vnlesse he would be gone within three dayes with all Grecians with him, sauing that the king stayed Helen in Egypt, where Menelaus came after the siege of Troy, and Ioseph. lib. 1. contra. Appio. was honourably receiued by Proteus the king, and welcōmed of his wife Helen. Others write that Menelaus and Helen went both together after Troy was destroyed, by force of tempest Herodot. lib. 2. into Egypt: it is not much materiall. Nowe while these fiue potentats called Larthes raigned in Egypt, which continued for the space of one hundreth ninetie and foure yeres, it began in the second Iubilee, at what time Lamprides the two and twentieth king raigned in Egypt, and Tros the third king raigned in Troy, Proteus the thirteenth king raigned ouer the Argiues, and Shamgar iudged Israel.
This gouernment of Larthes ended when Tautanes the 28. king of the Assyrians raigned, and when Abdon the twelfth . . Iudge iudged Israel. After this gouernment of Larthes, Mane∣thon writeth of another kinde of Potentats, which continued 177. yeeres, whom Functius followeth, and reciteth not one king that raigned in Egypt during that time, but hee rehear∣seth who flourished most, and who gouerned chiefly in Chaldea, Assyria, and in other kingdoms, and maketh no men∣tion of any king in Egypt during 177. yeeres, and therefore I will returne to Herodotus, whom Melancthon doeth followe in this, and write of those kings orderly as I finde them: this kinde of Potentats began three hundreth and thirtie yeeres after Israel departed out of Egypt. About which time, Troy was destroyed by the Grecians, a∣bout Ann Mundi 1783. tenne yeeres before the sixt Iubilee, and in the seuenth yeere of Thuoris king of Egypt, otherwise called Proteus. The kingdome of the Latines began this time, when that Aeneas with his sonne Ascanius after Troy was destroyed came to king Latinus, where raigned fiue kings before Aeneas came, by the name of kings of the Latines, of whom I wrote in that historie. But now to the kings of Egypt: for after that Proteus died, Ramsinitus. the kingdome happened to Rampsinitus a king of the greatest wealth that euer raigned in Egypt, whose treasures were such, that he inuented to build some strong place for his treasure: and hauing cunning and subtile workemen to builde this worke: one of them perceiuing the infinite treasure that the king should put there, made a stone of that bignesse that two men might remoue it, and likewise of that length & bredth, that a man might creepe well through the place of that stone being thence remooued. Before this fellowe died, he Good instru∣ctions of the father to his sonnes. opened to his two sonnes howe they might haue treasure ynough in remouing such a stone, which he for that purpose had made. When he had taught them in all points to know this stone, and how to bring their purpose to passe, he died, and they practised the fathers counsel, and found as their
father told them twise or thrise. In continuance of time the king also found that much of his treasure was taken away: he inuented by some policie the next time to preuent them: engines and snares were layd for them, in the which one of the two brothers being taken fast, called for his other bro∣ther and willed him to cut off his head, lest hee should be knowen thereby, and so likewise lose his life. This being done, the king came the next time into his treasurie, and found a dead man without a head, and musing much who it should be, deuised in this sort, that this body Herodotus lib. 2. should be hanged vpon some gibbet with men to watch and to see who would weepe, and who should take him away. The mother of this dead man within a while after threatned her sonne, that vnlesse he would bury his brother, she would reueile vnto the king the whole matter: he also (to please his mother) deuised to saue himself, & inuented meanes to make the watchmen drunken, and tooke his brother from the tree Wine must be vsed, and not abused. the watchmen being asleepe, & after returned to the watch∣men, fained himselfe drunken, and to haue slept with them. The king perceiuing that he was deceiued, punished the watchmen, & mused how he might know how these things came to passe, or who should take him away: then he inuen∣ted this policie, hauing only one daughter, he promised she should lye with any man in the kings house that could tel a∣ny likenes of this matter, or any els within Egypt, and should be his wife afterward. Euery man was willing to haue the kings daughter to wife, but none could aduertise her howe these things were done. The thiefe at length that robbed the king of his treasure, that did cut his brothers head in the treasurie, and after deceiued the kings watch and stole him from the gibbet, he thought once againe to trie his skill for Rewards doe trie skils. a kings daughter: he went to his brother late dead, and cut off his hand, and caried it vnder his cloake, and went into a darke chamber into the kings daughter as the custome was, and tolde her the whole matter how it was, that he did all things, robd the king, kild his brother, made the watchmen
drunken, and buried his brother. She hearing this, layd A pretie de∣uise. hand vpon him in the chamber: and seeking his hand in the darke to lead him to her father, hee secretly conueyed the dead mans hand into her hand, and conueyed himselfe a∣way: and she thought that she had him by the hand all the way as she went to her father, vntil she came to the light and saw she was deceiued. The king being deceiued three times before, made a ge∣neral decree throughout all Egypt, making good his promise by an othe, that he should marry his daughter whosoeuer he was, if he would come vnto the king and confesse his faults, for the king was amazed at these great enterprises: for (saith Theft rewar∣ded with the mariage of a kings daugh∣ter. the king Rampsinitus) the Egyptians in trueth excell all other nations in policie and wit, but this passeth all the Egyptians: and therefore the king married his daughter vnto this cun∣ning thiefe, as to a man of great knowledge and wisdome. After this king Rampsinitus died, succeeded Cheops, a king Cheops. of great wickednesse: during this kings time, Egypt so mour∣ned, that their temples were shut, their sacrifices stayed, Herodotus lib. 2. and all Egypt by this king put to toyle and slauerie, almost in the like state as the poore Hebrewes were in Moses time, carying great huge stones, to builde monstrous and vaine workes: hee had a hundreth thousande men, to make vp one Piramides, who continued in this worke twentie yeeres: the charges thereof (as Herodotus affirmeth) for rootes, gar∣licke and onions onely, beside all other meate, came to one thousand six hundreth talents of siluer, so that the worke be∣ing great, & the people many, Cheops thereby fel to want, and Cheops daugh∣ter. hauing not to perfourme his worke, forced his daughter by her body to gaine as much as she could, to finish the worke begun: but she for a memoriall of her selfe, sought of euery man a stone, & she had therby so many stones, as she her selfe caused an other Piramides to be made equall to the highest. This foolish king as it is thought to auoyde idlenes a∣mongst the people, occupied them in these vaine and mon∣strous workes, as places and sepulchres for kings burials: for
vntill the time of Rampsinitus, all things prospered in Egypt. This Cheops after he had raigned 50. yeeres died, after whom succeeded his brother named Cephrim, a king no lesse hateful . to the people of Egypt then his brother was, who in like sort vsed them with toile, and with all kinde of bondage as Cheops did, and therefore the like praise they had. For after they had raigned both an hundred sixe yeres, during which time Egypt suffered great calamitie, they disdained after their death to call them by the names of kings, but suffered shepherds to lodge in their stately Piramides, loathing once to thinke vp∣on these two kings. By this time ended the gouernment of 177. vnder the Po∣tentats, during which time many things happened in other kingdomes, as erection of the kingdome of Israel after Sam∣sons time their last Iudge, by appointing Saul their first king, Saul. about the 60. yeres of these last Potentats of Egypt. At what time the kings of Peloponesus in Greece, and their gouernment of Monarchia ended, & priestes which were called Carni were appointed magistrates. After 26. kings had raigned in Scicio∣num, about the 80. of this gouernment, the kingdome of La∣cedemonia Egypt often gouerned by Potentates and pincipa∣litie called Dynasteia. and the kingdome of Corinth beganne both at one time: at what time raigned in Athens Codrus their last king: after whom the state altered into the gouernment of Iudges, in the 114. yeere of this Dynastia, during which time raigned in Assyria foure kings, and ouer the Albanes, otherwise called Herodlot. lib. 2. the Latins raigned sixe kings: this was the twentie Dynastie of the Egyptians: this began tenne yeeres before the sixt Iubilee, and ended 19. yeeres after the beginning of the ninth Iubilee. In Egypt gouerned by this time Mycerinus or Cerinus (in Mycerinus. Diodorus) the sonne of Cheops, a iust king and gentle, vsing the people with much more clemencie then either his father or his vncle did before him: he opened the temples, which of an hundreth and sixe yeeres were shut vp, he restored all E∣gypt into her former libertie, which had bene long in cala∣mitie and misery vnder his father: he commaunded the peo∣ple to be free from their taxes and toiles, and vsed them with
greatlenitie: hee iudged iustly, and shewed himselfe such a king, that all the Egyptians thought themselues happie of his gouernment: for he loathed tyrannie and crueltie, and was much ashamed of his fathers reproche amongst the people. This Mycerinus in the middest of his good gouernment Mycerinus. had onely one daughter, that died, of whom her father (to shewe the great loue which hee bare vnto her) made such a monument for her buriall, that it past all the burials of the kings of Egypt: hee caused a coffine of the likenes of an oxe to be made, set ouer all with golde, wherein hee layed his daughter, and hanged the same vp from the ground in his pallace at the citie of Sai, where euery day the priestes came with frankincense and other sweete odours, to doe sacrifice: the oxe of Apis, which was the God of Memphis, and the Apis. oxe Mneum which was the God of Heliopolis, were not so set foorth as this oxe of Sai, where Mycerinus daughter Mneum. was buried. An other misfortune was denounced by an Oracle vnto Mycerinus, that hee likewise should be buried within sixe yeres after his daughter, for that he altered the state of Egypt, Egypt ruled by Oracles. and eased the Egyptians from such bondage as they were to abide for an hundreth and fiftie yeeres, of the which Cheops and Cephrim two brethren perfourmed an hundreth and sixe, remayning yet behinde fourtie and foure yeeres of the cala∣mitie, which by an Oracle was appointed for Egypt: and to seeke to please the Oracle, Mycerinus became a little better then his father Cheops, or his vncle Cephrim, two tyrants that plagued Egypt. After this king, the priests of Egypt doe set downe a king named Asichis, of whom I finde in Herodotus, that he past the Asichis. rest of the kings of Egypt in building and vexing of his sub∣iects, in so much that hee made one Piramides to excell the rest, with this inscription, This Piramides doeth passe the rest as farre as Iupiter doeth excell the rest of the gods. This king is named also Anisis in Melancthon and in Functius, but in Hero∣dotus, Anisis, Anisis.
or Asichis, a king who came not to be king of E∣gypt by succession of blood, but by election of the priestes, who after he had raigned sixe yeeres, was driuen out of Egypt by Sabacus an Aethiopian, which raigned after Anisis 50. yeeres Sabacus. king of Egypt: this king is called Sesac in the booke of the Kings, of whom you may reade more: for in the fift yeere of Roboam 3. Reg. cap. 14. king of Iuda this Sesac king of Egypt is spoken of. After Sabacus, succeeded Sethon a priest of Vulcan: this king Sethon. after many ouerthrowes, being left and forsaken of his owne people, made his complaint to Vulcan, of whom he was cer∣tified in a dreame, that he should haue ayde and helpe, if he would meete the king of Arabia and his armie, and giue him battel. Being thus encouraged, with a smal cōpany of Egyptiās Melancthon lib. 2. Chron. that folowed him, he camped before the city of Pelusiū, where the armie of the Arabians pitched their tents: while the first night they lay in their tents, rats, vermine, and myse, of al the coūtrey about, deuoured their arrows, their bowstrings, their quiuers, their targets, & their instrumēts which they prepa∣red for the warres, so that the Arabians in the next morning fled. In memory of this victory, Sethon when he died, caused Herod. lib. 2. himselfe to be buried in the temple of Vulcan, and commaun∣ded that his statue should be made in a stone, with a rat in his hand, with this sentence written about it, In me quis intuēs pius Herodotus fabulous. esto. In that place where Herodotus doth intreat of this Sethon, he seemed very fabulous, & saith, that the Isle of Foemis swim∣meth on a lake, and that the priests of Egypt affirme, that from the first king of Egypt vntil this kings time, 341. kings are past, which are 11. more kings then Manethon before affirmed: during which time the sunne foure times altered his course; rising in the West, and going downe in the East, with such o∣ther vaine and friuolous fables cōcerning their antiquities. This Sethon is named of Eusebius, Spethon, with whom Ma∣nethon Iosephus lib. 10. cap. 1. supposeth in his chronicles, that it was he that Sanna∣herib had warres with, and after ouerthrew him: for I reade in Eusebius and Iosephus, who make mention of one Tarachus king of Aethiopia, which came to ayde Sethon king of Egypt a∣gainst
Sanneherib, at what time God had raised many enemies to plague Israel and Iuda for their transgressions against their God, which so mercifully had saued them oftentimes, as As∣sar, Salmanasser, which in the histories of the Prophets is cal∣led Tiglat Assar, to whose hands God gaue ouer Samaria, and tenne tribes of Israel, and afterward Ierusalem to the hands of Nabuchodonosor, with the other two tribes of Iuda & Beniamin: for both the kings, of Assyria and of Egypt, made a pray of Iuda, as in the history of the Assyrians is more at large declared. In Egypt after Sethon the priest of Vulcan died, the gouern∣ment Diodorus lib. 1. changed betweene 12. Princes which should equally gouerne the whole kingdome of Egypt, & so did for 15. yeres, as Diodorus affirmeth. After this, one of the 12. princes ob∣tained into his owne hand the whole kingdome, and gouer∣ned 54. yeres after, augmenting the confines of Egypt by the ayde of certaine Grecians, which against their wils were dri∣uen into Egypt by a tempest, with whom Psammiticus entred into friendship, and came thereby to be king of Egypt. To these Grecians did the king giue a countrey to dwell in, farre from Nilus: with these Greekes Psammiticus cōmaunded Psammiticus. that certaine yong gentlemen of Egypt should be brought vp in the Greeke tongue, which afterward made Egypt acquain∣ted therewith. While yet Psammiticus was one of the 12. ma∣gistrats, before he became king, these 12. consented to make some monument in memory of their gouernment, & there∣fore they erected many huge & strange works, as pillars, por∣ches, labirinths, Piramides, temples, & other sumptuous buil∣dings: they also studying how to passe these monuments, in∣uented to make a Labirinth vpō the lake of Meris, not far frō A Labirinth. the city of Crocodiles: for so the Egyptians had cities according to the names of those fowles, fishes, and beastes, which they had honored for their gods, and had erected temples for sa∣crifices in these cities: and though the temple of Diana in E∣phesus, & the temple of Iuno in Samos were huge & monstrous Pramides and Labirinthes were made for kings burials. for their bignes, yet the Piramides of Egypt were farre more greater. But the Labirinth far excelled this greatest Piramides:
for within this Labirinth were chambers, parlers, halles and A Labirinth described. other roomes, to the number of three thousand, whereof an hundreth and fiftie were made vnder the ground, and the other aboue ground, with such artificiall worke, with the pictures and likenes of all kinde of creatures, that it farre ex∣celled all the monuments of Egypt: and the place whereup∣on it was made and builded, was a lake of three thousand sixe hundreth furlongs, which are three hundreth seuentie and fiue miles, which is more wonderfull then the Labirinth it selfe. Herodoti fabula. Herodotus lib. 2. But now to the king Psammiticus againe, who hauing long layd siege to Azotum a citie of Syria, and after many yeeres ouerthrowen (for it was the longest siege that euer endured which may be read of;) Psammiticus died: after whom succee∣ded his sonne Necho, of whom the Prophets make true men∣tion, and therefore Herodotus, Diodorus, and others, may be the better spared being prophane writers, because hee and his doings is mentioned in the sacred histories: of whom the Prophets write, that the wrath of God was ripe to giue iudgement against Egypt at this time: for Egypt had so long offended the Lorde with their vaine superstition and ido∣latrie. Now Necho was cried out vpon by the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezechiel 30. which was by the riuer Perath, and gaue sentence against all Egypt in this sort: Howle and crie, woe be vnto Egypt, the sworde shall come vpon Egypt, and feare shall come vpon Aethiopia. Pa∣thros shall be desolate, and fire shall be in Zoan, (which is Taph∣nis.) Thus the Prophet cried out againe, I will powre out my wrath vpon Shin, (which is named in histories, Pelusium) and I will destroy the multitude of No, the yong men of Auen, (which The citie of No, is nowe called Alex∣andria. is otherwise called Heliopolis) and of Phibeseth (which is also named of olde, Pubastum) shall fall by the sworde.
CHAP. III. Of the last kings of Egypt by the name of Pharaos, which conti∣nued a thousand two hundreth yeres: and of the first conquering of Egypt by Cambyses the second king of Persia. THis time great warres grewe betweene the Assyrians and the Egyptians: the great∣nes of both these kingdomes, which then were the onely kingdomes of the world, were destroyed by the sword: for so the Prophet saide, that Egypt should be the reward of the king of Babylon, for his labour which he tooke against Tyrus, and so it was performed in Necho: after much mischiefe that Necho. he had done to Israel, he was deliuered into the hands of Na∣buchodonosor, for so the Lord said, I will strengthen the armes of Nabuchodonosor, and the armes of Pharao shalbe weakened. Of this, Necho and Aprie the last Pharaos mentioned in Scripture had full triall: for Necho raigned seuenteene yeeres, and left behind him a sonne named Psammis which raigned 6. yeeres, Psammis. and making warre with the Aethiopians died. About this time Phaortes king of the Medes with al his army was ouerthrowen by the Assyrians, at what time the Scithians entred into Asia, spoiled and wasted almost to the countrey of Palestina. Tullus Hostilius the third king of Rome died in the beginning of the raigne of Necho. Herodotus doth place Apries the sonne of this Apries. Psammis. This king for a time prospered like his grand∣father Psammiticus: but I wil admit Herodotus to speake of this king Apries for the like cause as before: for I finde that he is called in Ieremie, Hophra. To this king many of Ierusalem fled Ieremie 44. cap. from the hand of Nabuchodonosor, where they were as well en∣tertained as with Nabuchodonosor, for so the Prophet said, that the sword should follow them into Egypt, and Pharao should destroy all that fled from Nabuchodonosor, who at that very time tooke the citie, and brought all Iuda captiue into Baby∣lon, though Ieremie perswaded the contrary: yet they of Iuda
vowed to burne incense vnto the Queene of heauen, and vn∣to the gods of Egypt: but the God of Abraham and Isaac gaue them ouer to the sworde, and destroyed them with famine. And after that Apries had fedde his tyrannie against the Iewes, and had slaine the Prophet Ieremie: afterward he ouerthrew Sidon, besieged Tyre, and had done great harme in Iudea, and Melancthon lib. 2. Chron. the word of the Lord came vnto him, saying, I will giue Pha∣rao Hophra king of Egypt into the handes of his enemies, and into the hands of them that seeke his life, euen into the hands of Nabuchodonosor. Though Herodotus affirmeth (as other pro∣phane Herodotus lib. 2. histories doe,) that Apries was after the ouerthrow of Sydon, forsaken of his people, and vanquished by Amasis at Memphis, and caried captiue from Memphis into Sais, into his owne pallace before. But now Amasis raigned king in Egypt, and ruler of Apries throne: thus Apries after he had raigned thirtie fiue yeeres, died by the handes of his enemies. During the raignes of these two last kings Necho and Apries, which was fiftie three yeres, many destructions of countreys and cities happened, as the destruction of Niniue, and also Assyria by Ciaxeres king of the Medes, the destruction of Hierusalem, and all Iudea by Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and the warres betweene the Chaldeans and the Egyptians, which continued seuen and twentie yeeres, the victorie whereof fell to the king of Baby∣lon, as the Prophet before had sayde, I will giue the lande Ezechiel cap. 29. of Egypt into the hande of Nabuchodonosor, for wages to his Armie. This time raigned in Rome, Ancus Martius the fourth king, Ancus Mar∣tius. and Tarquinius Priscus the fifth king. Europus raigned now the seuenth king of Macedonia, and in Lydia Haliates their eight king. Hitherunto the liues of Pharaos kings of Egypt, which continued from the first Amasis in the beginning of the eigh∣teenth Dynastia, which was about the time of the going of the Patriarch Iacob into Egypt vnto his sonne Ioseph, vntil the time of this Amasis the last king of that name, about twelue Amasis. hundreth yeeres, so long continued the names of Pharaos.
This Amasias, as the rest of the kings before him, was so ido∣latrous, and so addicted to obey Oracles, that hee also imi∣tated his predecessours in such fonde buildings, to carie huge stones from Memphis and from Elephantina to builde a temple vp vnto Minerua in the citie of Sai, that hee much mused how he might passe the rest with the monstrousnesse of the great huge stones to build temples, images, colossus: wherein he in one monument excelled the rest. He caused a house to be made of one stone to be brought The kings of Egypt conten∣ted one to ex∣cell another in building. from the citie of Elephantina to the citie of Sais, which is (as Herodotus writeth) twentie dayes sayling: two thousand cho∣sen men were three yeeres in bringing this house to Sai, of all other workes most to bee wondered: for this stone was one and twentie cubites in length, and fourteene in breadth: and also hee made a colossus or an image in Memphis, before the temple of Vulcan, of seuentie and fiue foote long: he buil∣ded likewise a large temple for Isis in Memphis. Thus the kings of Egypt stroue one after another, to excell in their workes and vaine monuments. In the time of this king, a lawe was made in Egypt, that in euery Prouince of Egypt the President thereof should take Idlenesse in Egypt pu∣nished. accompt, and examine the youthes of their prouinces, how and after what sort they liued: for to see an idle man in E∣gypt that could not answere for himselfe howe hee liued, it was death: and therefore to auoyde idlenesse, they were thus compelled by the Kings of Egypt, to carie stones to the building of Piramides, temples, Colossus, Labirinthes, and such like. This law afterward was by Solon brought to Greece, for So∣lon was in Egypt in the time of the last Amasis. Pomponius Mela saith, that in the raigne of Amasis were twentie thousand ci∣ties, Herodotus saith, one thousand and twentie cities: for old 20000. Cities in Egypt. Egypt in times past was very great and large, for hard by the marches of Affricke in the shore standeth Alexandria: on the borders of Arabia is the citie of Pelusium: other faire cities are farre from the sea, as Memphis, Sai, Bubastis, Elephantina and
and Thebes, which is reported to haue an 100. brasen gates, and so many princes pallaces. Many good lawes are writ∣ten among the Egyptians by Sasiches and by Sesostris, but speci∣ally by Bocchoris, of whose lawes I wil set dowme some few as Diodorus wrote them, to the nomber of 17. 1. The first law was, that none might violate their gods with othes: the offenders herein were punished as false to God and man. 2. If any ayded not a man iniuried or beaten, or robbed by any man, either vpon the way as he trauailed, or in the place where he dwelt, he was to die for it, if he might haue helped it: else to publish, and to call for helpe. 3. False witnes was so punished, by a decree made for that purpose: the punishment that hee that was accused should haue, being proued, should be for the false accuser not being proued. 4. Against idlenes, all the names of the citie, parish, or countrey, are brought and recorded with the magistrates of the prouinces, & are examined, how they are occupied, how they liue, of what trade or trafique he or they be of: if he be found idle, he shall die by the lawe in Egypt: this law Solon caried with him from Egypt to Athens. 5. If any man killed a freeman, or a seruant, death was his punishment. 6. If the father killed the sonne, he was free frō death, but he should for three dayes be punished as the decree was made in that behalfe: for the Egyptians thought not the fa∣ther worthy of death for killing of his sōne, quia auctor fuit. 7. For the sonne that killed his father, the greatest tor∣ments that might be deuised was by lawe appointed for him, for to take the life of him away, which gaue him life. 8. If a woman with child, by law be condemned to die, she is reserued vntill the childe be borne: for the Egyptians thinke it not fit that two should be punished, when one
had offended, and that the giltlesse with the giltie should be condemned: Iniquum enim iustum cum iniusto poenam pati. This law was caried from Egypt into Greece, & from Greece into other countreis. 9 The souldier that offended his captaine in the fielde, or had transgressed the commandement of the officers, he should not die, but with all infamie and shame he should haue two letters printed in his forehead, as cōmon markes of infamie: but if hee had reuealed any secrets to the ene∣mies, the lawe had commaunded his tongue to be pluckt out of his head. 10 If any had clipt any lawfull coine, or counterfaited the like, or diminished the weight, by lawe he should die. 11 If any man had counterfaited the hand of any man, or had taken away any letters, or had put in any letters in any writings, or found faultie in forging any deede or letters, he should haue both his hands cut off. 12 If any had violated by force any maid or free woman, he should haue that member punished that had offended, his priuie members cut off: if by consent the man and wo∣man sinned, it was by lawe appointed that the man should be beaten with roddes to the nūber of a thousand stripes, and the woman should haue her nose cut off, for a marke of a whore. 13 For satisfiyng of creditors in borowing of money, it was by an othe confirmed, & not with obligations made, that the money shoulde be paide vpon the day appointed: for a sacred othe sincerely inuiolated, was more esteemed in Egypt, then any writing or bond made: for it was a won∣der to see in Egypt a man forsworne. 14 For it was not lawfull to arrest any man in Egypt for debtes by the lawe of Bochoris, but to seize vpon the goods or substance: for whatsoeuer passed in secrete wri∣tings betweene the partie and creditour, no arrest was ad∣mitted:
for all the people of Egypt were diuided into foure Bochoris lawes. partes, which were husbandmen, craftesmen, shepheards, and souldiers: payment was made to the creditors by the goods of the debtors, and not by arrest: for they thought that a man free borne, shoulde for no money be impriso∣ned, specially the souldiers, which with danger of life de∣fendeth his countrey. 15 The like law was in Egypt for vsurie by Bochoris, which A lawe for vsurie. was brought to Athens by Solon, which lawe was called : by this lawe Solon commaunded that no Citizen in Athens should be put in prison for vsurie: for the Egyptians condemned much the Grecians that had by the law forbid∣den to arrest any plough, harneis, and such necessaries for the vse of man, and yet a man that vsed these, and coulde make these, suffered to be arrested and to be imprisoned. 16 The law against theft in Egypt was, that he that would A law against theft. steale, shoulde write his name, and recorde it in a booke which the chiefe captaine, or the great prince appointed: for those shoulde receiue the theft, and the partie that had lost his goodes, should come to his captaine, and shoulde set downe the day and the houre wherein his goods were lost, and the captaine shoulde recorde it in his booke, and appoint him a day to come againe: against the which day the theft being found out, hee should haue all his losse sa∣uing the fourth part, which by law the theefe had: for they so iudged it better, sithence it were vnpossible to forbidde theft, or to hang as many as would steale. 17 As for the law for mariage, it was thus: that the priests of Egypt might mary but one wife a piece: others as many A lawe for mariage. as pleased them: for that they would haue their countrey populous, & their cities strong with people: no bastardes might bee named in Egypt, though diuers were borne of bondwomen, esteeming onely their fathers for credit, and the mothers for their nources. Nowe for their Iudges and
Magistrates that executed these lawes in Egypt, they were elected by 30. of the best and wisest men in euery great ci∣tie, as Memphis, Heliopolis, Thebes, and the rest, in euery ci∣tie one chiefe Iudge with his sociates with him, as were the Areopagites in Athens, or the Ephories in Sparta. Of other lawes concerning the religions of their gods, & their bu∣rials, and of their discipline and order in warres, I haue written of it in the Diall of dayes. There was also a lawe in Egypt before these lawes, that the Diodo. lib. 2. cap. 3. pictures and images of their gods painted in tables and set in brasse in their Temples, should be caried in their ensigns to the field in the time of warres. But as Egypt florished in the time of king Amasis, so Egypt was brought subiect vnto the Persians within sixe dayes after Amasis the last name of Pha∣raoes. Amasis dayes: for after that Amasis had reigned fourtie foure yeeres, his sonne succeeded him called Psammenitus, who af∣ter he had reigned sixe yeeres, was ouerthrowen by Camby∣ses Psammenitus. king of Persia, which came from Persia into Egypt, to re∣uenge the wrong which hee receiued at Amasis hand, who refused to giue his owne daughter in mariage to the king of of Persia, but deceiued him with a daughter of Apries called Nytetis, which was onely left aliue of all the stocke of Apries: whom Cambyses maried, supposing her to bee king Amasis Herodot. lib. 3. daughter, vntill Apries daughter opened the whole matter, affirming vnto the king, howe Amasis had betrayed her fa∣ther the king being his master, and by that reason had obteined the kingdome of Egypt: and also shee reuealed, howe he disdained to giue his owne daughter, but tooke me vp being left desolate and comfortlesse, and willed mee to Cambyses. faine my selfe to bee his daughter. These floutes and scoffes of Amasis, kindled wrath in Cambyses to come in armes into Egypt, but before he came, Amasis died. Notwithstanding after he had conquered his sonne Psam∣menitus, and had possessed the kingdome of Egypt, hee went from Memphis vnto Sai, to satisfie his wrath vpon Amasis: and
though he was before buried, yet hee caused his carcas to be brought before him, and cōmaunded it first to be whipt and The crueltie of Cambyses. scourged, then thrust him through with daggers & bodkins, after this he haled & lugged it through the Citie of Sai, with all contempts that might be inuented, and last he caused it to be burned, which was against the maner of the Egyptians: for they suppose the fire to be a liuing creature, because the fire deuoureth all things, and at last deuoureth it selfe. Thus the olde auncient kings of Egypt continued a thou∣sand Melancth. li. 2. Chron. two hundred yeeres, before they were conquered by a∣ny nation: and though they were by the kings of Assyria and of Chaldea, which then florished chiefely, often assaulted, yet they neuer lost the proper names of their kings which were called Pharaos, vntill Cambyses time, which continued vnder the Persians a hundred thirtie fiue yeeres, and after they re∣uoulted Diodo. lib. 2. vnder Darius Nothus, and kept of, vntill by many sharpe battailes they were againe by Ochus vanquished, who vsed in Egypt great crueltie. About this time Tomiris Queene of the Massegets, and Tar∣quinius superbus, the last king of the Romanes reigned in Rome: for the Romanes lost their kings, and the Egyptians lost their kingdome about one time. Cambyses this time hindred the building of the Temple by the meanes of the Samaritanes, who euer enuied Ierusalem. Thus briefely I haue written of the state and gouernment of the olde kings of Egypt, Pharaos by name, vntill the time of Alexander the great: and nowe something after Alexanders dayes. Egypt and their kings afterward altered and changed The names of Pharaos changed to Ptilomeis. from the names of Pharaos to the names of Ptolomeies, as you shal reade hereafter, from Alexander the great, vntill the time of Iulius Caesar, during which time the kings of Egypt were called Ptolomei. Therefore I haue gathered together all the names of these auncient kings of Egypt, from Osiris time the first potentate in Egypt, which was in the time of Abraham, vntil Amasis time, the last Pharao which was in Cambyses time the second king of
Persia: that is, from the going of Abraham into Egypt, vntil the Prophet Daniels time, which was a thousand foure hundred 1425. twentie fiue yeeres: for before Osiris time, and long after, we reade of no certeine king by the name of Pharao, but of some gouernment called Dynastia, at what time in euery prouince of Egypt, before Egypt had the name of Egypt, certeine poten∣tates gouerned for the space of fiftene Dynasties. Hence grew that vaine opinion of the priests of Egypt, that they were the anciētest nation in the world, & that the starres altered their The Egyptians then compted their yeeres sometime by 2. moneths, sometime by 3. and some∣time by 4. mo∣neths. Diodo. lib. 1. cap. 1. courses foure times, and the sunne twise since they first inha∣bited Egypt, recording in their chronicles the names of three hundred & thirtie kings, and before their kings the gouern∣ment of those whom they called Heroas, or Deos, which reig∣ned eighteene thousand yeeres. But leauing them to their fabulous antiquitie, I haue set downe all the names of Pharaos that I coulde reade in Mane∣thon, Eusebius, Diodorus, Herodot, and Melancthon, beginning at Osiris, which was that Pharao to whom Abraham came vnto, in the sixteene Dynastia of Egypt, from the first Pharao called Amasis, vnto the last Pharao called likewise Amasis, as they are set downe in Functius table, who followed Herodot from Cheo∣pes, vnto the last Pharao of Egypt called Amasis. For the placing orderly of the kings of Egypt, Manethon differeth from Euse∣bius, Eusebius from Diodorus, Diodorus frō Functius: and there∣fore as I wrote the names of the olde kings of Egypt as Ma∣nethon laide them downe, so will I nowe also write them as I found them in Functius table from Osiris, which was that first Pharao, vnto the last Pharao named Amasis. 1 The first king of Egypt, A∣masis, named Pharao 25. yeeres. 2 The second king was Che∣bron, which reigned 13. yeeres. 3 After whom reigned A∣menophis 21. yeeres. 4 Then Mephres reigned 12. yeeres. 5 Mispharmutosis 26. yeres. 6 Thutemosis reigned 9. yeeres. 7 Amenophis the 2. of that
name reigned 31. this king made a lawe, that assoone as any Hebrewe shoulde bee borne, he should be drowned in the riuer of Nilus. 8 Orus surnamed the great, reigned 38. 9 Acengeres reigned 12. yeres. in this kings time the kingdome of Athens began by Cecrops. 10 Achorus reigned 9. yeeres. 11 Cenchres reigned 16. yeres. this was that Pharao that resisted God, and contrari∣ed Moses sent from God for the deliuerance of his peo∣ple, at what time the tenne great plagues happened in Egypt, and after, the ouer∣throwe of the king and the whole kingdome in the red Sea. After that Israel had left Egypt, and the King, and all his Nobles, and peeres, and forces, were drowned in the redde sea, these many kings reigned that helde still the names of Pharoes, as 12 Acheres reigned king 8. The first king after Israel left Egypt. yeeres. 13 Cheres reigned fifteene yeeres. 14 Armeus which is also Da∣naus 5. yeeres. 15 Ramesses surnamed Egyp∣tus reigned 68. yeeres, af∣ter whose name the land be∣fore called Oceana Mizre∣ia, or Oseriana, was called Egypt. 16 Menophis, of some named Miris, reigned 40. yeeres. this made the first Labi∣rinth for his buriall in E∣gypt, whose patterne was by Dedalus caried into Creete. 17 Zetus reigned fiftie fiue yeeres. 18 Ranses reigned sixtie sixe yeeres. 19 Amenophis the third of that name reigned fourtie yeeres. 20 Amenophis the fourth of that name reigned twentie yeeres. 21 Thuoris reigned seuen yeeres. the fiue last kinges gouerned by the names of fiue Larthes, during whose time endured that kinde of gouernment called Dy∣nasteia Larthum for a hun∣dred ninetie foure yeeres.
After succeeded another Dynastie, which endured a hun∣dred seuentie seuen yeeres, during which time Functius na∣med no king in his table, but were ruled with Gouernours in euery principalitie of Egypt, as Sanhedrin with the Iewes, or Amphictions with the Grecians. 22 Then succeeded Smendes, to whom Ieroboam fledde, which in the Scripture is called Sesach, hee reigned 26. yeeres. 23 Pseusenses reigned fourtie one yeeres. 24 Nepher Cheres 4 yeeres. 25 Amenophis the 5. reigned 9. yeeres. 26 Osochorus reigned 6. yeres. 27 Spinaces 9. yeeres. 28 Pseusennes. 35. yeeres. 29 Cheopes reigned 50. yeres. 30 Cephenes reigned 56. Eusebius saith, that after Ce∣phenes, Seustoris reigned. in this Cephenes time began the kingdom of Macedonia. 31 Micerinus Chcopes sonne reigned sixe yeeres. 32 Asichis reigned 6. yeeres. 33 Sabachus reigned 50. 34 Spethon reigned 33. After these thirtie foure kings, the kingdome of Egypt was gouerned by twelue Magistrates of equall authoritie, which ruled the realme of Egypt for fifteene yeeres. After these twelue Magistrates had ended their time of fifteene yeeres, one of the twelue named Psameticus, reigned fiftie foure yeeres. Then Necho reigned seuenteene yeeres: Necho. this king slue Iosias in Mageddo, & was himselfe slaine by Na∣buchodonosor. After Necho, reigned Spamnus sixe yeeres. After Spamnus Apries, and after Apries reigned Amasis the last of the name of the Pharaos. Eusebius setteth these kings downe in a∣nother sort, and addeth some other names, which I omit to auoide tediousnesse. Many things I omit willingly, which the olde Egyptians vsed: for as we hang at our doores signes of beastes, fowles, and fishes, that strangers might know our houses: the Egypti∣ans vsed those signes at their eares, that by the markes and fi∣gures of such beasts, foules, & fish, as they had at their eares, The maners of Egypt. they might knowe of what qualitie or condition they were.
For if an Egyptian did excell in running, he should haue the figure of an hare hanged at his eare: if he were slouthfull and The maners in Egypt. heauie, he should be marked with a Crocodile: if he were li∣beral and franke, he should haue the picture of an open hand at his eare: if he were couetous, he had hanged at his eare a close hand & shut: if hee were quicke of hearing, the picture ofa Serpent: if he were iust & honest, he had the likenes of an eye at his eare: if hee were craftie and subtill, the figure of a foxe: if enuious, of an eele, and so of the rest. The chiefe Cities and great Townes of olde Egypt were thus named. 1 Memphis. 2 Sais. 3 Bubastis. 4 Thebes. 5 Papremos. 6 Butis. 7 Leontina. 8 Elephantina. 9 Alexandria. 10 Heliopolis with many others. These are the names of all the ancient kings of Egypt that I could find: and for that I neither foūd them in Manethon, Eu∣sebius, Diodorus, nor in Herodot orderly set downe, I haue cō∣ferred the state & gouernment of the potētates called Dyna∣stia Egyptiorum, & haue as nigh as I could placed them: for it cannot bee in such antiquities but many errors happen, as I haue sundrie times said of the Chaldeans Assyrians, Scithians, E∣gyptians, and other auncient nations, whereof no mention is made in the sacred histories, neither can bee made truely in prophane histories, for that nothing was knowen to pro∣phane writers before Cirus time, or rather after Alexander the great, at what time prophane Historiographers beganne to Diodo. lib. 2. recorde antiquities: and thus much vntill Cambyses, who was the first conquerour of Egypt, by whom the Persians had go∣uernment The whole time of the kings of Persia was but 130. Diodo. erred. ouer Egypt a hundred thirtie fiue yeeres, vntill the reigne of Darius Ochus: for in the sixt yeere of this king, the Egyptians reuoulted, and these many kings afrer reigned in Egypt.
1 Amirtes Saites reigned 6. yeeres. 2 Nepherites reigned sixe yeeres. 3 Achoris reigned twelue yeeres. 4 Nectanabus reigned 18. 5 Nepherites one yeere. 6 Mectanabus againe reig∣ned 18. yeeres. this was the last before the comming of Alexander the great. CHAP. IIII. Of the second conquest of Egypt by Alexander the great: of their kings afterward called Ptolomeis, vntill the time of Caesar Augustus, by whom all Egypt was last conquered, and made a Prouince subiect to the Romane Empire. THe Egyptians (as you heard) hauing great warres, first with the Assyrians, and af∣ter by the Persians, vntill Cambyses time, Cambyses. by whom they were made to pay tribute vnto the Kings of Persia, vntill they wax∣ed strong againe that they reuoulted from the Persians in the time of Darius Nothus, vntill by many sharpe battailes they were againe by Ochus the eight king of Persia vanquished, who vsed in Egypt great crueltie, so that the later kings of Egypt Melancth. lib. 4 were for eight and thirtie yeeres vnder the Persians: but after that the Persians were vanquished, and their Mo∣narchie taken from Persia into Macedonia, by Alexander the great, the Egyptians willingly yeelded themselues to Alexander, as to a second conquerour: hee vsed them with great clemencie, permitting them to haue their former liberties and lawes, appointed ouer them certaine Magi∣strates of the Grecians called Nomarchas, and ouer them two Superuisors called Episcopi, to see that none of the a∣foresaid Magistrates should claime more dignitie then was set downe by Alexander in a table: which the Romanes after∣ward kept, vsing the same order for a time as Alexander did.
It is written that the great Alexander had yeerely tribute paide vnto him during his life, the summe of sixe thousande Melancth. lib. 2. Chron. talents: for Plutarch in the life of Agesilaus speaketh of a king named Tachus in Egypt, to whom Agesilaus came from Sparta: for Nectanabus was a nephew of king Tachus, and one of his chiefe captaines, who rebelled against the king: and being chosen by the Egyptians their king, he desired the aide of Age∣silaus, who ioyned with him being an olde souldier, hauing had in hand greater battels in Greece against Pelopidas and Epaminondas, then at that time with Nectanabus against Tachus. Therefore Nectanabus committed all into the handes of Nectanabus. Agesilaus, by whom the victorie fell to Nectanabus, & Tachus the king forced to flee. After this the affaires of this Nectana∣bus had good successe, and hee was quietly stablished in his kingdome by the meanes of Agesilaus king of Sparta, to whō Agesilaus. Nectanabus gaue two hundred thirtie talents of siluer in rea∣die money, to defray the charges of his souldiers. Thus Nectanabus reigned quietly in Egypt, though vnder Darius the last king of Persia Mezabes gouerned Egypt, who yeelded into the hands of Alexander the kingdome of Egypt, assoone as hee had heard that his master king Darius was slaine, and al Persia subdued by Alexander, who (as you heard before) possessed Egypt without warres, being yeelded of the state of Egypt. From the time of Alexander the great, vnto Iu∣lius Diodo. lib. 18. Caesar, that is, from the Monarchie of the Grecians vnto the Romanes, is two hundred eightie two yeeres. After the death of Alexander, his kingdomes were diuided chiefely betweene foure of his graund captaines, specially The king∣domes of A∣lexander diui∣ded. those kingdomes which were of the greatest fame and re∣nowne, as Macedonia to Cassander: Asia the lesser, to Antigo∣nus: Babylon and all Asia the great, to Saleuchus furnamed Ni∣canor: Egypt with the most part of Syria, to Ptolomei the sonne of Lagi. This was the first king of Egypt after Alexanders death, after whose names all the kings of Egypt, vntill Iulius Caesars time were called Ptolomei.
This king grewe great and mightie in Egypt, and beganne strongly vpon the next nations vnto him to make warre, and brought diuers subiects vnder the Empire of Egypt, whose good successe in the beginning Perdiccas began to enuy. This Functius lib. 3. Perdiccas was the chiefe gouernor of Macedonia, and as it were left a tutour ouer Arideus the base brother of Alexander the great, to whom by common consent the kingdome of Mace∣donia was appointed. Perdiccas supposing to keepe Egypt sub∣iect Diodo. lib. 18. to Macedonia, and to bridle the insolencie which he sawe in Ptolomei, he leauied a great armie of souldiers, made a voi∣age into Egypt: against whose comming, Ptolomie with al cele∣ritie gathered his army, and gaue him battel, wherein Perdic∣cas was slaine, and his whole company ouerthrowen. Vpon this ouerthrowe of Perdiccas, Ptolomei king of Egypt Iosephus lib. 12. cap. 1. waxed insolent of the victorie, entred into Syria, & by strong hand brought Syria vnder Egypt: after hee went to Ierusalem, he plagued the citizēs, wasted, spoiled, & brought diuers out of Iudea captiues into Egypt. Of this king the Prophet Daniel spake in this sort, The king of the South shalbe mightie, and his do∣minion Daniel cap. 11. shalbe great: reade more in Daniel of this. Antigonus be∣ing Ptolomeis vi∣ctories ouer Demetrius. aduertised of Ptolomeis great victories, howe he had van∣quished Perdiccas & subdued Syria, sent his sonne Demetrius, a young man of 22. yeeres, and the first time that he tooke the charge of a General in hand, and that against an old souldier of the great Alexander, trained vp in discipline of warres al∣waies. Demetrius was put to flight, 5000. of his men slaine, and almost eight thousand taken by the Citie of Gaza. Antigonus hearing howe his sonne was ouerthrowen said, that this Ptolomei ouerthrew beardles men, & said further, he should fight with bearded men. And it came to passe that De∣metrius being before put to flight, was not quiet before he re∣quited the last foile by the king of Egypt receiued, with the Ptolomei ouer∣throwen by Demetrius. like ouerthrow: wherein Demetrius had the victorie of Ptolo∣mei and of his army, which victorie did put Ptolomei out of al Syria, and brought Antigonus in againe. By this time, Seleucus whō Antigonus had driuen out of Babylon before, came againe and entred into Babylon.
Cassander likewise fearing that young Hercules the sonne Iustine lib. 15. of Alexander the great, being nowe of fourteene yeeres of age, should be by the Macedonians so fauoured for his fa∣thers sake, that hee should be king in Macedonia: therefore hee secretly commaunded, that both Hercules, and his mo∣ther Arsine should be murthered: yet Cassander was not The tyranny of Cassander. quiet, vntill hee practised the like murther against Olympias Alexanders mother, and against Roxana Alexanders wife. Antigonus and his sonne Demetrius, were much enuied for their victories this time, in so much that all these kings after Alexanders death destroyed one another with con∣tinuall warres, Lysimacus was slaine by Seleucus, Seleucus was slaine by Ptolomei, whose sister was maried to Lysimachus. Polibeus writeth, that in the hundred twentie fourth Olym∣piad, Polibeus lib. 2. Ptolomie Lagi king of Egypt, Seleuchus Nicanor king of Sy∣ria, Lysimachus king of Thracia, and Ptolomei Cerannon bro∣ther to Philadelphus, chiefe souldiers vnder Alexander the great, were slaine one of another. Thus Ptolomei the sonne of Lagi, after hee had conque∣red Perdiccas, ouerthrewe Demetrius, subdued Syria, and the most part of Iudea, when hee reigned fourttie yeeres, died: during which time Demetrius Phalerius ruled Athens vnder Cassander: and Demetrius surnamed Poliorcetes, de∣stroyed a Citie in Samaria, which Perdiccas builded. This time the people of Alexandria sent to entreate for the Romanes friendshippe to aide them, if neede re∣quired: This was the first request made to the Romanes, by The Romanes were of all na∣tions feared. the Citizens of Alexandria in Egypt: for the Romanes be∣ganne to bee strong, and they of Alexandria perceiuing the great warres and tyrannie that was in all partes of the worlde at that time: And also hauing seene within Egypt more blood in the time of one Ptolomei, then in twentie Pha∣raos: for then Egypt had nothing to doe but to builde Pi∣ramides, and to make Labirinths, monstrous and neede∣lesse monuments, but nowe sworde and fire came into Egypt.
In the time of this king florished Theophrastus, a famous Philosopher, one of Aristotles schollers, and Menedemus ano∣ther Philosopher: in the same time liued Menander the Tra∣gedian, Atheneus the Historian, and Demetrius Phalerius. In Egypt succeeded after Ptolome Lagi his sonne Philadelphus, a learned prince, and a great fauourer of learned men: this The praise of Ptolomei Phi∣ladel. king was iust, discreete, and gentle, bent more to mainteine peace, then to procure warres, and therefore so beloued of his people, and hee to them againe so louing, that during his whole gouernment, which was thirtie eight yeeres, the Egyptians liued quietly without trouble or warres, where be∣fore, Functius lib. 3. Coment. Egypt for a thousand foure hundred yeeres was brought vp vnder blind priests, idolatrous superstition, giuen to all errours, onely acquainted with the Egyptian tongue. Now Philadelphus with greater care and zeale of his coun∣trie, then any of his predecessours had before, kept with him diuers and sundrie learned men, as Aratus, Callimachus, Apollo∣nius, Melancth. lib. 2. Theocritus, Hipparchus the Mathematician, and Demetri∣us Phalerius the Philosopher, which at that time was bani∣shed from Athens, and receiued in Egypt. Philadelphus a pru∣dent Diodo. lib. 1. and a learned prince, and cōuersant with learned men, Philadelphus the onely king of all the Pto∣lomeis. knewe well that the Iewes religion, their lawes, their maners, and their seruice of God, did farre excell all the nations of the world: he sent great presents and giftes to Eleazr the hie Priest then being at Ierusalem, entreating him to send lear∣ned men of the Hebrewes that coulde translate the bookes of Moses and the Prophets into the Greeke tongue, that Egypt might be acquainted with the worde of God aswell as Iuda: to whom Eleazar sent seuentie two learned men to inter∣prete, and to translate the Bible. After this, hee prouided in Alexandria such a famous Iosephus lib. 12. Cap. 2. Librarie to the common vse of learned men, as farre excel∣led all other Libraries: And (as Melancthon sayth) hee cau∣sed many other thinges to bee translated into the Greeke tongue: hee restored the poore Iewes that dwelt captiues in Egypt into libertie: hee sent for learned men into all Regi∣ons,
hee honourably mainteined them and louingly vsed them, that Egypt florished with sound doctrine and vertuous men: for euen then Iesus the sonne of Sirach, gathered in E∣gypt Sirach and his sonne. together many wise sentences and godly speaches, ma∣ny learned and vertuous lessons, which his graundfather be∣fore had written in Ierusalem, which hee nowe augmented with care and diligence; and compiled in a booke which is reserued in the Church to great vse. This king excelled all the Pharaos before him, and all the Ptolomeis after him, and during his reigne he studied to main∣teine peace, and to auoide warre, and therefore bestowed his daughter Berenices to Antiochus surnamed Theos, who offe∣red diuers iniuries to mooue warres against Egypt: but while Philadelphus liued, Egypt prospered & florished with all good successe, but after that Philadelphus died, his sonne Ptolomei Ptolomei Euer∣getes 3. king of Egypt. Euergetes reigned twentie sixe yeeres, of whom Daniel saide, that the kings daughter of the South which was Berenices, Philadelphus daughter, and this king Euergetes sister shoulde come to the king of the North to make agreement: but Daniel saide it shoulde not continue, for shee shoulde bee Daniel cap. 11. deliuered to death, and out of the budde of her rootes shall one stande vp named Euergetes, and shall enter with an armie into the fortresse of the king of the North, which is called Antiochus Theos, and doe what hee list, and shall preuaile. Hee plagued the Syrians and reuenged Berenices his sister with diuers victories: for hee caried captiues into Egypt their goddes, with their moulten images, and their pre∣cious vessels of siluer and golde: for after Seleucus had lost his Nauies by a tempest on the sea, hee geathered an ar∣mie by lande, and gaue battaile to Ptolomei, but the like misfortune fell then vnto him, and the victorie happened to Ptolomei: for hee was driuen to flee to Antiochia, and from thence to craue his brother Antiochus helpe, which then gouerned Cicilia. Ptolomei hearing of these newes, concluded a peace with Seleucus, and returned into Egypt,
after he had fully requited his sisters death vpon the Syrians. During Euergetes reigne, the Parthians beganne their king∣dome, who were all named Arsaces, as nowe the kings of E∣gypt were called Ptolomei: this time the warres of Africke be∣ganne betweene the Carthagineans and the Numidians: at that time Amilcar was sent captaine generall into Spaine for Carthage: in this Euergetes time certeine enterludes were ap∣pointed by the oracle of Sibilla, in Rome named Floralia the Floralia. Rubigalia. These feastes are set foorth in my dyall of dayes. fourth kalends of May, in the honour of the goddesse Flora for faire weather, and fruites of the earth, like vnto the feast named Rubigalia, which Numa Pompilius instituted the se∣uenth kalends of May in Rome, After this Ptolomei Euergetes had reigned twentie sixe yeres Plini lib. 18. cap. 29. Plutarch  Numa. Ptolomei Thilo∣pator 4. king of Egypt. he died, whom succeeded his sonne Ptolomei surnamed Philo∣pater a cruell beast and not a king, but a monstrous tyrant, a murtherer, both of his wife and his sister Euridices, whose fil∣thy and lewde life is better to passe with silence, then to ex∣presse in writing, of whome Iustine saide, Noctes in stupris, dies in conuiuijs consumsit, letting his strumpet Agathocles and her mother Euanthea to rule and gouerne Egypt as plea∣sed them: for none might lesse commaunde in Egypt then Iustine lib. 29. the king, nor none might doe more in Egypt then women: for nothing delighted Philopator, but women and daun∣cing, and whatsoeuer Agathocles would, that also Philopator would. Against this king, Antiochus the great king of Asia and Syria, came towarde Egypt, and beganne to take and spoile those Cities of Syria, which held with Philopator the king Functius lib. 3. of Egypt. Antiochus comming forwarde towarde Egypt, Ptolomei Philopator mette him, and gaue him battell at Ra∣phia, a Towne in the Confines of Palestina, where Antio∣chus the great was ouerthrowen and put to flight, and Antiochus the great. forced to intreate for peace at Philopators hande, and so Philopator king of Egypt gotte the victorie ouer Antiochus, and recouered those Townes of Syria which Antiochus had woonne before.
This victorie was well gotten, but not well vsed, for Philopator was so puffed vp with pride and insolencie, that Iustine lib. 3. hee thought hauing ouerthrowen Antiochus the great, hee might well also ouerthrowe IEHOVAH the great, entred Ierusalem, spoyled the Temple, slue the Citizens, and made hauocke of Gods people, some to bee deuou∣red of beastes, and some to bee quartered by men. Reade the Machabees further of this, but specially reade the ele∣uenth Machabees. Daniel cap. 4. of Daniel, where the whole historie of the kings of Syria and Asia, of Egypt, of Persia, of Greece, and of the Romanes are before spoken by the Prophet. There it said was by Daniel, that Antiochus and all his armie should be deliuered into the handes of Philopator, and after that victorie, it was by the Prophete saide, that Tyrants were euer warned. Philopator shoulde waxe arrogant and proude, and that he shoulde contemne and blaspheme the Lorde of Israel, and the God of Iacob, that hee shoulde prophane the Temple, destroy the people, and in his furie excell in tyrannie, but at length hee shoulde not preuaile: for hee was poy∣soned, and so died after his most wicked and incestuous life, leauing behinde him a sonne by his sister Euridi∣ces, of fiue yeeres olde, when hee had reigned seuenteene yeeres. I passe briefely these Histories of Egypt, for that in the Polibeus lib. 5. historie of the kings of Syria and Asia, the kings of Egypt are likewise spoken of, and in the Machabees also you may reade further of this Antiochus: for since the death of Alexander the great, the kings of Syria and Asia could not agree with the kings of Egypt, vntill the last destruction of both the king∣domes by the Romanes, and therefore assoone as euer Phi∣lopator died, Antiochus streight againe sought to inuade Egypt, vnderstanding this Ptolomei Epiphanes, the sonne and heire of Philopator was young, and not able to resist Ptolo. Epipha∣nes 5. king of Egypt. so great a King, hee entred into Phoenicia, and into other partes of Syria, which yet liued subiect vnder the king of Egypt.
They of Alexandria sent to Rome to the Senators for ayde against Antiochus, and against Philippe king of Macedonia: for both these two kings affected the kingdome. Ambassadors were sent from the Senators vnto Antiochus, willing him to auoyde out of Egypt, and not to doe iniurie to the yong king. This messenger was litle esteemed of Antiochus, and there∣fore Functius lib. 3. Comment. the Senators pronounced him an enemie of the Ro∣manes. Antiochus being aduertised of this, agreed with Ptolo∣mey Epiphanes, and gaue him Cleopatra his daughter in mari∣age, supposing thereby the easier to get the kingdome of E∣gypt: hee gaue Coelosyria, Iudea, Samaria, and Phoenicia with his Melancthon lib. 2. Chron. daughter to Epiphanes, but he was deceiued and mist his pur∣pose. For he was preuented by the Romanes, and kept off from Egypt: hee was ouerthrowen and vanquished at Thermopila by Attilius and Glabrio, Romane Consuls, and the next yeere after, he was quite driuen out of Syria and Asia, by Lucius Cor∣nelius Scipio, at the citie of Magnesia. Of this Antiochus the great, and of his sonne Antiochus Epi∣phanes another monster, Daniel before shewed their tyranny: for during the time of these two kings, Antiochus Epiphanes Isephus lib. 12. cap. 13. king of Syria, and Ptolomey Epiphanes king of Egypt, the Iewes were most miserably afflicted. Reade Iosephus, how also the Samaritanes molested them, and sore vexed them. And for that I spake of these kings before in the history of Assyria, I will briefly runne ouer the rest of these kings. Now after that Ptolomey Epiphanes had raigned 24. yeeres, hee died, lea∣uing two sonnes behinde him, the elder called Philometor, Philometor the sixt king of Egypt. the yonger called Phiscon: the elder brother raigned king in Egypt 35. yeeres, of whom his vncle Antiochus Epiphanes, a subtile king, vnder the pretence of loue and care of his ne∣phew, became his ouerseer and tutour, rather aspiring the kingdome then respecting the king, for hee furnished Egypt with men of armes, hauing the strongest townes of Egypt in his owne hand, as Pelusium and others. The king being yet yong, idle, slow, and of no courage, ad∣dicted to all filthie vices, without respect of himselfe or of
his kingdome, fled to his brother Phiscon to Alexandria, where both were besieged by Antiochus, vntill Popilius the Romane was sent from the Senators of Rome to commaunde Antio∣chus out of Egypt, without further delay, which hee was con∣strained to obey, though he did much harme before his de∣parture out of Egypt. Philometor hauing recouered his kingdome into his hand, and the Romanes to be his friends, to auoyde further braules, and to stablish himselfe strong in Egypt, he maried his daugh∣ter Cleopatra to Alexander, who had then obtained the king∣dome of Syria: but this friendship continued not long: for Demetrius Nicanor, the sonne of that Demetrius vanquished by Alexander, came to Syria, got certaine townes into his handes, appointed Apollonius captaine of Coelosyria, who tru∣sting Functius lib. 3. Comment. too much to himselfe, was quickly vanquished by Iona∣thas. Philometor vnderstanding of these warres in Syria, be∣tweene his sonne in law Alexander and Demetrius, he also ha∣sted with an armie to Syria, thought to preuent both, and to haue Syria with Egypt: he tooke his daughter Cleopatra away from Alexander, and gaue her to Demetrius, and both wicked∣ly and falsly dealt with his sonne in law. But Demetrius had Syria, and Alexander was slaine by Zab∣diel the king of Arabia, and his head sent to Ptolomey Philome∣tor to Egypt, who then was king both of Egypt and Syria but for three dayes: for within three dayes after Alexander was Melancton lib. 2. slaine in Arabia, Philometor died in Egypt, and Demetrius Nica∣nor was receiued king into Syria. This time gouerned in Ieru∣salem prince Iannaeus the last gouernour of Iudea of the house of Dauid: he with many battels discomfited the Arabians. In Parthia raigned now Mithridates the fift king, and in Ma∣cedonia raigned Perseus the last king. In Philometors dayes, A∣riarathes king of Thracia sought the Romanes fauour, and made a league of peace with them. Aristobulus a Iewe borne a great Aristobulus a Philosopher. Philosopher of the sect of the Peripatetiks, expounded the bookes of Moses to Ptolomey Philopator. In the beginning of this kings raigne, died two of the most famous warriours of
the world, Scipio Affricanus the Romane, and Hannibal the Car∣thaginian. It is supposed that they both died in one yeere, and both banished from their countreis. But to Egypt againe. After Philometor, raigned Ptolomey E∣uergetes Ptolomey Euer∣getes the 7. king. the second of that name, and (as Functius saith) sirna∣med Phiscon, for the deformitie of his body: but others, as Manethon and Iustine, say, that this Euergetes was the seuenth king of Egypt, and that Phiscon was the eight king. It is not Ptolomey Phis∣con the 8. king. much material, and therefore I will follow Functius, who set∣teth downe in his table this Phiscon by the name of Euergetes; whom Epiphanius called Philologon: he raigned 29 yeres king of Egypt, a monstrous and incestuous beast, farre passing all other his predecessours in filthie wickednesse: he was not so foule in the shape of his body, as he was filthy in his minde: for he kept his owne sister, of whom he got a daughter, and Functius lib. 3. Comment. after with that daughter borne of his sister, committed abo∣minable incest. He muthered his owne children, and cut Iustine lib. 38. them in small pieces, and made his wife their owne naturall mother to eate them: but he had the reward due for such of∣fences: he was thrust out of his kingdome, and died a bani∣shed slaue, hated and abhorred of all men. After Phiscon was banished, raigned his brother Ptolomey sirnamed Alexander, as Melancthon saith: but Alexander raig∣ned not long, but was likewise banished as his brother was. Then succeeded in Egypt Ptolomey Lathurus, who in the 3. yere of Alexander king of Iuda, was expelled out of his owne king∣dom by his mother Cleopatra, who fauoring more her yonger Cleopatra Queene of Egypt. sonne named Alexander, intended to make him king of Egypt: she taking Lathurus wife, maried her vnto Alexāder, yet he mi∣strusting the great cruelty which he saw in his mother, fled se∣cretly, letting the gouernment to his mother and to his wife. This Cleopatra after that both her sonnes were thus banished, raigned 10. yeres. Ptolomey Lathurus being now in Cyprus and sent for by the citizens of Ptolomais to defend them from A∣lexander king of Iuda, which hearing of Lathurus cōming, left his purpose, raised his siege, & returned to Ierusalem, fearing
the great armie of Ptolomey, who had thirtie thousande in the fielde. The citizens of Ptolomais when Alexander de∣parted, changed their purpose, and kept Lathurus out of the Iosephus lib. 13. towne, whereby he was thus mooued to send some of his ar∣mie to oppresse Iudea, some to lay new siege againe to Ptolo∣mais. Alexander being aduertised that Lathurus with al his ar∣mie spoyled and wasted his kingdome, he returned and met at the flood of Iordan, where Lathurus gaue a very great ouer∣throw to the king of Iuda, and (as Iosephus writeth) thirtie 30000. Iewes slaine by La∣thurus. thousand Iewes were slaine. The calamities of the Iewes were such, that they were com∣pelled by the king of Egypt to feede vpon the dead carcases, and bodies of their friendes and countreymen, at what time many godly men of the Iewes were present, beholding this myserie, as Simeon, Zacarias and others. Beside this calami∣tie, Simeon. Zacharias. at what time the contention grew hote in Iuda betweene Aristobulus, Antigonus, and Alexander Ianneus: the Iewes at that time were so plagued, that Alexander sent for ayde vnto E∣gypt to Cleopatra: for Iustine writeth, that Cleopatra vsed Alex∣ander her sonne too familiarly, and that her great abomina∣tion was knowen in Egypt. And therefore Ptolomey Lathurus was sent for by his owne subiects to come into Egypt, for that the Queene Cleopatra Ptolomey La∣thurus the 10. king. his mother who had banished him from Egypt, practised ty∣rannie and all kinde of crueltie in Egypt, where hee raigned 8. yeeres. After Lathurus, raigned in Egypt Ptolomey Auletes, father to the last Cleopatra, some say her brother, which was Ptolomey Au∣letes the 11. king. Marcus Antonius friende: this king liued at Rome vntill such time as he was restored by Gabinius into his kingdome of E∣gypt, at the commandement of the Senators. This Auletes is named by Eusebius and Epiphanius, Dionysius. This king for some certaine offences and discords done to his subiects, departed from Alexandria, and sailed towards Rome, hoping that Caesar or Pompey would restore him to his kingdome: and being desirous to see Cato, trauailed vnto him where he was occupied: and opening the cause of his
comming to Rome, sought therein Catoes counsell, who tolde Catos saying of Rome. him how he should finde Rome vnsatiable, and that if Egypt were conuerted into siluer, it would not suffice the Magi∣strates of Rome: which saying of Cato Ptolomey found to bee true: for after long being at Rome, hauing fully satisfied the Senators and other magistrates, he was sent by the Sena∣tors, and specially by Pompey, with one Gabinius to be restored to his kingdome againe, where he raigned thirtie yeeres. Af∣ter Ptolomey Dio∣nysius the 12. king of Egypt. whom succeeded his sonne Ptolomey Dionysius, vnto whom Pompey the great fled from the battaile at Pharsalia, hoping to haue some helpe for the friendship shewed to his father, as you heard before. But there Pompey was slaine by the kings commaunde∣ment, Strabo lib. 17. and his head sent to Caesar, and also when Iulius Caesar came after, the like sauce was prepared for him: but Caesar preuented it, ouerthrewe him, and put him to flight, in the which flight the king thinking to escape Caesars hand, entred Melancthon lib. 2. into a cocke boate, and was drowned amongst the rest for company. The kingdome of Egypt was giuen by Caesar vnto Cleopatra, Dionysius sister, who raigned vntil the twelfth yeere of Augustus Caesar, at what time she willingly died to accom∣pany her louing friend Marcus Antonius: shee was the last of the line of Ptolomeis, and the last Queene of Egypt: for after Cleopatra. Cleopatra, Egypt was made a prouince vnder the Romanes by Augustus Caesar, at what time Augustus Caesar commaunded his lawes and decrees, which himselfe caused to be engraued on a pillar of brasse, and to be set vp in Alexandria for the Egyp∣tians Augustus lawes in Alexandria. now made subiect to the Romanes, to be gouerned by, in like sort, as Alexander the great, the second conquerour before Caesar had done the like, appointing officers and ma∣gistrates, chiefe rulers, named Nomarchas, and two ouer∣seers Episcopi. Of this Manethon tooke no notice, and therefore Iose∣phus taunted him in his second booke Contra Appionem, that hee had the heart of an asse, and the impudencie of a dogge, to make Egypt, which was three seuerall times con∣quered,
first by Cambyses, secondly by the great Alexander, and last by Caesar, equal to the Hebrewes which endured the force, and saw the last destruction of Assur, and Pharao. Thus Egypt was the thirde time conquered by Iulius Caesar, and by his nephewe Augustus Caesar, and these many kings of the names of Ptolomeis raigned in Egypt from Alexander the great vntill the 12. yeere of Augustus Caesar. 1 Ptolomey Lagi raigned 40. yeeres. 2 Ptolomey Philadelphus, raigned 38. 3 Ptolomey Euergetes, raigned 26. 4 Ptolomey Philopator, raigned 17. 5 Ptolomey Epiphanes, raigned 24. 6 Ptolomey Philometor, raigned 35. 7 Ptolomey Euergetes, the second of that name, raigned   8 Ptolomey Phiscon, raigned 29. 9 Ptolomey Lathurus raigned 17. 10 Ptolomey Alexander, cum Matre Cleo∣patra, raigned 10. 11 Ptolomey Auletes, raigned 30. 12 Ptolomey Dionysius raigned   13 Cleopatra Auletes daughter, some say his sister, raigned 14.
OF THE ANTIQVITIE of the Scythians: of their lawes, gouern∣ments and life: of their hardinesse in warres, and of their victories ouer the Persians and Egyptians, and their often inuasions into Asia. SCythia is a countrey large and wide, cōteyning within it selfe diuers and sundrie nations, as Sages, Nomades, Massagetes, Ama∣zones, Caspians & Hircanians, with Solinus cap. 60. 61. many other nations bordering vpon Scythia, & dwelling with∣in Scythia: of the which particu∣larly to write, I thinke it need∣lesse, the rather, for that Pompo∣nius Pomponius Mela lib. 3. Mela, Solinus & also Strabo in his 11. booke doeth describe Scythia and other nations which dwelt in Scythia, exquisite and painfull men in describing countreis, their townes, their riuers, their hilles, their maners, and natures. And therefore lest I should seeme fabulous (as diuers wri∣ters herein offend, the Grecians specially, who neuer thought their histories worth the reading, vnlesse they were mingled with vaine fables) I wil write of their warres, and of their an∣tiquitie, & therein I shal hardly escape fables of some Talmu∣dist or other, so difficult a thing it is to finde out a true begin∣ning of antiquities in prophane histories, as Liuie saith, vt re∣rum vetustas sine errore esse nequit.
The Scithians are thought to be one of the ancientest nati∣ons in the world, from whom diuers great kingdomes tooke Beroaldus lib. 4. cap. 5. their first originall, as Celte or the olde Gaules, which now are called Frenchmen. Berosus affirmeth, that Noah by the name Berosus lib. 2. of Ianus, and all his familie dwelt first in Scithia Saga, & thence came to Chaldea, and dwelt in Senar: for during the time of Ia∣nus, Cameses, and Saturnus, and al the time from Ianus vntil Ni∣nus, the prophane writers called the golden world: for then men liued without lawes, and had all thinges in common. This Plinie in his naturall histories affirmeth, that the Persi∣ans called the Scithians, Sagas. There is great contention be∣tweene Plinie cap. 17. the Scithians and the Egyptians, concerning ther anti∣quities, Iustine lib. 2. the historie whereof is written in Trogus Pompeius: there, after much disputation it is concluded, Scitharum gens semper antiquissima, that the Scithians had the soueraingtie ouer the Egpytians in antiquitie. As the Egyptians excelled in great & monstrous buildings, so these Scithians exceeded for sweete and famous riuers, as 1 Ister. Herodotus lib. 2. 2 Tyres. 3 Hypanis. 4 Borysthenes. 5 Panticapes. 6 Hypacaris. 7 Gerrhus. 8 Tanais. 9 Moetin. These Scithians who were rude and slauish people, with∣out maners or nourture, excelled farre the Greekes which with great care and diligence, studied to attaine knowledge and vertue: for by howe much the more the Scithians were more ignorant then the Greekes, so much the more the Scithi∣ans Scithians. excelled the Greekes in vertue: their hardinesse and cou∣rage in warres was such, that they were accompted amongst all other nations the most inuincible people of the worlde, that it is doubtfull (as Iustine saith) whether the men or the women of Scithia be more famous: they attempted no lesse Signiories then the whole Empire of Asia, which Empire they so tamed with often inuasions, that the Scithians were
lords of Asia eight and twentie yeeres. For at what time Ciaxares, otherwise called by the Pro∣phet Daniel, Darius Medus, layde siege to Niniue the chiefest Ruffius de  origine. citie of Assyria, and being euen then readie to take Niniue, the king of Scithia whose name was Madies, came with a great ar∣mie of Scithians & set vpon the Medes, ouerthrew them, spoy∣led and wasted at that time in their returne to Scithia, all Asia, and kept Asia vnder the kingdome of Scithia for the space of eight and twentie yeeres. And againe before this time, the Scithians brought Asia to Functius. pay them tribute, at what time Tanais king of the Gothes was their general: and againe before that time, the Egyptians who with an armie set forward toward Scithia, at what time Vexo∣res raigned king in Egypt, the Scithians hauing intelligence of their ambassadors comming, answered in this sort, that they marueiled much that so famous a prince as the king of Egypt, should come to fish with golden hooks to Scithia so barren a countrey: saying further, that the Scithians had rather come to offer warres into Egypt, then to welcom them into Scithia, but such rude welcome as rude people can yeelde, the king of Egypt shall haue: and therewithall gaue to Vexores such Vexores. Iustine lib. 2. a battell, that he was ouerthrowen, and cōstrained to take his flight to Egypt againe, and was so folowed at the hard heeles, that if bogs and marish ground had not stayed the Scithians, they would haue giuen him battel in Egypt, as they did com∣ming home through Asia, spoiling, wasting, and destroying it the thirde time. Iustine writeth this historie at large. That time the Scithians absented themselues from their countrey in Asia so long, vntill their wiues sent vnto them, threatning them, that vnlesse they would out of hande re∣turne home, they would take their next neighbours for their husbandes, and further they should not come when they would: for after they did marrie their seruants that were The women of Scithia maried their seruants. left, as shepheards and swineheards at home, which resisted their owne masters, to haue their wiues, their houses and their owne countreis. The like historie is written of the Ama∣zones,
women of Scythia, who gouerne and rule their coūtrey without men with such fame, as Hercules, Cyrus, and Alexander the great can witnes of them. The custome of these Amazones, lest their stocke should pe∣rish, was once a yere to accompany with people of their next Iustinus lib. 2. confines for multiplication sake. And thereby being with child, if it should be a male child, they presētly kil him or send him to his father: if it should be female, she was exercised frō her cradle in al martial exploits, both on horsebacke and on foote, & she had the right dug or breast cut off, wherby they might exercise their bowes. Two Queenes raigned of the A∣mazones of passing great reports, named Marpesia & Lampedo, of whom both Asia & Europe haue tasted of their darts: these two Queenes, after they had won diuers townes in Asia, and also had builded other townes in Asia, they died vncōquered in their countrey. After them succeeded Otrera the daugh∣ter of Marpesia, who raigned together with her sister Antiopa. Otrera the third Queene of Scythia. Otrera or Oreithia hauing an armie out of Scythia, leauing her sister Antiopa to defend Scythia, the fame and renowne of these Antiop the Queenes sister. two Ladies kindled Hercules and his felow Theseus with diuers yong gallants of Greece to saile to Hircania, a part of Scythia, who vpon the sudden, vnlooked for of Antiopa, with some slaughter of the Amazones, Hercules tooke Menalippe, and The∣seus tooke Hippolite, both the Queenes sisters. Otrera hearing of these newes, returned home with all hast, asked ayde of Sa∣gillus king of Scythia, to reuenge the wrong done by Hercules and Theseus against both her sisters, saying also that the Ama∣zones were Scythians aswel as he, & therfore not to deny ayde, promising the king that women should be as wel in the fore∣ward of the battel as men: but Hercules restored Menalippe to the Queene her sister againe, and Theseus married the other, Iustinus lib. 2. by whom he got Hippolitus. After Otrera succeeded Penthesileia, whose valiant acts and deedes in the Troyans warres against the Greekes, who knewe Penthesileia the 4. Queene of Scythia. them not? After Penthesileia they succeeded orderly vntil the time of Alexander the great, at what time Thalestris raigned Thalestris.
Queene of the Amazones. I will leaue this part of Scythia thus much commended by the Amazones, and will briefly speake of other nations in Scy∣thia, as the Massegits, a people of wōderful courage, as by their warres against Cyrus might appeare: for after that Cyrus had brought the Medes, Chaldeans, Assyrians, Lydians, and all Asia vnder the Empire of Persia, hearing of the great harme and the inuasions that the Scythians had often done in Asia and Europe, hee leuied a huge armie, and passed towards Scythia, at what time Tomiris raigned Queene ouer the Massegites: who hearing of Cyrus cōming, though he was then the onely monarch and conquerour that brought all the East kings vnder Persia, yet she permitted him with al his armie to passe the riuer of Oraxis, and to come and to make choise to set his campe as pleased him best. Cyrus at that time vsed a strata∣gem, Cyrus. left his tents full of all delicate and daintie banquets, with all maner of wine, and fained to take his flight for feare of the enemies. The Queene hearing of Cyrus flight, cōmanded her sonne Spargapises Tomyris sōne. named Spargapises out of hand to follow Cyrus with an armie of Massegetes. The yong Scythian being not acquainted with such galant banquets in Scythia, began to assaile Cyrus wine, but hee and all his armie were ouerthrowen without any sword drawen, or a blow giuen. When Cyrus had returned, and found the Scythians some drinking, some sleeping, some dauncing, and all drunken, he slew them with the sword, and thought thereby that God fa∣uoured much his cause to haue such a victorie ouer the Scy∣thians Strabo lib. 11. without blood of the Persians, and therefore he erected a temple to the goddesse of that countrey, & appointed that day a solemne feast called Sacaea, which Cyrus consecrated in Sacaea. remembrance of his happie victorie. When Queene Tomyris heard that her sonne Spargapises was slaine by Cyrus, and al his army, she leauied a great nom∣ber Herodot. lib. 1, of the Massegetes together, and went in person her selfe to the battell, & that to the only battell that euer was in Scythia,
the greatest and the terriblest: for two hundreth thousand Iustinus lib. 1. Persians were slaine, and Cyrus himselfe killed in that battel. Of Cyrus burial, his graue and his epitaph, and also the cruel∣tie of Thomiris to Cyrus being dead, I will write in the historie of Persia. After this great victorie of Tomyris, the Scithians had Lthinus king of Scithia. peace vntil Lanthinus time king of Scithia. After Cyrus time, Darius Histaspis came to Scithia, who be∣ing Darius Histspis ouerthrowen. denied of king Lanthinus daughter in mariage, he retur∣ned his loue to hatred: he waged battel against Lathinus, and brought to Scithia seuen hūdred thousand Persians, of whom he left behind him slaine in Scithia, fourescore & tenne thou∣sand, and Darius himselfe constrained to take his flight, with no lesse feare then danger into Persia againe. In like sort the Scithians vsed Zopirona a general of Alexanders Zopirona ouer∣throwen. the great, in a battel giuen by the Macedonians to the Scithians, with such slaughter, that the whole armie of Zopirona was o∣uerthrowen, and himselfe hardly by flight escaped, as Vexores king of Egypt, & Darius king of Persia had done before: of such inuincible courage the Scithians were, being frō their birth ac∣quainted & brought vp in hardines, that life and death were esteemed alike: they made no accompt of victory for wealth and treasure, but for honour. Alexander the great, who had better successe in Scithia then any of his predecessors, liked the people so wel for their hardy and valiant enterprises, that he builded a city and named it Alexandria, which was the first citie that he builded in Scithia, which name was after raced by the Barbarians, and repaired againe by Antiochus the sonne of Seleucus, who according to his progenitors name, called it Seleucia. Into this citie (saith Solinus) Orodes king of Parthia conueyed the Romans that were taken at the slaughter of Cras∣sus. Strabo writeth, that Alexander the great builded 8. great Eight townes builded by Alexander. townes amongst the Bactrians, and amongst the Sogdians, two large countreys of Scithia: also he saith, that Alexander de∣stroyed certaine cities in Bactria, a citie called Cariata, where Callisthenes the Philosopher was imprisoned by Alexander: in Sogdiana he destroyed a citie which Cyrus builded after his
owne name called Cira, hard by the riuer Iaxartes. I reade of none sauing of Alexader, which ventured so much in Scithia, as the Scithians haue done in other countreis: you shall reade that the Scithians haue thrise inuaded Asia, haue driuen the Cimerians out of Europe, haue giuen to the Medes diuers ouerthrowes, specially in a great battell at Mount Cau∣casus, Diuers coun∣treys ouer∣throwen by the Scithians. and after came into Media their owne countrey, wasted it, spoyled it, and did possesse it, as lords and rulers thereof, vntill by a stratagem of the Medes, the Scithians were slaine being drunken. After the Medes, the Egyptians were ouer∣throwen with their king Vexores, and put to flight. After the Egyptians, Phrahartes king of Parthia with all his Parthian ar∣mie, and almost all the countrey of Parthia, were at that time wellnigh conquered by the Scithians. The Persians were twise by the Scithians ouercome, vnder The praise of Scithia. Darius Histaspis, who was discomfited with all his armie, and himselfe glad to take his heeles: and vnder Cyrus the great king, who also after two or three battels, was slaine amongst the Scithians. It was thought a thing most renowmed to make an armie, and to enter Scithia. Liber Pater was the first that trauailed into Scithia, as farre as Panda a citie of the Sog∣dians, where the first altar was erected in testimonie of so fa∣mous an enterprise. The second altar was made euen in that Trophes set vp in Scithia. place by Hercules. The thirde by Semiramis Queene of Assyria. The fourth and last altar was erected by Cyrus, and therefore it was compted one of the greatest commendations of Alex∣ander the great to make his voyage so farre, whereby hee had the name of the fift that also erected his monument: so in∣uincible were the nations of the Scithians, that they would take no iniurie at home, neither offer iustice abroade. The antiquitie of the Scithians is such, that there is no great certaintie of their time, nor no sounde histories haue declared any thing formally, neither of their kings, nor of themselues, and therefore I wil briefly ende their historie in this place, onely setting downe the names of such kings as I found scattered in diuers histories of other kingdomes.
1 Scytha the first king of Scythia, of whose birth and begin∣ning the Scythians do much bragge. Reade Diodorus. Diodorus lib. 2. cap. 11. 2 Napis. 3 Pluto. 4 Sagillus. 5 Targitaus. 6 Plinos. 7 Scolopithus. 8 Penaxagora filius Sa∣gilli. 9 Tanais. 10 Indathirsus. 11 Saulius. This king killed the Philosopher Anacharsis, for that hee found him in Grecian robes executing the rites and ceremonies of the Greeks, in a sacrifice to Berecynthia, against the customes and lawes of Scythia. 12 Spargapithus. 13 Aripethes. 14 Sciles. This king was in like maner driuen out of his king∣dom for imitating the Grecians in their sacrifice to Bacchus: for the Scythians did mocke and floute the Greekes to alter themselues like faunes or Satires, some like men, some like wo∣men, and some like beasts with darts in their hands, and Yuie crownes on their heades, after the maner of the Grecians, which the Scythians could not abide. 15 Octomasades. 16 Lanthinus, which raigned in Scythia when Darius king of Persia came with an army of seuen hundreth thousand, and was ouerthrowen of the Amazones, Sogdians, Hircanians, and of diuers other nations, which dwel in Scythia: which to write itwere but labour in vaine. But a few of the Ama∣zones Queenes I will set downe, as Pēthisileia which came to the Troy∣an warres against the Grecians. Menalippe that gaue battell to Hercules. Hippolite that gaue battel to The∣seus. Tomiris that gaue battell to Cyrus and ouerthrew him. Antiopia: and Marpesia. Otrera and other warlik Queenes. But of Tamberlanes greatnes of his armie, and victories against the Turke, how he toooke him, caried him in a cage with him to all his warres, and howe he vsed to tread vpō his necke as a blocke to mount on horsebacke, lute histories euery where are written.
OF THE ORIGINAL OF the Parthians, and of the beginning of their kingdome, and how long it continued: of their kings, gouernment, and last destruction by the Romanes, in the time of Au∣gustus Caesar. THe Parthians were (sometime) people of Scythia, and driuen frō thence as banished men, weried and ouerthrowen: and after, by long warres they came to the deserts of Hircania, and possessed the cōfines of those nations cal∣led Daces, and Maiani: for in the Scythian tongue, the Parthians doeth signifie banished men, so that the Parthians were first ob∣scure Pathia. and base people, banished out of their countrey of Scy∣thia in the time that the Asyrians & the Medes flourished, and long after that the Persians had gotten the monarchie from the Medes. The Parthians were very rude, without lords or lawes to rule them, vntil the empire of Macedonia had gotten the masterie ouer the Persians: for at what time Alexander the great died, no Maccdonian would vouch safe to be king in Par∣thia, the successors of Alexander made no accompt of the Par∣thians, Parthians not esteemed. but as rude people, and mercenarie souldiers, neither
esteeming them nor their countrey: so simple a beginning the Parthians had, vntill they scattered themselues to serue as mercenarie souldiers: then beganne the Parthians to haue some fame by their seruice, which were (as I saide before) scant knowen. It is written by Solinus, that Parthia grew into so large an Solinus cap. 68. Empire, that it conteined 18. kingdomes: these kingdomes are deuided into two partes, eleuen of the eighteene called the vpper kingdomes, beginning from the borders of Arme∣nia, passing along the Caspian sea coast to Scithia: the other seuen kingdomes haue on the West the Medes, on the South Carmania, & on the North Hircania the language of the Par∣thians Iustinus lib. 41. is mingled partly with the Medes, and partly with the Scithians: their apparel after the custome of Scithia, their soul∣diers in fight were their seruants, of whom the Parthians had as great care, as of their children, teaching them in their youth to ride, to shoote, and to doe all other martiall ex∣ploits: for of fiftie thousand souldiers which they had against M. Antonius, were none free men but 450. all the rest were ser∣uants. The Parthians began to erect a kingdome, at what time raigned in Egypt Euergetes the thirde king, and in Ma∣cedonia raigned king Demetrius, likewise in Asia and Syria raigned Seleucus Gabinius the forth king. About this time the Carthagineans had great warres with the Numidians, which Polibeus lib. 2. endured foure yeeres: of these warres Polibeus writeth. In the time of the first king of Parthia which was named Arsaces, Eu∣menes Arsaces the first king of Prthia. king of Bithynia inuaded Asia. This king Arsaces deserued no lesse fame by his great prow∣esse and valiant deedes, by his fortun at warres and good suc∣cesse amongst the Parthians, then Cyrus did amongst the Per∣sians, or Alexander the great amongst the Macedonians. The Parthians so loued this Arsaces aliue, and so honoured him dead, that all the kings of Parthia after him were called Ar∣saces, with no lesse dignitie then the Caesars of Rome, or Pha∣raos of Egypt, and yet a meane man in the beginning, who might more bragge of vertue, & knowledge, then of dignitie
or parentage: for before these Parthians, followed Eume∣nes in the warres of Asia, after Eumenes they followed An∣tigonus, after Antigonus they followed Seleucus Nicanor, after him Antiochus. At what time the Parthians reuoulted and made a choise of this king named Arsaces, who brought such Parthia by Ar∣sices renow∣med. renowne to the Parthians, such credite to the countrey, as en∣larged their confines, and augmented their Empire. This time one Theodotus being but then President ouer 1000. Townes and Cities in Bactriana, proclaimed himselfe king of the Bactrians: with this king Theodotus, Arsaces entred Iustine lib. 41. in societie, and with his sonne after him: nowe when Arsaces had setled himselfe quietly in Parthia, he gaue them lawes to liue by, he did set and frame all things in order, hee builded Townes and Cities, and one chiefe Metropolitane Citie, and named it Daram. This king had a sonne named Mithridates, who after his Mithridates 2. king of Par∣thia. father reigned in Parthia with no lesse fame then his father, he leauied an armie of a hundred thousand footemen, and twentie thousand horsemen, fought with Antiochus the sonne of Seleucus king of Syria, with such inuincible courage, that Antiochus thought it his best way to haue peace with him. When this king died, succeeded him Pampatius the third Pampatius 3. king of Par∣thia. Pharnaces 4. king of Par∣thia. king in Parthia, who when he had reigned twelue yeeres, left behinde him two sonnes, the one named Pharnaces, the other Mithridates: the elder brother after the Parthian maner en∣ioyed his fathers seate, and his father surnamed Arsaces as the other kings were: This king ouerthrew a very stout Nation called Mardi, and did as his predecessors had done, adde some people, or wanne some countrey to Parthia, who ha∣uing many children when hee died, and hauing more care of his countrey then of his children, appointed his brother Mithridates 5. king of Par∣thia. Mithridates to be king of Parthia, a man of great courage and singular vertues. The same very time when Mithridates entred into Parthia as king, did Encratides likewise enter to the kingdome of the Bactrians, but these two kings prospered not alike: for Encra∣tides
after diuers and sundry battels giuen to him by the Sog∣dians, Dranganites, and Indians, wherein he gaue diuers repul∣ses Iustine lib. 4. vnto his enemies, but at length so wearied with continu∣all warres, hee was ouerthrowen and vanquished. In Parthia with better successe fought Mithridates with the Medes, whom after many doubtfull battels, Mithridates subdued the Medes, and brought them subiect vnder the Parthians, and appoin∣ted in Medea Bachasus to be lieutenant, and went himselfe in∣to Hircania, and then waged warres with the king of Elymees, which he vanquished and all his countrey, and ioyned them to the Parthians: so that Parthia was so strengthened by the Medes, the Elimees, & other nations, that they gouerned from mount Caueasus, to the riuer Euphrates: so that poore Parthia before a base people, and a rude countrey, are nowe become lords ouer the stoute Medes, so by Gods appointment king∣domes and Empires doe both flowe and ebbe: during this time Masinissa was by sundry battels driuen out of his king∣dome Masinissa. by Syphax king of Numidia. At that time reigned in Syria, Seleucus Philopator their se∣uenth king, and in Egypt reigned Ptolomei Philometor the sixt king, Cornelius Scipio about this time triumphed ouer Asia. After this Mithridates death succeeded his sonne Phrahartes: Phrahartes 6. king of Par∣thia. who had not the fortune which his father had, for Phrahartes was sore vexed by the Scythians, who at the first came to aide the king of Parthia against Antiochus king of Syria▪ the souldi∣ers fell to mutinie for want of pay, and therefore wasted and spoiled the Confines of Parthia, burned townes, and rob∣bed Istine lib. 42. countries, that Phrahartes was constrained to leauy an armie, and to make warres vpon the Scythians, whose lucke had beene better if hee had taried in Parthia, where hee left behinde him Himerus, too young a man to gouerne a king∣dome, who lost at home in Parthia, asmuch as Phrahartes lost in Scythia. After Phrahartes was ouerthrowen by the Scythians, Ar∣tabanus Artabanus 7. king of Par∣thia. succeded, who likewise shortly was slaine in the warres at Colchata, after whom succeeded his sonne Mithri∣dates
the second of that name, who for his noble deedes and Mithridates 8. king of Pa∣thia. valiant actes, was named Mithridates the great, and yet not so great as infortunate: for when he had reuenged the death of his father vpon the Scythians, plagued the Armenians, and had gotten diuers Nations subiect vnto Parthia, yet hee was banished from Parthia, and his kingdome giuen to Horodes his brother. Horodes hauing the kingdome of Parthia in his hand, hearing that his brother Mithridates had fledde into Babylon to auoide further feare, hee besieged Babylon, vntill by famine they were compelled to yeelde the Citie: Mi∣thridates hoping for pardon, yeelded himselfe to his bro∣ther: Hrodes 9. king of Parthia. but Horodes▪ supposing that he would prooue rather an enemie then a brother, commaunded him to be slaine be∣fore his face. By this time the Parthians grewe so great, and waxed so strong, that their fame extended into Rome, a Citie that coulde neuer abide no kingdome nor no countrey to florish Crassus sent to Parthia. beside themselues: and therefore the Romanes sent Marcus Crassus, one of the greatest men of Rome to Parthia, who had such conceiptes in his head, that the victorie of Lucul∣lus against Tigranes king of Armenia, and all that Pompei did against Mithridates king of Pontus, were but trifles to that which hee entended: for hee thought to conquer the Bactrians, the Indians, and the great Ocean sea. For in his decree and commission to him giuen by the Senate, there was no mention made of the Parthians, which the Parthians knewe, and therefore sent Embassadours vnto Crassus, opening vnto him that hee offered warres vnto the Parthians, against his decree by the Senate: but Crassus more bold then wise saide, that Horodes king of Parthia shoulde an∣swere The answere of a Parthian vnto Crassus. him in Seleucia. One of the Parthian Embassadours fell a laughing, shewing to Crassus the palme of his hande, saying, Haires shall sooner growe in the palme of my hand, before you come to Seleucia: and so with defiance of Crassus; the Embassadours returned to their king, telling him that he was to prepare for warres.
By this time Artabazes king of Armenia came to the campe of Crassus with sixe thousand horsemen, promising Crassus tenne thousand more horsemen, and thirtie thousand foote∣men, but that promise was not kept, for hee was assaulted by the Parthians in his countrey: beside, Crassus had in his armie fiftie thousand. Horodes king of Parthia made ready for Cras∣sus, Surena cap∣taine generall of the Par∣thians. and appointed one named Surena his lieutenant, the se∣cond man in all Parthia next to the king, in experience, va∣lue, reputation, and riches: for Plutarch saith, that when Sure∣na remooued with his owne houshold onely, he had a thou∣sand Camels to carie his sumpters, and two hundred Co∣ches of Curtizans, & a thousand men of armes armed from toppe to toe, beside another thousand more lightly armed: his whole traine & Court made aboue ten thousand horse. Crassus thought long to giue battell vnto the Parthians, but the miserable sight of the ouerthrowen Romanes which were so martyred with such torments, shewing vnto their cap∣taines their handes fast nayled to their targettes with ar∣rowes, and their feete likewise shotte through and nayled to the ground, the forked arrowes fast in their bodies, and so wounded with speares and pikes, that the most part of the Romane gentlemen slue themselues, for so did Censorinus, and Publius Crassus himselfe commaunded one of his gentle∣men to kill him, whose head was cut off after by the enemie, Crassus slaine, and his head sent to the king of Par∣thia. and brought to his father for a present, whose sight killed the Romanes hearts. Yet the olde Crassus shewed greater courage at that time then euer hee had done before: hee made an oration to his souldiers, when his heart was full of sorowe, brought them examples howe Lucullus ouercame not Tigranes, neither Sci∣pio, Antiochus the great without blood. Thus hee comforted his people, and perswaded them to turne their sorowes into furie, and to shewe themselues worthie Romanes for the re∣uenge of his sonnes death: but the inconstancie of Crassus fortune was no better then his sonne, after many vnlucki battels to bee slaine, and his head to be cut off as his sonnes
was, and twentie thousand Romanes slaine: beside Surena did send Crassus vnto Herodes the king his master into Ar∣menia. After Crassus and his sonne were thus shamefully Enuie at Rome. slaine in Parthia, the Parthians so triumphed of this in feastes and playes, making rimes and iestes (as Plutarch saith) of both Crassus heads. About this enuie beganne a quarrell in Rome, first be∣tweene Plutarch in the life of Crassus. Lucullus, and Pompei, and after betweene Pompei and Caesar: nowe the Romanes hauing susteined such foile in Par∣thia, and the Parthians such victorie ouer the Romanes, that Horodes king of Parthia, and his sonne Pacorus conceiued great pride therein, but pride will haue a fall, and so it fell to the Parthians. After diuers great victories of many Countries, Venti∣dius Ventidius vi∣ctorie ouerthe Parthians. a Romane lieutenant of Marcus Antonius, who fully reuenged the death of Crassus, with such a slaughter of the Parthians, that in the first battell that he had with Horodes, he slue Pharnabates, & Labienus, which two encreased much the Parthians fame, while Labienus was in Syria, two of the chiefe captaines he had: in the second battell he farre excelled the first, and slue many more of the Parthians: in this battell Pa∣corus Pacorus slaine. the kings owne sonne was slaine. This made the victorie of Ventidius more notable: this ex∣ploit was a full requitall of Crassus death, so that Ventidius a meane man borne, was the onely man that euer triumphed Ventidius vi∣ctorie ouer the Parthians. ouer the Parthians vnto the very last day of them: when newes of these victories came to Horodes, that his sonne Pacorus was slaine with all his armie, of whom hee heard before so well of in vanquishing and ouerthrowing diuers armies both in Asia and Syria, hee suddenly fell to such a furie, that hee be∣came beside himselfe, that for many dayes hee was dumbe Horodes dumb. without speach: and when hee spake any worde, hee spake nothing but Pacorus, hee thought that hee sawe him, that he heard him, and that he spake with him. But in time after hee had recouered his former state, hee imagined of thirtie sonnes he had, who should be king after
him: at length hee bequeathed his kingdome vnto his sonne Phrahartes: this was the last king of Parthia. About this time Phrahartes the 10. king of Parthia. much trouble was in Rome betweene Caesar and Pompei the great, the ciuill warres whereof had almost ouerthrowen the state of the Romanes, the which I will write of in the Romane historie: nowe when Phrahartes had slaine his father Horodes, and had possessed the kingdome of Parthia, hee doubting lest the like murther might happen to him, hee made sure woorke. After hee had slaine the king his father, hee also slue his thirtie brethren: this tyrannie in the beginning of his go∣uernment, Many reuoul∣ted frō Phra∣hartes. made diuers gentlemen of Parthia to forsake him, & to flee vnto Antonius, to whō (as Plutarch saith) Anto∣nius gaue diuers cities, as Larissa, Arethusa, & others. After this hee tooke a generall muster of all his armie, and of his confe∣derates that were come by commaundement to aide him from Armenia, and other places, so that Antonius had three∣score thousand footemen, and tenne thousand horsemen, be∣side The great ar∣mie of Anto∣nius. thirtie thousand of other Nations. This puissant armie made all Asia to tremble, and yet no worthy exploite done, but besieging the Citie of Phrata in Media: the loue hee bare to Cleopatra was thought to be the cause of his ill lucke. Cleopatra. In the meane time Phrahartes king of Parthia being aduer∣tised where Antonius left his engines of battell, hee sent a number of horsemen to fight with Tatianus, who was in that conflict slaine with tenne thousand more at that time: this troubled all Antonius armie: notwithstanding Antonius ha∣sted to battell with them, at what time hee put the Parthians to flight, without any great slaughter of the Parthians. Antonius lingering still, and doing no great acte in Par∣thia, determined to giue ouer such craftie people: and though Antonius had ouercome the Parthians in eighteene seuerall battels, yet they gaue him diuers repulses and such Antonius de∣pature from Parthia. ouerthrowes, as Antonius was most willing to let them alone and to depart from them, whome they followed in his re∣turne at the hard heeles to his great losse and shame.
This made Phrahartes king of Parthia so proude, that Antonius the great Romane tooke his flight from Parthia, that hee vsed such murther and tyrannie in his Countrie, that his owne subiects threwe him out of his countrie and kingdome, and placed in his seate Tiridates to bee king, vn∣till Phrahartes after hee had beene thus banished was ay∣ded by the king of Scythia to bee restored vnto his king∣dome againe. Then Tiridates hearing that the Scythians came with a great Tiridates. armie to restore Phrahartes, he fledde into Spaine vnto Octa∣uius Caesar: thither likewise did Phrahartes send Embassadors: Caesars clemen∣cie andiustice when Caesar had heard both the parties, the complaintes of the banished king Phrahartes, and the request of Tiridates say∣ing, that Parthia was fitte to be subiect to the Romane Em∣pire, affirming also that if it should please Caesar to substitute him lieutenant vnder the Romanes in Parthia, that he would with all Parthia holde with Rome. Notwithstanding Caesar vsed in this great clemencie both wisdome and iustice, he commaunded that Phrahartes sonne shoulde bee king in Parthia, and that Tiridates (if it pleased him) should continue in Rome vpon Caesars charges, vntill his returne from Spaine, at which time Caesar hauing occasi∣on after he came home to Rome from Spaine, to go to Syria, and to dispose of those kingdomes which his predecessours had conquered in the East countries, and to set all things in order, he charged then that Phrahartes should make no warres Diodo. lib. 42. against the Parthians, promising that hee and his posteritie should gouerne Parthia vnder the Romanes, willing and com∣manding him and the king his sonne to send those ensignes to Rome, which Marcus Crassus lost at Parthia, and cōmanded them to be true friends to the Romanes. The fortune of this Cae∣sar was such, that he could then cōmand with a word, more then Antonius▪ who sought it with blowes, or Crassus that sought it with his death. This Caesar afterward called Augustus, brought parthia to be a prouince vnto the Romanes, and en∣ded without warres, which other could not do with warres.
Thus the kingdome of Parthia which beganne in the hun∣dred thirtie three Olympiad, and ended in the beginning of the Monarchie of Augustus Caesar, in the hundred eightie eight Olympiad, after hee had conquered his friend Marcus Antonius: There reigned in Parthia eleuen kings, whose names are here vnder written. 1 Arsaces the first king, by whom the kinges of Parthia were all called Arsaces. 2 Mithridates the second king of Parthia. 3 Pampatius the third king of Parthia. 4 Pharnaces the fourth king of Parthia. 5 Mithridates the fift king of Parthia. 6 Phrahartes the sixt king of Parthia. 7 Artabanus the seuenth king of Parthia. 8 Mithridates the great, the eight king of Par∣thia, and sonne to Artabanus. 9 Horodes the ninth king of Parthia. 10 Phrahartes the tenth king of Parthia. 11 The eleuenth and last king of Parthia, sonne to Phrahartes, and supposed to be called Phra∣hartes, after his fathers name.
OF THE ANTIQITIE OF Media: of the originall of their Kings, and of their common wealth, gouernment, and continuance. THough the Assyrians, the Chalde∣ans, and the Egyptians were con∣quered by the Persians: yet I wil touch the historie of Media, be∣fore I handle Persia, for that the Medes likewise were made sub∣iect vnto the Persiās: for al these kingdoms came at length to Cy∣rus hand. For as the kingdome of Media began atone time with the newe kingdome of Assyria, after Sardanapalus time: so they ended about one time, and both these kingdomes by Cyrus taken vnto Persia: and euen so of Lydia the next historie to this, was also by the Persians sub∣dued: of the which also I meane briefely to speake, before I handle Persia: for so the course of time, and the order of the histories doe require: but now of the Medes. For Strabo in the description of the kingdome of Media Strabo. lib. 11. sayth, that Parthia is bordered vpon the East side of Media, and on the South it is inhabited with people called Cadusij: and (as Strabo writeth) it hath other nations dwelling about the Sea of Hircania: the riuer Halis (as Herodote doth write)
is the Confines of both Media and Lydia. And hee sayth fur∣ther, that the Medes were called Arij before, and then long after that Medea came from Cholchos vnto Athens, & from A∣thens vnto this people then called Arij, & changed the name of the countrey after her owne name Media, whō the Greekes called after that Medi, by the name of Medea: but otherwayes confirmed by Iosephus, and by Zonaras in his first booke, who Iosephus lib. 1. cap. 6. say that Medi had their originall from Madai, the sonne of Iaphet, and of him (as Melancthon sayth) named Madei first, and after of the Greekes called Medi. There were many Townes in Media first builded by the Macedonians, inhabited by the Grccians, as Laodicea, Apannia, Rhaga, which Nicanor builded. The Medes in times past flori∣shed The Medes first by Cyrus vanquished. (a kingdome that gouerned many Countries, and had vnder their Empire the most part of Asia, vntill the Persians vanquished the Assyrians by king Cyrus, which Cyrus after∣warde subdued the Medes, and brought both Assyria and Me∣dia vnto the Empire of Persia. The chiefe Pallace of the kings of Media is called Eobata∣na, where the kings of Media kept their Court euery win∣ter. Herodote, which wrote his historie in the time of Xerxes sayth, that after the Medes had conquered the Assyrians, the Medes had no kings of long time after, but euery Citie by popular state was then gouerned, vntill Deiocis time, Deiocis the . king of the Medes. who being wise, and withall very ambitious, plausible in his speach, and gentle in his dealings, wanne the peoples hearts to affect him much: who by secrete meanes aspiring to the kingdome, hauing many great friendes by councell to further him, and with power to aide him, vntill by common consent of the whole Estate hee was chosen King, in the fourtie fiue yeere after the building of Rome, and in the seuenth yeere of Numa Pompilius reigne, the second king of Rome, in the eighteene Olympiad. Arbase▪ subdu∣ed the Assyri∣ans, and made them subiect to the Medes. For after that Arbaces then chiefe Gouernour of the Medes had ioyned in friendshippe with Bellochus lieutenant of Babylon, and both conspired (as you heard before in the
historie of the Assyrians) against Sardanapalus, whom after they had with three or foure battels conquered, the Assyri∣ans with their Empire was translated vnto the Medes by Ar∣baces: Arbaces which Medes yet had no king created, but were ruled and gouerned by Arbaces, as Babylon was by Bellochus. Bellochus. Nowe after that Arbaces had gouerned the Medes twentie eight yeeres, at what time Procas Siluius reigned king ouer the Latines, and at Athens Thespeius liued their tenth Iudge after their kings: It is written that one Phidon of Argiue, found about this time the vse of measures and weights. This Arbaces began to reigne ouer the Medes fourtie two yeeres before the Olympiads, at the which time the kingdome of Macedonia began: so that the Medes & Macedonians began fourtie two yeeres before the Lydians, and the Lydians twentie foure yeeres before the Romanes. Ctesias a great antiquarie of the Persians, who wrote in Artaxerxes time presently after He∣rodot, saith, that after Arbaces time, a sonne of his succeeded him named Madanes, who reigned 50. yeres: and then follow∣ed Sosarmus, which reigned 30. yeeres: after him succeeded Sosarmus 3. king of the Medes. Aristeus, who held long warres with the Cadusians, by whom he was at length slaine: but before he died, he cōmanded by Aristeus 4. king. will that the Medes should neuer be in league with the Cadu∣sians, but with sworde and fire to persecute them, vntill they were brought subiect vnto the Medes. After the death of this Aristeus, reigned in Media Arti∣nes, 22. yeeres: after him Artelanus gouerned the Medes, four∣tie yeeres, in whose time the Parthians were subdued and The Parthians were vanqui∣shed by the Medes. brought vnder the Empire of the Medes, after they had yelded them selues and the Countrey vnto the king of Saca, which king, both he and his Countrey after two yeeres great warres had betweene them and the Medes, were vanquished both they and the Parthians, when the Medes had brought the king of Parthia and the king of Saca vnder the yoke of Media, at what time Artabanus reigned king ouer the Medes, af∣ter whom succeeded Astiages, which with some writers is na∣med Astiages the last king of Media. Apanda. This was the last king of Media, which was con∣quered
both he & his countrey by Cyrus king of Persia, whose historie is at large set foorth in the Empire of Persia: Diodorus with others which write of these kings, as Herodot and Ctesias. Great cōtrouersie there is betweene writers about the kings of Media, of their succession, of their reigne, and of their go∣uernments: though Strabo and Pomponius Mela doe fully de∣scribe the situation of Media, yet the best Chronographers varie much of their gouernment. Iustinus affirmeth, that the Iustinus lib. 1. Medes reigned 350. yeres: others say 304. making their com∣putations from Sardanapalus time, whom the Medes conque∣red, vntil the time of Cyrus, by whom the Medes were vanqui∣shed: Diodor. lib. 2. cap. 7. so long the Empire stood. Againe they vary much in the names of their kings: for as I named from Arbases the first king, vntill Astiages the last king Arbases the first gouernor of Media. Controuersie of the gouern∣ment of the Medes. Sosaramus 2. king of Media. and the ninth king of the Medes, so some againe after this sort doe set downe the lynes of the kings of Media. After Arbases reigned Sosarmus the second king of Media: he reigned thir∣tie yeeres, at what time reigned in Egypt a king of singular wisedome, very courteous and gentle, much commended of Herodot for many rare vertues, named of Functius, Osorus, and of Eusebius Nicerinus. About this time was Achas king of Iuda borne, and Coenus the second king of Macedonia beganne with Sosarmus the se∣cond king of Media to reigne. Marke the order of time: for both the Macedonians and the Medes at one time began their kingdomes, & euen then the Lacedemonians ended their king∣domes: for so God worketh by order of nature and time. The Peloponesians & the Athenians were so plagued one of another Orosius lib. 1. cap. 24. by continuall ciuill warres, the slaughter so great on both sides, & the warres so long, as men cōquered on neither par∣ties yeelded at last vnto necessitie, and were forced to for∣sake the fields, & to withdraw themseles from destroying of both their coūtries: for the warres that was betweene the A∣thenians Great warres betweene the Pelopon, and the Athenians. & the Lacedemonians frō time to time was the ouer∣throw of all Greece: the cause arysing frō so little a quarell, as hereafter shalbe mentioned in the historie of Greece.
While these warres endured in Greece, Romulus and Rhe∣mus were borne, and the third king of Media beganne to go∣uerne Romulus borne the Medes: his name was Medidus, in the first Olympiad, at which time the king of Tyre which was named Elulaeus (as King of Tyre, Menander testifieth a writer of their owne Chronicles) was besieged by Salmanassar king of Assyria, who after he hee had spoiled Phoenicia, & Samaria, he turned his force against Tyre. After great slaughter he tooke Sidon, Arce, and Paletire, with many other Cities from the king of Tyre, and brought the spoyle thereof vnto Niniue: And yet sayth Menander, for all Menander de bello Salmanas∣ser. his victorie, he was the second time discomfited, his Nauies so scattered, that fiue hundred of his best souldiers were ta∣ken by the Cananites, and by the king of Tyre: whereat Salma∣nassar waxed full of wrath, and commaunded his souldiers to stoppe all conduites, and all passages of waters, that for fiue yeeres they were forced to digge out water, and to make welles and springes to susteine themselues withall: and this historie is written in the Chronicles of Tyre. About this time liued that good and learned Poete Ar∣chimus, that wrote of the warres of Troy. Coelius king of the Thuscans ayded Romulus the first king of Rome with men and money against the people called Cennienses, and the Antena∣tes: Dyonisius Hal. lib. 1. of this kings name mount Coelius, one of the seuen hilles of Rome was called. Plutarch sayth, that Numa Pompilius, the second king of Rome was borne about this time: and in the twentie eight yeere of the third king of the Medes, was that wicked king Sancherib, with his horrible blasphemies, with a Sancherib ouer throwen. hundred foure score & fiue thousand of his souldiers slaine by the Angel of the Lord. After this Medidus the third king of Media had reigned fourtie yeeres, succeeded him Cardiceas the fourth king, who Cardiceas 4. reigned thirteene yeeres. During this kings gouernment, King of Media. the Empire of Assyria was brought by Merodach the sonne of Baladan vnto Babylon, where Merodach reigned fourtie yeeres Merodach 4. king. the first king of Babylon. Nowe in Iudea gouerned a wicked king, a great idolater, a murtherer of the Prophetes, and a
most contemptuous despiser of God. This Manasses filled all Manasses a ty∣rant. Ierusalem with blood, hee martyred Esai the Prophet, com∣maunding him to bee cutte in two pieces with a sawe: for the which tyrannie God gaue him ouer to the handes of the Babylonians. In Ethiop reigned about this time a king named Tara∣chus, of whome Iosephus maketh mention, that hee came Lib. 10. ap. 1. to ayde Spethon king of Egypt, against Senaherib, in the six∣teenth Olympiad. About this time Nicomedia was builded: Dionis. lib. 2. Gela a Towne of Sicilia, and Phaselis a Towne in Pamphilia were likewise builded. All this while the Medes had no king crowned nor allowed, but as a supreme Gouernour of all Media, but were (as you heard) from Arbaces time vn∣till Sosarmus. this time, gouerned by a Magistrate or chiefe Gouern∣ment, euen vntill Deiocis, which was the chiefe gouernour Deiocis the 1. king of the Medes. and the first king: for Arbaces, Sosarmus, Medidus, Cardiceas, these foure were but gouernours, though for order sake they were named kings. CHAP. II. Of the first King of Media: of their gouernment, lawes, and con∣tinuance from Deiocis, vntill Astyages the last King of the Medes. BVt Deiocis nowe after hee had gouer∣ned wisely and discreetely the Medes, hee through his owne pollicie and his friends councell became the first King by consent and by election. When he was sure of the kingdome, and had setled himselfe as a King, hee straight commaunded Townes and Cities to be builded, and erected many strong Fortes, made good lawes, and gouerned the Medes with equitie and iustice for the space of fiftie three yeres, as both Herodot and Diodorus Siculus affirme. Diodorus Siculus lib. 3. This Deiocis likewise appointed a certeine garde for his person, for change of state is dangerous: for nowe Deiocis
from a Magistrate was made a king, and therefore with grea∣ter care and feare he foresawe things belonging to his per∣son: hee had his garison and his garde to attend his person, and prouided that the Medes, who both loued him and ho∣noured him so much, shoulde bee in all seruice at his becke: he commaunded then to builde one great Towne, a chiefe Strab. lib. 11. Citie, and to bee the onely seate of the king, as in all king∣domes the Palace of the king is the chiefest. Nowe the Medes hauing this commaundement, beganne with one consent to builde one great Towne aboue the rest fortified with walles, and strengthened with garisons. This Russ de Medor. origine. citie was great and large, and was called Ecbatana, where this king Deiocis liued, vsing such iustice and seueritie, as hereby no man might haue accesse vnto him but by meanes: hee grew so seuere, that no man might haue sight of him, no man might laugh, cough, or spit before him. This was the onely Deioces praised king that brideled the Medes, and asmuch commended for his seuere punishment of iniuries, as for his sounde iudge∣ment of iustice and equitie praysed. There were many nations subiect vnto the Medes, as Buse, Paretaceni, Arezantij, Budi, and others. In his time reigned in Macedonia, Perdiccas: in Iudea Ezechias and his sonne Manasses: in Rome reigned Romulus in the later ende of his reigne, and in Lydia Candaules the fourth king of Lydia. This time reigned in Egypt 12. gouernours of equal autho∣ritie: Diodo. lib. 1. these ruled Egypt as supreame magistrates 15. yeres, vn∣till Psammeticus: one of these 12. Iudges had gotten the king∣dome vnto his owne hands, who reigned 54. yeeres king in Egypt. You shall reade in Herodot, and in Diodorus Siculus, the Herodot. lib. 2. whole historie, euen from this king Psammeticus, vntill the time of Cambyses. As Kingdomes and Countries florished and became mightie & strong in armes, so they inuented militarie disci∣pline to defende themselues & their Countries: euery King∣dome had their proper and seuerall order of fighting, with varietie and change of their marching into battell, with sun∣dry
and diuers kindes of Trumpets and ensignes. The Egyp∣tians had Crocodiles and cattes in their ensignes: for those The Egyptians. which they honoured as goddes in the Citie, they vsed them in their warres in their ensignes, and a Trumpet made of a horne. The Indians had in their ensignes the picture of Her∣cules The Indians. caried before them into battell, with many little Belles and Timbrels for their Trumpets. The Persians preferred in their ensignes the image of the sunne, and burning lampes, which should be caried in the middest of the armie. The old The Persian. Athenians caused an owle to be set in their ensignes: and the Thebans the image of Sphinx with shaulmes & flates for trum∣pets. The Macedonians had a wolfe caried in their ensignes. The Macedo∣nians. The ancient Romanes before they grew to their greatnes, vsed a handfull of hay tied to the ende of their speares, which should be caried before them as ensignes, and thereby called manipulares miliets: they had not yet vsed in their ensignes the picture of a horse, which they vsed after the hay, or of a The Romanes. bore or of Minotaurus, or of the eagle which nowe they vse for their ensignes. The Cimbrians had in their ensignes a brasen bull. The olde auncient Germanes vsed to paint in The olde Ger∣manes. their ensignes the likenesse of shining light. The Parthians tied little brasen belles to their speares, and infinite number of hornes, hauing before them caried in their ensigne a flagge of red leather painted ouer ful of keies. And so I might speake of more that vsed their coūtrie orders and maners in warres: but mightie Emperours and Kings had in their seuerall en∣signes what pleased them, as Hanibal had a red flagge with The seuerall ensignes of kinges and great cap∣taines. a naked sword for his ensigne. Old Osiris had the dogge Anu∣bis in his ensigne. Great Porus king of India had the image of Hercules caried before him in his ensigne. Cyrus king of Persia, a cocke. Iulius Caesar an Elephant. Eumenes king of Asia had in his ensigne the image of Ce∣res, and the statue of Alex∣ander the great. Neoptolemus the image of Minerua. Ca. Marius in the Cymbrian warres vsed to cary in his en∣signe a siluer eagle, and so vpon their tents they vsed the like.
And so of their secret watchword which the Emperours, and great kings vsed in their warres, I thought good to set downe some briefe examples of mightie great conquerours and captaines, which they vsed in the fielde in the time of warre to their officers and souldiers. Cyrus king of Persia would vse this for his watch∣word: Iupiter belli Dux. Antiochus, sirnamed Soter, vsed this watchworde: Bene valere. Augustus Caesar Emperour of Rome vsed this word: Faelicitas, sometime, Vi∣ctoria. M. Antonius in his warres vsed this worde: Lar Deus. Pompey the great vsed, In∣victus Hercules. Caius Caligula the Empe∣rour vsed, Priapus and Venus for his watche∣word. Watchwords at seraln  or eat . Demetrius king of Macedo∣nia, had for his watch∣worde, Iupiter & Victo∣ria. The Emperour Septimus Seuerus vsed this word, Laboremus. As Pertinx the emperour vsed Mi∣litemus for their watch∣words in their campe. Claudius Caesar neuer mis∣sed this watchworde, Virum vlcisci decet. The watchworde of Silla was but Apollo. The sixt king of the Medes was named Phaortes, a man of great promesse and of great fortune, who much encreased the state of Media with winning of many countreys, and ad∣ding of many nations to the kingdome of Media: he moued warres first against the Persians, and brought them at length vnder his hand, and vanquished them, who became subiects vnder Phaortes to the Empire of Media. After that, he passed further vnto Asia, destroying and vanquishing many stoute nations, in so much that he brought all Asia vnder the Medes. Againe he went with great force against the Assyrians, layde siege to Niniue, where he was slaine and all his armie vanqui∣shed: Phaortes slaine at Niniue. he raigned in Media 22. yeeres, about the 33. Olympiad, 105. yeeres after the building of Rome.
At this time raigned in Iudea, the good king Iosias, who de∣stroied idolatrie, & restored religion, cōmanding the groues, the altars, and other superstitious places, to be had in pieces: he caused all the wickednes which raigned among the Iewes in his fathers dayes king Amon, to be quite taken away. Now in Lydia gouerned Ardeis the 6. king of the Lydians. In Rome go∣uerned Tullus Hostilius the 3. king of the Romanes, & in Agrigen∣tū at this time the great tyrant Phalaris exercised his tyrannie. Phaortes. After Phaortes had brought all Asia vnder the Empire, and had vanquished the Persians, and now the monarchie was in Strabo lib. 11. Media, the Medes grew so strong that they subdued all coun∣treis, and became the only kingdom of force & power, whose fame and renowne was spread ouer the whole world. After him succeeded Ciaxares the 7. king of the Medes: this passed Ciaxares the sonne of Pha∣ortes, and the 7. king of Media. all the kings of Media before him, and obscured the fame of his predecessors: this king is named in Daniel Darius Medus, as Melancthon doeth note. This was he that subdued Asia, and deuided Asia into nations, countreys, prouinces, and kingdoms, and the first among the Medes that deuised speare∣men, bowmen, and horsemen, and taught the Medes many warlicke feates: he vanquished all the regions about Media, and gathered all the force hee could against the Lydians, and after brought all his armies ouer the riuer Halis, and went to reuenge his fathers death Phaortes vpon the Assyrians, besie∣ged Niniue, and (as Eusebius testifieth) he tooke the citie of Niniue, and conquered the most part of Assyria, except Baby∣lon and fewe prouinces about Babylon. It is written in Ruffi∣nus, that while Ciaxares layed siege to Niniue, Madies king of Scythia came with great power against this Ciaxares, with Ruffinus de Me∣dorum origine. whom he encountred and put him to the worst, scattered his armie, and wan the field, and remoued their siege frō Niniue, in so much that the Scythians ruled & gouerned al Asia for 28. yeres, but afterward slaine and ouerthrowen by the Medes. About this time Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon layed siege to Ierusalem, tooke Zedekias the king, burned the citie, and de∣stroyed The besieging of Ierusalem by Nabuchodono∣sor. the temple, and the most part of the best Iewes were
caried captiue into Babylon, where Ezechiel began to prophe∣cie both against Egypt and Babylon, where likewise he prophe∣cied the rebuilding of Ierusalem, and the restoring of the Iewes after 70. yeres captiuitie. There folowed in Media Astiages Astiages the 8. and last king of Media. the 8. and last king of the Medes, who raigned ouer the Medes 35. yeeres, hauing onely one daughter named Mandanes: of this her father thought so wel, that he iudged no man among the Medes worthy of his daughter, but gaue her in mariage to Cambyses king of Persia, which then payed tribute vnto the Medes, and were broght vnder their monarchie by cōquest. Now Astiages the king being in his town Ecbatana, dreamed of his daughter Mādanes in this sort: he thought in his dreame that his daughter made so much water at one time as filled al the streets of the city Ecbatana, & that it did ouerflow all Asia: who when he awaked, mused much at this dreame, & fearing Astiages dreame of his daughter. the successe thereof, tooke order with one Harpagus a friend of his, that when his daughter Mādanes should be brought to bed, the child should presently be killed. This cōmandement of the king troubled Harpagus, insomuch that he himself dete∣sted Harpagus. so foule an act, caused one named Mitridates a heardman of Astiages to come to his house, to whō he imparted the kings Mitridates. cōmandement, charging him to take the child, and to bring him to some place where the childe might die, to auoyde the displeasure of the king. This poore man obeying Harpagus, tooke the child, delighted much in his fauour, thinking in his heart that he was of some great parentage, tooke it with him, and hauing that time by his wife a childe borne dead, hee tooke it, and made as though it were Cambyses sonne, & buried Cyrus brought vp with a poore heard∣man as his owne childe. him in a desart place, and cōmanded his wife to bring vp Cy∣rus as her owne childe. Now when Harpagus was throughly certified that Cyrus was killed & buried by this his trusty friēd, who saw the place where the dead childe was buried, suppo∣sing it to be Cyrus, Harpagus therof was very glad, told the king that in al things his cōmandement was executed. The king was merie, & al things very quiet, and he doubted nothing. While this Astiages was lustie and frolike, Cyrus grew in the
meane while to some stature, being about tenne yeeres of age, hauing some cause to be brought before Astyages, he had some impression in his head, and conceiued by imagination, considering the time that Cyrus should haue bene killed, and astyages hath knowledge that Cyrus was not slaine by Harpagus. the age of Cyrus then present: hee beganne to examine the matter with Harpagus, and Harpagus with Midridates, vntill the trueth was found. Astiages being much disquieted with this Harpagus, was troubled in minde, fearing some mis∣chance should happen vnto him by the meanes of this Cyrus, of whom he dreamed (as you heard) commaunded him Cyrus is bani∣shed from Me∣dia vnto Persia. out of his sight, and to goe vnto Persia to his father Cambyses, and to his mother Mandanes, and there, vpon his allegeance to stay. Cyrus is father to Cambyses, and not his soane, in all writers but in Herodotus. Cyrus began to feele his stomacke being very young, to be very great: yet for that time he obeyed the king, and went to Persia, where he consulted with Harpagus about the recoue∣rie of the kingdome of Media. For when Cyrus had heard how that Astiages had commaunded Harpagus to kill him, and to Cyrus maketh this force in a readinesse. haue him out of the way, hee thought now being in yeeres, fully to reuenge the said wrong: he gathered his power toge∣ther, and had his souldiers in armes, and was ready with his force to march against Astiages. The bruite and great report of Cyrus preparation came to Messengers sent vnto Cy∣rus. the eares of king Astiages, who not being therewith a little frighted, sent messengers vnto Cyrus, commanding him vpon his allegeance to repaire to king Astiages. To whom answere was made by Cyrus, that Astiages should see Cyrus before hee Cyrus answere. wished to see him, and that Cyrus would come before Astiages would haue him to come. This answere of Cyrus being giuen to the king, he straight commanded all Media to be in armes, and with great hast & with no lesse feare made his souldiers readie. Nowe Harpagus hauing determined to flee from his charge, being generall of the Medes, vnto Cyrus: When both the armies came to ioyne in battell, Harpagus perfourmed promise with Cyrus, forsooke the Medes, and came to the The first bat∣tell of Astyages with Cyrus. Persians. This first battell by reason of Harpagus and diuers
noble men more of Media which reuolted, was ouerthrowen by Cyrus. Astiages againe gathered his force, renewed his armie, and came in field himselfe being general in person against Cyrus, The second ouerthrow of Astiages, and the last. where hee was with all his souldiers ouerthrowen, and his kingdome taken from him, and the Empire of Media which before gouerned Persia, is nowe againe brought by Cyrus vn∣to Persia. This was the vncertaine state of the worlde then, some∣time conquerours, and sometime straight conquered, as be∣fore you haue read of Assyria and Chaldea sometimes the As∣syrians mastered the Chaldeans, and againe the Chaldeans ouer∣came the Assyrians, and so of the Medes and of the Persians: The last ende of the Medes. for now the Persians are become lords of Media, Lydia, Chal∣dea, Assyria, all Asia, and the most part of the East, which the Medes hitherto for the space of an hundreth and thirtie yeres gouerned Asia about the riuer Halis. Thus Media after it had The riuer Ha∣lis. in all continued three hundreth and fiftie yeeres, from Sarda∣napalus vntill Cyrus time, by Cyrus was ouerthrowen, in the The 56. Olym∣piad. thirtie and fifte yeere of the raigne of Astiages, two hun∣dreth yeeres after the building of Rome, at what time Tarqui∣nius Priscus was the first king of Rome. This time ruled in Lydia, Cressus, which within foureteene yeere after was likewise vanquished by Cyrus, and his king∣dome translated vnto Persia. It is in Zonaras and in Iosephus Zonar. lib. 1. cap. 19. otherwise written about Cyrus and Astiages: they affirme that Cyaxeres was the sonne of Astiages: this was of Daniel called Darius Medus, & of Iosephus, Zonaras, Zenophon, and others. This Iosephus lib. 10. cap. 13. was vncle vnto Cyrus, and heire vnto Astiages: hee together with Cyrus gouerned for a time, afterwarde hauing but one daughter, he bequethed his daughter and the kingdome vn∣to Cyrus his nephew his sisters sonne, who was married vn∣to Cambyses. While this Cyaxeres liued, he honoured much Daniel, and had him in great reuerence. Herodotus writeth in the histo∣rie Herod. lib. 3. of Cyrus, and sayeth, that Cyrus married Cassandanes the
daughter of Pharnaspis: so doeth Zenophon, and so doeth Zo∣naras zenophon lib. 8. Padago. write. The Egyptians affirme, that Cyrus married a wife in Egypt, and by her got Cambyses but howe foeuer Chronographers agree, it is certaine that hee beganne a monarchie vpon the conquering of Lydia and Media, as shall bee more at large written in the historie of Persia. The Medes fed on fruites, Ex amigdalis tostis panes, ex ma∣lis Howe the Medes fed. Strabo lib. 11. siccis ac tritis massas conficiunt, They make their drinke of certaine rootes, and they vse wilde beastes, and wilde fowles for their foode: for they nourish no tame beast. And this is the propertie of the Medes and of their king, to haue as many wiue's as they woulde, they might not haue vnder Of their hus∣bands. seuen. And so their women thought it a great praise and fame to haue many husbands, but they might not liue without fiue hus∣bands, as Strabo doeth write in his eleuenth Booke.
OF THE ANTIQVITIE OF Lydia: of the originall of their Kings, and of their common wealth, and gouernment. THE kingdome of Lydia, being before called (as Herodotus wri∣teth Herodot. lib. 1. cap. 7.) Maeonia, beganne to take name of one Lydus the sonne of Artis: but that seemeth to be fa∣bulous, as Herodotus is in many of his histories. Lydia is named of Lud the fourth sonne of Sem, as Iosephus, Zonaras, and Philo Iu∣daeus Iosephus. lib. 1. 14. antiq. Zonaras lib. 7. affirme. This countrey is situate in this sort: it hath East∣ward Phrigia: on the Southside Caria, and on the Northside Misia, as both Strabo and Plinie affirme. The riuer Meander runneth through Lydia, and compasseth the most part of Ly∣dia. Strabo lib. 13. Plini lib. 5. na. histor. Eusebius in his histories faith, that the kingdome of Lydia beganne in the first Olympiad, and in the beginning of the 14. Dionysius lib 2. Plt, in Romule. Iubilee, about which time Romulus the first king and builder of Rome was borne: of whose birth as Dionysius and Plutarch write, many strange things are read. Lydia was before Rome 24. yeres, and after the destruction of Troy 405 yeeres. When I speake of the Romanes and of their kingdome, you shall haue it fully▪ set downe. The kings of
Lydia, the kings of Rome, and the kings of Media, are almost of The Lydians, the Romanes, and the Medes beganne to raigne toge∣ther. one time: for assoone as the Medes began to set vp their king∣dome, the Assyrians which gouerned so long all the East part of the worlde decayed. Likewise the Lacedemonians ended their gouernment, and their kings failed in Alcanes time the ninth king of the Lacedemonians: at which time the Macede∣monians The Lacedemo∣nians ended their kingdom now. elected their first king called Cranaus: so some coun∣treys, nations, and kingdomes beginne, others ende: some rise, and some fall, as time giueth them licence by Gods ap∣pointment. But nowe of the kings of Lydia: where I finde in Eusebius Arsidius the first king of Lydia. their first king to be named Arsidius: this Functius doeth call Ardisus, at what time iudged the Athenians Aesculus the twelft Iudge of Athens, after the kings who had gouerned from Ce∣crops their first king, which began in Moses time, vntill Codrus the last king of Athens, which ended his kingdome in the time of Dauid, where raigned that while 17. kings. When Arsidius raigned in Lydia, Ioathan was king in Iudea, and in Samaria Pe∣cah the 17. king of Israel. These people of Lydia were first very warlike, stoute, and a couragious nation, but Cyrus brake their backs, and compel∣led Lydians be∣came idle and slouthfull. them to be caupones & institores (as Iustine saith) & to leaue off armes (for that oftentimes they rebelled against Cyrus) and to vse such trafiques as were of the meanest credit: here∣by, these stoute and strong nations before, came now by Cy∣rus pollicie to be very idle and slouthfull, whereby they in∣uented many vnthriftie games, diuers playes at dice, tenise, and such like, and hauing nothing to doe, neither durst they doe any thing for feare of Cyrus: they fell (as Plinie saith) to exercise Artes ludicras & lenocinia, and so became from a strong and stoute people, the most slouthfull and idle people of the world. Budaeus thinketh, that this region Lydia is now called Ana∣tolia: Budaeus de asse. lib. 3. after Arsidius had raigned in Lydia 36. yeeres, succeeded him Aliagtes the second king of the Lydians, at the which time Aliagtes the se∣cond king of lydia. grew great warres of twentie yeeres continuance betweene
the Lacedemonians and the Messanians: the cause thereof you Warres be∣twene the La∣cedemonians and the Messa∣nians. shall reade in Orosius. Catina a citie in Sicilia at this time was builded, and Messana one of the chiefest cities of the Messani∣ans was taken then by the Lacedemonians. Now raigned in Rome Romulus the first king, in Phrygia Mydas, in Egypt Sacalion, Orosius lib. 1. cap. 21. Herodot. lib. 8. in fine. and in Macedonia Perdicas the fourth king of that countrey, of whom Herodotus doth set forth how he from a meane state became king of the Macedonians. Titus Liuius writeth, and so doeth Dionysius, that Romulus a∣bout Liuius lib. 1. Dionysius 2. this time did triumph ouer the Sabines, whose warres continued two yeeres, with whom after hee had furnished Rome with the spoyles of the Sabines, and had taken their The first tri∣umph of Ro∣mulus. daughters and virgins by force to the nomber of 683. he suf∣fred Tacius Sabinus at that time king of the Sabines, to gouerne with him in Rome fiue yeeres, at which time the citie of Rome Dionysius lib. 1. was much increased, and more amplified by adding there∣unto Mount Coelius, and Mount Quirinal. Now ruled in Iudea Ezechias about the 12. Olympiad and the 15. Iubilee. There fell about this time in Athens a thirde alteration of The thirde al∣teration in the gouernment of Athens. their gouernment after this sort: After their 17. kings go∣uernment, then gouerned in Athens Iudges, to the nomber of 13. After the Iudges there was another state agreed vpō, that euery 10. yeeres there should be a new magistrate in Athens, and they were called Decennales principes: and this gouern∣ment Decennales principes. endured 70. yeres, which was the whole time of 7. prin∣ces, and then againe changed vnto a popular state. But let vs returne to the kings of Lydia, the historie that I haue in hande. After that this Aliagtes had raigned 14. yeeres he died, and Meles the third king of Lydia. Meles succeeded him the thirde king of the Lydians: of whom Herodotus doeth make mention, that he was the first that tri∣umphed ouer the people called Sardei. This Meles had a ba∣stard borne vnto him, a stoute man, a great souldiour, and so great, that he with his posteritie ruled the Sardeans vntil Cyrus time. In this Meles time were the Camerines subdued, hauing once or twise before reuolted against the Romanes, ouer
whom Romulus the second time triumphed, their cities ta∣ken, The second triumph of Romulus. and their countrey made a prouince to the Romanes. By this time the people of Vienna mooued warres against Romulus: but being ouerthrowen, Romulus made his third and last triumph of these three triumphes: reade Dionysius. Romu∣lus The third tri umph of Ro∣mulus. Dionysius lib. 2. died, to whom many townes, cities and prouinces, yeel∣ded themselues vnto Romulus, for the fame and report they heard of him: for he was both religious and vertuous. Hippo∣menes the fourth prince or magistrate then gouerned Athens. After that Meles had gouerned the Lydians 12. yeeres, there folowed the fourth king named Cādaules, a foolish and a vaine king, of whom this historie is of Herodotus written. This Can∣daules, Candaules the fourth king of Lydia. whō the Greciās called Mirsilus, had a passing faire wo∣man to his wife, of whom he ioyed much, esteeming her to be the onely woman of the world for beautie: and hauing a deare friend, and one of his owne seruants named Giges from whom he could conceale nothing, he perswaded this Giges to be an eye witnes of his wife, whose perfection in al points he could not with tongue expresse vnto Giges: but willed him to be in some secret place, where and when he had appointed To bragge of beautie is dangerous. him to behold the rarenesse of her beautie. Giges after three or foure denials, being vrged thereunto by the king his master, cōsented to the kings request, & secretly came to the place where the king had appointed him, where he saw the queene naked as shewent to bed, to whom Candau∣les when he knew that Giges suffficiently had viewed his wife, he saide, Esto fidelis Giges: at the which wordes the Queene The foolish∣nes of Can∣daules. looked backe being amazed of his speach, and saw the backe of Giges by chaunce as he went away, & requesting the king to tell who hee was, after much entreatie he saide it was his seruant Giges. The Queene dissembling the matter that night, said no∣thing, but in the morning shee did send for certaine of her chiefe friendes, and told the cause, and willed them to be in a place appointed ready against Giges came, whom she sent Two offers vnto Giges. for, to whom she said these words: Giges thou hast to chuse of
two offers, either to kill the king my husband and to marrie me and become king thy selfe in Lydia, or els to be killed and lose thy life presently: for in that place where he shewed me naked, thou shalt destroy him, there shalt thou haue a dag∣ger ready: which being perfourmed by Giges, he married the Queene, and became the fift king of the Lydians, according to the oracle of Delphos, who had afore told that Cādaules should be the last king of the stocke of Heraclides, and Giges the sonne of Dascilus of the house of Memnades, the fift king of Lydia, Giges the fift king of Lydia. which gouerned not long without due reuenge, which fell in the time of Cyrus. Thus the ancient stocke and the long succession of Heraclides, euen from Hercules vntill Candaules Heraclides stocke ended in Candaules the 4. king, and cōtinued 502. yeeres. heodot. lib. 1. Iustinus lib. 3. the sonne of Mirsus was of fiue hundreth and two yeres con∣tinuance: during which time raigned 22. kings one after an∣other of the line of Hercules: reade Herodotus. Taurentum was builded by Philautus in the time of this Candaules by the Par∣thians: reade Iustinus the thirde booke. After that Giges had by wicked meanes obteined the king∣dome of Lydia, and had sent to Delphos great presents, and rich rewards to Apollo for the oracles giuen: he went in armes a∣gainst Miletum and Smyrna two cities in Greece, besieged Colo∣phonem, and subdued it. No other action of any importance hath bene written of him: he died when he had raigned 36. yeeres. In Giges time, Bizantium otherwise called Constanti∣nople Constantinople builded. was builded. About this time the tyrant Phalaris gouer∣ned the Agrigentines. Tullus Hostilius raigned thirde king of Rome, in the last yeeres of Giges. In Iuda raigned Amon. And amongst the Egyptians Psammeticus: this Psammeticus when he had obtained Egypt into his owne handes, being before but Herodot. lib. 2. one of the twelue that gouerned Egypt, he ioyned with the people of Caria and Ionia, and thereby he much augmented the state of Egypt. From this king vnto Cambyses time, the hi∣storie is set foorth very plaine in Herodotus. The Grecians about this time first frequented the oracle of Dodoneum ora∣culum at this time. Iupiter called Dodonaeū oraculum. Archilocus the historian, Ari∣stoxenes the musition, & Simonides florished in these dayes. In
the seuenth yeere of Giges, the state of Decennales principes en∣ded, The state of Athens againe. and the common wealth of Athens was gouerned after∣terward by a popular state called Democratia. Now Ardis the Ardis the sixt king of Lydia. sixt king of Lydia and sonne to Giges succeeded in the king∣dome, of whom there is litle or nothing mentioned. In the beginning of this kings raigne, in the 29. Olympiad, and in the 16. Iubilee, Zaleucus king of the Locresians decreed a Zaleucus lawe for adulterie. lawe to his subiects concerning adulterie, that whosoeuer should be found faultie in this offence, should lose both his eyes. His sonne violating this law, was of his owne father the king iudged to loose both his eyes: his nobles and his great men entreated for the yong mans fault, but the king not neg∣lecting to do iustice according to the law by him made, and according to his sentence giuen vpon his sonne by the lawe, he caused his sonne to be brought before him, where in pre∣sence A iust king. of his subiects the king shewed both mercie and iu∣stice: for hee commaunded first that one of his owne eyes should be put out, and the other eye to be taken from his A rare exam∣ple of iustice. sonne. A rare example of Iustice and mercie, and the like not to be found in our dayes. At this time in Rome triumphed Tullus Hostilius ouer the Fi∣denans Tullus Hostilius triumphed o∣uer the Fide∣nans and the vients. & the Vients, and entred Rome triumphantly the ninth yere of his raigne. Now raigned in Iudea Iosias a godly king, who purged Ierusalem and all Iewrie from abominations and idolatrie, and brought them to knowe the Lorde againe: in whose time the Prophet Ieremie began to prophecie the de∣struction of Ierusalem and other kingdomes. In Corinth raig∣ned at this time Cipselus, and amongst the Medes gouerned Phaortes their sixt king, whom the Assyrians ouerthrew, as He∣rodotus doeth affirme. In the realme of Pontus there was this Herodotus lib. 1. time builded a towne called Hystris, and in Asia two other Terpander a fa∣mous musi∣tion. Thales a great Philosopher liued long. townes called Chautus and Stagera. Terpander an excellent mufition at this time liued, and Thales Milesius a great Phi∣losopher, whom Eusebius affirmeth to haue liued from the 30. Olympiad, vntill the 58. Olympiad. About this time the Sabines after much slaughter were againe
vanquished by Tullus Hostilius: then the Latins made warre a∣gainst the Romanes, which continued fiue yeres: about which Dionysus Hali∣ca. lib. 3. time Tullus Hostilius the thirde king of the Romanes, with all his familie was burned in his owne house. Solinus saith, that Solinus cap. 2. he died in the 35, Olympiad. Numa Pompilius a Sabine borne in the city of Cures the second king of Rome, was consecrated by the soothsayers called Augures: in his time bishops, called Pontifices, were created in Rome, holy fire, vestall virgines, and religious men, and priestes of diuers orders, as Salij, Faeciales, and Flamines, which he instituted to serue his gods, for hee was vertuous and good: for when Rome was builded by Ro∣mulus, Numa was borne. The Cimmerians were now at this time ouerthrowen by the The Cimmeri∣ans subdued by the Scythians. Scythians, the Scythians entred vnto Asia and tooke Sardis the chiefest citie of the Medes, and came conquering countreys and regions as farre as Palestina. About this time Necho king of Egypt, who a little before ouerthrewe the good and godly king Iosias, is now by Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians, vanquished by the riuer of Euphrates. CHAP. II. Of the rest of the kings of Lydia, from Ardis the sixt king, vntill Craesus the last king of Lydia, and of their destruction by Cy∣rus, and the kingdome brought subiect to Persia. NOw succeeded Ardis his sonne named Sadaites the 7. king of Lydia. Sadaites, the 7. king of the Lydians, who (as Herodot. saith) raigned 12. yeres: but Functius saith, 15. yeres. Of this king no∣thing is mentioned with Historiogra∣phers, Herodotus lib. 1. but that in his time Ancus Martius Ancus Martius the 4. king of Rome. the fourth king of Rome brought a huge armie against the Veientines, which be∣ing by Martius ouerthrowen, had his triumph graunted vnto him by the Senators. This Martius made vpon Tiber a hauen called Hostia, foure or fiue leagues from Rome, and a passage frō thence to the sea. The Sabines were ouerthrowen by this king, as before oftentimes by his predecessors.
This time was Dirachium builded, and Perosina. Aulus Gelius Dirachium builded. an ancient writer, reporteth an historie of one Arion a Lesbian borne, a man of great skil in musicke, a deare friend of Perian∣der The history of Arion the mu∣sition. king of Corinth, trauailing Sicilia and Italy: he grew in great fauour with all men in all countreys, and hauing in time hea∣ped great wealth by his arte, longed againe to be with Peri∣ander Aulus Gellus lib. 16. cap. 19. in Corinth. Now being shipped and well forward to∣ward Greece, the mariners vnderstanding that he had much money, spoyled and robbed him of his money, and after be∣ing ready to kill him, he befought them with teares to spare him so much time, vntil he had attired himselfe in his best ap∣parell, and to licence him to play vpon his lute, and to sing Orthium car∣me  Arion. two or three songs before he died to the Muses: which being graunted, he prepared to play and sing very loude, and in the midst of his song he leapt as farre as he could into the sea, where the great Dolphine, a fish (as histories record) very Herod. lib. 1. much entised with musicke, & greatly delighted with mans voyce, caried him cleane vpon his backe from the water, and Arion caried by a Dolphine in the sea. brought him vnto an hauen of Lacedemonia called Tenarum, from whence he trauailed to Corinth, and opened to Periander the king, the whole course of his fortune. About this time Tarquinius Priscus the fift king of Rome be∣gan his gouernment in the 41. Olympiad, as Dionysius writeth: Cleonidas The∣bs in Olym∣pi ricts. in the which Olympiad, Cleonides a captaine of Thebes got the victorie in the games of Olympia. After Sadaites folowed Ha∣liates the 8: king of Lydia: he raigned 49. yeeres, in whose time though he himselfe did nothing worth the writing, yet the most part of the kings of the worlde were busie: the king of Assyria was in warie with the king of Egypt. This time raigned in Babylon Nabuchodonosor, to whose go∣uernment not only Assyria, but al the East kings were broght vnder his becke. Likewise about this time a great band of the Scythians were driuen to flee to the Medes, where they The Scythians caused warre betweene the Medes and the Lydians. were kindly harboured, much made of, and well intertained, vntil such time as by some cōspiracie they were found rebel∣lious vnto the king of the Medes: then they fled from thence
vnto Lydia to this king Haliates, and being by him there suc∣coured, great warres grew thereof betweene the king of Me∣dia and the king of Lydia, and continued vntil Astiages maried Astiages ma∣ried Haliates daughter. the daughter of Haliates, vpon the which, peace and great af∣finitie began to be betweene the Medes and the Lydians. He∣rodotus who writeth this historie, is thought of Functius and others to erre in the time. In Egypt there raigned Apries, whom Ieremie calleth Hophra, Heredot. lib. 1. whose name he ought to knowe for by this king Ieremie was put to death in Egypt. In the 7. yeere of this king Haliates, this Apries king of Egypt in the middest of his tyrannie, God gaue him into the hands of his enemies: so the Lord said, I wil giue Ieremie cap. 44. Pharao Hophra king of Egypt into the hands of his enemies, as I gaue Zedechias king of Iuda. And in another place the Lord saith, I will giue the land of Egypt vnto Nabuchodonosort king of Baby∣lon, and Egypt shalbe the wages for his armie to spoyle her spoyle, and Ezchiel cap. 19. to take her praye. For to Egypt flead Iuda for succour, where they were put to the sword, and not one escaped. Now againe in Rome beganne Tarquinius Priscus the fift king of the Romanes: he on the other side beganne to lay on about him with the Latins, and with the Sabines, that after he had brought the Latines with long warre to seeke fauour at The Latins vanquished by the Romans. his hande, and being driuen out of the countrey by Tarqui∣nius, were forced to intreate for peace, and to craue the Ro∣manes friendship, who by this time waxed so strong, that all the West part of the world began to heare of the Romanes. Now after that the Latins were vanquished, the Sabines againe, being olde auncient enemies of Rome, a very warlicke The Sabines ouerthrowen. nation, with all force came against Tarquinius: at what time their bridge was burned, their tentes taken, and themselues slaine, and forced to intreat for truce for six yeres. After the Sabines, the Hetruscanes armed them against Tarquinius, whose Hetruscans. warre continued 9. yeres. About this time the seuen sages of Greece florished, whose names I thought good to put downe The 7. Sages. together, for that they liued at one time: Solon of Athens, Tha∣les of Milesia, Pitacus of Mitilena, Periander of Corinth, Bias
of Prienna, Chilo of Sparta, and Cleobulus of Lindia. These singu∣lar wise men were in those dayes esteemed the rarest men of the world. In this time the kingdome of Corinth failed in Pe∣riander Alteration in the gouern∣ment of Co∣rinth. the last king, or rather the last tyrant, and the gouern∣ment was altered to a popular estate. About that time Polymnestor a very yong man, and (as the historie hath termed him) a boy, being a feeding his fathers Polimnestor Millesimus as swift as a hare. goats, a hare by chance rūning by, the boy folowed, & ranne so swiftly, that he ouertooke the hare, and brought her home to his father, declaring the race & the running betweene him and the hare to his father. The matter being spread abroad, the yong man was brought to the games Olympical, where he Solinus cap. 6. wanne the victory in running, and had a garland on his head, Zenophon lib. 8. pediae. Ioseph. lib. 10. cap. 12. as Solinus doth write. Ciaxeres sōne vnto Astiages, some say his father as Zonoras in his first booke, but Zenophon likewise affir∣meth with Iosephus, that this Ciaxeres, was Astiages sōne called by the name of Darius Medus of Daniel, and of Iosephus: but the Some contro∣uersie of Ciaxe∣res. Grecians named him Ciaxares Cyrus vncle: for when Astiages died, he left behind him as his heire Ciaxares, and a daughter named Mādanes which was maried to Cambyses. I wil not mo∣lest An error in Herodotus. the reader with variety of auctorities, sometime disagree∣ing in computation of time, or varying of the place, or of the person: but howsoeuer it is, this Ciaxares became a great and a strong king: for after he had conquered many countreis, he went in armes against the Assyrians, besieged Niniue, & tooke the spoyle thereof by ayde of Cyrus, who afterward shortly Niniue taken by Ciaxares. sub dued it, and became cōquerour of al Assyria, and brought them subiect to the Medes. About this time Solon made lawes to the Athenians, and Mi∣lo Crotoniensis a Romane of a wōderful strength, is reported by Solinus, that he could cary vpon his backe an oxe, & that with Solinus t p. 4. a stroake of his bare hand he killed that oxe. This Ciaxares, at what time Harpagus layed siege to a towne in Phocea called Io∣nia, the extremitie of his warre being such that they were for∣ced to flee forsaking their towne and countrey towarde the West part, where they builded a towne which they named
Massilia, of whom Eusebius in his chronicles maketh mention, Massilia buil∣ded. Iustine lib 43. Budae, de asse. lib. 1. Strabo de moi∣bus Gallorum. and in Iustine you shal reade the whole historie. Diuers write of this Towne, as Melancthon, Strabo, and Budeus, that in Mas∣silia Frenchmen, in whose border this Towne was builded, by frequenting the Towne, and by exercising of the Grecians societie in the Towne, grew in time to vnderstād the Greeke tongue, the traffique, their order, their lawes and gouern∣ment, which in these dayes excelled in vertue and maners, where of a long time the Greekes tongue florished, the aunci∣ent customes and maners of Ionia were kept. Nowe Tarquinius Priscus after he had triumphed ouer the Tarquinius Priscus slaine. Latines or Albans, ouer the Sabins, & ouer the Hetruscans, three seuerall triumphes, hee was conspired and laide in waite for by Ancus Martius children his predecessors in Rome three yeeres before he was slaine, after he had reigned thirtie eight yeeres, and in the fourtie one Olympiad hee died. Then followed by succession after Aliactes Croesus, the ninth and Cressus the 9. king of Lydia. last king of Lydia, being thirtie fiue yeeres of age, and being before hand growen vnto great force & power, and hauing heaped a great abundance of treasure, began to warre vpon these Grecians which dwelt in Asia, vpon the Ionians & Aeoliās, and the people called Doreans: hee receiueth the Lacedemoni∣ans, because they were stoute and a warlike nation, into his societie. Croesus thus following in pompe and pride of fortune, hea∣ring Babylon besie∣ged by Cyrus. that Cyrus king of Persia had laid siege to Babylon, and that Balthasar then king of Babylon had endured two or three ouer∣throwes, and most like to lose his kingdome, vnlesse with some speede hee were ayded: Croesus hasted to Babylon with more haste then good speede. After his best done, Balthasar Babylon taken by Cyrus. Balthasar slaine. was slaine, Babylon taken, and the Monarchie thereof caried vnto Persia by Cyrus. Croesus being ouerthrowen and narowly escaping, fled from whence he came to Lydia againe, where after that Cyrus had layd all things in order, and had dispo∣sed the victorie to his minde, hee returned after Croesus vnto Cressus fled. Lydia, layde siege vnto Sardis the chiefe Citie and palace of
the king, where Croesus after his flight hearing of Cyrus com∣ming, Heredot. lib. 1. Sardis taken, and Cr. the se∣cond time conucted. and hauing felt his force before at Babylon, he was not a little troubled, but abiding the brunt thereof, vntill Cyrus tooke the towne, vanquished his power, and brought the kingdome of Lydia subiect vnto the Persians: thus was Croesus twise ouercome by Cyrus. When Cyrus had brought these great kingdoms vnder the scepter of Persia, he tooke an order with Croesus, that he being depriued of his crowne, and spoyled of his substance, should yet haue a towne in his possession, where hee might liue not Errors in the Olympiads. (as before) a riche king, but as a poore man. In Croesus time reigned in Rome Seruius Tullus, the sixt king of Rome, in the 51. Olympiad, and foure yeeres before the 18. Iubilee. This king did adorne Rome and the common wealth thereof much, and (as Dyonisius Halicar reporteth of him) he brought within 20. Dyonis. lib. 4. yeres space the Hetruscans to his becke, he tamed al the coun∣tries about Rome, and excelled in gouernment. By this time Cyrus had subdued the Medes, after Astyages Media at this time was made subiect to Persia by Cyrus. was conuicted, and the Medes made subiect to the Persians: Ciaxerxes, whose sonne (as you heard before) was called of some Darius Medus, who reigned ioyntly with Cyrus 2. yeeres as Astyages here for a time. The temple of Apollo at Delphus, was now the second time set on fire: the Lacedemonians with Lacedemonians and the Ar∣giues. the Argiues were in armes about this time, who were setled on eyther side, with all the power they could make, to make of one partie a conquest: but before they ioyned in battell, being better aduised by some councell, they agreed to auoid the destruction of so many men, that 300. chosen men of the Lacedemonians, and likewise 300. chosen men of the Argiues, should make an ende of the battell, and they which shoulde A braue com∣bat. haue the victory of these chosen men, should be cōquerors, and the others to yeeld where the victorie happened: which being fought out, the victorie fell to the Lacedemonians, ha∣uing but three of their 300. left aliue, all the rest on both sides stood to it vnto the last man, as Herodot doth write. In Croesus time happened in Athens a great sedition be∣tweene Herodot. lib. 1.
the Citizens about vsurie, the crueltie whereof grew to be such, as the vsurers claimed free mens sonnes & daugh∣ters to be solde, or otherwise as captiues or slaues to serue them, vntill paiment were made. This was one of Dracos Dracos lawes mitigated by Solon. lawes, which (as Demades sayth) was written with blood. To mitigate this crueltie, Solon by consent of the whole Citie was chosen an vmpire, whose Edict was, that free mens chil∣dren should not be sould or brought vnto any bondage for vsurie: and further he decreed, that all creditours should for∣giue Solons lawes of vsurie. their debt vntill that time. And Solon himselfe which made the lawe, first performed the lawe therein: for hee forgaue fiue talents himselfe, which amounted to 2400. crownes: for euery talent is sixe hundred crownes. He added to the twelfth moneth called Lunaris annus, the Epact, Melancthon 2. Chron. which is eleuen dayes, to make an equall number of dayes with the yeere of the sunne. He gathered all the writings of Homer being 300. yeeres before vnto one volume: hee made many good lawes in Athens. So likewise at that time did Tha∣les in Miletum, a great Philosopher, who did to many Cities Thales in Mi∣letum. in Greece, as Solon did in Athens: for they were in Croesus time. In this time florished Pythagoras, borne in Samos, brought vp in Egypt, and taught philosophie in Tarentum: he was the first among the Italians that read philosophie, whose sect af∣ter him were called Pythagoreans, who farre differed from o∣thers Pithagoras taught in Italie. in his doctrine. It is written that Croesus bragging much of his substance, and so preferring thereby himselfe to be the most fortunate & happy king of the world, sitting on his re∣gall throne in his princely attire, beset with precious stones of seueral names & colours in most gorgeous & sumptuous sight, seemed to himselfe to be the goodliest creature of the world: he asked of Solon whether he had euer seene so faire a Croesus to Solō. sight, or so goodly colours in a creature: Solon answered, the Pecock, & the Popiniay do farre excel Croesus in naturall co∣lours & beauty: whereat Croesus being angry said, Solon was a foole: but afterward Croesus being vanquished by Cyrus, remē∣bred Lydia did re∣bell against Cyrus. Solons words: but now againe to Lydia, which had reuol∣ted against Cyrus & fel to rebellion.
By this time Cyrus was busie in other warres, and hearing of these newes, returned and made of them the last conquest, in the thirtie foure yeere of Seruius Tullus reigne the sixt king of Rome, and in the two hundred and ninth yeere after the building of Rome. Thus Lydia being brought by Cyrus a ser∣uile Prouince to Persia, afterward the reliques of the Lydians The first con∣quest of Lydia. became from stout souldiers to slouthfull slaues, and from men became women, accompanying themselues with an idle life, giuen to inuent many vnthriftie exercises, as before is written. And the maides of Lydia went a whoring for their dowrie, offering themselues a pray for money, and the wic∣ked gaines of their bodily vse was the dowrie of their mari∣age, who before Cyrus time, during the time of nine kings, esteemed neither Chaldeans, nor Assyrians: their fortune so flowed, that it became a cōmon prouerbe, As rich as Croesus. Croesus fauour with Cyrus. But nowe Croesus hauing experience of Solons speach, be∣came now as wise as he was before rich: for the which cause The good opi∣nion of Cyrus toward Croesus. Cyrus esteemed him so, that he would take nothing in hand without Croesus councell: for Cyrus in all his warres, which at that time Cyrus had with so many Nations, hauing already conquered the Assyrians, the Chaldeans, the Lydians, and other kingdomes, hauing like mind to conquere all the world as Alexander the great had, insomuch that Croesus wondred at his fortunate successe in al his actions, his singular wisdome, his great pollicie, and his princely liberalitie to be such, as Croesus did often say, It was no shame for Croesus to be con∣quered by Cyrus. After that Croesus was long enterteined with Cyrus, hauing good experience of his fidelitie and seruice, he commended Croesus vnto his sonne Cambyses, charging him so to esteeme of Croesus, as he would be directed in all great causes by him. Nowe Cambyses farre vnlike vnto his father, both in nature and in fortune much inferiour, a cruell king, yea a tyrant: for in his voyage to Egypt, with whom Croesus was in compa∣nie according to his fathers commaundement, Cambyses kil∣ling Cambyses tyran nie to his soul∣diers. and murthering his owne souldiers being Persians, like a
hungrie lion foming in blood without any respect of per∣son, Croesus began reuerently to warne Cambyses of his fathers councel, & of the trust that his father Cyrus had in him to ad∣monish Cambyses to lenitie, perswading him to vse more cle∣mencie, Croesus coun∣cell to Cam∣byses. & to shew good coūtenance to his souldiers, saying, that the strength of a king was his people, and that mercie in a king was the anchor of his scepter. Cambyses moued with these words, thought to stabbe him: but Croesus by flight esca∣ped, and Cambyses for anger that he had so escaped, comman∣sded them to the sword that ayded Croesus to flee from Camby∣es sight at that time: of this at large doth Herodot write. Herodo. lib. 3. Thus endeth the kingdome of Lydia in the 14. yeere of Croesus, which continued from the beginning, vntill the last ouerthrow of Croesus 230. yeeres: but Functius saith, 205: o∣thers say not 200. and some 130. yeres, beginning in the first Olympiad, & ending in the 51. Olympiad: for as the kings of Ly∣dia Lydia is made a prouince of Persia by con∣quest. began but 24. yeeres before Rome, so it ended in the eight yeere of Tarquinius Superbus the last king of Rome, & after the first building of Rome 180. yeeres, and was translated to be a prouince of the Persians. Ardisus the 1. king of Lydia, reigned 36. yeeres. Aliagtes the 2. king of Lydia, reigned 14. yeeres. Meles the 3. king of Lydia, reigned 14. yeeres. Candaules 4. king of Lydia, reigned 17. yeeres. Giges the 5. king of Lydia, reigned 36. yeeres. Ardis the 6. king of Lydia, reigned 37. yeeres. Sadaites the 7. king of Lydia, reigned 15. yeeres. Haliactes the 8. king of Lydia, reigned 49. yeres. Croesus the 9, and last king, reigned 14. yeeres.
OF THE FIRST ORIGINAL of the Persians: of the antiquitie of their Kings, of their common wealth and go∣uernment, and of their continuance, and how they haue beene called the great Kings, by the meanes and dignitie of Cyrus. NOw hauing left Assur the second sonne of Sem in Assyria, and Ar∣phaxad the third sonne of Sem in Chaldea, & Lud the fourth sonne of Sem, in Lydia: I am come with Elam the eldest sōne of Sem vnto Persia. Of these foure sonnes of Sem, the Assyrians, Chaldeans, He∣brewes, & Lydians proceede. Ha∣uing also left Chus in Ethiopia, & Mizraim in Egypt, I come (as I said before) to Persia, then cal∣ed Elam: so Daniel nameth it, whē he saw the vision in the Pal∣lace in Susa in the prouince of Elam, by the riuer of Vlai: in this place Elam dwelt: and the nation were long named Elamites, whose historie I haue now in hand. Persia therefore is large and wide, reaching vnto the North as farre as Caspia 8000. Strabo lib. 15. furlongs, as Erastones setteth it downe, which is in accoumpt yeelding eight furlongs vnto a mile, a thousand miles: and from the Citie of Susa vnto Persipolis, 4200. furlōgs, which is
530. miles, and from thence vnto the confines of Carmenia, Pomponius. Mela lib. 3. The descrip∣tion of Persia. are 1600. furlongs. The Region of Persia is cōfined with Me∣dia on the North: Persia hath eastward Carmenia, & hath west∣ward Susia: for Susia is (as Strabo writeth) a part of Persia, & li∣eth betweene Babylon & Persia, & hath Susa that famous citie, where most often the kings of Persia vsed to bee, with it. The nations of the inhabitants of this Countrey are called Palis∣chores, another natiō called Achemenides: from these the olde kings of Persia were called Achemenides: for among the old Persians they had a law, that none should be king in Persia, but he should be of the stocke of Acheminides, which of long time continued before Cyrus, while yet the Persians were called E∣lamites, among the Hebrews, & of the auncient Greekes called Cephenes, all kings of Persia were called Achemenides: the like law was in Sparta, Corinth, Egypt, & with other natiōs for their kings, for that diuers kingdoms had by law cōfirmed, that no election of kings should be, but of those families which by lawe in recordes were allowed, as The kings of the Parthians were all called Arsaces, out of Arsaces stocke. The kings of Alba called Siluij from Siluius Posthumus, the third king of the Albanes. The first kings of Egypt were all called Pharaones. The kings of Corinth Bacidae, of the house of Bacis. The latter kings of Egypt called Ptolomei, after the death of Alexander. The kings of Sparta. Heraclides. And so the Emperors of Rome named first Caesares, then were Alex. lib. 3. cap. 16. they called Augusti, and the third time they were named An∣tonini. Thus in these coūtries none might be king elected, but of these houses & families, yet in other kingdoms they were otherwayes elected, as The Ethiopians made choise of the most likeliest man in sight. The Medes in like maner vsed to make choise of no king, but such as ex∣celled in talenesse of person, and strength of body. In Libya none should be king, but he that could winne it with running: for he that was most swift, should be king in Libya: and so according to cu∣stome, and to the maners of euery Countrey or kingdome, any prince or king was elected and chosen.
Againe there be in Persia two other nations called Cirtij, and Marai, beside a sect of people named Magi. The chiefe Cities of Persia, before Babylon was by Cyrus wonne to bee a Persian Citie, were Susa, Parsagardia, Persepolis, and Gaza: for The kings of Persia all cal∣led Achemini∣des. The Persians called first Ce∣phenes. there the Persian kings had their monuments: in Gaza, there lay there treasure and wealth. Beroaldus in his Chronicles, Suetonius, and Tranquillus in August say, that the Persians were called of the Greekes in ancient time Cephenes, but they brag∣ged and boasted of a more auncient name, and called them selues Artaei. Artaei. But after that, Perseus the sonne of Iupiter and Danaes had maried Andromada the daughter and heire of Cepheus, and had by his wife a sonne named Perses, after whose name then Perse. they being called Cephenes, are nowe called Persis, after the name of their king Persis. This region of Persia was diuided vnto a hundreth twen∣tie Prouinces, in the time of Darius Hystaspis, the third king of The Persians before called Elamites. Persia, appointing to euery Prouince a gouernor, that should pay certeine tribute vnto the king. Iosephus saith, Elam the eldest sonne of Sem, was the first original of the Elamites, now called Persians, a countrie most fertile and most florishing, which had soueraigntie ouerall Asia. After that, Cyrus from Diodo. lib. 13. a priuate man brought vp by a heardman in an obscure place in Media, became lord of all Asia, king of the greatest part of the Eastkingdomes, and the conquerour of Astyages, king of the Medes, and of Croesus, king of the Lydians, and last of Bal∣thasar the last king of Babylon, and the last successour of Nabuchodonosor the great: hee fortified himselfe with strength of munitions, commanded garisons readie in euery great ci∣tie of Persia, appointed races of horses to bee had in all the Iosephus lib. 11. cap. 6. Empire of Persia, and euery gouernour of euery Prouince to furnish the king with horses and men necessarie to defende the countrie: for the Medes, Assyrians, Chaldeans, Lydians and Egyptiās, were by this time brought subiects vnder the Persiās. And therefore their wealth must be infinite: for in Artax∣erxes time there was an hundreth and twentie Prouinces vn∣der
the Monarchie of Persia, as Iosephus writeth. Ctesias and Dionisius, two great writers of Persian histories affirmed, that the king of Persia was woont to haue in his Pallace, fifteene thousand euery day to dinner and supper: for they receiued out of Asia euery yeere fourtie thousand and fiftie talents. For when Alexander the great had conquered Persia, and Curtius lib. 5. had taken Babylon, he found a hundred fiftie and seuen thou∣sand talents, and yet not so much as Cyrus left behind him (as The wealth of Persia in the time of Cyrus. Strabo saith) and no maruell: for Cyrus had all the wealth of Iudea, and the treasure had in the Temple at Ierusalem which was infinite, of Assyria, Chaldea, Lydia, and Media, and therefore Herodot called him Cyrus the great king, and after Cyrus time all the kings of Persia would be called , the great kings. For in all the histories you shall not reade, that the Ro∣manes who afterward likewise mastered the whole worlde, had so much treasure at one time, as either Cyrus had left in Persia, or as Alexander had found in Persia: yet Persia before Cy∣rus time was obscure and of no fame, subiect vnto the Medes: for Cyrus had long warres & many battels with Euilmerodach in Assyria, with Croesus in Lydia, with Astyages in Media, & with Zenophon. Paeda lib. 8. many kings before he had rest, and before hee had brought the Monarchie vnto Persia, and to be called the great king. Cyrus began his Empire at Babylon, at what time Seruius Cyrus began his Empire. Tullius, the sixt king of the Romanes reigned in Rome, and A∣masis gouerned Egypt: In Cyrus time the temple of Apollo was burned in Delphos the second time. Cyrus obteined the king∣dome of Persia in the beginning of the eighteene Iubilee, and in the third yeere of the eightie Olympiad, which much differ from Diod. Siculus, who affirmeth that Xerxes the fourth king after Cyrus, tooke his voiage into Greece, in the seuentie fiue Olympiad, from Polybius, that affirmeth Xerxes went into Greece in the 74. Olympiad: in the like error is Halicarnasseus, Herodot, and others: some affirming Cyrus to begin his Empire in the 50. Olympiad, some in the 54. some in the 57. some in the 60. Olympiad, & thus they erre some 30. Olympiads, some 20. some
more, and some lesse of the true time of Cyrus: for in the sacred historie by sound testimonie it was laid downe by Daniel and in Nehemias, the very time of Cyrus. Now after that Cyrus had brought all these kingdoms vn∣der the monarchie of Persia, he tooke Armenia in hand, & ha∣uing conquered the king & the countrie of Armenia, Tigranes the kings sonne of Armenia, a familier old friend of Cyrus, hea∣ring of Cyrus victorie ouer his father, he then being farre frō Armenia, returned home with all haste, and besought Cyrus not to thinke of the warres betweene his father and him, but to remember the amitie & familiaritie which was betweene them both: and therefore Tigranes entreated Cyrus to haue the crowne after his father, paying vnto Cyrus such tribute as he would appoint: to which request Cyrus consented, ap∣pointing Fiftie talents are three thou sand crownes. fiftie talents yerely to be paid to the kings of Persia, which is three thousand crownes. After the conquest of Ar∣menia, Xenophon lib. 2. & 3. Paedag. Cyrus passed with his army vnto Phrygia, Cappadocia, and Arabia, who coulde not long hold out, but partly yeelded, and partly conquered, were brought subiect and to pay tri∣bute vnto Cyrus. Cyrus was woont before he entred into bat∣tell, to sing a song to Castor and Pollux, and to march as the olde Spartanes, with hymnes and odes to the muses to solace their hearts, and to auoide feare that might occupie their heads otherwayes. Cyrus his garde or chiefe souldiers about him were called Homotimi, as the best souldiers vnder Alex∣ander Homotimi. Argyraspides. the great were call Argyraspides, vnder Achilles named Myrmidones, vnder Pyrrhus called Dolopes, and so of other Myrmidones. Dolopes. great conquerors which had a peculiar name of their chiefe souldiers. Nowe the last and the greatest victorie was ouer the Babylonians, which he attempted not before he grew great and strong by other victories: for truely before Babylon was wonne, the monarchie was in Assyria. We reade of no king that conquered so many kingdomes as Cyrus did, neither of such fauour with God: for no doubt he was instructed of Daniel to know and to confesse the God of Cyrus by David instructed. Israel, as appeared by his care and diligence in ayding the
Iewes after the captiuitie vnto Ierusalem, in suffring them qui∣etly to returne with wealth & treasure, in cōmanding all his princes of Syria and subiects, to fauour & to helpe them, with a decree made for the building vp of their temple vnto God, which had raised Cyrus to punish the blasphemie of that Chaldean king Balthasar, and to make an end of his kingdome, and by Cyrus to restore the kingdome againe of Israel, which Cyrus. was ouerthrowen by the Chaldeans. Cyrus being then the one∣ly conquerour ofthe world, & hauing vnder the Persian scep∣ter all the East kingdomes, he had in mind the woonted ma∣ners of the Scythians, how they came often times from Scythia, and rushed in armes vnto Asia, spoiled, wasted, and destroy∣ed the regions and countries about Asia. Cyrus made warre vpon the Massagites, which were of the stocke of the Gothes: of these Messagites came the Getes and the Sueuians. While Cy∣rus was occupied in these warres, Cambyses reigned in Persia sixe yeeres, so that the gouernment of Cyrus and of his sonne Cambyses were compted all one for two yeeres, because Cyrus tooke his warres in hand needelesse to Scythia. And beside, he was warned by Soothsayers, by the di∣uination of Swalowes which were seene in the tents of Cyrus, being vnluckie birdes, not to goe to Scythia: for Swalowes Swallowesvn∣lucky birdes. flying about the tentes of Pyrrhus, in the warres of Italie, and also lighting vpon the sailes of Mar. Antonius nauies in his warres against Augustus, prognosticated to them both cala∣mitie & destruction: nay God, with whom Cyrus should haue consulted, who brought him from Harpagus clawes, saued him from Astyages sword, defended him from Croesus snares, and gaue him so many victories. God vsed the like example vpon Iosias, Salomon, Osias, and Dauid, as hee did nowe vpon Cyrus, for that Gods seruaunts Melancthon lib. Chron 2. should knowe their infirmities, and confesse that God gi∣ueth victorie: for as Iosias was slaine in Mageddo, by Necho king of Egypt, so Cyrus trusting in his owne strēgth, was ouer∣throwen with all his armie of the Massagites. Cyrus head was cut off by Tomyris Queene of Scythia a woman, and throwen
into a great vessell ful of blood, with spiteful wordes saying, Diodor. lib. 2. cap. 11. Satia te sanguine quem sitijsti: yet Dyodorus saith, his body was hanged vpon a gibbet, & his head throwen into a barrel full of blood: for Cyrus before that time had taken Spargapises, ge∣nerall Herodot lib. 1. of the Massegites, ouerthrowen the whole hoste of the Massegites, and had slaine Queene Tomiris sonne Spargapises. Of the histories of Cyrus, reade Zenophon and Herodot, where you may be satisfied of the whole life of Cyrus, and also of his death. In Cyrus time when the Hebrew prophets in Israel en∣ded, The first in∣fancie of Greece. then the Philosophers in Greece began: Thales with his successours after him in Ionia, a man of great antiquitie a∣mongst the Grecians, who taught them first the obseruations of the starres, the eclipses of the Sunne and Moone, the di∣uisions of the yeere, and the number of the dayes. The other taught in the Confines of Italie: they were called Pythagorici, the one in Miletum, the other in Tarentum. There were in Greece before this time certeine wise and learned Poets, as Homer, Hesiodus, and Orpheus, and Linus, that were had in great honour in Greece. It is written by Aristobulus, that Cyrus had vpon his tombe diuers Epitaphes, as this, O homo, ego Cyrus Asiae Rex, ne mihi se∣pulturam inuideas. O man, I am Cyrus king of Asia, suffer Cyrus without enuie, this seuen foote ofgroūd to couer his bones. Onesicritus rehearseth in Strabo many Epigrames vpon Cyrus tombe, and Cyrus himselfe in these wordes crieth out in Zeno∣phon: Non auro non argento condi, sed corpus terraereddi: though Zenophon reporteth other wayes of Cyrus death, reciting an The death of Cyrus. Zenophon. lib. 8. Paedago. Zonar. lib 1. cap. 29. oration that Cyrus before hee died, called before him all his Nobles, to whom he made long speach concerning the im∣mortalitie of the soule, exhorting his two sōnes Cambyses the elder, & Smerdis the yonger, whō Zonaras named Tamaraxes, to vse iustice in their gouernment, bequeathing to Cambyses the Empire of Persia, withall the kingdoms thereunto belon∣ging, Assyria, Chaldea, Lydia, with all the rest of his kingdomes, Prouinces, & Territories, sauing Media, Armenia, & Cadusia, which Cyrus bequeathed to his yongest sonne Smerdis.
Of this Cyrus read Zenophon, and see how Vlisses is set forth by Homer, Aeneas by Maro: so is Cyrus magnified by Zenophon. Cambyses the 2. king of Per∣sia. Cambyses succeeded Cyrus his father, not in vertue and iustice, not toperforme his fathers will, but to breake the decree which Cyrus made after the captiuitie to the Iewes for their re∣turne to further the temple: the tyrannie of whō if you list to be acquainted withal, reade Herodot the 3. booke, & you shal know the whole life of Cambyses, who after Cyrus death vsed al kinde of murthers, fomed in blood, raged in tyrannie, gathe∣red an armie of Persia, and of Greece, mooued warres against Amasis king of Egypt. The cause of this warre doth Herodot in this sort set downe: Herod. lib. 3. Cambyses had councell to aske Amasis daughter in mariage of some backe friend of his: Amasis sawe the full intention of Cambyses, coulde not tell well howe to answere Cambyses: hee thought this way to deceiue him: there was one only daugh∣ter of Aprie king of Egypt left aliue of that stocke, a wise and a Nitetis sent to Cambyses. very faire woman named Nitetis: this Amasis the king with all sumptuous tyre, with golde & substance plentifully, did send to Persia to king Cambyses, with whom shee was in great fauour & loue by the name of Amasis daughter, saluting her daily by that name, vntill Nitetis spake these wordes. O Cambyses, thou art much deceiued to take me for Amasis daughter: I am king Apries daughter & the last of that house, whom Amasis the king sent vnto you: he killed my father, and he nowe thus vsed you. Vpon this, Cambyses sent vnto the king of Arabia, to licence him with his armie to haue pas∣sage to Egypt: which being then graunted, Cambyses spoyled, wasted, and burned, vntill hee came to Memphis, where hee thought to finde Amasis aliue, but he found his sonne Psamme∣ticus. Memphis being taken by Cambyses, another battell was Memphis takē by Cambyses. fought by Nilus, where likewise Cambyses got the victory af∣ter a great slaughter: of this Herodot doth write, that when tri∣all was made of the dead souldiers, whether the Persians or the Egyptians had the harder scull, it was found that the Persi∣ans heads were so soft, as any small thing would breake it, and
the Egyptians head so hard, that nothing skant might breake Difference betweene the Persians and the Egyptians. it: the reason was, that the Egyptians were woont euen from their youth to shaue their heads, & so hardened them by the heate of the sunne, that it is a woonder in Egypt to see a balde man. And the Persians were wont to beare vpon their heads such great mighty hats called Tiaras, rowled in such sort, that Strabo. lib. 15. their heads were mightie & monstrous, that by the warme∣nes thereof they were so soft as wooll. Nowe Cambyses waxed so cruell by this victorie, wasted where he came, committing sacriledge, adding one euill to another, fearing his owne conscience, suspecting his brother Smerdis, sent his trustie and secret friend Phraxaspes to kil him, maried his owne sister, who hearing of her brothers death, mourned and wept, wherefore Cambyses slue her. After this, when his deare friend Praxaspes had intreated him secretly to spare wine, the cause of his disquietnes, certifying him what hard opinions the Persians had of him, & how they would be glad to haue Cambyses to be Cyrus sonne, sober, & temperate: Cambyses answered in this sort: thou shalt see whether I be so∣ber The tyrannie of Cambyses. or no: goe thy waies, bring thy sonne vnto me, & set him to stand against the doore. This being done, Cambyses com∣manded the yong man to put his left hand vpon his head: he tooke his bow, & shot him into his hart, & smiling vpō Prax∣aspes he said, behold how sober I am, & what a steady hand I haue amongst the cups: yet as not contented to rage, to mur∣ther, and to vse tyranny against those that were aliue, but he would satisfie himself vpon dead men, he caused Amasis king of Egypt his body being dead & buried in his graue to be takē The Persians worship the fire. vp, to be beaten, whipt, & to be wounded with swordes and daggers, and last to be burned to ashes against the lawes of Persia: for that the Persiās honor the fire as a god, & therfore not lawful to feede vpon dead bodies: against the lawes of E∣gypt, for the Egyptians take their fire to be a liuing creature, & to deuoure any thing that is put into it, and therefore the E∣gyptians were wont to salt their dead bodies, lest they shoulde be deuoured of vermins. Neither were the old Romanes▪ wont Herodot. lib. 3.
to burie the bodies of the dead for a long time: for I reade of none buried with the Romanes before Sillas time the Dicta∣tor: Silla. for this was the custome of those daies, that wheresoeuer any Romane should die, hee should bee brought dead to his owne house, and there be kept seuen dayes, the eight day he should be buried, and the ninth day the ashes buried, & that in his owne house, at what time they sacrificed to Proserpina nouendiale sacrificium: for so also it was among the Grecians, as Nouen. liales pulures. you may reade in Plutarch, after the funerall of Philopoemen: his ashes were couered with garlands, & flowres, and nose∣gaies, all the souldiers crowned with garlandes of lawrell in token of diuers victories: but this funerall was appointed for a captaine or a Prince that died as a conquerour in the field: yet the funerall potte, where the ashes of the dead were laid, should be caried with great solemnitie, and be kept as a mo∣nument among his friendes and kinsemen in great honour, before their gods Penates or Lares. And here a little to speake of buriall, wee reade in Genesis, Genesis 2. 3. that Abraham bought a fielde of Ephron the Hittite, to burie his wife Sara, and to burie the rest of Abrahams stocke: this was a possession of burial vnto Abraham, & he paied 400. shekels. Iacob dying in Egypt with wis sōne Ioseph, cōmāded his bones to be brought to Hebron. Ioseph after that charged also his bre∣thren Abrahams field for bu∣riall. that his bones should be caried to his fathers graue in Hebron: but of the maners & orders of funerals in euery king∣dome it is set downe in my other booke. But let vs returne to Cambyses, where hauing subdued Egypt, and ready further to warre vpō the Ethiopians, which was a kingdom ioyned to E∣gypt, at what iime newes came frō Persia by a messenger, that his brother Smerdis had vsurped the kingdome, letters were sent frō the two Magi, which Cambyses left ouer seers of Persia in his absence, to all partes of Egypt, to signifie the same. For Patizitis (so one of the Magi was named) had found a kinseman of Smerdis most like in all points vnto him: this be∣ing instructed, was crowned king in Persia by the name of A counterfait Smerdis. Smerdis Cyrus sonne, and being proclaimed king by heralds, and by post letters sent to signifie the same to all Countries,
that all countries should obey Smerdis and not Cambyses: and so that herald certified Cambyses. By this terrour and feare Cambyses called Praxaspes, consul∣ted with him, and demaunded whether hee had perfourmed his charge concerning Smerdis: to whom he said, I haue bu∣ried Smerdis with my owne hand. Cambyses being thereby en∣bouldened, demaunded the trueth of the herauld: hee char∣ged him to speake trueth, whether Smerdis my brother gaue thee this charge, or any els in Smerdis name: to whom he an∣swered, In trueth I neuer sawe Smerdis Cyrus sonne, sithence the time that Cambyses tooke his iourney from Persia vnto E∣gypt: but euen he whom Cambyses made his deputie in Persia, gaue me this in commaundement to doe. Cambyses making him ready with all haste possible to goe Cambyses by his owne sword slaine. with his armie to Susa, and leaping on horse backe, his sword fell out of his sheath, and pearced him through his thighes, of the which wound within twentie dayes after Cambyses di∣ed, when he had reigned seuen yeeres and fiue moneths. Cambyses before his death, sawe the like dreame as Iu. Caesar did the night before he was slaine in the Senate, who seemed in his sleepe to flee aboue the cloudes, and to sitte vpon the Alex. lib. 3. cap. 26. throne of Iupiter, and that vpon the sudden hee was throwen downe to the earth. The like Cambyses dreamed of his bro∣ther Oracles are doubtfull. Smerdis, whē he thought that sitting vpō Cambyses seate, his head reached vpto the heauens, so that almost the like ef∣fect happened to them both: for Cambyses had knowledge by the oracle at Butis, that he should die in Ecbatana, but he knew not that another Ecbatana was in Syria, beside that in Media, Herodot. lib. 3. and therfore was deceiued. Yet Cambyses left this example of iustice behind him: he vsed one of the Iudges named Sisamnis in this sort, that being corrupted with money to giue sen∣tēce against iustice, he caused him to be slaine, & to flay him, Sisamnis skin. & to lay his skin for a couer vpō the seat of iudgemēt for the next Iudge that came afterto leane vpon. And he appointed Otanes Sisamnis sōne tosucceed his father, brought him to the Melancthon. 2. Chron. His sonne O∣tanes. iudgement seate, and shewed him his fathers skin, cōmaun∣ding him to behold the same, before he would giue sentence in any thing.
CHAP. II. Of the two Magi that vsurped Persia after Cambyses time: of Darius Histaspis and his good gouernment, of Xerxes the great, and his warres in Greece: of his ignominious flight from Greece, and of his death in Persia after his flight. NOw while Cambyses was thus in Egypt, these two Magi gouerned Persia seuen Two Magi go∣uerned Persia 7. moneths. moneths in bountifull sort, forgiuing tributs and taxes, and graunting liber∣ties and freedom for the Persians to liue as they listed. Writers doe varie about the name of these two. Iustine called these two Magi, Comaris and Oropastis: He∣rodotus doeth call the one Patizites, and the other Smerdis. Zo∣naras Herodot. lib. 3. nameth the elder Tanoaxeres, but it is not materiall: for Eusebius doeth not nomber these two amongst the kings of Persia. But in the eight moneth one of the seuen princes or gouer∣nours of Persia ouerthrew these Magi: then these seuen prin∣ces being vertuous and welbeloued of the people, agreed in loue and faith one with another, one preferring another to What state should go∣uerne Persia. the kingdome, that it was hard for the people to make choise of any of them: yet to them the election was referred. Otanes one of the seuen princes, thought that it was not necessary to haue a king, to make a free common wealth bound to a Mo∣narchia: he perswaded the countrey to liue vnder the law of popular state called Democratia, euery city to haue their magi∣strate, Otanes for De∣mocratia. and euery prouince to haue such gouernours as might defende the countrey with lawes and armes: affirming the greatnes of a king to approch the nature of a tyrant, and ther∣fore most dangerous: for when they giue ouer to be kings in doing iustice, then they begin to be tyrants in committing rage and furie. Megabisus held a contrary opinion, allowing Megabisus the second for Oli∣garchia. not a popular state, who are neuer quiet, neuer constant, drawen one day of this side, to morow of another, affirming the furie and rage of the people to be intollerable, and like
the streame of a violent flood, without wisdome in gouern∣ment, without reason in iudgement, and euen like Hidra that monstrous beast of Lerna, neuer satisfied, neuer cōtented, ne∣uer quiet: and compared it to the saying of Demosthenes, that populus was one of the three monsters at Athens, which raig∣ned at one time, Noctua, draco, & populus, the owle, the dra∣gon, The three monsters of Athens. and the people. Megabisus therefore disliked a Democraticall cōmon wealth, perswaded that some of the wisest and best learned should be chosen for a state: for to good men belong good counsell (said he) and they will in conscience and trueth refourme things amisse: his reason tended to haue a common wealth called Oligarchia, or Aristocratia, and not a popular state. The thirde Darius spake, disanulling both Otanes and Megabisus opinion, declaring by examples of diuers kingdomes, the Darius perswa∣sion for a Mo∣narchie. Lib. Paedag. defect of kings, as Zenophon and Herodotus most largely dis∣course, and amongst Philosophers approued the best state of a common wealth to be a Monarchie: alleadging also by Cy∣rus Herodotus 3. last will and Cambyses, that while any of Cyrus stocke liued, Cyrus last will. that they by succession should enioy the Scepter of Persia, and if the house of Cyrus should faile, then to make an electi∣on of a king by the seuen princes of Persia and the people. And therefore both in reason a king is to be elected, and by them commaunded of Cyrus to be confirmed. The other foure, which yet had spoken nothing, but dili∣gently hearing these three before, they all consented with Darius, and supposed that common wealth to be best, where a Monarchie is, the soueraigntie whereof is in a king: and therefore they agreed all to elect a king: and to auoyde con∣tentions and quarrels, they committed to Fortune their election in this sort, That all the seuen princes should be a A deuise for the ection of a king in Persia. horsebacke the next morning in the suburbes of the citie to talke of this matter, and that whose horse should neigh first after Sunne rising he should be king in Persia. They all to this consented, and euery prince rode sumptuously to the place. These were the names of the seuen princes.
Otanes. Intapher∣nes. Gobrias. Megabisus. Astphatines. Hidarnes, The names of the 7. princes of Persia. And Darius. The night before they should ride to the place, in the morning Darius consulted with the master of his horse, ope∣ned the whole cause, and asked his deuise by arte. Oebarus Oebarus poli∣cie. (so his name was) assured Darius of some secret helpe: hee brought Darius horse that night to a mare, to that place where they should meete in the morning. Darius riding vp∣on that horse by the counsell of Oebarus, the next morning met according to their agreement altogether. Darius horse hauing bene with the mare in that place, beganne lustily to praunce, and to neigh lowdly: whereat the other sixe prin∣ces lighted immediatly from their horses, and saluted him as their king. This Darius now king of Persia had maried a daughter of Cyrus named Atossa, of whom hee had Xerxes. Within some Darius king of Persia. space after Darius came to the kingdome, the Assyrians be∣ganne to reuolt from him: hee layed siege to Babylon twen∣tie Babylon besie∣ged. moneths, and could not preuaile, vntill one Zopirus a sub∣tile Persian, who yeelded Babylon to Darius hand, by this poli∣cie: he himselfe did cut off his owne eares, his nostrels, and Zopirus subtil∣tie. came all bloodie to Babylon, accusing Darius crueltie, who for perswading him to raise his siege and to spare blood, he vsed me as you see. The Babylonians light of beliefe, thought it trueth, made him captaine ouer a band of souldiers, who for his more cre∣dit with the Babylonians, gaue two or three light ouerthrowes to Darius men, and by this meanes brought Babylon to Darius hand. Of this Zopirus was Darius wont to say when he held a pomegranate in his hand, that he wished nothing more in Darius saying of Zopirus. the world, then to haue so many Zopirus as the pomegranate had kernels.
Now is Babylon the second time taken by the Persians. When Darius was quietly setled in Babylon, he made warres vpon the barbarous Scythians: for euen as Cyrus was wont to driue the barbarous nations from Asia which came from the region of Arctoa: so Darius tooke that course by his chiefe captaine Me∣gabisus, to clense Persia from strangers: the Getes, the Cimmeri∣ans, Cimerians. and the Sauromats inhabited in Asia and about Thracia. Getes. For of the Cimerians came those Germans called Cimbri, and from the Getes came likewise the Gothes. These Getes yeelded to Megabisus: the Scythians he could not vanquish. Scythians. But after some warre he returned vnto Greece, sent ambas∣sadours vnto Amintas king of Macedonia to haue free passage Persian ambas∣sadors sent to Macedonia. through his countrey: which being graunted more for feare then for loue, Amintas entertained the ambassadours of Per∣sia very liberally, brought them to a banquet, where after much rioting of wine, they handled rudely the Macedonians ladies that beare them companie. Alexander the sonne of Amintas, and the great grandfather of Alexander the great, being discontented with their beast∣lines, desired the king his father to take his rest that night, ta∣king vpon him the entertainment of these Persians: who after his father was gone, he consulted with certaine noble men of Macedonia, that they should come in most gorgious and sumptuous attire like women in the apparel of women, with A worthie hi∣storie of Alex∣ander Amintas sonne. their naked weapons close vnder their garments, comman∣ding them when they should so beastly handle them next, to stabbe them vnto the heart. In the meane season Alexander desired them that the ladies might withdraw themselues for a time, promising them they Iustinus lib. 7. & Herodot. 5. should presently returne to beare them companie: in the meane time while these ladies were absent, came the Macedo∣nian lords in forme and shew of ladies, and perfourmed the wil of Alexander in all points, when they saw occasion offred. At this time Pisistratus that gouerned Athens, had a sonne Pisistratus. named Hippias, which was banished his countrey for his cru∣eltie toward the citizens, and was with Darius, who hearing
that his brother Hipparchus was slaine, made meanes to Da∣rius that hee would vouchsafe to ayde him to his countrey: which was the rather granted, for that Darius was offended with the Athenians, for that they aided the Ionians against him in that warre called bellum Ionicum, when they tooke Sardis and burned it. He caused presently a hundreth thousand footemen, and Hippias by Da∣rius ayded. tenne thousand horsemen to accompany Hippias to Athens, who whē they came within two mile of Athens, the Athenians with these newes were sore afrighted, & stood in great doubt whether to yeelde or to resist them, vntill Miltiades a famous captaine comforted them by the coūsell of Callimachus tooke in hand to fight with the Persians. He had tenne thousand of Athens, and ten thousand Platenses, here was his whole force: but in that battel that noble fellow Miltiades, and Callimachus Melanct. lib. 2 Chron. with his Greekes, gaue the ouerthrowe to the Persians in the fields called Marathon, to the nomber of sixe thousand three hundreth, by the counsel of Callimachus. Thus much Melan∣cthon affirmeth: but Iustinus saith, that there were sixe hun∣dreth thousande Persians, of the which (saith hee) two hun∣dreth Herodotus 7. thousande were slaine, and the rest put to flight: but this warrewas after that which was at Marathon, when Darius vpon the hearing of these newes, was three yeeres in prepa∣ring for it. With this Miltiades flourished in this warre Themistocles, a gallant yong gentleman of Athens: this Themistocles was wont to say (after that fielde fought in Marathon, and the Persians vanquished) that the victories and triumphes of Miltiades could not suffer him to sleepe: but his sonne Xerxes perfour∣med Iustine erred. it, as it shalbe spoken hereafter. In Esdras it is referred to Artaxerxes sirnamed Mnemon, whom the Hebrewes tooke to be Asuerus. Hitherunto Eusebius doeth agree. In this warre Pisistratus two sonnes died, Hipparchus and Hippias: Hipparchus Plato so commended him, that he was cō∣uersant Hipparchus a wise man. with learned men, he loued Simonides, he brought Ho∣mers Iliads first to Athens, & caused the Grecians in any solemne
meeting to sing Homers verses: his delight was to preferre learned men, and to reuerence wise men, and for that onely Aan lib. 8. Lib. 1. cap. 16. cause he was esteemed the wisest man of Athens. But to Da∣rius againe, whom Zonaras saide that he was the husband of Esther, which in the Scripture is called Asuerus. Melancthon writeth, that Darius Histaspis was that Assuerus that maried Esther: and here the history of Esther might be well brought in, sauing it is in the Bible: for Herodotus saith, that Darius ma∣ried Herodot. lib. 7. two women, the one named Aristona which may be the name of Esther, as wel as the name of Vasthi to be Atossa which was Cyrus daughter, on whom he got Xerxes who succeeded after him, though Artabazanes the eldest sonne by Aristona or Melancton lib. 2. chron. Esther made claime to the kingdom, and opposed himselfe a∣gainst Xerxes: yet whē Darius made warres with the Grecians, and afterward with the Egyptiās, in the which iourney Darius died, he appointed Xerxes to gouerne Persia in his absence, and to be king after him if he should die in warres, for that his Herodot. lib. 7. mother was Cyrus daughter, and for that Cyrus was called by the Persians Pater patriae. The goodnes of this king was fully proued, at what time the Church was miserably afflicted by that wicked Haman and hindred by that cruel Cambyses against the decree of Cyrus: he confirmed the decree, and gaue licence and full libertie for the Iewes to build their temple according to Cyrus decree: for God raised Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes, Nabuchodonosor, Euilmero∣dach Good kings by God raised. to be pillars and defenders of his Church. When Darius had raigned 36. yeeres, he died, in whose dayes the kings of Rome ended their kingdom, and their monarchie fel to a new forme of state called Aristocratia. In the time of Darius raig∣ned Aristodemus in Cuma a towne of Italy, not as king, but as a Dionysius lib. 7. tyrant, with whom the barbarous nations had open warres. This cōtention betwene Artabazanes & Xerxes was ended by Instaphernes: but Herodianus saith, by Demaratus Ariston, to both their liking, iudging the crown to be Xerxes according to Da∣rius will and the request of Persia, and Artabazenes so satisfied that one loued another. In Darius Histaspis time raigned in
Madonia Alexander Amintas sonne their 10. king. Herodotus also this age wrote his history, which after it was read in Athens he was of more credite amongst the Grecians, though Strabo cal∣led Lib. de esse. his booke Mythistoriam, fabulous histories, as Budeus wri∣teth. Sophocles and Euripides liued in Darius time, and Socrates was borne. Darius Histaspis a litle before he died, after he had heard the newes of the Grecians victorie at Marathon, being before offended with the Athenians for that they inuaded Sardis, now ten times more kindled to reuenge these iniuries, po∣sting all Asia, and sending to all his prouinces, prepared such force, that he was three yeeres in prouiding men and muni∣tions against the Grecians, at which the Egyptians reuolted from Darius, which were by Cambyses before subdued, he then Melancton lib. 2. had thought to make his voyage to Egypt, and appoynted Xerxes his sonne by Cyrus daughter Atossa, to gouerne in his absence Persia: betweene whome and his brother Artaba∣zanes, some strife (as you heard before) grewe about the gouernment. But Xerxes after his fathers death, was the fourth king of Persia, who taking that warre in hande against the Egyptians, Xerxes a king of Persia. which his father Darius thought to haue taken, had hee not bene by death preuented, not yet thinking to reuenge the Greekes, vntill Mardonius his aunts sonne had perswaded him. He gathered such an armie, as the like is not read, sauing of Tamberlane the Scythian king, of whom the history is publike: this great preparation of Xerxes was consulted and through∣ly waighed before it was taken in hand, for Artabanus Xerxes owne brother thought it not a necessarie warre. Mardonius his neere kinseman perswaded the contrary saying, that Xer∣xes with that force might bring all Europe subiect to the Em∣pire of Asia. Mardonius sentence preuailed. Mardonius. Xerxes made readie his armies: the nomber were so ma∣ny, as scant could bee accompted, for hee had twelue hun∣dreth and seuen Nauies: the Scythians, and the Persians, the Phaenicians; which dwelt in the lande of Palestine, brought
three hundreth nauies, the Egyptians two hundreth, the Cy∣prians The huge ar∣mie of Xerxes. one hundrerh, the Silicians one hundreth, and the Lici∣ans brought fiftie nauies, Dores which dwell in Asia brought thirtie, they of Caria brought seuentie, the Ionians an hun∣dreth nauies, the Aeolians threescore, and the inhabitants of Helespont, brought an hundreth nauies, so that Herodotus Herodotus 7. accompts the whole nomber of the nauies to be three thou∣sand: but Iustine writeth, that Xerxes had in his companie to∣wardes Iustinus lib. 2. Greece, tenne hundreth thousand nauies, insomuch that the Persians bragged, that the Ocean seas had scant suffi∣cient The vaine brags of Xerxes. roome for their nauies, that all Greece was not able to giue them ground ynough, and scant place for their shotts in the aire: with this insolencie the Persian armie marched. Diodor. lib. 11. While Xerxes this time was in preparing such a huge host, the Grecians bestirred themselues with all care and diligence to call their force together, and to gather their strength to∣gether from all parts of Greece. The Athenians made four∣tie nauies: the Magarenses made twentie nauies: the Chalsi∣denses The Grecians preparation for Xerxes. so many, as they of Athens made, which was fourtie: the Peloponesians twelue nauies: the Lacedemonians tenne: the Epidaureans eight, and the inhabitants of Agineta two and twentie: the Traezeneans made fiue nauies: so that the whole nomber of the Grecians nauie was but two hundreth seuen∣tie and ons. The Athenians appointed to be their generall, Themistocles: and the Lacedemonians made Euribiades: but the Persians could not finde a fit generall for so great an armie: for (as Herodotus doth record it) there was in the campe of Xerxes an hundreth Myriad is 10000. and seuentie Myriads of souldiers. You must vnderstand, that euery Myriad is compted for tenne thousand, so that a hun∣dreth and seuentie Myriads are to be taken for seuentie hun∣dred thousand men, which Xerxes had in his voiage to Greece, Seuen hun∣dreth thou∣sand men. which was in the seuenth yeere of his raigne, when he sailed on the sea of Helespont, and marched with more boldnesse then wisedome, drinking a bowle of wine to the Sunne, and throwing the cuppe after his draught into the sea, making a
vowe that hee would not returne from this iourney, before hee had brought all Greece and Europe ioyned with Asia, subiect to Persia. But hee was soone deceiued: for the Per∣sians fought for money to augment their treasure, & the Gre∣cians fought for vertue to defende the libertie of their Coun∣trey: for this warre of Xerxes was more taken in hande for Xerxes need∣lesse warre. ostentation then for necessitie, to doe iniurie and not to de∣fend iustice. The authours whereof God hath from time to time pu∣nished: as Iosias that good king, yet for such a fault hee was giuen to the hand of Necho king of Egypt an infidel. Cyrus, this Xerxes grandfather, for taking vnnecessarie warres in hand against the Scythians, was slaine by Tomyris a woman: and now this king needlesse without cause offered, thought to haue eaten vp all Greece, he was made a runnagate, and to flee from Greece, his souldiers slaine, his captaines drowned, and himselfe hardly escaping: for within two yeeres the Per∣sians had foure ouerthrowes. The first ouerthrowe was at Thermopila, where hee lost Xerxes lost foure great battels. First at Ther∣mopila. 2. At Artime∣sium. 3. At Sala∣mines. twentie thousand Persians by three thousand Grecians. After, they were vanquished in two sundrie great battels vpon the sea, the one hard by Artimesium in Thessalia, the other by the Isle Salamines, from whence Xerxes himselfe was secretly for∣ced to flee in a little boate, after he had lost the last battel, to his great ignominie and shame, which hee neuer recouered during his life. Afterward, leauing Mardonius behinde him with three hundreth thousande Persians, the fourth battell was giuen him at Platea, where the Persians likewise were ouer∣throwen, 4. At Platea. Mardonius slaine by a souldier of Sparta, and all Greece triumphed of that victorie.
CHAP. III. Of the successors of Xerxes in Persia: of their warres, victories, and gouernment: of the state of Greece, and of the prosperities, victo∣ries, and fame they had in Xerxes time. THis time flourished Greece, for it had many The∣mistocles, which was wōt to say, I ouercome my friends with patience, & my foes with celeritie: after this victory it began to be strōg, and to flo∣rish in same before al nations, vntil ciuil warres: for Caesar was demaunded by a Romane a friend of his, how he conquered so many nations in so short a time? he answered by celeritie: for (said Caesar) it was a fault found in Hanibal, that Caesars saying of Hannibal. after he had taken Capua, that he had not layd siege to Rome. This great and mightie voyage of Xerxes being thus with losse and shame finished, euen hee who was a terrour to the whole world, and so called terror gētium before this time, was Reade Herod. his sixt booke to the end of this Xerxes. now had in contempt, & despised of all Persia. Artabanus who then perswaded this iourney, had 7. sonnes well esteemed of the Persians: and perceiuing the contempt of Xerxes with the people, and how he slew his brother, after this great infamie of the warre, when he returned home, he tooke his brothers wife, and his brothers daughter, and committed incest with them both, but his owne vncle Artabanus his fathers brother slew him, after that Xerxes had raigned in Persia 21. yeeres. Herodot. lib. 7. But Mardonius could not perswade Xerxes before his going to Egypt: for he went to Egypt in the second yere after Darius death: and after he had subdued them, & brought them into a straighter seruitude then they were vnder Darius, he made his returne towards Greece, leauing behinde him in Egypt his brother Archemenes to gouerne the countrey. After he had bene foure yeres in subduing Egypt, the fift yere he tooke this voyage with great expedition to Greece. Greece then flou∣rished: Functius lib. 2. for euen at that time, and specially after Xerxes time, their fame grewe greater by their great victories had ouer Xerxes: for in Greece euery citie seemed a kingdome, and so continued vntil the Peloponesian warres: such magistrats, such
captaines, as Themistocles, who by Thucydides was thus com∣mended Themistocles. that he excelled for his wit, that he wanted neither foresight of things to come, neither memorie of things past, neither vnprouided of things present, and what hee knewe not, he would learne: and what he was taught he could per∣forme: ready of wit, quicke of actions, and circumspect in all his doings, the honor and glory of all Greece. After whom Pe∣ricles was had in great estimation in Athens. So of Agesilaus and Cleomenes in Sparta: of Epaminondas & Pelopidas in Thebes: and so the rest at that time in Greece, of whom I haue written in the historie of Greece. After him succeeded his sōne Artaxerxes the long handed, Artaxerxes the fift king of Persia. for that the right hand was longer then the left, a noble and a courteous prince, and the first of this name of al the kings of Persia: he began to gouerne Persia after Xerxes his father, at what time Perdicas the second of that name, & the 11. king of Macedonia raigned. To this Artaxerxes fled that worthy man Thucyd. lib. 1. Themistocles, being banished from Athens, whom often from destruction he saued, and by whom the great ouerthrow was giuen to Xerxes and to his nauie, to the glory of Greece, and shame of Xerxes. In this Artaxerxes time florished two great Philosophers, Empedocles and Parmenides. Many learned men of great fame liued in Artaxerxes time, as Democritus and He∣raclitus, two philosophers, the one laughing alwaies at the fo∣lie of the world, the other alwayes weeping at the misery of the world. Hipocrates that famous phisition serued this Artax∣erxes Many learned men flourish. in Court, Gorgias and Pherecides, Policlitus and Herodotus. Greece began to florish in philosophie, and in all knowledge about this time. In this kings time the Romanes sent to A∣thens for the lawes of the twelue tables, at what time the Ro∣manes created tenne men named Decemuiri, to interprete the Leges duodecim tabularum. lawes. About this time Titus Liuius writeth that the French∣men came out of Scythia, first with one Marcomirus, to the nomber of 489. thousand to the confines of Germanie, where they were called first Nemmagi by the Saxons: the second name they had of Cambra the Queene, and were called
Sicambri, and the third name of Francus a king, they were na∣med Franci, as you may reade more in the history of France. But to returne to Artaxerxes, whose zeale to the Church was such, that he commaunded the Edict of Cyrus to be per∣formed, which was hindred by Cambyses, and by Darius Histas∣pis his owne grandfather, who after once he had permitted the Iewes to haue Cyrus decree performed, a good king, yet he was letted to doe that which now his sonne doeth, by reason of the warres which hee had in Egypt and Greece: for then warres were put to silence in Asia and in the East part. At this time Artaxerxes did send Esdras with great treasures Artaxerxes good benefits to the Iewes. and substance to Ierusalem, in the seuenth yere of his raigne, to build vp againe Ierusalem, to repaire the temple, & to restore to the Iewes their common wealth. This Artaxerxes is named in Esdras to be Darius by the prophet Aggeus and Zacharie, at what time a great multitude of the Iewes came from Babylon Esdras cōmeth from Babylon. with Esdras to Ierusalem, though Sisines the gouernour of Sy∣ria and Phoenicia would had hindered them, had not Artax∣erxes commanded to helpe them. All this time Artabanus mused how he might destroy Ar∣taxerxes to haue the kingdom: for to that end before he slew Xerxes this kings father, & that imagination was strong with Artabanus, laying the like snares to murther Artaxerxes: but Artabanus snares. Artaxerxes hauing intelligence of the same, and fearing Arta∣banus sonnes, seuen stout and gallant gentlemen, he gathered an armie of souldiers, as though he had some secret voyage in hand, amongst whom Artabanus was soonest and readiest armed: and as Artaxerxes vewed his armie, he spied Artaba∣nus Melancthon lib. 2. Chrn. in armes, of whom stil he stood in feare, vntil he preuēted the danger with Artabanus death to saue his owne life. The Iewes toke this Artaxerxes to be Darius Histaspis sonne, whom they called Assuerus by queene Esther. By this good king Ne∣hemias was sent after Esdras to Ierusalem, with the like rewards as before. From the seuenth yeere of this Artaxerxes, sirna∣med the long hand, some do beginne the seuentie weekes of Daniel, concerning the comming of Messias. About this
time Pericles died, a noble Captaine of Athens that succee∣ded Pericles. Themistocles: and Plato was borne, whose master Socrates flourished at that time. Thucydides which liued in the time of Artaxerxes saith, Themistocles was driuen from Athens, and banished vnto Persia, yea & to come to serue this king, whose father he anoyed so much, and whose people he vanquished in foure great battels: so vngrateful Athens was towards The∣mistocles, Aristides, Alcibiades and others, of whom I do speake in the historie of Greece. The Iewes had some quietnes from Artaxerxes time the fift king of Persia, vntill the time of Ochus the eight king of Persia. Likewise the Grecians were in rest, and had the cities & coun∣treis to vse with free libertie by meanes of this king Artaxer∣xes: for the Athenians and the Peloponesians were made friends for fourteene yeeres, of whose warre afterwarde Thucydides continueth his history, and writeth the calamitie of Greece, which ensued the ciuill warres of the Grecians. After folowed the Peloponesian warres, which continued 27. yeeres, to the Artaxerxes Mnemon liued about 400. yeeres before Augustus Cae∣sar. ouerthrowe of all Greece. In the seuenth yeere of this warre died Artaxerxes, after he had raigned fourtie and foure yeres: this warre began before Augustus Caesar foure hundreth yeres. About this time Capua was taken of the Samnits, and Mace∣donia was in many places wasted and burned by a Thracian Thucidid lib. 2. captaine called Sitalices. Agis was king in Lacedemonia this time, and Archidamus raigned in Sparta. There liued more learned men in Artaxerxes time then in any one kings time, and that in euery part and coast of the world, and therefore it is not amisse to put them in one place, for that they were at one time, I meane one age: especially of Romanes & Grecians. Esdras and Nehemias, two noble Iewes. Aggeus and Zacharias, two godly Prophets. Empedocles and Parmenides, two great Philosophers. Phericides, an Historiographer of Syria. Cratinus, a great writer of Tragedies and Comedies. Sophocles and Euripides the Tragaedians. And Proclitus a Philosopher.
Democritus and Heraclitus, two Philosophers. Hippocrates, a famous Phisition, attendant vpon king Artaxarexes. Ctesias, a Persian Chronographer, and one of Artaxerxes houshold. Socrates flourished this time, and Plato his scholer was yet but yong. Herodotus and Thucydides, two great writers. Aristophanes and Protagoras, whose bookes were burned in Athens by a publique Edict. And a litle after, Pindarus and Diogoras the Philosopher. Zeuxes and Phidias, two renowmed cunning men in cut∣ting or grauing Images, statues, in painting most ex∣cellent, which skill amongst the Grecians was much esteemed. In Artaxerxes time liued Miltiades, Themistocles, Cimon, and Pericles, foure famous Athenians. In Rome Lucius Sicinius dentatus, a very strong man, Tribune of the people: of whose strength Plinie in his seuenth booke, Cap. 28. and Solinus, Cap. 6. In Artaxerxes time the Romanes sent to Athens for the twelue Tables which Solon had made, to be had in great reuerence amongst the Grecians. In Persia after Artaxerxes succeeded Darius Nothus: this ma∣ried Darius No∣thus. Artaxerxes sister. Bibliander thought him to bee Xerxes sonne: others named him Xerxes the seconde: others affir∣ming him to be Artaxerxes sonne: but it is not much mate∣rial, for Chronographers omit to put him amongst the kings of Persia: so Ctesias himselfe a Persian writer, who liued in his dayes, and serued his predecessour Artaxerxes. While this Darius raigned in Persia, the Egyptians againe began to reuolt: at what time Amartheus gouerned Egypt, and Orestes raigned king in Macedonia. The Athenians made this time a league with the Lacedemo∣nians: likewise they concluded a peace with the Argiues, and with the people of Mantinea, by the counsell of Alcibiades.
This time gaue the Lacedemonians a great ouerthrow to the Thucidides lib. 5. Argiues, whereupon peace was concluded, Agis being then king in Lacedemonia, and himselfe generall in the fielde at Te∣gaea. The state of Greece was to be lamented from time to time: for as they did thinke all the world to be barbarous be∣side themselues: so of themselues they could not agree, vn∣til all Greece was through ciuil warres destroyed and wasted, one countrey bickering at another, and one citie enuying an other, that they who triumphed oft ouer the strong Persians, are now troden vnder foote of their next neighbours. For in this Darius Nothus time, when the Athenians had gi∣uen an ouerthrow to the Syracusans, the Lacedemonians enuied The Syracu∣sans. so much Athens, that they sent a great companie of souldiers with Gilippus their captaine, to bring downe the victories of the Athenians, at what time the Athenians were ouerthrowen, and the Syracusans triumphed. In this warre died that noble fellow Nicias the generall of the Athenian armie, with many mo famous Athenians, which shalbe more at large in another place, when we speake of Greece, be declared. The Rhodians this time did reuolt from the Lacedemonians, whereupon the Lacedemonians sent ambassadours to Persia to this Darius to haue his friendship, and to ioyne with the Lacedemonians in a league of peace: for the Medes likewise (as the Egyptians did before them) reuolted from Darius: for at that time Egypt and Media began to rebel against Darius. About this time Alcibiades, who succeeded Nicias in Athens, Alcibiades vi∣ctorie at Chal∣cedon. had gotten a great victorie at Chalcedon, ouerthrew the cap∣taine Pharnabazus taken by Zantium, and was thereby made chiefe captaine of the Athenians, being absent from Athens. Now when Darius had raigned nineteene yeeres in Persia, Darius Nothus died. Artaxerxes Mnemon. he left behind him two sonnes, Artaxerxes sirnamed Mnemon, to whom he bequethed the kingdome of Persia being his el∣dest sonne, and Cyrus his second sonne, to whom likewise he gaue certaine cities and prouinces vnder his gouernment. Cyrus not well contented with his fathers will, hee secretly rose in armes against his brother his father yet liuing: who
commaunding Cyrus to be brought vnto him, layd him for a time in prison, and kept him in fetters of golde. But after Darius time, it grew to further malice and to open warres: for Cyrus bearing the name of the former auncient The name of Cyrus. Cyrus, (which was a deare name among the Persians) was the bolder to fall out with his brother, supposing that the Per∣sians would the more fauour him for the names sake, which in trueth among the Persians was much honoured. Cyrus was from his cradle of a hot stirring minde, Artaxerxes milde and gentle in all his actions: hee was named first Arsicas, and is with many writers so called. Now when Artaxerxes was consecrated king at Pasargar∣des in the temple of Minerua by the priestes of Persia, reports were made vnto him, that Cyrus his brother had conspired his death, and had layed waite to kill him: of the which Ar∣taxerxes Plutarch. in Artax. was by his counsell perswaded to trie out the trea∣son of Cyrus: which being found out, yet by the meanes of his mother Parysatis who loued Cyrus dearely, hee was of that fault pardoned. Notwithstanding the great courtesie of Artaxerxes to∣wards Cyrus, he after this thirsted more for the kingdome of Cyrus warres against Artax∣erxes. Persia then before: for this king Artaxerxes Mnemon, follow∣ing his grandfathers steps Artaxerxes the long handed in all goodnes and vertue, hee was much beloued of his subiects, honoured of his countrey, and of all countreys much estee∣med: he gaue himselfe to heare suiters causes, and to let his poore subiects to haue accesse vnto him to open their cau∣ses. Now such as desired innouations and change, gaue out Diodorus lib. 14. that the greatnes of the Empire of Persia stood in neede of a king that should be alwayes in armes, such a prince as Cy∣rus was: these people stirred vp Cyrus to open warre against his brother, who leauing the gouernment of Lydia, being al∣so generall lieutenant of all Asia giuen vnto him by his fa∣ther Darius, sent messengers vnto Lacedemonia for helpe, ga∣thered of Greece and of barbarous nations, to the nomber of thirteene thousand, beside his owne force, and marched Cyrus armie 3. thousand.
boldly forwarde, vntill hee heard that Artaxerxes had an Artaxerxes armie of nine hundred thousand fighting men: yet Cyrus went forward, and gaue him battell and diuers sore assaults, 9 hundred thousand. but preuailed not: this warre is of Xenophon excellently de∣scribed and set foorth in all points. In this battell was Artax∣erxes hurt, by Cyrus his owne hand, but afterwarde the mi∣serie and the extremitie of Cyrus was such, as by Plutarch is set in the life of Mnemon. The cause of this warre was ambiti∣on, and the desire of Cyrus to the kingdome: but (as Melan∣cthon saith) the rather moued hereunto by his mother Pary∣satis, Melacthon 2. Chron. Pary sis Artax. mother who hated Statira Artaxeres wife, to the death. The great magnanimitie, iustice, modestie, liberalitie, and other singular vertues which shined in this Cyrus, is of Xeno∣phon not forgotten in his booke de Cyriminoris expeditione: for Lib. 8. after Cyrus death, all those that boasted to haue slaine him, were by Parysatis meanes Cyrus mother so persecuted, that they died most miserably, as Artasyras and Mithridates. To be short, this Parysatis the kings mother found no rest, vntil she Satyra Ar∣taxerxes wife. Agesilaus. had poisoned the Queene Statyra her daughter in law. In the meane season, Agesilaus king of Lacedemon maketh warres with the Persians: Artaxerxes wisely looking to the warre, sen∣deth Hermocrates to the most part of the cities of Greece, with great treasures of gold and siluer, to raise the rest of the Greci∣ans against the Lacedemonians. During this garboile betweene Artaxerxes and Agesilaus, Parysatis was sent to Babylon to Parysatis sent for to Babylon. come to the Court: for the king kept not his anger long a∣gainst his mother. After this, Artaxerxes tooke a iourney a∣gainst the Caduceans, sent an armie to Egypt, who had reuoul∣ted from his father, and thought to recouer both Media and Diodor. lib. 15. Egypt. Nowe the King entering into some yeeres, hearing of some sturre and contention betweene his two sonnes, Dari∣us and Ochus, either of them aspiring into the kingdome, the yonger being Ochus a valiant man, but of a hot nature, & had some in the Court that wrought both with the king, & with his sister Atossa, who loued him dearely, & (as Plutarch saith)
too dearely, by a crime betweene them both suspected. Notwithstanding Artaxerxes proclaimed Darius his eldest sonne to be king, to see whether the like contention and re∣bellion would grow betweene his children, as fell betweene him and his brother Cyrus, & to put Ochus his younger sonne Ochus. out of all hope to succeede in Persia a king after his father: he commaunded according to the lawe of Persia, that his sonne Darius should weare the point of his hatte right vp in token of his succession: for it was not lawfull to any, sauing to the king or to his successour, to weare his hatte with the point vpward. There was likewise a custome in Persia, that when any A custome a∣mong the Persians. should be proclaimed successour or heire apparant to the crowne, he should request any one thing at the kings hand, and haue it: there was a very faire gentlewoman taken after Melancthon 2. Chron. Cyrus death in the campe by Artaxerxes, who had beene in great fauour with Cyrus a Grecian, borne in Ionia named Aspa∣sia, called for witte and beautie . This woman did Artaxerxes so esteeme, as when his sonne Darius craued this woman for his gift, he was much offended thereby, and yet must of force depart from her, according to the lawe of Persia, but it cost Darius his life: for after Aspasia was taken againe from Darius by his father, he began to be Plutarch in Artax. moued herein, and to conspire the kings death, being wel set forward by Tiribazus: for ill councell easely takes place, as Sophocles saith. But Artaxerxes had intelligence of this trea∣son, and layde waite to take them in that place where they had appointed to murther the king: and thus they being preuented, were adiudged to die according to the lawe, both Darius and Tiribazus. Nowe Darius being dead, Ochus Darius brother stood in good hope to be next heire to the crowne, and the rather, by the meanes of his sister Atossa, of whom some suspition was Atossa maried to her father Artaxerxes. spread abroad of incontinencie betweene Artaxerxes her owne father, and Atossa whom hee maried afterward, yet hee feared the succession of his brother Ariaspes, for the Persians honored him mst.
Artaxerxes had another sonne named Arsames, a very wise and a valiant man, whom his father loued dearely, which O∣chus well vnderstood, and therefore hee determined to en∣trappe them both: his malice and crueltie was such, for that he knewe his brother Ariaspes to be simple and plaine, he sent Ariaspes. some secrete messengers with threatning wordes from the king, forging terrible newes to terrifie his brother, telling him howe the king was determined to execute extreme iu∣stice vpon him for diuers pretended treasons proued against him: poore Ariaspes was put in such dispaire of his life, that he ended all with a cuppe of drinke. King Artaxerxes vnderstanding of his sonnes death in such Artaxerxes Mn had 60. children by concu∣bines. sort, tooke it very heauily, and beganne to suspect Ochus the more: he then laid his loue altogether vpō Arsames one of his bastard sonnes (for he had sixe score children by cōcubines, and he had but three onely legitimate) Ochus hauing brought to passe al his purpose, sauing Arsames, who being in the grea∣test fauor with the king, could no longer abide to deferre his intent, entised Harpaces, Tiribazus sonne, to make an ende of this tragedie to kil his brother, which he performed: which Arsames killed by Tiribazus sonne. whēit was told the king, being very weake & almost gone for age, he tooke it to his hart, & consumed the few daies which were behind of his life, in great anguish & sorow, after he had liued foure score & foureteene yeeres, & had reigned in Per∣sia 62. yeres: Thus the house & stocke of noble Cyrus ended. Artax. reigned 62. yeeres. CHAP. IIII. Of the tyranny of Darius Ochus: of his sōne Arsames, and of the vtter confusion and last ruine of the Persians, in the time of the last king Darius surnamed Codomanus, by Alexander the great. IT was found that this Artaxerxes Mnemon, sur∣named with the Grecians the great, was a noble, wise, & discreete prince, in respect of the succes∣sion that reigned after him. Eusebius tooke this to be Assuerus, which maried Esher, as the He∣brues did: but Zonaras, Bibliander, Melancthon, with others af∣firme Darius Hystaspis, as before is spoken.
During the long reigne of this king, reigned in Macedonia foure kings one after another, Pausanias, Amintas, Argeus, and the fourth Amintas againe: in Egypt gouerned Nectanebus, and in Sparta, after the death of Agis gouerned Agesilaus, a wise valiant prince, who inuaded Phrygia, scattered the ar∣mie of Tisaphernes the Persian, and put him to flight at the ri∣uer Pactolus. In this kings time was Lysander, that so much plagued the Athenians, slaine by the Thebans, a man of great fame amongst the Lacedemonians: diuers are of opinion, that he reigned not so long as Plutarch saith: some attributing fourtie, as Ruffi∣nus: Ruffinus de origine Persar. others 36. as Functius doth: but it is not materiall: hee was a iust, modest, and a wise king: Persia, Asia, and all Greece, and specially Iudea might so say, when they sawe the tyran∣nie of Ochus, who succeeded him. About this time in Rome Camillus triumphed ouer the peo∣ple Camillus tri∣umphed. called Veyans, when M. Manlius and Lu. Valerius were Consuls. In this Artaxerxes time liued Mausolus king in Ca∣ria, Mausolus tombe. of whose wife named Artimesia it is thus reported, that when the king her husband died, she made him such a sump∣tuous tombe, so worthie a monument, so braue a building, that it was compted for the rarenesse thereof, one of the se∣uen wonders of the world: for Artemesia had the most skilful∣lest cunning men of that age, as Timotheus, Scopas, Brixias, and Leocharas. Likewise reigned in this time in Thessalia a great Pnij. lib. 36. Alex. Pheraeus a tyrant. tyraunt Alexander Pheraeus, who was wont to burie men a∣liue, and to put others in the skinnes of beares and wilde bores, and then to set houndes vpon them to teare them in pieces: others hee would binde to a post naked, and woulde himselfe both shoote and throwe dartes to kill them. In a battell against this tyraunt Pelopidas that valiant Theban cap∣taine was slaine, and afterward the tyraunt was killed by his owne wife. In this Artaxerxes time Rome was laid siege vnto, and ta∣ken Eutropius lib. 2. T. Lini. lib. 6. by the Frenchmen: but by Camillus the Romane dictator manfully rescued, to the ouerthrowing of the Volcos, and the
Hetruscans: hee subdued their people, wasted their townes, and afterward builded vp Rome againe, repaired the Capitoll after that he had repulsed the Frenchmen, and made them Eutrop. lib. 1. most willing to flee from Rome. About this time two great Townes in the Countrey of Poloponesus in Greece, were swal∣lowed vp by an earthquake, called Helice and Burae. Plato the Philosopher, about this time florished. Aristotle was yet a yong man, Platoes scholler, fourtie and foure yeeres yonger then his master. Diogenes liued this time: so farre doeth Xenophons histo∣rie of the Grecians reache: for hee began where Thu∣cydides left. Socrates Platoes master, was nowe in Athens poisoned. Demosthenes borne in the one yeere with Aristotle, a fa∣mous Orator afterward. Ctesias a Persian Historiographer, serued this king Ar∣taxerxes in his house. Artaxerxes Ochus after he had killed his two brethren Ari∣aspes Ochus 8. king of Persia. and Arsames, succeeded his father, not in iustice, but in tyrannie: not in gouerning of his subiects, but in murthering of princes: of all the kings of Persia most cruell: yea Cambyses coulde not match him: for after hee had played the beare at home with his owne people, he plaied like the lion abroade amongst other nations, specially with the Iewes, who liued all this time in tranquilitie, enioying Halciones dayes in buil∣ding Darius Ochus compared to Cambyses. vp Ierusalem, in repayring the Temple, in rearing vp the walles, in planting againe religion, and inhabiting Iudea, and so possessing the libertie of the Countrey graunted first by Cyrus, cōfirmed by Darius, but fully permitted by Artaxerxes, surnamed Longhanded, Esdras, Nehemias, Zorobabel, being in∣strumēts thereunto appointed, & authorised by these good kings. But this cruel Ochus after he had destroied the stocke of
Cyrus in the beginning of his gouernment, he laid siege to Si∣don, kept them most miserably without any hearing of peace or offering of mercie, though it was by the best and grauest citizens humbly entreated for, whom hee most cruelly slue without respect to the lawe of armes: whereat the citizens being desperate to see his tyrannie, they burned the towne Reade this miserable hi∣storic in Diod. and themselues, to the number of fourtie thousand. After this, Ochus tooke his voiage to Ciprus, where reig∣ned at that time a familiar friend of his named Euagoras, whō he, after he had taken Ciprus, and made slaughter most cruelly of the citizens, killed without respect of olde amitie and ac∣quaintance. Of this Euagoras there is extant an eloquent ora∣tion Oros. lib. 3. cap. 7 of Isocrates: hee proceeded forwarde in armes to Egypt, where he exercised the like tyrannie with sword & fire with∣out mercie, vntill he had subdued Egypt: thence he went, fo∣med in blood vnto Phoenicia, with all tyrannie he could de∣uise. Nowe after he had subdued Sidon, Ciprus, Egypt, Phoenicia, he woulde not spare Iudea the next prouince vnto Phoenicia, which had beene in great rest from Artaxerxes the long han∣ded vntill this time: at what time cōtention grew betweene two brethren about the office of the high Priest at Ierusalem, Iohanna who was then the high Priest, and Iesus who sought ayde at Vagoses hand the Persian: to auoide this helpe Iohanna slue his brother in the temple of Salomon. Thus they did prouoke God to anger, and God raised Va∣goses, Ochus lieutenant to be their enemie, brought him to Ie∣rusalem, went to the temple which was prophaned and pol∣luted Melancthon 2. Chron. with blood. Vagoses spoiled it, caried the treasures with him: to whom the high Priest had tolde him that he did most wickedly so to defile the temple: hee answered, Not so wic∣kedly as thou in killing thy brother. Whē he had both spoi∣led Ierusalem and the temple, and brought the Iewes vnder O∣chus foote to pay tribute vnto the Persians for the space of se∣uen Vagoses Ochus lieutenant. yeeres: after this he brought diuerse families of the Iewes captiues with him vnto Hircania: this great calamitie endu∣red The Iewes plagued by Ochus. vnto Alexander the great, which when he came to Ieru∣salem,
made all things well againe. Of this Ochus there is no good thing to be written, though Herodot doeth not altoge∣ther omitte him. Ctesias doth make likewise mention of him, Ochus a cruell king. and doth write of his birth, of his life, and of his gouerment, and doeth much varie from others: for Ctesias euer flattered the Persia kings, forwhich Plutarch in many places reproueth him. In this time reigned king in Macedonia Perdiccas, who was taken by the Illyrians in battell: after him succeeded Phi∣lippus Amintas sonne, and father to Alexander the great, who began to moue warre against the Athenians, and continued after against other cities of Greece for three yeeres. In the eleuenth yeere of Ochus was Alexander the great borne: the same selfe day was the temple of Diana in Ephesus burned, at the which time Philomelus a captaine of Phocea in Iustinus lib. 8. Greece, spoiled the temple of Apollo at Delphos: thereby grew great warres called sacrum bellum, which continued tenne yeeres in Greece. About this time Clearchus the tyraunt reig∣ned Functius lib. 3. in Heraclia, and Spartacus the sonne of Leuconis reigned as king in Pontus. In the eleuenth yeere that Phillip reigned king in Macedo∣nia, Philip of Ma∣cedon. Greece was sore troubled and vexed: for Philip with an ar∣mie of Macedonia tooke Myciberna, Tiro, and Olynthus, three great townes of Helespont: hee pursued the Phoceans vnto the temple of Apollo at Delphos, who thinking to haue sanctuarie, were burned: the rest of Phocea yeelded to Philip. Timoleon a noble captaine of Corinth sailed to Sicilia, ouerthrewe the ca∣stell of Syracusa, and made a popular state of Syracusa: he deli∣uered the Greekes that were in bondage in Sicilia vnder the Carthagineans, vnto their countrie, & banished the thousand traiterous souldiers that had forsakē Timoleon in Sicilia. This Plutarch in Ti∣moleon. time Philip subdued the Illyrians, vāquished the Thracians, and deliuered Thessalie from tyrants, that long gouerned in Thes∣salia: he made free al the cities of Greece frō all the incursions of barbarous nations, & concluded a peace with the Greekes. The olde Persians had this custome when they went to warres, to goe in red cassockes according to the Persians ma∣ners:
so did Artaxerxes enter to battell with his brother Cy∣rus, If you will know of Cyrus fully, reade Xenphon de  l. and also de expdt. Cyri. at what time euery souldier should put an arrowe with his name written on it, into a large great coffer that stood in the kings Court: which arrowe if he returned aliue from the warres, hee shoulde at his comming to Persia take his ar∣rowe out of the coffer: for by arrowes left in the coffer, they knewe who they were, and howe many that died in their warres. This time died Plato, and Speusippus succeeded him in his schoole, after whom succeeded Xenocrates. Aristotle the Philosopher florished in this time. Demosthenes and Aeschines, two famous Orators, bore most swaynowe in Athens. After Ochus had reigned in tyrannie twentie sixe yeeres, he was vsed euen as he had vsed others, slaine of Bagoas, and Ochus slaine of Bagoas. his sonne called Arsames being very young succeeded him: who when he had bene foure yeres king, and had growen in∣to some stature of body, Bagoas feeling a gilitie conscience, for that he had killed Ochus the kings father, fearefullest some reuenge would fall vnto him, he to preuent the danger there∣of, practized the like conspiracie against the sonne, as he did before against his father, & slue the young king: this was the ende of Ochus, and his sonne Arsames: no marueile to see ty∣rants Arsames, Ochus sonne slaine by Bagoas. die by tyrannie. This Bagoas would haue had translated the kingdome of Persia, after this murther of the father and the sonne, and his great tyrannie vnto one Darius, gouernor at that time of Ar∣menia: for he had murthered al them that issued out of Cyrus: for whē Artaxerxes Mnemon had made warres with the Cadu∣ceans, one of those nations chalenged Monomachian, which is Darius the last king of Persia. a combate, with any one Persian that durst take him in hand: Darius one of Artaxerxes captaines fought with this Caduce∣an and slue him, to whom the gouernment of Armenia was giuen for that seruice by Artaxerxes. Nowe Bagoas when he had brought Darius to be king in
Persia, stil his conscience tormented him, and doubted much Darius, & fearing lest he should haue the reward of a traytor, hee deuised to poyson Darius: but of the conspiracie Darius had such intelligence, as Bagoas was forced to drinke that Bagoas dranke of his owne poyson. draught which hee had prepared for Darius, and so Bagoas dranke his owne poyson, and dyed. Nowe the great kings of Persia (for so were they called in Diodod. 17. respect of their force and power) continued no longer, their race ended, their kingdom cameto an Aliens hand, a forreine prince, who in short time waxed strong and stout withall, not inferiour to any of his predecessors: who hauing intelli∣gence of a great armie of Macedonians and Grecians by Philip king of Macedon sent to Asia, hee gathered his force, and ha∣uing Alex. the great already a huge hoste of Persians, hee appointed a gene∣rall ouer them called Memnon, a Rhodian, a singuler skilfull souldier. In the meane season Philip died, and his sonne Alex∣ander the great succeeded him, a yong gallant king, of twen∣tie yeeres of age: this stept in into his fathers roume, he en∣terteined his fathers souldiers, and tooke the warres of Asia in hand. Darius hearing of Alexanders setting forward, made him ready, stirred the cities of Greece against him, so that di∣uers of Greece vnderstanding the force, power, and florishing state of Persia, dehorted their countrie men from Alexander, Melancthon 2. Chron. and to sticke and to staie with Darius. The Thebanes began to forsake the Macedonians, saying they would fight with the Persians, which had often defended the libertie of Greece. Demosthenes traueiled as much as lay in him, to bring the Athenians to ioyne with the Thebanes, and so to stand with the Persians: for Demosthenes so hated Alexan∣der, Thebes de∣stroyed. that he called him , as Aeschines sayth. This moued Alexander to some anger: he returned to Greece, began with the Thebans, destroyed and brought the citie of Thebes euen to the ground, after he had slaine sixe thousand Thebans, and taken captiues thirtie thousand. Then Alexander sent to Athens, required those men which perswaded this warre, to be sent vnto him, which was Demosthenes, Lycurgus, and others. Here Demosthenes perswa∣ded
the Athenians with a fable of the wolfe, who offred peace to the shepheards vpon condition to banish their dogges, opened the meaning of Alexander, and the danger ensuing: Demades sent to Alex. and therefore Demades an eloquent Orator, & one that lo∣ued peace was sent vnto Alexander to entreate for peace: which was graunted by Alexander in such gentle sort, that he wan great fauour in all Greece: such was the clemencie and li∣beralitie of this prince, that all Greece with one consent made him the generall & defender of their liberties. Now hauing laid al things quiet in Greece, he came in the second yere of his reigne toward Asia. In the meane seasō Da∣rius king of Persia hauing leauied a great armie, sent his cap∣taines The first bat∣tell betweene Alex. and Dari. at the riuer of Granicus. & lieutenants to tarie Alexander at the riuer Granicus, and there to giue battell, where Alexander must fight of ne∣cessitie, that riuer being the only barre to stop his entrie vnto Asia. Darius had two captaines, named Rosases, & Spithridates, who being valiant men, began the battell, & did set vpon A∣lexander both together. Alexander was in great daunger, had not Clitus his foster brother saued him at that time: for many Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. came at once vpō him: yet Darius in the endhad the worst: for the Persians stood not to it, but turned their backes and fled, and Darius armie was put to flight. This was the first battell fought betweene Darius & Alexander, at the riuer of Granicus. In the second battell Darius himself comes in person against 600. thousand n the 2. battel of Darius in Cicilia. the great Alexander, hauing leauied in Susa a great power of sixe hundred thousand fighting men, trusting much in the multitude of his souldiers, the rather further emboldened by a dreame which Darius sawe. Beside all this, hee waxed more bould, for that Alexander staied so long in Cicilia, supposing him to be afraid: so partly by his great army, & partly by his dreame (which was, that he saw all the Macedonian army on a fire) & partly for that he thought Alexander durst not come, he waxed proud, & vsed contemptuous words against Alex∣ander, Darius con∣temptuous words of Alex. saying hee feared nothing so much, as that Alexander would flee, before he would come at him: but he was satisfi∣ed by one Amintas a banished man of Macedonia, who knewe wel the disposition of Alexander. This second battell happe∣ned
in Cicilia, where Darius was put to flight: howbeit, Alex∣ander was hurt in one of his thighes with a blowe of a sword. Alexand. hurt. Chares writeth, that Darius himself hurt him, & saith also, that Darius & Alexander fought hand to hand in this battel. Darius lost a hundred ten thousand of his men, yet scaped Darius and fled, but his wife Statira, and his mother Sisigambis, and Darius, his wife his mother, & his daughter taken. two of his daughters were taken by Alexander. Darius hauing two ouerthrows already, & seeing the great nes of Alexanders inuincible courage, hauing but 30000. Gre∣cians in his armie, with which smal number he conquered all Asia, & all the East countries, Darius sent Embassadors to A∣lexander Darius sent Embassadors. with letters to diuers of his friends about him, to en∣treate of peace, offering Alexander 10000. talents, with Meso∣potamia, & all the countries, signories, and lands on the one side of Euphrates, with one of his two daughters in mariage, that they might be kinsemen & friendes: but it would take no Reade Curtius of Alexander. place with Alexand. except Darius submitted himselfe in per∣son vnto the curtesie of Alexand. Now Statira Darius wife di∣ed in trauell of child being captiue with Alexander after the second battell, which encreased much the misfortune of Da∣rius. When Darius Embassadors tooke no effect for peace, then he gathered a greater armie then the second, & had got∣tenne An other ar∣mie of Darius of 10. hundred thousand. hūdred thousand fighting men against Alexander at the riuer of Euphrates, making his praier vnto his gods, that if the kingdome of Persia must needes haue an end either through diuine reuenge, or by naturall change, that none but Alexan∣der might sit in Cyrus throne after him. Alexander with his ar∣mie went to meete with Darius: the battell was fought at Ar∣belles by report of most writers, though Plutarch & others na∣med it Gausameles: the victorie happened vnto Alexander, vn∣to the ouerthrowe of Darius, and last destruction of Persia. Diod. lib. 17. Thus the great Empire of Persia, the glory and renowne whereof all the world spake of, is brought to an end by Alex∣ander in three battels, with 30. thousand men. The treasure which Alexander caried away from Persia vnto Macedonia, loded tenne thousand Moyles, and fiue thousand Camels.
The kingdome of Persia continued from Cyrus vnto Alex∣ander the great: for as Cyrus gate Chaldea and Assyria vnto Per∣sia from Balthasar the last successour of Nabuchodonosor: so A∣lexander got Persia from this Darius, which was none of Cy∣rus posteritie vnto Macedonia, though in trueth Arsames the sonne of Ochus Darius predecessor was the last of Cyrus house: and yet Melancthon sayth, that Darius was Arsames sonne, and so doeth Eusebius. Thus ended the great kingdome of Persia: in like sort as they had by Cyrus woone it, so nowe by Darius they lost it: therefore I thought it necessarie to set downe the names of the kings of Persia, howe many they were, and how long they reigned, from Cyrus the first, vntill Darius the last king of Persia. 1 Cyrus the first king of Persia reigned twentie and nine yeeres. 2 Cambyses his sonne the second king of Persia, reigned seuen yeeres and more. 3 Darius the sonne of Hystaspis the third king of Persia, reigned 36. yeeres, maried to Atossa Cyrus daughter. 4 Xerxes Darius sonne reigned twentie one yeeres. 5 Artaxerxes long handed reigned 44. yeeres. 6 Darius Nothus reigned nineteene yeeres. 7 Artaxerxes Mnemon reigned fourtie yeres. Functi∣us saieth thirtie sixe yeeres. Plutarch doeth write that he reigned sixtie two yeeres. 8 Ochus his sonne after he had killed both his brethren, Ariaspes and Arsames, reigned twentie sixe yeres. 9 Arsames the sonne slaine by Bagoas, reigned 4. yeeres. 10 Darius the last king of Persia, ouerthrowen by Alex∣ander the great, reigned sixe yeeres. Thus the Greekes laye them downe in their Cataloge, though Eusebius otherwaise sets them downe. Darius Medus, Functius. of whom mention is made in Daniel, is here of the Grecians omitted. Iosephus thinkes him to be Ciaxeres Astyages sonne: and so Xenophon agreeing with Iosephus, placeth Darius Medus before Cyrus. Metasthenes doeth not much dissent from the
Greekes in his Cataloge, sauing that he speaketh not of Cam∣byses, because hee reigned in his fathers time: for hee was ap∣pointed to be king in Persia in the absence of Cyrus, who in his owne person went against the Scythians at that time. Likewise Metasthenes omitteth to speake of Xerxes, who Xerxes omit∣ted by Metast∣henes. for the like reason being in great warres at that time from home in Greece, leauing behinde him to gouerne Persia his sonne Artaxerxes: so that Metasthenes writeth, that Darius Medus and Cyrus, reigned together two yeeres, and then pas∣seth to Darius Hystaspis, which is also called Assuerus, making no mention of Cambyses name: and then he goeth to Artax∣erxes Melancthon 2. Chron. the long handed, passing ouer the name of Xerxes his fa∣ther: the cause is layd downe by Melancthon: in the rest Me∣tasthenes doth agree with the Greekes. After that the Persians the strongest and the greatest na∣tions of the world had gotten the Monarchie of the Assyri∣ans & Chaldeans, not by the sword of Cyrus, but by the idolatrie of Balthasar, whom God gaue ouer vnto Cyrus hand, making an end of one, and beginning with the other: for the finger of God doth appoint Monarchies according to Sirach, say∣ing: No kingdome shalbe translated, if wickednesse of the king and kingdome be not the cause thereof. Nabuchodonosor was conuer∣ted and confessed Gods power: Euilmerodach his sonne ac∣knowledged the Highest: but Balthasar through blasphemie and idolatrie lost the Empire of Assyria: Euen so in Persia, while Cyrus, Darius Medus, Darius Hystaspis, Artaxerxes gouer∣ned Persia, the Persians florished, they were lordes of the whole world. Nowe when Alexander had abated their pride and di∣minished 11. Olympiad. their force, & had taken their Empire from them vnto Macedonia, and had substituted lieutenants and gouer∣nours vnder him in all kingdomes and countries, where the Persians had before soueraigntie: for as the Persians were ob∣scure and of no fame before Cyrus time, so after Alexander the great, their renowne was lost, their pompe and their pride decayed, & their kings afterward of small accompt: for nowe Macedonia and the Grecians triumphed, and the Persians being
destroyed and scattered without any king or any prince of Alex. Seuerus anno Christ. 225. fame to gouerne them, vntill the time of Alexander Seuerus Emperor of Rome, fiue hundred & fiftie yeres after Alexander the great, at what time liued in Rome Vrbanus Bishop there at that time: this Emperour had a mother named Mammea, a wise and a discreete woman, who hauing knowledge that O∣rigen, a great man in the Church of God was then at Anti∣oche, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 18. sent for him, and so enterteined him as a rare iewell in those dayes. At that time reigned in Persia one Artaxerxes, who being of the name of the auncient kings of Persia, was Olymp. 251. likewise wise and valiant, and in processe of time grewe so strong, that he ouerthrew Artabanus king of the Parthians, and thereby restored to the Persians a beginning of a newe king∣dome. CHAP. V. Of the estate of the Persians vnder the Romanes after the time that they were conquered by Alexander the great, vntil the time of Alexander Seuerus Emperour of Rome 550. yeeres after, at what time began the newe kingdome of Persia by one Artaxerx∣es, and of his successors, vntill the Persians the fourth time were vtterly destroyed by the Saracens. THe Persians againe began to take strength, and to drawe together in the fourth yere Agath. lib. 2. & 4. de bello Gothorū. of Alexander Seuerus reigne, in the which time florished many great and famous learned men, which were for their singularitie elected Counsellers to the Emperour, as Fabius Sabinus. Domitius Vlpianus. Aelius Gordianus. Iulius Paulus. Pomponius Alphenus. Florentius and Martianus. Calistratus and Hermogenes. Venulcius and Triphonius. Metianus and Celsus. Porculus & Modestius, pro∣fessours of all the ciuill lawe, and to Papinianus a singular rare man in those dayes: but of this matter Lampridius doth write
at large. But let vs nowe returne to Persia, and to the newe The Persians without king from the 112. Olymp. to 251. Olymp. kingdome which had beene so long without king or king∣dome, but kept vnder of euery nation not daring to name a king from Darius vntill this Artaxerxes. This first king of the newe kingdome of Persia, after hee had slaine Artabanus king of Parthia, and had reigned fif∣teene yeeres: hee was ouerthrowen and subdued by the Ro∣mane Emperour Alexander Seuerus, of whom hee triumphed Herodimus. in the ninth yeere of his Empire, though some hold the con∣trarie, that Alexander in that battell was discomfited by Artabanus. In this time the Romanes had gotten three great victories, one in Mauritania by Furius Celsus: the seconde in Illirico by Varus Macrinus: and the third in Armenia by Iunius Palinatus, three famous Romanes: of these victories Lampridius maketh mencion: Herodianus sayeth, that in Fraunce reigned Hilde∣gastus, a king much honoured of the Frenchmen, by whose Hildegastus. diligence and pollicie Fraunce, which was then rude and barbarous both in liuing and in maners, became ciuill and pollitike: for vnto this time their building was very base and simple in Fraunce. About this time Origene was called from Herodian lib. 6. Origne. Alexandria vnto Caesarea, where he made his booke entituled De Martyrio. And nowe was Iulius Affricanus of great estimation after Iu. Affrican. Artaxerxes succeeded Sapores, the second king of Persia: this reigned thirtie one yeeres, hee had sore warres with Gordia∣nus Gordianus. king of Affrica: this Gordianus pronounced open warres, and commaunded their temple of Ianus to be opened as the Romanes did vse when warre was proclaimed: hee destroyed many Cities and Townes, and continued his warres against Eutrop. lib. 8. the Persians, made great hauocke in all places, and gaue the repulse to Sapores: howe be it Gordianus was by conspirators deceiued, and of him whome hee deserued well of, by trea∣cherie slaine of one Philip, surnamed Arabs. This Philip gouerned the Romanes fiue yeres, and builded a towne of his owne named Thracia, called Philippus Caesar, at
what time the plaies Ludi saeculares, were set forth with such 257. Olymp. pompe in Rome, as the like to that time were not seene. The Parthians inuaded Armenia, droue the king called Tyridas Eusebius. out of the countrie, tooke his children, & possessed his coun∣trie: certeine sectes of heresie began in Arabia, which Origen did ouerthrow: in Affrike likewise questions grew, whether Hist. eccle. lib. 6. cap. 2. heretikes being conuerted from their errors might be rebap∣tized: of this Ciprian, and the ecclesiasticall histories write, Ciprian lib. 1. epist. 2. and of a councell called concerning the same: for Berilhis a∣bout this time bishop of Bostherna, fell to a monstrous error, denying the eternitie of Christ. In the twelfth yeere of Sapores reigne happened such a sicknesse in the most part of the world, specially in Egypt and Alexandria, that Ciprian thereby tooke an occasion to write a booke entituled De morta∣litate. Trebellius. About this very time the Gothes rushed into Asia, spoiled townes and cities, wasted many countries, burned the great temple of Diana at Ephesus, and did great harme: the Germanes Oros. , cap. 22. ioyned with the Frenchmen, gathered a huge armie very strong against the Romanes, ented into Italie, made hauocke in all places, vntill they came to Rauenna. Trebellius setteth downe the spoile that the Gothes haue done in Greece, in Pon∣tus, and in Macedonia. But to returne to Sapores king of Persia, who in the seuenteenth yere of his reigne got a great armie of souldiers, entred into Syria, Cilicia, & Capadocia, committed great crueltie and slaughter, vntill Valerian the Emperour met him in Mesopotamia, and gaue him battel, where the king of Persia was ouerthrowen and taken by the Emperour, by Sapores taken. whom he was kept captiue in miserable seruitude all his life afterward in Persis. Odenatus held then the whole Empire of the East in his hand at this time, which being slaine by his coosin Maeonis, Zenobia Odenatus wife, a famous woman re∣uenged her husbands death, after the king her husband had Zenobia Odena∣tus wife. vanquished the Persians, and had put the king Sapores to flight, and pursued him vnto the citie of Ctesiphon, where he besie∣ged him, and brought him to great extremitie.
This Zenobia ruled the Palmyrians with her two yong sonnes Herreminianus and Timolaus, and as Trebellius writeth of her, she sent an armie of souldiers against Egypt, vnder two vali∣ant captaines Sarba and Timogenes: she was wise, learned and stoute, and compted for her courage and magnanimitie a se∣cond Semyramis. In the last yeres of Sapores king of Persia, was Paulus Samosatenus in the last council had at Antioche, cōdem∣ned Paulus Samo∣satenus. as heretike, and put from his bishopricke, by Aurelian the Emperor. The third king of Persia was called Ormisdates: this Ormisdates the third king of Persia. raigned but one yeere, and did nothing worth the writing. But Aurelianus hauing asswaged the furie and sedition which then was at Rome, sent his armie to Thracia and to Illyria, where Aurelianus great victo∣ries. he vanquished the Barbarous nations, slewe the grand cap∣taiue of the Gothes by the riuer Danubius, ouerthrew the Sue∣ians, Sarmates and Germanes, and slew of the Almanes fifteene thousande: thence he returned his force vnto the East, van∣quished the Palmireans, and their famous Queene zenobia, and after he inuaded Egypt, and triumphed ouer these nati∣ons in Rome. After this, he began to persecute the Christians, and to send His persecu∣tions against the Christians. his commissions abroad vnto all places, with great crueltie to vexe and to molest the Church: but in the middest of his tyrannie he was slaine by conspiracie of his owne seruant, Ecclesiast. 7. cap. 26. Orosius lib. 7. cap. 23. betweene Bizantium and Heraclea: the heresies of Manichees began in Aurelianus time. Now in Persia began Vararanes their fourth king, and ano∣ther Vararanes the fourth king of Persia. of that name succeeded him the fift king of Persia, of whom there was nothing done during nine yeeres which they raigned, worth the reciting. After these succeeded in Persia Narses the sixt king of the Persians: this began to flou∣rish Narses the sixt king of Persia. and to waxe strong, gathered force about him, and be∣gan to warre in Mesopotamia, and in Armenia, wasted, subdued and vanquished all the prouinces thereabout, tooke Galerius. in hand, and gaue him in battell the ouerthrow. This Maxi∣minus Constantius Maximinus. Galerius being elected together with Constantius Chlo∣rus, both Emperours for two yeeres, the Romanes had then
their handfull to do: diuers nations reuolted from them, and many countreis were in armes against them, and they much weakened from the force and power of the olde Romanes, by reason of the treason and murther, one Emperour finding meanes to kill another: therefore Constantius was made a gouernour of a great armie of Romanes to resist the force of Fraunce, Hispaine, Affricke and Italy. Galerius appointed ge∣nerall against Greece, Illyrica, Persia, and the East countreys: either of these two had the name of Caesar giuen them, and well worthie. For Constantius discomfited the Germanes, made free the Frenchmen, subdued and slewe threescore thousand of the Eutrop. lib. 10. Almanes: Maximinus hee on the other side vanquished the whole armie of the Assyrians, gaue the ouerthrowe to Narses king of Persia after the first battell, and at that time brought vnder the Romane Empire fiue prouinces. Misdates the eight king of the Persians raigned seuen yeres Misdates the eight king of Persia. and nine monethes, in whose raigne happened in Tyre and Sydon such an earthquake, that innumerable people were slaine thereby: that houses and whose streetes fell downe to the grounde, in the yeere of CHRIST, three hundreth and sixe. In the which time Dioclesian the Emperour, in the nine∣tenth yeere of his raigne, began extremely to persecute the Dioclesians per∣secution. Christians, which cōtinued most cruelly for thirteene yeres. Of such persecution shall you scant reade in all the Ecclesia∣stical histories: this Emperour was so proude, that after hee had done his triumph in Rome with such pompe and magni∣ficence, Pomponius Laetus. he commaunded his subiects to adore him, and to worship him with some diuine seruice, Fratrem solis & lune se nuncupans, putting golden shoes on his feete, wrought with pearles and precious stones, with an edict giuen, that his no∣bles and great men should kisse his feete. By this time Sa∣por the ninth king of the Persians had raigned seuentie yeres: he was crowned (as Functius saith) in his mothers wombe, Ruffinus de orig. Perfi. hee plagued those Christians that dwelt then in his territo∣ries,
with taxes, tribute, and with all crueltie, at length per∣secuted them with open murther and slaughter: for he slew Simeon Archbishoppe of Seleucia, with a hundreth more in one day of Christians: hee layed siege to Nisibis, and got Singara, Bizabda, and Amyda, three great townes from Con∣stantius Eutrop. lib. 10. that were vnder the Romanes, tooke them, scattered and destroyed the Romane armie, that peace was offered to Sapor at that time by the Romanes. Of this king Sapor, and of his great warres called Persi∣cum Ammia. lib. 19. & 20. bellum, of his long gouernment, and of his often perse∣cution against the Christians, reade Eutropius and Pompo∣nius Laetus. During his raigne Constantine the great, was Constntine the great. made Emperour of the Romanes, the sonne of Constantius the last before him sirnamed Chlorus, a good Emperor, he sought peace, and restored peace, specially to the Christians, which were before so persecuted by Dioclesian, by Valerian, by Sapor, and by the Emperour Licinius, which presently succeeded his vncle Constantine. Eusebius sayeth, that Helena the wife of Constantius Chlo∣rus, Helena. and mother to Constantine the great, founde the Crosse vpon the which our Sauiour CHRIST died, in Ierusalem. Of Eusebius trip. lib. 2. cap. 18. this the Romane Papists make much more adoe then of the Sonne of GOD who died thereon: for the Messias our Saui∣our they robbe of his glory and honour, and the Crosse of wood they worship and adore. This Constantine builded two famous great cities, the one Helenopolis and Constantinopolis builded by Constantine the great. named Helenopolis after his mothers name, being before cal∣led Drepana an auncient citie in Bythinia, the other hee buil∣ded, and named it after his owne name Constantinopolis, be∣fore called Bizantium, a very auncient citie in Thracia. At this time died in Syria and Cilicia, a great multitude of people of famine and hunger. This time was Athanasius called from exilement by the Emperour Constantine, and was sent vnto Alexandria, where hee was sore vexed by the Arrians, a secte of heresies sprong vp in those dayes by one Arrius of whome the rest
were named Arrians. Donatius, an arch heritike, a beginner of other heresies, of whom many heritikes flowed in Affricke. Diuers sects of heresies. Constantine though he could keepe the Church from tyran∣nicall persecution by restoring of peace, yet hee could not stop the rage of heretikes which in his dayes were many: as the Sabellies, the Manichees, the Donatists, the Arrians, and the Nouatians: yet God raised singular learned men to defend his Church, as Origene, who suppressed them, & disputed against them, in Arabia, and in Affrica. After him Cyprian bishop of Carthage, Lactantius a very eloquent man, and Ambrose bishop of Millaine: but of this you shall reade more; where I entreat of Councils and Synods in the March of Martyrs. But now to the kings of Persia. Artaxerxes succeeded Sapo∣res, Artaxerxes the tenth king of Persia. in Persia the tenth king, and raigned 11. yerees: of whom as of the rest, litle or nothing is to be written: for then the kings of Persia were not of such fame, or of such force, as be∣fore while they ruled as lords ouer the worlde, for two hun∣dreth and thirtie yeeres. Now they had much to doe to de∣fend themselues from inuasions, the monarchie had passed away to Macedonia, their wealth, power and countrey were brought to nothing by Alexander the great: the kingdome of the Gothes and the Vandales began first their gouernment to∣gether The kingdom of the Gothes, the Vandales, and of Lom∣bards at this time began. with this Artaxerxes: the first kingdome of Hunni and of Lombardie, began also now to take footing in the yeere of our Lord three hundreth seuentie and fiue. This time a nomber of Christians were againe restored to their countrey, which had bene banished before: likewise more then fourescore thousand of Burgundines, which inha∣bited about the riuer Rhene, became Christians at once, at what time Theodosius the Emperour gaue two or three bat∣tels to the Gothes, ouerthrew them, and constrained them to goe out of Thracia, with their king Athanaricus. This time liued Ambrose bishop of Millaine, and Gregorie Ambrose bi∣shop of Mil∣laine. Nazianzenus died, two famous learned men, in whose time two Councils were called, the one in Rome, and the other in Constantinople. Theodosius the Emperour hearing that Maximus
was proclaimed Emperour by his owne souldiers in Armori∣ca, which is called now litle Britaine, made an armie against Maximus, who now had taken Gratianus, and slew him at Lug∣dunum, and had driuen Valentianus from his gouernment in Lugdunū is Li∣ons in France. the West part to flee to Theodosius. By this time stept to be king in Persia Sapores the second of that name, and the eleuenth king of the Persians: he raigned Sapores the 11. king of Persia. fiue yeeres, who without any warres liued his time in rest. In his dayes were signes seene in heauen in the likenes of a doue, which burned and appeared for thirtie dayes, as Euse∣bius reporteth, which I omit. Litle is to be mentioned of the last kings of Persia, for that the Romanes kept them stil downe. About this time Theodosius went with his sonne Honorius to Constantinople, leauing behind him in Rome Valentianus to go∣uerne, who within a short time by false conspiracie of Euge∣nius was destroyed, whereby Eugenius vsurped the Empire: of this you shall reade more in the Romane Empire. Augustine Augustinus. a great clearke and one of Ambrose disciples, was now bishop of Hippo in Affrica. I thought good once for that I finde little or nothing worth the writing of the kings in Persia in those dayes (for that the Macedonians, and after them the Romans, had brought Persia and all other kingdoms to subiection for a long time) to set the sects and sundry sorts of heretikes that began like monsters to trouble the Church, to write of councils had Of heresies, and of Coun∣cils. herein by generall consent, of the opinions sprong of that time, and of their consultation: yet for that we hasten to end the historie of these later kings of Persia, of whom (as I haue said) litle is to be written, sauing of some few kings, as Artax∣erxes the first that restored to the Persians their kingdome, af∣ter he had slaine Artabanus king of the Parthians. Againe Sa∣pores the second king of Persia, Narses the seuenth king, and Sapor the ninth king of Persia: these kept tacke with the Ro∣manes, vexed Mesopotamia, Armenia, and other countreis, (as you heard before) persecuted the Christians, and did some actions that they seemed to shew a shadow of the olde Per∣Persiaus,
but to small effect: for the Saracens (as before you The Persians foure times subdued. heard) haue fully mastered them, and quite destroyed them, and so they came to their decay, first by Cyrus, then by Alex∣ander and by the Macedonians, and the thirde time by the Ro∣manes, and last by the Saracens. After Sapores the eleuenth king of Persia, entred Varanes the twelft king, who raigned twelue yeeres: in whose dayes were many signes in heauen, much earthquake in sundry places of the world, herefies, contentions, and many straunge questi∣ons demanded, as An Deus habeat corpus, & membra, and such other absurd and blasphemous quarels grew. Euen this time Auricular confession was abrogated by Nectarius then bishop Auricular con∣fession abro∣gated. Tripar. 9. cap. 35. of Constantinople, for filthie and many fornications cōmitted in those dayes by priests and deacons. The Frenchmen de∣nied tribute vnto the Romans also this very time: vpon which occasion, warre grew againe new betweene the Romanes and the Frenchmen in the time of Valentianus the Emperor. Hun∣ni were most busie in diuers parts of the East, spoiling Arme∣nia, and Pannonia, & passing ouer the riuer Ister, entred Thra∣cia, wasting and destroying al places that they came vnto. About this time Nectarius (of whom you read a litle be∣fore) Trip. 10. cap. 24. being bishop of Constantinople died, in whose place suc∣ceeded Chrysostom a famous learned man, of no lesse learning then vertue, who in the Council gathered at Cyprus, where Ori∣gens bookes were condemned by the auctoritie of Epiphanius and Theophilus two great learned men, and for that Chryso∣stome would not subscribe thereunto, he was put out of Coun∣cill, Ioan. Chry∣sostome. and banished from his bishopricke: howbeit, he was with great honour receiued againe vnto Constantinople with∣in a short space after. But to hasten out of the history of Persia. Isdigertes the thir∣teenth Isdigertes the 13. king of Persia. king raigned 21. yeeres in Persia, of whom wee reade nothing, but that he vexed and molested the Christians, and especially those he persecuted whom he found in any terri∣torie of his, and yet within a while the Christians had good successe in Persia, and the king much contented with them, Trip. 8.
pleasured and aduanced them, vsing them courteously and gently. Honorius now Emperour of the Romanes, associating Honorius. himselfe with Constantius whom hee sent to Fraunce, and by whom Constantine then was slaine, who gouerned at that time in Britannie, to whom Placidia Theodotius daughter was committed, and againe from Honorius giuen to his friend Constantine died in Bri∣taine. Constantius in mariage, by whom Constantius got Valentinus the thirde of that name: Constantius grew in such fauour with Honorius the Emperour by his great seruice in Fraunce and in Hispaine, that he was taken and chosen by Honorius himselfe to be his associat in the Empire. About this time all the Iewes that were cōmorant in Alex∣andria, Tripar. cap. 12. were thence expulsed with much blood and great slaughter, and this was done by Cyrillus then bishop of Alex∣andria. This time also was there a Councill at Carthage, where the heresies of the Pelagians were quite ouerthrowen: then died that great learned man S. Hierome. S. Hierom died. Now in Constantinople the Arrians fell in great discord be∣tweene themselues, which continued twentie and fiue yeres, and after that againe vnited and were made friends. In these dayes Paulus Orosius wrote his historie, and Nestorius was re∣mooued Paulus Orosius. from Antioch to be bishop at Constantinople. The Iewes againe as they were by the iustice of God scattered vn∣to all places of the world, so had they no rest in any place of the world, as you heard erst of the Iewes in Alexandria: so now likewise in Creete they had a false Moyses fained, whom then they so honoured, and whose lawes they obserued: and yet Eusebius saith, that a nomber of them at that time were con∣uerted Tripar. cap. 9. and became Christians. At this time in France, Faramundus was by common Faramundus. consent of the people elected and named king of Fraunce, who died seuen yeeres after he came to the kingdome. Mar∣comirus succeeded him being his owne brother, and he raig∣ned eighteene yeeres: of whose actions and liues, you shall in the histories of Fraunce reade more. The Frenchmen be∣ganne here to record and to nomber the kings of the whole
countrey of Gallia, which vntill that time were called Reges The Frenchmen began to be kings of all Gallia. Francorum, kings of Fraunce, being a parcel of Gallia. This hap∣pened in the yeere of the worlde foure thousand three hun∣dreth eightie and seuen, and in the 300. Olympiad. By this time raigned in Persia Varanes the fourth of that name, and after him raigned his sonne Varanes the fift of that name, and they When the O∣lympiads en∣ded, the Indi∣ctions of Con∣stantine began. both raigned 37. yeeres, and they had warres with the Ro∣manes also. In the time of this last king Varanes, began the In∣dictions of Constantine the great. Now againe the third time the Persians begin to quaile: for in the time of Corsoes and his sonne Hormisda the last king of Persia, the Saracens became lords and gouernours ouer the Persians, in the yeere of Christ our Sauiour 634. These are the names of these latter kings that raigned in newe Persia. 1 Artaxerxes the first king that restored the new king∣dome of Persia, raigned 15. yeeres. 2 Sapores raigned after him being the 2. king. 31. yeres. 3 Ormisdates. 1. yeere. 4 Varanes. 3. yeeres. 5 Varanes the second of that name. 16. yeres. 6 Varanes the thirde of that name. 4. monethes. 7 After him Narses. 7. yeres 8 Misdates. 7. yeeres. 9 Sapor raigned 70. yeeres: this king was crowned in his mothers wombe. 10 Artaxerxes the second of that name. 11. yeres. 11 Sapores the second of that name. 5. yeeres. 12 Varares the 4. 12. yeres. 13 Varanes the 5. of that name. 12. yeeres. 14 Isdigertes. 21. yeeres. 15 Varanes the fift of that name. 20. yeeres. 16 Varanes the sixt of that name. 17. yeres. 17 Perozes. 20. yeres. 18 Canades. 12. yeres. Lambases Procopius doeth call this Blasen, raigned 4. yeeres. 19 Cosroes. 48. yeres. 20 Hormisda Cosroes his sonne, and last king of the Persians, raigned 8. yeeres.
OF THE ORIGINAL OF Mahomet in Arabia: of his greatnes and credit, not onely among the Saracens and Arabians, but also in the East kingdomes: of the inuasions of the Saracens: of their scattering warres in Asia, Europe, and in Affricke: and of their continuance. THus the kingdome of Persia, the only monarchie of the world for 130. yeeres (I meane from Cyrus vnto Darius) is vtterly nowe de∣stroied by the Saracens the fourth time, a sort of infidels, which had their first original from Agar the bond woman of Abraham, by whom Abraham begate a base sonne called Ismael, whose pro∣genies were called Ismaelites af∣ter the name of Ismael among the Hebrewes: so were they in other places called Agareni after Agars name: and in conti∣nuance Agareni then, are called now Saraceni. of time from Agareni called Saraceni, which name they holde to this day. For euen as from Ammon and Moab, two incestuous sonnes of Lot gotten by his two daughters in his drunkennes, an infinite stocke of wicked and idolatrous people grew, which were named after their fathers name, Ammonites and Moabits, enemies to God and to his people:
so of this bond woman Agar and her sonne Ismael, all the Is∣maelites, Ismaelites and Saracens alone and all the Saracens doe spring: which people as they were in the beginning most in nomber, and most able of force and power to persecute then that little flocke of Iacob at that time: so now are they in the latter dayes of the world most in nomber by the names of Saracens, Turkes, Canes, infi∣dels, and such like other names. I will therefore but touch the historie of Saracens, for that they were alwayes people scattered into all Asia, and from thence to all parts of the world, much like to the Scythians, who in like maner russhed into all partes, and inuaded all countreys, being rude and barbarous nations, praying vp∣on euery place they came into. I referre them that wil reade of the Saracens, to Augustinus Caelius, who at large wrote their histories. I will briefly passe the names of some few of those which beganne to raigne from Mahomet, where he is named Muhamet which began his kingdome after Christ, sixe hun∣dreth twentie and foure, at what time Bonifacius the fift was the fourth Pope of Rome: for the great prophet Mahomet in The first Pope of Rome began in the time of Mahomet. Arabia, and the great Pope of Rome beganne at one times as two tyrants to persecute the Christians. These two grew so great, that they ruled all Christian Emperours, kings, prin∣ces and states: one, making them to holde his stirope, and to kisse his foote, the other with sworde and fire, tyrannized ouer kingdomes and nations, encreased his fame by blood and tyrannie. When Bonifacius the thirde, and the first Pope of Rome altered the title of a bishop to the dignitie of a Pope, Phocas then was Emperour of Constantinople: for while the Emperours flourished at Rome, no Pope was heard of. I will returne to speake of the Saracens, who at that very time that they ouercame the Persians, entred into Syria, slewe Bahanes with all his armie, tooke Damascus, brought Egypt to pay tribute, layde siege to Hierusalem, brought Antioche sub∣iect to the Saracens, wasted and spoyled all Syria, and brought Hierusalem. the kingdome of Persia (which so long flourished) vnder Ma∣homet,
who gouerned the Persians 800. yeeres and odde. This poisoned scorpion and the only plague of Christians (I meane Mahomet) was borne in Arabia, a large countrey and wide euery way: here they liue after diuers maners, and with diuers kinds of religion: some with powled heads and hoods like miters, some with beards shauen to their skinne: they ab∣staine from swines flesh: for Solinus saith, that no swine can liue in that Arabia, which the Greekes cal . Of the diuisiō of Arabia into Harmenios and Erembos, and the third into Scene∣tem, which is that countrey called the region of the Saracens, Snets people in Arabia dwelling in tents. people that haue no houses, but dwell in tents couered ouer with things made and wouen with goates haire like the ma∣ner of the Scythians, who likewise had no houses but their wa∣gons, in the which they carie their wiues, their children, and themselues into any coūtrey where they take warre in hand. Nowe of the Arabians trafique and marchandise, and of their frankincense, myrrhe, and many other kinde of spices, of their birdes, Phoenix and Cynomolgies, of their precious Solinus 45. stones, of their hilles, sweete riuers, and other rare things in Arabia, I referre you to Strabo: he leaueth nothing vntoucht Strabo lib. 16. within Arabia. But I wil returne to Mahomet, a poore man of a base and meane parentage, brought vp a seruant to feede and to at∣tend Mahomets edu∣cation. camels, a young man of a wonderfull craftie subtile wit: hauing married his mistresse, and thereby growen wealthie, he vsed the company of one Sergius a Monke, with whom he was taught to accuse the Iewes as wicked cruel tyrants, to kill Sergius a Monke. a great Prophet, and to accuse the Christians of ignorancie, and of much simplicitie, scoffing them for their superstitious ceremonies and meere fantasies in their religion (as he said) of their God Christ. This Mahomet vomited his malice in such sort, that not onely Asia, but Affricke and Europe were by him infected: hee settled himselfe in the richest regions of all Arabia na∣med Scenites, where in short time through the craft and subtiltie of his fained religion, and by the dayly accesse
of a white pigeon in the eare to eate graines of wheat, which he vsed to deceiue the simple, supposing the pigeon to bee some spirit from God that instructed Mahomet in all good discipline and religion, that whatsoeuer Mahomet did, it was taken as done by a prophet. He grew of such credite within Arabia, that he made lawes and decrees, he altered the whole course of the Arabians gouernment, and brought the Sara∣cens to beginne their yeeres and their accompt, from the be∣ginning of Mahomets raigne. For as the Grecians were wont to nomber yeeres by their Olympiads, the Romanes by their Lustrum: so the Arabians and the Saracens vsed their accompt by Hegira, begunne in the Hegira. time of Mahomet, at what time he escaped hardly the hands of the chiefe men in Arabia called Philarchi: who thought to kill Mahomet for his newe doctrine against the religion of the Arabians. But after he had escaped, he gathered a great armie, by meanes of many that tooke him and honoured him as a diuine prophet, and entred with force and maine strength againe vpon his enemies, and had the victory ouer them. From the which time the Arabians beganne to ac∣compt their yeeres in memorie of the escape of Mahomet by flight, which the Arabians call Hegira, and after by Mahomet Beroaldus lib. 4. cap. 5. commaunded in the time of Heraclius the Emperour and Pope Honorius, in the yeere of our Sauiour sixe hundreth twentie and one, to bee kept of the Saracens and of the Arabi∣ans in great honour and accompt, and to beginne all their ac∣compts, trafiques and marchandise, by Hegira. And as wee vse the yeere of our Lorde at the very day that he was con∣ceiued in the wombe of the Virgine by the holy Ghost: so the Arabians from the time of this Hegira by Mahomet com∣maunded, vsed their yeeres. MAhomet the great prophet, and the only Prince of Ara∣bia 1 Mahomet. began his gouernment in the yeere of our saluation 624. At what time Heraclius gouerned as Emperour in Con∣stantinople: he raigned nine yeres, died, and was honoured as a God to this day among the Saracens.
After this Mahomet, raigned in Arabia Ebubezer three 2 Ebuzer. yeeres: during which time, he subdued the citie of Gaza, and brought that prouince altogether vnder the Arabians, who at this beganne to be sirnamed Amiras, a name of dignitie, as Caesars among the Romanes, or Pharaos among the Egyptians: this raigned the first Amiras. The second Amiras was called Haumar, which raigned 12. 3 Haumar. yeeres: this enlarged the countrey of Arabia, from Egypt vn∣to the riuer Euphrates: this brought Persia subiect to Arabia, and forced Hormisda their last king to take his flight, and to leaue behinde him all his treasures, and all the wealth of Persia. This Amiras tooke Caesarea a citie in Palestina, after he had besieged it seuen yeeres by his lieutenant Muhanias, who was his Generall from the confines of Egypt vnto Euphrates. This Haumar after hee had destroyed the temple of Hierusa∣lem, caused the Crosse which hee found in the temple, to be set vp in Mount Oliuet to scoffe there the Christians, who be∣ganne at that very time to worship euery where the Crosse: that was the first Crosse, and the first time that the vse of Crosses beganne, from that in Mount Oliuet. But after much harme done by this Haumar, hee was slaine by a Persian wo∣man named Margaret, as hee was praying, kneeling before the newe erected idole of Mahomet. After this Haumar succeeded Hotaman the fourth Ami∣ras: 4 Hotaman. this inuaded Affrica, possessed diuers places, and filled many townes with Saracens: at what time Muhanias the chiefe Generall of all the Arabians territories, sailed with a great nauie into Cyprus, inuaded the whole Isle, and tooke the ci∣tie Constantia, and the citie Aradus, and at his returne came to Rhodes, destroyed the huge and monstrous image of Phoe∣bus called Colossus Solis, accompted one of the seuen wonders of the world. While Muhanias was in warres with the Cyprians and the Rhodians, the very same time another Prince of Arabia named in the Chronicles Busor, inuaded Isauria, destroyed Busor. the countrey, made a great slaughter of the people, and
brought fiue thousande captiues prisoners into Arabia: but within fewe dayes Hoaman was slaine through the treasonof his owne housholdes and chiefe friends. This time raigned king in Fraunce Clodoueus the second of that name, which Clo∣doueus was called Lewes the first: and in Constantinople raigned Emperour Constans which was sonne to Constantius the third, who had a great ouerthrowe in battell by sea by Muhamias with his armie of Saracens. Eugenius then was elected the tenth Pope of Rome. Hali who gouerned the Saracens after Hoaman with Muha∣mias Muhamias the fift Amiras. for 3. yeeres, at what time he was slaine by a conspiracie of souldiers: after whose death Muhanias became the fift A∣miras ouer the Arabians, who gouerned foure and twentie yeeres, and kept his court all that time at Damascus. This Mu∣hanias grew mightie and strong, inuaded Affrica, slew foure∣score thousand Africanes, spoyled the territories of the Ro∣manes, entred into their confines: but the Romanes forced him to flee, pursued him, and compelled him to seeke the Romanes fauour, paying three thousand pound in golde, and fiftie Saracens for yerely tribute. Constantine the fift sirnamed Pogonatus, held then the Empire at Constantinople. Gizid the sonne of Muhanias succeeded his father, and raig∣ned 6 after him 3. yeeres: this had not such successe as Muha∣mias his father had: but after Gizid succeeded Habdella the 7 seuenth Amiras, against whom Marnan was elected the eight Amiras, who died within nine moneths after, and left his 8 sonne Habdimelech to be the ninth Amiras: this raigned two and twentie yeeres. Habdimelech the ninth A∣miras. The Saracens about this time inuaded so many countreys out of Asia, as in Spaine with such armies by long warres with the Gothes, who at that time mastred all Spaine. After the Ro∣mans time, and now after the Gothes, the Saracens possessed the West part of Spaine, and from Spaine such an infinite nomber entred into Fraunce in the time of Martellus and Charles the great, that made all Europe to be in feare of these monstrous infidels: these spoiled and destroied countrels & kingdomes,
and vsed great tyrannie in euery place of Europe, in like sort as they did before to the Hebrewes and to the Church of God, at what time they were Agareni or Ismaelites after the name of Ismael and his mother Agar, and nowe from Agareni are called Saraceni, continuing their tyrannie (euen from A∣brahams The Saracens called Agare∣ni, and before Ismaelites. time vnto this day) the name of Turkes, which in the yeere of our Sauiour 1299. tooke the Empire of Constanti∣nople, and began to set his Empire there. And for that the Sa∣racens, and the Turkes after them, haue their histories in the chronicles at large set forth in Aug. Caelius, Egnatius, Blōdus and others, I will set downe as in a table some fewe of these Sara∣cens Amiras, for that they followed the Persian historie, whom they the fourth time haue conquered, as before is written, first by Cyrus, the second time by Alexander the great, the thirde by Alexander Seuerus being long before by the Romanes kept vnder, and now the fourth time by Haumar the third A∣miras of the Saracens: and so the Persians endured the bon∣dage, vntil the time of Sophi came, who gaue diuers repulses to the Turkes, and to the late Egyptians called Soldani, reco∣uered Persia, that now againe Persia is very populous, and in∣habited, and strongly defended by the Sophie, which is now the generall name of all their kings. But to returne to Habdimelech the ninth Amiras, who had Habdimelech the 9. Amiras. now concluded a league with Iustinian the Emperour, and had also subdued Armenia and Mesopotamia, and ended the ci∣uill warres which this time grewe betweene the Princes of Arabia: this hauing done great exploits, ended his life after he had raigned two and twentie yeeres. This time raigned in France Clodoueus the thirde, foure yeeres, and after him Clodoueus the thirde, and Hildebertus 78. his brother Hildebertus raigned king in France 18. yeeres. During the raigne of Habdimelech, a huge nomber of Egypti∣ans inuaded Affrica, and destroyed Carthage. After this succeeded the tenth Amiras of the Saracens: this 10. Amiras. turned many of the Christians Churches to be temples for Mahomet, as the Church of Damascus and others: this time Masalmas a Barbarian captaine, gaue a great ouerthrowe to
the Romans at the assaulting of Tyrannia, and after spoiled the countrey of Galici in his returne, and died in the ninth yeere of his raigne. Zulzimin the eleuenth Amiras folowed: he raigned three yeeres: during which time Haumar the second of that name, 11 Zulzimin. and the 12. Amiras that succeeded after Zulzimin, subdued Cilicia, and Masalmas another prince of the Saracens, inuaded Asia, tooke the citie of Pergamum, layde siege to Constantino∣ple, which siege endured three yeeres, at what time Zulzimin died, & Haumar the second that succeeded him, raigned two 12 yeeres after him, who was glad to haue escaped the great fa∣mine, cold and plague, which then raigned among his armie during the siege of Constantinople: beside his whole nauie vpon the sea were burnt vp with wilde fire, and monstrous great hailestones: this Haumar persecuted the Christians most ex∣tremely. Gizid the second of that name & the 13. Amiras, succeeded Haumar and raigned 4. yeres: this was by a Iewe perswaded to 13 Gizid. destroy images. About this time Muza a Saracen captaine in∣uaded Spaine, and conquered diuers prouinces and cities, set∣led himselfe, and inhabited as a king ouer the Saracens in Spaine: after whom succeeded 15. kings of the Saracens within Vincentius lib. 24. 20. yeeres after Muza, at what time Rodericus the last king of the Vestgothes which raigned in Spaine, & the Christians, were forced to flee, and to keepe Asturum and Legio for their prin∣cipall strength: after which time they were called the kings of Legion. This time the cities of Italy beganne to elect in euery citie a chiefe Magistrate, which they nowe call by the names of the Duke, as the Duke of Millaine, the Duke of Flo∣rence, and so of the rest, all Italy being before gouerned by Hexarchies, from the which the cities reuolted into this new order and election of Dukes in euery citie, after the time of foureteene Hexarchies, which gouerned Italy before it was deuided into dukedomes. Euelid the 10. Amiras, and the sonne of Gizid, raigned after 14 Euelid. his father 18. yeres: during which time, Masalmas a prince of
the Saracens tooke Caesarea a citie in Cappadocia. This time the Saracens strength & force were great: for they inhabited eue∣ry coast of the world: they were strong in many and in diuers The Saracens. partes of Asia: they ruled as kings in Africke and in Spaine: they possest many places in Fraunce, and of the Romane terri∣tories: 14 for now the glorie of the Romanes and their power de∣caied, after whom the Saracens and the Turkes beganne to be mightie. After this, Euelid died, in the 18. yeere of his reigne. After him succeeded Gizid the 3. of that name, and the fif∣teenth Gizid. Amiras: this was slaine by his owne people the same yeere that he became Amiras: after whome, Eyces his sonne 15 reigned one yeere after his father, the 16. Amiras: this time 16 reigned in Fraunce Carolus Martellus, with his brother Pipinus: this Martellus made a great slaughter of the Saracens, at what time Eudo their general brought to the number of foure hun∣dred thousande Saracens of men women and children from Spaine to Fraunce, and was subdued by Martellus, with the most of his people ouerthrowen, and their king Abdimarus slaine. In the time of this valiant Martellus, the Saracens inuaded Fraunce sundry times, and tooke Narbon and Anemon, two of the chiefest cities of that part of Fraunce: but they wer assaul∣ted by Martellus, so that they fled from place to place, & were vanquished and slaine in heapes: for Martellus slue three Sa∣racen kings, Abdimarus, Athinus, and Armoreus: but they wan∣ted no kings, the best captaines tooke vpon them the names Three kings of the Sara∣cens slaine. of kings, when any king died or was slaine in the field: for in Spaine fifteene kings of the Saracens were slaine within twen∣tie yeres, and yet the Saracens continued and preuailed from 200. yeeres before Martellus time, vntill the time of Ferdi∣nandus the great, 800. yeeres well nigh after: During which time the Saracens (as I write in the historie of Spaine) much preuailed. This time Maruan the second of that name, and the seuen∣teenth Maruan the 17 Amiras. Amiras, inuaded Cyprus with an armie of Saracens: but such ciuill warres began betweene the princes of Arabia, that Maruan was constrained to forsake Arabia, and to flee to E∣gypt,
after he had reigned Amiras 4. yeeres, and from thence forced to take the like flight towards Spaine, to rest among his Countriemen, but hee was preuented and slaine by Salim The Hunes now in Ger∣many. prince of Chorasimia. About this time the Hunnes, people from Scythia, made se∣uen seuerall iournies from Scythia to Pannonia, and at last seated themselues, whose chiefe captaine was named Arpat: of this reade more in Ritius, and in Bonfinus. Now in Arabia reigned Muhamat the 18. Amiras, at what time gouerned in Muhamat 18. Amiras. Constantinople, Constantine surnamed Copronimos as Emperor, and Aistulphus reigned king of Lumbardie, & was at that time the thirtie one king in number, the which had reigned kings in Lumbardie. This Lumbardie is a pleasant fertil countrie, called of some the Paradice of all Eorope, which reacheth from the Alpes to the riuer of Rubicon. But to Arabia againe, where nowe reig∣ned Habdallias the ninetenth Amiras of the Saracens: this reig∣ned twentie one yeeres, and gathered an armie of eightie Habdallias 19. Amiras. thousand, inuaded Cappadocia, vnder captaine Salimie, who was appointed Generall ouer the Saracens. This Amiras vexed the Christians sore: the Arabians wax∣ed so mightie at home and abroade, that almost no place was free from the Arabians▪ they had warres this time with the Armenians, and with the Turkes, who yet had not erected their Empire vp, but were such scattering infidels, and like in all maner of life and liuing to these Saracens, and to the Scythians, which dispearsed them selues ouer all the whole worlde, as Caterpillers, to destroy and spoyle all Nations and Countries, one succeeding the other. The Saracens & the Turkes alike. Mady succeeded Habdallias: this was the twentie Amiras, who reigned nine yeeres, in the which time hee prepared an armie for warres against Asia: but hee was then intercepted and returned into Arabia without any thing done: howe be it Aaron his sonne inuaded Armenia, and Ithuma entred Asia, and was slaine with all his armie by the Romanes. Againe, Aaron the sonne of Mady entred into Asia, and
gote diuers victories, and constreined Eirene with her sonne Constantine the Emperour to seeke peace, and to pay tribute The Romanes paid tribute to the Arabians. vnto the Arabians. After Mady succeeded his sonne Moses, and reigned Ami∣ras one yeere, after whom folowed Aaron the brother of Mo∣ses, he reigned twentie three yeeres: during which time the Arabians inuaded Cyprus, subdued Cappadocia, tooke two nota∣ble Fortes and strong Castles, Amachan in Armenia, and Seba∣san: this time florished in Fraunce Charles the great, to whom this Amiras sent many rich presents, & withal a mighty huge Amy. lib. 3. Elephant. This Arabian prince had such great victories, that Nicephorus the Emperour had much adooe to escape from his hand in Crason, which is a Towne in Phrygia: besides the Arabians had spoiled Sardinia, and destroyed Corsica, and also the Saracens that were nowe dispersed into al Countries spe∣cially into Spaine, where they gouerned as kings, and in Fraunce, where likewise they bare such great sway and soue∣raigntie, that Charles the great was well contented for the time to conclude a peace with Abumalach king of the Sara∣cens. Well, to finish shortly his great exploites of long histo∣ries, I passe to the 23. Amiras. Muhamad the sonne of this Aaron the twentie three Ami∣ras Muhamad 23. Amiras. of the Arabians, in whose time great ciuill warres began in many Countries, that hee had much a dooe to keepe his owne Countrie from ciuill inuasion for fiue yeeres. After him succeeded in Arabia Habdallias the third of that name, and the twentie foure Amiras: this reigned 17. yeres. Habdallias 24. Amiras. During this time, the Saracens gaue two great ouerthrowes to the Greciās, at what time they tooke the Isle of Creete, spoi∣led Blondus lib. 12. Palestina, & possessed many Regions & diuers countries, wasted much the countrie betweene Vtica and Carthage, so that the Arabians waxed the only nation in strength & force, in all the East kingdomes: for by this time Africa which was ful of the Saracens, was forced to yeeld to them aswel as Spaine: for still came from Arabia supplies to euery Countrie and place where the Saracens had planted them selues, aswell in Europe and Africke, as they did in Asia: for nowe Abderana
king ouer the Saracens in Africa, was not contented to liue quietly ouer his people in Africa, neither Abumalach, nor yet Abumalach. Aigolandus, with whom Charles the great had long and terri∣ble Aigolandus. warres, could be satisfied with any one kingdome of the world, vntill at length God so strengthened the Christians, that they were sore afrighted and amazed by the meanes of these infidels, that they ioyned together their power and force, and were by Gods prouidence after 800. yeeres deli∣uered from the tyrannie of these cruell Saracens. Now reigned king in Fraunce Lewes, surnamed, The holie, sonne to Charles the great, who succeeded his father both in the kingdom of Fraunce, & in the Empire of Rome, which was taken away into Constantinople, vntill the time of Charles the great, at what time Leo the 3. of that name, and the 30. Pope of Rome renued the Empire, and was called Imperium Roma∣norum nouum. Nowe in Arabia reigned Muhamat the twen∣tie Muhamat 25. Amiras. fiue Amiras for fourtie yeeres: during which time the Sa∣racens rushed into Italie, spoyled and destroyed the countrie with sword and fire, at what time they came to the suburbes of Rome and did great harme, spared no place, but as Blondus Blond lib. 12. affirmeth, Ferro & flamma totam deuastarunt Italiam: this time the Danes inuaded England in the time of Edelbertus, who va∣liantly resisted the Danes, and constreined them with great losse and slaughter to retire: reade more in Polidore of this. Polid. lib. 5. After this time the Saracens began in many places to bee slacke, and specially in the most part of Europe, though in Spaine they continued vntill the great Ferdinandus time: but for that the Saracens are sufficiently spoken of in the historie of Spaine, I will therefore here no further proceede there∣in, onely laying downe so many as reigned kings in Ara∣bia, called by the name of Amiras, from Mahumet the first pro∣phet and prince, vntill Muhamat the twentie fiue Amiras, which continued 253. yeeres: these names followe in this sort as you see set here downe. Mahomet reigned nine yeeres, the first Amiras of the Saracens.
Ebubezer 2. Amiras, three yeeres. Haumar 3. Amiras, twelue yeeres. Hoaman 4. Amiras tenne yeeres. Muhamias 5. Amiras 24. yeeres. Gizud 6. Amiras, three yeeres. Habdalla 7. Amiras, one yeere. Maruan 8. Amiras, one yeere. Habemelech his sonne, twentietwo yeres. Vliud nine yeeres. Zulzimim three yeeres. Haumar the 2. of that name, two yeeres. Gizud the 2. foure yeeres. Euelid his sonne, eighteene yeeres. Gizud the 3. one yeere. And his sonne Eices after him, reigned one yeere. Maruan the second, sixe yeeres. Abubalas fiue yeeres. Haldalla twentie one yeeres. Mady nine yeeres. Moses the sonne of Mady, reigned af∣ter his father one yeere. Aaron the younger sonne of Mady, reig∣ned after his brother Moses twentie three yeeres. Muhamad the sonne of Aaron, reigned fiue yeeres. Habdalla the 3. reigned 17. yeeres. Muhamat the 25. Amiras, reigned four∣tie yeeres. Thus farre I thought good to write the beginning of Ma∣homets kingdome, and his successours in Arabia, and of the Saracens spread from Arabia vnto Africke, and vnto Europe, and nowe a litle of the Turkes historie, and that briefely.
OF THE GREAT TURCKE, and of his kingdome from Othoman the first, vntil Selimus the eleuenth: of the two Empires of Constantinople and Trapezumtium, which now the Turckes doe gouerne: of their begin∣ning, and of their first seruice vnder Basi∣lius Macedo Emperour of Constantinople. THe Turckes historie is like the Sa∣racens, or like the Scythians, peo∣ple without guide or gouer∣nours, vntil of late time they in∣habited first about mount Cau∣casus, & from thence to the Cas∣pia sea: a nation mingled of the Scythians & of the Hunnes, which nowe are called Hungarians, ob∣scure and base people, without any mencion made of them a∣ny where, but of their bare names in Plinie: a people scatte∣red in Scythia, and after into other Countries, rather called Latrocinantes quàm belligerantes, as Egnatius nameth them: of whom (as I saide) Pomponius Mela maketh but little more mencion then Plinie did. The first seruice which they did, was vnder Basilius surna∣named Egnat. lib. 2. Macedo then Emperour at Constantinople, in the yere of our Sauiour eight hundred fourtie, at what time they in∣uaded The first ser∣uice of the Turkes. Armenia, and within a while after, gaue a battell to the Arabians vnder their first captaine called Mucaletius. After twise or thrice good successe had against the Arabi∣ans and the Saracens, they gathered together vnder a head at Tangrolipix, where diuers more heaped and flocked to
them from the streight of Caspia, and from Caucasus: there they waxed strong, and began to inuade Asia, vntill the time of Ottoman the first, a man base and obscure borne, cuius pa∣rentes Ottoman the first of the Turkes. agrarij, but very valiant, wise, and fortunate: he first beganne to aduaunce the name of the Turckes, and to set foorth his force and power being much inflamed with de∣sire of soueraigntie, and very ambitious of honour and dignitie. After hee had subdued a part of the kingdome of Bythinia, and had taken certeine Cities and strong Townes towards Egnat. lib. 2. the Sea Euxinus, at what time reigned in Constantinople Michael, surnamed Paleologus Emperour, in the yeere of our Sauiour Christ a thousand three hundred: this Ottoma∣nus within twentie eight yeres which he reigned, had streng∣thened his Cities & Townes, and had builded many strong Fortes, and specially one inuincible Castle, which hee na∣med after his owne name Ottomanni Castrum. This Othoman left behinde him a sonne named Orchanes, Orchanes 2. in whose time contencion grewe betweene Paleologus, and Cantachuzenus, about the Empire of Greece, whereby Orcha∣nes power and force so encreased, that while these two con∣tended about the Empire, hee tooke Prusia out of their Prusia taken by Orchanes. handes, a large strong Citie: and finding his father in lawe Caramanus false and deceitfull, hee ouerthrewe him, and killed his sonne, a young gallant youth: but after that Orchanes had reigned twentie two yeeres, hee was slaine in Bythinia. After him succeeded his sonne Amurathes, a man of Amurathes 3. singular courage and fortune, who forgetting not his fa∣ther nor graundfather Othoman, imitated them in all man∣ly exploites, and presently armed him selfe against his owne graundfather Caramanus, whose daughter was his naturall mother. This Amurathes was solicited by the Em∣perour Palealogus. Paleologus, being nowe a very olde man, to aide him against the Bulgarians, hard olde souldiers, brought vp alwayes in warres: to this hee quickely consented, and
prepared an armie of twelue thousand Turkes, and brought them into Europe, and did great seruice to the Emperour, ouerthrewe the Bulgarians, and reuenged the Emperour vp∣on the enemie: but being after these victories tickled with the wealth and pleasures of Europe, hauing giuen the repulse to Cantachuzenus which affected the Empire, while he fained this seruice, hee passed ouer the sea Helespont, tooke Callipolis with other cities, as Adrianopolis, Bydus, and Philippolis, ouer∣threwe Egnat. lib. 2. and conquered euery prouince as he traueiled: hee entred Bulgaria, inuaded Seruia, and slue the princes of the countrie named Lazarus, with a great slaughter of his peo∣ple: but Amurathes escaped not long, for hee was slaine by a seruaunt of Lazarus prince of Seruia, who reuenged his ma∣sters death stoutly. Thus Amurathes died, after he had reigned twentie three yeeres: after whom liued two sonnes of his, the one named Paizates, the other Soliman. These two brethren coulde not agree: they fel at such variance, that Paizates slue his brother Pazaites 4. Soliman, and presently after tooke in hand to reuenge his fa∣thers death vpon Marcus Craienicius prince of the Bulgarians, Soliman. whom he subdued, and after slue him in the fielde: by which conquest he obteined the most part of Bulgaria. And yet not therewith contented, hee inuaded Bossina, Croatia, and other partes of Illyria, wasted and spoyled all places into Thracia: yet he could not quiet himselfe, but laid siege to Constantino∣ple, and continued the same for eight yeeres, and had at that time taken the Citie, if hee had not beene preuented by two great armies of Frenchmen and Vngarians, to whom this Pa∣zaites gaue such a terrible battell, that hee ouerthrewe both Pazaites victo∣rie ouer the Frenchmen and the Hūga∣rian. the armies, and tooke the most part of the French captaines with their Generall the Duke of Burgundie, with an infinite slaughter of the souldiers, and had also at that time taken Si∣gismundus king of Hungaria, vnlesse he had bene saued by the Venetian nauie. From this great victorie hee againe returned to Constanti∣nople, endured his siege, and laide hard at it. When newes
came, that Tamberlanes the Scythian inuaded his Countrie, he remoued his siege at these newes, and made more haste then good speede: for in that battell betweene Tamberlanes and Pazaites, two hundred thousande Turkes were slaine Pazaites the Turke kept in a cage by Tamberlanes. at mount Stellum, in the confines of Bythinia, the Turke taken and set in fetters of gold, and bound in chaines of gold, and so kept all the dayes of his life in a Cage, which Tamberlanes caried into euery forreigne warre out of his Countrie, and vsed (as some write) as a blocke to mount on horsebacke. This time reigned in Constantinople Andronicus, as Blondus Functius. affirmeth: this great victorie of Tamberlanes fell in the yeere of our Sauiour Christ 1397. at what time Charles the sixt, sur∣named Beneamatus was king in Fraunce, and Vladislaus had ta∣ken the Empire of Germanie into his hand. In Rome Pope Bo∣nifacius the ninth of that name reigned. This Pazaites had two sonnes, the elder named Orchanes, of some called Calepinus: the younger named Mahomet, which Mahomet 5. was also named Moses: this by conspiracie and treacherie slue his brother Orchanes within two yeeres after his fathers Egnatius lib. 2. death, and reigned alone, recouered, and possessed all that Tamberlanes had gotten of his father. This Mahomet had spite to the Bulgarians, and to the Va∣laches, and began with no lesse good successe to aduaunce the name of the Turkes, then his father did: hee waxed mightie, and after hee had brought all these Prouinces and Regions about to be vassalles of the Turkes, and had quieted himselfe, after many victories, hee made Adrianopolis to be his chiefe Adrianopolis. Citie, where hee all his life kept his Court: where after hee had reigned seuenteene yeeres, hee dyed: at what time E∣manuel gouerned as Emperour in Constantinople, and Sigis∣mundus king of Hungaria reigned Emperour of Germanie: in Englande Henrie the fourth flourished. This Mahomet left to succeede him a sonne named Amu∣rates, the second of that name, and the sixt king ouer the Turkes: this Amurates farre excelled all his predecessours in Amurates 6. his warres: hee beganne to warre with the people called
Mysores, and their prince, which nowe are named Seruij: hee tooke their Cities Scopia and Nouemontum, and tooke the Scopia & nowe Nouemontum. Kings two sonnes, and his daughter: hee caused the Kings sonnes eyes to be pluckt out, and yet maried their sister, and thereby restored the Citie Nouemontum to the king againe. Egnat. lib. . After this, hee commenced warres against the Germanes, Hungarians, and Valaches, spoyled their territories, and wa∣sted their Countries, and vsed great extremitie: hee passed thence to Epire, laide siege to Croia, tooke it, and possessed it. After truice made, and peace concluded betweene the Turke and the Hungarians, Amurates against his promise and othe, by perswasion of Pope Eugenius the fourth, entred in armes, and gaue two terrible battels to the Christians, in the which many Nobles dyed and were taken. In these two A great ouer∣throw by the Turke to Polo∣nians, Hunnes, Hungar, &c. great victories, the one at Varna, the other at Basila, he slue an infinite companie of Hungarians, Polonians, Hunnes, and others of Germanie: for in this warre at Varna, Ladislaus, king of Polonia was slaine, and Cardinall Iulian, with all their cap∣taines and men of armes: in the other at Basila, all the Prin∣ces of Hungarie, and many of the Nobles and Peeres of Ger∣manie. Thence hee returned into Asia, after hee had subdued and conquered all places as hee traueiled: and hauing had suffi∣cient triall of his good fortune, with some diffidence of further successe by some change of fortune, hee committed the kingdome vnto his sonnes charge, while yet hee liued, being willing to take his rest, and to see the euentes of the succession in the kingdome by his sonne, ouer whom he ap∣pointed Tutour and Gouernour (for that Mahomet his Calibassa. sonne was yet young) a Turke named Calibassa: but this during the time of thirtie foure yeeres did no great exploite, but made one voiage to Epirus, and besiged the Citie of Croia, but in vaine: for that valiant and noble captaine Scan∣derbeg draue him quickly with losse and shame from Epyrus, and for very griefe hee dyed after his returne. Of this Scan∣derbeg This Scander∣beg is called Castriotus. Prince of Epirus, the historie is set foorth according
to his desertes, in Barletius. In the time of this Mahomet, Constantine the last of that name, and the last Emperour of Barletius lib. 13. Constantinople reigned. Soldan Zeledim, Emperour of the Functius. Tartarians dyed in this time. Nowe reigned Emperour of Germanie Albertus the second of that name, which was both king of Hungaria and Bohemia: hee reigned Emperour but two yeeres, after whom succee∣ded Fredericke the third, Archduke of Austria to be Empe∣rour of Germanie, which reigned Emperour fiftie foure yeres. But to come to Mahomet, the second of that name, and the seuenth king of the Turkes. This, for his greatnesse and good successe in his warres, was named Nouus Othomanus, an other newe Othoman: for as in the first Othoman, the kingdome of the Turkes beganne: so nowe by this Mahomet, the Empire of Mahomet 2. the Turkes beganne, and therefore he was called Othoman the great. He subdued two Empires, twelue kingdomes, two hun∣dred Cities and great Townes: hee tooke from the Venetians the Isles of Chalcidis and Scodra: hee tooke diuers Cities in The great vi∣ctorie of the Turkes. Greece, as Corinthus and Mitilena. The Turkes inuaded Syria, wasted and destroyed Hungaria, and tooke al Euboca: he tooke Capha a Citie in Pontus, and Hydrantes in Italie: hee tooke in battell by treacherie (saith Functius) Stephanus king of Mysia, whom he vsed as Cambyses vsed Sisamnis: he flayed him, and banished him from his kingdome: he destroyed all the pro∣uince of Carinthia. Quae & quantae huius victoriae, totus vix dies explicet: the very wordes of Egnatius. This Turke so plagued the Christians, that yet to this day they coulde not recouer the losse: howe be it hee was ouer∣throwen Egnat. lib. 2. by Scanderbeg in a great battell, where hee lost an infinite number of his Turkes: by Hussa Cassanus king both of Armenia and of Persia, who also gaue a great ouerthrowe to Mahomet: by Stephanus Prince of Valachia, who gote ouer the Turkes a great victorie: by Pope Sixtus the fourth The Turkes ouerthrowe. who gaue battell by sea vnder the Cardinall of Aquileia: by the Rhodians, and by the Christians at a place called Alba Graeca, hee was discomfited, and diuers times ouerthrowen:
but still hee preuailed with more gaine then losse, and with fame & renowne, that he is now Emperour of Constantinople, and of Trapezuntium, and king of many kingdomes, lord and gouernour of so many Prouinces and Regions, that he thereby is nowe named the great Turke. Nowe after this Turke had reigned thirtie one yeeres, he Pazaites 8. dyed in the yeere of our Lord God 1481. on the fift nones of May. After whose death, great ciuill warres grew among the Turkes, and continued for a time: which being done, Pazaites the second of that name, and the eldest sonne of the last Mahomet, hauing vanquished his younger brother, ob∣teined Egnatius lib. 2. the Empire, armed his men and himselfe out of hand, assaulted the Castle of Valachia, and tooke it: after hee mar∣ched The Soldan of Egypt. against the Soldan of Egypt, by whome hee had sundry ouerthrowes, that the Turke and the Soldan entred into a league, and concluded a peace. After, he returned and went against the Germanes, whom he by continuall warres brought vnder the Turkes seruitude, and at that very time he so plagued the Venetians, that he sub∣dued Methon, Dyrrhachium, and Naupactum, three strong great cities. The Turkes vnder this Pazaites conquered and subdued many places: for this Emperour vanquished the Po∣lonians, which people were called before, Gelas, and subdued Chrom. Polo. lib. 3. cap. 31. many people inhabiting about Meotida: hee destroyed the Citie of Craocia, but constrained by the armie of Maximi∣lian Croacia. the Emperour to forsake their Fortes, hee was also put to flight. Reade Chromerus Chronicle of this Pazaites warres against the Venecians: at what time hee returning from the ouerthrowe and subduing of Modon, the Sophi king of Persia, (for so nowe all the kings of Persia are called Sophi) gaue the Turkes a great ouerthrowe. Thus farre doeth Egnatius prosecute the Turkes histo∣rie, vntill Selimus time the ninth Emperour of the Turkes: Egnat. lib. 2. at what time reigned Emperour in Germanie Maximilian, sonne to Frederike the third, and in Fraunce Lewes the twelfth of that name.
This Pazaites, after hee had reigned thirtie one yeeres, di∣ed: after whom succeeded Selimus, the ninth Emperour of the Selimus the 9. Emperour of the Turkes. Turkes, who liued seuen yeeres in the Empire: this had a great ouerthrowe in Armenia the great, by the Sophy of Persia: how be it, afterward he recouered his strength, and gathered an armie, passed into Egypt, gaue battell to the Soldan, whom hee tooke as prisoner, and at that time subdued all Egypt and Syria: for nowe the kings of Egypt are called Soldani, as the kings of Persia are Sophy. But to come to Soliman the tenth Emperour of the Turkes, Soliman 10. Emperour. who reigned fourtie eight yeeres, and had diuers times ma∣ny victories, and as many ouerthrowes: for first hee lay de siege to Rhodes, tooke Alba Graeca by treacherie and deceipte: but Virtus an Dolus quis in hoste requirit? hee subdued Corsica, and ouerthrewe a great armie of the Germanes, by the Citie Functius. of Buda in Vngarie, being betrayed and sould into the Turkes by Catzianerus: and by the like treachery of a Spaniard, the Turkes gote a very strong fort in Vngarie called Granensis Arx. After this, Soliman laide siege to Vienna in Austrich, and to diuers Townes in Sicilia, but they were manfully resisted and repulsed from both Austrich and Sicilia. His armies in the East Countries were so slaine and scattered by the Sophy of Persia, that Soliman lost in two battels an infinite number of Egnat. lib. 2. hia Turkes. After these two great victories had ouer the Turkes by the Persians, he was by the Germanes resisted at the hauen of Her∣cules: he was by the Rhodians driuen out of the Isle of Militea: he entred into a league with the Persians, & concluded peace with diuers princes of Asia, & came into Vngaria, laid siege to Segethum, where he died in his tents before he could win Se∣gethum. After his death, his sōnes fought for the Empire. Bai∣azetes was compelled to flee into Persia, being by this ciuill warre ouerthrowen by his brother Selimus, who of all the sonnes of Soliman was left aliue, and succeeded his father in the Empire. Vnder this Selimus the Turkes tooke warres in hand against the Saracens, and prepared a nauie into Cyprus,
which had reuoulted from the Turkes. After hee made a voy∣age against the Moscouians at the riuer of Tanais, where Seli∣mus lost more then hee wanne: then he laide siege to Nicosia, and to Famagusta, two noble cities in Cyprus: for Famagusta is Nicosia. the chiefe Citie of Cyprus. Two yeeres after this, the Persians Famagusta. gaue two great ouerthrowes to the Turkes in Mesopotamia: at what time the Tartarians (which in olde time were called Scy∣thians) wasted and spoyled Russia and Moscouia: but I leaue the Soldane of Egypt, the Sophi of Persia, the Saracens, the Turkes, and those infidels, and ende their historie in this Selimus, laying their names downe as they reigned, from Othoman the first, vnto Selimus the eleuenth. 1 Othoman reigned 28. yeres. 2 Orchanes 22. 3 Amurathes 23. 4 Pazaites hauing slaine his brother Solimanus. 26. 5 Mahomet 17. 6 Amurates the 2. of that name, Mahomets sonne 34. 7 Mahomet the 2. which tooke the Empire from the Greekes 32. yeeres. 8 Pazaites the 2. 31. 9 Selimus 7. 10 Soliman 48. 11 And after Soliman, his sōne Selimus.
OF THE ANTIQVITIE OF Greece: of the beginning of their Cities and Common wealth: of their lawes and gouernments by degrees, during yet the infancie of Greece. NOwe I leaue Asia, and come to Europe, to that noble and famous Countrie of Greece, though by order of historie I shoulde passe from Persia, with Alexander the great into Ma∣cedonia, whither the Empire Greece. from Persia was brought nowe by Alexander: yet for that Greece is vpon the way, and that Alex∣ander Alexander. the great subdued all the Prouinces of Greece, and was by consent of all the Countrie made Emperour of Greece, where his father Philip was made but a Duke or a Gouernour of Greece: I will therefore first speake of Greece, for that Mace∣donia and Greece were but one Empire, and vnder the great Alexander: for so hee was called in the sacred historie, the King of Greece, and so after Alexanders death they compted their yeeres after the reignes of the Kings of Greece: and therefore I will passe first ouer Greece, before I come to Macedonia.
To this Countrie came the third sonne of Iaphet, named Iauan, or Iaon, of whom this Countrey nowe called Greece, was then named Ionia: for all Countreys had their names by the first inhabitants therin, as in the 10. of Genesis is men∣cioned, the first ground and originall, from whence the na∣tions Genesis 10. of the world had their beginning, by the description of the sonnes of Sem, the sonnes of Cham, and the sonnes of Iaphet. After that Iaon the third sonne of Iaphet, possessed Greece, a Countrey for the situation thereof most delecta∣ble and fertile, wherein many things of great accompt are most worthy to be remembred. This Countrey of Greece is diuided vnto twelue regions: The first and principall part of Greece is the region of Morea. The 2. the Countrie of A∣thens. The 3. of Corinth. The 4. of Lacedemon. The 5. of Messenia. The 6. of Achaia. The 7. of Boetia. The 8. of Thessalia. The 9. of Arcadia. The 10. of Ionia. The 11. and 12. of Dorica, and Aeolica. Although Strabo saieth, that these two last are Countries within Peloponesus, which is nowe called Morea, which was the greatest and chiefest Countrey of Greece, inhabited first by the Barbarous: for so all Greece was inhabited first, the Countrie of Athens one∣ly excepted. The platte forme of Peloponesus is like the leafe of a Plane tree, with creekes and nookes, and conteineth in length from the West vnto the East, a thousand foure hundred furlongs, and almost so much in breadth. The coast of Pelo∣ponesus is on the north side, with the Ionian sea: on the West Solinus cap. 11. with the Sicilian sea: on the South with the Candian sea: Strabo. lib. 8. all these Shires or Countries are situated within Morea, Achaia, Elis, Messenia, Laconia, which is also named Lace∣demonia and Arcadia, which is enuironed rounde about with Peloponesus.
In euery countrey of these are very famous townes and cities, named at large in Pomponius Mela, and in Strabo. Next Peloponesus beginneth the countrey of Hellas, which is called and taken for true Greece. In this Hellas is the region of Pho∣cis, where the temple and Oracle of Apollo in Delphos, and the Hellas. famous mount Parnassus: here is also in that part of Greece Boetia where Thebes a most famous citie is, and mount Cythe∣ron much spoken of in Poetrie: then is the countrey of Locris, Megaris, and of Athens, more famous of it selfe then it neede The praise of Athens. to be commended, as well for chiualrie and magnanimitie, as also for learning and knowledge, being the fountaine and nourse of Philosophie. This countrey of Athens doeth Strabo describe in his ninth booke, that he bestoweth all that booke in the setting forth onely of Athens, with commendations of Boetia and Thessalia, as the chiefest and rarest countreis of Greece: for Thessalia cō∣tayning within it the renowmed mount Olympus, which by The praise of Thessalia. meanes of the wooddie bottoms of the hill, with a very plea∣sant riuer running through the same, maketh a most delecta∣ble and pleasant soile, called Tempe Thessalica: vnto Thessalia belong the plaines of Pharsalia, where Pompey was ouer∣throwen Solinus cap. 11. in the last battell betweene Caesar and him. In Thessalia are many notable riuers and cities, many Isles lie ouer against the maine land of Athens, as Salamis, Sunim, Cos and Ceos: not farre from Athens is the plaine Marathon, where was a bloodie battell betweene the Persians and the Athenians. Greece was so full of renowmed cities, famous ri∣uers, notable mountaines, a countrey of singular rarenesse in althings, that it were to much labour to write the due praise of Greece. But I referre him that would reade the setting forth of Greece to the eight & ninth booke of Strabo, to the second Strabo lib. 8. 9. booke of Pomponius Mela, where all Greece is particularly de∣scribed at large: and I will proceede to the seuerall gouern∣ment of Greece in seuerall countreis, and will set downe the continuance of euery Region, with the names of the kings where and how long they raigned: and for that the countrey
of Morea is the first inhabited countrey of Greece, and the lar∣gest region of the same, called in Strabo, Arxtotius Greciae, I wi beginne with their common wealth. This region was first named Aegialia by the name of Ae∣gialeus their first king, and continued so vntill the time of Apis Fiue seuerall names of Pelo∣ponesus. the 4. king: after whom this region was named Apia, which name continued vnto the time of Sicyon the 19. king of Mo∣rea. After this king Sicyons time, the countrey was called Sicy∣onium, and continued vntill Pelops time, by whom againe the countrey was called Peloponesus, and now at this time is cal∣led Morea: so that Peloponesus had fiue seueral change of names from the first gouernment vnder Aegialeus the first king, vntill Xeuxippus raigne, the last king of the Peloponesians. And although the kings of that region did nothing worth the memorie, hauing bene twentie and sixe kings successiue∣ly: yet they are the very way to come further vnto Greece: for all this while the whole countrey of Greece was inhabited with barbarous people, and was farre from the fame which they gained afterwarde: therefore I will briefly passe ouer the historie of their kings and their raigne, because I might speake of other countreys in Greece, which flourished toge∣ther with Morea. For the first king of this region was named Aegialeus, he gouerned that part of Greece, at what time Ni∣nus Marianus Scotus. raigned in Assyria, and (as Eusebius writeth) Thebaei ruled Egypt, in the yeere of the world two thousand one hundreth and seuen, yet Bibliander would not allow so many yeeres by two hundreth and odde, which is rather to bee followed, for that it doeth with the Genesis agree. For in the fiue and twentieth yere of this king Ninus was Abraham borne, which was within two hundreth and ninetie yeeres after the flood, and therefore better agreeth with Ninus time. The second king after Aegialeus, was named Europs: hee raigned fiue and fourtie yeeres: this time flourished Zoro∣astes the great king of the Bactrians: he was thought to be the Zoroastes. first that read Astrologie, and taught to others Astronomie: in whose time Tribeta the sonne of Ninus by Semiramis was
expulsed out of the kingdome of Assyria, and hee builded a towne in the coast of Gallia, and called it Treueris. The thirde king of Sicyonium was named Stelchium: hee raigned twentie yeres: at what time the kingdome of Creete Marianus Scotus. beganne, and had for the first king one named Cres: after whose name the countrey of Creete was called. This Cres builded a citie in Creete and named it Nosus: in the which he also builded a temple to the goddesse Cybeles. After him succeeded Apis the fourth king of that region, after whom (as Apis a king of Apia. I haue written before) it was called Apia: hee raigned then, when Ninus the sonne of Ninus and Semiramis gouerned the Assyrians. After him followed the fift king named Telasion, in whose Telasion the 5. king. time died Noah the righteous preacher and patriarch, and at which time Abraham begate Ismael vpon Agar the bond wo∣man: of this Ismael came all the Ismaelites, a wicked nation that offended the Lorde: In time afterward they were called Agareni, after the name of Agar, and now are called Saraceni, which are infidels and heathens. Now succeeded Telasion the sixt king of Peloponesus named Aegidius: at what time raigned in Assyria, Analius. About Aegidius the sixt king. this season Isaac the sonne of Abraham begate two twinnes vpon Rebecca his wife: Esau which was also called Edom, of whom the Idumeans came: and Iacob afterwarde called Israel, of whom issued the twelue tribes of Israel. In this kings time Sodom, Gomorrha, Zeboim, Adama and Zoar, fiue principal great Pentapolis burnt. cities in the lande of Palestine, were destroyed and burned with fire and brimstone from heauen: the iust iudgement of God for sinne. Thurimachus the eight king raigned 45. yeres: in this kings gouernment Eusebius noteth the seuenteenth Dynastia of the Egyptians to begin, where Shepheards gouerned as chiefe ru∣lers for the space of 103. yeeres soueraigntie. About which time the kingdome of the Argiues first sprang vp, where Ina∣chus Argiue begun. raigned the first king within the kingdome of Argiue, and afterwarde continued from Inachus vnto the time of
Tenelanthus the last king of the Argiues, as Marianus Scotus writeth, foure hundreth yeeres. After this Leucippus succeeded Messapius in Pelopone∣sus: at what time Bellochus raigned King in Assyria, and Thelassus gouerned the countrey of Thessalia. Among the Ar∣giues Ruffi. de orig. Graeco. raigned now Phoroneus the sonne of Inachus and Niobes the second king after his father: this made lawes first to the Argiues, and instituted orders in gouernment, and wrote de∣crees for his subiects, and ruled the Argiues to his great fame, as Eusebius in his histories setteth forth. In Licippus time Sem the sonne of Noah died, after hee had liued sixe hundreth yeeres, and had seene much miserie and great calamitie, but not so much as his father before him had seene: he liued after Abrahams dayes thirtie and fiue yeeres. Osiris, whom the Egyptians call Apis, and sometime Serapis, for that they adored this as their God, liued about this time, and destroyed that monster in Thracia called Licurgus. Reade more of this in Herodotus. Ismael Abrahams base sonne by A∣gar Herodot. 2. 3. the bondwoman died now, and left behinde him twelue sonnes, great princes ouer many tribes and nations, which began in time to grow enemies to the Church of God, and to persecute the people of God, and were named Ismaelites. In this time raigned in Assyria Bellochus sirnamed Priscus Diodor. de sub. au. lib. 2. their twelft king, and in Egypt gouerned Menam the first king that taught the Egyptians many ceremonies, as newe sacrifi∣ces to their gods, religions and seruice, and instructed them in many things: for this time Egypt was raw and rude in skil and knowledge. This Menam was thought (of Functius) to be that which is read in Scripture to be Mizraim, and of Be∣rosus called Oceanus. There is nothing to be written of these kings worth the memorie of man: for all this while Greece was inhabited with barbarous people, nay the most of Greece was not yet inhabited. Athens was not builded, neither Spar∣ta, nor Corinth: for the kingdom of Lacedemonia and the king∣dome Corinth. of Corinth began about Dauids birth. Lacedemonia. The Argiues were the most ancient people in Greece, next
after the Peloponesians: for they beganne to raigne in Argos in the time of Iacob the Patriarch, at what time Baleus sirnamed Xerxes gouerned in Assyria being the eight king of the Assyri∣ans, Functius. before the Athenians, as long as Iacob was before Moses: for in Athens raigned Cecrops the first king, which king was of one time with Moses. But let vs proceede. The ninth king in Peloponesus was na∣med Mesapius, who raigned fourtie and seuen yeeres. Philo Iudeus affirmeth, that Iob about this time liued, and that after his punishment and afflictions, he maried Dina the daughter of Iacob: but this is thought to be false, and found otherwise, that Iob and Dina were not of one time not by foure discents: for that Iobab which is written in Genesis, was of Iacobs time: this Iobab was the second king that raigned in the lande of Genes. 36. Edom, as one of the stocke of Esau, and therefore some writers erred herein. Now foloweth in Peloponesus Heratus the 10. king, in whose Heratus the tenth king of Poloponesus. time one Hispalus the sonne of Heroules sirnamed Libius, raig∣ned in Celtiberia, who at that time builded a city after his owne name, and called it Hispalis. You must vnderstand, where you reade Celtiberia or Iberia, that then that countrey was so called Celtiberia which is now named Spaine, as it is in the treatise of Spaine more at large written, when and how long Celtiberia or Iberia conti∣nued by that name, and when the name of Spaine beganne. The kings of Egypt beganne now to be called Pharaones, a generall name of dignitie alwayes vnto their kings afterward: Pharaones. for their proper names were not so. The eighteenth Dynasteia of the Egyptians likewise beganne this time, which continued three hundreth fourtie and eight yeres: in the which gouern∣ment Amasis was the first king. Sparta a very famous citie a∣mongst Sparta buil∣ded. the Lacedemonians was nowe builded by one Spartus the sonne of Phoroneus, the second king of the Argiues, whome a litle before you read of. Mar. Scot. sayeth, that Greece was not tilled before this time, & that corne being brought then from Corne first sowen in Gree Phoenicia to Greece, was first at that time sowen: but I will bee briefe in passing ouer the names of the kings of Poloponesus;
because I might come to the ripenesse of Greece, which was many hundreth yeeres after this time. The eleuenth king was named Plemneus, and their twelft king named Orthopolis: of these two wee haue nothing to write more then of the rest, but in respect of the time and of the gouernment to open the naked state and weake Em∣pires The naked Empires of the world. of the world, at that time wherein there was no action done worthy of writing for scant armes were then knowen: this onely wee finde, what kings raigned then, and in what partes of the worlde they gouerned, hauing their those names which they haue not nowe: for then the Frenchmen were called Celtae, the Spaniards Celtiberi or Iberi, and so of other nations. But nowe raigned in Assyria Mammitus the thirteenth king, and Crassus raigned ouer the Argiues the fift king. This time Cath begate Amram Moses father, and about this time Ioseph. died in Egypt. after which time the children of Israel were sore afflicted by the Egyptians vnder another Pha∣rao, Ruffin. de orig. Grecor. sirnamed Amenophis, a cruell tyrant ouer the Hebrewes then being vnder his subiection in Egypt. This king made an Edict, and charged the midwiues that all children of the He∣brewes should bee slaine, or else cast into Nilus as soone as they were borne. Of some this king is called Memnon. Tacitus lib. 3. About this time gouerned in certaine partes of Celtes one Lugdus, after whome the place and the people were called Lugdunenses: and likewise one named Narbon, by whose name the countrey is to this day called Narbonensis, which are two prouinces within Gallia now called Fraunce. About this time flourished the great Astrologer Atlas, which is of Poets Atlas. fained to sustaine the skies vpon his shoulders, for his skil and knowledge therein. In the two and twentieth yeere of this king Orthopolis, Am∣ram married Iochabed, and begate Aaron, and three yeeres af∣ter begate Moses. In Moses time beganne the kingdome of 2373. Thessalia, where Emon the first king raigned: and together Thessalia. with Thessalia sprang vp the kingdome of Athens, three hun∣dreth
Athens. seuentie and fiue yeeres before the destruction of Troy, and about seuentie yeeres before Israel was deliuered from the bondage of Pharao: for from Cecrops the first king of A∣thens vnto the first Olympiad, raigned in Athens seuenteene kings, and twentie princes or Iudges, first called Metondidae, after called Decennales principes after the kings. Of this king it Metondidae. is written that hee first named Iupiter a god, and honoured Decennales him: he erected the first altar in Greece, found images, and of∣fered principes. vp sacrifices which were not before Cecrops time seene in Greece: for Castor and Pollux, Liber and Mercurius, with di∣uers ancient gods of the Gentiles, were after the time of Ce∣crops. Iustinus lib. 2. But I will leaue Athens for a while, and I will speake of the Sicyonians and Argiues: for these two regions of Greece were the first regions that were gouerned by kings, but such kings as then that time yeelded called Reguli: but the state and regiment of the Argiues after the succession of foure∣teene kings, was caried by Perseus into Mycena, which king∣dome of Mycena was established in Euristheus, after whome raigned sixe kings, and ended together at one time, with the kingdome of Sicyonum, as you shall reade after in the next chapter. But now I wil set downe the names of the kings of the Sicyonians in order, as I finde them in Ruffinus, and in Functius tables. 1 Egialeus, after whose name the countrey was called Egialea, raigned. 52 yeeres. 2 Europs. 45. 3 Stelchin. 20. 4 Apis, after whose name the countrey was na∣med Apia. 25. 5 Thelassion. 52. 6 Aegidius. 34. 7 Thurimachus 14. In this kings time began the kingdome of the Argiues. 8 Leucippus. 53. 9 Messapius. 47. 10 Heratus. 46. 11 Plemneus. 12. 12 Orthopolis. 63. 13 Merathius 30. In whose time the king∣dom of Athens began. 14 Maretus. 20.
CHAP. II. Of the building of Athens▪ of their beginning, and of their first lawes vnder 17 kings, being the thirde kingdome of Greece in antiquitie after the Sicionians and the Argiues. CEcrops of whom mention is made be∣fore, builded Athens in Achaia, and here∣of it was named first Cecropia: after that it was called of one Ati, Attica: and last of all it was named of Minerua, A∣thens: for in the Greeke tongue Athenae is called Minerua, though in ancient time it had other names, as Mopsopia, or Strabo lib. 8. Ionia, Diadas, and Orchomenon, and now at this time of no great Ruffinus de ori∣gine Grecorum. fame, but a poore fisher towne, which Mahomet the eight Em∣perour of the Turkes hath brought vnder. In the dayes of Cecrops, raigned that Pharao which was with Thucyd. lib. 2. all his nobilitie and chiualrie of Egypt drowned in the read sea for his wickednes and tyrannie against God and his people: he was by his proper name called Chencres. There happened in Cecrops time, two great wonders in Greece: the one a great deluge in Thessalia called Deucaleons floud: the other that great harme of fire called Incēdium Phaetontis: at what time the Deucal. flood. Grecians were named Helenes after the name of Hellenes the sonne of Deucaleon and Pyrrha. After this Cecrops folowed Cranaus the second king of Athens, which raigned nine yeeres. Hermes Trismegistus a great Philo∣sopher, Hermes Tris∣megistus. and a priest of Egypt, flourished, though Suydas saith, that he liued before Abrahams time: yea some of the best lear∣ned that are best acquainted with histories, thinke it a name fained, and a booke framed of late vnder the name of Trisme∣gistus. Now folowed Marathus the foureteenth king of Pelopo∣nesus, Erictherus the 15. king, & Choar the 16. king of Pelopone∣sus Erictherus. (as Functius saith:) Ruffinus nameth this king Astades. I passe Functius. ouer the names without any matter to be written of them, for Greece was yet as the Chaldeans and the Assyrians in the begin∣ning, building and beginning to frame kingdomes: for all this
time no part of Greece was knowen but Sicyonum, which is the countrey of the Peloponesians, after them the Argiues, and now the Thessalians and the Athenians start vp and beginne a king∣dom as the third and fourth gouernours of Greece in antiqui∣tie. About this time the citie of Corinth was builded: this was first called Epira, and grewe afterwarde to be one of the strongest cities and holdes in all Greece. Nowe was the citie Epidaurus, and the citie Bythinia buil∣ded: now Memphis was builded in Egypt, for the world was Called first Mariandina. then busie onely in building: at what time in Athens raigned Ruf. de orig. Graecor. Amphitrion the thirde king, and after him succeeded Erictho∣nius the fourth king of Athens. About which time came Phae∣nix and Cadmus from Thebes to Egypt, and from Egypt vnto Sy∣ria, and gouerned Tyre and Sidon: at what time raigned in Creete Asterius, and ouer the Argiues the ninth king cal∣led Stelenus. I thought for obseruation of time very necessary to set downe the time and beginning of euery kingdome as they began in one place after another, though I finde nothing yet in Greece worth the writing, concerning either warres or go∣uernment. Now beganne in Phrigia a new kingdome called Dardania, after one Dardanius name, who both builded this Dardania. towne and raigned there the first king 31. yeres: though Ma∣nethon setteth downe 64. I wil folow Archilochus in this histo∣rie, whose assertion is more probable concerning time then Manethon is. It was called before Meonia: this kingdome be∣ganne 830. yeeres after the flood, when Amyntas the 19. king of the Assyrians kept his Court at Niniue. About which time Moses died, after whom succeeded Iosua. In Egypt then go∣uerned Aegyptius, after he had driuen his brother Danaus then king out of Egypt, vsurped the kingdome, after whose name E∣gypt was named (before called Mizraim) and had to his sir∣name Ramesses. About this time in Egypt the first Labyrinth was builded Labyrinth. by Menophis, by some called Miris: after which example De∣dalus imitated the like worke, and made the second Labyrinth Diod. lib. 1. cap. 2.
in Creete, at what time Minoes raigned king in Creete. This Mi∣noes Creete. was the first lawmaker in Creete, when likewise Radaman∣thus ordained lawes in Licya. Bellopares now king in Assyria go∣uerned, and Epopeus the 17. king of the Peloponesians. For that I see not much matters in following the course and order of these kings of Greece, and for that I finde (as I said before) no∣thing historicall, because yet time seemed raw in Greece, and farre from the ciuil dissentions which long after happened in Greece, & from the forren warres which the Grecians had with the kings of Persia and Macedonia (for now all the warres that were, was in Assyria & Chaldea:) I wil hasten therefore to come to the histories of Greece, & wil passe ouer these fragments of places and persons, vntil I shall find matters to write of: only I will set downe the names of the kings of the Argiues as they raigned orderly. 1 Inachus the first king, raigned 50. yeres. 2 Phoroneus. 60. The names of the kings of the Argiues. 3 Apis. 35. 4 Argos. 70. 5 Crassus. 54. 6 Abas Phorbas. 35. 7 Troiphas 46. In this kings time the kingdome of A∣thens beganne. 8 Crotopus. 21. 9 Stelenus. 11. 10 Danaus which was dri∣uen by his brother Rame∣ses out of Egypt, came to Argos and raigned 50. 11 Lynceus. 41. 12 Abas. 23. 13 Protheus. 17. 14 Agrisius. 13. Now the kingdom of the Argiues ended, & their foueraigntie was taken away into Mycena by Perseus, a noble valiant cap∣taine, which had diuers victories ouer diuers countreis, as o∣uer the Persians, and now ouer the Argiues in the time of Agri∣sius, after they had gouerned Argos 544. yeres: where Eristheus Euristheus ac∣compted ano∣ther Hercules. a man most famous, & named another Hercules, for his great courage and enterprises, he was of the stocke of Atrides: for A∣treus, which was Agamemnon & Menelaus father, was his owne vncle, and therfore he gouerned the most part of Greece. In his time (which yet had growen to no strēgth) he established the kingdom of Mycena, and broght many subiects vnder it, that
Mycena became populous and strong, and the Mycenians be∣came Mycena. to be conquerors of many prouinces, & therefore wri∣ters omit the name of Perseus and of Stelenus, and they begin the kingdom frō the time of Eristheus: after whom succeeded 6. kings, who waxed strong, & mighty, that then Mycena ruled al Greece. These had the 10. yeres warres with the Troyans, and at last conquered them, which warre was the cause of their own destruction, & for that they began together at one time, and both had equall nomber of kings: for 6. kings raigned in Mycena, and 6. in Troy, whose names I haue here layd downe. The kings of MYCENA. The kings of TROY. Eristheus raigned 45. yeres. Dardanus the first king. 31. Atreus, and Thiestes. 65. Ericthonius. 2. 57. Tros. 3. 60. The kings of Mycena, and of Dardania. Agamemnon Atreussonne 18. Ilus the 4. king. 54. This came frō Mycena vn∣to Troy with 1202. shippes. Laomedon the 5. raigned 36. In whose time Troy was de∣stroyed by Hercules with his company going to Colchos. Aegistus after Agamemnon. 2. Priamus the 6. and last king, was by Agamemnō subdued, and his citie conquered. Orestes 15. yeeres. In whose time Mycena was subdued by the stocke of Heraclides vnder the Peloponesians.   Thus ended the kings of Mycena and of Troy, the one being destroyed by the other: yet after Orestes was slaine by Pirrhus in the temple of Apollo, Tisamenus Orestes sonne raigned 15. Ruf. de orig. Graecor. yeres after his fathers death: and after Tisamenus raigned but two more, which were called Penthillus and Cometes. But there is scant any mention made of these after Orestes time. Now after that these two kingdomes were destroyed, and ouerthrowen, presently the kingdome of the Latines begin∣neth in the person of Aeneas, who trauailing from Troy vnto Italy after the destruction therof, maried king Latinus daugh∣ter and heire, which is spoken of in the originall antiquitie of the Latines, by Halcarnassaeus, Ruffinus, Eusebius, and others. The Peloponesians raigned 860. yeeres, and ended in the time of Samson the last Iudge of Israel, which ended the go∣uernment The kings of Peloponesus. of the Iudges in Israel, which continued from Mo∣ses
vntill Samsons time 400. yeeres, and after Samsons death 40. yeeres, kings began to raigne in Israel. After that the kings en∣ded in Sicyonum, priestes raigned in that countrey of Pelopone∣sus called Carnij, which gouerned vntill the comming of that Carnij. strong and ancient people called Heraclides: who afterwarde grew of great force, that the long ciuill warres which con∣tinued Heraclides. 27. yeeres, to the last destruction of all Greece, as more at large in Thucydides is mentioned, and shalbe spoken of me when the time of these ciuil warres shall come to be handled in this historie. I in the meane season will returne to the state of Athens, which by this time grewe to some fame, though before (as Theseus the 10. king of Athens and first ad∣uanced the fame and state of Athens. other parts of Greece) obscured by reason of no action done worth the writing vntill Theseus time, which raigned (as you heard before) in Poliphedes time the 24. king of Pelopones. he brought vnto Athens al the whole prouince of Attica, and dis∣persed people from other parts of Greece, and made them all one corporation, which were before dispersed vnto diuers villages: he erected a council hall, and made a towne house, which the Athenians called Asti: he instituted great feasts and sacrifices vnto Minerua called Panathaenea: this was for all the Plutarch in vita Thesi. countrey of Attica, and he ordeined another feast which they called Metaecia, for strangers and forreners that should come . to dwel at Athens. That done, he began to set vp an estate of a common wealth: he made distinctions of degrees, and diffe∣rence of states: moreouer Theseus coyned money, & marked the coyne thereof with the stampe of an oxe, in memorie of the bul of Marathon, or of Taurus, chiefe captaine of king Mi∣nos, which Theseus subdued by combate appointed. The The fame of Theseus. stampe of the oxe continued in Athens vntill Pericles time, at what season the owle was stamped in the coine of Athens. The renowne of this Theseus was marueilously blowen through all Greece, after diuers victories gotten against the Amazones, the slaughter of king Deucaleon king Minos sonne, of the vanquishing of the huge monster Minotaurus, of the warres of Lapithes, of the ouerthrowe of Captaine Taurus,
and of infinite more victories, so that all Greece rang of The∣sius The fame of Theseus. fame, that his acts came to certaine prouerbs in all parts of Greece, Hic alter Theseus, this is another Theseus: Hoc sine Theseo nōfit, This was not done without Theseus. He dischar∣ged Athens of their tribute vnto king Minos, & appointed cer∣taine games called Isthmia after the imitation and order of Thucyd. lib. 2. Hercules, that euen as the Grecians did celebrate the games of Olympia in the honour of Iupiter by Hercules ordinance, so they should likewise celebrat the feast of Isthmia games which The∣seus made in the honour of Neptune: for he imitated Hercules in all his actions. The great admiration which Theseus had of Hercules cou∣rage, Theseus emu∣lated Hercules. made him in like sort with Themistocles to say, that as the victories and triumphes of Miltiades would not suffer Themi∣stocles to sleepe, so the renowme and fame of Hercules could not keepe Theseus backe from the imitation thereof: for they both were neere kinsmen. He was so great a benefactor vnto Athens, that on the 8. of October the Athenians doe most so∣lemne sacrifice in remembrance of his returne frō Creete with the children of Athens, after the killing of king Deucaleon and Minotaurus, & in the honor of Neptune (as Plutarch saith.) The Ruffinus de orig. Graecor. Athenians honour the name of Theseus, which of some is sup∣posed to be the sonne of Neptune, euery 8. day of euery mo∣neth, so much Greece was beholden vnto Theseus. Plutarch in the life of Theseus saith, that Aegeus his father descended of the linage of the great Erictheus, & of the first inhabitants which occupied the coūtrey of Attica: for there is no mention made that they came out of any other countrey, but they were cal∣led Autochthones, borne of themselues in the lande of Attica, (for so the Athenians would haue it.) This was the first that erected Athens: and hauing ioyned the citie of Megara and all the territories thereabout vnto At∣tica, The deuision betweene the Peloponesians and the Athe∣nians. he caused (as Plutarch affirmeth) foure square pillars to be set vp for the confines within the streight of Isthmis in Pe∣loponesus, with this sentence written on the pillars: All from these pillars Eastwarde, is in Ionia which is Attica: and all Strabo lib. 9.
from thence Westward was in Peloponesus, to separate the countrey of Attica from Peloponesus: for in Ionia Attica lay. After this Theseus, succeeded in Athens Mnestheus the eleuenth king, which raigned foure and twentie yeeres. This Mnestheus. time gouerned Agamemnon in Mycena, when Helen Menelaus his brothers wife was rauished and taken away by Paris, who likewise being very yong was before rauished by Theseus. I will briefly rehearse the rest of the kings of Athens: for after Mnestheus, Demophon succeeded in Athens the twelfth king ouer the Athenians, and raigned 33. yeeres. In whose time Aeneas maried Lauinia king Latinus daughter, who gouerned them three yeeres and died, and left to Ascanius his sonne the kingdome after him: he raigned after his father thirtie eight yeeres. This time raigned in Assyria Tauteus the twentie and Eli the hie Priest iudged Israel 70. yeres before this time. ninth king of the Assyrians. Eli the priest now iudged Israel, and Samuel the Prophet was borne. Oxintes the thirteenth king of Athens raigned twelue yeeres: about which time Ascanius be∣gan to build a towne, and named it Alba longa, where he with Alba longa. all his Court remooued, leauing Lauinium to his fathers wife Lauinia, thirtie yeeres after his father Aeneas had builded the citie of Lauinium. In this kings raigne the Amazones burned the temple of Diana in Ephesus. Now followed in Athens the foureteenth king ouer the Athenians, who raigned but one yeere: after him raigned Thi∣moetes the 15. king he raigned eight yeeres. This was the last king of the stocke of Erictheus: after this time raigned Sil∣uius the thirde king of the Latins: here of all the kings of Alba Of Erictheus stocke the kings of A∣thens descen∣ded. were afterward called Syluij. In the 70. yeeres after the de∣struction of Troy, and foureteene yeeres after the kings fai∣led in Peloponesus, came certaine people from Greece vnto Pe∣loponesus, and possessed a great part of the countrey, which were called Dores: of this Thucydides onely can best report, for it is his proper historie. Thucyd. lib. 2. 3. Now was Melanthus the sixteenth king ouer the Athenians which raigned 37. yeeres: in this kings time raigned in Assy∣ria Dercillus the 31. king. About this time Samuel the Prophet
iudged Israel, with whom gouerned afterward king Saul: du∣ring which gouernment, the prophet Dauid was borne, when Aeneas came to Italy about Dauids birth. Aeneas raigned the sixt king of the Latins: at what time the stocke and familie called Heraclides entred Peloponesus, who waxed so strong and fierce, that they waged warres against the Athenians, with whom they had diuers battels. CHAP. III. Of the originall beginning of the kings of the Lacedemonians, and of the kings of Corinth, who at one time beganne their go∣uernment vnder the state of Monarchie, and also ended about one time: of their gouernment, and continuance. THis very time beganne the kingdome of Corinth to start vp, where first raigned Alethes their first king, which raigned fiue and thirtie yeeres in Corinth. To∣gether with the Corinthians beginne the Lacedemonians to set vp a kingdome, where raigned first as king one Euristhe∣nes, of whome issued after those two va∣liant and noble Captaines, Cleomenes and Leonidas so much Leonydas. for their courage and prowesse set forth in Thucydides, whose greatnesse and courage shall (when time serueth) be decla∣red, Thucyd. lib. 1. to their great fame. Vnderstand how by degrees one af∣ter another, kings and kingdomes in Greece beginne: 1 The first gouernment began in Peloponesus, and conti∣nued during the time of 26. kings, which was 860. yeres. 2 The second kingdom which sprang vp in Greece were the Argiues, where raigned 14. kings, which conti∣nued 544. yeeres. After these two, the Athenians and the Thessalians beganne to flourish about one time. Athens waxed more famous then any other region of Greece: seuenteene kings successiuely raigned in Athens, and continued from the going out of the Athens con∣tinued 463. yeeres. children of Israel out of Egypt, yea fourtie yeeres before that time, vntill the 423. yeere after their departure out of Egypt,
euen from Moses time vntill Dauids raigne: for in Moses time Cecrops the first king of Athens raigned, and in Dauids time Co∣drus the last king of Athens. This is a sure computation of time, wherein can be no errour. The ancient and first people of the worlde after the flood, beganne to accompt the time from the going of Noah out of How the Chal∣deans and As∣syrians ac∣compted their time. the Arke, as the Chaldeans and Assyrians did, as Berosus (their owne countrey Chronographer) doeth affirme, whose histo∣rie endured from Noah to Moses. Then the Hebrewes made their accompt from the deliuery of Israel out of Egypt, as Iose∣phus How the He∣brewes and Iewes accomp∣ted their time. (their countrey man likewise) affirmeth by their Iubi∣lees which they vsed euery fiftieth yeere. All other kinde of Chronicles which accompt by the Olympiads, or from the raigne of Alexander which the Greekes vsed, from the destru∣ction of Troy, or from the building of Rome which the Ro∣manes Errours in Chronicles. and diuers other nations did, doe much erre, and must of necessitie erre: for they neither agree of the time of the O∣lympiads, neither of the time when Troy was destroyed, nor when Rome was builded. But I wil returne to my matter. Now that Peloponesus, Argos, Thessalia, and Athens, haue al∣tered their gouernement from kings vnto princes and magi∣strates, and that now Lacedemonia and Corinth beginne toge∣ther to erect vp their kingdoms, and to enioy a Monarchie by the gouernment of kings, who began to raigne in Lacedemon and in Corinth, foure hundreth and thirteene yeres after the Is∣raelits went out of Egypt, at what time in Athens raigned Codrus the last king of 17. and ouer the Latins Aeneas Siluius the fourth king: This time began warres betweene the Peloponesians and Iustine lib. 2. the Athenians while yet Codrus liued, in the which warres to saue his countrey, and to satisfie the Oracle giuen thereby, he Thucyd lib. 1. & 2. entred boldly & valiantly to the midst of the enemies like De∣ius or Curtius, and died, after whom succeeded Medon Codrus sonne, after whose names the magistrats of Athens were called Metondidae. About this time beganne Dauid to raigne king in Hebron, Saul being slaine and his sonnes in the 8. Iubilee of the Iewes. Latinus Siluius raigned ouer the Latins, the 5. king. In
Tyre reigned Hiram, one that loued and fauoured king Dauid all the dayes of his life: this time gouerned in Assyria Eupales, the thirtie two king of the Assyrians. In Corinth gouerned Ixion Ixion 2. king of Corinth. the second king, who reigned thirtie seuen yeeres, in the hun∣dred eighteene yeeres of the taking of Troy by the Grecians. In Lacedemon likewise the seconde king called Argis succeeded, who liued but one yeere: after him succeeded the third king Argis & Arce∣stratus the 2. & 3. king of Lacedemon. named Arcestratus, who reigned thirtie fiue yeres. A little af∣ter this, Absalom slue his brother Amnon, and fled to the king of Gessur, about which time Salomon was borne of Bethseba: for that I finde no great matter to write of the kings of Lace∣demonia, where reigned nine kings, sauing Agesilaus onely, and of the kings of Corinth, where reigned twelue kings: I meane to auoide tediousnesse to set downe the names of these kings aswell of Lacedemon, as of Corinth, in a table with their reigne∣ment and gouernment as here you see: for that these two kingdomes beganne both at one, and also ended about one time. 1 Alethes the 1. king of Corinth, he reigned 35. Looke Herod. lib. 7. for these kings of Lacedemon. 2 Ixion. 37. 1 Euristhenes the first king of Lacedomon. 42. 3 Agelaus. 37. 2 Argis the 2. king one yeere 4 Pryminas. 35. 3 Arcestratus 35. yeeres. 5 Bacis the 5. king 35. 4 Labotes 37. yeeres. 6 Agelas. 30. 5 Doristus 29. yeeres. 7 Eudemus. 25. 6 Agesilaus 44. yeeres. 8 Aristemedes. 35. 7 Archelaus 60. yeeres. 9 Egemnon. 16. 8 Thalecus 8. reigned 40. 10 Philestenus. 12. 9 Alcanes the last, 37. 11 Autones the last 1. yeere.   This Agesilaus being very wise & valiant, learned to obey before hee came to commaunde, well instructed in militarie discipline, iust & vertuous in all his actions, which the Epho∣ri being chiefe of authorities within Sparta, and were to con∣troule kings insolencie and iniustice, if any were by them vsed: he first after he was elected king, armed himself against
the king of Persia, for the defence of the Crecians his Countrie Agesilaus a∣gainst the Persians. men that dwelled in Asia, and after hee had set the Cities of Greece which were in Asia at libertie, he entred vnto Phrygia, where hee tooke many cities, wanne great spoiles: these ex∣ploites being done, hee returned vnto the Citie of Ephesus, where within fewe dayes hee had leuied a great number of men of armes, imitating herein king Agamemnons example in chusing the best souldiers to warres with him, and lea∣uing behind at home the worst: he from Ephesus entred into Caria, and from thence to Lydia, and tooke Sardis the head Ci∣tie of Lydia, slue Tisaphernes, the king of Persias Generall. Age∣silaus became so great by diuers victories gotten against the Persians and barbarous kings, that hee was made generall of all Lacedemoniā nauies: for as then Theopompus saith, he was Melanctohn 2. Chron. the worthiest man of fame in his time: for he rather gloried in the praise of vertue, then in the greatnesse of his authori∣tie. Nowe Pharnabazus was come from Persia as generall af∣ter Tisaphernes, who at his first comming had a sharpe wel∣come: Agesilaus so prospered, that being but two yeeres in Asia, hee was for his honestie, continencie, courtesie, and plaine dealing, through all Asia much commended: he was Thucyd. lib. 8. wont often to say that sentence of Timotheus: as Mars vseth no mercie, so Greece contemneth golde: but Agesilaus being called from Asia home to Greece, hee was much against his Agesilaus say∣ing. will enforced to fight in Greece, and against Greekes his owne countrie men, euen against that worthie and renowmed cap∣taine Epaminondas, whose magnanimitie Agesilaus often woondred at. I neede not much to prayse the life of Agesilaus: for it is set foorth in Plutarch euen from his youth, his maners, his warres, his victories in such sort, that Epaminondas though then his enemie at the battell at Leuctres, before and Plut. in Agesil. after wondred much at his magnanimitie, and commended much his agilitie, courage, and wisedome: reade Plutarch of this and Zenophon, where hee wrote an noble oration in Zenoph. lib. 1. the prayse of Agesilaus: yet I will leaue the warres betweene
them both, concerning the libertie of the Boetians, vntill some other place where more shalbe spoken. Zenophon was great with Agesilaus, and in person present Zenophon great ly honoured of Agesilaus. in all the warres whom he much loued and honoured: to be short, Sparta thought themselues happie to haue such a king: but I omit vntill better occasion be offered to speake further of Agesilaus. Nowe to the Lacedemonians againe, whose kinges ended in Alcanes the ninth king, being the last after that the Lacedemonians had a Monarchie vnder kings for three hun∣dred and odde yeeres: and nowe at the fall of the kings of La∣cedemonia in the time of this king Egemnon, which was the Ruffi. de Greco. Orig. ninth king of Corinth, diuers kingdomes sprang vp together, as the kingdome of Assyria, at what time Sardanapalus the last king there raigned of thirtie eight kings, nowe transla∣ted vnto the Chaldeans by Phul Belochus. The Medes this time beginne a kingdome vnder Arbaces, and the Macedonians their newe kingdome vnder Caranus their first king: and within fourtie yeeres after beganne the kingdome of Lydia, and within thirtie yeeres after beganne Romulus his Empire in Rome, so that within one hundred yeeres one after another, sprang these fiue kingdomes: The kingdom of new Assyria. The kingdome of Media. The kingdome of Macedonia. The kingdome of Lydia. And the Romanes beganne to haue footing, and kings beganne to flourish: a∣bout which time the kingdome of Corinth decayed, after the raignement of twelue kings, which gouerned wel nigh three Twelue kings reigned in all Corinth. hundred yeeres. Now that the Lacedemonians and the Corinthians had a fall in their kings, and that the state of their gouernment was al∣tered to an other forme, as before the Argiues, and the Pelopo∣nesians, the Athenians, the Thessalians, whereof that gouern∣ment, I meane of kings, translated to another forme: so like∣wise nowe the Lacedemonians and the Corinthians together were changed from Kings to Iudges, and other popular Magistrates.
And as in Greece one countrie began with the other: so one fell with the other, and so I hasten to the historie of Greece, whereof nothing yet is spoken but the accompting of time, sauing the warres that the Grecians had with the kings of Per∣sia, and with the kings of the Medes: for the first tribute that euer was paid out of Greece vnto any barbarous king, was vn∣to Croesus the last king Lydia: so long Greece florished, as long as they had not ciuill warres betweene them selues, which The first tri∣bute of Greece paid vnto Croesus. was the onely cause of the whole destruction of Greece: other∣wayes Asia, Persia, Media, Lydia, and Scythia, felt the value of Greece, enuied their fame, and sought to ouerthrow their glo∣rie, and could not. For Plutarch in the life of Solon sayth, that Licurgus was the eleuenth person that descended from the right line of Hercu∣les: great controuersie there is amongst Historiographers concerning Licurgus time, of his parentage, and of his trauell out of his countrie: they haue written diuersly of his gouern∣mēt, of his lawes, & of his death: but specially they vary of the time he liued in: some will haue him in Iphitus time: Aristotle Licurgus. is of that opinion: others say, that he was long before any of the Olympiads, as Eratosthenes: but Zenophon affirmeth that hee Zenoph. lib. . Laced. was of great antiquitie, he was in the time of Heraclides, which were neerest of blood vnto Hercules: but howe so euer it is a∣greed, it seemeth it should not be long from Homers time, for that he was the first that brought the vnknowen poemes of Ho∣mer to light in Greece. Chronographers varie much about the time of these men vnder written: for in antiquitie of time they seeme more fabulous then historicall. Hermes. Tris. Homer. Pythagoras. Linus. Orpheus. Lycurgus. Cyrus. Romulus. With infinite more which I omitte here to name.
CHAP. IIII. Of the generall gouernment in all the Cities of Greece, from Ly∣curgus time the king, and the lawmaker in Sparta, vntill the comming of Xerxes the great, the fourth king of Persia into Greece: of Lycurgus lawes among the Lacedemonians: and of Solons lawes among the Athenians. THus Lycurgus being singular, rare and wise in his doings, first consulted with the oracles of Apollo at Delphus, chan∣geth the estate of the common wealth, instituteth a Senate of the Lacedemoni∣ans, to the number of twentie eight, who should pul downe the furie of the people, if neede so required, by any in∣nouations against the kings: and againe to bridle the tyran∣nicall Lawes and in∣stitutions made by Li∣curgus. gouerment of the kings against the people: and a litle after that, a supreame authoritie was instituted and giuen to certaine Magistrates called Ephori, who should likewise con∣troule the Senate and the kings in their faults. Lycurgus made lawes for the women of Lacedemonia, and instituted disciplines for the maides to exercise therein, as to runne, to wrastle, to cast the dart, to throwe the barre: hee made lawes touching mariage, and appointed order for edu∣cation Plut in Lycur. of children: they were taught after seuen yeeres of age howe to obey, to susteine paine, to endure labour, and to continue in fight: they were cōpelled to shaue their heads, to goe bare legged, to vse all kinde of exercise: naked they laye together on a bedde of strawe, which they them selues made of the toppes of reedes or canes that growe in the ri∣uer Eurotas. Licurgus also appointed them streight diet, & taught them Zenophon de repub. Laced. short speach, little meate, and fewe wordes: hereby grewe the Lacedemonians to be the onely famous people of the world, the most endured souldiers, and the most able men of body. Diod. lib. 2. cap. 3 The like lawe Bochoris made in Egypt for the education of their children: they might not exceede in expences vpon any
male childe borne, aboue twentie drachmes: then either streight hee shoulde bee exercised a souldier in the fielde, or with the priestes in Astronomie and Arithmetike, or else if he were not a likely childe of limme and body fitte for a soul∣dier, he should be put with shepheards, husbandmen, or with some craftesmen: for he might not be idle in Egypt. It seemed that both Lycurgus and Solon brought from Egypt their lawes into Greece: for all confesse that Egypt was mater artium. Lycurgus appointed an order for buriall amongst the Lace∣demonians: Lycurgus. hee did cut off all superstition of places, but onely to lappe the corps within a red cloth, and spread it ouer with oliue leaues, commaunding by his law, that they should not mourne for the dead past eleuen dayes, & on the twelfth day to doe sacrifice to Proserpina, and to giue ouer mourning. This streight kind of gouernment bred due obedience in Sacrifice to Proserpina for the dead the 12. day. Sparta, & that of Sparta none should traueile without licence. And amongst the Lacedemonians he made lawes, that none should dwell in Sparta. This Lycurgus framed his life accor∣ding to the lawes he made: and for that he would know of A∣pollo, whether his forme & maner of gouernment were good, he went to Delphos to consult with the oracle: and before hee went, he sware the Senators, the Ephories, & the king of Spar∣ta, to keepe his institutions & lawes vntill he would come a∣gaine from Delphos, where hee willingly died, lest he should returne to Sparta, whereby they might haue occasion by his returne to breake their oth. In ancient time this towne Sparta Strabo lib. 8. had the soueraignty & rule of a 100. townes, & euery yere an oxe in euery of these 100. townes was sacrificed vnto Mars: & this sacrifice was of long time vsed in Sparta, & named Hecatō∣ba, as Strabo saith. This was a kind of sacrifice afterward vsed in diuers coūtries. Al which time Iudges gouerned in Athens Hecatomboa. from Medon the first Iudge the sonne of Codrus, vntil Eurixias time being the last Iudge: for after 17. kings had reigned in Athens succeeded after iudges, to the number of twentie, who ruled the state of Athens, from the time of Codrus the last king of Athens, vntill the time of Tullius Hostilius the third king of
the Romanes, who reigned in the 22. Olympiad: so long Iudges reigned as chief magistrates in Athens. After these 20. iudges the forme of gouernment was againe altered in Athens, that nine magistrates yerely should be chosen of the chiefe men, of the noblest stocke within Athens, which shoulde gouerne the state of Attica: but (as Eusebius saieth) then ruled lust for lawes, & the libertie of Athens grew to be much offensiue, vn∣til Eusebius lib. 10. cap. 3. de prepar. the time of Draco, who made seuere lawes and sharpe pu∣nishments for offendors, in the time of the 36. Olympiad. Dra∣cos 36. Olympiad. lawes were called for their seueritie, lex sanguine scripta, lawes written with blood: he was the first that made lawes in Athens. After him succeeded in the 47. Olympiad Solon, a singu∣lar man of rare vertue, & of great iustice: he did mitigate the furie of Dracos lawes, & made found & perfect lawes for the Dracos lawes 47. Olympiad. Athenians. In this Solōs time, Athens was wel gouerned, & flori∣shed before all other townes of Greece: he instituted his lawes Strabo lib. 15. in Athens, whē Cyrus reigned king in Persia welnigh 200. yeres before Alexander the great: at what time the Greciās, knew not the Persians, neither did the Persians know the Grecians, which seemed strange in so late a time: yet Strabo writeth this, an an∣cient writer: that whereas the Romanes had at that time diuers warres with the Sabines, Samnites, Fidenats, Thuscans, and o∣ther nations about them, the Greeke Historiographers tooke no notice of them, neither Herodot, Thucydides, nor Zenophon: so strange were the Romanes to the Grecians. Lesse maruel it is that the Chaldeans and the Assyrians thought Spaine to be but a citie, called (as Iosephus saith) Iberia: euen so did they esteeme Ioseph. contr. Appio. lib. 1. Fraunce and Italie being farre countries from the East, where the most warres were in those first yeeres after the flood. But to returne to Solon, who studied by all possible meanes to furnish with good lawes and to be carefull of the state and gouernmēt of Athens: for he chiefely delighted in moral Phi∣losophie, which treated of gouernment & common weales, which was most necessarie for those dayes: for the seuen wise Solon. men which then florished in Greece, sought no further know∣ledge then of things common for the vse of man: for in those
dayes he was called most wise, that could handle great causes in matters of State, and endeuour to haue a good witte in iudgement of gouernment, which in Solons time was found rare in men, and therefore Greece had but seuen wise men of great accompt for knowledge and iudgement, which were named the seuen Sages, whose names are these vnder written Solon of Athens. Thales of Miletum. Bias of Prienna. Chilo of Sparta. Cleobulus of Lindia. Periander of Corinth. Pittacus of Mytilena. But in Athens warres grewe betweene the Magarians Iustin. lib. 2. and the Athenians for the Isle of Salamina, which was in the possession of the Magarians. Solon herewith being moued, fained this Stratageme, to sende a trustie man of his owne to Solon Strata∣geme. Megara, fayning himselfe a reuoulted traytour, and that of purpose hee came to tell them howe they might take all the chiefe Ladies and Gentlewomen of Athens together, if they would follow him. The Magarians easely beleeuing this man, folowed him: which when Solon vnderstood, hee appointed certaine young men in womens apparel that should daunce on the shore side, with short daggers vnder their clothes, vn∣till their enemies were landed: which being done, the ene∣mies hauing sight of these young Ladies dauncing and play∣ing without any man with them, they so greedily leapt one vpon the necke of the other to take such a faire bootie, that not one escaped, but were all slaine, and by this meanes Sa∣lamina was gotten to the Athenians. Neuerthelesse the Magarians were sharpely bent to reco∣uer The Magarians ouerthrowen. Salamina againe, if by any meanes they coulde: but A∣thens had still some great wittes, who were euer most busie in bickering and quarreling with their neighbours: for the Athe∣nians coulde better perswade with their tongues, then fight Thucyd. lib. 1. with their swords. Solon wanne great honour and glorie, for one oration hee made in the defence of the temple of Apollo. Solon by subtiltie and witte set order betwixt the poore and
the riche: for by this time fell againe the Athenians to the Attica diuided. olde troubles and dissencions, about the gouernment of the citie, so that all Atica was in it selfe diuided: some taking part with the best and chiefest Citizens, others with the common people. Solon pacified this sedition: for hee was neither partaker with the riche in the oppression of the poore, nor with the Solon. poore in the necessitie of offence: his equitie and vpright dealing was well knowen in Athens, therefore hee was chosen gouernour by common consent of all the Countrie of Atti∣ca, to reforme the rigour of the lawes, and to temper the state of the cōmon weales. And first he began to take away al Dra∣cos bloodie lawes, sauing for murder & manslaughter: for by Dracos lawes by Solon miti∣gated. the lawes of Dracos all kinde of offence was punished with death, aswell the least fault, as the greatest offence, and there∣fore called lex sanguine scripta Then Solon erected the Coun∣cell of the Areopagites: out of this Councell, the citie of A∣thens did yeerely choose their gouernour: for in Dracos time Areopagites. were certeine Iudges vpon life and death called Ephetes, be∣fore the time of the Areopagites. After this, Solon established diuers lawes within the Citie Plutarch in Solon. of Athens, and appointed three kindes of Councels to go∣uerne the Citie, one aboue the other: and then he instituted some lawes, which I will briefely here recite: he made a lawe The lawes of Solon. for the maintenance of willes and testaments: hee made an acte for planting and setting of trees: an other acte he made, 1 lawe. that they shoulde not transport out of the Realme neither 2 corne, nor any other fruite to strangers, sauing oyle: hee or∣deyned 3 a law, that no stranger should be free Denizen with∣in Athens: he appointed a lawe for welles, for that Attica is a 4 drye soyle, wanting springs and riuers, vsing onely welles: 5 therefore hee ordeined, that all within foure furlongs (which 6 is halfe a myle) should come to one well: he made a lawe to forbid ioynters and dowries, not to vse marchandize for ma∣riage, neither shoulde they buye their husbande to gayne thereby, but that man and woman shoulde marrie for issue,
for pleasure, and for loue: hee made a lawe for womens go∣ing abroade, what time they shoulde goe to walke, appoin∣ting The lawes of Solon concer∣ning the wo∣men of Athēs. to them the time of their feasting, of their sacrificing, and also appointed a time of mourning, to plucke from wo∣men all disorder and wilfull libertie, which by nature they seeke: he made lawes against idle persons, those that did not Solons care for his countrie. labour, charging the Councell of the Areopagites to en∣quire howe euery man liued within Athens, and to punish them to their deserts: likewise he made a lawe for clearing of debts, called , and afterward that no man should lende money vpon vsurie, and a lawe against the same made: in Plut. in Solon. this law he raysed the value of money of 73. drachmes which was then a pounde, to a hundred drachmes. Solon made a lawe to forbid euill speach of the dead. Nowe after that Solon had made these lawes and many more, he cause'd them to be written in tables by Plutarch cal∣led Axones, by Aristotle called Cyrbes: but the Athenians being Axones. Cyrbes. still very seditious and quarelling within themselues, Solon to auoide the braules, secretly tooke his voiage (but with li∣cence giuen) to Egypt: there a while he studied and conferred Solon went to Egypt. with Psenophis and Souchis two of the wisest priestes at that time in Egypt, from Egypt he went to Cyprus. After this, Solon went to Sardis the chiefe Citie of Lydia, where Croesus kept then his Court: with whome hee questi∣oned touching happinesse, Croesus supposing himselfe most Croesus. happie for his great honour, wealth, fame and dignitie, and his great triumphes which he had ouer great nations: but Solon preferred poore vertuous and quiet men before Croesus, as Tellus in Athens, and Biton in Argos, so that this good man did much good in Athens: for yet the glorie and liber∣tie of Greece was not subiect to straungers, though they had sundrie bickeringes and contencions betweene them∣selues. All this while Themistocles was not knowen in Athens, neither Lysander in Sparta, neither Leonides in Thebes, nei∣ther
(as I saide a little before) was Persia knowen to Greece, Persia not knowen to Greece before Xerxes time. nor Greece to Persia: for before Cyrus time, the Persians were of no great fame, neither before the warre of Xerxes were the Grecians of any great glorie. CHAP. V. Of the huge armie of Xerxes: of his preparation both by lande and by sea: of the pompe and pride of Xerxes in his iourney to Greece: of his shamefull great ouer∣throwe, and ignominious flight from Greece againe into Persia: and of the flourishing state of Greece at that time. TThis Xerxes was the fourth king af∣ter Cyrus, ouer whome Greece had the greatest victorie that euer Greece 72. Olympiad. had. For Cambyses the sonne of Cyrus, and the second king of Persia was skant knowen in Greece, but Darius sur∣named Hydaspis, to whom Cyrus daugh∣ter named Atossa was maried: this Darius was the third king of Persia, and the first that made preparation against Athens: and nowe hauing a great ar∣mie hee appointed Hippias the sonne of Pisistratus, who being banished from Athens fledde from Greece vnto Per∣sia, to bee lieutenant ouer Darius armie. The Athenians hearing of Darius comming, sent to haue some ayde of the Lacedemonians: but being deceiued of their long expectation, hauing Miltiades their captaine, The battell of Marathon. stayed not, but with furie proceeded and gaue him the o∣uerthrowe in the battell of Marathon, and in the seuentie two Olympiad. Nowe Darius hauing some intelligence of troubles in E∣gypt, Darius.
altered his purpose from Greece, and turned his armie to Egypt: in the which warres after he had pacified and had set in order all things, he returned to Persia, where shortly after he died: whose place of gouernment his sonne Xerxes had, who bestowed fiue yeeres in gathering his huge force Diod. lib. 11. and armies together, thinking rather to eate Greece then to fight with Greece: his power was so great, and his force so Xerxes great armie. much, (for so Iustine saith, Herodot, and Thucydides, with o∣thers) that when Xerxes had demaunded of some of his cap∣taines, Thucyd. lib. 1. what they thought of his armie: some answered, that all Greece was not able to receiue them to land: others say, that the Ocean sea had not roome sufficient for his na∣uies: and thus Xerxes was flattered by his captaines, that he went forwarde towardes Greece with a farre greater force then his father Darius had. Some write that Xerxes had seuentie hundred thousand footemen, as both Iustine and Ruffinus affirme, and three thousand nauies: Iustine writeth Iustine lib. 2. Ruffinus de Greco. orig. tenne thousand, and fourtie hundred thousand horsemen. But as his comming to Greece was most terrible vnto Greece, so his flight from Greece was most shamefull to the Persians: for at his first entring vnto Creece, Leonidas king of Sparta passed the streightes of Thermopyla with foure thou∣sand souldiers, kept him play there, to the losse of twentie Thermopyla. thousand Persians: they of Sparta being animated by their king to stand like stoute Lacedemonians against such rude and bar∣barous people, a thing easely perswaded to them that alrea∣die were perswaded to die, they entred to the number of sixe Herodot. lib. 6. hundred into the tentes of the Persians, thought it more va∣lue to die before Xerxes face, wasted and spoiled euery tent, and making diligent searche for Xerxes through all the tents of the Persians, killing them and destroying from the begin∣ning of the night vntill the next morning: Xerxes herewith being frighted, escaped. Nowe Themistocles being appointed generall of the Athe∣nians Themistocles generall of Athens. against Xerxes in this warre, hauing bene before in the battell of Marathon, being then very young, but very much
enflamed with desire of glorie, to see the worthinesse, and to Herodot. lib. 6. heare the report and great fame of Miltiades, which was then generall ouer Athens, it tickled Themistocles to studie to de∣uise Miltiades. to take some new matter in hand to gaine glorie: for The∣mistocles was of that opinion, that the last ouerthrowe of the Persians at Marathon, was but a beginning of further troubles, though others thought the contrary: he was euer most care∣full to perswade the Athenians to the seas, and to make gallies for the warres of Greece. All the Athenians were most cruell, because the Athenians were lordes of the seas. Themistocles mused euery way, and studied dayly to pre∣uent dangers before they were offered: he could not be quiet, he would take no rest for the safetie of his countire of Greece: and being asked of his familiar friendes why hee tooke such paines, he answered, that Miltiades victorie would not let him Themistocles saying of Mil∣tiades. sleepe: Themistocles was the most ambitious man in the world. Nowe when hee had wonne the Citizens to bende their force to the sea, while this preparation was in Greece, newes came howe that king Leonidas was killed in the countrie of Thermopilis (of whose courage and exploites you heard a lit∣tle Thucyd. lib. 1. before) and that Xerxes had nowe that entrie into Greece by land, and had Embassadours to demaunde the Empire of Greece both by sea and by land, and that all Greece shoulde acknowledge obedience to king Xerxes: but Themistocles hanged vp the interpretour that came with Xerxes Embassa∣dour, for that hee being a Grecian, woulde vse the Greeke tongue in the seruice and commandement of the barbarous king. This stoutnesse of Themistocles pleased more the Athenians, Eurybiades ge∣nerall of the Sea. then the suffering of Eurybiades the Lacedemonian to be Admi∣rall of all Greece: for the Athenians woulde not set saile vnder any other Admirall then their owne, aswell because they had the greatest number of shippes in their armie, as also they thought them farre more worthie then any other Countrie of Greece: but Themistocles foreseeing the daunger that was
likely to fall out betweene themselues, did willingly yeelde the whole authoritie vnto Eurybiades, and gote the Athenians to agree thereunto. This time, Aristides after he had bene banished fiue yere by meanes of Themistocles, was nowe by a decree of Themisto∣cles Aristides sur∣named the iust. called home againe: for Aristides was a good iust man, and well beloued in Athens. By this time the fleete of Xerx∣es shewed on the coastes of Attica, and couered all the seas, and Xerxes in person came with an army by land to campe by the sea side. The Grecians hauing the sight of so monstrous an armie both by sea and by lande, forgate all Themistocles per∣swasions, and beganne to retire to the Peloponesians, and there to recouer the gulfe of Peloponesus. Themistocles perceiuing their determination, was in his mind angrie, that the Grecians would thus disperse themselues asunder, leauing the aduauntage which both lande and seas offered them: he suddenly vsed this stratageme, to sende to Themistocles stratageme. king Xerxes a trustie friende of his owne named Sicinus, a Persian borne, taken in the warres before by Themistocles, and Thucyd. lib. 1. kept by him as a scholemaster in his house for his children: this hee sent secretly to Xerxes, to aduertise him, that Themi∣stocles generall of the Athenians was very desirous to become Xerxes seruaunt: and for that the Grecians were determined to flie, hee wished the king not to let them scape, but to set vpon them while they were farre from their armie by land. Xerxes being glad of Themistocles message, the next mor∣ning by breake of day, placed himselfe on a huge hill where hee might beholde his whole fleete, and discerne the orde∣ring of his armie by sea: there did Xerxes set vp a throne of Ruffinus de Gr. . orig. golde, and had about him many secretaries to write all that was done in the battell. Themistocles with no lesse skill had chosen his time and place: the gallies drewe neere to the other armies. Xerxes Admirall, a man of great valure, bestowed arrowes and dartes, charging the Grecians gallies hotely: they ioyned and grappled together: the battell beganne so fiercely, that
the dead bodies being thrust ouer boorde into the sea, al∣tered the collour of the water into blood. The Grecians by reason of the streightnesse of the sea wherein they fought, The great slaughter of the Persians. preassed sore vpon the Persians, who with ouer great a mul∣titude hindred them selues much, being so many laide one an other a boorde in such disorderly sort, that they were constrayned to flie by night, in which flight many, of their Thucyd. lib. 1. gallies were drowned, and many taken, & more running secretly into Persia, for feare of Xerxes being a cruell man. This famous victorie gotten by the Grecians, made Xerxes starke madde, his losse was so great, and his shame was more. Iustine 2. Being thus amazed what to doe, Mardonius his lieutenant did perswade him to returne to Persia, and to leaue him with three hundred thousand souldiers behind. Xerxes resolued to followe Mardonius councell, and was forced to scape in a poore fisher mans bote most cowardly and shamefully, who before thought, that land and seas had not roome sufficient for his armie. The victorie which the Greekes had ouer Xerxes at Salami∣na, Plutarch in Themistocle. was the greatest that euer Greekes had: for in trueth the Greekes this time florished, being after this great victorie much enriched with the golde of Persia: for Mardonius Xerxes lieutenant, had the like successe as his master had: for he was ouerthrowen in a battell in Boetia, leauing be∣hinde him all the kings treasures, which was infinite, and did more hurt to Greece then good: This Mardonius was driuen Mardonius. with like shame to followe his master into Persia. Among the Greekes which euer contended more for vaine glory then for profit (as by this victory appeareth) grew great enuie, the Lacedemonians affirming that they & their Admi∣rall Euribiades deserued the glory and honour of this victorie, Themistocles much honou∣red of all Greece. the Atheniās chalenging the praise & fame to thēselues & to their generall Themistocles, of whō all Greece spake much ho∣nour, & who by common iudgement deserued most praise. Skant was Xerxes in Persia, but ciuil discentiō began in Greece, and Themistocles, by whose seruice principally the glorie of
Greece shined at the victorie of Salamina, was banished from Athens, and went from place to place, vntill he came to Per∣sia Diod lib. 11. to this king Xerxes, whom hee made to flee from Greece, as both Heraclides and Clitarchus affirme: yet Thucydides saith, Xerxes was dead before Themistocles comming: but he meant Thucyd. lib. 1. to his sonne Artaxerxes, surnamed the long handed. Herodot ended his historie in Xerxes time, where Thucydides begin∣neth, and therefore is best herein to be beleeued. Nowe Themistocles in Persia by drinking bulles blood, did poyson himselfe, to auoide the seruice which Artaxerxes ap∣pointed Themystocles poysoned him selfe. him against Greece: he knowing the valour of Cimon, and fearing his courage, who lay with an armie there at Cy∣prus, to haue giuen battell to Themistocles, but Themistocles preuented that with death: for after this great victorie of the Grecians ouer the Persians at Salamina, Greece florished, vntill ciuill discord beganne within Greece, and so continued, one Citie contending with another, vntill it brake out into pub∣like warres, which began fiftie yeeres after the ouerthrow of Xerxes. After him succeeded in Athens Pericles, a man of great valure, but he had an associate ioyned with him, a singular rare man: he was the sonne of that valiant captaine Miltiades, who ouercame Darius Xerxes father in the battell at Mara∣thon. Miltiades Pho∣cion father. Of his seruice and courage you shal heare more: for as Themistocles had Aristides, surnamed the iust his collegue as a touchstone to reprehend Themistocles for his ambition: so nowe Pericles had Phocion surnamed the good called home being banished from Athens fortenne yeeres to ioyne in go∣uernment with Pericles: for when Aristides died, and Themi∣stocles was banished, Cimon had bene of long time in seruice as generall in forreine countries out of Greece. Then Pericles beganne to deale in the common weale of Athens, & for that Cimon was inclined to take part with the best men, and with The iustice of Cimon. the honestest causes, he was the more esteemed, not onely in Athens, but in all Greece, and specially of the Lacedemoni∣ans, who could not brooke so well Pericles, who tooke a con∣trary course euery way to Cimon: of whose seruice abroade Cimons prayse.
farre from Greece somewhat I wil recite: for neither Themisto∣cles, Reade Thu∣cyd. lib. 1. nor his successour Pericles bridled more the crueltie of that mightie Persian king, then Cimon did, not only in chasing him out of Greece, but folowing him hard at the heeles to Per∣sia, and brought him against his wil to conditions of peace. After this he entred Thracia, subdued them, & forced those Herodot. lib. 7. Persians that dwelt in Coronesus an Isle in Thracia to flight. Ci∣mon was made general of Athens, at which time he conquered the citie of Ionia, and the citie of Amphipolis, and wanne the Isle of Syros: he subdued Asia from Ionia vnto Pamphylia, and Diuers victo∣ries of Cimon. brought them in subiection vnder the Grecians: Cimon after this went against the Faselits, who were Grecians borne, and yet enemies vnto Greece, destroyed their countrey, and wanne their chiefe citie called Faselis. Againe, Cimon had two great victories against the Persians in one day: one victorie on sea, where he tooke 200. sailes prisoners at the riuer Eurymedon, Ariomandes being the kings Diod. lib. 11. lieutenant: the other victory on land, with great slaughter of the barbarous people: al their tents and their pauilions he ca∣ried away. Plutarch saith, that these victories excelled the vi∣ctorie of Salamia which the Grecians wanne by sea, and the other which they wan by land before the citie of Platea. By this valiant man Cimon the name of Athens was reuiued: for Cimons only study and care was, to haue Greece not to halt, Plutarch. in Cimon. and therefore his secret desire and traueile was, that Greece should stand vpon two legs, which was Athens and Sparta. He alwayes sought meanes to keepe the Athenians and the Lace∣demonians Athens and Sparta, the two legges of Greece. in peace: for the Athenians thought themselues to be the only light of al Greece, affirming them only to be bread and borne in the countrey as Indigenae, seditious people, vn∣quiet, . and euer desirous of soueraigntie, and therefore Cimon followed the Lacedemonians maners for their sobrietie and temperancie of life, and wished alwayes their prosperitie. This Cimon while he liued, was the onely man that Greece was beholden vnto: for vnder Cimon it flourished most, and Athens flouri∣shed vnder Cimon. specially the Athenians, which Demosthenes affirmeth in diuers
of his orations, that they had the soueraigntie of al Greece for Melancton lib. 2. the space of 73. yeeres, compting from the time of Cimons vi∣ctories at Euridemon, vntill the yeelding of Athens vnto Lisan∣der: Athens flou∣rished 73. yeeres. for after Cimons death, no famous acte was done by any Grecian to the barbarous people, sauing that Agesilaus king of Lacedemon came fiftie yeeres after Cimons death, with an ar∣mie of Grecians into Asia, and beganne a small warre of no no∣table exploit, for that hee was called home againe to Greece, by occasion of newe troubles and ciuill warres risen among the Grecians. Now when Cimon had brought into Greece (as it were) an Plut. in Cimone. other golden worlde, such as was in Saturnus raigne: and ha∣uing brought with him to Athens the bones of Theseus 700. yeres after Theseus death: for the which he wanne exceeding∣ly the Athenians hearts, he died at the siege of the citie Citium Theseus bones by Cimon ca∣ried to Athens. in Cyprus: after whom continued Pericles his colleague in go∣uernment of Athens for a time. About this time in Rome tenne Magistrates were appointed and first created, within a while after the putting downe of Tarquinius the last king of Rome, called Decem viri: from whom ambassadours were sent to A∣thens for the lawes of the 12. tables. I will now leaue to speake of Athens, and I will write what other cities of Greece did, what kings raigned, and what go∣uernment they had: for at this time the chiefest cities of Greece were in an vprore: for Xerxes after his shameful flight Xerxes tyran∣nie in Persia af∣ter his fleeing from Greece. Herodot. lib. 6. from Greece to Asia, slew his brother Mancistes, vsed abomina∣ble incest with both his brothers wife and his daughter, and himselfe was after slaine by Artabanus. Now while his sonne Artaxerxes raigned, he was vertuous, good, and liberall, and fauoured peace more then warre: he liued vntil the seuenth yere of the warres of the Peloponesians. Agesilaus raigned king in Lacedemon. The Thebans waxed strong, and beganne to haue the better of the Lacedemonians. Sparta was now in the declining state, & had sustained much losses and harmes by the Boetians, and by the Thebans, by meanes of Epaminondas and Pelopidas: therefore they sent for
Agesilaus into Asia: for while hee was in Asia, Lisander lost againe two great battels, and in the last Lisander himselfe Lisander slaine. was slaine. CHAP. VI. Of the ciuill discention in Greece after Xerxes time, howe euery citie was in armes one against another: of their Peloponesian warres, which continued 27. yeeres, to the ouerthrow of Greece by Philippe, and after by his sonne Alexander, which shalbe set downe in the next Chapter. THus the Thebans ioyning with the Athe∣nians, through the great courage of Ci∣mon hauing wonne these two victories, Athens by Ci∣mon recoue∣red. the one by land the other by sea, Cimon by his prowesse and valure, recouered now Athens, which before hee had lost. Athens beganne to lift vp her selfe, and Thucyd. lib. 1. & 2. being well refreshed by the spoyles of the Lacedemonians, and encouraged by the death of Lisander, and by the banishment of Pausanias, it was hie time for Age∣silaus to returne from Asia vnto Greece: for Epaminondas the Thebane captaine, vsed great celeritie in his warres, and ma∣ny Stratagems against Sparta. Conon hearing of Agesilaus com∣ming, armed himselfe, and (as Iustine saith,) was then in A∣sia, and came that time from Asia, when Agesilaus came. Agesilaus was scant come into Sparta, but Epaminondas Iustinus lib. 2. came spoyling and wasting, and sacking all the countrey of Lacedemon, with a great armie of fourtie thousande Thebans to the riuer of Eurotas, which was a great terrour vnto Spar∣ta, Epaminondas saying of Spar∣ta. hauing but sixe thousande, which Agesilaus disposed in se∣cret places of the towne: for Sparta was not walled, and therefore the more doubted of Epaminondas. Now both Agesilaùs and Epaminondas stood on either side of the riuer Eurotas, one beholding another: a sight not plea∣sant Melanct. lib. 2. chron. to Sparta, and readie to be brought to that ruine which happened thirtie yeeres before to Athens.
Now after Epaminondas had continued by Sparta 4. dayes, and saw that he could not enter the citie, after few battels on Epaminondas. both sides of equall losse, he departed and went to Arcadia: such was the magnanimitie of the Spartās, though they were brought to that calamitie by the Athenians before, yet they held out while these flourished in Sparta, namely, Euristhenes. Leonidas. Eurybiades. Pausanias. Agesilaus. Lysander. Cleomenes. Argestratus. Doristus. Archelaus. Agis. Archidamus. Cleombrotus. Brasidas. Metagenes. Clearchus. Gilippus. With many like, but chiefly with Lycurgus who made Sparta most famous in discipline by his lawes. Epaminondas and Pelopidas were chiefe gouernours of The∣bes, Epaminondas praise. who not only restored the Thebanes diuers times their li∣bertie, but also resisted the violence of the Lacedemonians, and ouerthrewe their Seigniorie, and brought Sparta so vnder foote, that these two valiant captaines did breake and cut in sunder the lincks and chaines that made the Lacedemonians Diod. lib. 15. strong. The Lacedemoniās who at that time were almost lords and masters of al Greece, had diuers ouerthrowes by Pelopidas: such was his good successe, that during his life (as Plutarch af∣firmeth) he was gouernour of Boetia, or general ouer the The∣banes: he wanne the victorie of the Lacedemonians at the bat∣tell Pelopidas vi∣ctorie at Te∣gira. of Tegira, where none else then Pelopidas might callenge any part of that victorie: thereupon a new supplie was sent from Lacedemon to Tegira, where a newe battell was present∣ly offred to Pelopidas, in the which battell he had the victorie, and slew both the generals, aswell him that with a new armie Victorie the second time at Tegira. came from Sparta to Tegira, as also the other which had the ouerthrow. Now as the Thebanes waxed strong by the meanes of these two Captaines Epaminondas and Pelopidas: so were they also ouerthrowen by diuers, as by the Plateans and Boetians. But Thucyd. lib. 2. Sparta was much molested with the Thebanes: so that by hap∣pie
successe of Pelopidas many victories were wonne, and spe∣cially at the battell of Leuctres, where both Pelopidas and Epa∣minondas played the champions: for Epaminondas being ge∣nerall, The victory at Leuctres. brought all his power and force to giue the charge vp∣on Cleombrotus then king of Sparta, with great furie. Pelopidas perceiuing the intent of the Lacedemonians, together with E∣paminondas set vpon Cleombrotus, before he could order his ar∣mie, with such incredible courage, that the Lacedemonians the only souldiers in martial discipline, were driuen (beside their Thucyd. lib. 1. skill, and wonted courage of sighting) to turne their backes and to take their flight, and there were slaine that day more Lacedemonians in that battell, then we reade of in any former battel. Their king was slaine, and a thousand of the best of au∣thoritie, the most part noble men of Lacedemon, and almost brought to vtter ruine: for this warre at Leuctres was as fa∣mous as any one battell of Greece. This time only was Epaminondas gouernour of Boetia, and Plutarch in Pelop. generall of the armie: afterward they were both gouernours of Boetia together: at what time they both inuaded the coun∣trey of Peloponesus, and made the cities to rebel against the La∣cedemonians, Melanct. lib. 2. & passed ouer the riuer of Eurotas with seuentie thousand men, and tooke many litle townes of the Lacedemo∣nians, wasted and destroyed all the countrey to the sea side. The reputation of these two men Pelopidas and Epaminondas, made all men most willingly to march vnder their conducti∣on. This great battel at Leuctres happened in the 32. yeres of Artaxerxes sirnamed Mnemon, 29. yeeres after Lisander had brought Athens in subiection, in the 102. Olympiad, before A∣lexanders Sprta destro∣ed 30. yeeres after Athens was destroyed by Lysander. raigne 36. yeres: so long held the Lacedemonians the Empire of Greece after the victory of Lisander at Athens, which was thirtie yeeres. And now Sparta is brought into that misery by Epaminon∣das & Pelopidas, as Athens was by Lisander, the only two lampes of Greece, the two eyes, and the two legges of Greece, and yet the only two that were the cause of the destruction of Greece. The cause of the warres of the Pelopones. The cause of these great and long ciuil warres seemed in the
beginning but small, but (as Pindarus saith) Scintilla parua mag∣nam syluam comburit: and so it came to passe by occasion of a litle contention betweene the Athenians and the Magareans, de luco incenso. The Athenians made a decree, that it was not lawfull for any of Megara to enter into any part of Attica: Read Thucyd. the 1. and 2. booke. this was thought iniurious, and therefore complaint was made vnto the Lacedemonians, who sending messengers vnto Pericles the chiefe gouernour of Athens to entreate that that decree should not stand, Pericles answered, that the Lacedemo∣nians sought a thing of small moment: but that the example of the fault was intollerable, and therefore the Lacedemonians should commaunde Pericles and all Athens in causes of grea∣ter waight. This grew into such suspition with the Lacedemonians, that warres of 27. yeeres came of it, which was called Bellum Pelo∣ponesiacum, Melanct. lib. 2. the Peloponesians warre. This spoyled and wasted Greece: this warre full ended the glorie of Greece, and brought the whole Empire to ruine, to whom within 50. yeres before this warre, all Asia was brought subiect, as Xerxes could well The opinion of Xerxes. witnes that Greece florished, when he was forced with shame and losse secretly in a small boate to scape into Persia, which Xerxes entred Greece with tenne hundred thousand souldiers, with 1200. nauies, some write 3000: Hee that thought Helle∣spont could not containe the nomber of his nauies, and sup∣posed that all Greece were not able to receiue his armie, euen hee after that incontinently lost foure great battels, and was like a coward driuen out of Greece, leauing Mardonius his lieu∣tenant with three hundred thousand souldiers behinde him, who likewise at the battell of Platea was slaine, and his armie ouerthrowen. Then Greece flourished, when Darius Histaspis, which was Xerxes father, had the ouerthrow at the great battell of Mara∣thon: at which time that noble and valiant man Miltiades was generall for Athens. Then flourished Greece, when the Lace∣demonians liued after the lawes of Lycurgus, and when the A∣thenians kept the lawes of Solon. Then flourished Athens, Atheneus lib. 12.
when the reuenues of Athens came yerely to the accompts of sixe hundreth talents: nay it is written, that Demetrius Phale∣rius which then gouerned Athens, had yeerely comming into the treasure house twelue hūdred talents, to the which Budeus doeth agree. The citie of Athens flowed in wealth, when that Peus lib. 2. de Asse. Isocrates could get 20. talents for one Oration, and when De∣mosthenes had of Harpalus 20. talents for one dayes silence. When the Athenians tooke the Isle Cythera and the castle Silence well solde. Nisaea which was the only strēgth of Megara: when they van∣quished the Lacedemonians at Epidaurus, and compelled them to make league with the Persians, and craued their ayde and helpe against the Athenians: when Thrasillus gaue an ouer∣throw to the Lacedemonians by sea, and to their general Min∣darus betweene Sestos and Abydos, and yet they lost more then they gained by the Lacedemonians: such was then their malice as Cleon the Athenian, and Brasidas the Lacedemonian, two vali∣ant captaines in the battell at Amphipolis, fought so, that they Cleon and Bra∣sidas slaine at Amphipolis. were both slaine and all their souldiers: so in like sort was all Greece destroyed by ciuil warres: such was the malice and en∣uie that one citie bare to another in the time of the Pelopone∣sian warre. For from the battell at Salamina where Xerxes had the great ouerthrow, vntill the battell at Leuctres, these iolie captaines flourished at Athens. Callimachus. Miltiades. Themistocles. Aristides. Phocion. Cimon. Pericles. Alcibiades. Nicias. Conon. Thrasibulus. Thrasillus. Leosthenes. Nicostratus. Aristonymus. Cleon. Aristarchus. Theagenes. With many such, but spe∣cially with one Solon, who beautified Athens before. But nowe Athens by this ciuill warres is much eclipsed from her glorie: for this warre of the Peloponesians, brake the backe of all Greece. Alcibiades rashnesse was much gi∣uen to pricke forwarde this warres: for hee was ioyned with Nicias, who fauoured the Lacedemonians, and sought Niceas. meanes to keepe the Athenians in friendship with the Lace∣demonians, which purchased Nicias great loue and fauour of
the people, which spited much Alcibiades to see Nicias in such credite with the people, and therefore he studied how to in∣fringe Diod. lib. 12. this peace, and to diminish the fame of Nicias, no other wayes then you heard before of Themistocles and Aristides, the one enuious and glorious, the other good and iust, and so sir∣named Aristides the iust, one finding fault with the other, to the great danger and trouble of Athens. After these succeeded two great men Pericles and Cimon, Alcibiades the author of Sicil warres. the one factious and stubburne, the other meeke and gentle: and euen so now Alcibiades yong and ambitious, Nicias sober and temperate, for Alcibiades being the authour of the warres of Sicilie, alluring the people with his pleasant tōgue, to make warres in Sicilia a beginning to further enterprise, Nicias per∣swading to the contrary, with all meanes possible affirming plaine that the citie of Syracusa was too great a matter for A∣thens to take in hand. Alcibiades brought the Athenians much Alcibyades brags. attentiue vnto him, promising them to bring to passe great wonders, hee assured the Athenians that if Syracusa might be conquered, Lybia and Carthage might soone be conquered, and so passe to Italy. The Athenians people most desirous to enlarge their Seg∣niorie, who much coueted in Pericles life to haue Syracusa in hand, now being perswaded by Alcibiades, they are most wil∣ling to set him forward, hauing 140. gallies, and 5000. foote∣men, very well armed and appointed, besides archers and other light armed men to the nomber of thirteene hundreth: but Alcibiades did no great exploit, sauing the winning of the Plut. in Alcib. citie Catana: for hee was called home immediatly by the A∣thenians to answere certaine accusations layd to his charge: he returned from Sicilia, not daring well for feare of his ene∣mies to come vnto Athens: he sent vnto Sparta to haue safe cō∣duct and licence of the Lacedemonians to dwell in their coun∣trey: his request being obtained, hee practised vpon his first Alcibyades counsel. comming, seruice against his owne citie, he counselled the Spartans speedily to send ayd to the Syracusans, whom they had of long time before delayed. Gylippus was sent from Sparta to Thucyd. lib. 7.
Sicilia to ouerthrowe the Athenian armie. His second coun∣sell Thucyd. lib. 7. was that the Lesbians, and they of Chios which were not in league with the Athenians should begin to warre vpon them. The thirde counsell was, that the Lacedemonians should for∣tifie Alcibiades en∣tertained with the Lacedemo∣nians. the citie of Decelia, which was within the territories of Attica. Alcibiades himselfe would saile vnto Ionia to perswade those cities to ioyne with Sparta. By this time Athens was on euery side troubled, and the A∣thenians force diminished: whereby grew great warres and ci∣uill Melanct. lib. 2. discorde among the citizens of Greece. The authoritie of Alcibiades, his credite and his fame got him both enuie and malice, and that of the best: they feared his fauour with the people, and (as Plutarch saith) he had such entertainment of Timea the Queene, (king Agis wife of Sparta) that the king be∣ing Timea king A∣gis wife. abroad in the warres, Alcibiades got the Queene at home with childe, and therefore the chiefe magistrats of Sparta cal∣led Ephori, wrote letters vnto certaine captaines of the warre to kill Alcibiades. But hee hauing some intelligence hereof by the Queene, Iustin. lib. 3. practised with Tisapharnis the king of Persias lieutenant, to withdrawe his fauour from the Lacedemonians, and to ioyne with the Athenians. For by this time Alcibiades had some hope by his friendes meanes, to be called home againe to A∣thens: for true it was, he went to Samos,  was an armie of the Athenians readie to saile to Athens: there Alcibiades was honourably receiued, and by meanes of Thrasybulus hee was Alcibiades re∣ceiued to A∣thens againe. shortly after most louingly receiued into Athens, at what time hee did some good seruice to Athens, and requited the spite and enuie which the Lacedemonians shewed him in Sparta. For now Myndarus the Admirall of the Lacedemonian ar∣mie by sea, hauing threescore shippes, and hauing giuen the ouerthrowe once or twise to the Athenians: with this Mynda∣rus ioyned also Pharnabasus the king of Persias , with a bande of footemen: for now Tizapharnes  good friend died, and in his place came this captaine arnabassus: Pharnabassus. being throughly stirred to reuenge the malice of Sparta, hee
went with a small nomber of gallies to the Isle of Cos: there he was aduertised, that the Athenians and the Lacedemonians were in battell by sea before the citie of Abydos: and being in Thucyd. lib. 8. the midst of their fight, Alcibiades discouered his galleis, and commaunded straight to set vp his flagge in the toppe of the galleis of his Admirall, and in the very heate of the battell when that the Athenians were at the worst, Alcibiades fresh∣ly Alcibiades vi∣ctorie at Aby∣dos. did set vpon the Peloponesians, brake their shippes, chased them to flight, and got the victorie ouer the Lacedemonians by sea: and after this victory straight the Peloponesians with an other armie, and Pharnabasus with Mindarus were together in the citie of Cizicum. Of this Alcibiades hauing intelligence, hasted towards them: for he had not forgotten the letters of the Ephores to the captaines for the killing of him. Mindarus the Admirall, and Pharnabasus the generall were Mindarus ouerthrowen. no sooner on the maine sea, but Alcibiades with his Athenians gaue them battell, and ouerthrewe them, scattered them, and slewe a great nomber of them, drowned more, and killed Mindarus the Admirall in the fielde fighting valiantly, and forced Pharnabasus to flie cowardly, and to take the citie of Ci∣zicum: their losse was so great, and their strength so dimini∣shed, Diod. lib. 13. that Sparta hearing of this great victorie of the Atheni∣ans, fell in great dispaire, and doubted much of their state and gouernment: for by this victorie the Athenians had the pos∣session of the whole countrey of Helespont. After this Alcibiades went againe against Pharnabasus, spoi∣led his countrey, tooke diuers of his townes, and gaue the o∣uerthrow Alcibiades vi∣ctorie at . to the generall in his owne territories. Alcibiades thence went and made warres against the Chalcedonians, who were now reuolted from the Athenians, and had receiued a gouernour and a garison of the Lacedemonians into their ci∣tie: hee layed siege to Chalcedon: Pharnabasus came to ayde Pharnabassus. the Chalcedonians, but hee was with shame (as before) put to flight, and Hyppocrates the Lacedemonian gouernour, slew be∣fore the citie a great nomber of his men, and tooke many of them prisoners, and at that time made the Bythinians to make
a league with the Athenians, yeelding their towne and their possession into Alcibiades hand. After this victorie of Chalcedon, hee tooke the citie of Sely∣brea, and went in armes against Byzantium, where after a ter∣rible Byzantium which is now called Constan∣tinople. battell hee wanne the citie, and got the victorie with three hundreth prisoners of the best citizens. Thus Alcibiades hauing wonne fiue seuerall victories by giuing of fiue terri∣ble battels. 1 The first victorie at Abydos with great celeritie. 2 The second victorie at Cizicum. 3 The third victorie against Pharnabasus. Fiue victories of Alcibyades. 4 The fourth battell at Chalcedon. 5 The fift and last battell at Byzantium. After these fiue victories Alcibiades hoysed saile and dire∣cted his course toward Athens, where he was most honorablie Thucyd. lib. 8. receiued. About this time the Egyptians reuolted from the Persians and the Medes, but Darius subdued them straight againe to the Medes: the Rhodians likewise brake their league with the Lacedemonians. These Lacedemonians kept the Persians al∣wayes in their hand, when neede required it, to ayde them: Diod. lib. 11. for of all Greece the Athenians were most hatefull to the Per∣sians, for that in the battell of Marathon the Athenians gaue so great an ouerthrowe to the Persians, that twentie thousande Persians were slaine, and many of them great men. 20000. Persians slaine at Ma∣rathon. This rancor boyled in the Persians hearts, though they had diuers times after the like ouerthrow, as at Thermopila by Leo∣nidas, at Salamina by Themistocles, at Platea, and at other pla∣ces: yet no battell grieued them so much as the battell at Marathon by Miltiades. Athens was the only Lady of all Greece, Thucyd. lib. 1. in whose lappe were more noble and couragious captaines nourished, then in all Greece beside: and therefore she was feared of all Greece, and enuied of all Asia. Nowe after many good fortunes of the Athenians, it fell out otherwise to them in the warres of Sicilia: their state
declined, and their force diminished: for by this time Alci∣biades the thirde moneth after his returne being puffed vp with former pride, went with an hundreth shippes into Asia, Alcibiades in Asia. where hee lost more to Athens in that one iourney, then hee gained in the last fiue victories, onely by his negligence, let∣ting to one Antiochus the charge, and himselfe purposing to passe to Hellespont vpon pleasure. The Athenians hereby being brought into great dispaire, vnderstanding that Alcibiades willingly absented him selfe with a voluntary banishment from Athens, made a choyse of Conon to succeede him in gouernment, whose vnhappie suc∣cession was no better then banishment, according to the law and custome of Athens: for they had in Athens a kinde of ba∣nishment Ostracismus in testa script. called Ostracismus, that when any Magistrate, ge∣nerall, or captaine waxed great and a potentate or mightie, (fearing that his greatnesse should annoy the state publique Petalisimus in folio  script. by some priuate hatred,) hee should bee banished for tenne yeeres. The like lawe the Syracusans had concerning the ba∣nishment of their great men, which they called Petalisimus: which was a banishment for fiue yeeres. These kindes of Diodor. lib. 19. banishments did suppresse the furie and malice of the Cap∣taines and great men, for any offence likely to be suspected in them. Now after that Alcibiades had ouerthrowen the whole force Melanct. 2. Chron. of Athens in this sort, and that Lysander had a great spite to the state of Athens, seeing the towne weake, vnfurnished, and vnfortunate, without men or munitions: hee besieged A∣thens, which without great difficultie was yeelded vp vpon Athens de∣stroyed. the sixt moneth, and the sixteenth of March. Beholde the fall of the great glorie of Athens, which be∣fore mastred all Greece, and nowe by Lysander brought in sub∣iection and made euen with the grounde: and in steade of good gouernours he appointed thirtie Tyrants that should 30. Tyrants appointed go∣uernours of . gouerne Athens as pleased them, subiect to Sparta, and al∣most vassals of the Lacedemonians: and beside, order was taken, that Alcibiades should be slaine by meanes of Phar∣nabasus
Darius generall, doubting much that if Alcibiades were not preuented, Athens should againe flourish: so am∣bitious and so vnquiet was Alcibiades, that scant all Greece could suffice him: which Agis king of Sparta, and Lysander saw in him. When Alcibiades by deceit was slaine, and Athens conque∣red, Alcibyades slaine. the Lacedemonians were lords of all Greece: notwithstan∣ding, when the Thebans and Corinthians contended to haue the citie of Athens altogether quite destroyed, and from the ground raised vp, that there should be no mention made of Athens for euer after: the Lacedemonians consented not to that, saying that Athens had bene of long time one of the two legges of Greece, and further saide, that it had bene one of the two eyes of Greece, which had brought many great men vp, Athens one of the two eyes of Greece. the nourse of knowledge, and the lanterne of Greece, which had resisted the violence of all Asia, and had giuen many times the ouerthrow to the barbarous nations, and therefore not vtterly to confound it. In this warre there were thirtie thousande taken captiues of the Athenians, which against the lawes of Armes were slaine by Lysander: some writers appointed the destruction of Athens to be in the last yeere of the Peloponesian warres, and in the second yeere of Artaxerxes sirnamed Mnemon, seuen∣tie and seuen yeres after the great victory at Salamina, and be∣fore the taking of Rome by the Gaules, nineteene yeeres, as Po∣libius setteth downe. The cause of this ouerthrow begonne by the Athenians (as you heard before) was the hatred of Pe∣ricles Thucyd. lib. 2. against the Magarians. In the very yeere that Athens was by Lysander destroyed, Darius Nothus died the sixt king of Persia, whose yonger sonne Ad Aegos po∣tamos. named Cyrus gouerned then the Lydians, and the Medes. This yere also was Dionysius the king of Sicilia banished: the poore Athenians were sore afflicted: Thebes, and Argos and many townes besides of Greece, were full of miserable and bani∣shed men from Athens, amongst whome Thrasibulus a wor∣thie man of great courage was forced to flie, and to leaue
Athens vnder the gouernment of tyrants, who hauing a gard of thirtie thousand of citizen souldiers to defend them in all Xenophon lib. 2. e. Grec. tyrannie, made hauocke and spoile, and great slaughter in A∣thens, in so much that they made the children to daunce in their parents blood. Amongst these thirtie tyrants was one named Theramenes, who doubting that this tyrannie could not long endure, per∣swaded Theramenes. with Critias to haue more mitigation and lenitie in the gouernment, saying that Thrasibulus and Conon were yet aliue, and had taken a strong fort in Attica called Philen. Di∣uers cities of Greece bewailed the lamentable estate of A∣thens. Critias accused Theramenes of treason, and though it was in the citie knowen that Theramenes was honest, gentle, and a good citizen: yet Critias crueltie was such, that Thera∣menes died. Thus I leaue Athens foming in blood vnder cruel tyrants, Artaxerxes and Cyrus warres. and wil something speake of Artaxerxes Mnemon, to whom this very time the kingdome of Persia nowe happened by Darius Nothus his will, bequething to Cyrus his yonger sonne Lydia and Ionia. Cyrus was not pleased with this will, and whether hee was by his mother mooued, (for Cyrus was the onely ioye of his mother) or by him selfe enflamed through desire of soueraigntie, hee gathered an armie of the Xenophon lib. 1. de exped. Cyri. lesser Asia, and brought them ouer the riuer Euphrates, and beganne warre with the king his brother. The battell was sharpe, and went in the beginning with Cyrus: for Artaxerxes hoste yeelded for a time to the furie of Cyrus souldiers, and Artaxerxes himselfe had a wound giuen him by Cyrus his Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. one hande: but afterwarde Cyrus was taken, and was bound with fetters of golde, and had at that time died, if his mother had not most earnestly entreated for him. Cyrus by his mothers meanes being let at libertie, with great furie followed his first purpose, gathered a farre grea∣ter Cyrus second battel. armie, wherein were tenne thousand Grecians, vvell and strongly furnished, which came out of Greece to ayde Cy∣rus. To be short, it was in vaine: Cyrus was slaine in that bat∣tell,
and his armie ouerthrowen: yet Iustine saith, that the Gre∣cians Iustine lib. 4. valiantly stoode to it vnconquered in that wing of the battell where they stood. Of this warre doeth Xenophon most Zenoph. de ex∣ped. Cyri. amplie entreate, with whom Cyrus the yonger himselfe was brought vp: of this Cyrus and of his actes Xenophon wrote six∣teene bookes, eight of discipline militarie, and other eight of Xenophon of Cyrus. his warres. Now to Athens againe, where tyrannie all this while go∣uerned: but Thrasibulus was not carelesse how to represse these tyrants, whome Ismenias a prince of Thebes secretly ayded: and when that Sparta had made a decree, that no citie of Greece should suffer any exiled Athenians to enter into it, the Thebans resisted the decree, and they also made not onely a decree within Thebes and in all Boetia, that no house should be shut to the Athenians, but ayded them with men and mo∣ney. Likewise Lysias an oratour of Syracusa bestowed 500. rea∣die and well furnished souldiers to ayde Athens. When this preparation was heard of in Athens, the Ty∣rants sent to Pausanias king of Sparta to defende them, which 30. Tyrants and their go∣uernment o∣uerthrowen by Thrasybulus and Conon. hee with some conscience refused: for the which afterwarde Pausanias was accused by the Lacedemonians. In the meane season Thrasybulus gaue battell to the thirtie Tyrants, ouer∣threwe them, and tooke the citie of Athens, restored libertie to the citizens: at what time hee brought in Solons lawe to for∣get Xenophon lib. 2. reg. Grr. the iniuries past of friendes, of parents and of children, which were slaine in Athens vnder these thirtie Tyrants. This lawe of Thrasybulus was reuiued by the Senatours of Rome The law of forgetfulnes which were in the time of Trium viri, which were Octauius Augustus, Marcus Antonius, Lepidus Aemilius, when Iulius Caesar Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. was slaine, to forget the reuenge of Caesars death, to auoyde ciuill warres within Rome. A litle after this, Conon againe scattered the force of Sparta, and after much hurt to the Lacedemonians, he came to Athens, Conon ioyned with Thrasibu∣lus. and ioyned with Thrasybulus, by whose courage and valure Athens by degrees reuiued: for yet the ciuill warres in Greece were not ended: for as these afflictions and miseries hap∣pened
to Athens by ciuill warres: so after to euery citie of Greece the like happened, that of the onely countrey of the worlde, it was brought into a most miserable destruction. And for that you may reade the strength and force of Greece while they held together, I wil set downe the warres and the victories which the Grecians haue had ouer the Per∣sian kings, and ouer all other barbarous princes in Asia, and The victories of the Greci∣ans. in all partes of the East, at that time when that the Persians were lords and princes of the whole worlde, and helde the Monarchie onely, without resistance of any king or coun∣trey: yet in the most flourishing time of the Persians, the Grecians had these victories of them which are layde downe before you, viz. THe great battell at Marathon, where Miltiades got the victorie ouer Darius Histaspis the thirde king of Persia. 1 The famous enterprise and victorie of Leonidas at Thermo∣pila, 2 where hee slewe twentie thousande Persians, with three hundred Grecians. The two terrible battels at Salamina, where Themistocles 3 and Aristides, had the victorie against Xerxes both by sea and land. The battell fought before Platea against Mardonius, where was slaine sixe and twentie thousande, and Mardonius the 4 king of Persias lieutenant. The victorie hereof was giuen to the Athenians: yet the honour of the victorie by common re∣port 5 yeelded to the Plateans, at what time Aristides was gene∣rall of Athens, and Pausanias king of Sparta, was generall of all Greece. The warres of Chalcedon against Pharnabasus, where Alci∣biades 6 wanne the victorie. The warres betweene Ptolomey king of Egypt, and Alexan∣der 7 king of Macedon, the sonne of Amintas, pacified and en∣ded by Pelopidas, and tooke the kings brother called Philippe, which was Alexander the great his Father, and thirtie more of the noblest mens sonnes in Macedon to Ostage, and
brought them to Thebes, to let the worlde see the reputation of Greece then. The victorie of Aristides gotten at Psittalia, where he tooke 8 three Persian lordes sonnes to Sandauce king Xerxes sister, and the Grecians were of one minde, and thought with such cou∣rage to bring Asia vnder the Empire of Greece. The victorie of Cimon in the countrie of Thracia, where he vanquished certeine great men of Persia allied to the king 9 himselfe, and kept the Citie of Eronea vpon the riuer of Stry∣mon, ouerthrewe the barbarous people, inuaded the Thraci∣ans, droue the Persians away, and possessed al Thracia, and ap∣pointed Grecians to inhabite the Countrie: thus had the Greekes victorie out of Greece before their ciuill warres began: this Cimon plagued the Persians, past into Asia, and returned with diuers victories into Greece againe. When Nicias wanne the hauen of Syracusa, and besieged 10 the Citie in such sort, that Euripides made an Epitaph vpon the graue of Nicias, and had gotten eight seuerall victories ouer the Cicilians. The victorie which Agesilaus had of Sardis, the chiefe Citie 11 of Lydia, and the victorie ouer Tisaphernes lieutenant of all 12 Persia, who gaue battell to the Nation that dwell in Acar∣nea, ouerthrewe them and destroyed them, and had victo∣rie, 13 and after went to Egypt being an olde man, to Tachos king of Egypt, where hee vsed a Stratageme, that hee gote victorie of Tachos vnto Nectanebus: nowe when Persia, Asia, Egypt, Lydia, felt the force of Greece, then was Greece re∣nowmed. The victorie of Phocion in the Isle of Naxes in a battell by 14 sea, and another victorie of the Macedonians in a battell that Phocion had with Antipater, where Leonatus, who came out 15 of Asia to ioyne with Antipater, was killed. The battell at Mantinea the chiefe Citie of Arcadia: 16 the victorie hereof fell to Epaminondas, and to the Thebans.
CHAP. VII. Of the last destruction of Greece by the Macedonians, by meanes of ciuill discorde, and the Peleponesian warres, the onely cause of their ruine and confusion: at what time king Philip brake their backes, and his sonne Alexander their neckes: and after them the Romanes kept them in perpetuall seruitude. WHat should I write of the victories of E∣paminondas, Agis, Cleomenes, or of others, which fell before the ciuil dissension of Greece, I meane chiefely the Peloponesi∣an warres, though some of those victo∣ries Greece flori∣shed before the Pelopone∣sian warres. were after the warres of Peloponesus, yet certeinely while the Grecians helde as some time they woulde, then was Xerxes driuen out of Greece, and beaten in his owne countrie: then was Pyrrhus not onely resisted, but also slaine at Argos: then was Philip king of Macedon kept out of Greece, vntill they beganne to be factious and seditious, one citie against another, and some had sought helpe of Philip to suppresse their owne Countrie men, vntill hee was made gouernour of Greece, Greece was not altogether conquered, though in deede they were sore Philip left a way open to Alex. his sōne. oppressed by the Peloponesian warres: but nowe by Philip king of Macedon it was brought againe to ruine, and the way left open to his sonne Alexander the great, who after brought all Greece subiect to Macedonia, whither the Monarchie of the Persians was translated, and vnder whom all the worlde al∣most was subdued. Nowe that I opened fewe victories vnto you, which the Grecians with fame and great honour wanne, if I shoulde set downe the victories which one Citie wanne of an other, or one Countrie of an other, they should be infinite: for with∣in twentie seuen yeeres all the Gities of Greece, (which were not for their number to be numbred, and for their strength not to be spoken) were destroyed: for I dare speake it, that
Greece had more annoyance by two battels, then all the gaines of the victories which the Greekes had ouer all the bar∣barous Aegos Potamos. nations. The first was at the riuer of goates giuen by Lysander against Athens, called the battell at Aegos Potamos: the Two battels. Aegos Potamos. & Leuctres. other giuen by Epaminondas against Sparta, called the battell of Leuctres. These two Cities being the two eyes and the two legges of Greece could neuer agree, the one enuying the state of the other, vntill both were destroyed, and by their occa∣sion all Greece also destroyed. About this time Camillus florished in Rome, who both Camillus. gaue the repulse to the French men, euen at the gates of Rome, when they had taken Rome, and also triumphed ouer the Volscans, ouer the Veiens, & ouer the Hetruscans: for which good seruice he was the next yeere following made Dictator in Rome. This fell in Rome, when Mausolus king of Caria died, and had by his wife Artemesia his tombe made so gorgeous, that it was reputed as one of the seuen wonders of the world. In Athens now after the thirtie tyrants were ouerthrowē, gouerned tenne men of equall authoritie by Thrasibulus and Conon appointed called Decennales principes: these two lifted Decennales principes. Athens on foote againe: for Conon had fiftie talents, which he had gotten in Cyprus by king Euagoras: this hee bestowed to raise vp the walles of Athens, which Lysander made euen to the Thucyd. lib. 8. grounde: for yet florished in Athens after these Peloponesian warres, though not great captaines, yet famous Philoso∣phers and eloquent Orators, which kept Greece in memorie, and by whose meanes many monuments in Greece were re∣serued: For now florished Plato, and after him his scholler A∣ristotle, Alexander the great his scholemaster, for whose sake Athens was had before other Cities in reuerence, Alex. in Egypt spared for A∣rius sake. in like sort as Augustus Caesar spared Alexandria in Egypt, for Arius the Philosophers sake, who then dwelt there: yet Alexander made all meanes possible to take such Orators as did perswade the Athenians in armes against him, and against his father before, which were Lycur∣gus the Orator, Demosthenes, Aescnes, Demades and others:
which like barking dogges kept these wolues from Athens, in perswading the people to be in armes against foreigne prin∣ces in the defence of Greece: but when they had no enemie, they became enemies within themselues. When Greece was by reason of these ciuill warres made weake, and not able to resist any great strength, (for after the death of Epaminondas, greater warres and more seditious stir∣ring fell in Greece then before:) Philip king of Macedon hauing Xenoph. lib. 2. full intelligence of the state of Greece, howe by long warres betweene themselues, they were easely to be ouerrunne, hee secretly kindled a seconde fire in Greece by stirring of secrete captaines to encrease the hatred of the Grecians one against an other, which could neuer be extinguished: such was their desire to rule and to triumph one ouer another. Philip king of Macedonia, Alexander the great his father, as Iustine in lib. 8. yet like a foxe hiding himselfe in a denne, watched oportu∣nitie of time, vntill contention grewe betweene the Phoceans Diod. lib. 16. and the Thebans about the sacriledge, which the Phocians cō∣mitted in the temple of Apollo at Delphos: of this occasion be∣ganne the warres called bellum sacrum, of the which mencion Amphictions Iudges of Greece. is made often in histories, and specially with the Orators of Greece, who cried crucifige vpon the Phocians for so execrable a thing, before the Iudges Amphictions, which were appoin∣ted generall Iudges for the whole state of Greece. This warre beganne in the time of Ochus the eight king of Persia: the Iud∣ges laide a great fine vpon the Phocians which they grudged to pay, beside the secrete perswasions of the Lacedemonians, promising them aide to stand in armes against the Thebans, who had before accused them. Functius lib. 3. Philomelus a Phocean captaine gathered a great armie, brake the decree of the Iudges, burned the tables where they were written, and ouerthrewe the iudgement seate of the Amphi∣ctions. By this occasion great warres grewe betweene the Pho∣ceans Xenoph. lib. 1. and the Lacedemonians of the one side, the Thebans and the Thessalians of the otherside. About the beginning of this warre, Alexander the great was borne. Philomelus being killed
in the fourth battell, after hee had done some harme to the Thebans. Onomarchus was appointed in his roome, who like∣wise ouercame the Boetians, and tooke one of the chiefe Ci∣ties Iustine lib. 8. called Coronea: he ouerthrewe the Thessalians in two bat∣tels, and slue a number of the Macedonians which Philip had sent to ayde the Phoceans. The Thebans being thus weakened by the Phoceans, they sent to Philip for aide, and besought him to be their Generall in this warre. This delighted much the king of Macedon: for nowe he sawe an easie way to conquer the Phoceans, the Athe∣nians, and the Lacedemonians, and to bring all Greece subiect vnder Macedonia. Philip came with great force, not to reuenge the Thebans (as he saide) but to reuenge the sacriledge which the Phoceans did in Delphos: for it is written, that they spoyled the temple of tenne thousand talents, which (as Melancthon Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. saith) is threescore tunnes of gold. In the third battell one Narchus was taken by Philip, and hanged, and sixe thousand of his souldiers slaine: the Phoce∣ans had wonne three principall Cities in Boetia, Orchomenon, Coronea, and Corsia, whereby they might easely subdue all Bo∣etia at their owne will. This warre of the Phoceans beganne fif∣teene yeeres after the battell of Mantinea, where the worthie and valiant Epaminondas was slaine, with whō this Philip king of Macedonia dwelt in house, when Philip was taken an ostage The due praise of Epaminon∣das. by Pelopidas of Antipater, as you reade before. Philip seemed to haue obserued many good instructions, which hee no doubt learned at Thebes in Epaminondas house, and yet as great difference betweene the two men as is betweene golde and siluer: for Epaminondas left not his fellowe behinde in Greece after him, so rare a man to be founde, in Philosophie fewe like him, brought vp vnder Lysias the Pythagorian, in o∣ther exploites of warres not to giue place neither to Pyrrhus, nor to Hanibal. The calamitie of this Phocean warre annoyed Greece more Philip lay in waite for Greece. then the warres of Peloponesus: for the foolish Thebans did send not for a helper but a destroyer, whē they sent for Philip:
for hee euer had a desire to Greece: hee expected oportunitie, and wrought all secret meanes possible to set all Greece by the eares. About this time Ochus recouered Egypt againe, which Ochus. had reuoulted from the Persians since Cambyses time. Also hee recouered Cyprus and Phoenicia. Temnes betrayed Sidon vnto king Ochus, whom hee afterward hanged for his paines, after that Philip had taken Toron, Olynthus, and Miciberna, 3. townes of Helespont, and had wasted and destroyed many Countries and Cities of Greece by the onely meanes of this Phocean warres, which continued tenne yeeres. While Greece stood in great danger of Philip, the Athenians and the Lacedemonians gathered their force againe, but to no effect: Philip waxed so strong in Greece, that they were forced Greece sought peace of Phil. to seeke to entreate for peace: for all Greece feared Philip more then they loued him: for such were his secret stratagemes, with deceitfull promises, that all Greece sawe his malice: but such was their inward enuie, their hidden hatred, and their secret Diod. lib. 16. working against themselues, that they had rather haue any barbarous nation to gouerne them, then one to loue an o∣ther, and to ioyne with common assent for the defence of their Countrie. This was the first cause of the Peloponesian warres, the se∣cond cause of the Phocean warres, the third and last cause of the destruction and slauerie of Greece. Alexander the great, a Alex. the great man of great fortune, and of greater ambition, being by Da∣rius entreated to peace, offering vnto Alexander his daugh∣ter Roxane in mariage, with Mesopotamia and diuers other prouinces and territories, answered in this sort, That as the heauen coulde not abide two sunnes, so the whole earth coulde not suffer two Alexanders. It seemed truely that there was in euery Citie of Greece an Alexander: for it is recorded in histories, that Sparta might not endure two Lysanders at one Lysander. time, Athens might not suffer two Alcibiades, Thebes might not suffer two Pelopidas, neither the earth suffer two Alexanders: Alcibiades. but as Alexander had no longer time to florish then twelue yeeres, so the whole state of Greece, their Empire and their
glorie continued not aboue a hundred and fifteene yeeres; Greece flori∣shed for 115. yeeres. beginning from the battell at Marathon, to the battell at Sala∣mina, tenne yeeres, from the battell of Salamina vnto the first warres of the Peloponesians fiftie yeeres, from the beginning of the Peloponesian warre vnto the last of the same at the battel at Aegos Potamos, twentie seuen yeres, which was the time of the ciuill warre of Greece, and from that to the battell at Leuctres Beroaldus lib. 4. Eratosthenes. thirtie yeeres: so long the glorie of Greece endured without conquest: all which time was Greece a lady and mystresse of all nations. I haue found so much errour in the Olympiads, that I vse them as little as I may: for Thucydides and Xenophon, that one∣ly wrote of Greeke histories, were much deceiued in the Olym∣piads, and yet they know their errour: and therefore they vsed the Olympiads most seldome, though they liued and wrote in The error of the Olympiads. the florishing time of the Olympiads. After this they were had by Philip king of Macedon vnto some bondage, though they warred thirtie yeeres, and kept him hard play, vntill the Thebans (as you heard) sought his helpe against the Phocians, Iustine lib. 9. and made a rodde to beate themselues: euen so nowe were the Phoceans forced to aske aide at Ochus hands king of Persia, Ochus sent 300 talents to the Phoceans. who did send three hundred talents with a hūdred fourescore thousand crownes. Philip was commen with a great band of Macedonians and of Thessalians againe into the coast of Boetia, where Phallecus the generall of the Thebans was also with an armie in armes ready to giue battell to the Phoceans: who Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. when he sawe the great power of king Philip in fielde, he en∣treated of peace: which being graunted by the king, vpon condicion he should goe out of Boetia vnto Peloponesus, this being done by Phallecus, Philip had without resistance all Boe∣tia yeelded vnto him. The Phoceans are nowe brought subiect vnto Philip, their Cities and Townes destroyed, and the people dispersed vnto small villages, paying three score talents yeerely vnto Philip, the libertie and dignitie of the Iudges Amphi∣ctions The Amphicti∣ons restored. were restored, and a decree made, that Philip should be
Duke of all Greece: thus Philip triumphed the more, for that he had this good fortune in so honest a cause, as in defending of the temple at Delphos, and the iudges seate and dignitie of the Amphictions. When he had ended this Phocean warre, called bellum sa∣crum, Bellum sacrum. hee againe returned into Macedonia in the first yeere of the 108. Olympiad. When the Athenians and the Lacedemoni∣ans sawe the force of Philip much to increase in Greece, De∣mosthenes being euer an enemie to the Macedonians, perswa∣ded the Thebans and Cities of Greece to ioyne against Philip for the common libertie of their countrie. Nine yeeres after Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. the Phocean warres, came Philip againe in armes into Greece, after he had taken many Cities in Thracia, & had driuen Cal∣lias the tyraunt out of Euboea: he likewise wanne the Citie of Bizantium, which is called nowe Constantinople, some time a Citie vnder the Lacedemonians, and sometime vnder the Athe∣nians. A great battell was giuen vnto Philip at Cheronea, fiftie seuen yeeres after the ouerthrowe of Athens at Aegos Potamos Diod. lib. 6. by Lysander, which was so fought out, that it was doubtfull for a time where the victorie should fall, vntill Alexander the great, being of the age of eighteene yeeres, thrusted himselfe freshly into the middest of the battell, by whose prowesse the Grecians gaue backe, and their army was ouerthrowen. In this battell, sixe thousand Citizens of Athens were slaine, and two thousand Citizens taken, but many more of the Thebans were both killed and taken. Amongst the Athenians which were taken, Demades the Demades. Orator was one, by whose meanes king Philip graunted them peace, and deliuered them free from their raunsome for De∣mades sake: for Demades bare good will alwayes vnto the Ma∣cedonians, cleane contrarie to Demosthenes, who both enuied Demosthenes. them and spited them, calling Alexander the great brainelesse boy: but he notwithstanding esteemed Harpalus the Macedo∣nian, when he bribed him with twentie talents: this made O∣rators in Athens to speake as Aeschines did, or to be dumbe as Demosthenes was.
For such was the libertie of the people of Athens, main∣teined by the Orators against the Magistrates and chiefe men of Attica, that when it pleased the people, they woulde aduaunce whom they woulde, and pull downe whom they list, banish whom they liked not, and call againe whom they fauoured: insomuch that Athens was alwayes The three monsters of Athens. gouerned by a state of Democratia, which made Demosthenes to exclaime in these wordes, Noctua, populus, & Draco tria mon∣stra Athenis: for in Athens they esteemed more the seruants, poore people, straungers, and specially mariners, more then their Magistrates, noble men, officers, or their chiefe Citizens. The people grewe so strong and so headie in A∣thens, that it was not lawfull to banish straungers, or to pu∣nish Xenoph. de Rep. Athe. &. Lace. seruaunts: to be short, of the common wealth of Athens and of Sparta, reade Xenophon. Nowe againe to the victorie at Cheronea, the last and the Corinth the 3. citie of Greece. sorest battell which brake the backe of the Citie of Athens. Philip king of Macedon called together all the States of Greece into Corinth, where by common consent hee was chosen and named Prince, or rather Generall of all Greece, against the Persians. All Greece being nowe quiet in peace, Philip beganne warres against the Persians, and with great ce∣leritie hee sent an armie into Asia. While these things were doing, Philip was slaine by Pausanias, when hee was of the Melanct. lib. 2. age of fourtie sixe yeeres, after hee had reigned king twen∣tie Philip slaine by Pausanias. fiue yeeres. Greece thought by the death of Philip againe to recouer their former libertie: they little doubted, Alexander being then but young, neither Arideus which was Philips base sonne by Laryssea, which for a time reigned after Alexander: but according to their wonted maners, full of innouations, am∣bitions, contencions and hatred, neuer quiet, but one Citie or other would be iarring, the Persians power grewe great, and the Greekes beganne to reuoult from Alexander, which by succession after his father shoulde bee their chiefe Generall.
The Thebans offered themselues to ioyne with those Ci∣ties that woulde defende the libertie of Greece, and exclude those Macedonian souldiers, which Philip placed in the castle of Thebes called Cadmea. Hereby Alexander tooke occasion Newe warres by Alexander in Greece. to enter in armes, ouerthrewe Thebes vnto the grounde, wasted, and spoyled diuers. Cities in Boetia: for at one time, the Athenians, the Lacedemonians, and the Thebans reuoulted from Alexander by perswasion of Demosthenes, being corrup∣ted with rewardes of the Persians. But when Thebes was de∣stroyed, Alexander sent to Athens, offering peace vnto the A∣thenians, vpon the yeelding vp of Demosthenes, Lycurgus, and others by the Citizens vnto Alexander. Vnto this demaund of Alexander, Demosthenes brought in the fable of the Woolfe, who offered peace vnto the Shep∣heardes Demosthenes fable of the woolfe. vpon condicion to haue the shepheards dogges a∣way: applying the morall hereof vnto the Oratours of A∣thens, who by continuall barking to the people kept Greece frō forraine soueraigntie: but the Athenians standing much in feare of Alexanders force, and beside knowing their owne weakenes, they sent Demades the Orator to entreate for peace: which being obteined of Alexander by the meanes of Demades, the Athenians, the Lacedemonians, the Thebans, Demades en∣treateth for peace. and the rest of the Cities of Greece hauing obteyned peace, likewise by one consent they appointed Alexander their captaine and chiefe generall against the Persians. At what time reigned Darius the tenth king of Persia, to whom many of Philips children by other mariages fledde, to see the euents and sequell of the warres betweene Alexan∣der and Darius. This last yeelding vp of Greece vnto Alex∣ander Peace by A∣lex. graunted to all Greece. was three yeeres after the great battell of Cheronea, and after the warres of the Peloponesians three score yeeres. Of this warre Thucydides diuided his eight bookes, concerning the ciuill warres of the Grecians, which conti∣nued twentie seuen yeeres, euery booke comprehending three yeeres warres, vntill twentie one yeeres expired: at what time Thucydides died, then Xenophon beganne where
Thucydides ended. Thus ended the glorie of Greece, which florished in wisedome and knowledge from Solons time vntill Plato, two hundred yeeres, and from Platoes birth vntill this last conquest of Greece a hundred and twentie yeeres. Though yet Greece brought many learned men after A∣lexanders time, yet the fame and renowme of Greece was caried vnto Macedonia, their Empire translated, their libertie lost, and all Greece made subiect vn∣to Macedonia, at what time the Monarchie of Persia was lost, and brought by A∣lexander vnto Ma∣cedonia.
OF THE KINGDOME OF Macedonia: of the continuance, lawes, and gouernment of their Kings, and of their warres, vntil the time of Alexander the great. AFter I haue briefely entreated of Greece, and haue abridged many things which might haue beeue well in the histories of Greece: yet I haue many times occasion to speake of Greece in handling of Macedonia: neither neede I long to stay in Macedonia: for of all the kings of Macedonia before Philips time, little or nothing is to bee spokē of them, so obscure a king∣dom Macedonia was before Philpis time: & for that the warres of Philip & of his sonne the great Alexander are mencioned in the Persian and in the Grecians historie, I neede not much to Iustin. lib. 7. write of them: therefore I will begin with the descents of the kings of Macedon, & of the first names of the countrie which was called Emathia of one Emathius, which was the first that Emathia. obteined soueraigntie in Emathia, which name continued vn∣til the time of Deucaleons nephew named Macedo: he chāged the name of Emathia & called it after his owne name Macedo∣nia, Melacthō saith that the name of Macedonia is come of Kit∣tim, the sonne of Iauan the sōne of Iaphet. Herodot & other aun∣cient writers affirme, that the kings of Macedonia take their . Solinus cap. 13. originall from Hercules.
Nowe the land which before was called Pieria, Migdonia, or Emathia, is nowe called the Realme of Macedonia, a coun∣trie bounded on the East side with Thracia, on the South with Thessalia, on the West with the Illyrians, hauing on the North side Peonia as Pomponius Mela saith, the Macedonians inhabited Pomp. Me lib. 2. cap. 3. many Cities, of the which Pella was the most renowmed. The kingdome of Macedonia in the beginning was ofo great fame vntill Philips time, which was Amyntas sonne, and Alexanders father, who first brought the name of Macedonia to be spoken of, though before of sclender renowne and ob∣scure fame, rather deseruing the name of a Prouince then of a kingdome, as Ruffinus writeth: for as Cyrus reigne doeth Of Cyrus reigne in Per∣sia many erre. much lighten the whole historie of the Persians, and the very time of their kings in respect of Cyrus his decree and dealings with the Iewes, by the meanes and traueile of Zorobabel, Es∣dras, and Nehemias, mencioned in Scripture: euen so doeth the name of the great Alexander reforme many errors in Xe∣nophons Of Alex. time in Macedonia. histories, for that the certeintie of the Macedonian hi∣storie depēdeth vpon the time of Alexāder, which of necessi∣tie must be within a 130. yeeres of Cyrus, though many of the best writers erre much in this. After Macedo succeeded Cranaus a captaine of certeine Pe∣loponesians, hee was the first that had the name of a king, hee builded a Citie according to the Oracle, that hee should fol∣lowe a heard of goates, and where they stand, there to builde a Citie which he named Aegea: others say, that he came vpon Solinus cap. 3. a tempest to a towne named Edissa, & there beholding goates together, he changed the name of Edissa vnto Egea, there he builded and made his Court, and gathered together the scat∣tered Aegea called after the name of Gotes. Macedonians into one place, and began to reigne there as a king. At what time Procas Siluius reigned ouer the Latines, Ozias reigned ouer the Hebrewes, Ieroboam in Israel was king, and A∣lexander reigned king in Corinth: this time Arbaces transla∣ted the Monarchie of Assyria vnto the Medes, hauing giuen the ouerthrow to Sardanapalus, whereby both the kingdomes
of the Medes and of Macedonia beginne at one time: for nowe the kings of Lacedemonia ended  gouernment, and Funct. Cron. these kingdomes beganne to florish 37. yeeres after the de∣struction of Troy, in the beginning of the thirteene Iubilee of the Iewes, before the Olympiads the space of one whole Iubilee which is fiftie yeeres. This Cranaus the first king of the Macedonians reigned twentie eight yeeres, whose successor I reade in Eusebius and Caenus. 2. king of Macedon. Glareanus was Caenus: he reigned the second king of Macedonia twelue yeeres, at what time Amulius Siluius the fifteene king of the Latines reigned: this Amulius the yonger sonne of Pro∣cas Siluius draue Numitor his elder brother out of his Coun∣trie, and also Numitor had a daughter, whom hee caused to be a vestall virgine to auoyde mariage: but notwithstanding shee was gotten with childe of two children in steade of one, which were called Romulus and Remus, of whose education and strange bringing vp, how they slue Amulius, and restored their graundfather Numitor to the kingdome againe, and howe they both builded Rome, you may reade in the histo∣ries of the Romane kings: after whom succeeded the Romane kings. In Egypt reigned this time Sabachus, this is named in Scrip∣ture Sech: the third king of Macedonia was Tyrimas, who suc∣ceeded Tyrimas 3. king in the kingdome in the time of the second Olympiad, as Eusebius and Glareanus do witnesse, whom I folow chiefely Iustine lib. 6. in placing the kings of Macedonia, though Iustine & Sabelicus say otherwaies, that one Telegonus reigning in Paeonia which is a piece of Macedonia, and one Europus who likewise on the other side of Paeonia gouerned. These two bare most sway in Macedonia, vntil Caranus came with a great number of Greekes by the Oracle commaunded to seeke a seate in Macedon, who by force expelled Mida, which gouerned in a part of Macedon, and forced other gouernours which then ruled diuers coun∣tries De orig. Maced. Ruffi. about Macedonia, which was no large kingdome in the beginning, but Caranus by this meanes augmented much the Countrie of Macedon.
After this Caranus Iustine setteth downe Perdiccas, with whom agreeth Soli, and saith that this Perdiccas was the Perdiccas. first that bare the  of a king in the twentie two Olym∣piad, The first that bare the name who liued in such liking and loue of his subiects, that his life seemed a lawe, and his death an oracle, for which hee died being an olde man: hee called his sonne named Ar∣geus, and shewed him a secrete place where hee woulde haue his body buried, and his successours the kings of Macedo∣nia after him. This superstitious buriall the kings of Macedo∣nia Burial for the kings of Ma∣cedon. helde as by an oracle, commaunded vntill the time of Alexander the great, who was the ninteenth king after this Perdiccas. Argeus succeeded his father, and was a modest Argeus. prince, hee did minister iustice to his subiectes, and liued in Ruffi. de orig. Maced. Ioue and fauour with his people, leauing behinde him to gouerne the Macedonians his heire Philip, who died in his youth and left the kingdome to Europus a young childe, in whose time the Thracians and the Illyrians had continuall warres with the Macedonians. The Illyrians vexed and ouerthrewe the Macedonians in a great battel, despising the infancie of their king, and litle wai∣ing the Macedonians in respect of their king: they were here∣by much mooued to fight againe, and gathered a huge hoste, Europus in his cradle brought to the fielde. brought their king in his cradle to the field, and gaue battell to the Illyrians, ouerthrewe them, vanquished them, and slue the most of them: for the sight of their young king made them like lyons hungrie of their praye, with double courage to fight. But I will returne to Eusebius and Glareanus where I beganne, and whom I chiefely imitate, though Solinus and Euseb. Iustine wrote otherwaies: for it is no rare thing to haue wri∣ters to varie, specially in histories of long time: for here Per∣diccas is placed to be the fourth king, which both Iustine and Solinus wrote to be the first king of Macedonia: in this Functius in his table of the kings of Macedon, a singular Chronogra∣pher Functius. following the best learned and next agreeing with the Scripture, doth set this Perdiccas to be the 4. king, who came of a meane state to be a king of Macedon, where he reigned 51. yeeres.
This time Romulus had great warres with the Sabines which continued three yeeres, with whom Tatius Sabinus reigned in Rome together with Romulus fiue yeeres. About this verie season Saneherib was ouerthrowen for his great Saneherib. blasphemie against God, with a hundred fourescore and fiue thousand slaine in one night by the Angel of the Lord, while this Perdicas reigned in Macedon. Merodach the sonne of Baladan, after hee had gouerned Ba∣bylon twelue yeeres, and ouercame the Assyrians, and brought the Monarchie againe to the Chaldeans: about the thirtie yeere of Perdicas Egypt was gouerned by twelue Magistrates of equall authoritie. After Perdicas succeeded Argeus his sonne, the fifth king of Macedonia, of whom you reade be∣fore Philip 6. king. by Iustine set downe to be the second king. Philip the sixt king of Macedon reigned thirtie eight yeeres, in the 34. O∣lympiad, in whose time happened in Rome great warres be∣tweene Tullius Hostilius the third king of Rome, and the Sa∣bines. The Latines warre with the Romanes. The Latines likewise beganne warres with the Romanes, which continued fiue yeeres: this time reigned in Egypt Necho, who had warres with the Chaldeans, at what time hee ouercame the Syrians, and slue Iosias in Mageddo: the Messe∣nians reuoulted from the Lacedemonians, and the rude barba∣rous Scythians entred into Asia, spoyled and wasted all the Countrie, vntill they came vnto the land of Palestine. This time Periander reigned in Corinth, whose life you may reade in Herodot, of whom is also written a historie of Herodot. lib. 1. this time of Phaortes, the sixth king of the Medes, who was slaine at the siedge of Niniue by the Assyrians with all his companie. In these dayes Tullius Hostilius with al his familie were bur∣ned in his owne house: in the thirtie fiue Olympiad many great warres and blooddy battels fell in the time of this Philip, for both Ieconia with all his friendes, likewise Daniel with his fel∣lowes were caried away captiue vnto Babylon, and within a while after Ierusalem was besieged and made euen to the ground, and the Iewes caried captiues vnto Chaldea.
Againe Ciaxeres which is by Daniel and others named to be Darius Medus, had great warres: thus the Assyrians tooke the citie of Niniue, and reuenged the death of Phaortes, and so the Assyrians were quite destroyed, & brought the monarchie vnto the Medes. All the warres that Ancus Martius the fourth king of Rome had with the Latins, Fidenats, the Sabins, the Ve∣iens, the Volscans and others, were in this kings time. After this Philip succeeded Europus the 7. king of Macedonia, Europus the 7. king of Mace∣don. of whom as of the rest nothing is to be written worth the me∣morie: for yet the name of Macedonia was no further knowen then to their neighbours, which were the Thracians, Illyrians, Thessalians: for all the fame and report of the whole world the Macedonia yet not knowen. Chaldeans and the Assyrians had, for they helde the monarchie so long, that though the Egyptians flourished at one time, and gaue them sundrie battels at their noses in Assyria, and likewise the Hebrewes gaue diuers ouerthrowes in Iosaphats time, Eze∣chias and Iosias kings of Iuda, yet they continued welnigh thirteene hundreth yeres lords and monarches of the world, vntil the Medes began to plague them, and had taken the mo∣narchie from them. And then the Persians tooke it frō them, of whom al writers were busie to write their warres, their bat∣tels, and of their conquest, vntill the time of Alexander the Of this Europis Herodot ma∣keth mention lib. 8. great, which is yet to come in the hundreth and fourteene O∣lympiads, and now I entreat of histories of those kingdomes done in the 43. Olympiad, which is 300. yeres: for so long was betweene the first of Nabuchodonosor, which was in the 17. Iu∣bilee, and the last of Alexander, which was in the 23. Iubilee, which is sixe Iubilees, which is 300. yeeres: for euery Iubilee is Sixe Iubilees 300. yeeres. 50. yeeres. It doeth agree with the Olympiads, so farre am I be∣hind to speake any great matter of the Macedonians, sauing of Philippe Alexanders father, a historie of two hundreth yeeres, and therefore I will hasten to runne ouer the names of the first kings. Alcetas the 8. king of Macedonia raigned 29. yeeres, after Alcetas the 8. king. whom succeeded Amintas the ninth king of Macedonia, which raigned 50. yeeres. Of this Amintas Iustine writeth a historie,
that when the Persians had sent ambassadours into Macedonia to entreate of peace, in their wine they began wantonly and rudely to handle certaine ladies and gentlewomen of Mace∣donia. Alexander the sōne of Amintas a yong galant prince be∣ing Iustin. lib. 7. hereby much moued, entreated his father an old man to take his rest that night, & said he would entertaine and keepe company with the ambassadors of Persia, who were wel whit∣tled with wine: the ladies being desirous to depart were kept against their will vnder, Alexander the yong prince promised other ladies to beare them company the rest of the night. Now Alexander got certaine yong gentlemen in the ha∣bit & forme of women, hauing vnder their long clothes their Ambassadors of Persia slaine. naked daggers, and commanded them that when the Persian ambassadours should abuse them, or offer them any villany, they should out of hand stabbe them, which was accordingly brought to passe: vpon this occasion warre was proclaimed betweene the Persians and the Macedonians. Bubares was sent with an armie of Persians into Macedonia, who after hee had Bubares fel in loue with Cy∣gaea. seene Cygaea the daughter of king Amintas, he was more prone to loue then bent to warre: he maried Cygaea, & thereby peace was had betweene the Macedonians and the Persians. About this time the Lacedemonians had warres against Po∣lycrates the tyrant of Samos: of this Polycrates successe, happi∣nes, Herodot. lib. 3. and great fortune of his raigne, read Herodotus. The same time were the most part of kings called tyrants, they were so ful of blood. Tarquinius superbus the seuenth and last king of the Romanes for his great tyrannie and outragiousnes, and for the wicked abuse of Lucretia by his sonne was odious & hate∣full to the Romans, and became an enemie to Rome. Cyrus was in his greatnes this time, & the only great man of the world: for he wanne the Assyrians, the Chaldeans, and the Medes, and brought them vnder the Empire of Persia, he ouercame also the great and mightie Croesus king of Lydia. In Macedonia raigned after Amintas his sonne Alexander: Alexander the 10. king. this king was accompted riche, and not without cause: for he had so good successe in encreasing his substance, that he first
of al sentimages of cleane gold for a gift, one to Apollos at Del∣phos, another to Iupiter at Elis. He was greatly giuen to delite his eares, in so much that he entertained many that were cun∣ning Solin. cap. 13. vpon instruments, amongst whom was Pindarus the har∣per. Iu. Solinus saith, that Archelaus had the kingdome of Ma∣cedonia at this mans hand: he was politike in feates of warre, and iudged the first deuiser of battel vpon the sea. This Archelaus affected the companie of learned men: hee Archelaus a friend of Euri∣pides. so much delighted in learning, that hee called Euripides the tragical Poet, to be one of his priuie council, for whose death afterward Archelaus long mourned, and shaued both his head and beard at his funerall. After this king the state of Mace∣donia being much troubled with dissention by the space of 10. kings gouernments, was stayed at last in the raigne of A∣mintas, which was father vnto Philip, who was father vnto A∣lexāder the great: and for that there is not much to be written of the most part of the kings of Macedonia vnto Philips time, I haue set down their names according to Eusebius and Herodot. The names of the kings of Ma∣cedon according to Eusebius. The names of the kings of Macedon according to Herodotus. Cranans and Caenus. Alexāder the sonne of Amintas. So many He∣rodot in the lat∣ter end of his 8. booke doeth rehearse, and after cōmeth to Philip, omit∣ting the rest. Tyrimas and Perdicas. Amintas the sonne of Alceta. Archaeus and Philippus. Aloeta the sonne of Aeropus. Europs and Alcetas. Aeropus the sonne of Philip. Amintas & Alexander. Philip the sonne of Argaeus. Perdicas and Orestes. Argaeus the sonne of Perdicas. Archelaus and Pausanias.   Armintas and Argaeus.   Alexander and Ptolomeus.   And Philip Alexand. father.   Of these are not much to be spoken (as I said before) there∣fore I will begin here with the raigne of Philippe, of whom Macedonia had such expectation, that they saw in him a light and such readie proofe of him, as Philip. of one brought vp for three yeeres for an ostage of the king of the Macedonians in one of the chiefest cities of Greece, and that in the house of Epaminondas, the rarest Philosopher, and the greatest captaine of those dayes.
Now the cities of Greece being full of ciuil warres, some of them made meanes to Philip to ayde them, and thereby ele∣cted him their chiefe generall: in short time the occasion be∣ing thus offered to Philip, he encreased his owne kingdome of Macedonia with the ruine of Greece: for first he beganne to Macedonia enriched with the ruine of Greece. make warre vpon the Athenians the second citie of Greece, a famous citie and full of ciuill discord, which Philip well per∣ceiued, and therfore he vsed great celeritie to winne Athens, and great policie to keepe Athens being wonne: for he fauou∣red them when he could haue spoiled them, he let them goe free without ransome that he tooke in the warres. After he had brought Athens to his bow, he tooke the most Diod. lib. 16. noble citie of Larissa, and subdued all the countrey of Thessa∣lie being the next ioyned countrey to Macedonia: he fedde di∣uers captaines secretly in Greece to mooue ciuill seditions, knowing that diuision in a kingdome is the onely ruine of a kingdom, as in the warres betwene the Phocians and the The∣bans Bellum sacrum. was truely prooued, and by Philip fully performed. After this it happened that two brethren contended about the kingdome of Thracia, which to auoyde warres, both con∣sented to the iudgement of Philip, who not like a Iudge in gi∣uing The falshod of king Philip. iudgement, but like a foxe came with an armie and sub∣dued both the brethren, and so got the kingdome of Thracia subiect to Macedonia: by these subtile dealings he also wanne Cappadocia and Epire, and made warres against the Scythians. All the endeuours of Philip was to this purpose, that he might be the lord of Greece, and vpon that he called all Greece to the citie of Corinth, and offered to make warres vpon the Persians Philip greedie of Greece. in his owne person. This was to flatter Greece, but Virtus an do∣lus quis in hoste requirit? for the Persians euer annoyed Greece. After that Philip had won Athens, hee was sure of the Thebans and of the Boetians, who alwayes were in a league with Athens by meanes of Demosthenes, who euer perswaded  as . much as tongue could doe, to stand against Philip: but when Philip waxed strōg, who sought with flatery with his friends, and with golde with his enemies, and Greece waxed weake by
reason of their ciuill warres and spoyling one of another, he had free passage euery where, being made gouernour of all Greece: he then easily subdued the Illyrians and the Olynthians, conquered Amphipolis, Pyrinthus, and Byzantium: and by this meanes Philip became the onely king of all Macedonian kings Philips victorie at Cherronea. before him. He grew so great after his victory at Cherronea, that he made then ready an armie to Persia, and he deuised to bring the monarchie frō Persia to Macedonia, which his sonne Alexander did within a while after. Philip being thus aduaun∣ced with many victories and triumphes, leauing behind him at euery victorie some triumphant pillar or arch, as trophes and monuments of his fortune, was in the midst of his glory by the Oracles of Pythias warned of his death, at what time he sacrificed to his gods a crowned bull. Reade more of this Diod. lib. 16. in Diodorus. After that Philip had much mooued all the cities of Greece to resist the Persians, and to make one chiefe generall ouer all Greece against the Persians: for Plinie writeth, that Philip in the Plin. lib. 2. cap. 27. hundred & eleuenth Olympiad, had much weakened the state of Greece, and therefore hee was the sooner chosen their cap∣taine: which being obteined, he had what he sought. Vpon this he returned into Macedonia, prepared souldiers, made ready his armie, and was in the midst of his greatnesse, when Pausanias for an iniurie receiued before, for want of iu∣stice betwene Attalus who had most horribly abused him, and Philip being king to whom hee appealed, of whome hee had Attalus. (though oftentimes he sought) no remedie, but rather flouts and scofs, which kindled in Pausanias such hatred, that hee re∣uenged Pausanias re∣uenge vpon Philip. the foule fact of Attalus vpon king Philippe, and that with death. Thus Philip raigned in Macedonia 23. yeeres, at what time Ochus raigned in Persia, and recouered Egypt, and Camillus triumphed in Rome, and ouerthrew the Frenchmen. About this time died that noble Philosopher Plato, after whom succeeded Speusippus, after him Zenocrates. De∣mosthenes and Aeschines, two famous Ora∣tors flourished in Greece.
CHAP. II. Of the renowme and fame of Macedonia during the raigne of Alexander the great, of his conquest and victories ouer all the East: of his dangerous warres in India, Egypt, and in Scythia, and of the subduing of Darius, and the taking away of the Mo∣narchie from Persia into Macedonia. ALexander the great being of twentie yeeres of age, succeeded and exceeded his father Philippe, both in vertue and in vice: they were thus farre one from another in nature, that what Philip did through pollicie and subtiltie, that A∣lexander would doe with open strength and courage: Philip reioyced when hee Comparison betwene Phi∣lip and Alex∣ander. might deceiue the enemie, Alexander when he coulde ouer∣throw them: Philip more politicke like afoxe in council and deuice, Alexander like a lion more fierce and couragious in conquering and subduing: Philip sought meanes to be belo∣ued of his enemies, and to make his foes his friendes, Alex∣ander sought to be feared, and to make his friendes his foes. These and such other comparisons doeth Iustine setforth be∣tweene iustin. lib 9. the father and the sonne. Alexander beganne to raigne (by Curtius computations) after the building of Rome foure hundreth twentie and fixe yeeres: at what time Ca. Sulpitius, and Lu. Papyrius were Con∣suls Melanct. lib. 2. of Rome, in the hundreth and eleuenth Olympiad, when Iaddus was hie priest in Hierusalem. Plutarch writeth, that A∣lexander was descended from Hercules by Caranus side, and that of his mothers side he came of the blood of Aeacides by Neoptolemus. Olympias his mother dreamed the first night Olympias dreame. that she lay with Philip, that lightning fell into her bellie, and that light fire dispersed it selfe in diuers flames about her: and king Philip also dreamed, that he did seale his wiues bellie, and that the seale left behinde it the print of a lion. Philippes dreame. Alexander was borne the sixt day of Iune, on the very same day that the temple of Diana was burned: he had diuers graue
tutours and gouernours. Leonidas was chiefe gouernour vn∣to Leonidas Alex∣anders gouer∣nour. Alexander, for that hee was a noble man and a kinsman to the Queene Olympias. Aristotle was his chiefe tutour, one of the greatest Philosophers and best learned men in his time. King Philip had taken before, the citie of Stagira, where Ari∣stotle was borne. While this Alexander was yet yong, one Philonicus a Thes∣salian had brought Bucephalus a gallant horse to be solde vnto Bucephalus. Philip: the price was thirteene talents: they brought the horse to the fielde to be ridden, whom they founde so rough, that the riders said he would doe no seruice, affirming that it was vnpossible to tame him, they found him so churlish, yerking out and suffering no man to come nigh him. King Philippe commaunded them to take the horse away. Alexander mis∣liked the riders and tooke the horse in hande, being a very Bucephalus ta∣med by Alex∣ander. yong man, and turned him towards the sunne, (for that Alex∣ander saw before that the horse started at his owne shadowe) Alexander vsed the horse so, that he rode him, and made him as gentle as could be, both with the spurre and with the bitte, and so lighted from the horse: to whome Philippe his father then said (for ioy weeping,) Seeke a greater kingdome sonne Plutar. in vita. Alex. then Macedonia is: for Macedonia is to litle for thee. This Au∣lus Gellius, Plutarch and Plinie doe affirme. This horse Alex∣ander kept for his owne saddle vntill the warres of India, where the horse with sickenesse died: where hee made a mo∣nument in memorie of Bucephalus, a towne after the name of Curtius lib. 9. the horse, and named the citie Bucephalia, which hee builded vpon the riuer Hidaspis. Reade the whole 16. booke of Diodor. Diodor. lib. 16. Siculus of the warres and gouernment of Philip. Now as soone as Philip his father died, he went into Pelopo∣nesus in Greece, & there called al Greece together, and claimed the soueraigntie which his father had ouer them against the Persians: which being granted, & he being by cōmon consent appointed their only & chiefe gouernour against the Persians: within short time after many of these cities beganne to mur∣mure against Alexander, and to reuolt frō Macedonia. When
Alexander perceiued that the Athenians, the Thebans, the Ar∣giues, the Lacedemonians, the Arcadians, studied and conuented together for the libertie of Greece, he presently without any delay (as his nature was) had warre with Thessalie the next countrey vnto Macedonia: after, he subdued Thermopyla, and vrged the Amphictions which were then appointed Iudges The incōstan∣cie of the Gre∣cians. vniuersally for all Greece, that with al their decrees and lawes they would mooue Greece by faire meanes to surrender the gouernment which his father had, and also to him graunted. After that, the Athenians sent ambassadours, and offered all courtesie to Alexāder: the Corinthians likewise sought to please him in like sort, which Alexander accepted in good part, and returned with his armie from Greece into Macedonia: hee was scant in Macedonia, but the Grecians according to their cu∣stome beganne to send from citie to citie, to stand against A∣lexander in the defence of their countrey: the Thebans sent ambassadours to the Arcadians, the Arcadians to the Argiues, the Argiues to the Aeolians, to whom the Athenians sent also by the perswasions of Demosthenes, though they were before the first that entreated for peace at his hand. Alexander hearing of these often false dealings, he then cō∣meth Diod. lib. 17. from Macedonia and Thracia with a huge armie of thir∣tie thousande footemen, and three thousand horsemen, and vnderstanding that the Thebans had him in contempt, he ful∣ly determined to destroy their citie in such sort without mer∣cie, that it should terrifie all Greece thereby: he layed siege to Thebes three dayes, and the fourth day he made it euen to the Thebes de∣stroyed. ground: there was not death spared neither to children, nor to women: the slaughter was so terrible, that there was slaine within the citie of Thebes aboue sixe thousand, maimed and taken aboue 3. hundreth thousand: this fell in the hundreth and in the last yeere of the 11. Olympiad. This terrour made Greece to quake. Alexander being more angrie with Athens then with the rest, he sent ambassadours to Athens to haue the 10. Orators sent vnto him: for Alexander knew that the Orators whetted
the people to reuolt, and that they perswaded the Athenians with their eloquencie alwayes to rebell. Athens was put now to her shift, vntill Demades, one of the Orators, sought licence to goe to Alexander from the citie as an ambassadour: hee vsed that force of eloquence to Alexander for peace, which Demosthenes vsed against Alexāder to the Athenians for warres: by Demades perswasion Alexander was wonne to pardon the Athenians againe. Alexander returned into his owne kingdom, and left Greece in quiet for a short time. After, Cassander the sonne of Antipater builded vp Thebes Alexanders voyage to Asia. againe: and then Alexander made himselfe ready to goe vn∣to Asia, and with great celeritie (as his maner was) hee brought his armie out of Europe into Asia: hee had in his band thirtie and two thousand footmen, fiue thousand hors∣men, and an hundreth and eight shippes. These newes being brought vnto Darius the last king of Per∣sia, which had vnder his gouernment all the East kingdomes, and sawe him selfe so strong that hee called him selfe king of kings, and cousin to the gods, he litle esteemed the report, and Darius opinon of himselfe. made small accompt of the Macedonian nomber, commaun∣ded some of his princes to take Alexander and to beate him like a childe with a rodde, and after to bring him vnto Da∣rius: but Alexander was no longer in getting the victory ouer The first vi∣ctorie at the riuer Granicus. the huge hoste of the Persians at the riuer of Granicus, then Da∣rius was in directing his captaines to beate Alexander with rods: this was the first battell and victorie which Alexander had, where twentie thousande footemen and 250. horsemen were slaine. After this battell, Alexander tooke Lydia in hand, wanne the Ruffin. de orig. Maced. citie of Sardis, and shortly all Lydia: hee tooke Ephesus, and Miletum, two famous cities: hee besieged Halicarnassus, wa∣sted and spoyled it to the ground. Alexander in this voyage after he had brought Lycia and Pamphylia vnder his wings, he Q Curt. lib. 3. still inuaded Darius prouinces and territories further to pro∣uoke him to warre: many wondered at the a gilitie of Alex∣ander, and fearing much the greatnesse and good successe of
Alexander being so yong a king, that they beganne both to feare him and to loue him, and to forsake Darius. Alexander went forwarde still conquering and subduing all countreys: he came into the territories and prouinces of Darius, and hee entred Paphlagonia and came to the citie called Ancyra, who without any strokes yeelded themselues by these occasions of Alexanders good successe. Darius thought it was but fortune, and not the deserts of Darius caused a muster at Babylon. Alexander: he caused therefore a great muster at Babylon, and made an armie readie of seuentie thousand footmen, and thir∣tie thousand horsemen of the Persians: he also had beside ten Darius armie. thousand horsemen of the Medes, and fiftie thousande foote∣men: two thousand Bactrians horsemen, and ten thousande footemen: he had of Armenia fourtie thousand footmen, and seuen thousand horsmen: of Hircania sixe thousand: of the De∣rinces fourtie thousand footmen, and two thousand horsmen: from the Caspians eight thousand footemen, and two hundred horsemen of Greece were ioyned vnto Darius, that expected the ouerthrow of Alexander with his thirtie thousand: he had such a huge nomber, that he feared that Alexander would flie before he came to make battel: for so Darius saide to Amin∣tas the Macedonian. But it came to passe otherwise: Alexander had the victorie Plutar. in vita Alexand. in that place which Darius appointed: this battel was fought in Cilicia, where Alexander killed aboue a hundreth thousand The second victorie of A∣lexander in Cilicia. footemen, and tenne thousand horsemen of Darius men: this was the second battell, in the which Darius mother, and his wife, and two of his daughters vnmaried, were taken prisoners and brought to Alexander, whose misfortune he more piried, then he reioyced at the victorie: such was the clemencie of Melanct. lib. 2. Alexander vnto these miserable captiue Ladies, yea such was his chastitie, though they were (as Plutarch faith) most come∣ly and faire, not once to offer any worde of dishonour to them. A greater conquest (as I take it) to ouercome himselfe; then the victorie against Darius. Alexander after this victorie remoued his campe to Ma∣rathon,
thence to Phoenices and to Biblon, and hauing gotten these three cities, hee came to Sydon a famous citie, wanne that also: for all Syria and Phoenicia (Tyre excepted) were brought by Alexander subiect vnto Maccdonia: hee besieged Tyre, and continued seuen moneths both by land and by sea: for it was a citie of inuincible force, and kept Alexander hot Tyre besieged and taken. assaultes, vsing all engines and pollicies, and yet stoode in great doubt of the getting of Tyre, vntill one night he drea∣med that Hercules helde out to him his hand ouer the walles of Tyre and called him by his name: then he followed, and continued his siege, vntill he had quite ouerthrowen Tyre. This towne was builded by Agenor. Tyre by Agenor builded. While Alexander conquered and subdued all places, Da∣rius was not idle to prepare his forces to giue the thirde Q. Curt. lib. 4. battell vnto Alexander: hee sent to Bessus his lieutenant in Ba∣ctria, commaunding him to come with as many souldiers as possiblie he could, and so the rest of his lieutenants: he like∣wise sent and to make as great an armie as might yet terrifie Alexander: hee sent to the Scythians, and to the Indians, and Drius 3 pre∣paration a∣gainst Alex∣ander. brought his force to Babylon. At that time hee had thrise as many as he had in Cicilia. In the meane season Alexander went to Gaza one of the Gaza be∣sieged. chiefest cities of Syria: at this towne Alexander had two seue∣rall wounds very dangerous, and yet not so dangerous as the victorie was famous: thence he remooued his tents and pas∣sed forwarde to Egypt, sent his footemen to Pelusium: he him∣selfe with few chosen souldiers passed ouer Nilus to Memphis, and thence to all the parts of Egypt, where he was receiued as Diod. lib. 17. a conquerour without battel giuen. When he had set things in order in Egypt, altering neither their lawes nor their cu∣stomes, he went forward and found a place where he builded the citie Alexandria, and named it after his owne name. After he had conquered all Egypt, this citie was builded in Alexandri builded 420. yeeres after the building of Rome. the seuenth yeere of Alexanders raigne, foure hundreth and twentie yeres after the building of Rome, at what time Caius Petileus, and Lu. Papyrius were consuls in Rome as Liuie writes.
When Alexander had brought all things to passe as he wisht, hee left two ouerseers in Egypt with foure thousand souldiers with them, the one was a Macedonian named Pencestes, the o∣ther a Rhodian named Aesculus, and returned and pitcht his tents hard by a little village of Assyria called Arbela, where the The thirde battel of Alex∣ander at Ar∣bela. last and the greatest battell was betweene Darius and Alex∣ander. But because I haue spoken of these three great victo∣ries of Alexander in the histories of Persia, where I opened particularly the whole discourse of the warres, I may passe to other matters with this farewell to Alexander, that so fewe in nomber, with so yong a king against such a mightie mo∣narche, as at that time had almost all the world vnder his go∣uernment, and yet in three victories his kingdomes was taken from him, aboue a hundred thousand slaine, and Darius him∣selfe fled, and being hard followed was slaine by Bessus. Of this Alexander Daniel prophecied, that such a king should come that might doe what hee list. Iustine sayeth, that Da∣rius iustin. lib. 11. had in his armie three hundreth thousand footmen, and a hundreth thousand horsemen. Diodorus varieth much from that nomber, and so doeth Curtius: Plutarch saith that Darius Curtius lib. 5. had tenne hundreth thousand fighting men at that battell at Euphrates. Also some writers differ for the place, that this great battel was not at Arbeles: Plutarch a man of great iudge∣ment, Plutarch. in Alexand. whom I had rather folow in matters of any controuer∣sies, then any other in this historie betweene Alexander and Darius, therefore he setteth downe the first victorie at the ri∣uer Granicus, the second victorie in Silicia, the thirde at Gausa∣meles, and not at Arbeles, as the most writers affirme. After these victories which Alexander had, he remooued to Babylon, where he continued 34. dayes, from Babylon to Susa where hee found within the castle foure thousand talents in ready coine of gold and siluer, beside other infinite treasures. These townes yeelded to Alexander after the last ouerthrow of Darius without any assalt giuen: and frō Susa went after Darius to Media where he fled, and where he found Darius slaine by Bessus one of his owne captaines which was Darius lieutenant Darius slaine by Bessus.
ouer the Bactrians. This Bessus perceiuing that Alexander was following hard at the heeles of Darius, thinking much to please Alexander slewe his owne lorde and master: for the which Alexander rewarded him not according to his expe∣ctation, but according to his deserts, commaunded that hee should bee bound betweene two trees, and by horses to bee The punish∣ment of Bessus. drawen in pieces. It is written that when Alexander saw Da∣rius dead, hee wept and couered his bodie with his owne Plut. in Alex. cloake: so wept Iulius Caesar when he saw the head of Pompey, and Antigonus when he saw the head of Pyrrhus, though they were enemies. Nowe by Darius the Persians lost their mo∣narchie, Melanct. lib. 2 Chron. and by Alexander the Macedonians wanne it. Aristotle hearing of Alexanders good successe, his victories and his conquests ouer so many nations to be such, wrote vn∣to the king, putting him in remembrance that GOD giueth victories, and kingdomes are giuen by GOD, to do good and not euill, to vse iustice and not iniurie, to be a king and not to be a tyrant. By this time Alexander had raigned eight yeeres king in Macedonia, after hee had conquered the Carians, the Lydians, the Cappadocians, the Phrygians, the Paphlagonians, and Diod. lib. 17. the Pamphylians: also he subdued the Cilicians, the Syrians, the Phoenicians, the Armenians and the Persians, the Medes and the Parthenians, and was king of all the East countreys: yet hee was not satisfied, for he sawe the Scythians, the Hircanians, the Curtius lib. 7. Bactrians, the Sogdians, the Massagets and the Sagaes and the In∣dians vnconquered, he could not quiet his minde before hee had subdued these nations. Alexander sought where he might heare of a kingdome vnconquered, and hearing of Hercules actes and exploits in the West kingdomes, he fully had determined after hee had brought all Asia and the East countreys as he did to subiecti∣on, to leade his armie and to passe into Affricke, to Carthage and to Numidia, and thence to Gades to see Hercules pillars: Alexander de∣termined to imiate in his victories Her∣cules. thence hee thought to leade his armie vnto Iberia, which is Spaine, and from Spaine to the Alpes, and so to Italy, and from Italy to Epire, leauing no where in his minde vnconquered:
So he fumed and fretted at the fame of Achilles, of Theseus, and of Hercules: for Hercules was the onely man that Alexander The hautie minde of A∣lexander. emulated, hee thought of Hercules as Caesar thought of Alex∣ander. This king was of such wonderfull hautinesse, that hee thought that the earth might not suffer two Alexanders, no more then the heauens might cōtaine two Sunnes: so he an∣swered Darius when he entreated for peace, and offered thir∣tie Alexander pa∣em non patitur. thousand talents for his wife and his daughters. And Alexander hearing Democritus the Philosopher affir∣ming that there were many worldes, hee brake out in teares, Diod. lib. 17. and in great furie saide: Is there more worldes then one, and yet I haue not conquered halfe one world? But hee was pre∣uented with a contrary course, he fell to take ease at Babylon, where he gaue himselfe to banquets, to riot, to surfeting, and to drinking, and so hee bestowed in Babylon the rest of his life in all kinde of pleasures and pastimes. Hee maried the Per∣sian ladies with noble men of Macedonia, and he himselfe ma∣ried Statira Darius daughter: hee married in Susa eightie and Roxana. two nohle men of Macedonia vnto the Ladies of Persia and Media vpon one day, and made a braue large tent of foure The first feast. furlongs about, and appointed an hundreth gorgeous riche beds: where also the kings bed was furnished with too much riches to be spoken of. I will they should reade Quin. Curtius, Q. Curt. lib. 7. & 8. and Diod. Siculus, of the riche and sumptuous solemnitie of this feast, of the regall magnificence of Alexander, of the pompe and glorie of these Macedonian mariages with these Persian Ladies. After these great mariages of himselfe and of his nobles, Melanct. lib. 2. and of his sumptuous feast which continued fiue dayes, hee made also a solemne feast of cōmon mariages, where 9000. Q. Cur. lib. 8. were maried, to whom Alexander gaue a cup of gold to euery one to honour the feast. He became from a famous conque∣rour, The 2. feast. a voluptuous man, a drunkard furious and fell, at last in his rage to kill and to murther his dearest friendes, as Hermo∣laus, Parmenio, yea Clitus his owne foster brother, who saued Alexanders life at the battel at Granicus, at what time Rhosaceris
a Persian captaine had slaine Alexander, had not Clitus bene: he slewe Calisthenes the Philosopher for his good counsell. Alexander saide, Odio qui sibi non sapit: he could not abide to Odio qui sibi non sapit. heare any praise of his owne father Philip, he would be called the sonne of Iupiter, disdained his noble men and olde soul∣diers of Macedonia that serued his father: he forgote to doe good (as Pindar truely said) and gaue himselfe to be a tyrant after Babylon was taken. Alexander was modest, discreet, wise, iust in iudgment, tem∣perat in diet, for a time, but the reward of sinne fel vpon him, many hated him, and many conspired his death: as Sostratus, Philota, Antipater, Epimenes, Nicostratus and Anticles, but Epime∣nes disclosed his conspiracie to his brother named Eurilochus, to whom Alexander gaue 50. talents for these newes, and par∣doned Plutarch. in Alexand. Epimenes, but the rest he executed. Yet still more con∣spiratours grewe, in so much that Antipater his lieutenant in Macedonia, yea as some do suspect, by Aristotles counsell, poy∣son was sent from Macedonia vnto Babylon, and deliuered to Cassander which was Antipaters sonne, to Iolla and to Philippe, Diuers opini∣ons of Alex∣anders death. which were Antipaters brethren, which were of the kings priuie Chamber, and these when they sawe their time, be∣stowe a cuppe of drinke vpon Alexander for his last fare∣well: which when he perceiued that there was no helpe, he tooke his ring from his finger and gaue it to Perdica, with a commandement giuen, that his body should be caried to Iu∣piter Curtius. of Ammon. Yet some write that he died of a hot feuer. A little before hee died he was demaunded who should raigne king after him: he answered, euen he that is most wor∣thie to come after me. And then being againe asked at what time he would haue his body buried: he answered, when you are at rest and quietnesse. And so it came to passe, that hee was left vnburied in Babylon vntill Olympias his mother came from Macedonia, and caused his bodie to be caried to Alex∣andria: Melanct. 2. Chron. for assoone as Alexander died, they contended to bee kings, and so forgot to burie Alexander according to his commaundement.
Thus Alexander after hee had liued thirtie two yeeres, and raigned twelue, he died, at what time happened the saying of Demades to be true, that the kingdomes and souldiers of A∣lexander The kingdom of Alexander compared to a Cyclope. should be like a Ciclope without an eye: surely so it came to passe, that after Alexanders death the most part of the worlde was without a king: for Alexander had so many kingdomes, that when hee died hee left no king behinde him, vntill againe they beganne with the sworde to claime king∣domes. After Alexanders death, who died two hundreth and eight Buchol. in Chro. Alexander died 280. before Caesar was slaine. yeeres before Iulius Caesar was slaine, during twelue yeeres which Alexander the great raigned in the whole: hee raigned sixe of these twelue yeeres king ouer the Chaldeans and the As∣syrians, ouer the Medes and the Persians, leauing Roxana king Darius daughter great with childe, for the which the Macedo∣nians did her great honour: for king Darius had three daugh∣ters, Statira, Roxana, and Bersene, who were all married vnto Alexander. This time beganne the Romanes to flourish, and had con∣quered the Sabins, the Samnits, the Latines, the Fidenats, the He∣truscanes, the Volscanes, and diuers other countreys, and be∣ganne to looke further from Rome vnto other kingdomes of the worlde. For nowe had triumphed in Rome during the raigne of Alexander, these many gallant fellowes. 1 Marcus Valerius Co∣rinus. 2 C. Mar. Corolyanus. 3 Tit. Manlius Tor∣quatus. 4 Lucius Papyrius. 5 Fabius Maximus. 6 Mar. Curius. 7 Lucius Voluminus. 8 Caius Sulpitius. And 9 Caius Decius. And as Liuie saith, al these seemed in courage and prowesse to be yong Alexanders. Liui. lib. 9.
CHAP. III. Of the diuision and parting of the kingdomes of Asia and Syria af∣ter the death of Alexander betweene his captaines: for hee left no king to succeede after him but the sworde: so many kingdomes were voide by his death, that his captaines that fought then vn∣der Alexander for wages and spoyles, fought nowe for kingdomes and Empires: of their warres and of their continuance. BVt to come to Macedonia againe, where these great captaines fell at va∣riance Contentions betweene A∣lex. captaines. after the death of Alexander, howe the kingdomes of Alexander might bee diuided: sixe dayes they were in discoursing of these causes who should succeede Alexāder in the kingdome of Macedonia, some greedie of praie, some of ease, some after long warres, some of one thing and some of another: the noble men and chiefe cap∣taines, they had an eye to the treasure of Alexander which was one hundred thousand talents, beside his reuenues yere∣ly Perdicca. which was three hundred thousande talents: Perdiccas thought Roxana being great with childe by Alexander (if it should be a sonne) that he should be king of the Macedonians: Meleager contraried Perdicas saying, That Alexāder had a gal∣lant Meleager. youth to bee his sonne by Arsine named Hercules, more fitter for the crowne of Macedonia, then to expect a doubtfull chaunce by Roxana: others thought that Aridaeus a bastard Iustine lib. 13. brother of Alexanders shoulde succeede in the kingdome. Reade Q. Curtius of the orations and perswasions of seuerall Dukes and captaines concerning the succession after Alex∣ander Ru ffi. de origi. Maced. in the kingdome of Macedonia. After long debates & se∣uerall opinions touching Alexanders posteritie, it came at last to the murthering of his wife Roxana being great with childe by Alexander, to the killing of young Hercules Alexan∣ders Alex. posteri∣ties slaine. sonne by his wife Arsine, to the slaughter of his mother Olympias, and of his base brother Aridaeus: it came in fine to bloodie ciuill discord, that the calamitie and miserie of Ma∣cedonia
after Alexanders time, passed farre the felicitie and iol∣litie of Macedonia during the time of Alexander: for after that Antipater had murthered all Alexanders stocke, his wife, chil∣dren, mother, brother, and all Alexanders nigh kinsemen: hee armed himselfe against Lysimachus, by whom Antipater was slaine. Thus after long seditious contentions, they agreed a∣mong themselues, that Antipater should gouerne Macedonia Funct. cōment. lib. 3. and Greece: that Ptolome should gouerne Egypt and Afrike, and part of Arabia: Learchus should gouerne Lycia, Pamphylia, and the greater Phrygia: Cappadocia, and Paphlagonia, were as∣signed to Eumenes: to Laomedon were assigned Syria and Phoe∣nicia: to Cassander Caria: to Menander Lydia: and to Lysima∣chus Thracia Pontus and Cilicia: Illyria to Philotes: to Leonatus the lesser Phrygia: these with others, whose names Functius setteth downe. These princes within fourteene yeeres by ci∣uill Iustine lib. 23. discord fell to variances and contencions, that they de∣stroyed one another: such is the force of ambition, that it Ambition a∣mong the kings after Alex. neuer conteineth within any bounde of reason. I will not repeate the names of those that were likewise as∣signed to gouerne the Sogdians, the Bactrians, the Indians, and other places which in like maner through mutual dissension slue one another. Alexander for a while was left vnburied in Babylon quite forgotten of all his princes, vntil Ptolome, as Cur∣tius doeth witnesse, sent for his body, brought it to Memphis, Curtius lib. 10. and from Memphis it was caried to Alexandria, and there in his owne tombe was buried. Nowe after these Princes were thus destroyed, the Em∣pire voide of any good gouernment: for though they with Arideus the first king ele∣cted after A∣lex in Maced. one consent elected Arideus to bee king of Macedon, yet their obedience was farre from their election, but euery man aspired to a kingdome: all the Countries betweene the riuer Hydaspes, and the riuer Indus, Taxillus gouerned: In Per∣sia gouerned Neoptolemus: in Parthia, Nicanor: in Babylon, Pen∣cestes: and Archesilaus had in his hand Mesopotamia. All these practised meanes how they might from gouernours become
kings: for as I saide before, Alexander left no king behind him, for so it was before Alexander by Cyrus, before Cyrus by Na∣buchodonosor, Alex. left no heire but the sword. before Nabuchodonosor by Merodach, before Me∣rodach by Ninus, before Ninus by Nimrod. So God from the beginning by his great wisedome hath established kingdomes and common weales, that where hee gaue his sworde, there the victorie went, and there the Mo∣narchie florished: so God ordeyned things to come to passe, that nowe againe the Empire of Alexander should be deui∣ded, as Daniel the Prophet had before tolde saying, That a Daniel cap. 11. strong king should come and gouerne, and doe what plea∣sed him, but it should bee diuided in quatuor ventos Coeli, as then it happened truely betweene foure princes, though Io∣sephus sayeth fiue: the first was Cassander, the sonne of Anti∣pater, Cassander. and euen hee who poysoned Alexander, hee I say after his fathers death, and after hee had destroyed the whole progenie of Alexander, inuaded Macedonia and v∣surped the kingdome: the 2. Ptolo. Lagi the first king of Ptolome. Egypt, and had the most part of Syria vnder his Scepter: the 3. Seleucus surnamed Nicanor, king of Babylon, and of Seleucus. Asia the greater: the 4. Antigonus king of Asia the lesse. Antigonus. These and their posterities had entred in armes, and be∣ganne to warre within them selues, that they likewise came to ruine and were destroyed one by another, as you shall reade more in the histories of the kings of Asia and Syria. In the meane season the Athenians againe, a people euer desirous of soueraigntie, vnderstanding that Alexander the great was dead, were in armes against Antipater, still loo∣king Curtius lib. 13. Iustine. lib. 13. to haue their former libertie, ioyned with themselues the Aeolians, gathered three thousand souldiers, two hundred nauies, & now Demosthenes being banished frō Athens being at Megaris, or as as Plutarch saith at Aegina, for his 20. talents in bribes receiued of Harpalus, was called backe by the Athe∣nians, who through his wōted eloquence allured the Argiues, the Corinthians, and the Scicionians, to ioyne with the Athenians
against Antipater, who by election was king of Macedonia next after Alexander, and chiefe gouernour ouer all Greece as Alexander was and his father Philip before him. In these warres the Athenians had very good lucke in the beginning, Leosthenes. while yet Leosthenes their generall was aliue, but hee being dead, their good happe and successe died also, before Leost∣henes had shut vp Antipater in the citie of Lamia, and straight∣ly had there besieged him. But this continued no longer then to the battel of Cranon, where againe the Athenians were ouerthrowen, and Demost∣henes with many of their Orators fled, and after to auoide An∣tipaters hand ridde away themselues by poyson. Cassander be∣ganne in Macedonia and in Greece to practise falshood, after he had maried Arideus daughter Thessalonices: for by consent Arideus. of all the princes, Arideus was appoinred to succeede Alexan∣der, and he reigned seuen yeeres king in Macedonia, but Olym∣pias Iustine lib. 14. Alexanders mother made meanes to dispatch both Ari∣deus, and his wife Euridices out of the way, for that they resi∣sted the Queene Olympias to come into Macedonia frō Epire, and Olympias her selfe liued not long after: for the Macedoni∣ans honoured her much for Philip her owne husbands sake, and for Alexander her sonne, vntill shee became to be cruell and to vse much tyrannie. But Cassander who farre exceeded her in murthering and in destroying, tooke her also, and commaunded her to bee Diod. lib. 19. slaine, and likewise commaunded Roxana Alezanders wife to be kept, and to be looked vnto, being sent with her sonne A∣lexander to Amphipolis, but she & her sonne was slaine. While The crueltie of Cassander. in this sort Cassander fomed in blood, Antigonus who had ob∣teined to be king of lesser Asia, came in armes against Cassan∣der. Lysimachus king of Thracia, and Seleucus king of greater Asia ioyned with Cassander, and the battell was giuen at Gaza, a citie of Palestina, where Demetrius Antigonus sonne had the worse. Cassander within a while after this battell died, when he had reigned eighteene yeeres. After whom succeeded two sonnes of Cassander named
Antipater and Alexander, who in much discord and with much adooe they reigned foure yeeres: this young king An∣tipater after he had reigned three yeeres, perceiuing that his mother was more bent to fauour her other sonne Alexander, with his owne hand slue her: vpon this vile murther Alexan∣der presently sent to Demetrius for ayde, and to reuenge his mothers death vpō his brother: Demetrius was glad to heare such newes, that Antipater had slaine his mother, and nowe Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. Alexander to rise against his brother, sawe an open passage hereby offered vnto him to become king of Macedonia, which so came to passe, for both Antipater and Alexander one de∣stroyed another: for Lysimachus slue Antipater, and Demetri∣us Demetrius. Alexander, left the kingdome to Demetrius: the posteritie of Cassander had no lōger time in Macedonia, it was Gods iudge∣ment: for this Cassander as it is reported, poysoned Alexander the great, being with two other of his brethren Iolla & Philip, gentlemen of his priuie chamber their race ended: for in the Cassanders trea∣cherie and murther. time of Antipater and his sonne Cassander, Demosthenes, Dema∣des, and the most part of the noble Orators of Athens were slaine. And nowe Demetrius the sonne of Antigonus was proclai∣med king of Macedon, and beside Macedon he had Thessalie, and the most part of Peleponesus: hee further did leade his ar∣mie against the Boetians, laide siege to Thebes and tooke it: after that hearing that Lysimachus king of Thracia was taken prisoner by a barbarous nation, hee went with his armie to inuade Thracia: he was skant in Thracia but Lysimachus came home, and beside hearing that Pyrrhus had forraged all Thes∣salia, Pyrrhus. and had entred alreadie into the streightes of Thermopi∣les, Demetrius was constreined to leaue both Thracia and also Thebes, and to returne against Pyrrhus: and for all that Pyrrhus Funct. lib. 3. Comment. sought Demetrius with his armie to giue him battell, and De∣metrius sought also Pyrrhus, yet they mist both at that time: but after Demetrius his lieutenant named Pantarchus, a strong man and of great courage gaue to Pyrrhus battell, which vi∣ctorie fell to Pyrrhus the onely king that imitated Alexander
the great, and to him by all mens report most like in cou∣rage and prowesse. After this victorie of Pyrrhus, hee againe inuaded Macedo∣nia, being aduertised that Demetrius was sicke, in the which iourney Pyrrhus came as farre as the citie Edissa without resi∣stance: yet Pyrrhus was driuen out of Macedonia that time with all his force. Demetrius wanting leasure to fight with Pyrrhus, hauing Diod. lib. 17. many warres in hand beside, concluded a peace with Pyr∣rhus: for then Demetrius was troubled diuers wayes. Lysi∣machus king of Thracia inuaded the high countrie of Macedon next vnto Thracia, and Ptolomei king of Egypt entred with his armie into Greece, and Pyrrhus though there was a peace con∣cluded, yet stept in with Lysimachus, entised the Macedonians partly through faire meanes, and partly through flatterie to forsake Demetrius: by this meanes Macedonia was diuided be∣tweene Pyrrhus and Lysimachus, and Pyrrhus was proclaimed king in Macedonia, after they had chased Demetrius, Pyrrhus reigned in Macedonia seuen moneths. Againe Lysimachus made warre on Pyrrhus, and after ma∣ny battels Lysimachus gote the victorie, and reigned king in Macedonia seuen yeeres. Iustine praiseth this Lysimachus to be Iustine lib. 15. the rarest man of his time valiant and wise, and a great Philo∣sopher, of a noble house borne of Macedonia, where nowe he is become king. It is written that this Lysimachus slue a lyon The praise of Lysimachus. with his owne hand: but I leaue him king of Macedonia, and returne to Demetrius, who for three yeeres had beene tossed Curtius lib. 8. with extreme hard fortune: nowe for recouering of his king∣dome againe hee had leuied a great armie of one hundred thousand footemen, of twelue thousand horsemen, and had Demetrius armie. gotten fiue hundred shippes together, part in the hauen of Piraeus, part at Corinth, part at the Citie Chalcis, and part a∣bout the Citie Pella. His enemies hearing of these newes, I meane three kings, Seleucus, Ptolome, and Lysimachus, ioyned themselues
there together against Demetrius: and beside they sent to Pyrrhus, that poore Demetrius miserie from princely hap∣pinesse Funct. lib. 3. Coment. so ouerthrowen, that his armie forsooke him, himselfe yeelded vnto Seleucus, his wife named Phila, for very griefe poysoned her selfe, and so kept as prisoner in Syria by Seleucus, where Demetrius turned captiuitie into pleasure vnto his dying day, who after hee had reigned sixe yeeres dyed in Cherronesus, leauing behinde him by his wife Phila two children, Antigonus and Stratonice, and other two sonnes both named Demetrius, of whom you shall heare more hereafter: both Plutarch, Iustine, Plutarch in Demetr. Demetrius left two of his name behind. and Ruffinus affirme, that the posteritie of Demetrius suc∣ceeded kings in Macedonia, vntill the last king named Per∣seus: this time also died Ptolomei Lagi king of Egypt with great fame and report. Nowe Lysimachus reigned this while in Macedonia, v∣sing such tyrannie and practising such crueltie against his owne subiects, that they reuoulted from him and fledde to Seleucus: then warre grewe betweene them, that Lysi∣macus Lysimachus. lost what hee wanne, fifteene of his children, and his life also by Seleucus: this was the last battell fought a∣mongst them that were of Alexanders successours. Seleu∣cus not long liued, but within seuen moneths after was Diod. lib. 17. and 18. by Ptolomei surnamed Cheraunos, brother to Ptolomeus Phi∣ladelphus, the seconde king of Egypt after Alexander the great, slaine: for Lysimachus had maried the sister of this Ptolomei and reigned after his brother in lawe in Mace∣donia the space of one yeere: after this Macedonia was continually plagued vntill their last king of Macedon na∣med Perseus, whom the Romanes ouercame by Paulus Aemilius, and so brought Macedonia a Prouince vnder Rome. Nowe this while Perdica vsed another way to bee king All meanes made for king domes. of Macedonia, hee made meanes to marrie Cleopatra the sister of Alexander the great, and thought so to ouerthrowe Aridaeus: but hee was preuented by Antipater and slaine by
his owne souldiers: some thinkes that the ambition of Perdi∣ca was the first cause of all ciuil warres in marying Cleopatra. Polib. lib. 2. Polybius saith, that all these iolly captaines, Ptolomie the sonne of Lagi, Seleucus, Lysimachus, & Ptolomie Cerannus, died in the 124. Olympiad. Macedonia had little good successe of their kings, as you heard of Cassanders two sonnes Antipater and A∣lexander, The destructi∣on of many kings within fewe yeres. who reigned but foure yeeres, Demetrius sixe, Pyr∣rhus seuen moneths, Lysimachus seuen yeeres, and Ptolomei Ce∣rannos one yeere, after whom succeeded Meleager two mo∣neths, Antipater fourtie fiue daies, yet Iustine saith he reigned one whole yeere, and Sosthenes two yeeres. After these kings the kingdome fell to the house of Deme∣trius (as I saide before) to Antigonus the sonne of Demetrius, borne of Phila the daughter of Antipater and sister to Cassan∣der. This Antigonus was called the second Antigonus: for the first Antigonus which was this Demetrius father, was supposed Antigonus the first the base sōne of Philip. and taken to be a base sonne of Philip, and a brother of Alexan∣der the great: for so he himselfe in his decrees and statutes na∣med himselfe Philips sonne, of whose warres against Emmenes when he was king of Asia, I spake in the historie of the kings of Asia and Syria. The second Antigonus which was Demetrius sōne, is much praysed for his iustice, gouernment, modestie, and of such good vertuous disposition, that he was surnamed of the Gre∣cians Euergetes. Of this second Antigonus issued foorth the se∣cond Funct. lib. 3. Comment. Demetrius which reigned tenne yeeres: I will speake of the troubles in Macedonia during the reigne of Ptolomei Ce∣rannius the seuēth king after Alexander, of Meleager the eight king, of Antipater the ninth, and of Sosthenes the tenth king: these foure kings reigned not aboue foure yeeres. After Lysimachus by this false treacherie of his brother in lawe, Ptolomei was deceiued and setled himselfe king in Mace∣donia hee concluded a peace with Antiochus, and entred in friendship with Pyrrhus, and by these meanes he was farre frō Ptolome Ceran. any feare of forraine enemies: he mused howe he might de∣stroy his owne sister Lysimachus wife and his children, who of
right ought to bee heires to the crowne of Macedonia: hee sware that he would marie his sister, and make her children by Iust. lib. 24. Lysimachus his owne to inherite the kingdome: but he was no sooner within the Citie of Cassandria, where he should marie Arsinoe the Queene, but he commanded that both her sōnes, Tyrannie re∣warded with tyrannie. the elder named Lysimachus after his fathers name, of sixteene yeeres of age, and Philip three yeeres younger then his bro∣ther, to be killed, and their mother forced to steale away by night into Samothracia: but hee was wel requited by Belgius, hackt and slaine, and his head cut off & caried vpō a speare in opē sight of the Macedoniās, which put them in no litle feare. Sosthenes was proclaimed king of Macedonia, a man of great Sosthenes. courage: hee resisted the furie and rage of the Frenchmen, which wasted the countrie and spoyled the Cities, vntill that Brennus another captaine of the Frenchmen ioyned with Bel∣gius, with a hundred & fiftie thousand footemen, and fifteene thousand horsemen, and easily being so many might ouer∣throwe so fewe. Sosthenes was faine to take a holde: for that time Brennus and Belgius spoyled Cities and Countries, rob∣bed Diod. lib. 18. their temples, and had infinite treasure from the temple of Apollo. Thus the Macedonians were sore plagued, and had these two great ouerthrowes by Belgius and Brennus, but the third ouerthrowe fell to the Frenchmen in such extreame sort, that Brennus slue himselfe. After this the Frenchmen againe inuaded Macedonia, while Antigonus which was Demetrius brother reigned, where they Demetrius. were vanquished & ouerthrowen in most miserable sort: this gote to Antigonus great credit, vntil Pyrrhus gote the victorie of him, and forced him to take his flight. So poore Macedonia was still by one or other put to worse, Pyrrhus mocking Anti∣gonus for his brauerie to goe in purple like a king apparelled, being chased out of his countrie by him and by others, yet it was Antigonus chaūce to haue Pyrrhus head brought vnto him by Alcioneus his owne sonne from the siege of the citie of Ar∣gos, Alcineus brought Pyr∣rhus head to Antigonus. where this great king after many victories ouer kings was slaine at a womans hand by throwing of a tyle stone.
When king Antiochus sawe Pyrrhus head throwen before him by his sonne in such contempt, hee layed his staffe about his sonnes backe, calling him a cruell murtherer, and an vn∣naturall barbarous beast, and turning his eyes from the sight thereof weapt, remembring Demetrius hard fortune which was his father, and also the miserie and ende of the first Anti∣gonus his graundfather: he most honourably caused his head and his body to be burned & his ashes burned. Thus thestate of princes is changed sometime in the height of good lucke Instine lib. 25. and fauour, and sometime forsaken of their owne friends. Antigonus hauing this great victorie of Pyrrhus, vsed all cle∣mencie towardes Pyrrhus sonne named Helenus, sent him vn∣to Plutarch in Pirrho. his Realme of Epirus with honourable conuoye, seasing all Pyrrhus campe and armie, vsed his friendes courteously, and receiued many of Pyrrhus souldiers & preferred them. Thus Pyrrhus who helde out against three kings, Lysimachus, Deme∣trius, and Antigonus, beside his magnanimitie and prowesse shewed against the Illyrians, the Cicilians, the Carthagineans, and against the stoute Romanes, and yet neuer conquered. Hanibals words of Pyr∣rhus. This Pyrrhus was preferred by Hanibals iudgement to be the second souldier of the worlde next to the great Alexander, after whose death Greece fell to contencions, as Macodonia by Antigonus florished but a short time: for assoone as Pyrrhus dyed, the Peloponesians yeelded to Antigonus. Pyr∣rhus had a sonne named Alexander, who burned in furie Antigonus O∣uerthrowen by Pyrrhus sonne Alex. to reuenge his fathers death, beganne vpon the confines of Macedonia to quarrell with Antigonus: hee was no sooner returned from Greece into Macedonia, but Antigonus had both lost his kingdome and himselfe by a faire battell giuen to him by Alexander the sonne of Pyrrhus. Antigonus had a brother named Demetrius after his fathers name a very young man, who so reuenged likewise the ouerthrowe of his brother, that hee recouered not onely Macedonia from Alexander, but forced him after a great ouerthrowe to flie from his owne kingdom of Epyrus: so variable is the chaunce of warre, and so mutable the state of man, that sometime Fun. lib. 3. Cot. they be kings and conquerours, and straight banished men.
Nowe Alexander fled to Arcadia, from whence hee was re∣stored Alex. againe was ouer∣throwen by Demet. Antigo. his brother. to his kingdome within short space: for Demetrius af∣ter the death of his brother Antigonus, continued not long king in Macedonia: for by time Agas king of Cyrena died, and had left for his heire one daughter named Beronices, whom her father espoused to king Ptolomeis sonne of Egypt: but nowe Arsinoe king Agas her husband being dead, and also hearing that king Antigonus was dead, shee made meanes to send for Demetrius, who came with all speede from Macedonia to Cy∣rena, and hauing a sight of Arsinoes beautie, hee fell more in desire of the mother then of the daughter. This Demetrius be∣ing a proud insolent young king, and giuing great cause to Demetrius. Beronice the young ladie to hate him, he little esteeming that folowed his fancie to winne Arsinoe, which when it was well knowen to the daughter, and to many of the Court after howe Demetrius vsed himselfe, Beronice and all men beganne mortally to mallice Demetrius, and to turne their mindes a∣gaine towards Ptolomeus sonne. They hated him in such sort, Iustine lib. 26. that snares were inuēted for Demetrius, and watches appoin∣ted to find him in the fault, and so it came to passe then when he was in bedde with the mother, the daughter brought cer∣teine armed men into the chamber, cōmaunded them to kill Demetrius. Beronice entred not the chamber, but stood at the doore, & spake vnto them that they should spare her mother, which when Arsinoe heard after she had done what she could to saue Demetrius cōcerning his body with her body, of force she was taken from him & he slaine: thus Beronice reuenged the wrongs & spite of Demetrius done against her selfe, and Demet. slaine for adulterie. her mother, & after maried Ptolomeis sonne, according to his father king Agas cōmandement: this was the end of king De∣metrius the sonne of Demetrius. About this time Megasthenes There is Me∣tasthenes and Megasthenes. a Persian Chronographer wrote his histories: some call him Metasthenes: this time the Romanes began to florish in all kind of excesse, as in wearing of rings & costly tires, which (as Pli∣nie saith) were skant before this time seene in Rome: this time also was the Bible translated by the 70. interpreters into the Plini. lib. 33. Cap. 1. Greeke tongue.
CHAP. IIII. Of the Romane warres with king Philip, and his sonne Perseus, the two last kings of Macedonia: of their ouerthrowe by Paul. Aemilius, and of the ouerthrowe of false Philip, and coun∣terfaite Andriscus by Q. Metellus, in the last conquest of Ma∣cedonia. NOwe to returne to Macedonia, after that Demetrius was slaine as you heard, Philip Demetrius nephewe, and sonne to Anti∣gonus succeeded in Macedonia. You must Philip king of Macedonia. take heede least you be deceiued in the names of diuers Demetrius: for the first and the greatest was called Demetrius Antigonus, whose life Plutarch doeth write at large: another Demetrius surnamed Poliorcetes, who in Plut in Aemil. his time destroyed a towne of Samaria which Perdicas builded vp againe: and the third named Demetrius Phalerius, which Diuers Demet. Plut in Demet. was gouernour of Athens vnder Cassander: and the fourth De∣metrius Antigonus sonne, of whose death for adulterie with Queene Arsinoe you read of before: so likewise you shal reade of diuers Seleucus, of diuers Antiochus, and of diuers Ptolomeis, where I speake of the kings of Asia, Syria, and Egypt, much er∣rour may growe hereby without heede taking. Philip reigned now in Macedonia, and hauing no long time to rest, but at his first entrie had warres by the Romanes, for whom Ti. Quintus T. Fminius. Flaminius the Consul was in person to offer battell in the de∣fence of Greece, & the rather for that Philip king of Macedon ay∣ded Hannibal against the Romanes with all the force he could. Philip prouided all things ready: a man might thinke that Liui. lib. 31. Philip had force and power sufficient against a Consul of a ci∣tie, being a king of a whole Realme: and surely so he had, had not Titus by his eloquence wonne al Greece against Philip, and yet before this time the Grecians bare no great good will to Philip refused to meete Fla∣mi. in battell. the Romanes as Plutarch affirmeth. Diuers times Flaminius of∣fered battel to Philip, but still refused & by Philip auoided, fea∣ring such hard fortune as his predecessors had: he kept the top
of the mountaines with his armie, that when the Romanes forced to gette vp the hilles, they were receiued with dartes, slings and shotte that lighted vpon them from the toppes of the hilles, that the Romanes were sore anoyed. But after they found meanes to winne the hilles by the ad∣uise of Charopus, a great man of Epirus: Titus diuided his ar∣mie into three troupes, and himselfe went with one of the three. Philip lost then about two thousand souldiers, the Ma∣cedonians fled, and the Romanes spoiled their campe, tooke all that they found in their tents: Titus had some aduertisement that Philip fledde by Thessalia: the Consul with great mode∣stie Philip fledde. did forbeare the spoyling and wasting of the Countrie: hereby he wanne many friendes: Philip was most desirous to haue peace with Titus, and it was offered him vpon conditi∣on that he would that Greece should be at their libertie, and The Cities of Greece yeel∣ded to Tit. remoue his garisons out of their Citie: this Philip refused, and thereupon all Greece came in, and offered themselues vnto Titus without compulsion. Nowe hauing Greece on his side he went towardes Thessa∣lie, with great hope to ouercome Philip: Titus had in his ar∣mie about sixe and twentie thousande fighting men as Plu∣tarch writeth, king Philip on the other side had no lesse in number: they beganne to march the one towardes the other neere the Citie of Scotusa, there they determined to trie the battell, where Titus gaue the ouerthrow, and slue eight thou∣sand Philip at the battell of Sco∣tusa lost 8000. in the fielde, and tooke fiue thousand prisoners in the chase: Philip was driuen to entreate for peace, which was graunted vnto him vpon the condition before offered, and taking one of Philips sōnes in hostage, sent him to Rome to the Senate: for then Hannibal of Carthage, a great enemie of the Romanes was ouercome by Scipio Affricanus, and banished out of his Countrie, and commen to king Antiochus, whom hee perswaded with all diligence to followe his good fortune, and the encrease of his Empire. Hanibal sought still to finde occasion to make warres with Hanibals per∣swasions to Antiochus. the Romanes, and went about to bring Antiochus to ioyne with
Philip, two mightie kings against the Romanes. In the meane time Titus had commissioners sent from Rome to ayde him, Plutarch in Tito. and to assist him in the affaires of Greece, willing him to looke to the Cities of Corinth, of Chalcides, and of Demetriade, Libertie pro∣claimed by Titus to the Greekes. and to make sure that they should not enter into league and allyance with Antiochus, and all the rest of Greece to set at libertie: this was done by Titus, and proclaimed by the He∣ralde, and authorised by the Senate of Rome, that all Greece should be free from all taxes, impositions, and subsidies. Af∣ter that Titus had sent Lentulus into Asia to set the Bargili∣ans at libertie, and Titillius into Thracia, and Publius Iulius sent to king Antiochus to set the Grecians at libertie. Titus himselfe went to the Prouince of Magnesia, and from thence to Argos to set the Greekes at libertie which were vnder Philip and Antiochus, from Argos returned into Rome after foure yeeres warre with Philip, sauing that Pu. Sulpitius had the charge against Philip the first yeere being then Con∣sul of Rome before Titus time, who for the time of his being Ruffi. de Mace. in Macedonia gaue two ouerthrowes vnto Philip king of Ma∣cedon, and forced him to flee in great danger of his life. But to returne to Titus, who being called to Rome by the Senate, Tit. Flami. tri∣umphed ouer king Philip sonne at Rome. came in solemne triumph with king Philips sonne before his chariot, & brought at that time (saith Plutarch) infinite trea∣sures, and leauing Philip to pay to the Romanes a thousand ta∣lents beside, and not to molest and vexe the Cities of Greece, and that it was not lawfull for Philip to warre, or to fight out of his owne kingdome, vnlesse he should be required there∣unto Liui. lib. 2. Decad. 4. by the Romanes. Thus Philip being daunted of his great courage, and much weakened in strength by the Romanes, hauing two sonnes, the Secret enuie betweene Phi∣lips two sōnes. one named Perseus, the other Demetrius, betweene them both grewe secret seditions, and proceeded so in malice, that though Demetrius was in Rome in hostage with Titus as you heard, and Perseus in Macedonia with his father, accusing his brother of his secrete treacherie towardes his father Philip
and his countrey, that the king was in offence against De∣metrius, and grewe more and more by Perseus, soliciting the cause to doubt Demetrius, hee coulde not quiet himselfe, vn∣till Demetrius poysoned. Demetrius was had out of the way by poyson (as Ruffinus sayeth) but it was not long after but Philip had knowledge of the iniurie hee had done to his sonne Demetrius, by the false accusation of his sonne Perseus, hee studied howe to take reuenge vpon Perseus for the death of Demetrius, and sawe no way vnlesse hee would leaue Macedonia without a king: for then Perseus was the last of the line of Antigonus. Thus poore king Philip being plagued by the Romanes Philip died. for his kingdome, and brought to a full weerinesse of his life at home, by his two sonnes, fell to a consumption and dyed, afterhe had reigned king of Macedonia fourtie two yeeres. Plutarch reciteth a historie of one Antigonus surnamed Doson, that was cousin to the other Antigonus surnamed Go∣nates: this Antigonts Doson reigned before Philippe fifteene Of Antigonus the first the 2. and the 3. yeeres. As I toulde you before of the names of so many Demetrius, so nowe the names of so many Antigonus may trouble the reader, and therefore I will shewe the order of it. The first Antigonus was taken to bee base brother to A∣lexander the great, who after Alexanders dayes was taken to be the greatest and mightiest of all his successours. This Antigonus had a sonne called Demetrius, of whome came this seconde Antigonus surnamed Gonatas: the third Antigonus surnamed Doson, and after this Antigonus reig∣ned Philip, who dyed for sorowe and griefe for Demetri∣us death. Nowe Perseus the last king of Macedonia, succeeded his father Philip king of Macedonia in the fiue hundred seuen∣tie Perseus the last king of Macedonia. fiue yeeres of the building of Rome, and in the hundred and fiftie Olympiad, at what time reigned king in Egypt Pto∣lomeus Philometor the sixth king: and in Syria reigned An∣tiochus Epiphanes the eight king, and also this time ouer the
Parthians reigned Mithridates Arsaces, who succeeded his bro∣ther Pharnachus: this did great exploites, of whom you shall Iustine lib. 41. reade in the histories of the Parthians written by Iustine: in Rome Lucius Manlius and Quintus Fuluius were Consuls. This Perseus succeeded Philip his father, found the strength of his kingdome so great and so well prouided, that hee had The rich state of Perseus af∣ter Philip his father. in his armorie to arme thirtie thousand: he had in his fortes and strong places eight million bushels of corne safely lockt vp, and hee had ready as much money as would serue to en∣terteine tenne thousand strangers in paye for tenne yeeres: this also he found ready men leauied a great number, which his father had prepared for the second warres of Macedonia. Perseus being thus furnished, tooke that in hand which was Philips purpose, to warre against the Romanes, and he maintei∣ned warres a long time, and had in the beginning good suc∣cesse Perseus. against the Romanes, that in the first battell he made, hee gaue the ouerthrow to Pu. Lucius the Consul, and at that time Perseus 1. vi∣ctorie against Pu. Lucius. generall for the Romanes: he slue 2500. of his horsemen, and tooke sixe hundred prisoners, and beside he did suddenly set vpon their armie by sea, riding at anker before the citie of O∣ren: he tooke twentie of their great shippes, and sunke the rest which were loden all with corne. Thus Perseus began very hotly with the Romanes, and gaue the ouerthrowe to the first Consul: the second battell which Perseus fought was with Hostilius the second Consul and ge∣nerall Perseus 2. vi∣ctorie against Hostilius. of Rome, whom he likewise repulsed: and when that Ho∣stilius attempted by force to inuade Macedonia, Perseus offered him battell in Thessalie, and he refused him. Perseus seemed so proud of these two victories against the two Consuls of Rome, that hee little esteemed the Romanes, went and fought a battell in the meane time with the Darda∣nians, where hee slue tenne thousand of these barbarous peo∣ple, and brought a marueilous great spoyle away: beside this hee gote the Gaules that dwelt about the riuer of Danubie to ioyne with him, and practised with Gentius king of the Il∣lyrians to ioyne also in this warre with him. The Romanes
being of these newes aduertised, they thought good to send a Paulus Aemi∣lius chosen Consul. skilfull souldier and a wise captaine (as Paulus Aemilius was) whom the Romans chose now the second time to be their con∣sul and captaine in this second warre, to whom they gaue the whole charge of Macedon. Aemilius prepared an armie of an hundreth thousand against Perseus, and when he had arriued into Macedon, & being aduertised how Perseus lay at the foote of mount Olympus with 4000. horsmen, and with fourtie thou∣sand footemen: beside he had Gentius king of the Illyrians, to whom Perseus promised thirtie thousand talents to ayde him against the Romanes. Now Scipio sirnamed Nasica, the adopted sonne of the great Liui. lib. 5. Scipio the Affricane, and Fabius Maximus, of whom Cicero said, Cunctando restituit rem, two yong valiant Romanes offered to take the straights, offered to do diuers seruices: but old Aemi∣lius hauing wonne many victories, hee could stay leasure and oportunitie of battel. Now Perseus hauing pitched his campe before the citie of Pydne, where Aemilius in hast marched and met in battell. Polibius writeth this storie, and saith: so soone as the battel was begun, Perseus withdrew himselfe and got in∣to the citie of Pydne out of the battell, vnder pretence to doe some sacrifice vnto Hercules: but Aemilius with his sworde in The battel at Pydne. hand lay on vpon the enemies. The slaughter was so great on Perseus side, that Plutarch saith that the riuer of Leucus ranne Plutarch in Aemilio. all bloodie: the battell was so fierce on both sides, that it con∣tinued not aboue two houres: the victorie fel to the Romanes, with the losse of 25. thousand Macedonians. This victorie was heard of in Rome the very day that it was wonne, saying that Castor and Pollux brought these newes to Rome. In this battel I note one rare historie of Mar. Cato the sonne Mar. Catces sword lost and found in the battel. of great Cato, and sonne in law to Aemilius, who most valiantly fighting in the midst of the Macedonians, by chance his sword fell out of his hande, the which he tooke so grieuously that he ranne to the Romane armie, where he told them what had be∣fallen vnto him, praying some of his friends to helpe him to recouer his sword: saying, that he thought more honour for
him to die there, then liuing to suffer his enemies to enioy any spoile of his: whereupon a nomber of lustie valiant souldiers rushed in straight amōg their enemies about the place where The magna∣nimitic and great courage of the Romanes. the sworde fell: their force and furie was such, that it made a lane through the enemies, and as yong raging lions with such force cleared the way in such sort, that the sworde was found: this happened in the middest of the battell. Againe in this battell of Pydne a great feare tooke Aemilius Aemilius hea∣uinesse. after the victory: who being very late in the night, & broght to his tent with torches and links, missing his sonne, beholding how his souldiers after this victorie decked themselues with crownes and garlands of laurell, became sad and heauie, sup∣posing his sonne to be cast away, vntil Scipio returned frō fol∣lowing the enemie: then Aemilius ioy was doubled, but that shortly followed, which then missed. Now Perseus fled from Pydne to Pella. After this victory, Aemilius made a progresse into Greece, and cōming to Delphos, there he saw king Perseus Perseus image throwen down at Delphos. image of golde set vp vpon a great pillar of 4. square. Aemilius commanded that image of him being conquered to be taken downe, and his owne image being the conqueror to be set vp: thence he went to the city of Olympia to visit the temple of Iu∣piter Olympian, & after he redeliuered to the Macedonians their countrey and townes againe to liue at libertie, paying to the Romans for tribute yerely 100. talents. After, he went to Epi∣rus, hauing put al things at stay in Macedonia, that the Macedo∣nians submitted themselues to Aemilius. Aemilius sent his lieutenant by sea to take king Perseus, who fled to Samothracia, where he and his children yeelded vnto Cneus Octauius lieu∣tenant to Aemilius. Of this great victorie newes came to Rome from Macedonia in one day, some say 4. dayes. This king Perseus was a very couetous prince, hated of his The miserie of Perseus. subiects, & of no man beloued, & noted to be such a coward, that Aemilius mocked him for it. This Perseus lost in 2. houres in the battel of Pydne (to the Romans great glory & praise) the fame & renowne which Alexander the great had brought and wonne to Macedonia. Of these 2. warres of Macedonia with the Diod. lib. 31.
Romanes, and of their last king conquered, reade Liuie and Ap∣pianus Liuie lib. 4. & 5. in that booke entituled Mithridaticus. This is that Ma∣cedonia which then Alexander had augmented with these ma∣ny kingdoms, Persia, Media, Armenia, Albania, Cappadocia, Iberia, Syria, Egypt, Bactria, Scythia, India, all Asia, and welnigh all the worlde, now brought by Paulus Aemilius to be a prouince of the Romanes, who in one day sold (as Ruffinus wote) 82. cities. 82. Cities sold by Paulus Aemilius. Thus is the kingdom and monarchie of Alexander king ouer kings, troden downe by Aemilius a magistrate of a citie: thus is Macedonia whose empire reached into the furthest part of the world, made a prouince vnto Rome, which in the time of Alex∣ander was so famous: neither the Assyrians by Ninus, neither the Chaldeans by Nabuchodonosor, neither the Medes by Darius Medus, neither the Persians by Cyrus were of such fame, as Ma∣cedonia was by Alexander. It is a true saying, Per me reges reg∣nant, All kings are by God esta∣blished. &c. It was decreed aboue before God, how long the Cal∣deans should raigne before the Assyrians, the Assyriās before the Medes, the Medes before the Persians, the Persians before the Macedonians, & in like sort how long the Romans shal cōtinue. This was by Daniel diuinely reueiled by the 4. great beasts that came vp frō the sea, one diuers to another: the first a lion which had egles wings: the 2. was like a beare: the 3. like a leo∣pard: the 4. was terrible, and it deuoured the rest. And Daniel in Susa in another dreame (or rather a vision) saw a battel be∣twene a ramme and a goat, which is Persia and Greece. I referre you to the 7. and 8. of Daniel for the interpretation of the Daniel 7. & 8. same, where the text is most plainly by the prophet Daniel set downe, where Daniel briefly deciphered the whole world in a short historie, and layde downe the ground of all the histo∣ries Daniel a sound warrant for the histories of three mo∣narchies. of the worlde, I meane after Daniels time, who liued and prophecied in Cyrus time: after whom the Persians, the Greci∣ans and the Romanes flourished. Now to returne to Aemilius, whose family (saith Plutarch) doth proceed from Numa Pompilius the 2. king of Rome, and whose diuers victories ouer the Ligurians, Illyrians and other nations of Affricke & others, might haue chalenged triumph in Rome
without contention, which was resisted by Seruius Galba, for that he was so long as foure yeeres in warres against Perseus. Seruius Gal∣ba. Galba, and diuers others thought it dishonourable to the Ro∣manes to cōsume so long a time with king Perseus, sith the Ro∣manes made king Antiochus to forsake Asia, driuen thence be∣yond mount Taurus within the borders of Syria, & before that they had ouercome king Philippe in Thessalie, and deliuered Greece from the bondage of the Macedonians, and had conque∣red Hannibal the onely enemie of Rome and souldiour of the world, vnto whom no king or captaine coulde be compared, and therefore not to haue a triumph. But Marcus Seruilius Mar. Seruilius. who had bene a Consul, and had fought 23. combats of life and death in his owne person, and had slaine as many as cha∣lenged him man for man, hee furthered the triumph, which was by the whole consent of the Senate & the people of Rome graunted vnto Aemilius: but I omit to speake of his triumph, vntil I set downe the triumphes of the kings, consuls, and Em∣perours of Rome, because he is a Romane. Here I write of Macedonia, of their kings and of their tri∣umphes, who ended their gouernment in Perseus time, in the 153. Olympiad, after the building of Rome 586. yeres, and in the beginning of the 26. Iubilee. At what time raigned in Syria Antiochus Epiphanes the eight king, to whom Pompilius was sent from the Senate to commaunde Antiochus to depart Egypt, and that to answere the Romanes before he should go out of a litle circle which Pōpilius made with his white sticke which he had in his hand, either yea or no. This time Prusias king of By∣thinia cōmitted his sonne Nicomedes (as Liuie saith) to the Ro∣manes, within short space after that king Perseus was conque∣red Perseus ouer∣throwen the fourth of Sep∣tember. by Paulus Aemilius vpon the 4. of September, and that the Romanes had brought Macedonia vnder the Empire of Rome. One Andrisius a meane man claimed by succession to be king after Perseus, affirming himselfe to be Perseus sonne, and changing his name from Andrisius to be Philippe, gathered a great hoste, vsurped the kingdome, vntill Lu. Tremelius came from Rome and gaue him battell, in the which Andrisius was
quite ouerthrowen. And so Macedonia after the gouernment of 36. kings (as Ruffinus saith,) but as Functius and Trogus Pom∣peius say, 38. kings: for from Cranaus vnto Alexander the great were 23. kings, from Alexander to Perseus 15. The names of those 23. kings before Alexander, I wrote them before Alex∣anders raigne: the other 15. are these following. 1 Aridaeus raigned 7. yeres. 2 Cassander. 18. 3 Antipater and Alex. 4. 4 Demetrius. 6. 5 Pyrrhus. 7. moneths. 6 Lysmachus. 5. 7 Ptolomeus Ceraunus. 1. 8 Meleager. 2. moneths. 9 Antipater. 1. 10 Sosthenes. 2. 11 Antigonus Gonatus. 36. 12 Demetrius. 10. The names of the kings of Macedonia af∣ter Alexander. 13 Antigonus Dosen. 15. 14 Philip. 2. 15 Perseus the last king 10. yeeres. OF THE FIRST WARRES of the kings of Asia and of Syria with the Romanes: of their succession in the warres, and of the continuance of their kingdomes after Alexanders death. AFter the death of Alexander the great, the world being left without a king, his No king lest after Alexan∣der. princes, nobles, and olde souldiers, who did more aduaunce the renowme and fame of the Romanes then the glorie of Macedonia or Asia, after much blood, shedding and great crueltie euery man fought for a kingdome: it came to passe as Daniel the Prophet said, that all the kingdomes of Alexan∣der Daniel cap. 11. fell betwene 4. princes, and were deuided into foure king∣domes: which was, Egypt appointed to Ptolomey the sonne of Lagi: Asia, to Antigonus: Persia and the East part to Seleucus Ni∣canor: and Macedonia vnto Antipater, as you heard in the hi∣storie of the kings of Macedonia.
Now I haue in hand to speake of Seleucus the great king af∣ter Alexander for after Antigonus was slaine, and his sonne De∣metrius Seleucus. dead being taken captiue by Seleucus, he entred into A∣sia and cōquered from mount Taurus into Ionia, which before Antigonus had vnder his gouernment, and had subdued all the regions of the greater Asia, and made himselfe mightie and Diod. lib. 19. great, which was in the 14. yeere after Alexanders death. The Iewes doe accompt the gouernment of the Grecians in Syria, from the first yeere of Seleucus Nicanors raigne, which in the Machabees is obserued. This king grew so great, that hauing subdued all Antigonus kingdomes, and hauing giuen Lysimachus the ouerthrow be∣ing of the age of 77. yeeres, he thought no lesse in his minde after such great victories, but to become another Alexander, and to bring all the worlde vnder his gouernment: for hee ouercame the Bactrians, and passed to the Indians, hauing al∣readie vnder his Scepter all Asia, Persia, Syria, Babylon, with di∣uers others. Of this Seleucus Iustine writeth a strange historie, how his mother Laodice being maried to Antiochus, seemed in Laodices dreame. a dreame to haue layen with Apollo, and to bee by him with childe: and of a ring, which Laodice dreamed to haue of A∣pollo, in the stone of the same ring was an Ancre imprinted, which afterward was the cognizance of all Seleucus posteritie. This ring did Laodice deliuer to her sonne Seleucus, at that Iustin. lib. 15. time when great Alexander tooke his conquest to Persia, vn∣der whom Seleucus was then a souldier: for hee was but base borne, as in that historie ye may reade further: yet this Se∣leucus after that Alexander died, had growen to be the onely great king of all Alexanders successours, and builded a great citie, and named it Antiochia after his fathers name, which was Antiochus a captaine vnder king Philip Alexanders father. The elder that Seleucus waxed, the more ambitious hee was: euen so was Lysimachus as olde as hee, the one seuentie Ambition is dangerous. and foure, and the other seuentie and seuen, and yet both gi∣uen to seeke more kingdomes: and at last seeking one to con∣quer the other, (as it came to passe after many battels) Lysi∣machus
was ouerthrowen and slaine by Seleucus. Of this great victorie he waxed so proude, that he forgate the fraile∣nesse of fortune, and the inconstancie of time, not thinking that his death should be within seuen moneths after: for Pto∣lomeus sirnamed Cerainon, whose sister Lysimachus had maried, reuenged the death of his brother in lawe. This battell be∣tweene Lysimachus and Seleucus was the last battell of all those that serued Alexander in his conquest: for as Lysimachus ouer∣threw Pyrrhus, so Seleucus ouerthrew Lysimachus, and now Pto∣lomeus Seleucus slaine. ouerthrew Seleucus, and that (as I said before) within seuen moneths after Lysimachus ouerthrow. But Iustine saith Seleucus was slaine by snares and falshood. By this time died the most part of those that were Alexan∣ders Melanct. chron. 2. princes, and in his iourneyes with him chiefe captaines, as Perdicca, Craterus, Emmenis, Antigonus, Antipater, Cassander and his two sonnes. Polibius saith, that Ptolomeus the sonne of Lagi, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolomey Cerainon, died in the hundreth twentie and foure Olympiad, which was after Alex∣anders the great tenne Olympiads, which is fourtie yeeres: for he died in the hundreth and fourteene Olympiad. All writers doe agree of this Olympiad: for the Greekes compted their The cry oftrue Chronicles vpon the O∣lympiads. yeeres from Alexanders death forward: for before Alexanders time the Greekes histories erred much, and specially by their Olympiads which made Chronographers to erre: for al chroni∣cles crie out vpon the Olympiads. Seleucus after he had gotten so great fame, that all Asia and Syria obeyed him, he beganne to builde townes and cities, as Functius. Antioch, Laodicea, Seleucia, Apamia, Edissa, Berouea, and Pellum, and brought the Iewes to inhabite these cities: he gaue them equall lawes and ordinances, together with the Grecians, to liue and to enioy their libertie thereby: and after he raigned one and thirtie yeeres he died. After him succeeded Antiochus Soter the second king of Sy∣ria: Melanct 2. Chron. hee raigned 19. yeeres: after whom succeeded Antio∣chus, sirnamed . This king played his part, hee was the cause of all the warres betweene the Egyptians and Syrians:
he had great spite vnto Philadelphus the king of Egypt, wasted The praise of Philadelphus. and spoiled much of his countrey: this king Philadelphus was adicted more to peace then to warre, more giuē to his books then to brawles: he tooke greater care to furnish Egypt with the lawes and ordinances of the Iewes, then to prouide prepa∣rations against Antiochus, and therefore to auoyde warre (whereby he might finish many good things which he tooke Antiochus  the third king of Syria. in hande, and specially the translation of the Bible from the Hebrew vnto the Greeke tongue by 70. graue, wise, and learned men) for that cause he gaue his daughter Berenices in mariage to Antiochus. This king Antiochus had before maried Laodices, by whom hee had two sonnes: the elder named Seleucus sir∣named Functius lib. 3. Comment. Gallinicus, and the yonger Antiochus sirnamed Ierax. The mother of these two was diuorced for a time from king Antiochus. Now after he had maried Berenices, he liued in quiet and in The tyrannie of Laodices. fauour with his father in lawe Philadelphus as long as he liued: but when Philadelphus died, he called Laodices his first wife a∣gaine, and turned Berenices aside for a time. Laodices being re∣turned vnto her husband, deuised a way to kill Berenices Phi∣ladelphus daughter: but first she imagined to requite her hus∣bands courtesie, for calling her home: and fearing he would do the like againe, she gaue him a cuppe of drinke and dispat∣ched him quite: then shee called both her sonnes, and made them with speede (onely to feede her furie) to put Berenices out of the way. Hence grew the cause of all the warres (as I The cause of the Syrian warres. said) betweene the kings of Egypt and the kings of Syria: and not onely betweene those, but also poore Iudea was so beaten and afflicted betwene these, as they often times made a spoile of Ierusalem, of the temple, and of Gods flocke. Of this Daniel spake, that Berenice the kings daughter of the South should be Daniel 11. matched with the king of the North, which was Antiochus  king of Syria, which is in the North in respect of Ierusalem, for that the Prophet gaue the situation of that place to be be∣tweene the South and the North. When Philadelphus died and his sonne Ptolomey Euergetes
succeeded, he thought to reuenge the murthering of his si∣ster, and made a great armie readie to giue battel to Seleucus, and tooke from him the most part of Syria, wasting and spoy∣ling Sedition and great mutinie in Egypt. all Asia beside: and hearing of sedition and mutinie in E∣gypt his own kingdom, he returned hauing done great harme to Seleucus, to answere those which rebelled in Egypt. In the meane season Seleucus thoght not only to recouer his losse by Ptol. Euergetes, but also to requite him with the like. After this litle stay, Seleucus came with a nomber of nauies, and thought Diod. lib. 18. to haue againe those townes and cities which he lost to Ptolo∣mey: but a sudden tempest ouerwhelmed that enterprise, and left nothing to Seleucus of al his preparation, but nudum corpus & spiritum, himselfe with few others frō shipwracke: he staied by these repulses, and could not reuenge the wrōg he had by Ptolomey, vntil he saw his time conuenient, at which time (as a man borne to be ouerthrowen) he fled from the battell with losse and shame to Antioch, and from thence he sent for ayde to his brother Antiochus to Silicia. Ptolomey vnderstanding of Antiochus ayd, he presently con∣cluded Peace be∣twene Seleucus and Ptolomey. a peace betweene Seleucus and himselfe for 10. yeeres. Antiochus perceiued how the matter went, and where he came to ayd his brother, he now turneth his force and power against his brother: and hauing many of the Celtes (which were Frēch∣men) his hired souldiers, ouer whom Brennus had the charge, (not Brēnus that sackt Rome, for he was before 108. yeres, but Brennus. he gaue the ouerthrow to his brother Seleucus,) he was met a∣gaine with Eumenes king of Bythinia, who saw a platforme layd before his face to possesse Asia, if these two brethren might be conquered: and therefore Seleucus being ouerthrowen by his brother Antiochus, Eumenes againe ouerthrew Antiochus, Eumenes ouer∣threw Antio∣chus. and droue him out of Asia euen to flee to Ptolomey, where he was claptin prison, frō whom he secretly stale away, and fled, but being taken by theeues was slaine. About that very sea∣son, his brother Seleucus by a fall he had frō his horse, lost both his life and kingdom, after he had raigned king of Asia and Sy∣ria 20. yeeres: and so these two brethren by discord lost both
Syria and Asia. After this Seleucus came & succeeded his sonne Seleucus Ceraunos the 5. king of Asia and Syria: he, after he had Seleucus Cerau∣nos the 5. king of Asia and Syria. raigned 3. yeeres, was slaine by one of his owne noblemen na∣med Nicanor. Then followed Antiochus surnamed the great, the 6. king of Syria, who indeed was so great, that he wanne to his kingdome more then any of his predecessors: and hauing Antiochus the great the sixt king of Syria. long warres in Egypt, with Ptolome Philopater, by him for all his greatnes he had an ouerthrow or two. But this Philopater died, and left behind him a young sonne, whom he committed for the safegard of his kingdome, to the Romanes, commending both his sonne in his minoritie, & his kingdome into the fide∣lity of the Senators: for all kings in their distresse fled vnto the Romanes, as to a sanctuary of refuge. Now Antiochus the great in his minde contemned the Ro∣manes, Ieseph. lib. 7. cap. 27. & made warres in Egypt vpon this yong king: to whom the Senators sent Embassadors, commanding him to auoyde Egypt, & not to warre vpō the yong king, whom the Senators of Rome tooke to their tuition. Antiochus esteemed not much the threatning of the Senators, but rather despised the messen∣gers, making his armie ready against the Romanes, hauing by this time Hannibal, who by Scipio Affricanus was ouerthrowen at the battel of Zama, which was the last ouerthrow of Hanni∣bal: for the Carthagineans had lost Sicilia, Sardania, & Spaine, and Hannibal fled to Antioch. Hanibal was driuen out of Italy to Affrike, and frō Affrike to Asia vnto king Antiochus, where he was with great curtesie receiued. By this time the Senate had intelligence, that Nabis the ty∣rant Nabis the ty∣rant. had inuaded diuers countreies of Greece, & subdued ma∣nie cities, and therefore they wrote vnto Titus Flaminius, that Greece should be set at libertie from Nabis, as Macedonia was from Philip. The greatnes of the Romanes was such, that they thought to execute all warres by their commandement: yet the name of Hannibal caried great reputation with all men, Hanibals name. and specially with the Romanes, who had for 16. yeeres well tried his valure. Antiochus at the first made much account of Hannibal: for had he followed Hannibals aduise in his warres against the Romanes afterward, as he did at the first, Antio∣chus
Iustin. lib. 31. had done farre better: for Hanibals counsell was, that An∣tiochus should make warre with the Romanes in Italy: for (said he) Italians must ouercome Italy, and Romanes must conquere Rome. Hanibal hated the Romanes, and therefore he studied Hanibal hated the Romanes. how to set forward Antiochus, and perswaded Antiochus, (who trusted still in peace) that as the Romanes had gotten the most part of Europe and Affrike, so would they not giue ouer vntill they would get Asia if they might. The authoritie and credit Melanct. chron. 2. of Hanibal made Antiochus so to yeeld, that Hanibal himself was sent to Syria to leuie a great nomber of ships, & he was made general of Antiochus army by sea, together with one Apollonius. This battel by sea had no good successe: the victory fel to the Romans: Apollonius fled, and (as Plutarch saith) we find that Hani∣bal did nothing worth the memory. After this battel, assoone as Antiochus was ouercome by the Romans, Hanibal fearing he should be deliuered to the Romans, fled to Prusias king of Bythi∣nia, at whose hands he was required againe by Tit. Flaminius. Now king Antiochus hauing lost 50. thousand footmen and Antiochus desi∣reth peace of the Romanes. 4000. horsmen, was forced to desire peace, which the Senate graunted him, vpon conditions that he should auoid forth of Europe and Asia, and medle no further but within the precinct of Taurus: and also that hee should pay to the Romanes tenne Ioseph, lib. 7. cap. 27. de bel. Iudaic. thousand talents, and 30. pledges for the assurance of his pro∣uinces: and lastly that hee should deliuer Hanibal, who had bene the only procurour of the battel. These conditions be∣ing performed by Antiochus, the Senate gaue all those cities of Asia which Antiochus had lost, to Eumenes king Atalus bro∣ther: Eutrop. lib. 4. they gaue also to the Rhodians diuers other cities, for that they had assisted the Romanes against Antiochus. After this great victorie, Lucius Cornelius Scipio returned to Rome, and with great glory triumphed, and then obtained the like name in Asia as his brother had before in Affrike, which was, to be called Scipio Asiaticus, for that he conquered Antio∣chus Scipio Asiaticus. the great at Magnesia, & had driuen him out of Asia, euen as his father the elder Scipio was called for subduing of Hani∣bal, and the driuing out of Hanibal of Affrike, Scipio Affricanus.
All this while the Iewes were so much troubled betweene the kings of Egypt and the kings of Syria, that they found that same true: but specially by the king of Syria, and therefore the Iewes rather did ioyne their force to the Egyptians against the kings of Syria: for while Antiochus held warres with the Romanes, Sco∣pas king Ptolomey Epiphanes general was in Coelosyria, possessed Samaria & other cities of Iudea, and molested the Iewes at that Ioseph. lib. 12. cap. 3. time much, vntill Antiochus ouerthrew Scopas at the flood Ior∣dan, destroyed his army, got those cities which Scopas had, and entred into Ierusalē, where he was fully pleased with rewards, and satisfied with money, with whom they had peace: for Iu∣dea (as I said before) had peace and quietnes frō Alexander the great, vntil Antiochus the great, which was 100. yeres and odd. About this time 3. notable triumphes were at Rome: the one by Scipio forth of Affricke, before whose chariot Asdrubal was Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. led: the other by Metellus foorth of Macedonia, before whose 3. Triumphes at Rome. chariot Andriscus was led: this was that false named and coū∣terfaited Philip: the thirde triumph was by Metellus sirnamed Mummius ouer the Corinthians, before whom were caried the brasen ensignes and painted tables and other sumptuous or∣naments of that famous citie. CHAP. II. Of that wicked and most blasphemous king Antiochus Epiphanes sonne to Antiochus the great, and the type of Antichrist: of his vsurpation and tyrānie of the kingdom: of his sacking and crueltie in Ierusalem: of his bloody warres, and persecutions of Christians. DVring the warres of Antiochus the great with the Romans, ciuil warres began in Greece againe betweene the Athenians and the Aetolians. Of these warres reade Polibius and Plutarch in the life of Philopomen. Likewise Mithridates king of Parthia waged battel with the Sinopians. About this time Si∣phax king of Numidia was after sundrie battels by Masinissa Polib. lib. 4. ouerthrowen and driuen out of his kingdome. This time Pharnaces the fourth king of Parthia conquered those people called Mardi, astoute nation, as Iustine saith.
In the time of Antiochus the great, there happened in one yeere 57. earthquakes, insomuch that Rhodes and Caria were so shaken thereby, that the huge idole of Phaebus (called Colossus solis) fell. In these dayes an infant was borne hauing a head like a sow, and many other mōstrous things fel in the time of Antio∣chus as Liui reporteth. Eratosthenes the philosopher florished in this time. The Romans were so strong in these dayes, as Car∣thage, Liuius lib. 3. Numidia, and all Affricke were subdued: Greece, Macedo∣nia, Pontus, and all Asia were conquered: all kings of the world almost came then to Rome, to see the maiestie of the Romanes, to behold their triumphes, and to offer themselues in seruice. The end of this great king was to be slaine by rude countrey people, as he would rob the temple of Belus: he that thought to conquere the stoute Romanes, was conquered by silie and simple men of Syria: he that brought all Greece and Asia vnder his becke, had this his death by his rashnesse and folly, and as Antiocus is slaine. Melancthon saith of Antiochus, , Of an ill be∣ginning proceedeth an ill ending. When this Antiochus so was killed, he left behinde him 3. sonnes, and one daughter maried to Ptolomey, of whom Phi∣lometor was borne: his sonnes were named in this sort: Seleu∣cus Seleucus Phi∣lopater the se∣uenth king of Syria. sirnamed Philopater was the eldest, who raigned 12. yeeres: of whom we reade nothing worth the memory, a man giuen to all vices, to all idlenes, lust, wickednes, and powling of his subiects. This history is onely written in the Macabees, where Simon vttereth what treasure was in the temple, and how He∣liodorus was sent by the king to take them away: but hee was striken of God, and had the repulse with such terrible sightes Heliodorus pu∣nishment. and strokes, that Heliodorus wished death rather then life, vn∣till the high Priest Onias prayed for him. Of this Seleucus Da∣niel saide, In loco Antiochi stabit vilis questor, &c. for there was nothing left vnspoken by Daniel before hand, which should happen afterward. This Seleucus beganne to raigne after his father in the 125. yeere of the Grecians raigne in Syria, after the building of Rome 566.
After this Seleucus died, Antiochus sirnamed Epiphanes, the second sonne of Antiochus the great, being a pledge then in Antiochus Epi∣phanes. Rome with Demetrius, hearing that his father was dead, hee se∣cretly fled from Rome, and came with al force vnto Syria, vsur∣ped the kingdome, and draue Seleucus sonne out of his coun∣trey: this began his gouernment in the 130. yeere after Alex∣ander the great his death. Polibius affirmeth this man to bee such, as no wickednes escaped him, craftie and subtile, furious and ful of al mischiefe, and of the best writers named the type of Antichrist. Of the furie of this Antiochus, and of other kings of Syria, Daniel doth fully describe them, and doth fore∣shewe their tyrannie against Iudea. Reade the 11. of Daniel, where he prophecieth against the kings of Syria, together with the Persians, Grecians, Egyptians and Romanes, howe all these should afflict Iudea. This Antiochus in the beginning of his raigne, beingfully Antiochus Epi∣phanes the 8. king of Syria. acquainted with the Romanes power, hauing bene so long in Rome a pledge for his father, dissembled with the Senators, and bare himselfe a friend vnto the Romanes for feare more then for loue: after that he had filled Ierusalem with blood, and Ioseph. lib. 1. & cap. 1. de beud. had killed Onias the high priest, a holy & godly man, he tooke money of Iason which was Onias brother, and made him high priest, who receiued Antiochus with al reuerence & duetie in∣to Ierusalem, who slew the best citizens, spoiled the towne, and robbed the temple: this was his first voyage to Ierusalem: the high priest Iason which Antiochus had made, plaied the tyrants Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. part, slew his owne citizens, and made hauocke in Ierusalem of his owne countreymen, friends and kinsmen: but this king and this priest had the like reward by God appointed, shame and confusion. Read the Machabees, and you shal haue the hi∣storie before you, that Iason, after he had wandered from citie Machab. 2. cap. 5. to citie like a vagabond, hated of all people, and beloued of none, being banished from Ierusalem, died most miserablie in Arabia, being accused before the king then named Areta. Some write that he fled from Arabia to Egypt. But I wil returne to that cruel monster king Antiochus, who
after he had dissembled with the Romans, pretended care and gouernment ouer the yong Philometor king of Egypt, being his sisters sonne: for Cleopatra the daughter of Antiochus the great, was married to Epiphanes, who had giuen her for her Cleopatra ma∣ried to Epi∣phanes. dowrie Coelosyria, Samaria, Iudea, and Phenicia, by whom this Philometor was gotten. This yong king being yet in his minoritie and tender of yeeres, and by his father (when he died) committed to the fi∣delitie of the Senators of Rome, whom he made tutors ouer his sonne Antiochus: Epiphanes clayming some title to ouersee Philometor Cle∣opatras sonne by Ptolomey Epiphanes. the yong king his nephew, led an armie frō Syria vnto Egypt, vnder pretence of loue & care towards his nephew the yong king: but he more thirsted for the kingdom then he esteemed the king: he laied garisons in Memphis, and filled all the cities of Egypt with souldiers, specially Pelusiū, and other strong ci∣ties. Functius lib. 3. Comment. Philometor misdouted these endeuors of Antiochus, and so suspecting his vncle to be one that waied more the kingdom then the king, he fled to his yonger brother to Alexandria, sent to the Romans for aide against Antiochus: who perceiuing that they were put in trust to haue some care of this king by his fa∣thers last wil and testament to them cōmitted, they determi∣ned to send Popilius frō the Senators, to cōmand Antiochus as his father before him was cōmanded to depart out of Egypt, and to suffer king Philometor to enioy his kingdom quietly. While this Romane ambassador was preparing to come, An∣tiochus hasted his purpose in folowing fast at the heeles of Phi∣lometor, which was the elder brother, & therfore by succession king of Egypt: he shipped in Cyprus, and from thence to Coelo∣syria, thēce to Egypt, and so passing ouer Nilus, to Leusnies a ci∣tie not farre from Alexandria: where the Romane ambassador Popilius was sent to An∣tioch. Popilius met him, and deliuered the minde of the Senators in writing to him: which being read, he paused, and said that he would consider further, and cōsult with his friends to answere the Senators. Popilius hauing a white sticke in his hand, made Iustin. 34. around circle about king Antiochus saying, Answer the Romans Popilius words to Antiochus. before thou go out of this circle, that I may declare to the Se∣nators thy words.
Antiochus was so amased at the stoute words of Pōpilius, that Tit. Liuius lib. 5. Decad. 5. he was constrained to say, I will doe that which the Senators would haue me to doe. And so he was forced in great furie to depart out of of Egypt, but hee reuenged his wrath vpon the poore Iewes: hee so plagued Iudea with spoile and slaughter, and caused them to forsake their true and ancient religion which they had from Moses: hee burned the bookes of Moses, The tyrannie of Antiochus. and of the Prophets: he made the idole of Iupiter Olympus to be set vp and to be worshipped, and commaunded all idola∣trie and wickednes to be had in Ierusalem in reuerence. This proude king entred into the temple of Salomon, after hee had made such a slaughter of yong and olde, of women and chil∣dren, that within three dayes 80. thousand were slaine, and 40. thousand taken prisoners. Menelaus the traitour, the high priest, a murtherer before Machab. 2. cap. 5. of Onias, and now a traitour to his countrey, brought Antio∣chus into the citie, guided him from place to place, that af∣ter hee had taken 800. talents away from the temple, he gate him away to Antiochia, thinking in his pride to make men saile vpon the drie land, and to walke vpon the sea. The filthinesse and abomination of this beast is set foorth in the Macabees in the second booke the fift and sixt chapters, from the begin∣ning vnto the ende. This was the second comming of Antiochus to Iudea and to Ierusalem, in the eight yeere of his raigne, two yeeres after his first being in Ierusalem: whose comming, and whose do∣ings were by the Prophet Daniel before spoken: for he saide, Daniel cap. 8. that this tyrant should continue 3500. dayes in wasting and spoyling of Iudea, in prophaning the temple, in killing and murthering of Gods people. The nomber of these dayes are sixe yeeres and sixe monethes: so long endured this wolfe. Ioseph. lib. de an∣tiquit. 12. cap. 13. After this, Habuit mercedem, God rewarded him: for he died in such torments, that his bowels were eaten with wormes, and himselfe brought in such miserie, that he died according as he liued, after hee had raigned twelue yeeres. During his time, the warres continued in Macedonia betweene Perseus the
last king, and Titus Aemilius the Consull, and at length the conquerour of Perseus. Prusias king of Bythinia came with his sonne Nicomedes to Rome, where he commended his sonne to the Senators. About this time Terentius flourished. Nowe when Antiochus surnamed Eupator had entred in his Antihchus Eupator. fathers seate, in the 150. yeere of the Greekes being in Syria, and in the beginning of the 26. Iubilee, he folowed his fathers steppes, came with an armie to Ierusalem, and besieged the ca∣stle of Sion: but while he laied siege, his generall Lysias tolde him that his kingdome was inuaded by the enemies. Then he concluded peace with Iudea, and returned in all haste into Sy∣ria, Demetrius So∣ter the 9. king. brought Menelaus that wicked and cruell high priest with him, who after much mischiefes done, died at Beroea, a towne of Syria. Antiochus had not reigned but one yeere, but Deme∣trius Soter fledde from Rome where he had bene a pledge, du∣ring the whole gouernment of his brother Antiochus Epipha∣nes, which was twelue yeeres, and during some yeeres of his graundfather Antiochus the great: he came to Syria, entred the Citie of Tyrus, where his souldiers apprehended both the king and his generall Lysias, whom Demetrius commaunded Ioseph. lib. 13. cap. 4. to be killed, before hee should see them, though Eupator was his sisters sonne. This Eupator ended his life, after hee had reigned but two yeeres. In the meane time, Onias the sonne of Onias the high priest, which was also slaine by Menelaus who succeeded him: this Onias being of the Iewes surnamed the iust, lamen∣ting Esai. cap. 19. much the miserable estate of Iudea, fled into Egypt to king Pto. Philometor: and hauing licence of the king, he builded a temple in the citie of Heliopolis, to the likenesse of the temple in Ierusalem, according to the saying of Esai, In that day shall the altar of the Lord be in the middest of the land of Egypt: and the Lord shalbe knowen of the Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall knowe the Lord. In that day Assur shall come to Egypt, and Egypt into Assur. This Demetrius sent Alcimus against Iudas Machabeus, who Alcimus sent by Demetrius to Ierusalem. by flatterie entred into Ierusalem, and slue three score of the chiefe and greatest men of the citie, & after gathered a num∣ber
of wicked persons together, who did much harme in Iu∣dea: to whome king Demetrius sent Nicanor with an hoste of Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. souldiers to ayde Alcimus. This Nicanor blasphemed God, prophaned the temple, threatned the Iewes, and came to Bethoron, where Iudas Machabeus gaue him battell and ouer∣threwe him. This Demetrius was no lesse cruell to the Iewes, then either his father or his brother were before him: hee played the beare, vntill Alexander Epiphanes, Antiochus Eupators sonne came to the Citie of Ptolomais. Iustine saith, that this Alexander was a base man borne, named Prompalus, and that hee was Alex. other∣wayes Prom∣palus. made by others to take this name vpon him, and to say that he was Antiochus sonne. Atalus king of Asia, Ptolome Philome∣tor king of Egypt, and Ariarathes king of Capadocia, counselled Prompalus to inuade Demetrius kingdome, which was done, and a battell giuen, in the which Demetrius was slaine, after Demet. slaine by Alex. other∣wayes Prom∣palus. he had reigned tenne yeeres. Now after Alexander had the victorie of Demetrius, he clai∣med to be the king of Syria by succession, fayning himselfe to be Antiochus Eupators sonne: hee maried Cleopatra king Philo∣metors daughter of Egypt: the mariage was celebrated in the Citie of Ptolemais. This Alexander was not ayded by these kings for any great affection they bare him, but for the ha∣tred they had towardes Demetrius, who was so ambitious, proude, and cruell in the beginning of his reigne, that these three kings, of Egypt, of Asia, and Arabia, had susteined losse and harme before Demetrius was ouerthrowen by Alexander: he had two sonnes, whom hee sent with great treasures to a Iustine lib. 35. friende of his named Gindius, to auoide the daunger of the warres: the elder of them was named Demetrius after his fa∣thers name, who hearing of his fathers death and of the riot and lust of this Alexander, a man giuen to al vices and wicked∣nesse, came into Syria being aided by the king of Creete, and possessed certeine Cities in Syria: he appointed his generall one Appolonius, who too much trusting his owne force and Apollonius De∣met. generall slaine. courage, was in the first battell by Ionathas ouerthrowen.
Ptolome within a short time came with a great armie to see▪ his sonne in lawe in Syria: to whom all the cities opened their Funct. lib. 3. Coment. gates to welcome their king of Egypt, they rather thinking that hee came to make peace betweene Demetrius and A∣lexander: but Ptolome imagined howe hee might deceiue them both for a kingdome: hee placed his souldiers in di∣uers Cities of Syria: and because Alexander was then in Ci∣cilia, hee tooke occasion to offer him warres by taking his daughter away from him, whome hee gaue in mariage a∣gaine to Demetrius. Alexander hearing that his wife was taken from him, and maried to Demetrius his mortall enemie, summoned his fa∣ther in lawe to battell, wherein he had the ouerthrowe, and Ioseph. lib. 13. Cap. 8. was forced to flie to Arabia where Alexander was taken and slaine, and his head sent by the king of Arabia to Egypt to king Ptolome. Thus was Prompalus (otherwaies named Alexander) throwen downe from the throne of his kingdome, deceiued Alex. head sent from A∣rabia to Egypt. by fortune, and reuenged by iustice. This reward he had, to faine him selfe Antiochus sonne, and falsely to alter his name from Prompalus vnto Alexander, that Ptolome who ayded him to the kingdome and gaue his daughter in mariage to him, the same Ptolome droue him out of the kingdome, and had both his head and his crowne giuen him. But Philometor en∣ioyed not long these great honors: for within three dayes af∣ter he had receiued Alexanders head, Ptolome died: so long he Ptolo. dyed. ware the crowne of Syria. When the Syrians heard that Alex∣ander was dead in Arabia, and Ptolome dead in Egypt, they slue all the souldiers of Ptolome which were left in garisons in the Cities of Syria, and receiued Demetrius Nicanor to be their king, which was Demetrius Soters sonne. Nowe when Deme∣trius Demetrius Ni∣canor. had recouered his kingdome againe, he fel in short time in as great contempt with all men for his slouthfulnesse, as his father before him was for pride: and to auoide that fault, he waged warres with the Parthians, to whom he gaue two seue∣rall ouerthrowes by the aide of the Bactrians, and the Persians: Demet. taken prisoner. but afterward he was taken, and sent prisoner into Hircania to Arsaces king of Persia.
While Demetrius was in these warres, Ionathas the high Ionathas the high priest slaine. priest was by deceipt slaine by Trypho: also he slue young An∣tiochus, ouer whom he was tutour, and reigned three yeeres king in Syria. Cleopatra Demetrius wife fearing the tyrannie of this Trypho, and knowing her husband to bee captiue in Hir∣cania, shee maried Antiochus Soter her husbands brother, shee being then in the citie of Seleucia. Antiochus leuied an armie, came to Syria, pursued Trypho, from whom reuoulted all his souldiers, and he himselfe fled. Antiochus possessed Syria qui∣etly: and calling to mind the pride of his father, & the slouth∣fulnesse Antiochus So∣ter. of his brother, for which faultes they were both hated of their subiects, hee vsed great diligence and faire meanes to winne those cities which had reuoulted from his brother: yet according to his predecessours the kings of Sy∣ria, he beganne shortly after this good mind to molest Iudea: he besieged Hircanus the high priest in Ierusalem, but he tooke money, and remoued his siege. In the twelfth of his reigne, Antiochus beganne to warre a∣gainst Phrahartes king of the Parthiās, leuied an armie of eigh∣tie thousand men. Phrahartes had Demetrius the brother of Antiochus in custodie with him, to whom his father Arsaces The king of Parthia ouer∣throwen. had promised him before he died to restore him to his king∣dome, and thereupon gaue his daughter in mariage. The king of Parthia was ouerthrowen and driuen to slight in two or three battels, leauing al Parthia wasted and spoyled by An∣tiochus. In the meane time Demetrius was sent by Phrahartes to his kingdome, while Antiochus was absent from Syria. In this warres of Parthia Antiochus came to Babylon, where Antiochus a∣gainst the Parthians. many kings gaue him the meeting: for hee waxed great and strong: and there hearing that his brother Demetrius was commen to Syria from Parthia, and was receiued againe to his kingdome, he made haste to returne with his souldiers to Syria: but Phrahartes had prepared an armie vpon the way to meete him, and to giue him battell, where Antio∣chus Iustine lib. 38. was slaine.
CHAP. III. Of the last destruction of Asia and Syria, through their ciuill dis∣sention and long warres one with another, the onely cause of their bondage afterward to the Romanes, vnder whom they liued as subiects, and all Asia and Syria made Prouinces vnder Rome. WHen the king of Parthia had the victorie, hee much repented him that he let loose Demetrius, but hee coulde not helpe it. When Demetrius had bin from his king∣dome Funct. lib 3. Comment. thirteene yeeres captiue, but with great honour (for that he maried Arsa∣ses daughter king of Parthia) his returne to Syria was in the sixe hundred twentie seuen yeere after the building of Rome, and hee reigned afterward foure yeeres: for in the fourth yeere after his returne from Parthia, where hee had bene thirteene yeeres captiue, he leuied an armie against Hircanus: but Demetrius woonted and intollerable pride was such, that the Syrians by no meanes coulde abide him, and therefore they sent to Egypt to king Ptolome, that he would ap∣point them a king of the blood and house of Seleucus. Such Egypt too much trusted by the Syrians. were the maners of the Syrians, that vpon any broile or diffi∣dence they had in their king, the kings of Egypt shoulde be their shield and defende them, and by that meanes onely di∣uers kings of Egypt became kings of Syria. The people of Syria hauing sent to Egypt, Ptolome prepared Alexander Zebenna with a great hoste against Demetrius, from Alexander Zebenna. whom most of his subiects reuoulted, and therefore the easier to be vanquished, as it came to passe in the very first battell, betweene him and Zebenna. This Zebenna was one Protarchus sonne, a meane man, and such a one as Prompalus was, of whō you reade before. These false pollices and craftie deuices are Funct lib. 3. Coment. Iustine lib. 39. alwayes in courtes about kings and princes: as in Macedonia a false Philip, and after him againe a fained Perseus: so in Syria a false Prompalus, and after him a false Zebenna, of whom reade the fable in Iustine and in Functius.
When this Alexāder Zebenna had ouercome Demetrius, he enioyed the kingdome of Syria two yeres quietly: but shortly Zebenna en∣ioyed Syria. he waxed so proud and arrogant, that he litle esteemed king Ptolome, who only made him king in Syria. Ptolome hearing of these newes, recōciled himselfe first to his sister Cleopatra, who had bin maried to both the brethren Antiochus and Demetrius kings of Syria, and straight after sent an armie to ayde Gryphus, who was by his mother appointed king, which gaue battel to Zebenna, & ouerthrew him, and forced him to flee to Antioch, Gryphus ouer∣threw Zebenna. where for want of money to pay his souldiers, he robbed the temple of Iupiter: from thence he was driuen by the countrie to take his flight. Againe, his souldiers forsooke him, and left him: he was taken and brought to Griphus, and by commaun∣dement slaine. Nowe Griphus hauing obteined his fathers kingdome, Zebenna slaine. doubted nothing of his mother Cleopatras treason being bu∣sie in other affaires of his kingdome, vntill hee was made ac∣quainted with his mothers intent, of whō he had some triall both towards his father, whom shee betrayed being her hus∣band, & his brother whō also she slue being her owne sonne: her ambitions & impietie was so found, that when she offe∣red a cuppe of drinke to her sonne the king, she was cōmaun∣ded to drinke the same her selfe, and so the poyson with the which she thought to poyson her sonne, was made to be her owne draught and her owne death. After this, Griphus reig∣ned Cleopatra by her owne drinke poyso∣ned. king in Syria eight yeeres very quiet, before Cizicoenus his brother beganne to warre: he was his brother by the mother side, borne by his vncle Antiochus Sedetes: while the state of Sy∣ria was thus afflicted with continuall warres betweene bre∣thren and brethrens children, Ptolomeus Physcon died, who left behinde him the kingdome to his wife and to his sonne, of whō I haue entreated in the historie of Egypt. But now the ci∣uill warres being in Syria betweene Antiochus Griphus, Deme∣trius Brethren and cousin ger∣maines. Nicanors sonne and Antiochus Cizicenus Antiochus Sedetes sonne, though they were brethrē by the mothers side, & cou∣sin germaines by the fathers, yet their ambition was such to
the kingdom of Syria, that they forgate fraternitie in blood, & Ioseph lib. 13 antiq cap. 21. fel to strokes, one persecuting the other with cōtinual warres & sundry battels, vntil at lēgth Antiochus Griphus was slaine by Antiochus Gri∣phus slaine. the treacherie of Herodianus in the 662. yere after the building of Rome, in the 29. yere of his reigne. I remēber a history in Di∣onisius Halicarnassaeus, in the which historie Rome is much com∣mended Dioni. Halicr lib. 2. in respect of other countries, as Persia, Greece, Macc∣donia, Syria & Asia, kingdoms of ciuil warres, the very cause of their ruine: but in Rome no ciuil warre was knowen, no muti∣nie, no discord was seene for 620. yeres, frō the time of Romu∣lus the first king of Rome, vntill the time of Tiberius Gracchus, which was the first that died in an vprore which he himselfe beganne. But while these ciuill warres endured in Syria, Masinissa king of Numidia was occupied in Affrike, hauing great wars betweene the Carthagineans & the Numidians. Aristonicus also the sonne of Attalus king of Pergamus, & brother to that vali∣ant king Eumenes, inuaded Asia as his owne kingdom fallen to him by succession of his father. At that time reigned in Bythi∣nia Nicomedes, & in Pōtus Mithridates, the sōne of that great Mi∣thridates, who held warres with the Romanes of a long time. Ioseph. lib. 13. cap. 8. About this time began the sects of people in Iudea, the Pha∣rises, the Saduces, and Esseni: Of these Iosephus writeth: beside, Esseni were as the Scribes a∣mong the Iewes. Mysipsa. we reade of them in the new Testament. In the time of Antio∣chus Griphus, Mecypsa king of Numidia died, who left 3. sonnes behind him named Adherbalis, Hiempsalis, & Iugurtha: of this Salust maketh mention in the warres of Iugurth, which warre happened in this time of Griphus: for Marius the Romane Con∣sul about this time triumphed ouer Iugurth. Pompey the great was borne about the time of that triumph, & Lucretius the Po∣et also. But I will come to Syria, where after king Antiochus was slaine, his sonne Seleucus succeeded him: this prepared to reuenge his father vpon his vncle, gathered his force, & gaue him battel, and slue his vncle Antiochus Cizicoenus, whose sōne Antiochus slaine. reuēged vpō his cousin his fathers death: he gaue him battel,
ouerthrewe him, droue him out of Syria to Cicilia, where hee was burned in his owne house, and all his friendes with him. Skant was this mischiefe done, but straight another folowed: Seleucus brother named Antiochus folowed fast Cizioenus sōne, and slue him with all his armie. Then Philip the third brother of Seleucus tooke much of the kings treasure, and went pri∣uately and dwelled in a part of Syria, vntill that Ptolome, who by his owne mother before that time was expelled out of E∣gypt, though afterwarde hee was receiued king againe in the 663. yeere after the building of Rome. This I say brought the Nothing in Syria but blood. fourth brother of Seleucus named Demetrius Eucerus to Damas∣cus, where hee was crowned king, who ioyned with Philip, o∣uerthrew Antiochus their brother, and the eldest after Seleucus. This murthering one another in Syria, with such tyrannie and bloody treason betweene brethren and brethrens chil∣dren, that all the kings of Syria euen from Antiochus Epiphanes the eight king of Syria vntill Philip the seuenteenth king, no forraine enemies needed to inuade Asia, but one king destroy∣ed an other by ciuill warres. About this time Cneus Pompeius father to the great Pompe, subdued the Picents and the Marsies, and Silla ouercame the Samnites. Betweene this Silla and Ma∣rius beganne a great quarrell about the warres of Mithrida∣tes: Silla and Ma∣rius two great enemies of Rome. these two, though they did much good to their Countrie, and were equal to the best, yet they past al men in offence and harme towards Rome, so that they onely were the two fire brandes of Italie. Mithridates king of Pontus inuaded Asia, obiected himselfe against the Romanes: but Silla who at that time triumphed o∣uer all the countries and almost ouer Rome, staied Mithridates. Lucullus waged warres this time with the Parthians: Nicomedes king of Bithinia in those dayes died, and made the Romanes his heire, as Attalus king of Asia did Mithridates. Nowe Philip and Demetrius two brethren reigned the last kings of Syria of the blood of Seleucus, which reigned not long: for Demetrius went against Alexander king of the Iewes, by whom he and his com∣pany Demet. ouer∣throwen by Alex. king of Iudea. were vanquished and driuen out of Iudea. Demetrius be∣ing
thus expulsed, gathered those scattered souldiers, which Alexander king of Iudea dispearsed, and laid siege to the citie of Berea where his brother Philip lay, where Demetrius was taken by the Parthiās & sent to Parthia to be kept as a prisoner, where Demetrius ta∣ken by the Parthians. he died. After that Demetrius was sent to Parthia, Philip came out of Beroea, & entred into Antioch, and obteined the whole kingdom of Syria into his owne hand: but he was shortly van∣quished & ouerthrowen by Gabinius the Romane. The Syrians were cōpelled by this ciuil warre to cōmit themselues to for∣raine kings, to auoid the tyrāny which lōg endured betweene the kings of Syria, so that both the kings & the kingdom of Sy∣ria were at the last breath, some willing to call Mithridates king of Pontus, some Ptolome king of Egypt, and some Tygranes The kings of Syria brought to extremitie. king of Armenia. At length they made a choise of Tygranes to be their king, the rather for the societie of the Parthiās, & the affinitie of Pōtus, which were the next kingdōs vnto Armenia. While these brethrē Philip & Demet. were at variance, such an earthquake was in Syria, that 170000. men perished there∣by, & many cities laid prostrate to the groūd. Tygranes gouer∣ned Tygranes reig∣ned 18 yeeres king of Syria. the Syrians 18. yeeres quietly without any warre or busi∣nes, though in deede diuers there were that hoped for a day, specially Antiochus Cizicoenus, which all this time lay close in Cicilia. Tygranes had thought to subdue Palestina, and so after some leasure to warre vpō Iuda: but hearing that Lu. Lucullus af∣ter that Mithridates was by the said Lucullus conquered, mar∣ched forward into Armenia, Tygranes was driuē to forsake Sy∣ria, & in al haste to returne to defend his owne coūtrie, where he was ouercome in two or three great battels, and at length taken in his chiefe citie called Artaxa. Nowe Tygranes could not returne to Syria, but he was led captiue to the Romanes by Pompei the great: who after that wēt Melanct. lib. 2. Pompe the great brought Syria to be a prouince of Rome. in person into Syria, & brought it to the forme & gouernment of a prouince, for that Syria (as Plutarch saith) wanted a lawfull king. He made a prouince of Syria to the Romane Empire: he cōquered al Iurie, & builded certeine cities in Iudea: this very time M. Crassus with his sonne, & with all his armie was ouer∣throwen
and slaine in Parthia. Likewise Iulius Caesar came into England called then Brittaine, and conquered it: at what time Iu. Caesar came to England. reigned in Brittaine Cassibelane, who after two or three repul∣ses giuen to Caesar, yeelded & consented to pay tribute. At the cōming of Pompe into Syria, Diodorus Siculus a great writer wēt to Egypt, where he wrote in a booke of his, the antiquitie of the Egyptiās. About this time Titus Liuius the historiographer, Diodo. lib. 2. and Horace the Poet were borne: but the historie of the kings The kings of Aram which is Syria are more in sacred hi∣stories then prophane. of Syria is set forth with the kings of Israel and Iuda, and also in the Machabees: for in the sacred histories of the scripture much mencion is made of the kings of Aram, by the names of Aram Soba, Aram Padan, Aram Damasci, Aram Naharaim, by the which names Syria is better described in Genesis, in the Kings, in Para∣lipomenon, and in Deuteronomiū, then by Ptolome, Strabo, Pompo∣nius Mela, or Solinus: for the kings of Aram which is Syria, haue diuers names in Scripture, as Aram Naharaim, which is that part of Syria which is betweene Euphrates and Tygris: the regi∣on Iudg. cap. 3. thereof is called Mesopotamia: reade the 3. of the Iudges. Likewise Aram Padan which is a coūtrie in Mesopotamia, & of∣ten Genesis. 48. taken for al Mesopotamia, where Iacob mēcioneth of Rahels death his wife, when he came from Padan Aram. Againe, Aram Damasci, where Benadad king of Aram being sicke, sent Hazael to the man of God Elisha, to knowe whether Benahad should recouer his health. To be short, Aram Macat, Aram Soba, Aram Rhohab, and Aram Damasci are regions and countries in Mesopotamia, Coelosyria, & in the higher Syria farre from Perela and Galaad, the countrie of Ruben and Gad, and of the halfe tribe of Manasses. But these names of Syria were long The true war∣rant of all an∣tiquities is in the sacred Scriptures. before any prophane writer wrote of Syria: fewe prophane histories were before king Philips time Alexander the great his father: all true antiquities are conteined in sacred histories, in Moses, in the Chronicles of the kings of Israel and Iuda, and in the Prophets: late writers began in the time of Cyrus to write of the Monarchies of Persia, of the Greciās, and of the Romanes, of whom Daniel before had spoken, and likewise gaue light vnto prophane writers to write their histories.
These kings of Aram then were the most cruell tyraunts, and most furious enemies of Iudea, of the people of God, and of his Church: & likewise these last by the names of the kings The continu∣ance of the kings of Syria. of Syria, which continued no longer then from Alexander the great which was the first, vntill the time of Pompe the great, which was the last, that brought all Syria a prouince to the Romanes. As God dealed with the kings of Aram in the be∣halfe of Iuda then: so he wrought with the kings of Syria now in the behalfe of his Church, who euer preuailed against all kingdomes of the world, as God caused Senaheribs armie one to kill an other to the number of 185. thousande in one day and night. So hee likewise raised one king against an other in Syria, that from Antiochus the great, vntill the last king, there was nothing but killing and murthering in Syria: for the ty∣raunt Antiochus Epiphanes his sonne after he fomed in blood, The kings of Syria one mur thering ano∣ther. died most miserably: his sonne likewise Antiochus Eupator was slaine by his vncle Demetrius: Demetrius was slaine by Alexan∣der, which fained himselfe to be Antiochus Epiphanes sonne: A∣lexander was slaine by the king of Parthia, and his head sent to Syria. After Demetrius Nicanor was kept out of Syria, by his owne brother Antiochus Sedetes: this Sedetes was killed by Try∣phon: againe Tryphon was slaine quickly of his owne people. Then Antiochus Gryphus Nicanors sonne, and Antiochus Se∣detes sonne killed one an other in such sort, that Syria wanted Seleucus house destroyed by ciuill warres. heires of Seleucus house to be kings, & also Syria was brought so lowe and so poore by these ciuill warres, that the Romanes prayed ouer them, after they had reigned two hundred eigh∣tie nine yeeres, and brought Syria a prouince subiect to Rome. All the names of the kings of Syria and Asia, since Alexan∣der the great his time are these. 1 Seleucus Nica. reigned 31. 2 Antiochus Soter. 19. 3 Antiochus Theos. 15. 4 Seleucus Gallinicus. 20. 5 Seleucus Ceraunus. 9. 6 Antiochus magnus. 36. 7 Seleucus Philopator. 12. 8 Antiochus Epiphanes. 12. 9 Antiochus Eupator. 2. 10 Demetrius Soter. 10. 11 Alexander Prōpalus. 5. 12 Demetrius Nicanor. 2.
13 Antiochus Sedetes. 3. 14 Trypho reigned 3. 15 Demetrius againe Nica∣nor. 4. 16 Antiochus Griphus. 29. 17 Antiochus Cizicoenus. 18. 18 Philipus the sonne of Gri∣phus. 2. Functius doeth varie a litle from Iustine in the yeeres of these kings. OF THE FIRST AFFRICAN warres betweene the Carthagineans and the Romanes, which continued 24. yeeres: and of the victories of the Romanes ouer them. HAuing something entreated of the kings of A∣sia & Syria, and yet nothing so largely as the hi∣storie required, howe be it the kings of Asia and Syria are spoken of both in sacred & prophane histories, & haue also an intercourse betweene the kings of Assyria and of Egypt: I will therefore passe to the kings of Affrike and Libya, and speake of their warres with the Romanes. This Countrie (as Pomponius Mela describeth) is on Pompo. Mela. lib. 1. the East part bounded with the riuer Nilus, & inclosed North with the sea Libicke, on the South with the Ethiopian sea, and on the West with the Antlantike sea. Affrike is shorter then Europe, and farre lesser then Asia: it is more in length then in breadth: the breadth of Affrike is thirteene thousand furlōgs, which is a thousand sixe hūdred miles and more: the length (as Strabo writeth) is as much a∣gaine, Strabo. lib. 17. which is 3200 miles, and all that part of Affrike which is beyond the Mores, called the Nigrites & Pharusians, doe ex∣tend into Ethiope. The Ethiopians possesse thence vnto the bor∣ders of Asia: also the white Ethiopiās & Libyaegyptiās dwelling a∣boue Affrica descri∣bed. those places before recited: then the Numidians and the Mores, of whō the Mores extend to the Antlantike sea. I thinke it a worke needles to describe Affrike more amplie then it is by Iulius Solinus, & Pōponius Mela, written in Latine: the rest is set forth by Strabo, of whom for that hee writes more large, I note him chiefely for mine authour.
dearth hapened amongst the Affricanes, that the Romans could no longer remaine there: but they returned to Rome with their victorious nauies in great pompe and glorie, hauing 484. ships sailing in braue sort towards Rome, with infinite wealth and treasure. Beholde in the midst of this great pompe, the euents of for∣tune: The great losse of the Romanes by shipwracke. a very great tempest rose, so that they suffred such ship∣wracke about the coast of Sicile, that scant were saued 80. ships of the 484. yet the inuincible and stoute courage of the Ro∣manes were such, that their minds were nothing dismayd with these missehaps, though it was the very greatest shipwracke that euer the Romanes had, or any other nation in the world. New supplies and other captaines were straight appointed, with 260. ships to take voyage to Affrike, who likewise when they had wonne certaine cities and townes in Affrike, retur∣ned to Rome with great spoile, but sustained the like ship∣wracke againe. The Senate finding these continual dangers of sailing and seafight, thought good to forsake the sea, and to fight vpon the land: for hauing wonne the victories of foure battels vpon the sea with infinit treasures ouer the Affricanes, Eutrop lib. 2. they lost by three shipwracks, more then they wanne by the foure victories. In the fift yeere after Regulus was taken by the Affricanes, Metellus was sent from Rome to Sicilia, where the Carthagineans came with 130. elephants: of the which nomber Metellus got Metellus vi∣ctorie. 26: he slew 2000. Affricanes as Eutropius saith, but Melancthon in his chronicles saith, that Metellus slew 36. elephants, and tooke aliue 146. elephants, which Metellus in great triumph Melanct. lib. 2. brought with him to Rome. The Affricanes after these great mischances, required Regulus a Romane captaine, whom the Affricanes tooke captiue and kept in prison vntill this time: him they sent vnto the Senate to entreate for peace, who when he came to Rome, perswaded the Romanes that peace by no meanes should be granted to the Affricanes, alledging that they were voyde of all hope to recouer their former estate: they were quite quailed and dismayed, and readie to yeeld all
Affrike vp to the Romanes: hee refused to tarie in Rome, though Luc. Florus lib. 2. the Senate sought him, but returned to Carthage according to his othe & promise, with a denial of peace, where he was with most cruel torments put to death. Thus Regulus that might haue saued his life in Rome, lost it in Carthage, and that most willingly. After this, the Senate sent Publius Claudius and Caius Iunius Pullius Clau∣dius ouer∣throwen. with an armie of Romanes, but not with such good successe as Metellus had: for in this iourney the Affricanes ouercame the Romans, so that of two hundreth and twentie sailes they saued but thirtie, 89. were taken, and all the men which fought in The Affricke victorie ouer the Romanes. them: the residue were sunke: besides, the Affricanes tooke 20. thousande of the Romanes prisoners. Thus sometime the Car∣thagineans, and sometime the Romanes preuailed, and so still continued with mortal malice. Caius Luctatius was sent pre∣sently with 300. sailes frō Rome, after this great losse that they had by the Affricanes, in the 9. yeere after the victories of Me∣tellus. This Luctatius with great courage perceiuing the Affri∣canes to be puft vp with pride of their last victorie, and now a∣gaine Eutrop. lib. 2. that they sent Hamo frō Carthage with an armie by land, and an other to Amilcar Hanibals father by sea, Luctatius before Melanct. lib. 2. these armies came together, gaue to the Affricanes a sore bat∣tell, which was fought ouer against Lylibium a citie of Sicilia, with such passing valiantnes of the Romanes, that they toke 73. ships of the Affricans, they sunke 125. they tooke 32. thousand men prisoners, and slew 13. thousand, with an infinite deale of gold and siluer, which Luctatius broght with him to Rome. After this great ouerthrow of Hanno, Luctatius hasted to the citie of Erix, where Amilcar stayed with his power, whom Luctatius vi∣ctorie ouer the Affricanes. hee forced to forsake the towne to his great losse: the resi∣due of the Affricanes were by Luctatius solde for eighteeene Melanct. lib. 2. pence a piece. The Affricanes being thus spoiled and ouer∣throwen by Luctatius, entreated for peace, which was to them Affricanes solde for 18 pence a piece. by the Senate graunted, which peace continued betwene the Affricanes and the Romanes 26. yeeres. Thus ended the first warres of the Affricanes, which endured 24. yeeres. During
which time Ptolomey Euergetes raigned in Egypt, and Seleucus Gallinicus raigned in Syria. The Parthians began to set vp a kingdome this time, and An∣tigonus sirnamed Doson raigned then in Macedonia. About this Polib. lib. 2. time Aratus an excellent Greeke, the gouernor ouer the Ache∣tans, exempted al kinde of tyrannie out of the citie of Corinth, and brought the Megereans in societie with the Corinthians. About the latter end of this first warre betwene the Affricanes and the Romans, came Hiero the mightie and puisant king of Si∣cilia to behold the enterludes at Rome, where he distributed a∣mongst Hiero his libe∣ralitie in  Rome. the Romans two hundred thousand bushels of wheat. During this first warre of Carthage, M. Claudius gaue a great ouerthrow to the Frenchmen, and slew their king called Viri∣domarus with his owne had, as Eutropius saith. The greatnes Viridomarus king of France slaie by Mar. Claudius. of the Romanes was such then, that they had warres with Illyri∣ans, with the Istrians, with the Frenchmen, with the Affricanes, and with diuers others, ouer whom the Romanes triumphed: at which time they concluded a peace with al nations, which neuer happened to the Romanes since the first building of Rome, but onely in Numa Pompilius time. CHAP. II. Of the second Affricane warres betweene the Carthagineans and the Romanes, which endured 17. yeeres. During which time Ha∣nibal held terrible warres with the Romanes, which brought the Empire of Rome wellnigh to Carthage: but at last by Scipio Af∣fricanus the warres were ended, Carthage ouerthrowen, Affrica wonne, and Hanibal forced to flee. NOw after that Hamilcar died in Spaine, a man of great skil, to whom the Affricans Hamilcar was Hambals fa∣ther. in the first Punicke warre committed the whole gouernment of Affrike: this Hamilcar made warres with the Romanes in Sicilia a longer time then it was loo∣ked for. After that, he kept them play in Hamilcars praise. Affrike, and from thence he was sent go∣uernour and generall for the Affricanes into Spaine.
This Hamilcar was sirnamed Barcha, after whome succeeded Hamilcar. Asdrubal his sonne in lawe, for that Hanibal Hamilcar his owne sonne was but yong & tender: notwithstanding he was hard∣ned now against the second warres of Affrike, where he farre excelled his fathers doings in his first warres. After the first warre ended, Hamilcar Hanibals father died: hee continued three yeeres in the seruice of the warres vnder the conduct of Asdrubal his brother: for at what time his fa∣ther Plutarch. in Hanibal. had him first to Spaine, he was but nine yeeres olde, and after that to Asdrubals death (as Polibius affirmeth) seuenteene yeeres: so as Plutarch and Polibius agree, he was 26. yeere olde Eutrop 3. whē he was chosen lieutenant general against the Romans: but Eutropius saith he was but twentie: but he was no sooner cho∣sen generall, but he bent himselfe fully against the Romanes, to whom he bare a secret malice for the losse of Sardinia and Si∣cilia, but specially for his fathers Hamilcars sake, who hated so Hanibal suc∣ceeded Has∣drubal. the Romanes, that he compelled Hanibal his sonne being but a boy, to sweare at a sacrifice which Hamilcar made, that hee would be a mortall enemie to the Romanes. Liui. Flor. lib. 2. cap. 6. The remembrance of which things enticed Hanibal to at∣tempt warres against the Romanes, at what time Hanibal sware vpon his fathers graue, that he would be an enemie to the Ro∣mans, and performe the othe which he sware to his father Ha∣milcar. This inheritable hatred made Hanibal to practise in∣nouations, and to finde occasion to begin this second warre. There was a towne named Saguntum, the people hereof con∣fined indifferently betweene the Romanes and the Carthagine∣ans: Saguntum be∣sieged and ta∣ken by Hani∣bal. this towne Hanibal assaulted, to whom the Romanes sent ambassadours, to will him to cease from battell: for the Ro∣manes were alwayes lothe to vse force, if either intreatie or courtesie might take place: but Hanibal refused to speake with them. The Senate sent to Carthage, willing that com∣maundement might be giuen to Hanibal to spare the Sagun∣tines, which were in league with the Romans: but they had the like answere in Carthage, as they had of Hanibal. Then Fabius who in his ambassage offered to the Carthagineans the choise
It was doubtfull a long time, whether there were a sea be∣yond Afrike, or whether the land might be coasted about, or whether Afrike being barren & waste, ful of desertes & moū∣taines, Hanno a tra∣ueiler. might extend so farre as that there were no ende of it, vntill the voyage of Hanno a captaine of Carthage, who tooke vpon him to searche the coastes: and when he had traueiled much, hee returned home with this answere, that he wanted not sea roome but victuall. After Hanno, another called En∣doxus passed out of the gulfe of Arabia: hee traueiled so long, that he brought notice with him of countries & other things Pomponius Mela lib. 3. vnknowen in Affrike and Libya: you must thinke that Affrike and Libya is all one generally. In this countrie of Affrike is Mauritania, a large and a wide countrie: the end of this coast is the riuer Mulucha, and the beginning thereof is from the Promontorie which the Greekes call Ampelisia: from Mulucha Molochathi, (as Strabo writeth) to Pompo. Mela. Lib. 1. the riuer Ampsaga, lieth Numidia, a countrie not so large as Mauritania, but wealthier and better peopled: Cirta is the greatest citie therein, the pallace of king Iuba and king Siphax, and after Massinissa and Mycipsa, and of a long time their suc∣cessours. To describe Affrike perticularly, it is infinite, for that the most part of it is wast ground, vnmanured, and void Strange beasts in Affrike. wildernesse, where strange and diuers kindes of beastes doe breede, and also many fabulous things of Solinus and Strabo written, as Satyrs, Blenias, & such wilde people, that rather are like beasts then men: reade Solinus and Strabo of all the sundry sortes of serpēts, strange beastes, & of the mōstrous kindes of creatures, which breede in Affrike and Libya. I will declare Lib. 17. briefely the report of al Carthage & Numidia, two of the chie∣fest cities of Affrike: of these townes mēcion is made of diuers writers. This Carthage was builded at such time as Hiarbas reigned in Libya, by a lady named Elissa, otherwayes named Dido, king Pigmaliōs sister of Tyre, borne in Phoenicia, after whō Tirians long inhabited: a hundred thirtie fiue yeeres before Ioseph. lib. 1. the building of Rome was Carthage builded: some say that Car∣thage was builded before Didos time by people of Tyre, of whō Carthage was first named Byrsa.
Ioseph setteth downe the names of those kings that reigned Ioseph. lib. 1. contra Appio. in Tyre, before Dido came to Affrika. 1 Abibalus. 2 His sonne Hiramus. 34. 3 Abdemonius. 4 Hyramus. 2. 5 Baleastartus. 43. 6 Abdastartus. 9. 7 Astartus the sonne of Ba∣leastartus. 8 Astarimus which was slaine 9 by his brother Phelles that succeeded him. 10 Ithobalus. 11 Badezorus the sonne of I▪ 12 thabolus, after whome suc∣ceeded his sonne Mettinus. 13 And last reigned Pygmali∣on, which was brother vnto Dido. These were the kings that reigned in Tyre, before the building of Carthage. Strabo sayth, that there were 300. cities in that part of Af∣frika before the building of Carthage, which were destroyed by the Pharusians and Nigretes. Next vnto Carthage in autho∣ritie Vtica. and power was the Citie of Vtica, famous for the name of Cato: these two Cities were the onely hauens to the Ro∣manes to enter into Libya. Not farre from Vtica was Appollonia Apollonia. and Hermea, two populous Townes well inhabited. In this lesser Asia where Carthage and Vtica were both builded by the Phoenicians, are diuers others Townes, as Hippo, Hermea. Rheguis, and Tabraca: this part of Affrike florished, and be∣came so famous, that the Romanes who in those dayes waxed strong, had an eye to Affrike, and (as their maners and custome were neuer to be satisfied vntill they were lords of the whole world) they beganne to be enemies to the kings of Libya and Strab. lib. 17. Affrike, held them warres the first time for the space of twen∣tie foure yeres, with equal conquest to the Romanes. It is writ∣ten, that in this first yeeres warre which the Romanes had with the Carthagineans, that the Romanes susteined great losse and much harme, specially by shipwracke. The Romanes neuer waged any battell out of Italie before this time, and therefore to know what power they were ableto make within the citie Muster in Rome. Eutrop. lib. 2. of Rome, they mustred & numbred them by the poles, & they found within the citie of Rome 300. thousand able souldiers to serue, sauing 500. When Appius Claudius & Q. Fuluius were
Consuls in Rome, the first battell was fought in Sicilia, where the Romanes gate the victorie, & Appius triūphed ouer Hieron Appius trium∣phed ouer Hieron. king of Sicilia & ouer the Affrikanes. The second and the third battel the Romanes wrought very great enterprises, & gate the victories against two nations of Affrica. This time againe the Romanes triūphed ouer the Affricanes, & Hieron king of Sicilia intreated for peace, and in consideration thereof gaue to the Romanes 200. talents of siluer: but this peace endured not long: for within fiue yeeres after the warres began, the Romanes vn∣derstanding that the Affricanes came in heapes from Libya in∣to Sicilia, prepared an armie vnder the conduct of Cneus Cor∣nelius The second triumph ouer the Affricanes. and Caius Duillius then Consuls of Rome: this battel was fought on the sea, where Cornelius the Consul was deceiued by traine: but Eutropius saith that the other Consul fought out the battel, and ouercame the Affricanes: he tooke 31. shippes and sunke 18. he slewe 3000. and tooke seuen thousand men prisoners. Reade Polyb. of the warres of Affricke. This victory vpon the Sea happened better to the Romanes then they looked for. Although the Carthagenians were often discomfited and ouerthrowen by the Romanes, yet they esca∣ped not free, and specially vpon the sea, where the Romanes sustained diuers losses, and such losses, as were equall to the Melancth. lib. 2. Chron. victories which they wanne vpon the land. When Lucius Sci∣pio had wonne Corsica and Sardinia, being then Consul at Rome, and ledde from them with him to Rome many thou∣sand prisoners, ouer whom he triumphed by these diuers vi∣ctories and triumphes which the Romanes had ouer the Liby∣ans, the Carthagenians were forced to forsake Sicilia, and to re∣turne to Affrica, where the Romanes within a while transposed their warres against Hamilcar captaine of the Carthagineans, to Hamilcar dis∣comfited vp∣on the sea. whome battell was giuen vpon the sea, where Hamilcar was discomfited and constrayned to retire backe, after he had lost 64. shippes. This was the second victorie which the Ro∣manes had vpō the sea ouer the Affricanes, yet this time the Ro∣manes lost two and twentie ships: this battell was wonne by M. Attilius Regulus & Lu. Manlius then both Consuls at Rome.
These captaines after they ariued farther into Affrike, Cli∣pea the chiefest city of Affrike yeelded thēselues to the Romans: nowe Manlius returned to Rome with great pompe, brought Clipea the chie fest citie in Affrike. with him twentie seuen thousand prisoners. Regulus remai∣ned still in Affrike, whose worthy actes and famous victorie a∣gainst the Carthagineans in the absence of his fellowe were Lu. Florus. lib. 2. cap. 2. such, as hee ioyned battell with three of the best captaines of all Affrike at that time, which was Asdrubal and Hamilcar, Ha∣nibals father. In this victorie Regulus slue eighteene thousand Regulus victo∣rie. of his enemies: hee tooke prisoners fiue thousand and eight Elephants, and at that victorie (as Eutropius sayth) hee recei∣ued vnder obeysance threescore and thirteene cities. The losse was such to the Affricans, that they desired peace of the Romanes: which was denied by Regulus contrary to a Romanes nature, which alwayes vsed al nations with great cle∣mencie: but Regulus gained nothing by this, but shame and losse: for the Carthineans desired the ayde of the Lacedemo∣nians, which with all diligence sent a band of men with one Regulus too se∣uere. Xantippus, through whose meanes Regulus was ouercome in the next battell, where the Romanes had a great ouerthrowe, by the onely seueritie and too much insolencie of Regulus. The Affricanes slue thirtie thousand Romanes, and tooke priso∣ners fifteene thousand, and Regulus himselfe was taken, and cast into prison. Thus hee that triumphed ouer Affrike with great fame Regulus van∣quished. Melanct. lib. 2. and commendations, lyeth nowe a captiue in a dungeon, at the disposition of the Affricanes. The Romanes hearing of these newes, they presently sent M. Aemilius Paulus, which passed ouer into Affrike with a nauie of three hundred sailes: The great vi∣ctorie of the Romanes ouer the Affricans. the battell was renued, and fought vpon the sea with such courage of the Romanes, that they sunke a hundred and foure shippes of their enemies, tooke thirtie shippes and all the men within them, slue and tooke prisoners besides fif∣teene thousand: with the spoyle of Affricanes Aemilius en∣riched his souldiers. All Affrike had beene conquered this time, had not such
either of warre or of peace, gremio togae excusso, pronounced openly publike warres to the Affricanes. In the meane time the Saguntines famished: yet some writers report, that Sagun∣tum The Saguntines famished. endured 8. moneths siege, as Plutarch and Liuie affirme. The taking of this citie was a great furtherance to Hanibals enterprises. The Romanes hearing of these newes, deuided the prouin∣ces betweene the two Consuls, Publius Cornelius to Spaine, and Titus Sempronius to Affrike and Sicilia: and then the Romanes sent certaine of the noblest men of Rome to Carthage, to pro∣nounce Warres pro∣nounced to the Carthagi∣neans. open warre to the Carthagineans, which was as braue∣ly receiued, as it was lustily offered. Hanibal hearing of this preparation in Rome, he left Asdrubal in Spaine, and himselfe passed ouer the mountaines Pyrenei, making his way where no way was as yet, ouer the Alpes. Eutropius reporteth, that Ha∣nibal brought with him to Italy 80. thousand footemen, twen∣tie thousand horsemen, and 37. elephants. Hanibal had great hope that the Ligurians and the French∣men would ayde him, which in deede came to passe as hee ex∣pected. Sempronius Gracchus conueyed his armie foorth of Si∣cilia. Scipio in the meane time encountred with Hanibal: but he was discomfited, his men put to flight, and Scipio himselfe The first vi∣ctorie of Ha∣nial. returned wounded to his tents. In like maner the other Con∣sul fought with him at the riuer Trebia, & was ouerthrowen, and escaped hardly himselfe. Thus Hanibal got the victorie of both the Consuls, yet it cost Hanibal the setting on: for he lost many of his men, and the most part of his elephants. After this battel, Hanibal ouercame all the countrey, and did Florus lib. 2. cap. 6. put all to fire and sworde, whereupon diuers in Italy for feare yeelded themselues to Hanibal. There were at that time fiue and twentie thousand Romanes slaine, and the residue fled. Flaminus the Consul at that very time was also slaine by Ha∣nibal at the lake Thracimene which is in Perusia, who had the charge of Sempronius place. The Romans hearing of those hard Plutar. in Fab. newes, appointed Fabius Maximus generall against Hanibal, a graue wise man, and of great authoritie and estimation with
the people of Rome: this Fabius by tracting the time and daly∣ing, Q. Fabius made general. brake the violence and force of Hanibal, and thereby gaue him oftentimes the ouerthrow. Hanibal vsed kinds of poli∣cies to draw Fabius to fight, who remoued his campe frō citie to citie, and from place to place, with such furie and rage (to Florus lib. 2. see the delay of Fabius) that Hanibal lost more then he wanne during the time of Fabius. Of this it is written, Cunctando resti∣tuit rem. By this time there were two other created consuls in Rome, Luc. Aemilius and Pub. Terentius Varro: these succee∣ded Fabius, but not with such good successe, nor with the like fortune as Fabius had: for Fabius aduertised both the consuls, that they could neuer ouercome Hanibal but by prolonging to fight: how be it light heads wil folow no counsel, as it came to passe by the rashnesse of Varro contrary to the mind of the The great vi∣ctorie at Can∣nes. other consul, who ioyned battell with Hanibal hard by a litle village in Apulia named Cannes, where the Romanes had the greatest discomfiture that euer they had: for in this battel the Affricans slew (as Liui saith) 40. thousand footmen and 2700. horsemen. Plutarch saith, that there were slaine 50. thousand Plutarch. in Fabio. footemen, and 14. thousand taken prisoners, Aemilius the con∣sul slaine, and to the nomber of 20. others of the order of con∣sul Polib. lib. 5. and Pretors. Againe, in this great ouerthrow, there were taken and slaine of the Senators 30. of noblemen and gentle∣men 800. After that battel many cities in Italy which were before vn∣der the obeysance of the Romanes, fell from them to Hanibal: Eutrop. lib. 3. from that battell of Cannes, Hanibal sent to Carthage 3. bushels Three bushels of rings onely, as Eutropius saith, sent by Hanibal to Car∣thage. ful of rings & chaines, which were pluckt from the necks and hands of the gentlemen, Senators and souldiers of the Romans. Thus Hanibal had such good successe in the beginning of his warres, hauing subdued the Saguntines, ouerthrowen the Ro∣manes at the riuer Trebia, slaine the consull Flaminius, and the most part of his armie at the lake Thrasimene, & then the great slaughter and murther of the Romanes now at Cannes: yet the Romans neuer quailed for al this, their stout minds were such, that they could not heare of peace: the Romanes were neuer
more valiant, then when they were cōquered: their courage, Melanct. lib 2. Chrop. their magnanimitie & noble vertues were most seene in their aduersitie. Now while Hanibal florished thus in Italy like a . cōquerour, his brother Asdrubal whom he left behind him in Spaine, sustained a great ouerthrow by the two Scipios, in which battel he lost 35. thousand men. Now in the 4. yere after that Hanibal inuaded Italy, Marcellus was sent against Hanibal, who Marcellus came against Hanibal. in truth fought with good fortune at Nola a citie of Campania, and made Hanibal to forsake Nola with all his armie. By this time Hanibal had gotten many cities frō the Romanes in Apulia and Calabria: the fame of Hanibal was such, that all the world spake of it: for Philip king of Macedon sent to offer ayd to Ha∣nibal against the Romanes: the messengers were apprehended by the Romans, and the whole matter knowen, whereupon the Foure gene∣rals sent by the Romanes to foure seueral kingdomes. Romans sent 4. generals at one time to 4. seueral places: in Ita∣ly against Hanibal: in Macedonia against king Philip: in Spaine a∣gainst Asdrubal Hanibals brother: and in Sardinia against a Car∣thaginean captaine called also Asdrubal, who was taken by Tit. Manlius the proconsul: who slew besides of the Affricanes 12. Tit. Manlius victorie. thousand, and tooke 1500. prisoners, which Manlius brought with him to Rome. On the other side Hanibal plaied the lion, besieged Tarentū, and wan it, after that the Romans had before won it, & posses∣sed it 100. yeres and more: how beit Marcellus hindred Hanibal of his purpose sundry times, & gaue him diuers ouerthrowes: for of all the Romane captaines Marcellus matched Hanibal ei∣ther in policie, counsel, wit, or any other stratagem deuised, of whom Hanibal said, that he delt with an enemie that could be neuer quiet conquerour nor conquered: and so hee spake of The saying of Hanibal of Fab. Maximus. Fabius Maximus, when he had againe wonne Tarentum, say∣ing, The Romanes haue also their Hanibal. Hanibal yet triumphed of his victories, and was emboldened by his good fortune to march forwarde, thinking to inuade the citie of Rome, came and camped within 24. furlongs of Hanibal cam∣ped within 3. miles of Rome. Rome, which is but three miles, and from thence hee came with two thousand horses so neere vnto Rome, that riding
from the gate Colnia vnto Hercules temple, hee had leasure to Hanibal came to Romes gate. view at his pleasure the situation & walles of Rome, and might at that time haue conquered Rome, if hee had then gone for∣ward with his victories: but he feared the Consuls & retired: for both the Consuls came with an armie against him: and to Eutrop 3. increase the fame of the Affricanes, Asdrubal slew both the Sci∣pios, which so long had bene conquerours in Spaine. Eutro∣pius saith, that they were rather by traine beguiled, then van∣quished by manhood. About this time a great part of Sicilia was recouered by Marcellus the Consul: but Hanibals fortune continued still, though he had diuers ouerthrowes of Marcellus and of Fa∣bius Maximus, two worthie Romane captaines: yet he was farre before hande in victories, and did much more harme to the Romans then Pyrrhus, Mithridates, Philip, or Antiochus the great. Reade the whole 3 De∣cade of Liuie. After that Hanibal had thought to haue inuaded Rome, he re∣tired to Campania, and vpon the sudden he assaulted Cneus Ful∣uius being then in Italie, slewe him, and eight thousand ofhis people: but Hanibals head was much occupied about Mar∣cellus, neuer ceasing to lay ambushes in euery place to mur∣ther him, vntill at length he layed certaine bands of Numidi∣ans Florus lib. 2. cap. 6. in a groue to entrap the enemies passing to and fro. Mar∣cellus cōming to view this groue & the situation of that place, fell vnfortunatly into Hanibals ambush, where hee was com∣passed on either side with his enemies, and fighting then most Marcellus slaine. valiantly was slaine. Hanibal being aduertised that Marcellus was slaine, he was so glad (in respect that Marcellus euer hindered his victories Liuie lib. 8. and most troubled him of all the Romane captaines) that Ha∣nibal supposed better ofhimselfe, with hope he should meete no more with such as Marcellus was: but he was deceiued: he met with an other Scipio, though in trueth two were slaine by Asdrubal in Spaine before: but this Scipio reuenged their Scipio requited the slaughter of the Romans. deaths, and fully requited all iniuries that the Romanes recei∣ued, with the slaughter of many thousand Affricanes, with the subduing of Carthage and Numantia, and with the conquest
of Hanibal with both his brethren, Asdrubal and Mago. Vntill this time Hanibal excelled all the captaines of the Liui in the ende of the 2. and 3. Decade. world, as hee spake ofhimselfe, if hee might haue conquered Scipio. Now the state of Carthage changed, and the fortune of Affrike fell, and now the Romanes beganne againe to be ad∣uanced: for after that Scipio had won new Carthage in Spaine, where the Affricanes had all their golde and siluer and furni∣ture for warre remayning, sending to Rome such hostages of the best Affricanes taken, amongst whom Mago Hanibals bro∣ther Mago Hani∣bals brother sent to Rome. was sent also with the residue, there was great mirth in Rome of these newes. Now while Scipio conquered Carthage in Spaine, Q. Fabius Plutar in Fab. Maximus recouered Tarentum in Italy: for diuers cities of Ita∣lie hearing what victories Scipio had in Spaine, reuolted from Scipio conque∣red Carthage. Hanibal, and yeelded to the Romanes, as Capua, Salapia, and others in like maner: all the Spaniards tooke part with Scipio against Hanibal, after that Scipio had subdued Carthage, dis∣comfited Asdrubal, and vanquished the two kings Mandocius and Iudibilis. Scipio hauing sent before to Rome great spoiles, he himselfe returned to Rome after he had gotten in Spaine in one yeere 69. cities. Now Hanibal beganne to decline from his former fortune, Asdrubal sent for out of Spaine, to whom battel was giuen where he was slaine. sent for his brother Asdrubal out of Spaine, who deliuering his place of gouernment vnto one Hanno a noble captaine of Car∣thage, came with a great armie to Italy, where he was by Mar∣cus Liuius the consul met at Sena a citie of Apulia, where battel was giuen to Asdrubal. Of that battell Plutarch reporteth, that fiftie sixe thousande were slaine of the Affricanes, and Asdrubal himselfe: so that the ouerthrow of that battell at Sena was al∣most as great, as the ouerthrow which was giuen to the Ro∣manes at the battell of Cannes: yet Eutropius saith, that Asdru∣bal fel into the ambushments which of set purpose were laied for him by Claudius Nero, and Liuius Salinator. These, to spite Hanibal the more, they set vp Asdrubals head Sol. lib. 15. vpon a pole, and they sent to Hanibal notice of these newes: this grieued not Hanibal a little, to see his brothers head set Liui. lib. 27.
before his tent, his other brother Mago prisoner at Rome, and himselfe in some dispaire of his countrey: yet Hanibal when he saw his brothers head, said, Cannam, Trebiam, & Thrasime∣num Hanibals words at the sight of his brothers head. fraterno capite pensauimus: reuiuing much his heauie heart with the remembrance of so many Consuls, Dictators, and captaines heads of the Romanes slaine at the three great bat∣tels of Cannas, Trebia, and Thrasimene. Euen then Hanibal was called for into Affrike: for Scipio the yeere before was made Hanibal called to Affrike. Consul at Rome, and sent by the Senate to Affrike in the fif∣teenth yeere after this second warre which beganne by Hani∣bal, Florus lib. 2. cap. 6. where all Affrike was in such doubt of Scipio, that of neces∣sitie they did sende for Hanibal, and yet before he came, Scipio ouercame the valiant captaine Hanno, slew 11. thousand of his Scipio his vi∣ctories in Af∣frike. souldiers, tooke his tents with 4500. of his souldiers, and a∣gaine hee tooke Syphax king of Numidia or of Massylia priso∣ner, because hee ayded the Affricanes, inuaded his tents and Eutrop. lib. 3. sackt them, and sent king Syphax with the most nobles of Nu∣midia prisoners to Rome, with an infinite spoile: of which newes Rome reioyced not a litle. But now to Hanibal, who after he had bene such a scourge to Rome for 16. yeeres before he was called to Affrike, it is writ∣ten in Plutarch, that after the last battell which he had in Italy with Sempronius, before he toke the sea, he set vp a triumphing A monument of Hanibal. arche or pillar by the temple of Iuno Lucina, in the which arch were briefly engrauen his noble victories, both in the Punicke and Grecke tongue, for a memorial of his being in Italy: and af∣ter he sailed to Leptis, and frō thence to Zama, and there when Plutarch. in Spione. it was tolde Hanibal of the state of Affrike, and the victories which Scipio had had and like more to haue, considering that Sardinia, Sicilia and Spaine were lost, and now the warres were driuen out of Italy into Affrike, where Syphax king of Numidia was taken, Carthage spoiled, and in great want, and all Affrike in dispaire: he was hereby bent to peace, and entreated with Scipio for peace, which was offred vpon these conditions, that Eutrop. lib. 3▪ the Affricanss should pay to the Romans 500. thousand poūds. But after long talke betwene Scipio and Hanibal, no peace was
agreed vpon, insomuch that Hanibal was constrained to make his last battel: this fielde was appointed to be fought, where they prepared themselues to battel by the citie of Zama, where The battel in Zama. Scipio had the victory. In this battel Masinissa king of Numidia did valiantly: this of a yong boy affected much Scipio, and he was a sure friend to the Romans al his life. Hanibal was welnigh Hanibal fled. taken in this battel: but he escaped, and left his tents behinde him, where were found 20. thousand pounds of siluer, and 800. thousand pounds of gold, with infinit other treasures. After this victory as Scipio came frō the battel, he met with Scipios victo∣ries at Zama. Vermina king Siphax sonne, who at that instant brought an ar∣mie to ayd the Affricans: he likewise was put to flight, and fol∣lowed into Carthage gate. When the Carthagineans heard that Scipio was marching towards them, they were much dismayed Eutrop. lib 3. therby, and sent to intreat for peace being aduertised that Ha∣nibal was ouerthrowen and put to flight: this peace was gran∣ted Peace gran∣ted to the Car∣thagineans. by Scipio vnto Carthage, vpon such conditions as pleased best the conquerour. Now after that Affrike was conquered, no nation then was ashamed to be ouercome by the Romans, for Affrike was made a prouince, and as it were an open passage to encrease & en∣large Affrike was made a pro∣uince to the Romanes. the empire of Rome. When Scipio had broght the Affri∣canes subiect vnder the Romans, before he departed frō Affrica, he restored Masinissa to his kingdom againe, adding therunto the best part of king Siphax countrey. After this, Scipio entred into Rome with pompe & great triumph: of the maner there∣of I shal haue better cause to set down in the Romane history. Thus was the end of the second Punick war, which endured Melnct. lib. 2. Chron. 19. yeres, as Eutropius saith, others affirme but 17. yeres. There is an history extant in Appiā, how Hanibal & Scipio fought hand Scipio and Ha∣nibal fought hand to hand. to hand in this battel, & after them how Masinissa and Hanibal fought very egerly with such bloody strokes, that both were rescued twise or thrise. Read Appian and Polibius of this battel. We reade not of such a triumph as Scipio had, though many had more shewes in plates, treasures, captiues, & prisoners, as Silla, Marius, Pompey, Caesar, with others: yet the cōquest of one
Hanibal was such a thing, all Affrike being on his side, and al∣most Hanibal of any one man most plagued Rome. all Italy, as did more aduance the triumph of Scipio, then all the aforesaid triumphes: for during the space of 17. yeres the Romanes had more to do with one Hanibal, then they had with all the kings of Asia and Europe at one time. The battels of this second warre of Affrica were equall to either Alexander, or Xerxes, as the battel of Ticinū where Sem∣pronius The sixe great battels in the second Pu∣nicke warre. the Consul was slaine: the second at the riuer Trebia where Pub. Aemilius the Consul was slaine: the thirde at the lake Thrasimene where Manlius the Consul was slaine, and all Reade Plut. in Hanib. of the 2. warre. his armie: the fourth at Cannes: the fift at Sana: and the sixt at Zama where Hanibal was put to flight. And yet these two fa∣mous captaines, had some enemies at home that enuied their glorie and great renowme. It was a common saying, Hani∣bal had in Carthage his Hanno, and Scipio had in Rome his Fabius: but because I shall haue occasion to speake of these two valiant captaines in diuers other places, I will briefly passe to the thirde warres of Affrike, which happened 52. yeres after these second warres. Now what dealings fel in other countreis during the time of these 17. yeeres warres, you shall reade that about the be∣ginning of this second warre, that Ptolomey Philopater king of Egypt, he had warres against the Iewes, spoiled Ierusalem, pro∣phaned the temple of Salomon, and troubled all Iudea. This very time the Rhodians waged warres against the Bizantians, and the people of Creete had warres with the nations about Polibius lib. 4. them called the Gnosians and Litians. Polibius in his fourth booke likewise sayeth, that Mithridates king of Pontus had warres with the king of Sinopenses. About this time the warres of Syria beganne betwene An∣tiochus the great king of Asia, and Ptolomey Philopator king of Warres be∣tweene Antio∣chus the great, and Philopa∣tor. Egypt: for Hanibal fled this time from Affrike to Asia to An∣tiochus, after he was cōquered by Scipio at Zama. During these Punicke warres, Hiero the king of Sicilia died, which ayded the Affricanes against the Romanes in the first warres, and his sonne named Hieronimus succeeded him, who for his great
insolencie and pride was slaine by his owne people. This time the Macedonians had a great ouerthrow by the Ro∣manes by the citie Appolonia, at what time Nenius Crispus was generall for Rome. Likewise Nicanor sirnamed Sicamber, had Polib. lib. 5. the like ouerthrow by the king of Orchades. During this warre, Attalus king of Asia, Pleuratus king of Three kings became in league with the Romanes. Thracia, and Scerdiletus king of Illyria, became in league with the Romans: at what time warre was proclaimed by the Ro∣manes against king Philip of Macedonia. This time raigned in Parthia Pampatius, otherwise by Iustine called Phrahartes, the thirde king of Parthia. Liuie doeth write, that about this time a childe was borne with a Sowes head, and other fabulous Liui. lib. 31. things in that place, as an oxe to speake with mans voice. The Samaritans annoyed much Iudea this time. The Romanes lost more Senators, Consuls, noblemen, and gentlemen, in this The second warre of Af∣frike annoyed much the Ro∣manes. second warre of Affrike, then they did in conquering of Ma∣cedonia, Egypt, Syria, and Asia. And yet in ciuil warres betwene Silla and Marius, I finde in Eutropius such slaughters of Con∣suls, Praetors, Aediles and Senatours, as the nomber shalbe set downe in the ciuill warres of Rome. CHAP. III. Of the thirde and last Affricane warres betweene the Romanes and the Carthagineans, which endured foure yeres: of the ouerthrow of Carthage and Numantia: of the ruine and last conquest of Affrica by the Romanes. THe state of Affrike being by their last seconde warre weakened, and almost brought to nothing by the Romanes, the Affricanes were two and fiftie yeeres in The thirde warres of  beganne 52. yeeres after the second warre. recouering any strength, either to de∣fend themselues or to offend others: in the meane time the Romanes very ambi∣tious, and very impatient to heare of any kingdome to flourish, hauing waged warre with the Affri∣canes 24. yeeres the first time, and 17. yeeres the second time,
and that out of Italy such nations and sundrie kings, yea with all Affrica, which is described to bee welnigh the thirde part of the world: hauing, I say conquered all Affrike, and Libya, Warres a∣gainst the Macedonians. the Romanes proclaimed warre against Philippe king of Ma∣cedonia: there T. Quintus Flaminius had such good successe, that peace was concluded vpon such conditions as plea∣sed Flaminius. Then had they warres against the Lacedemonians, vanqui∣shed them and their generall called Nabides: submission was made to the Romanes, and peace also graunted to them vpon the like condition, as was graunted to Philippe. After this en∣sued warres in Syria against Antiochus the great, whom like∣wise Warres in Sy∣ria against An∣tiochus the great. the Romanes so pursued after diuers ouerthrowes, that his tents were inuaded, and Antiochus himselfe was put to flight at the battell of Magnesia, by Cornelius Scipio, sirnamed Asiaticus. The Romanes beganne to bee in such admiration with all Asia and Europe, hauing alreadie subdued all Affrica, that the name of a Romane was a very terrour vnto those kings that were furthest off. The Affricanes, while the Romanes were busie in Asia, they beganne to quarrell with king Masi∣nissa, a sure and a constant friende to the Romanes, being in armes in person against the Affricanes, during the time of all the second warres. The Romanes hearing of these newes, sent Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. ambassadours to Carthage, to require them to withdrawe from Numidia, and to cease the warres from their olde friend Masinissa: the Carthagineans refused to obey the Romanes, whereupon the thirde battell was taken in hand against the Carthagineans, in the yeere after the building of Rome sixe hundreth and foure: yet Eutropius sayeth, sixe hundreth and one, and in the 52. yeere after the second battell finished. The Consuls tooke their voyage from Rome to inuade Carthage. In this iourney Scipio, nephewe to Scipio Affricanus, Warres a∣gainst Car∣thage. was deputed generall of the armie, a man well beloued, and much reuerenced, for that hee was a passing and good cap∣taine, readie and very circumspect of his charge, by whome
the Consuls with the armie were twise saued at the besieging of Carthage, to the great honour of Scipio their generall. The Carthagineans, being not so strong, neither so able to resist the violence of the Romanes as they were in the time of Asdrubal and Famea, 2. cap∣taines ouer Carthage. Hanibal, appointed two valiant men named Asdrubal and Fa∣mea, to be captaines of Carthage, to whom the charge of Car∣thage was giuen: these two iolie captaines, Asdrubal and Fa∣mea, so much sought to auoyde the meeting of Scipio, as they thought to prolong the warres by keeping off, rather then by comming into battell: for the names of Scipios was terri∣ble to the Affricanes. Hereby the renowme of Scipio was such, that the Senate called him home to Rome, to haue the honour of Consulship, Scipio made Consul. being yet but a very yong man: and before he should be sent to assault Carthage, some dissention fell betweene the Senate, Debating at Rome about the destru∣ction of Car∣thage. whether Carthage should bee quite destroyed or no. Some thought that Carthage being so strong a citie, would neuer long be quiet with the Romanes: others thought that Rome should want the friendship of Carthage, if Carthage should be destroyed: it was at last agreed, that the general Scipio, should doe as pleased him, by occasions giuen of the enemie. Vpon this Scipio was sent againe to inuade Carthage, about which time Masinissa died, after that he had liued ninetie and seuen yeeres, who left behinde him 44. sonnes, whom hee Masinissa died. committed to the faith of Scipio, and amongst whom Masi∣nissa requested Scipio to distribute his kingdome: which be∣ing Eutrop. lib. 4. done, Scipio went and besieged Carthage, kept out vi∣ctuals from the citie, hauing also giuen them many hard and sharpe battels aswell by water as by lande, whose good suc∣cesse happened all well at last to Scipio: for after hee had con∣quered them both by sea and by lande, then hee applied his force to destroy Carthage, a towne of great strength, and very populous, a great and a large citie of sixe Germane miles compasse, and two Germane miles diameter euery way. This Carthage was first builded by the people of Tyre, and was by them called Byrsa. Byrsa.
Scipio commaunded the citie to be rased from the ground, The destru∣ction of Car∣thage, before called Byrsa. giuing licence to as many as would saue themselues, to goe out of Carthage: at what time 50. thousand saued themselues by escaping away, the rest so despaired, that some poysoned themselues, some killed themselues, and the most part bur∣ned themselues. Asdrubal their generall fled to Scipio for mer∣cie, Melanct. lib. 2. who hearing that his wife and children would not saue themselues, but willingly died within Carthage, hee also kil∣led The burning of Carthage endured 16. dayes. himselfe. The burning of Carthage endured 16. dayes. During which time, Polibius (who writeth all the Affricane historie) saith, that Scipio beholding the ruinous state of Car∣thage, and the lamentable destruction of the people, recited a Latine verse weeping, Illa dies veniet cum fato Troia peribit. And being demaunded why he wept and vsed those wordes, Hee answered, I weepe for that I thinke others shall see of Rome, that which I see now of Carthage: for that shall come (saide Scipio) that Rome shall likewise perish, such is the mise∣rie and state of this world: and so fell it to Rome in the time The sayings of Scipio of Rome, concer∣ning Rome. of Totilas king of the Gothes, 700. yeeres after the burning of Carthage. When Carthage was thus destroyed, the rest of the Affri∣canes yeelded all their townes, which were in the beginning of the warres in nomber 300. Also they yeelded 200. thou∣sand armories which they had in Lybia, 3000. pieces of artille∣ries, and all other engines & instruments of warres, as though they would neuer againe take warre in hande: yet when Car∣thage was by the cōmandement of the Senat reedified in Af∣frike Strabo lib. 17. 22. yeeres after that it was destroied by Scipio Aemilianus, sirnamed by the victorie Affricanus the yonger, thither went diuers citizens of Rome to dwel. This citie was begun by Caius Grachus, & afterward was fully restored to her former state and beautie by Iulius Caesar, and his nephew Octa. Augustus his suc∣cessor in the Empire. After the burning of Carthage 14. yeres, Eutrop. lib. 4. was likewise Numantia a citie in Celtiberia destroyed by the Melanct. lib. 2. same Scipio Aemilianus, a citie that did much annoy the Ro∣mans, of great force and power a long time, insomuch that the
overthrowe of Numantia was more terrible then Carthage: for they were brought to that famine within the citie, and yet would not yeeld themselues, that some killed thēselues, some The desperate mindes of the Numantines. with poyson, some with the sword, and some with fire: at last, like desperate people, they burned the towne and themselues. While Scipio laid siege to Numantia, newes came from Rome Numantia de∣stroyed by Scipio Aemili∣anus. that Tyberius Grachus was slaine in such seditious quarrels as Tyberius himselfe began: the cause being opened to Scipio of Tyberius his death, he recited a Greeke verse of Homer, saying to the companie,  that is, let him die with the like death, that cōmitteth such a fault. But that verse cost Scipio his life: for after hee returned from Numantia Scipios saying of Lib. Grac∣chus. home, for that hee saide Tyberius was iustly slaine, Scipio was found the next morning dead in his bed. This was the end of Scipio Affricanus the yonger, he to be killed in Rome for his ser∣uice to his countrie, as his graundfather Scipio Affricanus was banished out of Rome, to die in other countries. But to returne to ende this third & last warres of the Affri∣canes with the Romanes: though Carthage and Numantia were Eutrop. lib. 4. ouerthrowen, yet in Numidia vsurped Iugurth the kingdome, who after he had slaine both his brethren Adherbal, & Hiemp∣sal, thought to withstand the iustice & reuenge of the Romanes herein: for king Myrpsa who succeeded Masinissa, left these Iugurth reuol∣ted from the Rmanes. three sonnes, Iugurth, Adherbal, and Hiempsal: all these were friendes to the Romanes, & therefore the Senate sent Calphur∣nius the Consul with an army: but he was corrupted with mo∣ney by king Iugurth, gaue him and concluded such a peace as contented not the Romanes, and therefore it was foorthwith infringed. Then Albinus Posthumus was sent the next yeere, who likewise had no good successe, for that he cōmitted the battell to his brothers guiding, who fought against the Nu∣midians very vnfortunately. The Romanes being not a litle offended with these newes, sent the third time Quintus Cecilius Metellus, who with his wisedome, sobrietie, and courage, discomfited Iugurth in ma∣ny Iugurth van∣quished. battels: of the which reade Salust of the warres of Iugurth.
This Metellus ouerthrewe him, and tooke all his Elephants, Metellus. and nowe when Metellus was at the point to haue finished this victorie ouer Iugurth, Caius Marius came from the Senat, Iugurth. and succeded him: he most easely ouercame both Iugurth king of Numidia, & Bochus king of Mauritania, who assisted Iugurth Bochus king of Mauritania. in this warre against the Romans: yet Eutropius saith, that both Metellus and Marius had triumphes graunted them by the Senatours ouer Iugurth. After Iugurth we reade nothing worth the memorie in Af∣frike. In the later ende of this third warre, there were fiue tri∣umphes Fiue triumphs in Rome at one time. together at Rome: one by Marcus Iunius, who vanqui∣shed the Danes in Fraunce: the second by Minutius Rufus, who ouercame the Scordicians, Triballians in Macedonia: the third by S. Cepio, who subdued the Portugals in Spaine: and the two other triumphes which Metellus and Maurius had ouer Iugurth. And thus ended the third and last warres in Affrike, which continued foure yeeres. Of this Affricane warres there are many writers as Polibius, Liuius, Appian, Eutropius, Melancthon, & others: but of the peo∣ple, their countrie, their cities, their maners and antiquitie, Strabo. lib. 17. reade the 17. booke of Strabo, where you shal reade of Affrike, and Libya at large. I did nothing but briefely runne ouer the historie, & tooke of euery writer herein so much as I thought good to finish the historie, and the rather for that it is a kno∣wen historie to many. Thus from the beginning of the first warre, vntill the ende of the last warre, are accompted a hundred and eight yeres: so From the be∣giuning of the first, vntill the end of the 3. and last 108. yeeres. long they continued in warres against the Romanes, at length all were brought vnder the Romanes, as were of Affrike habita∣ble. So the Romanes had of all Europe dominion, sauing of some dwelling beyonde the riuer Ister, and of some others that dwell betweene the riuer of Rheine and Tanais: euen so had they the gouernment ouer all Asia, sauing the Scythians, the Indians, and the Bactrians, which the Romanes made no Strabo lib. 17. great accompt of, being so barbarous people, and so farre from them.
OF THE ANTIQVITIE OF olde Italie first called Ianicula, and then Saturnia: of the beginning of the Kings of the Latines, the first kingdome of Italie: of their lawes and gouernments from Faunus vntill Aeneas, and from Aeneas vn∣till Romulus. NOwe to the greatest and last Mo∣narchie of the worlde, I meane the Romanes, which by Daniel is also set foorth as the other three before: for Macedonia, Greece, Annius lib. 1. and Italie, are by the name of Isles named, where Iaphet and his offspringes tooke first pos∣session: for Iauan the sonne of Iaphet, which of Melancthon is supposed to bee of prophane Genesis 10. writers called Ianus, with his foure sonnes, Elisha, Tharsis, Kittim, and Dodanim, inhabi∣ted first the Isles of the Gentiles, which were diuided in their landes, euery man after his tongue, and after their families in their Nations. Of this Kittim the Prophet Isai speaketh, and Isai. 25. also Ieremie in this sort to the rebellious Iewes, Ite in Cedar & insulam Kittim, &c. Goe ye into the Isles of Kittim farre off, take diligent heede, and see whether such things be there, they change not their goddes, but Israel haue changed me for idoles.
This Kittim is mencioned often times in the Prophets and Kittim. in the booke of Nombers, where it is saide, The shippe shall come from the coastes of Kittim and subdue Ashur, and shall subdue Eber: and againe in Ezechiel, The companie of the Assyrians haue made their banckes of Iuorie, brought out of the Isles of Kittim: so that by Kittim is meant Greece and Italie by the best learned Ieremie cap. 2. Diuines, and so expounded by the 72. interpreters: for Moses doth warrant these antiquities, concerning the fiue sonnes of Sem, that from Elam the eldest sonne of Sem, the Persians haue Num. 24. 27. their beginning: from Assur the second sonne of Sem, the As∣syrians: from Arphaxad the third sonne, the Chaldeans: from Aram, the Syrians: euen so from the posteritie of Cham, the E∣gyptians, Ethiopians, and Libyans: and from the children of Ia∣phet, the most part of Europe and of lesser Asia. But howe grosly and howe foolishly doe prophane Histo∣riographers erre in their fabulous antiquities, which with fai∣ned, How fabulous prophane wri∣ters are in an∣tiquities. false, and strange names oppose themselues against the propheticall histories? for the Iewes committed to their su∣perstitious Rabbies all knowledge, the Egyptians to their fabu∣lous priests, the Persians to their insolent Magi, & the Greekes euen to their owne fancies, following their imaginations in all their histories, that of all men they are reprehended, and the crie of all Chronicles against them, naming it Graecia men∣dax, Graeci pueri & fabulosi: and therefore Kittim is the warrant for the antiquitie of the Italians, as Chus is for the antiquitie of the Ethiopians, and Lud for the Lydians, and so of the rest. And therefore I will returne to old Italie, which had diuers  de an∣. Hetrure. names, as Ianicula of Ianus, whom the Greekes call Oynotria, Ca∣mesena of Cameses, Saturnia of Saturnus, Hesperia of Hesper, and Italia of Italus: the which to write particularly I should but gather fables together, of which Fabius Pictor is full. Iulius Solinus sayth, that Italie is set forth by so many, and special∣ly Solin. cap. 7. by M. Cato, that there can be nothing written, but the dili∣gence offormer authours haue preuented i for the descrip∣tion Strab. lib. 6. Cap. 2. and 3. thereof reade Solinus and Strabo: therefore I leaue to the Iewes their Talmudistes full of lies, to the Egyptians their
priestes full of fables, to the Greekes their innouacions and in∣uentions full of vncerteintie, and so foorth of others: for if I should write what I finde of the antiquitie of olde Italie, by them that were neuer in Italie by 2000 miles, I meane Berosus of Babylon, and 10. Annius, I should be but tedious. From Ianus first comming into Italie, which was by them thought to be Noah, vntill Cameses time, is 141. yeres: so long Italie was called Ianicula: from Cameses which was in Ninus time, vntill Italus or Hesperus two brethren, 430. yeeres: du∣ring Annius cōpu∣tation of the antiquitie of old Italie be∣fore the buil∣ding of Rome was 1450. yeeres. which time Italie was called Camisena or Saturnia: for that these two reigned kings in Italie at one time. From this Italus whom the Greekes called Atlas, and by whō the countrie was named Italia, from which time to the last destruction of Troy were 454. yeeres: from the ruine of Troy to the building of Rome foure hundred and thirtie yeeres. So long Italie was by the Thuscans, Hetrurians, Samnites, Sabines, Fidenats, Vuiens, Volscans, Latines, with others, inhabited before the name of the Romanes were knowen: for first in Italie dwelt Greekes, Arcadi∣ans, Salentines, Lacedemonians, Cicilians, Rutilians, with many more nations, as Myrsilus a Lesbian writer doth note: of the Annius de an∣tiq. Etruria. which Annius in his institutions of the antiquitie of Etruria, of their lawes and gouernment during the time of their ma∣gistrates called Lucumones, hath more then is necessarie written. In like maner Fab. Pictor a noble learned Romane of the stocke and house of Fabians, endeuoured with all his studie to proue the antiquitie of olde Italie from Ianus time, which Fab. Pictor. Deauo secu∣lo. he most surely accompted to be olde Noah, attributing to the Thuscans so much as Annius before. In his first booke hee en∣treateth from Ianus and Saturnus time, vntill Romulus time: in his second booke from Romulus forwarde: for all agree that the late Romanes after Romulus time haue had their discipline, their religion, their lawes, their diuination, and all such ce∣remonies from the Hetruscans. The like traueile M. Cato in Myrsilus de bel. Pelasgico. in his fragments De originibus tooke: the like paine as the be∣fore named Annius and Fab. Pictor did for the antiquitie of
olde Italie. I will come therefore to the kings of the La∣tines, which were the first kings that wee reade of in Italie, where reigned before Aeneas comming to Italie fiue kings, Reade in Cato de Fragmentis. as Ruffinus affirmeth: but as Annius, Fabius Pictor, and M. Ca∣to, reigned twelue kinges, and from Aeneas vntill the time of Romulus, sixteene kinges reigned: of the which briefely I meane to speake a litle, setting downe the names of their kinges & the number, of the time that they reigned: and for that Aeneas was prima Imperij Romani origo, the first begin∣ning Reade Annius de antiq. Hetru. and the originall of the Romane Empire, and the one∣ly authour of gens Iulia, from whence Iulius Caesar, Augustus, and the Emperours of Rome come off: I will therefore set downe the time of his comming into Italie, his continuance and his posteritie after him, vntill Romulus time the first buil∣der and founder of Rome. Aeneas, after the Greekes had taken Troy, hauing gathered the noblest and best men with all the strength and treasures of Troy, tooke the Castle Ilion for his defence, vntill hee per∣ceiued that hee coulde not resist the violence of the Grecians, Strabo. 5. determined to escape the enemies, and to sende some of the best before with abundance of treasures to mount Ida, and there to tarie vntill Aeneas and the rest sawe their time to escape: which being perfourmed, they departed from Ida, tooke the sea Helespont, into Thracia, from Thracia to Ma∣cedonia, as Beroaldus affirmeth: from Macedonia to Cicilia, Beroal. lib. 2. from thence into Italie: where then Latinus reigned King of the Countrie, with whom the Rutiles people dwelling at Ardea, a Towne distant from Rome a hundred and three score furlongs held warre. Of this Latinus, Aeneas was so enterteined and his armie, that hee graunted Aeneas a place to inhabite, not farre from Laurentum, where Lati∣nus might vse Aeneas aide in this warre. Aeneas builded a Towne for his ayde against the Ru∣tiles, and named it after his wifes name Lauinium: for hee grewe in such fauour with king Latinus, then being in warres with Mexentius, and with others, that after two or three
ouerthrowes by the Troianes giuen to Mexentius king of Tyr∣rhenum Halycar. lib. 1. and to Turnus king of the Rutiles, who shoulde haue maried Lauinia before Aeneas, for that shee was espoused to Turnus first. Aeneas good successe in warres was such being king ouer all the Troians, and so named of his souldiers, that Latinus gaue his daughter & heire of the kingdom to Aeneas, Latinus gaue his daughter to Aeneas. that after Latinus was slaine in battell, Aeneas was the right and lawfull king of the Latines, where he reigned three yeeres and died, leauing his sonne Ascanius to succeede him king of the Latines. Nowe before Aeneas time reigned fiue kings ouer the Latines, by the names of Ianus. Saturnus. Picus. Faunus. Latinus. the sixt Aeneas. These kings reigned about 150. yeeres in Italie before Ruffi. de Lati∣nor. origine. Aeneas came to Laurentum, which was about the time of Dauid, who beganne his kingdome in the foure hundred thir∣tie foure yeere after that the Israelites left Egypt, in the begin∣ning of the eight Iubilee. Yet Annius in his Chronicles of the Hetruscanes saith, that Annius de an∣tiq. Hetruria. after Hesperus died, his brother succeeded him named Italus in Vetulonia, the chiefe Towne at that time in Italie: this Ita∣lus had a daughter named Roma, who builded Capua in Latio, in the place where nowe Rome is builded vpon the one side of mount Auentine, as Fabius Pictor affirmeth in his booke De origine Vrbis Romae: this doeth Annius set downe in this sort. Fab. Pictor. 1 Roma reigned in Latio yeeres. 46. 2 After Roma her sonne Romanessus. 79. 3 After him Picus Priscus. 57. 4 After Picus, Faunus Priscus. 30. 5 After Fannus his daughter Agilla. 54. 6 Then reigned Vulcanus. 36. 7 After Mars, surnamed Ianus iunior. 23. 8 After Ianus succeeded Seculus surna∣med Saturnus. 36. 9 Picus Iunior. 34.
10 Fannus Iunior. 24. 11 Latinus Aeneas father in lawe. 38 12 And after Latinus reig∣ned Aeneas as his heire ma∣ried to his daughter. 3. In this both Annius and Fabius Pictor do agree, which yeres amount to 454. yeeres that Aeneas predecessors reigned be∣fore the destruction of Troy, and before he was king of the La∣tines. Sempro. de diui∣sione Ital. Of this Roma which was Italus daughter, Rome was first named, as Sempronius in his booke of the diuision of Italie af∣firmeth, and sayth further, that Romulus had his name giuen by the place named Roma, and not Roma from Romulus. But Ruffinus and Functius sayth, that Ascanius beganne his kingdome ouer the Latines, when Samson was Iudge in Israel, No time cer∣teine of the nestruction of Troy. in the sixt Iubilee after Moses, which is an hundred yeeres be∣fore Dauids kingdome. But omitting controuersies, Ascanius being in quiet pos∣session of the kingdome, hee caused a monument to be ere∣cted vp in maner and sort like an arche or a pillar, whereup∣on he caused this sentence to bee written rounde about that monument as followeth: Patri deo Indigeti qui Numici amnis vndas temperat. This pillar is made and consecrated to the Dionis. Halicar. lib. 1. god of the Latines, who hath power and soueraigntie ouer the riuer Numicus. Some say, that Aeneas made this in me∣morie of his father Anchises: other say, it was Ascanius doing in memorie of his father Aeneas, who vanished away at the riuer Numicus: others say, that the Latines did it in remem∣brance of their last king Latinus: but howe so euer it is, a graue there is as Halicarnassaeus sayth, that it is composed fine Aeneas monu∣ment at the riuer of Nu∣micus. and artificially made of wood and stone in most curious ma∣ner: but I will be briefe, and omitte these things, and will as I haue promised, onely set downe the names of the kings of the Latines. 2 Ascanius Aeneas sonne reigned after his father the se∣cond king of the Latines: this Ascanius had a sonne named Lib. 1. Iulus, of whome doeth Gens Iulia spring out. Ascanius is called in Halicar. Eurilion, who reigned twentie eight yeres.
3 After Ascanius succeeded Syluius a brother of Asca∣nius, & a sonne vnto Aeneas by Lauina king Latinus daugh∣ter, whom Aeneas left great with childe when he died: she for feare of Ascanius, hidde her selfe in mountaines and in wooddes, vntill she was brought to bed, and therefore her sonne was named Syluius, after which name all the kings of The cause why the kings of Alba were called Syluij. the Albans were named Syluij: this reigned king after Ascani∣us, & Iulus which was Ascanius sonne, who became a priest, and a religious man vnto the gods, which vntill the time of Augustus the familie and stocke of Iulia remained and con∣tinued as great Bishops named mag ni Pontifices, or else as high priests named summi Sacerdotes, amōg the Romanes the onely men of great renowme and fame. This Syluius reig∣ned twentie nine yeeres and dyed, and left behinde him Aeneas Syluius. 4 Aeneas Syluius reigned thirtie one yeeres, and left be∣hind These kings are set downe in this order by Halicar. lib. 1. him a sonne named Latinus Syluius, the fifth king of the Latines. 5 Latinus reigned after his father fiftie yeeres, and left behind a sonne named Alba Syluius, which was the sixt king of the Latines. 6 Syluius Alba reigned thirtie nine yeeres. 7 After him succeeded Capetus Syluius the seuenth king of the Latines, 24. yeeres. Eusebius named this king Atyn. Eutrop. lib. 1. doeth call him Epidum: so doeth Ouid in Meta∣morph. Reade Mane∣thon supplem. lib. 14. 8 Capetus left behind him Capis Syluius the 8. king of the Latines, who reigned 28. yeeres: of this king Capua a Citie in Italie was first builded. Eutrop. lib. 1. 9 After this succeded Calpetus Syluius the ninth king of the Latines, who reigned thirteene yeeres, and left behinde him a sonne named Tiberinus. 10 Tiberinus the tenth king of the Latines reigned 8. yeres and was slaine in a battell fought by the riuer Albula: Tiber first na∣med Albula. some say, that he was drowned in Albula, and therefore the riuers name was altered and named Tiber, after the name of
Tiberinus, which is that riuer that runneth through Rome: Annius in Cron. Etrusca. this Tiberinus left a sonne to succeede him called Agrippa Syluius. 11 Agrippa Syluius reigned fourtie yeeres, being the ele∣uenth king of the Latines. 12 Alladius Syluius the twelfth king of the Latines suc∣ceeded Agrippa, and reigned nineteene yeeres, whom Eu∣trop doeth call Remus Syluius, a wicked man and a cruell ty∣raunt, vsing many horrible attempts against God, & there∣fore Eutrop. lib. 1. was worthely slaine by a thunder boult: for he went a∣bout to make the people beleeue that hee was a God: hee would gape, and receiue the lightning into his mouth, but he and all his house was therewith consumed. Halic. lib. 1. 13 After him succeeded the thirteenth king of the La∣tines, which was named Auentinus Syluius, which reigned thirtie seuen yeeres: of this king mount Auentine, one of the seuen hilles in Rome was named, for that this king A∣uentinus was buried there. This time reigned Amazias king of Iuda, brother to Amos Isaiah his father, at what time reigned in Assyria Sardanapalus their last king. 14 Procus Syluius succeeded the fourteenth king of the Latines, which reigned twentie three yeeres, who left the Reade Annius Chron. of He∣truria of the succession of these Latine kings vntill Romulus time. kingdome to his eldest sonne Numitor Syluius, and left to his other younger sonne, money and great wealth: but this Amulius draue his elder brother Numitor out of his king∣dome, and Numitor was constrained like a priuate man to leade his life in the Countrie. Amulius hauing vsurped vpon his brother, studied to roote out and to make an end of his brothers house, to bee the surer in his kingdome: but hee was slaine in the Towne of Alba by Romulus, who came of the body of Numitor by his daughter Rhea, and (as Annius doeth write) begotten of Amulius his vncle, by whom the kingdome of Alba descended vnto Romulus, and was the seuenteenth king from Aeneas. This I haue laide downe as I founde in Annius and Halicarnassaeus worde by word, whereunto agree Fabius Pictor, and M. Cato in his frag∣ments.
CHAP. I. Of the first building of Rome by Romulus: of his gouernment, lawes, and appointing of Magistrates after he had founded the ci∣tie: of his warres with the Sabines: of his conquestes and victo∣ries ouer these Sabines, Fidenats, and of his triumph ouer king Acron. IWill omit to write of the prophane an∣tiquitie of the Tuscans, and of their chiefe citie Hetruria, of whom you may reade These 3. wrote more then they could proue of Italie, or more then is allowed by Myrsilus or Halic. Sempronius, M. Cato, Fabius Pictor, and ma∣ny others, where you may satisfie your selues of many such fables as are to bee founde in prophane histories: and there∣fore I will begin the historie of Rome frō the Latines, and so briefly passe vnto Romulus the first builder and first king of Rome, whose lineall race descended from the kings of the Latines, in the which kingdome reigned succes∣siuely sixteene kings before Romulus builded Rome from Aene∣as time, as in the histories of the kings of the Latines is de∣clared. And nowe in what Olympiad Rome was builded, the Chro∣nicles crie out one against another in such sort, that some say The historie of the Latines. that Rome was builded in the fift Olympiad, some in the sixt O∣lympiad, some in the eight, some in the ninth, and some in the twelfth Olympiad. But the best agree, that Rome was builded in the seuenth Olympiad: for yet prophane histories were not ac∣quainted with the actions of time, for fewe or none wrote in those dayes, or within three hundred yeeres after: for Rome in Romulus a war∣like king. the beginning was but a little towne, and so frō time to time encreased her Territories, and enlarged her Confines, first by Romulus pollicie in warres, and secondarily by Numa Pompi∣lius Numa Pomp. a peaceable prince. wisedome in religion and peace. At what time Phul Assur reigned the second king of newe Assyria, for now the monarchie of the Assyrians was takē away into Babylon after Sardanapalus time, by Phul Belochus the father of this king: for the kingdomes of newe Assyria or of Babylon,
of the Medes, and of Macedonia, began before the kingdome The kingdom of Lydia began in the first Olymp. of Rome the space of one Iubilee, which is but fiftie yeres: and the kingdom of Lydia began 26. yeres before Rome, in the first Olympiad. Thus at one time almost fiue kingdomes begā their gouernment. About the name of Rome, diuerse opinions are: some say, that the Pelagians, after they had ouercome the grea∣test part of the world, and had subdued many nations, in the end did stay there, and named it Rome first: some say, that after the destructiō of Troy, certaine Troians (to saue themselues frō the sword with their wiues) tooke sea, & were driuē by winde to the Thuscan shore neere to the riuer Tiber, & that one Roma M. Cato defrag. a Troiane lady named Rome, after her owne name: others hold opinion, that it was Romanus the sonne of Vlisses and of Circes, Fab. Pictor de aureo seculo. that first named Rome: other say otherwayes. Reade Plutarch, Fabius Pictor, and Cato, of the sundry opinions of Rome, you shall finde all in Halic. Many fables are written concerning the name of Rome, and as many about Romulus birth, who (as the best writers a∣gree Halicar. lib. 1.) is the most likest to haue first named Rome. This Romu∣lus descended right from the line of the kings of Alba, euen Romulus li∣neally descen∣ded from Aeneas. from Aeneas body, which was the first king of the Latines that became king of Alba: for so were the kings of Alba before As∣canius time named, from whom Romulus by succession line∣ally issued. The historic is knowen of the two brethren, Nu∣mitor and Amulius the last kings of Alba: these brethren agree∣ed by lotte for the kingdome to make diuision, the one to haue the golde, siluer, iewels brought thither from Troy, rea∣die money and goodes, which fell by lotte vnto Amulius: and the other the kingdome which fell to Numitor. This had a Rhea Romulus mother. daughter named Rhea, of some named Syluia, of others Ilia: this was Romulus mother afterward, though her vncle Amulius had put her to be one of the vestal virgins, which by the law might not be maried before thirtie yeeres of age, vnto whom Amu∣lius had a speciall regard lest shee should haue children: not∣withstanding she was found with child against the profession of the vestall virgines, and deliuered of two twinnes.
This put Amulius in great fright for the kingdome, which Amulius hin∣dred of his purpose. for all his sleightes in seeking meanes to destroye these two twinnes, he coulde not hinder one iote of Gods prouidence herein: this Romulus grewe in time a goodly young man in height and strength passing all his people, hee was holy and religious, and much addicted to obserue diuinations, and vn∣derstanding the lewde practises & wicked intention of Amu∣lius from time to time without cōsent of his graundfather Nu∣mitor they sluehim, & restored their graundfather Numitor in∣to the kingdom of Alba: and hauing many fugitiue slaues and banished men which came from diuers countries with Romu∣lus & Remus to kill Amulius, they thought good to build them a citie in that place where they both were brought vp first, at what time strife beganne betwixt Romulus and Remus the two Strife be∣tweene Romu∣lus and Remus. brethren, about the placing of Rome, which coulde not agree before Romulus had slaine his brother Remus. After whose death Romulus layde the first foundation of Rome the twentie one of April, which day the Romanes kept holy and in memorie of the natiuitie of their countrie: they kept a feast day which the olde Thuscanes kept before, and vp∣on that day named the feast of Palilea: yet some write, that the foundation of Rome was laide by Romulus the thirtie of A∣prill, Fabius Pictor lib. 2. Eutropius the second day of May. But when he had builded Rome, and situated the Citie vp∣on foure litle hilles, to them three other litle hilles after∣ward were added, whose names were written by Fabius Pictor in this sort. The first Mount named the mount Tarpeius. The second mount Quirinall. The third mount Palatine. The fourth mount Caelius. Dionis. lib. 2. The fifth mount Exquilinus. The sixth mount Auentinus. The seuenth mount Viminalis. After Numitor his graundfather died, the kingdom of Alba fell vnto Romulus by inheritance: and after hee once builded Rome, hee was also by common consent of all made king, which Romulus refused before hee had seene some mysterie
by diuination wherein Romulus was very expert: but after that he had offered sacrifice vnto Iupiter, and sawe light shi∣ning vpon the left hand towardes the right hand, which a∣mong the olde Hetruscans were signes of good successe, Ro∣mulus was perswaded by diuination to take the kingdome of Dionys. Halic. lib. 2. Rome vpon him: hee being king in his kingdome confirmed and made a lawe, that no king shoulde be in Rome after him, but such as by auguration had some happie tokens of his suc∣cesse in gouernment: this lawe continued not onely all the time of the Kings, but also in the time of the Consuls it was No king in Rome without diuination. obserued: that no Consul nor Dictator shoulde be elected without consultation with Augurers, according to Romulus lawe. reade more in Halicar. Nowe after that Romulus had builded Rome in this sort, Plutarch in Romulo. and had gotten the kingdome of Alba into his hande (for now Numitor his graundfather died) he diuided his best figh∣ting and chosen men into two companies: in euery one of 3000. footemē nd 300. horse of the old Ro∣manes called legions. these companies were three thousand footemen, and three hundred horsemen, which were called by the olde Romanes Legions. After this, hee instituted a common wealth, hee or∣deined a hundred counsellours which were named Patrici∣ans, or Senators. In the fourth moneth after Rome was builded, Romulus faigned certeine playes in Rome to drawe people into the Ci∣tie, whereby hee appointed by that meanes to entice the Sa∣bines daughters, and the women of Alba to come to Rome to see the playes: at what time a number were rauished by Romulus and his souldiers: the number of women which were thus rauished, some say were but thirtie, others say fiue hundred twentie seuen, and others say sixe hundred eightie The rape of the Sabines virgines. three: of the which maides Romulus tooke but one onely to him selfe, named (as Plutarch calles her) Hersilia, a wise sober Virgine, and who afterwarde was the mediation of peace betwixt the Romanes and Sabines: and they say, Talassiues was the watch worde giuen by Romulus to his men, at that time when this rauishment shoulde bee executed, which name
was so much honoured amongst the olde Romanes, as Hyme∣neus was amongst the Grecians. For as the Greekes doe cele∣brate the feaste of Hymeneus, and so honour him with songes at mariages: euen so the olde Romanes vsed the like ceremo∣nie of Talassiues, when any Romane was maried: in Greece, they vsed songes to Hymeneus at the mariages, in Rome songes named Talassion. I referre them that woulde faine delight them selues with Plutarch. in Romul, those matters, to Fabius Pictor and to Plutarch, and I wil briefe∣ly returne to the Romane histories which are long and large, for that the Romanes of this litle poore beginning which you heard of (I speake of Romulus a meane man in the beginning, Fabius lib. 2. De aure seculo. and of Rome a litle Towne at the first) became so great in time, that it deuoured and swallowed vp all the kingdomes Eutrop. lib. 1. of the worlde: so Eutropius saith, that the Romane Empire which at the first beginning thereof was the least of al other, in processe of time became the most ample of all other Em∣pires. Now while Romulus deuised by al pollicie to make Rome of some fame, Acron king of Ceminenses mistrusting the old en∣terprises Plutarch. of Romulus, and fearing the like attempt as he did to Fabius lib. 2. the Sabines, began to make hote and violent warres vpon him Eutrop. lib. 1. with a puissant army, inuaded Romulus territories, where Ro∣mulus met him couragiously, and (to auoide the slaughter of many) a combat was betwixt the two kings in persons ap∣pointed, in the which combat Romulus killed Acron, ouerwhō Acron king of Cemnens. kild by Romulus. he first triumphed & gote the victorie. This was the first bat∣tell that Romulus began with such good successe, that he ouer∣threw the Ceminenses, the Antenates, and the Crustumens, being aided by Seuis king of Etruria. Romulus (to discharge his vowe made to Iupiter) made his triumph ouer these nations, han∣ging the armour & weapons of king Acron about the bowe of a yong oke, which Romulus caried on his right shoulder mar∣ching on foote before the army towards the citie, with a roy∣al song of victory. This was the first triumph of Romulus, & the The first tri∣umph in Rome. first entry giuē into other triumphs that folowed presētly. Af∣ter this triumph of Romulus, the Sabines could not forget their
iniurie for their daughters and virgines rauished by Romulus, Tatius elected generall for the Sabines a∣gainst the Ro∣manes. but elected Tatius a gallant gentleman to be Generall of the Sabines, and to reuenge the wrong done by Romulus. Tatius besieged Rome: that time one named Tarpeius was appoin∣ted captaine of the Castle, whose daughter named likewise Tarpeia, betrayed the whole Citie for a reward, which Tatius promised: some say that Tarpeia was Tatius daughter. By this treason of Tarpia, the Sabines entred Rome, and great warre continued betwixt the Sabines & the Romanes 3. yeres. But in time betwixt Romulus and Tatius peace was conclu∣ded, and they both together reigned ioyntly, and gouerned Rome fiue yeeres, Tatius dwelling by mount Tarpeius, after∣warde called the Capitoll, and Romulus on mount Palatium: Warres be∣tweene Tatius and Romulus. but within a while in this fiue yeere Tatius was slaine, and Ro∣mulus gouerned himselfe and ouercame the Antenates, the Veients, and other nations, triumphed ouer them the second time. And when that Romulus had reigned thirtie seuen yeres, after three seuerall triumphes he died, of whose death diuerse Reade Dionis. Halicar. lib. 2. & Eutrop. lib. 1. opinions are of Romulus assencion into heauen in the sight of Proclus, and of a voyce heard he should be called Quirinus af∣ter his death: reade Plutarch concerning his vanishing away, and concerning his whole life. Romulus strength & his whole force exceeded not aboue two thousand footemen, and not three hundred horsemen, when he beganne his kingdome in Rome: but when Romulus died, hee left fourtie sixe thousand footemen, and a 1000. horsemen. During the time of Romulus gouernment reigned in Assyria Salmanasser 10. yeres, by whō Samaria was subdued, & the 10. Dionys. Halic. lib. 2. tribes of Israel caried captiue into Babylon. Also Senaherib his sonne reigned after his father seuen yeeres, he likewise wasted and spoyled Iudea in the time of king Ezechias, vntill hee was vanquished & al his armie to the number of a hundred twen∣tie sixe thousand. In Lydia reigned two kings during Romulus time, Haliagtes the 2. king, and Meles the 3. king. In the begin∣ning of the Romans kingdom the third kind of gouermēt begā in Athens after 17. kings gouernment, & then after 13. Iudges.
Now beganne the thirde alteration of the state called Decen∣nales principes, a magistrate that should continue tenne yeeres in office, and then another elected into his roume. Now in that time that Romulus raigned, beganne in Rome diuers kinds of magistrats and officers, lawes and orders were by Romulus appointed for the better gouernment of the citie of Rome, as Senators, Tribunes, Aediles, Celeres and diuers other sacred and religious offices, as Flamines, Bishops, Foeciales, Salij, vestal Nunnes, southsayers and others: the right vse of their offices being not knowen to the reader, vnlesse he be wel read Romulus lawes. in histories, I haue orderly as they were appointed by Romu∣lus, here set downe as many magistrates, officers and offices, as were in Rome by Romulus first instituted during his raigne. After that Romulus had builded Rome after the death of his brother Remus he made these many lawes. 1. First he deuided the whole company of the multitude into three tribes, and hee deuided the three tribes into 30. partes, which were called Curiae. 2. Then he elected one chiefe magistrate to gouerne Rome in his absence, which was named Praefectus vrbis, as Viceroy, or as lieuetenant to Romulus, as Iulius Caesar and Au∣gustus 750. yeeres after Romulus time vsed the like. 3. Romulus made a choise of 300. stoute and valiant souldiours called Celeres, and a captaine ouer them called 300. Celeres. Tribunus Celerum, these were Romulus gard: the Tribune was as Esquire of the body, or as captaine of the gard, to defend him from any sudden assault, and readie to execute the kings commandement. 4. Romulus appointed 12. men officers called Lictores, 12. Lictores. that should carie tipstaues or rods to make roume and way before the king. 5. Hee also appointed after them 12. othermen called Caduceatores, which were appointed next the kings person before him to carie axes, or mases, as Serieants at armes, an office of great antiquitie in all countreys of the world: for
we reade in Homer that Agamemnon sent a Serieant at armes The antiquitie of Serieants at Armes. called Talthubius to arrest Achilles for his absēce in the warres, and for his disobedience to Agamemnon, being then appoin∣ted generall for the Grecians against the Troyans. 6. When Romulus had prouided these officers for the sauegard of his person, he likewise erected counsellers, and made choise of a hundreth graue and wise men, who for the honour of their place, and dignitie of their calling, should be named Senators, to gouerne and to foresee the Senators by Romulus first made. dangers and perils of the citie, to punish vice, and to reward vertue. These were called by strangers, princes of Rome, to whom the king committed the whole direction and cor∣rection of the citie. The familie and stocke of the Senators were called Patricij: for all Senators were elected out of the Patricians. 7. Hee appointed the place and the time where the Augurers and Southsayers should vse their diuination tou∣ching The time and place of Au∣gurers. the euents and proceedings of Rome, which should be before Sunne rising, and after sunne setting: for Romulus himselfe caried the Augurers crooked staffe for his skill in diuination. 8. Then hee erected three Augurers with their orders Reade Fene∣stella and Pom Ltus of these lawes. and authorities, by whom all sacrifices and religious cere∣monies were solemnized. These three hee elected out of the three tribes. 9. He instituted that no man might enter into the Se∣nate to heare any cause pleaded or consulted, before hee were 25. yeres of age: he seemed to be of Aristotles opinion, that held, Iuuenem non esse Philosophiae idoneum. 10. After that Romulus had inuented these many good and seemely decrees, to set foorth that little kingdome of Rome: Now last of all he made lawes for setting foorth the dignitie of a king, as to weare purple colours: for Romulus The dignitie of a king. ware a coate of purple in graine: and vpon that a long robe of purple colour: for this princely and riche colour was onely esteemed of the olde Romanes, and so honoured, that
none might weare it but the kings of Rome, and after the kings time, onely the Dictators and Consuls. 11. Romulus instituted a feast in memorie of Hersilia, and other Sabine virgines which were rauished, by whose meanes peace was concluded betwene Romulus and Tatius king of the Sabines. These feasts were called Matronalia. Matronalia. 12. He also instituted the feast called Lupercalia, which Lupercalia. was celebrated in Rome in memory of Romulus escape, when that he slew Aemilius his father vnknowen, but taken for his vncle, he ranne with a naked sword in his hand from Alba, to the very place where the wolfe gaue him sucke first. Reade Plutarch of Romulus life. They vsed at this feast a sacrifice in a denne vnder mount Palatine in the moneth of Februarie, A sacrifice to Pan and to Faunus. in the honour of god Pan and Faunus. Now Rome hauing her first foundation by Romulus, and much encreased by the policie and gouernment of Romulus, that the confines of Rome extended into diuers parts of Italy, and so enlarged by the warres of Romulus, and yet not 8 miles from the towne of Rome, that Numa Pompilius who succeeded him not in blood, but by election, for that hee was a Sabine borne in the citie of Cures, and had maried Tacia the onely daughter and heire of Tatius the Sabine, who before had go∣uerned Rome together with Romulus. This Numa was entreated to accept the kingdome by am∣bassadours Numa Pompi∣lius the second king of Rome. sent vnto him from the people of Rome with one consent, who after a long negatiue oration made vnto Proclus and Valesus, and being vrged thereunto both by Sabines and Eutrop. lib. 1. Romanes, accepted against his will the gouernment of Rome: after the Senators bare rule by the space of fiue dayes, which was called interregnum betweene Romulus and Numa, which Interregnum for fiue dayes. was accompted one whole yeere. This king was vertuous, godly; and religious, addicted al∣together to gouerne Rome with peace: for during the whole time of his raigne, Numu waged no warre, but established lawes, and framed such decrees and orders, as kept the people
which had bene so long accustomed with warres, vnder Ro∣mulus in quietnes and tranquilitie, which neuer happened in Rome, but onely in Numas time, and once in Augustus Caesars time. When Numa was consecrated king of Rome by the Au∣gurers, hee beginneth with the seruice of his gods, and there∣fore he instituted bishops, and diuers kinde of priests: he ere∣cted a colledge for the vestal virgines: he appointed the holy Flamines, F∣ciales, Salij. and immortal fire, with honour and reuerence to be kept by the vestal virgines. These ceremonies he had from Greece: for the like ceremonie was in Athens by old women, in watching the holy lampe, and in Delphos in the temple of Apollo. Ceremonies in Athens. Hee founded diuers temples in Rome, with innumerable rites and ceremonies: he first corrected the Kalender, though not so exactly, yet he so perfected it, that then the Romane yere The yeere corrected and augmented by Numa. of tenne moneths was made twelue, by adding Ianuary and February. Which Numa not only added to the yere of tenne moneths, but he mended also the 10. moneth, and the dayes of the moneths: he corrected the Kalenders which was also by Romulus begunne, but finished by Numa. This continued from Romulus vntill Iulius Caesars time by the name of Romulus yeere, who then caused the yeere to be∣ginne in March, a moneth which he consecrated to his sup∣posed father Mars, not knowing then Aemilius to be his father whom hee slewe then. But to Numa, in whose time a great plague raigned in Rome, at what time fell from heauen a bra∣sen or copper target, and lighted betweene Numas hand cal∣led Ancylia. Of this target I shal speake in another place. The lawes that Numa taught then to the people being rude and ignorant, were no otherwise made, then the lawes of Ly∣curgus Dissimulation in Religion. in Sparta, or of king Minos in Creete: for Numa made the people to beleeue that the lawes which he gaue, were frō the gods sent into him by the nimph Aegiria, with whom he had sundry times conference in mount Auentine. So did Lycurgus admonish the Spartans with the lawes from Apollo, which Ly∣curgus Lycurgus. (as he saide) brought from Delphos into Greece: in like fort Minos made his people beleeue, that his decrees and Minoes.
lawes were giuen to him by Iupiter in mount Curetes. So did Platiae Silt. Silla make his souldiers beleeue, that hee had some spirite in a litle table that hanged about his necke, that instructed him in all his warres. And so did Sertorius by his white hinde make Superstition soone belee∣ued. his captaines thinke, that hee was sent from the goddesse Diana. Now Numa a peaceable and religious prince, aduanced tillage in Rome, and deuided his people into diuers occupati∣ons: hee limitted bonds to the territories of Rome, and tooke away all factions that helde before with Romulus and Tatius, and gouerned Rome with such iustice and clemencie, that all warres and dissentions were forgotten in Rome: the temple of Ianus was shut, which was an olde custome in the time of peace, which continued the whole raigne of Numa, which was 43. yeeres: for the Romanes had no warres in all Numas time: for (as Plato saith) there is true gouernment, and there Platoes saying of a king. is a happy common wealth, where the minde of a wise Philo∣sopher is ioyned to the maiestie of a king, where graue coun∣sel is giuen, and good lessons taught, the vertuous man rewar∣ded, and the vicious man punished. This good king liued of al others most happy in peace and The happie raigne of Numa. quietnes, all the dayes of his life: and the misfortune of fiue other kings which after him succeeded, caused the honour of Numa to shine with more glorie: for (as Plutarch saith) foure of them died not their naturall death, three were killed with Plutarch in Numa. treason, and the fourth was striken with a thunder bolt, and burnt with lightning, and the 5. driuen out of his kingdome, and died in exile: so that of the seuen kings Numa onely ex∣celled, of whom some say that hee had no children but one daughter called Pompilia, which was maried to C. Martius Co∣riolanus. Pompilia. Of this Pompilia was borne Ancus Martius the fourth king of Rome: some say againe, that Numa had foure sonnes, named Pompo, Pinus, Calpus, and Mamercus: and of these foure The 4. sonnes of Numa. descended the noblest races and most ancient houses of the Romanes. Reade of this king more in Plutarch, and in Dioni∣sius Halicar. lib. 1. Halicarnassaeus.
In Aethiope raigned while Numa liued and ruled Rome, a king called Tarachus, which came to ayde the king of Egypt against Tarachus. Sanaherib king of the Assyrians, at what time the Empire of E∣gypt was deuided into twelue prouinces, by equall portions betwixt 12. princes. When Numa beganne his kingdome in Rome, Candaules the fourth king of Lydia gouerned the Lidians, whose historie both of his wife, and of his life, together with Herodot. lib. 1. the fable of Giges ring, is written in Herodotus at large. Ma∣nasses also king of Iudea for his wickednes against the Lorde, was deliuered into the hands of Benmerodach king of the Chal∣deans, and was caried captiue into Babylon. Deioces the fift go∣uernour that gouerned the Medes, and the first king that raig∣ned ouer them, liued this time. In Athens raigned Leocrates the fift magistrate, Absander the 6. magistrate, and Erixias the last magistrate of Athens, in that gouernment of 10. yeeres to Decennales principes, con∣tinued tenne yeeres. euery magistrate appointed, which continued the time of 7. seuerall magistrats, which was 70. yeeres. Concerning this kings death, he himselfe cōmanded that his body should be burned, and therfore they made two cof∣fines of stone: in the one of them Numas body was layed: in the other, his bookes which were written with his owne hand: twelue bookes were written concerning the office of the priests, and 12. other cōcerning Philosophie, and the dis∣cipline of Numa. He commaunded in his last will, that these Numa buried at the hill Ia∣niculum. bookes should be buried with his body at the hill called Iani∣culū: and so after he had liued 80. yeres, and raigned 43. yeres, he died: who in his life time instituted these lawes. Dionisius Hali∣car. lib. 3. 1. He instituted the kinds of priests which were called Flamines, of these were 4: one to Iupiter called Flamen dialis Flamines. who only should be present at sacrifice done to Iupiter: two vnto Mars called Flamines Martiales: these in like maner should instruct the people the maner and order of sacrifice done to Mars. 3. And the fourth he appointed in the honour of Qui∣rinus, called Quirinalis Flamen, to celebrate the memorie of Romulus: for so Romulus was honoured and called by the Romulus cal∣led Quirinus.
name of Quirinus. After this these priests were all bishops, archbishops, cardinals and patriarkes, by the names of Fla∣mines, Protoflamines, Archiflamines, &c. 4. Then Numa instituted another order of priesthood called Faeciales, which were peace makers, to pacifie quarels, Faecies. to entreat of peace, if they could, else to denounce warres: for without their licence the king might not commence warre with the enemies. 5. Againe he appointed another nōber of priests which were 12. named Salij, that should dance & leape before the sacrifice in the moneth of March, apparelled with pide cas∣socks, girded with swords about them, with copper helmets on their heads, with Thracian targets, and short daggers in their hands. 6. He augmented the nomber of soothsayers by Romulus first instituted, & erected a colledge of soothsayers, appoin∣ting Pomp. Laetus. one to be chiefe called Pontifex Max. that had the au∣ctority of hie priest, & was master of al the pōtifical lawes. 7. He also made a lawe that no stranger might be of this sacred societie, but such holy deuout and religious men, as Pontifex Max. with his colledge of soothsayers, should elect by diuination. 8. He also appointed 4. vestal virgins, which should watch Plato in Numa Pomp. and attend the holy and immortall fire, with reuerence and great honor consecrated to Vesta, which vsed like ceremo∣nies as the olde women did in Athens in watching the holy lampe. 9. He decreed that the targets called Ancylia should be in Ancylia. the custodie of the 12. priestes called Salij, in like maner as the custodie of the lampe was cōmanded to the virgins. 12. Salij. 10. After this he deuided his people into diuers occupa∣tiōs, some to tillage, some to one science, some to another. 11. He instituted certaine priestes to Berecynthia, which should be gelded, which were named Galli, aster the name of a riuer in Phrygia, where they were gelded: but this was Pesinuntia as Images brought to Rome by Scipio Nasica, long
after Numas time, to whom these ceremonies were done in memorie of Claudia, who with her girdle halde the shippe where the idole of Pesinuntia was. Reade of these lawes and orders more in Pomp. Laetus, and in Fenestella. CHAP. II. Of the gouernment, lawes and orders of Rome after Numa Pompi∣lius time, vntill the ende of Tarquinius the proude, the last king of Rome: of their warres & victories during this time ouer their neighbours about them: of the enlargement of the citie of Rome, and of their territories: and last of the banishment of their kings. AFter this Numa succeeded Tullus Hosti∣lius borne in the towne of Medullia, the Tullus Hosti∣lius the thirde king of Rome. thirde king of the Romanes, a man of cleane contrary disposition to Numa: this followed the nature of his grandfa∣ther Hostilius Tullus, a deare and a sure friend of Romulus, of whom by his ser∣uice Hostilius Tullus a friend of Romulus. against the Sabines and others, hee well deserued to be esteemed: this was the first in Rome that ware a garland of oken leaues, in token and proofe of his vi∣ctorie against the Fidenats. Such one was this Tullus, more bent farre to warre then to peace, readie to take any quarrell in hande to defende the citie, which happened vnto him as soone as hee had entred into his kingdome: for C. Cluilius chiefe gouernour of the Albanes much enuying the good suc∣cesse of Rome, permitted the Albanes to robbe, to spoile, and to waste the territories of Rome, most desirous of warres against the Romans: but before he could do any exploit, he was found dead in his tent. After him succeeded in his place Metius Suffetius, which M. Suffetius. likewise vsurped & folowed his predecessour. Cluilius among all the iniuries against Tullus Hostilius, against his faith and promise to the Romane Empire, who in right of blood were kings of the Albanes, and to whom they then ought by law of armes to haue payed tribute: but M. Suffetius had the like end as Cluilius had. Reade the whole history in Dion. Halicarnassus Halicar. lib. 3.
of this king. Now Tullus hauing this occasion offred to him by the Albanes, he waged warres against the Veients, and Fide∣nats, and gaue them such sharpe battels, that after he had con∣quered The warres of this king is written in Li∣i lib. 1. them & triumphed ouer them, he also in like sort wēt against the Albanes, ouerthrew them, & tooke their city, which was builded in Aeneas time by his sonne Ascanius, named Alba longa, which had florished 487. yeres, brought the people cap∣tiue to Rome after much slaughter, so that by the ruine and spoile of the Albanes, the Romans glory increased, & their king∣dom Eutrop. lib. 1. was enlarged, for that the Latins were the first stocke of the Romanes from whence they had their first beginning and ofspring. A history worth the reading is written in Halicanassaeus, how Tullus king of the Romanes, and Suffetius gouernour of the Al∣banes, Halicar lib. 3. consented to auoyd great slaughter and much effusion of blood which should happen to both parties if their armies would enter into battel, to cōmit the battel to three men cho∣sen of either parties, 3. of the Romans and 3 of the Albanes, and where the victory shal happen, there the other partie should yeeld. The king Tullus brought into the field 3. men that were brethren, the sonnes of Horatius a noble Romane. Suffetius like∣wise Horatius. broght into the field 3. brethren the sonnes of Curiatius: Curiatius. these 3. Albane brethren were cousine germaines to the 3. Ro∣mane brethren. These sixe men after they had sacrificed vnto their gods, and had taken leaue of their parents & friends, they entred the battel, and after a long & doutful combate betwixt both parties, the Romans conquered the Albanes, and so by law of armes Alba longa their chiefe citie, and all the kingdome of Alba longa destroyed. Albania was made subiect to the Romanes, though still they re∣belled and held out against the Romans many battels & sundry euents of warres, vntil Tul. Hostilius did fully conquer them in the 28. Olympiad, at what time mount Coelius was adioyned to Rome, and made habitable by the king, and there Tullus the king kept his court. Now as soone as the Albanes were conquered, the Sabines Oros. 2 lib. againe waged warres against the Romans, and were vāquished in the battell of Malicusa. After that Tullus Hostilius had con∣quered
Alba longa, which was distant 12. miles frō the citie of Eutrop. lib. 1. Rome, then Veiena and Fidena, the one 6. miles, the other 18. miles distant from Rome, & had enlarged the citie with these Halicar. lib. 3. confines and territories more then Romulus did, he was striken with lightning, that both hee, his wife, and all his house were burnt, when he had raigned 32. yeres, in the 35. Olymp. When this king raigned in Rome, Zaleucus gouerned the Locresiās, who for his law making, & law keeping, is much mentioned in hi∣stories: Zaleucus histor. for in that law against adulterie his owne sonne first offending should haue lost both his eyes, but his nobles made great intercessiō for the kings sonne: the king to satisfie their requests, shewing himselfe a naturall father to his sonne, and a Rare iustice. iust king to his people, caused one of his sonnes eyes, and an∣other of his owne eyes to be taken out, to performe the lawe which he made. In the time of Tul. Hostilius, Manasses king of Iuda was con∣uerted vnto his God, and thereby restored to his kingdome when he expelled idolatry, and serued God the rest of his life. In Chaldea raigned Nabuchodonosor the father of the great Na∣buchodonosor, and in Media Phaortes the 6. king of the Medes. Du∣ring the time of this king in Rome, raigned in Lydia Ardis their 6. king: and in Macedonia Philip their 6. king also: for the Medes, the Macedonians, the Lydians and the Romanes began their Em∣pires within 60. yeres together. Tullus Hostilius the third king appointed two Quaestors, as it Two Quaestors by Tullus Ho∣stilius appoin∣ted. were two Treasurers, to sease by the pole euery citizen of Rome, to leauie and to keepe the same money to the vse of the citie: he created also 2. Iudges which were called Duum viri: these should determine causes for life and death. In like sort of Ancus Martius with his lawes, Tarquinius Priscus and his de∣crees, you may reade in Pomp. Laetus and Fenestella. Euen so Seruius Tullus the 6. king of Rome, perceiuing that the Senators had more to doe then they could well accom∣plish, especially in priuat causes of the citie, he instituted two Two Censors by Ser. Tullius. men called Censors, to record and to write the nomber of all men in seruice, to take view of such offenders within the ci∣tie, and to punish crimes and offences: and if any Senators
should not execute iustice, he should be depriued out of the Senate. If any of the magistrats created by Romulus should not imitate and liue within the lawe of Romulus, they should be by the Censors punished. If any of the religious officers and the priests which Numa instituted, should transgresse the lawe of Numa, he should also by these Censors be reformed: this office cōtinued 5. yeres, and vpon the fift yere new Cen∣sors Pomp. Laetus. were made: this was called Lustrū, at what time althe citie Lustrum. was visited, all faults opened vnto them, and all iniuries done reformed by them, as C. Fabritius being Censor, remoued frō the Senate P. Cornelius Ruffinus, for the expences of 10. pound more then was allowed by these Censors: and so M. Cato ba∣nished The iustice of the Censors. C. Flaminius brother from the Senators, for the fauou∣ring of a prisoner at the request of a woman. The auctoritie of those Censors were such, as might reforme all things by law. The old Romanes vsed to accompt their actions, & to nom∣ber their yeeres euery fift yeere which they called Lustrum, as Fenestella de mag. Rom. the Greciās vsed to nomber the yeres by their Olympiad, which the Greekes named Penterides. This office of Censors conti∣nued for a time in Rome, being renued euery fift yeere, which was a great day in Rome, and appointed by Seruius Tullus the Beroaldus lib. 1. sixt king of Rome, and endured vntil Vespatian the Emperours time, the last conquerour of Ierusalem 650. yeeres: yet I reade not but of 75. Lustrums which is 360 yeres. For Eutropius saith, that both Lustrum and the Olympiad, endured no longer then The Olympiads continued vn∣til Constantine the great. Sillas time. But yet compted vntil Constantines time. Tarquinius the proud appointed 3. men to keepe the Sibillas books, after they were augmented from 3. to 10. and at last frō 10. to 15. These were chosen out aswel of the Patricians, as of the vulgar people: they should once a yere in the moneth of Februarie reade these bookes, and after they should see the bookes safelie kept vntil Februarie againe. Now after that Tullus died, succeeded in Rome Anc. Martius Ancus Martius the fourth king of Rome. the 4. king, one in nature like vnto his grandfather Numa Pom∣pilius, and one that in the beginning of his gouernment imita∣ted Numa in all points, commanding the people to obserue the lawes and ceremonies of his grandfather, thinking therby
to haue the like successe of quietnes and peace, commaunded Numas lawes to be written in tables, and be set on postes and pillars in the market place, studied diligently to keepe his peo∣ple Numas lawes in tables. in peace, & thoght to liue quietly with that litle territorie that then the city of Rome gouerned. But it happened other∣wise: for scant he had established himselfe in his kingdom, whē the Latins vnder their gouernour there, waged warres against the Romans, and brought an army to the very towne of Medul∣lia, which they tooke, and possest for 3. yeres in spite of Ancus Martius. Now this king was forced to forsake Numa, which liued in peace, and to folow Tullus his predecessor in warres, and therefore he altered his minde, and gathered force toge∣ther, Halicar. lib. 3. and began stoutly to answere the Latins, and to giue them so many battels, that he destroyed, vanquished, and wan their chiefe cities, as Politoriū, Telena, Ficania, and diuers others: he recouered Medullia, & gaue diuers ouerthrowes to the Latins: All this histo∣rie is read in Liui lib. 1. then straight he was much troubled with the Sabines and Fi∣denats, the Veients, and the Volscanes: these people euer warred against the kings of Rome: for yet Rome was not come to any greatnes. But when they had quite conquered the Sabines, La∣tines, Veients, Volscanes, Fidenats, and other nations next vnto Oros. lib. 2. them, which oftentimes they did, and they stil reuolted, then the citie of Rome began to looke vnto other kingdomes: but during the time of their kings, their owne neighbours an∣noyed them most. This king Ancus Martius had no rest during his whole go∣uernment, vntill he had brought these people before spoken vnto subiection: then he began to build, & to enlarge the city Mount Auen∣tine ioyned o Rome. of Rome by taking mount Auentine vnto it, and the hil Ianicula a large ground of 18. furlongs about, ful of diuers yong trees, specially laurel, but by An. Martius made habitable and popu∣lous, & there vpon the hil Auentine a faire temple was builded vnto Diana: and to this moūt, Martius brought frō Telena and Politorium and other townes, men and women to dwell there. A bridge made by An∣cus Martius ouer the riuer Tiber. After this, the king builded a towne fast vpō the sea shore cal∣led Hostia 6. miles frō Rome, & made a bridge ouer the riuer of Tiber which ranne by Rome: he also builded a prison house to
punish offenders, & diuers other monumēts, which you may read in Halicarnasaeus: whē he had raigned 24. yeres he died, lea∣uing Ancus died a king. behind him 2. sōnes, the one an infant, and the other not able to succeed his father in the kingdom, & therfore Tarqui∣nius, Tarquinius Priscus the fift king of Rome. a man of good seruice before time knowen, and in great friendship with Anc. Martius, was by consent of the Senators and of the people elected the 5. king of the Romans. In the be∣ginning of whose raigne Thales, Periander, and Terpāder, euen then the 17. Iubilee after Moses began, in the 41. Olympiad. Errors in the Olympiads. But first I must set downe what kings raigned in other coun∣treis, before I speake of Tarquinius Priscus. In the beginning therefore of Ancus Martius raigne, raigned king of Egypt Ne∣cho, by whom Iosias king of Iuda was then slaine, and in Media Ciaxeres, in Daniel called Darius Medus. This time raigned in What kings raigned this time in other Countreys. Babylon Nabuchodonosor, by whom Ioakim king of Iuda was ca∣ried captiue vnto Babylon: and in Lidia raigned Sadaites their seuenth king. Then the Prophet Ieremie prophecied the 70. yeeres of captiuitie to the Iewes, in the time of Ancus Martius, after whom Tarquinius Priscus, by election and not by succes∣sion became the fift king of Rome. Of whose countrey, paren∣tage and friends, and how he came to be king of Rome, reade Halicarnassaeus, where you shal finde the whole historie therof. Against this king the Latins had diuers aydes frō the Hetrus∣cans, specially from fiue great cities inhabited by people cal∣led Clusini, Arretini, Volaterani, Rusellani, and Vetulonenses. And in like maner as before to Ancus Martius, so now they began with Tarquinius Priscus, one that had good cause to knowe them, for that he had tried them before, and therefore vsed Priscus an olde souldier of Anc. Martius. them as his predecessors did, ouerthrew them, and subdued them, so that their cities, their townes, and their countreys were made euen to the ground. By this king were the Fidenats, the Latins, and the rest of those nations about Rome subdued and destroyed: the Hetrus∣cans which kept Tarquinius in warres nine yeeres were ouer∣throwen, in so much that they made Tarquinius prince of He∣truria: Priscus made prince of He∣truria. so the Hetruscans after nine yeres warres being broken
and weary, thought good with one consent to send ambassa∣dors from all the cities of Italy to Tora to entreate for peace: Meanes made to Priscus for peace. which was graunted vnto them, vpon condition that they would make Tarquine their prince, and to haue the name of their chiefe magistrate in euery city, which were called Lucu∣mones, Lucumones olde magistrates a∣mong the He∣truscans. to hold of him. This being of meere force consented, Tarquinius Priscus granted them their owne lawes, customes, and liberties in all points as they had before. After this, he gouerned in peace, after he had triumphed with great pompe and solemnitie as then the time serued. He went dayly most sumptuous inapparel: he ware a crowne of gold vpō his head, and had on Togam pretextā, with a scepter of Iuory in his hand, which was then strāge to see in Rome: for Romulus had his scep∣ter Priscus Scepter of Iuory. but of wood: he sate in a chaire of Iuory, and his Serieants about him, where he gaue lawes to the people: he was admo∣nished of this good fortune whē yet he was a stranger in Rome by an Egle, who toke his hat frō his head in his claw, and flew so hie in the aire, that scant the Egle could be seene: and in Diuination by an Egle. the sight of al his people the Egle brought the hat againe, and let it fall vpon Priscus head: he was by this perswaded, that it signified good, and therefore expected the kingdome after Ancus Martius, though a stranger, and that Ancus had 4. sonnes to succeed him. The Sabines which held the Romanes play for 5. yeres, were also by Tarquinius ouerthrowen. In these warres against the Sabines, Ser. Tullius was made general: this for his good seruice Ser. Tullius ge∣nerall vnder Priscus. and wise policie, afterward succeeded Tarquinius in the king∣dome: for he was esteemed of the people, & in much fauour with Tarquinius: in the like fauour was Tarquinius before with Ancus Martius, whose seruice seemed such, that he was elected king ouer the Romanes, though he was a stranger. Now after that Tarquinius had subdued al townes and cities about Rome, and had made the confines of Rome larger then before: yet (as Eutropius saith) all the warres, victories and tri∣umphes which Romulus, T. Hostilius, Anc. Martius, and this Tar∣quinius Priscus, these 5. kings had ouer many people, extended
not aboue 15. miles from the citie of Rome, so hard were the Romans kept in warres on all sides, & applied with their neigh∣bours, and so long were they augmenting their Empire. But to returne to Tarquinius, who made the city of Rome farre The great be∣nefits of Pris∣cus to the citie of Rome. more famous then before, by building the walles thereof, by doubling the nomber of the Senators, & the first beginning of the capitol: this king also builded a place for playes, called Circus, and instituted diuers games there, betwixt mount Auē∣tine and mount Palatine: he made sinks to auoyd the filth and ordure of the citie, and with great expences made it to be ca∣ried into the riuer of Tiber. This Tarquinius was the first that The first tri∣umph with Chariot. entred the citie of Rome with any triumph on chariot, though some say that Romulus, some Valerius Publicola: but Tarquinius Priscus by cōmon consent was the first that set forth triumphs in so stately and magnificent shew, and hee himselfe the first that triumphed on triumphant chariot, and that three seueral times, ouer the Latines, Sabines, and Hetruscanes: and when hee had aigned 38. yeeres, he was slaine by the sonnes of Ancus Priscus slaine. Martius his predecessour. During his gouernment, raigned in other countreys these kings: in Lydia, Haliactes their 8. king, in Macedonia, Europus their 7. king, in Egypt raigned Apries, whom Ieremy calleth Ho∣phra: at what time Ierusalem was destroied by Nabuchodonosor, and the Iewes broght captiue vnto Babylon. In this kings raigne the warres grew betwixt the Lydians & the Medes, when Astia∣ges raigned king ouer the Medes. This time florished in the last yeres of this king many wise men, as Solon in Athens, Thales in Miletū, and others called the 7. sages. Likewise about the last yeeres of this king, Nabuchodonosor was by repentance for his transgressions against the Lord, restored to his kingdome a∣gaine. Now after this, the 6. king of the Romans was named Seruius Tullius, of whom you heard before, how he was a cap∣taine Seruius Tullus the 6. king of Rome. vnder Priscus, and now elected king in the 50. Olympiad, & in the beginning of the 18. Iubilee, being maried to Tarqui∣nius his own daughter a noble womā borne, yet a captiue and Liui. decad. 1. a handmaid. This time liued Accius Nauius, a great soothsayer
of great fauour and credite in the citie of Rome: this man be∣fore the king, who scoffed the art of Nauius and caried in his bosome a hard flint stone, onely to trie the skill of Nauius, which he with a knife did cut through the midst, and therfore Cicero 3. de diuina. the king commaunded his statue or image to be made, and to be erected vp in that very place where he vsed this feat before Priscus Tarquinius, in memorie of his arte, with his flint stone and knife in his hand. His fathers name was Tullus, & his mo∣ther Halicar lib. 3. was named Ocrisia: he was wise, eloquent and discreete, whom the people honored much, and whose counsel Tarqui∣nius vsed in any doubtful action as an oracle: he was brought vp in militarie discipline, as both the Sabines and Hetruscans can testifie. This king perceiuing that Ancus Martius sonnes had slaine king Priscus his predecessor and his father in lawe, vnderstan∣ding himselfe to stande in the like danger if they should liue, they being right heires to the Empire of Rome, Seruius by de∣cree banished the sonnes of Martius out of the territories of the Romanes: yet Fabius Pictor saith, that they were the sonnes of Tarquinius Priscus: but hee is reprehended and conuicted The errour of Fabius Pictor. with probable reasons by Halicarnassaeus. But howsoeuer it was, the like ende that Tarquinius Priscus had by Ancus Mar∣tius sonnes, the same had Seruius Tullus by Tarquinius sonnes, both murthered. As touching the gouernment of Seruius Tullius in the Ser. Tullius the sixt king of Rome. warres against the enemies of Rome, he excelled his predeces∣sours, and brought the people, the townes, and cities about Rome most willingly to yeeld themselues, after that he had tri∣umphed ouer them with 3. solemne triumphes: for this king for the space of 20. yeeres, waged warres with the Hetruscans, with the Sabines and others, so that he conquered at length all places about Rome without blood: for the Romans yet had no great force to make warre farre from Rome: for during the trop. lib. 1. time of their kings which was 244. yeeres, which was the first infancie of Rome, they had their handes full to answere those next cities, and their next neighbours dwelling about them.
This king was the first that inuented mustering of men, The first mu∣ster of Rome. which before this time was not knowen, as Eutropius saith, in al the territories of Rome: for in Seruius Tullus time, the names of all the inhabitants of Rome were taken and accompted by the pole, there were found in the Citie of Rome eightie foure thousand Citizens able men. In Seruius time brasse was coy∣ned in Rome, and after Seruius time two hundred yeeres there was no siluer coyned in Rome. By this king three hilles were annexed to Rome, the one was called Quirinalis, the seconde Viminalis, & the third called Esquilinus. By this king the walles Halicar. lib. 4. of Rome were entrenched rounde about, and by this king was a faire Temple builded vpon mount Auentine to the godesse Diana. Reade more in Dionysius Halic. but the end of this king was (as I saide before) to be slaine by the wickednesse of his sonne in lawe Tarquinius, who was sonne to the last king Tar∣quinius Seruius Tullus slaine by his daughter. Priscus, whō this Seruius Tullus succeeded, & the trea∣cherie of his owne daughter whō he had espoused to the said Tarquinius. Thus was he slaine when hee had reigned fourtie foure yeeres king of Rome. During which time reigned in Egypt king Amasis, and in Macedonia Alcetas. In the time of this king Seruius, Croesus the last king of Lydia was conquered by Cyrus, and the king∣dome of Lydia brought vnder the Persians, at what time Cyrus beganne his Empire in Persia, after he had conquered Astia∣ges, the last king of the Medes, and made Medea as Lydia was, subiect vnto Persia at one time: for Cyrus grew in Seruius time the strongest king, and the onely Monarch of the worlde: for Lu. Tarq super∣bus the last king. after he had conquered these two great kings, Croesus king of Lydia, and Astyages king of Media, he also at that instant subdu∣ed Balthasar the last king of Babylon, so that he adioyned to the Empire of Persia, the kingdomes of Media, Lydia, and Babylon. This time did Daniel prophecie of the foure Monarchies by the foure beastes rising out of the seas the very ground of all Chronicles. In Seruius Tullius reigne happened the renow∣med and famous battell betwixt the Argiues and the Lacede∣monians, Habar. lib. 4. three hundred against three hundred on either side,
to trie and to make a full conquest by them of all their warres: which happened to the Lacedemonians, for that three of the three hundred escaped, and all the rest on both sides died Herodot. lib. 1. manfully in the fielde. This time florished Stesichorus and Hi∣ponax, likewise Anaximenes the Philosopher, and Chilo one of the seuen wise men liued in this age. Nowe I will returne againe to Rome, and speake of Lu. Tar∣qninius surnamed the proud, who succeeded Seruius Tullus in Lu. Tarq. super. and the last king. the kingdome not lawfully, but by force and strength, in the 601. Olympiad sixteene yees before the begining of the nine∣teenth Iubilee. In this Olympiad Agatharchus wanne the victo∣rie in the games of Olympus. This king as hee entred vnto the kingdome of Rome with force and violence, so hee continued with crueltie and tyrannie, farre differing frō Tarquinius Pris∣cus his graundfather. This king planted himselfe in Rome a∣gainst the Senators and the people, and garded himselfe with Halicar. lib. 4. wicked and lewde people, translating the whole gouernment of the kingdome into tyrannie: he maried his daughter to the Gouernour and Dictator of the Latines named Octauius Ma∣milius of the stocke of Telegonus, the sonne of Vlisses by Cyrses, Oct. Mamilius. to strengthen himselfe against his enemies. This Tarquinius was maried to Seruius daughter, a very ver∣tuous and modest lady, and his yonger brother named Arnus The differēce of two brethrē maried two sisters of con∣trary disposi∣tion. maried the yonger daughter of Seruius, a wicked and lewde woman not of the disposition of her elder sister, a match vn∣fitte for so quiet a husband, not like his elder brother: the dif∣ference betweene Tarquine the proud and his brother, or his sōne as some suppose, & also the differēce betweene the two sisters was great, the one rash, cruell, wicked, false, and full of all impietie, to whom happened an honest, sober, and vertu∣ous lady, and yet could not doe any good vnto him: and to his good brother being gentle, courteous, good & godly hap∣pened (as I tolde you) that wicked scorpion the yonger sister, who when that she coulde not perswade her husband to any wicked acte, shee came to him, (I meane to Tarquine the Tarqui. wife a vertuous lady. proude) who was as ready as shee to kill, to murther, and to
commit any wicked thing else: shee councelled him, and shee furthered him to murther the olde king her father, and Liui. lib. 4. to take the kingdome into his hand. What should I rehearse the number of this womans faultes? Reade iui and Halicar∣nassaeus, and you shall reade how Tarquinius slue the king his Dionys. Halic. lib. 4. father in law, and vsurped the kingdome, and afterward how tyraunt like he gouerned the Citie of Rome, vntill he became so odious, as he was deposed from his Throne, and banished Tarqui. depo∣sed from his kingdome. from Rome, aswell for his owne tyrannie and murther, as also for his sonne Arūtius Tarquinius his rape and wicked inconti∣nencie: for when he had forced a noble woman named Lucre∣tia, the wife of Colatinus, (who when shee had of this iniurie Rape the cause of put∣ting downe kings in Rome. complained to her husband and other her friends in the pre∣sence of them all she slue her selfe) the filthines and horror of this wicked acte, kindled the heartes of the Senators and the people against Tarquinius. Sp. Lucre. Pu. Val. Publicola. C. Lu. Iunius Brutus, sware in that place the destruction of Tarquinius, and hee himselfe became generall for the Citizens, that they deposed him frō his king∣dome: such was the seueritie of the Romanes in punishing ad∣ulterie, Tarqui. depo∣sed from his kingdome. Eutrop. lib. 1. being the only cause of the first alteration of the state publique in Rome. For before Arūtius Tarquinius had cōmit∣ted this abominable actiō with Lucretia, the Romanes had for∣gotten the faults of the father in killing his father in lawe, for he had conquered the Volscans, he subdued the Citie of Ga∣bios, and of Suessa, and after hee ouercame the Thuscans, hee made peace with them, and he builded Iupiter his Temple in the Capitol, and he was laying siege to the citie of Arde tenne miles from Rome, when his sonne Arūtius did defile Lucretia: the foulenes of the fact was such, that the souldiers forsooke the father for the offence of the sonne, and the gates of the Romes gate shut against Tarqui. Citie were shutte against Tarquinius at his returne from the siege of Arde. Thus when he had reigned twentie fiue yeeres, he fledde with his wife and children: he was the seuenth and last king of the Romanes, though afterward he sought the helpe of Por∣senna Reade Plut. in Publ.
king of Thuscia, and thought to recouer his kingdome a∣gaine. But when he perceiued that the Romanes would not ac∣cept Reade the 4. boke of Hali. of the two last kings of Ser. Tullius and Tarqui. super. him longer for their king, and that Porsenna woulde aide him no longer to his kingdome, hee departed to Thusculi a Citie not farre distant from Rome, where hee liued with his wife a priuate man for the space of fourteene yeeres, and then dyed: his sonne Sextus was slaine in his owne citie Gabia, whi∣ther he fledde for refuge. In this sort reigned in Rome seuen kings for the space of two hundred fourtie foure yeeres (as you heard before) who for all their force and courages, for all their long warres and sharpe battels, their Empire extended not aboue fifteene myles from Rome: the reason was, that they fought with Ro∣manes like them selues, though they were called first by the All Italie was inhabited lōg before Rome was builded. names of Sabines, Volscans, Thuscans, Veients, Fidenats, Samnites, and Latines: for vntill Romulus time the name of the Romanes was not knowen: the Latines were the first auncient name of the Romanes: from them Romulus and his brother Remus had their beginning: for (as you heard) before Romulus builded Rome, reigned amongst the Latines fifteene kings. Thus much for the kings of Rome, of their continuance and of their go∣uernment. Nowe what was done in other Countries, and what kings reigned while Tarqui. the proud gouerned Rome, Herodot and Iustine doth write that. Cyrus the great king of Persia, was con∣quered and slaine by Tomyris Queene of Scythia. Psammenitus the last king of Egypt was subdued, and all the kingdome of Egypt made tributarie vnto Persia by Cambyses, who at that ve∣ry time hindred the building of the Temple of Ierusalem, vntil The Persians conquered E∣gypt at what time the Ro∣manes bani∣shed their kings. the second yeere of Darius Hysdaspis the third king of Persia. That Darius in the time of Tarquinius Superbus made warres against the Scythians, by whō he was forced to take his flight. This time wicked Haman vsed great meanes to destroy the Iewes with king Ahashuerosh, which in prophane histories is named Darius the sonne of Hisdaspis: but his councell then against Mardocheus happened to himselfe and to his tenne
children: the historie is written in the booke of Hester. This time reigned in Athens Hyparchus the tyrant, which afterward Harmodius and Aristogiton slue. In the time of this Tarquinius the Persians reuoulted from their king Darius the sonne of Hysdaspis, but by the subtiltie and sleight of Zopirus recouered, and afterward the Persians by the meanes of Megabisus Zopi∣rus Herodot. lib. 5. some chiefe captaine of Darius, tooke the Citie Perinthus and subdued Thracia and Peonia. Here I haue set downe the names of the seuen kings of Rome, and their continuance in gouernment. Romulus reigned 38. Numa Pomp. 43. Tullus Hostilius. 32. Ancus Martius. 24. Lu. Tarquinus Priscus. 38. Seruius Tullus. 44. Tarquinius the proud. 25. Nowe during the whole time of these seuen kings which were two hundred fourtie three yeres, which was the first in∣fancie of Rome, for all their warres, their victories and tri∣umphes had first ouer the Hetruscanes, the Sabines, the Latines, the Fidenates, Antenates, Veients, and the Albanes, their Em∣pire extended no further then Ostia eighteene miles distant frō the citie of Rome. After that the name of a king was bani∣shed, and two Consuls were created to gouerne and to com∣maund with Serieantes before them, with the authoritie and full power of kings. CHAP. III. Of the first change of gouernment in Rome from a Monarchie vn∣to Aristocratia, at what time one Dictator and two Consuls were appointed to gouerne the people in the roume of kings: of their good gouernment, lawes, warres, and victories, vntill the Tarentine warres where Pyrrhus beganne to ayde the Taren∣tines against the Romanes. AFter these kings were thus banished frō Rome, Consuls reig∣ned in Rome 464. yeeres. they created in the place of one King two Cō∣suls, which continued after it was first institu∣ted, vntill Iulius Caesars reigne, which was 464. yeeres: it was decreed that these two Consuls
should not rule aboue one yeere, least the continuance of the office shoulde make them waxe hautie. In the first yeere Eutrop. lib. 1. after the expulsing of the kings Lu. Iunius Brutus, who had of all others procured most the banishment of Tarquinius was made the first Consul in Rome, and with him Tarquinius Dionys. lib. 5. Collatinus, the husbande of Lucretia: howe bee it Collatinus was forthwith depriued of his Consulship, for that it was agreed, that none should remaine within the Citie that bare the name of Tarquinius: whereupon Valerius Publicola was ele∣cted Consul in his roume. These two Consuls were not long in their office, but Tar∣quinius who a little before was banished, assembled a great armie to ayde him to recouer his kingdome: in this battell Brutus the Consul, and Arūtius Tarquinius his sonne slue one an other. This battell seemed doubtfull for a time on both Brutus slaine. parties: but at last the victorie fell to the Romanes. The death of Brutus was much lamented in Rome: for he so loued the libertie of Rome, that hee caused his owne sonnes who for that they seemed to fauour Tarquinius case, In. Brutus their father brought them into the market place, and there Publicola being Consul at that time, commaunded them first to bee beaten with roddes, and after to bee behea∣ded before all the people, for that they preferred the case of Tarquinius, before the state of the Citie: and therefore the women mourned for Brutus death a whole yeere: in whose place Publicola hath chosen Consul in Brutus roume Spurius M. Horat. Pul. made Consul. Lucretius, Lucretias father, who dyed by sicknesse. After him Horatius Puluillus was made Consul: for in the first yeere of Consulship siue Consuls reigned one after ano∣ther: againe warre was attempted by Tarquinius against the Romanes. In this warre Porsenna king of Thuscia, ayded Tar∣quinius, but to no effect, and therefore Tarquinius gaue ouer longer to warre against his Countrie, contented himselfe to liue the rest of his time a priuate man, and troubled not Publicola: who being lefte quiet by Tarquinius, when hee Liui. lib. 2. sawe that neither by warre with the which hee often asfai∣led
his Countriemen, neither with treacherie which hee practised with the families of the Vitellians and the Aquil∣lians, hee coulde any way profite. Then Publicola gaue himselfe fully to looke vnto Rome, Valerius Pub∣li. his rites and lawes. which was so impouerished by ciuill warres, that collection of money was made for the buriall of Valerius the Consul his fellowe in office. Hee first redressed thinges decayed in Rome, in sup∣plying the number of the Senators that were slaine in the warres of Tarquine, in whose places hee chose newe Sena∣tors to the number of a hundred sixtie foure: after, he defen∣ded the Citie against Porsenna, and destroyed the Countrie round about, and slue of the Thuscanes fiue thousand: he al∣so The victorie of Publicola. vanquished the Sabines, and triumphed ouer them, and he subdued the Latines, who were most busie against the Ro∣manes this time: for Rome was found in the time of this Pub∣licola sore vnpeopled and poore, by reason of the ciuil warres of Tarquinius, and therefore all the Nations which the kings of Rome before had subdued, beganne to reuoult and to wage warre freshly against the Romanes againe: but they were by this valiant Romane brought to their first state, and Rome much enriched by the spoyles of the Sabines, Latines, Thuscans, and others. This Publicola was Consul foure times seuerally, he was a good man and a iust Romane: hee made lawes and de∣crees Public. foure times Consul. within the Citie: first, hee ordeyned by lawe, that all offendours being condemned by the iudgement of the Consuls, might appeale vnto the people. Hee likewise decreed, that no man might exercise any Plutarch in Publ. office, vnlesse hee came to it by the gifte of the people: and he also made a lawe in the fauour of the poore Citi∣zens, that they should pay no custome nor impost whatsoe∣uer. This hedid to winne the peoples fauour, and to keepe them in hande: many women then in Rome esteemed little of their life, in respect of their Countrie, as Cloelia, Cloelia. Valeria. Valeria, and diuers others, whose statues are erected vp
on horsebacke in the holy streete. Appius Claudius, a very riche man of the Sabines, came to Rome this time to dwell, and Appius Clau∣dius. brought with him fiue thousande families with their wiues and children, of the most peaceable, and esteemed men of the Sabines. In the ninth yeere after the banishing of Tarquinius, there was a newe office created in Rome called Dictatura, which A newe office in Rome called Dictator. farre excelled in authoritie the office of the Consuls. In this office Titus Largius was first instituted Dictator: and in the same yeere an other newe officer called magister equitum, an officer deputed to bee attendant vpon the Dictator, in the which office Spurius Cassius was appointed. The Dictator was not to continue in his office aboue sixe moneths: for such was the authoritie of the Dictator, that hee might deale in all No appeale from the Di∣ctators. causes, and iudge of life and death, without any appeale ey∣ther to the Senate, Consul, or to the people: and therefore the people much complaining, beganne to make vproares, and fel to dissension, and to require for an officer to aide and defende the people: and for that the Senators and Consuls (as the people pretended the cause) woulde haue them op∣pressed, a cōmocion was thereby in Rome by the commons, and therefore they created two men whom they called Tribu∣ni Tribuni Mile∣tum appointed in Rome. Militum Tribunes of the people: they were assigned to bee peculier Decisers and Determiners in causes belonging to the people. This office continued vntil Sillas time, by whom the office of Tribuneshippe was abrogated, but after by Pom∣pey the great restored. In Rome dwelt a rare man of great seruice in the warres of Tarquine, whom Largius the first Dictator knewe to be such as Eutrop. lib. 1. deserued great prayse then, being a young man: for hee was crowned with Oken leaues according to the Romanes maners in Tarquinius dayes, and sithence profited Rome in diuers ser∣uices, in subduing the Volscans, in winning the citie Corioles, he inuaded the Antiates, and often repressed the insolencie of the people, insomuch that the Romanes hauing many warres in those dayes, this Corolianus was at them all: for there was no Corolianus his due prayse.
battell fought, no warre enterprised, but Coriolanus retur∣ned from thence with fame and honour. But his vertue and renowme gate him much enuie: for hereby hee was bani∣shed Coriolanus ba∣nished. Rome by the Ediles & Tribunes of the people, against the Patricians will: but the Romanes made a rodde to beate them selues, when they banished Coriolanus: for he came in armes against his owne Countrie and Citie with the Volscans, be∣ing at that time their generall: hee with great furie inuaded the Territories of Rome, hee caused the communaltie of Rome and Nobilitie to fall to ciuill dissension, hee so plagued the Romanes diuers wayes vnto the very gates of Rome, he was so much moued against them, that hee refused three seue∣rall Coriolanus sto∣make against Rome. Embassadours to heare them, being his chiefe friendes, sent vnto him by the Senate to entreate for peace: hee refu∣sed to heare the Bishops, and the Priestes Feciales. He likewise denied the Augurers, the sacrificers, and the Liui saith that Volumnia was his wife, and Votaria his mother. ministers of the goddes, vntill Volumnia his mother, and Vir∣gillia his wife with their two young sonnes gotten by Cori∣olanus, with Valeria the sister of Publicola, and diuers other La∣dies of Rome came to meete Coriolanus, to entreate for peace vnto the Volscans campe, and what time hee had compassion of his mother, of his wife, and of his two sonnes, and of the other Ladies being his neere kinswomen: then hee with∣drewe his armie from Rome, and yeelded to the teares of his mother: but the fickle mindes of the people by the conspi∣racie of Tullus Aufidius were such, that Coriolanus was mur∣thered Coriola. slaine in the citie Antium. in the Citie of Antium, at his very returne from that voyage. What shall I say of Caius Mutius Sceuola? of his noble at∣temptes against king Porsenna, of Horatius Cocles, and of di∣uers others, whose statues at Rome, and whose histories in euery booke written, and in euery mans mouth can wit∣nesse? Halicar. lib. 4. for in this very time in Rome when Cresius Fabius and Titus Virginius were Consuls, three hundred noble men of 300. Fabians slaine. the house and stocke of the Fabians, tooke vpon them alone to wage battell against the Veientines, offering themselues to T. Liui. lib. 2.
the Senators and to the people of Rome to fight: from this 306. Fabians slaine. battell not one scaped of three hundred Fabians but one, and another which was young at home, not able to goe to warre∣fare: for all the males of the Fabiaus were slaine in that battell. These warres were extremely handled and prosecuted by the Hetruscans, Fidenats, and the Falascies against the Romanes, when Rome was in most aduersitie and pouertie, aswell for the late ciuill warres of Tarquine the proude, as also diuers o∣ther forreigne enemies, which on euery side assaulted Rome. These 300. Fabians full of prowesse and valure, vnder∣tooke this warre against the Veients: but being ouer char∣ged with multitudes, were all slaine sauing one, to their great Oros. lib. 2. cap. 5 fame, yet this followed after their death: presently the Fasi∣liscians yeelded them selues to the Romanes, the Fidenats de∣stroyed them selues with fire, the Veients were ouerthrowen and slaine by Camillus, so that the deaths of these three hun∣dred Camillus reuē∣ged the Fabiās Fabians were fully reuenged. These were chiefe men that reigned in Rome after the kings vntill the Decemuiri, which had beene Consuls, Dicta∣tors, and the chiefe magistrates of Rome, whose names are these. 1 Lu. Iunius Brutus. 2 Pub. Valerius Publicola. 3 Mutius Scaeuola. 4 Cai. Horatius Puluillus. S Horatius Cocles. 6 Titus Largius. Magistrates of Rome. 7 Spu. Cassius. 8 Mar. Coriolanus. 9 Fab. Vibulanus. 10 Q. Seruilius. 11 And Appius Claudius: from whome sprang the stocke of Claudia, vntill the time of Decemuiri. Nowe to speake some thing of that which was done in o∣ther coūtries about the time of the banishment of these kings, Alexander the tenth king of Macedonia slue the Persians Em∣bassadors: at what time Bubaris a noble Persian, and an Em∣bassador sent vnto Macedonia, maried the daughter of Amyn∣tas and sister to Alexander, and by that meanes peace was con∣cluded betweene the Persians and the Macedonians. About this time also the Persians vanquished the Ionians, and tooke Mile∣tum.
About the time of Tarquinius death, florished Callima∣chus in the famous battell at Marathon: and a fewe yeeres af∣ter, Egypt reuoulted from Persia, at what time Darius Hysdaspis thought to inuade Greece: after whose death, presently Xerxes his sonne sent his brother Achemenes to Egypt as his generall, Herodot. lib. 7. where he was slaine by Psammetichus his sonne king of Libya, In the great warres of Xerxes in Thermopila, and in Artimesia The two wars in Thermopila and in Arti∣mesia. when Themistocles florished and triumphed ouer the Per∣sians, then florished in Rome Coriolanus, in whose dayes the Ro∣manes had no store of coyned money, their wealth was in cat∣tell: for a mutton was then for tenne obolos, the price of an oxe a hundred obolos. Cimon a famous and a noble captaine of Athens, subdued all Asia from Ionia vnto Pamphylia, and banished from Greece Cimon a noble captaine. all the barbarous people: but within a litle while after, Athens was by Mardonius taken, about which time the three hundred Fabians were slaine in a battell against the Volscans. This time florished in Greece Diagoras, Sophocles, Euripides, Pindarus, and Xerxes the famous painter. In Rome at this time a newe Dictator was created, and a muster taken within the Citie the second time. Quintus Cicinatus was taken from the Q. Cicinatus. plough, to weare the garment made for the Dictator, called Toga pretexta, he tooke his iourney forthwith against his ene∣mies, and putting them to flight deliuered the armie of the Romanes, and besieged the hill Algidus. This yeere ceased the office of the Consuls for a time, and in the place of the two Consuls, were chosen tenne men which should beare chiefe authoritie in the Citie, and they were called Decemuiri. Du∣ring Decemuiri cre∣ated. which office certeine noble men were sent from Rome to Athens, to see the vsages of the most famous Cities of Greece, and to conferre with the most learned men touching the lawes which they called the twelue tables. At that time Spu. Posthumius, Publius Sulpitius, and Au∣lus Eutrop. lib. 1. Manlius, three expert Romanes, tooke the voyage to A∣thens, brought the lawes of Solon with them, and the lawes called the twelue tables.
By these lawes which they wrote themselues in brasen tables, the tenne men ruled the Romanes the first yeere, with the good liking of the people: the seconde yeere, to the hurt and preiudice of Rome: and the third yeere, to the great infamie and shame of the Decemuiri: for when Appius Clau∣dius Decemuiri de∣priued. one of the tenne Commissioners had defloured Virgi∣nia, the onely daughter of Virginius, hee beganne a commo∣tion among the souldiers, and chose to slay his daughters rather then to suffer the shame: for which fact the Decemuiri were depriued of their authorities, and they them selues condemned. This is the seconde alteration of the state of Rome, and all Dionys. Halic. lib. 10. for women: the first for the deflowring of Lucretia, the kings were expelled: and nowe for the like foule fact, the Decemuiri were ouerthrowen by a decree had in mount Auentine, af∣ter Decemuiri cōp∣ted tenne Tar∣quines. they had reigned in their full authorities three yeeres, be∣ing rather tenne Tarquines, or tenne tyraunts to destroy their Countrie, then Iudges or Commissioners to defende and to saue their Countries. I haue set downe their names to your viewe, as they were put in the commission, by Isidorus lib. 5. Halic. lib. 10. Liui. lib. 3. and the first Decad. Appius Claudius. Titus Gematius. The names of the Decēuiri. Pub. Cestius Valicanus. Spurius. Caius Iulius. Aulus Manlius. Publius Sulpitius. Titus Romulus. Veturius Geminius. Publius Curiatius. In the three hundred and fifteene yeere after Rome was built, the Fidenats rebelled against the Romanes, with whom the Veintines ioyned themselues to assist them: at what time Tolominus reigned king ouer the Veentines. These two Cities were not farre from Rome. Fidena was but seuen miles, and Veiena eighteene miles distant from Rome: but the Fidenats, Veientines, and the Volscans, which al∣so Fidena. tooke part against the Romanes, were ouerthrowen by Mar∣cus Veiena. Aemilius then Dictator. In that battell Telinus king of the Veientines was slaine, the Romanes coulde neuer keepe their
neighbours vnder hande, though they had often subdued them: for Furius Camillus when he was created Dictator, he was sent vnto those vnruly people with an armie of Ro∣manes, who discomfited and vanquished them. Immediat∣ly The French men inuaded Rome. hereupon the Frenchmen inuaded Rome, and pursued the Romanes vnto the flood Allia, within two miles of the Citie of Rome: they besieged the Citie, and wanne it, and the chiefe of the Citizens fledde with Manlius vnto the Capitoll for their defence: where if Camillus had not in time T. Liui. lib. 5. remoued the Frenchmens siege (and yet at that time, he was banished from Rome) the Capitoll had beene wonne: for before Camillus came the holy Geese saued the Capitoll: for Geese saued the Capitol frō the Gaules. they ranne vp and downe for feare, and bewrayed the Gaules with their noyse. The terriblest and greatest victorie about one time hap∣pened nowe in Rome: for after their great ouerthrowe gi∣uen to the Romanes at the riuer Allia, the Gaules laid siege presently to the Citie of Rome, entred the Citie, and fin∣ding Florus lib 1. no resistaunce, they feared some treason marching vp to the Towne to the market place, they sawe sitting there in iuory chaires with crownes & garlands vpō their heads, men all in purple long gownes with white staues in their handes, with long white beardes, who seemed to bee of such maiestie, that the Gaules supposed them at the first sight to bee some goddes, that sate like men to defende the Citie, and were about to retire, vntill they perceiued Rome taken by the Gaules. that they were men: whom they with much furie slue with the sword, and then raunsackt the Towne, killed and spoiled, and possest the whole Citie sauing Ti. Manlius, who with a thousande Romanes tooke the Capitoll for their defence, whom the Gaules coulde not winne in seuen moneths as∣sault: so long the Gaules had Rome in possession. But to be Camillus resto∣red Rome be∣ing banished from Rome. short, they were to their losse constrained to forsake Rome, and were glad to take their flight by Camillus, who then though banished by the Romanes, saued and rescued Rome at that time.
But Camillus remoued them, put them to flight, and pursu∣ed them with such a slaughter of them, that hee recouered Camillus rescu∣ed the Romans frō the Frēch∣men, and sa∣ued Rome. the golde and treasures, and ensignes of warres which the French men had gotten, and returned to Rome, and so en∣tred the Citie with his third triumph, and was called the se∣conde Romulus, for that hee recouered his Countrie from the enemies: for in the time of his Dictatorshippe, hee ouer∣threwe the Phalissians, Capenats, the Veients, tooke diuers Cities, and wasted their Territories, ouer whom he trium∣phed. After this, Camillus besieged the Falerians, & ouerthrew the Latines, and the Volscans: hee wanne the fielde of the Pre∣nestines, The office of Camillus. and slue the great armie of the Thuscans at Sutrium. Camillus gaue diuers repulses to the Gaules, and resisted stout∣ly the furi of Brennus their king: for in the time of this Ca∣millus, Rome was destroyed and quite burnt, and againe built, Halicar. lib. 10. 11. and by him afterwarde, as by a seconde Romulus defended: for hee was chosen Censor first: hee was chosen twise Tri∣bune of the souldiers, and hee was fiue times chosen Dicta∣tor: for then the Romanes had altered their gouernment from Kings to Cōsuls, frō Consuls to Dictators, frō Dictators to Decemuiri, which Decemuiri continued not long, and then a∣gaine Liui lib. 3. 4. to Consuls: for in the first yeere after Rome was taken by the Gaules, (for in those daies they were not named French men, but Gaules, which is a more generall name) two men were created, which were called Tribunes of the souldiers, Tribuni Mili∣tum created. in steade of the two Consuls, which were of no lesse autho∣ritie then the Consuls. Howe be it the dignitie of the Tribunes endured not long, for that office ceased: for the people of Rome were so sediti∣ous in the time of Camillus, that nothing coulde please them, neither Kings, Counsellers, Dictators, Praetors, Tribunes, or a∣ny other officer: for now the Consuls were caused to be bani∣shed as the kings were, and in their roumes were placed the tenne men called Decemuiri, which continued but two yeres, The office of Consulship put off. and out the third yeere: then were placed magistrates named Tribuni Militum, which gouerned 43. yeeres: and then a∣gaine,
Consuls were placed in their authorities, after Rome had bene without Consuls 45. yeres. Thus the people put vp and put downe whom they list, insomuch that Sex. Ruf. saith, that Rome was without any magistrate for foure yeeres: for they stoned Posthumus the generall, & banished Coriolanus Ca∣millus, that such a furie reigned in the people, that foure seue∣rall seditions grew in Rome by mutuall discord. The first in Sacro Monte, where the Romane people came armed in the 71. Olymp. against vsurers, where at that time Dionys. 6. Lib. 2. Menenius Agrippa an eloquent Romane, appeased the furie and rage of the people, with the fable betweene the belly and all members of the body, by the which oration hee brought them to quietnes. The second discord at Rome was in moūt Auentine, 302. Val. cap. 9. yeeres after the building of Rome in the time of Decemuiri, whose insolencie and tyrannie were such, that they forgote the destruction of their kings, the arrogancie of Tarquine in rauishing of Lucretia, they committed all offences, iniuries Dionys. 10. full of filthy lustes without respect of lawe or conscience, that Virginius seeing his daughter so oppressed by Appius Liui. 3. Claudius, slue her in the market place with his owne hand to auoide the present infamie and shame that his daughter Virginia was at hand to come vnto. The third sedition at Rome on mount Ianiculū vnder Car∣milius then being Tribune of the people, and generall ouer The third se∣dition in Rome them in the dāgerous seditions: the cause was for the indig∣nitie of mariages betweene the Patritiās & the cōmon peo∣ple, Lib. lib. 4. which Liui at large setteth downe in his fourth booke. The fourth sedition in Rome and the cause thereof was ambition & desire ofhonor, that the cōmonpeople would haue magistrates created ioyntly with the Patricians: here grewe mutinie & discord betweene the Patricians and the vulgar people: this discorde fell in the seconde age of Rome called Adolescentia Romae. Adolescentia Romae. About this time florished in Greece Pericles, who succee∣ded Themistocles in his roume, and gouerned Athens fourtie
yeeres with great fame: at what time hotte warres were be∣tweene the Athenians and the Peloponesians. During these broyles at Rome, Xerxes the great king of Persia was slaine by Thucidides lib. 1. Artabanus, after whose death Artaxerxes surnamed the long handed, did sende Esdras to Ierusalem from Babylon to repaire the Citie, to builde the Temple, and to reforme the com∣mon wealth of the Iewes destroyed by the Chaldeans, before Cicilia was plagued by the Carthaginians, and often oppressed by the common people. Nowe reigned in Macedonia Perdicas the eleuenth king: this time florished in Greece 1 Heraclitus. 2 Empedocles and Liui. lib. 4. 3 Parmenides, and after 4 them Aristophanes, and 5 Hypocrates that famous physicion: at what time also the great Philosopher 6 Soorates Platoes master kept his schoole at Athens. This time reigned in Sparta Agis king of the Lacedemonians: in Macedonia, Archela∣us their twelfth king. About this time the originall of the The originall of the French men. kings of Fraunce beganne to spring in Germanie, who at that time were driuen out of Scythia to the number of foure hun∣dred eightie nine thousande, first being called Neumagi, se∣condly called Sicambri, and the last time called Franci. About this time the whole states of Greece were by the eares, and beganne the warres of the Peloponesians which en∣dured twentie seuen yeeres, of whome Thucidides wrote a whole volume of eight bookes. The Egyptians reuoulted from the Persians and rebelled, vntill Darius Ochus time the eight king of Persi. Let vs returne to the historie of the Romanes: for as soone as Camillus dyed, the French men arriued and camped in Ita∣lie, Camillus died. against whome Quintus Cicinatus being then elected Di∣ctator, was sent with an armie against the Frenchmen: where Titus Manlius prouoked one of the French army to fight with him hand to hand, whō he slue, & after he had slaine him, he Oro. lib. 3. cap 6. pluckt a chaine of gold frō his enemies necke, & put it about his owne necke, for the which he & his posteritie were called
Torquati, for a perpetuall memorie of that fact. This was done A sirname. 30. yeeres after that Camillus had expulsed the Frenchmen. The like historie is written of Marcus Valerius, who being T. Liui. lib. 7. chalenged by a Frenchman to a combate, accepted the chal∣lenge and came readie armed vnto the fielde, where a crowe lighted vpon his right arme and sate there still, vntill his ad∣uersarie came to handie gripes. The crow flew and smote the Val. Max. cap. 16. lib. 8. Frenchman vpon the eye with his wings, that he could not see to fight: by meanes whereof he was slaine, whereby hee was sirnamed Coruinus, as Torquatus was. At what time the French∣men M. Valerius sir∣named Corui∣nus. were put to flight, and againe by Sulpitius the Dictator they were subdued, and the Thuscans likewise were the very same time vanquished by Caius Martius, who then ledde pri∣soners C. Martius his triumph ouer the Thuscanes. with him to Rome in one triumph 7000 captiues. By this time the Romanes force encreased, and they preuai∣led in warlike feats and in chiualrie, although yet their wealth and substance were very slender: for men raigned then in Rome, as had this sentence alwayes in their mouthes, Agere magna, & pati fortia Romanorum est. Mutius Scaeuola spake it The praise of the olde Ro∣manes. first before Porsenna king of the Thuscanes: so great were the Romanes, so ful of valure, and so renowmed were their actions, that the Dictator of Rome was more feared, then any Empe∣rour of the world, and a Consul more esteemed then a king, as by their victories and triumphes ouer all nations may appeare. The discipline of the Romanes was such, as their generals, lieutenants, captaines, officers, yea the priuate souldier, if hee The discipline of the olde Ro∣manes. had deserued, should haue had his triumph, or bee preferred vnto a higher place of seruice. Plinie saith, the garlands which were made for the Conquerors, were some of lawrel, some of oken leaues, some of Mirtle, some of greene grasse, and some of golde. The citie of Rome was full of statues and images erected, as monuments of the Romanes pictures set vp at the Statues and images. barres where the Orators did plead: and images in the mar∣ket place of Dictators and Consuls, that to bee a souldier in Rome, was more then to be a captaine in Greece, and to be a
Consul in Rome, were more then to be a king in other places: so mightie the Romanes waxed by this, that they warred nowe Of this warre writs Liui lib. 9. and Oros. ib. 3. cap. 21. & 22. a hundreth and three miles distant from Rome, and tooke the Samnits in hande, against whome Lucius Papirius Cursor then created Dictator, went with an armie, giuing charge at his departure from Rome, to Quintus Fabius Maximus (who at that time was appointed an officer attendant vpon the Di∣ctator Fabius. Max. called Magister equitū) that he should not fight with the enemies during his absence. Howbeit, vpon occasions Fabius with great good lucke fought with the Samnits, and vanqui∣shed them, for which disobedience (notwithstāding his good successe) Luc. Papirius after his returne gaue sentence of death The seueritie of the Romanes in militarie discipline. vpon him: but hee was deliuered through the passing great fauour of the people. In the second battell the Samnits ouercame the Romanes, and caused them (to their reproch) to creepe vnder the yoke, which was made with two speares in the earth, and the thirde vpon the toppe of them, like a gallowes. In the thirde battel Tit. Liui. lib. 9. Luc. Papirius had the vpper hand ouer the Samnits, and caused To creepe vn∣der he yoke a great re∣proch. seuen thousand of the Samnits to creepe vnder the yoke, at the battell of Allifas. Thus the Samnits were discomfited by the Romanes: but ne∣uerthelesse they still renued their battell, vntill Fabius Maxi∣mus Eutrop. lib. 2. came to ayde his sonne Quintus, who was vanquished by the Samnits, and three thousand of his souldiers slaine: for of all nations that the Romanes had to doe withall, the Sam∣nits diminished most the force of the Romanes, as in the bloo∣die battels at Tifernum, Longula, and at Lantula, where Quintus Aulius generall of the Romanes was slaine. Likewise in the bat∣tels Liui. lib. 9. at Satricula, and Suessula, the last ouerthrow of the Samnits: reade Liui of the Samnits warres, who continued their warres with the Romanes 49. yeeres, but in an exceeding great battell they were slaine and ouerthrowen by Pub. Cornelius The Samnits quite van∣quished. Ruffinus, and Marcus Curius Dentatus, then Consuls at Rome.
CHAP. IIII. Of the warres and victories of the Romans ouer king Pyrrhus, called the Tarentine warres, vntill the Carthaginean warres: of their victories and triumphes had ouer Italy, with diuers other for∣reine nations and kingdomes. WHen the Romans had thus cōquered the Samnits, they proclaimed open warres against the Tarentines, which inhabited the furthest part of Italy: for they had Pyrrhus came to ayde the Tarentines. iniured the Romanes ambassadours, who sent for Pyrrhus king of Epire to assist them. Pyrrhus foorthwith came: for he euer enuied the glorie of the Romanes, and wished to haue some dealings with them: for he was ac∣compted Hanibals say∣ing of Pyrrhus. the second souldier of the world next to Alexander the great: for he was like to Alexander in all points. This king discended of the line of Achilles, and was named Pyrrhus, as the name of Achilles sonne: hee was glad to haue occasion offered him to warre against the Romanes, he gathe∣red souldiers and his forces together: hee associated with the Samnits, the Lucanes, and the Brutaines, and ioyned his armie with the Tarentines, and marched forwarde to giue battell to Publius Valerius Leuinius the Consul, to whome Pyrrhus gaue Pyrrhus victo∣rie of Leuinius the Consul. the ouerthrowe: for Pyrrhus was then an olde souldier, and had practised armes against Lysimachus king of Thracia, and a∣gainst Demetrius king of Macedonia. Then the Consuls lost of Romane souldiers to the nomber of fifteene thousande, and Eutrop. lib. 2. Pyrrhus got not that victorie without blood: for he had slaine of his souldiers by the Romanes seuen thousand: and Eutropius sayeth, that Pyrrhus had fled and lost the fielde, had not his Eus. ib. temp. elephants bene, by whose meanes onely he ouerthrewe the Romanes. Pyrrhus, to shewe his greatnesse to the Romanes, sent the Plutarch. in vita Pyrrhi. prisoners which hee tooke without raunsome: but the ma∣iestie of the Senate requited Pyrrhus, in letting so many pri∣soners of the Samnits and Tarentines free to Pyrrhus.
After this the second battel betwixt the Tarentines and the Plutarch. in vi∣ta Pyrrhi. Romanes, was at the citie of Ascalum, where likewise Pyrrhus had the victorie ouer the Romanes. This time the Carthagi∣neans offered ayde to the Romanes, and sent their ambassadors with a crowne made all of golde, in token of their good will: this gift should be put in the Capitol in the seate of Iupiter. Liuius lib. 7. The Romans were somewhat heated by Pyrrhus, and hauing lost two victories, they prepared for the thirde battel, whose charge was giuen to M. Curius Dentatus then Consul: who ex∣specting ayde to come from Lucania, vntill king Pyrrhus a hot rash captaine did set vpon them, but to his great losse, and to one of his last ouerthrowes in Italy. I find in Eutropius, that Pyr∣rhus The Romanes victorie ouer Pyrrhus. lost twentie thousande of his souldiers, his elephants and himselfe sore wounded. Pyrrhus hauing this repulse, sent one Cineas an ambassador to the Romanes, an excellent eloquent Orator and one of De∣mosthenes chiefe scholers: hee thought to entreate for peace vpon indifferent conditions: but no condition pleased the Romanes, vnlesse Pyrrhus would depart out of Italy. This an∣swere being returned from the Senate, Pyrrhus demaunded of Eutrop. lib. 2. Cineas what maner of place Rome was. Cineas answered, that Rome was a citie of kings, saying further, that euery one in Cineas saying of Rome. Rome was such as Pyrrhus was in Epire. Then said Pyrrhus, were I king of Rome, or had I Romane souldiers, I should soone con∣quer all Asia and Europe. Then Fabritius a noble Romane was sent against king Pyr∣rhus: this Fabritius was so honoured at Rome, and so esteemed abroade, and yet a poore man, that Pyrrhus offered him gold Reade Poli∣beus of this warre, lib. 2. and siluer, yea the fourth part of his kingdome if hee would forsake Rome. This was that Fabritius that refused Pyrrhus gifts, and also opened the treason and conspiracie of his Phisition, who offred for money to bring Pyrrhus into Fabritius hands: and this was hee that forced Pyrrhus to flee to Sicilia, and after hee had subdued the Samnits, and the Lucanes, hee had his tri∣umph graunted him. While Pyrrhus stayed musing in Sicilia, Curius Dentatus, and Cornelius Lentulus being Consuls, were
sent to meete Pyrrhus, and to giue him battel: for the Romanes suffered him to haue no rest within Italy. In this battell the armie of Pyrrhus was slaine, his tents sackt, and hee himselfe Pyrrhus armie slaine. driuen to Tarentum, he lost 23. thousand that day, ouer whom Curius Dentatus triumphed in his Consulship: hee brought foure elephants into Rome, which were the first that euer were seene in a triumph at Rome: for before Pyrrhus warres, the Florus lib. 1. cap. 18. spoiles and the treasures of the Volscanes, and the Sabines, were but cattell: the spoiles which the Romanes had of the Gaules, were Carpenta: the spoyle of the Samnits, were but armours Val. Max. cap. 12. and broken weapons. The like poore spoiles and praies had the Romans ouer the Fidenats, poore townes, not yet wel enri∣ched for the ciuill warres which they had with the Romanes: But Pyrrhus brought the strength and treasure of a king, his golde and siluer, his elephants and camels, that the victorie Reade Plutar. in Pyrrho. which Curius Dentatus, and Fabritius then Consuls at Rome had ouer Pyrrhus, so reioyced Rome, that their triumph then ouer Pyrrhus, was the most ioyfull and acceptable triumph that euer Rome saw at that time. To this ende came the vaine hope of king Pyrrhus, who Pyrrhus driuen out of Italy. thought to haue conquered Italy, and thereby to be king of Rome. After he had spent 6. yeeres in continuall warres with the Romans he fled, after whose flight immediatly all Italy was conquered, and Sicilia. Not long after Pyrrhus was slaine at Argos a citie of Greece: for after Tarentum was destroyed, then the Picents and their towne Asculum, were also subdued by Sempronius. After the Picents, the Salentines and their chiefe port Brundusium, was conquered by Mar. Attilius: and last of all the Volscanes were also ouerthrowen by Fabius Gurges. Fl. lib. 15. Thus was all Italy soone subdued after the ouerthrowe of Ta∣rentum. Oros. 4. cap. 6. At this time flourished in Greece, Agesilaus a noble man of Sparta, and after the death of king Agis he was elected king in Who flouri∣shed this time in other coun∣treys. Sparta ouer the Lacedemonians, with whome flourished for a time Lisander a valiant captaine of Sparta, and a great enemie of Athens. Alcibiades was famous in Camillus time, and Niceas
the Athenian, who during Camillus warres in Rome, and before his time a litle, all Greece were busie in the Peloponesian warre. This time Diogenes the Cynicke, Plato the Philosopher liued, and his scholer Aristotle was borne. In Persia raigned Artaxerxes Mnemon, sirnamed the great, Artaxerxes Mnemon. who helde warres for a short time with his brother Cyrus whom he slew. Reade of this king in Xenophon his fift booke, and after, his sonne Ochus raigned king in Persia. In Macedonia raigned Philippe, Alexander the great his fa∣ther, who subdued and conquered many nations in the time Philip. of Camillus, and after succeeded him his sonne Alexander the great, whose renowme and fame are in all bookes manifest. This time liued Mausolus king of Caria, whose tombe when he died, the Queene his wife Artimesia made so gorgeous and so sumptuous, that it was reckoned in the nomber of the seuen wonders. Alexander Pheraeus the tyrant of Thessalia raig∣ned at this time, with whom Pelopidas had battel, and who by Epaminondas his friend was rescued. Likewise gouerned in Egypt as reuolted kings from the Persians since Cambyses time, The Egyptians reuolted from the Persians. the second king of Persia, vntill Darius Ochus raigne the eight king of Persia, Nepherites sixe yeres, Achoris twelue yeres, and Nectanabus eighteene yeeres. When now that Camillus was dead, there succeeded a nomber of valiant Romanes, as 1 Tit. Quintius Cicinatus. 2 Tit. Manlius Torquatus. 3 M. Val. sirnamedCoruinus. 4 Q. Fabius Maximus. 5 Luc. Papyrius Cursor. 9 And Curius Dentatus. With many more valiant Romanes, that augmented the glo∣rie of Rome, in subduing the nations about them, as the warres of the Volscans; Thuscans, Samnits and Torentines can witnes, of which you may reade in Liuie, in Halicarnassaeus, in Eutropius, and in others. During which time the kings of Egypt (after Alexander the great) with the kings of Syria and Asia, were as well occupied Alexander the great. with warres in their owne kingdomes, as the Romanes were in Italy: so likewise were the kings of Macedonia, and all the states of Greece: for Alexanders souldiers and his captaines, had fil∣led
all the East part of the world with warres: for Alexander had subdued and conquered the most part of all the kings then liuing, and brought them to pay tribute to the kings of The greatnes of the Empire of Macedonia, by the meanes of Alexander the great. Macedonia. So that after his death, they fought for kingdoms, and euery king sought by warres to become like vnto Alex∣ander, and so by that meanes one destroyed another, that then proud Persia, which had the Chaldeās, Assyrians, Lydians, Medes, Egpptians, all Asia, and all the world vassals and subiects vnder them, were then made to yeeld to the Macedonian empire. You haue read how hitherto the Romanes haue from a li∣tle towne in the beginning, crept ouer all Italy, and now are readie to trie their valour abroade, and so to set foote in Af∣frike and Lybia, countreis farre from Rome: for yet the Romans had neuer waged warre forth of Italy. And to the end they might vnderstand what power they were able to make, there was a muster had, and the names of the Romanes were nom∣bred 300000. Citi∣zens mustered in Rome before the first warres of Affrike. by the pole, which amounted to the nomber of three hundreth thousand citizens. In the 480. yere after the building of Rome, the name of the Romanes became famous, insomuch that they proclaimed Polibius lib. 1. warres against the people of Affrike: at what time Appius Clau∣dius sirnamed Caudex, and Q. Fuluius were Cōsuls. This warre endured vntil Q. Luctatius, & Aulus Manlius consulship, which was 22. yeeres. Of these 3 seueral warres which the Romans had with the Affricanes, I haue said some thing in the Affricane historie. The first warre was against Hamilcar Hanibals father, The first Af∣fricane warres▪ a famous Captaine at that time of the Carthagineans, with whom Hanibal in his youth was brought vp in Spaine, at what time the Romanes pretended warres against Hieron king of Si∣cilie. But he together with the residue of his nobilitie, made peace with the Romans, and gaue them in cōsideration thereof Eutrop. lib. 2. 200. talents of siluer, and then the Affricans were ouercome in Sicilia, which was the second time that the Romans triumphed ouer them. After his the Carthagineās were discomfited on the sea in the third battel, where the Romans toke 31. ships, and sunke 18. beside the slaughter of 3000. and the taking of 7000. with fewin dayes after.
This time Caius Aquilius, and Lucius Scipio were Consuls: for then Scipio wanne Corsica and Sardinia, and led with him ma∣ny thousande prisoners, and triumphed in the second battell Hamilcar the general of the Carthagineans discomfited by Regulus. by sea. Hamilcar the generall of the Carthagineans lost 64. ships, and was forced to retire backe, at what time Clipea the chiefest citie in Affrike was yeelded vp to the Romanes. After this great victorie Manlius the Consul returned to Rome, and brought 27. thousand prisoners, and triumphed with great pompe and solemnitie: and Attilius Regulus the The noble vi∣ctorie of Atti∣bus Regulus. other Consul remained still in Affrica, who while his fellowe was in Rome, ioyned battell with three great captaines of the Carthagineans at one time, of whom Regulus got the victorie, slew 18. thousand Affricanes, tooke prisoners 5000. men, and eight elephants, and brought vnder obeysance of the Romans threescore and thirteene cities, and at that time the Carthagi∣neans desired peace of Regulus. The inuincible courage of the Romanes was such, that du∣ring the first Punicke warres which continued 22. yeeres, in foure battels vpon the sea, the Affricanes were quite vanqui∣shed Halicar. lib. 1. and subdued, not without great losses of the Romanes which they sustained by shipwracke, and therefore the Sena∣tours thought good to giue ouer that kinde of battell, for the continuall and often damages which they sustained, and spe∣cially The great ouer throw of the Romanes. in that battel when the Lacedemonians ayded the Affri∣canes, at what time thirtie thousand Romanes were slaine, fif∣teene thousande taken prisoners, and their captaine Regulus taken and put in prison. But this great ouerthrow of the Ro∣manes Florus. 2. cap. 2. was fully requited by Marcus Aemilius, and Sergius Ful∣uius made Consuls for the next battell: for (as Eutropius affir∣meth) the Romans were so furious for the ouerthrow of Regu∣lus, that they prepared 300. saile to passe into Affrike. In this Eutrop. lib. 2. battell Aemilius sunke 104. ships of his enemies, tooke thirtie Aemilius vi∣ctorie. ships with all the men that fought in them, slewe and tooke prisoners 15. thousand Affricanes, with an exceeding great spoile, with the which he enriched his souldiers. At this time all Affrike had bene subdued, had there not at
that very time chanced so great a dearth in Affrike, and yet the Consuls for all these victories suffred such shipwracke by Great ship∣wracke of the Romanes. a sudden tempest about the coast of Sicilie, that of 484. ships, skant eightie could be saued. Many of these shipwrackes happened to the Romans, which made their victories of lesse renowme: but they were of such courage, that nothing coulde dismay them, on land nor on sea. For though Publius Claudius had lost his people in an vn∣luckie battell by lande, with no lesse euill successe by ship∣wracke, then before you heard by sea: yet with greater cou∣rage Oros. lib 4. cap 10. then before (being more kindled to reuenge their losses and damages) they prepared 400. saile well furnished, for the which voyage they created Caius Luctatius, and Aulus Posthu∣mus Consuls. The battell was fought ouer against Lilibeum C. Luctatius and Aulus Posthumus Consuls vi∣ctorie. a citie of Sicilie, where the Romanes tooke 32. thousand priso∣ners, slew thirteene thousand, and sunke 125. ships. Vpon this ouerthrow the Affricanes were compelled to de∣sire peace, being not able to wage warre longer with the Ro∣mans: for they had lost both their chiefe captaines, their ships, their munitions in this onely battell, and so their first warre ceased, and peace proclaimed by the Romans, which cōtinued 24. yeres, vntil the second warres begunne by Hanibal. These were the names of the Consuls and the chiefe valiant Romans that flourished then in Rome, during the first Punicke warre. Appius Claudius, sirnamed▪ Caudex. Q. Fuluius. Luc. Manlius Volso. Mar. Attilius Regulus. Mar. Aemilius Paulus. Sergius Fuluius. C. Sulpitius Paterculus. Attilius Calatinus. Cneus Seruilius Sepio. C. Sempronius Blesus. C. Furius Placidus. Cn. Cornelius. & C. Duilius. C. Aquilius Horus. Lucius Cornelius Scipio. C. Aurelius Cotta. Pub. Seruilius Germinus. These cap∣taines flouri∣shed in Rome in the first Pu∣nike warre. Mar. Fabius Licinius. Mar. Octacilius Crassus. C. Luctatius Catullus. Aul. Posthumius Albinus. Lu. Manlius Regulus. Mar. Valerius Maximus. Q. Luctatius.
With many other noble Romanes, Consuls, Dictators▪ Tri∣bunes and other magistrates, which then liued at Rome at the time of this warre. CHAP. V. Of the Romane warres, and of their conquest ouer Carthage, Nu∣mantia, and all Asia: and of their diuers victories and triumphes ouer other nations, during the time of this Affricane warres. IN other countreys and kingdomes, while this warre endured betwixt the Romanes and the Affricanes, these kings raigned. In Bythinia gouerned king Ni∣comedes, who builded a great citie, and named i after his owne name Nicome∣dia. In Asia and Syria raigned Antiochus sirnamed Theos the thirde king, after A∣lexander the great died: and Ptolomey Euergetes rigned like∣wise the thirde king of Egypt. During this first Affricane warres, the Parthians which were vassals vnder the Macedonians, erected vp their kingdome, ouer whom raigned as their first king one named Arsaces, af∣ter whom the kings of Parthia were all named Arsaces. In Ma∣cedonia All the kings of Parthia were named Arsaces. this time raigned Antigonus, sirnamed Gonatus, whose successours continued kings in Macedonia, vntil the Romanes ouercame and subdued them. Alexander the great had not heard of the Romans in those The name of Rome was not heard of out of Italy in the time of Alexander the great. dayes, their fame and renowme being yet not farre knowen: for they were from the first building of Rome, vntill the first Punicke warres occupied in Italy, where diuers stoute and va∣liant nations inhabited, who were brought vnder the obey∣sance of Rome, and so soone as Rome could commaunde Italy, they commenced warre against the Affricanes. But before, when Alexander was in armes against the Persians, and in ar∣mour against all the East kings, the Romanes had warres in Ita∣ly, at what time so many Alexanders, so many Pyrrhus, so many Hanibals in Rome liued then in valure and courage, that both Pyrrhus and Hanibal felt of it to their losse, and the ouerthrow
of themselues. Liuie writeth a noble historie in comparing certaine Romanes, man for man to Alexander, and of those that liued about the time of Alexander the great: for he died about sixtie yeeres before the first Affricane warre. For (saith Liuie) had Alexander come to Rome as conquerour then of all the East kings of the world, he had found in Rome many conque∣rors, and many Alexanders like himselfe, as these vndernamed. Mar. Valerius Coruinus. Tit. Manlius Torquatus. Caius Martius Rutilius. Caius Sulpitius. Lucius Papyrius Cursor. M. Curius Dentatus. Qu. Fabius Maximus. Lucius Voluminius. Certaine no∣ble Romanes compared to Alexander the great for their worthines and valure. Qu. Publius Philo. Mar. Valerius Publicola. T. Veturius Caluinus, and 2. valiāt Romans callled Decis. If then Alexander had made his voyage to Rome, hee had found in his dayes these gallant Romanes being all Consuls or Dictato and all conquerours: he might well haue come to Rome like Alexander the conquerour: but Liuie doubted hee T. Liuius praise of the Romans, lib. 9. should be driuen out like Darius conquered. So were Pyrrhus and Hanibal, who came both in Armes into Italy to conquer Rome, but both driuen out of Italy, and conquered: for Pyrrhus at last saw it, and saide, Italy could not be conquered but with Ittalians, neither coulde Rome be subdued but with Romanes. Pyrrhus saying of Rome. For it was tolde him by his Orator and also his ambassadour Cineas, that Rome was a citie full of kings, and that euery Con∣sul or Dictator of Rome was like king Pyrrhus himselfe in E∣pire. Hanibal was also compelled to say (after many bloodie battels and victories had ouer him, and ouer his father Hamil∣car Hanibals words of Rome.) that the Romanes had many Hanibals. If Alexander might haue come to Rome before his time, he should haue found Ca∣millus another Alexander: before Camillus hee should haue found Coriolanus: before Coriolanus, hee should haue founde Publicola: and euery one of these esteemed and prooued as Alexander. After that the Romans had concluded peace with the Affri∣canes, they were also at that time at rest from warre with all nations, which thing happened not since the building of
Rome vntill that time, but once in Numna Pompilius raigne. But they were not so long: for when Lucius Posthumius Albi∣nus was Consul, warre was begunne betwixt the Illyrians and the Romanes, ouer whome after they had taken many cities, they triumphed, and the Illyrians yeelded. At what time the Frenchmen inuaded Italy with an armie of eight hundreth thousand, but they were ouerthrowen by Aemilius the Con∣sul, and 40. thousand of the enemies slaine, for the which a tri∣umph Eutrop. lib. 3. was decreed vnto Aemilius: and the like triumph was graunted vnto Marcellus, who with a small troupe of horsmen slew Viridomarus the king of the Frenchmen (as Eutropius saith) Virodomarus slaine. with his owne hand, and ouerthrew his armie, cōquered Mil∣laine, and brought to Rome an exceeding great spoile. Plutarch. in Marcel. The Istrians and the Ligurians also were within a while af∣ter subdued by the Romanes, at what time Tenca Queene of the Illyrians slewe the Romane ambassadours, against the lawe The Romane ambassadour slaine by Tenca. of Armes. By this time the Carthagineans had gotten some strength, and made themselues readie to reuenge the great losses and wrongs that they sustained in the first warres by the Romanes. In the second warres, Hanibal the sonne of Ha∣milcar being of the age of 20. yeeres was made generall, as his father was in the first, and presently with great furie beganne to lay siege to Saguntum, and famished them: thence he passed ouer the Alpes, and brought to Italy 80. thousand footemen, and 20. thousand horsemen, conueyed his armie to the riuer Ticium, where Pub Cornelius Scipio the Consul was discomfi∣ted, Ticium. and his armie slaine and scattered, himselfe wounded and welnigh taken, had not his sonne Scipio afterward called Affri∣canus rescued him Hanibal passed still forwarde with his armie, and camped by the riuer Trebea, where hee gaue the like ouerthrowe to Polibeus lib. 3. Sempronius Gracchus, the other Consul. Thence Hanibal passed into Hetruria, at what time by a great tempest he was much hindered, being before wounded at the battell of Tre∣bea, and now his eye by mischaunce lost, hee marched to Pla∣centia, Flaminius the Consul slaine by Hanibal. where in a great battell hee slewe Caius Flaminius
the Consul, and 25. thousande souldiers. Hanibal being thus heated with good successe of victories, he passed vnto Apulia, where he gaue the greatest ouerthrow to the Romans that euer Eutrop. lib. 3. they had, in the battell at Cannes, at what time Lucius Aemilius and Pub. Terentius Varro were Consuls: for in this battell Ae∣milius the Consul was slaine, and twentie other of the order of Consuls and Praetors 30. slaine and taken of the Senators, Liui. lib. 22. infinit nomber of noble men, gentlemen & souldiers, which Florus lib. 2. I layd downe more particularly in the warres of Affrike. This only battel made all Italy to quake, and many cities and coun∣treys The most part of Italy reuol∣ted from the Romanes. to reuolt from the Romans, as Capua, Campania, and other places. It is written that Hanibal did at that time send to Car∣thage three bushels full of rings and iewels. Howbeit Asdrubal which was Hanibals second brother, had not the like lucke in Spaine, as Hanibal had in Italy: for hee lost that very time of his men thirtie and fiue thousand, by the two Scipios which were then in Spaine captaines of the Ro∣manes. The victories of both Scipios in Spaine ouer Asdrubal and Mago. And within a while after, both Asdrubal the seconde brother, and Mago the thirde brother of Hanibal, were the se∣cond time ouercome by the two Scipios againe in Spaine: for at that time that Hanibal played the Lion in Italy, and had ta∣ken many cities from the Romanes in Apulia and Calabria, yet the Romanes in foure seuerall places at one time had foure ge∣nerall lieutenants in armes. 1. In Macedonia, Valerius Liuius against Philip. 2. Titus Manlius Torquatus, in Sardinia against the Sardinians. 3. Pub. Cor. Scipio in Spaine against Asdrubal. 4. In Italy against Hanibal. The furie of Hanibal continued in Italy for tenne yeeres, so that all Italy stoode in dispaire of themselues. But when Fa∣bius Max. was sent against Hanibal, hee by detracting of time and delayes hindered the violence and rage of Hanibal, and Cunctando re restituit. thereby finding oportunitie to set vpon Hanibal, gaue him of tentimes the ouerthrowe, and therefore hee was called Scu∣tum Romanum, The Romane targat, onely by delayes. And euen Fabius the tar∣get of Rome.
so was Marcellus for his heate and furie called Ensis Romanus, and likened to Hanibal himselfe: for Hanibal himselfe called Marcellus be∣ing the sworde of Rome. Marcellus the Romane Hanibal: and said further, that Marcellus was neither quiet being conquerour, nor conquered. But while this violence of Hanibal continued in Italy, in the tenth yeere after that hee inuaded Italy, after many victories ouer the Romanes, hee approched within foure miles of Rome, and his horsemen came to the very gates of the citie. At what time (to encrease his fame) his brother Asdrubal slewe Pub. Scipio. Cneus Scipio. both the Scipios in Spaine, to the great discomfort of Rome, who had for many yeeres bene conquerours in Spaine. Hanibal might then haue easily conquered Rome, if hee had set for∣warde his armie (for so Caesar saide afterward) but hee feared the Consuls which were readie to come out of Rome to giue him battell. And not without good cause: for Hanibal found so many Scipios, so many Fabius, so many Marcellus, and so Hanibal droupt. many Hanibals like to himselfe, that hee still stoode in awe of the Romanes: for he heard that an other Scipio went to Spaine, in the place of the two Scipios slaine by Asdrubal, and also he heard of his victories ouer many cities, and shortly after he heard of Carthage in Spaine, in the which warres hee tooke Mago Hanibals brother, and sent him with the residue of the prisoners to Rome. This daunted the courage of Hanibal, and augmented the glorie of Scipio, being then of the age of twentie and foure yeeres: after whose going into Spaine, the fortune of Hanibal declined in Italy: for Fabius Maximus recouered Tarentum, Tarentum re∣couered by Fabius Max. and many other cities which had yeelded to Hanibal, submit∣ted themselues to Fabius. Marcellus had also recouered Salopia, and had taken Syracusa, and many other cities in Campania, and had sundrie times scattered Hanibal and his armie at Ca∣nusium: for either of these two Consuls, Fabius and Marcellus, had bene twise Dictators, and fiue times Consuls. In Spaine also Pub. Scipio gaue an ouerthrowe to Asdrubal at Betula, and slewe eight thousande Affricanes and Spaniards. Pub. Scipio. In the eleuenth yeere after that this warre beganne, Marcellus
that noble captaine whom Hanibal feared most, was slaine at Venusia, being then Consul, whom Hanibal most honourablie The Consul Marcellus slaine. caused to be buried in Venusia. As Hanibal flourished with his victories in Italy, so Scipio excelled in Spaine, and had victories at will: for hee discomfi∣ted the king of Spaine, and atchieued great conquests. About this time Hanibal sent for his brother Asdrubal to come from Spaine to Italy, who being preuented of set pur∣pose Asdrubal which was Ha∣nibals brother slaine. by the way was slaine, and all his armie, by Appius Clau∣dius Nero. In that time were fiftie and sixe thousande slaine, and Asdrubals head brought, and was throwen before the tents of Hanibal his brother. Hanibal then beganne to dispaire of the successe of this warre: for both in Spaine and in Affrica, hee was by this meanes weakened: in Italy all reuerted and slid from Hani∣bal: Scipio subdued the Carthagineans, and tooke Syphax king Scipio tooke Syphax king of Numidia. of Numidia prisoner, who had ioyned to ayde the Affri∣canes against the Romanes, and had also expelled by warre Ma∣sinissa out of his kingdome. This great ouerthrowe in Spaine and in Affrike, caused Hanibal to quake: for in Italy hee beganne to be forsaken of his former fortune, and in Affrike they cried out for ayde at All writers make menti∣on of this se∣cond Punicke warre. Hanibals hand. Now Hanibal perceiuing that all went to de∣cay, and being also sore wearied with continuall battels, desi∣red peace, which was graunted vpon such straite and hard conditions as pleased not the Carthagineans, and therefore they willed Hanibal rather to fight it out. This last battell whereupon the whole state of Affrike depended, was appoin∣ted to be fought at Zama. But before these two great captaines should ioyne in bat∣tell, Hanibal desired to speake with Scipio openly or priuately. Scipio denied not the meeting of Hanibal in the sight of both the armies. The speach of Hanibal tendred peace, which Scipio Hanibal and Scipio talke to∣gether. without accepting the conditions before spoken, would not allow: the effect of both the speaches is written in Liuie. To be short, the battell at Zama ended, where Scipio cōquered the
Affricanes, and put Hanibal to flight, and then were the Affri∣canes to accept such conditions as Scipio offered them be∣fore: Conditions of peace to the Affricans. for of necessitie they sought peace. The conditions of peace were, to restore Masinissa first to his kingdome, and to returne all Romane prisoners into Italy, to yeeld all their ships sauing tenne, to deliuer all their elephants to the hand of the conquerour, and that they should not make warre within Af∣frica or without, without licence of the Senators of Rome, and Yeerely reue∣nues out of Affrike to the Romanes. yeerely reuenues of 10. thousand talents of siluer to be payed to the Romanes. This warre being finished and peace thus concluded, Scipio was receiued vnto Rome with a great triumph, hauing a sir∣name giuen him by the conquest of Affrica, called Scipio Affri∣canus. Of him, and of others that serued in the second warre of Affrica, of those that triumphed, I meane Dictators, Con∣suls, Praetors, and other Romane magistrates and captaines, I haue layed downe to your viewe, their names together in or∣der, as they serued in that fielde. Publius Cornelius Scipio. Titus Sempronius. Quintus Flaminius. These trium∣phed with great pompe in Rome, sauing fewe of them that were slaine in these warres. Lucius Aemilius Paulus. Marcus Attilius Regulus. Publius Terentius Varro. Luc. Posthumius Albinius. Qu. Fabius Maximus. Mar. Claudius Marcellus. Mar. Valerius Leuinus. Pub. Sulpitius Galba. Cneus Fuluius. Quintus Fuluius Flaccus. Mar. Liuius Salinator. Tit. Quintius Crispinus. Lucius Veturius. Quintus Caecilius Metellus. Appius Claudius Nero. Scipio, sirnamed Affricanus the son of Pub. Cor. Scipio. These flourished chiefly, and triumphed in the seconde warres of Affrike, which endured (as Eutropius saith) 19. yeres: The fame of the Romanes after the ouer∣throw of Ha∣nibal. but others say 17. yeeres. Of this warre the Romanes waxed so strong, that they soone conquered al nations, and present∣ly ensued warre in Macedonia against king Philippe, for yet in Macedonia the Monarchie since the time of Alexander the great, remained: for the Romanes had driuen before this time, that noble and valiant captaine Pyrrhus out of Italy,
and nowe after Pyrrhus they haue driuen out Hanibal, the very scourge of Italie and whippe of Rome: they haue also conque∣red Hanibal the whip of Rome. the stoutest & the valiantest nations that then reigned on the earth, the Carthagineans, the Libyans, and the Affricanes, with such terrible warres, as Alexander might not compare neither in his great battels in Persia, where he subdued Darius, neither his warres in India where hee conquered king Porus, for that Alexander made a conquest of many kingdoms with∣out fighting: as Egypt, Iudea, Greece, with diuers other king∣domes Consuls of Rome. which yeelded vnto him. And so Cyrus before Alex∣ander had the like lucke to conquer with great fame, but not with such terrour and daunger of life as these Consuls of Rome. But to the historie. Skant had the second warres of Affrike beene ended, but Embassadours came from Athens to Rome for aide against the king of Macedon: the common people Wars against the Macedo∣nians. murmured, for that they were weary with continuall warres. But the whole Senate agreed with the Tribune of the peo∣ple, to send Titus Flaminius, the sonne of him that was slaine at Flaminius sent to Greece. the battell of Thrasimen: who at his first comming to Greece, gaue battell to Philip hard by the hauen Epirus, & ouerthrew him and his armie. Flaminius the Consul had a brother na∣med Lucius Flaminius, with whom ioyned Atalus king of Per∣gamum in Asia, with certeine Rhodian souldiers, who tooke Euboea, and all the sea coasts. Philip to become stronger, ioy∣ned in friendship with Antiochus the great, king of Asia. Howe be it Flaminius had such good successe in Greece, that Philip was forced to entreate for peace, which was graunted vpon these condicions: That all the Cities of Greece within Asia and Condiciōs of peace graun∣ted to king Philip. Europe, should haue their owne libertie and lawes, That al Ro∣mane prisoners should be deliuered to their Countrie, That all their great Nauies shoulde bee deliuered to the Romanes, with all their Elephants, That hee should keepe no armie a∣boue the number of fiue hundred souldiers, and that hee should commence no warre out of the Confines of Macedo∣nia Val. lib. 7. cap. 5. without licence and leaue of the Senate. These condici∣ons
of peace were proclaimed with the sound of the trumpet through all the Cities of Greece. By this time Hanibal, who es∣caping from Scipio at the battell of Zama, came to Antiochus, Libertie pro∣claimed in Greece. councelled him with all meanes possible to warre vpon the Romanes, being nowe so weakened by the last Affricane warre. The authoritie of Hanibal moued Antiochus to take warres in hand against the Romanes: for assoone as the warre in Macedo∣nia finished and were giuen ouer by Philip, the warres in Syria began by Antiochus, and were executed by Hanibal. But Hani∣bal The warres of Syria by Anti∣cchus the great. was discomfited in battell on the sea, and Antiochus himself put to flight at Magnesia a citie of Asia, by Lu. Cornelius Scipio, brother to Scipio Affricanus, in the which battell (as Eutropius saith) were slaine fiftie thousande footemen and foure thou∣sand The victorie of Lu. Scipio. horsemen. Eumenes king of Pergamum the sōne of Attalus, being (as his father was) alwaies a friend to the Romanes, made all the pow∣er Eumenes. he could against Antiochus, for an old grudge that Eumenes had to Antiochus. To this warre of Syria came Scipio Affricanus to aide his brother Lu. being Consul then, against Antiochus: for Antiochus was so beset with M. Attilius Glabrio the Consul on the one side, and Scipio Nasica on the other side at Thiatira, by Emilius Regulus at Mionesus, and by Lucius Scipio at Magnesia. Nowe Nabides againe after he had submitted himselfe to Fla∣minius Nabides sub∣mitted him to Flaminius. vpon what condicions he woulde, being then vanqui∣shed and Armenes his sonne together with king Philips sonne Demetrius, were led before Flaminius charet as hostages and pledges to Rome, began to kindle more fire against the Romās: but he was slaine by the Aetolians. Eutrop writeth this historie otherwise: but I stand not vpon controuersies. After this ouerthrow giuen to Antiochus, he made meanes Antiochus sought peace. to the Romanes for peace, which was graunted, if he would a∣uoid forth of Europe & Asia, and meddle no further but within the precinct of Taurus, & giue to the Romanes 10. thousand ta∣lents, & 30. pledges for the assurance of his promise: and in conclusion, to deliuer Hanibal to them, who had bin the cause of this warre. This being done, the Senat gaue to Eumenes all Plinij lib. 33. cap. 11.
these cities of Asia, which Antiochus had lost in battell, & like∣wise they gaue to the Rhodiās diuers other cities, for that they assisted the Romanes against Antiochus. By this victorie trium∣phed Scipio surna∣med Asiaticus. Lu. Cornelius Scipio in Rome, where hee brought infinite spoile & treasures of Asia, and had the surname of Asiaticus gi∣uen him, & was called Scipio Asiaticus, as his brother was cal∣led Scipio Affricanus: but both these brethrē were much enui∣ed for their greatnes: Scipio Affricanus was accused by Marcus Por. Cato, by whose meanes afterwarde though he was not ba∣nished, yet he most willing departed frō Rome into Lucernum, saying these wordes: O ingrata patria, non habebis ossa mea. His brother Scipio Affricanus was both accused and condemned The words of Scipio of his countrie. when Caius Flaminius was Consul. About this time Hanibal died, & is buried at Libissa, a bani∣shed man out of his Countrie, a man likewise that had deser∣ued wel of his countrie. Philip king of Macedon died also this very time. This had both warred against the Romanes, and as∣sisted them against Antiochus. After Philip died, his sonne Per∣seus rebelled in Macedonia, and reared warres against the Ro∣manes, with whō ioyned Cotys king of Illiria: the Romanes were not long about Perseus: for he was vanquished in one battell, Perseus the last king of Macedon takē. yea and (as Phil. saith) in one houre: he fled from Pydna to Pel∣la, and within few dayes yeelded himselfe to Cneus Octauius in Samothracia: and was brought out of hand to Paulus Emilius, who after his honorable progresse in Greece and in Macedonia, he shipped at the citie of Orica, and returned to Italie, to whō a triumph was graunted, & such a triumph as farre excelled others, equall to Pompey or to Caesars triumphs. For Emilius had Emilius his tri∣umph ouer Perseus. in this triumph led before his chariot, king Perseus himselfe, being fourtie fiue yeeres of age, and his two sonnes, and in an other chariot, Gentius king of the Illyrians, with his brother C Anitius tri∣umphed ouer Gentius king of the Illyrians. and his sonnes, ouer whom triumphed Caius Anitius. This triumph is set foorth in Plutarch, to the admiration of many strangers which then were at Rome, as Eumenes king of Asia, and Prusias king of Bythinia, who at that time brought his sōne Nicomedes with him to Rome, and committed him to the go∣uernment of the Senators.
CHAP. VI. Of the conspiracie of L. Catelina: and of the two ciuill warres, the first betweene Marius and Silla, and the second betweene Pom∣pei the great, and Iu. Caesar: during which time Carthage and Numantia were subdued in Hispaine, and the last conquest of Affrika by Scipio the younger, and also surnamed Affricanus the younger. NOwe that the Romanes had quieted Asia, and brought the kings of Egypt to bee friendes of the Romanes, subdued Mace∣donia, and made all Greece free from warres, and when (as they thought) that they might take some repose and rest from further warres, they were certified of newes from Carthage, that the Affri∣canes and Carthagineans had broken the league of peace with the Romans, whereupon the third warres were taken in hand: The Romanes had in 5. pla∣ces warres at one time. for all this time of fiftie two yeres, peace was kept betweene the Romanes and the Affricanes, at what time the Romanes were occupied in the warres of Syria, against Antiochus: in the warres of Macedonia against king Philip, and his sonne Perse∣us: in Greece against Nabides the tyraunt of Lacedemonia: in Il∣lyria against king Gentius: and in Bythinia against Prusias, who had maried the sister of Perseus. These kings and countries were no sooner quieted, but the Affricanes began to commence warre the third time with the The third warre of Af∣frike. Romanes: at what time Lu. Martius Censorinus, and Marcus Manlius were Consuls at Rome, in the yeere after the building of Rome sixe hundred and one, some say sixe hundred & fiue. These Consuls tooke their voyage to inuade Carthage, and by Mar. Portius Cato his councel being at that time the wisest Catoes councel concerning Carthage. man in Rome, to rase Carthage from the grounde, or to make it euen to the grounde: yet Scipio Nasica a good man, and so of the Senators esteemed and of the Citizens accompted, con∣traried Cato in that councell, perswading lenitie to bee fitte for the Romanes being conquerours.
The warre was taken in hand, and so furiously folowed, that Carthage within foure yeeres was destroyed by Scipio E∣milianus, nephewe to Affricanus, who was deputed generall of the Romane armie at that time, of whom Cato was wont to say, Hic solus sapit, one in vertue and courage most like to his pre∣decessour Scipio Affricanus. The chiefe captaine then in Car∣thage was one Asdrubal & Phanea, or as some say Famea. These Phanea. names, Hamilcar and Asdrubal, were in Carthage, as Scipio or Fabius were in Rome. In the beginning of this warre died Ma∣sinissa, Hamilcar and Asdrubal a great name in Carthage. an olde constant friende alwayes to the Romanes, after that he had liued ninetie eight yeeres. Now Scipio with inuin∣cible courage assaulted Carthage, and wanne and pluckt it to the ground: he waxed so famous thereby, that being a yong man, he was created Consul, who by his prowesse and valure merited to be called Scipio Affricanus the yonger. In the meane time while this warre was in Carthage, one vsurped the name of Philip, & of the kingdome of Macedonia, and proclaimed warres against the Romanes, and gaue Publius Inuentius Pretor then of Rome the ouerthrowe, and made such a slaughter of the Romane army, that none skant escaped aliue Q. Cecilius Metellus was deputed captaine, and sent against Andriscus na∣med Psendophi lippus vanqui∣shed by Me∣tellus. this false named Philip, who slue twentie fiue thousand of his men, recouered Macedonia, and tooke prisoner this false Phi∣lip. This time Corinthus the third citie of all Greece was ouer∣throwen, and pluckt to the grounde by Mūmius the Consul, Mummius. which Citie was builded by Beletes Hippios sonne nine hun∣dred fiftie two yeeres before: so long Corinthus florished. Likewise at this very time againe, one in Macedonia vsur∣ped in like maner as before one false Philip nowe vsurped the name of Perseus: but hee was soone subdued by Tremilus the Questor, so that at once entred into the citie of Rome foure Perseus ouer∣throwen. triumphs: the first by Scipio Affricanus the yonger, foorth of Af∣frike ouer Asdrubal: the second by Metellus foorth of Macedonia ouer Andriscus, which was that false Philip before spoken: the third by Mūmius the Consul ouer the Citie of Corinth. After this triumphs, Scipio was sent to Spaine to the Numantines, who
had a little before discomfited Q. Pompeius the Consul, ouer whom he had his second triumph: but shortly by Scipio the citie of Numantia was subdued, hee had triumphed ouer Af∣frike. About this time, Attalus king Eumenes his father, some say his brother, died, and made the people of Rome his heire, Eutrop. lib. 4. Iustine lib 37. Gellius lib. 1. cap. 13. and so by testament Asia was annexed to the Romane Empire: notwithstanding warre ensued in Asia by Aristonicus a base sōne of Eumenes, & in that warre Pub. Lucius Crassus was slaine, his head cut off and brought to Aristonicus, and his body bu∣ried at Smirna. It is written of this Crassus, that he might brag of 5 principal great gifts: To be most noble, The most weal∣thiest, Fiue great gifts in Crassus. The most eloquent, To be the most learned ciuillian, And to be the most high Bishop. About this time Carthage in Affrike was reedified by the cōmandemēt of the Senat, after that it was subdued by Scipio 22. yeres, and (as writeth Polib.) diuers Citizens of Rome went to dwel in Carthage. Not long after this Scipio was found dead in his house, not without great suspiciō of Caius Graccus: now warre was by the Romanes cōmenced against the Thraciās, at what time triumphed in Rome the two brethrē Metelli in one The two bre∣thren Meielli triumphed. day: the one ouer Thracia, & the other ouer Sardinia: the wars of Iugurth immediatly after this ensued, of whō Salust maketh menciō. This was the sōne of Micipsa, king of Numidia, who hauing two other brethrē beside himselfe, named Adherbalis, and Hiemsalis, these Iugurth slue, and vsurped the kingdome: for this fact, the Romanes sent Lucius Calphurnius then Con∣sul against Iugurth, but hee did no good: for hee was corrup∣ted with money. After Spurius Albinus Posthumus was sent by the Senators, who fought with Iugurth, but with great dishonour. The thirde time Quintus Cecilius Metellus was sent, who vanquished Iugurth, and subdued Numidia, & at last tooke him and brought him prisoner to Rome. Of this Iugurth, Reade Salust of Iugurth warres. you shall reade more in the Affricane historie: and I will lay downe the names of the Romane Consuls, captaines, and ge∣nerals that triumphed from the ende of the second Affricane warre, which was from Scipio Affricanus the elder, vntill the
time of Scipio Affricanus the yonger, which was 56. yeeres. 1 Ti. Quin. Flaminius. 2 Lu. Flamin. his brother. 3 Lu. Cornelius Scipio surnamed Affricanus. 4 Lu. Valerius Flaccus. 5 M. Portius Cato. 6 Lucius Manlius. 7 Scipio Nasica. 8 Ti. Sempronius Longus. 9 Spu. Posthu. Albinus. 10 Quintus Martius. 11 M. Aemilius Lepidus. 12 M. Sempro. Tuditanus. 13 Lucius Anitius. 14 Au. Manl. Torquatus. 15 C. Lu. Crassus. 16 Quintus Opimus. 17 Sci. Affrica. the yonger. 18 Q. Cecilius Metellus. 29 C. Cecilius Metellus. 20 Lu. Cornelius Cnima. 21 M. Liuius Drusus. 22 C. Papirius Carbo. 23 Lu. Celius Metellus. 24 Cneus Octauius. These with many other noble Romanes florished in those dayes: for nowe the Romanes after all their wars in Affrika, brought all kingdoms vnder the Empire of Rome: for frō that time forward the glory of Rome did excel, sauing for some ciuill wars that grew beeene Ma∣rius & Silla, & after beweene Pompey & Caesar, els Rome was in Marius the first cause of the ciuil wars. her greatnes: for in the 646. yeere after the building of Rome Caius Marius, a man of great seruice amongst the Romanes in consideration that he had bene seuen times Consul in Rome, was the onely cause of the first ciuil warre in Rome, vpō indig∣nation taken, that Silla was preferred in the wars then against Mithridates king of Pontus, who had already done good seruice in Asia & Achaia, though Mithridates had perswaded the Athe∣niās to resist Silla: for at that time Mithridates held a great part of Asia in his hand, and of Thracia, so that many thought that Mithridates should in time conquer the Romane Empire: for he was eager and cruell against those that loued the Romanes. But Silla in spite of Mithridates & his philosopher Athenius, & Silla and Ma∣rius two ene∣mies 10 Italie. his successor Aristo the tyrant, besieged Athens, and wanne it, where he killed a number of the Citizens: many before were famished, for a measure of wheate called Medinus, was sold in Athens then for a thousand Drachmes, which doe mount to a hundred crownes, which before in time of peace was sold for fiue Drachmes.
After he had taken Athens, he marched to Beotia, and ouer∣threwe Archilaus Mithridates generall, & slue a hundred thou∣sand Melancthon Chron. lib. 2. of his men: and from thence to Thebes, and did much harme both to the Citie and Citizens. Marius disdaining the good successe of Silla, made meanes to the Senate to haue that warre into his hand, which Silla had against Mithridates. Eutrop. lib. 5. This was graunted to Marius, whereupon Silla in a great furie with all his armie returned backe to Rome, entred the Citie, killed Sulpitius, slue many, and draue Marius to flight, and secretly went to Apheca. Silla and Marius beganne nowe both to neglect the warres abroade against Mithridates, and like two furious enemies of Italie, spoyled their countrie, and gaue libertie to the enemie Cilla and Ma∣rius ciuil wars. to vanquish and subdue in this time Armenia the lesse, and all the sea coastes called Ponticum and Bosphorus. Silla by consent of the Senate, tooke his iourney against Mithridates, recoue∣red Greece (as you heard) and other prouinces. But to be short, Silla ouercame Marius after many hotte broiles in Italie, con∣cluded peace with Mithridates, returned to Rome, at what time Lu. Scipio and Norbanus were Consuls in Rome. These both thought to resist Sillas comming to Rome: but Lu. Scipio with all his armie went and yeelded to Silla, and the other Consul Norbanus the Consul slue himselfe. fled to Rhodes, where for feare to come to Sillas hand, hee slue himselfe. That yeere Silla was made Dictator in Rome, sixe hundred seuentie three yeeres after the building of Rome, at what time he tyrannized against the Citizens of Rome, so that Silla after much good seruice first done to his countrie, afterwarde fell Silla made Dictator in Rome. to such slaughter and tyrannie, that he had beene better vn∣borne then borne. And so of Marius may be spoken, who plai∣ed the like part before Silla, and were both called faces & faeces Italiae, for their bloodshed in their coūtrie: for Marius before Sillas slaughter and murthering of the Citizens of Rome, hee Faces Italiae. killed Cneus Sulpitius, and others: so Sulpitius and others slue in Rome Cneus Octauius, and many of the best of Rome, aswell Noble men, Senators, & Consuls, as others. This ciuil warre
in Rome (as Eutropius and Melancthon affirme) endured tenne yeeres, in the which were slaine aboue fiue hundred thou∣sand Eutrop. lib. 5. Melanct. lib. 2. souldiers, twentie foure Consuls, seuen Pretors, fourtie Tribunes, and (as they write) three hundred Senators beside. Reade Melancthon of this warre. Now after that Silla had these tenne yeres fomed in blood, Reade Val. Max. lil. 3. cap. 2. de Mario. and had subdued both Marius, and his sonne the yonger Ma∣rius, hee triumphed ouer Mithridates with great glory. In the latter yeeres of Silla, young Pompey afterwarde surnamed the Silla trium∣phed ouer Mithridates. great for his prowesse & courage, was much honored of Silla, who appointed him his lieutenant general ouer his garisons for Cneus Carbo the Consul, which fought with young Ma∣rius together against Silla, which Marius was slaine by Sil∣la in Preneste. At what time Carbo fledde, and was slaine by Pompey, and after that Pompey slue Domitius a captaine of Ma∣rius Pompey trium∣phed ouer Af∣frike. his side, and withall slue Hiarbus king of Mauritania, being of Domitius side, and therefore triumphed Pompey ouer Affrike being but twentie foure yeeres of age, which was neuer earst graunted to any Romane, and hauing not bene Consul. While this ciuill warre continued in Rome, little or no∣thing was done in other countries: for nowe all places were made quiet by the Romās, sauing some of Marius friends, who fled after Marius death, held out, and did what they could to trouble the Romanes, as Hirtulius, Sertorius and others of Mari∣rius friends that stirred wars in Spaine, in Cicilia, & Pamphylia: Sertorius a va∣liant captaine of Marius side fled to Spaine. against these Q. Metellus, sonne to that Metellus which subdu∣ed king Iugurth, was sent, & with him Cneus Pompeius was sent to aide him: for Sertorius was a valiāt approued captaine. Api∣us Claudius was then sent, after his Consulship was expired to Macedonia where hee died, without any harme done to the enemies: in his place succeded Scribonius Curio, who for his Pub. Seruilius sent to Cilicia. good seruice merited a triumph. Then was sent into Cilicia & Pamphylia Publius Seruilius, a passing good captaine: for hee wanne the worthiest cities of Licia, and subdued Cilicia: hee wanne Phasilides, Olympus, & Coritum, three great cities, and fi∣nished his warres in three yeeres, and returned to Rome, and
had a triumph graunted him ouer the Isaurians. So had Metel∣lus ouer Spaine, Scribonius Curio ouer Macedonia, & Pompeius a∣gaine Mithridates infringed the league. ouer Spaine, which was his second triumph: so at that time were foure triumphs in Rome together. Againe Mithridates infringed the league before made, and renued warres with the Romanes, and would haue inuaded A∣sia and Bythinia, had not Lu. Lucullus the Consul, and his fel∣lowe M. Aurelius Cotta come in time: for before this time, hee pretended warre against Bythinia and their king Nicomedes, and after that inuaded Capadocia, and Paphlagonia, and draue Eutrop. lib. 6. both Nicomedes king of Bythinia, and Pilemenes king of Paphla∣gonia to exile, and from thence he went to Ephesus, killing and flaying the Romanes friends: and withall he was so cruell, that Plutarch in Pompeio. he sent letters through all Asia, that wheresoeuer any Citi∣zen of Rome might be found, he shoulde be killed, though he was discomfited by Silla and Lucullus, and at last driuen to flee for succour to Tigranes king of Armenia, a captaine of great renowme in those dayes: for this Tigranes was so mightie a king, that he had subdued the Persians, and Mesopotamia: hee also wanne Syria, and a peece of Phoenicia: yet still Mithridates renued warres, called his armie from Scythia, and ioyned them with Tigranes force. Mithridates a great enemie to the Romans. But Lucullus followed Mithridates hard to Armenia, and re∣quired Tigranes to deliuer him Mithridates: which being de∣nied, Lucullus foorth with inuaded king Tigranes realme, and gaue him a great ouerthrowe, and passed from place to place as conqueror, destroying of countries, and taking cities, vntil he came to the riuer Danubius: he destroyed Appolonia, Parthe∣nopolis, and other cities of Pontus, and returned to Rome a con∣queror Iustine lib. 37. of many coūtries both he & his cousin germaine M. Both Luculli triumphed. Lucullus, and triumphed with great glory, but yet he missed of king Mithridates: he plaied still the tyraunt with the Romanes, vntil Pompey the great came, who ouercame Mithridates in Ar∣menia, sackt his tents, and slue fourtie thousand of his armie, and forced Mithridates to flee, when hee poysoned himselfe and died, after hee had kept warres with the Romanes fourtie
yeeres: for this warre of Mithridates began with Silla, and was ended by Pompey. Thus the Romanes at last conquered the Mithridates vanquished by Pompey the great. great king Mithridates, who had not continued so long, had not ciuill warres bene in Rome betweene Marius and Silla, and after that the conspiracie of Cateline, and after Cateline the ci∣uill warres betweene Pompey and Caesar: of this you shall reade hereafter. In the meane season there was no warre in other kingdomes: for Syria, Egypt, Libya, and all other places were friendes and subiects to the Romanes: for nowe the Romanes were in their greatnes and in their most glory and fame. Such men liued then in Rome, as did conquer the whole world. Now assoone as Mithridatates was by Pompey ouerthrowē, he addressed his battell against Tigranes, who yeelded vnto Tigranes yeel∣ded to Pompey Pompey without battell, and came to Pompeis tent, fell pro∣strate before him, and deliuered vp his crowne vnto Pom∣peius. After the yeelding of king Tigranes, Pompey made warres with the Albanes, and ouercame Orodes king of the Albanes in three sundrie battels: he also subdued Arthaces king of Iberia, and receiued him vnder the allegeance of the Romanes. To be The victories of Pompey the great. briefe, Pompey was the onely man that not onely augmented the glory of Rome, but also enriched Rome with infinite trea∣sures gotten by his conquest of Cilicia, Syria, Phoenicia, Iudea, Mesopotamia, Capadocia, Armenia, Iberia, Albania, and a great part of Arabia. By these kingdomes whom Pompey conquered, the reue∣nues of Rome were augmented three thousand and fiue hun∣dred Myriades. The glory of Pompey grew to be such in Rome, 3500. Myriads the reuenues of Rome aug∣mented. that hee was elected to be a Consul alone himselfe without a fellowe: for Pompey at his triumph ouer Mithridates his sonne, (for Mithridates him selfe, as you heard, died before the tri∣umph) had Tigranes also and his sonne, and Aristobulus king of the Iues ledde before his chariot: for at that time he trium∣phed ouer two kings, and ouer two kings sonnes. The pompe and pride of that triumph farre excelled other The triumphs of Pompey the great. triumphes: for Eutropius saith, that at that very triumph Pom∣pey
had vanquished certeine pirates on the seas when Lucius Metellus had triumphed ouer Creete, and therefore surnamed Metellus Cretius. After that Pompey had finished these wars in the sixe hun∣dred Catelines con∣spiracie. eightie nine yeere after the building of Rome, Lucius Ca∣tiline, a man of a noble stocke descended, but of an euill dis∣position, Anno 689. conspired with diuers other rash young men like himself, but yet were they noble men, and many gentlemen: but by Ciceros meanes then Consul, Cateline was expulsed foorth of the Citie, and shortly slaine in a battell by Caius An∣thonius fellowe Consul with Cicero: some of his confederates Lentulus Cethe∣gus and many mo of Catelins conspiracie slaine. were apprehended and thratled in prison, others, as Lentulus Cethegus with the rest, slaine. About this time, Horace the Poet was borne, and within fewe yeeres after, Octauius, which was called Augustus, was borne afterward. This time reigned in Egypt Alcetes the father of Cleopatra, after whome Cleopatra with her brother reigned, vntill Marcus Anthonius time, Alcetes. with whome shee liued and died: for nowe reigned in euery kingdome lieutenants and gouernours vnder the Romanes: all kingdomes and countries were made prouinces vnder Rome. These pirates nauies (as Plutarch saith) were about a thousand Piracie by Pō∣pey the great subdued. in number: they had takē aboue 400. Townes, they had spoi∣led many temples, as in Samos the temple of Iuno, & in Tenaria and Catabria, the two temples dedicated to Neptune, the tem∣ple of Apollo in Actiū, the tēple of Aesculapius in Epidaurū, and so of others. The greatnes of Pompey grew to be such in Rome, as Silla who was the first that called him by the name of Pompey the great, enuied his fame, Lucullus who much hated the pride and insolencie of Pompey, called him in scorne Agamemnon re∣gem regū, king of kings: and Pompey in like sort called Lucullus Xerxem togatum. This enuie bred hidden hatred in Rome, and made the people to become factious, sometime with Silla, Pompey called Agamemnon by Lucullus. Lucullus called Xerxes Toga∣tus by Pompey. Melanct. lib. 2. sometime with Marius, & now betweene Lucullus & Pompey, and after betweene Pompey and Caesar. They were so factious, at that time in Rome, that then Iulius Caesar a man of great prowesse and of a singuler dexteritie, whose seruice was
such, that it seemed from the beginning of his birth that hee shoulde growe great in Rome, and therefore Pompey looking into the disposition of Caesar, maried his daughter Iulia, and ioyned in the beginning with Caesar. While Pompey stood to Caesar his father in lawe, they were too strong to be resisted ei∣ther Lucullus, Cras∣sus and Pom∣pey the onely three that bare sway in Rome when Cae∣sar came in. by Lucullus or by Crassus, though Crassus before hee was slaine in Parthia, was equall to any of them both. But when Iulia Caesars daughter and Pompeis wife died, and the other third champion Crassus was slaine at Carras in Par∣thia by Surena, some square fell betwixt Caesar and Pompey: for Pompey would haue no equall man with him in Rome, and Cae∣sar could abide no superiour: and thus for a little demaunde made by Caesar to become Consul in Rome once for his great seruice in Fraunce and in other places, being denied by Mar∣cellus then Consul by the meanes of Pompey, grewe this great The cause of the ciuill wars betweene Pompey and Caesar. ciuil warres thirtie yeeres after Sillas death. Caesar hauing both friendes and enemies in Rome who became factious, his ene∣mies Marcellus, Lentulus, and others, ioyned with Pompey, and perswaded to keepe Caesar from being Consul: his friendes made much meanes to the Senators and to the people to haue Caesar to be Consul, as Marcus Antonius, and Quintus Cas∣sius. Caesar was much agreeued to see such in gratitude shewed to him that well deserued to be Consul, and came in armes against the Citie of Rome. Much feare was in Rome and great Caesar came in armes against the citie of Rome. tumult in Italie vpon the comming of Caesar▪ some ranne out of the Citie to Caesar, and some ranne from Italie vnto Rome vnto Pompey: the maner and order of this ciuill warre be∣tweene Caesar and Pompey frō the beginning vnto the ending, is set forth in Oros. most briefely lib. 6. cap. 15. Cicero traueiled much to pacifie these quarrels, but to no effect. Pompey with all the Senators and noblemen of Rome, departed foorth of the Citie, and went to Brundusium. When Of this warre reade Appian lib. 5. Caesar came in armes, before he entred into Rome, he besieged Brundusium. Pompey secretly by night escaped Caesar, and fled: Eutro. lib. 7. the Citizens yeelded to Caesar, who marched to Rome without resistance, entred to the Senate, opened the cause of his com∣ming,
not as Silla or Marius to destroy his Countrie, or to Iu. Caesars re∣quest vnto the Senators. murther his countriemen, but perswaded the Senate to send Embassadours vnto Pompey for peace. After this, he commit∣ted Rome to Lepidus, and Italie vnto Marcus Antonius, and hee himselfe went into Spaine, and forced the armie of Pompey to yeeld. Lepidus made labour to the Senators to haue Caesar Di∣ctator, while Caesar was absent in Spaine. Caesar at his returne to Rome made himselfe Consul, and Scruilius Ismaricus the other Consul, to whom he committed Italie and Rome. Caesar tooke sea, and sailed after Pompey to Epirus, and from thence to Dy∣rachium where Pompey was, and where also Caesar had the ouer∣throwe by Pompey. Caesar departed to Thessali, Pompey folowed, being puft vp with some pride of the last ouerthrow of Caesar, The victorie of Caesar ouer Pompey in Pharsalia. and a great battell was fought in Pharsalia, where Caesar gote the victorie, slue fifteene thousand of Pompeis souldiers, Caesar crying out vpon his captaines to spare the Citizens of Rome, whereby twentie foure thousand were taken prisoners, and Pompey himselfe put to the flight. But while Caesar & Pompey were thus in Pharsalia, Celius and Milo began to quarell and make sedition against the Consul Seruilius, but they were both slaine. But Pompey being thus dis∣comfited, Plut. in Alex. fled into Alexandria, where he thought to haue cer∣taine aide of the king of Egypt, ouer whō Pompey was appoin∣ted Tutor by the Senate, during the minoritie of the king. But Pompey was deceiued of his expectatiō: for he was killed, and his head cutte off and sent to Caesar from Egypt: which when Eutrop. lib. 6. Caesar sawe, hee wept to see the head of so worthie a man as Pompey. Melancthon sayeth, that Pompey was slaine by the Pompey slaine in Egypt. councell of Photinus an Eunuch, and by Theodotus the kings schoolemaster. Achillas and Septimius were sent from the king to kil Pompey: this Septimius had beene a captaine vnder Pom∣pey, and had charge in seruice, & Pompey knew him & spake to him. As Pompey was reading of a greeke oration which he had to speake with the king, Septimius thrust him through with the sword behind, and brought him to Ptolomy the king the sonne of Auletes and brother to Cleopatra, in the ght of Cornelia
Pompeis wife and his two sonnes, who fled to Aphrica to Sci∣pio and Cato Pompeis friends: after whom Caesar followed, and Melancthon Chron. lib. 2. in a great battelfoure yeres after his father was ouerthrowen at Pharsalia, he was slaine in Spaine. The other sonne of Pompey called Sextus Pompeius, liued eight yeres after Caesar was slaine. Not long after Pompeis death, Caesar came to Alexandria, Pompeis sonne slaine in Af∣frica. where certaine conspired his death by the aduise of Ptolome. Caesar hereupon made warres vpon the king, whom hee ouer∣came and put to flight, and so drowned himselfe in the riuer Nilus. Melanct. saith, that those very men, Achillas Photinus Sep∣timius which slue Pompey, conspired against Caesar: who vnder∣standing of this, commaunded them to be slaine. The king for feare also of Caesar fled, & was amōgst others drowned, seeking to escape. Egypt was giuē by Caesar to Cleopatra the kings sister, Caesar had a sonne by Cleo∣patra called Caesarion. whom hee after vsed as his paramour, and returned from E∣gypt after Pompeis friends who fled to Affrica, where Caesar had sharpe warres and very doubtfull battels: for in the last battel fought at Munda with Pompeis sonne, Caesar was driuen to so neere a straight, that his men fled from him, thirtie thousand Melanct. lib. 2. Chron. were slaine, and Caesar thought to slay himselfe. Cato and Scipio, Afranius, and Portreius fought so desperatly, that they feared no danger, yet Caesar gote the victorie. This Scipio which was of the stocke of Scipio Affricanus, and father in lawe to Pompey, slue himselfe: so did M. Cato. M. Pe∣treius, Lu. Florus lib. 4. and Iuba king of Mauritania. But Quintus Varus Pompeis lieutenant, Lu. Cornelius, Faustus Sillas sonne the Dictator, Afranius and Cneus Pompeius the eldest sōne of Pompey the great were slaine in battel. While Caesar was in Affrike in these warres, Marcus Antonius made him Dicta∣tor in Rome.
CHAP. VII. Of the alteration and change of the common wealth of Rome from Aristocratia to Monarchia againe: as before from Kings to Consuls, so nowe from Consuls to Emperours. The state was alte∣red by Iu. Caesar the first Emperour, and the last Dictator of Rome: and so from Iu. Caesar vnto the ende of Nero, which was the last of the progenie of Augustus. POmpeis friendes and adherents being thus subdued, & the ciuill warres cleare appeased, Caesar returned to Rome with great triumph, where he was chosen to be perpetuall Dictator, and named of the people Emperour: hee vsed great clemencie towards Pompeis friends, and caused Pompeis Images being throwen The humani∣tie and great courtesie of Caesar. downe before, to be set vp againe: hee raised the children of those parents which were slaine in the ciuil warres betweene Silla and Marius, and therefore the Romanes dedicated the Temple of clemencie to Caesar for his courtesie. Caesar was not idle after the ciuill warres, and after many daungerous battels: for in October hee entred with his tri∣umph to Rome, at what time he reformed the inequalitie of the yeere, and brought to perfection the Kalender, so that Caesar did what it pleased him in Rome, without regard of the Senators or Consuls, which was the onely cause of Cassius and Brutus conspiracie: and yet Caesar saued Brutus life once or twise after Pompeis death. This conspiracie being conclu∣ded Conspiracie against Caesar by Brutus and Cassius. betweene Brutus and Cassius, with many Senators and gentlemen of Rome more, the time was appointed and the place, diuerse strange impressions were seene in the ayre: also strange markes founde in Caesars sacrifice, the Southsay∣ers warned Caesar of the Ides of March: his wife Calphurnia Calphurnias dreame. certified Caesar of a dreame she sawe, and with teares desired him that day not to goe to the Senate: the conspiracie was deliuered to him in writing vpon the way as hee went to the
Senate, but destinies may be easier foreseene then auoyded, Destinies hardly auoy∣ded. Caesar was that day slaine, and so murthered that hee had 23. wounds on his bodie. Thus the great Caesar had butfrom October to March to liue in Rome as Emperour: all the rest of his life was 56. yeeres, his warres, his dangers, all the toile and traueile he tooke, was to Caesars death. come to be Emperour of Rome which he enioyed not 5. mo∣neths. Caesar had fiue triumphes very solemnly: the first hee had ouer the Frenchmen: the second ouer the king of Egypt: the third ouer Pharnaces Mithridates sonne king of Pontus: the fourth ouer Affrica of Cato, Scipio, and Cneus Pompeius: the fift of Caesars fiue triumphes. Spaine. Thus farre the glory of Rome florished, their fame and dignitie extended to al parts of of the world, as by their victo∣ries and triumphes ouer all nations may appeare: for during the raigne of the Consuls which gouerned Rome 467. yeres: for frō Iu. Brutus, and Publicola the first Consuls after the time The glory and fame of Rome during the time of Con∣suls. of the last king, vntill Pausa and Hirsius the last Consuls vnder Iulius Caesar the first Emperour, raigned in Rome 936 Con∣suls, all which time the Romanes encreased from the very be∣ginning their Empire, as may appeare by the victories and triumphes ouer so many countreys and kingdomes, as here I lay downe to your view. FIrst Sicilia was subdued by Marcellus then Consul, ouer which hee triumphed with pompe, and brought Sicilie a prouince vnder Rome. 2 Sardinia and Corsica were by Metellus conquered and made by him a prouince vnder the Romanes. 3 All Affrica and Carthage, was by Pub. Cornelius Scipio brought subiect vnder the Romans, and after againe by Sci∣pio sirnamed the yonger Affricanus. 4 Numidia and their king Iugurtha, was by Marius then Consul, after many sharpe battels ouerthrowen and sub∣dued, and Iugurtha brought prisoner into Rome, where he pied in prison.
5 Mauritania was in like maner held by Bochus and Iu∣ba, but both were vanquished, and all Mauritania by Iu. Cae∣sar then generall for the Romanes in the West, brought vn∣der the Empire of Rome. 6 Hispaine was brought vnder by Decius Brutus, and made a prouince vnder the Romanes, and after by Metellus and last by Pompey the great, who vtterly subdued Spaine. 7 After that all Affrica and Spaine was made subiect to These king∣domes made Prouinces to Rome by Con∣suls. the Romanes, the kingdome of Macedonia and all Greece were subdued and brought to Rome first by Tit. Flaminius, and af∣ter by Paulus Aemilius. 8 The Illyrians which ayded the Macedonians, were by Lucius Manilius conquered, and their king Gentius caried captiue into Rome, ouer whom he solemnly triumphed. 9 The Thracians were by Lucullus vanquished and sub∣dued, and so made seruants to the Romanes. 10 Asia was destroyed sundrie times, but last by Sci∣pio sirnamed Asiaticus, so named for his victorie ouer Antio∣chus Asia and Af∣frike brought subiect vnder the Romanes. the great, and ouer Asia, so that neere al Asia and all Af∣frica were made subiects vnder the Romanes. 11 All the countrey about mount Taurus, was subdued and brought vnder the Empire of Rome by Seruilius, who also conquered the Isaurians, and therefore sirnamed Isauri∣cus for his victorie therein. 12 Lucius Silla subdued the Parthians, and constrained their king Arsaces to pay tribute to the Romanes. 13 Lucius Lucullus vanquished the king of Armenia, and brought him to hold of the Romanes. 14 Pontus, Mesopotamia, Arabia, Iudea, and diuers other kingdomes and countreys were made prouinces vnder Rome by Pompey the great. Frenchmen were first by Camillus and after by Marius vanquished: the thirde time all Fraunce was conquered by Iulius Caesar.
Creete was by Metellus subdued, and therefore Metellus was sirnamed Creticus. Cyprus by Marcus Cato was made a prouince of the Ro∣manes. Pub. Ventidius triumphed ouer the Persians, and brought them subiect to Rome. Egypt vnder diuers Consuls kept vnder the Romans Em∣pire, and at last made a prouince vnto Rome, and was ap∣pointed Aegyptus Hor∣reum Romae. to be the treasurer of Rome, and called Horreum Ro∣mae, the barne of Rome. For while Pompey flourished in Rome, Caesar was also of great credite, and had bene Questor and Tribune of the souldiers, and after was sent Pretor to Spaine: for Caesar was a valiant soul∣dier and a skilfull captaine, his prowesse and deedes of armes excelled Silla, Marius, Crassus, Lucullus, and Pompey. Reade his life in Plutarch, and you shall finde how many nations, and howe many townes Caesar conquered in the warres with the Gaules, he brought welnigh all Fraunce to subiection. After hee warred vpon the Illyrians and Heluetians, at what time Cassius Lopanus raigned king: and soone after vpon the The warres and victories of Caesar. Britaines, which at that time neuer heard of the Romanes, whose prowesse and great courage Caesar in his owne Com∣mentarie doeth much commende. Caesar waged battell with diuers nations of Germanie, as with the Tigurians, the Belges, and the Neruians: for in Germanie are sundrie sorts of people, as Sicambri, Tenterides, which Caesar subdued. These conquests of Caesar, made Pompey much to feare the greatnesse of him, if hee should once come to be a Consul in Rome, and therefore Pompey laboured to keepe Caesar still oc∣cupied in Fraunce, in Spaine, and in Germanie, the onely soul∣diers of the worlde. But Caesar could not bee kept backe, but Caesars great∣nesse. would be a Consul for his long seruice, and sent to Rome to his friends for that purpose. The ciuil warres being thus ended betwixt Pompey and Caesar
which continued fiue yeeres, to the ouerthrow almost of the whole Empire, and Caesar also after the ciuill warres of fiue The ciuill warres be∣tweene Caesar and Pompey continued fiue yeeres. yeres, was slaine within 5. moneths. Marcus the chiefe friend of Caesar, a man of great credite in Rome, was made Consul, and for his greatnesse sake, he was matched with Dolabella, of this purpose done by the Senate, to curbe Antonius: for they doubted Antonius would aspire the kingdome as Caesar did. Cicero laboured to bring Thrasibulus law called  to Rome, to quiet and pacifie the tumult and warre which was like to ensue by Caesars death. But to no effect: for the Senate tooke part with them which had slaine Caesar. Antonius sought by all meanes to reuenge Caesars death: whereupon grew againe ci∣uill warres betwixt Octauius and Antonius. This Octauius was The third ciuil warre betwene Octauius Au∣gustus and M. Antonius. sisters sonne to Iulius Caesar, and he had adopted him to be his heire in the Empire of Rome in his testament. This was cal∣led by the Senate to withstand the furie of Marcus Antonius. So Pansa and Hircius then were Cōsuls, ioyned with Octauius, as both Eutrop. and Melancthon saith. These 3. captaines went gainst Antonius, and gaue him the ouetthrow. Antonius fled to Lepidus an olde friende of Caesars, and had at that time great bands of men readie: they ioyned their force together, but by These were called Trium∣uiri. Lepidus meanes, Octauius and Antonius were made frendes. These three, Octauius, Marcus Antonius, and Marcus Lepidus had all the gouernment of the citie. Octauius this time caused the Romanes to create him Con∣sul, Octauius at 20. yeeres made Consul. when he was but twentie yeeres of age. Euery man sawe how it would be in Rome, and perceiued that this ciuil warre would exceede the rest before betwixt Silla and Marius, and betweene Pompey and Caesar: for Bratus and Cassius that slewe Caesar, prepared an armie at Philippos a citie of Macedonia, where they ioyned battell with Octauius and Antonius. In this battell Cassius was slaine, and in the next battel Bru∣tus was slaine, and an infinite nomber of nobilitie: for during Cassius slaine at Philippos. the warres that these triumuiri first had with Brutus and Cas∣sius and their adherents, and then with Sextus Pompeius the yonger, sonne to Pompeius the great, there were many Sena∣tors,
Consuls, noblemen, and gentlemen slaine on both sides. Pompey wel∣beloued of the people. It could be no other wayes, considering the loue which the Romanes bare to Pompeius, and their feare which they bare to Caesar. Now Lepidus one of Trium viri died in Affrica, and the go∣uernment fell wholy betweene Octauius Caesar, and Marcus An∣tonius. Antonius had from Euphrates vnto the sea Illyricum, and Caesar Octauius had from the sea Illyricum to the West Ocean: but their friendship in gouernment continued not long. It is an olde saying and true, that Principalitie can abide no equa∣litie, and therefore ciuill dissention fell betweene Octauius and Antonius. Before they fell out betwixt themselues, they slewe and murthered without lawe whom they lusted, as Ci∣cero, Hortensius, Lucullus, with an infinite nomber of Senators, of Consuls, of noblemen and gentlemen, which died in the warres of Brutus and Cassius. And nowe againe newe ciuill warres beganne, which continued twelue yeeres, betwixt The most part of Romane gētlemen died in the warres of Brutus and Cassius. Octauius Caesar, and Marcus Antonius: but in the ende after many cruel battels and much slaughter, Octauius got the vi∣ctorie, at what time Rome was so weakened by these ciuill warres, that if then Pyrrhus, Hanibal, or Mithridates had liued, they might soone haue conquered Rome. Now when Antonius was vanquished by Octauius in a bat∣tell at Actium a towne of Epirus, hee flead to Egypt, being ex∣empt Antonius van∣quished by Octauius. of all hope to recouer his former state: hee slewe him∣selfe, and presently after him Cleopatra procured meanes to die for companie of her friend Antonius. It is saide that Cleo∣patra affecting much the Empire of Rome, was the cause of Reade Oros. lib. 6. cap 19. this ciuill discention: for shee was the last Queene of Egypt: after whose death, Egypt was annexed to the Empire of Rome by Octauius, and Cneus Cornelius Gallus was appointed lieutenant there. This was the first Romane that gouer∣ned Egypt. Octauius Augustus, after hee had vanquished Antonius, and had gotten the whole Empire into his owne hand, he became so louing to the people, so gentle to the Senators, and so li∣berall
to the souldiers, that he wanne the highest and lowest with great loue to fauour him. The ciuil warres being thus ended, Augustus became Con∣sul Augustus in his fourth Consulship had three seuerall tri∣umphes. Augustus salu∣ted of the peo∣ple as Pater patriae. the fourth time, at what time hee entred into Rome with three triumphes: the one ouer the Illyrians: the second ouer Marcus Antonius: the thirde ouer Cleopatra, at what time hee was saluted by the name of Augustus, and Pater patriae. This time Ianus temple was shut the thirde time in Rome, and now was the beginning of the peace and quietnes of the Romanes: for from the building of Rome vntill Augustus raigne, we reade that Ianus temple was not shut but twise before Augustus, in whose time warres were pacified through the whole worlde: and for ioy of these happie dayes, the moneth Sextilis then The moneth Sextilis called August. was called Augustus after the Emperours name, as his vncle Iulius had in the honour of his name the moneth then called Quintilis to be called Iulius. This Emperour Augustus was fortunate in warres, and cir∣cumspect in peace: he enlarged greatly the Empire of Rome, he annexed Egypt, Hungarie, Illyria, Rhetia: he vanquished the Danes in battel, & slew great armies of Germanes, and brought 400. thousand Germanes forth of Germanie prisoners, and pla∣ced Suet. in Aug. them in France, and replenished France with inhabitants of Germanie: he brought Fraunce to pay tribute, and brought Iudea a prouince vnder the Romanes. During the time of the Consuls, which endured 447. yeres, it is to be wondered, that one nation, of one towne, and that without a king, but by Consuls, should bring the most king∣domes of the world subiect to Rome, as Affrike, Hispaine, France and Britaine, of this side Rome, made by Cōsuls to pay tribute The conquest of the Romans. vnto the Romanes: beyond Rome Eastwarde, and round about Rome Northward and Southward, these kingdomes & coun∣treys were brought subiect to Rome, and made prouinces of the Romanes by Consuls, as Illyrians, Istrians, Dalmatians, Mace∣donians, & al the Greekes, the Medes, the Thracians, and the great Antiochus driuen out of Asia by Consuls of Rome: Valiant Pyr∣rhus, and mightie Mithridates kings of Epirus and Pontus, ouer∣throwen
by Consuls of Rome: Tigranes king of Armenia by Consuls: Mesopotamians and Parthians brought in league with the Romanes by Consuls: to be short, all Syria, Egypt, and Sicilia were broght by Cōsuls of Rome to be prouinces vnder Rome. What part of the world, but Consuls of Rome were knowen? Yea, the Arabians and Saracens knewe the force of the Romane The fame of the Consuls of Rome. Consuls: and when that the Romane consuls were lords of the whole world, finding no nation able long to encounter with them, their courage was such, that they enuied one another greatly, they spited one another in seruice, and at last fel to ci∣uil warres betwene themselues, as betwene Marius and Silla in the first warres, betwene Pompey & Caesar in the second warres, and betweene Mar. Antonius, and Octauius Augustus in the third warrs, to the ouerthrow welnigh of the whole Romane empire. For histories do report, that in these three ciuil warres before mentioned, died more Senators, Consuls, magistrats, noble∣men, and gentlemen, then in the three great Affricane warres: the first by Hamilcar which endured 22. yeeres most cruell: Ciuill warres. the second by Hanibal which endured 17. yeeres most terri∣ble warres: the thirde and last by Asdrubal, which continued foure yeeres, all which annoyed not Rome so much as did these three ciuil warres. But let vs returne to the happie raigne of Augustus called Augustus the prince of peace. the Prince of peace, the father of the countrey, and Emperor of Rome: whose happie gouernment made vnhappie Rome happie, and raised vp Rome from the ground vp to the hea∣uens. To this good Emperour the Persians, and the Parthians sent ambassadors with presents: to this the Scythians, the Indi∣ans, and the Garramants, people that neuer heard before any speach of the Romanes, sent both Legats and presents. What shalbe spoken more of this Emperour? In his dayes, in the two and fourtieth yere of this Emperours raigne, the Empe∣rour CHRIST borne the 42. yeere of Au∣gustus. Eutrop. lib. 7. of all Emperours, and King of all kings, was in Bethleem a towne of Iurie borne of the Virgine Mary, the onely be∣gotten Sonne of God, and the onely Sauiour of the worlde. This is the true Messias sent from Heauen to earth, to sa∣tisfie
the wrath of his father. This was the Lambe of God which tooke away the sinnes of the world. And therefore Au∣gustus was the happier, for that in his time IESVS CHRIST the Sonne of God was borne, as the Prophetes had before spoken. Now after that this good Emperour had liued eightie sixe Reade Sueto∣nius in Au∣gusto. yeeres, whose honour and loue was such in the whole world, that townes were builded and named after the name of Caesar, one by king Iuba in Mauritania, another by Hero in Palestina: and many kings left their owne kingdomes, & came to Rome, to do seruice to Augustus. He raigned fiftie and sixe yeres Em∣perour, he died at Atella a towne of Campania, was brought to Augustus died at Atella. be buried at Rome, and was canonized after his death as a god. Augustus had three things in Rome graunted: the first, to be Consul of Rome before he was twentie yeeres olde: the second, he was freed from any decree or law of the Senators: and the thirde, hee had his image on horsebacke set vp in the market place, which was granted to none but to Silla and Cae∣sar. Augustus great loue and ho∣nour in Rome at his death. In this Emperours time flourished in Rome many nota∣ble learned men, whose names are here subscribed. Virgil this time flourished. Horace also, and Tibullus. Propertius and Vitrimius. Vitruius. Titus Liuius, and Ouid. Valerius Maximus, And Strabo. When Augustus died, there was peace ouer the whole Augustus died the 14. Kalend. of October. world: for the Sonne of God was then borne, the king of all peace, whose fame by miracles filled all the earth. At what time raigned Tetrarche in Iudea Archelaus the sonne of that Herode, who slewe so many infants, thinking thereby to kill the Sonne of God, and therefore spared not his owne sonnes Aristobulus and Alexandeer. I haue spoken of this more in the historie of the Church. In the time of this Emperour Augustus, the kingdome of Fraunce beganne to be so named, after the name of one Fran∣cus Fraunce first named. the sonne of Antharius king of Sicambria. This Francus, af∣ter that his father died, made a decree, that Sicambria should
be called Francia after his owne name: of whom I shal speake in the historie of Fraunce. And now I will returne to Tiberius Caesar, who was Liuia Augustus wiues sonne, and Augustus sonne by adoption, the Tiberius the third Empe∣rour. successour of Augustus, and the thirde Emperour of Rome: of whom we reade, that he was very eloquent and well learned, but a great dissembler, who gouerned the Empire with aua∣rice, crueltie, lust and cowardlinesse: for he waged battell no Suetonus is Tiberi. where himself in person, but by his deputies and lieutenants. He beganne his Empire in the 768. yere after the building of Rome, and in the 15. yeere after Christ was borne: at what time Sextus Pompeius was Consul in Rome. This Tiberius had some warres with the Germanes, which were before subdued by Augustus, but nowe againe rebelled and brought to subiection by this Emperor Tiberius. Of these warres reade Cornelius Tacitus. Hee had warres before in Illy∣ria, Tacitus lib. 2. in the time of his father in lawe Augustus, ouer whom hee triumphed. In the last yeere of Tiberius Nero was Domitius borne. Tiberius was certified by Pilate from Hierusalem, where hee gouerned vnder the Romanes, of the miracles of Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 2. Christ, of his fame, and of his life and doings. Pilats letters were shewed to the Senators, and Pilate was blamed and re∣prooued, for that he suffered that IESVS to do any miracles without the consent of the Senators: for Pilate put vp the Image of Tiberius in the temple at Ierusalem. But in the latter ende of his raigne hee fell to great negli∣gence of gouernment, he gaue himselfe to be idle, and there∣by became vntemperate with inordinate lust, in so much that Tiberius died the Kalend. of April. hee was flouted and scoffed, and called Biberius Mero, in stead of Tiberius Nero: and after he had raigned twentie and three yeeres he died in Campania (as is supposed) by the meanes of Caligula, who succeeded him in the Empire. This Caligula was sonne to Germanicus, a lewde Emperour and a wicked, who farre exceeded Tiberius in crueltie and in Oros. 7. cap. 6. horrible life: he commaunded his Images to be put vp euery where, and altars to be consecrated to him, and caused his Eutrop. lib. 7.
Images to haue diuine honours: and hee sent to Iudea, and Oros. lib. 1. ca. 6. commaunded that his Image should bee set in the temple, boasting of his filthie life and gouernment, naming himselfe Iupiter for his incestuous life, and naming him Bacchus for his drunkennesse. Hee had carall copulation with all his three The incestu∣ous beast of Rome, Caligula. sisters, and with his daughter whom hee begate vpon one of his sisters: he defiled noble women and chaste matrones, and gaue them after to others to be defiled: hee was called the beast of Rome, who after hee had raigned foure yeeres, vsing great crueltie, auarice, filthie lust and horrible incest, he was slaine in his Pallace by his owne souldiers, as Iosephus writeth Caligula slaine the ninth Ka∣lend. of Fe∣bruarie. in his nineteenth booke. His birth, his life, and his death, is set foorth at large by Suetonius: who also wrote of all the liues of all the Emperours most amplie, omitting nothing that belonged to the Romane historie during the time of the Emperours. What were done in other countreys since the death of that good Emperour Augustus, what wickednesse ensued in Rome by his successours Claudius Tiberius, and Caius Caligula, Tacitus, Suetonius, Liuie, and other writers haue writ∣ten very largely. In the time of Tiberius Nero, within two yeeres of Au∣gustus Of these 12. cities, reade Tacit. lib. 2. This earth∣quake happe∣ned in the raigne of Tib. Caesar. death, happened such an earthquake in the night time, that twelue great cities in Asia fell prostrate to the ground: at what time Piso was Praetor in Syria, and Pontius Pilate was President in Iudea. This very time the Parthians required of the Romanes, king Phraartes sonne named Vonones, which was by his owne father put to the Romanes in pledge of loyaltie, to come againe to his kingdome: which being graunted, hee shortly after was despised, and driuen out of his kingdome by Artabanus. Mi∣thridates waged warre, and died in the Isle of Thiae, banished from Rome: for at that time there was a lawe made in Italy Tacitus lib. 2. Iosephus lib. 18. cap. 7. for the banishing of Sooth sayers and Mathematicians. Within a litle while after fell sharpe and cruel warre: of this warre betweene the Parthians and Hiberians, Reade Tacitus. At this time many great terrible earthquakes chaunced,
and many great wonders were seeene a little before Christ Iesus suffered his death and passion: for after the last earth∣quake (spoken of before) fell againe thirteene great and famous townes by another earthquake, whose names Eu∣sebius setteth downe in this sort, as in the margent you may Ephesus. Magnesia. Caesarea. Apollonia. Dia Hircania. Philadelphia. Mrthina. Mostheme, &c. Temis. Cumae. Sardis. Himulus. And Megachiero. reade. Our Sauiour Christ died in the Emperour Tiberius his raigne, at what time were finished the seuentie weekes spoken of in Daniel: about which time Philo Iudaeus was sent from Alexandria to Rome, to entreate the Romanes to bee friendes to the Citizens of Alexandria. This Philo Iudaeus was of great authoritie in those dayes, being a Iewe borne: his first comming to Rome was accepted the fifteenth yeere of the raigne of Tiberius: the seconde comming was in the se∣cond yeere of the raigne of Caius Caligula, where hee was but litle welcome: and with threatning wordes of Caligula he re∣turned backe to Alexandria. In the time of this C. Caligula came Herode the Tetrarche from Iewrie to Rome, and was by Caligula then banished from Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 7. Iudea to Lugdunum a towne in France: and Pontius Pilate who gaue sentence of death vpon the Sonne of God our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST in Ierusalem, this time fell into such mi∣series and calamities, that hee with his owne hande killed himselfe. Matthewe the Euangelist wrote his Gospell in Pilate killed himselfe. Iudea in the Hebrewe tongue, in the last yeere of the Empe∣rour Caligula: at what time Simon Magus the Sorcerer flou∣rished, and was honoured as a god in Rome, and in many o∣ther places. I will returne to the successour of Caligula, Tiberius Clau∣dius: hee sawe Drusus an vncle by the father side to Caligula Claudius Dru∣sus Emperour. and brothers sonne to Tiberius Nero: this made warres vpon the Britaines, which is now called England, ouer whom he tri∣umphed at Rome, and at that time hee annexed certaine I∣lands Eutrop. lib. 7. situate beyond Britaine called Orcades, to the Empire of He triumphed in Rome ouer the Britaines. Rome: he appointed playes in Rome, at what time ciuil warres grew amongst the Parthians. In the time of this Claudius, diuers and sundry great famines
were in many countreys: great famine was in Iudea, and the Apostles suffered much persecution: but they were comfor∣ted by the brethren. Of this famine spake Agabus in the Acts Euseb lib. 2. cap. 8. of the Apostles. In Rome also was great famine, and in Greece. This Claudius Tiberius had a wife named Messalina, a woman most vntemperate, giuen to much filthie lust, neuer satisfied Messalina an vntemperate woman. with venerie, nor neuer wearie: by this lewde Empresse ma∣ny were destroyed. Many things did this Claudius very quiet∣ly, and many things hee did very cruelly without discretion: and behaued himselfe very courteously towards diuers of his friendes, and therefore was thought of many not to be wise. Eutropius saith, that there was a most honorable tombe made Claudius tombe. to him at Mentz in Germanie. This Emperour liued 64. yeeres, and raigned in Rome Em∣perour foureteene yeeres: after whome succeeded Claudius Domitius Nero, who was sonne in lawe vnto Claudius Drusus, who adopted him to be his successour in the Empire, after the building of Rome 807. yeeres: some say 809: and after that Christ died, 57. This was the sixt Emperour of Rome, Of the first 5. yeeres of Ne∣roes gouern∣ment, the say∣ing of Traian. who excelled all good Emperours for fiue yeeres gouern∣ment: for Traian the Emperour was wont to say, Omnes prin∣cipes procul à Neronis quinquennio distare: for hee builded the Anephitheaters, and founded Bathes, and named them after his owne name at Rome: he ordeined certaine places euery fiue Quinquenale, imitating the Greekes in their Olympiads, and named them Neronea, the playes of Nero: hee much resem∣bled Playes made by Nero on euery fift yere, called Quin∣quenale. his vncle Caligula, a man much giuen to all kinde of riot, charges and expences: hee poysoned the sonne of Claudius whom his father sirnamed Britanicus, in remembrance of his victorie ouer the Britaines: hee married Octauia, and slew her husband, and (as Eusebius saith) slewe her also: hee married a courtezane named Poppea and slew her: hee had carnall co∣pulation with Agrippina his owne naturall mother, and after Nero beganne well and en∣ded ill. slew her: he also slewe a great nomber of the Senate, and di∣uers other worthie citizens. This Emperour exceeded all tyrants in crueltie, hee com∣mitted
diuers murthers vpon his owne kinsefolkes, and slewe his scholemaster, that graue and learned man Seneca. When that this Nero had giuen himselfe wholy to all tyrannie, and Suet. in Nero. became an enemie to all good, hee would daunce and sing openly with strumpets in the apparell of a cōmon minstrell. Now when hee had murthered Senators, citizens and diuers gentlemen, and had slaine his owne brother, his wife, and his The great murther and tyrannie of Nero. mother, he set the citie of Rome on fire, and let it burne for 6. dayes, to make him know how the citie of Troy burned when it was on fire by the Grecians. And when he had left no euill thing vndone on earth, hee beganne to persecute the Church, and to murther the saincts of God, as shalbe spoken in the History of the Church, of Paul, Peter, and others. Reade Tacitus of this wicked Emperour. While he fomed in blood at Rome, the Parthians bereft him of Tacitus lib. 14. 15▪ & 16. Armenia, and he had almost (as Eutropius saith) lost Britaine: he durst do nothing in feates of armes: for these cruel facts, he was abhorred of all men, and cleane forsaken of his owne friends: he was adiudged of the Senate to be an enemy of the weale publike. Nero hearing that he should be drawen na∣ked through the citie, and be whipt til he were dead, hee fled secretly forth of his Pallace by night with his Eunuch Sporus, and slew himselfe 4. miles from Rome. Nero slewe himselfe. In the time of Nero, fell by an earthquake three townes in Asia, called Laodicea, Hieropolis and Colossa. Diuers earthquakes and many wonders were seene in Rome, murther and slaugh∣ter Plini lib. 2. cap. 8. in Iudea, battels and blood. At what time Albinus gouer∣ned the Iewes vnder the Romans. In Neroes time gouerned in Britaine Aruiragus, in whose dayes many Britaines were con∣uerted to the faith by Ioseph of Arimathea, a Iew borne, and one of them that buried our Sauiour Christ. Thus the tyrant Ne∣ro, which wished that all the citie of Rome had but one necke, Neroes wish. that he might with one stroke cut it off, died after hee had raigned fourteene yeeres Emperour, and li∣ued one and thirtie yeeres.
CHAP. VIII. From Nero the tyrant the sixt Emperour of Rome, vntill the time of Lu. Antoninus Comodus the cruel, the 18. Emperour a match meete for Nero: in the one the stooke of Caesar was extinguished, in the other the blood of Antoninus ended and quite failed: two Emperours of like condition and maners: of the gouernment of them ouer Rome from Nero to Comodus, during which time raig∣ned twelue Emperours. AFter Nero succeeded Sergius Sulpitius Gal∣ba Galba the 7. Emperour of Rome. the 7. Emperour, a noble Senator of an ancient house: he was 73. yeres old when he was chosen Emperor by the Spaniards and Frenchmen: he had borne diuers offi∣ces in Rome, and in the field sundry times hee had bene a captaine in most perilous battels, and had gouerned diuers prouinces: he was vsed to say to his souldiers, Disce miles militare, Galba est non Genlicus, as though he said, Souldiers looke to your charges, Galba is pre∣sent. His empire was of short continuance, for he was slaine by Otho, when he had raigned but 7. moneths. This Otho after he had slaine Galba, inuaded the empire, and deteined it with the sworde ninetie and fiue dayes: for Aulus Otho the 8. Emperour of Rome. Vitellius being then with an armie in Germanie, was made Emperour of Rome by the souldiers, at the very time that Otho had slaine Galba. This Vitellius attempted battell against Otho at Bebriacus, where Otho was discomfited, and after slewe himselfe, with his owne daughter, when he had raigned not eight weekes. Vitellius succeeded in the empire the 9. emperour, descen∣ding of a noble familie: his father Lucius Vitellius had bene Auus Vitellius the 9. Empe∣rour. thrise Consul of Rome: notwithstanding hee had the like for∣ture as his predecessors Galba and Otho had; & that most wor∣thily: Eutrop. lib. 7. for hee was equall to Nero in great crueltie, and in ex∣cessiue gluttonie: he feasted foure or fiue times in one day: he The excesse of Vitellius. affected much Neroes doings, and would gladly imitate Ne∣ro
in gluttonie and riot: for he had at one time set before him two thousand fishes, and seuen thousand birds, besides other charges and expences. These wickednesses and vices cannot long endure in any man, much lesse in Princes. Hee had not raigned but 8. moneths, but hee was slaine by the captaine of Vespasian, for that Vitellius had slaine first Sabinus Vespasians brother, whom he burned in the Capitol which hee set on fire. Sabinus Vespa∣sians brother slaine by Vi∣tellius. But Vitellius had a reprochfull death for it: for as hee liued like Nero, so hee died like as Nero should haue died if hee had not killed himselfe. Vitellius was drawen naked through the citie of Rome along openly, with a sworde naked set vnder Vitellius dra∣wen naked through the streetes of Rome. his chinne, and euery man which hee mette, threwe doung vpon him, and with spitting in his face railed on him, and after that his throte was cut, and hee throwen into the riuer of Tiber. Thus the three last Emperours Galba, Otho and Vitellius, ty∣rants and not Emperours, beastes and not men, ended their Oros. lib. 7. ca. 8. liues when they had raigned all three, not aboue eighteene moneths. After this glutton Vitellius, followed Vespasian the tenth Emperour, a prince endued with most excellent vertues, a Vespasian a good vertu∣ous Empe∣rour. maintainer of ciuill order, who assigned in Rome certaine sti∣pends to learned men, and a man for his priuate life worthie to be had in memorie: and amongst other vertues, he excel∣led in this, not to reuenge any wrong done to him: hee also bare patiently the bitternesse of his friendes, and the taunts and scoffes of his enemies: hee maried Vitellius daughter a noble man of Rome, though Vitellius was his great enemie, and had slaine his brother Sabinus. This Emperour was most gentle and courteous, and be∣haued himselfe in the Empire very moderately. This Vespa∣sian, (at what time hee was sent by Claudius into Germanie, and from thence into Britaine) fought fiue seuerall great bat∣tels, Eutrop. lib. 7. and annexed two mightie nations to the empire of Rome. In this time was Iudea also annexed to Rome, and hee trium∣phed ouer them: he repaired the Capitol the temple of peace,
and the monuments of Claudius. From the time of Augustus Caesar, not one good Emperor raigned in Rome vntil Vespasians time. This is the tenth Emperour in order and nomber, but Vespasian a good Empe∣rour. this is the second in goodnesse and vertue. This Emperour Vespasian reduced Achaia, Licia, Rhodes and Byzantium, which is now called Constantinople: hee brought Samos, Thracia, Cilicia, and Thracia into the forme of Prouinces subiects to the Ro∣manes. This Emperour was honoured of the Senate, and be∣loued of all men, and had triumphed ouer Ierusalem, together Ioseph. lib. 7. cap. 24. with his sonne Titus, the eleuenth Emperour that succeeded his father, a Prince in all good vertues like to his father: for what praise Chronographers do yeeld to the father Vespasian, for his gentlenes, courtesie, patience, loue, liberalitie, and infi∣nite more vertues, the same doe they write of his sonne Titus, and therefore I neede not much commende Vespasian. His mother was named Domicilla a rare woman. Titus was giuen vnto all kinde of liberalitie, and as soone as Reade of the father and of the sonne in Egnat and in Sueton. his father had called him to bee a magistrate in the weale publique, and had giuen him charge of souldiers, he conten∣ded to excell his father in all good and ciuil gouernment, in∣somuch that he was had in great admiration for his vertues, Eutrop. lib. 7. and commonly called Delitiae hominū, the loue and delight of mankinde. He was so excellently seene in the Greeke and La∣tine tongue, that hee could make diuers Poetical tragedies in Greeke, and pleaded causes himselfe in the Latine tongue. He was so liberall, that he would say that day to be lost when hee The saying of a good Empe∣rour. had giuen nothing. And being counselled by his friendes that he should not be so liberall: he answered, None ought to depart frō an Emperour sorowful, for not obtaining their re∣quests: but he had no long life to make proofe of his greatnes. He was very eloquent, of passing great sobrietie, and a stoute warriour. It is saide of Titus that he was an excellent archer: for at the assaulting of Ierusalem he shot 12. arrowes, and killed with euery arrow a man. These two good Emperours Vespasian and his sonne Titus were well esteemed of in Rome, but they liued not long: for Titus died.
Vespasian the father reigned but tenne yeeres, and his sonne Titus reigned two yeeres, two moneths and twentie dayes af∣ter him, and died in the very place where his father dyed, at a Manor of his owne among the Sabines, in the eightie three yeere after the death of Christ. By this Titus Ierusalem was the last time destroyed, and the Iewes most miserably vanquished and scattered: for Ves∣pasian Euseb. lib 3. cap. 12. had commaunded that none of the stocke of Dauid shoulde remaine aliue in Ierusalem, lest any shoulde claime the crowne, which lineally descended from Dauid, to hinder the Romane title. This time all was quiet abroade, the broiles that at this time reigned, where in Rome it selfe, one Em∣perour preuenting an other, by murther, poyson, or by some other sleights and snares, so that it was more perilous to be Emperour of Rome, then to bee a subiect: for the maiestie of the Senators, and the dignitie of the Consuls were much Howe Rome florished in the time of Kings, Cōsuls, & Emperors. obscured by the tyrānie of Emperors: they durst do nothing that might offend the Emperor, or displease the people: they bare onely but the name of Senators and Consuls after Augu∣stus death: the which Consuls florished 447. yeeres being ay∣ded with Dictators and Tribunes, and not with Kings or Em∣perors: for vnder Kings, Rome was a seruant, vnder Emperors, Rome was a Captiue, but vnder Consuls, Rome was the onely mystresse and lady of the world. Behold the state of Rome vnder the 11. last Emperours. lauius Do∣mitianus 12. Emperour. And now I beginne with the 12. one that passed the rest in pride & crueltie: he in all points resembled more Nero or Ca∣tigula, then hee did his father Vespasian, or his brother Titus, though in the beginning he behaued himself with great tem∣perācie & modestie. But he was not long troubled with these good qualities: he was too soone infected with anger, cruel∣tie, pride, fleshly lust, auarice: he blotted out & abolished the memory of his good father and brother, he waxed such a ty∣raunt, & such a monster in Rome, that he cōmanded by a de∣cree Sextus Aureli∣us. to bee called a God, and to haue his statues in many places of the Romane Empire adored, and would not permit
the Romanes to set any pictures of him, vnlesse they were of gold or siluer: such was his horrible pride, and that ioyned with crueltie: for many of the best Senators he slue, and many Dominianus called a secōd Nero. he banished: he was the only persecutor of the Christiās, and therefore called the secōd Nero: he expulsed the Philosophers and Mathematiciās forth of Rome, which both his father and brother enterteined with annuall stipend. This Domitianus, though he triumphed twise ouer the Danes & Cattians, & had subdued the Sarmatiās, yet he susteined great damages & sun∣dry losses in those battels: for Appius Sabinus one of the Con∣suls, Domitianus ex∣ercise called . and Cornelius Fiscus captaine of the emperors gard, were slaine: so were his legions and captaines in Sarmatia: his exer∣cise euery day for an houre secretly in his pallace was to catch Reade Sueto. of this Emperor. flies: he also forbade to gelde any male kinde: also when one knockt at his doore and asked if any man were within, No, saith Domitianus, not so much as a flea. Now when Domitianus was so long detested, & abhorred of God and man for diuers wickednesses, he was slaine by his owne men in his pallace, after he had reigned 15. yeeres & liued 45. yeeres: he was so Domiti. was v∣sed as Vitellius was after his death. hated in Rome, that being slaine, they haled his body through the streetes, all his pictures and statues throwen downe, in so much that they coulde not abide to looke vpon any monu∣ment of his, neither to heare of his name. Notwithstanding so much good he did to Rome, that he fi∣nished sundry workes at Rome, which was the Capitoll, and Isiū and Sera∣piū two gale∣ries made by Domitius. the two galleries called by Eutropius Isiū and Serapiū: he made also the tilt for men to runne in, and builded a place for musi∣cians and singing men. In the sixth yeere of Domitianus go∣uernmēt, Antoninus Pius was borne, which afterward was em∣peror in Rome. About which time, the Picts came from Scythia to seeke habitation in Britanie: their captaine was called Ro∣dericus. Whē Richimer reigned king in Fraunce, diuers sects of heresies began this time, vnder Menander one of Simon Magus disciples. In the last yere of Domitianus, the apostle Iohn wrote Iren. lib. 1. cap. 21. Ireneus lib. 5. his booke of Reuelation in Pathmos. Here I write the Consuls names, which gouerned yeerely in Rome with Domitianus:
for after the emperours beganne to commaunde what they lusted in Rome, they made a choise of one Consul with his brother Titus when hee was emperour after with him: these gouerned his owne friendes, whom he himselfe made choise of, as other emperours did before him. Val. Messalinus. Virg. Rufus. Sabinus. Verus Pollio. Ser. Cornelius Dolabella. Lu. Minutius Rufus. Fuluius, which was An∣toninus Pius his graund∣father. Coceius Nerua, which suc∣ceeded Domitianus in the Empire. Ac. Volusius Saturnius. Vl. Traianus Crinitus. This succeeded Cocceius Ner∣ua in the Empire, whom Nerua adopted after him. Glabrio and Nonius As∣preanus. Domitianus himselfe was the other Consul, for the Empe∣rours woulde not permit two Consuls to gouerne together, vnlesse they were speciall friendes to the Emperours: so that the dignitie of the auncient Consuls daily decayed by the ty∣rannie and greatnes of the Emperours (of those last sixe Em∣perours Suetonius doth set forth the liues of these 6. Emperours at large. I meane) Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian Titus, and Do∣mitianus, which Suetonius doeth write at large. It were too long a historie for me to write of all their liues, howe be it I briefely touch and speake of their chiefe and most principall dealings. This time within fewe yeeres, the Goates, which are West coūtries waxed mighty and the East decayed by degrees. also the Getes, the Vandales, and the Hungarians began to grow strong, with whom the emperours of Rome had much to doe: for then waxed the West part of the worlde strong, as Spaine, Fraunce, Germanie, and Britaine, and were in armes against the Romanes, as you shal in the historie vnderstād: for as Sueton. with many other writers, set forth the exploites of those sixe which I now named: euen so doeth Dion write of Nerua, Tra∣iane, Dion writes of these 3. good Emperours. and Adrian, three of the best emperors. Iu. Capitolinus an ancient writer omitteth nothing, that might be spoken of An∣toninus Pius, in whose time Rome was like to be on fire, had
not the riuer Tiber with a sudden inundation stopt the rage of the fire, and yet 340. houses were quite with fire consumed: so by this writer were Antoninus Pius, and Antoninus surnamed the Philosopher, which of some is called Mar. Aurelius writtē of, and likewise of the lawes & exploites of these Emperors, Pertinax, Opilius, Macrinus, Claudius Albinus, Maximinus, Gordia∣nus, Lampridius wrote. & Balbinus, Lāpridius wrote of. Also he wrote of Comodus, and Heliogabolus, two wicked and cruell Emperors. The Ro∣manes wanted no writers to record their fame: for in trueth, as they excelled all other nations in power, greatnes, and dig∣nitie, The Romane historie. so had they more notable histories written of them. What kingdom, what countrie, what nations were not by the Romanes conquered? for you haue read in the historie be∣fore, how the Affricanes, Spaine, and Carthage, with their most famous captaines Amilcar, Asdrubal, and Hanibal, were vanqui∣shed The conquest of the Romans. by the Romanes: howe the successors of great king Cyrus, and the posterities of the great king Alexander, two of the greatest kings of the whole worlde, were subdued by the Ro∣manes: how the most worthy & next vnto Alexander the great in prowesse, Pyrrhus king of Epire: howe Mithridates the king of Pontus, who kept most terrible and cruell warres with the Romanes fourtie yeres: how Antiochus surnamed also the great king of all Asia: in fine, howe the Parthians, the Scythians, the Sogdians, the Indians, the Arabians, and the Egyptians were by the Romanes conquered, and therefore I will as briefely passe ouer the historie as I can, partly for that many haue trāslated the liues of the Emperors, & their exploites are here & there in fragments, and partly for that it were tedious to write all the Romans historie in particular: for the best reading is of the Romanes historie, during the reigne of the Consuls foure hun∣dred fourtie seuen yeres, all which time their conquests were great, & their victories infinite: but after the dignities of the Rome florished most vnder Consuls. Cōsuls were eclipsed by the greatnesse & crueltie of the Em∣perours, the state of Rome also beganne by a little and a little to loose her former fame, and to decaye in credite, for that they esteemed money more then men.
This vice of auarice excluded all kinde of vertues out of Hiddē hatred, priuat wealth, and yong coū∣cel: three dan∣gerous mon∣stersin a com∣mon wealth. Rome, and receiued into the Citie hidden hatred, priuate wealth, and yong councell, whereby the lady of the whole worlde sometime, is become now by auarice to be the hand∣maid of Spaine and Fraunce, yea to be led by euery citie of Ita∣lie. Thus was the glory of Rome brought vnder her owne ser∣uants to be a captiue, euen as Babylon, Ierusalem, Egypt, and o∣ther kingdomes, of whom the Prophets haue spoken & pro∣phecied, the reward of their wickednesse, idolatrie, and hor∣rible superstition. The like destruction the Romanes must looke to haue, as the Affricanes had, after them the Chaldeans, the He∣brewes, The reward of idolatrie is de∣struction. and the Egyptians, for their idolatrie and contempt of God. The like ende and destruction as had the Persians, the Medes, the Macedonians, and the Greekes, must the Romanes by the prophesie of Daniel expect: for I will the Reader to reade Daniel, Esai, Ieremie, and Ezechiel, of these great kingdoms be∣fore time for some destroyed and consumed, and I will re∣turne to the historie. Now after that good Emperor Cocceius Nerua had reigned but one yeere, foure moneths, and nine dayes, hee adopted Wpius Traian 14. Emperor. Traiane to the Empire, a Spaniard, and not an Italian, as many would haue it, a godly Emperor a good man: of whom many good things are written, amongst the which he is most com∣mended in two principal things, sanctitas domi, fortitudo for is: Oros. lib. 7. cap. 11. 12. he was patient in all traueiles, and in all aduersities: hee was very diligent in ciuill causes, and very expert in militarie dis∣cipline: hee was most liberall to his souldiers, and beneficiall vnto all men: he much honoured all learned men▪ he onely of all other Emperors obserued iustice, and practised the same to his people: hee gouerned the weale publique in such sort, Traiane the mirrour of Emperours. that hee ought worthely to bee preserued aboue all other princes: hee enlarged the borders and marches both in length and breadth of the Romane Empire, which frō the time of Augustus was but defended and conserued by other Empe∣rors, vntil this time: he is thus cōmended in Eutropius, that his Eutrop. lib. 8. courtesie and sobrietie farre excelled his martiall feates: hee
was so familiar, that he would ride, goe, and sit with his fami∣liars: hee would also banquet amongst them without estee∣ming The affabilitie of the good Emperour Traian. of himself more then of another: he openly and secret∣ly enriched not onely his friendes, but those whom he well heard of, and aduaunced them to honors with whom he had small acquaintance▪ hee infranchised many cities, hee did so many great good things aswell in repairing ruinous Townes and Cities, as also in building newe Cities & Townes in di∣uers coūtries, that in a maner he builded a new world againe: for he builded sixe great Temples, 1 To Apollo. 2 To Mars. 3 To Iupiter. 4 To Aesculapius. 5 To Ceres. 6 To Berecynthia. And therefore he was reputed in al the whole world of all men, and likened vnto some god, which had some diuine power to finish and to perfect a ruinous cōmon wealth, be∣ing by his predecessors Nero, Caligula, Heliogabolus, Domitianus and others, welnigh wholy destroyed and defaced. Traiane. So much preuailed in him the fame of perfect goodnesse, that at the election of any prince in Rome after Traians dayes, The Senators wordes. the Senators and the people would wish him to be as fortu∣nate as Augustus, and in behauiour of vertue and goodnesse, to be like the good Traiane, who both for his goodnes & ver∣tue was also called Pater patriae, as Augustus was, for that hee The loue of Traiā in Rome. subdued Dacia, recouered Armenia which the Parthians had wonne: he reduced vnder the obeysance of Rome, Spaine, Moscouia, Arabia, and the inhabitants of Cholcos: hee had great warres in all the East countries, and brought Assyria and Me∣sopotamia Traian wanne & recouered many coun∣tries by his predecessors lost. vnder his hand. He reduced many kingdomes to be prouinces vnder the Romanes: hee wanne Seleucia and Ba∣bylon, and prepared a nauie for the redde Sea, that thereby hee might spoyle and destroy the borders and coastes of Iudea. About this time the Temple of Pantheon in Rome was
burned: he triumphed ouer the Danes, and ouer the Scythians, and brought Rome againe to her former fame and glory, as it was in the time of Octauius Augustus. The two mirrors of Rome liued in Rome and dyed with the like loue and fame, after they had purchased great glory and Traians mo∣nument in Rome to this day called Traians pillar. renowme both for ciuill and marciall policie. Traiane was canonised, and was the first emperour buried within the Ci∣tie, his bones were put in a golden cuppe, and set vnder a pil∣lar which mounted in height to an hundred fourtie foure foote. Hee reigned nineteene yeeres, whose facts and worthi∣nesse are rife in memorie. If you list to reade further of them, looke in Capitolinus: amongst all the emperours, this you The fourth persecution. shall finde to excell the rest. In Traianes time fell the fourth persecution of the Christians, in whose time also dyed Iohn Oros. lib. 7. cap. 12. the Euangelist, after whose death florished his scholers and disciples, Papias, and Polycarpus, and Ignatius. In Traians time happened such an earthquake, that foure great Cities in Asia fell flatte to the grounde: three in Galatia, and two in Greece. A great earth∣quake in Tra∣ians time. Traiane dyed of the flixe at Seleucia a towne of Isauria, whē he had liued sixtie three yeeres: after whom succeeded Ae∣lius Adrianus the fifteenth emperour, an Italian borne, he was sisters sonne to Traiane, and yet not adopted to the Em∣pire by Traiane, but by meanes of Plotina Traians wife: hee was singularly learned, both in the Greeke and in the La∣tine: Adrian sister sonne to Trai. hee was excellently seene in Musicke and Geome∣trie, and was so expert in Astronomie, that hee made yere∣ly Prognostications for him selfe: hee excelled in diuers artes, as in caruing, grauing, paynting, cutting, eyther Princely qua∣lities. in brasse or in marble. Iustine writeth of this emperour, that hee coulde write, talke with his friendes, aske questions, and answere matters at one time: hee gaue him selfe wholly to pur∣chase Adriā praised. peace and quietnesse, and woulde often say that hee did more good in Rome by idlenesse, then his predecessours
by weapons: for hee purchased peace during the whole time of his Empire. In his time the Christians were sore persecuted, vntill cer∣teine learned of the Christians wrote bookes vnto the Empe∣rour Adrian for mercie in sparing of Christian blood: where∣upon the Emperour wrote diuers Epistles to Iudea, and to all Oros. 7. cap. 13. prouinces belonging to the Empire of Rome, that no Christi∣an should be apprehended for religion sake, at what time Ieru∣salem was named Aelia, after that he had quieted the Iewes by Ierusalem was named Aelia by Adrianus. his Sendrus, and slue of them fiue thousand. The Emperours name Aelius Adrianus, for after that the Emperor Adriā wrote his letter to Minutius to stay his persecution, certeine here∣tikes began to trouble the Church, as Saturnius, Basilides, and Menander, the successor of Simon Magus, of whom in Ecclesi∣asticall historie you may reade more. The fault of this Adrian was, that hee enuied the glory of Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 6. Heretikes trouble the Church. Traianus, and was most ambitious of honor and fame: other∣wise he aduauntaged the common weale of Rome more then any: for (as I saide) he was called the father of the Countrie, and his wife Sabina was also called Augusta: hee ordeyned lawes to the Athenians, which hee himselfe pickt out of Draco, and of Solons lawes: hee in person traueiled all the Empire of Rome: hee builded a faire Temple vnto Venus: The care and trauell of A∣drian. hee was very circumspect about the treasurie, and when hee had reigned twentie two yeeres, hee died in most miserable paines in Campania, about the age of threescore, offering himselfe to bee slaine to any of his deare friendes. These Adrian died. were the chiefe men in Rome when Adrianus reigned. Amilius Aelianus. Lucius Verus. Acilius Auiola. Cornelius Pasna. C. Bellicius Torquatus. Catilius Seuerus. Titus Aurelius Fuluius which succeeded Adri anus in the Empire. Titus Appronianus. Quintus Agulinus. Salinator and Rusticus.
Att. Titianus. M. Acilius Glabriotus. Auius Libo. Iuuentius Celsus and Neratius Marcellinus. Lenas Pontianus. Antoninus Ruffinus. Sergius Seruianus. Seruilius Hasta, and Valeri∣us Messala. With many other great men which then gouerned as of∣ficers and magistrates in Rome when Adrianus raigned: in whose time such earthquakes fel, that Nicopolis and Caesarea, 2. great townes in Palestina fell to the very grounde in the one: and in the other earthquake, in Macedonia a great city, and the most part of Nycena lay prostrate on the ground, which was rebuilded by Adrianus. This time reuolted the Brytanes from the Romanes, but were by Trebelius (as Spartianus writeth) mitigated and brought a∣gaine Titus Antoni∣nus Pius to subiection. Titus Aurelius Fuluius succeeded Adria∣nus in the Empire by adoption: This was also called Antoni∣nus Pius, for the great pitie and gentlenesse which he vsed to∣wardes all men. A good Emperour, compared of writers to that religious king Numa Pompilius, in like sort as Traianus Antho. Pius compared to Numa Pomp. was likened to Romulus: he was beloued as a father, and feared as a king. He was borne in Gallia Transalpina in a citie na∣med Nemesa, which in the time of Iulius Caesar was establi∣shed a Colonie of Rome. The Indians, Hircanians, and Bactrians sent Embassadours with giftes and presents to honour him. He was wont to say, that he had rather saue one friende, then destroy a thousand enemies. The people woulde often call The saying of Anto. Pius. him by these names, Lord, King, Emperour, Iudge, Patrone, and father: he endeuoured himselfe rather to defend then to amplifie, and the Empire he assigned to the most honest men, the graue, the learned and the iust men to haue offices and to beare rule in the citie: he aduanced good men, and Reade Sueto. of this good Emperour. detested euill men, and vsed no rigour nor crueltie to them. Kings and captaines in his time laide aside their warres, and would bring their controuersies and quarels to be decided by the Emperour Antoninus Pius: he was so iust and so pitifull in
all causes towards all men, that therein he farre excelled all the Emperours: he much honoured learned men, and had in his dayes many of them in his Court with him. In his time Alexander Se∣uerus borne. was Alexander Seuerus borne, which after was Emperour of Rome. During the time of his whole gouernment, which was 23. yeeres and 3. moneths, there was neither warres nor qua∣rels in Rome. In this time flourished many excellent men, as these vnderwritten. Galenus the mirrour of Phi∣sitions. Ptolomeus the great Astro∣loger. Apolonius & Basilides 2. great Philosophers, and scholema∣ster to the Emperour Ve∣rus. Nesomedes a Musition. Taurus a Philospher of Platoes sect. Arrianus a Philosopher in Nicomedia & Ma∣ximus surnamed Ty∣rus likewise a great Philosopher. At this time the Iewes beganne to fall into a furie, to kill both the Greekes and the Romanes, and to practise much ty∣rannie both in Egypt and Alexandria, and in Palestina, at what time gouerned Tinius Rufus in Iudea vnder the Romanes, but they were soone pacified and quieted. CHAP. IX. Of the good Emperour Ma. Antoninus surnamed the Philosopher, and of his sonne Comodus: of the difference in their gouernment: of the loue which the father had in Rome, and of the hatred and contempt which the sonne had: of the murther and slaughter of diuers Emperours, from M. Antoninus the 17. Emperour, vntil the time of Dioclesian, the 38. Emperour. AFter Titus Antoninus succeeded Mar∣cus Antoninus Verus in the Empire, a man of rare vertues, & borne of a great stocke: for his descent was by the fa∣thers side from Numa Pompilius, and by his mothers side from king Salentinus. This Emperor was a very learned man, and he raigned ioyntly with Lucius An∣toninus:
for in his dayes the Romanes began to haue two Em∣perours of equall authoritie, to gouerne the common weale. These two were (as Eutropius saith) brethren, and they waged battell against the Parthians, which neuer rebelled from Tra∣ianus Eutrop. lib. 8. time by whom they were conquered, vntill Marcus An∣toninus time. But they also conquered the Parthians rounde, and brought a triumph, and did solemnize the same with his Great oddes betweene Ve∣rus and Com∣modus two brethren. brother. This Verus Antoninus atchieued sundrie victories: he wan Seleucia a famous citie of Assyria, by meanes of these noble captains, Statius Priscus which subdued Armenia that then re∣belled, Sueto. in Anto∣ninis. and Auidius Cassius which likewise kept Media and Ba∣bylon in subiection. But as this Lucius departed from the citie Oros. lib. 7. ca. 15 Concordia, he died of an issue of blood, after whome againe Marcus Antoninus gouerned as Emperour, more to be maruei M. Antoninus. led at for his rare vertues, then to be commended for his sin∣guler learning. This professed not in outwarde shew to be a Philosopher, but in liuing. He was had in such admiration e∣uen Reade Egna∣tius in Adria. from his infancie, for his graue behauiour and sober life, that Adrianus purposed then he being but a childe, to leaue him as his successor. In philosophie he was instructed by A∣pollonius a Chalcedonian Philosopher, and he was brought vp in the Greeke tongue by Sextus Cherronesus nephewe to Plu∣tarch the Emperour, & in the Latine tongue he was brought vp with Frontus a very great Orator, so that Marcus Antoninus M. Antoninus excelled all Emperors in all kinde of knowledge. excelled all other Emperours in all kinde of knowledge: he was exceeding liberall, as at his warres which he had against the Marcomenes, where the Vandales, the Sarmatians, and al Bar∣barie were ready to mainteine warres against the Romanes, & were seene: for he made open sale of his plate, he solde all his apparell, and solde diuers iewels and ornaments of precious stones: he solde all his substance, to auoyde the exactions of his subiects. But the victorie which then he obtained, repayed all his debtes, and brought againe his plate, his iewels, and all other his substance home: for it is written, that these warres conti∣nued
three yeeres, and were the most terrible warres, and equall to the warres of Carthage. And when he had reduced Orosius lib. 6. cap. 15. Rome to a most fortunate state, and had raigned to the conten∣tation of all men 18. yeeres, and had liued 61. yeeres, he died, and was canonized at the earnest labour of all the people: af∣ter whom many mourned in Rome aswell of the people, and citizens, as Senatours. He was also called Pater patriae, with Traian, Adrian, Vespasian, and with Augustus. During These 5. Em∣perours were called one af∣ter another, Pater patriae. the reigne of this good Emperour fell such a great pesti∣lence in Italie, among the inhabitants thereof, and other prouinces about Rome, that there were new lawes made, and ordained for the buriall of the dead. At this time Asianus and also Appollinaris Bishop of Hieropo∣lis, wrote both two bookes in defence of the Christian religi∣on, & dedicated them to the Emperor Antoninus. In Fraunce, vnder Farabertus the 28. king then raigning in Fraunce, dyed many by persecution for profession of christianitie, at what time Lucius the sonne of Coyllus reigned king among the Bry∣tanes: who in the 13. yeere of his gouernment receiued the Christian faith, as both Gyldas and Beda affirme. Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, the disciple of Iohn the Euangelist, came into Rome in Antoninus time, whom Ireneus much commen∣deth. Ireneus lib. 3. cap. 4. Now for that the name of Antoninus was so much honored of the Romans, it was decreed that none should be so named, but by consent of the Senators, & such Consuls as then raigned: for Antoninus became as great a name in Rome, as Augustus was, such was the loue and honour that the Romanes yelded The name of Antoninus much honou∣red in Rome. to this name. The Senators had no greater present to pre∣sent Alexander Seuerus, then to offer him that name, and so to be called Seuerus Antoninus. The vertue and rarenesse of the men made the name so honourable, and therefore I will put them downe with the magistrates and Officers that ru∣led in Rome, during the time of these two rare Empe∣rours, Antoninus Pius, and Antoninus surnamed the Phi∣losopher.
Plautius Syluanus. Iulius Seuerus. Marcus Aulius Antoninus. Herodes Atticus. Lollianus Auitus. Grauius Maximus. Seleucus and Ruffinus. Gallicanus Glabrio. Torquatus and Camerinus. Marcus Vibullius surnamed Augur. Atidius Cornelianus who had charge in Syria at An∣toninus death. Quintilius and Priscus. Pescenius niger. Metilius Bradua and Lucius Aelianus. Lucius Aelius Verus. Stacius Priscus and Aui∣dius Cassius two notable captaines. Aufidius Victorinus. Iunius Rusticus and Elius Celsus. Erutius Clarus, Flaccus Piso, and Iulianus which was afterward Emperour. Claudius Pompeianus and Cethegus. Heren. Apronianus and Quintilinus. These with many moe notable men that gouerned in Rome when Antoninus Pius raigned. This Quintilinus whose house & stocke Commodus the em∣perour after destroyed, who likewise was by his father made Caesar, and had triumphed before with his father: These were the chiefe men that then bare rule in Rome in the time of Marcus Antoninus, fewe such Emperours were founde in Rome after they dyed. In time of Marcus Antoninus, Smyrna a famous towne of Asia fell by an earthquake, to the repay∣ring whereof this Emperour bestowed much money, and Commodus 9. Emperour. the Temple of Serapis was this time in Alexandria burned. Nowe when Lucius Antoninus Commodus beganne his Em∣pire Reade Lam∣pridius and Herodia lib. 1. after his father, the vertue of his father shined the more (beyng dead) by the vices of the sonne that succeeded af∣ter, who from his cradle was wicked, cruell, and beastly: he so defamed himselfe with ryot and ribawdry, that hee had three hundred concubines, and three hundred delicate males youthes which he vsed as women: he commanded his Colossus or image to be put vp, and withall made a decree that he should be called God Hercules.
This shamelesse Emperour, vnwoorthie of the name of Antoninus, woulde play openly vpon the Theater with fen∣cers, and he vsed himselfe so hatefully, that he was abhorred Vices most o∣dious in a ma∣gistrate. of all men and enuied as an enemie of mankinde, and so he ended his life, being either thratled or poysoned, after hee had reigned thirteene yeeres. For it was a woonder to see two good Emperours to succeede one another in Rome: A rare sight in Rome to see a good Empe∣rour. nay wee cannot reade but of onelie two which were good, Vespasian, and his sonne Titus: all the rest cruell tyrants de∣generated from kinde, and in whom appeared nothing more then treason or murther. After whome followed the Emperour Pertinax, an aged Pertinax. man, who had done much seruice, and therefore aduaun∣ced to the empire much against his will: for he was 69. yeres Reade more of him in Eu∣trop. lib. 8. olde when he was chosen Emperour: scant hee had reigned eightie dayes, but he was slaine of the souldiers, and his head cut off and caried rounde about Rome by the commaunde∣ment of Iulianus, who was the wolfe that caused this murther, but he was well requited. The like death happened to Iulia∣nus, Iulianus. being a man very factious and seditious, and very ambi∣tious: this was nephew to that Iulianus which liued in Adria∣nus time: he was discōfited by Seuerus Septimius, at a place cal∣led Lucius septimi∣us Seuerus 22. Emperour. Miluius bridge, & soone after slaine in his owne palace, his head cut off, and put vp in the market place: at what time Pes∣cennius was in Antioch, and Septimius Seuerus was in Panonia, both created Caesars. But after that Seuerus slue Pescennius, hee tooke the rule & gouernment of the Romane empire, & was the first Emperour created forth of Affricke. This was of great cre∣dite, for he had bin treasurer and Tribune of the souldiers, and at the last had the charge of the whole weale publike. This the Senate gratified much according to his request, and gaue him the name of Pertinax, whome Seuerus loued so well, that he both desired and commanded to be called Pertinax: whose Sept. Seuerus would be cal∣led Pertinax. death Seuerus reuenged vpon Pescennius & others. He was a va∣liant man: for he ouercame the Parthians, and the Arabians, and therfore was surnamed Parthicus Seuerus: he subdued Britaine,
who then after the death of Lucius began ciuil wars betweene themselues, and were almost vtterly conquered by Seuerus, by reason the noble men and Britaine held ciuill warres. During which time, Clodius Albinus created himselfe Cae∣sar Albinus head sent from France to Rome. in Fraunce, whom he slue at Lugdunum, whose head he sent to Rome, and whose friends in Rome at his returne he persecu∣ted to the last. This Emperour was well learned, and a great Philosopher. This Emperour Seuerus, after he had repayred many things throughout the Romane empire, and had made Rome againe chiefe mistres of those prouinces lost, he passed ouer the Sea vnto Britaine, where after he had subdued them, hee dyed among them in the citie of Yorke, in the eighteenth yeere of his reigne. Polidore doeth not agree Reade Polid. in lib. 2. with Eutropius in this: but in the Romane historie Eutropius must be beleued. After Seuerus succeeded his sonne Aurelius Bassianus, who also was called Caracalla: he was in conditions much like to Antoninus Ca∣racalla 23. his father but more sharpe: he was out of measure giuen to sensualitie, and carnall concupiscence: he espoused his mo∣ther in lawe named Iuba, of some named Iubba, though vn∣der colour to demaund Artabanus his daughter king of Par∣thia in mariage, which he falsly deceiued, beside the expecta∣tion of Artabanus, he slue many of the Parthians. This Antoni∣nus Reade Victor Aurel. Caracalla hauing had a sight of Alexander the great his pi∣cture, wherin he noted his sterne countenance, with his head somewhat leaning to the left shoulder, he caused the like pi∣cture to be made for himselfe, and commanded all his souldi∣ers Caracalla commanded himselfe to be called Alex. to call him Alexander. This Emperor died as he was pre∣paring a voyage against the Parthians at Edessa, when hee had liued 43. yeeres. Presently after the death of Caracalla, Opilius Macrinus and Opilius Macri∣nus. 24. his sonne Diadumeus were created Emperours, who after they had reigned ioyntly fourteene moneths, they were both slain in a sedition which fel among the souldiers, without do∣ing Marcus Aure∣lius Heliogabo∣lus 25. Empe∣rour. any thing worth the writing. After them stept to the em∣pire, Marcus Aurelius surnamed Heliogabolus, & well so named
for in all beastlinesse he resembled his predecessors, these vn∣derwritten. Nero Caligula. Sergius Vitellius. Domitianus Commodus. This Heliogabolus was supposed to be the sonne of Caracalla: he likewise defamed himselfe with all kind of shame and re∣proch, whose filthinesse and lewd behauiour you may reade in Herodian: He was slaine in an vprore which the souldiers made, at what time also his mother Semia Sira called of some Herod. lib. 5. Semiamira died, after he had liued very vnchastly and filthily Vnhappy are those empires where tyrants raigne for kings. for 4. yeres, but Eutropius saith 2. yeres & 8. moneths. During the raigne of these 3. last emperors, there were no good things done in Rome, but vprores and sedition of souldiers, creating whom they would to be Emperour one day, and the next day deposing them from life & empire. Only this happened, that the Amphitheator was set on fire, and few fellowes were qui∣et at Rome. The great men of authority then, were these. Titus Saturninus. Marcus Noninus Mu∣tianus. Cornelius Amulinus. Lu. Torpilius Dexter. C. Gallus Gentianus and Bassus. Gentianus. Clodius Albinus. Balbinus chosen Emperour a∣gainst Maximinus. Aur. Alex. Seuerus and Maxi∣mus were both made Empe∣rours. Aurelius Alexander Seuerus was chosen Emperour when he was but twelue yeeres of age, whome the souldiers named Alex. Seuerus made Empe∣rour at twelue yeres of age. Caesar, and the Senate created Augustus: he was a very vertu∣ous Prince, and one that fauoured all good men: he gaue him selfe to martiall pollicie, and tooke in hand about the 9. yeere of his raigne, warres against Artaxerxes king of Persia, who had before vanquished Artabanus king of the Parthians, who then gouerned the Persians. And as Artaxerxes ouercame Artabanus, & was the first king of Persia after Darius, who before was conquered by Alexander the great: so this Artaxerxes was subdued by this Alex. Seuerus, with great glorie, and had his triumph graunted him in
Rome, being but 21. yeeres of age: he had such care of the Empire, and such diligence, that he committed the charge of Armenia to a noble captaine called Iunius Palmatus: he committed the prouince of Illyrica vnto Varus Macrinus, and the countrey of Mauritania to Furius Celsus. Of these 3. Cap∣taines victories in these countreys, reade Lampridius. This Seuerus Court florished with learned men. was the first Emperour that fauoured Christians, and being so yong an Emperour, he associated with him to assist him in iudgement, Vlpianus a great Ciuilian, a lawe maker, and had an office called Magister Scrinii, as it were Master of the Rowles: he had in those dayes in his Court a number of lear∣ned men, whose names Lampridius setteth down in this sort, whome he vsed as Counsellers. Fabius Sabinus. Domitius Vlpianus. Aelius Gordianus. Iulius Paulus. Modestinus. Pomponius. Alphenus. Africanus. Florentinus. Proculus. Martianus. Callistratus. Hermogenes. Tryphonius. Metianus & Celsus. The most part of these were Ciuilians, and scholers to Pa∣pinianus. Besides, these lawyers florished in Seuerus Court, Quintilius Caius Marcellus, Aelius Seuerianus, & Cutilius Seuerus, Reade Egnati. and Suetonius of this Empe∣rour. three singuler learned Romanes: but he reigned not long: for he was slaine in Fraunce, in a tumult that grewe amongst the souldiers, hee, and his mother Mammea, in a towne called Moguntia, after he had reigned 13. yeeres. After this good Emperor Seuerus, succeeded Iulius Maxi∣minius, a man of meane parentage, whose beginning was to be a shepheard in Thracia, and after came to be a souldier, and Maximinius slaine and his sonne. Oros lib. 7. Cap. 19. in processe of time, came by the meanes of the souldiers to be Emperour without consent of the Senators: who in the beginning had some good successe against the Germanes: but not long after slaine by Pupienus at Aquilea, and his yong sonne called also Maximinius, when hee had reigned three yeeres.
After him succeeded Pupienus, Balbinus, & Gordianus, three Emperours together in Rome: but Pupienus and Balbinus were slaine at Rome, and Gordianus obtained the empire, and held it Gordianus. 27. Emperour. sixe yeeres alone: he espoused Tranquillina Masetheus daugh∣ter, and after tooke his voiage into Persia, and ouerthrewe Sapores king of Persia, tooke diuers cities, and in many sundrie Pupienus and Balbinus two Emperours, slaine at Rome in their Palace. skirmishes did greatly afflict the Persians. But as hee returned thence, he was likewise slaine through treason of one Philip, who succeeded him in the Empire: but his monument is erected vp by one of his souldiers in memoriall of him, and that place is called Gordianus graue. Eutrop. lib. 9. Marcus Iulius Philippus, after he had slaine Gordianus, he and M. Philip. 28. Emperour. his sonne Philip came to the empire, and reigned ioyntly fiue yeeres. In the time of these two Philips, there was celebrated in Rome great solemnitie and preparation of Gunnes and shewes, with such pompe and magnificence, as Capittollius af∣firmeth, Reade Iuli. Capitol. of these places. that the like before in Rome scant had beene seene. Philip builded a towne in Thracia, & named it after his owne name. Not long after, both the father and the sonne were slaine, the father at Verrona, and the sonne at Rome, being of the age of 12. yeeres. About this time liued Iulius Africanus, Hactenus Iu. Capito. & He∣rodianus. a great Historiographer, and that godly man Origen wrote his booke of Martyrs. After these two Philips succeeded Decius, borne at Bubalia a Towne in Hungaria, a man well instructed in all kinde of sciences: but hee was the eight Emperour that persecuted the Christians, and beside commaunded by an Acte, that all that worshipped Christ, shoulde be slaine: hee repressed Oros. lib. 7. cap. 21. some warres that were cōmenced in Fraunce, and made one voyage against the Gothes, at what time hee caused his sonne to be created Caesar. This Decius founded Bathes in Rome, who when he had reigned two yeeres, both he and his sonne died in Barbaria. Some iudged that hee was swallowed vp in an earthquake: and some affirme, that hee was drowned in a riuer of Thracia, called Abricium. Then were created Emperours in Rome, Gallius Hostilianus, Gallus Hostil. 30. Emperor.
and Voluntianus his sonne: they committed no act worthie of writing, but they were likewise persecutors of the Chri∣stians, and in their time fell great plagues and sundrie other diseases in the Romane Empire: and after they had reigned scant two yeeres, they were slaine, and within three moneths after them Aemilianus who succeeded them in the Empire, was in like sort slaine: so that of 30. Emperours which reig∣ned since Octauius Augustus time, vntill Licinius Valerian, Licinius Vale∣rianus 31. Of 30. Empe∣rours, not 3. escaped free from mur∣ther. sixe of them escaped not the handes of murtherers. Such was the enuious estate of Rome from time to time, such was their tyrannie and auarice, vntill the Romanes fame and dig∣nitie was much obscured, and so little esteemed of the kings about, ouer whome they had before so long triumphed euen from the Consuls time vntill this time: for the glo∣rie of the Romanes excelled all the nations of the worlde in power and fame, vntill tyrannie, murther and persecution Tyrannie and murther, the cause of de∣struction. filled the streetes of Rome with blood, whereby their glorie decayed, and their state diminished. Licinius Valerianns, of whome I made mention a little be∣fore, beganne his Empire in the yeere after Christes incarna∣tion 256. who had the gouernement then of Rhoetia and Noricus, being made by the souldiers Caesar, & soone after Au∣gustus. At what time Galienus also was created Caesar at Rome, Galienus by the assent of the Senate: and this was the onely occasion why so many Emperours of Rome were murthered, to haue two Emperours at one time of equall authoritie to gouerne, Two Caesars hardly agree, in one towne or countrey. Sext. Aureli. which kingdomes & principality could neuer wel abide. For after the authoritie of the Consuls ceased, they created in the place of 2. consuls, two Caesars, which should gouerne ioyntly, the one in the citie, the other abroad. These 2. Caesars practised more cōspiracy one to destroy another, to haue sole gouern∣ment ouer the empire, then they vsed diligence & care toge∣ther to saue the empire: for euery Caesar had great desire, and was much ambicious howe hee might be created Augustus, which was the greatest name of dignitie among the Romanes. Thus the state of Rome by ambitious mens gouernement,
became at length to haue so many Caesars in the field, as then pleased the souldiers, and to haue so many Augustus in Rome, as pleased the Citizens, vntill the Germanes, Gothes, Vandales, Hungarians, Frenchmem, with other nations might as well Eutrop. lib. 8. come with an armie into Italie and beard the Romanes in their Countrey, as the Romanes might come out of Rome to commence warre any where out of Italie. For nowe in the time of these two Caesars, Licinius and Galienus, the Germanes Galienus. read of this more in Trebellius. grewe so bolde, that they entred within Italie, and approched into the Citie Rauenna, at what time the other Caesar Licinius was discōfited & taken prisoner by Constantine at Nicomedia a city in Bythinia, & was slaine contrary to the oth & promes which Constantiine made him, & yet had espoused Constantia Constantines sister. Nowe the Almanes had spoyled France, and inuaded Italie, Greece, Macedonia, Pontus, and all Asia were ouer Rome fell to variance in these dayes. runne by the Germanes and the Gothes. These which were brought before by Traianus & by Augustus vnder the Romane Empire, are nowe by foreiners vanquished: the cause was, the Romanes anoied the Romanes euen as Pyrrus sayd, or as Ha∣nibal vnto Antiochus, that the Romans must be conquered with Romanes: which is now seene in the time of these Caesars: for now the Parthians base people and seruants sometime of the Macedonians, after they had gottē Mesopotamia, they pretended to claime a title to Syria. For nowe the strength of Romanes began to faile, and their kingdomes and their teritories The glory of Rome decaied. reuolted from them, and went to wrecke. For at that very time a base Frenchman called Posthumius, intruded into the Romane Empire, and gouerned the same by the space of tenne yeeres, but he was slaine by the souldiers in a tumult by the snares of Lollianus. After Posthumius, a man of a meane occupation, a handy craft man named Marius got the empire into his hand, & the next day after was slaine. This time Lollianus also began ano∣ther cōspiracy, at what time Victorinus gouerned France, who was slaine in the city Agrippa through the treason of one Actu∣rius, for that he defloured many maides & matrons, and gaue
himselfe altogether to a filthie life. See and marke the state of Rome in Lycinius & Gallienus time: First Posthumius & his sonne Eutrop. lib. 9. were slaine by the conspiracie of Lollianus: Lollianus slaine by the treason of Marius, Marius also dispatched out of the way by Victorinus, & Victorinus killed by Acturius: after whō succee∣ded Reade Trebel∣lius of the mi∣serable mur∣thering and killing of Ro∣mane Empe∣rours. Tetricus the Senator, who in like sort as others were, was by Aureolus slayne: & Aureolus, after he had concluded peace with Gallienus and Valerianus, who were both slaine at Millaine reigned alone. See the murther & slaughter of Emperors in Rome in those dayes: for an Emperour was no sooner made, but he either was killed violently, or murthered secretly. For Rome in those dayes was the onely Theater of tyrannie, and so continued vntill a great part of the Empire was taken into Constantinople: and within a while after it was fully gone into Germanie, so they kept the name of an Emperour onely for a time, but the dignity was decayed in Rome, and beganne to flourish in other places. After that time Aureolus in the 9. yere of his raigne was like∣wise slaine by Flauius Claudius, a very good Emperour, for he Flauius Clau∣dius 32. Em∣perour. recouered againe many things which were gone to decay du∣ring the reigne of Licinius and Gallienus: he was chosen Caesar by the souldiers, & created Augustus by the Senate, a iust man, and fitte to gouerne the weale publike: he brought againe the Gothes, the Macedonians, and the Illyrianes vnder the Ro∣mane yoke, and wanted but time onely to bring the other countreyes which were lost by his Predecessors vnder the Ro∣manes: but he died too timely, when he had reigned but 19. moneths: after whome succeeded Quintilius, brother vnto Claudius, and was nominated Emperour by the consent of the souldiers: and for that he was a man of singular fobriety, wor∣thy to be compared with his brother Claudius, he was by the Claudius had a golden target set vp in the Councell house. Senate created Augustus, and he continued but 17. dayes but he was slaine. Eutropius saith that Flauius Claudius the Empe∣rour had a golden Target hanged vp in the Councell house, and had also in the capitoll a golden Image set vp for a perpe∣tuall memorie of him: and he appointed before he died that
Aurelius Valerianus should reigne after him, a stout Emperour and one that subdued the Marcomanes, which then did spoile Au. Valerianus a stout valiant Emperour. & waste Millaine and the countreyes about. He also subdued the Thracians & the Illyrians, he ouercame the Gothes, and slue their captaine Cannaba beyond the riuer of Danubus. After this he commenced wars in the East countreyes, where Odenatus king of Palmirea had gotten many prouinces out of the Ro∣manes hands: but he was subdued, and his wife Zenobia taken prisoner, ouer whome Aurelianus the Emperour triumphed: and after his triumphes he inuironed the citie with stronger walles, he founded a Temple in Rome, which he dedicated to the Sunne, vpon the which Temple he bestowed an infinite deale of golde and precious stones. Eutrop. lib. 9. Aurelianus, after he had reigned 6. yeres, he was slain through the treason of his own seruants in the mid way betwene Con∣stantinople and Heraclea, in a place called Cenophrurium, but his death was not vnreuēged: after that this Aurelianus was slain, Rome was without an Emperor for 7. monethes, vntill Annius Tacitus was elected Caesar, a man of such good conuersation as Annius Taci∣tus 34. was meet to gouern an empire. Howbeit, he deceased within 6. moneths, & was by death preuented, as his successor Floria∣nus: who in like maner as Tacitus raigned but 2. moneths & 20. Florianus 35. daies, died without any mentiō made of any things worth the memory. After whom succeeded Probus a singuler souldier, a Probus 36. Ann. Dom. 279. man most expert in warfare: for he subdued the Germanes, the Sarmatians & the Illyrians. He ouercame the Gothes in Thracia, Read of these Sex. Aureli∣us Victor. he vanquished in sundry skirmishes diuers which attempted to vsurpe the state imperial, as Saturninus, in the East coūtrey Bonosus and Proculus, which affected much the kingdome of Fraunce, and Agrippina that claimed a title to Hispanie and Brytaine, he vanquished them and triumphed ouer them: this emperor licenced the Frenchmen and the Hungarians to haue vineyards. This emperour was a iust and a stoute man, equall in all pointes to Aurelianus his predecessor, & was slaine also Oros lib 7. cap. 23. & 24. in an iron towre at Sirmium in an vprore, which grew amōgst the souldiers after he had reigned 6. yeres and 3. moneths.
After this emperour, was Carus elected to gouerne the Ro∣mane empire, who presently after he had obtained the em∣pire, Carinus & Nu∣merianus two Caesars. Eutrop. lib. 9. made his 2. sonnes Carinus and Numerianus, Caesars, and commenced that warre against the Persians againe, which Probus thought before he died to haue taken in hand, which Carus perfourmed, and subdued Mesopotamia, and atchieued thinges manfully against the Persians. He wanne Seleucia the chiefest citie of Syria, and Ctesiphontes a towne in Persia. And when he had raigned two yeeres, he was stricken with light∣ning, Carus stricken withlightning. and his sonne Numerianus was slaine being very yong with his father in the warres of Persia, by the perswasion of A∣per his father in lawe. The other sonne of Carus called Cari∣nus, being deputed Caesar ouer Illyria, Fraunce, and Italie, de∣floured noble women, put innocents to death, and practised all kind of mischiefe, vntill he was ouerthrowne by Dioclesian the emperour: who next succeeded his father Carus. During which time Rome was in great trouble, and the empire in great danger: at what time these Magistrates and noble men flou∣rished, and some of them became emperors. Patrenus Volisianus. Pomponius Bassus. Flauius Aclianus. Annius Tacitus afterward Emperour. Lucius Ragonius Vrinatus. Gallius Hostilius afterward Caesar. Numus Albinus. Maximius Dexter and Arcesilaus. Iunius Tiberianus. Pomponius Victorinus. Aurelius Probus after made Caesar. Iunius Messula. Oniuius Paternus. Iunius Maximus. Lurius Orphitus. Pomponius Ianarius. These bare most sway in Rome during the e of these se∣uen Emperours, which raigned no more but 18. yeeres. All these seuen Claudius. Florianus. Quintilus. Probus and Aurelianus. Carus. Tacitus.  
So short a time the Emperours of Rome then reigned, that any Caesar was slaine sooner then any common souldier. At Orosius lib. 7. cap. 22. the which time Germanie and Fraunce waxed so strong, that the Romanes had their handes full to resist them and to keepe thē from Italie, & now they had entred Italie with great force spoyling and wasting the countries about, vntil they came to Rauenna, and Valerianus possessed Pannonia: and Carausius go∣uerned the Brytaines, which he detained by force, when he Carausius held Britaine by force. fledde for feare of Maximianus. CHAP. X. Of the rest of the Emperours of Rome after Dioclesians time, at what time their Empire at Rome beganne to decay: for that the digni∣tie of the old Emperours were diminished, by reason that Constan∣tinople, whom Constantine the great had so enriched and beauti∣fied with their ancient monuments of Rome, that olde Rome was hereby defaced, and new Rome thereby flourished, so that the Em∣pire was deuided betweene two Emperours, the one to be at Con∣stantinople, the other at Rome. NOwe to Dioclesianus, who beganne his reigne, after that Carus Augustus was Dioclesia. the 38. Emperour. stricken with lightnings, and his sonne Numerianus slaine by treason, he was created Augustus: he was borne at Dal∣matia, a Scriueners sonne, as Eutropius saith, but others affirme he was a bond∣man to Amulinus the Senator. This Em∣perour assoone as he had obtained the Empire to his hande, Reade An. Victor of this Dioclesian. he reuenged the death of Numerianus, slue Aper his sonne in lawe, & after subdued Carinus least he would claime the Em∣pire, being Carus his eldest sonne: he associated to himselfe in the Empire Maximianus, surnamed Herculius, and made him Augustus, who was before but Caesar. Beside he created other two Caesars, Constantius Clorus, and Maximianus Gabrius, borne in Dacia, for that in diuers countreies warre waxed hote, and that Dioclesian of necessitie must needes appoynt these two
Caesars, and take Maximianus to be his fellow in the Empire. This Dioclesianus caused Galerius to take to wife his daugh∣ter Galerius mari∣ed Dioclesians daughter. Valeria, and caused Constantius to marry Theodora, daugh∣ter in law to Herculius. This time gouerned in Egypt Achilleus, whom Dioclesian subdued, and after tooke Busiris and Copon, two cities of Egypt, slue a number of their nobles, and gaue A∣chilleus to be deuoured of wilde beastes. In the eight moneth of his warre in Egypt he tooke Alexandria, and after he had pa∣cified Aurelius victor Egypt, hee returned to Rome, at what time Herculeius re∣turned frō Affrike: and after he had finished his warres where he had subdued the Quinquagentiās, & concluded peace with them, afterward these two emperors liued and reigned toge∣ther Reade Oros. lib. 7. cap. 26. twentie yeres: they ouercame Narses king of Persia: they subdued the Caspians and the Basternes, and cōquered the Sar∣matians, and did triumph ouer them. After this triumph Dioclesiā waxed so proud, that he would The pride of Diocles. Eutrop. lib. 9. be worshipped like a god, and would be called brother to the sunne, & to the moone: he had his shooes wrought with gold and precious stones, & caused people to come kneeling and kisse his feete. Yet Eutropius writeth, that after these great tri∣umphs, which both Dioclesian & Herculeius had at Rome ouer Narses concubines, his sisters, and his children, they resig∣ned vp the imperial state, and liued a priuat life, the one in the citie of Solona, and the other in Lucania, for the which cause Dioclesianus was canonised after his death though he dyed a Dioclesian ca∣nonised. priuate man, which was neuer graunted in Rome to any pri∣uate man. Then Constātius and Galerius, which were but Caesars during the reigne of Dioclesian, were both made emperours, and the whole gouernment was deuided betweene them both: The Empire diuided be∣tweene Gale∣rius and Const. Fraunce, and Italie, and Affrike were cōmitted to Constantius: Illyria, Asia, and the East partes to Galerius: but Constantius, a man of great modestie, declared his worthinesse, refused the trouble and toile of warres that he should haue in Affrike, Fraunce, and Italie, and contented himselfe with the name of Augustus: and after hee had reigned two yeeres, deceased at
Yorke in Britaine, where Constantius had a base sonne that be∣came gouernour in his fathers roome in Britaine. Galerius, when hee heard that Constantius his fellowe in the Empire died in Britaine, he substituted vnder him two Caesars. This time some commotion began at Rome, where they no∣minated Galerius after the death of Const. substitu∣ted 2. Caesars vnder him. Maxentius sonne to Herculeus late Emperour, which when his father heard of, he came in all haste from Lucania to Rome, and by all meanes possible perswaded Dioclesian to re∣signe the Empire into his hand againe, which hee refused to doe. Then Seuerus Caesar was sent to appease the commotion which the gard had made, where he was slaine: then Hercule∣us seemed as though he woulde depose his sonne Maxentius, vnder colour of cruel pretence, thinking to goe to Fraunce as intrueth he went, meaning to kill his sonne in lawe Constanti∣nus, accusing his owne sonne, how he repulsed him frō Rome, and would haue killed him if he had not fledde: but his guile Warre began betweene Maxentius & Constantinus. was detected by his owne daughter Faustina, who disclosed all her fathers conspiracie to her husband Constantine, where∣upon Herculeus fledde to Massilia, where hee was slaine, a man voide of all humanitie, hurtfull to all, &c. After Herculeus was slaine, Galerius dyed, and then the empire was gouerned by Constantinus and Maxentius, whose fathers were before them emperors, and by Licinius and Maximinus: but so many Foure Empe∣rours at once in Rome. lordes coulde not agree long: for Constantine vanquished Maxentius at Miluius bridge. Within a short time warre grewe betweene Licinius and Maximinus: and to auoide the Const. would haue no com∣panion in the Empire. emunent mischiefe, Maximinus dyed suddenly at Tharsus. Constantinus being of a hautie courage, coueting to bee a sole Emperour, made warre vpon Licinius dis deare friend and his brother in lawe, who had espoused his daughter Constantia, with whome hee had diuers battailes. the one in Hungaria, the seconde in Cybale, the third in Nicomedia a famous Citie of Bythinia, where Licinius yeelded himselfe to Constantine, and yet contrarie to the lawe of armes, and to the othe and promise made betweene them, Licinius Oros. lib. 7. cap. .
was slaine: nowe there was no warre in Rome but betweene the Emperours, and nothing is to be written but of murthe∣ring and killing of Emperours: where before men wrote of their forreigne victories, of their conquests of kingdomes, of their triumphs, of their pompe and glorie, of their port and The sayings of the old Ro∣manes. fame, in so much that the Romanes onely bragd of themselues and said, Magna agere & fortia pati Romanorum est. Nowe Cerausius fledde before to Britaine from Maximia∣nus, where in Dioclesians time hee was slaine by Alectus his companion, after hee had kept Britaine by force for three Cerausius slaine. yeeres after Cerausius, and Alectus. Alectus was subdued by Asclepiodotus captaine of the garde, and so Britaine was reco∣uered againe within tenne yeeres after Cerausius had ta∣ken it. Nowe after that Maximianus Herculeus was slaine at Mas∣silia, thinking to returne to his sonne Maxentius againe, Constantine the great hauing intelligence of these practi∣ses betweene the father and the sonne, presently after the death of the father Maximianus, hee commenced warre vpon his sonne Maxentius, and ouerthrewe him as you Eutrop. lib. 10. heard before. Then the great Constantine hauing the Em∣pire Constantine the great made his three sōns three Caesars. in his owne hande, hee appointed Constantinus Crispus his sonne to haue the gouernment in Fraunce, his other two sonnes Constans and Constantius had the rule in the East partes: his three sonnes were made three Caesars, and him selfe made Augustus. His great fortune was such, that Constantinus was surna∣med the great: for hee was compared, for the good successe hee had in the beginning of his Empire, to Cyrus the great king of Persia, and to Alexander the great king of Mace∣donia, and in like sort prospered as they did at the first: but afterwarde being altered from his wonted gentle and flexible minde, hee persecuted his owne blood: he slue his owne wife Fausta, and his sisters sonne a very notable young Euselius of Cō∣stantinus life reade more there. man: hee persecuted sundrie of his friendes, and many of his alliaunce.
Constantinus was endued with many excellent vertues: hee was of such passing industry in wars, that he sūdry times ouer threw the Gotes, & wan great praise among the Barbariās. This Constantinus praysed. emperor was much adicted to the study of the liberall artes, and he endeuored to gaine the loue of the people. There was nothing wanting in Cōstantine, that should be in a good empe∣ror. he enacted and established many sound lawes to the Ro∣manes, and furthered the Church of Christ with al care & di∣ligence: for he destroyed many temples of the Gentiles. In his time sundry Synods were called, which shalbespoken of in another place, & specially the great Synod at Nice in By∣thinia, where 318. Bishops were together, at what time the 318. Bishops in the coūcell at Nice. heresie of the Arrians as ouerthrowen. He rebuilded in Thra∣cia Byzantiū, and named it after his owne name, Cōstantinople: and he reedified in Bythinia a towne called Drepana, & named it after his mothers name Helenopolis: of whom Eusebius doeth write, that Helena the mother of Constantine found the crosse Euseb. Tripa. lib. 2. cap. 18. whereon our Sauiour Christ suffered at Ierusalem: and when he had made great preparation against the Parthians, he dyed in Nicomedia, after he had reigned thirtie one yeres, and had liued sixtie sixe yeeres, and left behind him his three sonnes, Constantinus, Constans, and Constantius, to succeede him in the Empire. Hee left also a very gallant young man his brothers sonne named Dalinatius, which was slaine in an vprore which fell among the souldiers in Thracia. The three sonnes of Constantine had the Empire among them, as by will and testament Constantine had commaun∣ded: but the elder brother not long after his fathers death, attempted warre against his youngest brother at Aquileia, Constantine slaine in Thra∣cia. and was slaine, and then the Empire fell betweene the two other brethren Constantius and Constans, the one gouerning in the East, the other in the West. In the same sort was Con∣stans slaine in the Castle of Helena at Magnensium, as his Constans two sonnes slaine. brother Constantine was in Thracia. The third brother had diuers and sundry battels against Sapores king of Persia, who neuer had good successe in any battell hee tooke in hand,
but that battell which hee fought at Singara, and yet sustey∣ned the losse of the victorie of that battell. Thus the two sonnes of so worthie an Emperour dyed without any great conquest made. Nowe by this time new matters grew in Illiria: for Magnen∣tius Magnentius made Empe∣rour. possessed Italie, Fraunce, and Affrike after the death of Constans, though Sextus Aurelius writes otherwayes. Yet this Magnentius was made Emperour by the souldiers, at what time in Rome, Nepotianus, sisters sonne to Constantine the great, Nepotianus. was also by the people their created Caesar, whom Magnentius returning from Affrike to Rome subdued within twentie eight Pau. Oras. lib. 7. cap. 29. dayes after he was made emperor, after he created his owne brother Decentius to be Caesar, & reigned ioyntly three yeeres Eutrop. lib. 10. and sixe moneths, vntil the vnhappy battel at Marsa, where a great number of the Romanes were slaine, and Magnētius van∣quished, who shortly after slue himselfe at Louaine. Which newes being toulde to Decentius, hee for very griefe hanged Eutrop. lib. 10. himselfe. This time Constantius deputed his vncles sonne Gallus to be Caesar ouer the East partes: but shortly after, both Constan∣tius Sex. Aurel. and his cousin Gallus waged ciuil wars, in the which warre Gallus was slaine by Cōstantius. This time Syluanus being made Caesar, attempted newe matters in Fraunce, and was likewise slaine within thirtie yeeres after. Now Constantius was Empe∣rour alone, and hauing the whole Empire in his owne hand, he appointed Iulianus his vncles sonne, and brother to Gallus, Caesar ouer Fraunce. This recouered the spoile of the Barbariās, the townes and cities which they besieged, and slue a great armie of the Almaines at Argētine a citie in Fraunce. The ouer∣throw was such, that their king was taken prisoner, & Fraunce againe recouered. This time was Cōstantius occupied against the Parthians: and returning home from thence to pacifie that cōmotion, he died by the way, after he had reigned 38. yeres, Constantius di∣ed and Iulia∣nus made Au∣gustus. at what time Iulianus was made Augustus. But let vs know who florished in Rome during the reigne of this great Constantinus and his three sonnes, which was seuentie yeeres.
Ruffinus Volusianus. Arcadius Rufinus. Anicius Iulianus. Acilius Seuerus. Paulinus Probianus. Valerius Maximus. These flori∣shed as chiefe magistrates in Rome at that time. Septimius Bassius. Syluanus Caesar. Faecilianus and Tacianus, who were Consuls when Constantine the great dyed. Crispus Caesar. Ouinius Gallicanus. Annianus and Anicius Ru∣finus. Metilius Halarianus. Dalmatius Caesar. Nepotianus Caesar. Catulinus Philomanus. Publitius Optatus. Lucinus Caesar. Magnentius and Decentius both Caesars. Gallus Caesar. Cornelius Sergius. Daelius Probinus. Valerinus Proculus. Fabius Titianus. Mereatius Caerealus. Claudius Iulianus Caesar, who was next Emperour after Constantinus, and his sonnes, made great preparation against the Parthians, at what time sundry Townes and holdes were peaceably yeelded to Iulianus: hee returning from Assyria Iulianus slaine. as a conquerour, was slaine by his enemies in the seuenth yeere of his reigne. This Emperour Iulianus did excell in the Greeke and in the Latine tongue: he was passing well seene in all the liberall artes: he was very eloquent, and a great Philo∣sopher. Iulian likened to M. Antonius Oros. lib. cap. 30. Eutropius saith, that Iulianus resembled much Marcus Antonius, whom this Emperour in all points endeuoured to imitate: but he was a persecutour of the Christians. Iouinianus succeeded next Iulianus, being chosen by con∣sent Iouinianus. of the souldiers: hee was a very good Emperour, and a Iouini. a good Emperour & a fauourer of the Christians great fauourer of the Christiās: but being once or twise van∣quished by the Persians, he susteined such reproch, that hewas forced to make peace with a great portiō ofhis empire, which was not seene since the foundation of Rome. This Iouinianus was borne in a prouince of Pannonia, the sonne of one Verro∣manus, who in his sleepe was warned, that this Emperour Eutrop. lib. 10. should be named Iouinianus: who after hee reigned eight mo∣neths died: but Eutropius affirmeth that he reigned Emperor seuen yeeres.
After him succeeded Valentianus the sonne of Gratianus, a meane man of birth, in whose time the West kingdomes be∣gan Valentianus. Reade Oros. lib. 7. cap. 32. to annoy the Romane Empire: for hitherto the Romanes kept the sole Empire in Rome, vntill the time of Theodosius the great, which was the fiftie Emperour from Iulius Caesar. Valen∣tianus The glory of the Empire went by Con∣stantine to Thracia. and his sonne together had the Empire betweene them twentie one yeeres: Valentianus the father reigned of those, fifteene yeres: and his his sonne named also Valētianus, being a yong boy proclaimed Caesar by the souldiers, reigned the o∣ther sixe yeeres. After them succeeded Theodosius Iunior, in whose time the Gotes & the Vandales began to be gouerned vnder kings. The Theodosius Iu∣nior. This time be∣gan the Van∣dales, the Huns, and Longbards their kingdōs. Longobards and the Hunnes at that very time began their king∣doms. Many other kingdoms began this time, as Britaine and Scotland: and diuers nations in Germany waxed so strong & so mighty, that by often quarreling & long tedious warres, the Empire was not only diuided, but quite taken into the West partes of the world, so that frō the name of the Emperour of Rome, he was long named the emperor of Constantinople, and after that named the Emperor of Almaine, where betweene these Gotes, Vandales, Longobards, Hunnes, Polonians, and diuers o∣ther Potentates of Germany, beside Fraunce, Spaine, & England, the empire still remaineth in Germany, so that the dignitie of A Pope ruleth Rome in the stead of an Emperour. Rome, the great glory and long renowme thereof, is fallen frō an Emperour to a Pope, after that Rome had florished vnder kings 243. yeeres, vntill the time of Consuls, vnder Consuls and Dictators 467. vntil the time of emperors, & vnder em∣perors 447. yeres. Now I wil end this Romane historie, for that the glory of the Romanes died, & the dignitie of the empire ta∣ken away, & nothing to be spokē of the Romanes after Iouinia∣nus time, which was the 43. emperour after Augustus reigne, which gouerned Rome with glory & fame for the space of 407 yeres, as Sex. Ruffi. affirmeth: yet these emperors whose names I haue subcribed, gouerned as emperours vntill Charles the great: at what time the empire begā to quaile, & the Germans began to florish, and Rome quite forsaken and decayed.
And nowe for that the Empire is fully come to Germanie, I will onely put downe the names of the emperours of Rome, from Iu. Caesar vntill Theodosius the great, which are these. Iu. Caesar fiue moneths. Octauius Augustus 56. yeeres. C. Tiberius Nero. 23. yeeres. C. Caesar Caligula 4. yeeres. Tib. Clau. Drusus 13. yeeres. Cl. Domitius Nero 13. yeeres and 8. moneths. Serg. Sulp. Galba 7. moneths. Siluius Otto 95. dayes. Aul. Vitellius 8. moneths. Fla. Vespasianus 12. yeeres. Tit. Vespasianus 2. yeeres. Fla. Domitianus 15. yeeres. Coc. Nerua 16. moneths. Vlpius Traianus 17. yeeres. Aelius Adrianus 21. yeeres. T. Antonius Pius 23. yeeres. M. Aurelius Antoninus, surna med the Philosopher 19. yeeres. Lu. Aurelius Commodus 13. yeeres. Aelius Pertinax and Didius Iulianus, both these 2. Em∣perours reigned 5. moneths. L. Septim. Seuerus 18. yeeres. Au. Antoninus Bassianus, who was also named Caracalla 7. yeeres. Opili. Macrinus with his sne Diadumeus, both Empe∣rours slaine by the souldiers within 14. moneths of their reigne, these with others are omitted among writers by reason of their short go∣uernment, one murthering of an other. M. Aurelius Heliogabolus 4. yeeres. Au. Alex. Seuerus 13. yeeres. Maximinus with his sōne na∣med also Maximi. was of a meane souldier made Em∣perour without the autho∣ritie of the Senate and reig∣ned 3. yeeeres. Balbinus & Pupienus reigned one yeere, and were both slaine in an vprore of the armie. Gordianus reigned Emperour 6. yeeres. M. Iulius Philippus with his sōne named Philip reigned 5. yeeres, this was the first Christian Emperour. Decius and his sonne 2. yeeres. Gallus Hostilianus with his sonne Volusianus 2. yeeres. Lucius Valerianus and Gallie∣nus reigned both Caesars ioyntly 15. yeeres. Fla. Claudius reigned 20. mo∣neths, & his brothea Quin∣tilius reigned after him
but 17. dayes: both good Emperours, and yet accor∣ding to the custome slaine by them who made them and proclaimed them emperors. Val. Aurelianus raigned sixe yeeres and was slaine. Annius Tacitus raigned sixe moneths and was slaine. Florianus raigned 84. dayes and was killed. Aurelius Probus raigned sixe yeeres, 3. moneths. Carus with his two sonnes Ca∣rinus and Numerianus in like sort slaine within two yeeres after hee was made Emperour. Dioclesianus Iouius raigned 20. yeeres, with whom raig∣ned Maximianus, Galleri∣us, and Cōstantius Chlorus. Constantinus the great raig∣ned 31. yeeres. This appoin∣ted the first order of the ac∣compt called Indictiones, af∣ter the Olympiads were ex∣pired. After Constantine th great raigned his sonne Constan∣stine and his two brethren Constantius, and Constans, 14. yeeres. Magnentius raigned 3. yeres. Beraldus saith that he raig∣ned more yeres. Iulianus raigned 7. yeeres. Iouinianus raigned eight mo∣neths. Valentinianus raigned ioyntly with his brother Valens 15. yeeres. Theodosius the great raigned 17. yeeres. After this Theodosius no mention is made of any famous exploits or conquests done by the Emperours of Rome, but of slaughter and murther during the time of the other Empe∣rours, which was not long: for that the Empire was transla∣ted into Germanie. And it was gone to Constantinople frō Rome before it came to Germanie. Much more might haue bene written of other emperours which continued in Rome, tantū nomine, for the dignitie of the empire, and the glorie of the olde Romanes was quite defaced, and that litle soueraigntie which was left in Rome, was by the Pope obscured: for as the kings of Rome within 243. yeeres were exiled, and Rome became subiect to Consuls, so likewise Consuls within 467. yeeres, became subiect to the empe∣rours: And euen so the glory and renowme of the emperours
within 470. yeeres, was diminished by the Popes: so that now Rome is without either King, Consul, or Emperour, but only a Pope, and the pompe of the Pope beginneth to quaile. And Rome compa∣red to Babylon in greatnes of glorie and pompe. therefore Rome was well compared by P. Orosius to Babylon, whose glorie for a thousand and odde yeeres, farre excelled al the kingdomes of the world: and euen so Rome, who seemed to be a whole worlde of it selfe, is nowe brought to nothing, and so the beasts that Daniel saw in a vision, the one like a lion, which betokened the Assyrians: the second like a beare, which signified the Persians: the third like a leopard, which signified Rome was the fourth deuou∣ring and terri∣ble beast, that stamped all kingdomes vnder his feete by Da∣niel expoun∣ded. the Macedonians: and the fourth beast was fearefull and terri∣ble, it had great yron teetth, it deuoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue vnder his feete. So the Romans vsed all other kingdomes, and nowe are almost in the like case, as the Persians, Assyrians, or the Macedonians. And now I leaue the Romanes, and speake of the cruel per∣secution that chiefly raigned euery where vnder the Romane Emperours after our Sauiour Christ died, vntill Constantine the great, leauing the historie of Germanie, where now the Empire resteth, to euery mans reading: for that it beganne of late time, and also for that the most part is therewith ac∣quainted. And therefore I ende this historie of the Romanes in this place, with Eutropius, with S. Aurelius Victor, and with Sextus Ruffinus. Hitherto Rome helde the Empire with some glorie and renowme, and after it decayed from one Empe∣rour vnto another, vntil the Empire was taken into Germanie: for when the kingdome of Fraunce beganne in Faramundus time, I thought good to make an ende of the Empire of Rome in Theodosius the great his time, who liued and raigned at one time with Faramundus: for France flourished by the ruine of Rome.
OF THE TRIAL OF THE Martyrs of God in the Primitiue Church from the first persecution vnder Tiberius the 3. Emperour, in the which Stephen was stoned, Iames beheaded, Philip han∣ged, with infinite more tormented and persecuted, vntill the 3. persecution, which began vnder Domi∣tian the 12. Emperour of Rome. THe pollicie of Satan from the beginning of mankind was such, that he inuented many wayes to hinder the Church of God a∣mong The first per∣secution vnder Tiberius Nero the third Em∣perour of Rome. the old Patriarkes, and the members of gods Church: then before the Law was giuen in the mount to Moses, and after the law was giuen, with all kinde of su∣perstitious idolatrie of Idols and Images, vntil our Sauiour Christs time: then Satan stirred with much more policie then be∣fore, with persecution and heresies, to animate his souldiers against the Gospel in euery kingdome and countrey. For when our Sauiour Christ was ascended vp to God his Father, leauing his Church to endure such persecution, and afflictions for the exercise of the faithfull, as might in despite of Satan & his angels (as he bfore had tolde to his disciples) triumph by the blood of Christ Iesus, and after be confirmed by the blood of so many millions of martyrs, as were by God
appointed to be witnesses of his Church, hee was no sooner ascended vnto heauen, but his Church was persecuted on earth, which was the first persecution by the Iewes vnder Ti∣berius The first per∣secution vnder Tib. Nero, the thirde Empe∣rour of Rome. Nero the thirde Emperour of Rome: though the empe∣rour was instructed by Pilatus the Romane President, which continued then at Hierusalem 10. yeeres, that Tiberius read the letters of the Senators, opening the miracles of Christ Iesus in the Senate, the order and maner of his death, and of his resurrection, in somuch that the emperour would haue the Senators to put him in the nomber, and to record him as one of the gods: for it was a decree among the Romans, that none should be recorded one of the gods, without the Sena∣tors The Senators of Rome cano∣nized whom they would to be gods. consent. As Eusebius reciteth the wordes of Tertulian in this sort: Nullum deum à rege consecrandum, priusquam à Sena∣tu probaretur. But when the whole world was fully instructed by the A∣postles of Christ, who were dispersed and persecuted euery where, so that in omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, their words, their liues, and their doctrine went into al parts of the world: The spirite of God stirred many zealous, faithfull, and godly men, to receiue the doctrine of Christ our Sauiour, and re∣ueiled to the Gentiles that which the Iewes would not receiue, The stubborne and rebelli∣ous Iewes. and therefore euen from the blood of Abel the iust, vntil Za∣charias the priest which was slaine, &c. God will call them to accompt. Now after that Pilate had slaine himselfe, euen with those hands which he washed in Ierusalem like an hypocrite, as gilt∣lesse of the death of Christ Iesus, after he had giuen sentence of death on him: and also after that Herode died, being ba∣nished, full of calamities and miseries, eaten of vermines as a iust reuenge of impietie and tyrannie: about which time Ti∣berius the emperour died also, during which time in Hierusa∣lem persecution was yet hot & vehement: and euen then they allowed to Simon Magus the sorcerer (after he came from Sa∣maria to Rome) all honour and reuerence, and his Image to be put vp in Rome with this title, Simoni deo magno, and refu∣sed
Christ, though Tiberius the Emperour first sought it by all meanes. And againe Philo a learned Iewe sent from A∣lexandria to Claudius the next Emperour that succeeded Ti∣berius, Philo came to Rome the 2. time in Cali∣gulas raigne. who willed and counselled the Senators in many good and godly thinges concerning the Iewes: fo whose cause hee came from Alexandria to Rome. Caius Caligula be∣ganne to raigne Emperour of Rome, vnder whome the Iewes were miserablie afflicted, and most cruelly persecuted. In that time grew betweene the Greekes and the Iewes sedi∣tion Sedition in Alexandria. at Alexandria: for the which cause both the Iewes and the Greekes sent to Rome to Caligula ambassadours, for the redresse hereof. Philo a learned Iew, who had bene at Rome before in Euseb. lib. 6. the fifteenth yeere of the raigne of Tiberius, was nowe againe sent in the seconde yeere of Caligulas raigne, in the behalfe of the Iewes, and Appian in the behalfe of the Greekes. An other tumult beganne in Ierusalem: (Petronius being then President Petronius Pre∣sident in Hie∣rusalem. at Ierusalem) for that Caligula had commaunded his Image to be put vp in the temple at Hierusalem, and to be had in reue∣rence as much as the Image of Iupiter. This could not be suf∣fered, and therefore Caesars Image was taken away for this cause, and others which Caligula supposed against the Iewes, for that he hated them extreemely. Great slaughter was in Ierusalē. Agrippa being cast into close prison by Tiberius, is now not onely released and set at liber∣tie, Ioseph. cap. 15. but also made king of Lysania, and chiefe in the Tetrarchie in the place of Herode before him, but both Herod and Agrippa were exalted into these great honours, as scourges and tor∣tures to the Christians, whom they persecuted to the death: for now the Apostles were dispersed preaching the Name of The Apostles dispersed in to euery coun∣trey to preach. Iesus in all countreys, Iohn in Asia, Andrew in Scythia, Thomas in Parthia, Peter in Gallatia, Bythinia, Pontus and Cappadocia. Paul also after his conuersion doubted no danger, feared no death, but boldly and constantly preached: In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, that many godly men were stirred by their preaching to followe Christ: first at Caesarea, and then at An∣tioch, for there were first Christians conuerted.
Many wonders were done by the Apostles through the name of Iesus: the more that tyrants persecuted them, the more increased the doctrine of the Church: the more they were More Martyrs then Tyrants. slaine by the sworde, the more they increased in nomber by the word: for at the stoning of Stephen the first Martyr, many dispersed themselues into sundrie places. At the beheading of Iames the brother of Iohn, at the hanging of Philip the Apo∣stle at Hieropolis, at the martyring of Iames sirnamed the Iust, The first per∣secution. called also the brother of Christ in Iudea: these with infinite more Martyrs in the first persecution made the whole worlde amazed at their constancie and faith, though the deuil stirred his apostles, and sent them abroade likewise as aduersaries to the Church of God. Simon Magus the Samaritane sorcerer flourished at Rome vn∣der Claudius the Emperour, hauing all diuine honours attri∣buted Simon Magus had his mage set vp with this title, Si∣moni Deo Sancto. vnto him, with his Image set vp, and his Epigram, Simo∣ni deo sancto, hauing before seduced many in Samaria and in other places from the trueth. This Simon Magus the first cau∣ser of heresie, after whom succeeded a monster likewise of Sa∣maria, Euseb. 3. cap. 23. professing himselfe to be the Messias, whom the Iewes looked for, saying that he came from heauen to earth to saue mankinde, with such other blasphemies, as Eusebius setteth forth at large. Of these and of others I shall speake when I en∣treate Heretikes are Satans soul∣diours. of heretiques, among whom Simon was the first foun∣taine and chiefe head of heresie: so that Satan did set for∣ward his church with al care and trauaile, obiecting himselfe with his disciples against our Sauiour in all doctrine, as long as it pleased God to licence him. This time Tiberius Claudius raigned the first Emperour in Rome, and in like order as his predecessor Caligula persecuted the Church. Vnder this Emperour great famine happened Acts 11. in all parts of the world: at what time Paul and Barnabas relie∣ued the brethren at Ierusalem, and in other places persecution grew more and more euen then, in somuch that Paul and Pe∣ter were pursued from place to place, vntill they came to bee Euseb. 2. cap. 25. martyred at Rome: the one beheaded, and the other hanged:
yet had they established the Church before their death. Mar∣cus the Euangelist and the disciple of Peter preached Christ in Egypt, and taught in Alexandria, so that many were conuerted and beleeued. Hee was the first bishop of Alexandria, and Marke the E∣uangelist died a martyr vn∣der Traiane the Emperor. taught in the regions about, vntill Pentapolis, and after was lead with a halter about his necke, and burned by Idolaters, vnder Traiane the Emperour. Matthewe being before one of the 70. disciples, and after ioyned by drawing of lots into the nomber of the twelue A∣postles in the place of Iudas the traitor, taught and preached to the sauage people in Aethiopia about the riuer Phasis, where Màthew the A∣postle taught and preached in Ethiops. hee left his bones in testimonie of the Gospel in the citie of Sebastopolis by the temple of the Sunne. Euen so Luke borne in Antioch, a Phisition by profession, a follower of Paul, by whose admonition hee wrote the Actes of the Apostles, prea∣ching and teaching the Gospel euery where, died at Ephesus. So that in those dayes the Apostles and the other disciples, which then followed the Apostles, were so persecuted by ty∣rants that mightily trauailed among the people of God to re∣duce them from the Church: as Aegyptus a false prophet, Aegyptus a false prophet seduced 300 Iewes. who by subtiltie and craft of the deuill, seduced thirtie thou∣sande Iewes, and brought them from the wildernesse where hee taught them, into mount Oliuet, thinking thereby to laye siege and to take the citie by the sworde: but hee was preuented by Felix the Romane. Of this Aegyptus Paul was Acts. 21. cried out vpon, when the sedition was in Hierusalem. Reade the one and twentieth of the Actes, when Paul was brought Paul brought before Felix. before Felix. And now in the time of Domitius Nero, vnder whome the second persecution beganne, they were more wearie of their The second persecution. slaughter of Christians, and of their tyrannie towardes the Church, then able to wearie those whome God raised as de∣fenders and gouernours of his people: for while this cruel Emperor Nero raigned, Felix ruled in Iudea: at what time be∣ganne Felix ruled in Iudea. (betweene the bishops and the hie Priestes, against the people, and against the chiefe Citizens of Hierusalem,)
a newe sedition, in the which many of the Iewes perished: a∣mongst whome Ionathas was slaine. The like happened (as Ionathan slaine. you heard) in the time of Claudius about the feast of Easter, that thirtie thousand Iewes were slaine. This Nero armed against God, and settled to some in Chri∣stian blood, first charging Felix to kill, to murther, and to per∣secute all sort of people, but specially the Iewes: After he sent Festus to succeede Felix: and after Felix, Albinus (a cruel man by whom much blood was lost) was sent from Rome to Ieru∣salem, all persecuters and tormenters of the faithfull, in so∣much that the congregation of the faithfull at that time in Ie∣rusalem, were warned to remooue to Pella a village beyonde They fled from Hierusa∣lem to Pella a village be∣yond Iorden. Iorden, to auoyde the furie and hot persecution of that time: for this cruel Nero was not onely contented to be a tyrant farre from Rome, but also in the citie of Rome: he would see the people of God so martyred before his face, some with the sword, some with fire, and some otherwayes, that he was most meerie when he saw much blood, and yet was not satisfied vn∣til he saw Rome on fire it selfe: he is named amongst some wri∣ters : for while this Emperour raigned in Rome, Peter and Paul were martyred. But his tragicall actions had their iust reward, euen in Rome where hee was Emperour, after that he had raigned almost 14. yeeres. The contempt of Christ Iesus grew such in Iudea, though the Prophets before he was borne, preached vnto them the dan∣ger The insolen∣cie of the Iewes. of their incredulitie, and the Apostles after he was borne taught them, and shewed the workes of Christ, and Christ him selfe while yet hee liued among them, wrought miracles and wonders: yet the Iewes in contempt of this, waxed more stub∣burne and more insolent. The slaughter was such in Iudea, that the Saduces began to tickle the people againe with their inuentions: that hearing of Festus death, Ananias the hie priest Ananias a hie Priest. (before Albinus was come from Alexandria that succeeded Festus, the Romane President) persecuted many of the Saints in Hierusalem, and did put to the sworde euery one that hee suspected to holde the doctrine of the Apostles. So that by
many tumults and seditions of the Scribes and the Pharisees, the tyrannie and crueltie of the hie priestes, and the people, who euer kindled the Romanes to furie, all Iudea was full of blood vntil the last destruction of them and of their countrey, of the God vseth all things by meanes. which they were often warned, both by the Prophets and by Christ himselfe: but Titus the Emperour was appointed to be their scourge, to destroy their proud citie, to burne their ido∣latrous temple, and to ende their tyrannie which they vsed against God and his Church. During which confusion and ruine of Ierusalem, the con∣gregation Titus the scourge of Ie∣rsalem. then remoued by diuine warning to Pella a towne beyōd Iordan: for at that time (saith Iosephus) were in Ierusalem 30. Miriads of people, euery Miriad being 10. hundreth thou∣sand. Euseb. 3. cap. 8. The history is knowen, and therefore I referre you to Io∣sephus of the Iewes, & Eusebius his Ecclesiasticall historie, at what Ioseph. lib. 6. cap. 31. time Achaia, Lycia, Rhodes, Bizantium, Samos, Thracia, and Sicilia, were made Prouinces vnder the Romanes. CHAP. II. From the third persecution vnder Domitian the 12. Emperor, vnto the 6. persecutiō vnder Sept. Seuerus 22. Emperor: of the cōstancie of the faithful Martyrs euerywhere in the Church of God: of their godly liues, their deaths, and their glorious victorie ouer Satan. FLauius Domitianus, Titus his brother, vnder whom another persecution began ouer allthe The 3. perse∣cution. stocke of Dauid, left none of al them that were of kinne vnto Dauid in flesh. This shewed him∣selfe another Nero, farre vnlike vnto his father Vespasian, or to his brother Titus: and therefore named for his tyrannie . This time had raigned in Rome since the Apo∣stles times, these 3. bishops: Linus which was the first, Anacle∣tus, which was the second, and Clemens which was the thirde. Likewise in Antioch andin Alexandria, 1. Anianus. In Alex∣andria. 1. Euodius. In An∣tiochia. Simon 2. Albilius. 2. Ignatius. and Iustus, 3. Cerdo. 3. Heros.   bishops of Ierusalem were persecuted vnder Domitianus.
Nowe after this persecution vnder Flaminius Domitianus, who banished from Rome all the Philosophers and the Ma∣thematicians, who played the wolfe with the flocke of Christ, vnder whom Simeon the second shop of Ierusalem was most Euseb. 3. cap. 29. cruelly tormented and martyred, & al the remnant that were aliue of the stocke of Dauid, and all the Iewes which were any way in flesh kinne vnto our Sauiour Christ: After this fol∣lowed the 4. persecutiō vnder Traiane, which was so hot & so The fourth persecution in Traianes time. terrible, that it past & far exceeded the 3. other persecutions before vnder Caligula, Nero, and Domitianus. It was such, that it mooued Plinius secundus to write vnto Traiane the Emperour Euseb. Eccle. lib. 10. cap. 32. in the behalfe of the Christians, to mitigate the furie and rage of persecution that raigned euery where in Syria, Iudea, Alex∣andria, Antioch, and all other places, considering they did no∣thing Plini wrote to Traiane. but rise in the morning and meete together to sing Hymnes, and Psalmes to praise God: for Plini was amazed and quite astonied to see the multitude and nomber of Christi∣ans dayly encreasing, notwithstanding all the persecutions and slaughter that was most extreemely vsed against them from time to time. This caused Traiane the Emperor somewhat more milde∣ly to handle them, commaunding that the Christians should not be sought for to be persecuted, but yet being founde to punish them: for at this time flourished many godly and learned pillars of the Church, as Ignatius bishop of Antioche, Fire and blood the En∣fignes of ty∣rants. Polycarpus bishop of Smirna, Papias bishop of Hieropolitū, who suffered diuers kindes of torments, and were martyred, some deuoured of beastes, some with the sworde, some with fire, some with hanging, and many with many new inuented tor∣ments. For at that time liued many of perillous nature, that sought to please euil men, and to punish good men. The Iewes, as men full of madnesse, and voyde of the feare of God, beganne a tumult againe in Egypt and in Alexandria, All the Iewes were driuen out of Egypt. and slewe both Romanes and Greekes: they did vse such tyran∣nie at Cyrene, at Thebes, in the 19. yeere of Traianus, that Turbo the Romane slewe and droue all the Iewes out of Egypt and
Libya. So likewise did Lucius Quintinus, he slew many thou∣sand Iewes, and banished them to Mesopotamia by the com∣maundement of Martius. Yet the Iewes continued vntill the seuere commandement of Adrianus the Emperour, who suc∣ceeded The Iewes banished from their countrey by the com∣mandement of Adrian the Emperour. Traiane: who perceiuing their often tumults and se∣ditions to be such, as the Romanes coulde haue no rest while any Iewe liued in Iudea, he most straightly charged that they should bee driuen out of their countrey, and that not one should stay in Iudea. And Adrianus commaunded that none should be suffe∣red to dwell in any denne of the earth, so that the citie which a litle before hee destroyed and the whole countrey con∣quered, nowe the remnant of the Iewes as men forsaken of Euseb. cap. 6. God, are like vagabonds and roges, banished and whipt out of their countrey, and strangers are come to their place, and the name of Ierusalem changed, and called Aelia, according to Hierusalem na∣med Aelia. the name of the Romane Emperour. This was the last ende of Ierusalem, where Eusebius named 15. bishops euen from Christes death vntill the destruction of the citie, faithful and constant Christians, in spite of many persecutions: and therefore I haue set downe their names be∣fore you, as I found them in Eusebius. 1 Iames named Iustus. 2 Simon which was marty∣red vnder Domitianus. 3 Iustus. 4 Zacchus. 5 Tobias. 6 Beniamin. 7 Ioannes. 8 Mathias. 9 Philippus. 10 Senecas. 11 Iustus. the 2. of that name Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 9. 12 Leui. 13 Ephres. 14 Ioses. 15 Iudas, the last bishop of Ierusalem. These were Bishops according to the Lawe of Moses of the Circumcision. Now by the meanes of Adrianus, and his Epistle written to Minutius Fundanus his lieutenant for the stay of this sore and extreeme persecution in all parts of the East, the mem∣bers of Christ had some rest vntill Antoninus Verus, another
persecutor and a vexer of the Church, cleane against the good Emperor Antoniuus Pius his predecessor, who wrote in∣to Gentiles com∣mended the Christians. all parts of Asia, a litle before his latter ende, not onely to spare the Christians frō persecution, but also to fauour them and to ayde them: letting them to liue to their God whome they serued, commending much their constancie and faith towards their God. But while God stirred some good Emperors to fauour his Church and the members thereof, the deuil was as careful to raise sects of heretikes most wicked, to blaspheme the do∣ctrine of the Church: as first Simon Magus and his disciple and successor Menander the Samaritane, by whom two great here∣sies began, the one being in Antioch, the other in Alexandria, Menander the Samaritan, Si∣mon Magus scholer. the first schole of the Christians. The heresies of these two fil∣led all Egypt and Syria, euen in the first place where Christ was preached: but it was by God so appointed to exercise his peo∣ple, so that both heresie & true doctrine doeth encrease with persecution. Now beganne Basilides, Carponates, and Saturninus 3. great heretikes, successors of Menāder. Of these and of their Three great heretiques. fundrie sects, I haue to speake in their place. Now Antoninus Verus succeeding his father Antoninus Pius, raigned in Rome: vnder whom that godly bishop Polycarpus Euseb. 4. cap. 15. suffered martyrdome in Smirna, little esteeming the threat∣ning of the Romane Proconsul vnder Antoninus Verus, the people that were Iewes in Smirna crying to haue him throwen to the Lions, Saying, that hee onely was the father of all The fift per∣secution vnder Antoninus sir∣anmed Verus. Christians in Asia, a contemner of our gods, and a teacher of false doctrine: but neither the fire that should burne him, neither beastes that were threatned to deuoure him, neither any torment might feare Polycarpus, so that he most constant∣ly withstoode their torment. So did Metrodorus and Pio∣nius, two other constant Martyrs at that very barre with Po∣lycarpus, and companied him into the middest of the flame, where confessing their God, they died like good Christians in Smirna where Polycarpus was bishop. Anno Christi 170. Likewise at that time in Pergame a towne of Asia, Papilus
and Carpus, two valiant souldiers of Christ Iesus, and Agathoni∣cus a constant Christian endured the force of the flame, and died, and were crowned with martyrs. Iustinus the Philoso∣pher, and a worthie Martyr of the Church of God, reciteth in his Apologie other 3. faithfull Martyrs, named Centurio, Ptolomeus and Lucius, who altogether most boldly stoode to the face of Vrbicius then Proconsul of Rome, and said, that he iudged neither like the godly Emperour his father, neither like an Emperours sonne, being a Philosopher, neither in a∣ny part like a sacred Senator, making no accompt of his in∣solent Godly Martyrs feared no∣thing. speach, but died like martyred Christians. In the 17. yeere of this Antonius Verus, diuers parts of Asia, and Affrike were with persecution visited, insomuch that the congregation of the faithfull dwelling in Louaine and Vienna, (partes sometime of Gallia,) sent letters to comfort the bre∣thren euery where dispersed in Asia and Affrike: amongst whom I found these many professing the Name of Iesus, offe∣ring themselues vnto God as sacrifices readie to the fire, to the sword, to beastes, or to any other torments for Christ Iesus sake. Among whom was Vetius Epagathus a yong man, who Vetius. liued so to God, that many followed him with great triumph into the fire: Potinus bishop of Lugdunum, ful of the spirit, Za∣charias Zacharias. the priest, Sanctus a deacon of Vienna, Attalus borne in Luke 1. Pergamus, and Maturus. These contended for victorie, and to weare the glorious crownes of Martyrs: for they sawe before their faces, howe constantly Blandina did stande to the tor∣tures, and how she was bound to a tree, that fierce and wilde The glory of God is in his Saints. beasts might deuoure her. But God turned the furie and rage ofbeastes to spare and fauour his Saints. The like we reade of Alexander a Phisition borne in Phry∣gia, which for the Gospel was iudged to bee deuoured of beasts. Infinite was their ioy which they receiued by the spi∣rit of God in their torments, and innumerable were the mul∣titude of the Saincts, that dayly more and more encreased. And as among the olde Iewes, sundrie sects of heretikes be∣ganne to vexe and trouble the Church of God, as the Saduces, Euseb. 4. cap. 21.
Pharisees, Samaritans, Essaei, Masbothia, and other: so at this time sprang many sorts of heresies: first from Simon Magus the Sa∣maritane: Simon Magus. from Menander his disciple and successour: from Sa∣turnius, Valentianus, Cerdon, and many other, whereby many false prophets, false apostles, false antichrists, sowed sedition in the Church, and opposed themselues against Christ and his Church. But in vaine were all the shifts of Satan: for God raised such armies against them of men, of women, of children that The shifts of Satan is in vaine. confirmed their doctrine with their blood. The more they wrote, the lesse credite it had: the more they stirred, the lesse they accomplished: for the Martyrs of God amazed their fleshly cogitations, and fully vanquished their wicked de∣uises, God raised good and godly men, and singular wel lear∣ned, as Hegesippus, Appolinarius, Meliton, bishops of Sardis, Pini∣tus bishop of Creete, Dionisius bishop of Corinth, and Irenaeus, with many others. And for that, Irenaeus himselfe wrote a catalogue of the succession of the bishops of Rome after the time of the Apostles, I haue set them orderly downe as I Eusebius 5. cap. 6. found them in Eusebius. 1 Linus. 2 Anactelus. 3 Clemens. 4 Euaristus. 5 Alexander. 6 Xistus. 7 Telespho∣rus. 8 Higinus. 9 Pius. 10 Anicetus. 11 Soter. And 11 Eleutha∣rius. I will set downe in order the names of other godly bishops, as of Ierusalem and other places, where God hath bene glori∣fied by his Martyrs, because they shal go together: for after the 15. bishops which were in Ierusalem, before the destruction Godly bishops in Ierusalem af∣ter Vespatians time. thereof by Vespasian, others folowed good and godly, which stood to the Church of Christ most constantly and boldly: their names are thus named of the Gentiles. 1 Marcus. 2 Cassianus. 3 Publius. 4 Maximus. 5 Iulianus. 6 Gaianus. 7 Symachus. 8 Dolychianus. 9. Caius And Iulianus the 10. the 2. of that name. 11. 12. Capito & Valeus. 13 Narcissus.
After the destruction of Hierusalem, in Alexandria in the ninth yeere of Comodus the Emperour, was Iulianus bishop of Alexandria after Agrippinus, at what time Pautenus read the Diuinitie lecture to the Christians, a great scholer and a Phi∣losopher of the sect of the Stoikes, a man full of godly zeale, that trauailed from Alexandria to Iudea, to preache and to teach Christ. Likewise in Antioche Cornelius the fourth bi∣shop, During the time of Como∣dus the Empe∣rour many godly bishops flourished. Heros the fift, with the successours of them, flourished this time. And in the tenth yeere of Antonius Comodus the Em∣peror, many learned, graue, and godly men flourished in this blasphemous time, among so many wicked and lewde here∣tiques, that liued now in the worlde, as Theophilus bishop of Caesarea, some say of Antiochia, Banchillus, and Policrates, the one bishop in Corinth, the other in Ephesus, Demetrius of Alex∣andria, and Serapion of Antiochia, the eight bishop. After the Apostles there was no part of Asia emptie from godly men, of whom particularly to speake, how they liued, Euseb. 5. cap. 19. and bowe they died, I may not, for that their number is infi∣nite, and noting onely the chiefe bishops and learned men, and fewe Martyrs in respect of the whole, I will but briefly touch them. In this Emperours time the Church had some quietnesse, and in respect of much persecution before, they were called Halcyonia sub Comodo Ecclesiae, (and yet Comodus a wicked Emperour as euer liued) at what time they receiued the faith: for euen then Appolonius a Philosopher, a Senator Apol. the Phi∣losopher mar∣tyred. of Rome, a man of singuler learning and zeale, who before Pe∣renius the Iudge, in the Senate before al the Senators of Rome, mainteined his apologie of Christianitie, and read his writing before them, and confirmed the same with his death: for hee was at that time by decree of the Senate beheaded in Rome. About this time Smirna a towne of Asia, fell by an earth∣quake, and the temple of Serapis in Alexandria was burned. By this time raigned in Rome 13. bishops, after the time of the Apostles: in Alexandria tenne bishops, in Antiochia eight bi∣shops, besides many bishops of Corinth, of Creete, of Ephe∣sus, of Caesarea in Palestina many of these bishops. And
specially of Hierusalem, are not found in Eusebius distinctly. Hitherto the Romane bishops stood constant and stoute in the faith, with all humilitie and zeale: after this time, by de∣grees The bishops of Rome in the beginning good constant Martyrs. they waxed worse and worse, vntill they became worst of all. CHAP. III. Of the tyrannie of the time from the sixt persecution vnder Seuerus, vnto the ninth persecution vnder Dioclesian the Emperour: of the zeale and constancie of the godly in their Martyrdome: and of the tyrannie and wickednesse of the kings of Persia, and of the Emperors of Rome, at that time in the persecution of the Church. I Will passe to the Martyrs of the Church in all countreys, which nowe againe be∣ginneth, what in Alexandria and in E∣gypt, in the time of Septimius Seuerus the Leonides the father of Ori∣gen beheaded. Emperour. At what time Leonides the father of Origene was beheaded for the profession of his faith, leauing his sonne a young man behinde him, who vehe∣mently Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 1. Eccl. perswaded his father to stande constantly to Christ: and after being growen to some yeeres, taught in Alexandria Christians that came vnto him, as Olutarchus, who to prooue his zeale, and to shew himselfe a Christian, became willingly a Martyr of Iesus Christ. Also his brother named Heraclas, who being instructed by Origene, came in time to be a bishop of Alexandria: so many zealous men flocked to this vertous and good man, that he gaue vp his other prophane studie, as Grammer, & Rhetoricke, which Demetrius then bishop of Alexandria committed to his charge, and taught Christ to the brethren and Christians that came from uery part vnto him, in so much that diuers of his scholers proued themselues cōstant Martyrs: as these, Serenus, Heraclides, Heron, Serenus (an other frō the first) and Rhais a wo∣man: Diuers Mar∣tyrs in the time of Origin. these were crowned as victorious Martyrs. After whom folowed Potamaena, a very faire & vertuous virgine, who toge∣ther with her mother Marcella, offered themselues to the like
torments for Christ Iesus: but being pitied of many, that so faire and a beautiful virgine should die, she litle regarded her beautie but said, Gratior est pulchro veniens è corpore virtus, and so was with her mother Marcella burned: whose constant A good verse for a faire wo∣man. zeale mooued many in Alexandria to professe the Christian faith, as Basilides a souldier, and euen he who brought Pota∣miaena to the stake, was within foure dayes after put in prison, and there baptized, and after beheaded as a Martyr. Diuers beside, by the instructions of Origen, became faith∣full Martyrs in Alexandria and in other places: for during the reigne of Septimius the Emperour, great persecution fel euery where: in whose time this Origen florished amongst the Mar∣tyrs of the Church, a man singularly well learned, most zea∣lous, and most godly in al his life, euen from his childehood: whose fame grewe such, that Mammea Alexander Seuerus his mother came to Antioch for to see Origen, & was in the tenth yeere of Alexander Seuerus made priest at Caesarea in Palestina. Tertulian was in the time of Origen. Tertulian was in the time of Origen, in the first yeere of Anto∣ninus surnamed Caracalla, where hee came to Alexandria: hee commaunded that all the young men shoulde be called be∣fore him: and being together in one place, he gaue a signe or a watch worde to his souldiers to kill them, as both Herodia∣nus and Functius doe affirme. In the time of Origen, Asclepiades was the ninth Bishop of Antiochia, Calixtus the fifteenth and Vrbanus the sixteenth Bi∣shops of Rome, Philetus in Alexandria the tenth Bishop. At this time, Nicopolis a towne in Palestina was builded, being before called Emmaus. In the time of Maximinius the Emperor, Ori∣gen made a booke of Martyrs: for during the whole reigne of Nicopolis be∣fore was cal∣led Emaus. this cruell emperor, continued a vehement persecutiō of the Church: Origen confuted many Philosophers, and conuerted many heretikes, disputed & wrote in the face of the aduersa∣ries, insomuch that he reduced Berillus Bishop of Bosterna in Arabia, after sharpe and seuere disputation in the doctrine of the true Church, from his errour concerning the diuine na∣ture of Christ: his fame was such, that Athinedorus and his
brother Gregorie Nazianzenus, with other, many became his schollers. Dionysius also Bishop of Alexandria, in the time of Decius the Emperour, which was a vehement persecutour of the Christians, wrote this of himselfe in an epistle to Fabius Bishop of Antiochia, howe he by Gods prouidence was won∣derfully deliuered from great dangers, and many of the bre∣thren with him, and howe constant in the faith many at that persecution in Alexandria continued and stood most boldly vnto the last breath: as Metra a priest being taken, was com∣maunded Metra a priest tortured. by the Romane Iudge to speake some wicked blas∣phemous words, which he refused, and therefore he was bea∣ten and bruised with clubs, and after pricked in the face and in the eyes with sharpe needles, and at last haled & drawen through the towne and stoned to death. Metra Quinta a faithfull woman, was likewise taken and brought into the temple and there commaunded to worship their idoles, but shee lothing their idolatrie refused to obey them: she was therefore bound both her feete together, and drawen naked through the streetes where sharpe picked stones were for the purpose set in the way, & certein torturers, with whips in their hands scourging her as shee was haled. Appollonia a virgin of ardent zeale, refusing to blaspheme her Appollonia a zealous maid much tormē∣ted. God with idolatrie, and with wicked spches after them in their temple, they brake her chawe bone, and all her teeth they violently knockt out, and brought her vnto the stake where fire was ready kindled for her, and there being deman∣ded by the magistrates whether she would conuert from her God, and from his religion: shee looked on them, and saide, When I come from my God vnto you againe, I wil answere you, and withall leapt into the fire and ended her life with a glorious death: and to bee short, innumerable were they at The infinite number of Martyrs. that time in Alexandria, that willingly confessed themselues to be Christians, and so bent to offer their bodies to any tor∣ment for the proofe of the same, that at that very tumult and sedition, the wicked and vngodly fedde on the Christians and deuoured them as wolues or lyons deuoure their praye:
nay wolues, lyons, beares, and other sauadge wilde beastes spared the people of God, and had no power to touch them: Sauage wilde beasts spared the people of God. for God so stopt their mouthes, that tyraunts and cruel mur∣therers might be warned thereby: and for that it is infinite to prosecute the whole histories of Martyrs, I passe ouer them lightly, noting vnto you some fewe for example sake, as now vnder Decius the Emperour these many. 1 Metra a Priest. 2. 3. Quinta and Appollonia two virgins, you heard of these. 4 Serapion martyred with all the torments that might be. 5. 6. Iulianus and Coronion after scourging, and sore whip∣ping, were throwen to Camels, and after burned to ashes. 7 Marca a blessed Martyr and a stout Christian at that time, was burned aliue. 8 A souldier that stoode by and sawe the tortuers so cruell, re∣sisted and stood stoutly to the face of the Magistrates in the profession of Christ, and was after great tortures beheaded. 9. 10. Epimachus and Alexander after long imprisonment and diuers torments, were throwen to the fire with 4. wornē The multitude of Martyrs. 14 more to accompanny them. 15 Likewise Amonarium a blessed virgin. 16. 17. Mercuria a sage and godly matrone, and Dionitia a faithfull woman, they made the magistrate amased and the torturers astonied to behold their cōstancie in their tormēts. 18 Hieron Ater, and Isidorus 3. Egyptians & Dioscorus a boy of 15. yeres were most cruelly torne and broken in pieces by tor∣tures, and at last burned. 22 Menesion an Egyptian full of faith endured most willingly The zeale of Martyrs in those dayes. to be martyred for the Gospel. These with infinite more doth Dionisius a priest write to Fa∣bius bishop of Antiochia, setting forth his owne danger many times, and also setteth downe that persecution which con∣tinued most cruelly for one yere: for the nomber of the faith∣full so increased, their constancie and their faithso amased the wicked, that they were both weary & feareful to folowe their tyrannie, & at last ouerthrowen by their guiltie conscience: but Dyonysius sayeth that diuers times came in place to see
these persecutions certeine souldiers, who seeing the orders and maners of the Christians towards God and his Church, Many cōuer∣ted vnto the faith. felt them selues much conuerted and most desirous to con∣fesse themselues Christians. At a great persecution in Alexan∣dria standing before the Romane Magistrate, when a certeine Christian among the rest waxed timerous, and feared such torments as hee sawe other suffer hee thought to recant, but these souldiers cōforted him with signes, & perswaded him with secret words, and at length they came openly vnto him, councelled and comforted him to die like a Christian, and at length started in, confessed themselues to the Magistrates to be Christians, and therefore most willing with the rest to die for Christ Iesus sake. It made the the Romane iudge, and the rest of the Commissioners afraide, supposing further, that if The Iudges were amased to see such cō∣stancie in the Christians. they would vse this extreame crueltie of persecution, all A∣lexandria and al Egypt would become in time Christians, and therefore they rose vp from their seate frighted and amased of these strange sightes, and the Christians had some rest. The names of these last souldiers worthie to be engraued Cap∣taines on marble for their victories and conquest ouer them selues, which is the greatest conquest of all, I cannot omitte: they were foure in number. 1 Ammon. Euseb. 6. cap. 41. and 42. 2 Zenon. 3 Ptolomeus. 4 Ingenus. And beside these foure, an olde man named Theophilus, in Theophilus. the next place hee bringeth in Ischyrion, a faithfull Martyr of that time, and Cheremon, an olde Bishop of a Citie called Ni∣lus, Cheremon. who fled with his wife and children to the mountaines of Arabia, to auoide the tyrānie of that time: likewise of Vrbanus, Sidonius, and Selerius, three Martyrs which suffered all kind of torments, to enioy the glorious crowne of Martyrs. When this cruell Emperour Decius died, Gallus succeeded him both in life and in persecution, about what time Origen also died. This time in Rome, Cornelius was the twentieth Bishop: in An∣tiochia, Origen dyed. Demetrianus was the fourteenth Bishop: in Alexan∣dria, this Dionisius that wrote of this last persecution, the 13.
Bishop. In other places other godly & faithfull Bishops reig∣ned, as Theoctistus in Caesarea, Mezabantes in Ierusalem, Marinus in Tyrus, Heliodorus in Laodicea, in Cappadocia Firmilianus, Hele∣nus in Tarsus, & so (to be short) in all Syria, Arabia, Pontus, Bythi∣nia, Many godly and good By∣shops. and Mesopotamia, godly and good Byshops liued vnder the feare of God. This did Dionysius Byshop of Alexandria write to Stephanus the 22. Bishop of Rome, of the peace and the staie of the persecution in all the parts of the East coun∣tries. To this Bishop Stephen, Ciprian bishop of Carthage wrote concerning those that were here tikes conuerted, that by bap∣tisme Cyprian bishop of Carthage. they were first to be receiued into the Church. During this litle quietnesse and stay of persecution diuers and sundry sectes of heresies began to rise in many places: as Heresis No∣uatiana, & Sabellaena, with others. Cyprianus bishop of Carthage, a singular deuoute man, and a Martyr of the Church, was of the Carthagineans and the Affricanes honored as a god, to whō they erected a temple in memory of him, & celebrated a so∣lemne feast, calling often on the name of Cypriā, which tem∣ple the Vandales in the time of their king Tuorichus destroyed. Thus much Euagrius in his histories of the Church wrote of Cyprian, who also dyed a most constant Martyr of Christ Iesus. I omitte with Dionysius to name the Martyrs which dyed vnder Valerianus the emperour, because they were so many, The 8. perse∣cution vnder Valerianus. men, women, children, olde men, young men, olde women, virgins, souldiers, and all kinde of people, who became most willing Martyrs, and suffered diuers torments for religion sake. Amongst whome Lucius Maximus Demetrius, Faustinus, and Aquila suffered in Egypt: also Eusebius was then Deacon, Martyrs en∣crease in eue∣ry countrie. and after made Byshop of Laodicea in Syria, and Faustus who succeeded Eusebius, Cheremon, Caius, and diuers other, who from place to place, to auoide that terrible persecution which reigned vnder the Emperour Valerianus, wandred ma∣ny Countries, desertes, & mountaines. And as for the Mar∣tyrs of Caesarea, specially there were three, which willingly
came from their houses in the Countrie to Caesarea, being a∣shamed and sory to haue seene so many good and godly Christians contending for the same noble crowne of Mar∣tyrs, The crowne of Martyrs is eternitie. that they were so long negligent and carelesse of so glo∣rious reward, and therefore Priscus Malchus, and Alexander claimed before the Iudge the rewarde of Christians, and streight they were deliuered to be deuoured of beastes, from whom these three stoute Christians shrinked not. I will not omitte the historie of Marinus a knight of Caesa∣rea, who when hee obteyned that honour by iust desertes, which was among the Romanes a rewarde for victorie, and The historie of Marinus a Romane knight thereby to bee called Centurio, a certeine Sycophant accused this knight to the Magistrate, saying that it was not lawfull by the auncient lawes, that Marinus should haue that Ro∣mane dignitie, for that hee was a Christian: who being de∣maunded, most boldly confessed himselfe to bee a Christi∣an: and yet hauing three houres to deliberate of this cause, Marinus went to consult with Theotecnus byshop then of Cae∣sarea, by whom he was in this instructed: he brought him into the Temple, and offered before him a naked sworde, and the The new Te∣stament, and the naked sword. newe Testament of Christ Iesus: Chuse, said the byshop, which thou wilt: whereby he was admonished to stand to his faith most stoutly, and dyed for the same. This time againe another sedicion began in Alexandria: for sooner the great Ocean could be emptied from water, then Alexandria purged from sedicion. Of this sedicion, Dionysius wrote to Hierax byshop of Egypt, and also a terrible sicknesse Alexandria a very seditious towne. that then reigned in Alexandria for the rewarde of their per∣secution, which so long and so vehement endured, which was warre, hunger, and pestilence, that they were so pla∣gued in Alexandria for their crueltie against the Church of Christ, as Egypt was for their tyrannie shewed to the Israelites. These and many other things wrote Dionysius into Egypt, into Affrike, and to al Asia, to instruct the brethren of the tumults, sedicion, and persecution in Alexandria, and after of the Dionysius. warres, hunger, and plague that ensued the same.
Nowe a Synod was called at Rome to consult of the heresie of Paulus Samosatenus, who denied the Diuinitie and Eterni∣tie A Synod at Rome. of our Sauiour Christ: for at that time Paulus Samosatenus succeeded Demetrianus in Antiochia, and for that he thought so impiously of Christ, affirming in all pointes that hee was but a man, a Synod also was called at Antiochia, where diuers learned byshops, and other godly preachers came together: amongst whom, Firmilianis byshop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, Gregorius Nazianzenus and his brother Athenodorus which were byshops in Pontus, Helenus byshop of Tarsus, Hymeneus Samosatenus confuted. byshop of Ierusalem, and Theolecnus with Maximus, the one byshop of Caesarea in Palestina, the other byshop of Bostea∣na in Arabia, with many more which for breuitie sake I omit, where Samosatenus was confuted by Malchion a reader of the Greeke lecture in Antiochia, a subtill schooleman and a per∣fect Persecution slacketh, here∣sie reigned. good Christian, so that at length Samosatenus was con∣demned as a heretike, and driuen out of his bishoprike by the commaundement of Aurelianus the Emperour. This time began one other heretike called Manes to sowe the seede of Satan: of whom sprang those heretikes called the Manichees: and as persecution seased some time, so heresie at that very time beganne to encrease. Nowe reigned this time these byshops in Rome, Alexandria, Antiochia, and in other places. 1 First in Rome after Stephanus reigned Xistus 23. Byshop of 2 Rome, after him Dionysius the 24 Byshop, after Dionysius 3. 4. Felix the 25. then Eutichianus the 26. Byshoppe, and Euseb. cap. 27. 5 Gaius the 27. Byshop. In Alexandria after that godly Dionysius of whome you 6 heard of, succeeded Maximus, after Maximus succeded 7 Theonas. After Demetrianus in Antioch fourteene Bishops. This Paulus Samosatenus being as an Heretike condemned, succeeded him Domnus Demetrianns sonne.
After him succeeded Timaeus. After Timaeus, succeeded that great and famous scholler, Cyrillus. In Laodicea Eusebius a learned man was Byshop, and many other Byshops in other places, as Hymeneus and Labdas, two By∣shops of Ierusalem. CHAP. IIII. From Dioclesian vnder whom the vehementest persecutions of any reigned, vntill the reigne of Alexand. Seuerus: by whose good meanes and great trauatle persecution somewhat slackt, at what time diuers Heresies beganne fresh in many places of Asia and Europe. NOwe Dioclesianas the Emperour begin∣neth to reigne in Rome, vnder whome the greatest perseucution of all fell: for the like against the Christians was at no time seene: for some rest they had in all places by meanes of learned mens Epi∣stles to other emperors before this: but now were Churches throwen downe, sacred bookes burned, and godly learned Byshops persecu∣ted in such sort, that I wish them that desire to knowe the mi∣serie and aflictions of Christians of that time, to reade Euse∣bius his eight booke of his Ecclesiasticall histories, and there Euseb. 8. booke he shall reade howe that in Palestina and in Phoenicia, Christi∣ans were throwen most cruelly to bee deuoured of beastes,  The tyrannie vnder Diccle∣si ouer the martyrs of God. which beasts though they were such as were called , yet had no power to touch them, though they were lyons, beares, wilde bulles, and such others, which made the people amased: which thing being certified vnto the Romane ma∣gistrate Viturius, he commaunded them to be slaine with the sword, and their bodies to be throwen into the sea. The like persecution fell in Egypt, where an infinite num∣ber were haled and drawen by the head & by the feete, some Persecution in Egypt. hauing their bones broken, some their sinowes stretched, some hanged aliue to famine by their legges vpwarde, some
tortured sundry wayes in the fire, with diuers other inuenti∣ons of torments, that some dayes tenne, some dayes twentie, some thirtie, and some dayes a hūdred were persecuted most tyrannically, which continued not for dayes but for yeeres: for it was lawful for any other man to abuse, to punish, and to compell Christians to Idolatrie, and to obey their religion. The persecution was so sore in his time, that 1700. were mar∣tyred 1700. Martyrs in 30. dayes. and slaine in thirtie dayes, and they were the best and chiefest men in Palestina, Phoenicia, & Egypt: so was Philoromus a gouernour and a magistrate in Alexandria Phileas Bishop of Egypt, and these whose names among thousands I pickt out, for that they are great men and magistrates and gouernors. 1 Authimus Byshop of Nicomedia. 2 Lucianus Byshop of Tyrus. 3 Senobius one of the elders of Sidon. 4 Syluanus Byshop of Emisa, who in the very towne where he was Bishop, with diuers other Martyrs with him, were made A most vehe∣ment perse∣cution. as baites and prayes for rauening beastes. 5 Another Syluanus, who was martyred with 39. other Mar∣tyrs of Palestina: this Syluanus was Byshop of Gaza. 6. 7. Pelus and Nilus two Byshops of Egypt, with many moe, were martyred with diuers torments, and at last burned. Pamphilus an Elder, the very ornament of Caesarea died, a most constant Martyr. Out of Alexandria were martyred most cruelly for their profession and faith, many graue learned Byshops and El∣ders The blood of godly Martyrs are precious in the Church of God. of the Church of Christ: as Petrus then Byshop of Alexandria, with whome dyed Faustus, Dicius and Ammonius, three of the most learned and vertu∣ous Elders of that Church. After these Phileas, Hesicheus, Pachimius, and Theodorus: 4. godly Byshops ouer the Churches of Egypt, perfect Martyrs of Christ Iesus and of his Church. What shoulde I rehearse millions more, that constantly professed Christ, refused no death, no torments for his sake? such was the mercie of God towarde his Church, that
the more that tyraunts persecuted Christians to death, the more the number multiplied, their faith encreased, and the Church florished, insomuch that a noble man of Nicome∣dia A rare exam∣ple in Mico∣media. perceiuing the tyrannie and the affliction of the Chri∣stians, and the vehement persecution, that nowe endured in the time of Dioclesian, being a Magistrate, in the very face of the Romanes brake in pieces the Emperours letters, and Euseb. cap. 6. his decree concerning further punishment of the godly, though in Nicomedia then were two Emperours, yet this no∣ble man feared not for IESVS sake and his saintes, not one∣ly to breake the commaundement of Caesar his lord and Em∣perour, but also most boldly stood to it to the death. Besides, diuers others at that time in Nicomedia, suffered most willingly to bee martyred: yea some from the Empe∣rours Court, of his familie, as Dor theus, Gorgonius, and other Courtiers Christians. Courtiers: yea, they of the Emperours chamber, his owne cousins, being some but very young, of great honour and great fauour, loue, and liking with the Emperor, made more choise of this seruice and cruell death, then of that Courtly Courtiers Martyred. and gallant life: among whome I finde one named Petrus, a young lustie prince, who refused to bowe to Idoles, or to doe any sacrifice vnto them: hee was commaunded to bee lifted vp naked, and there to be whipped and scourged, vntill hee woulde willingly sacrifice to Idoles hee stoode stout and constant, vntill by beating vnto the very bones his fiesh from his body fell by pieces, and then they tooke salt and vineger mingled together, and powred it in purulen∣tis corporis partibus (as the historie sayth) and yet hee yeelded not: then th brought him to the fire, where they pinche The tyrannie of persecut. ō. him with hote irons, and pricked him with sharpe bodkins: and perceiuing that hee would not recant, he was comman∣ded to be burned. In this Dioclesians time, all prisons were full of Christians, and all Townes and Cities full of persecutions. In Arabia, All prisons in Townes and Cities full of Christians. multitudes of Martyrs were tormented with sundry inuen∣tions, as breaking of their legges, pulling out their eyes, cut∣ting
of their nostrels and their lippes, knocking out their teeth, and such vnchristian like torments. In Antiochia, with burning coles they tortured the Martyrs of Christ Iesus. In Pon∣tus, Perillus schol∣lers inuent tortures to destroy Chri∣stians. the Martyrs were thus tortured, with sharpe, long, and strong needles, thrusting them vp vnder the nailes of their fingers, and vnder the nailes of their toes. To bee short, in some places their right eye was put out, and the left knee was cutte off: in some other places, in boyling leade they were by little and little tormented: and in other places with In Dioclesians time hell was opened to let the furies out. all tortures in their priuie members, most terrible to be spo∣ken, punished, and martyred. In all places all kinde of tor∣ments were most cruelly vsed against the Saintes and peo∣ple of God. When Dioclesianus had reigned twentie yeeres, and had fomed like a bloody bore against the Church, hee dyed: in whose time the Christians multiplied by his tyran∣nie more, then reason or sence can alleadge. After him succeded Maxentius an Emperor, who though hee dissembled for a while to gette the Romanes good will, yet he shortly proued a tyraunt, and so hatefull to good men, that betweene Maximinus in the East coūtries with his hypo∣crisie Maximinus. and superstition, and Maxentius in Rome with his filthi∣nesse and tyrannie, the Church againe and the members thereof were most miserably afflicted in such sort, that neither Mazentius in Rome, nor Maximinus abroade coulde neither stoppe nor staye the multitude, that dayly came into Gods Tenth perse∣cution. Church, neither their murthering and killing in euery coun∣trie could feare them any thing at all. Maximinus, one of the greatest persecutors, sauing Diocle∣sian, who in thirtie daies slue and martyred 1700. Christians, 1700. Christi∣ans Martyred. by some diuine iustice of God fell grieuously sicke at Tarsus: where despairing of his life, & feeling his cōscience accusing him for the great slaughter he vsed against the Christians, he caused by an edict, persecution to stay, and to loose prisoners out of prison, & to set captiue Christians at libertie: but this cōtinued not but while the emperor was sicke & liketo die▪ for Maximinus sicke. whē he recouered his health, he waxed more cruel thē before,
sparing neither man, woman, nor childe, vsing all kinde of The tyrannie of this time might well be compared to the rage of Pharao ouer the Israelites torments on the Byshops and learned men in all Coun∣tries, so that his tyrannie ouer the Christians might bee well compared to the rage and furie of Pharao ouer the Israelites. But he was cutte offrō this murthering & slaughter of the Christians by Licinius the Emperour, who then had maried Constantia sister to Constantine the great: for at this time foure emperors were at once gouernors of Rome: & so a litle before, Maxentius the other persecutour was discomfited and van∣quished by Constantine the great at Miluius bridge. Thus farre fomed tyraunts in Christian blood, and the Church was sore afflicted euery where, where the Romane Emperours gouerned. And thus farre doth Eusebius his tenne The great cle∣mencie of Constantine the great towards the Christiās. bookes handle and set forth of those kingdomes and Coun∣tries, where this persecution and affliction of the Church re∣mained, euen from the Apostles time vntill Constantine the great. This Constantine was a godly Emperor, who defended the Christians and the Church of Christ, that in steade of per∣secution, brought libertie to the Church, and in steade of warre, peace: for after that Constantine the great had vanqui∣shed Licinius, & had gotten the Empire into his owne hand, he established first religion, and caused a Synod of Byshops at Rome to determine, and to agree concerning the agreement in religion: he wrote to Miltiades Byshop of Rome, he sent to Affrike to his lieutenant Anilinus, that Cecilianus Byshop of Const. caused a Synod at Rome. Carthage, with the other tenne Byshops that accused him, should be sent to Rome, & there further to examine the faults and errors of Cecilianus, and to auoide that controuersie be∣tweene these byshops, that then in diuers places liued. Hee wrote, that bishops out of Fraunce, and out of Affrike, should againe come together to reason in causes of the Church, and to moderate the same: for during the time that Licinius his Collegue in the Empire reigned, specially in the end, Licini∣us Licinius per∣secuted the Christians. beganne to hate Constantine, and to persecute the Church, waxed cruell against good byshops, & persecuted them most vehemently, and threwe their Churches downe, & slue and
murthered the people most miserably: for then Licinius com∣menced not onely warre against Constantinus, but also a∣gainst God and his Church. Hee caused Basilius Byshop Licinius tyrānie against the Christians. of Amasia in Pontus to bee slaine with the sworde, and a hundred other. His furie continued not long, and there∣fore God raysed vp this good Emperour, to reuenge his people, not onely nowe vpon Licinius, but also vpon Max∣entius and Maximinus, two great persecutours of the Chri∣stians. After this (as you heard) Constantinus studied howe hee might benefite the Church, establish religion, and ayde the afflicted members that long suffered sharpe persecution, and were nowe scattered into wildernesses, into mountaines, and into such places where they might hide themselues from the sworde and from the fire. This time florished Egypt with sundry learned and godly Philosophers. Also in Mesopota∣mia Rufinus lib. 2. cap. 8. the like godly men liued, some in wildernesses and in mountaines, as these whose names I lay downe, as I founde them in Rufinus. 1 Marcereus and another of that name liued in the wildernesse. 2 Isidorus in a place called Scithi. 3 Pembus in the desert of Egypt. Moyses and Beniamin in a place called Nitria. 4. 5. 6. Scyron, and Helias, and Paulus, liued and hid themselues in Apeliote. 7. 8. Poemen and Ioseph in Pispirihill, these with ma∣ny others that liued in diuers partes of Egypt true and sound Christians. Nowe when Constantine the great had by his greatnesse Constantine the great compa∣red to Cyrus and to Alex. enlarged the Empire of Rome farre more then any of his pre∣decessours, in so much that hee was compared vnto Cyrus king of Persia for his valure, vnto Alexander the great for his victories and conquests, who visited in like maner as Alexan∣der did, India, Aethiopia, Scythia, and other farre kingdomes
from Rome: and hauing stayed persecution in most places, hee comforted the Christians, so that the Gospel beganne to florish among the Barbarous people in Armenta and in Persia. Hee reedified great and chiefe Cities, as Nicomedia in Bythinia, and also Bizantium in Thracia, and made it equall to Rome in all points, and named it after his ownename, Con∣stantinople: Sozomenus 2. cap. 2. for there was nothing in Rome, but this Empe∣rour builded the like in Constantinople, in so much that it was called newe Rome, the onely Citie of fame and renow me in all the East countries. To this Towne many of the best learned men both Greekes and Iewes haue come and dwelt there: here nowe religion florished, Christians reioyced, and all learned men of the world frequented. Againe, Constantine caused a temple to be made by the oke of Mambre: this is nowe Terebinthus, a place The Oke of Mambre. from Hebron distant fifteene furlongs, and from Ierusalem 250. furlongs. To this place the Phoenicians and the Arabians were wont once euery yere to come, to traffique and to mar∣chandize with the Iewes: they kept a solemne feast in memo∣rie of Abraham the Patriarch, and offered in sacrifice after the lawe of Moses eyther an oxe or a goate, or else a sheepe or a Cocke. Euery nation honoured this place: the Iewes in memorie of Abraham, the Gentiles in memorie of the Angels Herma. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 3. that there appeared vnto Abraham: the Christians in me∣morie of CHRIST IESVS the Sonne of GOD being there then the thirde Angel seene of Abraham before hee tooke flesh of the Virgine Marie, well nigh two thousand yeeres. This place also Constantine adorned and beautified with many monuments. It were long to rehearse the goodnesse of this Empe∣rour, and to repeate his care and doings in all partes of the worlde for the Church: hee caused a Synod at this time to beehad at Nice in Bythinia, where were gathered to∣gether three hundred and eighteene Byshops: in the which, the heresie of Arrius was condemned. At what time A∣thanasius was appointed Byshop of Alexandria, to succeede
Alexander, who deposed Arrius. The Arrians persecuted this Athanasius, so that hee was forced to flee for succour to the Emperour Constantine. Athanasius by the Arrians persecuted. This time succeeded in Antioch after Tiranus the nine∣teenth byshop, Vitalis the twentieth: after him, Philogonus the twentie one: after him, Paulinus: after him Eustachius, whose place (after hee was banished for the Gospel) the Ar∣rians occupied. In Rome Marcus the seconde of that name was Byshop, after whom succeeded Iulius the third. In his dayes the Ar∣menians The Armenians and the Indi∣ans became Christians. and the Indians receiued Christianitie: yet in Per∣sia vnder king Sapores, the Christians were sore persecu∣ted: the Magi of Persia perswaded Sapores the king to pu∣nish Simeon the Archbishop of Seleucia, for that he was a friende to the Romanes. By this meanes, great persecuti∣on beganne in Persia, against the Archbyshop Simeon and Vstazanes an olde man and likewise the kings tutour, for The Sunne worshipped in Persia. that they would worship not the sunne after the manner of the Persians. Likewise Pusices a noble man of the Court of Sapor, Pusices. with his daughter a faire virgine did suffer torments for the trueth. Anania and Azadis the Kings eunuches, and Tarbula the sister of Simeon in like sort suffered violent death, and on that very day the Iewes by the commande∣ment of Magi, being by the king licenced, brought an hundred Christians, some of them were Byshops, some Elders, and some of other orders of the Church, which for that they would not worship the sunne wereslaine with the sword. It is written in Eusebius in the Ecclesiasticall histories, of Her. Zozamenis, that two hundred and fiftie Byshops were put to the sworde by commaundement of Sapores Zozam. lib. 2. cap. 12. 250. Bishops executed by Sapores, who reigned 70. yeeres. the king, for their constancie and faith in CHRIST IE∣SVS: whose names, though not all, yet some as I founde in the historie, I set downe: which are these.
1 Barbasymes. 2 Paulus. 3 Gaddiabes. These were al martyred in Persia vnder king Sapores. 4 Sabinus. 5 Mareas. 6 Mocius. 7 Manfriandes. 8 Hormisdas. 9 Papas. 10 Iacobus. 11 Romas. 12 Maares. 13 Agas. 14 Bochres. 15 Abdas. 16 Abdiesus. 17 Dausas. 18 Abranims. 19 Agdelas. 20 Sabores. 21 Issaac and 22 Dausas. These were taken captiue and brought before the Magi∣strates, and for not worshipping the Sunne according to the The Emperor Constan. wrote to Sapores king of Persia in fa∣uour of the Christians. Persians maners, the king commaunded, that they should be put to the sword. To this king Sapores, Constantinus the Emperour wrote in fauour of the Christians, which Epistle is extant in Eusebius in the life of Constantine. Thus much I thought good to set downe among other wickednesses and tyrannies that reigned among the Romane Emperours. Hee that will see more of persecution and here∣sies, let him reade Eusebius, Nicephorus, and others, and hee shall satisfie himselfe therein. I thought it fitte to annexe thus much of persecution to the Romane Emperours and to Popes, as to the authours of all persecutions in all Coun∣tries.
OF THE ANTIQVITIE OF Spaine, and of the originall of their kings, and of their contiuuance from Tubal vnto Hispanus. Du∣ring which time they were called by diuers seuerall names, as Caetubales, Hiberi, Celtiberi, and Hesperij, of which I shall briefly speake in their places. I Haue almost placed and fol∣lowed all Iaphets sonnes, and nowe I come to Hispaine, where Tubal tooke possession, which name is interpreted to be Hi∣spaine by Iosephus. I will bee as Melanct. lib. 1. short as I can, for that I would faine come to England, and yet France is vpon my way, where I must of necessitie stay a little to speake of them very briefly. Spaine was deuided in olde time but into 3. Prouinces: into Lusitania, which is now called Portingale: into Tarraconenses where the two Scipios builded a citie, and named it Tarracon, after the name of the Prouince: and into Baetica, which is so Baetica now called Ando∣losia. called by the riuer Baetis. This Prouince is now named Ando∣lasia, or Granado. The Romanes at what time they were lords of Spaine, made no other diuision but high and low Hispaine, by The Romanes made but two Prouinces of Hispaine. the name of superior & inferior Hispania. After, it was deuided into sixe Prouinces in this sort named, as foloweth.
1 The first Prouince called Terracon. 2 Called the Prouince of Carthage. 3 Lusitania, which is Portingale. 4 Gallacia. 5 Baetica, which is Andolisia or Granado. 6 Called Tingitana, a Prouince being within Affrica. Of these 6. Prouinces 2. of them are called Consulares prouin∣ciae, which is Betica & Lusitania: the other 4. called Presidiales. Spaine is cut from Fraunce Eastward by the mountaine Py∣renaeus, which doeth extend it selfe from the South vnto the North along betwene France and Spaine. On the West Spaine hath the ocean sea: and on the South the middle land sea. This countrey is very barren in some places, specially from Hercu∣les pillars to the mountaine Pyrenaeus: in other places, it aboun∣deth in all kinde of good things, for wines, oliues, yron, mines, siluer and gold. The length of Spaine from the West into the Reade of Hi∣spaine, Strabo lib. 2. & 3. East is 6000. furlongs: the breadth of Spaine is almost 5000. in some place scant three. Of the description of Spaine, of the aboundance and plentie of things, of their cities, townes, ri∣uers, mines, lakes, mountaines, and mounts, reade Strabo, Pom∣ponius Mela, and Iu. Solynus. Of the antiquitie of these people, and of their first arriuall Pomp. Mela lib. 2. cap. 6. into Spaine, I finde some controuersie, and in many things ap∣parant errors. Both Plutarch and Liui affirme, that in antiqui∣ties Liui lib. 2. men may most easily erre, specially in these first actions of time, when kingdomes first beganne. Therefore I beginne from the Centre and ground of all true and perfit Chronicles, the 10. of Genesis, where we reade of the encrease of mankind after the flood, and of the beginning of countreys and cities: and here all countreys were deuided one from another in language and in kinred. And had not Moses set downe the names of the first princes and their children, and the coūtreis All writers are to holde by Moses. and kingdoms by them first inhabited, we had bene as blinde men, not able to iudge of colours, or as they that neuer sawe the Sunne, not knowing light frō darknes: and they that wan∣der with prophane writers frō Moses and from the propheti∣cal
histories, shalbe in no better case: for of necessitie we must be forced to conferre with diuine histories for the certaintie of trueth in many things in the beginnings of kingdoms and Controuersie. countreys: for otherwise men do erre most grossely folowing their owne fancies, one reprehending another more to en∣crease cōtrouersies, then to finde out the trueth: as Appion ac∣cuseth Herodot for his meere fables in the history of Egypt, and Iosephus reprehendeth Appion for his great lies in the history of the Iewes. And here Berosus, who setteth downe the first begin∣ning of Spaine and of Chaldea and Syria, is of many cried out Contentions among Histo∣rians. vpon, as a fained and lying Berosus, yet many alleadge him and followe him of the best writers, as Functius, Ruffinus, and others. Berosus saith, the Spaniards tooke their beginning from the Caspians, a people in Scythia, as the Persians the Phoenices people in Syria, Celtes people now of France, and the Mores, and that is probable: for after the flood, the arke of Noah resting in Arme∣nia From whence came the peo∣ple after the flood to seeke dwellings. not far frō Scythia, after 150. yeres, people being then mul∣tiplied, came from thence to seeke countreys and to inhabite euery coast of the world. Chus the father of Nimrod went to Aethiope: Mizraim the sonne of Chus went to Egypt, possessed a∣bout the riuer Nilus: Gomerus the eldest sonne of Iaphet into that countrey afterward called Italy: and Tubal the fift sonne of Iaphet came into that countrey which is now called Spaine. Because I wrote of this in the beginning of euery kingdom, I neede not much to speake of them: and therfore I wil leaue the sonnes of Sem and the sonnes of Cham in their first posses∣sion, & I wil folow Iaphets sonnes, which came here to Europe, The time of Tubals com∣ming to Hi∣spaine. of whom I haue spokē, sauing of Tubal, who came into Spaine in the yere after the flood 143. within 12. yeeres after Nimrod began his kingdome in Chaldea, within two yeeres after his el∣dest brother Gomerus came into Italy, and 3. yeres before Miz∣raim (which is called Oceanus) went to Egypt, as Functius set∣teth it downe in his tables. This Tubal began to build and to inhabit first in Celtiberia, Celtiberia cal∣led now Byska. a countrey in Spaine which is now called Byskay: hee made a
towne, and named it after his owne name Tubal, in that Pro∣uince of Spaine which is called Baetica, and kept many sheepe The simplici∣tie of the first kings, not only of Hispaine, but euery where. and cattel, for that they are most necessary for man to liue by, both for clothing of the body, and for feeding of the belly: for in the first beginning of time, men were not so ambitious as to aspire great things. When Tubal was settled in his owne towne, he made lawes for his people to liue by, & taught the Berosus in Nino. Celtiberians & the people named Samotes. To Tubal came one Samotes sirnamed Disteltas, a most wise man, yet not knowen, but supposed to be Tubals brother one of Iaphets sonnes: yet Moses maketh no mention of him. Of the comming of Ianus, (which Berosus and other affirme to be Iauan) frō Phaenicia to Affrica, and from Affrica to Celtiberia to his sonnes sonne, and Annius de reg. Hispaniae. with the people which he brought with him to dwel in Celti∣beria, I referre you to Berosus and to Annius. Thus Tubal being 155. yeres old died, fiue yeeres before A∣braham was borne, which was in the 43. yeere of Ninus. The people were called Caetubales after Tubals name, vntill Iberus Tubal died. time the 2. king of Celtiberia, after whose name both the coun∣trey and the people changed, as Functius saith: other say, they were called Iberi of the riuer Iberus: but Berosus (whō Functius in all this historie doth folow) saith of Iberus the king the riuer also was so named, and the people that dwelt about the riuer were called Iberi. So likewise of Celtiberia, some writers affirme that it was so named, because it is next to those people of Coniectures in old antiqui∣ties allowed. France called Celtes, and therefore called Celtiberia: and surely the best coniectures in things vnknowen are best to bee al∣lowed. This Iberus raigned 37. yeres, and died in the 37. yere of Semiramis Queene of Babylon. During the life of Tubal, Samotes had a sonne called Ma∣gus: he raigned then ouer the people Celtes, where he builded Berosus. many townes, and gouerned the people with care and great diligence. Also in the 22 yeere of Semiramis, Sabatius Saga af∣ter that he came to Italy to old father Ianus, and had taught the Sabatius Saga. countreymen tillage and other kinde of husbandrie, he sent Sabus to that people which were called Sabines after, and con∣tinued
by that name vntill they were subdued by the Romans. In the time of this king Iberus, Isis was borne in Egypt, the wife of Osiris, of whome the Egyptians did glorie much: for they found in a pillar of brasse this sentence written of Isis as The monu∣ment of Isis n Egypt. an Epitaph ouer her graue, I am Isis Queene of Egypt, wife of great Osiris, and mother to great king Orus, taught of Mercurius to giue lawes to my people which none shall infringe, to inuent the vse of sowing of corne. I haue builded the famous citie Bubastia. Reioyce Egypt, that hath brought vp such a Queene. I haue liued with you your Queene, and now being dead I am placed among the glittering starres by the name of the starre Canis. This monument was of the Egyptians much honoured. Now followed in Celtiberia Iubalda the sonne of Iberus, and the 3. king of Celtiberia: he began his raigne in the yere 1993. after the creation of the world: he dwelt hard by the moun∣taine Iubalda, which he named after his owne name. This is Manethon de reg Hispane. since called of the Mauritaines, Ibiralta and of others corrupt∣ly: he raigned 66. yeeres, of whom nothing is to be written, but that he at that time encreased by litle and litle his territo∣ries, not by the sword (for few people knew then contention, for they had more countreys then they had men to inhabite) but with people, for no warre was yet knowen any where but with the Assyrians, who first vsed to trespasse vpon other nati∣ons about them, euen from Nimrads time. In Iubaldas time, Hercules Libyus florished, before the Hercu∣les of the Greekes welnigh 700. yeres. In this Iubaldas time died Noah the righteous preacher, whom prophane writers cal Bi∣frons Noah died in Iubaldas time. Ianus, and so is in euery countrey painted and set forth in histories. This Noah, forsaw the great miserie and calamitie of Gods iustice for sinne in the first age, & the general plague that folowed the destructiō of the whole world with a flood, and after he sawe himselfe dispised of his wicked sonne Cham, and cōtemned of his posterities in the second age at the buil∣ding of the tower of Babylon, where he saw the pride, disobedi∣ence, The towne of Babylon. and impietie of his owne people that came out of his owne bodie, who to seeke immortalitie vpon earth, sought to
auoyd God and his power, and to seeke to skale (through too much follie) the skies: but they were cōfounded, and their de∣uises Noth died af∣ter hee had seene in the world more miserie then any man: for that he sawe before the flood and af∣ter, the idola∣trie of the people. brought to nothing. No doubt hee sawe more miserie come to man, and more wickednes committed by man a∣gainst God, then any man euer could see. He died 350. yeres after the flood. In Assyria raigned Zamisnenias, which in Genesis is called Am∣raphael, the fift king of Assyria. Abraham was called from Vr in Chaldea to the land of Palestina, and after three yeeres driuen to Egypt, for that the famine was so great in the land of Canaan. This time gouerned in Egypt Osiris, which was that Pharao that Genesis 12. tooke Sara Abrahams wife away, but was warned in his sleepe not to touch her, and cōmanded by God to restore her to her Pentapolis fiue cities de∣stroyed. husband againe. During the time of this king Iubalda, Sodom, Gomorrha, Zeboim, Adama, and Segor, fiue noble cities of Canaan were destroyed by fire frō heauen for their abominable wic∣kednes: and there remaineth in memorie of their filthie viti∣ous liues, in the place of these fiue cities, a stinking horrible Stagnum As∣phaltidis. great lake, called Stagnum Asphaltidis. The 4. king that succeeded Iubalda in Celtiberia, was named Brigus: he began to raigne in the 4. yeere of Arius the 6. king Brigus the 4. king. of Assyria, at what time Hyarbas Priscus beganne to gouerne in Libya, a stout and a fierce king in armes, and therfore the Nu∣midians would be called after him Hyarbae, for stoute and war∣like The Numidi∣ans would be called Hyarbae. people. This Brigus builded many strong castles in Celti∣beria: in that prouince of Lusitania he builded 2. great castles, and called them after his owne name, Laccobryga: and Mirobri∣ga and he builded also Brygantum in the prouince of Taracon. This time gouerned the Celtes an expert skilful man, a man in those dayes of most honor for his wisdome and iudgement in all things, named Drius, after whose death the priests of the Drius. Celtes were named Druydes, of whom mention is made in Cae∣sar Druydes priests and in Plini. The authoritie and credite of these priestes in their dayes was great: they were honoured and reuerenced of all people: their wordes were had in such estimation, as though they had bene Oracles giuen: for at this time it was
rare to see a wise man, or to talke with a learned man: for the Magi of Chaldea, and the priests were not heard of, no philoso∣phie The simplici∣tie of the first age after the flood. spoken of, no Art taught, few scholes or none knowen, in so much that almost 300. yeeres after the flood there raigned no malice, no pride, no ambition, no warre in the most part of the world, and therefore it was called Aureum seculum, for the Aureum secu∣lum. simplicitie of the people, and of the plentie of al things which was cōmon among all men: sauing in Assyria, where the first Monarchie began, and quarrels grewe, as you shall heare be∣tweene the Chaldeans and the Assyrians, and after betwene the Assyrians and the Egyptians. So that nothing is to be written Consent of time the touchstone of trueth. of any great exploit done in Celtiberia all this time, neither in any place else, sauing to set downe the names of those kings that then raigned, and to know the agreement of time, which is the touchstone of trueth. In this Brygus time Abraham offered his sonne Isaac, at what time God blessed all the nations of the worlde in the seede of Genesis 22. Abraham. One Bardus raigned this time in Celta, which was of great authoritie with them for his first finding of Musike and meeter. In this Brigus time, Araunus the sōne of Cranus, which was the sonne of Ianus, builded a temple in Vetulonia, and de∣dicated the same vnto Ianus, which they also called Vertum∣nes: A temple buil∣ded and de∣dicated to Ia∣nus. and therein he erected vp the image of Ianus: and after he builded a chapell to the god Razenus in Vetulonia, so that now idolatrie began in euery countrey, & the nomber of the gods so encreased, that superstition had the better hand of true re∣ligion euery where, sauing in Gods owne Church, & those 2. Patriarches Abraham and his sonne, for Sara was now dead. But I wil passe to the fift king of Celtiberia named Tagus, sir∣named Tagus the fift king. Orma: of this king the riuer Tagus taketh her first name. Of this I reade nothing worth the nothing, but as his predeces∣sors he raigned by the name of a king without resistance: with The old kings of Hispaine are set downe by Manethon, as the kings of Assyria are by Berosus. whom raigned together in other kingdoms Baleus Xerxes the eight king of Assyria: this encreased the kingdome, and con∣quered euery where vntill the Indians, for he was valiant and couragious, & very fortunate in all his affaires. In the begin∣ning
of this Tagus raigne, the Argiues kingdome began, where Inachus raigned their first king. Phaeton came this time to Italy, at what time many townes and cities were burnt about the ri∣uer Ister, and about the Cymerians and Vesunians, and the places burned, to this day are named Palestina (that is to say) the coū∣trey burnt, recorded with writers Phaetontis incendium. Esau and Iacob were borne this time: and a litle after, their grandfa∣ther Abraham the patriarch died, 101. yeres after he was called Abraham died. from the Chaldeans, and in 175. yere of his age. After Tagus succeeded Belus the 6. king of Celtiberia: he be∣gan to raigne in the 482. yeere after the flood, and raigned in Belus the sixt king. Celtiberia 31. yeres: at what time Eusebius setteth down the 17. Dynastia of the Egyptians, where shepheards gouerned & bare rule in Egypt, which gouerment cōtinued 303. yeres in Egypt. With this Belus began Armatrites to raigne the 9. king of As∣syria, a king giuen to idlenes, & to al kinde of pleasures. About this time died Sem the sonne of Noah, who likewise saw (as his father did before) much wickednes and abomination: he died Sem liued 600. yeeres. 35. yeres after Abraham was dead. Sem liued 600. yeres. Pharoneus the 2. king of the Argiues (of whom Plato maketh mention in the beginning of his booke,) made lawes to the Plato in Ti∣mo. Argiues, and was of them greatly honoured after his death. In this kings time, Nilus did ouerflowe all the countrey of Egypt, and Osiris slew the great giant called Lycurgus in Thracia. Of this Osiris (whom the Egyptians named Serapis, to whom they vsed much diuine honour and solemne sacrifice, as to one of their principal gods) read Herodot more of this god, there you shal find how king Cambyses, Cyrus sonne, secōd king of Persia, gaue a blow, and wounded him in his temple, whereat the E∣gyptians Herodot. lib. 2. and 3. were more offended, then for al the crueltie & tyran∣nie which Cambyses did to them. It made them to reuolt from Cambyses, and to be in armes against the Persians, & to reuenge the blow which Cambyses gaue to their god Serapis. Deabus in Deabus found the first mines of golde. Celtiberia (he is also named Geriō) vsed this time great crueltie and tyrannie: he found then one of the first mines of golde, and after, he found many other mines of gold, siluer, and of
other mettals. This time Mena raigned in Egypt the first king, who instructed them in many things in Egypt, as to woorship their gods, to do sacrifice, with diuers other ceremonies, wher Mena is sup∣posed to be O∣siris, which Moses calleth Mizraim, and whom Berosus calleth Ocea∣nus. in Egypt excelled all other kingdoms: he taught thē the vse of beds to lye on, & tables to sit at meat. This Mena is suppo∣sed to be Mizraim Osyris, which of Berosus is called Oceanus. About this time dyed Ismael the base sonne of Abraham by his maide Agar after he had liued 137. yeeres: he left behind him twelue sonnes, princes ouer the people & ouer his tribes. In this tyraunt Deabus time, (otherwise called Gerion) Ioseph was sold into Egypt, and the Indians brought presents & com∣mitted themselues vnto the Chaldeans: for by this time many parts of the world were well inhabited, and some kingdomes began to be populous, and kings grew strong and mightie on the earth: for now raigned in Assyria Baleus Iunior, who flouri∣shed by his prowes & courage, augmented the territories of the Assyrians into the confines of India, and excelled in fame nexte vnto Semiramis Queene of Assyria. Osiris also had nowe gotten all Italie into his hand, and held it for ten yeeres. Ty∣phon became a great tyrant, killed his brother Osiris the iust, v∣surped the kingdome of Egypt. So I might say of Anteus in Ly∣bia, Triphon, An∣teus, Gerion, & Busiris sound tyrants. of Busiris in Phoenicia, and so of this Gerion in Celtiberia, and of diuers others who forsooke to be kings, being not conten∣ted with one kingdome, became tyrants, and vsed all kinde of cruelty, deceites, and treason to enlarge their dominions. When this tyrant Gerion died in Celtiberia, his 3. sonnes suc∣ceeded after him called Lomuini: they builded a great town in Celtiberia, & named it after their names, Lomuinia. These bre∣thrē, after they iointly gouerned the Celtiberians for the space of 52. yeeres, they left the countrey to bee gouerned by one Annius de re∣gibus Hispani. Hispalus the sonne of Hercules Lybius. This gouerned the Celtiberians for seuenteene yeeres, and builded a strong towne and named it after his owne name Hispalis. In his time the kinges of Egypt became first to be called Pharaoes, a name giuen to them of dignitie: for in the beginning of kingdoms, men were yet simple, contented with one Towne, for
diuers cities with a small territorie in steede of a great king∣dome, which shortly grew to that pride, that kings would not be contented with a kingdome, neither with 2. or 3. king∣domes: they woulde faine get the whole worlde, and some weepe with Alexander, because there were no more but one world to winne. So grew the intollerable insolencie of princes in short time vpon the earth, that they would be called gods, & comman∣ded by edicts, that they should be so worshipped: as Belus a∣mong Med called gods. the Assyrians, Nabuchodonosor among the Caldeans, O∣siris among the Egyptians, Alexander the great among the Persians, and Dioclesian among the Romanes. Idolatrie, su∣perstition, vainglorie and selfe loue entred into mens hearts, and possessed their mindes in such sort, in steede of trueth, simplicity, iustice, contentation and quietnes, which yet raig∣ned among men, dum aureum seculumfloruit. During the reigne of Hispalus in Celtiberia, that gouerne∣ment called Dynasteia Politanorum beganne in Egypt, which continued 348. yeeres. Argus the fourth king of the Argiues gouerned, after Hispalus had gouerned 11. yeres. Hispanus suc∣ceeded king of Celtiberia, which gouerned them for 32. yeres: of this king Hispanus Celtiberia was named Hispaine: for in E∣gypt The kings of Celtiberia were called kings of Hispaine, a∣bout that time that the kings of Egypt were called Pharao∣nes. beganne the names of Pharoes, when the kings of Celtibe∣ria were named kings of Hispaine. CHAP. II. From the time of Hispanus by whom they were called Hispaniards, vntill the monarchie was dissolued, and the names of kinges en∣ded: after what time Hispayne was deuided vnto particu∣lar Prouinces and seuerall dominions after the raigne and go∣uernement of foure and twentie kings, euen from Cetubal the first vnto Mellicola the last. HItherto you reade howe that the first inhabi∣tauntes were called by diuers names, first of Tubal their first king, by whome they were called Cetubals: at the seconde change, they were called Hiberi, and the countrey Hiberia,
after the name of Hiberus their seconde king: the thirde time, they were called Celtiberi, and the countrey Celtiberia: the fourth time, the countrey was called Hesperia: and the fifte time nowe of Hispanus, the countrey is called Hi∣spayne. This time in the East kingdomes nothing was done woorth the writing: Forkinges were scant yet knowen, no Nothing a∣mong the old kings of Assy∣ria and of Hi∣spaine worth the writing. great warres yet heard of, for at this time reguli non Reges fuere, and therefore I thought it the best course, to set downe the names of the first Kinges, that then inhabited in Hispayne: for all this while, and of long time after, no warre, no victorie, no martiall exploites were in anie part of the worlde, sauing in the East among the Chaldeans and the Assyrians, which grewe by this time so mighty, that they held betwene them the first monarchie, and yet their do∣minion seemed not to extend farre by the sequele. I wil there∣fore bee briefe, for that I cannot finde during the time of these 24. kings, anie historie woorth the writing, nor of long time after these foure and twentie kinges raigned in Spayne one after another. 1 Tubal their first king by whom they were called Cetubals, which raigned 155. yeeeres, and had setled some seates and builded some townes and died. 2 Iberus his sonne and their second king raigned 37. yeres, he also died. 3 Iubalda the third king and the sonne of Iberus raigned 66. yeeres, and dwelt hard by a mount of his owne name, called Manethon would fayne haue had cause to write of old Hispaine. Iubalda, which vnto this day is of the Spaniards named Gibral∣ta. 4 Brigus succeeded Iubalda in the 20. yere of Arius the sixt king of the Assyrians, and gouerned in Celtiberia 51. yeeres. 5 After him Tagus which is called Orma, gouerned the Celtiberians, and raigned 30. yeeres, hee beganne to gouerne his kingdome with Baleus Xerxes, the eight king of the Assyri∣ans, and at what time the Argiues reared first there, and Phaeton came to Italie. Phaetontis incendium.
6 Then succeeded in Celtiberia Betus their sixth king, which beganne his raigne when Armatrites the ninth king beganne in Assyria and raigned one and thirtie yeeres: this time Eusebius setteth downe the 17. Dynasteia of the The 17. Dyna∣steia of Egypt which endu∣red 103. yeres. Egyptians which endured 103. yeeres. During which time the shepherds had gouernment. 7 Gerion surnamed Deabus raigned 35. yeeres, he inuen∣ted the vse of many good things & found first the vse of mynes of gold, siluer and other mettals. 8 After whom succeeded his three sonnes surnamed Lom∣uini, which builded a towne after their owne name Lomuinia: Lomuini. they also raigned 42. yeeres after their father. 9 Hispalus the sonne of Hercules Libyus, and the 9. king of the Celtiberians, he raigned 11. yeeres, he beganne his gouern∣ment in the 36. yeere of Baleus Iunior the II. king of the Assy∣rians, he did nothing, but builded a towne and named it after his owne name Hispalis. 10 After Hispalus succeeded the tenth king named Hispa∣nus, From this Hi∣spanus the coū∣trey of Hi∣spaine was na∣med. which raigned 32. yeeres, by whom the whole countrey was called Hispania. This time Iacob with his children went to Egypt, when the great famine was almost ouer the whole world: so long the name of Hispaine continued. 11 Hercules after the death of Hispanus, being verie aged, raigned 19. yeeres: at what time Mamitus the 13. king of the Assyrians gouerned at Niniuie. 12 Hesperus raigned after Hercules 11. yeeres. In Egypt be∣gan this time to raigne Mispharmutosis: about which time Io∣seph being an hundred yeres old, died in Egypt. Narbon raigned Narbon. in that part of Fraunce which was called Celta, after whome the countrey was after called Narbon. 13 Kittim called in some places Atlas, after hee had forced Annius de reg. Hisp. his brother Hesperus to forsake the kingdome, and to flie into Italie, raigned in Spaine 11. yeeres. With this Kittim beganne to raigne in Assyria Maucaleus the 14. king, and ouer the Ar∣giues Crassus the fiftking. 14 Sicorus raigned after Kittim Atlas, who raigned 45. yeres:
for Kittim hauing his sonne in his steede to gouerne Spaine, Kittim Atlas. went to Italie, and raigned there, and was called for his great vertue and excellencie of minde, of that countrey Italus. This maried his daughter Electra to Cambo Blaston a Prince of Manethon de reg. Hispaniae. the Ianigenes. During the time of Sicorus Kittims sonne in Spaine, raigned in Egypt Amenophis a cruel king, who made a lawe that all the male children of the Israelites, which then were in great cruell bondage in Egypt, should be drowned in the riuer Nilus: at which time Moses beyng borne then in E∣gypt, was throwen to Nilus: but he was preserued by the ap∣poyntment of God. This time reigned in Assyria Spherus the 15. king. 15 Sicanus the sonne of Sicorus raigned after his Father . Sicanus is .  of Spaine. 12. yeres king of Hispaine. Phorbas the sixt king of the Argiues began in his kingdome to raigne, and Sparetus the 17. king of the Assyrians. 16 After Sicanus succeeded Siceleus, which raigned in Siceleus. Spaine 44. yeeres: this king came with the Sicilians to aide Iasius against Dardanus, who both were in armes for the kingdome of Italie, and did no other great thing. In the be∣ginning of this Siceleus raigne, the kingdome of Athens beganne vnder Cecrops their first king, in the fourth yeere of Sparetus the seuenteenth king of the Assyrians, and in the sixte yeere of Marathus the thirteenth King of Peloponesus. At what time Troyphas raigned the seuenth king of the Ar∣giues, and Acengeres raigned king of Egypt. Functius sayeth, that Mercurius Trismegistus an Egyptian Philosopher flouri∣shed about this time, a great learned Priest, whose bookes yet are to this day extant, though some doe doubt of the same, as in so ancient a thing men may easily doubt. I thinke there Hermes Tris∣megistus. was not so much diuinitie then in Egypt, as Trismegistus see∣meth to write in his bookes. 17 After that Siceleus had raigned 44. yeeres, his sonne named Lusus succeeded him, and reigned thirtie yeeres: this Lusius 17. king of Hispaine. dwelt in that part of Spayne which he called after his owne name Lusitania: thither he brought manie from Italie and
other places to inhabite. This Lusus beganne to reigne in Spayne in the thirteenth yeere of Ascatades the 18. King of the Assyrians, in the verie yeere that Dardanus slue by The onely vse of this history is for consent of time. deceit his brother Iasius, and after fledde to Samothracia. In the beginning of the reigne of this King, the Israelites were deliuered from their bondage and great miserie vnder Pha∣rao in Egypt, after they had continued foure hundred & thir∣tie yeeres there in seruitude. This time reigned in Athens, Cra∣naus their seconde king, and ouer the Argiues, Crotopus their eight king. 18 Siculus the eighteenth king of Spayne succeeded Sice∣leus, and reigned 64. yeeres. That time that he beganne to  kings of ria, and the nges of Hispaine go∣uerned about one time. gouerne Spaine, then Dardanus beganne to erect a kingdome in Dardania, which afterwarde was called Troy, which was in the last yeere of Ascatades the 18. king of Assyria, 830. yeeres after the flood of Noah. This Dardanus after he was fledde to Samothracia, for the killing of his brother Iasius for the gouernment of Italie, he sought no right in Italie, but resig∣ned the same to Turrhenius, who sailed into that part of Italie, called Ianigena, and possessed it, and reigned 51. yeeres, and Dardanus began his kingdome, and was the first king of Dar∣dania, after called Troy. This time Faunus Priscus reigned ouer Faunus Priscus. the Latines then called Aborigenes: for Latinus was the fift king after Faunus, after whom they were called Latins, after Latinus name their first king. 19 Testa succeeded Siculus in Spaine, and reigned seuentie yeeres. During which time Manethon which onely writeth of the first 24. kinges, doeth set downe nothing worth the wri∣ting: for these kings were not heard of any way out of Spaine: they liued so simply, & vnpeopled, without any war or other exploits done: the best is the noting of time, thereigne of o∣ther kings, & the histories of the East coūtreys are by this hi∣storie briefly passed ouer. During the 70. yeres of these kings, Bellopares the 21. king and Lamprides the 22. king of the Assyri∣ans reigned at Niniue. Menophis gouerned Egypt, Minos in Creete, Abas ouer the Argiues, Erictheus the sixt king of the
Athenians. In the latter yeeres of this king, Samgar which suc∣ceeded Ehud, iudged Israel: after Samgar, Debora, and Barac. 20 Romus the twentieth king that gouerned in Spaine: he raigned three and thirty yeeres, at what time raigned in As∣syria Romus 20. king. Lampares the 24. king, and ouer the Argiues Agrisius their fourteenth and last king. In Dardania raigned Tros their thirde king, who enlarged the citie of Dardania verie Manethon do∣eth write more of these histores. much, and altered the name of Dardania after his owne name, and called it Troia. I take little heede to Manethon, for hee doeth much differ from others in manie thinges, and I make as much haste as I can to come to an ende. Nowe af∣ter that Romus dyed, Palatinus succeeded and raygned eighteene yeeres: in whose time the kingdome of the Argiues Palatinus. was translated into Mycena, where for a long time it con∣tinued. 21 This time raigned in Troy, Ilus, after whose name Troy was called Ilion: and in Assyria gouerned Paninas Cacus founde first the vse of yrons. their 25. king: Gedeon iudged Israel. This Palatinus beyng a young man, was driuen out of his kingdome by Cacus in∣to Italie, from whence after a while hee returned and got his kingdome, and forced Cacus to flie into Italie, bee∣yng nowe agayne in his kingdome placed, hee founde the vse of yrons, and taught first the Spaniardes to make di∣uers kindes of weapons. I finde in Manethon that Palati∣nus raigned eighteene yeeres in the first time before he was forced by Cacus to flie into Italie: and after hee wanne his kingdome agayne, after that Cacus had raigned sixe and thirtie yeeres in Spayne: hee gouerned Spayne sixe yeeres. This Cacus was supposed of the auncient Spaniardes, to bee the sonne of Vulcan, for that hee taught to make weapons for to fight in the fielde, and founde the vse of yron. This Cacus was borne in Celtiberia a part of Spayne, two and four∣tie yeeres before Hercules was borne, as Manethon affirmeth: hee gouerned Spayne 222. yeeres after the going of Israel Manethon. de reg. Hispan. out of Egypt. At what time raigned in Egypt Romascs the se∣cond Larthes.
22 Nowe reigned Dedalus, of whom the Poets fayned that he with his sonne Icarus fledde with winges for Greece into Creete, for the passing celeritie of his sayle. This time Abimelech gouerned Israel, who slue his seuentie bre∣thren, and was slaine himselfe after in the thirde yeere of his reigne by a woman at Thebes. Aegeus King Pandeons sonne and father to Theseus, reigned in Athens this time. 23 Erithrus the 23. king of Spaine, succeeded Palatuus Erythrus 23. king of Hi∣spaine. and Cacies: hee reigned king in Spayne 66. yeeres. During which time Iair iudged Israel, and after Iair, Ieptha. Mytreus the 27. king of the Assyrians raigned in Niniue. In the ele∣uenth yeere of this Erithrus reigne, came Euander out of Arcadia into Italie, to whome Faunus the gouernour and ru∣ler of this scattered people that dwelt about Rome called A∣borigines, which yet had certaine dwellinges, gaue a fielde, Aborigenes. and a little hill afterwarde called Mons Auentinus, where Her∣cules slue Cacus, at what time Hercules came from Spayne in∣to Italie, before Aeneas comming 55. yeeres. Theseus go∣uerned Athens, after hee had subdued the monster Mino∣taurus, and conquered Creete. This Erithrus reigned in Spayne, vntill the verie yeere that Troy was by the Greekes destroyed. 24 After him succeeded Gargorus Mellicola, the 24. Gargorus Mel∣licola the last king of Hi∣spaine. Halicar. lib. 1. and last king of Spayne, who reigned 75. yeeres vntill the first yeere of Aeneas Syluius the fourth king of the Latins, at what time the Lacedemonians and the Corinthians beganne to set vp their kingdomes: for as the Troianes, the Peloponesians, and the Spaniardes ended their kingdomes: so they at that instant beganne to flourish in their newe kingdomes: for the Peloponesians, after they had had sixe and twentie kings, they were gouerned by Priestes called Carin. The Troianes also were ouerthrowen after sixe kinges reigne, and their The kings of Hispaine end their monar∣chie about the time that the Greciaus de∣stroyed Troy. Countrey destroyed with sworde and fire, so that the rem∣naunt were scattered to seeke newe kingdomes and other countreyes, some to Greece, some to Italie, and some to o∣ther places: and the Spaniardes euen so after 24. Kings, their
kingdome was turned into prouinces, and other particular gouernements. Thus Spaine, after it reigned vnder kings for the space of 988. yeeres, is nowe become into prouinces, gouerned by Hispaine deui∣ded into pro∣uinces after the raigne of 24. Kings. seuerall magistrates: during which time of 988. yeres which their kings raigned, yet were they not herd of in any part of the East countreys: their fame grewe no further then to the Confines of Italie, and to the furthest precinct of Spaine. Ephorus an ancient writer affirmeth, that all Spaine was taken to be but a citie named Iberia of all the East countries: and I can easily beleeue it: for the Romanes during the time of their seuen kings, were no where spokē of but within Italie, not so much as the Grecians their next neighbours made any men∣cion of them: neither Thucidides, nor Herodot, late writers, neuer thought of them in all their histories: specially Hero∣dot, who wrote generally of all Asia. In like maner the Greci∣ans were not knowen vnto the Persians before Xerxes time: Ioseph. lib. 2. cont. Apio. for so Strabo affirmeth, saying, nec Graeci Persas nec Persae Graecos nouerunt nisi perparum quantum fama percepissent. What frag∣ments Manethon and others found of the antiquitie of Spaine, Strab. lib. 3. and of their first gouernement of their kings, I haue briefly noted but the time onely, omitting other things of those dayes as meere fables and trifles, not worth the writing. CHAP. III. From the dissolution and change of the kingdome of Hispaine into Prouinces and Dominions, vntill they were subdued by the Car∣thagineans and Africans vnder whom they were subiects, vntill Scipio Africanus time, at what time both Africa, Carthage and Hispaine were made tributaries vnto the Romanes. NOwe after the kings of Spaine had finished their kingdomes, and the countrey was chan∣ged into particular prouinces and seuerall dominions, which so continued vntill Spaine was subdued by the Carthagineans, vnder
whom they liued vntill Afrike and Carthage were conquered by the Romanes. While Spaine was quietly gouerned by their kings, their wisemen called Turdetani, wrote their chronicles, Strab. lib. 3. their lawes, and the antiquities of their Countrey in ancient Poemes of 600. yeeres olde, as they write: These Turdetani Turdetani were wise men of Hispaine. were so honoured of the olde Spaniardes, as Magi were of the Chaldeans, Gymnosophistae Of the Indians, the Druydes of the olde Gaules after called French men, and as the Priestes of Isis and Serapis were esteemed in Egypt: for at that time they were led by oracles as the other countreys were. The Spaniardes vsed to consult with the oracles of Mnest∣heus, The oracles of Mnestheus. not farre from the high towre of Capio, which was for that purpose builded, as the towre of Pharaoh was in Egypt to giue light to the Mariners vpon the Sea in winters darke nights. Many good things were in Spaine in the time of their first kings, which were not found afterwards vntil the Romans The commo∣ditie of Hi∣spaine not well knowen be∣fore the Ro∣manes time. came: for when the Romanes became lordes of Afrike and of Spaine, which was the first conquest that euer the Romanes had out of Italie, and the onely hardest and most dange∣rous victorie, almost to the ruine and confusion of the Ro∣manes, as at the battell of Trebeia, of Cannes, of Thrasimene, and of other bloodie battels seene and proued: when (I say) they subdued Spaine, they founde the countrey so fertile and so rich, that both land and water yeelded plentie of all things: for the Romanes found mines within twentie furlongs of new Carthage, and the mines were of circuite round, about foure Mines found by the Romans in Hispaine. hundred furlongs, where the Romanes kept foure centurions to worke and to digge for siluer: they wrought so, that it was worth to the Romanes day by day, fiue and twentie thou∣sand Drachmes. The Romanes were so flesht with the conquest of Africa and Spaine, that they left no hill vndigged, no riuer vnsounded & no place vnsought, insomuch that Pluto had much to doe to escape the auarice of the Romanes. So Hanibal seemed to iudge The auarice of the Ro∣manes. of them when hee answered Antiochus the great, when he
shewed Hanibal the abundance of his wealth, and his infinite treasures: this sayeth Hanibal, will please the Romanes, but not suffice the Romanes. But I will returne to my Historie, Hispaine was gouerned by seueral Magi∣strates in di∣uers prouin∣ces for nine hundred yeres after their kings. hauing nothing to write of them since the time of their kings, vntill the first Romane warres in Affrike and in Spaine, which was after their kings nine hundreth and odde yeeres. During which time, they liued vnder seuerall gouernement: the most part of which time they liued subiect vnder the Affricanes and Carthagineans, by whome Spaine was so for∣tified, that the Carthaginians vsed Spaine for their strongest holde, and their onely stay and succour against the force of the Romanes: in so much that the Romanes had alwayes in Spaine during this Affrican warre, some of the best and The first sub∣iection vnder the Carthagi∣neans. most notable Romane Captaines, as their proconsuls and lieutenants to keepe Spaine in awe. For from Spaine, Ha∣milcar, Asdrubal, and after them Hanibal had their chiefest strength at any sudden pinch: for Publius Cornelius Scipio, The two Scipio. and Cn. Cornelius Scipio two brethren were both appoynted lieutenants generall for the Romanes: Pub. Scipio for the Sea, and Cn. Scipio for the lande: by whose great seruice and noble victories, all Spaine was welnigh reuolted from the Carthagineans. When the Romanes had gotten Spaine, they were not long after in getting Carthage and all Affrike: yet in the very yeere that Fabius Maximus and Claudius Marcellus were Consuls at Rome, Mago and Asdrubal, two noble Affrican Asdrub. Mago. Captaines, gaue such diuers great ouerthrowes to the Ro∣manes, as the furthest part of Spaine, which the Romanes▪ called Vlterior Hispania, forsooke the Romanes, and were ready to yeelde to the Carthagineans, had not Pub. Scipio at that The great victories of Pub. Scipio ouer the Hi∣spaniardes and Carthagineans. instant ayded the Romane armie with his owne companie, at what time two and twentie thousande Spaniardes and Carthagineans were slaine in two seuerall battels, ten thou∣sand taken prisoners, and 36. ensignes. Notwithstanding the Carthagineans passed from one towne of the Romanes
to another, from Illiturgum to Bigerra, from Bigerra to Numi∣dia, Bigerra the va∣lure of the two Scipios. from Numidia passed to Auringes, sparing no towne of the Romanes, though it were to their losse: for through the valure and courage of both the Scipios, being aided by king Masinissa an olde sure friend of the Romanes, the Affricans and the Carthagineans were vanquished and slaine. But yet had Asdrubal the sonne of Giscon an other conducting of a great armie, and the other Asdrubal sonne to Amilcar and brother to Hanibal (which Hanibal all this time helde warre with the Romanes within Italie, & had giuen diuers great ouerthrowes to the Romanes) these two Asdrubals were with two great armies, and Mago the noble captaine of Carthage had the guiding of the third armie. The Romane Scipios being aduertised of these three great Three great captaines of Africa. armies conducted by the three most famous captaines of Afrike, deuised in like sort to giue battell to these African cap∣taines, at what time Pub. Cornelius tooke vpon him to giue battell to Mago and to Asdrubal Giscon, and Cn. Scipio with the third part of the armie to set vpon the other Asdrubal Bar∣chinus an olde captaine in Spaine: but in this warre, after that the Scipios had fought like noble Romanes to the last, Pub. Cornelius Scipio was slaine, in the seuenth yeere after hee was sent by the Senators to Spaine, and 29. dayes before his bro∣ther Reade Liui. lib. 5. dec. 3. Cn. Cornelius Scipio was slaine. Eutropius affirmeth, that they were rather beguiled by traine, then vanquished by manhood: for Asdrubal had many ouerthrowes by the Scipios: in one battell, he lost 25. thousande men: Againe, Asdrubal the second brother of Hanibal, and Mago the third brother of Hanibal, were both ouercome in Spaine by the Scipios: of the maner and order of the warres of the Scipios in Spaine you shall reade more in the African warres. Great mourning was made in Rome and in Spaine, when these two Scipios were slaine: for now the Romanes from time The two Scipios slaine, were much mourned for in Hispaine. to time had no lesse care of Spaine, then they had of Italie: and nowe especially when these good Romane captaines were slaine, they coulde not vpon the sudden finde out fitte men
for Spaine, some naming one man, and some naming ano∣ther, vntill by a generall consent of the Senators, of the Consuls, and of the people, Pub. Cornelius Scipio the yonger, and sonne to that Pub. Scipio that died in Spaine, being foure and twentie yeeres of age, was appoynted to bee sent into Spaine to his fathers roome, a man of singular rare vertues, The praise of Scipio. and one iudged of all the Romanes that were either in his dayes or in any time since, most worthie of praise and fame. For while hee liued at Rome in his youth, hee woulde take nothing in hand before hee had gone into the Capitoll, and there considered with great iudgement what hee had to doe. This yong Scipio being sent to Spaine, in the fiue hun∣dreth Scipio sent to Hispaine. fourtie and foure yeere after the building of Rome, at what time M. Claudius Marcellus was made Consull the fourth time, and M. Valerius Leuinus the second time, lost no time, but assaulted newe Carthage, where the Affricans New Carthage assaulted and subdued by Scipio. had all their golde and siluer, and subdued it in one day From thence he passed forward into Betula a citie in Spaine, besieged it, tooke it, and gaue battell to Asdrubal, and ouer∣came him, tooke Mago Hanibals brother prisoner, and sent him to Rome with the residue. All Spaine reuolted from Hanibal with one assent, and tooke part with Scipio: for Asdrubal ouer∣come. hee had slaine Carthalon chiefe Captaine to Hanibal, and put Asdrubal Hanibals brother to flight. The fame of Scipio increased, and his good successe in his affaires in Spaine was Mago Hani∣bals brother taken by Scipio. such, that he recouered seuentie Cities, and many Cities which earst had yeelded to Hanibal from the Romanes, did nowe submit themselues to the Romanes. Nowe all things prospered with the Romanes against Hanibal and his friendes in Spaine: for one of his brethren named Mago, was prisoner at Rome, and nowe Asdrubal, as he woulde haue secretly fledde from Spaine to Hanibal his brother into Italie, and to flie from Scipio, hee was preuen∣ted of sette purpose vpon the way by Appius Claudius Nero, and M. Linus Salinator, and slaine with all his armie. Asdrubal slain.
Scipio full of prowesse and courage after this ouerthrowe of Asdrubal, fought in Affrike a battell with Hanno a cap∣taine The victories of Scipio ouer Asdrubal. of the Carthagineans, slue him, ouerthrewe his whole hoste, tooke his tentes, slue eleuen thousande, and tooke foure thousande prisoners: hee was sent for to Rome, and Hanno slaine. created Consul the seconde time, and after returned to Numidia, and made warre with Siphax king of Numidia, for that he ioyned to ayde the Affricans against the Romanes. King Syphax taken by Scipio In this battell Siphax was taken, and his kingdome giuen to Masinissa, who in all danger followed Scipio. This very time M. Portius Cato ouerthrewe a band of Spa∣niardes, and after subdued certaine Cities in Spaine, and triumphed ouer them with great pompe at Rome. Nowe Liui. 4. Iugurth being a very gallant youth, was sent of Micipsa his vncle a captaine of a companie of horsemen into Spaine, to associate Scipio and to ayd with him in his warre at that time Scipios com∣mendation of Iugurth. against Numantia a great Citie in Spaine: this Iugurth be∣haued him selfe so well in all this warre, that Scipio, after Numantia was destroyed, wrote to king Micipsa in commen∣dation of Iugurth, to will him to esteeme of such a one as in all chiualrie and manhood resembled his graundfather Masinissa. Iugurth by this meanes was adopted by Micipsa Micipsa adop∣ted Iugurth for his sonne. to be his sonne, to ioyne with his other two sonnes Adher∣bal and Hiempsal, whome he exhorted to be true to the Ro∣manes, and to hold with his brethren. But of this I wrote in the Affrican Historie. When Scipio had conquered all Affrica, and brought all Hispaine subiect to the Romanes, he returned into Rome with his great triumphes, and left all things in quiet, vntill Vi∣riatus time, a meane Spaniard, but a shepheard in the be∣ginning, Viriatus called the Hercules of Hispaine. and after became a captaine among robbers and thieues. This Spaniard grewe in time to bee called Protector of Spaine against the Romanes. This Viriatus stirred many battels, and raysed the Spaniardes for the space of fourteene yeeres against the Romanes. They hearing of this at Rome, Quintus SeruiliusC epio
was sent foorth with a Romane armie against this Viriatus. The battell was waged in Lusitania, nowe called Portingal, where Viriatus was slaine by his owne souldiers: yet all Spaine was in an vprore by this Viriatus, and many cities of Spaine reuolted from the Romanes, and were at that time in armes: for Viriatus had giuen a great ouerthrow to Caius Vetilius and all the Romane armie, and Q. Pompeius then Consul was discomfited by the citizens of Numantia the Vitilius and Q. Pompeius two Consuls ouerthrowen by Viriatus. worthiest Citie of Spaine. And after him, Caius Hostilius Mancinus had the like re∣proch, and was forced to make infamous league with the Spaniardes, so that the stout Romanes were twise discomfited by the Numantines: and Spaine againe beganne to spite the Romanes. This Viriatus kept playe with the Romanes, and gaue them many hard battels, and vanquished many great The names of Scipio knowen in Hispaine. Romanes, vntill another Scipio came, and brought Spaine as lowe as his predecessors did, and thereby was called Scipio Affricanus the yonger: for of long time, after the two Scipios the brethren, and after Scipio Affricanus the elder, that Pub. Scipios sonne that died in Spaine, by whome all Spaine was subdued, quietnesse was in Spaine, and they payed tribute vnto the Romanes, vntill the third Affrican warres, which be∣ganne two and fiftie yeeres after the second warre, and in the sixe hundreth yeere after the building of Rome. Then Famea and Asdrubal. Famea and Asdrubal (for this name was among them as Scipio was among the Romanes) were appoynted lieute∣nants for Spaine, who held out for a time, vntill by Scipio the yonger they were vanquished: for still Spaine was ay∣ded Sertorius by the Carthagineans and Affricans, and both Carthage and Affrike were strengthened by the Spaniardes. Carthage aided by the Hispa∣niardes. After Famea and Asdrubal were ouercome, Sertorius a noble Romane, who tooke part with Marius against Silla in the ciuill warres at Rome, doubting the fortune and force of Silla, fledde to Spaine, stirred the Spaniardes to battell a∣gainst the Romanes. This warre was great and bloodie for Sertorius a noble valiant Romane. the time that it continued, for Romanes fought against Ro∣manes:
for Metellus, who was sent from Rome to Spaine a∣gainst Sertorius, for all that Metellus was an approued soul∣dier, Metellus. yet hee was ouermatched by Sertorius. The Senate sent Cn. Pompeius to ayde Metellus: yet Sertorius assailed Cn. Pompeius sent to Hi∣spaine against Sertorius. them, and kept sharpe and eagre warre with equall fortune. This warre en dured eight yeeres, vntill Sertorius was slaine by his owne souldiers. At that time Spaine againe submit∣ted themselues to the Romanes: the warre nowe ceased in Spaine, and both Metellus and Pompeius had their seuerall triumphes ouer aine in one day, in the which day two other great triumphes were at Rome: the one by Curio ouer Pompey and Metellus tri∣umphed ouer Hispaine vpon one day at Rome. the Macedonians, the other by Seruilius ouer the Isaurians: so that in one day foure triumphes entred into the Citie of Rome together, so great and so famous was the glorie of Rome. Then wee reade of nothing done in Spaine vntill Sextus Pompeius, who after his fathers death Pompeius the great at Egypt, fledde into Spaine, to whome fledde M. Cato and diuers other noble Romanes: they tooke certaine Cities in Spaine, stirred the Spaniardes to withstand the Romanes, opening the violence and ciuill warres of Rome, the crueltie and slaughter M. Cato. of their friendes, and the vtter destruction of their countrey. This warre was appeased by Iulius Caesar, after many sharpe and doubtfull battels betweene Sextus Pomepius and Caesar: at what time Iulius made his triumph with great glorie and pompe ouer Spaine, which was the last conquest of Spaine: for by this time Caesar had triumphed ouer Spaine last conquered by Iul. Caesar. the Frenchmen, ouer the Egyptians, ouer Pontus, ouer the Affricans, and ouer Spaine last of all, and brought Spaine subiect to the Romanes.
CHAP. IIII. From the time that the Romanes conquered Hispaine, vnto the time of the Vandols the thirde conquest of Hispaine, and from the Vandoles vnto the Gothes victorie ouer Hispaine the fourth conquest, and from the Gothes vnto the time of the Saracens the fift conquest of Hispaine. AFter which time, Spaine was so obedient to the Romanes and so seruiceable, that when Caesar died, and good Augustus had taken the Empire in hand, the Spaniards Augustus Caesar so honoured, that the Spa∣niars comp∣ted their yeres from Augstus time. so honoured Augustus, that they began to make their accompts, and to nomber their yeres from the raigne of Augustus: for as the Romanes vsed to nomber their yeeres from the first building of Rome, the Grecians from their Olympiads, the Saracens and the Arabians from Mahomet, and the Christians from the birth of our Sauiour Christ: so the Spa∣niards numbred their yeeres from Augustus, whom they so esteemed and loued, that they builded certaine townes and cities, and named them after Augustus name, & so continued vntill the time of the Vandols and Gothes, and after them the Saracens. So long was Spaine vnder Augustus, and vnder the Empire of Rome: for as in Augustus time the Spaniards endeuoured euery way to please the Romanes, in accompting the yeeres from Augustus by these foure letters A. Er. A. which signified A Er. A. Annus erat Augusti, as the Arabians made their accompt by the worde Hegyra, which Mahomet commanded of late dayes Hegyra. to be kept: And of late dayes among the Romanes they nom∣bred their yeeres per Indictiones, which Constantine the great Indictiones. had made by Law to be obserued: for the old accompts and nombring of yeeres of the Egyptians frō the flood, of the Chal∣deans from Adam, the olde Greekes from Ninus, and long after What time the Gentiles began to ac∣compt their yeeres. from the Olympiads: so the ancient Romanes from the building of Rome, and so diuers others from the destruction of Troy, and the Christians from the time that our Sauiour Christ
was conceiued in the wombe of the Virgine. But now all Spaine was brought a Prouince by the Romans, vnder whom Spaine was gouerned by the space of 420. yeres, Hispaine vnder the Romanes 420. yeeres. vntill the Empire was taken from Rome to Constantinople, at what time the kingdome of the Gothes, Vandols, Hunnes and Lumbards beganne to flourish in the West countreys: for du∣ring The time that Rme flouri∣shed. the glorie of the Romanes, (which was from the very buil∣ding of Rome, vntill the ouerthrowe of their Empire, about 1200. yeeres) there was no stirring in these countreys that I named last: for the name of Germanie (where now the Empire Germanie of no name be∣fore Augustus time. lieth) was not heard of in Rome before Augustus time to any purpose: for during the time of their Consuls, which was the second and the thirde age of Rome, called Adolescentia & iu∣uentus Romana, they had conquered & subdued all kingdomes and countreys, and had made them Prouinces vnder the Romanes. Now Spaine being brought vnder by the Vandoles, vnder whom Spaine was gouerned 95. yeeres, and after by the Gothes who possessed that part of Hispaine which Gunthericus king of the Vandales had first subdued, being remoued thence further Blondus & Ri∣tius. to Affrike, the Gothes inhabited that countrey of Spaine, which the Vandols left, and were lords of Hispaine for two hundreth and odde yeres, vntill the cōming of the Saracens, who againe vanquished the Gothes, and kept Hispaine vnder them after they had ouerthrowen the Gothes 800. yeeres. And within short space, Ricardus king of Vestgothes called a Sinode of 62. bishops into Tolleto the chiefe citie of Spaine, where he caused the heresie of Arrius to be condemned. Then in Hispaine (after the Romans) was Luyba chosen, who Gundericus began in Hi∣spaine, when Faramundus beganne in Fraunce. raigned three yeres king of Spaine: after whom within 3. yeres his brother Leogildus succeeded, and subdued certaine cities of Spaine that rebelled after Luyba his death. After him, this Ricardus, who beganne to set his seate more firmely in Spaine, and to cal a Synode of bishops, and to plant Reade. idus lib. 10. cap. 26. religion: he brought all Spaine into a Monarchie vnder him, but that Monarchie continued not long: for the Saracens
inuaded Spaine, and brought them vnder their gouernment, and had driuen those Christians that liued vnder the Gothes into Astura, where they made a king to themselues named Pelagius, not vsing the title of the Gothes, but the title of Pelagius. Astura. The multitude of the Saracens was such, that they inuaded all partes of Spaine, and possessed the best places in Spaine, and dwelt there successiuely during the time of fif∣teene kings of the Saracens which gouerned Hispaine: but the fifteene kings continued but 20. yeeres, but this happened by the meanes of warres: but after they continued lordes of Hi∣spaine for 800. yeeres, as you heard before. This is the fift subiection that Spaine was brought into. 1 The first time they were subdued by the Carthagi∣neans. 2 The second time by the Romanes. 3 The thirde time by the Vandoles. 4 The fourth time by the Gothes. 5 And now the fift time by the Saracens. These Saracens placed themselues in the best places of Spaine, in the time that Rodericus the last king of the Vestgothes raig∣ned: Rodericus. at what time raigned in France Theodoricus sirnamed Ca∣la, and Leo the thirde of that name, sirnamed Isaurus, was Em∣perour of Greece, and had his Court at Constantinople. The Saracens were gouerned at their first arriuall in Spaine, vnder one named Muza. Muza. The Christian princes being sore afrighted with many sud∣den inuasions of such a multitude of infidels in diuers places of Christendome, and specially in Spaine which they wholie possest, they leauied their armies and gathered their forces, and gaue them diuers ouerthrowes. This time came out of Spaine into Fraunce 400000. Saracens with their wiues Foure hun∣dreth thou∣sand Saracens inuaded Fraunce. and children, being enticed thither by the duke of Vastonia: but the slaughter of them was such, that their king also Abdi∣marus was slaine among them by Carolus Martellus ano∣ble valiant prince of Fraunce, and the remnant that were
vnkilled of the Saracens, fled, and were by Humildus and Vai∣farus ledde into Aquitania, spoyled with sworde and fire all that Countrey of Fraunce, but still were ouerthrowen by Martellus. Againe the thirde time the Saracens inuaded Fraunce, and Saracens inua∣ded France the thirde time. tooke by treason Auenio: but Martellus pursued them, and as∣saulted the towne and subdued it, at what time many of the Saracens were slaine, and their king Athinus escaped by flight to Narbon: yet Amoreus another king of the Saracens, was slaine at that time by Carolus at Illiberis, who persecuted them from place to place, so that he ouerthrew and slewe them like sheepe, and burned their townes. How be it, the Saracens still so encreased, that the most part of Europe was in great dan∣ger of them. After that Carolus Martellus had played his part with the Car. Martellus had diuers vi∣ctories ouer the Saracens. Saracens, Carolus sirnamed the Great, beganne to warre vpon them, tooke Augusta, Pampile, and many other townes and strong holdes from the possessions of the Saracens: for at this time raigned king ouer the Saracens in Spaine Aygolandus, Aygolandus king of the Saracens. with whome Charles the great had many sharpe battels: for the Saracens had wasted and spoyled Sardinia, and Corsica, a∣gainst whome Lewes (sirnamed the Godly, sonne to Charles the great) leauied an armie, and passed to Spaine, besieged Dercosa, but in vaine: the furie and strength of the Saracens was then such, that Charles the great (being both Emperour and king,) was constrained to conclude peace for a time with the Saracens: at which time Abumalach raigned king in Abumalach. Spaine ouer the Saracens. With this king the league was made: during which league, Charles died. All this time that Carolus Martellus, and Charles the great were in warres with the Saracens, after that Pelagius had raig∣ned 1 twentie yeeres king of Astura or of Legio, (for so hee wil∣led Pelagius the first king of Astura. himselfe and his posteritie to bee called, quite renoun∣cing the title of the Gothes, who had raigned kings in Spaine before the comming of the Saracens) after him succeeded Pha∣silla his sonne the seconde king of Astura: this was torne in 2
pieces of a beare, as he was a hunting of wilde beasts, after he had raigned two yeeres. Alphonsus sirnamed Catholike succeeded in Astura the third 3 king, and raigned 19. yeeres. After Alphonsus, succeeded 4 his sonne Phroilla the 4. king of Astura, and raigned twelue alphonsus sonne named Catholike. Phroilla the 4. king. yeeres: at what time he was slaine by his brother Aurelius, who raigned sixe yeeres after his brother by vsurpation, and he made his heire and resigned the kingdome to Veramundus which was his brothers sonne, whome hee slew, for that Ve∣ramundus should not bewray the murther of his father: But Veramundus mist the kingdome for his conspiracie and wic∣ked silence. Sillo raigned king, who had married Aurelius si∣ster 5 named Egmund, vntill Maruegatus a bastarde sonne of Al∣phōsus 6 the Catholike, by the ayd of the Mauritanes got the king∣dome, Certaine nō∣ber of yong virgins payed for tribute. to whom he payed for tribute certaine nomber of Vir∣gins yeerely, during the life of Maruegatus: but he died with∣in three yeeres, and that custome was disanulled. Then Veramundus the sonne of Bilmarus, which was sonne 7 to Alphonsus the Catholike succeeded, and raigned two yeeres, and then resigned the kingdome to Alphonsus the sonne of Phroilla, and became a religious man. This Alphonsus was 8 sirnamed the Chaste, and raigned 36. yeres: he ouerthrew and subdued the Saracens that possessed Lusitania, and tooke their Lusitania is now Portin∣gale. chiefe citie then called Olisiponis, now called Lysborne. Reade Aemil. lib. 2. This Alphonsus kept the Saracens in some awe, and gaue diuers ouerthrowes vnto them during his time. After whom succeeded Raimiris the first of that name, and 9 9. king of Astura and Legio: he raigned sixe yeres. In his time Raimiris. Abderana king of the Saracens sailed with a nomber of ships from Affrica, and inuaded many places in Italie, and vsed great crueltie: of whose tyrannie and spoiles euery where you may reade in the Historie of the Saracens. I name none here, but such as troubled Spaine, whose histo∣rie I haue in hande, during the time that they raigned in Spaine. This time Theophilus helde the Empire at Constan∣tinople, and Lewes (sirnamed the Godly) the sonne of Charles
the great, was king of France and Emperour of Rome, as his father was. Now succeeded in Spaine Ordonius the first of that name, who raigned king after Amiris 10. yeres. During which time, the Normanes and the Danes rushed into France, and annoyed the countrey much, burnt Antwerpe, and afflicted the Frise∣ans most miserablie. All this while, the cruel Saracens were no where quiet, especially in Italy, where they spoiled and kil∣led The spoile and wast of the Sara in Italy. all that they came vnto with sword and fire, euen vnto the very gates of Rome, burning all the suburbes of the citie. About this time Anno 838. the Danes inuaded England, but they were to their great losse ouerthrowen and vanquished by Egbertus: at which time died Lewes king of Fraunce, sirna∣med the Godly. After this Ordonius succceded Alphonsus the Alphonsus ty∣rannie. thirde of that name, sirnamed the Great: he raigned as a wic∣ked cruel king, who to auoyde suspition of his tyrannie, fai∣ned a conspiracie to bee done of his owne brethren against him, and therefore caused that all his three brethrens eyes should be plukt out, thinking thereby with lesse danger to gouerne his kingdome. Then succeeded Garsia, who raigned 3. yeres: after whom Ordonius the second of that name, folowed king of Astura and Legio. This king also vsed crueltie, and caused 4. of the chiefe Castile reuol∣ted from Or∣donius. noblemen in the Prouince of Castile to be imprisoned, and in prison to be slaine, for which cruel fact the Prouince of Castile reuolted from Ordonius, and they elected foure Iudges to go∣uerne the Prouince of Castile: since which time (which was 900. yeeres after Christ) kings beganne a kingdome in Castile: for now was Spaine gouerned as England was, by 7. kings, the gouernment whereof was called Heptarchia: and therefore I wil passe ouer the time, and infinite quarels and toiles which continued for a long rime in Spaine: First, betweene the Van∣dols and the Spaniards, after betweene the Gothes and the Spaniards, and then last betweene the Sa∣racens and the Gothes.
CHAP. V. From the time that the Saracens possessed Hispaine vntill the time of Ferdinandus the great, and Alphonsus king of Arragon, which were the onely first two kings that possessed all Hispaine, from the first Monarchie of their kings, which was 2400. and odde yeeres: so base a Countrey was Hispaine, and conquered so many times, vntill Ferdinandus time. AT what time, in diuers Prouinces of Hi∣spaine dwelt seuerall kings, which then go∣uerned and possessed Hispaine, whose names are these that follow. The first king after the inuasion of the 1 Saracens, (which was driuen out of the kingdome,) was Pelagius, who raigned twentie yeeres in Astura. Phafilla Pelagius sonne raigned two yeres, and was slaine by 2 a beare in hunting. Alphonsus sirnamed Catholike, the first of that name, raigned 3 19. yeeres. His sonne Phroilla succeeded his father in Astura and Legio, 4 and raigned twelue yeeres, and after was by his brother Au∣relius slaine. Veramundus Phroillas sōne succeeded, but was forced to flie 5 by Sillo which gouerned the kingdome after Phroilla 6. yeeres. Mauregatus a base sonne of Alphonsus the Catholike, tooke the 6 kingdome of Austria by the meanes of the Mauritanes, and raigned three yeeres. Veramundus the sonne of Bilmarus, which was sonne to Al∣phonsus 7 raigned two yeeres. Alphonsus the seconde sirnamed the Chaste, raigned thirtie 8 and six yeres. This king raigning, the Saracens spoiled and wa∣sted all Sardinia and Corsica. After him succeeded Raimirus the first of that name; and 9 raigned sixe yeeres, in whose time Abderana king of the Sara∣cens, with an huge armie vsed great crueltie and tyrannie in many places.
After him Ordonius the first which raigned also tenne 10 yeeres: after whom Alphonsus the thirde sirnamed the great, 11 which raigned 46. yeeres. Then succeeded Carsia the first of that name, and raigned 12 three yeres: After whom succeeded Ordonius the second, who 13 vsed tyrannie in Castile, the onely cause of their reuolting, and of the change of their gouernment, in chusing first to them foure Iudges, and after erected kings. At what time the king∣dome of Castile beganne. Reade Ritius more of this historie. Then succeeded Ordonius Phroilla the seconde, which raig∣ned 14 two yeres: and after him Alphonsus the fourth, which go∣uerned 15 in Astura and Legio, fiue yeeres. Raimirus the second of that name raigned nineteene yeres: 16 this caused his brother Alphonsus eyes to be pluckt out, and after to bee in close prison, for that Alphonsus denied to be∣come a Christian. In this Raimirus time the Hungarians ouer∣came Lodowicke king of Germanie, and both Luitboldus duke of Bauaria, and Burgardus duke of Thuringia, were slaine at that time of the Hungarians. Ordonius the thirde of that name, raigned fiue yeeres, and 17 Sanctius the first of that name, raigned 11. yeeres king of 18 Astura. Raimirus the thirde being a childe, obtained the kingdom, 19 and raigned 25. yeeres, by whome Abdera then king of the Saracens in Spaine was vanquished: but Luiterus saith that Luiterus lib. 5. cap. 1. one Ramirus king of Galatia; vanquished the Saracens and their king, whome he named Abdamara. This time Enechus Countie of Bigora gaue a great ouerthrow to the Saracens, and made the Saracens to forsake their cities, and to flie from ma∣ny partes of Spaine. This Enechus founded then the kingdome of Nauarra, as Ritig. affirmeth. Then succeeded in Spaine Veramundus the third, who raig∣ned 17. yeere. This king after he had once or twise vanqui∣shed 20 the Saracens, yet they so preuailed, that he was vāquished and ouerthrowen, his citie of Legio assaulted and taken, Lu∣sitania possessed againe, and the most places of Spaine, wonne
againe which the Saracens lost before. This time the kingdom of Polonia beganne. Alphonsus the 5. reigned 37. yeeres: during which time, the 21 Saracens entred into Italie, tooke Capua, assaulted Barū, destroy∣ed many places, and spoiled cities. In this Alphonsus time, the kingdome of Hungarie beganne: in whose time reigned in Fraunce Hugo Capetus the first king of the Gaules. Veramūdus the 3. of that namereigned after Alphōsus 6. yeres, 22. 23. and Ferdinandus gouerned at Astura and Castile 40. yeeres. Sanctius the 2. king of Castile, and Alphonsus the 6. king of A∣stura: 24 the one reigned 13. yeres, the other seuen yeeres: but Sanctius being not contented with the kingdome of Castile, draue Alphōsus out of his kingdome and possessed both Legio and Astura, who fledde to Toletum to the king of the Saracens, who was within 5. yeeres after restored to his kingdome, and Sanctius slaine of his owne seruants. This Alphonsus (as both 25 Blondus and Aemylius affirme) plagued the Saracens, tooke To∣letum their chiefe Citie, and restored to the people the Chri∣stian faith. The kingdome of Bohemia began in the 9. yeere of Alphonsus gouernment: at what time Henry the fourth reigned Emperour of Germany, and Lodouicus Crassus gouer∣ned Fraunce. Alphonsus the 7. succeeded and reigned king foure yeeres: 26. Sanctius the 3. one yeere: and Ferdinandus the 2. gouerned 17. 27. 28. yeeres. Alphonsus the 8. surnamed the good, reigned 50. yeeres: in 29 whose time Rogerius king of Sicilia warred vpon the emperor of Greece, and tooke certeine cities, & at that time gaue some ouerthrowe to the Saracens: but hee was spoyled by the Vene∣tians in his returne at that time. After al this, succeeded Alphonsus the 9. which reigned 28. 30 yeres. Some writers omit this, & Polidorus calleth this Alphō∣sus Tolyd. lib. 5. the 8. This time Illomaniolinus king of the Saracens spoyled Spaine with fire and sword vntil the coast of Fraunce, and pos∣sessed diuers Cities: but all the kings of Spaine ioyned their force together, and agreed with one consent to giue battel, in
the which the Saracens were ouerthrowen, and infinite num∣bers slaine: but Illomamolinus tooke Granata at that time. Illomamolinus. Ferdinandus the 3. who succeeded Alphōsus. I omit Henry the 31 first, that reigned 3. yeeres being a yong boy, who playing a∣mong children, brake his necke by chaunce at Palentia. Then Ferdinandus finding that the Saracens were sore weakened, and had lost many strong cities, hee leauied an armie, gaue Hispaine set much at liber∣tie by Ferdinā∣dus. sundry battels, and forced those Saracens to flie out of the Isle Maiorica, and gote their chiefe Citie and holde which was called Valentia, and after obteyned many Townes and Cities of the Saracens: for at this very time, by Ferdinandus Spaine was almost euery where set at libertie frō the Saracens. After that Ferdinandus had reigned 28. yeeres he died, 1250. After whō succeeded Alphonsus the 10. of that name, king 32 Legio and Castile, and reigned 23. yeeres. All this time Spaine was possessed by the Saracēs, who were called kings of Spaine: other kings that reigned in some places of Spaine, as in Ca∣stile, Asturia, Legio, were as kings of litle prouinces, and (in re∣spect The force of the Saracens tryed. of the Saracens) were of small force. Notwithstanding, the Saracens were so beset on euery side by sundry Christian princes, and so often discomfited and vanquished in many battels, that now they are constrained to call their force toge∣ther: for Iacobus king of Arragon, through the aide of other princes, had obteined and got the Isles called Baleares. This time reigned in Castile Sanctius the 4. who after he had 33 reigned king of Castile and Legio 11. yeres, he died. After him succeeded Ferdinandus the 4. which reigned 15. yeeres, who 34 plagued the Saracens & destroyed them in many places, bur∣ning & spoiling their holds and fortes. After him folowed Al∣phonsus 35 the 11. of that name, who subdued & conquered them at his wil: he so plagued them, that he tooke their only cities, Alcala, & Bencay, which is called the kings pallace, & slue ma∣ny of the Saracens in the region of Granata, where 200000. Sa∣racens Alphonsus vi∣ctorie ouer the Saracens. camped, either to recouer their great losses which of late they had susteined, or els to lose their liues together. Al∣phōsus gaue them such a meeting, that he slue of the horsemē
thirtie thousand, and fiftie thousand footemen: the rest of the Saracens skattered & fled frō the slaughter to saue thēselues: but the rest cōtinued not long after. Spaine nowe began to re∣couer Saracens ouer∣throwen in Hispaine, her former libertie, & to florish, which had bin so long kept vnder infidels, during the time of 38. seueral kings. After Alphōsus had reigned 40. yeres with happy cōquests, he died, & Petrus the first succeeded & reigned king of Castile 19. yeres: whose cruelty was such, that his owne brother Henry was cō∣strained to flee to the king of Arragon, by whose helpe he van∣quished 36 his brother the king, & possessed the kingdom of Ca∣stile: at what time the king went with his three sōnes ouer in∣to Aquitania, frō whence he came with an army, & gaue bat∣tell to his brother, & recouered his kingdome againe. Henry being thus vanquished, he renued his force, and cōmenced Petrus slaine by Henry the second. warre with Petrus, in the which Petrus was slaine, & Henry the 2. time restored to the kingdom of Castile. Ritius at large spea∣keth of this warre. Now in Fraunce reigned Charles surnamed Reade Polyd. more. the wise, and Charles the 4. the sonne of Iohn king of Bohemia, which had bene emperor in Germany. Betweene England & Fraunce were great wars at this time: for a litle before, Edward the 3. had gotten victory by sea ouer the Frenchmen at Clusa, whē the Frenchmen lost 400. ships and 30000. souldiers. Henry the 2. succeeded & reigned 10. yeres, 37 Ritius saith 8. some say 6. this sent aide to Charles king of Fraūce against the Englishmen, betweene whō whot warres & sharpe terrible battels cōtinued. Then did Iohn the first succeed king 38 in Castile, & reigned 11. yeres: warre grew betweene this Iohn king of Castile, and the king of Portingal. 1378. Then succeded Iohn the 2. which reigned 47. yeres, yet Fun∣ctius placeth Henry 3. king of Castile after Iohn the first, which 39 reigned 16. yeres: of whō reade Polidor, how he established his Lib. 20. kingdom: for I may not be longin dilating histories, but brief∣ly passe ouer the names of the kings that reigned in Spaine, & of their wars, first with the Carthagineās, then with the Romās, then with the Vādales, & the last, & the most dangerous wars they had with the Saracens, and after the Saracens, the ciuill
warres they had to bring Spaine to a monarchie. Nowe after Iohn the 2. had raigned 47. yeres he died: during which time, Sigismundus king of Hungaria was created Emperor of Germa∣nie, and Charles the seuenth raigned king of Fraunce, which Fraunce at that instant was most miserably wasted and spoy∣led The French writers can o∣mit English victories. by Henrie the fift king of England, who also was crowned king of Fraunce in the chiefe citie of Paris, where he kept his Christmas. Neither Paul. Aemilius, nor Arnoldus Ferronus make mention of this warre, neither Tilius in his Chronicles of the kings of Fraunce, seemeth to make any great matter of it, but that the Frenchmen through discord & ciuil dissention, were ouerthrowen in a battell by Henrie the fift: but they coulde speake more of Martellus for his victories against the Sara∣cens, of Faramundus, of Charles the great, whose greatnesse was Henry the fift crowned king of Fraunce in Paris. neuer such as to be crowned king in Englande, as Henrie the fift was in Paris: but they want no writers to set foorth their glorie. The decay of the Empire made them to flourish by meanes of the Popes, who euer ayded them in any great acti∣ons, and at last the Popes brought France to Rome. After this, succeeded in Spaine Henrie the fourth, who raigned 23. yeres: 40 this time died Fla. Blondus a learned Chronographer at Rome, 1463. when Lewys the 11. raigned king of Fraunce. Ferdinandus surnamed the great, succeeded king of Spaine, 1475. and raigned 41. yeres. In this kings time the whole kingdom of Spaine was deuided betweene Ferdinandus and Alphon∣sus king of Portingal, and Iohn king of Tarracon, Nauarre, 41 Sicilia, and of the yle Maiorica, and of al that parte of Spaine, when he died, hee gaue to this Ferdinandus Alphonsus sonne, who for his often great victories against the Saracens, and ma∣ny other good successes in other warres, was thereby named Ferdinandus the great, and also surnamed the Catholike: for The first time that Hispaine was deuided betweene two kings. he had gotten the kingdome of Granata by the sword, and ex∣cluded all infidels and Saracens thence, and in their roome planted religion, and placed Christians. This was the first time that all Spaine was gouerned by two kinges, the one in Portingall, the other in Spayne: for vntill Ferdinandus and Al∣phonsus
time, Spaine was (as you heard) by the Saracens posses∣sed: before the Saracens, by the Gothes: before the Gothes, by the Hispaine fiue euerall times onquered. Vandales: before the Vandales, by the Romanes: before the Ro∣manes by the Carthagineans: so long to so many kingdoms was Spaine subiect: for of all nations in the world, they were onely the longest in slauery and bondage vnder strange & forraine kings. They were from Hispanus time the 9. king of Spaine after Tubal, after whose name the countrie was first called Hispaine, 2200. yeeres past, & Spaine continued that name vnder bon∣dage for the space of 2100. yeeres, which was from Hispanus vnto the time of Ferdinandus and Alphonsus king of Portingal who first began to be acquainted with the Indians. This Alphonsus king of Portingal dyed of a fall which he had Hispaine first acquainted with India. from his horse, & afterward his brother named Emanuel suc∣ceeded, who made great preparation to saile to India. About this time dyed Philip Archduke of Austria, father to Charles the fift, at Bruggis in Spaine: and Frederike the third Archduke of Austria, was elected Emperour of Germany. After Ferdinandus the great had reigned 41. yeres, succee∣ded Hispaine began to florish this time and not before. Charles Archduke of Austria to be king in Spaine, who also was elected Emperour of Germany: for he was crowned king of Spaine and of Sicile the seuenth day of Februarie 1518. and reigned 43. yeeres. Vnder this king Charles the fift, the Spani∣ards gote many victories in diuers countries: they tamed the Affricanes, and subdued Holand, Flanders, and places in Germa∣nie: they were skant knowen for all their vauntes and bragges Hispaine got her greatest glory by Charls the fift. before Charles the fifts time: then they beganne to trauaile countries, and to finde prayes and spoyles, so that nowe a world cannot conteyne them, forgetting that they were vas∣sales and subiects, first to the Affricanes, then to the Carthagi∣neans, next to the Romanes, after to the Gothes, and last of all to the Saracēs, who possessed well nigh al Spaine for many yeres, they are so glorious of their enterprises, so proude of their victories. But as we reade one kingdome to rise by the ruine of another: as the Assyrians began to florish by the decay of The insolen∣cie of Hispaine of late. the Chaldeans, the Persians by the fall of the Assyrians, the Ma∣cedonians
by the Persians, the Romanes by the Macedonians, and The decay of one countrie is the aduan∣cing vp an∣other. now Germany by the ruine of Rome: euen so may a man speak of Spaine. By the late decay of Naples, Hierusalem, Sicile, and o∣ther countreies, Spaine beginneth to flourish being wel aided thereunto by the Indians: they which were as dead men, bond slaues, and subiects in the worlde, neither knowne nor heard of for the space of 2000. and odde yeeres, became so sudenly The Hispani∣ards seifeloue. great and mighty, that they thinke wel of no nation but them selues, by their furie and wicked rage. It seemeth that they should not long endure, vnlesse God raised them for scourges and plagues for the punishment of sinne, & to punish other, as they were before punished of the Saracenes and infidels. But consider the time, howe after 600. yeeres the pope the Romane bishop, and Mahomet the prophet of the Saracenes began at one time: the one in Arabia, the o∣ther The Pope and Mahomet com pared. in Rome. This priest in Rome, and this false prophet in A∣rabia, brought all the world welnigh to commitidolatry, and to liue in awe and feare of them: and now of late, the Turkes and the Spaniards reuiue the memorie of the tyranny of the Saracenes, the one mainteining the idolatry of the Pope, the other defending the wickednes of Mahomet. Thus much I write of Spaine, during the time of their long bondage vnder so many nations as you hearde. I haue put downe the names and the numbers of their first kings, which were 24. at their first comming into Spaine, and then of their The long bon▪ dage of Hi∣spaine. seueral gouernment vnder particular magistrates, & then of their subiection vnder the Carthagenians, & after vnder the Ro∣manes, & then vnder the Gothes, and last vnder the Saracens: so long the Saracens gouerned as kings in Spaine, as 40. seuerall kings of Spaine liued, and gouerned as mean and simple kings in few places of Spaine, as in Astura, Legio, and Castile. But now from the time of this Ferdinandus, which raigned king in Spaine 41. yeeres, their chiefe credite & renowme ap∣peared, Ferdinandus. but specially vnder Charles the fift, who gouerned the kingdome of Spaine 43. yeeres, & the Empire of Germanie for sharles the fift. 39. yeeres with great glory & fame. After whom succeeded in
the Empire his brother Ferdinandus, to whom he resigned the empire aliue at Frankford, & after went with both his sisters, Mary and Leonora, into Spaine, where he died in a Monasterie vpon the 20. of September, where succeeded him his sōne Philp that now liueth: of whose large territories, great possessions, mynes, treasures of India, bookes are full and set onely foorth for that purpose, so that I neede not to speake thereof. OF THE BEGINNING and the originall of the Nation which was called Galgreekes, or Gallograecians: of their inua∣sions, spoile, and slaughter in many Countries of Asia, and of their ouerthrow by Cn. Manlius, who with great pompe triumphed ouer them at Rome. GAllograeci a French nation mingled with the Grecians, as both Iosephus & Zonaras Strab. 4. agree: This people dwelled sometime in Galatia, being from the beginning Ioseph. lib. 1. cap. 6. Frenchmen, and by the reasō they were in so many places skattered, after they Zona. lib. 1. cap. 4. were driuen frō Rome by Camillus, and after that Brennus their chiefe captaine Iustine lib. 15. died, that at one time all Asia was full of Frenchmen by the name of Galli. Iustine saith, that no king of the East Countrie would take battell in hand without a French armie. Againe, if any king were by force driuen out of his kingdome, they fled no where for aide, but to Brennus captaine of the Gaules. These people bearing such sway in diuers places of Asia, King of Bythi∣nia. that the king of Bythinia hauing occasion to craue some ayde for the defence of his kingdome, who hauing wonne the vi∣ctorie,
the king diuided the kingdome of Bythinia betweene Lu. Florus lib. 2. cap. 11. him and the Frenchmen, and therefore the Bythinians and the Frenchmen, for that they dwelled in one Countrie be∣ing two seuerall nations, were called Gallograeci: for so Liuius agreeing with this history of Iustine saith, that whē any French naon dwelt in any part of old Greece, those people were cal∣led Iustine lib. 25. Gaulgreekes, by reason of their mingling with other, they were called gens mixta & adultera: for after they had diuided Gallograeci. themselues into diuers coūtries, after Brennus their captaine was slaine (as I said before) they spoyled Greece, and the most part of Asia: the number of these Galgrecians were such, as all Asia stood in great feare and doubt of them. These Frenchmen florished vnder Brennus a captaine, fitte Brennus the Britaine inua∣ded Italie and tooke Rome. for such mercenary souldiers: and as Liui saith, Gens auidissima auri spared neither Towne nor Temple: for at that time when the Frenchmen inuaded Italie and had taken Rome, and had spoyled and destroyed cities and countries being such num∣ber together 300000. as saith Iustine, diuiding thēselues some to Macedonia, some to seeke one way, and some to seeke ano∣ther way, that the Frenchmen were a terrour in Asia: some of these dwelt in Galatia, some went to Phrygia, & there in many places inhabited. Now both these countries Bythinia & Gala∣tia are called Gallograecia, and as many as dwelt in any part of Greece, they were called Frenchgreeks: for at what time Cōsuls Ambigatus. reigned after the kings in Róme, reigned likewise in a part of Gallia called Celta, a king named Ambigatus, whose coūtrie was so populous, that skant the soile was able to entertaine them: he sent two nephews of his being brethrē, the one called Bel∣lencsus, the other Sigonesus, furnished them with men and mu∣nitions, Bellenosus and Sigonesus. & willed them to seeke some countrie and to trauell for a kingdome by the sword, hauing Brennus their chiefe ge∣nerall: Brennus gene∣rall. they as men greedy of spoile, wasting and destroying townes and countries, besieged Rome, tooke it, & wanne the Capitol. After the spoile of Rome, they passed into Thracia, where they possessed many cities: thence they passed into A∣sia, & into Helespont, where braules & contentions grewe be∣tweene
their cōpany, that Lomnorius returned againe with his Lomnorius. Lutarius. men into Byzantium in Thracia, and Lutarius into Macedonia. After this, Nicomedes king of Bythinia did leuie a great ar∣mie of these bastard Frenchmen, that these 2. great captaines Lutarius and Lomnorius the one came from Macedonia and the other from Thracia and met in Bythinia, and they of Celta hea∣ring of the treasures & great spoyles which their countrey∣men had, came more in heapes daily from their countrey vn∣to them, that the French armie waxed so strong and so great, that they were a terror vnto all Asia, in so much that the kings of Aisa & of Syria paied yerely stipends vnto them, & so con∣tinued these Gallogrecians, so named by their seueral dwellings amongst the Greekes, vntill the time of Antiochus the great, The kings of Asia and Syria payed tribute to the Gaul∣greekes. who became so strong in Asia and Syria, that he began to warre vpon the Romanes: for at that time some of them dwelled in Bithynia, some in Galatia, & some remained of them amongst the Tectosageans, Tolossa a wealthie countrey full of golde and siluer: in that countrey is Tolossa, from whence the Romanes as both Strabo and Possidonius affirme, had 15. thousand ta∣lents 15000. talents of the gold of Tolossa. at one victorie: the gold of Tolossa grewe to a prouerbe, Aurum Tolossanum: of this Cicero in his 3. booke de natura Deo∣rum make mencion: of this Tolossanum aurum doth Gellius re∣peate Gellius lib. 3. cap. 9. an Historie which doth agree with Trogus Pompeius, who saith that when Caepio the Romane Consul had robbed lib. 32. and spoyled the temple of Tolossa, the sacriledge seemed such vnto the Tectosageans, that they were warned by their ora∣cles, that vnlesse they would reuenge the sacriledge done by the Romanes vnto their Temple, they should be all consumed The temple at Tolossa robbed by the Romans. with the plague, for the Romanes had taken ten hundred thou∣sand pound of gold, and fiftie hundred thousand pounds of siluer from the temple of Tolossa: and it is written in that Historie, that the Romane Consull and his armie were ouer∣throwen by the Tectosageans: but when Antiochus was forced Sacriledge reuenged. to flee from Asia being ouerthrowen by the Romanes, at what time Mar. Fuluius and Cneus Manlius were made Consuls at Rome, these Gallogrecians were so scattered after the taking of
Rome, that they possessed many places in Asia & in Europe, be∣ing named according to the places where they dwelt, Gallo∣greeks, for so were they called being mingled with the Greeks, dwelling in diuers partes of Greece and about Greece: they brought al Asia and much of Europe to be afraid, spoiling and robbing all kingdoms & countreis where they came, and for a long time plagued thē, that they seemed lords of al places, beyng hardy and rude barbarous people, able to suffer anie Diod. lib. 5. hardnes, apparelled in skinnes of beasts, and lying vpon the ground, a shamelesse and filthy nation in beastly lust, wic∣ked and most cruell in all their dealings: insomuch that they sacrificed those captiues and prisoners taken in the warres, The sauage and cruell ty∣ranny of the Gallograecians. vpon long stakes and sharpe poules vnto their goddes: v∣sing the greatest tyrannie that they might inuent, against those whom they subdued and conquered. Thus much and more doeth Dio. Siculus write of them, concerning their man∣ners and liuing, of their garmentes, weapons, and order of fighting: but they were in time vanquished by the Romanes, Ruffinus de Ori∣gine Gallograec. and quite subdued in all parts of Asia. These Frenchmen otherwise called Gallograecians, flourishing in many places, the Romanes had an eye vnto them: & fearing they should be put to greater force, they sent Cneius Manlius then Consul to war vpon the Gallograecians: where they had a terrible battel by mount Olympus, and there were slaine of the Cneus Manlius triumphed o∣uer the Gaul∣greekes. Gallorgecians fourty thousand. After this battel the Consul did leade his army to the Tectosageans, and laid siege to Amyra the chiefest countrey, and tooke it, and after gaue a great battel to the Gallograecians, where they were all ouerthrown, ouer whō, Florus lib. 2. after he had brought those cities & townes about mount O∣lympus vnder the Romane empire, and had againe brought the Tectosageans and Tolossa, after he had subdued & conquered the Gallograecians, he returned to Rome, and triumphed, when Quint. Faminius & Marcus Aemilius Lepidus were consuls, after Liuius lib. 8. decad. 4. the building of Rome 567. yeres. Thus ended the time of the Gallograecians by Ruffinus and by Liuius writing: I might of this haue written more, but by reason of the history of Fraunce where they shalbe touched againe, I cease,
OF THE OLDE GAVLES CALLED now Frenchmen of their first arriuall and continuance in warres before they were seated in France, by the name first of Newmagi, secondly, by the name of Marcomanni, thirdly Sicambri. And first from Marcomirus vnto Francus time: during which time, they were called Sicambri for 400 and odde yeeres. I Need not long stand in Fraunce, neither in de∣scribing the coūtrey, neither much trouble my The first com∣ming of the Frenchmen into Germany. selfe with the late histories, which are knowen to the most part: this only as I haue done of o∣ther countreyes, set downe their antiquitie of their first comming into Fraunce, of their continuaunce vnder diuers names, and of succession of their kinges. Lea∣uing Gomer the eldest sonne of Iaphet with his posterities a∣mong Gomer. them by the name of Cimbri, Sicambrians and others, I wil speak briefly of their first arriuall frō Scythia, of their com∣ming to Germany, of their first habitations about the riuer of Rhene, and of their continual warres & victories in enlarging Beroal. lib. 4. the territories of their first possession which was but little, by many sharpe battels, & continuall long warres at home, and brought all Gallia subiect vnder them, which now is the one∣ly flourishing kingdome of the worlde, that earst contained many nations by the name of Gallia, Cisaphina, Transalpina, Bel∣gica, Strab. lib. 4. 5. as now Germania doth, & is situated betweene the riuer of Rhene & the mountains Pyrenaei, a fertile & a rich coūtrey re∣plenished with plenty of al things, wel watred with riuers & fountains. Solinus writeth, that out of Gallia you may trauel to any part of the world: the most part of this countrey is nowe Mela lib. 2. 5. called Fraunce, of whose description, situation, & other com∣mendations due to that soile, of the length, bredth, and ma∣ners of Frenchmen, Reade Srabo, Pomporius Mela, and Solinus. As for the originall antiquitie of the people, I reade that Solinus cap. 22. they are little beholden to them selues, either in finding out their antiquities, or recording of the same: but such fables as their parents yeelded from time to time, as the Egyptians did and others, which for want of true Histories,
fill their bookes with fables. And for that they were first strangers and foreiners in Gallia, comming from Scythia into Germanie, where their king named Marcomirus with the most part of his armie was slaine by the Gothes, Marcomirus his Marcomirus slaine by the Gothes. onne gouerning the rest of the Scythian armie, brought his people to the confines of Germanie, ad ostia Rheni, seeking out voyde places to inhabite: to whome in the seuenth yeere of his raigne, came 489. thousande moe Scythians, and there Marcomirus sonne began a new kingdome, & possessed many places by force about Rhene: and they were called of the Ger∣manes, Neumagi, at their first dwelling: after they were called Sicambri, and lastly they were called Franci. The Frenchmen were in their first comming to Gallia, so The French∣men forced to seeke dwel∣lings by the sword. tossed and so afflicted, for want of dwellings (their nomber and multitude was such) that of necessitie they were forced to seeke seates to dwell in by the sworde, and wonne diuers places about the riuer of Rhene, & possessed many fertill pla∣ces in Germanie about Hercinia: for Iulius Caesar in his Historie of Fraunce saith, Fuit tempus &c. There was a time, that the Gauls, which afterward were called Frenchmen, did vanquish They dwelt about the ri∣uer of Rhene, and after in Bohemia, and about Witen∣berge. the Germanes in warre, and for the multitude of their armie wanting places to inhabite, they in spite of the Germanes pos∣sessed about the riuer of Rhene & other places, about Witen∣berge and Boemia. And so Liuy affirmeth, that the people na∣med then Celtae, (which are Frenchmen nowe) were scattered ouer all Europe, and dwelt in Panonia, before the Romanes had any being there. And so Iustine seemeth to affirme, when he had said that 300000 Galatae sought new countries to dwell in, naming them Gens aspera & bellicosa, and the first nation Gens aspera & bellicosa. after Hercules that ledde an armie ouer the Alpes, at what time they went to Illirica, and from thence to Panonia, where like∣wise Appianus doth verifie their comming, when Camillus had driuen them and their captaine Brennus from Rome. Herodot Brennus driuen from Rome by Camillus. also doth remember these Scythians, how they came to dwell among the Cymbrians, and howe their nomber increased. It is euident in Polibius, Strabo, and in Appianus, that the
inhabitants about Rheni and other places of Germanie cal∣led Diuers names of the French∣men. Boios Brenici Tenani and Senoues were Frenchmen: but for that nothing is certaine before Augustus time in Germanie, as Strabo saith who liued in Augustus time, but controuersies are such about the antiquitie which in truth is very ancient, and Strabo liued in Agustus time. about their names which are many and diuers, as Neumagi, Marcomanni, Franci, Salii, Cimbri, Celtae, Galli, before they were called Frenchmē, that it would be both tedious & vnpleasant, and also vncertaine, for the variety of opinions. Leauing ther∣fore the dissension of these writers and the vncertaintie of kingdomes beginning, I will briefly speake of Marcomirus the first king of the Frenchmen named yet Neumagi, in whose time the countrey of Gallia was sore afflicted for Marcomirus made sharpe warres, and died after he had reigned eight and twentie yeres. After whom succeeded his sonne Antenor, who hauing maried a wife, learned and a modest Queene borne in Britaine named Cambra daughter to Bellinus the great, after whose name they were called Sicambri, which cōtinued vntill Neumagi cal∣led Sicambri. Francus time which was the sixtenth king after this Queene Cambra & her husband Antenor who reigned in the 91. olym∣piade: Cambra Belli∣nus daughter. at what time the Egyptians reuolted from the Persians in the time of Darius Nothus the sixt king of Persia, they were called Sicambri: for Galli, at that time were not called French, but Gaules. Of these Pau. Aemylius taketh no notice, neither doth Ar∣noldus Ferronus make any mention, two of the chiefe Frnech writers, neither the French chronicles: but Tritemius is recited by Functius, who setteth down what Tritemius thought of the originall of the Frenchmen: yet Aemylius affirmeth in that Aemil. lib. 1. the antiquitie of the Frenchmem is from the Troians. At what time Aeneas came from Ilion to Laurentum after the destructi∣on of the Citie, one Francus a Captaine of some nomber of Troians came with his companie ad paludem Meotim: after The French∣men challenge to come from the Troians. whose name they were named Frenchmen: but let Tritemius and Paul. Aemylius dispute of that matter. I will set downe the names of the kings, from Marcomirus vntill Francus.
I will briefly runne ouer the Historie: for at the first arri∣uall ouer of these Scythians into Germanie, they inuaded many places, and grewe so strong in so many places, that they pos∣sessed many Cities, Townes, and Castles, that for the space of foure hundred yeeres and more (during which time 400. odde yeeres reig∣ned the kings of Sicambri. reigned sixteene kings ouer the Sicambrians) they had conti∣nuall warres one after another, vntill Francus time, and from Francus againe vntill Faramundus time, another foure hundred yeeres and more still in warres: of whom Tritemius writeth seuerally, and obserueth the like order in his historie of the Kings of France, as Suetonius doth for the Emperours Tritemius. of Rome. Marcomirus waxed so great, that the Romanes had much a doe in his time, not onely to keepe those holds which they had, but also were constrained to answere these fellowes in Italie: for the Sycambrians were so fleshed with diuers victo∣ries which they had ouer the Gauls, and ouer the Germanes, The victories of Sicambri. that they were determined to stay no where, before they had first destroyed Rome, and sacked all Italie. The Romanes had thought to see the hardinesse & strength of these people to curbe them: but perceiuing the multitude to bee such as terrified all Europe, and doubting that they should haue the like warres with the Sicambrians as they had a litle before that time with the Affricans, so much the Romanes The Romanes much affrigh∣ted. were fearefull of these people, that they appoynted Caius Ma∣rius Consul against the lawe being absent, which was neuer seene before in Rome but once in the time of Cornelius Scipio in the warres of Affrike. Marius the Romane Con∣sul was ap∣poynted Ge∣nerall against these Sicam∣brians, whom the Romanes called Cimbri. But to benefite a common weale, lawes may well be in∣fringed, and specially when necessitie forceth the same: as at that time, Marius was appoynted against these stoute and strong people whom the Romanes called Cimbri: but I referre you to Tritemius, who onely wrote of these sixteene kings and of the people called Sicambri. Likewise reade Plutarch in Marius, and you shall knowe what strong warres, what sharpe battels, and with what inuincible courage they fought a∣gainst
the Romans. Caius Marius, Catulus Luctatius, and other Romane captaines can well witnesse of the hardinesse of this nation: for since The French∣men came from Scythia about 400. yeeres before the birth of Christ. the first time that this people came out of Scythia, which was 400. and odde yeeres before our Sauiour Christ was borne, they gaped alwayes for the Countrey of France being then inhabited with Gauls & the people Celtae, and the countrey it selfe called Gallia. They held the warres with the Gaules nine hundred yeeres, sometimes conquerours, and sometime conquered: they ceased not, vntill they wearied all the Countrie about them, and diuers places of Germanie and of Gallia waxed weake and feeble: so the Frenchmen began to What the Ro∣manes lost, the Frenchmen wanne in time, bee strong, and to winne that which the Romanes had lost. After that this Marcomirus had expulsed and vanquished the people that dwelt about Rhene, and had committed to his brother Sunno the possession of that countrey, hee went and passed ouer the riuer of Rhene, in the foure and twentieth yeere of his raigne, with a very huge armie of Sicambrians and Saxons, wasted and spoyled with sworde and fire many townes and countreys in the West Gallia: and after hee had made a great slaughter of the Gauls, he entred in league with Britaines, and returned a conqueror to see how the Germanes behaued and vsed Sunno, where he died after he had reigned eight and twentie yeeres. Reade Iornan∣dus de reb. Get. This Marcomirus was so famous, & had done such worthie feats in armes, that thē his people after his death were called Marcomanni: for so Plinie doth name them, lib. 12. cap. 4. While this Marcomirus helde warres with the Gaules, ciuill warres began in Greece which continued seuen and twentie yeeres. Marcomanni Darius Nothus gouerned the Persians, at what time in Rome a law was made, that it should be lawfull for the Patricians and Senators to ioyne in marriage with the common people. This time florished in Greece Pericles the Athenian, and Socrates the Philosopher. After Marcomirus his sonne builded townes and cities, and made strong holdes and castles: hee taught the vse of many things to his noble men, and hee
also taught the women which earst were rude and ignorant in Scythia to sowe flaxe and hempe, and to weaue silke and o∣ther like things. He made lawes to his people which neuer be∣fore Cambra a wise woman a Britane taught her husband and her peo∣ple ciuilitie. heard of any law in Scythia, & brought them from rude and wild men to knowledge & ciuilitie: for this Antenor was taught by his wife Cambra Bellinus daughter king of Britaine. She was wise, modest and vertuous, & brought vp her sonne Priamus in ciuill knowledge, and made him acquainted with orders and lawes insomuch that when his father Antenor died, hee was able to gouerne his people with lawes: for in the eight yeere of his reigne, he & his mother Cambra builded about the riuer of Rhene two great townes, the one he named Neopagus where long the kings palace stoode, and the other Neopagus. Neomagus in memorie of his name. Neomagus. The Sicambrians this time beganne to speake the Saxons tongue: for the maner and order of this people at that time whersoeuer they were scattred in any place of Europe or Asia, they were named after the name of the place as I tolde you. At their first comming into Germanie from Scythia, they were of the Germanes named Neumagi: after, they were called Neumagi. Marcomani after the name of Marcomirus. Then Sicambri after the name of Cambra Bellinus daughter: for so long as they ta∣ried Marcomani. Sicambri. in Scythia they were named Scythians, in Armenia they were called Armenians, in Gallia they were called Gaules, who when they had sacked Rome and taken it for seuen mo∣neths, they were constrained by Camillus to goe from thence to Galatia, Macedonia, or to any part of Greece: they were called Gaulgreekes, and so bare they as many names as those coun∣treys Gaul Greekes. had where they dwelt, vntil Francus time by whom they were called Franci which to this day they holde. Nowe after that Antenor had reigned thirtie yeeres, and his sonne Pria∣mus after him 27. succeeded Helenus the 4. king of Sicambria, Helenus the fourth king of Sicambria which reigned 19. yeeres. This king had the Gaules in hand, and plagued them: he gaue them diuers repulses, and in bat∣tell slue of them sixteene thousand, wasted and subdued Gal∣lia vnto the riuer Mosa: for this was the countrey that they ga∣ped
and thirsted for. During which time of 16. kings which gouerned after Cā∣bra Bellinus daughter, they persecuted the countrey of Gallia one king after another successiuely, vntill Francus time. In the time of this Helenus & his father Priamus, raigned in Per∣sia, Artaxerxes Mnemon surnamed the great, and in Caria raig∣ned Consent oft time of kings in other coun∣treyes. king Mausolus a countrey in Greece. In Macedonia raigned nowe king Philip. king Alexander the great his father, the sonne of Amyntas: this time Marcus Manlius conspired against Camillus, and moued sedition in Rome, and therfore he was ad∣iudged to be throwen headlong downe from the rocke Tar∣peia. In the time of this Helenus Plato died, in whose place suc∣ceeded Speusippus the Philosopher, Aristotle the Philosopher, and Demosthenes the Orator flourished, and Iaddua was high priest in Iudea, and continued 27. yeeres vntill Alexander the great his time. Diocles the eldest sonne of Helenus succeeded the fourth king, and raigned 39. yeres, a seuere man, bold and much giuen by nature to warres: hee followed his predeces∣sors in commencing warre in Gallia, hauing like affection to Diocles 4. king. the kingdome of Fraunce, as his father and grandfather had These kinges by succession professed armes. before him: he raigned king amongest the Cicambrians when king Alexander the great was in warre against Darius king of Persia, and after Alexanders death 30. yeeres: for in Diocles time the kingdomes of Egypt, Asia and Syria began to flourih Alex. the gre raigned in the time of this Diocles. againe vnder new kings, which were souldiers and captaines vnder Alexander the great, of whose ciuill warres you may reade in the histories of their kingdoms: for Darius surnamed Codomanus the last king of Persia was slaine, and his kingdome subdued, & the monarchie taken into Greece vnder the kings of Macedonia. About this time the Romans begā their great wars with the Samnites, when Pyrrhus king of Epirus had sailed with great na∣uie Pyrrhus raig∣ned in Helenus time which was Diocles sonne. and entred Italie, of whose warre there at that time Liui speaketh of, and called it Bellum Ausonium, when Pyrrhus was driuen out of Italie, and Lu. Papirius Cursor trium∣phed
ouer the Samnites, at what time he was Dictator in Rome: after whome Quintu Fabius being Dictator ouerthrewe the Samnites in a great battell. Tritemius writeth that the Gothes commenced warre this time against the Saxons, wasted and The victorie of the Sax∣ons ouer the Gothes. spoyled manie townes in the confines of the Saxons: for at that time fiue kinges ioyned in a league of amitie with the Sa∣xons, and gaue a great ouerthrow to the Gothes, to the number Diocles the fift king of Sicam∣bria. of a 100000. Gothes. After this victorie, Diocles was all the dayes of his life in fighting and wasting of Gallia, and did much harme vnto them, and when he had raigned 39. yeres, died: after whō succeeded his eldest sonne named Helenus the 2. of that name, and the 6. king of Sicambria, who was neither Helenus 6. king was remoued from his king∣dome. beloued of his people, nor profitable to the kingdome: for he was foolish in time of peace, and peeuish in warre: and therfore he was remoued from his kingdome, for that he was not found sufficient to gouerne, and his younger brother Bas∣sanus was crowned king in Sicambria, a man of great stout∣nesse, The booke of the law, and the sword of punishment caried before Bassanus. wisedome and iustice: in so much hee spared neither friend, kinne, brother, or sonne that violated his lawes: where∣soeuer he would trauell, he commanded two things to be ca∣ried before him, the booke of the lawe, and the sworde of punishment. Tritemius writeth this historie of Bassanus, that hee had a sonne named: Sedanus, who committed adulterie against the law, & was of his own father thus punished: although his nobles and great men made much meanes to the king for Adulterie pu∣nished by Bas∣sanus. his life, yet Bassanus executed the lawe, saying to his noble men in this sorte: I haue made a lawe with your consent, and to your contentation: will you bee against your selues, and against me in perurming of the same? and turning his speech to his sonne, he said, My sonne, I doe not kill thee, but the lawes of the countrey, which thou hast willingly violated, and therewithall tooke him by the haires of his head, & with Bassanus a iust king. his owne hand beheaded him. So iust a king was this Bassa∣nus, so seuere to wicked men, so gentle to good men, and so well esteemed of his people, that as Amerodacus a Philo∣sopher
of their owne nation sayeth, he was Appetentissimus diuinitatis. Reade more of this king in Tritemius: he raigned sixe & thirtie yeeres, and builded in memorie of his victory Tritem. in Bas∣sano. had ouer Taborinus king of the Tegurans, a strong castle, and named it Montabur. While this Bassanus flourished in Sicam∣bria, Mōtabur buil∣ded by Bassa∣nus. Demetrius the sonne of Antigonus gouerned in Macedo∣nia, Lysimachus in Thracia, and Philadelphus in Egypt: at what time the Hebrew Bible was translated from Hebrew into Greek by the means of Philadelphus. In the time of king Bassanus be∣gan the first warre betweene the Romanes and the Affricanes. Zeno the Stoike Philosopher died this time, and Eustratus the phisition flourished. Nowe when Bassanus died, his countreymen can onized Basanus after death called Basangor. him amongst the number of the gods, and did of long time worshippe him after his death, calling him Basangor: after whom followed his owne sonne named Clodomirus, & raigned Clodomirus 7. king of Sicam∣bria. 18. yeeres, in whose daies the feastes called Floralia, were cele∣brated in Rome: at what time the Romanes had peace with the Affricanes, but were occupied in Bello Lygustico. The Parthi∣ans which before were obscure and base people, & banished out of their countrey, began to stablish a new kingdome, and became so strōg that their kings were named Arsaces, a name of dignitie, as the Egyptians by their Pharoes and the Romanes by Caesars. I see I shoulde bee long to speake seuerally of the Arsaces the names of the kings of Per∣thia. rest of the kinges of Sicambria, which are yet nine to write of, therefore I will onely lay downe the names of these kinges from Marcomirus the first king of the Sicambrians vntil Francus the last king, to auoyd tediousnes. 1 Marcomirus the first king raigned 28. yeeres: he made the first warres in Fraunce & subdued vnto the riuer of Mosa. 2 Antenor who maried Cambria the Brittaine Belinus daugh∣ter, raigned 27. yeeres. 3 Priamus the sonne of Antenor by Cambria raigned 27. yeere: in this Kinges raigne the Sicambrians began to vse the Saxons tongue. 4 Helenus the fourth king raigned 19. yeeres.
5 Diocles the sonne of Helenus reigned 39. this king liued in the time of Alexander the great. 6 Helenus the seconde of that name, and the sonne of Diocles raigned 14. yeeres: this king was abstracted, and therefore he was forced to forsake his kingdome. 7 Basanus the brother of Helenus reigned 36. yeeres, at what time Philadelphus raigned in Egypt, and Antiochus Soter in Syria. This Bessanus builded a famous strong castle, in me∣mory of his victory had ouer Taborinus king of the Tega∣renes: and he named the castle Montabur. At what time He∣ligastus a Priest, and a Prophet amongst the Sicambrians flou∣rished. Al these kings holde their names from Cambra, and were called therby Sycam∣bri from Aute∣nor, who mari∣ed Cambra vn∣to Francus time. 8 Clodomirus the sonne of Basanus raigned in Sicambria 18. yeeres. 9 His sonne Nicanor raigned 34. yeeres, in what time the se∣cond warres of the Romanes began against the Affricanes. 10 Marcomirus the second of that name, and the 9. king, raig∣ned 28. yeeres. 11 Clodius the tenth king of Sicambria raigned 10. yeeres. 12 Antenor the eleuenth king raigned sixteene yeeres: in the time of this king and his predecessor, Terentius made his Co∣medies. 13 Clodomirus the 2. of that name, and the 12. king, raigned 20. yeeres: in whose time beganne the thirde and last warre be∣tweene the Romanes and the Affricanes. 14 Merodacus the 13. king raigned 28. yeeres: this king inua∣ded Italie, with 3000000. reade more in Plutarch of this people in the life of Marius. 15 Cassander the 15. king of Sicambria raigned 21. yeeres: this king ioyned with Arathius king of the Saxons, and Borbista king of the Gothes entered into Germany, and made a great slaughter of the Teutones. 16 Antharius the sixteenth king, he raigned fiue and thirty yeeres: this king also played his part with the Romanes, and wan Moguntia, and made it euen to the grounde. In whose time Iulius Caesar made his voyage to Britaine.
CHAP. II. From Francus the sixteenth king of Fraunce then called Sicambri, vntill the time of Farabertus the 12. in number after Francus: of the warres, inuasions, and victories, of the enlargement of their kingdome from one king to another, vntill Farabertus gouerne∣ment: during which time, they were called Franci, after the name of Francus. IN the yeere before the birth of Christ Francus the first king by whome the kingdome of Fraunce was so amed. 245. Francus the eldest sonne of An∣tharius, after that his father was slaine by the Gaules by the aide of the Romans, suc∣ceeded in the kingdome of Sicambria, & became such an enemie to the Gaules, that hee destroyed their townes and ci∣ties, wasted their territories, and spoy∣led the people, not only the Gaules, but also the Gothes and o∣ther nations: insomuch that the Romanes hearing of this Fran∣cus courage and stoutnesse, sent Lollius with a Romane armie, Tritem. in Franco. who in the first battel that he gaue in Germany, slue of thē 18. thousand. Francus sent his sonne Clogio to aide his neighbors, by whom the Romanes were put to flight, with a great slaugh∣ter Lollius with his Romane ar∣mie put to flight by Clo∣gio. of Lollius souldiers. In the mean time Francus when he had driuen out the Gothes from Germany, after he had plagued the Gaules, and had most miserably wasted and spoyled the coun∣trey, vnto the riuer Mosa, & as histories affirme, slue 200000. Gaules. which newes frighted much the Romanes. In the 24. 200000. Gaules slaine by Fran∣cus. yeere of his raigne, after he had concluded peace with diuers nations in Germany, he made a decree that Sicambria shoulde be called Francia, after the name of Francus, which to this day Sicambria now is called Fraunce. continueth a strong and a stoute nation, and the onely king∣dome of the world for all commodities. During which time, ciuill warres waxed hoate betweene Iulius Caesar & Pompeius the great, which being soon extingui∣shed both by the murthering of Pompey in Egypt, and by the like murther of Caesar at Rome in the Senate: after which
began another new ciuil warre betweene Augustus Caesar and Marcus Antoninus, which endured 12. yeeres: at what time Ianus Temple was shut the third time, and peace was then Ianus temple shut in all Au∣gust. time. graunted to all nations by Augustus. But the antiquitie of the name of Fraunce, beginning from Francus time in the 190. O∣lympiade, and in the beginning of the 29. Iubilee, at what time Augustus Caesar subdued all Spayne, and brought them vnder the Romane Empire. Nowe the names before named Neumagi, Marcomani, Cimbri, Celtae, Sicambri, and Sa∣mothei, are now changed, to be called Franci: after this Fran∣cus succeeded his sonne Clogio the seconde king of Fraunce, which raigned 30. yeeres, a wise man, and a great Astrologer, Clogio 2. king. For his know∣ledge and skill in Astrologie surnamed Magus. a Southsayer, and for skill and knowledge in many thinges he was named Magus. In the fourth yeere of Clogios raigne, Tiberius was sent by Augustus to Germanie with a very high hoste of Romanes, who destroyed all places where they came into. Clogio with an ar∣mie gaue vnto Tiberius a battell, in the which Tiberius wanne no great conquest but rather losse, and at that time departed A battell be∣tweene Clogio and Tiberius the Emperor. from field without victorie: yet the name of Fraunce was skant knowen a farre off, for the newnesse and late change of the name: and therefore the nations rounde about called Clogio a Germane, and not a Frenchman. Notwithstanding, Clogio beyng growen to so great a name, that he was feared as his father was before him of the verie Romanes: he made his sonne named Phrisus a king, and named the region where Phrisius the sonne of Clog made king in Friseland. he gouerned Phrysia, which at this day is called Frizeland: this was made subiect to Fraunce at that very time, paying yeerely tribute vnto Fraunce 260. oxen: this was done by consent of all Fraunce, for this Phrysus was the second sonne of Clogio. Nowe Fraunce beganne to bee knowen by the name of Tribute of 260. oxen paid out of Friseland in∣to the crowne of Fraunce. Ta∣cis. 4. 5. Fraunce: for Clogio hauing some ayde of the Saxons ouerthrew the Romanes armie, and slue Marcus Lollius their generall in the fielde, and after vanquished still the Gaules, vntill hee be∣came so mightie, that hee left behinde him his second sonne
king of Phrysia, and his eldest sonne and heyre king of France named Herimerus, who raigned after his father twelue yeres: whose successe was neyther like to his father Clogio, nor to Herimers 5. king after Francus. his brother Phrysus: who flourished in his newe kingdome, and gaue diuers expulses to the Romane force: insomuch that Friselande beganne to be spoken of through the prow∣esse and martiall feates of Phrisus their first king. For Heri∣merus the elder brother fighting against his enemies, very vn∣fortunately Herimerus slaine. was slayne when he had raigned twelue yeres: he died in the 32. yeere after Christes birth: at what time gouer∣ned in India, Pontius Pilatus President to the Romane Empire. About this time, Herodes builded a citie in the honour of Ti∣berius Caesarea before called Turris Stratonis. Tacitus lib. 4. Caesar the Emperor of Rome, and named it Caesarea, which was before called Turris Stratonis. In the time of this Herimerus in the citie of Fidena, a Thea∣ter fell downe at the play of an enterlude, which the Romane Attilius builded for sword players, where fiftie thousand were sore bruised, maimed, and slaine. The fourth king of Fraunce Marcomirus 4. king. was Marcomirus, which raigned eighteene yeeres, and had the like dealings within Gallia, as his predecessors had. In the seuenth yeere of Marcomirus raigne was Caius Caesar Caligula made Emperour in Rome. Reade Tritemius of this Marcomi∣rus, and of his sonne Clodomirus, who helde sharpe warre with the Romanes in Maguntia, and manie sore battels Clodomirus 5. king. after Francus. within Gallia. This time Guidericus king Bellinus sonne raig∣ned king in Brytaine: after whome succeeded by force of armes in Britayne Armiracus, whome Claudius Caesar van∣quished and triumphed ouer: but let vs returne to the kings of Fraunce. After Clodomirus succeeded his sonne Antenor the 2. of that name, & raigned 6. yeres, who in the last yere of his raigne ha∣uing occasiō to passe ouer the riuer of Mosa, the bridge there∣of being broken with the weight of the kinges companie, hee This king with 60. of his no∣ble men was drowned in the riuer Mo∣sa. & more of his Princes, were at this instant drowned, & three∣score noble men more of Fraunce, beside other Gentlemen and Captaines, after whom followed Rhaterus the eldest
sonne of Antenor, who raigned in Fraunce 21. yeeres, hee al∣so did handle the Gaules in like sorte, for before his predeces∣sors had won that countrey, which lay beyond the riuer Mosa, Gallia sore plagued. & had brought the Gaules most miserably vnder foote, yet stil they held long wars, and many sharpe battels with the French men vntill Faramondus time, who was the first king named of Gallia: which was 400. yeeres and odde. After Francus time, this Rhaterus after he had bestowed 21. yeeres in warres against the Gaules, they renued the league Raterus 7. king. which his predecessors had made with the Germanes, Saxons, and an other nation called the Dorings: he builded a towne, and named it Rhaterodamum and died. This kings life and do∣ings is set forth by Arebaldus in verse, and after augmented by Hunibaldus. In the second yeere of this Rhaterus raigne, Nero then Emperour of Rome played his bloody tragedies against the Christians, persecuted and tormented them, and slue them with diuers kindes of death: this time Alani a people of Alani. Scythia inuaded Media, and made hauocke vnto the confines of Armenia, at what time all the Philosophers and Mathe∣maticians Ioseph. lib. 7. cap. 27. were banished from Rome and Italie: in this kinges later time was Quintilianus brought to Rome by the Emperor Galba from Spaine. After Rhaterus succeeded his sonne Richimerus, which raigned 24. yeeres, and had great warres both against the Richimerus 8. king. Gaules, and against the Romanes, and beyng ayded by the Ger∣manes gaue a sharpe battell both to the Romanes, and to the Gaules, not farre from the citie of Basana. Tritemius affirmeth Ioseph wrote his historie de bello Iudaico in Richimerus time. that in that very yeere the Gothes had inuaded the coastes and confines of Germanie, and were by this Richimerus king of Fraunce, and Fernefrides kinges of the Dorings, Turings, and by Vidikindo king of the Saxons ouercome. But in trueth the crie of Chronicles is against it, and sayeth that these kinges of the Saxons, and the king of Turings were long after Richi∣merus time: but it is most certayne that at that time the Ger∣manes, the Saxons, the Turinges and Frenchmen tooke pos∣session in that Countrey which is nowe called Marchia
Bradenburgensis, where Sunno the sonne of Richimer did first and before any man inhabite there, and was the first prince Sunno. that gouerned the Countrie and ruled the people, and as Tri∣temius sayeth, hee was set there by his father and the other kings before named, to withstand and resist the forreigne ar∣mies, and other people comming from the East into Ger∣manie. The Gaules & the Romanes sore plagued by Richimer. This Richimer was a very notable stoute captaine, a boulde man and a seuere king, who during the whole reigne of twentie foure yeeres which hee gouerned in Fraunce, the Gaules and the Romanes were by him sore plagued and sore afflicted, sometime with slaughter and victorie ouer them, and sometime with repulse. This time Traiane the Emperour had warres in the East part, and subdued the Sauromaties, the Arabians, the Agarens, Odemarus 9. king of Fraūce, the Bospherans, and was ready to make his voyage to the redde sea, and so to conquer India. The fourth persecution fell in the time of Richimer, after whom succeeded his sonne Odema∣rus the ninth king of Fraunce: hee reigned fourteene yeeres, The 4. perse∣cution in Ri∣chimers time. and began to gouerne Fraunce in the yeere after Christ a hun∣dred fourtie foure. This king Odemarus was much giuen to seeke peace, and by all meanes studied to maintaine the same: Odemarus con∣cluded peace with the Ro∣manes. for after hee had concluded peace with the Romanes and with the Gaules, which peace during his life he kept inuiolated: for he thought himselfe contented and fully satisfied to defende that coast of Gallia, which his predecessours had with long and sharpe warres gotten: Neither Tritemius, Lazius, nor Functius do write any thing of this king worth the memorie, but his care and diligence of peace keeping: for since Francus time the first king of the name of Fraunce, vntill Odemarus the ninth king, not one of them sought peace but warres: and therefore they succeeded Vowes and othes made the Frenchmen for Gallia. one after another, with othes vowing to come & to possesse all Gallia by the sword. And hauing now subdued diuers parts in Gallia being a large kingdome, euen frō the riuer of Rhene, vnto the mountaines called Pirenaei, and naming them kings Reade Paul. Aemil. lib. 1. of Fraunce, for that they coulde not yet conquer all Gallia,
though (as I sayde before) one king after another shotte at it for nine hundred yeeres space, vntill all the realme of Gal∣lia became the kingdome of Fraunce. But while this Odemarus reigned in Fraunce, the Romanes The West kingdoms be∣gan to florish. whose force more & more grew in the Countries of Germa∣nie: vntil the Gaules, Saxons, Gothes, Vandales, Hungarians, and diuers others waxed very strong in the West Countries, that the Romanes were constrained to neglect the East parte, and to looke about home: for it is in all histories knowen, that the kingdome of Fraunce beganne to florish when the Empire of Rome beganne to decay. But to my French historie againe, first setting downe the names here vnder of those kings that reigned in Fraunce from Francus vntill Farabertus time, as foloweth. 1 Francus the first king after the name of Si∣cambri was finished, and after whose name Sicambri were called Franci, he reigned 28. yeeres. 2 Clogio the sonne of Francus reigned after The names of those kings that reigned in Fraunce frō Francus to Fa∣rabertus. his father 30. yeeres. 3 Herimerus the sonne of Clogio reigned 22. yeeres. 4 Marcomirue reigned 18. yeeres. 5 Clodomirus the sonne of Marcomirus reig∣ned 12. yeeres. 6 Antenor reigned af∣ter his father Clodo∣mirus 6. yeeres. 7 Ratherus succeeded his father Antenor, and reigned 21. yeeres. 8 Richimerus his sonne reigned 24. yeeres. 9 Odemarus reigned after his father Richi∣merus 14. yeeres. 10 Marcomirus the se∣cond of that name, and sōne to Odemarus reig∣ned 21. yeeres. 11 After Marcomirus succeeded Clodamirus, and reigned 17. yeeres. 12 After Clodomirus succeeded Farabertus his sonne, and reigned 20. yeeres.
CHAP. III. Of the continuall warres which the Frenchmen had still in seeking for the quiet possession and the whole gouernment of all Fraunce, from the time of Farabertus, vntil the time of Pharamundus, during which time they were called Franci: for as they were before called Sicambri from Mar∣comirus vnto Francus, foure hundred and odde yeeres, so nowe from Francus to Faramundus they were called Fran∣ci for foure hundred and odde yeeres, that well nigh nine hundred yeres they were before they could possesse the king∣dome of Fraunce. WHen Odomarus dyed, his sonne Marcomi∣rus the tenth king succeeded him, who Marcomirs 10. king. reigned twentie one yeeres, after whome succeeded Clodomirus the eleuenth king, Clodomirus 11. king. and reigned seuenteene yeres. After Clo∣domirus succeeded Farabartus the twelfth Farabartus 12. king. king of Fraunce, which reigned twentie yeeres: during which time of these three kings, which was fiftie eight yeeres, the Romanes being yet in full strength and The Romanes did stomake the greatnesse of the French∣men. courage, kept their Empire on foote, and kept other king∣doms vnder foote, that the French kings were forced to make peace at home with their neighbours to keepe warres with the Romanes. So Farabartus did confirme the first league which Francus the first of their name had in his time agreed vpon with the Germanes, Saxons, Dorings, Tretones, Marcomans, and Cimbrians. They ioyned their forces together for to resist the Romanes, Farabertus con cluded peace with the Ger∣manes, & other nations about them to keepe wars with the Samanes. who were alwayes so greedy of countries and kingdoms, and so desirous of Territories, that they sought to make them∣selues lords ouer all the West kingdome of the worlde, as in trueth they were at that time kings & emperors ouer the East countries, vntill they had lost both their soueraigntie & dig∣nitie in the East and in the West, & at last lost the Empire it self. The Romanes hearing of this strong league confirmed be∣twene these Frēchmen & the Germans, Mar. Aurelius Antoninus,
surnamed the Philosopher, prepared a great armie vnder the conuoy of his fonne Aurelius Commodus, being at that time ap∣pointed Caesar, and commaunded by his father the Emperor Commodus the Emperour forced to flie. to passe into Germany, and to commence warre against the Daces, the Saxons, Marcomanes, the Frenchmen, and other in Germany, in the which voyage Commodus gained but litle cre∣dite: for he was with shame forced to forsake the fielde with great losse of his men. This battell is mencioned in many hi∣stories: for it was so great and so terrible, that Functius and Bellum Mar∣comannicum. Orosius affirme, that bellum Marcomannicum, the like is skant read of. Againe in the next yeere being the 11. yeere of Farabertus Orosius lib. 7. cap. 15. reigne, an armie of Romanes was sent into Germany, of whom the like almost is read, sauing that of the parties the slaughter was great. This warre continued vntill the good Emperour Antoninus dyed, yet hee and his sonne Commodus had trium∣phed ouer the Marcomanes, which are thought to be Boremi∣ans, before hee dyed: but while these warres endured of these three last named French kings, Marcomirus and his sonne Clo∣domirus, and his sonne Farabertus: the Britaines made some insurrections for their former libertie, and were in armes vn∣till by Lollius Vrbicius the Romane Embassadour, they were a∣gaine repressed. Sunno by this the sonne of Clodomirus florished in that go∣uernment The Christian faith receiued into Britaine. which he had in Marchia, and builded a great Ci∣tie in memorie of the Frenchmen, and named it Francofordia, and builded another Towne hard by the riuer Suenus, and na∣med Franford buil∣ded by Sunno, and also Sun∣nia, which is now called Sunda. it after his owne name Sunnia, which is nowe called Sun∣da. About the twelfth yeere of Farabertus king of Fraunce, reig∣ned in Britaine Lucius the sōne of Coilus, who in the thirteenth yeere of his reigne, as both Beda and Gildas affirme, receiued the Christian faith from Eleutherius then twelfth byshop of Rome: for Lucius king of Britaine sent to Rome for that pur∣pose Embassadors, with whom Eleutherius sent two bishops, the one named Faganus, the other Diuianus, in the 239. Olym∣piad, and in the 179. yeere after our Sauiour Christ.
Tritemius and Hunibaldus, two French writers at large doe Tritemius and Hunibaldus. handle the historie of Farabertus, and therefore I will passe to Sunno his sōne, who succeeded him in the kingdome, & reig∣ned twentie eight yeeres. This king reigned in Fraunce when Lucius Septimius Seuerus held warres in Britaine: for after the death of Lucius the Barons of Britaine fel to ciuil wars, at what time hee caused a trench to be cast from sea to sea along the length of 22. miles, (as Eutropius saith) but Functius affirmeth it was in length 131. miles: but here Polydor criethin his chro∣nicle Varietie of o∣pinion in time and saith, that this was done 200. yeres after. The next king that succeeded Sunno, was Heldericus his sonne, of whom Tritemius writeth much and saith, that the Frenchmen before his time were not so ciuil, neither in beha∣uiour nor in clothing: before Heldericus time they were rude The meane state of Fraūce in Heldericus time. and barbarous, and at that time they had no sumptuous buil∣dings, no braue dwellings, being brought to ciuill order by Hildegastus, a man of great fame amongst the Frenchmen. In the time of this Hildericus the kingdome of Persia beganne a∣gaine vnder Artaxerxes, who slue at that time Artabanus king of the Parthians, and hee was the first king in Persia since the conquest of Darius Codomanus by Alexander the great, which was sixe hundred yeeres. In Rome this time reigned Emperour Alexander Seuerus, in whose dayes the Citie of Rome florished with wise men and learned in all knowledge. This Hildericus had a sonne named Batharus 15. king. Batherus, who reigned eighteene yeeres, at what time reigned in Rome that idle and lasciuious Emperour Gallienus: hee was so carelesse of his Empire, that thereby oportunitie was gi∣uen to Batherus, who euer lay in watch as his predecessours did before him to annoy the Romanes, and to subdue the Gaules: hee (I say) brought an armie of souldiers into Italie, being ayded by the Germanes, who beganne to thirst for the Empire of Rome, which dayly fell at that time to a decli∣ning state. Batherus spoyled and wasted all the Countrie of Italie Itale spoyled with the sword vnto Rauenna. with sworde and fire vntill Rauenna, and hauing done much
harme, hee returned backe to his Countrie with great spoyle: who after his returne from Italie, leauied an armie of Saxons and of Germanes, and passed the riuers of Rhene and Mosa, and Mosa. entred into Gallia, where hee made great slaughter of the Gaules, and subdued Gallia vnto the riuer of Sequana, which is called Sene, and from thence to the confines of Spaine. This ouerthrowe both of the Romanes and the Gaules, was in the thirteenth yeere of Batherus reigne, who liued after fiue yeeres and dyed. After whome succeeded Clodius, the eldest Clodius king after Faraber∣tus. sonne of Batherus: he reigned king ouer the Frenchmen twen∣tie seuen yeres, during which time reigned in Rome thus ma∣ny Emperors: Aurelianus, which reigned 6. yeeres, Annius Ta∣citus, and Florianus his brother, and Aurelius Probus: these foure Emperours reigned in Rome, while this Clodius reigned in Fraunce. For in the thirde yeere of this Clodius, the Romanes being mindfull of their late iniuries by Farabertus and Batherus, they sent a Romane armie into Almania, where Tritemius sayth, that many a Romane lost his life: for at that time the Frenchmen in∣uaded the countrie of Gallia, and subdued a great part there∣of, and possessed the same for the space of seuen yeeres. For Gallia was the onely Countrie that the Frenchmen shotte at: Gallia not yet gotten by the Frenchmen. for all this while their Territories about the riuer of Rhene, and from thence to the riuer of Mosa, and had some part of Gallia gotten. A little before this time reigned king of the Saxons Marbo∣dus, whose two sonnes named Antharius and Luterus were in that voyage made into Gallia, in the time of Batherus this Clo∣dius father. Now this king Clodius after he had reigned twen∣tie Vprores in many coun∣tries in Claudi∣us time. seuen yeeres, hee dyed: during which time many Coun∣tries were in an vprore, as Archileus in Egypt, Narseus in the East part rebelled, the Quingentians molested Affrike, aed Caransius detained Britaine with the sworde, neglecting the charge of Maximianus the Emperour, and his duetie and Eutrop. lib. 9. allegiance to the Romane state, fledde to Britaine to auoide the Emperours wrath, where hee was slaine by his compa∣nion
Alectus, after he had gouerned Britaine seuen yeres with Alectas slaine by Asclepiado∣tus. force. Alectus after hee had slaine Carausius, tooke vpon him the gouernment of the Britaines for three yeeres, vntill he againe was slaine by Asclepiadotus a Romane, who gouerned the Britaines tenne yeeres peaceably. After this succeeded in Fraunce Gualterus: he reigned eight yeres, after whom succeeded Dagobertus, or as Functius sayth, Gualterus 5. king after Fa∣rabartus. Degenbertus, who reigned 11. yeres: after him reigned his sōne Clogio two yeeres, in whose time the Romanes and they of Gal∣lia inuaded that part of Fraunce, where Clogio and his aunce∣stours did possesse, and made great spoile & waste of townes and people. Many sharpe battels were commenced by the Clogio 7. after Farabertus. Romanes, at what time this Clogio the 19. king of Fraunce was slaine in the field, whose body being dead, his owne brother Clodomirus withdrew out of the field, and armed himselfe with Clodomirus his valure & cou∣rage to reuēge his brothers death. Clogio his armour, lest he might be knowen to be kild, & came to the field armed in all points like vnto the king his brother, and was taken both of his owne souldiers, and also of the Ro∣manes & Gaules to be Clogio, entred into the midst of his armie, encouraged them with his person māfully fighting as though he had bin a cōmon souldier, whereby he kindled the hearts of the Frenchmen againe, that they recouered their courage, and put both the Romanes and the Gaules to flight, and got the second victorie by Clodomirus, though they lost the first, and their king Clogio: and though Clogio had two sonnes, the elder Clodomirus vi∣ctorie. called Helinus of twentie yeeres of age, the yonger Richimerus of eighteene, yet for that it was enacted that none should be king in Fraunce vntill hee were twentie foure yeeres of age as Tritemius affirmeth: This Clodomirus their vncle and brother vnto Clogio succee∣ded in the gouernment of Fraunce, and reigned 18. yeeres: Clodomirus suc∣ceeded his brother Clogio. during whose reigne the Switzers called Sueni, and the Dorings had such hote ciuil wars betweene them, that no peace by no meanes could be had of neither parts: & therfore the Dorings to auoide these continuall sharpe wars, offeredthis large ter∣ritorie & coūtrie, for the which this strife grew to Clodomirus.
The Frenchmen being most glad thereof, accepted the offer, and remooued from the riuer of Rhene where they first dwel∣led after they came out of Scythia, vnto the number of 30000 armed men, 2686. husbandmen, with their wiues and chil∣dren, 2686 husband men with their families. ouer whom Clodomirus appointed his brother called Ge∣nebaldus gouernour, vnder the lawe and condicion that Gene∣baldus and his successours for euer shoulde be subiect to the kings of Fraunce, paying yeerely tribute vnto Fraunce, and to be readie in any seruice of warre. This Countrie was called Menigauia, and lyeth about the riuer Meanum, and after East Fraunce, which in time grewe to Menigauia when Genebal∣dus reigned, paying tribute vnto his bro∣ther Clodomi∣rus. be one of the strongest dukedomes in all Fraunce. Here Gene∣baldus reigned quietly 20. yeeres: of this king, Hunibaldus and Tritemius write at large: for I finde that 20. dukes successiue∣ly of one stocke reigned in the dukedome, vntill the time of Pipinus, which was 414. this is called nowe Franconia. Nowe while Genebaldus ruled this part of Fraunce, his brother Clodo∣mirus died, after whom succeeded his sonne Richimerus, and reigned thirteene yeeres: at what time Constantinus the great was Emperour of Rome. Gebrich king of the Gotes, and Visumoar king of the Vandales, he in the fourth yeere of his reigne entred into Gallia, with an Gebrich king of the Gothes. armie of 200000 souldiers, wasted, spoyled, and subdued ma∣ny places in Gallia: hee gaue battell to Tiberiunus the Romane lieutenant and gaue him the ouerthrowe, and in the sixth The victorie of Richimerus. yeere of his reigne Richimerus againe came in armes against the Gaules and Romanes, in the which battell in the first time the Romanes were victors, but in the seconde time were con∣quered: but in the thirteenth yeere of this kings reigne, at what time Constans the eldest sonne of Constantine the great reigned Emperour of Rome, Richimerus was slaine in the fielde fighting valiantly against the Gaules and the Romanes. After Richimerus slaine. whom Theodomirus came to the gouernment of Fraunce, and reigned tenne yeeres: during which time he had sundry con∣flictes Theodoricus 38. king. with the Romanes, but in the tenth yere of his reigne, he and his mother Hastila was takē by the Romans & put to death.
After the death of Theodomirus, Clogio tooke the gouernment of Fraunce, who raigned 18. yeeres, and left three sonnes be∣hinde him: but I will write of him who succeeded his father which was named Hector, sirnamed Degenbart, of whom line∣ally From this Hector Degen∣bart Charles the great discen∣ded. discended king Pipine and Charles the great, as Tritemius affirmeth. For Marcomirus the sonne of this Degenbart, was a very notable souldier and a valiant man, and bridled the Ro∣manes 4 yeeres with continuall warres: ouer whom hee had diuers victories. But one great victorie hee had at Agripina, with incredible spoile & riches: for this Marcomirus was both a luckie name, and a great name amongst the Frenchmen. Marcomirus a great name in Fraunce. In Degenbarts time the Hunnes inuaded the Gothes, at what time the Gothes had passed the riuer of Ister, & inuaded Thra∣cia. And the Saxons also inuaded that time the Romane con∣fines: The Saxons inuaded the Romanes con∣fines. for by this time these kingdomes beganne to be migh∣tie and strong in Germanie: the kingdom of the Vandols, of the Gothes, of the Hunnes, and of the Longobards. At what time Rome beganne to shrinke, and to be much defaced of her former dignitie: for nowe by litle and litle the Empire yeelded to these West kingdomes, vntill the whole Empire was trans∣posed into Germanie. But to Marcomirus againe, who after he had good successe Foure noble captaines vn∣der Marco∣mirus. in many and sundrie battels with the Romanes, hee turned his force into Gallia, hauing Antenor, Priamus, Sunno, and Genebal∣dus, foure worthie captaines to leade his armie, committing seuerall charge to either of them, whose prowesse and ex∣ploits were such, that at that time they wanne and subdued much of the countrey, and ioyned the same to the kingdome: so that Gallia was daily weakened & diminished of her power, and Fraunce was strengthened and encreased in greatnesse and force. For (as I said before) the fall of Rome was the rising The fall of Rome was the rising of Fraumce. of Fraunce. Nowe after Marcomirus had recouered these townes and countreys, which were by his predecessours lost to Maximus and to the Romanes, and after hee had done great harme and spoile to the Romanes, he was slaine in the fielde valiantly by
Valentinianus and his armie, after whose death the kingdome of Fraunce was gouerned for the space of 26. yeeres without a The kingdom of Fraunce without a king 26. yeeres. Interregnum. king by the states of Fraunce, which is called Interregnum. During which time Valentinianus the Emperor, seeing great oportunitie, demaunded of the Frenchmen tribute being due to the Romanes, which the Frenchmen denied: affirming be∣side, that they would lose both liues and liuings, before they would lose their libertie: And also boldly againe affirming, that they were neuer conquered by the sworde, but with de∣ceite. Warres be∣tweene the Romanes and the French∣men. By this meanes new warres freshly beganne betweene the Romanes and the Frenchmen. This time in Fraunce were appointed two chiefe gouer∣nours called Interreges, the one named Dagobertus, the other Genebaldus, who gouerned discreetely and soberly, with the rest of the nobles and Barons of Fraunce for 21. yeeres, vntill Faramundus time, who then gouerned East Fraunce vnder the kings of Fraunce: this was by common consent of the States of Fraunce taken from his dukedome, and made king of France in the 299. Olympiad. At what time raigned in Rome the Emperour Honorius, and Arcadius Emperour at Constan∣tinople: and in Persia gouerned Vararanes the fourth of that name and 14. king, with whome the Romanes this time had Faramundus by common consent made king of France. great warres. About this time certaine Iewes were banished foorth of Alexandria: likewise this time S. Hierome died, and Augustine his scholer florished, and was made bishop of Hip∣po in Affrike. Thus farre the kings of Fraunce from Francus time, conti∣nued successiuely after Francus name, vntill this Faramundus which was foure hundreth yeeres: during which time raig∣ned foure and twenie kings. And from Marcomirus the first of them that came out of Scythia, vntill Francus time, another The French nations were 800 yeeres and more in getting of Gallia. foure hundreth yeeres: so that from the beginning of this na∣tion, being by so many names called, as the names of the countreys were, where they dwelt, where eight hundreth yeeres passed before they coulde be called kings of Gallia, for all their long warres and continuall battels. And for that it
may be with more ease knowen how, when and where, they raigned, I will set downe all the names of those kings that raigned from Francus time (which was in the time of Pompey the great) vntill Faramundus, in like sort as I haue layd downe the 16. kings of Sicambria. For lineally did 24. kings raigne from the father to the sonne, for the space of 404. yeeres, euen from Francus vnto Farabertus 12. and from Farabertus to Faramundus 12. which was the first king of all Gallia: for as the first name continued after the name of Cambra, by the name of Sicambri, or Cimbri, as the Romans called them, vntill Francus time: so frō Francus From Fara∣mundus, I vse P. Aemilius. time vnto this Faramūdus time, the name of Franci cōtinued: so now from Faramundus forward, they were named Galli, and became the greatest kingdome of Europe, especially since the Romane Empire decayed. For as the Romanes were streng∣thened by the subduing of the Latines and Albanes, (Crescit Roma Albae ruinis,) euen so Fraunce became strong by the ruine of Rome. 1 After Farabertus suc∣ceeded his sonne Sunno, and raigned 28. yeeres. 2 Hildericus the sonne of Sunno. 40. yeeres. 3 Batherius the sonne of Hildericus. 18. yeeres. 4 Clodius the sonne of Ba∣therius. 27. yeeres. 5 After Clodius succee∣ded his sonne Walterius and raigned 8. yeeres. 6 After Walterius raig∣ned his sonne Dagober∣tus or Degenbertus. 11. yeeres. 7 After him his sonne Clo∣gio. 2. yeeres. 8 After Clogio, his bro∣ther Clodomirus raigned after him 18. yeeres. 9 After Clodomirus, his sonne Richimerus raig∣ned These kings raigned from Farabertus to Faramundus. 13. yeeres. 10 After him raigned Theo∣domirus. 10. yeeres. 11 After him raigned Clo∣gio. 18. yeeres. 11 After Clogio Marcomi∣rus the thirde of that name.
CHAP. IIII. From Faramundus the first king that had all Fraunce in his hand, and from whom all Historians and Chronographers beginne the historie of Fraunce: who beganne his raigne in Fraunce, in the yeere of our Lord and Sauiour 420: of the lawes, gouernment and warres from that time, vnto Clodouaeus the first Christian king of Fraunce, and so vntill Clodouaeus the second of that name, and the 12. king after Faramundus. NOw this Faramundus the sonne of Mar∣comirus the great, when hee was made Faramundus ap∣pointed his brother Mar∣comirus East Fraunce. king of Fraunce, he cōmitted the charge of his former gouernment which hee had in the East Fraunce, to his brother Marcomirus, & he gouerned the French∣men in Gallia 7. yeeres: and he augmen∣ted the crowne of Fraunce with more territories, as Mosellana, Augusta, and other places. He instru∣cted the rude people, and brought them from rudenesse to ciuilitie, taught them to liue vnder a lawe, made decrees and statutes to gouerne his countrey. Here the crie of Chronicles: for Pau. Aemilius, writeth this historie farre otherwise: so doeth Langaeus, and hee saith that P. Aemil. lib. 1. the Frenchmen were named Franci, of one Francio the sonne of Hector. But the trueth of this historie is found rather in Tri∣temius and Hunebaldus, with whom both Functius and Lazius doe agree. In this they agree all, that from Faramundus time Faramundus the first king of Gallia. the kings of Gallia were nombred. Iulius Caesar, (who long serued vnder the Romans in France) deuided Gallia into three countreys: from the riuer of Rhein, vnto the riuer Sequana, and that countrey is called Gallia Bel∣gica: from the riuer of Sein vnto Garumna, that countrey is cal∣led Celtica: and from Garumna vnto the mountaines Pyrenei, which is called Aquitania, which was before called Amorica. With this Plini doeth accord. All these people were in anci∣ent time called Celtae. Reade Strabo and Plini in the description of Gallia: from mount Pyrenei to the riuer Garumna, lieth Aqui∣tania, Plini lib. 4. cap. 17. 18.
from thence to Sequana dwelt the Celtes, and frō thence to the riuer Rhein, the Belgians. I will passe to the kings, who beginne in this Faramundus time to be kings of Gallia, after 870. yeeres warres by his pre∣decessors before: he raigned seuen yeeres, and others affirme 11. yeeres. In this Faramundus time the Lawe called Salica Lex Salica made in Fara∣mundus time. Clodius the se∣cond king of Fraunce. was made. After whome succeeded Clodius his sonne, sirna∣med Crinitus, or Comatus, the second king of all France, which was called then Gallia: he raigned 28. yeeres, and plagued the remnant of the Gaules which dwelt in Gallia vnconquered. He gaue diuers sharpe battels to the Romanes, and commaun∣ded by an Edict, that the Frenchmen should let their beards, and the haires of their head grow, and so to combe & keepe it without cutting: because they might bee knowen hereby to be the Frenchmen, and to make a difference betwene them and others that dwelled within Gallia: wherefore he was sir∣named Clodius Crinitus. Clodius was sir∣named Crini∣tus. In the sixt yeere of his raigne, he ouercame those people called Senouenses and Aurelionenses, which dwelt about Lute∣tia, and ioyned them to the kingdome of Fraunce. He likewise in the ninth yeere of his raigne subdued the Saxons, the Tren∣tones, the Doringes, and brought all that part of Fraunce bor∣dering The diuers vi∣ctories of this Clodius. vpon the sea into subiection: and in the thirtieth yere of his raigne, he also brought Bataui, Tungri, Menaxij, and di∣uers other people that were cōmorant in the edge of France: at what time the Gothes had done great harme in that part of Fraunce called Aquitania, and also the Burgundians subdued much in Lugdunum. This time the Scots and the Pictes inua∣ded Scots and Picts inuaded Bri∣taine. Britaine, and spoiled the countrey and did much harme. About this time Atala king of that nation called Hunni in Germanie had much to doe with the Romanes, and both gaue and tooke diuers repulses. This Clodius when hee had enlarged the kingdome of Fraunce with the most part of Gallia, and had raigned twentie yeeres, some say 17. yeeres, hee died: in whose time Valenti∣nianus Clodius died. had married Eudoxia the daughter of Theodosius the
Emperour, by whom Valentinianus was made Augustus. This time Theodosius waged warres against the Vandols, who had a Ruffinus de orig. Francorum. king named Giezirichus, who had license by Valentinianus to dwel in Affrica: who had dwelt there in despite of the Romans for the space of 95. yeeres, vntil by Iustinianus the Emperour, they were thence expelled and driuen out: and at that very time the Hunnes entered and spoiled Thracia and Illyrica, and subdued with sword and fire, vntill they came to Thermopila. Likewise in the foureteenth yeere of this Clodius, the Gothes brake their league against Spaine, and possessed with the sworde the next territories to Spaine, and besieged the citie of Narbon. This time Patricius was sent from Celestinus then bishop of Rome to Ireland, to instruct the Irishmen in the Christian faith: of this Patricke the Irishmen bragge much. In the time of Reade Gildas, Giraldus and Beda in the hi∣storie of Bri∣taine. this Clodius, Vortigerus with the Saxons by deceit and craft in∣uaded Britaine: for hitherto the Britaines kept tacke with the Romanes, sometime in warre with them, and sometime in The antiqui∣tie of English Saxons in Bri∣taine, called before Aru∣brones Roxones. peace. Reade more of this in Beda. This was in the yere after Christ 446: at what time great persecution was in Affrike vn∣der king Giezirichus the Vandole, and the heresie called Euti∣chiana beganne to rise in Constantinople. This time raigned in Persia, Vararanes the fift of that name, and fifteenth king of Persia. After this time we reade of no mention made of any Olym∣piad, though long before they were little vsed: for the Olym∣piads flourished vntill the time of Lucius Silla the Dictator: yet The errors of the Olympiads. vsed for computation sake, (but with most absurd and grosse errours,) both of Zenophon and Thucydides, who little vsed them, and yet erred in them, though they liued and wrote then when the Olympiads most flourished: and it made me al∣so oftentimes to auoyd the Olympiads in my histories, for that I found great errors in them. But I will come to the thirde king of Fraunce Meroueus the sonne of Clodius, who succeeded his father and raigned Meroueus the thirde king. 12. yeeres, others say but 10: and so the errour which was in
the yeeres of Faramundus, is corrected and amended. This king lost nothing which his father got. He did not onely de∣fend and maintaine all those countreys and territories which were ioyned to the kingdome of Fraunce by his father, but also enlarged the same with the vanquishing and subduing of the Romanes in many places. These French people by this time became so strong and so mightie, that they were feared of all Northren nations, and therefore certaine countreys conspired against them, and commenced warre against them, as Attila king of the Hunnes, Attila king of the Hunnes, V∣ualaricus king of the East. Gothes, Ardari∣cus king of Ge∣pida, ioyned together a∣gainst the French. who slew his owne brother called Bleda, (which ioyntly raig∣ned in the kingdome) for to haue the sole gouernment: with him that time ioyned Vualaricus king of the East Gothes, Arda∣ricus king of Gepida, and other nations of the North. These commenced warre vpon Meroueus with fiue hundreth thou∣sand souldiers: but he was ayded with Theodoricus king of the Vestgothes, and with Aetius the Romane lieutenant. And the battaile was terrible and great, and endured from Sunne ri∣sing to Suune setting, where 188. thousande were slaine, but Til. in Cron. Franc. Reg. the victorie fell to the Frenchmen, with great slaughter on ei∣ther side: for in that battaile was slaine Theodoricus king of the The great vi∣ctorie of the Frenchmen. Vestgothes, whose bodie was brought with great pompe and solemnitie to Tolosa to be buried. In the next yeere after this great battaile, Attila king of the Hunnes (being of the mightiest power, and of the greatest Attila a strong king. force of all Germanie,) inuaded Italy, ouerthrowing and vt∣terly spoyling all partes and places of Italy where hee came into: the harme and spoyle he did was such, that Leo the first of that name, then Bishop of Rome, came in his pontificall robes and met him, (to whom Attila vsed great reuerence,) Ioseph. lib. 71. cap. 8. and obtained peace. The like is written of the great Alex∣ander, who with the like honour reuerenced the high Priest at Hierusalem, by whom Alexander was pacified, and his warre turned to peace. Now after in the eleuenth yere of Meroueus, he besieged Augusta besie∣ged by Mero∣neus. Augusta the chiefest citie of Treueres which Attila a litle before
tooke with the sword, and possessed it, but recouered into Fraunce againe: so that the Frenchmen by this time grewe so great & so strong, since the time they came first from Scythia These places the Frenchmen fist inhabited after they had come from Scythia. into Germanie, when they dwelt about the riuer of Rein, in those places which are now called Holland, Gilderland, Cliue∣land, and Frizland, that they beganne to aduance themselues, and to extol their kingdom aboue the Empire: for with con∣tinual warres of almost 870. yeeres, with the slaughter of ma∣ny of their kings, dukes, and barons, when they were yet cal∣led Sicambri, and after Franci, and now Galli, they became at length so strong, that rather the empire was subiect to France, Fraunce flou∣rished. then France to the empire. For this French nation (as I said before) behaued themselues so in all places where they dwelt, that they would both vse their maners and speach, and there∣fore were they called by so many names, as Neumagi, Marco∣mani, Sicambri, Germani, Franci, and Galli. But this word France was encreased more and more, and what victorie or conquest The Romane Empire fell to decay. soeuer these kings obtained, stil they ioyned it to that part of Fraunce where they first inhabited, vntill they had conque∣red all other names within Gallia to be France, and that euen from Francus which raigned but fewe yeeres before our Sa∣uiour Christ. Now after that Merouaeus had raigned 12. yeres he died, after Childericus the fourth king of Fraunce. whom succeeded his sonne Childericus, who after he had raig∣ned king for one yeere, hee vsed such an inordinate filthie life and insolencie, that he was dispossessed of his kingdome: in whose place Egidius a Romane was elected, who raigned eight Egidius raig∣ned 8 yeeres. yeeres, some say but 3. yeres after. But before he went he re∣posed all his trust in Virodomarus his friend, an excellent soul∣dier, to whom he gaue halfe a piece of gold, & kept the other halfe himselfe, willing him to beleeue no message without he sawe that halfe piece of golde. But reade this historie in Aemilius and you shall finde howe Childericus was by Virodo∣marus Aemil. lib. 1. restored to his kingdome againe, and how Virodomarus was brought from Turingia with all the nobles of France into his kingdome: where Childericus was placed againe in his
kingdome, being then gone to Bisinus king of Turingia for re∣fuge and succour, and with him came from thence Basana the kings daughter: some say, that she was Bissinus wife the king. Til Chron. Francor. rg. The histories say, that she came and followed after Childeri∣cus from her father, whom Childericus married, and by whom Clodoues the first of that name recei∣ued first the Christian faith in France. hee got Clodoueus, which was the first king that receiued the Christian faith. Childericus after his returne to his kingdome, remembring the victories and cōquests of his father, began valiantly to re∣couer those places and townes frō the Romans, which Egidius while he gouerned Fraunce had willingly lost. He layd siege to P. Aemil. in Childeico. Coloni and ouerthrew it, he remoued Odoacer from Fraunce which hee inuaded with a huge armie, and put him to flight: and when he had recouered all Fraunce from the Romanes sub∣iection, hee appointed lieutenants and generals in euery pro∣uince of Fraunce, and left all Fraunce free from the Romanes to Childericus died. his sonne Clodoueus, and died when he had raigned 26. yeeres: others say 23. yeeres, Paul. Aemilius affirmeth 30. In the time of this king came Ambrosius Aurelius the Romane, and tooke the gouernment of Britaine, after 20. conflicts hee A nomber of Bitaines came ouer sea, and possessed A∣quitania. was slaine by the English Saxons: at what time certaine Britaines sailed ouer and came & possessed Aquitania. For now raigned in Italy Odoacer (Hercules being driuen before out of Fraunce as you heard by Hildericus) this Hercules hauing setled him selfe in Italy, and assuming there the name of a king, the Empire was remoued at that very time into Germany, and Rome and all Italy were gouerned by strangers. All the West kingdomes were much molested and sore vexed this time, for (as you Vortiger and after him Hengistus. heard) Vortiger, and after Hengistus scattered the Britaines to seeke new dwellings, so me into Cambria (which is now called Wales, where they euer dwelt since that time) and some to France, which is called in France to this day litle Britaine. A∣gaine The first time that Armorica was named litle Britane. the Longobards setled themselues about the riuer Danu∣bius, and diuers other nations in Germanie, and in the West countreys were placed and againe displaced by warre. But to Clodoueus the son of Childericus by Basana, who came Clodoueus the fift king.
to the kingdome of Fraunce at the age of 21. yeeres, and raig∣ned 30. yeeres: he liued 15. of them a Pagane vnchristened: in the other 15. he was christened, and was the first that receiued the Christian faith into Fraunce, and also the first king that possessed all Gallia vnder the crowne of Fraunce: for in foure great battailes he had these victories. The first against the Romanes, whose lieutenant was called Reade of thse 4. great victo∣ries Blondus and Procopius. Siagrius, who was taken in the bataile and slaine, and the ar∣mie of the Romanes put to flight and slaine. The second warre was against Gothemarus and Gotegiseleus, who before had slaine in warre Chilpericus his wiues father, and Sigismundus his wiues vncle: this warre Clodoueus tooke in hande at the suite and earnest request of his wife Clotil∣dis, for shee was a Christian, who laboured much with the king her husband to become a Christian, and with as great care shee dayly solicited the king to reuenge her father and vncles death. The thirde warre was against the Almanes, at what time Clodoueus the first perfor∣med his othe and became a Christian, af∣ter his victorie had against the Almanes. he vowed if God would giue him the victorie, hee would be∣come a Christian, which he performed, and obtained the vi∣ctory, and was baptized by Remigius bishop of Rheme. The fourth warre was against Alaricus king of the Gothes, whom he slew in the fielde, and discomfited all his armie. By these foure great victories Clodoueus had brought all Gallia to be all Fraunce: for during his bastards sonnes time, he subdued Turingia, and enlarged his countrey from the riuer of Rhein, vnto the riuer Sequana. Theodoricus being by his father Clodoueus sent as President to Aquitania, at what time he brought diuers people (by the sworde) vnder his fathers subiection, as Albios, Rhatenes, Tolasates, and the people called Auerni: He subdued Vastonia and other places. Reade more of the warres of Clodoueus, of his vowes, and conuersion to the faith, and of his victories, in Paul. Aemilius, and in Tilius: who after he had raigned thirtie yeeres he died, and was bu∣ried in Paris. Thus farre Huibaldus. Hitherto reacheth Hunibaldus historie of the antiquitie of
Fraunce, which he wrote and deuided into 18. bookes, con∣teyning the history of all the kings, from the first Marcomirus which came from Scythia, vntill the time of Clodoueus death, which were 47. kings which raigned by sundry names for the space of 950. yeeres. While this Clodoueus raigned, the Saracens inuaded Phoeni∣cia, Syria, and Thracia, and did great harme. This time raigned In this time of Clodoueus, raig∣ned Emperour Anastatius, and in Britaine raigned Ar∣thur. in Persia Lambases, whom Procopius named Blasen: and about this time Anastatius the Emperour builded a most strong ci∣tie in Mesopotamia, and named it after his owne name Anasta∣sia: and walled the citie of Theodocia in Armenia, which the Emperour Theodosius had builded. In the time of this Clodoueus Arthur raigned in Britaine, who did much annoy the Saxons, and had if he had long liued, re∣stored the Britaines againe to their former libertie. But to returne to the successors of Clodoueus, who left behinde him foure sonnes, Theodoricus, Clodomirus, Childebertus, and Lotha∣rius, Cldoueus 4. sonnes. amongst whom the kingdome of Fraunce was deuided, the whole kingdome made a Tetrarchia: and so in processe of time the whole kingdome fell to Childebertus hand, frō whom the lines of the kings of Fraunce descende vntill Hildericus, though some say it doth descend from Lotharius: yet raigned these 4. brethren in seueral Prouinces of Fraunce, as foure Te∣trarches for a time. During which time, reade Procopius and Paul. Aemilius and see the euents of fortune, the vncertaintie Procop lib. 1. de bell. Gothor. of states, and change of earthly dignitie, and how Theodoricus, and Clodomirus two of the brethren, with all their children died: then Childebertus deuided the whole kingdome be∣tweene him and his brother Clotarius. In the meane season let vs see what was done in other coun∣treys: for while these foure brethren gouerned Fraunce, Rome Reade of theis 18. yere warre Procop. lib. 2 de bello Persico. was taken being besieged by the Gothes, and destroyed and left desolate by Totila king of the Gothes: he also vanquished the Brutians and the Lucans, hee tooke Apulia and Calabria, and besieged Placentia. This warre of the Gothes cōtinued 18. yeeres, during which warre raigned 3. kings ouer the Gothes:
the first Vitiges, who destroyed Rome in his time, but reedified and builded againe by Belisarius: the second king Alaricus, who was slaine within few moneths: so that the most time of this 18. yeeres were continued vnder Totila, who plagued so sore This king To∣tla plagued Italy & Rome. Italy and Rome, that after that time Rome was so decayed and possessed with strangers, that sooner you should finde in Italy a Germane then a Romane: and in Rome it selfe, tenne Van∣dols, tenne Gothes, or tenne Longobards, for one citizen, in so More Vandols and Gothes in Rome then Citizens. much that they were not able to appoint a Consul to go∣uerne them, who had gouerned them for the space of 447. yeres: so long the Consuls of Rome gouerned the citie, which was vntill the Emperours time, and then they gouerned the whole worlde. But now, not onely the dignitie of Con∣suls was lost, (which were of long time languishing and de∣caying, since ciuil warres betwene themselues, with persecu∣tion of the godly, and tyrannie of the wicked Emperors) but the name it selfe vtterly perished and quite abolished by those nations of Germanie, who were scant knowen in Augustus Caesars time: and therefore valeat Roma cum Papa, who entred into Rome, and tooke possession thereof within 40. yeeres of Clotarius gouernment. At what time he erected vp his Papa∣cie The kingdom of the Pope, and the king∣dome of Ma∣homt, began at one time. in Rome, when Mahomet aduaunced vp the kingdome of the Saracens. The Pope beganne his Papacie in Rome 14. yeres before Mahomet beganne his kingdome ouer the Saracens in Arabia. Nowe a Pope for an Emperour gouerned Rome, a prophet for a king raigned in Arabia: of whome I spake in the historie of the Church, and in the historie of the Saracens. And now I will make mention of Iustinianus, who gouerned then as Emperour: vnder whome Bellisarius annoyed Italy, subdued Siracusa, and tooke Catina, and in the last yeere of his Consul∣ship subdued Sicilia. After that, he passed into Affrica, and deliuered Carthage from the siege of Stoze, and appointed one Salomon gouer∣nour ouer the towne. This Bellisarius prooued so excellent a Bellisarius much com∣mended. captaine vnder Iustinianus the Emperor, that he aduanced the
name of the empire through his victories gotten in diuers bat∣tels, that some write that Bellisarius had a triumph graunted him at Rome, appointed by the Emp. Iustinian: much is writtē of this Bellisarius in the wars called Persicum, which Iustinianus Bellisarius a no∣ble captaine vnder Iustinia∣nus. begā, but Bellisarius ended. This Bellisarius toke Catina, Siracusa, and subdued al Sicilie, Rauenna, & Naples, and was made gene∣rall vnder Iustinian in the East empire, where he merited the name of a good souldier. Iustinianus made the 4. bookes of the Institutes and other 50. bookes of ciuill lawe, called the Pan∣dects, Pandects made by Iustinianus the Emperor. which Tribonianus ended, and brought to perfection. This time Cosroes king of Persia inuaded Cilicia, and Syria, he tooke Antiochia, and now againe the fourth time, after he had concluded peace with Iustinianus, he inuaded the territories of the Romanes, but he was now driuen thence by Bellisarius: at what time Arethus king of the Saracens came, and yeelded to Iustinianus both his kingdome and his children. Totila king of the Gothes this time gaue an ouerthrow to Demetrius vpon the sea, and tooke Neapolis. During these 45. yeres, Hunni in∣uaded This time died Arthur i Britaine. Europe, spoyled and wasted into Bizantium, which is Constantinople: in Britaine died Arthur the sonne of Vter Pen∣dragon, after whome succeeded Constantius a wicked lewde Prince, about which time, Narses a Persian with a great ar∣mie entred into Italie, vanquished the Gothes at Tagira, and a∣gaine the Gothes ouerthrowen by Narses at Necerium, and at Prccopius of the warres of the Gothes thus farre. last driuen out of Italie, and their king Totila slayne. Thus farre Procopius writeth of the warres of the Gothes. Nowe to Clotharius, which raigned in Fraunce 5. yeeres after the death of his three brethren and their children, and died, as Blondus saieth, at Tridentum: after whose death, Fraunce was againe deuided betweene the sonnes of Lotharius, who is called in Be∣roaldus, De Chron. Fran. Clotarius, which raigned 5. yeres after Childebertus, and died & was buried in the church of S. Medardis in Suetia, which Church he began to builde a litle before he died. After whom succeeded Cherebertus the sonne of Clotarius, Cherebertus a wicked vici∣ous prince. a wicked vicious king, who after he raigned 9. yeeres, died in the armes of his concubine at Paris: after him Chilpericus raig∣ued
14. yeres, as vitious and wicked as his brother, yet of him lineally do discend the line of the kings of France vntil Childe∣ricus time, he was caused to be slaine betweene Landricus and This time be∣ganne warres betweene the Romanes and the Persians. his strumpet Fredegunda, and was also buried in Paris. Now Iustinus the yonger, a daughters sonne of Iustinianus, gouerned in the empire: warrre was proclaimed by the Romanes against the Persians, at what time Hormisda raigned king of Persia, who was vanquished by Tiberius Constantius: and againe the Per∣sians lost those townes which they had gotten during the go∣uernment of Iustinianus. This time Chilpericus left a childe of the age of 4. moneths, called Clotarius the second of that name, and the 10. king of Fraunce, who raigned 44. yeeres: this king being yet an infant Clotarius the tenth king. vnder the protectiō of Landricus, whom Guntrandus the kings vncle had made master of the horse, Childebertus king of Medi∣omatrices sought to attempt through force to gouerne France, but in vaine, for he mist of his purpose: for he & his wife died within a while after vpon one day, supected to be poysoned. Howbeit, when Clotarius came to any estate ciuill, warres be∣gan Reade Tilius de reg. Franc. in France betwene the king, and Theodobertus and Theodo∣ricus two sonnes of Hildebertus: these two brethren plagued sore the king, vntill they were deuided one against another, and then al France was afflicted. But during these ciuil vex∣ations in France, the Persians wasted Palestine, tooke Ierusalem and their patriarch Zacharias, they raged against the Egyptians, and they subdued Alexandria and Libya, vntill Aethiope, tooke Carthage, and proudly denied the Emperour Heraclius peace: but the Persians and their king Cosroes repented their denial, for The victorie of Heraclius ouer the Per∣sians. Heraclius prepared warre, and leuied an armie, and entred into Persia, & flew in that voyage 50000. Heraclius the second time persecuted the Persiās with sword and fire so hard, that Cosroes their king was slaine. By this time the Persians were on euery side so assaulted & so weakned, that they were most miserably Polyb. lib. 4. slaine and destroyed, & their kingdom taken by the Saracens. About this time Caddwalader the last king of the Britaines, Caddwalader the last king of the Britaines. was by a dreame admonished to leaue his kingdome, and to
passe ouer sea to Rome, at what time the English Saxons pos∣sessed the whole Isle of Britaine, sauing Scotland and the Picts. Let vs leaue France for a while in their ciuil dissentions be∣tweene Clotarius and the two sonnes of Childebertus, named Theodoricus & Theobertus, who after they constrained the king Warres be∣tweene Theo∣doricus and Theobertus. to accept what cōditions of peace they lusted, these two bre∣thren fell out, that againe all France was in armes, & for a time France was most miserablie afflicted. Now Persia being de∣stroied the third time by the Saracēs, we wil passe ouerthe Pope in Rome, & Mahomet in Arabia, and returne to Germanie, a coū∣trey so famous of late, that the Monarchie & sole empire flou∣rished there: though the Romans in Iulius Caesars time made no Vādoles, Gothes, Hunnes, Danes, Hungarians, and others, were by the olde Romane called Ger∣manes. accompt of them, calling all those nations which are called Vandols, Gothes, Hunnes, Hungarians, Danes, Sueuians, Russians, and others by one name Germanes. These coūtreis and kingdoms flourished when the East kingdoms decaied, and that within 500. yeres of Augustus time, when Rome was in her most glory & dignitie: and for that the names of their kings may be read in Functius, I wil not set them down: for those that were of any great renowme in histories, chiefly the Gothes and Vādols, who hitherto had 24. kings, and the Longobards who had 17. kings. Diaconus writes of them, & Functius in his table records them: and therfore I wil returne to Clotarius, who when he had raig∣ned 41. yeeres, he assigned Dagobertus his eldest sonne king of Clotarius died. Austratia, ioyntly to gouerne France with him for three yeeres more, and then Clotarius died in the 44. yere of his raigne. This Dagobertus was the 11. king frō Faramundus, and had a Dagobertus the 11. king. brother named Aribertus, to whom he gaue Aquitania in pos∣session, and gouerned himselfe after his father in Fraunce 14. yeres: he was very vitious and so giuen to women, that when he would trauaile he would haue his womē caried with him, Agmina Scortorum, a whole armie of concubines, who went Til Chron. Franc. reg. in habits of Queenes, and dwelt in pallaces made vnto them by the king Dagobertus. And with this vice there was ioy∣ned an other vertue, which was to banish all those Iewes out of Fraunce, that would not become Christians: for nowe
Fraunce hath their vines and grapes, and all the countrey of Fraunce flourished since Probus the Emperours time, who first Fraunce suffred to haue their vines by Pro∣bus the Empe∣rour. suffered them to haue the vse and benefites of all vines. By this time his brother Aribertus died in Aquitaina, and left a sonne behind him, named Hilpericus, who likewise died after his father shortly, and all Fraunce fell to Dagobertus: who at that time placed his eldest sonne Sigebertus king of Austrasia, where sometimes Dagobertus gouerned during three yeeres of his fathers raigne. Dagobertus had warres with the Vuindos whom he vanquished by the ayde of the Saxons, and also hee Dagobertus di∣ed vpon the 4. kal. of Febru∣arie. had warres against the Vascons, who though they reuolted as Tritemius affirmeth, yet receiued them into fauour. In Rome now had raigned 9. seueral popes, whose names are set down in the history of the church, and ouer the Saracens (who quite had subdued all Persia before) raigned already foure Amyras of Mahomets sects. Thus in Rome a silly priest became a great Pope, and in Arabia a false Prophet of one age with the pope Mahomet. became a mighty king, which by his greatnes attained a sur∣name called Amyras: of whom likewise I haue spoken in the historie of the Saracens. 1 Pharamundus reigned 8. yeeres, Beroaldus saith 11. yeeres. 2 Clodius Faramundus sonne surnamed Criui∣tus reigned 18. yeeres. 3 Meroueus succeeded his father Clodius, and reigned 10. yeeres. 4 Hildericus the first reigned 26. this is cal∣led of many Childericus. 5 Clodoueus reigned 30. 6 Childebertus reigned 45. yeeres. 7 Lotarius or Cotarius 5. yeeres. 8 Heribertus reigned 9. 9 Hilpericus or Chilperi∣cus 23. for marke whō Beroaldus, Ruffinus, and others doe name Chilpe∣ricus, that same doeth Functius name Hilpe∣ricus, & so of Cheriber∣tus Functius he nameth Heribertus. 10 Lotarius 2. the sōne of Hilpericus 14. yeeres. 11 Dagobertus succeeded his father, and reigned 14. yeeres.
CHAP. V. From Clodoueus the 2. who began his raigne 645. vnto the raigne and gouernment of Charles the great, the patrone & only mirror of Fraunce, by whom chiefly the French men flourished, in famous renowne, and in whom all the lawes, relikes and monuments are established. NOwe I will goe forward with the histories of Fraunce, and speake of Dagobertus, who when he had raigned 14. yeeres died, Aemilius saith, 16. yeres: for he raigned 2. yeres in Austrasia, & is buried in S. Denis which he himself had buil∣ded the seconde of that name, and the twelfth king, after Pharamundus succeeded. This was called Lewis, the first Lewes the first. of that name. This time raygned king of the Gothes Sisenan∣dus, who was by them and of Dagobertus aduaunced to gouerne the Gothes. The Emperour Constantinus surnamed Iunior was by his stepmother Martina poysoned after hee had reigned foure moneths, for that shee practised to haue her sonne Emperour, who reigned with his mother two yeeres: and then the treason of Martina was founde, which Martinas trea∣son found, & after punished was in this sort reuenged: his nostrels were cutte, and his mothers tongue was taken out: and so were both, least againe they might bee forgotten and bee receiued to the Empire, banished from Constantinople. By this time died Sigibertus king Clodouaens brother, who adopted before his death Ildebertus the sonne of Grimoaldus, supposing that he should haue no heire of his bodie: but his wife being with childe when he died, had a sonne named Da∣gobertus, who was sent to a Monasterie in Scotland secretly to be brought by Grimoaldus: for which cause Clodouaeus waged Dagobertus sent to a Monaste∣rie by Grimo∣aldus. warre with Ildebertus the king, and with his father. Ildebertus was slaine in the field in battell, and his father taken and put in prison in Paris, where he died: at what time Clodouaeus ap∣poynted his owne sonne Childericus king in Austrasia. This Ildebertus slaine. time in Fraunce the famine was such, that the king Clodouaeus ooke all the gold and siluer which his father Dagobertus had
set vp in Saint Dennis and other places, and all the trea∣sures Aemil. l. b. 2. out of the Temples in Fraunce, to helpe the poore of Fraunce. After Clodoueus had reigned seuenteene yeeres, succeeded Clotarius the third of that name (hee died and is buried with his father in S. Dennis) and in Beroaldus table named Dagober∣tus Clotarius the 3. of that name. the second, who reigned foure yeeres. After whome suc∣ceeded his brother Theodoricus, who was in the first yeere of his raigne banished out of his kingdome for his incontinen∣cie. After him Hildericus, Theodoricus brother was elected king El. de reg. Frāc. of all Fraunce, he reigned 12. yeres: Beroaldus saith fiue, he was slaine in hunting, by one Bodillus, whome the king had before most cruelly caused to be bound to a stake, and to bee whipt with rods: which he requited to the king with death. Theodoricus by Bodillus slaine in hunting. Which newes being heard of, Theodoricus the kings brother being before as you heard banished, returned from a Mona∣sterie, and tooke againe the kingdome of Fraunce, and reig∣ned fourteene yeeres. The kingdome of the Saracens had not onely vexed and molested the East kingdomes, but also af∣flicted The Saracens held warres in diuers coun∣tries. and persecuted the West countries, and had diuers and sundry battels with the Emperours, the Gothes, and the Longobards, and are nowe become nations most mightie and strong in all the West, of whom reade Diaconus de gestis Longabardorum. After these thinges reigned Clodouaeus the thirde of that name, who reigned foure yeeres, after whom Hildebertus Clo∣douaeus Clodouaeus. his brother succeeded, and reigned eighteene yeeres: but here some of the good and the best writers doe disa∣gree Hildebertus. for the state of Fraunce, aswell for the names of their kings, as also for the historie it selfe, as some following Reade Tilius chron. de reg. Franc. Tritemius, and some imitating Paulus Aemilius, that one Chronicle cries against another. During the reigne of Hildebertus, Muhamad the Saracen inuaded Armenia, and entred into Affrica: for nowe the kingdome of the Saracens grewe so mightie and so strong, that they troubled all the Nations of the worlde, as you
may reade in their histories. This time reigned ouer the Longobardes Chimibertus, and ouer the Gothes Vitiza: for these two kingdomes florished nowe in Germanie, and beganne to match the Empire. Af∣ter this reigned king in Fraunce Dagobertus the seconde of that name, foure yeeres after whome, Lotharius Dagober∣tus his brother reigned two yeeres: some say seuen yeeres. Chilericus by the aide of Martellu, was crowned king of . Beroaldus in his table affirmeth, that for these two yeeres Fraunce had no king therein crowned, but Interreges were appointed: after which Chilpericus surnamed Daniel, by the ayde of Carolus Martellus was crowned king of Fraunce, and reigned fiue yeeres. After him gouerned Theodori∣cus,  Cala. 20. surnamed Cala, the sonne of Dagobertus the seconde, hee reigned fifteene yeeres. Anastasius the seconde, surnamed Artemius, helde the Empire for two yeeres: and after, Theodosius the thirde of Gizid. that name other two yeeres. This time Gizid the twelfth A∣miras, who reigned foure yeeres, and his sonne Euelid after him, played their partes in Asia and in Europe, as sometime the Scythians were wont to doe: they laide siege to Constan∣tinople, The Saracns by cold and hunger driuē from Constan∣tinople. but were thence expelled by hunger and colde, and with all their whole nauies were burned and destroyed vp∣on the seas. In the time of this Theodoricus, the Cities of Italie beganne a newe regiment vnder Dukes: euery Citie elected and made a choise of one gouernour, vnder whom, and to whom they The gouern∣ment of exar∣chie in Italie altered. liued as to their king, laying aside the last kinde of gouern∣ment, called magistratus exarchatus. This time the Scots and the Picts quieted themselues within their limittes, and spared their often inuasions into Englande: at what time Ceolulphus reigned in that part of Englaud called Northumberland. With Beda this time liued. this king Beda a learned man amōgst the Britaines, was in great reuerence and honour, and dedicated to him the historie of the Church in English, and by Bedas meanes, Ceolulphus deli∣uered Ceolulphus be∣came a Moncke. the gouernment to his vncle Egbertus, and became a Moncke.
In the time of this king the Saracens which inhabited in di∣uers partes of Affrike and Spaine, were driuen thence foorth to the number of foure hundred thousand by Edo, at what time they inuaded Fraunce, and were so miserably persecuted eue∣ry Edo and Ab∣dimarus two kings of the Saracens. way, that they lost Abdimarus their king, with a great num∣ber of the Saracens: but more is written of this in their owne historie. Now to Hildericus the third of that name, surnamed Stupi∣dus, the sonne of Theodoricus Cala, who reigned nine yeres, and after was by consent of all the princes of Fraunce deposed Hildericus sur∣named Stu∣pidus. from his kingdome, and in his place gouerned eighteene yeeres Pipinus: during which time Hildericus liued priuately and secretely in an Abbie. By this time died Carolus Martellus a great Prince of France, and lieth buried among the kings at S. Denis. Of whose va∣lure, fame and courage not onely in Fraunce, but euery where, Reade of this Noble Martellus, and of his diuers worthy and Martellus died renowmed victories ouer the Saracens in Paul. Aemilius in the beginning of his 2. booke: after whom succeeded Carolomanus which then yeelded all his signories and titles of dignities vnto Pipinus: who presently thereupon called a Parliament of all the Princes and Barons of France, to stablish lawes and Pipinus the first anointed. decrees for the receyuing of the Romane religion, and allow∣ing of the dignitie of the Pope into Fraunce, for the which Pope Steuen created king Pipine one of the Romane Patricians: this king grewe so great in Fraunce, that the Saxons sought his friendship, promisig to ayde him at all times with three hundred horsemen to any exploite. In the time of king Pi∣pine Salim a great Prince of the Saracens with eight hundred Salim. thousand Saracens inuaded Cappadocia without any great ex∣ployt done: this time the Turkes issued foorth of their Ca∣spian holdes and inuaded Armenia, and after commenced warre with the Arabians in Fraunce. The Popes authoritie first alowed in Fraunce. After that Pipinus had quieted the state of Fraunce, and was confirmed by the Pope to his kingdome: for he was the first that allowed the authoritie of the Pope in Fraunce: and
after that Thassillo king of Bauaria had yeelded himselfe to the crowne of Fraunce, and that the warres of Aquitania was ended, when Nauserius their gouernour was slaine by his Reade Pau. Aemilius lib. 3. of Charles the great. owne souldiers: then Pipinus died, after whom succeeded Carolus the great, who raigned in Fraunce sixe and fourtie yeeres. It is read that in euery countrie or kingdome, some men are noted chiefe one excelling another, and among these fewe gallant and famous, one is euer preferred in all coun∣tries, of whome they holde and bragge of, their antiquitie, their lawes, kingdoms, their chiefe conquests, and victories generally they doe attribute to one aboue another: as for example here I set downe. Among the old Assyrians. Nymrodes. Belus. But specially Ninus. Among the old Egyptiās. Vexores. But specially Sesostris, the Hercules of Egypt. Among the old Persians. Darius Histaspis. Artaxerxes Mnemon: But especially Cyrus. Among the Greekes. Miltiades, Phocion, biades, Pelopidas, Pericles, and diuers others: aboue all, Themistocles. Among the Romanes. Titus Manlius. Val. Coruinus. Coriolanus, and Camillus with others, yet one Iulius Caesar aboue them all. In Spaine. Amongst all other iolly fel∣lowes Viriatius most com∣mended, & of late, Charles the fift. And so in Fraunce. Francus. Marcomirus, and Phara∣mundus. Yet Charles the great, the onely man that aduaun∣ced the name of Fraunce. This king after his first entrie into Fraunce, tooke Aquita∣nia and Vastonia vnder his hand, and after went into Italie, be∣ing Charles the great aduan∣ced the fame of Fraunce. thereto requested by Hadrian then Pope of Rome, where he waged sharpe warres with the Longobardes, whom he van∣quished
and quite destroyed both them and their gouern∣ment out of Italie, where they reigned 204. yeeres after their I folowed in al points Paul. Aenlius from Pharamūdus, vntil Henry the first, and from thēce I folow∣ed Arnol. Fer∣nonus, vnto Lewes the 12. the two onely best writers of the French. first entring into Italie: in the which voyage he not only con∣firmed that which king Pipinus his predecessor had before graunted to the Pope Stephen, but also chargeth and cōman∣deth that all the rites and ceremonies of the Romane religion shoulde bee vsed and solemnized within all the kingdome of Fraunce. After this he returned into Fraunce, & made a voiage with an army into Spaine, and tooke many townes and cities of the Saracens, wasted and spoiled, and did great harme in Spaine, and did the like annoyance after his cōming home into Ger∣manie: for he subdued the Saxons, and brought the Bohemians vnder the crowne of Fraunce. After this, hee made warres a∣gainst the Hunnes, which endured well nigh eight yeres. This king ended many broiles and quarrels in diuers coūtries, and withall hee had so enlarged the kingdome of Fraunce, and brought all places and all nations subiect to Fraunce, that hee was by his good successe and great victories had ouer diuers regions, called Carolus the great: and for that the gouernment of Carolus the great was such, that almost all the Northwest kingdomes were eyther made fearefull of Fraunce, or paying tribute, or some seruice to Fraūce: so that Carolus by his great∣nesse euery where, and by his fauour with Pope Leo, was by the meanes of Leo created Augustus and made Emperor, and the Empire brought from Rome into Fraunce, from thence in∣to Germany, where it remaineth by the name of the Emperour The empire of Rome brought to Fraunce by Charles the great. of Almania, the third remoue of the Empire: for first frō Rome to Constantinople, where it continued for a long time, and frō thence remoued to Germany, and last into Fraunce. I wil set downe the names of all the kings of Fraunce, from Clodouaeus the 2. & the 12. after Faramundus, vntill this Charles the great, the 12. king of Gallia, as I founde them in Fun∣ctius and in Beroaldus table: for Pharamundus began his reigne in Fraunce in the 299. Olympiad, and in the yere of our Sauiour 420. and reigned as here you may reade in this table.
1 Clodouaeus 2. reigned af∣ter his father 17. yeeres. 2 Lotarius 3. succeeded and reigned 4. yeeres. 3 Hildericus the 2. reig∣ned 14. yeeres. 4 Theodoricus succeeded his brother Lotarius, and reigned 14. yeeres. 5 Clodouaeus 3. 4. yeres. 6 Hildebertussucceded his brother Clodouaeus, & reig∣ned 18. yeeres. 7 Dagobertus the 2. called alsoin Functius Clodouaeus Though Clodo∣uaeus the 2. of that name be the 12. king in number after Pharamundus, yet because of the diuision of the histoe I begin frō him as from the first vnto Charles the great. reigned 4. yeeres. 8 Lotarius 4. of that name and brother to Dagobertus reigned 7. yeeres 9 Theodoricus surnamed Cala, sonne to Dagobertus, the 2. reigned 15. yeeres. 10 Hildericus surnamed Stupidus 9. yeeres. 11 Pipinus surnamed the short, came after Hilderi∣cus, being deposed from his kingdome and reigned 18. CHAP. VI. From Charles the great, the onely king of Fraunce in fame, of whom all the states of Fraunce holde their lawes, monuments, and other ceremonies belonging to their inaugurations, crowning, and their seuerall pompe: of his warres and victories against the Saracens: of his diuers conquests euery where, and of the taking of the Em∣pire into Germany. CHarles the great, the twentie three king of Fraunce, who was made Emperour, and created Augustus by Pope Leo, and the Em∣pire brought thereby to Fraunce, and into Germany: for vntill this time the Empire re∣mained in the East part called imperium Ori∣entale, which was Constantinople, and remoued into Fraunce From Phara∣mundus to Clo∣douaeus the 2. and from him to Charles the great. and Germany, where it is called imperium Occidentale. Hitherto I haue set downe the names of the kings of Fraūce lineally frō Pharamundus the first king of Gallia, which reigned in the yere of Christ our Sauiour 420. vntill Carolus the great the 23. king after Pharamundus, who being both Emperour and king, go∣uerned Fraunce fourtie sixe yeeres. This succession of kings continued 408. yeeres: so that from the first comming of the Frēchmen out of Scythia, which was in the 85. Olympiad, twētie
yeeres before the twentie one Iubilee, vntill this Charles the great, which was in the 814. yeere of Christ, from Marcomirus vnto Francus, 106. Olympiad, whhich is 424. yeeres: during which time they were called Neumagi Marcomanni and af∣ter I vse not these Olympiads for any iust nūber of yeeres, for that there was error in them. Sicambri vntill Francus, from Francus vnto Pharamundus 113. Olympiad, which is 452. yeeres, during which time they were called Franci: from Pharamūdus to Charles the great 393. yeeres, at what time they were first called Galli: so that from Antenor, who maried Cambra the daughter of king Beli∣nus the Britaine, vntill Charolus the great are 1270. yeeres. By this time the kingdome of Fraunce waxed so mightie, that Ca∣rolus was made Emperour by Leo the Pope, as I said before. Nowe Fraunce by meanes of his great fortune fauoured so Charles the great made Emperour of Rome. much Pope Leo, that Rome by Fraunce, and Fraunce by Rome became strong. The Popes of Rome after this time by meanes of their reli∣gion receiued into Fraunce, into Spaine, into Britaine, into di∣uers partes of Germany, and into other kingdomes of Europe, beganne againe to reuiue their Empire vnder the Pope, and brought the Emperour subiect to the Pope, made kings and princes to creepe to the Pope, and entised all Europe vnder Popes flori∣shed after the Emperours. his crosse, yeelding homage and paying tribute vnto him, as to their chiefest and onely Monarch of the world: for before the Popes time the Emperour of Rome subdued and conque∣red all nations, and forced all kingdomes to pay tribute vnto Rome. Nowe the Pope subdued the Emperour, and made him his general lieutenant: after the Emperour he substituted the king of Fraunce, and the king of Spaine martiall of the fielde to fight for him, that he became so great, that though he cal∣led The greatnes of the Popes of Rome. himself seruus seruorū: yet would he be compted and estee∣med lord of lordes: for he would binde, and he would lose, he would curse, and he would blesse, hee would forgiue sinnes, and pardon offences: he kept the keyes of heauen, and of hell. Who ruled like lordes, and commaunded like kings, but the Pope and Mahumet, of equall antiquitie and of like nature?
the one in Arabia the other in Rome, two mōsters of the world, and two enemies of Christianitie, whom wee leaue a while and turne to Fraunce, where the Empire remained this time. The king∣doms of the North began now to flou∣rish. And for that the kingdomes of the Danes, of the Sueuians, of the Noruegians, and other nations of the North beginne now to flourish: and also, for that the state of Fraunce are now be∣come acquainted with al writers as diuers Chronicles are ex∣tant thereof, I wil only therefore set downe briefly their kings and their names frō Carolus the great, vntil the time of Lewes the 12. of that name: rather for that the histories of Fraunce are now familiarly knowen by reason of their warres, and of the greatnesse of their kingdome, then while they were yet strangers by the name of Neumagi first, and after Sicambri, and then Franci, and last Galli. Beside other names, as Cimbri with Beroaldus lib. 4. the Romaus, Galatae with the Greekes, after called Gaulgreekes in Asia, Belgae while they dwelt in Germanie, Armeni while they Gaul grekes. were in Armenia, and Scythae before they came out of Scythia. But how so euer writers vary in their names, they agree that they were called Celtes, Galli, and Franci, which name they helde from Francus time, because they were of long continu∣ance: all other names were giuen to them according to the countreys that they dwelled in. But let vs returne to Charles the great, who after hee had raigned 46. yeeres he died, after whom his sonne Lewes sirna∣med Lodouicus pius succeeded his father Charles the great, both in the king∣dome, and in the Empire. the Godly, succeeded and gouerned Fraunce 26. yeeres. This was also crowned Emperour after his father, by Pope Steuen the fourth of that name: at what time Michael sirna∣med Curoplates was Emperour of Constantinople, who sent ambassadours to Lewes for conclusion of peace: for the Sara∣cens about this time tooke Creete and possessed it, and van∣quished in two or three battels the Greekes, and subdued ma∣ny townes in Asia. This king Lodouicus now consecrated Au∣gustus, appointed his three sonnes to haue seuerall gouern∣ments: Tilius de reg. Francor. the one called Lotharius whom hee sent into Italy as a king to rule and to order the States of Italy: the second sonne named Pipinus he sent to gouerne in Aquitania: the third after
his owne name Lewes, whom also hee sent as king ouer the Noricanes. After Lewes died, his sonne Lotharius succeeded and held the Empire 15. yeeres, vntill his brethren commen∣ced The great slaughter in the ciuil warrs of Fraunce be∣tweene bre∣thren were such, that all Carolus stocke was welnigh extinguished warre against him, and such terrible and bloodie warres, that all Fraunce was weakened thereby, and all the blood of Carolus extinguished: for in these warres were slaine aboue 100000. of the floures of Fraunce on both sides. But in fine they agreed amongst themselues, that Lotharius should hold the Empire and gouerne ouer Italy, and other nations in the East, and Carolus (sirnamed Caluus) should be king in Fraunce, and the thirde sonne should possesse in Germanie and in Hun∣nia vnder the name of a king. This Carolus Caluus raigned king in Fraunce 38. yeeres: hee Carolus Caluus. imprisoned close in a monasterie his brothers childrē, which was Pipinus and Lewes. After this, Carolus died in Mantua, be∣ing poisoned by Sedechia a Iew, and his owne Phisition: then succeeded Lewes sirnamed Balbus who raigned two yeres, and Lewes sirna∣med Balbus. was created Emperour by Pope Iohn in Fraunce. He had two sonnes by his concubine, named Lewes and Charlemaine, they both succeeded their father as kings of Fraunce: Lewes died in Lewes the third, and Ca∣rolomanus the 27. the fourth yere of his raigne, and Charlemaine in the fift yere. After whose death, the Danes and the Normanes inuaded Fraunce, and filled all Fraunce with blood. Carolus the thirde of that name sirnamed Crassus, after these two brethren, raig∣ned Carolus sirna∣med Crassus the 28. fiue yeeres, Beroaldus saith 7. yeeres. About this time the Danes gaue sundry battels in England, and were often vanquished, but still they continued their warres vntill they made a conquest of all the East partes of England. This time Odo the sonne of Robert duke of Anioy raig∣ned Odo the 29. in Fraunce, and gouerned it 9. yeeres: In whose time the schole in the Vniuersitie of Oxeford was builded by Alfredus king of Northumberland, in the yeere of Christ 895. By this king the Floure deluce was first appointed in the en∣signe of Fraunce, then Carolus (sirnamed Simplex) raigned 27. Carolus Sim∣plex. yeeres: this was the sonne of Balbus. But to auoyde tediousnesse, (according to my promise) I
wil passe ouer the rest of the historie, and of the names of the rest of the kings of Fraunce vntill Lewes the 12: for I may not stand long to entreate of euery countrey (for that I write of Lewes the 12. many countreys,) onely touching the antiquities of king∣domes, their continuance, their beginning and ending, the time of their gouernment, and the names of their gouer∣nours, committing to your view this compendious abstract of all Chronicles, and all their histories, which would make infinite volumes to be read in those Chronographers that I follow Tilius table chiefly in setting downe the kings of France largely wrote of them. 31 Rodulphus duke of Burgundie, and after king of France, raigned. 2. yeeres. 32 Lewes, who fled into England with his mother named O∣ginia, returneth now into Fraunce, and raigned with Rodul∣phus 10. yeres. But he raigned king in the whole. 27. yeeres. 33 Lotharius the sonne of Lewes the 4. by Gerberga the sister of Otho the Emperor, he raigned 31. yere. In whose time the kingdome of Polonia began, in the yeere of Christ 963. The kingdom of Polonia. 34 Lewes the fift of that name raigned. 1. yeere. Hitherunto haue raigned from Faramundus 34. kings: now raigned after this Lotarius these many kings, which you see Reade Aemil. lib. 1. here vnder written in this table, which hitherto continued in the line of Francus: and now I will set downe the first king of Hugo Capetus the first king of those that were natural∣ly borne Galli. those that were naturally borne Galli, the thirde name of the kings of Fraunce. 35 Hugo Capetus raigned 9. yeeres. This was the first king borne of those that were called Galli: for hitherunto the lineal sucession of Francus endured. 36 After him his sonne Robert raigned 34. yeeres. In the be∣ginning of whose time the kingdome of Hungarie beganne. 10. Tilius de reg. Franc. 37 Henry the sonne of Robert succeeded and raigned after his father. 30. yeeres. 38 Philippe the first of that name, and sonne to Henry raigned 49. yeeres. In whose time beganne the kingdome of Bohemia. In the time of this Philippe the first, two most famous men and worthie Captaines tooke their voyages, the one named
Godfrey of Bullen, with an armie from Fraunce into the holy Land which was Ierusalem, so called after Christs time on earth: Hierusalem called the Ho∣ly land. this warre is called bellum Sacrum the sacred warres, against the Saracens. Reade Tilius Chronicles of the French kings, where you shall finde a Catalogue of the nobles, peeres, and gentlemen of France, and of diuers other countreys that went on that voyage with Godfrey of Bullen to Hierusalem: the other Captaine came to England, William the bastarde of Norman∣die, afterward called William Conquerour, of whom our English chronicles can testifie. But I wil briefly passe ouer the kings. 39 Lewes sirnamed Crassus raigned 28. yeeres. 40 Lewes sirnamed Iunior. 43. yeeres. 41 Philippus Augustus sirnamed Deodatus 43. yeeres. In whose time the Iewes were banished out of Fraunce. 42 Lewes the eight of that name. 4. yeeres. 43 Lewes the ninth, sirnamed Holy. 43. yeeres. Both Functius, Beroaldus, and Tilius agree in placing these kings in this sort. 44 Philip the 3. sirnamed Audax, son to Lewes. 9. 15. yeres. 45 Philippus the 4. sirnamed Pulcher the faire, and sonne to Philip the thirde, raigned 28. yeeres. In this kings raigne began the kingdome of Ottoman the Turke. 46 Lewes the 10. sirnamed Vtinus, king both of Fraunce and of Nauarre, raigned almost 2. yeeres. 47 Philip the 5. sirnamed Longus, raigned 5. yeeres. 48 Carolus Pulcher king of Fraunce and Nauarre 7. yeeres. Now after this, Philip the first of the house of Valois began, in the 1328. yeere of our Sauiour, whose line hath conti∣nued euen frō this Philip of Valois the first king of that house, vntill Frances Valois last king of Fraunce, and the last of that stocke, which continued 263. yeres: whose names successiue∣ly are here set downe in Tilius Chronicles, as followeth. 49 Philip of Valots the first king of that name. 22. yeres: The house of Valloys began. 50 Whose eldest sonne named Iohn was the first Dolphine of Fraunce, which to this day doeth continue. Hee raigned af∣ter his father king of Fraunce. 14. yeeres. 51 Carolus the 5. sirnamed the wise, raigned 18. yeeres. Whose brother named also Philip was made duke of Burgūdy. About
this time Iohn Wicleue opened much falshoode yet vn∣known of Papistrie, both disputing & writing against it. 52 Carolus the sixt, sirnamed Bene amatus raigned 42. yeeres: this ordeined first the 3. Floure deluce. This time raigned in England Richard the second. 53 Charles the seuenth raigned 38. yeeres. This king com∣menced warre against England, at what time Henry the 5. raigned, who subdued all Fraunce, and was crowned king in Paris. 54 Lewes the eleuenth raigned 23. yeeres. 55 Carolus the eight raigned 14. yeeres. 56 Lewes the 12. raigned 17. yeres in France, being the 1500. yeere of our Sauiour Christ: Reade of this king Arnoldus Fer∣ronus all his thirde booke which hee onely wrote of this Lewes the 12. At what time raigned in England Henry the 7. Thus farre briefly Iranne ouer the state of France, omitting many thinges willingly and wittingly, which I particularly I haue fol∣lowed Paulus Aemilius, and Al. Ferranus, since Faramun∣dus vnto Lewes the 12. and haue also cō∣ferred both them with Ti∣lius Chron. Be∣fore Faramun∣dus by Trite∣mius. touch in the historie of Spaine: for I tooke not in hand to write at large, or to set foorth great volumes of superfluous histo∣ries, but onely (as I saide before) to note the antiquities and first beginning of kingdomes, and to marke the errours of prophane histories in many things, dissenting from Moses, from Daniel, and from the Propheticall writings, who ope∣ned all Chronicles: for they coulde not agree in the chie∣fest pointes of all true Chronicles, neither the Romanes in the building of Rome, from whence they ground their histo∣ries: neither the Greekes by their Olympiads: neither the Persi∣ans of Cyrus time, neither Spaine in their accompt of A. E R. A: neither the Arabians of their Hegyra. In fine, vnpossible it is to finde the trueth of Antiquities in prophane writers, with∣out conferring of the same with the Sacred histories of the Prophets, who reueiled the trueth of time by their Iubilees.
A BRIEFE FOR BRITAINE. SEeing that I haue written of other countreys, I can not tell how to answere my countrey∣men well, if I should not also somewhat speake of the Bri∣tains, though in trueth many haue sufficiently written of the comming of Brutus vnto this land, of his kingdome and suc∣cession of kings and continu∣ance, which though of some denied, which do now as they then did in the time of Halicar∣nassaeus: Sempron. de Ital. who after he had trauailed his histories from Sempro∣nius, Fabius Pictor, and from M. Cato, and proued euidently the Fabius Pictor de aureo seculo. comming of Aeneas into Italy, of his kingdome and posteritie in Alba longa vntill Romulus, being 17. discents after him: yet Mar. Cato de originibus. some gens inuidiosa Traianis (as Halicarnassaeus calleth them) seemed not to allow the historie, though they knewe it them∣selues, & also read it by so many proued, because they would Berosus and Manethon wrote vn∣knowen histo∣ries. be named antiquaries, and the credite of the histories should come from them. Such was Polidor Virgil in his history of Britaine, such was Berosus in the historie of Hetruria, (being two strangers) and such was Manethon to write of Spaine. So there were among the Iewes Talmudists, who among other matters which they Talmudists fa∣bulous. wrote (for they were the onely men among the Iewes) would also by this credit that they had amōg the people, write what they listed, that they became thereby very fabulous in their histories. So among the Egyptians their superstitious priestes filled their bookes with lies: and so of diuers other countreis, men wrote rather fables then histories of their coūtreys. But these are reiected from sound approued authors, tanquam Mi∣thici: The priestes of Egypt, Mithici. for in reading of histories I find nothing so readie as er∣rors in antiquities of countreys, and in original of nations.
And surely it is not to be wondered at, concerning the an∣tiquities of time, euen from the beginning of the world, and the late beginning of writers from Cyrus time, or rather Alex∣anders time: for in the first age from Adam to the flood, no No prophane writers known before Cyrus time. trueth is had nor knowen but onely by Moses in the Genesis, and 1650. yeeres frō the flood vnto the time of the Olympiads, men wandered in no true accompt of time, nor of histories, (excepting that which is written in the bookes of Moses and the Prophets) nothing seemed sound nor certaine, but cōie∣ctures and fained fables, as in the historie of the Chaldeans, As∣syrians, The vncer∣taintie of pro∣phane histo∣ries. Aegyptians, and diuers other nations, many things are written which is named Mythycum very licentiously and to li∣berally: and after the time of the Olympiads, how vntrue pro∣phane historians wrote vntil Daniels time, who seeth it not? Since which time, a briefe of al true chronicles is set downe by the Prophet in describing the 4. beastes and their natures, Daniel a true Chronogra∣pher for the 3. last Monar∣chies. signifying thereby the Monarchies of the worlde, their go∣uernment and their continuance, the onely grounde from whēce all writers make good their histories. But let no man write of his coūtrey with more affection then trueth wil war∣rant him for his proofe, as it seemeth Berosus did of Chaldea, Manethon of Egypt, Ctesias of Persia: for that they may easily be corrected by any late writer that is seene in the Sacred histo∣ries (and yet they were men of singular authoritie and credite in histories of their countreys) who by conferring Propheti∣cal histories with their prophane writings, men find nothing more then fables of antiquities, and errors in lieu of true hi∣stories, not knowing the Centre of all certaine Chronicles, I meane the Prophetical histories. But haue with them for my countrey also, being cōtented to be excused with them by Liui, In tanta rerum vetustate, multi temporis errores implicātur, &c. For no doubt as Greeke histories The Greekes histories more fabulous then the Latines. are more vncertaine then the Latins, of whom Iosephus saith, that they had nothing to bragge of, but their lies, euery man setting downe in writing his opinion, rather then studying the trueth of the historie. But as occasion shall serue me, so shal I
speake of them and of others. In the meane time I marueile much howe some men are more bent without either reason or authoritie, to reprooue that which in true Histories is approoued. Many of the best Romane writers seemed to be ignorant of that which they knew, and yet would take no notice thereof: they woulde not haue vrbem omnium gentium, & Imperiorum dominam to bee builded by any of Aeneas stocke, or any of∣springs of the Troyans: neither would they allow any part of Italy to be inhabited with the Grecians, whome the Romanes Fab. Pictor de orig. mortally hated. They claime their antiquitie frō Noah by the name of Ianus, who came from Scythia Saga presently after the flood into Italy: and after Ianus from Saturnus and from M. Cato de org. Ital. Cameses. This Sempronius, Mar. Cato, and Fabius Pictor seeme fully to prooue, and they stand to it stoutly: notwithstanding Semp. de diu. Ital. they haue as many Greeke writers against them in proouing the contrary: affirming, that the Grecians, Arcadians, Lacede∣monians, Achaians, and Pelasgians first inhabited Italy. So Myr∣silus Myrsilus de bello Pelasgico. in the whole booke which beginneth thus, Italiam pri∣mùm coluere Graeci, &c. prooueth the Grecians to be the first in∣habitants in Italy. After Myrsilus followeth Dionysius Hali∣carnassaeus in like order and proofe, as he that readeth Halicar∣nassaeus, Halicar. lib. 1. readeth Myrsilius: and after Dionysius, Herodotus who doeth not onely fully warrant Myrsilus and Dionysius, but also concludeth with more warrants of his owne. This cōtrouer∣sie riseth betweene the Grecians and the Romanes, about the antiquitie of Italy: the Greekes calling Italy, Spurcam, spuriam & nouitiam, and the Romanes naming Greece, Mendacem & fabulosam. The like controuersie grewe betweene the Egyptians and the Scythians in those dayes, and the like nowe about the com∣ming of Brute vnto this countrey, whose cōming hath bene Contention betweene the Scythians and the Egyptians. receiued and confirmed by succession of kings from Brutus to Cadwalader. And after the kings, the line and stocke of Bru∣tus vnto this day 2700. yeeres, sed nihil magnum somnianti: for they can reprooue without authoritie, but they wil not allow
proofs with authorities: such is their credite with some peo∣ple, as Pythagoras was with his owne schollers, who thought Pythagoras speach a sufficient warrant to proue anything, on∣ly alleaging . I doubt there be many Pythagoreans, that Pythagoras au∣thoritie with his schollers was no more but . stand too much in their owne conceites, some dreaming the word Britania to be Pritania, some imagining the Britaines to to be Picts, and that the originall of the Britaines shoulde bee from the Picts, and many such other reasons, rather fables, wherein there is neither agreement of time, which is to bee noted, nor affinitie with speache, neither likenesse of names, nor any things else like: for the Pictes came but the last day to Armorica, which is little Britaine in Fraunce, with one Rodericke their captaine from Scythia, and not with Aene∣as Picts inuaded Britaine. from Phrygia, to seeke where they might haue place to in∣habite. I confesse that these Pictes and Scots, inuaded Britaine, and made often irruptions into Britaine in the time of Con∣stantine the great, Iouinianus, Theodosius, and many other Em∣perours: but they were repelled, and compelled with many a good beating to retire. I should better allowe the opinion of those that say, that the Pictes are Scots: for with the Britaines the Picts by no likenesse may bee resembled neither by time, nor by tongue. I will leaue the Picts for the Scots, whose kingdome was subdued and translated into Scotland, by Kenedus king of the Scots, where I leaue them. Many licencious writers haue bene, and are in the world, not only in matters of antiquities, but in other matters also. Who will beleeue Polidor a strāger in Britaine, before Giraldus a singular learned man borne in Britaine? who had traueiled as many countries as Polidor did, and therefore was in great credite with Rich. the second: who who will beleeue a forreine late writer before Gildas the Bri∣taine, that wrote of his coūtrie in Claudius Caesars time? If nei∣ther Giraldus, nor Gildas, nor any other ex bardis Britannis are allowed, let Ponticus Virunnius, let Iu. Caesar in his Comment, Pont. Virunnius whosaid they were ex eadem prosapia, be allowed. For the trueth thereof I doubt not but I shall write as true
as the Frenchmen shall doe of Fraunce, the Hispaniard of Hi∣spaine, and so of the rest: I meane, of the Saxons, of the Greekes, Brutus from Italie. and of the Romanes: and my reason shallbe as probable for the landing of Brutus in this Island from Italie, as the Italians shall prooue Ianus to come from Chaldea into Italie, or as the Ianus from Chaldea. Frenchmen shall prooue Marcomirus to come from Scythia in∣to Germany, and so in time to come into Fraunce, and so to Marcomirus from Scythia. holde the name of Francus. I will not speake of Caetubales, Hiberians, Hesperians, nor of the olde Celtiberians, afterwarde called Spaniards, who had their name of Hispanus: neither will I speake of the aunci∣ent stocke of Brutus while yet they dwelt in Creete, and after in Phrygia, and after that in Albalonga, and last in Rome, but of the comming of Brutus vnto this land the sonne of Syluius, the sonne of Ascanius, the sonne of Aeneas, and from the name of the Britaines since that time, of the which if any man doubt, he may aswell doubt of the antiquitie of the Latines, of the Al∣banes, and last of the Romanes, which al did issue and proceede of the house of Aeneas: for imperij Romaniorigo Aeneas, as is prooued by Halicarnassaeus, which affirmeth that Romulus the first king of the Romanes was the seuenteenth king out of the body of Aeneas lineally descending: for after Aeneas died, be∣ing at his death king of the Latines three yeeres, after whom succeeded his sonne Ascanius, and builded a towne hard by Albalonga builded by Ascanius. the hill Alba, and named it Albalonga, leauing his fathers wife Lauina in that Citie which Aeneas builded thirtie yeres before Ascanius builded Albalonga: where during his life As∣canius kept his Court, and it became the king of Albans Pal∣lace: at what time the names of the Latines were changed to the kings of Alba, which endured foure hundred yeeres and Reade Dyonis. Halicar. of this historie lib. 1. odde, vntill Tullus Hostilius the third king of Rome conquered them: so that the right line and blood of the kings of Alba des∣cended also from Aeneas by succession, from the father vnto the sonne, vntill Romulus time, as Halicarnassaeus saith: whose names are set downe orderly in Annius chronicles, and in Be∣rosus, with whom Dyonis. Halicar doeth in all points agree, as
well for the continuance of time, as also for their sure na∣ming of their kings which reigned betweene Aeneas and Ro∣mulus. So doeth M. Cato in his fragments, men of great credite in other histories, & to be skant in the Britaine historie allowed, hinc liuor, the cause thereof I take it in some rather negligence then ignorance: for in trueth the Phisicion must study to ease his patients, the Lawyer to please his client, the Diuine to feede the soules: so that few haue time to studie histories. Yea Halic. lib. 1. Origo Romani imperij Aeneas. many that read histories, are to seeke in histories other wayes then the histories of Englād: but I wil returne to Aeneas which is as Annius saith, Imperij Romani origo, and therefore I will be∣gin from the comming of Aeneas into Laurentum in Italie. Nowe as concerning the comming of Aeneas into Italie, his toyles and trauailes, reade Helanicus an olde auncient wri∣ter. My onely purpose is to set downe the true histories of the Britaines, hauing that name from Brutus, euen as the Frenchmen were named of Francus, and the Hispaniards from Hispanus. If you reade Fab. Pictor de aureo seculo, and Portius Cato, you M. Cato de frag. origo. shall finde the kindred and predecessours of Romulus the first king of Rome so plainely to come out of the very house and stocke that Brutus the first king of the Britaines came out of: so that the last king of the Latines, I meane Aeneas, and his sonne Ascanius the first king of Albalonga, are of that anti∣quitie and continuance in Italie, as Brutus is in Britaine, now called Englande. For as Romulus and the kings of Rome, and af∣ter the Emperours and the Romanes were offsprings of the kinges of the Albanes and Latines, and the Albanes and The Romanes. come fromthe Troians. Latines offsprings of the kings of Troy: so is it prooued that the Romanes came from Troy: for Ascanius was graundfather vnto Brutus, who first came into this Isle named then Albion, but by Brutus after named Britaine. Some take this for fables, certeine it is that the beginning of antiquities seeme fabu∣lous, for that the errors of time haue obscured many things, as is proued of the Romane histories, whom the Grecians neuer
knewe nor neuer heard of: for neither Thucydides, nor Xeno∣phon, two of the greatest writers in the florishing state of Romanes not knowen to the Grecians before Alex. time, nei ther the Greci∣ans to the Per∣sians, vntill Xerxe, time. Greece, yea and late after the foundation of Rome 360. yeeres, neither Herodot after them made any mencion of Rome. Euen so the Grecians were to the Persians, and the Persians to the Grecians most ignorant, not one knowing another be∣fore Xerxes with his huge armie thought to inuade Greece: for these be the words of Strabo, Nec Graeci Persas, nec Persae Graecos agnorunt. And as for Fraunce and Spaine they were taken but for two cities, the one named Gallia, the other Hesperia, as Iose∣phus Strab. lib. 15. affirmeth. Many men write very fables of their countries, as Berosus, if it be Berosus, being a Chaldean priest, wrote of the Chaldeans meere fables, and more licencious of the kings of Assyria, without any warrant of trueth, not knowing the Scriptures, Berosus. where the best and soundest warrant of Chaldean histories are to be found. In like sort Ctesias the Persian wrote of his coun∣trie Ctesias. 23. bookes both vaine and foolish in setting foorth the antiquitie, gouernment, and greatnesse of the king of Persia, then is truely prooued by true accompt of time, as Plutarch Manethon. affirmeth. So Manethon an Egyptian priest, wrote so many lies of his countrie of Egypt that accompteth 340. Pharoes succes∣siuely from Amasis the first Pharao, vnto Amasis the last Pharao: but he is reprooued to his face by Iosephus in both his bookes against Appion the Egyptian, and a scholemaster of Alex∣andria: Ioseph. lib. cont. App. on. yet Manethon founde great fault in Herodot for his fa∣bles and lies of Egypt. But let controuersies passe, all countries haue their fables mingled with trueth: and so I will returne to the histories of The proofe of Brutus cōming into Albion more plaine then of Francus into Fraunce, or of Hispanus into Hispaine. the Britaines, whose certeintie and trueth is as sound, and as true to bee prooued, as either Fraunce, Spaine, or any other countrie: whose continuance was without change of name for lōger time, then many bragging kingdoms, whose lawes, whose kings, whose countrie vnconquered longer then any of them both, easie to be prooued by all sound writers: for Spaine was conquered and subdued first by the Carthagineans,
and Affricanes: secondly by the Romanes: thirdly by the Van∣dales: fourthly by the Gothes: and fiftly by the Saracens, who possessed almost all the kingdome of Spaine for 800. yeeres. Reade Annius de frag. Hispa∣niae of the sun∣dry names of Hispaniards. So may it be said of the change of their names: as Catubales, Iberians, Celtiberians, Hesperians and Spaniards, which during the time of this change, serued the Carthagineans, the Ro∣manes, the Grekes, the Gothes, and the Saracens. The Britaines ne∣uer The Britaines neuer chāged their names. changed their names since Brutus time, which is 2700. and odde yeeres, which no one kingdome of the worlde can say so much, though in some part it was subdued by the Ro∣manes, and then by the Danes, and last by the Normanes: yet they reserued their names vnchanged, & all the whole coun∣trie of Camber the second sonne of Brutus vncōquered, which of late is called Wales, their auncient name vnchanged, and their language vncorrupted. So may I speake of the Frenchmen which were called at The diuers & sundry names of the French men. their first arriuall from Scythia into Germany, Neumagi: then were they called Sicambri: thirdly Franci: and fourthly Galli. So were the Persians, Elamites, Artaeans, and after Cephancs, and last of all Persians: so Egypt was called Oceana, Nilea, Aerea, and last of all, Egypt. To conclude, there is no nation that I can reade of, but were subiect to diuers names, & therby knowē, The Persians and the Egyp∣tians were by diuers names called. sauing onely the Britaines, which continue vnto this day: though the Danes beganne to call them Welsh, as they call all strangers Welsh, which was 1800. yeres & odde, as the reignes and gouernmēt of the kings of Britaine do manifestly proue. whose names I neede not to write, for that they be set downe to your viewe in tables printed with the pictures of all the kings of the Britaines: Now after 1 Brutus. 2 Locrinus. 3 Madan. 4 Mempricius. 5 Ebrancus and 6 Brutus, surnamed Viridescutum, and so forward vntill Rudacus time, the 20. king Britaine diui∣ded for 50. yeeres into foure king∣doms. after Brutus, at what time the kingdome was diuided into foure parts, and gouerned by foure seuerall kings for fiftie yeeres: Rudacus king of Cambria, which is Wales: Pinnor king of
Loegria, which is England, Saterus king of Albania, which is nowe Scotland, and Clotenus king of Cornubia, nowe Cornewall: all the kingdome after fiftie yeeres came to Dunwallus, Clote∣nus sonne, about 700. yeeres after Brutus, and continued vn∣till Elidurus the third, for the space of a 182. yeeres. And after Elidurus the third, it continued the reigne of From Elidurus vnto Belinus the great 185. yeeres. thirtie three kings from Elidurus vntill Belinus the great, 185. This Belinus was vncle vnto Cassibelane, who reigned king in Britaine when Iulius Caesar came into Britaine, about a thou∣sand and thirtie yeeres after Brutus: so long was Britaine vn∣conquered, which as I said before: for the spite of Androgeus to Cassibelan, he wrote his letters to Caesar after the first great ouerthrowe of Caesar: of which Lucan the Poet saith. Territa quaesitis ostendunt terga Britannis Romani, &c. This Androgeus then Duke of Troinouant, nowe called Lon∣don Androgeus the onely cause of Caesars victorie. since king Luds time, promised his aide and helpe with all the Britaines which he coulde make, if after the conquest he should by Caesar be restored to gouerne the Britaines: but Caesar by this meanes brought the Britaines to paye tribute to the Romanes, yet reigned kings in Britaine from Cassibelan lineally vnto Cadwallader for seuen hundred yeres and odde: The kings of Britaine conti∣nued 1800. yeeres. so that Britaine was gouerned from the first king vnto the last for a thousand eight hundred and odde yeeres, as Guido∣nius affirmeth. But for that the kings of Britaine are by all their names na∣med, their successiōs & continuance of time writtē in diuers Chronicles of Englande: beside Doctor Powel of late hath written of their ciuill warres, of their kings, their lawes, and Iu Caesars stock proceeded frō gens Iulia. gouernments, that I neede not further to write herein: my desire is no lesse to satisfie those that will with reason and au∣thorities bee satisfied, then was M. Coruinus a learned Ro∣mane Orator, willing to please Augustus Caesar for the setting foorth of his familie and his house, in proouing gens Iulia, which was the stocke of the first Emperour Iulius Caesar his vncle, to descende lineally from Ascanius. The historie is writ∣ten
in Coruinus de progenie Augusti, in whose time Coruinus florished; whome Augustus desired to traueile and to set Augusts Caesar desirous to knowe his ge∣nealogie. downe the genealogie of his stocke, that being so fortunate an Emperour as hee was, in subduing almost all the king∣domes of the worlde, and captiuating them as Prouinces vnder the Empire of Rome, hee might knowe also whence gens Iulia came, that hee might assure him selfe of the cer∣teintie of his house. To satisfie this Emperor Augustus being thereunto by him intreated, Coruinus briefely diuided the whole earth into three seuerall partes, Asia, Europe, and Affrike: In this Asia the great is Asia the lesse conteyned: in the which Countrie is a Region named Phrygia, into the which one Dardanus a great prince of Creete that had the daughter of one Teucer gi∣uen Dardanus mar∣ried the daugh ter of Teucer. him in mariage, came with a great multitude of young men and souldiers to inhabite about the time that Moses dy∣ed, where hee builded a great Citie, and named it after his owne name Dardania, and the inhabitants therein were cal∣led Dardanians. The fame of this king Dardanus grewe so great, that Teucer his father in lawe came from Creete, with a number of gentle∣men to visite his daughter vnto Dardania in Phrygia, where Dardanus reigned three yeres, after whom succeeded Erictho∣nius The successi∣ons of all the kings that reigned in Troy. 75. yeres: after Ericthonius succeded Tros the king of Dar∣dania, which reigned sixtie yeres, by whom Dardania was na∣med Troy, after the kings name: after Tros succeeded Ilus, who reigned 54. yeres, after whom succeeded Laomedon, and reig∣ned 36. yeres: and after him reigned his sonne Priamus named Dionys. Halicar lib. 2. Alexander in histories the sixt and last king of Troy: in whose time Troy was destroyed by the Grecians. This Messala setteth downe in his historie, how Aeneas after the warres came into Italie, and maried king Latinus daughter, succeeded as heire of Aeneas maried Latinus daugh ter. the king in his kingdom, from whose body lineally descēded these many kings: whose names onely I wil set downe for that I haue in the historie of the Latines written of their continu∣ance and of the time of their gouernment vntill Romulus.
1 Aeneas. 2 Ascanius. 3 Siluius. Dionys Halycar Annius, & M. Coruinus, set downe these kings in this sott. 4 Aeneas Siluins. 5 Latinus Siluius. 6 Alba Siluius. 7 Capetus Siluius. 8 Capis Siluius. 9 Calpetus Siluius. 10 Tiberinus Siluius. 11 Agrippa Siluius. 12 Alladius Siluius. 13 Auentinus Siluius. 14 Procas Siluius. 15 Amulius Siluius. 16 Numitor Siluius which was both grādfather by the mother side & vncle by the father side vnto Romulus. M. Coruinus wrote vnto Augustus the whole historie of the kings of Alba, vntill Romulus time, and prooueth plaine in his booke, that the noble Emperour Augustus proceeded from the house of Aeneas, that gens Iulia came lineally from the bo∣dy Augustus Caesar lineally pro∣ceeded from Aeneas. of Iulo, which was the surname of Ascanius: some affirme the contrary. Yet Coruinus, an auncient antiquarie liuing in the time of Augustus, and writing his booke to Augustus at the earnest request of the Emperour Augustus, affirmeth all this to be, which Halicarnas. in all pointes alloweth: but what is to proue the Britaines to come from the Troians? or to proue Brutus to come to Englād, as much & more it maketh proofe, that Brutus came to this land, as Aeneas came to Italie: the one is prooued by a number of Romane writers, the other by so many of both Romane and Britaine authours, and yet Aeneas is by some enrious writers denied to come to Italie, as Brutus is to come to Britaine, of whom Dionys. Halic. saith, Scriptores partim ignorati, partim inuidia dissimulati de aduentu Aeneae in Dionys. Halicar lib. . Italiam. The historie of Aeneas, and the historie of Brutus, after the destruction of Troy, is one of the most auncient histories of the Gentiles, though in some it bee fabulous, as all prophane histories be in many pointes: yet from these Troians, as from the first originall of their kings and Emperours, both the Ro∣manes and the Frenchmen are by some of their owne best wri∣ters proued: of whom Aemilius writes of their antiquitie. It is most likely that euery Countrie hath more care of it
selfe then of other countries, and rather French writers are to be beleeued in the histories of Fraunce, then forreigne wri∣ters: so of the Romanes, of the Grecians, and of all other coun∣tries as Myrsillus saith, Plus vicinis quàm remotis, & multò plus genti ipsi quàm extremis credatur: and yet who seeth not, but both the Romanes, the Grecians, the Frenchmen, and all nati∣ons, aduaunce their countries with best histories, and passe Diodor. lib. 2. lightly ouer many histories that makes against their Coun∣tries? But as Diodorus Siculus describeth Britaine, by the name of Britaine, to be fertill and plentifull in corne, cattell, iron, with diuers other commodities: so doeth Strabo commende the Britaines to bee people farre bigger and taller then the Frenchmen are, in these wordes: Britannorum statura supra Strab. lib. 4. Gallos procera, &c. and after he reporteth of certaine Britaines which he himselfe sawe at Rome in the time of Augustus Caesar, of bigger bodies, and of taller stature then any Romane, by halfe a foote: for saith Strabo, Vidimus puberes Britannos longis∣simi corporis nostris indigenis semipede celsiores. But to be short, as it was among the Iewes permitted to the Talmudistes to write their countrie histories, to the Indians Talmudists. Gymnosophists to write of India: the olde Gaules committed the olde recordes and Chronicles of their Countries to their Gymnosophists. wise men called Druydes: the olde Hispaniards, during the Druydes. time of their kings, and long after euen vnto the Romanes time, had the antiquaries called Turdetani, to write the Chro∣nicles Turdetani. of their Countries: and euen so among the olde Bri∣taines were called Bardi, to recorde their antiquitie and their histories, men of like credite and estimation among the Bri∣taines, Bardi. as were these before named in their Countries: with∣out whose consent and councell if any man wrote concer∣ning the state and antiquitie of their countrie, hee should be punished according to the custome of the Countrie. It is ea∣sily spoken, there was no Troy: but all countries haue allow∣ed it, time hath confirmed it, both Greeke and Latine histories haue written of it. It is soone saide, There was no such Brutus: but continu∣ance
of time, succession of kings, possession of the countrie doe proue the contrary. If neither Geraldus being of the time of Richard the second, neither Gildas long before Geraldus, li∣uing in the time of Claudius Augustus the Emperour, both singularly learned, if neither consent of time, succession of kings, the antiquitie of the historie, nor the affinitie of tongues, which no Grecian can denie, (for we holde the aun∣cient names of riuers, townes, mountaines, and other monu∣ments euen from Brutus time in the selfe same tongue that Brutus spake.) Let them giue some credite to Pont. Varunnius, Iulius Caesar, who said, Gens ex nostra prosapia est, being proued by M. Corui∣nus, and Halicarnassaeus, lineally to descend from Aeneas. What shoulde I write more? Inuidia serra animae: and truely is that spoken, that three good vertuous mothers had three wicked vicious daughters: Familiaritie the mother of contempt. Peace and quietnesse, the mother of idlenesse. And Trueth the mother of hatred. Yet in spite of that scorpion, Sus ex merito quemque tuetur ho∣nor. The historie of Belinus the great, whose daughter named Belinus the great. Cambra was maried to Marcomirus sonne, the first king from whom the Frenchmen since their comming to Germany flori∣shed by the name of Sicambri, after the name of Cambra the Britaine: the historie of Brenus his brother are wel knowē with forreigne writers: so of Rodericus the great, of Leoninus the Rodericus the great. great, who are in the Britaine historie as much cōmended, as Pompey the great, or Constantine the great among the Romanes: Leoninus the great. for as Pyrrhus saide, Italie was not to be subdued but by Italians, neither Rome but by the Romanes: euen so the Britaines were not to be ouerthrowen but by Britaines. And here I end.
