17749 99836947 1247
THE XII. WONDERS OF THE WORLD. Set and composed for the Violl de Gambo, the Lute, and the Voyce to Sing the Verse, all three ioyntly, and none seuerall: also Lessons for the Lute and Base Violl to play alone: with some Lessons to play Lyra-wayes alone, or if you will, to fill vp the parts, with another Violl set Lute-way. Newly composed by Iohn Maynard, Lutenist at the most famous Schoole of St. Iulians in Hartfordshire. Eight parts in one vp∣on one Plaine-song, begin and end where you will, so as you do come in a Semibriefe one after another. Oh followe me Tom Iohn and Wilcok three knaues in A knott followe mee hooe then ❧ LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for Iohn Browne, and are to be solde at his Shop in Saint Dunstones Church-yard in Fleetstreete. 1611.
TO HIS EVER-HONOV∣RED LADY AND MISTRIS the Lady Ioane Thynne, of Cause-Castle in Shropshire, Nestors yeeres on earth, and Angels happinesse in Heauen. Madame. WHat at first priuately was entended for you, is at last pub∣lickely commended to you. This poore play-worke of mine, had its prime originall and birth-wrights in your own house, when by nearer seruice I was obliged yours. I am humbly-bould to present it to your Ladiships view and protection (if you will daigne to make happy by your Patronage so meane a worke) both for your well knowne loue to the Science, and your many many fa∣uours conferred vpon my vndeseruing selfe, the louer and admirer of your Vertues. The powrefull perswasi∣on of that nobly-disposed Gentlewoman Mrs. Dorothy Thynne, your vertuous Daughter, whose breast is possest with an admirable hereditary loue of Musicke, and who once laboured mee to that effect, hath not a little emboldned mee herevnto. If there liue any good thing in mee, onely your Onely-Selfe is firstly inte∣ressed in the same, I being doubly bound, by your bountie on the one side, and my dutie on the other. Accept then, Gracious Lady, with vnwrinkled brow, the affectionate, though weake deuoyre of him that strongly desires to doe you seruice. I know it is not able Eagle-like to looke with an vndaunted eye against the brightfull Sunne of your matchlesse iudgement; wherein notwithstanding, if your Clemencie shall allowe it ¦uourable roome, I feare not the vnequallest front of the sowrest Criticke. Thus lowly-laying both it and my selfe, the worthlesse Authour at your VVorships seruice, I beseech Him that is the Giuer of all things, to graunt vnto you, and your vertuous Daughters, a full confluence of vnited Happinesse heere, and glory eternall hereafter. Your Ladiships in all humble seruice Iohn Maynard.
A Wonder. The Courtier. I CANTVS. LOng, long haue I liude in Court, yet   learn'd not all this while, To sell poore suters smoake, nor where I hate to smile:   Superiours to adore, Inferiours to des- pise: To she from such as fall, to   follow such as rise, To cloake a poore de- sire vnder a rich aray, Nor to aspire by vice though t'were   the quicker way.
BASSVS. LOng, Long haue I liu'd in Court, &c.
A Wonder. The Deuine. II. CANTVS. MY calling is diuine, and I from God am sent, I will no chop Church   be, nor pay my Patron rent, nor yeeld to sa- criledge, but like the kinde true mother,   rather will loose all the Childe, then part it with another: Much wealth   ij. I will not seeke, nor worldly Masters serue, so to grow rich and fat   while my poore flocke doth starue.
BASSVS. MY Calling is diuine, &c.
A Wonder. The Souldiour. III. CANTVS. MY Occupation is the Noble trade, the trade of Kings, the   tryall that decides the highest right of things. Though Mars my Mai- ster be I doe not   Venus loue, nor honour Bacchus oft, nor often sweare by Ioue, Of speaking of my selfe I   all occasion shunne, and rather loue to doe, to doe, ij. to doe, to to doe to doe   then boast what I haue done.
BASSVS. MY Occupation is the Noble trade, &c.
A Wonder. The Lawyer. IIII. CANTVS. THe Law my Calling is my robe, my tongue, my pen, wealth and opinion gaine,   and make me Iudge of men, The knowne dishonest cause I neuer did defend, nor spunne out   sutes in length, but wisht and sought an end, ij. nor counsaile did be-   wray, nor of both parties take, nor euer tooke, nor euer tooke I fee, for   which, for which, for which, for which I neuer neuer spake.
BASSVS. THe Lavv my calling is, &c.
A Wonder. The Phisition. V. CANTVS. I Studie to vphold the slippery state of Man, of Man, who dies,   ij. who dyes when wee haue done the best, and all wee can, From practise and from bookes,   ij. ij. From practise and from bookes I draw my learned skill, not from the knowne re-   ceipt or Pothecaries bill. The earth my faults doth hide, ij. The   world my Cures doth see, What youth and time ef- fects is oft,   is oft, is oft, is oft, is oft, is oft, is oft ascrib'd to mee.
BASSVS. I Studie to vphold the slippery state of man, &c.
A Wonder. The Marchant. VI. CANTVS. MY trade doth eue- ry thing to euery land supply, Disco-   uers, ij. vnknowne coasts, strange countryes doth al- lye: I neuer   did forestall, ij. I neuer did in- grose, Nor custome did   withdraw though I return'd with losse, I thriue by faire exchange, I thriue by faire ex-   change, By selling and by buying, And not by Iewish vse, ij. and ij. Re-   prisall fraud or lying.
BASSVS. MY trade doth euery, &c.
A Wonder. The Country Gentleman. VII. CANTVS. THough strange out landish spirits praise, Townes and Countries scorne, The Country   is my home, I dwell where I was borne: There profit and command ij.   with pleasure I pertake, yet doe not ij. ij. ij. ij. yet doe not Haukes and   Dogs my soul companions make. I rule ij. but not oppresse, End quarrels not main- taine,   See Townes but dwell not there, there, there, there, there, there, there, there there, there, there, ij.   there, there to abridge my charge or traine.
BASSVS. THough strange outlandish, &c.
A Wonder. The Batchelar. VIII. CANTVS. HOw many things as yet are deare alike to mee? The field, the horse,   the Dog, Loue, Armes, or liberty. I haue no Wife as yet, ij.   as yet, as yet, as yet, which I may call mine owne, I haue no children yet that by my   name are knowne, Yet if I marryed were, if &c. if &c. I would not wish to   thriue, if that I could not tame, tame, tame, tame, tame, the veriest   shrew a- liue. aliue.
BASSVS. HOw many things as yet, &c.
A Wonder. The Marryed man. IX. CANTVS. I Onely am the man a- mong all marri-ed men, that doe not   wish the Priest to be vnlinck'd agen, And though my shoe did wting, ij. I would   not make my mone, Nor thinke my neighbours chance more happy then mine owne, ij.   Yet court I not my Wife, but yeeld obseruance due, Being neither   fond, ij. nor crosse, nor iealous, nor vntrue.
BASSVS. I Onely am the man, &c.
A Wonder. The Wife. X. CANTVS. THe first of all our sexe came from the side of Man, I thither am return'd from whence our sexe began. I doe not   visit oft. not many vvhen I doe, I tell my minde to fevv, ij. and that, ij. and   that in counsaile too, I seeme not sicke in health, ij. ij.   Nor sullen but in sorrow, in sorrow, in sorrow, sorrow,   Nor sullen but in sorrow, ij. I care for some what else then what to weare to morrow.
BASSVS. THe first of all our sexe, &c. I thether am return'd.
A Wonder. The Widdow. XI. CANTVS. MY dying Husband knew how much his death would grieue mee, would   grieue mee, ij. and therefore left me wealth to comfort and relieue mee, Though I no more will   haue, I must not loue disdaine. Penelope her selfe did Sutors entertaine, entertaine, And yet   and yet to draw on such, ij.   such as are of best esteeme, ij. nor younger then I am nor richer will I seeme. nor richer   will I seeme.
BASSVS. MY dying Husband.
A Wonder. The Maide. XII. CANTVS. I Marriage would forsweare, but that I heare men tell, men tell, that shee that   dyes a mayde ij. ij. a mayde must lead an Ape in hell,   Therefore if fortune come I will not mocke and play, nor driue the bargaine on,   nor driue the bargaine on, till it be driuen away, Titles and lands I like, ij. yet   rather fancy can, A man that wanteth gould, then gould that wants a man. Here endeth the twelue Wonders of the world.
BASSVS. I marriage would forsweare.
XIII. Lute Lessons. A Pauin.
XIII. BASSVS. A Pauin.
XIIII. Lute Lessons. A Galliard to the Pauin.
AN Almond to both. XIIII. BASSVS. A Galliard to the Pauin.    AN Almond to both.
XV. Lute Lessons. A Pauin. The tuning.
XVI. BASSVS. A Pauin.      You must set your Base Violl a note below your Lute, to play this Pauin, because of his compasse: and it fits the Keye best, because of auoyding Flats and Sharps in your Base: so likewise the Galliard following.
THe Galliard to the Pauin before.
XVI. BASSVS. THe Galliard to the Pauin before.
XVII. Lute Lessons. ADew.
XVII. BASSVS. ADew. Here endeth the Lessons for the Lute and Base Violl.
XVIII. Lessons for the Lyra Violl. A Pauin. The first tuning. XVIII. BASSVS. A Pauin.
XIX. Lessons for the Lyra Violl. A Pauin. XIX. BASSVS. APauin.
XX. Lessons for the Lyra Violl. A Pauin. XX. BASSVS. A Pauin.
XXI. Lessons for the Lyra Violl. A Pauin. The second tuning. XXI. BASSVS. A Pauin.
XXII. Lessons for the Lyra Violl.
XXII. BASSVS.
XXIII. Lessons for the Lyra Violl. A Pauin.
XXIII. BASSVS. A Pauin.
XXIIII. Lessons for the Lyra Violl. A Pauin.
XXIIII. BASSVS. A Pauin. FINIS.
THE TABLE. THe Courtier.I The Diuine.II The Souldiour.III The Lawyer.IIII The Physition.V The Marchant.VI The Countrey Gentleman.VII The Batchelar.VIII The Marryed man.IX The Wife.X The Widdow.XI The Maide.XII A Pauin.XIII A Galliard to the Pauin.XIIII A Pauin.XV A Galliard to the Pauin before.XVI Adew.XVII A Pauin.XVIII A Pauin.XIX A Pauin.XX A Pauin.XXI A Pauin.XXII A pauin.XXIII A Pauin.XXIIII FINIS.
