18127 S112991 99848232 13312
MADRIGALLS TO FOVRE VOYCES NEWLY PVBLISHED BY THOMAS MORLEY. THE FIRST BOOKE. IN LONDON BY THOMAS EST IN AL∣dersgate street at the signe of the black horse. M.D.XC.IV. CANTVS.
TO THE AƲTHOR. MORLEY! would any try whither MORe LYeth In our ENGLISH, to merit Or in th'ITALIAN spirit Who in regard of his each wit defieth? Lo the cleare proofe then if a man would make it (O would some one but try it) To choose his Song, and Gold enough lay by it, And say to thee; heere, better this and take it. I know (how ere thou lik'st them) thou could'st doe it Wert thou but so put to it. For if thou sing'st thus when nought doth incite thee Aware when PRAYSE and GOLD did both inuite thee. Jncerto.
I. CANTVS. APrill is in my Mistris face, ij. my Mistris face. Aprill is in my Mistris face, And Iuly in hir eyes hath place, And Iuly in hir eyes, hir eyes hath place. With in hir bosome, with in hir bosome, is Septem╌ber, But in hir heart, But in hir heart, hir heart, a could De∣cember. But in hir heart, But in hir heart, hir heart, a could December.
II. CANTVS. CLorinda false adieu thy loue tormēts mee, thy loue tormēts me; let Thirses Thirses haue thy hart since hee contents thee, Clorinda false adieu thy loue torments mee; thy loue tormēts mee; let Thirsis Thirsis haue thy hart since hee contents thee, O griefe & bit╌ter anguish ij. for thee I languish. Faine I alas would hide it ij. O but who can a╌bide it? I can I can not I a╌bide it. A╌dieu adieu adieu thē, ij. fare wel, leaue my death now desiring; thou hast lo thy requiring. Thus
spake, Philistus on his hooke relying, thus spake hee on his hooke relying, and sweetly sweet fell a dye╌ing. Thus spake Philistus on his hooke rely╌ing, ij. so spake he on his hooke relying, & sweetly sweetly sweet fel a dye╌ing.
III. CANTVS. WHy sit I heere (alas) complaining? Why sit, why fit I heere (alas) complaining, sit I heere complai∣ning! with sobs & gronings, ij. -ij. my disdaining. O this cōtenteth, whome griefe tormēteth. Ah cease this wee╌ping this weeping, foole alas ij. she does but this to proue, to proue thee: a∣way away away a╌way away false comfort; no thou canst not moue mee: thou canst yu canst not moue mee, moue mee, thou canst yu canst not moue me, You yt saw to much, mine eies, shal deerly buy it, you yt saw to much to
much mine eies, shal deer╌ly buy it, yt made my hart my hart beleue, I did es∣py it, Hence falce comfort in vaine thou doest ease mee, comfort in vaine thou seekst to ease mee, A╌way I say then, a╌way I say thou canst not please mee, a╌way I say then, O yu canst not thou canst not please, no thou canst not please mee, thou canst not please not please mee, thou canst not please mee, A╌way I say ij. a╌way I say thou canst not please mee.
IIII. CANTVS. SInce my teares and lamenting, false loue bred thy content∣ing, ij. still thus to weep for euer ij. these fountaines shall perseuer shall perse╌uer. Till my hart griefe-brim filled, till my hart my hart, till my hart griefe-brim fill╌ed griefe-brim fill╌ed. (Out a╌las) a╌las be distill╌ed. Out a╌las alas be distill∣ed. Till my hart griefe-brim filled. til my hart my hart, til my hart griefe-brim fill╌ed griefe-brim fill╌ed. Out a╌las a╌las be distill╌ed. Out a╌las a╌las be destill╌ed.
V. CANTVS. HElp I fall, I fall, Ladie, my hope lo doth betray mee, my hope lo doth bee╌tray mee; O help alas I fall, I fall, but you voutsafe to slay mee, Help I fall, I fal, I fall, my hope lo doth betray me, O help I fall Lady I fal but you vout∣safe to slay mee. See a Nymph vnkind and cruell, ij. and cru╌ell, vnkind & cruell, vnkind vnkind & cru╌ell, to scorn hir onely Iu╌ell. See a Nymph vnkind & cruell, ij. and cru╌el, vnkind & cruel, vnkind, vn: ij. to scorn hir onely Iuel.
VI. CANTVS. LLady Lady why grieue you still mee? Lady O no you loue mee, ô no you loue you loue mee, If this be loue to kill me. O strange tormēting, strāge tormēting break ah, break, alas, hart alas, ah, break, break hart alas hir hart conten∣ting. And you that now doe disdain mee, And you that now disdaine mee, that now doe disdaine mee; Say then that griefe hath slaine mee, ij. Say then that griefe hath slaine mee, And you that now doe disdaine mee, you that now, that now dis∣daine
mee, that now doe disdaine mee, thē say that griefe hath slayne mee ij. then say that griefe hath slayne mee.
VII. CANTVS. IN dewe of roses, ij. of roses stee∣ping hir louely cheekes Lycoris thus satt weeping. In dewe of roses, In dewe of roses steeping, hir louely cheekes Lyco∣ris Lycoris thus satt weeping. Ah Dorus falce ij. yt hast my hart be∣reft mee, and now vnkind hast left mee, heare a╌las heare ô heare mee, ay mee, ay mee, can not my bewty moue thee? Pitty thē, pitty mee because I loue thee: Ay mee, thou skorn'st the more I praye thee, and this thou doest to slaie mee. thou doest to slaye mee. thou skorn'st the more I
praye thee, and all to slaie mee, yea this thou doest thou doest to slaie mee. Ah doe then, then doe kill mee and vaunt thee, kil mee: yet my ghost still shall haunt ij. ij. yet my ghost still shall haunt thee.
VIII. CANTVS. IN euery place, ij. falce Loue a∣las assailes mee, & grief doth so formēt so tor∣ment mee, that how can Ioy con╌tent mee? when hope and faith and all no whit auailes mee? O gentle Loue, O gentle gentle Loue, O gentle Loue, ô graunt mee lesse to grieue mee, or grieue mee more, ij. or grieue mee more, and griefe will soone relieue mee.
IX. CANTVS. NOw is the gentle season freshly flowring, to sing and play and daunce while May endu∣reth, while May endu╌reth, while May en╌dureth, to sing & play & daūce while May endureth, while May endu╌reth; and wooe & wed (toe) ij. & wooe & wed (toe) ij. and wooe & wed, & wooe and wed (toe) and wooe and wed, that sweet delight procureth.
X. CANTVS. THe fields abroad with spāgled flowres are guilded. The fields abroad with spāgled flowres are guil∣ded. with spangled flowres are guilded. The meades (are) mantled. ij. the meades (are) mantled, the meades (are) mantled and closes, in May each bush a╌rayed, & sweet & sweet wilde roses, and sweet wilde ro∣ses; the Nightingale hir boure hath gay╌ly builded, the Nightingale hir bowre hath gayly hath gayly buil╌ded, and full of kindely lust, and Loues inspi╌ring; I loue I loue, ij. I loue I loue (she)
sings hark ij. hir mate desiring; and full of kindely lust, & Loues inspi╌ring: I loue I loue ij. I loue I loue (she) sings hark ij. hir mate desiring.
XI. CANTVS. COme Louers follow me ij. & leaue this wee∣ping follow mee, ij. see where the Louely little God, where the Louely God Sweet╌ly lies a sleeping ij. where the Louely little God, where the louely God lies sleeping. Soft then: softly for feare wee wake him ij. softly for feare wee wake him, and to his bowe he take him his bowe he take him. O thē if he but spie vs if he but spie vs, whether shall wee thē flye vs; ij. shall wee flie vs? And if he come, ij. and if he come vpon
vs, Out well a╌way ij. out well a╌way then are wee woe beegon vs. Hence then a╌way follow mee, a╌way begon follow mee, dispatch vs, hence then a╌way follow mee a╌way beegon dispatch vs; and that a pace, that a pace, for feare hee catch vs, & that a pace least hee catch vs and that a pace, ere hee wake, for feare hee catch vs.
XII. CANTVS. NO no no no no no thou doest but flout mee, thou doest flout, thou doest flout mee, thou doest flout thou doest flout mee thou doest but flout mee: fie a way ij. fie a way ij. fie a way I say, nay, thou canst liue canst liue with out mee, yea thou canst liue well with out mee, yea thou canst liue with out mee. Since for mee then you care not, you care not spite mee and spare not. O heauie par╌ting; turne ô turne, turne ô turne & cure this smarting. Come then ô come with
comfort, ô come with comfort, come then, ô come with Com∣fort ô come with comfort com╌fort pi╌tie my crying. ô helpe a╌las, ô help a╌las ô help a╌las for now I lye a dye╌ing. come then ô come with com╌fort, come then ô come with com∣fort come╌fort, pi╌tie my crying, ô help a╌las, ô help a╌las, ô help a∣las help a╌las for now I lye a dye╌ing.
XIII. CANTVS. I will no more no more come to thee come to thee I wil no more come to thee, yt flowtst mee when I woe thee. I will no more, no more come to thee, I wil no more come to thee, that flowt'st mee when I woe thee. Still ty hy hy hy hy ij. thou cryest still ty hy hy hy hy ij. still ty hy hy hy hy yt cryest still ty hy hy hy hy thou cryest; & all my louely louely louely rings & my pinnes and my gloues denyest. O say alas, ô say what moues thee what moues thee, to grieue him so, to grieue him
so that loues thee? Leaue a╌las, ah leaue a╌las, leaue tormenting, ah leaue ah leaue leaue a╌las tormenting, and giue my burning my burning, yet yet some small relenting. Leaue a╌las, ah leaue tor∣men╌ting, ah leue alas alas a while, alas leue a while leue alas tormen∣ting, and giue my burning yet some small relenting.
XIIII. CANTVS. BEesides a foūtaine, ij. of sweete brier and roses; heard I two Louers talk in sweet & wanton gloses. Besides a fountaine, ij. of sweet brier & roses; heard I two Louers (loueing) talk these sweet and wāton gloses, Say dainty deere, quoth hee, to whom, tel me, daintie deer quoth hee, to whome is thy liking ty╌ed? To whome but thee my bonny loue; to whom but thee my bonny bonny bonny loue my loue ye gentle Nimphe replied. I die I die I die quoth hee quoth hee; & I & I & I said
shee, Ah giue me then, ah giue me, giue me then quoth hee but he durst not say giue mee some token, and with his hands the rest hee would haue spo∣ken; fie a╌way nay fie a╌way, cryed the Nimph then, fie a╌way, nay fie a╌way then cry'd the Nimphe (a╌las) you well doe know it: Ah quoth hee sweetly come kisse mee then sweetly come kisse mee then, sweetly kisse mee and shew it.
The first part. XV CANTVS. SPort wee, Sport wee my louely treasure ij. Sport wee my louely trea∣sure my louely treasure ij. For why, long loue long ser∣uing ij. Asketh equall de╌seruing deser╌uing, Asketh e∣quall de╌seruing, de╌seruing deseruing, Asketh equal equal de╌ser╌uing, Let bee our sportfull pleasure, ij. Let bee our sportfull pleasure pleasure, Let bee our sportfull pleasure, our sportfull plea∣sure. To kisse, to kisse ij. To kisse to kisse to kisse the while wee
may now, To kisse the while wee may now, And that you wot well what Loues other token. Ioy more then can bee spoken, ij. Ioy more then can bee spo╌ken. Ioy more then can bee spoken bee spoken.
The second part. XVI. CANTVS. O Swet a╌las, ij. O sweet a╌las what say you? O sweet a╌las ij. O sweet a∣las what say you? O sweet a╌las, ij. O sweet a╌las what say you? ay mee, ay mee, that face ay mee that face that face discloses, The Scarlet blush, of sweet vermillian roses, and yet a╌las, and yet a╌las I know not, If such a crimsen, staining, be for loue, be for loue or disdaining But if of loue it grow not, ij. but if of loue it grow not, ij. bee it disdain cōceiued, to see vs of loues
fruits so long so long be╌reued. But if of loue it grow not, ij. But if of loue it grow not, but if of loue, but if of loue it grow not, bee it disdaine conceiued, to see vs of loues fruits so long be╌reued so long bee╌re╌ued.
XVII. CANTVS. HArk iolly shepheards hark: hark you you lusty ringing! hark (a╌las) hark how cheerefully the bells daunce hark how cheerefully the bells, how cheerfully the bells daunce, the whilst the ladds are springing. Gow then, why sit wee heere delaying? sit wee heere thus delaying, why sit wee delaying, why then sit wee delaying? and all yon merry merry merry wanton lasses play╌ing, & all yon merry merry laddes, and merry merry wanton lasses wanton lasses playing, and all yon merry merry lads merry lads, lads and
lasses playing. How gayly Flora leads it, & sweetly treads it? The woods & groues they ring, they ring lowdly resoūding, with Eccho sweet re╌boū∣ding. The woods and groues they ring they ring lowdly resounding, with Eccho sweet rebounding.
XVIII. CANTVS. HOe who comes here all alone with bagpiping & drūming with bagpiping & drūming? O the Morris tis I see; tis the Morris ij. daunce a cōming. Hoe who comes heere all a╌lone with bagpiping & drūming, ij. O the Morris tis I see, tis the Morris, ij. daūce a comming. Come Ladies come come quickly, ij. come away come I say, ô come, come quickly, & see a╌bout how trim, how trim they daūce & trickly. and see about how trim they daūce & trickly. Hey ther a╌gain hey ho ther a∣gain,
hey ho how ye bells they shake it! now for our town hey ho, now for our town ther & take it: now for our town hey ho, now for our town & take it. Soft a while not a way so fast, they melt them: Piper, Piper, Piper! be hāgd a while knaue, looke, ye dauncers swelt thē, ye daūcers swelt thē. Out ther, out a while stand out you come to far, to far you come I say in, ther giue the hobby horse more rome for to play in, ther giue the hobby horse more rome to play in, more rome to play in.
XIX. CANTVS. DYe now my heart from thy delight exi∣led, dye now my hart from thy delight e╌xi╌led, thy loue is dead and all our hope bee╌guiled. O Death ô Death vnkind and cruell, vnkind & cruell, to rob the world so, of that hir fayrest iewell, hir fairest iewell. Now shoot at mee now shoot & spare not, Now shoot at mee now shoot & spare not, now shoot at mee and spare not, kill mee I care not. Thinck not ô Death a∣las thy dart shall paine mee; why shouldst why shouldst thou
heere against my will re╌taine mee, retaine mee? O heare a dolfull, a dolfull wretches crying, or I dye for want of dyeing, ij. or I dye for wāt of dyeing, or I dye I dye for want of dyeing.
XX. CANTVS. SAy gentle Nymphes ye tread these mountains saye gentle Nymphes that tread these moun∣taines these mountaines, whilst sweetly you sit playing, ij. sit playing, sweetly sit playing. whilst sweetly you sit playing. Saw you my Daphne ij. my (Sweet) Daphne stray╌ing a∣long your Cristall foū╌tains. If so you chaunce to meete kisse hir and kindly greet hir, then these sweet gar╌lands take hir, and say from mee, and say from mee I neuer will for╌sake hir. If so you chaunce to meet
hir, kise hir and kindly greet hir, then these sweet gar╌lands take hir, and say from mee, and say from mee I neuer will for╌sake hir.
A TABLE OF ALL THE MADRIGALLS. APrill is in my Mistris face. I. Clorinda. II. Why sit I heere complayning? III. Since my teares and lamenting. IIII. Help I fall. V. Ladie why grieue you still mee. VI. In dewe of roses. VII. In euery place. VIII. Now is the gentle season. The first part. IX. The fields a broad. The second part. X. Come Louers follow mee. XI. No, no, shee doth but flout mee. XII. I will no more come to thee. XIII. Beesides a fountaine. XIIII. Sport wee my Louely treasure. The first part. XV. O sweet alas. The second part. XVI. Hark iolly Shepherds. XVII. Hoe who comes heere. XVIII. Dye now my hart. XIX. Say gentle Nymphes. XX. FINIS.
MADRIGALLS TO FOVRE VOYCES NEWLY PVBLISHED BY THOMAS MORLEY. THE FIRST BOOKE. IN LONDON BY THOMAS EST IN AL∣dersgate street at the signe of the black horse. M.D.XC.IV. ALTVS.
TO THE AƲTHOR. MORLEY! would any try whither MORe LYeth In our ENGLISH, to merit Or in th'ITALIAN spirit Who in regard of his each wit defieth? Lo the cleare proofe then if a man would make it (O would some one but try it) To choose his Song, and Gold enough lay by it, And say to thee; heere, better this and take it. I know (how ere thou lik'st them) thou could'st doe it Wert thou but so put to it. For if thou sing'st thus when nought doth incite thee Aware when PRAYSE and GOLD did both inuite thee. Jncerto.
I. ALTVS. APrill is in my Mistris if face, ij. Aprill is in my Mistris face, And Iuly in hir eyes hath place, And Iuly in hir eyes hir eyes hath place. With in hir bosome, ij. is Septem╌ber, But in hir hart hir hart, a could Decem╌ber, But in hir heart hir heart, But in hir hart hir hart, a could Decem╌ber.
II. ALTVS. CLorinda falce, adieu thy loue, adieu thy loue tor∣mēts mee, thy loue tormēts mee; Let Thirsis Thirsis haue thy hart, since he cōtēts contents thee Clorinda falce adieu thy loue, a∣dieu thy loue torments mee, thy loue torments mee; Let Thirsis Thirsis haue thy hart since hee cōtents contents thee. O griefe & bitter an∣guish, O griefe and bitter an╌guish; for thee I lāguish. Faine I a∣las, would hide it ij. but ô who can a╌bide it? I can not I a╌bide it, Adieu adieu adieu thē, ij.
farewel, leaue me death now desiring, yu hast lo thy requiring. So spake Phi∣listus on his hooke re╌lying, ij. & sweetly sweetly fel a dieing. So spake Philistus once, so spake hee, so spake he on his hooke relying, So spake Philistus on his hooke relying. So spake Phi╌li╌stus on his hooke relying, & sweetly sweetly fell a dyeing.
III ALTVS. WHy sit I heere (a╌las) complayning? Why sit I heere (alone alas) why sit I heere alone cōplai∣ning! With sobs & gronings, ij. ij. my vniust disdai∣ning. O this this mirth con╌tenteth, whom grief of minde tor╌menteth. Ah cease this wee╌ping, cease this weping, foole alas, ij. ij. she does but this to proue thee; a╌way away away away away falce com∣fort, no thou canst not, thou canst not moue mee, thou canst thou cāst not moue mee, thou cāst thou canst not moue mee. You
that saw to much mine eies, deerly shal buy it: you that saw to much mine eyes, deerly shal buy it, yt made my hart beleue I did espy it, did espy it, Hence away comfort in vaine thou dost ease mee, comfort in vaine thou seekest to ease mee; a╌way I say then, a╌way I say, no thou canst not please mee, a╌way I say no thou canst not please mee, no thou canst not please thou canst not please mee, thou canst not please mee. ij. a╌way I say ij. ij. thou canst thou canst not please mee.
IIII. ALTVS. SInce my teares and lamenting, falce loue breed thy cōten∣ting. ij. still thus to weep for euer, ij. these fountaines shall perseuer shall perseuer. Till my hart grief brim filled. ij. Til my hart grief brim filled griefe brim filled. Out alas be distilled. Out a╌las a╌las Out a╌las alas bee di╌still╌ed. Till my hart griefe brim filled. ij. Till my hart griefe-brim fill∣ed griefe brim filled. Out alas be distilled. Out a╌las a╌las. Out a∣las a╌las bee di╌still╌ed.
V. ALTVS. HElp I fall I fall my hope lo doth beetray mee, my hope a╌las Lady lo doth betray mee, O help a╌las I fall, I fall a╌las I fal, but you voutsafe to slay me. Help I fall I fal Lady, help I fal my hope lo doth betray me. O help I fal I fal a╌las a∣las I fall but you voutsafe to slay mee. See a Nymph vnkind & cruell, ij. & cruell vnkind & cruell, ij. vnkind & cruel, to scorn hir onely Iuel. See a: See a: & cruel vnkind & cruel, ij. vnkind & cruel to scorn hir onely Iuell.
VI. ALTVS. LA╌dy Lady why grieue you stil mee? ô no you loue mee, ij. O no, you loue you loue mee, you loue mee, If this be loue to kill to kill mee. O strange tormenting, ah, break, ah, ah, break break hart a╌las, hir hart contēting, And you that now doe disdain; me, you yt now yt now dis∣daine mee, yt now doe disdaine mee, thē say yt griefe hath slaine mee; ij. then say that griefe hath slaine mee. And you that now doe disdaine mee, and you that now disdaine
mee that now doe disdaine mee, Say then that griefe hath slaine mee, ij. Say then that griefe hath slayne mee.
VII. ALTVS. IN dewe of roses, in dewe of roses stee∣ping hir louely cheekes Lycoris Lycoris thus satt weeping. In dewe of roses, ij. of roses stee∣ping hir Louely cheekes, Lyco╌ris thus satt weeping. Ah Dorus falce, ij that hart by hart my hart beereft mee, & now vnkind hast left mee. Heare a╌las heare O heare mee, ay mee, ay mee, can not my bewty moue thee, not moue thee? pittie mee thē because I loue thee. Ay mee: thou skorn'st the more I praye, thou skorn'st the
more the more I praye thee, and this thou doest to slaie mee. thou skorn'st the more I pray thee, and this thou doest to slay mee. and all to slay mee. But doe then doe, kil mee and vaunt thee, ij. yet my ghost still shall haunt thee, yet my ghost still shall haunt, ij. yet my ghost still shall haunt shall haunt thee.
VIII. ALTVS. IN euery place, In euery: place fierce Loue In euery place, in e∣uery place fierce Loue a╌las fierce Loue a╌las assailes mee; & griefe doth so tor╌ment mee, doth so torment mee, torment mee, that how can Ioy content mee, content mee? when hope no whit at all a∣uailes mee. O gentle Loue, ij. O gentle gentle Loue, O gen∣tle Loue, O graunt mee lesse to grieue mee, Or griue mee more ij. or grieue mee more, and griefe will soone relieue mee.
The first part. IX. ALTVS. NOw is the gentle season freshly flow∣ring, to sing & play & daunce while May endu∣reth, while May endureth, to sing and play & daunce while May endureth, ij. to sing & play & daunce while May en∣dureth, & wooe & wed (toe) & wed (toe) & wooe & wed (toe) ij. and wooe and wed, and wed (toe) and wooe and wed, that sweet delight procu╌reth.
The second part. X. ALTVS. THe fields abroad with spangled flowres are guil╌ded, with spāgled flowres are guil∣ded, the fields with spangled flowres are guilded, with spangled flowres are guilded, The meades (are) mantled, ij. the meades (are) mant∣led, ij. the meades (are) mantled and closes, in May each bush a∣rayed, and sweet wilde roses and sweet wilde roses; the Nightingale hir bowre hath gayly builded, ij. hath gay╌ly builded, & full of kindely lust, and Loues inspi╌ring: I loue I loue ij.
I loue I loue (she) sings hark, I loue I loue (she) sings hark hir mate desi∣ring; & full of kindely lust, and Loues inspi╌ring; I loue I loue ij. I loue I loue (she) sings hark, I loue I loue (she) sings hark, hir mate desi╌ring.
XI. ALTVS. COme Louers follow mee, ij & leaue this weeping, follow mee, ij. See where the Louely little little God, sweet╌ly, lyes a sleeping. where the Louely little God the Louely little God, lies sweetly slee∣ping. Soft then, softly for feare wee wake him, ij. wee wake him, and to his bowe, his bowe hee take him, and to his bow hee take him; O then if hee but spie vs, if hee but spie vs, whe∣ther shall wee then fly vs, whether shall wee then fly vs? And
if hee come, ij. ij. and if hee come vp╌on vs, Out well a way ij. well a way, then are wee woe begon begon vs. Hence then a way follow mee beegon follow mee; hence then a way follow mee dispatch vs. & yt a pace, yt a pace, for feare, least yt hee catch vs; and that a pace least hee catch vs, & that a pace ere hee wake for feare hee catch vs.
XII. ALTVS. NO no no no no no thou doest but flout mee, thou doest flout, thou doest flout mee, thou doest but flout, but flout mee. Fie a way, fie a way fie a way fie a way I say, nay thou canst liue, nay thou canst liue without mee, thou canst liue well without mee, yea thou canst liue without mee. Since for mee then you care not, spite mee and spare not. O what parting! turne ô turne, turn ô turne turne ô turne & cure this smarting. Come thē ô come with com╌fort, come then ô come with com╌fort com∣fort
pi╌tie my crying. ô help a╌las, ô help a╌las ô help a∣las help a╌las for now I lye a dye╌ing. Come then ô come with cōfort, ô come with cōfort, come thē ô come with cōfort ô come with com∣fort com╌fort pi╌tie my crying, ô help a╌las ij. ô help a╌las for now I lye a dyeing.
XIII. ALTVS. I wil no more no more come to thee, I will no more come to thee, that flowtst mee when I woe thee. I will no more no more come to thee come to thee, I will no more come to thee that flout'st mee when I woe thee Still ty hy hy hy hy, ty hy hy hy yu criest, ij. stil ty hy hy hy hy hy yu criest stil ty hy hy hy hy thou cryest, ty hy hy yu criest; and all my rings, my pinnes, & my gloues deniest. O say alas, what moues what moues thee, to grieue him so, that loues that loues thee that loues
thee? Leaue a╌las then, leaue tor╌menting, ô leaue a╌las a∣las a while a╌las, leaue a while leaue a╌las tormen╌ting, & giue my bur∣ning yet some small relenting. Leaue a╌las then leaue a╌las leaue tormen∣ting, ah leaue ah leaue leaue a╌las tormēting, & giue my burning, my burning, yet yet some small relen╌ting.
XIIII. ALTVS. BEesides a foūtaine, ij. of sweet brier and roses, heard I two Louers (loueing) talk in sweet and wāton gloses. Besides a fountaine ij. of sweet brier and roses, heard I two Louers talk in sweet & wāton gloses. Say dainty deere, quoth hee, to whome; Say daintie deere to whom, is thy liking ty╌ed? To whom but thee my bonny bonny bonny loue, my loue; to whom but thee my bonny loue, my loue, the gentle Nimph repli╌ed. I die, I die, I die quoth hee? & I, & I, & I quoth
shee, Ah giue mee then, ah giue mee giue mee then (quoth hee) but said durst he not giue me some tokē; & with his hands ye rest he would haue spoken. Fie a╌way, nay cry'd the Nimph, fie a╌way nay cryed the Nimphe, nay fie away (a╌las) to wel yow know it; Ah quoth hee; Sweetly come kisse mee then ij. sweetly come kisse mee then and shew it.
The first part. XV. ALTVS. SPort wee, ij. Sport we my louely tresure, my louely treasure. Sport we my louely treasure, Sport wee my louely louely louely treasure, For why, long loue, long seruing. ij. Asketh equal deseruing, Asketh e∣quall de╌seruing ij. Asketh equall de╌ser∣uing. ij. Let bee our sportfull pleasure, our sportfull pleasure, Let bee our sportfull plea╌sure, ij. our
sportfull pleasure, To kisse to kisse ij. To kisse to kisse now, to kisse the while wee may now, ij. and that you wot well what Loues other token, Ioy more then can bee spoken bee spoken Ioy more then can bee spoken. Ioy more then can bee spoken bee spoken.
The second part. XVI. ALTVS. O Sweet a╌las, ij. O sweet a╌las what say you? O sweet a╌las, ij. O sweet a∣las what say you? O sweet a╌las, O sweet a╌las a╌las what say you? ay mee ij. ay mee, ay mee that face, ay mee that face discloses, the Scarlet blush, of sweet vermillian roses, and yet a╌las, & yet a╌las a∣las I know not, If such a crimsen stayning, be for loue, ij bee fore loue or disdaining. But if of loue it grow not, ij. But if of loue it grow not, but if of loue, but if of loue it grow
not, bee it disdaine cōceiued, to see vs of loues fruits so long bereued. so long bee╌re╌ued. But if of loue it grow not, ij. But if of loue it grow not, ij. Bee it disdain dis╌dain concei∣ued, to see vs of loues fruites so long so long bee╌reued.
XVII. ALTVS. HArk iolly shepheards, hark, hark you you lusty ringing ringing, how cherfully the bells daūce, the bells they daūce, how cherfully the bells daūce, the whiles the lads are springing. Gow then why sit wee heere delaying? sit wee heere thus de∣laying, why thē why sit we delaying, sit we delaying, & all you merry lasses merry merry wanton lasses playing; & all you merry merry lasses playing and all you merry merry laddes and lasses play╌ing. How gayly Flora leads it, & sweetly treads it. The woods & groues they ring, wods &
groues ring loudly resounding, with Eccho sweet reboūding. The wods & groues they ring, woods & groues ring, loudely resoūding, with Eccho sweet rebounding.
XVIII. ALTVS. HOe who comes heere: All a╌long with bagpiping and drūming, with bagpiping & drūming? ô the Mor∣ris daūce it is cōming, ô the Morris daūce lo it is a cōming, Hoe who comes heere, all along, comes heere all along with bagpiping & drumming? ij. ô ye Morris daūce it is cōming, ô the Morris daūce lo it is a cōming. Come come Ladies, come Ladies out, come ye Ladies out, come Ladies out, ô come, come quickly, & see a bout how trim they daūce a∣bout how trim & trickly, & see about how trim they daūce & trickly.
Hey ther a╌gayn, ij. ther again ij. hey ther again how ye bells they shake it? now for our town once, for our town & take it: now for our town, ij. hey ho, now for our town once more & take it. Soft a while not a way so fast they melt thē. Piper! Piper! Piper! be hāg'd a while thē looke; be hang'd a while knaue seest not, the daūcers how they swelt thē? Out ther, out a while, you come I say in: ther giue ye hobby horse more rome, ij. to play in, ther giue the hobby horse more rome to play in, more rome to play in.
XIX. ALTVS. DYe now my heart from thy de╌light exi∣led, exi╌led, from thy de╌light exiled, thy loue is dead and all our hope bee╌gui╌led, thy loue is dead and all our hope beeguiled. O Death thrise cruell, O Death ô death vn∣kind and cruell, to rob the world so of that hir fayrest iewell, of that hir fayrest iewell. Now shoot at mee now shoot & spare not, now shoot at mee now shoot and spare not, and spare and spare not; kill mee I care not, Thinck not ô Death a╌las, thy dart will paine mee;
why shouldst why shouldst yu here against my wil re╌tain me, gainst my wil re∣taine mee? O heere a dolfull wretches cry╌ing, or I dye for want of dyeing, or I dye I dye, or I die for want of dyeing or I dye for want I dye for want of dye╌ing.
XX. ALTVS. SAy gentle Nymphes that treade these moun∣taines, (you) that tread these mountaines, Say gentle gentle Nymphes (you) that tread these mountaines, whilst sweetly you sit playing whilst sweetly sweetly sweetly you sit playing, you sit play∣ing, sweetly sit playing, whilst sweetly you sit playing, Saw you my Daph∣ne, ij. Saw you my Daphne ij. stray╌ing a∣long, your Cristall fountaines? If so you chaūce to meet hir, kisse hir (O) and kindly greet kingly greet hir, then these sweet garlands,
these sweet garlands take hir, and say from mee, I neuer will for∣sake forsake hir. If so you chaunce to meet hir, kisse hir (O) and kindly greet, kindly greet hir, then these sweet garlands these sweet garlands take hir & say from mee, I neuer will forsake forsake hir.
A TABLE OF ALL THE MADRIGALLS. APrill is in my Mistris face. I. Clorinda. II. Why sit I heere complayning? III. Since my teares and lamenting. IIII. Help I fall. V. Ladie why grieue you still mee. VI. In dewe of roses. VII. In euery place. VIII. Now is the gentle season. The first part. IX. The fields a broad. The second part. X. Come Louers follow mee. XI. No, no, shee doth but flout mee. XII. I will no more come to thee. XIII. Beesides a fountaine. XIIII. Sport wee my Louely treasure. The first part. XV. O sweet alas. The second part. XVI. Hark iolly Shepherds. XVII. Hoe who comes heere. XVIII. Dye now my hart. XIX. Say gentle Nymphes. XX. FINIS.
MADRIGALLS TO FOVRE VOYCES NEWLY PVBLISHED BY THOMAS MORLEY. THE FIRST BOOKE. IN LONDON BY THOMAS EST IN AL∣dersgate street at the signe of the black horse. M.D.XC.IV. TENOR
TO THE AƲTHOR. MORLEY! would any try whither MORe LYeth In our ENGLISH, to merit Or in th'ITALIAN spirit Who in regard of his each wit defieth? Lo the cleare proofe then if a man would make it (O would some one but try it) To choose his Song, and Gold enough lay by it, And say to thee; heere, better this and take it. I know (how ere thou lik'st them) thou could'st doe it Wert thou but so put to it. For if thou sing'st thus when nought doth incite thee Aware when PRAYSE and GOLD did both inuite thee. Jncerto.
I. TENOR. APrill is in my Mistris face, ij. my Mistris face, And Iuly in hir eyes hath place, hir eyes hath place. With in hir bosome, with in hir bosome is Septem∣ber, But in hir hart hir hart, a could December, But in hir hart, But in hir heart, a could December.
II. TENOR. CLorinda falce: Adieu thy loue torments mee, thy loue tormēts me. Clorinda falce adieu thy loue tormēts mee, let Thirses haue thy hart since he contents thee. A╌dieu thy loue tor∣ments mee, thy loue torments mee. Clorinda falce adieu thy loue torments mee; let Thirsis haue thy hart since hee cōtents thee. O griefe & bitter an∣guish bitter anguish, for thee vnkind I lāguish. Faine, I alas would hide it ij. faine I a╌las would hide it, O but who can a╌bide it? I can not I a╌bide abide it. A╌dieu adieu adieu thē, ij.
fare well, leaue mee death now de╌siring, yu hast lo thy requiring. So spake Philistus on his hooke re╌lying, So spake Phy¦listus on his booke relying, & sweetly sweetly fel a dyeing. So spake Phi╌listus once, So spake he, so spake hee on his hooke re╌lying; So spake Philistus on his hooke relying, ij. and sweetly sweety fell a dyeinng.
III. TENOR. WHy fit I heere? complayning? With sobs and gronings, with sobs and gronings, with sobs and gronings, & gro╌nings my disdaining. O this this mirth con╌ten∣teth, whom grief of minde tormēteth tormēteth. Ah cease this wee∣ping, cease (a╌las) this weeping, this weeping, foole a╌las, foole a∣las, ij. foole she does but this to proue thee; away away away away falce comfort, away falce comfort, thou canst not, no thou canst not moue mee, thou cāst yu cāst not moue mee, no yu cāst not moue mee, yu canst thou
canst not moue mee, You yt saw to much mine eies, deerly shal buy it: you yt saw to much to much mine eyes, shall deerly buy it, deerely shall buy it, that made my heart bee╌leue I did espy I did e╌spy it. Hence falce comfort in vaine thou doest ease mee, comfort in vaine thou doest e╌ase mee; a╌way I say, then a╌way thou canst not please mee, a╌way I say, no, no, no, thou canst not no, no, no, no, no, thou canst not please mee, no thou canst not please mee. a╌way I say ij. a∣way I say thou canst not please mee.
IIII. TENOR. SInce my teares and lamenting, falce loue breed thy cōten∣ting. ij. still thus to weep for euer, ij. these fountaines shall perseuer shall perseuer. Till my hart griefe brim filled. ij. Till my hart grief brim filled griefe brim filled. Out a∣las bee distilled bee distilled. Out a╌las bee distilled bee distilled. Till my hart griefe brim filled. ij. Till my hart griefe-brim fill∣ed griefe brim filled. Out alas be distilled be distilled. Out a╌las bee di∣stilled bee distilled.
V. TENOR. HElp I fall I fall ô I fall my hope lo doth betray me, my hope a╌las ô my hope lo doth betray me, O help I fall, Ladie I fall, ô help I fal, but you voutsafe to slay mee. Help I fall I fal I fal a╌las my hope lo doth betray me. O help I fal I fall Lady ô help I fall but you voutsafe to slay mee. See a Nymph vnkind & cruell, ij. vnkind & cruell, ij. a Nimph vnkind & cruel, to scorn hir onely Iuel. See a: ij. vnkind & cruel, ij. a Nimph vn: to scorn hir onely Iuell.
VI. TENOR. LAdy Lady why grieue you stil mee? ô no, you loue me, ij. ô no, you loue me, ô no you loue you loue mee. O no no you loue mee: If this be loue to kill mee. O strange tormenting, strange tormenting: break, ah, hart a╌las, break alas, break, hart break hart alas hir hart cōtēting. & you yt now doe dis∣dain me, & you that now disdain; yt now doe disdaine mee, that now dis∣daine disdaine mee; Say then that griefe hath slaine mee; Say then that griefe ye griefe hath slaine mee. Say then yt griefe hath slaine mee. ij
And you that now doe disdaine mee, and you that now dis∣daine, that now doe dis╌daine mee that now disdaine disdaine mee, Say then that griefe hath slayne mee, say then that griefe that griefe hath slayne mee, Say then that griefe hath slyne mee, Say then that griefe hath slayne mee.
VII. TENOR. IN dewe of roses: Hir louely cheekes Lycoris, Lycoris thus fatt weeping. In dewe of roses; hir Louely cheekes Lycoris Lycoris thus satt weeping. Ah Dorus falce, ij. that hast my hart my hart bereft mee, & now vn∣kind hast left mee. Heare a╌las heare O heare mee, ay mee, ay mee, can not my bew╌ty moue thee? pittie pittie thē mee pittie mee bee∣cause I loue thee. Ay mee, thou skorn'st the more I praye thou skorn'st the more I praye thee, and this thou doest to slaie mee, and
this thou doest to slay to slay mee; thou skorn'st ye more I pray thee, I pray thee, and this thou doest to slaie mee. Ah doe then doe, ij. kil mee and vaunt thee, ij. yet my ghost still shall haunt, ij. ij. still it shall haunt thee.
VIII. TENOR. IN euery place ij. In euery place fierce Loue a╌las assailes mee as∣sailes mee, and griefe doth so torment torment mee, doth so torment mee, that how can Ioy content mee? con╌tent mee, when hope and faith and all no whit auailes mee. auailes mee. O gentle Loue, ij. ij. O gentle Loue, gentle Loue, O graunt mee lesse to grieue to grieue mee, Or griue mee more ij. ij. or grieue mee more, and griefe will soone will soone relieue mee.
IX. TENOR. NOw is the gentle season freshly flowring, to sing and play & daunce while May while May endureth, while May endureth, to sing and play and daunce while May endureth, ij. & wooe & wed (toe) ij. and wooe & wed (toe) ij. and wooe and wed (toe) ij. and wooe and wed that sweet delight procureth.
X. TENOR. THe fields abroad with spangled flowres are guilded, The fields abroad with spāgled flowres are guilded with spangled flowres are guilded, The meades (are) mantled, ij. the meades (are) mantled, ij. and closes; in May each bush araied, & sweet wilde roses, ij. The Nightingale hir bowre hath gay╌ly gayly builded, the Nightingale hir bowre, hir bowre hath gay∣ly gayly builded, and full of kindely lust and Loues inspi╌ring, I loue I loue ij. I loue I loue (she) sings hark, I loue I loue (she)
sings hark, hir mate desi╌ring; and full of kindely lust, and Loues inspi╌ring; I loue I loue ij. I loue I loue (she) sings hark, I loue I loue (she) sings hark, hir mate desi╌ring.
XI. TENOR. COme Louers follow mee, & leaue this wee∣ping, follow mee come follow mee, See where the Louely littell God, where ye Louely God, lies a sleeping, where the Louely little God, See where the Louely God lyes sleeping. Soft then, softly for feare wee wake him, wee wake him, and to his bowe hee take him, his bowe hee take him, and to his bowe hee take him: O then if hee but spie vs, then if hee but spie vs, whether shall wee then fly vs? fly vs, whether shall wee then fly shall wee flye vs? And if hee
come ij. and if hee come ij. and if hee come vp∣on vs. Out well a way, ij out well a way a way then are wee woe bee╌gon vs. Hence thē a way follow mee begon, hence follow mee bee╌gon dispatch vs, Hence then away bee╌gon follow mee dispatch vs; and that a pace least that hee catch vs, and that a pace, least if hee wake hee catch vs hee catch vs.
XII. TENOR. NO no no no no no thou doest but flout mee, thou doest flout, thou doest flout, mee, thou doest but flout mee thou doest but flout mee. Fie a way, fie a way fie a way I say fie a way, fie fie a way nay thou, canst liue without mee thou canst liue without mee without mee yea yu canst liue with╌out me with out mee. Since for mee then you care not, for mee you care not, spite mee and spare not. O heauie parting heauie heauie parting, Turne ô turne turne and cure this smarting. Come then ô
come with comfort, com╌fort with comfort come then ô come with comfort com╌fort pi╌tie my cry╌ing. help a╌las, help a╌las a╌las for now I lye a dyeing. Come then ô come with comfort, com╌fort with comfort: Come then ô come with comfort com╌fort pi╌tie my cry╌ing, help a∣las help a╌las a╌las for now I lye a dieyng.
XIII. TENOR. I will no more come to thee that flowt'st mee — when I woe thee. I wil no more come to thee come to thee, I will no more come to thee that flowt's mee when I woe thee. Still hy hy hy hy hy thou cry╌est, still ty hy hy hy hy, ty hy hy yu cryest, still ty hy hy hy hy ij. still ty hy hy hy hy thou criest, & all my louely louely rings, & pinnes & gloues deniest. O, say a╌las, ij what moues thee to grieue to grieue him so, to grieue him so that loues that loues thee, Leaue a╌las
then, leaue a╌las, leaue a╌las tormenting, ah leaue a╌las ij. then, ah leaue tormenting, & giue my burning, my burning, some smal relen∣ting. Leaue alas thē leaue alas ij. tormenting, ah leaue a╌las ij. then, ah leaue tormenting, and giue my burning, my burning, some small relenting.
XIIII. TENOR. BEesids a foūtaine, ij. of sweet brier & roses, heard I two louers talk in sweet & wāton glo∣ses. Besides a fountaine ij. of sweet brier & roses, heard I two Louers talk in sweet & wāton gloses. Say dainty deer, quoth he, to whom is thy liking ty╌ed? To whom but thee my bonny loue, to thee my bonny loue ye gētle Nimph re╌plied. I die, I die, I die quoth hee? & I & I & I said she. Ah giue mee then quoth hee, giue mee giue mee giue mee giue mee thē, but durst not say a╌las some token; & with his hands the rest he would haue spo∣ken.
Fie a╌way, nay cry'd the Nimph, fie a╌way nay fie away then cryed the Nimphe, nay fie a╌way nay, fie a╌las you well doe know it: quoth hee sweetly come kisse mee then, sweetly come kisse mee then, sweetly and shew it.
The first part. XV. TENOR. SPort wee, Sport wee my louely treasure, my louely treasure. Sport wee my louely treasure, ij. my louely treasure, For why; long loue long ser╌uing. ij. Asketh equall de╌ser╌uing Asketh equall de╌ser╌uing deseruing, Asketh equall de╌ser╌uing. Let bee our sportfull pleasure, ij. Let bee our sportfull plea∣sure, our sportfull pleasure, ij. our sportfull pleasure to kisse to
kisse, ij. To kisse to kisse, ij. To kisse the while wee may now ij. And that you wot well what loues other to╌ken, Ioy more thē can bee spoken. Ioy more then can bee spoken spo∣ken, Ioy more then can bee spoken, then can bee spo╌ken.
XVII. TENOR. HArk iolly Shepheards: Hark you you lusty ringing how cheerfully the bells daūce, hark how cheerful∣ly cheerfully daunce the bells while you Iolly Iolly Iolly ladds are spring∣ing, Gowe then, why sit wee heere delaying; why doe wee heere sit de╌lay∣ing, gowe thē why sit wee heere delay╌ing sit we heere delay╌ing & all you merry merry wāton lasses playing, & al you merry merry lads, & merry merry lasses so merrely play╌ing & all you merry merry wāton lasses, merry wāton lasses playing. How gayly Flora fayre, gayly how she leades it, and sweet∣ly
treads it, ye woods & groues they ring they ring ij. wods & groues they ring lowdly re╌sownding with Eccho sweet rebounding. The woods and groues they ring they ring they ring woods & groues they ring lowdly re∣sown╌ding, with Eccho sweet rebounding.
XVIII. TENOR. HOe who comes heere: All along who comes heere, with bagpiping & drūming? tis the Morris daūce the Morris daūce a comming a cōming, tis the Morris cōming. Hoe who comes heere, all along who comes heere with bagpiping & drūming? tis ye Morris daūce the Morris daunce a cōming a cōming, tis the Morris cōming. Come Ladies quickly, come Ladies out come quickly, come Ladies out come quick∣ly, & see a bout how trim they daūce trim and trickly, & see about how trim, how trim, ô how trim, how trim they daūce & trickly. Hey there a∣gayn,
hey ho ther again, her ther againe, hey ho ther againe hey ther again, the bells hey how they shake it? now for our towne once ther, now for our town there & take it, now for our town for our town, now now for our towne once more and take it. Soft a while not a way so fast the melt them. Who calls? who calls? be hāg'd a while knaues all what care I ye daūcers though they swelt they swelt them? Out ther, you come to far I say in: ther giue ye hobby horse rome, ther giue the hobby horse more rome to play in, more rome to play in, yet more rome to play in.
XIX. TENOR. DYe now my heart from thy delight exiled ex∣iled, die now my hart from thy delight exiled; thy loue is dead and all our hope bee╌guiled, thy loue is dead and all our hope bee╌guiled. O Death ô Death vnkind O death vn∣kind and cruell to rob the world so of that hir fayrest iewell, of that hir fayrest iewell iewell. Now shoot at mee now shoot and spare not, now shoot at mee and spare not, ij. now shoot and spare not, kill mee I care not, O think not
Death a╌las thy dart will paine mee, thinck not thy dart will paine mee, why shouldst why shouldst thou heere a gainst my will retaine mee? O heere a dolefull cry╌ing, heere a dolefull crying, a dolefull wretches crying, or I die for want of dye╌ing, or I dye for want for want of dye∣ing, or I die for want, or I die for want, for want of dieing.
XX. TENOR. SAy gentle Nymphes, that tread these moun∣taynes that tread these mountayns, Say gentle Nymphes that tread these mountains whilst sweetly you fit playing you sit play∣ing, whilst sweetly you fit playing, ij. sweetly fit play∣ing, whilst sweetly you sit playing, Saw you my Daphne, ij. Saw you my Daphne straying, a╌long your Cristall fountaines? If so you chaūe to meet hir, kisse hir and kindly greet hir, kisse hir and greet hir, then these sweet garlands take hir, & say from mee, and say from
mee I neuer will, I neuer will forsake hir. If so you chaūe to meet hir, kisse hir and kindly greet hir, kisse hir and greet hir, then these sweet garlands take hir, and say from mee, and say from mee I neuer will, I neuer will forsake hir.
A TABLE OF ALL THE MADRIGALLS. APrill is in my Mistris face. I. Clorinda. II. Why sit I heere complayning? III. Since my teares and lamenting. IIII. Help I fall. V. Ladie why grieue you still mee. VI. In dewe of roses. VII. In euery place. VIII. Now is the gentle season. The first part. IX. The fields a broad. The second part. X. Come Louers follow mee. XI. No, no, shee doth but flout mee. XII. I will no more come to thee. XIII. Beesides a fountaine. XIIII. Sport wee my Louely treasure. The first part. XV. O sweet alas. The second part. XVI. Hark iolly Shepherds. XVII. Hoe who comes heere. XVIII. Dye now my hart. XIX. Say gentle Nymphes. XX. FINIS.
MADRIGALLS TO FOVRE VOYCES NEWLY PVBLISHED BY THOMAS MORLEY. THE FIRST BOOKE. IN LONDON BY THOMAS EST IN AL∣dersgate street at the signe of the black horse. M.D.XC.IV. BASSVS.
TO THE AƲTHOR. MORLEY! would any try whither MORe LYeth In our ENGLISH, to merit Or in th'ITALIAN spirit Who in regard of his each wit defieth? Lo the cleare proofe then if a man would make it (O would some one but try it) To choose his Song, and Gold enough lay by it, And say to thee; heere, better this and take it. I know (how ere thou lik'st them) thou could'st doe it Wert thou but so put to it. For if thou sing'st thus when nought doth incite thee Aware when PRAYSE and GOLD did both inuite thee. Jncerto.
I. BASSVS. APrill is in my Mistris face, Aprill is in my Mistris face, my Mistris face, And Iuly in hir eyes hath place, hir eyes hath place. With in hir bo∣some is September, But in hir hart, But in hir heart, a could December. But in hir heart, But in hir heart a could December.
II. BASSVS. CLorinda false adieu thy loue torments mee, let Thirses haue thy hart since he cōtēts thee. Clorinda, false adieu thy loue tormēts mee; let Thirsis haue thy hart since hee cōtents thee. O griefe & bitter anguish: for thee vnkind I languish. I languish. Faine I alas would hide it ij. faine I a╌las would hide it, O but who can a╌bide it? I can I can not I a╌bide it. A∣dieu adieu adieu thē, ij. fare well, leaue mee death now desiring; thou hast lo thy requi╌ring. So spake Philistus
on his hooke re╌lying, and fell a dyeing. So spake Phili╌stus on his hooke relying, So spake Phi╌listus on his hooke re╌lying and fell a dye╌ing.
III. BASSVS WHy sit I: O this this mirth cōtēteth, whome griefe of mind tormenteth tormenteth. Ah cease this wee∣ping, cease alas alas this weeping, foole alas, foole alas she does but this to proue thee; a╌way a╌way a╌way a╌way false comfort false comfort thou canst not moue mee, thou canst thou canst not moue mee, thou canst thou canst not moue mee, yu canst not moue mee. You yt saw to much to much mine eies, shall deerly, shall deerly buy it, that made my heart espy it. Hence falce cōfort in vaine yu doest ease mee, cōfort in vaine yu seekst to
ease mee, a way I say then, a╌way thou canst not please mee. thou canst not please mee, a╌way I say thou canst not please mee.
IIII. BASSVS. SInce my teares and lamenting, false loue bred thy contenting, ij. still thus to weep for euer, these fountaines shal perseuer. shal perseuer. Till my hart griefe-brim filled, ij. griefe-brim filled. Out a╌las alas be distill╌ed. Out a╌las alas a╌las be distilled. Till my hart griefe-brim fill╌ed. ij. griefe-brim fill╌ed. Out a╌las a∣las bee destill╌ed. Out a╌las a╌las a╌las bee distilled.
V. BASSVS. HElp I fall, my hope lo doth betray mee, ô help I fall, Ladie I fall, but you voutsafe to slay mee. Help I fal, I fal, my hope lo doth betray me, ô help I fall Lady I fal but you voutsafe to slay me. See a Nymph vnkind & cruell, ij. vnkind & cruell, ij. a Nymph vnkind and cruell, and cru╌ell, to scorn hir onely Iu╌ell. See a Nymph vnkind and cruell, ij. vnkind & cruell, ij. a Nymph vnkind and cruell, and cruell, to scorne hir onely Iuell.
VI. BASSVS LAdy Lady why grieue you still mee? ô no, you loue mee, ij. ô no, you loue mee, ij. ô no, you loue mee: If this bee loue to kill mee. O strange tormenting, strange tormenting: ah, break, hart a╌las, break a╌las, break, break hart alas hir hart cōtēting. And you yt now doe disdain me & you that now disdain; that now disdaine mee, that now doe disdaine mee; Say then that griefe hath slaine mee, ij. say thē that griefe hath slaine, hath slaine mee. And you that now doe disdaine mee, and
you that now disdaien that now disdaine mee, that now doe disdaine mee! say then that griefe hath slaine mee, ij. saye then that griefe hath slaine hath slaine mee.
VII. BASSVS. IN dewe of roses: Lycoris thus satt weeping. In dewe of roses; Lycrois thus satt weeping. Ah Dorus falce ij. yt hast my hart bereft me, and now vnkind hast left mee; Heare a╌las heare O heare mee; ay mee, ay mee, can not my bewty moue thee, Pit╌ty then pitty pitye mee beecause I loue thee. Ay mee, thou skorn'st ye more I praye thee, I praye thee, thou skorn'st ye more I praye thee, and this thou doest thou doest to slaie mee, thou skorn'st the more I praye, and this thou doest thou doest to slaie mee, and this thou
doest to slaie mee, but doe then doe, ij. kil mee and vaunt thee, ij. yet my ghost still shall haunt thee, shall haunt thee.
VIII. BASSVS. IN euery place ij. fierce Loue a╌las assailes assailes mee, that how can Ioy content mee? when hope and faith and all no whit auailes mee. O gentle Loue, ô gentle gentle Loue, ô gentle gentle Loue, ô graunt mee lesse to grieue to grieue mee, Or griue mee more ij. or grieue mee more and griefe will soone relieue mee.
IX. BASSVS. NOw is the gentle season freshly flowring, to sing and play and daunce while May en∣dureth, to sing & play & daunce while May endureth, & wooe & wed (toe) ij. and wooe and wed (toe) and wed (toe) and wooe and wed that sweet delight procureth.
X. BASSVS. THe fields abroad with spangled flowres The fields abroad with spangled flowres are guilded: The meades (are) mantled, ij. the meades (are) mantled, and closes, in May each bush arayed, and sweet wilde ro╌ses, and sweet wilde ro╌ses. The Nightin∣gale hir bowre hath gay╌ly hath gayly builded, and Loues inspi╌ring: I loue I loue ij. I loue I loue (she) sings hark ij. hir mate desiring; & Loues inspi∣ring;
I loue I loue ij. I loue I loue (she) sings hark I loue I loue (she) sings hark hir mate desiring.
XI. BASSVS. COme Louers follow mee: Soft then, softly for feare wee wake him, wee wake him, and to his bowe hee take him, and to his bowe, his bowe hee take him: whether shall wee then fly vs? shall wee then fly vs, shall wee then flye vs? And if hee come vp╌on vs, Out well a way, out well a way a way then are wee woe beegonne beegonne vs. Hence then a waye follow mee, a waye bee∣gonne, hence and dispatch vs, and that a pace, that a pace, for
feare, for feare hee catch vs.
XII. BASSVS. NO no no no no no thou doest but flout mee, thou doest flout, thou doest flout mee, thou doest but flout but flout mee: fie a way, fie a way I say a way I say nay thou, nay thou nay thou canst liue without mee yu canst liue well with out mee, yea thou canst liue canst liue with out mee. Since for mee then you care not, since for mee then you care not spite mee and spare not. O heauie parting. Turne ô turne, turne ô turne & cure this smarting. Come thē ô come with comfort, come then ô
come with Comfort pi╌tie my cry╌ing. help a╌las, help for now I lye a dye╌ing. come then ô come with com╌fort, come then ô come with cōfort pi╌tie my cry╌ing, help a╌las help for now I lye a dying.
XIII. BASSVS. I wil no more no more come to thee yt floutst mee when I woe thee. I will no more no more come to thee, that flowtst mee when I woe thee. Still ty hy hy hy hy yu cryest, still ty hy hy hy hy ij. ty hy hy thou cryest, & all my louely rings & my pinnes & my gloues deniest. O say alas, thē ô say a╌las what moues thee, to grieue him so yt loues thee, to grieue him so yt loues thee? Leaue a╌las leaue then ah leaue tormenting, ah leaue ah leaue then leaue a while a∣las ah leaue tormenting, and giue my burning yet yet some small re∣lenting.
Leaue a╌las leaue then ah leaue tormenting, ah leaue ah leaue then, leaue a while a╌las ah leaue tormenting, and giue my burning, yet yet some small re╌lenting.
XIIII. BASSVS. BEesides a fountaine, heard I two Louers talk in sweet and wanton gloses. Besides a foun∣taine heard I two Louers talk in sweet & wāton gloses. Say dainty deere, quoth hee, to whom is thy liking ty╌ed? To whom but thee my bonny loue my loue ye gentle Nimphe replied? I die, I die I die quoth hee? & I & I & I said shee: Ah giue mee, giue mee then quoth hee (but durst not say but durst not say) some token; and with his hands the rest hee would haue spo∣ken. Fie a╌way, nay fie a╌way she cryed then: fie a╌way, nay fie a∣way
then cry'd the Nimph, nay fie, a╌las, you well doe know it, quoth hee sweetly come kisse mee then and shew it.
The first part. XV. BASSVS. SPort wee, ij. Sport wee my louely treasure, ij. Sport wee my louely louely treasure, For why, long loue lōg seruing, Asketh e∣quall de╌seruing. ij. Let bee our sportfull pleasure, ij. Let bee our sportfull pleasure, our sportfull pleasure, ij. To kisse to kisse to kisse now, To kisse to kisse, To kisse the while wee may now; To kisse the while wee
may wee may now, And that you wot well what loues other to╌ken, Ioy more then can bee spoken. Ioy more then can bee spoken, Ioy more then can bee spoken, bee spo╌ken.
The second part. XVI. BASSVS. O Sweet a╌las, O Sweet a╌las what say you? O sweet a╌las, O sweet a╌las what say you? ay mee, ij. ay mee, ay mee that face, ay mee that face discloses the Scarlet blush, the Scarlet blush of sweet vermillan roses, and yet a╌las, and yet a╌las a╌las I know not, If such a crimsen stayning, be for loue or disdaining. But if of loue it grow not, ij. But if of loue, but if of loue it grow not, bee it disdain cōceiued, to see vs of loues fruits so long be╌reued, so long be╌reued. But if of loue it grow not, ij.
But if of loue, but if of loue it grow not, Bee it disdain con∣ceiued, to see vs of loues fruites so long be╌reued so long bee╌reued.
XVII. BASSVS. HArk iolly Shepheards: Gowe then, why sit wee heere delaying? sit wee heere thus delay∣ing. Gowe then why sit wee heere de╌lay╌ing, sit wee delaying and all you merry wanton lasses playing, & all yon merry merry wanton wanton lasses playing, and all yon merry merry wanton lasses wanton lasses playing? How gayly Flora leades it, and how she sweetly treads it? The woods and groues they ring, lowdly resounding lowdly resoun∣ding, with Eccho bounding. The woods and groues they ring lowd∣ly
resounding, lowdly resounding, with Eccho sweet rebounding.
XVIII. BASSVS. HOe who comes heere: with bagpiping and drūming, tis the Morris daūce ij. a cōming with bagpiping & drūming? tis the Morris daūce ij. a com∣ming. Come come Ladies, come Ladies out, come quickly, come Ladies out, come ye ladies out, come ladies out, ô come, come quickly, & see how trim they daūce trimly & trickly, & see about how trim they daūce, how trim & trickly. Hey ther a╌gayn, hey ho ther again againe hey ther again ther a∣gain, again, again, how ye bells they shake, hey they shake it? now for
our town now for our town hey, now for our town once more and take it. Soft a while not a way so fast they melt them. What Piper ho! be hang'd a while knaue thē, seest thou not, ij. the daūcers how they swelt them, the dauncers swelt them. Out there, out a while stand out there; fie you come to farre I say in: ther, giue ye hobby horse more rome, more rome to play in, more rome to play in.
XIX. BASSVS. DYe now my heart exi╌led. dye now my hart frō thy delight delight exiled, thy loue is dead and all our hope bee╌guiled our hope beeguiled. O Death ô Death vnkind and cruell, to rob the world so, of that hir fayrest iewell, hir fairest iewell. ij. Now shoot at mee now shoot & spare not, now shoot at mee now shoot and spare not ij. kill mee I care not, O thinck not Death a╌las thy dart will paine mee, thinck not thy dart will payne mee, why shouldst why shouldst thou
heere against my will retaine mee? O heare a dolfull, a dolfull wretches crying, or I dye for want of dyeing, or I dye for wāt I dye for wāt of dye∣ing, or I dye I dye for want of dye╌ing.
XX. BASSVS. SAy gentle Nymphes that tread these moun∣taines, Say gentle Nymphes that tread these moun∣taines, whilst sweetly you sit playing sit playing, whilst sweetly sweet╌ly you sit playing, sweetly sit playing, whilst sweetly you sit playing, Saw you my Daphne ij. Saw you my Daphne straying a∣long your Cristall fountaines? If so you chaūce to meet hir, kisse hir and kindly greet hir, and greet hir, then these sweet garlands, take hir, and say from mee, and say from mee I neuer will forsake hir, If so you chaunce to meet
hir, kisse hir and kindly greet hir, and greet hir, then these sweet garlands take hir and say from mee, and say from mee I neuer will forsake hir.
A TABLE OF ALL THE MADRIGALLS. APrill is in my Mistris face. I. Clorinda. II. Why sit I heere complayning? III. Since my teares and lamenting. IIII. Help I fall. V. Ladie why grieue you still mee. VI. In dewe of roses. VII. In euery place. VIII. Now is the gentle season. The first part. IX. The fields a broad. The second part. X. Come Louers follow mee. XI. No, no, shee doth but flout mee. XII. I will no more come to thee. XIII. Beesides a fountaine. XIIII. Sport wee my Louely treasure. The first part. XV. O sweet alas. The second part. XVI. Hark iolly Shepherds. XVII. Hoe who comes heere. XVIII. Dye now my hart. XIX. Say gentle Nymphes. XX. FINIS.
