18347.5 99841471 6056
A True Relation of the birth of three Monsters in the City of Namen in Flanders: As also Gods Iudgement vpon an vnnaturall sister of the poore womans, mother of these obortiue chil∣dren, whose house was consumed with fire from heauen, and her selfe swallowed into the earth. All which hapned the 16. of December last. 1608.
A True relation of the birth of three Monsters, in the Citty of Namen in Flanders: as also Gods Iudgement vpon an vnnaturall sister of the poore womans, mother of these obortyue children, whose house was consumed with fire from heauen, and herselfe swallowed into the earth. All which hapned the 16. of December last. 1608. GOd, in his great loue to mākind, hath euer shew∣ed vs his suffe∣ring mercy, be∣fore his sudden Iudgemēts, and with a fathers loue to his offen∣ding children, tels vs of our faults, before he chastize vs. Many wayes hath God (of late) both here at home, as well as in forrayne countryes, forewarned vs to repent, before his Iudgement
lighten vpon vs, yet we still preseuer in our vi∣cious kind of liuing, neglecting his mercy, when wee know his Iudgement is irreuocable. So repugnant is frayle nature against Diuine reason, that our soules lye wallowing (like Swyne) in all foulnesse of life and sensuall Con∣cupiscence. O England, looke vpon thy selfe, before thou search into forrayne wonders, and thou shalt find, the Highest is offended with thee: for these tokens of his wrath, to forewarne thee, hast thou felt; mortality through pestilence: he hath (for the seuen deadly sinnes) giuen thee almost seuen yeeres punishment: strange Inundati∣ons of waters, like a second Deluge, haue ray∣ned vpon the fruitfull earth: fyre from heauen hath made Churches and steeples, Gods Bea∣cons, to bid vs arme our selues with repentāce, a∣gainst y• generall enemy to the world, the Deuill: frosts haue hardned y• heart of our mother earth, and haue made her so vnnaturall, that she hath almost starued her children, sending out of her barren wombe no fruite, but leane-visaged dearth, to deuoure those that she should feede; and nowe doth this monster-feede vpon vs, and yet wee repent not. And nowe looke further into the world, and you shall see through the eies of your vnderstand∣ing,
such apparant tokens of Gods wrath, able to fright vgly sinne, from the hearts of welshaped creation, and make men by Contrition as pure, as before they were polluted with their fleshly Concupiscence. IN the City of Namen, in the Lowe Coun∣tries, there dwelt a poore labouring man, hauing to his wife a woman of a good birth, and reputed alwayes vertuous in her liuing. This poore woman had a sister excéeding rich, one as fully vicious, as she was vertuous, more proud, then she could be humble. So blind is Fortune in her gifts, that merit doth not guide her, but Chaunce. The poore mans wife being great with child, and feeling the pangs of Childbirth, in all haste sent her husband to her rich sister, to lend her ayde in that extremity, thinking that womanly Charity (if they had not bene sisters) would haue made her come and visited her in that time of neede and danger. The poore man béeing come to his wines sisters house, and speaking with her, told her the cause of his comming. But she replyed, and sayd, How darest thou (base begger) to come to procure me to visit so poore a whore, whose blood and knowledge I disclayme, as being not my fa∣thers right begotten daughter, but a bastard? I
haue friendes comming to my house, to make marry with me, and I shall leaue them, and goe helpe to bring more beggers into the world. The poore man replyed, O sister, do not so much wrong your poore sister, as to terme her a bastard, being your mothers daughter. With that, this inraged shée-deuill strooke the poore man with a staffe, that the blood ranne about his eares, and commaunded her seruants to kicke him out of doores, saying. It was a fit reward for a begger, that will call a Gentlewo∣man sister. Home goes this poore man, with a sorrow∣full heart, calling to Almighty God for venge∣ance on this Monster of her sexe, that pittilesse woman: And comming to his wife, told her of the vnkindnesse of her sister. The poore affrigh∣ted woman, through griefe and rage, fell present∣ly in labour, and was deliuered of thrée Mon∣sters, striking a terrour to those women imploy∣ed in that businesse. Thse ill-proportioned children, were a sonne and two daughters; and the first that sawe this world, was a daughter, that had such dressings, and attyre on the head, by nature of flesh, as wo∣men haue made by art of Bonelaces, and such like, with a fleshy Uardingale about the middle of it, as if Nature, hauing forsaken her old fashi∣ons,
had now deuised new. This child, (or rather Monster) cryed with a shrill voyce, and spake, saying, O thou Creator, that gauest me this forme & life, let me not liue here in this world of Pride, of Lust, of Murther, and all wickednesse: returne me suddenly to what I was; for here (I know) is nothing but calamity. And as it spake these words, it straight∣wayes dyed. The second was a sonne, with a strange mis∣shapen head, hauing vpon the backe of his right hand, the fashion of a deaths head: And this child sayd, that Dearth and Plague should couer the whole World, and that they were sent to giue no∣tice of it to all men. And so speach and life left him together. The third was a daughter, hauing about the necke, a Ruffe laced, and Cuffes about the wrests, like the Ruffe, all of flesh, so artificiall in nature, as if Nature in her first work had intrea∣ted Arte to help her: And this child sayd, that God would punish the world suddenly, for our manifold transgressions; and sayd moreouer, that they thrée were sent to forewarne vs of the Lords comming; and then straight dyed The mother of these Monsters, through griefe and terror, yelded vp the ghost, and left a poore disconsolate husband behind her, to fill ye mouth
of rumor, with these strange vnheard of won∣ders. But now to shew the Iustice of God, with his mercyes. That proud, rich, vnnaturall sister of this vn∣fortunate mother, at the same instant time that this poore woman was deliuered, had her house, amidst all her mirth, fired with lightening: and shée flying out of it, to saue her life, the willing earth gaped wyde, and swallowed her quick, hol∣ding it more fit for her to be in the earth, then on the earth, being so vnnaturall against nature: And her wealth and all her substance was quite consumed with that quenchlesse fire, till Gods Iudgement was executed, and then it ceast of it selfe, doing no farther damage. The fame of these wonders hauing possest the City, and the trueth of them apparantly knowne, stirred vp good motions in the hearts of the In∣habitants, to Fasting, to Prayer, to Almes-déeds, and such like workes of grace and par∣don. The Gouernours of the City caused it to be printed, as well to giue the country round about knowledge of it, as to continue the remembrance of it there, that they might still preseuer in the good course they begun. Thus haue I set downe briefly these wonders
in nature, in the City of Namen in Flanders, which happned the 16 of December last. 1609. Faithfully translated, according to the Dutch Copy, printed in the same City. FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Simon Stafford, for Richard Bun∣nian, and are to be sold at the signe of the red Lion vpon London Bridge. 1609.
