19555 99849595 14752
A DESCRIPTION OF S'HERTOGENBOSH: VVritten in the yeere 1540, by Simon Pelgrom of S'hertogenbosh, in his life time Prior and Prouinciall of the Order of Guilhelmines. Together with The principall points and passages con∣cerning the last Siege. ALSO, A Register from day to day, of that which hath happened, aswell without as within the Towne, from the first beginning vntill the latter end of the said Siege. Translated out of the Dutch Tongue, and printed according to the Originall. LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, dwelling at the South entrance of the Royall Exchange 1629.
A Description of S'hertogenbosh: Written in the Yeere 1540. Together with a Register of all the princi∣pall passages in the late siege of the said Towne, 1629. Vnto the Worthy, Worshipfull, and Discreete Lords, Chiefe Baily, Presidext, Sheriffes, and Councellours of the renowned Towne of S'herto∣genbosh. THe place whereupon the Towne of S'hertogenbosh is built, hath heeretofore (according to the common presumption) beene a Boscage or Wood, kept for the Hunting of the Dukes of Bra∣bant; of this Boscage the Towne hath the name of S'hertogenbosh. This Boscage was an euen and recreatiue place, fruit∣full of wild Deere, as of Harts, Hinds, Wilde Bores, Wolues, Hares, Rabbets, and such like: wherein were many little water-brookes, Orchards, and Hearbes. In this Boscage the Duke had made a Cottage, as-well for his Dogges and Horses, when he went a hun∣ting, as also for men to be at shelter from the raine and
great heate. This same Cottage was after this named the Hanse-wint, or in English the Grayhound, and is yet vpon the Market-place. The Hunters of the Duke had made a Ditch round about this Hutte, for to be assured against the forces of their Enemies; because there was a great difference risen betweene them and the Hunters of the Count of Meghen, for that they were come vnder the Iurisdi∣ction of the said Count, following not onely their Dogges that were astray, but also by reason of the great heate, their Game. Wherefore they were very much beaten and hurt by the Counts Hunters, for da∣ring to hunt in anothers Hunting place. The Duke tooke this very ill so that he forced those of Meghen to hang those dead Dogs by the hinder legs on high, and for reparation of their fault, to couer them with Corne. The place of this Boscage was fit for many vses, ha∣uing in the middest a common Riuer, where resorted (as if it had been a common Hauen) many men, there to receiue their goods which they had bought. The Kempenlanders, Peelanders, and their neigh∣bours, were wont to bring their Bees towards the far∣thest dominions of Gelder, for that that Land hath a sweet ayre, and was very fruitfull of Corne, Blossoms, Ypes, or Broomes blossomes, being very good foode for the Bees. This Nation bringing ouer their Bees in Hiues, and trading with the Gelders Nation for Corne. Beanes, Pease, Cheese, and such like Wares, they haue chosen this place as the fittest, where they came in great number with their Boars, and Carres: for to receiue those Wares they daily bought. And it hapned then that this place, by reason of the great trading more and more did encrease, wherefore ma∣ny came thither. There were then no publike Tauernes for to lodge
the Iourneying Trauellor, so that they were forced to lye in the Field, vnlesse they would goe to the next Villages and Houses. A certaine Trauellour, being weary of this misery, was minded there to build, and was the first that builded there a Publike Tauerne, neere the old Diese, about the Geertruyde-Bridge, who was, by reason of the many Guests, and good trading, in a short time growne very rich: which was no wonder, because it was then a peaceable time, and the people came there in great number, as well from the Gelder quarters, principally from Bonuneler, Tielerweert, Maes, and Wael, as also out of the quar∣ters of Brabant, namely, from Brussels, Louen, Ant∣werpe, Kempenland, and out of all the Townes and places situated there round about, for to trade with their Merchandise in this place. By reason of this good successe and welfare of this Vintner, (like men being of nature artificers) there came more yet to build their dwelling-places there: so that there were built many Houses. These then were the first luckie beginners of the Towne to come. Euen as those that prosper are hated, misery onely is freed, so the prosperity of this people hath beene hated by the Burgers of Heusden, because this Tra∣ding and Merchandise was wont to bee with them. These Burgers then fearing that such a luckie begin∣ning, and great multiplication of these new buil∣ders should doe them not small, but very great hin∣derance, and that their Towne, for want of men and trading, would come to nothing: therefore they thought how to preuent it, and by what meanes they might best hinder it. After they had well medi∣tated these businesses, and iudging, that their lon∣ger staying would bee but a hinderance vnto them, they concluded together to fall vpon these new
Builders, and caused them to depart: who hauing gotten fit opportunity, they did fall very secretly vp∣on them, caused them to depart out of the place, and beate downe their new Buildings to the very ground, for to hinder these speedy beginnings; which otherwise would haue put downe all the trading of their Towne. This attempt was to no purpose against the For∣tune: for that the people did not forsake this place by reason of the said dammage and hinderance, but shortly after this returned thither againe, and did build againe new houses in the old Field: for which the iealousie of the Burgers of Heusden did increase more and more, and would not leaue them at quiet, but fell for the second time againe vpon them, de∣stroying their houses, and caused them to retire a great way off that place, to the end that their last in∣tent should not bee greater then the first. These people being twice destroyed and ruined by the Burgers of Heusden, they were forced to be strag∣glers here and there, which did grieue them much, hauing no meanes to resist them; yet notwithstan∣ding continued still in their opinions, and did looke alwaies for a better occasion, hauing in minde the saying of the Poet Virgil: O passi grauiora dabit Deus his quoque finem. On friends: let greater perrits past Giue greater Courage now at last; And God (who doth all what he wills) Will set a period to these ills. And expecting after darknesse the light, were min∣ded to seeke other helpe and assistance: They made their complaints vnto the Duke of Brabant, who
(they knew) would assist those that were in misery; and manifested also their cause vnto the Burgers of the Brabandish head Towns, and did together require helpe and assistance, that they might bee assured a∣gainst the forces of those of Heusden, and to be resto∣red in their former place, that they might build vp a∣gaine their pillaged and ruined Houses. In this they were not deceiued of their hope, be∣cause these Brabandish Burgers, hauing regard vnto their request, condiscended vnto them, and promised truely to helpe and assist them, so that hereafter they should not any more bee hindred of their good in∣tent. The Illustrious Prince alledged this reason in the common Assembly, That he was willing to prouide vnto the same for time to come, but that he was now much troubled himselfe with Warres, and great af∣faires, and therefore did put the said cause to the dis∣position of the Brabandish Burgers. The three chiefe Townes of Braband, namely, Lo∣uen, Brussels, and Antwerpe, tooke this Cause in good earnest vpon them, and considering well of it, they found fit to build there the fourth chiefe Towne, to the end that the Brabanders forces might lye vpon 4. Pillers. By the command of the Prince, they began there to make there three Ports or Cates in a round, which were ended in a short time: each chiefe Towne buil∣ded one Gate. Those of Louen about the Market place, neere the great Hospitall, which is now the Prison∣gate. Those of Brussels, the Crosse-gate, which re∣maines still in Orten-street. Those of Antwerpe the Vrouwe-port, or Gate, about the Wilde Bore, which in the augmentation of the Towne, was taken away by the Burgers. The Forces were made in fauour of these new In∣habitants,
because that their Enemies and haters should no more in time come to spoile nor ruine their building, nor to make them retire any more. These chiefe Townes were specially minded here∣vnto, to the end that the Gelders might be forced to stay in their Dominions▪ for that the Brabanders most times were forced to maintaine Wars against them, about whose frontiers, the Townes, Villages, Houses, and goods of the Brabanders are situated, which were still very much spoiled and ruined by this Gelder Na∣tion. These then haue beene the beginnings of the new Towne, and the first foundations. When these Gates, in manner aforesaid, were built so freely, there came so great a quantity of peo∣ple to build and dwell therein as if vnder the founda∣tions there had beene Mines of Siluer. These new Inhabitants taking anew their courage, which they had lost by reason of the pillaging and de∣stroying of those of Heusden▪ they builded againe new buildings, setting the Houses one close to the other, and the number of the same encreased daily more and more, and so fast, that they at last, with the assistance of the Prince, did make a Wall and Ditch round a∣bout the Towne, and strengthned it with a stone wall, so that they were able to resist their enemies. As the number of the comming Strangers did very much increase, and the Towne prospered, so they be∣gan to build other new buildings. The Princes Court was the principall, and most costly builded, situated ouer against the Butchers Hall, where there is now the Tauerne called the Swanne. The House Rood enburgh is also built by the Com∣mon-wealth for the gracing of the new Towne, and it was a great while the Treasure-house of the towne.
The Towne-house was built as well at the charges of the Prince, as also of the Burgers. The Burgers of S'hertogenbosh being come in such a wished state, began to statute Lawes, and to make a Magistrate, to bring the Riuer through the Towne, to make new streets and wayes, and to make much one of another, wherefore they haue gotten great Liber∣ties of their Prince, as by the Letters thereof more at large may appeare. All those that come to dwell there, although they were broken and Bankrupts, they got liberty of the Prince, wherefore it did happen, that there came ma∣ny out of the Land of Cleefe, Guilicker-land, Gelder∣land, and out of other neighbour places, to take their residence there. This said Prouince yeeldeth very strong and bold Women, so that these Strangers brought with them very bold Women, which for the most part had com∣mand ouer their Husbands, and did make away the common goods in despight of their Husbands: Ther∣fore the Prince gaue vnto this Towne this Law, That the Women without their Husbands may not dispose of any of their goods: but that the Husband, without the knowledge of the Woman, hath full power to sell and dispose of their goods. There were not as yet any Churches built in the new towne, but the Orten-Church, situated neere the Diese, hath beene a great while the Parish Church, which was long before built by a Gentleman, who being strayed by the tempest of the Sea, landed there first of all; for that the Sea was wont to come in that place, as appeareth by the name of that place, called Ooort-Duyuen. There were also no Cloifters in the towne, the Fri∣ers were the first that began to build there, and buil∣ded a small dwelling house; after this they tooke a
bigger place neere the Princes Court, and enlarged their place of residence, after the manner of Cellekins, and they haue also built a Church, which the Burgers haue vsed a great while for their Parish Church They were not yet tyed to any publike promises. Shortly after this there came many men and wo∣men from seuerall Regions in the same towne, after beginning of this towne, (as hereafter more at large shall be declared) they haue built there their Houses and Cloysters. The Towne was in a short time so increased by rea∣son of the louing and friendly Burgers, that euery one thought it should haue been a second Rome, and were forced because of the multitude of men, to inlarge the Towne, and make it bigger, that the multitude of the Burgers might the better dwell therein. In the yeere 1300, when the augmentation of the towne was intended to be inlarged, the said towne was therein assisted by the Prince, and by the Pro∣uince of Brabant. The Burgers did make new Stee∣ples in the precinct, with new Gates, they did also make new and wide ditches, and new Walles, and or∣dained new Streets to be made; they brought the Riuer the Dommel, and the Aa in seuerall places tho∣row the Towne, and prouided further all that which was needfull for the augmentation of the Towne. This new towne was presently multiplyed with new Burgers, which according to their state, builded each for their commodity new houses: and did so in∣crease in riches, as if they had got to the riches of Cre∣sus; by which meanes it happened, that there were built so many faire and costly Cloysters, holy Houses, and costly buildings, so that the most part of the new towne, is built with Cloysters, Churches, Chappels, and such like Houses.
In the yeere 1380. there were laid the foundation of the great and renowned Church called St. Johns Church, the ground-place of which, together with the streets situated there round about, from the pri∣soner-gate to the Hintemer-gate, is called the Hinte∣mer sant, because the said place heretofore hath ap∣pertained vnder the Vilage Hintem. About that time there were built seuerall publike and priuate Houses, as holy Churches, Hospitals, and diuers Houses for the poore, which daily increased by reason of the riches of the Burgers, and their liberali∣ty. Which things seuerall to declare, should bee too long, and needlesse. These Burgers are, by reason of their ciuill carriage, wisdome, and courtesie, come in great fauour vnto e∣uery one, being faithfull to euery one and did deceiue no body, neither were chargeable vnto any: Their friends were welcome vnto them, but they did resist their enemies: for as the vnquiet and vnpeaceable Gelder Nation, when they were about the building of S'hertogenbosh, did spoile the Brabandish Townes and Villages, setting on fire their Countrey-houses, de∣stroying their Lands, taking away their Horses and Beasts, and ruining all that whereby they could come; Likewise they (some while before the building of the Towne) did fall vpon the Village called Oosterwicke, neere the Towne, and haue quite pillaged the same, and set on fire all the trees: These Burgers of S'herto∣genbosh haue after that, with their owne power, resi∣sted the said Gelders Nation, and haue not onely kept them from comming abroad, but also haue falne in their owne dominions, and haue forced them to lay downe their Armes. But as euery thing in this world is not euerlasting, so this Towne also hath suffered many seuerall dam∣mages and alterations, and was twice almost burnt
downe. The first and greatest fire was in the yeere 1419, on the 28 of Iune: the second fire in the yeere 1463 the 17 of Iune, at the Heusdens Faire. The first fire began in the Verwer-street, neere the signe of the Brasse▪ Kettle: by which fire, the Towne-house, and all the Papers and Writings, were altogether burnt. The second fire began neere the signe of the Falcon in the Hintemer-street, where the top of S. Iohns Church and many Images were also burnt. The name of the Duke of Braband, by whose com∣mand the towne of S'hertogenbosh was built, we haue forborne to set downe in this History, because of the diuersity of the Historians, and haue kept this diffe∣rent till the last. The common presumption is, that the Duke Godfrey in the Cradell, hath beene the Founder of S'hertogenbosh, which is confirmed by these words: GodrIdVs dVX è sILVa feCIt oppidVM. The Duke Godfrey hath of a Boscage built a towne, in the yeere 1184. Others presume that Henry the first sonne of God∣frey the third hath built this towne. The Historie written before the Chronicle of Saint Truden, saith, In the County of Peeland is a Boscage, which the Emperours haue giuen vnto the Church of Vtricht, whose right hath appertained a long time vnto the Counts of Gelderland, which said Counts haue giuen the same Boscage vnto their friends, and haue sold the Village called Ʋucht vnto the Duke Henry van Looteringen, who hath built vpon Oortens-dyck, a towne which is now S'herto∣genbosh. Others say, that in the time of Iohn the second, and Iohn the third Dukes of Braband, there were
first made Walles about this place by one William de Bosco, Knight, sonne of Gerlacus de Route, who did liue in the yeere 1313, when the Geerlinger Bridge in the Hintemer street was builded, and got the name of it. This Knight dying, gaue vnto the Lord of Erp, the Cloyster called Clarissen in the Hintemer street, and made his onely heyre the Lord Francis, in September, Anno 1335. Some say also, that the place of this Towne here∣tofore hath beene a Boscage or Wood, appertaining vnto the Duke of Gelderland, who hath giuen this place vnto John the second sonne of John the first Duke of Braband, for a Gift at his Christening, and that the Towne of S'hertogenbosh is scituated and built on this place. They say also, that the said Duke Iohn hath fold and assigned the said Boscage vnto the said William de Bos∣co, from whence he hath gotten his surname: And that this William de Bosco hath beene the first that hath made Walles about the Towne, and admitted euery one that would come and liue there. Although it seemes that these three opinions are contrary one to another, notwithstanding, they may very well agree together, yea concurre one with an∣other, As concerning the two first opinions, euery one can well iudge it: for that Henry the second liued in the yeeee 1185, when his Father Godfrey did raigne. And it is the vse of all Historians, that when Kings and Princes raigne during their sonnes liues, that all that which happened in such a time, is written both of the Fathers and children. Concerning the third opinion there will not bee much difference, for that it is to bee vnderstood of the principall part, namely, from the Prisoner∣gate to the Pinappels and Saint Anthonies Gates,
Against this doth not contradict, that it is not men∣tioned there of the beginning of S'hertogenbosh, for that it is the biggest and fairest part, hauing in his ringle the great S. Iohns Church, the great Hospitall the Holy Ghost, or the Spint, the Gregorians Frater∣house▪ the Sister of Ortens Cloyster, the great Begging-Cloyster, with many other Cloysters three following the rule of Saint Augustine, and one of Saint Benedi∣ctus, one of Saint Clara, and many beautifull Chap∣pels, as, Saint Iacobs Chappell, which is now a Parish Church, one of Saint Anthonies. The Synechdochies manner of speaking is, where a part is taken for the whole, it is very common vnto the writers. Laftly, it is knowne, that in the time of the said Knight, William de Bosco, the Towne was augmen∣ted, as by the Letters of the Duke of Braband, and of the Magistrates of S'hertogenbosh, more at large may appeare. Thus farre Simon Pelgrom of S'hertogenbosh, Prior and Prouinciall of the Order of Guil∣helmines. THis Towne of S'hertogenbosh did from time to time increase so much, that at the last it was growne to be the head or chiefe Towne in the fourth quarter of Braband, vnder whose obedience are these foure Counties, as Kempenland, Peeland, Maaesland, and the Land of Oosterwicke; in which Counties are situated the Townes of Helmont, Eynd∣soue, Megen, and Graue, hauing besides these vnder their command 72 Villages, in the which are one hun∣dred and one Parish Churches. S'hertogenbosh lyeth vpon the Riuer called the Diese, 6 Miles from the Mase, 12 miles from Rauensteine,
9 miles from Heusden, and 36 miles from Antwerpe. It is by nature a strong place, because of her situation, and low grounds round about, which lieth most times vnder water, specially in the Winter, except on the Ʋuchter side, Southward of the Towne, where, for the highnesse of the Land, the Towne is sortified with 2. Royall Forts, the one lying neere the Towne, beeing the smallest is called St Anthony: The other lying on the Vuchters-heyde, hauing fiue Bulworkes, Fran∣cebray Counterscarps, and a double Ditch, named the Fort Isabella. Eastward of the Towne lyeth a Royall Fort called Pettler-Sconce, towards which they must come by water thorow the Hekell, because it ly∣eth as it were in a Myre, hauing on the one side a small moore or damp, then followeth high ground, but on the other side Iow fields, being still vnder wa∣ter. Notwithstanding that these Lands round about S'hertohenbosh lye most times vnder water, they are good and firme Lands, sandie and hard ground, which is for the most part of summer very dry▪ in some part of it is sowne summer Corne, as Oates and Barley, which are sometimes ouerflowed by the high waters of the Maes, and suffer sometimes dammage, which is hardly recouered, except it be by an extraordinary dry Summer. Thorow this Towne runne also seuerall waters, or small riuers, hauing their beginnings out of two seue∣rall streames, the one being called the Aa, the other the Dommell, or Domale: which two Riuers in this last Siege were stopped by the command of his Princely Excellency about the Trenches, who making the water to come round about his Workes, through a new made ditch, about 30 foot wide. The water in and about the Towne was stayed with two stone beeres on the Bulworkes, next to the boome, as also
on the boome it selfe, with a Sluce doore, else it would haue runne in a great part, yea almost round about the Towne, if the said Riuer had not beene stopped. In the yeere 1577. on the 21 of September (in the time of the gouernment of Don Iohn) the said Towne being by the command of the generall States, released from the Dutch Souldiers, which lay in the Towne, remained on the States side till the yeere 1579. with∣out any Garrison, notwithstanding, the States vsed great diligence to assure this Towne with Garrison, according to the agreement made at Ʋtricht. Albeit that at last, by reason of the differences amongst the Burgers, (for this cause) and of the departure of those that were minded towards the States, is turned on the Spanish side▪ and so remained popish, wherein came a great number of Ecclesiasticall persons. On the 19 of Ianuary, in the yeere 1585. there was made an enterprize vpon the said Towne, by the Count of Hohenloo, they were already in the Towne, but were, by reason of the bad carriage of his Souldi∣ers, and the good courage of the Burgers; beaten out of the Towne backe againe, with the losse of many men, slaine, hurt, and taken prisoners, and so remai∣ned vnmolested till the yeere 1601. the first of No∣uember, vpon which day, the said Towne, by the command of the high and mighty Lords the States, was besieged, vnder the Conduct of the Illustrious Prince Mauritius of Nassawe of famous Memory, and was with great diligence entrenched round a∣bout: but because of the great extraordinary frost, he was not onely hindered of the approaching, the get∣ting of Victuals. Munitions, and other necessaries, but also those that watcht in their Sentinels, were dead frozen: therefore the said Prince broke vp his said Leager, and departed from thence the 27 of the same moneth of Nouember.
In the yeere 1603 this said Siege was againe vnder∣taken on the 19 of August: but because the Arch-Duke Albertas did lye ready with a great Armie of Souldiers, for to seeke his fortune vpon these Lands, therefore he followed the said Prince on the 21 of the same moneth, leaguering himselfe on the East side of the Towne, in the which at that time there was but a small Garrison, and besides they did refuse to take in any Garrison vpon the request of the Arch-Duke say∣ing that they themselues were strong enough to resist their enemies: but there was, by the practice of the said Duke, put into the Towne about 3000 men, a∣gainst the Burgers will, who thereupon did mutiny: wherefore some of them were punished. His said Ex∣cellence seeing that the said Towne was thus proui∣ded, did with good order breake vp his Leager, and lest the Towne on the 5 of Nouember, in the same yeere, as likewise the Arch-duke, departing euery one in their Garrison. The Gouernour, the Lord Antho∣ny Shets, Lord of Grobbendoncke, remained in the Towne. The High and mighty Lords the States generall, with the Illustrious Prince of Orenge, hauing nothing so at heart as the welfare of these vnited Prouinces, and the good Inhabitants of the same, haue in the be∣ginning of this yeere 1629, kept seuerall Assemblies with the Illustrious Prince of Orenge, for to haue rea∣dy all things necessary for a braue siege, hauing there∣fore to that end, sent betimes in the beginning of the yeere, through the Riuer the Wael, vp towards Nim∣megen, and to the Sconce S'Grauenweert, some Bridges, and slat bottom'd ships with Ordnance, Munition, and other warlike prouisions. Whereupon, in the middest ef the moneth of Aprill, the Garrison follo∣wed, who had their Rendezvous about the said Sconce.
The Illustrious Prince, the 24 of Aprill, in the mor∣ning betimes, at six of the clocke, with a good resolu∣tion, departed from the Hage, with valiant and braue Followers, taking his way towards Vtriclat, so to∣wards Arnhem, and from thence to S'Grauenweert, where his Excellency finding his Troopes ready, de∣parted with great diligence for Mockerheyde, put∣ting there on the 28 of the same moneth his Army in Battell-aray, where they that night lay in the Field. The 29 of the said moneth, early in the morning, marching further towards the Towne called Graus, ouer the Bridge, right to the Besh, before which Towne that night the Prince sent some number of Horse, and the next day, being the 30, hee beset the same Towne: then his Excellency came with his whole Army before the Towne, after Dinner, at 3 of the clocke in the afternoone, taking his quarter, with 134 Companies, at Ʋucht, lodging in the house cal∣led Heyms-house. His Excellencie had further separated the other chiefe Quarters as followeth: His Highnesse Count Ernst at Hintem with 50 Companies. Count William of Nassaw, Gouernour of Heusden, at Orten with 32 Companies. The Lord of Bredrode about the Pettler Sconce with 26 Companies. His Highnesse of Solms at Engelen, neere Creueceur, where the Ships lay with Munition and Victuals. The Lord Pincen comming in the Leager on the 11 of May, he is commanded to take his Quarter at Deu∣teren: Further, the Quarters were appointed and made vp in a very short space. In the matching toward the Bosh, the said Prince tooke the house called Heeswicke, scituated 6 miles from the Bosh, in which were 60. men.
The Gouernour Grobbendoncke being aduertised that the Leaguer was comming for the Towne, seeing also some of our Horsemen, notwithstanding, would not beleeue that it was intended vpon him, but thought that it was intended vpon Breda; yea durst freely say, that the Prince would not beginne such a vile deede: but shortly after this, seeing him make his Quarters, and that our Souldiers came neerer the Towne, and forced his Souldiers to retire in the same, began to thinke vpon his owne fault, that the said towne was not sufficiently prouided of men, Ordnance, and Gun∣powder; he could a little while before haue gotten from Luike many thousand pounds of Gunpowder, but he left it for want of money. These tydings being come at Brussels and in Bra∣band, did make great alterations there: the Arch-Duches did presently send Post by Post to Spaine, cau∣sed all the chiefe men of Warre to be assembled, and gaue order for payment: that with all speed the soul∣diers should be brought in the Field. Grobbendoncke did presently write for men and powder, and that there should be haste made for the releeuing of it. Certaine renowned chiefe men of Warre of the Spanish side, said, (as is told me) with laughing mouth, that Grobbendoncke was like the bold men, which say that they are not afraid for the Deuill, iesting at all times with him, yea, would faine see him, but being in such a case, they are as much afraide as others, wishing that they were released from him: so it is with him, for that hee oftentimes did say, that hee would very faine haue vs to come and see him, wish∣ing that the Prince Fredericke durst doe so, he would shew him what a man hee was, thinking that other chiefe men of Warre were not so couragious: But now, seeing him before the Gates and Walles of the
Towne, he is as all the rest, wishing that he would goe away. The first of May the Illustrious Prince did condiscend, that many, women Beggins, and ser∣vant Maids, should depart out of the Towne. The Horsemen which lay within, thought also, without permission of the Prince, to depart out of the same, but were forced to retire backe againe. Betweene the 4 and 5 of the same moneth, came into the Towne 800 men, secretly along Vlimen, neere Deuteren, by the Kee-Sconce, and so got in through S. Johns Gate, going in some places vp to the midst of the body in water: for which his Excellence caused also there to be made a broad way of Bauens, with a Bulwarke from the Vuchter-heyde along thorow the Moores, neere the Vogel-key of Grobendoncke, vntill the Quarter of Pinsen being garnished with many Re∣douts made of Wood, and is called the Hollans Walls which way of Bauens is made out farther along the Riuer called the Bosh-sloot, to the Village called Enge∣len. And so with this all the Leager round about is finished within the space of 8 or 10 dayes. The 5, Captaine Drop was put as Admirall ouen the shallops. The 8 of this said Moneth there were fetcht some halfe Curtowes out of the ships at Crenecour, and were brought to the Leager, for to bee planted vpon the Batteries. Those of the Towne began also to labour very ear∣nestly on their Workes without the Vuchter-gate, ma∣king their Batteries higher, but shot very little. A∣bout this Towne the Lord of Bredrode began to make a Sconce ouer against the Pettler, and all the Workes were by the command of his Excellence, made high∣er, thicker, and the Ditches wider.
The 12 the Dommell was bespoken to be stopt, or to make a Damme ouer it. At night, those of the Towne came out with two shallops vpon the Quarter of Count Ernst, thinking there to take some Prisoners, but they hauing misfor∣tune, did speedily retire backe againe, whereupon they of the Towne did shoot with Ordnance and Muskets, but did small hurt. This Leager is presumed to bee betweene 60 and 70 thousand men strong, whereof were 70 Cornets of Horse. The 14, about forty flat-bottome Turfe-shippes were fetcht from S'Grauenmoer, neere Breda, and were brought in the Leager, for to make of the same Ship-bridges. The 15, those did salley vpon the quar∣ter of the Lord of Brederode, but were caused with forces to retire backe againe. The 16 are those with∣in come out againe with some shallops, vpon the quar∣ter of Count Erust, but were faine to retire without doing any thing. The 20 we began to make a Trench betweene En∣gelen and Creueceur, for the security of the Horses: and all other Trenches with double bankets or feet-ben∣ches: the foot of the Trench was about 16 foot thick, and the vpper part 6 foot. Neere the place called Vliemer brugge ouer against the high-way, is made a Fort which can hardly be taken, to resist those of Breda that would come out. On the 23 there came a Messenger with Letters, which was followed by ours, so that he was drowned; whose said Letters were deliuered vnto the Prince. The 27, 28, 29, & 30 of the same moneth, we shot on both sides very fiercely though there was but small hurt done. The first of June, those of the great Fort Isabella did make a salley vpon the French Battery, but were at last forced to retire.
The night following, those of the Towne did make three seuerall fires vpon the steeple of the Church, weighing the fire three times vp and downe. The French did fall vpon the Enemies, and caused them to retire, and got many Shouels, Spades, Swords, and other things. The 3 and 4 those of the Towne made againe a fire vpon the steeple of St Johns Church: And the 5, 6, 7, and 8 of this Moneth, there was little done on both sides. The 9, ours of the great Battery did shoote vpon the Towne and the little Sconce aboue 140 shot. The same day those of the Towne came out with two shallops vpon the Quarter of Pinsen, thinking there to take some Horses, and men which were at worke, but were hindred. The 11 there arriued in the Quarter of Count Ernst yet 18 or 19 Companies of new Scotchmen. The 12 and 13 little hapned. The 14 His Excellencie, with the Lords the States, went vpon the Battery, and caused a Morter to be set on fire, which stood vpon the same Battery, which the first time did not worke very well: but the second time much more, so that for the dust we could scarce see the said Sconce: the little Sconce was likewise battered: and betweene the 13 and 14, there were a∣gaine made 3 fires vpon the steeple. The 15 there were throwne into the Sconces sixe Granads, whereof the second did worke very well, so that the Hurts did fly in the ayre. The same day, the water of the Dommell was let go in the outmost ditch round about the Princes quarter. The 16 at night, those within did make a salley, (comming through the Hintemer Gate, vpon the Workes of Count Ernst, causing the Watch to retire to the Battery: notwithstanding, they were forced
to retyre. The 18 there were throwne into the little Sconce two or three Granads. The same day at night, the English were busie to fill the ditch of the little Sconce. The French were at that time also very busie, making that night three bints of their Gallery neere the great Sconce. The next night those of the Towne did very fiercely throw with hand-Granads and firing with pitch hoopes. The 20, ours did labour in open day vpon the Gal∣leries, and did throw 8 Granats into the little Sconce, which caused all that they came neere to flye in the Ayre, the men did withdrawe themselues into the Counterscarps, to saue their liues. Those of the towne did make three seuerall fires vpon the steeple. The 21 there were Granads throwne againe into the little Sconce which was thereupon very much beaten with Ordnance. The 22 at night, the English were very busie vpon their Gallery, which was for the third time set on fire by those of the Sconce: notwithstanding the said Eng∣lish were very couragious, beating their enemies out of their Counterscarpes in the ditch, where many of them were drowned. The 23 the English were againe very forward with their Gallery: likewise the French, who did set on fire a Mine neere the great Sconce. At which time Count Henry van den Bergh did muster his men, and was found to bee about 25000 men strong, aswell of foot as Horse. The 24 and 25 hapned very little. The 26. there was vpon three seuerall places in the Leaguer a fire, namely in the Horsemens Quarter, in the Quarter of Brederode, and in the Quarter of His princely Excellency, amongst the English, where there was done the most dammage. Count Henry van den Bergh being a marching vp,
did lodge himselfe in Langhestraet, at Sprang, Wael∣wicke, Druynen, and Loon-opt-land. His Maiesty of Bo∣hemia came this night in the Leager, and went with His Excellency to see all his Workes. The 27 came the Horsemen of Count Henry van den bergh at Ʋly∣men, shewing himselfe on seuerall parts of the Leager, from Ʋlymen to Cromvoort. At night there was an Allarum in the Towne. The 28 there was in the Quarter of Count Ernst a∣gaine a fire in two seuerall places. At night, Count henry van den bergh shewed himselfe neere the Three Sisters, neere the Hollands Wall: amongst which ours shot 10 or 12 Cannon shot, whereupon they did pre∣sently retire. Our Souldiers were in battell-array all this night. The 29 there came some Souldiers in the Leager, which were runne away from the Enemies, complaining of hunger and great dearth. The 30 the Spanish did hide themselues in the Wood behinde the Ynffer-Sconce, who got some Waggons with Bauens of our Leaguer, and about 40 prisoners: They tooke also the Houses Burtell and Hesop, the Souldiers which were in the same, came with their full Armes & bag∣gage into the Leager: besides, they came betimes in the morning with 2 shallops from Vlymen, to the three Sisters and Hollands Wall, to sound the depth of the water; whereupon the whole Leager came in battell aray. Some that were run away from the Enemies, declared, that in the Spanish Army, a pound of Cheese was worth 12 Stiuers, and a Kan of Beere 6 Stiuers, and all other things accordingly. The 2 of Iuly, Monsieur Fama was hurt with a shot thorow the body, and dyed immediately. The 4 at night, the Spanish came againe vpon the Leaguer, a∣mongst which we played very fiercely with our Ord∣nance from the outermost Batteries: wherupon they were forced to retire, leauing behind them some dead
men and hurt. At that same time they thought also to breake thorow along the Wall of the Dommell, but were also hindred of it. Those that wee tooke priso∣ners, complained of great hunger, misery, and bad payment. This was the tenth time that they tryed their fortune against the Leager, which made vs to stand euery night in Battell-ray. This night those within the Towne did make againe three seuerall fires vpon the steeple. Also wee tooke prisoners some of the Boores which did measure the depth of the water, and thought to bring them through it, of which two were hanged in the Quarter of his Excellencie: The one was a Borrow-master of Beckhonen, and the other a Boore of Vucht: they confessed to haue receiued each 20 Gilders, and that they should haue had with them 600 men, which should haue brought into the towne each of them 10 pounds of Gunpowder. The 6 the English and French haue brought ouer their Galleries before both the Sconces. Betweene the 7 and eighth those of the Great Sconce made a salley, but were bea∣ten backe againe, leauing behind them about 40 men aswell dead as hurt. The Spanish marched from Cran∣voort, and the places there-about, towards Boxell. The 9 the French haue taken the Hornenworke of the great Sconce: there was begun an inner Trench from the Quarter of Pinsen to the Three Sisters: like∣wise from the Quarter of His Excellencie to the Sconce of Brederode: and from thence neere the Cloi∣ster at Eyken-donck vnto the Quarter of his Highnesse Count Ernst, and are well prouided with Redouts a∣gainst those within. The 12 the Coronelship of Mons. Fama late, is giuen vnto Count Maurits of Nassawe. The 14 the 2 water-mils neere the Diese, together with 21 other water-mils to bee vsed with Horses, were to be mended, therewith to make dry the low∣land. The 16 Count Henry vanden bergh marched vp
with his whole Army from Boxtel, making a Bridge neere Moock ouer the Maes, hee himselfe remaining neere Moocke. The 17 there was a Boore taken priso∣ner, who thought to bring a Letter into the towne, by which Count Henry van den bergh commended vnto the Gouernour Grobbendoncke to keepe good Watch, saying that hee would take no aduantage vpon the Leager for to relieue the towne. Of this tenor: MY Lord Seeing that it is impossible to beate away the Enemies out of their Workes, with the Men which I haue ready, because he lyeth very fast, more then ordinary fortified: I finde it good to breake vp my Leager, and to transport my selfe by the Jmperialists, who are al∣ready in Armes, and a great many of them are departed for Wesell, aswell of Horse as Foot, hoping to doe such a notable deede, that the Enemies shall bee forced to fight with vs; and that in that cause God will make vs to haue the Victory, and that thereby the Towne shall bee relieued, if you can keepe the same yet for a time: which I would hereby make knowne vnto you. I pray you, when you haue receiued this, that you then in the night make a great fire vpon the steeple of S. Iohns Church, mouing the same ma∣ny times: and to make the next day a great smoke on the said steeple, by which J shall know that this Letter is de∣liuered vnto you: and when this Messenger shall depart againe with answer, you shall then the night following doe the same token with fire, and then the day following againe with smoke along time. Meane while J rest, My Lord, Your louing & faithfull friend, Henry van den Bergh. In the Leager at Box∣tell, Iuly 16. 1629. The Superscription is, To my Lord, My Lord the Baron of Grobbendoncke,
Knight of the Order of St Iacob Collonell of a Regi∣ment of Wallons, Gouernour of Shertogenbosh. But this Letter being come into the hands of His Excellency, he did send it vnto the Lords the States of the vnited Prouinces, with his aduice what order and what meanes there should be imployed to hinder the designe of the Enemies, and he himselfe gaue or∣der to follow the Enemy with as many men as hee could spare out of his Leager, to continue and aduance this Siege. The 18 the Lord Dieden, Gouernour of Emmericke, hath taken in the morning at three of the clocke, the great Sconce, finding in the same 10 Hogsheads of Wine, 24 Tunnes of Beere, and some bread and Porke. The next following, the Colonell Harwits got also the little Sconce, finding in the same much Ar∣mour and Houshold-stuffe. The 24 the Prince heard that Count Henry van den bergh was fallen into the Ʋelewe, whereupon there were sent thither some of the chiefe men of War, with a great number of Souldiers of Foot and Horse, for to secure the Betuwe and other places from his Designe. the 25 and 28 those within haue with two shallops brought into the Towne some prisoners. The 28 ar∣riued in the Leager the yong Prince of Denmarke, who will stay there a while. The 3 of August the Rush bridge was brought o∣uer. The 4 we tooke in the Tanaille before the Vuch∣ter gate, notwithstanding those within did beate vs out againe. The 7 at night the said Tanaille was taken, and presently there was made a Battery of the same. The 10 at night there came two Boores out of the towne, each with a couple of Pigeons, and 3 Letters, which Letters were brought to the Prince: the tenor of them was, that they were to be relieued within 3. weekes: the 13, 14, & 15 was on both sides very
fiercely plaid with Ordnance, and some Granads were throwne into the Towne, which caused great outcries in the same. Those within came out vpon the Trench northward of Brederodens Quarter, neere the water∣milles, thinking to cut thorow the same, which being almost done, they were beaten backe againe Between the 17 and 18, those which came out with some shal∣lops, vpon the Battery betweene Pinsens Quarter and the great Sconce, spoiled the victualers; but found no Ordnance, because it is euery night brought vnder the great Sconce, and so returned backe into the Towne. The 19 there was a Mine sprung in the Hornenworke neere the Hintemer end, which killed many men; notwithstanding those within defended themselues three seuerall times, and kept the Victo∣rie. After that his Highnesse Count Ernst had well beset the Betuwe, and other places neere the Issel streame, for to hinder the comming of the Enemies, (which were already falne in the Ʋelewe) with braue and chiefe men, well considering of all things: thereupon the Prince also did send thither men of Horse and foot as many as his Excellency could well spare, shewing himselfe day and night (fearing not any danger) euery where in the vttermost of the Workes and batteries; then there came on the 20 this joyfull Letter, from the Worthy, Worshipfull man of Warre, Otto van Gent and Oyen, Lord of Dieden, &c. vnto the Illustri∣ous Prince of Orenge. MY Lord, The bearer hereof, my Cousin Mederode, commeth to bring your Excellency report of the good successe of the taking of the Towne of Wesell. The Ene∣my did leaue at that same time 2 Forts or Sconces, with∣out staying that wee should shoot vpon them. They haue bored to the ground their ships of Warre: and hauing some
Bridges vpon the Rhyne, I haue burnt part of them, which were not fit. Here is a great number of Ordnance, and 13 or 14 Boats set vpon Waggons. I haue, for the better assurance of the Towne sent vnto the Gouernors of Rhees and Emericke, that they would send me some Companies of Foot. And if your Excellence thinketh fit. I wish to haue a great many more men, wherewith, &c. In Wesell, in haste, August 19. 2629. My Lord, Your Excellencies humble and obedient, Otto van Gent and Oyen. Whereupon there was a generall Thankesgiuing through all the Leager for this Victory; and we haue made Bonfires after the Leager manner, as follow∣eth, His Excellency commanded that none should begin before the Signall of the Jacht before Creueceur was done. The Princesse was her selfe vpon the Walles of Creueceur, and the Yacht play'd his Canon; then those of the Fort Creueceur did play with 18 Peeces, and played those of the Redouts along the Bosh-sloot, then the Lord Pinsen, then the great and little Sconces, and then the Ordnance about the Quarter of the Prince of Orenge; then after those the Quarter of Bre∣derode from his Fort against the Pettler, then his high∣nesse Count Ernst with his whole and halfe Curtows, as also at Orten. When the Ordnance had thus played at all places, then beganne likewise all the Muskettiers of the whole Leaguer. Those of the Quarter of his Prince∣ly Excellency beganne first, and then they followed Eastward the one after the other, round about the Leager, as a running Fire. The Pike-men, and ser∣uants of the Horsemen did carry burthens of Straw
vpon their Pikes and staues going so through all parts of the Leager, that it made a great light. When the second charge of the Canon began, was cast into the Towne a Morter: the ships (lying by hundreds toge∣ther along the Diese) did make Bonefires with pitch-Barrels and did hang out Lanthorns vpon their Masts. In summe, it was like as if the whole Leager had bin on fire. The 26 at night went forth 2 companies of Horsemen, and 200 Fire. lockes, which met by the way a Conuoy that went for Breda, of which ours killed some and brought prisoners with them 40 men and about 80 Horses well furnished: Also a Ritmaster and a Lieutenant, with a Cornet: for the Waggons was giuen security. The 30 a Boere or a carrier of let∣ters was hanged here in the Leager, after he had beene imprisoned about 10 weekes. Betweene the 30 and 31, the Gallery on the West side of the Ʋuchter-gate was brought ouer; and the ninth binte of the other Gallery on the South side of the said Bulwarke (which the 4 was appointed to be made) was brought ouer. The first of September, ours that were in the Bul∣warke, began to breake from the said Bulwarke in the Walles of the Town, which was about 12 foot thicke, and there to make a Mine. On this day Monsieur Sta∣kenbroeck and the Duke of Bouillon, with ten Cornets of Horse, three Peeces of Ordnance, and some hundred Fire-lockes, are marched toward the little towne cal∣led Endhouen, and got the same, with the Castle, which lyes there, on the second of the same moneth, with agreement, or composition. About 200 men, which did withdrawe themselues from thence in a Moore neere that place, part of them were defeated by the Duke de Bouillon, and about 160 were brought prisoners into the Leager. Betweene the 9 and 10 in the morning, the Illustrious Prince did ride towards the Mine which he did cause to spring, and it did work
well, springing to the Vuchter-gaete. The English had the Watch there, who fell vpon the Enemy with a great courage, and did so beate them out of the same, that thee were forced to retire and leaue the Halfe-Moone; they defended themselues at the first well, but ours fell on with a false Alarme, likewise fell the Enemies with all their forces vpon vs, ours did retire somewhat backe, so that the Enemies were deceiued, thinking that they had the Victory; whereupon our second Mine sprung, so that armes and leggs flew in the Ayre, whereupon ours fell on againe, and did beat them by force out of the halfe-moone, (as aforesaid) so that we tooke in all their workes on the Ʋuchter-gate: in which halfemoone we began to worke at 3 of the Clocke, because those of the Towne should not shoot in it, we beganne also presently to mine in the stone Bulwarke, where on the 11 our Mine sprung, wherevpon, by the command of his Excellency, some of ours did fall, onely to see what countenance the Enemies held, which came presently backe againe, and our Souldiers presently lodged in the breach of the Mine. Thereupon came a Drummer from the E∣nemies, hee pretended to aske leaue to dig out two Captaines, which they said were on led in our Mine: the Prince (who was present in the Workes) com∣manded to be looked for them, which was also per∣formed: vnto those that looked for them, was giuen a Couinex-daller by the Spanish; but it was not there∣fore that they did it, because the Drummer came pre∣sently againe, requiring to speake with some of our Officers, to report vnto the Prince to treat of a Com∣position; whereupon there came presently 4 persons of quality out of the Town, to the Illustrious Prince, (who sate in the Gallery vpon a little bench, being ac∣companied with some chiefe men, though few in number) speaking there with the said prince, requiring
foure dayes, meane while they would send vnto the Infanta, and in case of default of releeuing in that time, would treat of the rendition of the town which was denyed vnto them; notwithstanding, they fell to a treaty of a parly, and they haue on both sides sent Hostages: meane time many Burgers and Ecclesiasti∣call persons shewed themselues vpon the Walles. On the 13 of the same moneth, those of the Bosh did dine with the Illustrious Prince, and after dinner did returne with the Princes Coaches backe againe in∣to the Towne, and ours came againe out of the same towne; those of the Towne did leaue their Commis∣sion with vs, the which, together with the resolution of the Prince, the high and mighty Lords the States did carry with them into the Towne. On Friday the 14, after dinner, about 4 of the clocke, the Composition of the rendition of the migh∣ty and renowned Towne of S'hertogenbosh, is absolute∣ly concluded in the Leager, in the House where the Illustrious Prince was lodged, and was by both par∣ties subscribed, to the great ioy of ours, aswell among the chiefe, as common Inhabitants. The Committies are ioyfully departed one from another; and those of the Towne (after they had subscribed the Compositi∣on) departed with the Princes Coach to the Towne; which were these, to wit, Fr. Michael Episcopus Bus∣cobus: Fr. Johannes Moores, Abbas Bernensus: Johan∣nes Hermans, Deccanus Buscobus: R. van Voorn: T. vanden Velde: R. van Ireneuen: B. Loef vanden Sloot: Henrick Somerts: Peter Huberts, Hercalt Heuel. Meane while there came in the Leager many thou∣sand of Burgers from seuerall Townes and places, to see the braue Siege, the Illustrious and Couragious Prince of Orenge, and the departure of the Enemies out of S'hertogenbosh; of which many were forced to lye all night in the Field.
The 17 the Prince caused the men of Warre to bee armed, and there were made 2 Tents neere the towne, wherein were the Illustrious Prince of Orenge, being accompanied with his Princesse, his Maiesty of Bohe∣mia, and his Queene, the Prince of Denmarke, besides 40, aswell Dukes, Counts, as Barons, where those of the Towne did march by them: First there came a Company of Horse of ours, where those of the towne did passe neere: then followed the Waggons and Carres, with sicke persons, baggage, Iesuites, Nunnes, and Friers of all sorts: betwixt these was Grobben∣doncks wife in a Coach (who was but three weeks out of Childbed) with whom the Prince had a long Dis∣course. At last at night followed the Gouernour sit∣ting vpon a Horse, betweene 2 Coronels of ths States: the Footmen were 22 Companies, being about 2000 men strong, together with the sicke and hurt persons, whereof there were not aboue 1200 in health: there followed also three Companies of Horse, braue and well armed. Of our side marched againe into the Towne the Guard of the Illustrious Prince, the Company of my Lord Beuerweert, and also the Company of my Lord Wits, besides some other Companies. Also in the Pet∣ler Sonce many Souldiers. On the 18 there was put an Orenge Ancient on the steeple of S. Iohns Church: there came many thousand Burgers from without in∣to the Towne: the Burgers within were reasonably well contented, saying that they had not had want of victuals during this Siege, but onely of Butter and Cheese, which was very deare. On the same day came his Princely Excellencie himselfe into the Towne, but returned presently againe to the Leager: Many of the high and mighty Lords the States generall, and Deputies of the same, are come into the Towne with Coaches,
and were welcommed of the Magistrates, and are lodged at the signe of the Sunne. On Wednesday the 19 of this moneth, the Gospell of God was preached in 3 Churches, and his Princely Excellency, his Maiesty of Bohemia, together with the Prince of Denmarke being present in Saint Iohns Church, where were baptized three children, to which the said Potentates were Godfathers: namely his Maiestie of Bohemia of the first child, called A∣melia; his Princely Excellency of the second child, na∣med Iohannes; and the Prince of Denmark of the third child called Mauritius. The Lord God saue and blesse from henceforth his Princely Excellency, who hath carried himselfe in this siege as a valiant and braue Souldier, fearing no dan∣ger, but presenting himselfe alwaies personally, to the encouragement of his Souldiers, and terrour of his E∣nemies. There was neuer seene in any siege in this Countrey, so many Dukes, Barons, Gentiles, and Vo∣luntiers, which did come out of seuerall Kingdomes and places, but onely before this Towne of which no body can speake enough, being all done in a short time. And that the Enemies must giue him the honour, that when he came there with his great and strong Armie, he could attempt nothing vpon him, but sent a Let∣ter into the Towne, and so went away. For this great Victorie, which the Lord God hath (this yeere) giuen vnto these Lands, there is by the high and mighty Lords the States generall ordained and commanded to keepe a Fast, and day of Prayer, whereupon they gaue out this Letter. Welbeloued, &c. WHereas it hath pleased the Almighty Lord God to shew vs his exceeding great mercy and compas∣sion ouer these Lands, that he not only hath stayed the great
forces of the Enemies, the which according to all appea∣rance, were like to breake thorow in the midst of the heart of our Land, with destruction of goods and liues of the In∣habitants, together with the reformed Religion, as also of the liberties, lawes and priuiledges; but that he aboue all this hath greatly blessed these Lands, with the taking of the Towns of Wesell and S'hertogenbosh, to the increase of his holy Word, and comfort of many, which haue beene many yeeres vnder the tyranny of the Spaniards, There∣fore the high and mighty Lords the States, haue found very necessary to bid and command a generall fasting day, in all the vnited Prouinces, Countries, Shires, and their associate Townes and places, to be on Wednesday next with∣in 14 daies, which shall be the 10 of October, stilo nouo, for to giue hearty thankes, praise and glory vnto the Lord for all these vndeserued blessings, and vncessantly to pray, that he will giue vnto the Inhabitants of S'hertogenbosh the true knowledge of his holy Gospell, and to send to that and true and faithfull Teachers. Also that the Almigh∣ty God will be with the Army of this State, as a Lord of all things, for to beate away the Enemies out of our Domi∣nions, and to continue his blessings ouer vs: Also that hee will defend from all euill and dangers his Excellency the Prince of Orenge, and to multiply his daies wtih wisdome blessings and felicity, and to conserue his person, and all his Army in health, to the glory of his holy Name, and in∣crease of his holy Word. Therefore we require, &c. In the Hage, Septemb. 24. 1629. In the Towne are chosen new Magistrates, and the old are released from their Oathes done to the King of Spaine. And Sir Philips de Thienen, Coronell ouer the Regiment of his Highnesse van Brederode, is put as Commander ouer the Garrison. The Burgers are also releafed from their Oath vnto the King of Spaint, and tooke their Oathes vnto these Lands.
A Iournall or Day-register of that which is happened within the Towne of S'hertogen∣bosh during the last siege. Written by one of the Spanish side. ON the last of Aprill, 1629, the Enemies came vnto the Sconce Creueceur, 150 ships strong. The first of May they came to Orten, and did presently intrench themselues from Orten to Hintem, from Hintem to Dungen, and to Gastell, from Ʋucht to Vlymen, vnto the Bosh-sloot, where they brought about 50 ships with Bauens, and further at Engelen, where they laboured very earnestly. The 5 there came from Breda, along Flymen, into the Towne, betweene 8 and 9 hundred men, which went vp to the middle in water. The 6 we shot with a peece of Ordnance from the great Sconce amongst 15 Horsemen, of which some were flaine. The 10 the Captaine Dirck Busschieter with 12 men, did pierce thorow the Coe-wall, which the Ene∣mies (being strong 59 men) thought to hinder our comming thither, but were forced to retire with the losse of two men. In 14 dayes there is from without happened but very little: for they did nothing else but intrench themselues. At this time the Butter began already to be worth 10 or 12 Stiuers, and yet hardly could any be gotten. Whereupon the Gouernour and Magi∣strates did command, that all Honey-sellers, & spice-bread-makers should no more vse or boile any Honey,
vpon penalty of 100 Dollers to be paid by them that shall bee sound in fault, because they would eate the Honey vpon their bread. The Souldiers could hardly get any victuals, for that they were so deare, where∣fore it was commanded that the Porke should be sold for 6 stiuers a pound, a pound of Butter for 6 stiuers, and a pound of Cheese for 4 stiuers. Vntill the 20 the Prince Fredericke Henricke, had not shot with Ordnance vpon the towne, but because many houses were to be broken downe, & many trees for to be vsed for his fortification. The 22 the Prince caused to shoot vpon the Orten-gate nine shots of Canon. We saw also a battery made by the Enemies at Hintem. Tho same day there went out two Messengers of ours, which returned for Brussels, but could not get through, for that the towne was already beset. The same day all the houses were visited, and all the Corne that was in the towne was set downe toge∣ther, with the number of all the dwellers. The 23 in the morning we saw in the ayre ouer the Towne about Orten, two Raine-bowes, with the backe one against the other, with two Sunnes be∣tween the said Raine-bowes, the one aboue the other, what the interpretation is, God knowes. The 24 our Souldiers brought in 14 Horses of the Enemies, which altogether were sold for 28 Gilders, yet more 3 horses of the Enemies for 4 stiuers and 8 pence, yet another for 3 stiuers: a little Carre of Hay did cost 60 Gilders. The Enemies did shoot againe vpon the Towne: and two messengers arriued heere thorow the Leager; their report was kept secret from the Burgers: we bought a horse for a stiuer; and Mr. Pauwels gaue a stiuer for the 4 shooes. There was a Horse sold for a pipe of Tobacco, for which they could haue had 12 pound Flemmish two moneths before.
The 26 a Herring cost halfe a stiuer, an Egge one sti∣uer, a pound of Beefe 5 stiuers, Mutton 8 stiuers. The 27 was published, that no body should cut downe any wood which was in their Gardens, vpon penalty of 100 Ducats, because the same must be vsed on the Workes in the Walkes. The same day the Ene∣mies did shoot thorow the holy-Crosse-gate, into the house of Mary Grietmakers. The 28 we fell vpon the enemies Quarters at Vucht and 5 men were slaine. The 29 we fell out by the Vuchtergate, on the Ha∣mer, and at night at 11 of the clocke wee tooke from the enemies a Corps de Guarde, wherein they kept watch. The same day wee skirmished a long time with the Enemies. The 30 we made an vndermine through the walls of the Towne, safely to march towards the Hintemer gate vpon the Watch; This day the Enemies shot very much; and a shot came thorow the steeple of S. Iohns Church, and also through the steeple neere the Boome. The 31 the Enemies did shoot aboue 110 shot with halfe Curtowes, by which some of the Burgers hou∣ses, and the Bishops house was damnified, though in this moneth there were none slaine by the shooting of Cannons, but onely Captaine Ratelo, and a Gunner was hurt. The Mils haue also till now ground. The 1 of June, the Captaine Dommell bergen gathe∣red his Companie for the first time. This day & night the Enemies did shoot very fiercely vpon the batte∣ries, and were approached to the Hintemer gate more then halfe a Musket shot, where there were many Souldiers on both sides hurt and slaine. The second on Whitson Eue, wee shot very fiercely vpon the Enemies, specially from the Hintemer-gate, and the out-works, so that euery Muskettier did shoot
30, 40, or 50 shots, whose brests were so blew that they could not continue any longer. The Enemies did shoot downe with their Ordnance many rare out∣workes of S. Iohns Church. Here arriued a messenger from Brussels, whereupon there was at night a fire made upon the steeple of the said Church, for a token that the said Messenger was safely arriued. The 3. vpon Whitsonday, we bought Beefe yet for 7 and 8 stiuers a pound, Murton for 8, 9, & 10 stiuers. The 4 we fell out of the Towne vpon the Enemies Trenches towards Vucht, and defeated many of them. And on the Hintemer gate, an ancient Souldier had his head shot off. The 5, on both sides, aswell out as vpon the great Sconce was very fiercely shot, wherein the Dutch which were come out of Breda, did defend them∣selues very manfully: wherefore they did mock those of the Bosh, saying, that they were fit to fetch Mar∣chants and Boores, where they doe not feare to bee beaten. The same day Peter Cabusins, Constable, broght from the little Sconce into the Towne 2 halfe Cur∣towes. Before the Vuchter-gate a man had his legges shot off: and a Boy, which came from the Sconce to the Towne, to fetch there a bottle of Wine, was slaine in the Vuchter gate. At the same day, the siluer S. John on the Ʋuchter gate his backe was shot in pieces. The 6, a woman dwelling at the figne of the Hand∣bow, being in her chamber, both her legs were shot off. The 7 the Enemies came so neere vnder the little Sconce, that they in the Workes did drinke one to another with a Kanne of Beere, and Tobacco, which they did giue one to another with their pikes, and fell prefently to shoot againe. The Beggins that were in the Cloisters, did make Cushions for the Souldiers; and the priests made hearts to hang about their necks. The 8 and 9 they shot very fiercely one against the
other. On the 10 the Enemies shot thorow S. Johns Church, and did hurt a man which was confessing his sinnes: the same day a mans head was shot off, and al∣so a Souldiers eare; there were shot to this day 1000 shot. The 11 the Enemies came neere vnto the Sconce before the Vuchter-gate, and tooke in the Hornen∣worke, with maine force. The 12 was shot on both sides very fiercely on the Hintemer gate. The 13 and 14 we did still continue our shooting, and tooke in some Workes from the Enemies, and brought into the Towne 2 Rondasses. At night the Enemies did set the Captaines house on fire with their Granads, in the little Sconce, where also flew vp 4 Barrels of Gunpowder, and 100 Granads. The 15 the Enemies thought to fill the ditch of the little Sconce, but were hindred of it by ours, where there were slaine that night aboue 30 of the Enemies, and of ours were but 2 hurt. On the same day it was published at all corners of the streets, that euery one should break off the Lead which was about their hou∣ses, and to bring it into the Towne-house, as also from the water and pissing-places, which the Magistrates would begin first, and they that did not performe it should forfeit both life and goods. The 16 at night ours made a salley out with shal∣lops vpon the Enemies Trenches; where they defea∣ted 2 Sentinels, with some Souldiers, one that stood a fishing had both his leggs shot off. The 17 we fell out on the Hintemer gate, vpon the stone Bridge, and defeated many of the enemies, we brought also in the Towne many armours, and a Ser∣jeant of theirs. The 18 we tooke on the place called Muntell, an Enginier, which was about his Workes, and we did cut off both his eares.
The 19 wee skirmished fiercely one against another. The 20 the Enemies thought to lay a bridge between both the Sconces, with Bauins and Deale boards, which we did set on fire with pitch hoopes, and caused the Enemies to retire. The 21 the Enemies did fall very fiercely vpon the workes of the little Sconce. The 22 the Enemies did all their endeuours to get in our Horne-worke, but were forced to retire. And the Ancient Cornelis Berberts was killed with a shot, which came from the Enemies. The 23 early in the morning, the Enemies came twcie vpon our Workes of the Sconce, but were for∣ced to retyre; they caused a Mine to spring, but did no hurt, we did kill many with Flayles wherewith the Corne was beaten, we got two that were hurt from the Enemies, which we brought in the Hospitall to be cu∣red. The same day after dinner, the Enemies came a∣gaine vpon our Workes, causing a Mine to spring, toge∣ther with one of ours, they played thereupon with halfe Courtowes, shooting fifteene shot vpon ours of the Sconce, there we very fiercely skirmished, and the Captaine Endenhouldts went first on with his souldi∣ers, giuing them good courage, whereby he had got great honour, and defeated many men. The 24 there was very fiercely shot on both sides, and were throwne in the great Sconce eleuen Granads, which Sconce was very much battered, so that the wals were almost filled with bullets. The 25 Colonell Bastocke was kild vpon the out∣workes of the Sconce, who hath at all times carried himselfe very valiant. On the same day, and on the 26, the Enemies did no∣thing else but fill the ditches with wet Bauins of trees, part of which ours fetcht out againe. About this time our horsemen did fetch grasse from
the Doncke, which ours did dry, and made hey of it in the towne, some Burgers hauing the watch on the Or∣ten-gate, of which some were a drinking in the house of Hanshen Vangenuchten, where there came a Bullet of an halfe Courtowe through the top, which made a breach that a horse could haue gone through it, but there was no body hurt. The 27 we did nothing else but fiercely shoot and fight. The 28 we did fall out vpon the Enemies Trenches, and vpon their battery, but we found there no Ordi∣nance, for that they euery night tooke away the same. And ours fetcht out of the ditches aboue 300 Bauins. The same day we played with our Canon vpon the E∣nemies Workes, and we heard and saw (as the speech went) the souldiers of Count Henry vandenbergh, vpon the Broome field. The 29 ours did shoot very fiercely out of the town, and fetcht againe at night about 300 Bauins out of the Ditches of the little Sconce, where were slaine two of our Souldiers. The same day a womans two legges were shot off, and a boyes thumbe. The 30 we heard much shooting about Dungen, by which we vnderstood that the Kings and Imperiall troopes were neare▪ whereupon we shot very fierely from the towne. At the same time there came ouer fiue Dutch souldiers complaining that in three dayes they had not eaten any bread, and would serue the Em∣perour. Betwixt the 30 and 31, the Enemies fell fiercely vpon the Horne-worke of our Sconce, and played very fast vpon them, but ours caused them to retire, in which were slaine a Captaine and a Sergeant of ours. The first of July we got tidings, that the Spanish vpon the Dungen▪ had gotten many prisoners of the Enemies which was esteemed to be aboue 200 souldiers, and 50 Wagons, besides some horsemen.
The same day the Enemies did shoot through the Priests Church in the Quire, and also in Saint Iohns Church in the Organs, but did small hurt. The 2 a woman, which was a drawing a Kanne of Beere, was shot with a Bullet of a Canon, which tooke away her apron from about her belly, and brake the Kan in pieces, without any more hurt. The 3, the Enemies shot ouer the Market place, that the Bullet came in a Chamber of the house, at the signe of the world. Also twice through a Mill. At night in the Enemies Leaguer, was an alarme with Drumme beating and sound of Trumpets, because Count Henry vanden bergh prayed very fiercely with Ordnance and Muskets vpon them. The 4. there was slain a Burger, named John Hendrixson as he was a measuring the Priests Corne in the Laught, which was the first Burger that was killed, the second Burger was called Yougen Coert, which the same day be∣ing at the Orten-gate, was shot in the head. The 5 the Enemies threw Granads into the little Sconce, so that the Church, being a little Chappell, fell downe. The Enemies were also very forward with the filling of the Ditch of the great Sconce. The 6 at night 4 of our Land-souldiers went out in the enemies Workes, and did set on fire some Sconce-kornes, because they kept no good Watch. If we had bin strong we had done a notable exploit. The 7 (being the Bosh Faire) at night we fell out of the towne in the enemies trenches (when they did fill the ditches) some of ours were slaine, and some hurt on both sides. The 8 ours fell on the Enemies workes on the Hinte∣mer gate, where was kild a Captaine, also many of the Enemies: from the 8 till the 14 the enemies attempted nothing vpon the Sconces and Towne, but shooting and working, those of the Sconce did also work against
them, and separated the Sconce. About this time two messengers went out, to wit, Iohn Pleyte and Awy Awy, for to try if they could go thorow the Leager; but saw no meanes to doe it; so they came backe againe. The same day one of our Ancients (which in a salley was taken prisoner) came out of the Leager home a∣gaine, with a faire Hat and feather, and a siluer Sword: he said that it was giuen him by the Prince, who had also made him good cheere. Also ours brought in some prisoners, being in poore clothes, they were English and Scotchmen. The 14 the Kings Corne was sold to e∣uery one that would haue it for 18 Gilders the Mett; the Souldiers got Bread, Cheese, Beere at the Kings al∣lowance. The 15 a pound of Mutton was sold for 18 stiuers. The 16 and 17 the enemies shot very fiercely vpon the great Sconce, making tryall to take the same, but were manfully resisted. The 18 in the morning at 5 of the Clocke, ours cau∣sed a Mine to spring, & retired then toward the towne; whereupon the Enemies tooke in the said Sconce. One of Captaine Dirck's souldiers being before the Holy Ghost, vpon the wall, was shot with a Canon in 4 or 5 pieces. The same day a soldier being on the Sconce, was shot in the head, that his braines flew out, so that he knew not himselfe, and we could see nothing but that he was dead; whereupon his Compagnons that were with him, carried him into the Church-yard, laying him in a Chest to bury him; comming there, hee lifted vp his armes and legges, and rose vp out of the Chest, to the great wonder of those that were with him, who carri∣ed him into the Hospitall, there to be cured. The same day, in the Shilders street, a womans head was shot off, and a Boy through the body as he sate a weaning. The same euening ours did retire out of the little Sconce to
to the towne, fearing the enemies would fall vpon them, and for that they were needfull in the towne. At night we fell out vpon the Leager of the enemies and defeated 4 Sentinels: and we brought through the Leager two messengers, hauing each some Pigeons with them, for to bring vs tydings: for that we had not had any Messenger in a moneth, because that the e∣nemies Sentinels did stand very close together, and be∣tweene them some water-spaniels, which (during the Warres) neuer was seene the like. The 19 Marcelis Andreesen standing at watch on the Orten-gate, had one of his legs shot off: the same day there came two Drummers, hauing with them some pickled Herrings to distribute amongst their Friends. The 20 the Enemies did shoot very fiercely thorow S. Johns Church, and vpon the rowne. The 21 there came againe into the towne 2 Drum∣mers to release some prisoners, who had againe some pickled Herrings for to giue away: they tooke with them many Horses which wee had taken from them, and were sold amongst the Enemies, because we had no food for them: the same Drummers brought ty∣dings, that in the Leager, some messengers that were sent by Count Henry vanden bergh towards the towne, were to suffer death. The old pickled Herrings were for 4, 5, and 6 stiuers a peece; Beefe for 9 and 10 sti∣uers a pound; a bushell of Turneps (which before the siege was sold for a stiuer) was sold for 5, 6, and 9 sti∣uers. At that same day there came some other Drummers, which also brought some Limons and Herrings to giue away. The 22 the Constable, Hans den ouden Clerk's Head was shot of. On the same night there came a Enginier vpon the Doncke, before S. Johns Gate, for
to measure something, the which our Soldiers got and brought in, and was in great danger to lose his life. At that time the enemies shot fiercely with Ordnance. The 23 the Burgers on the Orten-gate shot fiercely vpon the Enemies. This day the Magistrates denyed (for the first time) Gunpowder amongst the Burgers. And one called Groen, sitting talking before his doore, had one of his legs shot off. The 24, from the Hintemer gate, and Ʋuchter-gate, were shot by ours aboue 300 shot vpon the Enemies. The 25. (on S. Iames day) our Souldiers brought in 7 Boores, and a Boy, which they had fetcht neere vnder the Enemies quarters; if the Boy had not cryed, they would haue gotten a Waggon with women, who were come to see. This night departed many Companies of the Enemies, and ours were in their Cops de guardes, where they found no body. They brought a shallop full of Wheele-barrowes, Shouels, Deales, and Wood. The 26 the Burgers watches were altered out of the Gates, they were now commanded to goe vpon the steeples on the walles of the Towne. The same day the Enemies made a great falley vpon our Halfe-Moone; where there were slaine many of them, and 7 of ours, with 10 hurt: yet we were forced to leaue the fame. The 27 our souldiers fell out, and brought in againe some Wheelbarrowes and other things, with some pri∣soners and Horses: but the Gouernour commanded that wee should bring in no more Horses, because wee had no food for them within the Towne. The 28 a Bakers man comming at night homewards, going to bed, fell from the Chamber, who rose vp, and went againe to the Chamber, and to bed, who in the morning was found dead, and buried the next day: the Clarke hearing the dead sighing, called some men, and there came presently by hundreds together, to open the Graue, to fetch the man out; a Batchelor tooke him by
the hand, and drew him out of the Chest, but hee was dead, and remained dead; his cheekes were very red, and the blood ran out of his mouth, which many hun∣dred men did see; whereupon the whole towne was in alteration. On this day fresh butter was sold one Gil∣der a pound, and salt butter 30 stiuers, a couple of yong Pigeons for 24 stiuers, a Pullet a rixdoller, a pound of Mutton 20 and 24 stiuers, candles 12 stiuers a pound, an Egge two blancks. The 29 and 30 the enemies shot with Arrowes, such as we shoot with Bowes. This day the Sho omakers and Lether-sellors did dry their Hides, because there was no tallow to be gotten: the Tallow of the beasts was sold for 12 stiuers a pound, which we melted to∣gether with oyle of Turneps, to be eaten vpon bread: Also Mustard was mingled with oyle of Turneps, to be eaten with bread: the Horses which were brought in, did eat the leaues of the trees, and the Constables did beat them from the walls into the ditches of the town; those that could not swim ouer, were drowned. The last day of the same moneth the Enemies shot in pieces on of the Mills. The first of August the Enemies shot very fiercely with Cannon and Muskets vpon the Towne; and the Burgers did much wonder that the Souldiers did keep watch in the Fish-market, S. Iohns, and the Orten-gates▪ which were the best Watches The 2 the Enemies did a manfull salley on the Coun∣terscarp before the Vuchter-gate, but were forced to retire, with great losse of theirs, and 4 of our s. The same day a childs head was shot off, and a womans legge. At this time the Ecclesiasticall persons, as Paters of the Ie∣suites priests, Friers S. Iohns Monkes, Baselers, and o∣thers, did all together make vp two Counterscarps or workes, behinde the Sistets of Orten. We got also ty∣dings that the Imperialists were come into the Betuwe,
and that they had taken Reuen, and Wagemingen, but we afterwards vnderstood the contrary. The 4 the enemies shot two shots neere the Pow∣der-steeple, so that a Mill fell downe. The same day the Enemies made a salley vpon the foremost Workes, on the Ʋuchter-gate, with about 500 Frenchmen, a∣mongst which were many Gentiles and Voluntiers: there were slaine many of them, and they were forced to retire. The Enomies shot many Granads vpon the Molen-brugger-wall, so that euery one did retire from thence farther into the Towne. The 5 the Enemies caused a Mine to spring, and they fell in the fore-worke, but were forced with the losse of some Souldiers and Voluntiers, to retire backe a∣gaine. The same day the enemies did send for their slaine & hurt men, among which were many Gentiles. The 6 there was much shooting on both sides, vpon and out of our foreworke. The Enemies killed with a shot from the Donck, 5 men on the Vuchter-gaete, and some lost their armes and legges: there were so many Granads shot into the towne, that the people were for∣ced to retire deeper into the towne, and were much a∣fraid: the Enemies fetcht the earth with whole Bas∣kets from the fore-worke, and besides approached still. The 7 the Captaine Campagne commanded a great many prisoners of the Enemies to goe to the Donck, with the which he ran ouer vnto the Enemies; with this Campagne lodged alwaies the Drummers, and hee knew all that which passed by the Gouernour in the towne, which we doe not doubt, but that he hath ma∣nisested it vnto the Prince: they shot so fiercely with Granads, that we did not respect the shooting of the Ordnance: and there were daily slaine so many men, that I leaue to set downe the number. The 8 the Enemies came into our foreworke, which we left to saue our Souldiers, because there were daily
many killed. The same day the Gouernour and Ma∣gistrates, caused the Burgers to be assembled, propoun∣ding that the Ʋuchteren wall should be entrenched, and the houses puld downe, vnto which the Burgers were vnwilling, saying; if we could not hold the Sconces and out-workes, and if our walles of the towne cannot resist, what shall it be when our houses are broken downe, and we loose our grounds. And they said also, you haue broken downe (without our consent) the Wind-milles, you may also doe this if it doe like you. The 9, there was offered by the Gouernour and Magistrates, that whatsoeuer Burgers or voluntaries would goe with the souldiers in the Trenches, for to re∣sist the Enemies, that they may doe it freely, whereupon some said, if we doe it, it is more then reason that wee should receiue the Kings money and bread. The 10 and 11 the Enemies shot many Granads, which caused great pitifull cryings and dammage. The 11 the Gouernours and the Magistrates caused the Burgers againe to be assembled, propounding that it was certaine that Captaine Compagne had manife∣sted vnto the Enemies the state of the towne, and that there should be chosen Commissioners, some out of the Clergy, some out of the Councell of Warre, the third from among the Burgers, what they would ordaine to make and to breake, that same should be accomplished, vnto which the Burgers would not condiscend; there∣fore the Gouernours and Magistrates required of them, that they would subscribe an Act, that they could not coudescend vnto the cutting off, of the Ʋuchteren wall, nor also would not goe to the Trenches, of which there was nothing done. The Clergie was also assembled for to furnish money for the payment of the souldiers. The 12 the Enemies shot very fircely with Granads, of which one fell in the Crosse-brothers-Church; the which destroyed all the seates, and all the Glasses in the
same Church. A Monke of about 80 yeeres of age, was crushed in pieces, so that there was found nothing but one of his legges, and a piece of his head. This day there went three Messengers out of the towne, from wch the Pigeons did returne. The same day there were buried in the towne two French Counts: the one did serue the King, and the other the States. The 13 there was very fiercely shot, and at night were sent into the towne 11 Granads, which did great hurt to the houses and men, so that euery one was in feare: the same day the Gouernour and President as∣sembled with the Lord Bishop, to what end, is vn∣knowne to the Burgers: whereupon followed, that at night there went out about one thousand men, for to cut through a damme, but could not be brought to the effect. They brought in some prisoners, and killed some; This night the Granads did much hurt to the men and houses. The 14 in the morning the Enemies shot very fierce∣ly into the towne with Grenads, that it was very la∣mentable to see, and rained some houses; of some the heaues and tops were damunified very much. The 15 the Enemies plaid very fiercely with their Canon. The 16 the Enemies shot aboue 300 shot vpon the Vuchter gate and street, and about 25 Granads, so that the people could not goe quietly in the streets; the Crosse-Brothers were faine to retire out of the Cloy∣ster, and went by the Fryers to dwell, and to doe their seruice. We got this day good tidings, whereupon was commanded vnto the watches to let flye all their Ancients as well vpon the gates, as the walles, for a to∣ken that we yet were well minded and couragious. The 17 the Enemies did nothing else but shoot with Ordnance, and threw 20 Granads in the towne. The 18 the Enemies brought many Bauins for to fill
the ditch. They did also a sally vpon our Workes be∣fore the Graefse-gate, which did endure from about 11 of the clock at noone, vntill 6 of the clocke at night, where there were slaine and hurt many on both sides; Also there were some vpon the walles, but were forced to retire. The 19 there were sent 5 Granads vpon the Vuchte∣ren-wall, and then it was very quiet, but were brought neere the towne about 50 Wagons with Bauins, they shot but with three pieces of Ordnance, though at night againe with Granads, so that the dead men which were buried, were digged out of their graues. The 20 the Enemies shot very fiercely vpon the Ʋuchter-gate and the Bulworke, that there fell great breaches out of the said bulworke in the ditches; Also some Sconce-kornes fell downe▪ the same day assem∣bled the Gouernour, President, and the Captaines of the Burgers, with the Lord Bishop, but to what end re∣maineth secret. This day the Enemies did a sally vpon the Works without the Graefse-gate, where they were beaten backe, and many men were slaine and hurt. The 21 the Enemies did againe a sally vpon the said Worke, which ours were forced to leaue. The 22 the souldiers of the Captaine Dirck de leeue, brought in three horses, with a Cornet, which they tooke prisoner (as they say) from Wyckde duersten, by whom we vnderstood that Count Henry vander bergh had taken Amersfort, and three dayes after pillaged it, and left it. Also that the Enemies had taken with an enterprise the towne of Wesell. The 23 the Enemies shot againe very fiercely with Canon, but no more with Granads, whereof wee were glad: the Gouernours and Magistrates did ordaine; that the Burgers in the morning and after dinner, should worke three houres. At night the Enemies did make Bone fires, and ioyfull tokens for the taking of
Wesell, they plaid also with Ordnance and Muskets that neuer was seene the like. The 24 the Enemies did come very neere with their approaches. The 25 the Enemies shot with granads vpon the fish-market, so that euery one did put their houshold-stuffe into the sellors, and themselues went deeper in the towne. The 26 the Enemies did fill a part of the Ditches of the towne, and approached euery day very much, they threw with Granads, by which was set an house on fire, vpon the which they shot very fiercely, by which meanes many Burgers and souldiers were slaine: there came tidings that the Enemies had taken Santvliet, but was not true. The 27 in the morning betimes, two posts were sent to Brussels, which tooke with them pigeons; we had not had in 7 weeks any tydings nor Messengers: this day ours brought in the Drossart of Gorcums-man, with a braue horse, who said that Gount John of Nassaw was with 16000 men about Endhouen, and that it was in∣tended vpon Heusden. This day the Enemies were ve∣ry much busie to fill the ditches, and shot very fiercely vpon Saint Iohns steeple, and with granads in the Hin∣temer street, which caused great hurt on men and houses. The 29 the Enemies began againe to shoot with granads, specially vpon the Priests Cloister, where were some houses altogether destroyed: this day there came a pigean in the towne, which was a token that the said Posts were come through the Leaguer, and out of dan∣ger. The same day the Gouernour and Magistrates did command that the Vuchteren wall should be cut off; and the Magistrates gaue Beere vnto the Pyoners: the Go∣uernours diuided also muition bread amongst the nee∣dy Burgers, if the towne should be releeued, that then
they should pay it againe within halfe a yeere; if not, they should not pay for it. There was also sold Oyle, Stock-fish, Ryse, and other victuals, that were bought for the Garrison, this was done for to get money. The Oyle was sold for 25 stiuers the Kanne, a pound of Ryse 4 stiuers, Stockfish 4 ½ stiuer a pound. The 30 the Enemies were busie to fill vp the ditches with Bauens; of which we set some on fire. The Ene∣mies were so bold, that some looked ouer the Walles, which came not well to passe for them. The 31 we began to lose our courage, some Burgers refused to watch, and others to worke; thereupon the Magistrates cōmanded that the Burgers should watch of two nights one: and vnto those that did worke was giuen Beere, Bread, and Cheese, for that they should be the more willing. The first of September there rose great alteration a∣mongst the Burgers who dwelled vpon the Ʋuchteren wall, because there was giuen order to make a Ditch on the Orchen, and through a Field behinde Iacob Gys∣brechts, in that manner to cut thorow the said Wall; whereupon the Burgers (being 20 or 30 in number) went to the President Henry Fransen van gessell, com∣plaining vnto him of the same, who gaue them for an∣swer, Beate them away if they be there. The 2 the same persons went into the Town-house, where they got no contentment according to their minde, returning homewards, said, There lye our Armes, we will not watch, but keepe our Houses and Vuchteren Wall, which was of more importance then their watching or working. The Enemies shot so fiercely vpon the Coc-wall with Ordnance and Granads, that many houses were throwne downe: there came also a bullet thorow St. Iohns Church, which damnified the whole Organs in our Ladies Quire.
The 4 the Enemies shot so many Granads vpon the Vuchteren wall, that no body could keepe him there for feare of being hurt; the like was euery where in the towne. The Enemies came with their Galleries neere our out-workes, which we haue before the Vuchter-gate, ouer the ditch into our Bulwarkes. The 5, 6, 7, and following dayes, the iealousie of the Burgers did more and more increase against the Gouer∣nour, his brother-in-law, and the President; Many said publikely, We were commanded to prouide our houses vpon great penalties, and now there is no Powder; We haue many yeeres brought vp Fortification mony and Subsidies, for to fortifie the Walls and towne, now we are well serued, we haue a rich Gouernour, a rich President, &c, the which haue cozened vs very much, and such like iniurious words; whereupon followed, that vpon the 9 and 10 the Enemies tooke in the halfe-moone before the Vuchter-gate, and ours were retired into the Towne. The 11 in the morning, there sprung a Mine in the great Bulwarke, which did make such an alteration a∣mongst the Burgers, that each cryed for to parly: wher∣upon some were committed, and a great many of the Burgers ran vpon the Walls, putting off their Hats, and so the composition was agreed vpon, and subscri∣bed on the 14, and the Gouernour, with the Garrison, and many Ecclesiasticall persons, and some Burgers, marched out of the Towne on the 17: whereupon there was in the towne great heauinesse. FINIS.
