19766.3 S106459 99842175 6808
A True Reporte of three straunge and wonderful Accidents, lately hapened at PERNAW, a Cittie in Lifflande. Wherein is conteyned a Prophesie of the greate Dearth & Famine, which (by reason of the warres in those partes) hath there come to passe in the yeare last past, 1602. And also of the great Victorie lately atchiued by the great Sophy, who with the aide & assistance of the King of Per∣sia, ouerthrew the Turkish Emperour with all his forces neere vnto the Riuer Euphrates. Truely translated out of the Dutch printed Coppie, printed at Nimmegen, ❧ At London printed for William Barley. 1603.
man in long robe carrying a hat and scepter
¶ A true Report of three strange accidents which lately happened at Pernaw, a Cittie in Lifflandé &c. WE finde (gentle reader) in an∣cient Histories, and principal∣ly in the workes of that famous and learned writer Flauius Iose∣phus lib. 7. cap. 12. that before the lamentable and woful de∣struction of Hierusalem, there appeared many strange signes both in the aire, and among the people, namely there was séene right aboue the said Cit∣tie a dreadfull Starre, in forme and fashion of a Sword: as also that in the darke night cleare day appeared and was seene in the Temple: that a Cow brought forth a Lambe, and which was most strange, a certaine man went vp and downe among the people, continually for the space of seauen yeares before, not ceasing with wo∣ful cries, to forwarne and admonish the people to forsake their wickednes: fore shewing the destruction of the place. The very like, yea and almost the verie same acci∣dents signes and wonders, haue lately happened within this whilome most pleasante Countrie of Livonia, in
the Cittie of Pernaw: for in the yeare 1599. vppon Saint Lukes day, a certaine Merchant of the said Cittie, ha∣uing (according to the custome of the Countrie) enuited many of his freinds and Neighbours to a feast at his house, among the rest also, enuited thither a certaine old man of the same Cittie whose name was Stile, a man of the age of foure score yeares or thereabout, knowne to all the inhabitants there to be borne deafe and dumbe, and had soe continued all his life tyme to that day. This olde man being placed at the table among the company, and seing the great and horrible abuse of the good guiftes and creatures of God which were there pro∣uided, by those abhominable vices of gluttony and drun∣kennes, and not being able to endure the sight therof, by the iust iudgment of God presently leapt ouer the Table, and with a fierce and sterne countenance, turning his eyes toward the people, and wringing his hands as a signe of the great sorrow which he conceiued at his hart, burst forth in these speaches to the Companie which were present. Alas quoth he (my deare freinds) how can you be thus merrie, when a man seeing this abhominable abuse, to the high displeasure of almightie God, might well loathe to liue any longer in so wicked a time. Therfore (deare brethren and sisters) repent, repent I say, for the pun∣nishment of the Lord God is neare at hand: with greate stormes and ouerflowing waters, wil he destroy the wic∣ked, and nothing but affliction and punnishment shalbe their portion. Such dearth that yeare shalbe that the people shall not finde any foode for nourishment, nor any way to escape by reason of the troublesome warre to come: great plague pestilence and murren shall destroy both younge and old, therfore liue ye as if presently ye should die, for surely it is at hand: great and horrible wonders shall ye heare,
and sée many strange and monstrous Children borne, as a looking-glasse both for rich and poore. The people with great admiration and astonishment came running together to see this miracle which had hap∣penned, and the Company which were enuited being dasht with this suddaine accident, haueing now giuen ouer their pastime and being sore amased were with one accord attentiue to the speaches of the olde man, percei∣uing aswell by his strange gestures as by the suddainnes of his speach that this was Gods onely doings: and being moued with great feare and horror, asked him at what time all those things should happen: wheruppon the said dumbe man thus presentlie replied. Ere the yeare 99 be come and past, the Lord God in his iust anger and wrath will draw his sword, therfore repent you of your sinnes, for the day of iudgment is at hand. These words spoken, the man was againe bereft of his speach, and became dumbe as before, féeling him selfe presently sicke, and the next day after he died: and was honorably buried, being accompanied to ye Church, by an infinite number of the inhabitantes there, whoe greatly lamented for his death. The next day after his buriall, there was a certaine woman brought forth a man childe, with a naturall face before, and behind like the scull of a dead man, his right arme also was like a Sword, and the other like a Rodde: which child liued two dayes and no longer. After this the Lord shewed an other, no lesse fearefull signe of his indignation and wrath, for iust ouer the said Cittie of Pernaw, was perfectly seene in the cleare Fir∣mament or Skie, a Beere and Coffin, couered all with blacke: which sight endured from foure of the clocke in the afternoone, till eleuen in the same Night. Therefore good christians, consider first the suddaine
and fearefull spéech of the Dumbe, secondly, looke vppon the monstrous birth and shape of this Childe, and lastly, meditate vppon the fearfull signe séene in the Ayre, and therevpon with an humble and penitent hart, imagine the Tragicall end of all, pittying the afflicted Countrye and people of Lyffeland, and let their hard fortune be a warning to thee, that thou sinne no more presumptu∣ously. And as ye heathen Poet sayeth. Foelix quē faciunt aliena pericula cautum, that is to saye, happy is he which can beware by other mens perilles: make thy selfe happie with this warning, and doe not with the wicked and stubborne Iewes, contemne and scorne, this gentle ad∣monition, and fore-warning of the Dumbe, least God in his Iustice bring a worse Plague vpon vs, then he did eyther vpon those Iewes or vppon this Countrey of Lyffeland. FINIS.
A True Reporte of the great Victorie lately atchi∣ued by the great SOPHY: who with the aide and assistance of the the king of Persia, ouerthrew the Turkish Emperour with all his forces, neere vnto the riuer Euphrates. Truly translated out of the high Dutch Copie printed at Hamborrow. 1602. ❧ At London printed for William Barley. 1603.
¶ A true Report, of the late victo∣rie atchiued by the great Sophy: together with the king of Persia, vpon the Turkes &c. WHereas the great Turkish Emperour with all his Armie, munition, and pre∣paration, was come to the Ryuer of Eu∣phrates, being strong both of Horse & foot, about three hundred Thousand men, and perceauing that Morath generall of ye Persians, had caused the Bridge to be pulled down there, yt was made ouer the said Riuer, and that he was marched on th'other side, and hard by a mountaine did prepare and strengthen himselfe with ye forces sent vnto him by ye great Sophy, with those hee had before, so that the Persians were stronge about Foure-score and tenne Thousand men, amongst the which were about twenty Thousand, whereof every one of them, had two horses for a man. The Turke could not haue so much inteligence to vnderstand if the Sophy himselfe were personally pre∣sent in the Campe, or no: or if he yet were in Persia for more forces, which he especially did feare. Because therfore he could not passe ouer the Riuer,
he in all hast caused the bridge to be builded againe, and sent ouer the said Riuer two Genneralls called Beller∣byes with their forces, to wit Bellerby of Gretia and Bel∣lerby of Natolia, but he himselfe tarried on this side of the water till the next morning. Now about two houres before day breaking the Gen∣nerall Moreth fell in the Campe of Bellerby of Grecia, who had encamped himselfe somwhat farre off from the Bellerby of Natolia, and most valiently came vppon him with such a force and power, that he vppon a soddaine most spéedily did ouercome all his Ensignes and Tents, and ouerthrew and slew all his Campe. The Soldiers of the Campe of the Bellerby of Natolia héerwithall were put in such a feare, that they ranne in to the Riuer, and passed ouer to the Campe of the great Turke, The Turke séeing this ill successe, presently planted his Ordenaunce in good order one by an other, and pla∣ced the same right against the Enemie which was on the other side of the water: and because they should not sée the Ordinaunce, he commaunded that some Companies should be placed and stand before the said Ordinance, with this token, that when the peices of Ordinance should be all in readines and charged, they should sound Alarme and the said Companies standing before the said Ordinance should part aside, and so to discharge the said peices of Ordinance vppon the Enemie. This determination being agréed vppon, and fire be∣ing put to the aforesaid Ordenance, many of them did burst and fly abroad, and slew and hurt a notable num∣ber of men, yea and many of the Turkish Armie: by the noise, cry, and tumult wherof, many Horses and Mules, with those that were on the backs of them did leape into the Riuer and were drowned,
The Sophians and Persians which had sustained great losse of men by means of the Ordinance, retired on the other side of the Mountaine, and it was supposed that at that time were slaine and shot to death about Twentie thousand Sophians and Persians. They retireing so backwards as is aforesaid, the Turke with all his whole Armie passed ouer the Riuer, and marched towards the Mountaine where the Sophi∣ans were encamped, who had deuided themselues into foure partes or squadrons, kéeping close together: and when they sawe that the Turkes came vppon them, they were glad, and most valiently met and fought with them so that on both sides many men were slaine: but the night ouertooke them, which was to the aduantage of the Sophians for it was not possible that they could resist and withstand longer against the great force and power of the Turkes, therefore by Night they all did flye to the Mountaine, the Turkes for darkenesse could not follow them, as they were minded and would faine haue done and so the Turke tarrying in the fieldes that Night pur∣posed and concluded the next day to leaue all his footemen with the péeces of Ordinance behind him and with horse∣men onely to pursue the Enemies and by these meanes vnawares to surprise and take the Towne of Tauris, be∣fore those of the Towne should heare of the ouerthrowe of the Sophy. But on the other side, the Persians and Sophians, which dilligently did looke to themselues, and had great care to the matter, concluded with themselues, that ten thousand men which were the day before newly ariued, should marche against the Turkes, and when the Turkes should come vppon them, they should flée, as if they were ouercome, and the rest of the Sophians and Persians, which were yet about twentie thousand, should come be∣hinde
the Turks, and compassed them betwéen them both, and without doubte they should spéed well, and ouercome their enemies. The next morning, the Turke séeing that the enimie was yet so neare at hand, he thought they had not bin able to fly any further for darknes, came vpon thē with great force: but they presently according to their agreement did fly, and the Turkes not thinking on this martial pollicie, did pursue them till noone, and being come to a small Riuer, because they were somwhat wea∣rie, and tired, encamped themselues on the said Riuers side and there dined: and after dinner the fresh Turkes leauing the wearied and tyred Companies with all their treasures and spoiles behinde them, thinking the next night vnawares to surprize the Towne of Tauris, did pursue and chase the Persians and Sophians, in their fained flight. But when they came to the Towne, in all hast a post came to the great Turke about two houres in the night, who certified vnto him that the ennimie had ouerthrown and slaine all his footemen which he had left behinde, and that they had gotten the pieces of Ordinance, and still were coming with all their forces behinde him. The Turke hearing suche newes, and thinking on the great treasure that he had left behind him, presently went back againe, and the Persians and Sophians which héertofore did flie, turned also backe againe, and sawe that their forces did follow and pursue the Turks behinde. The Turkes which tarried with the treasure on the said water side, perceiuing their Enemies did breake vp and runne away, the Persians and Sophians being before and behinde the Turkes, came fiercely and valiantly vppon them, and did great hurt amongst them. The great Turke much discontented, séeing that the
Ennemie had so craftilie compassed and brought him in the middle betwéene them, begun a most harde and hote battaile, wherin the Sophians and Persians got the victo∣rie: which when the Turkes saw, they did fly out on the one side, for otherwise it was not possible for them to escape. The Turkish Emperour himselfe, when he sawe that all his forces did fly, and that all his Ensignes were ta∣ken, did likewise fly to saue his life, and came with a most swifte horse to Amasia, and tarried in Natolia till the remnant of his Armie (which was verie little) was gathered together: for the Turkes did nothing but flie all the Night, and al those which were slack in running, were all cut downe: and those that came ouer the Riuer pulled downe the bridge made by them before, to the end the Persians should not pursue them: but the Persians and Sophians being glad of the victorie, as Conquerours of the fielde, went home againe: although they would faine haue prosecuted their victorie, had not the most part of their forces been slaine Performed in Anno Domini. 1602. FINIS.
A True and Lamen∣table Reporte of the miserable & pitifull present state of the Cuntrey of LIVONIA, (commonly called Lyffelande) concerning the great Dearth & Famine now being there, [by reason of the VVarres] in such sorte that one Neighbour and Friende doth kill an other and eate them, the like neuer before, eyther seene or hearde of. Written by credible & great per∣sonages of that Cuntrey, vnto the reue∣rend and learned Conrado Schlusselborrow, Doctor in Diuinitie, and Superintendant in the Citty of Stralsunde in Suetia. Truly translated out of the high Dutch Copie printed at Hamborrow. 1602. At London printed for William Barley. 1603.
¶ A true Relation of the miserable and pitifull state of the Cuntrey of LI∣VONIA, aflicted with great Dearth Famine &c. MOst Reuerend and learned Doctor, occa∣sion seruing at this present time I coulde not omitte to certifie vnto your worship the lamentable and pittifull estate of this sore afflicted country of Lyffland, for sure∣ly the iust wrath of God by reason of our manifold sinnes, is kindled against vs. And first by reason of these warrs, many thousand men were slaine and put to ye sworde on both sides, as wel Ger∣manes, Dutchmen, Swedens, Poloniās: as also other nati∣ons, amongst the which many without any respect of per∣son, sexe or age most cruelly were racked, martyred and burned, yea the fruite in the Mothers Wombe was not spared, the little Infants were taken and held vp by the féete, and without any mercie most barbarously massa∣cred and cut into péeces. Secondly, there was héere such wonderful and strang diseases and sicknesses almost amongst al men, that they did fall down in the stréetes and fieldes, & became madde and sencelesse yea and the most part died thereof.
Thirdly there was neuer such great dearth & famine, especially amongst the poore Husbandmen and Countrie folke, insomuch that Many did eate the dead carions that they found in the fields, as Horses, Cats, Dogges, & also the very shoes of their féete, yea one Christian body hath eaten an other: and especially which is most wonderfull and neuer heard of before. That in the Towne of Salis two Daughters did eate their deseased Father, and also a woman did eate her deseased husbande. And at another place one neighbour sent his child to one of his neighbors to fetch or carry somthing, who tooke the child and cut his throate, and whilest he was taking out the intrailes, the Father of the child [who did maruell of the long tarrying of his Childe came and perceauing that his Childe was slaughtered in manner aforesayd, was in a mighty rage, & fought with his neighbour who likewise killed ye father of ye child, & dressed him for meate & eate him. Such feare∣full and heauy accidentes doe daylye happen with vs in Lyffland. God almighty most graciously deliuer vs and shew his mercy vpon vs. Dated at Pernaw, the fourth of September. Anno 1602.
¶ A true Copie of a Letter written & sent from the Castle of Osel, of the miserable estate at this present time of Lyffland: Written by M. Frauncis Rappen the elder Gentl. vnto the reuerend father M. Peter Dvd∣derstedten, Preacher in ye Cittie of new Pernaw. REuerend and learned father, Friend and Kinsman. I and all my house∣hold with all our harts are very sory and most pittifully grieued to heare the miserable estate, which you by reason of the fearefull raising of warres, haue sustayned, we like∣wise here in these places are troubled and plagued with famine (God Almighty shew his mercy vppon vs, and saue vs and deliuer vs from it) insomuch that if it plea∣sed God we had rather to choose a plague for it. Séeing that not onely the poore people staruing and famishing do fall downe and die in the stréetes and wayes, going one neighbour to an other, and doe still striue and fight for dead cattell which die of the murren, and most greedely doe eate the carsons of the fielde and doe not regard how
vnnaturall it is to deuoure dead swyne, dogges & catte but also one Christian and friend killeth & eateth another, the parents doe dresse for meate their children when they are dead by reason of the great Dearth, for the Enemie hath wasted & spoiled all the Countrie, and robbed euery one of their goods, for which causes you haue béene con∣strained to go wt your wife and familie out of these coun∣tries into Germanie. And although wée would faine giue double money for Corne, wée can here get none séeing all is gone, partly spoiled and wasted vpon the Fieldes, and partly by rea∣son of the cold Summer it could not ripe, insomuch that all my Tennantes cannot furnish nor prouide me of a bushel of corne to releeue my poore familie, who for very hunger do starue and famish which most pittifully doeth greeue my harte. I pray the Lord of Heauen mercifully to looke vppon vs, and deliuer vs from this most lamentable estate. Dated at Osel the 22. of September. 1602. Your worships friend Francis Rappen the elder.
FINIS.
tree
