20095 99854422 19843
A DISPVTATION against the Adoration of the reliques of Saints departed. WHEREIN NINE PALPA∣ble abuses are discouvered, committed by the popish Priests in tbe veneration thereof. Together with, The refutation of a Iesuiticall Epistle, and an Index of the reliques, vvhich euery seuenth yeere, are shovvne at Avvcon in Germanie vn∣to the superstitious people and pilgrimes, com∣piled by the Canons of S. Maries Church An. 1608. By Iohn Polyander Professour of Divinitie in the Vniversitie of Leyden in Holland, & trans∣lated by Henry Hexham, out of French into English. At Dordrecht. Printed by George Walters, Anno. 1611.
TO THE TRVE∣ly religious & honorable Ladie, The Ladie Vere, spouse vnto my honorable Lord, Sir Horace Vere knight, Lord Gouvernour of his Maiesties cautio∣narie towne of Briell, & chiefe Commaun∣der vnder his Excellencie of the English forces in the seruice of the most illustrate Lordes the States of the Vnited Provinces. MAdame: it were in vaine for mee to seeke to embelish your chri∣stian graces by a dead letter: Seeing they are most lively, & giue a farre greater lustre in your selfe, where God hath planted them, then can be expressed by the blunt & vnlearned Pen of a Souldier. But seeing God hath made them so transparent, & hath kindled in you so holy a flame of loue and zeale vnto the true & onely worship of his name:
Me thinkes this plaine translation of mine, not for any worth that is in me, but for the subiects sake, hath found out a fitt Patronesse, whose per∣son & practize affordetth a reall confutation of that superstition which is here vnmasked, And so much the more presuming vpon your Ladiships favour & gentle acceptance: in regard I dedicated this same Authours former refutati∣on vpon the invocation of Saincts, vnto my ho∣norable Lord your husband; so that now, as God hath made you one, I may make you both equally interressed in this one subiect (though diversly handled) striving for that honour, which is due vnto his name. These Popish iuglings cannot bee vnknowne to your Ladiship, seeing the vnholy blood of Hales (which did cleere & thicken as the Pilgrims purse was light or heavie) is of your owne house, & of so fresh remembrance, whereby your honourable Auncestours did learne to detest such divelish cousenage, as the burned bones of your most wor∣thy Granfather did long agoe witnesse, to all the worlde. Moreover, (Madame) there are also some abhomiations in this disputation, which I know made my Authors pen to tremble in copying of them out, and mine to quake in translating them: others againe, which may drawe from your Ladiship a chast smile and a modest blush:
but let the shame light vpon their heads, who are the authors thereof: & the more they blaspheme and dishonour our blessed God & Saviour, the more let vs worship and honour him, and learne as Bees to sucke honey from banefull weedes, or as cunning Physicians to extract Antidotes from poyson, since God turneth the very abhominati∣ons & execrations of the wicked, as exsamples for the good & edification of his children. Here with (Madame) as with the chiefe end of this labour I ende, beseeching God to blesse my honourable Lord and you, with all happi∣nesse and ioy in this world, and euerlasting feli∣city and blisse in the world to come. From our Garnison of Dordrecht this 18. of October. 1611. Your ladiships in all dutifull respect. Henry Hexham.
To the Christian Reader. WOrthie Reader, for varietie sake, to em∣ploy my idle time to some vse, and to offer my mite vnto the Church of God, that the graue and learned men of our nation may see, that the Ministers of other reformed churches, marche pouldron to pouldron with them vnto the Lords combate: I haue vnderta∣ken this translation, free from ostentation: onely my ambition is (in tracing after the stepps of my Authour) to haue one flurt at Antichrist, and one push at the fall of the great whore of Babylon, and so much the rather, because mine eyes haue seene some of her fornicatiōs, which some others haue but heard. But it may seeme strange to some, that a souldier should vndertake such a taske, as
not appertaining to his profession: as that man judges me a souldier, so I entreat him to esteeme me a Christian, and then both hee and I shalbe consonant. Wel then, into whose handes soeuer this poore translation of mine shall come, whō God hath alreadie inlightened, let vs sing an everlasting Halleluiah, & giue praise vnto that great God, which hath translated vs out of the kingdome of darknesse into his merveilous light. And if it fal into the hāds of anie that are infected with this deadly con¦tagion, I entreate them to reade it, not to re∣fute it, for alas they are not able: because it is grounded and bounded vpon & within the sacred word of God, and seconded by the opiniōs of the most holy Fathers. That were as if they should runne in vpon Gods two-edged sword. That were as if a falling and a running ennemy, beaten on all sides should turne backe vpō a stand of charged pikes, which are ready to receiue thē. There¦fore, it were better for them to suffer it to graze vpō their stonie hearts then to resist. And for my part, I will daylie praye vnto the Father of lights, to illuminate and water their soules with the beames and streames of his Sunne of righteousnesse, that as Eagles wee maye soare vp onely vnto him with
the wings of our faith, in whom alone is found the wel-spring of living waters and noewhere else. As concerning the graue & learned Au∣thour of this litle treatise, it were meere pre¦sumptiō in me, to make an attestatiō of his worth, whē the noe lesse wise thē H. Lords of this state, haue abundantly testified the same to all, by resolving on him, as the sit∣test they did know to re-establish the trueth by his publique profession at Leydē. This I will only day, that if a few spare houres cold bring foorth this, we may well expect and promisse our selves noe small fruit of those holy labours, which shall hereafter bee vn∣dertaken. Thus I beseech God to accept of my weake performance, and giue a bles¦sing vnto this and them. Thy loving Countrey-man H. Hexham.
To the most noble and vertuous Lord, MONSIEVR ARNHOVLT DE GROENEVELT, Lord of the Landes and Lordships of Fl∣lignies, Godimont, & Ramegnies in Neuf∣ville lez Sorgnies &c. And ancient Coronell vnto the most illustrate and mightie Lordes, the States of the vnited Provinces. MONSIEVR: IT is more then two yeeres past, since a marchant of this ci¦tie, one of the mem¦bers of our French Church, came to shewe mee in my lodging two cop∣pies of an Epistle, published by the Canons of Awcon in Germanie, touching the ve∣neration due vnto their reliques: which a friend of his, a zealous lover of the trueth
had sent him, with expresse charge to pre∣sent it vnto me in his behalf, & earnestly to request me, to returne some answere vpon it. Wherevnto, considering that I could not so suddenly accomplish his desire, be∣cause of my other employements, hee thought good not to limit mee any pre∣fixed time: but that I should vndertake & finish this worke at my leisure. This is the cause, that I haue made noe great hast in composing this treatise, which I haue distri¦buted into three partes: In the scope there of, I haue followed the order & the exam∣ple of the ancient Prophets and Apostles, as also their true Successours, and Imita∣tours, who haue all maintained with one common accord, that God onely ought to be worshipped by his people, & will not haue this seruice giuen to anie other, by the authentique, and irreprehensible testi∣monies of holy Scripture, the which God hath armed with an inviolable authoritie, to the end, that those which feare him, might make noe scruple to receive it who∣ly, and to giue full beliefe therevnto. True it is, that I haue annexed vnto it some attestations of the ancient Fathers, not to approoue the foolish imagination of the Romanists, but that the holy Scrip∣ture
maye take more force & credit: seeing she hath receiued it alreadie frō God, who is the authour thereof: or that the trueth of it, which is infalliable, should depende vpon the advise and jugement of our ance∣stours & predecessours, which might erre: but rather to shewe the Doctours of the Romane church, who relye more vpon the authority of men, then vpon Gods in the poincts which concerne our controversies, that their condēnation is not onely found in the decrees of divine Law: but also in the recordes of the pastours of the primitiue Church: yea euen in theirs whome they choose for their Iudges and defendaunts. I call the Epistle of these Canons Iesuiti∣call in the beginning of my disputation: because after I had conferred it with Bel∣larmins booke, the first tutour of these Ie∣suites vpon this subject, I finde it is but a patching together of his argumēts, where∣by he sought to prooue the worshipping of the reliques of Saincts. I meant not to vse in the resutation of their Epistle anie elegant speech, or anie cir∣cumlocution and readiousnesse in wordes: because the trueth (without borrowing else where) hath ornaments enough in her self: and when shee is simple, and in her naked
robes, shee taketh the more delight in such as fetts her foorth, & represents her before the view of al men, in roundnesse and sim∣plicitie. Forasmuch then, as wee cannot resist to much, nor too often the heresies which daylie multiplie in this wicked worlde: es∣pecially the foolish superstition of those which would attribute to the reliques of mortall man, the honour belonging vnto the sole maiestie of the immortall God: al¦though that Calvin, Chemnicius and some other excellent Divines, haue taken penn in hand to oppose themselues against the first inventours and advancers of this Idolatrie: yet I haue also thought it my duty, to giue foorth this disputation against the new protecters of this superstition, and in par∣ticular against the Canons of Awcō: because it may be availeable to the Christiā church (as S. Augustine saith) that manie bookes be writtē vpon one subject: prouided that they be made in diversity of stile, but not in diuersity of beliefe, seeing that by this meanes heretickes are the more convicted, and on the otherside, wee open the more passages for the Children of God, to escape from the call, and out of the snares of these fowlers, & offer them sundry sorts of coun¦terpoysons
to preserue their braines from the venoume of their Sophistrie. As for the rest, there are manie conside∣rations, which mooued mee to dedicate this treatise vnto you: For I will not here speake of that holy zeale, which made you expose your person and goods, from your youth, aswel in the defence of our iust cause at S, Amands, and in some other pla∣ces adioyning therevnto, wherein you bore the brunt of the first persecutiō: as for the preseruation of our Churches here in these Vnited Provinces: so long as it pleased the Lord of Hosts to maintain you in the gou∣vernement of the Towne of Sluce, & so long as your age would permit you to continew in that of Nemegen, and to follow his Excel∣lencie with your foote Regiment in manie feiges, assaults, & admirable recouverings of manie Townes and fortes, brought vn∣der the obedience of our Superiours in the face of our enemies. Neither, will I speake of that zeale, and your other virtues which recommendes you among the gentlemen of our Common-weale, and in perticular among vs: for which I must acknowledge my self indebted, to testifie the same pub∣likly in the name of the members of our Church, that for this respect we honor you
and your like, who loues true godlinesse with their hearts, and seeke to worship with vs our onely God and heauenly Father in spirit and trueth. Beside, hauing knowne in sundrie sortes your singular fauour and beneuolence towardes mee and mine, for which I feele my self obliged to present you with this small gift in acknowledgement thereof. Wherevnto also, your comendable reso∣lution hath moued me, in consecrating the rest of your aged daies in the lecture of ec∣clesiasticall bookes, and your capacitie in iudging well of our disputations against the traditions of the papisticall Doctors, and cheifly in this, vpon the reliques of the Saincts departed. For as in the daies of your ignorāce, you haue seen the abuse of this superstition, & quickly after your conversion manifested vnto the worlde, that you had it in abho∣minatiō: so having as it were this smal trea∣tise alreadie printed your heart: I assure my self that yow will approue it, and will finde that whatsoeuer I haue alledged ther¦in, is grounded vpon the experience of trueth, the instruction of the Orthodoxe Fa∣thers, and the authoritie of the holy Scrip∣ture.
In confidence whereof, I offer vnto you this memoriall as a token of the affection I beare to your L. beseeching the Lord, who after the triall of a daūgerous prisō, noe lesse couragious, thē a long resistance against the allarmes & pernicious enterprises of our adversaries, hath at last trāsported you frō your gouvernmēt of the Citie of Nemegē (in which our most illustrate LL. wold wil∣lingly haue held you still) into this Citie of Dordrecht, to liue here among vs, for the more tranquility & ease of your agednesse, overworn & weakened through the travels and wearisomenesse of the warres, It will please him. MONSIEVR, To establish your heart in the assurance of his grace, towards those which reverence him, by the remem∣brance of so manie notable deliverances & victories which he hath giuē in our time to our Churches, & to fortifie you with con∣stancie, to perseuer with vs in the sole invo∣cation of his blessed name, for the repose of your soule, & the advancemēt of his glory. From my studie, this 2. of Septem. 1611. Your most humble servant, and most affectionate brother in Christ our Sou∣veraine Lord. Iohn Polyander.
The Second part of the fifth Psalme, put into French meeter by Cl. M. 6 Ta fureurperd & extermine Finalementious les menteurs, Quant'aux meurtriers & decepteurs, Celui qui terre & Ciel domine Les abomine. 7 Mais moien la grand' bonté mainte, Laquelle m'as fait sauourer, Iraencores t'adoer En ton temple, en ta maison saincte, Dessous ta crainte, 8 Mon Dieu guide moi & connoye Par ta bonté, que ne soys mis Sous la main de mes ennemis, Er dresse deuant moi ta voye, Que ne fouruoye. 9 Leut bouche rien de vrain'ame ne, Leur coeur est, feint faux & couuert, leur gosier vnsepulchre ouuert, De flatterie fausse & vaine leur langue est pleine. 10 O Dieu, monstre leur qu'ils mesprenent, Ce qu'ils pensent faire, desfaits, Chasse les pour leurs grands mesfaits, Carc'est contre toiqu'tfs se prennent, Tant entreprennent. 11 Et que tous ceux se resiousissent Quien toi ontespoir & foi, Ioye autont sans fin deffcus toi, Aucc eeux qui ton Nom cheissent, Et te benissent. 12 Car de bien faire tu es large Al'homme iuste, ô Vrai Sauueur, Etle couures de ta faueur, Tout ainsi commed vne targe Espesse & large.
A DISPVTATION against the worshipping of the Reliques of Saincts departed. OF all the Idolatries in the world, there is none more displeasing to God, nor more hurtfull to a super∣stitious man, then that which he committeth by the religious worshipping of the bones and reliques of the dead. For, if God would never suffer, that we should worship his living creatures, cre∣ated after his owne image & likenesse; noe not his Angels themselves, which are pure and im∣mortall, and haue noe participation with our humane corruptiō: how much lesse wil he per∣mit vs to attribute that honour due vnto his o∣nely Maiesty, to the bones & garments of rot∣ten bodies returned into ashes? Moreover if the
worshippers of the false Gods haue estranged themselves from our Creator,Ier. 13. 17. 13. who is the foun∣taine of living waters, to digg them pitts that can containe noe water: how much more are all those gone astray out of the right waie of sal∣vatiō, which runne after I know not what pie∣ces of old raggs, in-uented at their pleasure, and seeke for the light of lyfe, among the shad∣dowes of death. Now whereas the Canons of Awcon in Ger∣manie, haue not long since put forth an index of their relickes, with a Iesu-iticall Epistel stuf∣fed with false gloses and sophisticall reasons, to stirt-vp thereby the poore abused people of this age vnto the visitation of their said reliques, and to change at an instant, their natural stupiditie into a self-obstinacie, by preferring the deceitful shewes of religion, before he service which God prescribs vs in his holy word. So I desiring to ac¦complish the earnest request of some of my frein¦des, and also my vocation which bindes mee to pre-advertise the ignorant to take heed of these blind-leaders, which leads them vnto perditiō, haue spent some houres in composing of this Treatise, that may serue as a preseruative to the weake, against the venomous errours eontain∣ed in the saide writing, as a morning-watch to awaken & rouse vp the sluggish, as a Guide to such as are gone astray out of the path of truth,
and as a spurre to the dull to convert them to God, & to divert them from the pernicious adoration of things dead & corruptible, vnto the wholsome worship of our heauenly Fa∣ther the onely God living & incorruptible, who is a spirit, and loues such as worship him in spirit & truth. Whereunto I will indevour to bring them by three degrees. First,The depu¦tation di∣vided in∣to three parts. I will lay downe to them the principall causes for which Christi∣ans are not permitted to doe anye religious seruice vnto the reliques of the dead. Afterward, I will refute the arguments of the Canons of Awcon, whereby they seeke to prooue the contrarie. Finally, I will advertise the Reader of the falsities of those reliques specified in their index. I will confirme this my proposition (that Christians are not permitted to doe any religious ser∣vice to the reliques of the dead) by three reasons: whereof the first shall be, that the tradition of visiting and reuerencing religiously the reli∣ques of the departed Saints, hath no founda∣tion in the holy Scripturs, nor from the ex∣ample of those which haue followed invari∣ably their paterne. The second, how some Christians inconstāt in their waies, hauing learned this superstiti∣ous
ceremony in the Schoole of the Gentiles, haue brought it into the Primitiue Church about foure hundred yeeres after Christ. The third, that the consideratiō of the sun∣dry abuses, sprung from this wicked custome, nourished and maintayned yet vnto this pre∣sent in the Idolaters Synagogue, ought to mooue and stirre vp the true worshippers of God, wholly to banish it frō out of the christi∣an Church. Touching the first poynt of my admoni∣tion, surely we finde in the Byble,The se∣cōd part. that the ho∣ly Patriarckes and their children haue buried honourably their dead, according to the ordinance of the Lord,Gen. 3. 19 Thou art dust, & to dust shalt thou returne; but we read not in any place of it, that they haue torne their bodies, and trāsported them by peece-meal after their de∣ceasse: placed their bones in sundrie places, showne their garments to the vulgar people with cōmand to worship them, and promisse that in calling vpon thē they should be heard, Neither reade wee also in it, that God hath commanded vs by his auncient prophets, to goe on pilgrimage to those parts where their inheritours had carried thē, to offer vp there vnto them burning tapers and holy candles, to touch, salute & kisse their bones with great devotion: Much lesse reade we in it, that God
hath prescribed them to solēnize the memo∣rie of their reliques by certain convocations of the people & publicatiōs of solemne fests, nor yet to load the Churches & Altars with them, nor to carry them vppon their necks & shoulders, nor to walke vp & downe with thē in processions; to the intent to moue every one to reverence them, with confidence to obtaine succour from God and his Saincts by worshipping them. And albeit that the Patriarke Iacob, and Io∣seph his son, grounding them-selues vpon the truth of Gods promisse, that he would giue for an inheritance to their posterity the land of Canaan, enioyned their children to trans∣port them forth of Egypt, when the houre of their deliuerāce should come into the cōtrey which God had promissed them: and that Moses tooke their bones alonge with him when the children of Israel came forth of E∣gipt: notwithstanding he never shewed thē vnto the people of God in his greatest distres∣ses, either in his passage through the redd sea, or in the wildernesse: much lesse did he lift them vp into the ayre, and sett them vppon a Perch (as he did the brasen serpent) or orday∣ned that any should behold them, with sted fast assurance that every of them should bee delivered from their euils by contemplating
them: but contrary wise he kept them secret, & close in their coffins: and the Elders of the people that surviued Moses and Ioshua, cau∣sed thē to be buried so soone as they arrived in the land of Canaan,Ios. 24. 32 in a field which Abra∣ham & Iacob had bought before time of the sonns of Hamor the father of Sechem. Also the Prophet Samuel sheweth vs,2 Sam. 21 13. 14. that K. Dauid hauing taken the bones of Saul and Io∣nathan frō the inhabitants of Gabish Gilead which had taken them vp from the streete of Beth-shan, brought them from thence into the contrey of Beniamin, caused thē to be bu∣ried in the sepulchre of Kis the father of Saul, and that in the Solemnizatiō of their funer∣alls his subjects did all that the King cōman∣ded them: but there is no mention made of any pilgrimage, or any religious seruice: which they should doe in honour of thē about their Sepulchre. Likewise,2 Kings. 23. 17. in the second booke of kings, the Authour of this Historie writeth, that King Iosiah willing to prophane the Altar which King Ieroboham had caused to be built in Be∣thel, and to dishonour eternally the Priests & other Idolaters, which he had maintained there; caused the bones of the false priests & other their confederates to be digged vp, cō∣manding them to burne thē vppon the same
Altar: But on the contrary espying an other Tombe in the same Cittie, demanded of the cittizēs thereof, What title is that which I see? & hauing vnderstod by their answer, that it was the sepulchre of the man of God, which be∣fore prophesied the things which the sayde King came then to doe vpon that very Altar, to shewe the publick reverence he bore vnto that man of God even after his buriall, bad the inhabitants of Bethel Let him alone, let none remoue his bones, whereto this Historiā addeth, that the citizens of the said city obeied there∣in king Iosiahs commandement. Although the holy Scriptures giues vs to vnderstand, that among all that are borne of woemē, God hath not raised vp more excellēt servants of his house, then Moses and Iohn Baptist: nor a more faithfull Martyr of his son Christ Iesus then S. Stephē, one of the seaven deacons of the Apostolique Church, & one of the first witnesses of Christ persecuted in Ie∣rusalem: Neueverthelesse their bodies were presently interred after their departure, that of Moses by God himself after a miraculous manner,Deut. 34. 6. in the contrey of Moab, in a place vnknowne vnto the children of Israel, and in∣accessible for the deuil, to the end, they might not abuse it by Idolatrie: that of S. Iohn Bap∣tists by his disciples, and S. Stephens by some
men that feared God,Marc. 6. 29. Act. 8. 2. Iud. ver. 5 as appeareth by the History of Moses, the Gospel according to S. Marke, the book of the Acts of the Apost∣les and the Epistle of S. Iude. Among all the auncient Prophets, there is none whose buriall is more memorable then that of the Prophet Elishas; in regard it plea∣sed God to raise vp miraculously by touching of his dead and buryed bodie: a man which in great hast for feare of their enemies they had cast into the grave of this prophet, as we read in the second booke of Kings & 2. Chap, howbeit the Authour of this historie addeth not for all that, that the Priests of the old Testament, haue commanded the people of God to resort vnto that tombe, to offer vp their praiers and sacrifices, or that they insti∣tuted any Feasts vpon certain daies in memo∣rie of this miracle, or enclosed the bones of this Prophet into a shrine, or chose out any expresse place to raise vp some altar in his ho∣nour, or did perswade any to resort thither from all partes, to offer vp there their praiers and sacrifices in the name of the vulgar peo∣ple, as if it were before the face of God him∣self. Morover the prophet Isaiah, hauing respect vnto the auncient custome of interring the dead, and hiding them in their graues, com∣pareth
the sepulchres of the righteous vnto bedds, to shew by this similitude, that wee can doe noe greater pleasure to God, nor a grea∣ter honour to his wel-beloved Sainctes after their departure, then to wrap vp their bodies in the beddes of the Earth, to rest there from their labours vntil the day of their resurrecti∣on, in which Christ wil come to awaken & call them vnto him, & bring them into the posses∣sion of life eternall. I say moreover, that the greatest hypocrits among the last Doctors of Israel, to wit, the Scribes and Pharises, who through hypocri∣sie and vaine glorie buylt vp the sepulchres of the prophets, and repaired the tombles of the righteous, stoned & massacred to death by their auncestors did not deterre their corp¦ses to dismember them, and shew their bones vnto the meaner sort of people, or to adorne the Altars of the Tempel of Ierusalem with them, but suffered thē to rest in their graues, as Christ himself witnesseth in the 23. Chap. of S. Mathews Gospel, the 27. verse and the next following. Touching the Apostles & disciples of our Saviour Christ, the historie of his burial shews vs, that S. Peter & S. Iohn approching neere vnto his sepulchre, to see whether he was tru∣ly risen or noe, found there his kerchief with
his linen clothes laied aside, but the Euāgelist S. Iohn noteth more expresly, that they came thither one after another, to behold the more earnestly his hand-kerchief and linnē which he had left behinde him after his resurrectiō, addeth not (which neverthelesse would have ben soo much the more remarkeable) that they either handled thē, or bore awaie those reliques with them, to shewe them vnto their con-disciples, or put them into any shrine or boxe, which with out all doubt they would haue done, if they had receued any such charg frō ther Mr. or if they could haue gathered by any of his familliar speeches he had with thē before, that such a collection & transportatiō of his reliques would haue pleased him after his resurrection, & haue ben as a fitt meanes, to confirme their bretheren in the Christian faith. As for S. Luke who discribs vnto vs all the memorable acts of the Apostles, since the as∣sention of Christ, vntil the second yeere of S. Pauls imprisonment at Rome, to the intent they might serue as a miror and exsample to all our actions, he makes no recitall, nor rec∣kons vp in his second booke any of Christs reliques, his Parents or faithful Martyrs, col∣lected by his Apostles, or giuen into the custo∣dy of their frends: but hee shewes that the
christians of his time perseuered with the A∣postles in the sincere doctrine of the H. Gos∣pell, and in breaking of bread, the true reli∣quaries and memorialls of the instructions &Act. 2. 42 suffrances of our sole Redeemer Iesus Christ. In like manner the Apostle S. Peter while he was living, would not promisse the faith∣full dispersed throughout Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, to leave after his death any other reliques behinde him, thē his Epistles which he wrote vnto them, as him self declareth by these wordes, that he wold en∣devour alwaies (to wit,2 Pet. 1. 15. by his writings) that they also might bee able to haue rememberance of those things after his departure. I could here alleadg for this purpose ma∣ny excellent admonitions, and notable exam∣ples of the auncient Fathers, and true succes∣sours of the Apostles: by which they shew vs, that they vnderstood right well, that the last degree of honour, and charitable office which survivours are bound to yeild vnto the dead, according to the rule of holy Scripture, and the custome of the chiefest fathers, aswel of the olde, as of the niew Testament, consist∣eth in burying of their corpses: but for this present I will onely recite that which Origen writeth thereof in his disputations against Celsus, S. Augustin in his firste booke of the
Cittie of God, S. Athan. in the life of S. An∣thony, Eusebius in his history of Policarpus mar∣tyrdome, and what Prudentius the Poet saith thereof in his verses vpon the death of one of his frendes. Humane bodies (saith Origen) hauing once ben the soules mansion,Origen. ought not to be cast awaie after their death:Cont. cōsidering that through the permission of good Lawes,Celsus lib. 5. & 8 wee must doe them that honour, as is befitting them in laying them into the Earth. We haue learned to honour the reasonable soule, and to burie honorablie the Corps, which is the instrument thereof. According to which S. Augustine saieth, that we ought not to dishonour and reiect the bodies of the departed, especially those of the faithfull, which the H. Ghost vsed as vessells & instruments vnto all good workes. For if our affection hath ben great towards our Parents, the more pleasing is their garment or ringe vnto posterity, their corps which touch vs more neerly; and with whom wee haue more familiarity, ought in noe wise to bee dispised, sith they serue not onely for an aide & ornament, but also partly vnto humane Nature. From hence it proceedeth that through a seruiceable piety they haue heretofore taken care for the buriall of the righteous, solemnized their funeralls, and prouided for their interring.Tob. 12. 13. As for Tobie hee obtained that speciall grace of God to burie the dead, as the
Angel witnesseth.Ioh. 12. 3 Moreover, our Lord which was to rise againe, commendeth the good worke of the re¦ligious woeman that had cast the costly oyntment vpon his body, commandeth to divulge it abroad be∣cause she had done it for the preparation of his sepul∣chre.Matt. 27. 57. The like honourable mention is made of those which tooke downe his body from the Crosse, and were carefull to burie it honourably.Marc. 15. 42. So then all thiese testimonies teach vs,Luk. 23. 50. though there be noe sence in the dead bodies; yet they fortifie vs in the beleefe of our refurrection,Ioh. 19. 38. and shewes vs that these bodies appertaines also vnto the prouidence of God, & that such Godly offices are pleasing vnto him. S. Athanasius reporteth, that S. Anthony tould his frendes a while before his death,Athana. in the life of S. An∣thonie. let none (saith he) carry my reliques into Egipt: least my body be honoured with a false honour, and least the solenities and obsequies, which so many tymes I haue condemned (as you know) should be practised vpon me. For the shuning thereof am I chiefly come hiether. Couuer then with earth this poore corps of your Father, and hide him, forgetting not this commandement from me your aged Father.Eusebe lib. 4. 15. & 5. 1. Eusebius hauing in his historie commended the zeale of the Christians of his time, which with the daunger of their lives had gathered vp the most precious ashes of Policarpus the Martyr, to bury them: complaineth after∣ward of the Tyrants of that age, which com∣manded their hang-men to cast the bodies
of those holy maryrs to their ravēous curres, appoynting besides certaine guardes to re∣straine & keep back the faithfull from taking vp the torne peeces of their corpses, gnawne by the dogges, and from laying thē into the earth. Prudentius comparing the Church-yeard wherein they went to burie one of his frends vnto a Mother that imbraceth her childe,Prudent. and fouldeth him vp in her armes. as if she would put him again in to her belly, crieth out. Nunc suscipe, terra fovendū Gremioque hunc suspice molli: Hominis tibi mēbra sequestro Generosa & fragmina credo. That is. O earth receaue & wrappe, Within thy gentle lappe
The members of this man: To the bequeath I than, And to thy imbracements Theis generous remnants. We must not forgett also how Bellarmin himself confesseth,Rob. Bel∣larmin li. 2. de Eccl. trium. c. 3 & lib. 2. de purgat c. 19. that God being willing to honour the body of Moses his faithfull ser∣vant, buried it with his owne handes, & that to laie abroad dead corpses in the ayre & be∣fore the view of the worlde, is the way to dis∣honour them: whereas on the contrarie to interr them, is to vse them honestly & to doe them honour. Prima vtilitas (saith he) quae mortuis accedit ex sepultura, est quòd consulitur ho∣nori eornm adhuc in hominum memorijs viven∣tium. Non enim caret ignomina quadam, quòd faeditas nostri corporis aliorum conspectibus pa∣teat, that is to say, The first benefit that befalleth the dead from their buriall. is, that we haue respect vnto their honours which are yet living in the me∣mories of men. For it is not without some shame that the foulenesse of our bodies should stincke before the sight of others. A most true saying where by this Cardinall condēneth the impudencie
of theis Porters of reliques. and imitatours of Ham, who vncouver before their bretheren the nakednesse and shame of their fathers, & are not ashamed in some places to shewe the navel and fore-skinne of our blessed Savi∣our, and at Rheimes in Campania the print of his buttockes. True it is, that in those daies some of the imitatours of the Gentiles, begann (as we shall vnderstand hereafter) to attribute more honour vnto the Martyrs thē in times past, and to solemnize the constancie of their faith and other christian vertues, with the like pompe and solemnity, as the Atheni∣ans did, which yeerely assembled about the graues of the Grecians to call there to minde, and to extoll to the Heauens the valour of those which had resisted couragiously the ar∣my of Xerxes, and who for the good of their contrey had lost their lives in the battell of Marathon. Neverthelesse, their principall ad∣vocate S. Ierom alleadgeth for their excuse, that the ceremonies which they did about the tombes of the Martyrs, was neither superstiti∣ous nor contrarie to that onely adoration due to the name of God.Hierone in his dis∣pute a∣gainst Vi∣gilantius. Who is he (saith hee in his dispute against Vigilantius) which hath e∣ver worshipped the Martyrs? who ever hath thoguht man to be God? O brainelesse head Paul & Bar∣nabas did they not ren their cloths, and said they
were even men, when the Lyconians hold them for Iupiter and Mercurius, and would have offered thē sacrifices? So farre is it thē, that the Chistians of his time should bee so debau∣ched, as to transferre the worship due vnto God, vnto the ashes of their Martyrs, that contrari-wise he denieth, that they did not once thinke to worship any other creature, which he preferreth before the reliques of Saincts, by this manner of speech follow∣ing. We neither serue nor worship, I say not onely the reliques of Saincts, but also the Sonne and Moone, neither Angels nor Archangels, neither Cherubines, nor Seraphins, nor any name which is named, either in this world, or in that which is to come: Least we should rather serue the creature, then God, who is blessed for euer∣more. Now we honour the reliques of the Mar∣tyrs, to worship him whose Martyrs they are. From whence it appeareth plainely, that the collection and religious seruice which those of the Papacie doe vnto the reliques of such as God hath with-drawne long since out of this world, being not groun∣ded vpon any commande of the Lord, nor from the' exsample of any of the true wor∣shippers of his diuine Majesty,Col. 2. 23 can neither be acceptable to God, nor available vnto those superstitious men which giue them∣selves
to this Idolatrie through a volunta∣ry devotion, without faith or assurance that God doth approove it in his holy word, which is the light of our faith, the rule of our religion, the measure of all our devotion, the guide of our conversation, & a lawe for all our workes,Rom. 14 23 He. 11. 6 1. Sam. 15. 22. without which all our actions & intentions are but sinne, displeasing to our Souveraigne Lord, who had rather that we should obay, and be at∣tentiue to his voice, then to offer sacrifice. Now if there were noe other consideratiō, then this which I haue expressed, it were sufficient enough to make them renounce this errour: but the perversity and obsti∣nacie of such, as take for a light their fool∣lish imaginations, for a rule their false tra∣ditions, for a law their absolute will, for a guide their old customs, and for a paterne the exsample of their predecessors, con∣straines me to proceede forward vnto the second point of my discourse, and to proue that the Christians in time past haue lear∣ned this superstitious veneration of the re∣liques of the departed, in the Gentils scho∣le, and since haue followed it, and brought it into the primatiue Church by cer∣taine steps and degrees, to the great heart breake of their faithfull teachers, and law∣full
successours of the sacred and holy A∣postles. I say, that this corruption is entred into the Christian Church by certaine stepps;The se∣cōd part. because that heretofore the source and be∣gining thereof was but small and simple: whereof Eusebius and some other Histori∣ans propounds vs a cleare exsample in the life of Constantine the Emperour: For they all confesse with one accord, that this Em∣perour thought good to coūcell the Chri∣stiās to immitate many sumptuous ceremo¦nies, which the gentiles vsed in solemniz∣ing the funeralls of their ancestours, espe∣cially in tansporting the dead corps of il∣lustrate personnages, and men of great re∣noume in their Contrey, out of base and vnknowne places into Church-yeards, and others that were more publique, to make the memory of the Martyrs & other faith∣full servants of God the more comēdable, and the Christiā religiō so much the more pleasing vnto all sorts of men. But they witnesse in noe place, that hee commanded his Bishops to lock them vp in their Church-Coffers, niether to trans∣port them by mamockes into diuerse pla∣ces, to represent them vpon feastiuall daies vnto the vulgar sort of people, with an ex∣hortation
that they should salute and kisse them: but on the contrarie enjoyned his subjects to burie them honorably, and lay them in the Earth. Notwithstandng the Devill taking hold and making vse of the Carnal wisedome of this Emperour turned it litle by litle into a cēsurable superstition. For since that time many Christians haue suffred them-selues to bee carryed away through there in considerate Zeale from one vanity vnto another, imagining with them-selues, that the bodies of the faith∣full deserued more, or asmuch seruice after their departure as the infidels: were not onely contented to remoue them from farr and remote places of their countreies, into there Church-yardes, wherein they ordi∣narily assembled in those days to watch & pray, and to doe therein some others rites of religion, because then they had no Chur∣ches. And euen thus sought to eternize the memorie of their vertues, by building them Sumptuous tombes, & solemnising, their funeralls with too excessiue praises. To shew then to euery man, that Sathan the Athenians Law giver and other Idola∣ters, instituted this Ceremonie, I wil onely alledg without reciting the testimonies of other Historians, what Plutarke writeth
thereof in his discourse vpon the interring of Theseus and Cimon. His wordes are these, that when Cimon by fore of armes had conquered the Ile of Scycros, bee remembred with himself, that the auncient Theseus sonne vnto Ageus, flying from Athens came into that Ileland, where Lycomedes for some bad sus∣pition hee had of him, caused him to be slayne by tresaon. Now by all meanes hee laboured to finde out his graue, in regard the Athenians had receaved before an or Oracle or prophesie from Apollo (or to speake more properly from the Deuill,) by which hee commaunded them to bring backe to Athens the bones and ashes of Theseus, & to honour him as a Demy-God: but hee knew not where they had enterred him, because the inhabitants of that Ile kept his graue secret and vnknowen, and would suffer no man to seeke it out: Howbeit; Cimon vsing all expedition to search it out, espied by chance an Aegle, which strook the ground with her beake and talents, in a place some what higher then the rest, whereupō it came into his minde, (as it were by divine inspiration) to cause that place to be digged, where they found the graue of some great corps, and the poynt of a brasen lance with a sworde. In such sorte, that hauing at last found the tombe, he tooke forth Theseus bones, and brought them into the Admirall-Galley
somptuously adorned, and transported them pre∣sently into his Contrey foure hundred yeeres after Thesius had departed from thence. For this seruice the people receaued him with great ioy and he gott thereby the good will of the Atheni∣ans, which receaved theise reliques with great Applause, with somptuous sacrifices, & processi∣ons, as if Thesius himself had ben liuing, and had returned back again into the Citie. And his reliques are in the midst of the Towne, yet vnto this day, neere vnto the Parcke where the young mē resort together for the excercising of their bo∣dies, & where is freedom both for slaues and all poore aflicted ones. More-ouer, the Sepulchres which yet vnto this day are called Cimonia testefie that Cimon bones & ashes were brought back againe into Attica. Notwithstanding the inhabitants of the towne of Citium honour still a certaine Tombe which they affirme should be Cimons, because that in the time of a great dearth & famine they had an oracle (that is an answere from the Deuill) which commaunded them to haue a care vnto Cimon, and not to neglect him, but to ho∣nour and reverence him as a God, as Nancicra∣tes the Orator hath recorded it in writting. The like hee saith also of Demetrius and Phocyon in the storie of their death whereunto for breuitie sake I will send the Reader.
Now al-be it that the Christians & mem¦bers of the primitiue Church, were borne away with the torrent of this heathenish custome, wherevnto the Emperour Con∣stantine had opened the sluces, passing beyond the boundes of Christian puretie & simplicity: yet the honour which they did about the graues & bons of their Martyrs, was in noe wise comparable, nor so super∣stitious as that was of the Athenians, and other pagans, nor like to that which at this day is committed amongst the Ido∣laters of the Romane Church. For let vs consider what S. Augustine saith thereof in his 8. booke of the cittye of God. Wee nei∣ther (saith hee) build Temples,August. 1. 8. ciuitat. Dei. c. 27 nor make priest∣hood nor sacrifies, nor any other diuine seruice, as a religion to the Martyrs. For they are not our Gods, but their God is ours. Truth it is, that wee honour their memorie, as the holy men of God. Which haue fought valiantly for the truth euen vnto the death of their bodies, to the end, that true religion might bee knowne & the false convicted. What man is it amonge the faithfull that ever heard a preist say standing be∣fore an Altar, built vppon the corps of Some Martyre to the honour and seruice of God, Pe∣ter, Paul or Cyprian I offer thee Sacrifice, seing that in memorie of them wee offer vp vnto God
who hath made them both men and martyrs, & hath conioyned them through a celestiall glorie vnto his angels, that in the assembly of the people, wee might giue thankes vnto the true God for their victories, and by the remembrance of their crownes & palmes, might exhort others vnto the imitation of their vertues. The funeralls then which the religious solemnize by the monumēts of the Martyrs, are noe other-wise then orna∣ments of their memorialls, & noe sacrifices which they doe offer vnto the dead as vnto Gods. These are S. Augustins wordes, by which hee testi∣fieth, that notwith-standing the ouverture, which the Christiās of his time made vnto this paganish superstition, in solemnising the Martyrs feastes: yet true pietie & the right invocation of the name of God bore some sway and aucthority amonge them. But if S. August. and his fellow-souldiers, could haue ben able to haue prevented the euils and mischiefs that this superstition drew after her taile, they would then haue redoubled their forces and fell vppon her with all their might, to haue hindred her from winning so many countryes in Chri∣stendome. So then it is my duty to excuse them, considering they opposed thēselfs against her, both by word and writing.
To begin with S. Ambrose, S. Augustin giues him this testimonie,Aug. li. 6. de cōfess. cap. 2. that hee did dis∣swade his Mother, and some other of his frendes, from frequenting of those publi∣que feasts, which the Christians solemnized yeerely in praise of their Martyrs, & that for sundry reasons, among others, Quia illa quasi parentalia superstitioni Gentilium essent simillima, (that is to say) because that theise funerall banquets, and solemne feasts, held in honour of their neerest kinred, was al∣most like vnto the superstition of the Gentils. As for S. Augustin himself, he plainely cōdemns it in his eight booke of the Citie of God, wherein hee doth not coulour it, but saies that such as brought their victu∣alls vnto the sepulchres of the Martyrs, to solemnize there their feastes, were not of the better sort of Christians. The same authour returning an answere vnto the reproch which the Manicheans made against him, to wit, that those which vaunt themselues so much at the name of Christians, worshipped notwithstanding the Tombes of Martyrs, following therein the exsample of the Heathen, saith (Pick mee not out from among the Christian name; those which neither know, nor follow the vertue of
their profession? seeke me not out the troupes of ignorant men which are superstitious, euen in the true religion, and so much giuen ouer vnto their pleasures, that they haue forgotten what they promised vnto God. I know (saith hee) that there are many which adore the monuments & pictures. &c. and among so great a multitude of people it is no wonder. Cease then I pray you at last from slandering the Catholique Church, in blaming the fashion of those, which her self condemneth and hath evermore sought to correct as wicked childeren. Also hee complaineth in his Epistle hee wrote vnto Ianuarius. That they had over∣ladē mens consciences with seruil burdens, and addeth thereunto, that the condition of the Iewes was more tollerable then that of the Christians, because men had made them subject onely to the burdens of the Lawe: but Christians vnto humane pre∣sumptiōs, that is, according to the opiniōs taken among them-selues, obstinatly to maintaine them to prejudice the truth. He confesseth likewise therein, that the church of God being plāted amonge much chaffe & daernell tolerated many things which neuer-the-lese her self did niether doc, ap∣proue, nor conceale. Also hee plainely sig∣nifies in that Epistle, that hee could not
allowe of diuerse things which they had instituted in the Church of God, ouer and besides the aunciēt custome of the fathers, of the old Testament, as if it were the ob∣servation of a Sacrement, which yet not-with-standing he confesseth, on th'other side, hee durst not so freely reject for avoy∣ding the scandall of some persons, wher∣of some were holy and others seditious, where vpon hee openeth his minde more clearely by the distinction which hee pro∣poundes against Faustus saying, One thing is that which wee support,August. contra Faustus. Lib. 20. cap. 21. another that which wee are commaunded to teach, & another that which wee are commaunded to amend; and constrayned to beare with, vntill wee haue amended it. If S. Augustin hauing conceaued some hope, sought to cure his auditorie of this contagious maladie, rather by gentlenesse then by seuerity. Not-with-standing called them wicked Children, superstitious euen in the true religion, giuen ouer to their de∣lights, forgetfull of that which they had promissed to God, and finally that they were not of the better sort of Christians, would hee not crie out with greater vehe∣mencie, against the Idolaters of the Romish Church, who scornefully and obstinately, refuse the fit remedies which should purge
them of their bad humours, being laden with so many corruptiōs almost incurable? would he not cry out louder, and tell them that they are not of the better sort of Chri∣stians, but of the wickedest? would hee not call them with the Prophet Esaye a sinfull nation:Esa. 1. a people ladē with iniquitie, a seede of the wicked, corrupt childrē: which haue forsaken the Lord, and haue provoked the holy one of Israel to anger? I could here produce many other testi∣monies to the like effect, were not these suf∣ficient to conuict all contradictours, and to shewe the ignorant, that S. Augustin & his fellow labourers (which liued foure hun dred yeeres after Christ) perceiued noe soo∣ner the bitter fruit of this dāgerous plant, which Sathā the wicked spirit had brought from the Athenian Schole into their chur∣ches, but they laboured with all their po∣wer to root it vp; & hew downe the braun∣ches thereof. From whence necessarely we may inferre, that these Canons of Awcon, which anone wee will refute more perticu∣larly, bragg of the antiquity of this tradi∣tiō with false brauadoes, since God who is the auncient of dayes, hath never taught it to our Fathers, in the first dayes of his grace, by his auncient Prophets, nor in the
beginning of the latter by his Sonne Christ Iesus and his Apostles, nor for some hun∣dred yeeres after their time by their true successours: but on the contrarie, raised vp holy and faithfull Doctors to resist & con∣tradict it. So that the title of Heretiques which they so vsually giue vs in all occurrē∣ces, may by a good consequence be retur∣ned vpon them. And here-upon I entreat the vnpassionate Reader, to censure whe∣ther this reproch which S. Tertullian made heretofore vnto their predecessours, who alwaies had antiquety in their mouths and noveltie in their braines, may not justly be appropriated to them.Tertul. in Apog. cap. 6. Where is the reli∣gion? where is the reuerence you owe vnto your ancestours? you haue renounced the custome of your Graundsirs in education, in apparell, in sence & in speech it self: You euermore praise anti quity & liue frō daie to daie after nouelty, wherby it is euident, seing that of your selues you forsake the good institutions of your predecessours, you remember & keepe the things which you ought not, and obserue not those which you should. Now resteth the lait part of our disputa¦tion,The dis∣couerie of nine seuerall abuses. that this law and custome of going to salute the reliques of the dead, ought to be abolished & banished out of the Christiā church, because of the manie-fold abuses
which heretofore haue ben committed, & which they yet committ vnto this daye in Christendome by obseruing them.The first abuse. The first is, It withdraweth the hearts & spirits of men, frō the right waie by which it hath pleased God to draw vs to the knowledge, and enioying the benefits of his son Christ Iesus. For in stead that God commandeth vs to seeke his son in his word and sacra∣ments, & in th' assemly of the liuing, which worship him in spirit and truth, amongst whom he is found. It perswadeth vs the contrarie to seeke him among the shrines and reliques of the dead, and in the com∣pagny of those which dwell in the dust of the earth,Luc. 24. 5. where hee forbids them by his Angel to seeke him. Againe, instead that the Apostle exhorteth vs to seeke Christ in Heauen where he sitteth at the right hand2 Cor. 5. 7. 16. Col. 3. 1. 2. of God his Father, and learnes vs to know him after the spirit and to assend vp vnto him in the high Places with the feete of our faith, it councels vs the contrarie, to seeke him and knowe him after the flesh, to seeke him now here, and now there, some-times by pilgrimages from one Contrey into an other, and sometimes to descend into the caues of the earth,Mat. 24. 23. 24. to contemplate there the reliques of his bodie, directly against
his owne expresse prohibition quoted by S. Mathew in the 24. Chap. of his Gospel. The second abuse is, that they haue transported the reliques of Saincts into di∣verse places, and admonished everie one to resort thether vpon feastiuall daies dedica∣ted to their memory, and so they intoxi∣cate the simple with this false opinion, that not only the saints but God himself taketh delight in such pilgrimages, and that their prayers made neere to the theise religious reliques, are sooner heard of the Saincts, & of God himself, then when they are made else where, as appeareth by the decree of the Councell of Trent, and the praiers which are forged by the Priests of the Ro∣mane Church, according to the tenour thereof. The decree of the Trent Coūcell is this.The de∣cree of the Coun¦cell of Trent touching reliques. Mandat sancta Synodus omnibus Episcopis & caeteris docendi munus curamqué sustinentibus, ut iuxta Catholicae & Apostolicae Ecclesiae usum à primaevis Christianae Religionis tempo∣ribus receptum, sanctorumqué Patrum consen∣sionem & sacrorum Conciliorum decreta de sanctorum inter cessione, invecatione, reliquarum honore & legitimo imaginū usu fidelis diligenter instruant, docentes eos sanctorum Martyrum & aliorum cúm Christo vivētium sancta cor∣pora,
quae viva membra fuerunt Christi & templa Spiritus sancti, ab ipso ad vitam aeternam suscitanda & glorificanda, á fidelibus veneranda esse, per quae multa beneficia à Deo ominibus praestantur: ita ut affirmantes Sanctorum reli∣quijs venerationem atque honorem non debe∣ri, vel eas aliaquè sacra monumenta à fidelibus inutiliter honorari, atque cornm opis impetrandae causa, Sanctorum memorias frustra frequentari, omnino damnandos esse, prout jampridem eos dānavit & nūcetiā dānat Ecc. that is, The holy Counsel enioyneth all Bishops & others, to whom the charge and care of teaching is committed, that (according to the vse of the Catholique and Apostolique Church, receiued from the first age of Christian Religion, the consent of holy Fa∣thers, and the decrees of sacred Counsels) they diligently instruct the faithfull in the Doctrine of the interecssion and invocation of Saincts, in honouring their reliques, and in the Lawfull vse of images, admonishing them touching the reli∣ques, that the holy Boddies of the Martyrs & other Saincts living with Christ, who while they liued in this worlde were his liuely members & temples of the holy Ghost, whome one day hee will raise vp and glorifie vnto eternall life, ought to be reuerenced by the faithfull, because GOD bestowes many benefits one men through those reliques. So that those which maintaine that
their reliques are neither to be reuerenced, nor ho∣noured, & that the faithfull reverence them, and other holy memorials to noe end. More-ouer that they in vaine frequent the places, wherein such reliques are, to obtaine succour from the Saincts, ought expresly to be comdemned, as for a longe time the Church hath condemned them, and condemns them yet vnto this present. The first prayer consormable to this de∣cree made by their Presbiters is this. Domine, nerespicias piccatanostra, sed respi∣ce ad deprecationem genitricis tuae Mariae, & perejus sancta merita, & perintercessionem san∣ctorum tuorum Apostolorum Petri & Pauli, atque omnium Sanctorum tuorum, quorum reliquiae sunt in isto loco, adiuva nos, sicut tuvi∣des necessitatem nostram. That is to say, Behold not our Sinns ô Lord, but behold the Prayer of thy mother Marie, and through her holy Merits, and through the mediation of thy holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all thy Saincts, whose reliques are in this place, help vs according to our necessitie.
The second is. Deus, qui ex omni coaptatione Sanctorum aeternum tibi condis habitaculum, da aedificatio∣ni tuae incrementa caelestia, vt quorum hic reli∣quias pio amore complectimur, eorum semper me∣ritis adiuvemur. That is to say. O God! which through the Sainets that thou hast appropriated to thy self, buildest thee an ever∣lasting Tabernacle, giue celestiall augmentations to thy building, that alwaies we may be succoured by the merrits of those, whose reliques wee here embrase with a holy affection. The third is, Propitiare nobis, quaesumus Domine, famulis tuis per horum sanctorum tuorū N. & N. atque aliorum, qui in praesentirequiescunt Ecclesia, me∣rita gloriosa, vt eorum pia intercessione ab omni∣bus semper protegamur adversis. That is to say. O Lord, be fauourable vnto vs thy servants, for
the glorio us merits of these Saincts. N. & N. and of all others which rest here in this Church, to the end, that through their Godly intercession, wee may evermore bee preserved in all our ad∣versities. I maintaine that this opinion is false, that God heareth soner our Prayers neere vnto the reliques of the dead, then else where; because it is grounded on princi∣ples directly contrarie to the infallible in∣structions of holy Scripture, where of the first is. That Christians are permitted to in∣vocate the departed Saincts, and to honour religiously their reliques. The second, that the deceased Saincts know whatsoeuer is done vnder the Sunne, and consequently vnderstand the Prayers of those which crie vnto them in this world. The third, that the Saincts after their departure, should re∣gard the seruice of such as salute, kisse, and honour their reliques, by way of religion. Fourthly, that God hath instituted the pil∣grimages which they obserue in the Ro∣mane Church, and had rather be worship∣ped in a place, wherein there is some reli∣ques, or memorials of the Saints, thē where there is none. Now inregard they haue not long agoe
reimprinted at Sedan my refutation against the invocation of Saincts, by which I haue represented vnto the reader the falshoode of the three first principles, I will send the Reader vnto it. But for the latter, I will set downe before him, that which S. Gregorie Nyssene iudgeth thereof in his Epistle a∣gainst the pilgrims, that went to Ierusalem, to see the sepulchre of Christ, and the most remarkeable memoriall of our Redeemer. When the Lord (saith Gregorie Nyssene)Gregorie Nyssene. calleth the blessed into the inheritance of the king∣dome of Heaven, he places not amonge the num∣ber of their workes which brings them thither, the pilgrimage vnto Ierusalem, neither maketh hee anie mention of such a worke, amonge the number of the Blessed. And why should men employ their time then, in doing that which nei∣ther makes them happie, nor is available vnto the Kingdome of Heauen? Wherein cann that man advantage himself, which should come into those parts, as if more abundance of the holy Ghost were there, and that his grace were more ample in that place? If Grace were more aboun∣ding in Ierusalem, then sinne would not bee so rife amonge those that inhabit there: but at this present, there is noe manner of wickednesse which is left vncommitted amonge them. Let our exsample offend noe man, but let rather our per∣swasion
finde beliefe, seing wee diswade them from that which wee haue seene with our eyes. As for vs, before and after wee came thither, wee al∣waies confessed that Christ is true God, and our faith was neither impaired, nor engmented therby. This good I haue gathered by it, that by the con∣ference I haue had therof, I must alwaies acknowledge, that there is more sanctitie in vs, which dwell fardest from it. You then which feare God, praise him at home in the places were you make your abode, for the alteration of the place makes not God to come the neerer vnto you: But wheresoeuer thou shall be, he wil come vnto the, if he finds the Lodging of thy soule readie to enter∣taine him. But if the inward man bee la∣den with wicked thoughts, thou shalt not re∣ceiue Christ, though thou wert in Golgotha, in mount olivers, or in the tombe of his resurrection. Perswade the Bretheren then, that they goe on pilgrimage out of their Bodies vnto the Lord, & not out of Cappadocia into Palestina. If that which was done there in the beginning did last still, the holy Ghost dispensing his gifts in the like∣nesse of fire, then would it behooue vs all to be pre∣sent there, where he maketh such distribution to all: But if the Spirit bloweth where it pleaseth him, those which haue beleeved there, are made partakers of his diuine gift, according to the proportion of their faith, and not according
to their pilgrimage vnto Ierusalem. I could here likewise coppie out S. Chri∣sost. admonition,Chrys. ad Philem. hom. 1. that to obtaine pardon for his sinnes, he needed not to make any long iourneis into farre Countries, neither to spend his mony.August. serm. 3. de art. Also that of S. Aug. that God commaunds vs not to goe into the East, nor to saile into the West to seek out righteousnesse: likewise that of S. Ber∣nards,Bernard. serm. 1. de advēt. that to finde the Lord it behooues vs not to passe the Seas, and Alpes, but that euerie man should goe vnto God within himself: & many other instructions of the true Doctours & Fathers of the primitiue Church, conformable to those of Christ & his Apostle S. Paul, that God wil bee wor∣shipped by vs in al places, in Spirit & truth; if I feared not to abuse the Readers patiēce, and knew moreouer, that our adversaires makes no account of the Doctrine of the Orthodoxe Fathers, whēsoeuer it refelleth their inventions, & is repugnant vnto the authority of their Pope, whome they pre∣ferre, as wee can proue by their writtings, before a thousand Chrysostomes, Augustins, Bernards, and Gregories. The third abuse is, that through the visi∣ting of these reliques, the hearts of super∣stitious men are moued, to transferre that
worship which is due onely vnto the liuing and incorruptible God, to dead & corrup∣tible things. For as in the time of S. Ierom S. Christostom, & S. Augustin, the Christiās were adicted vnto this ceremonie, of going to visite the sepulchres and monuments of the Martyrs, and other holy men, and to solemnize yeerely certaine solemne feastes in memorie of them. So ever since, their foolish Imitatours, haue buylt Temples & Altars in honor of their reliques, lighted vp Candles about them, and haue craued succour and help by their praiers, not one∣ly of God himself and his saincts, but also from these dead an insensible things, which neuer had any communion with humane life, neither could in any wise vnderstand them, nor neuer shalbe capable of hauing participation in the knowledg of our God, and of that eternall life, which he hath pro¦mised vnto his children. For confirmatiō whereof, I wil not here speake of the Monkes, which in time past worshipped the arme of S. Maurus, nor of some other Idolaters which praied to the bones of their Saincts; nor of those which adore our Sauiours crosse vnto this day, onely for the present, I will but reite the praier, which the Monkes of the Abbey of
Fons make ordinarily vnto the table-cloth vpon which, & according to their traditi∣on, they saie our Sauiour and Lord Iesus Christ hath celebrated the holy Sacrament with his disciples. And those which the Monkes of Cahors sing vsually going in procession, in honour of his kerchiefe, and to the great dishonor of the person of our blessed Sauiour, and onely mediator Iesus Christ. The Monkes of Fons, esteeming more of an olde and false table-cloth, then of our Lord Iesus Christ, the authour of truth and niewnesse of life, call vpon it for aide in this manner, Sanctissima Dei mappa ora pro nobis, O most holy table-cloth of God pray for vs. The Monkes of Cahors addressing thē∣selves rather vnto the Napkin or kerchief, which our Redeemer left behinde him to rot in his sepulchre, thē vnto this high Priest who shortly after his resurrection was takē vp by his Father into Heavē, to make there continuall intercession for vs, cryes vnto it singing in this manner Sancte Sudari ora pro nobis that is, O holy handkerchiefe pray for vs. againe, Sudarium Christi liberet nos a peste & morte tristi. that is, O kerchiefe of Christ deli∣ver vs from plague and a heavie death. More∣over, they crue that for his kerchiefes sake
representing the face of Christ by picture, it would please him to let them behold his face aboue in Heauen. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui in memo∣riam passionis vnigeniti Filij tui, sanctam eius sindonem, cum expressaipsius effigie venerandam reliquistiin terris, tribue, quaesumus, vt per vir∣tutem eius sanctae sindonis faciem tuam contem∣plari mereamur in coelis: That is to say. O Almightie and Eternall God, which in memorie of the passiō of thy only begottē son, hast left behinde him on earth his holy Sindon with his shape printed vpon it, graunt that through the vertue of this holy lunen wee maye merrit to contemplate thy face in Heaven. O Lord how long wilt thou endure this idolatrie?Ier. 4. 13. ô poore Superstitious men, how long will yee continue on, in seeking our Lord Iesus Christ, who is all in all of vs, in things that are nothing worth? The fourth abuse consisteth,THE fourth abuse. in the ado∣ration of false reliques, so artifcially coun∣terfeited and invented by the one, as foo∣lishly beleeved and receiued by the other.
The cause why S. Augustine complaineth in his treatise,Augus. de Labore Mon. c. 28. touching the travelling Monkes, that Sathan had dispersed throw∣out Christendome, many Hypocrites vn∣der the habit of vagabond Monkes, strag∣gling vp & downe through countries not sent, neuer still, nor never setled, whereof some of them made Marchandise of the members of the Martyrs, which made him to doubt & suspect, that they were not the right members of the Martyrs. To this purpose Socrates reporteth in the 14. Chap. and 7. booke of his Historie,Socrates l. 7. c. 14. that the Christians for some time honou∣red through ignorance, the dead carkiese of a seditious Monke called Ammomus, thinking it had bene the body of some ho∣ly Martyr. Also, Erasmus of Rotterdam reporteth in his Conferences,Eras. coll. de pilgri. that two Pilgrims arriving at Canterburie, the one of them was so amazed, at the impudencie and deceit of those, which presented before them al sorts of reliques to be worshipped, and amonge the rest an Arme bleeding with the flesh vpō it, that they seemed thereat to be horribly affrighted, & flying back would not kisse it. Gregorie surnamed Turonensis, and diverse other Historians affirme,Gregory Turonen¦sis. that in the shrine
of a departed Sainct, they found the roots of sundry plantes, the teeth of Moses, the bones of Mice, and the feete of foxes, in stead of the true reliques of his bodie. It is most manifest, that presently after the reformatiō of the Churches in France, Helvetia, Germanie, and some other ad∣joyning places, they founde in the shrines & chestes of the papall reliques, the bones of diverse Beasts, pieces of brickes, spriggs of trees, cordes, and manie other trifles, & small trash, which these superstitious men had worshipped, during the night of their ignorance, & the thicke darknesse of their idolatries. Calvin noteth in his admonitiō against the reliques of the Romish Church,Calvin. that they found at Geneve the taile of a Hart, which these Superstitious people had often times kissed, imagining that it had ben S. Anthonies Arme: and a pumeise stone saluted by these Doltes besotted with this opinion, that it was S. Peters braines. Theodorus Besa proueth by the testimo∣nie of more then fiftie eye-witnesses,Theodo∣rus Bela. in his Apologie against the calumnies of a certaine Apostate, by name Francis Baul∣dwin, that at Bourges they found a wheele turning about vpon a staff adorned
with this laciuious and magicall verse writ∣ten vpon a scrole of parchment. Quand ceste roue tournera, Celle que saime, m'aimera. That is to say, When this wheele shall turne about, Shee whome I loue, shall loue mee. And at Tours a Card which gamesters call the knaue of Dyamants, with a baw∣die and villennous song written vppon it by some whoremonger, & put into a silver Arme. And after that a silver crosse besett with many precious perles, and with an Agath, wherevpon was engravē the picture of Venus bewailing the death of Adonis her Louer lying by her, which the vulgar sort
of people adored vpō the day of the death and passion of our Lord Iesus Christ. Rodulphus Hospaniā attesteth likewise,Rodol∣phus Ho∣spinian. in his recitall of the originall of Reliques, that in the shrines & treasuries of the Cat∣holique Church at Zurich, they foūd some of the ribs of a Cat, or some such like crea∣ture with a cord twelue ells long, which be∣fore the reformation of the said Church, was worshipped by the blinde people there perswaded there-vnto by the guilfull glo∣ses of their pastours, that they were the re∣liques of Felix, and of some other holy Martyr. Although these Testimonies are wor∣thy of beliefe, and approved by every man without contradiction: yet I assure my∣self, that our adversaries will take a small occasion, at the very name of these Au∣thours, to quarrell at the Title of their bookes, & to call them in question and re∣ject them. I feare I shall not get much more, by in∣serting here the wordes of George Cassander one of their chiefest writers,Cassan∣der. whereby he ad¦monisheth the Emperours Ferdinand and Maximilian, that this abuse began to thrust vp her head litle by litle through the often visiting of the monuments of the re∣nownedst
Martyrs, that in S. Augustins and S. Ambroses time, the custome of bringing victualls in memorie of the martyrs, was forbidden by S. Ambrose himself: that in the ages ensuing, they haue attributed too much honour vnto the memorie of the Saincts, that some men of noe note, had perswaded the simple, to place a false confi∣dence in a superfluous & fond seruice, and had added many other euils vnto it, to wit, that the priestes & monkes coveteous of dishonest gaine, haue counterfeited reli∣ques, & preached false miracles, to nourish superstition in the hearts of men, and drew them, rather vnto the admiration of their miracles, then vnto the imitation of the Saincts. Finally, that the Devill making vse of the superstition of these men, reuea∣led euery day new reliques, when he saw that the Bishops of the Romish church, were so earnestly giuen to enquire foorth the inventers and promoters of those reliques, and they should finde therein (as he saith) abuses, & deceits, as great and as abhomi∣nable, as that was which S. Martyn dis∣couvered, who passing by the sepulchre & reliquaire of a Martyr greatly renowned in his Countrey, & having vnderstood (after hee was throughly and seriously informed
thereof) that it was the tombe of a Mur∣derer, caused it to be demolished, and cast downe, that noe more mention might bee made thereof, nor that they might vse it any more after that superstitious manner. I say, I shall not get much more, by repeating Cassanders wordes vpon this matter, be∣cause the Iesuites who dommineere at this present in the Romaine Church, approue not all what this Catholique Doctour hath writ, but according to the authority which was giuen them by the Council of Trent, commaunds al Readers to cancel & deface the best sentēces in his writtings, extracted from the holy Scripture, and from the true fathers and successours of the Apostles. As for example, they commaund in their in∣dex which they tearme purgatiue, printed at Antwerp by Chrystopher Plantine Anno. 1521. to purge his writtings of that, which hee teacheth in thē, of the true & naturall signification of the word Merit, and of the ancient custome of the Fathers & Aposto∣lique Doctors, concerning the administra∣tion of the holy Sacrament of the Lordes supper, vnder the two signes of bread and wine, vsed for more then a thousand yeeres after the comming of Christ. Likewise they cōdemne therein his booke intituled Pre∣ces
ecclesiasticae, that is ecclesiasticall Prayers; and his exhortation touching the extenua∣tion of the invocation of Saincts, and al his Disputations vpon their merits. Now if these Physitions make noe conscience, to prescribe vnto Christians, that they should apply their expurgatorie index vnto Cassander books, to draw from them the pure blood and vitall sappe, & leaue nothing in them but the corrupt and badd humours: haue not I then just occasion to suspect the like answere vpon the allegation of his testimo∣nie, and that they will say Cassander passed the limits of their rules and traditions in his discourse abouesaid, & so consequent∣ly they ought to cutt of what-soever they judge therein vicious and superfluous? Not-with-standing, there is the bodye of a whole Council, called the Council of the auncient Bishops, which their cheifest Do∣ctours hold for perfectly found, and can in no manner bee stayned with any corrup∣tion, and wherein they can finde nothing that is worthie of purging and correcting, whereby wee can shew them, that manie ages agoe, the reliques of Saints haue bē su∣spected by their predecessours, assembled in the ancient Councils. Wee reade then in the 14. Canon of the
5. Council of Carthage, that Aurelius Bishop of the Carthagian Church, accompanied with two and seventy Byshops of the neigh∣bouring Churches, reprooved therein cer∣taine reliques, counterfeited by some falsi∣fiers, & priuily brought into the primitive Church, for loe, the Contents of the Canon rune thus. Placuit vt altaria quae passim per agros aut vias tanquam memoriae Martyrum constituun∣tur, in quibus nullum corpusaut reliquae Mar∣tyrum conditae probantur, ab Episcopis qui cisdem locis praesunt (si fieri potest) evertantur. Si autem hoc propter tumultus popularis non sinitur, plebis tamen admoneantur ne illa loca frequen∣tent, vt qui recta sapiunt, nulla tibi supestitione devincti teneantur: Et omninò nulla tibi memo∣ria Martyrum probabiliter acceptetur, nisi aut ibi corpus, aut aliquae certae reliquiae sint, aut vbi origo alicuius habitationis, vel possessionis, vel pas∣sionis fidelissimâ origine traditur. Nam quae per somnia & per manes quasi revelationes quorum libet hominum vbique constituntur altaria, om∣nino reprobentr. That is to say. It hath pleased vs (to decree in this Coun∣cill)
that the Altars which are built vp and downe in feilds, and by the way sides, as in me∣morie of the Martyrs, In which one cannot finde, that there hath ben enclossed the Bodies or reliques of the Martyrs, should be cast downe if it be possible by the Bishops of those places. But if they cannot doe it because of the popular tumult, Let them never-the-lesse admonish the people, not to frequent such places, to the end, that those which be wise, may not be carryed away with su∣perstition. And let them receiue noe where, any memorie of the Martyrs, but in those places wherein their is some corps, and certaine reliques, or some tradition of the sure originall, of the abode of some Martyr, or of his suffring: For wee haue thought it good, that they wholly cast downe the Altars, established by the dreames and revela∣tions of all sort of persons. By these wordes it appeareth then, that wee are not the first which haue warned the superstitious, first, that the simplicity of their ancestours, and their naturall inclina∣tion in giving eare vnto the dreames and lies of all sort of Doters, hath opened the way vnto many false reliques. Secondly, that their foolish devotion made them lay them vnder, and afterward neere vnto Al∣tars. Thirdly, that their obstinacie hath
by all force, with-held the good Bishops from purging the Churches of them, men∣tioned in the Canon already cited. More-over, we could here copie out the decrees of some other Counsells, especially that of Lions, whereby their Priess in for∣mer times haue ben advertised of this a∣buse, and exhorted to seeke remedy for it. We could also produce many sentences of the Fathers, conformable to them: But in doing it, we should offend the Romanists, who beleeue that Counsells cannot erre, to alledge thē for a proofe vnto the said Can∣non, approoued long agoe by their prede∣cessours, and which they holde still for au∣thentique. The fift abuse testifies,THE fifth abuse. that one supersti∣tion hath drawne many others after her. For as the Prelats of the Romane Church make noe conscience to allure the silly peo∣ple vnto the adoration of their reliques: So to induce them the more, to put their con∣fidence therein, they promisse indulgences and pardons, to such as will kisse them, & permits their Idolaters to carrie them vpon their neckes, & to sweare by them, tramp∣ling vnderfoot by this meanes, the second and third commaundement of the diuine Lawe, and maliciously contradicting the
Doctrine of the auncient Prophets & Apo∣stles, who teach vs all with one common accord, that no man ought not to vnder∣prop his faith vpon any other, then vppon God himself, nor to sweare by any other, then by him, nor to seeke the remission of his sinnes in any other, then in our onely Saviour Iesus Christ. Therefore, these Sa∣crilegious persons, wilbe so much the more inexcusable before God, at the day of judg∣ment, because they are not ignorant, that God threatens with a Curse, by his Pro∣phet Ieremiah the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arme.Ier. 17. 5. For if the Lord, which in his word permitteth vs, to craue the assistance of living mē, as those whome hee hath ordained dispensators of his bles∣sings, to relieue vs in our necessities, con∣demneth not-with-standing those which assure themselues of the help which they expect from mortal men, hath he not farre greater reasō to curse those Idolaters, which put their confidence in the bones and gar∣ments of the dead,Deut. 18. 11. to whom hee forbids vs to goe to enquire, or to haue any recourse vnto them, to aske their Counsell or help in our distresses? Also, they haue read for the most part, that the marke whereby God discerneth
the way of his people from strangers, who are not yet cōverted vnto him, is, according as the same Prophet Ieremiah propounds it, that the people of God sweare by his name, to wit,Ier. 12. 16. The Lord liveth: but the idolatrous people which haue noe communior. with him, sweare by Baal. Beside, they are not ignorant that the Apostle. S. Paul (according to the transla∣tion of the two & seauentie interpretours) translateth in his Epistle the word swearing which the Prophet Isaiah vseth in the 45. Chapter of his prophesie, for a Confession, from which exposition of the Apostles, euerie man of a sounde judgment may dis∣cerne by a necessary consequence, that as the Apostle, calleth the swearing, made by the name of God, a confession, and an ac∣knowledgment of his divine Maiestie, and of the Souveraine authority he hath ouer all his Creatures: So on the contrary, wee may tearme a deniall, and abiuration from his name, euery oath which is sworne in the name of the departed Saincts, or of their reliques. But this is not all. For euen by their owne consciences they are convicted. First, by that testimonie which S. Peter giues vs, in the booke of the Actes of the Apostles,
that there is noe saluation in any other thē in Christ,Act. 4. 12. neither is there any other name vnder Heaven giuen vnto men, whereby wee must bee saued. Secondly, by that of S. Pauls in his Epistle to the Hebrewes, that by the onely Sacrifice of Christ,Heb. 9. 12. wee haue full deliverance, & remission of our sinnes. Thirdly,Iam. 4. 12 by that of S. Iames in the fourth Chapter of his Epistle, that there is but one Law giuer, (to wit God) which is able to saue, and to destroy. Who can then excuse the malice and impietie of these Doctours, which with holding the trueth in vnrighte∣ousnesse, attribute to their Pope this diuine aucthority, of forgiving and binding the sinnes of men, according to his Law and will, & to the rotten reliques of dead bod∣dies, the incommunicable power, onely proper to Christ, who is able perfectly to saue them, that come vnto God by him, seeing he euer-liveth, to make intercession for them? And how is it possible, that God should bee so gentle and full of long suf∣france, as to endure these sacriledges so longe? The sixt abuse is, that the Monkes and Priests of the papacy, more zealous in kee∣ping a good fire in their kitchin, then the ashes of the Martyrs and other deceased
Saincts to make their reliques the more to be respected, haue attributed to them the power of doing many miracles, after the manner and imitation of the Sorcerers, & false Prophets of the Heathen. For, as S. Augustine reporteth in the one and twen∣tith, and two and twentith booke of the citie of God, that the Heathenish Sorcerers, maintained heretofore night & day (throw a diabolicall slight, admirable to the eyes of the ignorant) the light of Venus lampe, & bragged because they had the reliques of Hercules, Romulus, and Bacchus, which had done some miracles in the temples dedi∣cated to their memory: so before that the auncient pagans, went oftentimes on pil∣grimage out of Egypt (witnesse Epiphanus) vnto the Prophet Ieremias sepulchre, because their Diviners made them beleeue, that their Gods had revealed, that the bones of this Prophet could preserue them from the stinging of Aspes, and Crocodils. And that Ptolomeus their king, was perswaded to haue the corps of Alexander the great trans∣ported into Aegypt, through the predicti∣on of Aristander, who tould them, that the Countrey wherein the body of king Alex∣ander rested, should abounde in all riches, and should bee preserved from the oppres∣sion
of their ennemies, as Aelian gives vs to vnderstand in the 12. booke of his sun∣dry Histories. If the Priestes of the Romane Church vsed but this in comon with the abouesaid Sorcerers and sooth sayers, that manie mi∣racles haue bene done, by touching and worshipping the reliques of some great personnages, renowned in their Coun∣treys: then they would not be so much of∣fended with vs; because wee make noe rec∣koning of them. But they proceede fur∣ther: for some of their Sorcerers haue also done miracles & cured many diseases with the braines of a Cat, the head of a Raven, & such like reliques of dead beastes, as Bodin proueth in his third booke of Sorcerers, by the testimonie of Idocus Damhouder of Bruges, and other credible Historians. So that there is noe more likelihood of truth, in the one sort of miracles, thē in the other, seeing that the former haue ben done with asmuch shewe of devotion towards the de∣parted Saincts, and their reliques, as those which at this present are so much esteemed in the papacy. For Bodin reporteth in the same booke, and second Chapter, how a Sorceresse of Bruges cured an infinit num∣ber of diseases, and that shee tould such as
came vnto her, that they must steadfastly be¦leeue, that she had the power to help them of their sicknesses. Afterward, shee com∣maunded them to fast, and then to repeate ouer certaine times a Pater-noster, or that they should goe on pilgrimage to S. Iames or to S. Arnoult. What an impudencie is it then, in these Boasters of reliques, to bragg and vaunt themselues, at there miracles, wherein often times hath bene discouuered many deceits and illusions. For behold how S. Augustin answered the miraclers of his time, especi∣ally the disciples of Donat,August. l, de Vnit. Eccl. cap. 16. Let not the Dona∣tist (saith hee) tell mee that this or that is true, because that Donat, Pontius, or some other, hath done such and such like miracles, or because some men, which pray vnto the memory of our dead, are heard, or because that vpon it, there comes to passe such and such like things, or that this our sister hath seene waking such a vission, or dreaming hath dreamed such a dreame. Away with all these fictions of lying men, or shewers of guilfull Spirits. For either that which they say is false, or if the Heretiques doe some wonders, so much the more ought we to take heede of thē, be∣cause the Lord after he had said, that there should come many deceivers, which in shewing great signes and wonders, should deceiue the Elect, If
it were possible, addeth therevnto worthy of great commandations, Behold, I haue tould you be∣fore. It were an endlesse labour then, to vtter all the falacy and guiles, whereby they de∣ceiue the people, yea, which their owne Do∣ctours haue found out & amonge others, that which Nicolas Lyra, heretofore percei∣ved in the miracles, which the Priests of his age feigned (as this writter speaketh) for temporall gaine. Now these jugling trickes of the mini∣sters of Antichrist, are so much the more de¦testable; in regard they attribute not one∣ly the power of doing miracles to the reli∣ques of Christ, of the virgin Mary, of the Apostles, of the holy Martyrs, and other excellent personnages, renowned for their good life & purenesse in doctrine, but also to the reliques of the greatest deceivers of the world. To begin then with the reliques of S. Francis, (who for his impiety was condem∣ned by Pope Iohn the 22. as a pervertour of the Christian religion,) it is written in the booke of Conformities, that a woman trou∣bled with the bloody flix for the space of thirteene yeeres, was cured thereof by tou∣ching the hemme of his gowne, and that a
blinde man recouvered his sight by tou∣ching of his hoode. S. Gregory also rehearseth in the first booke of his Dialogues, & second Chapter, That a provost of the monasterie of Funda in Italie called Libertinus, having drawne on a stocking of the Abbot S. Honorats, mett a woeman that went to burie her Sonne, who importuned him with many prayers to raise him from the dead, & this good prouost graunting her her request, laid the stocking ouer her said son, and put life into him againe through the vertue thereof. He likewise reporteth in the third booke of his Dialogues, that in the time of a drought, the Citizens of Spoleta made great store of raine to fall vpon their Soile, by lif∣ting vp towards heauen the gowne of S. Eutychus. Wee knowe also that some woemē with Child, following the Counsell of their Monkes, haue kissed S. Ioostlings breeches in Flaunders, others lifted vp S. Arnoults—, others haue stradled ouer S. Guerchilous image, hoping by this meanes to bee the more safely deliuered of their children. Wee are not ignorant likewise, that many Idiots of the Romane Church, be∣leeue,
that there is in the citie of Orleans some residue of the marriage wine, of Cana in Galile, which never diminisheth although they drinke oftentimes thereof. And in our Ladies Church at Rome, and at S. Salvader in Spaine, some of the morcells of those Loaues, wherewith Christ fed fiue thou∣sand persons in the wildernesse, which neuer lesseneth, although they oftentimes eate their bellies full thereof. Moreouer they beleeue, that the Pre∣lates of Rome haue in some of their Chur∣ches, diverse reliques of a wonderfull force and vertue, as at S. Iohn Latrans, the wast∣coate of the Apostle S. Iohn, which being heretofore laid ouer three dead bodies, made them to rise vp a liue in the field. At S. Pauls, that crucifix which spake vnto S. Brigit, Queene of Sweethland, whē shee came to pray in that place. At S. Iohn del' Isle, that image of the vir∣gin Maries, which at the overflowing of the Tiber, could not be spoiled, nor her lampe put out with the water. At S. Francis the bodie of S. Lodovica, a a Romaine lady, which doth many mira∣cles. At S. Maries Trāspontina a cruciix, which spake heretofore to S. Peter & S. Paul.
To S. Mary en voy large, a small picture of the virgin Maries, which hath wrought many miracles. At S. Maries laneufve, an other small picture of the virgin Maries, which was mi∣raculously preserved in the midst of a great fire, which burned the other ornaments of this Church. At S. Augustins, an image of the virgin Maries, painted by S. Luke, which did also many miracles in the time of pope Innocent the eight. At S. Martins, a gowne which the virgin Mary made for her sonne Christ Iesus in his minority, which miraculously groweth to the same stature as himself grew. In S. Pontials Church-yeard an host con∣secrated by a Priest, singing masse in the Chappel, which because he doubted, whe∣ther it was the body of Christ, sprung out of his hand in a wonderfull manner; and falling vppon the ground made a marke of blood which is to be seene within a litle grate of iron yet vnto this day. A jest not vnlike to that of the Iesuits, and advocats of that horrible conspiracie of Garnet, and of his complices, against the Crowne of the King of great Britanie, who were so im∣pudent (as this wise King accuseth them,
thereof, in the preface of his Apologie dedi¦cated to the Emperour, & all other Princes in Christendō) that thy were not ashamed to say and write, that after the execution of that Traitor, quartered with his cōfederats in London, a woman found a straw tinctu∣red with a dropp of bloode which sprunge from the body of of this traitour, and was miraculously metamorphosed into the resemblance of his head chopt off, with a crowne set vpon it. But as this deceit was soone after discouvered, and manifested to the world, aswell by the penn of this King and Solomon of our age, as by the art of his painters, who according to his Maiesties de¦sire, drew a picture vpon a straw and a drop of blood taken from some other body like vnto the same in all things: So, I beseech God, that it will please him by this exsam∣ple and advertisment, to awaken all other Christian Kings, to sift out and examine more deligentlie then they haue done in times past, the other jugling trickes of the forgers of reliques, and lying wonders. This is that (Gentle Reader,) which our Iosiah my dread Souverain (vpon whose sacred person, the Lord hath experimented his preservations from their damnable treasons: because he dwelleth in the secret of the most hie,Psal. 91. and shall abide in the
shadow of the Almighty; he will cover thee vn∣der his wings, & thou shalt be sure vnder his fea∣thers: A thousand shall fall at thy side, and tenn thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come neere thee,) toucheth in his premonition as in a passage, having reference to that straw, which the fathers the Iesuites would haue fathered vpō Gar∣net their auricular-traitour, but as my Authour saith, his Maiesty ingeniously found out as cun∣ning a Parrahsius in his great Ile of Britanie, as a Zeuxes in Italie. At S. Maries de la consolation an image of the virgin Maries, which hath done many miracles. In S. Vitus Church an oyle drawne from the reliques of that Sainct, which being mixed with them, healeth the byting of madd doggs. At S. Sabinaes a huge blacke stone, chai∣ned to the great Altar, which the Divel threw at S. Dominicus to overwhelme him while he prayed in that place: but it chaun¦ced, that this stone burst miraculously, & that S. Dominicus was not hurt there∣with. At S. Iulians a water distilled with the re∣liques of S. Iulian whih helpeth al manner of-fevers and diseases. In the same Church an Image of the vir∣gin
Maries, brought from the citie of E∣dessa, which vpon a day, seing the holy man S. Alexis comming towards her, after his wonted manner to say his prayers, and hearing him knock at one of the Church-doores spake twise together vnto the Sex∣ten, Open, and let in that holy man of God S. Alexis, for he hath merited Heaven. In S. Bbians Church-yeard an herbe which shee herself planted, thar cureth the falling sicknesse. At S. Anastases a pillar wherevpon they cut of S. Pauls head, which being falne from his body, gaue three jumpes, and at euery jump sprang forth three fountains a mira∣culous-lie, which (if you will beleeue it) are to be seene there yet vnto this day. At S. Maries de la voy, an Image of the virgin Maries, which hath done diuerse miracles. By the Church of the Abbey of Save, a fountaine, which cureth many diseases, but especially the bloody flix. Also they approue the fallacy of the pa∣risian Priests, who say, that the Crucifix, which they keepe in S. Denis Church, spake in time past to testifie that this Church was dedicated vnto him: and other Deceiuers which maintaine that their Crucifixes haue
wept heretofore, and that they still haue of their teares. They approue also that palpable jest of their Doctours, that the speare of Pilates souldier called Lonchè, was trāsformed into a blinde man, which they call Longin, and that being advanced from a souldier to a Captaine, recouvered his sight after he had washed his eyes with the water and blood, which issued foorth of Christs side, which himself had wounded, and through this miracle, was mooued to make profession of the Christian religion, & to seale it with his owne martyredome. But who is able to reckon vp all the false miracles, which the Quacksalvers of the Romane Church, attribute to the gownes, dubblets, hose, jackets, shirts, smocks, gird∣les, and other ragges of the departed? And who dares make any questiō of it, but that the Pope, who at this present liveth in Rome, & maketh himself to be worshipped as a God,2 Thes. 2 hath receiued this power of doing signes and lying wonders, seeing it is found in the reliques of the dead, and espe∣cially in theirs, who while they liued in this world, would not suffer none to worship thē,Act. 10. 25. 26. but acknowledged themselues alwaies to be but dust & putrefaction? Who would
not wonder at their Priests, which no soner swallow downe their litle God, which to their thinking is the very bodie of Christ, but presently after it they doe some new signe or wonder to solace and ase those which daily frequent them, seeing those which at some times doe onely behold but his garments, which is of a farre lesser price thē his body: & also diverse others, which salute his Mothers image, or touch the hoode of some Monke, or the gowne of some departed Nune, receiue some ease for their grevances. The seauēth abuse is worthier of laugh∣ing then of refuting.The 7. abuse. For these Gypsians rancks in the nomber of their reliques one of the feathers of Gabriel the Archangel, as though hee had appeared to the virgin Mary in the likenesse of foule. An ano∣ther of the H. Ghosts, as if the holy Ghost descending vpon Christ in the likenes of a doue, had let falne one of his feathers in Iorden, to be taken vp, and to be enclossed into a reliquarie in memorie of his ligh∣ting vpon our Saviour, & of his apparition to S. Iohn Baptist. They also put amonge the pieces of their reliques, things invisible and imposi∣ble to be showne, as the sounde of the bells
in the Temple of Ierusalem, the puffing of Ioseph when he cloue woode, which they keepe al Court-cheverni. They giue likewise to the Angels and in∣visible Spirits, corporall and visible armes. As for example, they glory at Carcassonnae & at S. Iulian de Tours for having S. Michels buckler and poinyard. Also they shew with them the taile of that asse that carryed out Lord Iesus Christ into Ierusalem when he made his royall en∣trie therein: The feathers of the chickins proreated by the Cock which crew when S. Peter denied his master: and a morcell of the broiled fish which S. Pter presented to Christ after his resurrection, whē he appea∣red vnto them by the Zea side, which hath lasted ever since without rotting, and cann be better preserued from corruption, then Christs flesh, which notwithstanding the Consecration of the host, which srueth him as a couvered, spoileth if the priest keepe it too longe in his boxe. Beside all this, they shewe at Rome the impression of Christs feete, which is to be seene in S. Laurences Church, where our Sa∣viour meeting with S. Peter after his ascen∣tion, tould him that hee should suffer at Rome.
And who would not mocke at these & such like reliques of these cōnicatchers, whē they themselues mock at one another, and take delight in deceiuing each other, and sporting some crafty devise or another vp∣pon the poore ignorant people, which attend and waite with great devotion for the representation and sight of them? Whereof we finde sundry examples in our moderne Histories, of which I will onely, alledge two, which are so abhominable that noe man that feareth God and is pure in heart, cann consider them, without dis∣daine and horrour. So then, Martinus Chemnicius repor∣teth in his treatise of reliques, made against the decree of the Counsell of Trent, tou∣ching the veneration of them, That a cer∣taine Orator & porter of the popes bulls, vaunted vpon a day, that amonge other of his reliques, hee had some of the feathers of the holy Ghost, now a chiefe companiō of his consort, over hearing him, picked cuningly his boxe and taking away his fea∣thers, laid coales into it in stead of thē. On the morrow this Oratour was to make a longe Sermon and discourse vpon the fea∣thers of the holy Ghost, and seing the peo∣ple falne downe vpon their mariebones to
behold & worship them, opening his boxe to pull foorth his feathers, found coales in it, whereat he neither blushed nor was put out of countenance, but presently chaun∣ging his discourse, was so expect in his art of lying, that he tould them he had mista∣ken his boxe, & that those were the coales taken vp from vnder the gridyron, where∣vpon S. Laurence had bene carbinadood. Another Germaine Divine named Iaco∣bus Herbrandus, auoucheth in his disputati∣on de Sceloatriae, that a certaine priest of Ro∣tenborough neare vnto Nicre, called Pfaff Isele, hauing bene at Rome and created the popes Indulgentiar, returned from thence into his Countrey furnished with diverse reliques, amonge others one of the winges of Michael the Archangel: Now to make it the more beneficiall vnto him, he extol∣led the vertues thereof in all his Sermons. But vpon a Sunday, being loged in an Inn, within the village of Altingue, and being overcome with wine, he kept not his boxe of reliques so carefully as hee had done before. So that through this mischance, his reliques were stolne: On the morrow being got vp, & perceiving the theft, spake not a worde thereof to his Hostis, because hee suspected that shee knew it: but went
and fott a handfull of haye out of the next cratch in the stable, & laying it in his boxe, called his Hostis and tould her. See, here are my reliques, whereat she begann to laugh, notwithstanding hee tould her, that when shee came to church, to bee an assistant in the holy service, shee should also kisse those reliques, shee replyed vpon it shee would not, but hee wagered that shee should. Af∣ter this coming to Church, this priest be∣gann to preach of the admirable vertues of his reliques, and to declare vnto the peo∣ple, that he had a handfull of the hay of the stable in Bethelem, wherevpon our Redee∣mer Iesus Christ had oftentimes slept, whē hee was a babe, which had the power to preserue from the plague (wherewith Ger∣manie was then infected) all those which did but kisse it, and to driue away all Adul∣terers and Adulteresses which came neere vnto it: Now his Hostis that knewe full well the deceit of this shamelesse Priest, see∣king on the side to spare her monie, and fearing on the other side to lose wholly her good name, because her chastitie was cal∣led into question before, choose rather at last after longe deliberation, to cast away her money, then to bring her reputation into a furder danger, so that shee was the
very last that came to kisse the reliques of her owne stable, and the priest tould her in her eare, What, art thou come too? The same Doctour annexeth vnto this storie, that many Germanies having heard say of the vertue of his reliques, ranne in al hast vnto this Priest to kisse them, but for all that, they were not preserued from the plague, but miserable aicted therewith. Beside, that Duke Everhard being ad∣vertised of the cossenning trickes of this Priest, commaunded the Divines of Tu∣binque to call him in question before them into their Vniversitie, to reprooue him therefore: but hee too well vnderstanding his craft, answered them impudentlie, that he neither had lied, nor beguiled any man. In fine, after a serious warning, which these Divines gaue him, that it was more then mainfest to all the world, that many which had kissed his reliques, were notwithstan∣ding dead of the plague, he replyed in a flouting manner at those poore superstiti∣ous people, that they had not kissed his re∣liques; but the glasse onely wherein he had putt them. The eight abuse is noted in that they place in the Catalogue of their religious reliques, as worthy of Adoration the in∣struments
and meanes which the ennemies of our Lord vsed to intrapp, crucifie, and perce him, as the lanterne which Iudas car∣ryed to lighten the Sergeants that sought his Master: the money which he had recei∣ved of the hie-Priest to betray him: The Crowne of thornes which they put vppon his head, and the nailes and speare of Pi∣lates hangman, vnto which they pray in this manner. Felix hasta, nos amore per te fixi sauciae, That is, Happie speare, wound vs with his loue, whome thou hast pearced. To which also they add the Crosse, where vnto Pilates souldiers had nailed the body of our Lord Iesus Christ, which they blesse and call vpon in this manner. O crux, lignum triumphale! Mundi vera salus, vale, Inter ligna nullum tale Fronde, flore, germine. Medicina Christiana, Sanes salva, aegros sana,
Quodnon valet vis humana, Fit n tuo nomine. Assistentes crucis laudi; Consecrator crucis audi. Atque servos tuae crucis, Post hanc vitam, verae lucis Transfer ad palatia. Quos tormento vis servire Fac tormenta non sentire, Sed cum dies erit irae, Nobis confer & largire Sempiterna gaudia. Amen. That is, O crosse triumphant wood! Al haile worlds true health! amonge all the trees in the woode, thers not thy like for blossome, bough, and budd. Chri∣stians Physick, saue the sounde and heale the sick. That which no humane power can doe, is done in thy name. O consecrator of thy crosse! hearken vnto the assistants thereof, and transport after this life, the servants of thy Crosse into the palace of thy true light. Graunt that those whome thou hast commaunded should suffer torment, maye feele noe torments, but when the day of thy wrath shall come, graunt vs eternall ioy. Amen.
Againe. O crux ave! spes unica Hoc passionis tempore Qua carne, carnis conditor Suspensus est patibulo, Auge pijs iustitiam Reijsque dona veniam. That is to say. Al haile ô Crosse our onely hope in the time of this passion, on which gibit the Creatour of all flesh, according to his flesh was hung. Encrease righteousnes in the Devote, & pardon the guilty. And againe, Dulce lignum, dulces clavos Dulcia ferens pondera, Quae sola fuisti digna sustinere Regem coelorum & Dominium, That is to say. O sweete woode, bearing the nailes & sweete bur∣thens, which alone hast bene worthy to beare the King and Lord of Heaven.
And although at some time they ad∣dresse their prayers to God himself, or to his son our Redeemer; yet they attribute not onely to the crosse, whereto Christ was nailed, but also to the signe thereof, made by the hand of man, the vertue of purcha∣sing vs his grace, and maintaining vs there∣in, which cannot be attributed to anie o∣ther (without Idolatrie) then to the very person of our Saviour, heretofore crucified, and now sitteth at the right hand of God his father, to make intercession for vs, and to intreate him to be merciful & fauorable vnto vs. First they craue of Christ by this prayer. Concede nobis, Domine, vt qui ad sanctam cru∣cem tuam adorandam vemunt, nexibus peccato∣rum liberentur. That is to say. O Lord graunt, that they which come to wor∣ship thy holy Crosse, maye bee deliuered from the bandes of their sinnes. By the Second, O crux gloriosa! o crux adorandi! o lignum
pretiosum! & admirabile signum! Christe, Rex pijssime, huius crucis signaculo, horis & momen∣tis omnibus munire nos non abnuas. That is to say, O glorious crosse! o crosse worthie of adorati∣on! o most precious wood and admirable signe! Christ! most godly Kinge, refuse not to preserue vs at all howers and moments, by the signe of this crosse. The third. Redemptor mundi, signo crucis ab omni ad∣versitate custodi, qui salvasti Petrum in mari, miserere nobis, That is to say, Redeemer of the world, preserue vs in all ad∣versitie by the signe of this crosse, and thou which sauedst Peter in the Sea, haue mercie on vs. The first prayer they addresse to God the Father is, Deus qui vnigeniti Filij tui pretioso sanguine vivificae crueis vexillum sanctificare voluisti, concede, quaesumus, eos qui eiusdem sanctae
crucis gaudent honore, tua quoque vbique pro∣tectione gaudere. That is to say. O God which was willing to sanctifie the signe of the crosse, quickning it by the precious blood of thy onely begotten sonne, graunt vs wee pray thee, that those which reioyce in the honour of the sig∣ne of this holy crosse, may reioyce in all places with thy protection. The Second. Protege, Domine, plebem tuam par signum sanctae crucis ab omnibus inidijs inimicorum omnium, vt tibi gratam exhibeamus servitutem, & acceptabile tibifiat sacrificium nostrum. That is, Lord protect thy people by the signe of this crosse, from all ambushments of their ennemies, that we may yeild the acceptable seruice, and that our sacrifice may please thee, But yet this is worse, For they attribute more honour to the crosse, then to Christs resurrectiō, saying in their prayer to Christ,
Crucem tuam adoramus, Domine, resurrectio∣nem tuam sanctam glorificamus. That is, Lord wee worship thy crosse, and glorifie thy resurrection. And to the one, & to the other: Ecce lignum crucis in quo salus pependit, venite, adoremus. That is, Behold the woode of the crosse, whereon salva∣tion hath hunge, come, let vs worship it. Is not this then to seeke in rotten wood which serues christiās for no vse that which cannot be founde; but in that immaculate Lambe Christ Iesus, which is without ble∣mish, who was taught vnto vs by our Fa∣thers, who hath redeemed vs from our vaine conversation, not with corruptible things, as silver and golde, or by the woode of the crosse, but with his most precious bloode,1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. as the Apostle S. Peter witnesseth in the first Chapter of his first Epistle? Is not this to attribute as much honour to a creature dead & insensible, whervnto none of vs would willingly resemble, as to the living God the creatour of heauē & earth?
The last abuse is daylie seene, in the sun∣dry opinions,The 9. abuse. and disputes, which the one hold directly contrarie to the other, tou∣ching the right place, and the true Gardi∣ans, and keepers of these reliques, whereby one lie overthroweth another: For it is not possible for hem, to agree without gi∣ving each other the lie, and without giving to the Saincts, more bodies and members, after their departure, then they had while they were liuing. Which is easie to bee showne by their owne writings, and the inventories of their reliques. To begin with the reliques of Christ, as our aduersaires are not ashamed to main∣taine, that the body of Christ, (which is as∣sended vp into Heaven, to remaine there, vntill the restauration of all things,Act 3. 21 which God hath spoken by the mouth of his ho∣ly Prophets) is also here beneath on earth, in all the hosts consecrated by their Priests, which administer the sacrifice of the masse: so they make no conscience to affrme, that they haue the foreskinn & navell of Christ in diverse places, which they keepe and a∣dorne with this fine verse, Circumcisa caro Christi, sandalia clera Atque vmbilici viget hîc praecisio clara.
That is to say. The foreskinne of Christ, his pantofles also With his Navill, are inclossed within this place. For they haue showne heretofore the first foreskinn of our Lord Iesus Christ in our Ladies Church at Awcon, which wee shall come to speake of more amply in the third part of our disputation. The second, in our Ladies Church at Anwerpe. The third at Hildesham in Germanie. The fourth is to be seene yet according to their saying at Rome in S. Iohn Latrans church. The fifth in the citie of Byzanson in the free-Countie: and the sixt in the Abbey of Charroux in France. So that by this reckoning, they would make Christ Iesus not a man, like vn∣to vs in all things, saue in sinne, but in stead of a small skinn of his circumcision, hee should haue six, and consequently as manie bodies. Also S. Iohn Baptist, according to their tradition hath had manie heads & visages: For notwithstanding that the Monkes of Rome, glory in that they haue his whole head in the Cloister of S. Sylvester, those of Malta vaunt that they haue the hinder∣part,
and they of Amiens with those of S. Iohn Angelique for having the forepart with the gash of a knife, which Herodias should giue him ouerthwart the eye, as the hangman brought her his head, to present it by her daughter in a platter to Herode & his frends, invited to the feast of his nativity But who would not thinke it strange and incredible, that the Euangelists, which haue represented vnto vs in their historie, all the markes, which could bee perceiued in this incestuous strumpet of a cruell heart, thir∣sting after the innocent bloode of S. Iohn Baptist, should haue forgotten to shewe vs this last, which if it had bene true, would haue bene more remarkeable then all the rest. And although that Eusebius, and some other Historians attest, that the body of this Fore-runner of Christ, was burned to ashes, yet: these forgers of reliques, would make the Idolaters of the papacie beleeue, that the finger wherewith Sainct Iohn Bap∣tist showed our LORD Iesus Christ vnto his Disciples, in saying: Behold the Lambe of God which taketh away the sin∣nes of the world, was miraculously preser∣ved by the providence of the Lord, & mul∣tiplyed into so manie fingers, that their at
least six of them found, to wit, one at Lions, another at Bourges, the third at Bezanson in S. Iohn the greats Church, The fourth at S. Fortuits, the fifth at Thoulouse, and the sixt at Florence. As for the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. Albeit the Prelates of Rome say, that they keepe in S. Iohn Latrans church their whole heads, & their bodies parted in the midst, weighed, and divided in to equall shares by S. Sylvester in S. Pauls Church: yet those of Poitiers seeke to perswade the comon peo∣ple, that they haue S. Peters chinn and his beard, those of Argenton in Berri, that they haue one of S. Pauls shoulders, those of Trier that they haue manie of the bones of these two Disciples of our Lord Iesus Christ. Likewise those of Thoulouse shew one bo∣dy of S. Andrews, and those of melphe ano∣ther. The Priests of Rome also wrangle with those of Trier and Padoua for S. Matthias body; because euerie one of these three townes, thinke they haue his corps in his owne Church. The same presbiters striue for the body of S. Iames the yonger, S. Phillips, S. Symons, and S. Iudes, with those of Thoulouse, which
maintaine aswell on the one side, as on the other, that they haue in their Churches the same bodies of these Apostles aboue said. The Romanists shew besides, two seue∣ral bodies of two other Saints in two other places, as the body of S. Anne mother vnto the virgin Marie, and Magdalenes sister vnto Lazarus, the wise men of the East, S. De∣nises, S. Anthonies S. Petronelles, S. Susannas, S. Hilaries, S. Honorats, S. Gilses, S. Williams, and S. Ferreols. For they shew one of S. Anns bodies at Apt in Provence, and ano∣ther at our Ladies de isle at Lions. Then one of Magdalenes corps at Vezelè by Auxerna, and another at S. Maximnis in Provence. Likewise the bodies of the three wise men of the East, both at Milan, and Cologne S. Denises at S. Denis in France, and at Reges∣bourgh in Almaine, S. Anthonies at Arles and at Vienna, S. Petronels daughter vnto S. Peter at Rome, and at Mans in the Iacobins Covent: S. Susannas at Rome and at Tholose: S. Hilaires at Poitiers, & in two other chur∣ches▪ the one in that which the Canons of that place dedicated vnto him, & the other in the Monkes Church at Sella: moreouer, S. Honorats bodie at Arles, and in the Ile of Lyrnis nere vnto Antiou: S. Gilses in a towne in Languedoc, which beareth his
name, and at Tholose: S. Williams at an Abbey in Languedoc called S. William vppon the desert, and in a towne in Anssoy called Ecrichen: S. Ferrcels at Vses in Languedoc & al Breienda in Auvergne: and S. Longins trans∣formed from a speare by a monstrous meta morphesie into a blinde man, both in our Ladies church de l'isle by Lions, and at Man∣toua in Italie. Vpon others they bestowe three bodies, as to S. Matthias, to Lazarus, to S. Gervis, to S. Protis, and to S. Wolfe. For they shew the corps of S. Matthias at Rome, at Pado∣va and at Trier. S. Lazuruses, at Marseille, at Authun, and at Avalon: S. Gervises and S. Protises at Milan, at Brisac, and at Bysanson: S. Wolfes at Lyons, at Senes and at Ausserre. To some others they attribute foure, as to S. Sebastian whereof the one is nigh vn∣to Narbonna, in the place of his nativitie, the second at Rome in S. Laurences Church, the third at Soissons, and the fourth at Piligni neare vnto Nantes. They attribute to Matthias foure heads, whereof one is to bee seene at Padoua, an other at Tryer, and the other two at Rome: and also seaven armes, three at Rome, two at Tryer, and two at Padoua. To S. Andrew, three heads, one at Thou∣louse,
and other at Melphe, and the third at Rome: and fiue armes, two at Thoulouse, two at Melphe, and one at Rome: then fiue feete, one at Awcon in Provence, two at Thoulouse and the other two at Melphe. To S. Barthelmew fiue handes, one at Pisa, two at Rome, and two in the kingdome of Naples. To S. Phillip three feete, one at Rome, and two at Thoulouse. To S. Stephen two heads, one at Arles, an other in his owne Church at Rome. To S. Laurence three armes, two at Rome in his owne church another in the church surnamed Palisperna. To S. Anthonie fiue knees, one in S. Augu∣stins Church of Albi, two at Arles, and two at Vienna. To S. Sebastian twelue armes, one at Mombrison in Forest, an other at S. Servins de Tholose, an other at Case-Dieu in Auvergne an other at Angers, two at Soissons, two at Pi∣ligni, two in the place where he was borne, and two at Rome. To S. Lambert two heads, one at Tryer, and an other at Leige. To S. Anne fiue heads, one at Lions, an other at Apt in Provence, the third at S. Annes in Turingue, the fourth at Duran in
Iuilliers, and the fifth at Trier. To S. Vrsell two, one at S. Iohn Angeli∣ques, an other at Cologne. Likewise to S. Hilarie two, one with his Corps at Venise, the other separated from his bodie at Cologne. Moreover, they shew the blood of Christ in so many places, and in so many gobles, that on maye plainely see, they mock at the effusion of the most precious bloode of our Redeemer, and willingly are igno∣rant, that the bloode of Christ could not bee sheade in such an abundance, as thy showe, in diverse of their Churhes, neither was it taken vp so fluently, by some of the Apostles, or friends of Christ, when his hands and fete were nailed, and his breast wounded with the push of the speare. To conclude, I could heare speake of the multiplication of the virgin Maries milke, through the craft of these Alcumists, of her smockes, kerchiefes, phillits, girdles, gownes, pantofles, combes, Needles, Des kes, Linnen, pictures, and jewells: Like∣wise, of the garments of Christ, of his teares, of the Cupp, out of which hee dran ke with his Disciples, of the linnen girdle, wherewith hee girded himself when hee washed their feete, of his purple gar∣ment,
of his speare, which wounded his side, of the dice which in those daies were not in request, of the stone pichers of Cana in Galile: of the miraculous Loanes where∣with our Saviour fed fiue thousand per∣sons, of his garment without seame, of the reede which they put into his handes in steade of a Scepter, of the spunge where∣with they put gal into his mouth, of the Crown of Thornes they set vpon his head, of the pillar whervnto (according to their tradition) they bound him to scourg him, of the Staires of the Sessions-house of Pon∣tius Pilate, besprinckled with the drops of the bloode which fell from his body. In like manner, of the bones, ashes, garments, chaines, and other reliques of the Apostles and Martyrs of Christ: but who is able to number vp all the inventions of the olde raggs found out in the shopps of the bro∣cards of the Romane church? For albeit Calvin hath made a booke expressely a∣gainst them, yet he confesseth therein, that the number of them is innumerable. I entreat therefore the Reader to con∣tent himself at this present with the proofs of these brasen-fac'd inventors of reliques, which I haue vttered, and to consider thē without passion.
By meanes whereof, I assure my selfe hee will judge, that wee haue just reason, to haue in abhomination these deceiuers of the ignorant, and to hold the adoration of their reliques for a heathenish super∣stition and Idolatrie, condemned and for∣bidden by the Lord, and not to be tollerated by those whose eyes God hath opened to see the abuses thereof. FINIS.
A Iesuiticall Epistle TOVCHING THE SAINCTS RELIQVES, WHICH OF late they haue showne at Awcon vnto the Superstitious people, from the 10. of Iuly, vntill the 24. of the same Month, Anno. 1608. Published by the Canons of Awcon: tran∣slated out of Latin into French and brieflie refuted, By Iohn Polyander, Professour in the Vniversitie of Leyden. And since Turned out of French into English, by Henry Hexham, 1611.
S. Augustine in the preface of his Hypognostiques against the elagians. WHen the Adversaires of the Catholique faith, seeke to impugne the rule of trueth, through diabolicall armes, they make vs the more vigilant and carefull to answere them: and when they lurke in hypocrisie to annoy vs, they a waken vs, as it were out of a Slumber, to the intent that taking the buckler of trueth, wee maye watch with hearts, resisting their falshood: the Trumpet of God sounding in our Eares, Watch, and pray, that ye enter not in∣to tentation.
THE INSCRIP∣TION AND PREFACE OF THIS IESVITICALL EPISTLE, touching the visitation of the holy reliques which are to bee seene in our Ladies Church at Awcon, put foorth by the Canons of the said Church. The Provest, Deane, and Chapiter, of the royall Church of our B. V. Marie at AWon, wish all health and happinesse vnto the godly and Benevolent Reader. IT was ordained in holy writt, (bene∣volēt reader) that the devote & lovers of re∣ligion, should spend their limited weekes, not onely for a certaine number of
daies, but of yeeres, & tha during the same time, as wel those of their own contrey as strāgers, shoul rest from their labours & kepe a feast, watching afte an extraordinarie fashio to the praises of the Lord The which our an cestor here at Awcō, & in som other places throw a god∣ly ceremony haue brogh into a custome, and many yeers agoe, began to ope every seaventh yeere th sacred and most preciou
treasurie of their holy Re∣liques, & to lay thē abroad for certaine daies vnto the view of all sorts of people, to moue thē by the contē∣plation therof to reverēce them. In which times, but especially before the warres & dangeros waies, people resorted not onely frō adjoyning places, but also from farre, as out of Hungary, Germany, France & the Lowcontries, in such n abundance, that this semed not an (obscure) ci∣tie,
but rather an assembli of manie provinces an kingdomes together. Refutation. The inscription of this Epistle shewe that these Canōs are of the same hum and complexion, as the Scribes & Phari were in the time of Christ, & his Apost who gloried in them-selves for being pillars of the church. There is this difere betweē the swelling Titles, whih the Scr & Pharises attributed to thēselves, to repsent their dignity to the comō people▪ they were some what Ecclesiasticall; in of these, that the Canons of the Sygogue of Awcon assume to themselve which are rather politique. The preface of this Epistle demonsteth, that these new Scribes and Phari would faine constraine the Christians our age to judaisme, and obserue the customes of the ceremonial law, long abolished by our Lord Iesus Christ, hath purchased vs the freedome, to assble our selues euery day in his name, and
worship him in all places, after th' example of his Apostles, and other Christians well instructed in the faith, which accounted all dayes a like,Rom. 14. 5. & the one as the other, and reprooued the Superstition of those which condemned their bretheren in the distinctiō of a holy-day,Col 2. 16. of the new Moone, or of the Sabbath.Hier. in Com. ad Gal. 2. 4. Wherevnto, S. Hierome having respect, acknowledged euery day was alike, and that Christ was crucified, not onely vpon the day of the preparation, or rise againe vpon the Sunday: but ads that his resurrection is alwaies, and that alwaies we may liue by the flesh of Christ. He ad∣deth morover, that after the decease of the Apostles, some wise men instituted certaine daies, for fasting and convocation, to the intent, that such as waited more vpon the worlde, then vpon God, who could not, or at least would not assemble them-selves so much as one day in their lives, to come & offer vp vnto God the sacrifices of their praiers & humane actions, might watch & pray vpon those daies if they would. Whereby it appeareth painely, that the observation of the Iudiciall feasts were not instituted by our Lord Iesus Christ, or his Apostles, but by the Doctors of the primi∣tiue Church, to expresse and record more
clearely vnto the common sort of people, the principal benefits of our Redeemer Ie∣sus Christ, and to accustome them, to em∣ploy some extraordinarie dayes in medita∣ting vpon them. Wherevnto this testimo∣nie of Socrates may serue, as a sufficient proofe, whereby he declareth, that neither Christ nor his Apostles was of meaning, to suspend their judgements touching Easter∣day, or any other feast: nor instituted any lawes for them, that they should bee kept, nor yet denounced any condemnation a∣gainst such as did not obserue them, or did lay any cursse or penalty vpon them, as the law of Moses vsually did: but the marke whereat they aimed, was to recommend to euery one that vertue and life, which was pleasing to God. And what an impudencie is it, in these Canons of Awcon, to appropriate their abuse vnto the feasts of the old Testament: seing there is asmuch difference, betweene their seventh yeeres Sabbath, & that of the Iewes, as is betweene light and darknesse▪ For, that of the Iewes was neither conse∣crated nor employed but onely to the glo∣rie of God: whereas that of the Canons of Awcon and their pilgrims, is dedicated to the honour of the bones and raggs of mortall men.
Touching their pilgrimages vnto the re∣liques of the departed Saincts, they are in noe wise grounded vpon any institution of our Lord: neither from any example of the aue Iewes: nor from the doctrine of the Apostles, and first Doctours of the primi∣tiue Church. For Iesus Christ our Redee∣mer was so farr from commaunding his disciples to transport themselves from one place to another, to adore the ashes of their predecessours, that on the contrarie, spea∣king vnto the Samaritanish woeman, hee told her that the hower immediatly should come, whē strangers should not come any more vnto the temple of Ierusalem,Iohn. 4. 23. to wor∣ship God his Father: but that the true wor∣shippers should worship him in Spirit and truth at home in their owne Countrey. As for the Iewes the true Children of Abraham, as it cannot be proued by holy Scripture, that God enjoyned them to goe into any forraine Countrey, to visite the reliques of the Saincts departed: so they ne∣ver resorted any whether, but where God onely was invocated in all puretie: shuning all other places into which they had trans∣ferred the honour of God to his creatures ead and insensible, following therein the ropher Hoseas exhortation, Though thou
playest the Harlot  Israell, at the least let not Iu∣dah sinne: come not ye vnto Gilgal, neither goe vp to Beth-avan.Hosea. 4. 15. I acknowledg that some of the ancient Fathers, traveled to Ierusalem to behold the sepulchre of our Redeemer Iesus Christ, and some other monuments of the Saincts departed: but I add thereto, that in the be∣ginning they went not thither to worship their reliques, but God onely, neither had they any such, foolish imagination, as once to think, that the grace of God, was tyed more to one place then to an other, but their onely desire was, to consider the re∣markeable signes of Christs redemption, & the place of his abode with his disciples▪ Herevpon S. Hierom speaking of S. Hilari∣ons, journey to Ierusalem, rebuketh such: thought that any thing was wāting in the faith, who had not seene Ierusalem, and steemed others that had ben there, mo holy then they which had not. The king∣dom of God (saith he) is among you, The pal of God is as accessible in Britainie, as in Ierusalem. Anthony & the Monkes of ∣gipt saw not Ierusalem, and yet notwithstand found the gate open. While S. Hilariō in Palestina, he went and saw Ierusalem, cause he would not dispise the holy places in su
a iourney: neuerthelesse, he remained there but for a day, because it should not seeme he ment to shutt vp the Lorde into a certaine place From hence it followeth, that these Canons of Awcon and their predecessors, takes for an exam∣ple the Iewish ceremonies, and ancient cus∣tomes which some Christians through a su¦perstitious imitation, introduced into the primitiue church by some of their hirelings onely to encrease their dishonest gaine, but let vs proceed to the first parte of their E∣pistle, wherby they shew the reasons, where fore many superstitious men in times past haue visited the Reliques, which are to bee seene in their Church. The first parte of this Iesuiticall Epistle. They perceived what great benefites God hath imparted to mortall men, through those holy Reli∣ques, and how many sun∣dry
sorts of miracles haue bene wrought by them, through a supernaturall force. For, not onely the wordes of the Saincts (as S. Chrysostome saith) but al so the garmēts of their bo∣dies,Hom 8. d popul. & 6. de virt & vir. are more manificent then any other possession.2 King. 2 8. For the cloke of Eliah made of the skinn of a Ly∣on diuided the waters of Iorden heither and thi∣ther.Dan. 3. 25. The shooes of the three yong men marched through the midest of the
fire, the wood of Elisha, was able to change the na∣ture of the water,2 King.  & force it to beare the yron of the Axe vpon the face there∣of, as if it had bene vpon their backe.Exo. 14 Moses divi∣ded the Sea with his rodd,Nom. 20 & brake assūder the rock. The garments of S. Paul,Act. 19. 12. chased awaie diseases, S. Peters shadow droue thē awaie. The ashes of Mar∣tirs haue cast out Deuils, Yea, God himself did a singular honour to Moses
when he buried him with his own handes, as S. Hier¦om saith, Christ comen∣deth the womās faith who was trobled with an issue of blood, whereby she be¦leeved she should recover her health, if shee did but touch the hemme of his garment. Refutation. I haue already proued by the sixt abuse of reliques, that the miracles done by thē, are noe otherwise, then the illusions of Sa∣than & the jugling trickes of the hireling of Antichrist, which tend to this euil end to prouoke their Idolaters, to the adoration of bones & rotten garments: which are o
afarre basser rancke, then the desceased Saincts, which God neuerthelesse forbids vs to invocate. I say moreover, that if our fathers haue not adored the true things, wherewith our Lord Iesus Christ, & some other holy men of God haue wrought true signes and mi∣racles: much lesse are Christians bound to worship those, by which the Romish priests feigne to doe their lying wonders? So then, the holy Scripture makes noe mention of any adoration, which our Fa∣thers should doe in honour of Moses rodd, of Elias cloke, of Elishas wood, of S. Peters shadow, or of S. Pauls garments. For these holy men, were so farre from suffring the vulgar people to worship their garments, or shadowes,Act. 10. 26. that contrariwise even S. Pe∣ter himself, for bad Cornelius the Captaine to worship his person. S. Paul and Barnabas would not suffer the Priest of Lystra to offer them Sacrifices. S. Peter by commaunding Cornelius, who was falne done at his feete, to stande vp, & shewing him that hee was bt a man as he was. S. Paul and Barnabas by renting their clothes, and crying out in the midest of the throng, O men why doe ye these things?Act. 14. 14. 15. wee are men subiect to the like pas∣sions that ye be, & preach vnto you, that ye should
turne from these vaine things vnto the living God, which made Heaven & Earth, and the Sea, & all things that in them are. Then their power of doing miracles, pro¦ceeded not from their garments, or sha∣dowes, nor from their humaine nature, but onely from the divine might which really was in Christ, & accompanied in old time his faithfull servants after an extraordi∣narie manner. For as the three first E∣uangelists averre, that Christ of himself di acknowledge that vertue that issued forth of him, to cure the woman that was trou∣bled with the issue of blood, by touching the hemme of his garment: So wee read also in the third Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, that S. Peter & S. Iohn, seeing the people astonied and amazed, because▪ they had healed a man which had ben a creep from his mothers wombe, S. Peter sheweth thē, that this miracle was not done throgh their owne power or sanctity, but through faith in the name of Iesus Christ. As for S. Chrysostom, though at sometimes hee extolleth (through the art of his Rethorique) the reliques of the departed Saincts too excessiuelie: yet notwithstan∣ding the Canons of Awcon, or rather their Schoolmasters which haue dictated them
this Epistle falsifie his wordes, and wrest them into a sence cōtrary to his meaning: For in the text which they cite of S. Chryso∣stomes, hee speaketh not there of any mira∣cles, which it pleased God to worke by the garments of any of the holy Fathers after their departure, but whilst they were li∣ving, to shew by this argument, that their very garments which to the outward ap∣pearance of men, were base and contemti∣ble, were more precious in the sight of God, then all the sumptuous rayment of Achab and other infidell kings. Touching the honour which it pleased God to doe vno Moses his servant, by in∣terring him, (as S. Hierom saith) with his owne handes, whosoever hath but any jott of judgment or reason, will conclude from this interrment of Moses corps, the cleane contrary to that, which the Canons of Awcon here inferre, to wit, that God him∣self intended to hide his bones in a place vnknowne vnto the children of Israel, to hinder them from taking them vp, & least they should abuse them with Idolatrie, e∣ven as the superstitious men of the Romish church doe, who worship the bones, which in times past haue bene taken out of the graves of their ancestours.
Concerning that which they alledge of our Lord Iesus Christ, for commending the faith of the woeman which was trou∣bled with the issue of bloode, because shee said to her self, If I may touch but his gar∣ment onely, I shall be whole: I answere that although her faith was so weake, that shee quaked for feare when shee came neere vn∣to Christ, to confesse that shee had touched the hemme of his garment, and by that meanes was comforted by our Saviour who commaunded her to bee of a good courage, yet neverthelesse her faith was not defiled with such a superstition as that of the Romanists is. For when shee came trembling towards our Saviour, shee fell not done before him to kisse the hemme of his garment, but to worship his person, & to shew him before all the people, for what cause she had touched him, and how shee was made whole immeadiately vpon it. Now resteth the second part of this Epi∣stle, by which they rebuke the censours of the Superstitious veneration of their re∣liques, and applaude the Adorers thereof.
The second parte of this Epistle abovesaid. From the reasons above said we may gather, with what spirit aswell the olde Heretikes (namely, Euno∣mius, Vigilantius & Eusta∣chius, as many other new Innovators of Religion in France) haue bene in∣spired, who haue hereto∣fore burned the precious Reliques of the Apostles of that Kingdome, to wit, S. Hilaries at Poitiers, S. Ire¦neus at Lyons, & S. Mar¦tins
at Tours, giuing here∣by sufficiētly to vnderstād that they were not of that ranck, nor of that Religiō, as they were whom they detested with so great a ha¦tred & ill wil, nor so wor∣thy as their holy asshes, & some other holy memori∣alls of faith & piety, which rested there. The first founders of the Catholi∣que Church did not so, neither those doctors tha deliuered as it were from hand to hand, vnto their
posterity the Catholique faith: as they receiued it from Christ, much more pure, more sincere, and lesse corrupted then it is at this present, as most eui∣dētly is seene in the books of the Easterne Doctours, and Historians, that hee which would goe about, to proue it by any other testimonies, should seeme to add brightnesse vn∣to the Sunne at noone day.
Charles truely great for his piety, & eminent deeds or rather thrise most great Emperour and excellent Founder of this Church, imitating herein the steps of those holy personages, was amongst other his gra¦ces and virtues, worthy a Christian Emperour in∣dued with this, that his on∣ly desire was, to gather fro all partes whatsoeuer, a sortes of holy Reliques our Lord Iesus Christ, of his holy mothers, and
of the other Saincts: and after he had made them to bee transported from all countreys, caused them al so to be honoured & ado∣red religiously, as we may conclude from his Acts, the signes whereof are yet to be seene. Now the notablest & remarkeablest of them all is, the priuiledge which is found in the auncient mo∣numents of our Church, by which he ordayned in a generall assemblie of the
whole Empire, that this Citie of Awcon should be enriched with many im∣munities, and established for his royall Seat on this side the Alpes. The pri∣ueledge contayneth these words. I haue in this place built the monasterie of S. Marie, the mother of our Lord Iesus Christ: with asmuch labour and ex∣pence as I could, and haue adorned it with many pre¦cious stones & with mar∣ble. &c. Therefore the
lent workmanship of this great royall church, being fully finished, not onely according to my wished desire, but also through diuine grace, I haue col∣lected together (from di∣uerse Countreys & king∣domes, but especiall out of Greece) sundry signes & markes, of the Apostles, of the Martyrs, of the Con∣fessours, of the virgins, & haue brought them into this holy place, that the Kingdome might be esta∣blished
thereby & the re∣mission of sinnes be graun¦ted through their suffrings. The same care & desire flowed downeward vpon and with his paternall in∣heritance, and posteretie, vntill the glorie of the French (who had taken their Source and growth through Godlinesse, being distitute of his vnderpropping and foundation) be∣gann to decay litle by litle as S. Sigebert Gemblacen∣sis testifieth, by the very
wordes of the french histo¦rie it self in his treatise and translation of S. Vit, and Modestia. For this cause, al the most famous Cities, all Kingdomes and prin∣cipallities, endeuored by all meanes to obtaine some bodie of some one Sainct or another, as their prin∣cipall Patron and Protec∣tor, or at least some small reliques from some whole corps to assure & confirme their cōmō wealth throgh help thereof, trusting to
the great liberallity of the great miracles which God had wont to worke, for the loue he bore vnto those ho¦ly reliques. Refutation. I finde in this discourse many faults, the first is, that in accusing the Condem∣ners of this superstitious adoration of Re∣liques, they place in the first ranck of them Eumonius, Vigilantius and Eustachius, who were not so wel grounded in the reprehen∣sion of this Idolatrie, as wee are in ours. For proofe whereof, because I will not bee too teadious, I onely will alledge Vigilantius censure vpon it, & S. Hieromes answere vnto it. Vigilantius censure then, as S. Hierome propounds it was this. What needeth this, not onely to honour with such a reverence, but also to worship I knowe not what, caryed vp and downe and enclossed within a small vessell? Wee may se, that the pagans custome is almost brought
into the Church, vnder the color of religion, and that while the sunne shineth, they still light vp a great nomber of Candells, and that some of them kisse and worship a litle dust, wrapped vp in a costly sheete, and putt into a litle vessell. Let vs see on the other side, what answere S. Hierome gaue him, Who hath euer worship∣ped the Martyrs? Who hath euer thought man to be God, ô brainelesse head! If the Ro∣manists should answere vs in that manner, at this daye, Who hath euer worshipped the Martyrs? Who hath euer thought man to be God? may not wee justly reply, they are euen your Doctours, who haue seduced you, not onely to adore the Martyrs them∣selues, but also their bones and reliques. The second fault is, they ranck Vigilan∣tius in the catalogue of their Heretickes, who by S. Hierome his owne adversairy, was called Holy Father, who feeling himselfe mooued with the same zeale, as S. Chryso∣stome was, condemned the vnprofitable ex∣pence, which was employed about the garnishing of tombes and the reliques of Saincts departed.Epist ad Paulin For as Vigilantius tear∣meth, this ceremonie of kissing the reliques of the Saincts, and lighting vp of Candells about them, a heathenish custome introduced into the Church vnder a falsse pretext of religion:
So S. Chrysostom calleth it in his 12. Setmon vpon the first Epistle to the Corinthians,Chris. Hom. 12 1. Cor. a foolish devotion, a devillish observation, main∣tayned by the corrupt iugments of senselesse men that did but suck, therefore, to turne them from this superstition hee sheweth them, that the Martyrs take no delight to be ho∣noured with their money, for which the poore cry out, in that they did not rather employ it for their reliefe, & that the con∣sideration of our Lords resurrection, who rise naked from death, ought to learne thē to leaue of from the foolish expence of fu∣neralls. For whereto is it good (saith hee) seing it bringeth but losse to such as doe it,Chrys. Hom. 84 in Euang. Iohn. and noe benefit to the dead, but rather harme. The third fault is, they liken our Do∣ctours vnto Eunomius, Vigilantius, and Eu∣stachius, wherein they are in noe wise to bee compared. For the Eunomians were by the holy fathers taxed of Heresie, because they made it a difficult matter to enter into the Churches of the Apostles & Martyrs, who haue taught in time past, that Christ is true God & equall to the Father: whereof they cannot reproue our Doctours, seeing they preach in the Churches, adorned with the names of S. Peter & S. Stephen, & other of
the Apostles and Martyrs, & seing besides, that they maintaine the doctrine of the Godhead of our Lord Iesus Christ, against the disciples of Eunomius. Neither cann they charge our Diuines (vnlesse wronfully) with that Crime where with S. Hierome attached Vigilantius, (to wit,) because he held vncleane the bones of the Saincts departed, and would haue had their ashes ignominiously cast vpon a dunghill, to the end that he alone (though drunck and a sleepe) might be adored, but ours teach the cleane contrarie, that their bodies ought to be buried honorably. The fourth fault is, they accuse our Pre∣decessours for hauing burned in France the reliques of some departed Saincts, as those of S. Ireneus, S. Hilaires, and S. Martins: yet they cite not so much as one witnesse, herein they doe not imitate their Cardinal Bellarmin, who to giue some color and shew of truth vpon this false calumniation, al∣ledgeth in his treatise of Reliques, the Ae∣station of a certaine Monke, called Surius, which many Papists thēselues beleeue not, because another gray Fryer, named Feu-ar∣dant, speaking of the boddie of S. Ireneus in his preface vnto his latin Irenea, denieth that S. Ireneues corps was burned at Lyon,
or that his ashes were cast into the Rosne. I say againe, that this accusatiō of theirs it false; because they impute to the first Re∣formers of our age (whom wronfully they tearme Innovators of religion) the in∣solences committed by some vndis∣creet souldiers, in the beginning of the troubles without their councel or avouch∣ment. For they were so farre from exhor∣ting thē to burne the bodies of the Saints, or to throw their ashes into riuers, that cō∣trariwise, they preached against such ou∣trages, and admonished their anditorie, therein to followe the example of the aun∣cient Fathers, and that euery man was obli∣ged to lay them into the Earth, and hono∣rably to burie the bones and ashes of those whom God had taken out of this world. The fift fault is, they ranck amonge the nomber of the first founders of their Ca∣tholique religion, the Emperor Charles the great, who approoued not all the point thereof. For sundty Historians, yea, and his booke which he wrot, against the second Councell of Nice, shewes euidently, that hee condemned the decree of that Coun∣cell for the worshipping of images, calling it, a most impudent tradition, and a foo∣lish and prophane invention, comming
neere vnto that infidelitie, which alwaies keeps her Adorers in errour. Touching their allegation of the double diligence, which many towns & provinces vsed in searching out, and in honoring the reliques of the deceased Saincts, wee reply, that wee are not bound to follow the cu∣stomes of men, but onely the rule of diuine law, which neither hath enjoyned vs, nor our fathers vnto any such superstitious worshipping of reliques. Let vs now proceed forward to see what these Canons of Awcon cann say vnto vs in the third part of their Epistle. The third parte of this Iesuiticall Epistle. This abundant libera∣litie of God (say they) see∣meth noe new thing to those that are read in holy writ, and Historie: because
they know, that by S. Pe∣ters shadow (though no∣thing seemeth more vain) and by the kerchiefs and hād kerchiefs, which they brought frō S. Pauls body all sorts of griefs presently & most happily haue be driuen from diseased bod∣dies, & the infernal Spirit cast foorth of their Soules▪ From which example, th Godly custome of our an∣cestours proceeded, tha in immitating Ioseph of rimathea, & Nicodemu▪
represented by the bodies of our Lord Iesus Christ, and S. Stephen: they vsual∣ly wrapped vp the most precious reliques of their Church in silken clothes, which they called (Sāctu∣aires) of holy coverleds as ecclesiasticall historiās write the which they haue since distributed, & sent abroad according to the anciēt cu¦stom of the church, to such as through piety and loue vnto religiō desired thē, in such sort, that the Romane
church, hath not bestowed noe other reliques vppon Emperours, or any other great personnages, what∣soeuer, thā such sanctuaires and Couverleds, as appea∣reth by the letters pope (Hormisda) wrote vnto his Embassadours, and vn∣to Iustinian the Empe∣rour. And to the end, those Sanctuaires might bee in the greater request, amonge vs, it pleased the diuine goodnesse (as it eui¦dēt to māy of our church)
to illustrate & manifest thē through the operation of many great miracles, & so much the more, because that without this meanes, they could not satiate the pietie, which was kindled in many. Now this custōe of going on pilgrimage, to¦wards thee places renow∣ned for their reliques, and other memorialls of the Saincts, was brought vp in Christēdō, frō the first age of the Catholique church, & in that time, whē she had
some rest from the oppres∣sion of Tyrants, and other perverse Ennemies of the faith. And because we wil not here speake of the Ce∣remonies of the anciēt law wherby euery one was en¦joyned to goe yearely on pilgrimage to the feasts, as God himself had cōmāded it, & many other most reli¦gious personages, yea Chris himself & his most holy pa¦rēts, accomplished it with so great a zeale of going on pilgrimage, principally
vnto the holy places of the land of Iudea, which zeale was kindled also in the hearts of mē after Christs death, in immitating their ancestours, as the testimo∣nie of diuine write, and S. Hierome also speaking vp∣on this matter doth auou¦che, that all the wordes in the holy Scripture re∣commend to vs this godly worke. And in another place they runne hither: (saith he) from al the cor∣ners of the Earth, the citie
is full of all sorts of people &c. But chiefly with those which hold the highest de¦grees of honour in this world meet here with one accord. And verely our Patron Charles of most ho¦ly and famous memorie, withour producing any o¦ther examples at this pre∣sent, of any other Empe∣rours, & most noble parso¦nages, who were so much giuen vnto the exercise of these holy pilgrimmages, that oftentimes they went
a foote to Rome, onely to excercise thēselves in this godly worke. And haue attributed so▪ great honor vnto S. Peters Cathedrall church at Rome, as they haue kissed the very stares thereof one after another. So that one may say of him, & these Emperours, that which Austin hereto¦fore obiected against the I∣dolaters of Madaure, ye se that the highest dignity of the most noble Empire, supplicates with an hum∣ble
crowne by the Sepul∣chre of S. Peter the fisher. The like also haue ben found in Englād, Dēmarke, Frāce & Splayne, who being touched with this desire of pilgrimages, discharging thēselfs for the present fro al the affaires of their earth¦ly kingdomes, transported themselfes thither-wards through a long, daunge∣rous, & weary some way▪ to honour there their he¦venly King after the ex∣ample of the three Kings▪
which came to honour the cradell of our Lord Iesus Christ. Also many other Chri¦stians haue done the same, whose ordinarie custome was, eftsoones to visite the places, which were desti∣ned for the holy memori∣als & sepuleres, to the end (that as it is written of the virgin marie) their inward loue might be nourished by holy signes, & inflamed with the more loue of de∣votion, through the most
joyfull contemplation of the Saincts tombes, & reli∣ques. For this hath alwaies ben found by experience, & confirmed by the testi∣mony of all antiquity, that through these pilgrima∣ges, through this great floc¦king and godlynes of the people, a new zeale began to kindle in our spirits, to∣geather with the piety & reverēce we bore to these holy things, and also new desires to liue well, and to immitate the Saints in our
life and manners. And loe, next vnto the glory of God, the chiefest ende of our pilgrimages, which God so specially de¦mādeth of vs, was, because as S. Augustin saith, the bo∣dies of the Martirs haue ben giuen vs, to awaken vs vnto the excercise of de∣votion, through the admo¦nition of the places, & by the presence of these holy pledgs. For the holy place (as this Father exhorteth vs) reneweth & encreas∣eth
our former affections, whē as through the adver¦tisment of the places, it is manifested, & raiseth it self vp by wheating our chari∣tie, aswell towards those whome we are to imitate, as towards those, through whose assistāce we doe it. And therefore it hapned perchance (as it were by di¦uine disposition & proui∣dence) that almost all the holy bodies of the holy A∣postles, & principall Do∣ctours of the East, haue
ben transported into the West, before the Turks tyrannie: which sought to abolish and wholly root out the memorie of the Christian religion. And indeed, wee must acknow¦ledge, that whatsoeuer is most precious and of the greatest importance in our treasurie of Reliques, was brought from beyōd sea, out of those countries, through the great pietie, industrie, & deligence of Charles the great, as hath
ben showen before, by the auncient charter of our Church, and shall here∣after appeare by our In∣dex. Refutation. This third part of their Epistle, stuffed with vaine repetitions & insufficient proo∣fes, needs noe long refutation. As for th which they alledg againe, concerning the miracles done by S. Peters shadow, and by the kerchiefs & hād kerchiefs they brought from S. Paules bodie, it hath ben sufficient∣ly answered in the first part of their Epistle as also that which they rehearse againe touching the pilgrimages which our Fthers did to the holy places of Iudea, int refuting of their preface: by which we ha refuted all those, which through a foo devotion seeke to tye the seruice of G more to one place thā to another. Wher vpon S. Chrysostomes admonitiō may se that to obtaine pardon for our transgressions,
neede not spend any money, neither is it necessaire to doe any such thing, onely the integretie of a good will sufficeth. It is in vaine to take any iourneys into farre-countries, or to seeke vnto other nations farre from vs, or to endure daungers and perils, onely the will is enough. In like manner that of S. Augustins, God commandeth vs not to goe into the East, to seeke out righteousnesse, nor to saile into the West to obtaine pardon, forgiue thy ennemy, and it shall be forgiuen thee, seeke nothing of thy self out of thy self. Likewise S. Bernards, Oman thou needest not passe the seas, nor pene∣trate the Cloudes, thou behoouest not to passe the Alps, neither hast thou need, that any should shew the any longe way, Goe before God into thy selfe. As for their proofs of the ancient cu∣stome of their fathers, in wrapping vp in cloaths the reliques of the departed Saints, of the donation of those clothes, to al sorts of people (but especially to Emperours, & great parsonnages) of the miracles done by touching them, I call them insufficent because this custome is not grounded vp∣pon the worde of God, nor from the ex∣ample of the Disciples of our Lord Iesus Christ. For so farre was Ioseph of Arema∣thia, and Nicodemus, who wrapped vp the body of Christ in a sheete (whom they
make mētiō of in their fine discourse) from showing it, or giving it to some religious men, that on the contrarie, they buryed it with Christs bodie and sought to keepe it from the sight of men. And suppose that some miracles haue bene done, by the tou∣ching of such like clothes of the dead, wee are not to wonder at it, seeing Sathan, when it pleaseth God to lett loose his reignes, & permitt him to deceiue men with stronge illusions & errours, hath oftentimes done the like miracles by touching the reliques of dead beasts, as wee haue amply declared in our disputation, in the discouvering it the sixt abuse of reliques. I could here convict the Canons of Aw∣con by the testimonie of holy Scripture, that the wise men of the East, which ca out of their owne Countries into the La of Bethlem to worship our Sauiour Christ and to present him their gifts specified by the Euangelist S. Mathew in his second Chapter, were no Kings but Philosophers Secondly, that this deed was extraordin∣ry, and ought not to bee brought into▪ law and Custome in Christenstome, b cause our true Iosiah and fore-runner Iesus Christ is not, as he was then here beneath on Earth: but sitteth now aboue in Heauen
on the right hand of the Majesty of God his Father: but my desire is not to surpasse the limitts of our disputation, therefore, I will at this present rest contented with that I haue already said, touching the pil∣grimages of the ancient Fathers. Yet resteth the refutation of the index of the reliques of their Saincts departed, but before I enter into it, I will conclude my former refutation with the same exhor¦tation which the Apostle S. Peter gaue vnto all Christians vpon the end of his second Epistle generall, who had obtained faith at the same price with vs through he righ∣teousnesse of our God and Saviour Iesus Christ. My Beloued, seeing ye know these things be∣fore by the discouverie of the falsifications of so many texts of the Bible, contained in the aboue said Epistle of the Canons of Awcon, that these vnlearned & vnstable pervert the holy Scriptures vnto their owne distruction, beware, lest ye bee also plucked away with the er∣rour of the wicked, and fall from your owne sted¦fastnesse. But grow in grace, and in the know∣ledge of our Lord Iesus Christ, to him bee glory both now and for euermore Amen.
The Refutation OF AN INDEX OF THE RELIQVES, WHICH EVERY SEVENTH yeare ae showne at Awcon, vnto the poore and ignorant pil∣grims of the Romane Church. By Iohn Polyander.
Tertullian in the booke of his praescriptions against Heretiques. THe Doctrine of Heritiques (saith hee) com∣pared with that of the Apostles, will shew by the diversitie and contrarietie thereof, that it hath for authour, neither any Apostle, nor Apo∣stolique Doctour: because that as the Apostles haue not taught sundry Doctrines, repugnant one to another: So the Apostolique Doctours haue not vttered Doctrines, contrary vnto that of the Apostles, but those which are falne away from the institutions of the Apostles, and haue taught after another manner.
AN INDEX OF THE VIRGIN MARIES RELIQVES, OF CHRISTS of S. Iohn Baptists, & some other Saincts departed, composed and published by the Canons of Awcon, Anno. 1608. 1THE smocke which the most blesse virgin Ma wore, whē shee was deliuere of our Saviour Iesus Christ. 2 Two swadling bands wherewith the Son of Go was swadled, presently aft hee was borne.
3 The linnen cloth which couvered the most holy bod∣die of Christ, and which was besprinkled with his sa∣ving bloode. 4 The sheete wherevpon Saint Iohn Baptist kneeled in the prison, when his head was cutt of by the commaun∣dement of the adulterous King. 5 The girdle wherewith our Lord Iesus Christ trussed vp his garment. 6 The Cord with which they bound his sacred hands,
when they led him as an in∣nocent Lambe before many iudges. 7 A peece of one of the nailes, wherewith they nailed him to the crosse. 8 Two great peeces of the holy crosse. 9 Some of the peeces of th Sponge, & Christs kerchiefe. 10 The most blessed virgin Maryes girdle, with some of her haire, and her picture paynted by the Euangelist S Luke. 11 A piece of the chaine
wherevnto Sainct Peter was bound, while he was in prison. 12 One of Simions armes wherewith hee imbrassed the babe Iesus Christ in the tēple, being but fortie dayes olde. 13 The bones and blood of the first Martyr S. Stephen, wherevpon the king of the Romans ordinarily doth take his oath in our Chapiter. 14 S. Leoparts Corps. 15 The head and arme of the Emperour S. Char∣les the great, and his whole corps.
16 The celestiall manna, and S. Catherins oyle. The Refutation of this Index. If the poore ignorant people of the Ro∣mish Church, were but permitted to read the holy Scriptures in their mother tong; they would quickly perceiue with vs, th the reliques, which the Canons of Awcon attribute in their Index to Iesus Christ, his Mother, to S. Iohn Baptist, to Simion S. Peter & to S. Stephen are falsly invente by some juglars, & in noe wise grounde vpon the Historie of the holy Euangelists For the Euangelists and Authentique wit∣nesses of Christ, elected by God his Fathe, to record vnto vs all the memorable of our Sauiours Conversation, and of friends in this world, and to leaue behind them a faithful Index vnto posterity, mak no mention therein of any smock of virgin Maries, of anie of her haire, or of image painted by S. Luke, who was noe pter, but rather a Phycisian as Eusebius and
some other Historians affirme,Col. 4. 14. and prooue it by the fourth Chapter of S. Pauls Epistle written to the Colossians. Neither speake they therein of anie girdle of Christs, nor of any cloth within which his bodie was wrapped, when they nailed him to the Crosse: but one the con∣trarie, all of them witnesse, that he was cru∣cified stark naked, and that foure souldiers snared his garments amonge them. Nor speake they word of any sheete which Herod should commaund his Sariant to lay vnder Iohn Baptists knees, before he beheaded him, nor of any chopping of, or any separation (which should be done vn∣to Simeens arme wherewith he had imbra∣sed our Saviour Iesus Christ in the temple of Ierusalem) from his other members, or that it should be kept as a reliquaire by the Christians. Neither finde wee in the discription of S. Stephens stoneing and burial, that S. Luke should reporte, that those Godly men which buried him, tooke vp any of this Martyrs blood,Act. 8. 2. to deliuer it to the church, but caried it away with his bodie to be bu∣ried. The hirelings of Awcon cannot prooue by their Historie, nor any other authour
worthy of beleefe, that the Virgin Marie was so curious as to keepe her ragged swadling bāds, where with shee had bound vp the bodie of her litle babe Iesus Christ, or that shee gaue them to the Euangelist S. Iohn to keepe the wel beloued Disciple of her son Iesus Christ, with exhortation to recommend them after her departure to the doctors of the primitiue Church, or that shee did commaund, that they should be locked vp in any place, to bee showne at some times to the vulgar sort of people in memorie of the nativity of our Redeemer. Much lesse can they proue, that the Soul∣diers of Pōtius Pilate solde to the Apostles, or any of their Successours, the corde where with they bounde the handes of our Savi∣our Iesus Christ, or any of his garmēt they parted among them, or the crosse where∣vnto they nailed him, or any pieces of the sponge they filled with vineger when as he cried I thirst: But all these old ragges haue bene gathered, & patched together by the Fathers of these botchers, & polished with the name of Antiquity, to transforme the liuely simplicitie of the Sacraments, and true memorialls of Christ, into a motley religion, disguised with a million of crafty devises.
And whosoever will but conferre the In¦dex of these Canons of Awcon, with some other registers of the Romane Church: they shall soone perceiue how they contradict one another. For those of Charters main∣taine, that they haue the same smock which the virgin Marie had on, when shee was delivered of our sauiour Iesus Christ, which (according as men reporte that haue seene it) is too long for a woman of a midle sta∣ture as the Virgin Marie was, and as Ni∣cephorus witnesseth, that the hose of Ioseph her husband, were too short for a man of the same shape. For the Virgin Maries smocke, which they shew at Awcon vnto the ignorāt & credulous people, is so long & wide, that if shee had bene a Gyantesse (as Calvin noteth in his treatise of relikes) shee could scarcely haue worne it. One the contrarie, Iosephs hose (which the Can∣nons of Awcon haue forgott to put into their Index) are so short and straight that they will not serue a dwarfe, or a litle boy. Besides these Chap-men of Rome, and Salvadour in Spayne wrangle obstinately with those of Awcon, which of them shold haue the Swadling-bande where-with the Virgin Marie swadled vp her litle Babe Iesus Christ.
But yet there is a farre greater contenti∣on betweene the Huckstars of the Rom∣ane church for the peeces of Christs crosse. For there is almost not one Abbey or Cloi∣ster in the world, which makes not a bra∣vado & a superstitious showe therewith: al∣beit that Eusebius showes vs, in the life of Constantin the Emperour, that Helena his mother having found the same crosse, sent one peece of it vnto the Byshop of Ierusa∣lem, and the other vnto her son Consta∣tine, who adorned his caske with the secōd, & with the third, made a bitt for his horse, the hireings of Antichrist haue forged & multiplied them into so manie, that they shewe a great number of whole ones, be∣sides manie peeces in diverse Countries of Christendome. Morover, there are sundry Townes which affirm, that they haue the whole Sweat∣ing cloth of our Lorde Iesus Christ: But especially they of Rome, Byzanzon, and Cadoin in Lymos. Is it not then a great impudence in these Canons of Awcon, to maintaine against thē, that they haue some of the peeces of it? And if other Townes haue likewise some peeces of this Swearing cloth (as they vant they haue) what aud audaci∣ousnesse is it in those townes which I haue
named to maintaine at this day, that they haue his whole Sweating-cloth with the impression of all the parts of Christs body stāped into the same cloth frō the crowne of his head, vnto the sole of his foot: seeing wee cann prooue the contrarie by the cere∣monie which the jewes vsed in burying of their dead, and also by a text of the Euan∣gelist S. Iohns in his 20. Chapter and sixt & seuenth verses, that this sweating cloth, was but the kerchief which Ioseph of Aremathea and Nicodemus had bound about his head, and lay in a place by it felfe, from the other linnē clothes, wherewith his body had ben wrapped vp by his two difciples Iohn and Peter. As for the rest, if the Prelates of Rome haue the whole chaine wherevnto S. Peter was chained in his prison, doe not those ca∣nons of Awcon bragg falsly▪ that they haue a peece of it. If they of Rome haue also the whole body of S. Stephen, with all his bones, what an impudencie is it in those of Awcon and some Canons of other churches to say, as it were in dispite of one another, that eve∣ry one of them haue in his owne church, the bones and blood of this first Martyr of of Christs.
Concerning the Emperour Charles the great, we confesse that the Historians of his time witnesse, that he was buried at Awcon in Germany: howbeit wee wonder much, because they mingle the reliques of a politi¦que man, who was giuen to whoredome (as the Apostate Iohn de Serres withnesseth in his Invētorie) with those of Christs, the Vn∣gin Maries, and other holy personages which led a blamelesse life in this worlde. Furthermore, If the most holy place be at Rome in S. Iohn Laterans church, and if the Byshope of Roome keepeth there-in Aarons rod and the Heauenly Manna, doe not the Canons of Awcon deserue to bee controled, in that they attribute the propri¦ety of these reliques, and call their shoppe furnished with all maner of false marchan∣dize, the most holy place of the Virgin Ma∣ries Temple? For like as vnder the old Tes∣tament, there was but one Tabernacle, one Temple, and consequently one most holy place, vntil the first coming of Iesus Christ. So could it not represent vnto our Fathers but one Temple of the God-head of Christ, which is his body, & one most holy place, which is the Heauen into which this Souve∣raine and onely sacrificer hath tanspor∣ted his body by his assention. Now sup∣pose
that that should be false (as it is not) which the Apostle declareth in his Epistle to the Ebrewes, to wit, that the Tabernacle and Sanctuarie of the old Testament were but figures of the true Tabernacle, and of the true holy places, which are not made with mēs hands (but is the body of Christ & the Kingdome of Heauen) & that these figures ought not to last but vntil the time of their corectiō & accomplishmēt, throgh the death & passion of our Redeemer Iesus Christ: yet notwithstanding, to showe the correspondence between the shadowes & the bodie which is founde in Christ, the Doctors of the Romane church, ought but to name vnto vs one Temple, & one most holy place, heretofore figured vnto our Fa∣thers, first by the Tabernacle, & afterward by the Temple of Ierusalem: in lieu of so many Temples & most holy places, which in these later daies they shewe to the poore ignorant people, to learne them to Iudais∣me and observe the Ceremonies abolishd long since through he sacrifice of Christ Iesus, & condemned by the doctrine of his Apostles. As for the rest, either there is noe likely∣hood of truth, that the auncestors of these Canons of Awcon, haue had and showne
heretofore vnto the common people the true fore-skinne of Iesus Christ, or that these canons their successours hauing recei∣ved it from them, haue not kept it so faith∣fully as the garments of our Sauiour Christ, and the instrumēts wherewith Pilates soul∣diers serued their turnes to crucifie him, seeing that they dare not name his fore∣skinne in their Index, nor place it in the ranck of his other reliques afore mentio∣ned. And that which they make vp their tale withall, concerning S. Catherins Oyle, and S. Leopards corps, it is of the same coigning as their inventoire is of the bones of the ten thousand Martyrs, which maye not be touched but onely seene vnder the altar of the Church at Rome, called the Heauens Ladder: and the eleuen thousand virgins whereof they of Coullen gathered vp more then a hundred carte loades. For euery man of vnderstanding having regard to that which these churchmen of Awcon re∣port of their S. Catherine, and compare it with that which those of Rome say (who maintaine they haue one of her fingers in the temple of the holy Ghost, and in the temple dedicated vnto her the milke which gushed foorth of her necke, when shee was
beheaded, & the oyle which sprang foorth of her graue) will finde as much fraude and deceit therein, as in that which they recite of their Idol S. Christopher, to wit, that this Gyant hauing bene a theese in his youth, at last forsooke that wicked course of life, & to doe a publique penāce for his sinnes, vn dertooke to carie such as was desiours to passe ouer a great water, from one banck side to the other: Now vpon this occasion Iesus being willing to try his faith & obe∣dience, came & presented himself with the rest (as hee was readie to take them vp) in the likenesse of a litle boy, and talking with him, prayed him to carie him ouer as hee did the others, the which this theefe pre∣sently agreed vnto, but after hee had sett him vpon his shoulders hee found him so heavie, that being in the midst of the river he tould him that hee neuer had borne so heauie a burden: and that hee should sinke vnder him, if he did not presently ease him: Now euer since they haue called Christofle, or rather Christophorus that is, Christ bearer, from which fable euery man may gather, that these fine Doctours feede their wrech∣ed disciples, but with lies & illusions, where of I haue discovered a great number in these three litle Treatises, with assurance
that the vnpassionate Reader, and louer of the trueth, opening his eyes & eares to see and heare them, will not onely be mooued through this my advertisement to reiect them, but also to assist me on his behalf, to perswade these silly superstitious mē, to take heede vnto the seruice of Idoles invented by these latter priests of Ball, full of all deceit, and to worship with vs our onely God and hea∣venly Father in spi∣rit & trueth. FINIS.
