21079 99836439 713
Englands Farevvell to Christian the fourth, famous King of Denmarke: With a relation of such shewes & seuerall pastimes presented to his Maiestie, as well at Court the fift day of August last past, as in other places since his Honorable passage thorow the Citie of London. The most Honorable Entertainement of his Highnesse, aboord his Maiesties Ships in the roade of Gyllingame, neere the Citie of Rochester in Kent. With the Kings Entertainement aboord the Denmarke Ships, at Grauesend: As also their Honorable leaue-taking and farewell, Setting Sayle from Grauesend on Munday night, the eleuenth of August. 1606. By H. Roberts. Printed at London for William Welby. 1606.
To the right VVorshipfull Sir Iohn Iolles, Knight, Alderman and Sheriffe of the Citie of London, HENRY ROBERTS, your Worships true deuoted, wisheth all in∣crease of worship in this world, and after this life, the Ioyes Eternall. RIght VVorshipfull, long since in those im∣ployments I had for the Irish affayres, in the time of our most dread and gracious Soueraigne, decea∣sed, and euer sithence, I sought opportuni∣tie, to make some shewe of my zeale vnto you, but time neuer fauoring the expectation of my desired thought, I was enforced to keepe silent my loues intention. Yet now hauing some occa∣sion, through these great and most honorable fa∣uours shewed vnto the gracious and renowmed
King of Denmarke, at his being heere, by our famous King, Nobilitie, and States of our Land, whereof many haue beene eye-witnesses neere this honorable Citie: Yet considering, that many thousands which desired to see the same, haue been debarred of their contentments there∣in, and hauing bestowed my time and charge, in noting from time to time, what hath been done in all honor to welcome this renowmed King in seuerall places, and sundry honorable pastimes (no doubt) to the eternall honor of his Maiestie and this Land, I haue emboldned my selfe to publish the same vnder your VVorships pro∣tection, and beseech you of your accustomed cle∣mencie so to accept it, as it is faithfully enten∣ded: so shall I bind my selfe euer to your seruice, and in all duty rest your VVorships, Euer to be commanded, H. ROBERTS.
Englands Farewell: Shewing the most royall Enter∣tainement of the King of Denmarke, aboord his Maiesties Ships in the roade of Gyllingame, neere the Citie of Rochester in Kent. With the King of Englands entertainement aboord the Denmarke Ships at Graues-end. As also, their Honorable leaue-taking one from the other. THat there is no greater comfort to man, then perfit Loue to be maintained one with the other, there is few or none, but hauing Christian charity, can testifie: for besides the prescript rule of God which commaundeth wee loue one another, it bringeth such contentment to the minde, that there can be no Iewell of so rare and
high esteeme, as the perfit loue of friends. How many great Potentates haue, in their inwarde thoughts, preferred the loue of some especiall one in their pleasures to solace with, and in their coun∣sels to participate with in all passions both of body and minde, to be as a second selfe! Such is the effect of Loue, that many haue hazzarded life, and what euer the earth did af∣foord them in theyr loue, to make it knowne. Some for theyr Countryes loue haue dyed, some for their friend, and many by aduentring honor of theyr houses, by the force of theyr loue. If such be the touchstone of that vertue, and so highly ought to be regarded, how may all Chri∣stians ioy therein, that haue or doe participate of the same! And how may we admire in this iron age, wherein so many vices abound, to behold the a∣mitie of Neighbour with Neighbour, Nation with Nation, and Friend with Friend! Where, by the contrary, no torment on earth may be compa∣rable to the inward griefs that hart endureth, where enuy hath domination. And truly is it sayd and written of that horrible sinne, by whom, & through whom many great outrages haue beene attempted and done. And dayly we haue seene the Subiect at∣tempting the death of their Soueraigne, the Sonne the Father, the Husband the Wife, and many times the Wiues their Husbands. This helhound enuy, begotten by the Diuell, where it once fostereth, neuer
giueth ouer his hoste, vntill hee hath brought him to confusion: of which wee haue too many exam∣ples. God graunt, wee that professe Christ Iesus in one simpathy of hart and minde, may abolish that Hag, and truly embrace that heauenly commande∣ment, to loue one another, and that we all, subiects of this peaceable and most gracious Soueraigne King Iames, may be so vnited in loue to our maker, and duetie to his Maiestie, that the Deuill neuer haue power, to cause vs forget the one or the other: But, that seeing his Excellency is the true touch of loue, not only to vs his home-borne people, but vn∣to all Christian Nations what euer they bee that seeke his fauour or comfort, a Father to the Stranger, & a carefull maintainer of peace for his people, a true Ionathan to his Dauid, a holy anoynted of the Lord, in this most royall King, oh let vs all true subiects note, and noting, imprint in our hearts the rare, and most honorable loue of his Maiestie shewed to the person of his royall Brother, King of Denmarke, betweene whose loues there may be no comparison. The one, Loue caused to commit his Kingly per∣son to the aduenture of feares and enemies, to see his Ioy, the comfort of his royall estate our gracious Soueraigne the Queenes Maiestie, and their royall issue: whose loue, with brotherly loue hath beene so ioyfully accepted of their Highnesse, as neuer hath beene seene in this land the like. Yea, such a sur∣passing Ioy may it euer bee amongst vs, that wee
can neuer thinke, speake, or write too much thereof. Oh rare loue, oh kingly and royall president for all people to note, what hath happened since the sixteenth of Iuly now last past, the day of this famous King of Denmarks first arriuall in Tilbery Hope, where he was entertayned, and brought from his Ship with his chiefe delight our dread Soueraigne, and the Prince, louingly welcomed by the Queene and States, and ioyfully receyued by all their Subiects, who with duty and zeale, made it knowne in all the best manner so short time would giue leaue; yet such it was, as his Princely minde was much delighted in the same, and no doubt doth applaude this hono∣rable Citie, both for beawtie, wealth, and pleasure: a most excellent note and honorable appearance of his gracious acceptance of their loues shewed, may be gathered, by his sodaine and silent comming a∣gaine in person to view the state of this Citie, and rare monuments thereof, who hauing seene it the last of Iuly in all royaltie, the Citizens in their rich attyre, the houses garnished, and such mul∣titudes of people of all estates, in this manner en∣suing came to view it. The next day being Friday, and the first of Au∣gust, this royall King, knowing the zeale and loue of our Nation, whose loyaltie he neede not distrust, accompanyed with the Earles of Nottingham, Sus∣sex, and others, in their Coaches came to S. Paules Church, where he walked, and viewed the same, and from thence, to the top of the Steeple, where he
tooke much delight to behold the beautious scitua∣tion of London, the pleasant Gardens and Fields adioyning, the richnes of the Thames, so surnished with Ships of great countenance and worth, as he graciously applauded the excellency thereof. But amongst all other things, he admired most, when the noble men accompanying him, did report the being of a Horse vpon that place, comming vp such a way of great danger and so ye, that he tooke very good notice thereof, and wonderfully did admire the same. From thence he tooke his Coach with his com∣pany, and passed on to the Exchange, viewing the beauty of Cheape-side, and the riches of the inha∣bitants, the Goldsmiths, Mercers, and other wealthy trades, all the way setting their commodities to sale: A sight which may delight any Prince in the world to behold. To grace this Royall Exchange, so named by our late Royall Queene, his Grace walked round about the Pawneaboue, and viewed with great pleasure the same. Then came hee to the Marchants walkes be∣neath, where it was told his Highnesse the maner of our Marchants, and the houres of their meetings, where from all Countreys there was dayly newes to be heard by one meanes or other: Heere they make great exchanges of their Marchandize, make their traffike to forraigne Countreyes, ship their men for seruice; so that their greatest affayres were euery day twice there effected.
There-hence proceede they by Cornchill, Gra∣cious streete, and Fanchurch, to the Tower of Lon∣don, where our gracious Soueraigne, his deare estee∣med Brother King Iames, met his Highnesse, and with Kingly welcomes entertayned him, and in his owne person conducted him to the offices of the Iewell house, Wardrope, of the Ordinance, Mint, and other places, where, to their Kingly presence, in the Iewell house were presented the most rare and richest Iewels, and beawtifull Plate, so that he might well wonder thereat, but cannot truly prayse, or estimate the valew thereof by many thousands of pounds. The like in the Wardrope, where, for rich Robes, beset with stones of great price, faire and pre∣cious Pearle and Gold, were such, as no King in the world might compare: Besides the rich furniture of hangings, cloathes of estates, Cushions, Chaires, and Kingly furniture for his Palaces, as may cause much admiration, and bring great content to the beholders But passing then on to the office of the Ordi∣nance, he well viewed the warlike prouision of the great Ordinance, which at an houre is ready for any seruice to be commaunded. Ouer euery peece the Ladles and Spunges hang to lade them withall: and the Traces and Collors for the Horses to draw them away, when they shall need to serue. The armory and store of small shot so well main∣tained and kept, the numbers ready fitted of all sorts
of Muskets, Caliuers, Petronels, Dags, and other seruiceable weapons, as Pikes, Halbards, Targets, Sheelds of sundry fashions, for varietie, antiquitie of the things, and the relating of their vses, did make him with great and honorable admiration to behold them all very well, and commend them. These rare, rich, and most admirable pleasant sights ouer-gone, their Maiesties ascend to the Mint, which they viewed, and from thence to the Lyons, and other wilde beasts there kept and maintained for his Highnesse pleasures and pastimes, all kingly de∣lights, and such varietie, as I thinke the world can∣not bring in one Countrey more store, as it hath bin noted by many great Trauellers, who haue seene the greatest Courts of the world. From this place, as they went to take their Barges, the King of Denmarke walked a turne or two vpon the Tower Wharfe, viewing the rich and forcible Ordinance there placed, whereof there was no small store, as his Maiestie might well remember, by the honorable peale was made him the day before, at their setting forwards from the Tower, to goe through the Citie. When their pleasures were well delighted with these showes, the Tide seruing to shoote the Bridge, they tooke their Barges, and were rowed to his Maiesties House, White Hall. At their going from the Wharfe, an honorable peale of great Ordinance was discharged, the Officers vsing great diligence and foresight, and the Gunners applying themselues
very paynefully for the performance thereof, the time being so short, as truly they did all deserue great commendations. This day brought with honor to end, they repose themselues this night, and in the morning very earely, being Saturday, they hunted in the Parke of Saint Iames, and killed a Bucke. Then passed they on to Hyde Parke, where they hunted with great delight, spending the rest of the forenoone in following their pastime, and about the time of dinner returned, and there dyned; and about foure a clocke, their Barges being by com∣maundement ready at the Priuy stayres, they went by water to Greenewitch. The next day, being Sunday, her Maiesty was churched, to the great ioy of all the beholders, the two Kings being present at that time, where they heard a learned Sermon. This day they solace in their priuate delites, the Kingly Brothers, the Queene, Prince, and Nobles of both Realmes, shewing by all the meanes they can, their loues, by variety of delight to be∣guise time, and bid them welcome. On Munday, the fourth day of August, the Queene, who had not beene partaker of any their Kingly ports, accompanyed their Royall persons, and the Prince, who were attended on by the Nobility, and gallant Courtyers, at which time, their sport was to run at the ring; in following which, they spend that afternoone, where sundry of the young Noblemen
prooued their skill at that exercise, but none exceld his Maiesty, and the Denmarke King, at whose good successe the Queene was very much delighted, and tooke great pleasure therein. The next day, being the solemne obseruation of his Maiesties thanksgiuing for freeing his Highnesse from the treacherous practises of the Gowryes, the forenoone of that day they spent in thankefulnes to God, whereof his Maiestie hath a most religious and zealous care. The afternoone, for their delight, were the Beares and Bulls brought, in which sport some time was spent, but made the shorter, by rea∣son of the honorable exercise of Tilting: the Lords and Courtiers being readie armed, vpon notice giuen them, repayred to the Tilt-yard, euery one with his seuerall deuice, most gallantly mounted, and richly armed. To honor this royall presence the more, the King of Denmarke armed very rich, and mounted on a most stately Courser, came to the Tilt, and ran eight courses, the first foure with the Lord of Ef∣fingam, whobrake their staues most gallantly, three a peece, and foyled the other. Then the noble and most toward Earle of Arundell ranne with his Ma∣iestie of Denmarke, and brake three staues a peece, to the great ioy of all the beholders. Then follo∣wed the rest of the Tilters as they were appoyn∣ted, so gallantly behauing themselues, as was both honorable and delightfull to that most gracious and royall companie. Night growing vpon them, they
were enforced to giue ouer their sport, where, taking their humble leaues of the two Kings, the Queene, and Prince, they left the Tilt yard, and being vn∣armed, returned to the Court, where, besides for∣mer graces, and fauours shewed them by all their royall persons, they receiued many thanks, and so spent the rest of the euening in other delightfull sport, till time of night called them to rest. At this honorable exercise, the toward and most hopefull Prince shewed himselfe in his Armour, beeing gallantly mounted, and a hart as powerfull as any, though that his youth denyed strength. For this dayes exercise, all the Masters of Defence and professors therof, were summond with their weapons to shew their skill, that the King of Denmarke might see the manner of our fight, and the varietie of weapons practised for mens defence, as well in pri∣uate quarrels, as their Countries seruice: but the time ouerslipt, the Challenger Fencers, when they had marched with their Drums and Ancients about the Tilt yard, departed. The next morning, the King of Denmarke being desirous to see some of their practise, they which were readie in the Towne, hauing warning to giue their attendance, in the morning early repaired to the Tilt yard, and there, in presence of the two Kings, many of the Nobilitie and Courtiers, shewed both manhood and skill, wherein the Kings tooke great pleasures, and gaue them Kingly thanks and fauours.
This sport was made more short, by reason of the Kinges going from Court, to see our Kinges Houses neerest London, and to hunt in their Parkes: After they had broken their fastes, they set forwarde with their Traynes to Richmonde; there that night they hun∣ted, and lay: and the next day dyned at Hampton court, and there hunted, and killed Deate, with great plea∣sures: And surely the King of Denmarke was very much delighted, with the gallantnesse of these royall Pallaces of his Maiesties; as did appeare by his earnest noting of them, and often recounting of their pa∣stimes and pleasures. From thence, they proceeded to Windsore; where he was entertayned by the King, most royally: heere was presented vnto him, the Knights of Windsore; beeing all goodly Gentlemen, and such as had serued Queene Elizabeth in her Warres; and for seruice done, preferred in their latter yeares, to this place of rest: and are called by name of, King Iames Knightes of Windsore. These goodly auncient Gentlemen, beeing in their Roabes of Purple and Scarler, with the Garter, and Sainct Georges Crosse vpon them. Which goodly, and charitable maner, when the King of Denmarke was possest withall, and the order of their first foundation, and continuance, the King highly commended the Founder, and in chaitie wisht, the successors to the worldes end, might continue so hono∣rable an action as that: whereof, by Gods grace, there is no doubt, his Maiestie from his first comming,
hauing so graciously and most bountlfully shewed his zeale to that honorable action, by augmenting their portions, which were possest of those places. Long did they not make stay in Windsor, by reason that the time began to shorten, for the King of Den∣markes departure, wherefore after some time spent in hunting, they mae their returne to the Court at Greenwich, where her Maiestie lay: and on Fryday, the eight of August there ariued, and so rested till Mon∣dav following. The next morning then, being Saterday the ix. of August, the tyde seruing fit for their purpose, this gra∣cious and royall King of Denmarke, being now to take his farewell of those he helde in esteeme; with great curtesie, and many thankes, to those of the Counsell, and Nobilitie, which stayed from following the Kings hee gaue them a Princely and most louing farewell: and so of many others of Honour and Worship, with many rich and bountifull Rewardes to the Officers of the Kinges Household, and Guarde. Which done, the Barges giuing their attendance, these two Royall Kinges, the Queene and Prince Hen∣rie, came aborde them; and were rowed by all induste∣rous meanes downe the Riuer of Thames, so low as North-fleete, or there aboutes; where they had their Trayne attending, and their Coaches: so passed they on the way to Rochester, leauing the way to Grauesend: all the way followed with such numbers of people, as well from London, as other places, that it was to be wondered at.
Time hath brought them neare the Citie of Roche∣ster; where they are met with the Mayor and Bretheren of the Citie, who with reuerence, deliuered his Mace vnto his Maiestie; which graciously did accept the same, and redeliuered it to the Mayor, willing him to keepe it, and to vie it with Iustice, as before: Which done, the Mayor taking his Footecloth-Horse, which was ready, and rode on before his Maiestie, bearing the Mace before him throughout the Cittie, to the house of the Right worshipfull Sir Peter Bucke Knight, one of his Highnes Officers of the Nauie: which house was the lodging of the king of Denmarke: whom our King there left to his repose, and returned himselfe to the House of the reuerend Byshop of Rochester, Doctor Barlow: and the Queene & Prince to their Lodgings, which were all seuerall▪ The next day, being Sunday, which Holy appoyn∣ted day of the Lord, their Maiesties came to the Ca∣thedrali Church the Colledge, where they heard a most learned Sermon, by a reuerende graue and learned Doctor. The Sermon ended, their Dinners prepared aborde the Shippes, and their Boates and Barges attending them. They sette forwardes to the Waters side, where euery Officer in his place, serued: the Right Honourable Earle of Nottingham Lord High Admy∣rall beeing present, Sir Robert Mansell, Sir Iohn Treuor, and others. The King had a Note deliuered him, contayning
the names of euery Shippe, what burthen they weare, and what Munition and Men they had: which Note, his Highnes obserued, and viewed euery Shippe as they rowed alongst, keeping their way, vntill they came to the Shippe, prepared for them to dine: which Shippe was perfumed with sweete and pleasaunt Per∣fume, and hanged with Cloth of Golde all the sides within: wherein three Chaires of Estates was placed, for the two Kinges, and Queene. The dinner was furnished with all kinde of Daintie prouision, in such aboundaot manner, that the King of Denmarke marueyled where such store of meate should be dressed: And to see the manner of it, his Maiestie tooke occasion, after dinner, to goe vppon a spacious Gallarie made vpon Lighters, betweene the two royal Shippes the Elizabeth Ionas, and the White Beare; neere which two Shippes, ridde a great Hulke, which was furnished with Ouens for Baked meates; and had in it three faire Ranges to roast with: all which, his Maiestie in person saw; and thorowout that Shippe, went from place to place, noting euery roome. The time passing away, the Kinges tooke their Bar∣ges, accompanied with the Queene, Prince, and Noble∣men; and rowed on towardes Chartham, where they had sight of all the Shippes▪ which were rich in Anci∣entes, Pendants, Hagges, and Streamers: and withall, so furnished with goodly Men, as might ioy their Maiesties to beholde: All which, made so glorious a show, that might well amaze the miode of a man to thinke on, being a Friende; but torrifie the heart of the
proudst Enemie, to see it. When their Maiesties had viewed the whole Fleete, they were rowed to the shore; where on a Hill, very conuenient, they might ouer-looke the whole Nauie, there was ordayned places for them: When being sea∣ted, and the word giuen, euery Shippe, in their due course, discharged orderly their whole Ordinaunce, in such order and forme, the one Shippe after the other, as was greatly pleasing to their Maiesties; and gayned great credite to the Gunners, performets of that seruice. The great Shot then discharged, was two thou∣sand three hundred, besides the Health at dinner; which was begun with Shot, and answered. This welcome most Honorably performed, the Kinges gaue the Lord high Admyrall, and the Offi∣cers thankes, for their paines, and care taken herein, and returned to Rochester, to their Lodgings. That euening, the Gunners of the Nauie, shewed very exce∣lent and rare Fier-workes. The next morning, being Monday, and the xi. of August, the Kings, the Queene, and Prince, with their traynes, set forwarde towardes Grauesend, by the way so followed with people, as was wonderfull, and did make the trayne of Courtiers admire: yea, such was the multitude of people, Londoners, & others, which came to Rochester, that thousands could get no lodginges, or meate for their money. The time hath brought these Royall persons, neere to the Towne of Grauesend, where the Port Rene of the Towne, with his Brethren, in very decent manner, pre∣sented
them selues to his Maiestie, and offered his Of∣fice vnto his Highnesse: which graciously accepted the same, and deliuered it againe vnto him, So passed their Maiesties forwards to the waters side; at whose comming, they were saluted with a mightie peale of Ordinaunce from the King of Denmarkes Ad∣myrall, and so from all the rest of his Fleete: who ha∣uing finished, the two Block-houses of Tylberie and Grauesend began; and thundered such a Volye of Shot, as was highly to be commended. Aborde the Royall Shippe of the Denmarke Kings, are these Princes gone; where a most hartie welcome they receaue, and great cheare. The Ordinaunce often times discharging, vpon Healthes to all Friends: which Ordinaunce was answered by our two Block-houses in such order, as desarues commendations. After dinner, the Gunners of the King of Denmarks Shippes, shewed their rare deuises of Fire-workes: the beautie of which was not to be seene, by reason of the brightnesse of the Sunne, which dimmed the same. Dinner ended, and the tyde (which stayeth not) ser∣uing to goe for London, our gracious King & Queene hauing brought his kingly Brother to his owne Shipp, from whence he brought him, after many kinde Adues giuen on euery side, as well by the Princes, as their Noble trayne, they commende his Maiestie to Gods protection, and heartily wish his safetie in his owne Countrey: which solemne farewells accomplished, the King, Queene, and Prince, tooke their Barges to come for the Court, leauing the King of Denmarke to
Gods pleasure, and fauour of the Windes; who sent after them, a token of Princely loue, in the thundering noyse of all the Ordinaunce from all his Shippes. These Royall Companies parred, as you haue hearde, the King of Denmarke tooke order for Re∣wards to be giuen to all Offices of his Maiesties House∣holde: which, as it is sayd, was most bountifull. And for other places, aborde the Shippes to the Maisters, like Rewardes. Thus haue I recounted in two seuerall Pamphlets, the whole Discourse, and royall Entertainement of this most Royall King: whose pleasures, and great wel∣comes in all places, no Prince but may admire. And most worthely was the loue of all men besto∣wed on his Highnesse, for all courtesie and louing fa∣uoures might be exspected from a King of his magnifi∣cence, was not wanting in him; as his gracious counte∣naunce shewed in all places. Besides which, it hath very seldome, or neuer been seene, so many Straungers togeathers in this Lande, so well gouerned, and so kindly vsed: Such was his Princely care of them, and our Nation, for breeding of quarrells by any of his people, that of all other Vices, their charge was to keepe them from beeing druncke: and withall, in∣flicted vppon them a heuy punishment, for any that should offende, contrary to his commaundement: for the execution of this his Maiesties pleasure herein, hee appoynted a Marshall, who had diuers men, as Officers vnder him, to haue a vigilent care
ouer them; which with all diligence performed the same: and such as they found druncke, were brought to a House appoynted for their Prison; wheare their Thumbes were chayned togeather, and nayled by it to a post: where they remayned till some suite was made for their deliuerie, & hartie repentance for their faults; the due execution whereof, kept them in such awe, that you should seldome after the first weeke, see any of them out of order. A comfortable hearing it is to all Christians, to see so vile a sinne reformed. God graunt vs all to follow like examples of well doinges: preserue our dread So∣ueraigne Lord King IAMES, the Queene, the Prince, and all the rest of their Royall issue: And sende this famous kingly Brother, a faire winde, and a safe and pleasant passage to his desired Port. Amen. FINIS.
