23319 99853071 18436
A Summa∣rie of Englyshe Chronicles, Conteynyng the true accompt of yeres, wherein euery Kyng of this Realme of En∣gland began theyr reigne, howe long they reigned: and what notable thynges hath bene doone durynge theyr Reygnes. Wyth also the names and yeares of all the Baylyffes, Custos, maiors, and she∣riffes of the Citie of London, sens the Conqueste, dyli∣gentely Collected by IOHN STOVV citisen of Lon∣don, in the yere of our Lorde God 1565. Whervnto is added a Table in the end, conteynyng all the principall mat∣ters of this Booke. Perused and allowed accordyng to the Quenes maiesties Iniunctions. In aedibus Thomae Marshi.
KL. Ianuary hath .xxxi dayes. The day is .viii. houres, the night .xvi. ¶Fayres xviij A Circumcision of Christ 1   b Octa. of saynt Stephen 2 xj c Oct. of saynt Iohn 3   d Oct. Innocentes 4 xix e Deposit. of saynt Edward 5 viij f Epiphanla Dom. at Salisbury 6   g Grant. Withelmi. 7 xvj A Lucian priest, 8 v b Lewes confessor 9   c Paule the first Heremite 10 xiij d ¶ Sol in quary 11 ij e Rychard martyr 12   f s. Hillary martyr 13 x g Felicis 14 xviij A Archadius martyr 15 vij b S. Mauricius 16   c Saynt Anthony 17 xv d Prisce vyrgyn 18 iiij e Wolstan bysh. 19   f Fabian & Sebastian 20 xij g Agnes vyrgyn 21   A Uincent martyr 22 j b Emerense ¶ Terme begin. 23   c Timothe at Bristow at Chirchingford 24 ix d Cōuer. Pauli at Bristow at Chirchingford 25   e Policarpe at Bristow at Chirchingford 26 xvij f Iulian confessor 27 vj g Ualerij bysh. 28   A Theodore 29 xiiij b Basilij 30 iij c Saturnine & Uictor 31
KL. February hath .xxviii. daies The day is .x. houres, & the night .xiiii. ¶ Fayres.   b Fast. Brygyd vyrgyn 1 xj c Parth. of Mary at Bath and Maydstone, 2 xix f Blase bysh. 3 viij g Gilbert confessor 4   A Agathe vyrgyn 5 xvj b Amandy byshop & confessor 6 v c Anguly byshop 7   d Paule bysh. ¶Son in Pisces. 8 xiiij e Apolen vyrgyn 9 ij f Scholastice vyrg. 10   g Desidery byshop 11 x A Dorothe vyrg. ¶ Terme endes. 12   b Woulfrani byshop 13 xviij c Ualentyn martyr at Feuershā 14 vij d Faustine Iouite 15   e Iulian vyrgyn 16 xv f Polycron byshop 17 iiij g Symon byshop 18   A Sabyn and Iulian martyr 19 xij b Myldred vyrgyn 20 j c Lxxix. martyrs 21   d Cathedra Petri 22 xix e Fast. Locus bysexti 23   f Mathie apostle. at Henly vpon Thames, and at Teukesbury. 24 xvij g Mathie apostle. at Henly vpon Thames, and at Teukesbury. 25 vj A Mathie apostle. at Henly vpon Thames, and at Teukesbury. 26   b Augustyn 27 xiiij c Oswalde byshop 28
KL. Marche hath xxxi dayes. The daye is .xii. houres, & the night .xii. ¶Fayres. tij d Dauid byshop 1   e Cedde confessor 2 xj f Maurice confessor 3   g Adrian 4 xix A Foce & Eusebij 5 viij b Uictor and Uictorin 6   c Perpetue & Felix 7 xvj d Deposit. of Felix 8 v e Quadraginta mar. 9   f Agathe vyrgyn 10   g Gorgonij martyr 11 xiij A Gregory byshop 12 ij b Theodore martyr 13 x c Longius mar. ¶ Sol in aries 14   d Cyriaci mar. 15 xviij e Hilary byshop 16 vij f Patrick & Gertrudis 17   g Edward kyng & confessor 18 xv A Ioseph the husband of Mary 19 iiij b Cutbert, at Durham 20   c Benedic ab. 21 xij d Aphrodosy byshop 22 j e Theodore martyr 23   f Fast. 24 ix g Anuntiae. of Mary, at Northampton, at Waldē, at great Chart, and at new 25   A Anuntiae. of Mary, at Northampton, at Waldē, at great Chart, and at new 26 xvij b Anuntiae. of Mary, at Northampton, at Waldē, at great Chart, and at new 27 vj c castel, Hūtingto al ye lady days 28   d Uictor martyr, 29 xiiij e Quirini martyr 30 iij f Adelme byshop 31
KL. Aprill hath .xxx. dayes. The day is .xiiii. houres & the night .x. ¶Fayres.   g Theodore vyrgyn 1 xj A Mary Egypciace 2   b Rychard byshop 3 xix c Ambrose 4 viij d Martian at Wallyngforth 5 xvj e Syxtus bysh. 6 v f Egesippus at Darby 7   g Perpetuus at Bickels∣worth, at Byl∣lingworth, 8 xiij A Perpetuus at Bickels∣worth, at Byl∣lingworth, 9 ij b Perpetuus at Bickels∣worth, at Byl∣lingworth, 10   c ¶ Sol in Tauro, at Esam 11 x d Gutlary the mōday after 12   e Oswoldy archbyshop 13 xviij f Eufemie vyrgyn 14 vij g Olife 15   A Isidore 16 xv b Aniceti 17 iiij c Eleuthery byshop 18   d Alphe ¶ Terme begynneth 19 xij e Symon by. The .3. sunday after Easter fayre at Louth 20 j f Symon by. The .3. sunday after Easter fayre at Louth 21   g Symon by. The .3. sunday after Easter fayre at Louth 22 ix A George Marke at Charing, at Ip∣swiche, Amtyll and Hinningā, at Gilford, 23   b George Marke at Charing, at Ip∣swiche, Amtyll and Hinningā, at Gilford, 24 xvij c George Marke at Charing, at Ip∣swiche, Amtyll and Hinningā, at Gilford, 25 vj d euangelist, at Darby 26   e Anastasij 27 xiiij f Uitali martyr 28 iij g Petri Medolanensis 29   A Deposit, Erkenwalde 30
KL. May hath .xxxi dayes. The day is .xvi. houres, the nighte .viii. ¶Fayres. xj b Philip & Iacob. In. cru. at Rippō, at Stow the old, at Reading, Lecester, & Chēsford 1   c Philip & Iacob. In. cru. at Rippō, at Stow the old, at Reading, Lecester, & Chēsford 2 xix d Philip & Iacob. In. cru. at Rippō, at Stow the old, at Reading, Lecester, & Chēsford 3 viij e Floriant martyr 4   f Godard 5 xvj g Iohn port latin 6 v A Iohn of Beuerley 7   b Aapparitio Mich. at Beuerley 8 xiii c Gengulfi martyr 9 ij d Gordian and Epimachy 10   e Ascention daye. at Newcastell, at Yern, at Bermin∣cham at s. Edes. at bysh. Standford 11 x f Ascention daye. at Newcastell, at Yern, at Bermin∣cham at s. Edes. at bysh. Standford 12   g Boniface martyr at Newcastell, at Yern, at Bermin∣cham at s. Edes. at bysh. Standford 13 xviij A Boniface martyr at Newcastell, at Yern, at Bermin∣cham at s. Edes. at bysh. Standford 14 vij b Seruacij confessor 15   c Translat. off. Bernard 16 xv d Dioscorides martyr 17 iiij e Dunston byshop 18   f Bernardyne 19 xij g Helene Queene 20 j A Whyt∣sunday at s. Tyues, at Can∣terbury, Royston and Stow the old, King∣ston vpon Thames. 21   b Whyt∣sunday at s. Tyues, at Can∣terbury, Royston and Stow the old, King∣ston vpon Thames. 22 ix c Whyt∣sunday at s. Tyues, at Can∣terbury, Royston and Stow the old, King∣ston vpon Thames. 23   d Whyt∣sunday at s. Tyues, at Can∣terbury, Royston and Stow the old, King∣ston vpon Thames. 24 xvij e Adelme byshop 25 vj f Augustin of England 26   g Bede priest 27 xiiij A Trinite sunday. On the eue at Sto∣kesly, at Kēdale. On the day, at s. Mary Auke. at Rowell, 28 iij b Trinite sunday. On the eue at Sto∣kesly, at Kēdale. On the day, at s. Mary Auke. at Rowell, 29   c Trinite sunday. On the eue at Sto∣kesly, at Kēdale. On the day, at s. Mary Auke. at Rowell, 30 xj d Trinite sunday. On the eue at Sto∣kesly, at Kēdale. On the day, at s. Mary Auke. at Rowell, 31
KL. Iune hath .xxx. dayes. The daye is .xviii. houres, the night .vi. ¶Fayres.   e Corpus Christi at Newbery, at Co∣nentre, at s. Edes, at byshop Stāford. 1 xix f Corpus Christi at Newbery, at Co∣nentre, at s. Edes, at byshop Stāford. 2 viij g Corpus Christi at Newbery, at Co∣nentre, at s. Edes, at byshop Stāford. 3 xvi A Petroci confessor 4 v b Boniface byshop 5   c Melon byshop 6 xiij d Translat. Wolstane 7 ij e Wilhelmi confessor 8   f Trans. Edmond. at Maydstone 9 x g Iue confessor, 10   A Barnabe apost. at Okyngham, 11 xviij b Basill ¶ Sol in Cancer. 12 vij c Anthony 13   d Basill byshop & confessor 14 xv e Uite & modeste 15 iiij f Translat. Rycharde 16   g Botalphe 17 xij A Mardi & Marciliani 18 j b Geruasie 19   c Translat. Edward 20 ix d Walburge Uyrgyn 21   e Albane martyr 22 xvij f Fast. at Shrewsbury s. Albōs, 23 vj g Na. Iohn Baptist. at Cambrydge, at Glocester, Lincoln at wynsor, Cāter∣bury, Colchester, & wynbroke. 24   A Na. Iohn Baptist. at Cambrydge, at Glocester, Lincoln at wynsor, Cāter∣bury, Colchester, & wynbroke. 25 xiiij b Na. Iohn Baptist. at Cambrydge, at Glocester, Lincoln at wynsor, Cāter∣bury, Colchester, & wynbroke. 26 iij c Na. Iohn Baptist. at Cambrydge, at Glocester, Lincoln at wynsor, Cāter∣bury, Colchester, & wynbroke. 27   d Fast. 28 xj e Peter & Paule at wadhurst, Marl∣borow, Holsworth, at Northampton, and at Peterborowe. 29   f Peter & Paule at wadhurst, Marl∣borow, Holsworth, at Northampton, and at Peterborowe. 30
KL. Iuly hath .xxxi. dayes. The day is .xvi. houres, & the nyght viii. ¶Fayres. xix g Octa. Iohn Baptist. 1 viij A Uisitat, of our Lady 2   b Trans. of s. Thomas 3 xvj c Trans. of s. Martyn 4 v d Zoe Uyrgyn & martyr 5   e Octa. Peter and Paule 6 xiii f Tran. s. Tho. at Canterbury 7 ij g Deposit. of Grymhald 8   A Cyrilli bysh. at Partney, at 9 x b Nabor, at Felix. 10   c Trans. of saynt Benet 11 xviij d Nabor & Felix, at Lydde 12 vij e Priuate. ¶ Sol in Leo 13   f Reuel. ¶ Dogdayes begyn. 14 xv g Trans. of s. Swythyn 15 iiij A Trans. of s. Osmund 16   b Kenelme kyng, at wynscombe 17 xij c Arnolphe byshop 18 j d Rufine and Iustine 19   e Margarete, at Uxbridge. 20 ix f Praxede vyrgyn 21   g Mary Magda. Fast. at Marleborow, at Wynchester, at Col∣chester, Tedbery. 22 xvij A Mary Magda. Fast. at Marleborow, at Wynchester, at Col∣chester, Tedbery. 23 vj b Mary Magda. Fast. at Marleborow, at Wynchester, at Col∣chester, Tedbery. 24   c Iames apostle at Brystowe, at Ip∣swyche, Northamptō Darby, s. Iames be∣syde London, Readyng. 25 xiiij d Iames apostle at Brystowe, at Ip∣swyche, Northamptō Darby, s. Iames be∣syde London, Readyng. 26 iij e Iames apostle at Brystowe, at Ip∣swyche, Northamptō Darby, s. Iames be∣syde London, Readyng. 27   f Iames apostle at Brystowe, at Ip∣swyche, Northamptō Darby, s. Iames be∣syde London, Readyng. 28 xj g Samson byshop 29 xjx A Abdon and Sennes mar. 30   b Germany byshop 13
KL. August hath .xxxi. dayes. The day is .xiiii. houres, the night .viii. ¶ Fayres. viij c Peter Lammas at Exeter, at Fe∣uer sham, at Don∣stable, at s. Edes, at Bedford, at Merham church, at Wisbyche, and at Yorke. 1 xvj d Peter Lammas at Exeter, at Fe∣uer sham, at Don∣stable, at s. Edes, at Bedford, at Merham church, at Wisbyche, and at Yorke. 2 v e Peter Lammas at Exeter, at Fe∣uer sham, at Don∣stable, at s. Edes, at Bedford, at Merham church, at Wisbyche, and at Yorke. 3   f Peter Lammas at Exeter, at Fe∣uer sham, at Don∣stable, at s. Edes, at Bedford, at Merham church, at Wisbyche, and at Yorke. 4 xiij g Peter Lammas at Exeter, at Fe∣uer sham, at Don∣stable, at s. Edes, at Bedford, at Merham church, at Wisbyche, and at Yorke. 5 ij A Transfiguration 6   b The feast of Iesu 8 x c Siriarke 7   d Romaine at Romney 9 xviij e S. Lau∣rence day at Waltam, at Hō∣gerford, at Bedford, at Srrodes, Black∣amore, s. Laurence by Bodman 10 vij f S. Lau∣rence day at Waltam, at Hō∣gerford, at Bedford, at Srrodes, Black∣amore, s. Laurence by Bodman 11   g S. Lau∣rence day at Waltam, at Hō∣gerford, at Bedford, at Srrodes, Black∣amore, s. Laurence by Bodman 12 xv A S. Lau∣rence day at Waltam, at Hō∣gerford, at Bedford, at Srrodes, Black∣amore, s. Laurence by Bodman 13 iiij b Eusebij priest 14   c Assumpt. Mary, at Wakefield 15 xij d Rochus ¶ Sol in Uirgo 16 j e Oct. of s. Laurence 17   f Agapethe martyr 18 ix g Magnus martyr 19   A Lewes confessor 20 xvij b Bernarde 21 vj c Oct. Assumptio Mary 22   d Timothe 23 xiiij e Barthol. Apostle at London, Teu∣kesbury, Sudbery, Norwich, North∣hāpton, Douer, and at Rye. 24 iij f Barthol. Apostle at London, Teu∣kesbury, Sudbery, Norwich, North∣hāpton, Douer, and at Rye. 25   g Barthol. Apostle at London, Teu∣kesbury, Sudbery, Norwich, North∣hāpton, Douer, and at Rye. 26 xj A Barthol. Apostle at London, Teu∣kesbury, Sudbery, Norwich, North∣hāpton, Douer, and at Rye. 27 xix b The .27. day at Ashforde, 28   c Decolat. of s. Iohn 29 viij d Felix 30   e Cuthburge virgyn, 31
KL. Septēber hath .xxx. dayes. The day is .xii. houres, & the nyght .xii. ¶ Fayres. xvj f Egidy abbot 1 v g Anthony martyr 2   A Gregory 3 xiij b Translat. of Cuthbert 4 ij c Bartyn abbot 5   d Eugenius 6 x e Gorgon 7   f Nati. of our Lady at Sturbryge, at Lōdon in South∣warke, at wakefild 8 xviij g Nati. of our Lady at Sturbryge, at Lōdon in South∣warke, at wakefild 9 vij A Nati. of our Lady at Sturbryge, at Lōdon in South∣warke, at wakefild 10   b Marcian confessor 11 xv c Maurily byshop 12 iiij d Amantij martyr, ¶ Sol in 13   e Holy roode daye. at Waltā abbey at Wotton vn∣derhedge, Spal∣dyng, at Uxbridge, & Catesby. 14 xij f Holy roode daye. at Waltā abbey at Wotton vn∣derhedge, Spal∣dyng, at Uxbridge, & Catesby. 15 j g Holy roode daye. at Waltā abbey at Wotton vn∣derhedge, Spal∣dyng, at Uxbridge, & Catesby. 16   A Holy roode daye. at Waltā abbey at Wotton vn∣derhedge, Spal∣dyng, at Uxbridge, & Catesby. 17 ix b Uictor 18   c Ianuary martyr 19 xvij d Eustatius 20 vj e Mathew Apostle at Maulborowe, at Bedford. at Croydō at s. Edmundsbery. 21 f Mathew Apostle at Maulborowe, at Bedford. at Croydō at s. Edmundsbery. 22 xiiij g Mathew Apostle at Maulborowe, at Bedford. at Croydō at s. Edmundsbery. 23 iij A Andochy martyr 24   b Firmynmartyr 25 xj c Cyprian and Iustine 26 xix d Cosmy & Damiany 27   e Exuperrij 28 viij f Michael archan at Maulton, at s. Iues, Hadley, Mil∣nal, Sittingborne. 26   g Michael archan at Maulton, at s. Iues, Hadley, Mil∣nal, Sittingborne. 30
KL. October hath .xxxi. dayes. The day is .x. houres, & the nighte .xiiii. ¶ Fayres. xv A Remigius 1 iiij b Leodegarii 2 xij c Candidi martyr 3 ij d Frauncis confessor at Michel, 4   e Fayth, at Maydstone. 5 x f Marci & Marciliani, at s. Sythes 6   g Pelagie 7 xviij A Dionisij ☞ Terme begyn. 8 vij b Nicasius, at Welles 9   c Wylfryde 10 xv d Trans. of s. Edwarde. 11 iiij e Calixt, bysh. at Grauesend. 12   f Wolrane. ☞ Sol in Scor. 13 xij g Maurice martyr 14 j A Gaili confessor 15   b Maximini martyr 16 ix c Etheldrede vyrgyn 17   d Luke Euang. at Ely. 18 xvij e Quirini martyr 19 vj f Austrebert 20   g Xj. M. virgyns 21 xiiij A Mary Salome 22 iij b Romani archbysh. 23   c Chrispine 24 xj d Euerest 25 xix e Ursula 26   f Fast. 27 viij g Symon & Iude apo. at New market, at Neeford, at Ci∣ceter. 28   A Symon & Iude apo. at New market, at Neeford, at Ci∣ceter. 29 xvj b Symon & Iude apo. at New market, at Heeford, at Ci∣ceter. 30 v c Quyntyn martyr, 31
KL. Nouember hath .xxx. daies. The day is .viii. houres, the night .xvi. Fast. ¶ Fayres.   b All sayntes day. at Wakefield 1 xiij e All soules day, at Blechyngly. 2 ij f Wenefrede vyrgyn 3   g Amancius 4 x A Lete 5   b Leonard. Newport ponde. 6 xviij c Wyllybrord byshop 7 vij d Quatuor coronato. 8   e Theodore martyr 9 xv f Martyn bysh. of R. 10 iiij g Martyn, at Marlborow, Douer, 11   A Paternie ☞ Sol in Sagit. 12 xij b Brice. at s. Edmundes bury, 13 j c Trans. of Erkenwald 14   d Macute 15 ix e Deposit. Edmond 16   f Hughe byshop 17 xvij g Octa. Martini. 18 vj A Elyzabeth 19   b Edmond kyng at Heth 20 xiiij c Present. of our Lady 21 iij d Cecilie virgyn. 22   e Clement bysh. at Sandwych. 23 xj f Grisogoni martyr 24 xix g Katheryne vyrgyn 25   A Peter byshop 26 viij b Uitalis & agricole 27   c Ruffi. ☞ Terme end 28 xvj d Fast. at Maydenhead, 19 x e Andrewe apost. 30
KL. December hath xxxi daies. The daye is .vi. houres, the nyght .xviii. ¶ Fayres. xiij f Crisanti & Darie martyr 1 ij g Libiany 2   A Deposit, Osmond 3 x b Barbara virgyn 4   c Sabba ab. at Puckley 5 xviij d Nicholas bysh. at Spaldyng 6 vij e Oct. Andrew. at Sandhorst 7   f Concep. Mary. 8 xv g Cypriane abbot 9 iiij A Eulalie 10   b Antippa. ¶ Sol in Capri. 11 xij c Paule byshop 12 j d Lucy vyrgyn 13   e Nicasij 14 ix f Ualery 15   g O sapientia 16 xvij A Lazarus byshop 17 vj b Gracian byshop 18   c Uenesy vyrgyn 19 xiiij d Iulian martyr 20 iij e Thomas apostle 21   f 30. martyrs 22 xj g Uictor Uyrgyn 23 xix A Candidi 24   b Christmas day 25 viij c Steuen martyr 26   d Iohn Euangelyst 27 xvj e Innocentes daye 28 v f Thomas Becket, at Cātorbury 29   g Translat. of s. Iames 30 xiij A Syluester bysh. 31
A rule to knowe when the  begynneth and endeth. ¶ Eight dayes before any terme be, the Exchequer openeth for certayntie, ex∣cept Trinitie terme, which is but .4. dayes before. ¶ Hillary terme begynneth the .xxiii. daye of Ianuary, if it be not Sunday: then the next daye after, and endeth the .xii. daye of February. ¶ Easter terme begynneth .xvii. dayes after Easter, and endeth foure dayes after the Ascension daye. ¶ Trinitie terme beginneth the nexte daye after Corpus Christi daye, and endeth ye wednisday fortnyght after. ¶ Mighelmas terme, begynneth the .ix. daye of October, if it be not Sunday, and endeth the .xxviii. of Nouember. ¶ In Easter terme, on the Assentiō day. In Trinitie terme, on the Natiuitie of Saint Iohn Baptist In Michaelmas terme, on the feast of All Sainctes. In Hyllary terme, on the feast of the Puri∣fication of our Lady, ye Quenes Iudges of Westminster, doe not vse to sit in iud∣gement, nor vpon any Sundayes.
¶ A table for .xxx. yeres. to come. The yeres of our Lorde God. Letter Dominica Leape yeres. Easter daye. March or Apryll. 1564 a b 2 A 1565 g   22 A 1566 f   14 A 1567 e   30 M 1568 c d 18 A 1569 b   10 A 1570 a   16 M 1571 g   15 A 1572 e f 6 A 1573 d   22 M 1574 c   11 A 1575 b   3 A 1576 g a 22 A 1577 f   7 A 1578 e   20 M 1579 d   19 A 1580 b c 3 A 1581 a   26 M 1582 g   5 A 1583 f 3 M 1584 d e 29 A 1585 c   11 A 1586 b   3 A 1587 a   1 A 1588 f g 7 A 1589 e   30 M 1590 d   19 A 1591 c   4 A 1592 a b 2 M 1593 g   15 A ☞In this table aboue, what yere our Lorde God, you doe chose within wrytten, you shall strayght finde in the second rowe toward the left hand, the Dominicall letter seruing for ye yere: the third rowe sheweth the leape yeres: the .iiij. rowe the number of the daye that Easter daye falleth on: and the fift rowe, the name of the mo∣neth that Easter daye falleth on. Note that the letter A. standeth for Apryll, and the letter M. for Marche.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NOURABLE, and my very good Lord, the Lorde Robert Dudley, Earle of Leicester, Baron of Dynghby, Knyght of the honourable order of the Garter, one of the Queenes most honorable priuie counsell, and Maister of her maiesties horsse. BECAVSE, bothe by the vni∣uersall reporte of all men, I heare, and also by myne owne experience I perfectly know (right honourable and my very good lorde) how hono∣rably and cherefully diuers workes presented to your lordship, haue ben accepted: I (though of al others most simple) was thereby encouraged, to offer to your honour this my simple worke, in token of my bounden duty. The exaumple also of that famous
Monarche Artaxerxes, who so wel accepted the simple handfull of wa∣ter, that the poore Persian Sinetas brought him from the riuer Cyrus, putteth me in good hope, that youre honour who geue place to no man in humanitie and curtesie wil not mis∣like this simple signifieng of my good wylle. For, like as the mite of that poore widowe that is mencioned in the Gospell, whiche she gaue in all her penurie, is accompted a greater gifte, then those huge sommes that great men layde out of their greate stoare: so ought this my simple pam∣phlet be adiudged to procede, though not from greater, yet from as great good will, as the best and learnedst writers beare to your honour. For, they, of their abundant stoare, haue laied oute somewhat: But I, of my
meane knowledge, haue presented these few first frutes to your honor: knowing that your wisedome can in this small present right well see my good wyll. My gifte is a short briefe or summarie of the chiefest chances and accidentes, that haue happened in this Realme, frome the tyme of Brutus, to this our age. VVhiche I haue done by the conference of ma∣ny authors, both old and new, those Imeane, that commonly are called Chroniclers, out of whom I haue ga¦thered many notable thinges, moste worthy of remembrance, whiche no man heretofore hath noted. whiche worke also I was the bolder to dedi∣cate to your honour, because I know your lordships good inclination to al sortes of good knowledges: and espe¦cially the great loue that you beare
to the olde Recordes of dedes doone by famous and noble worthies whi∣che my boldnes, like as I truste your honour wil not only pardon, but also accept in good part: so I besech al the readers hereof, that folowyng your honourable exāple, they will iudge the best of this my trauaile, whiche I toke in hand, onely for the respect that I had to their profite. VVherby they shall both shew the goodnes of their owne natures, and also encou∣rage me willingly to go forwarde in this my enterprise. VVhich doubting not, but that I shall the rather ob∣taine of them, because of your lorde∣ships fauourable acceptance hereof, I wil now cesse any lōger to trouble your honor, beseching almightie god long to preserue you to the cōmodi∣tie of this our natiue countreie. Your L. most humble Iohn Stovve.
To the Reader. DIuers wryters of Hystories write dyuersly. Some penne their hystories plentifully at large. Some contrary wyse, briefly and shortly doo but (as it were) touche by the way, the remembraunce and accidents of those tymes, of which they write. Some do with a large com¦passe discouer as wel the affaires done in foreyn partes, as those that hapned in that countrey, of whiche especially they wryte. And some content to let a∣lone other matters, put in memory on∣ly such thyngs, as they thē selues haue had experiēce of, in their own coūtreis. Amongs whom, good Reader, I craue to haue place, and desyre roome in the lower part of this table. For I vse thee in this my booke as some symple fea∣ster, that beynge not able of his owne coste to feast his guestes sufficientely, is fayne to bee frended of his neygh∣boures,
and to sette before them suche dishes as he hath gotten of others. For I acknowledge, that many of the hy∣stories, that thou shalte reade here a∣bridged, are taken, partely out of Ro∣bert Fabian, sometyme Alderman of London, Edwarde Halle gentylman of Greyes Inne, Iohn Hardynge, a great trauailer bothe in foreyne coun∣treis, and also in all writynges of anti∣quitie, and other, who reaped great a∣bundance of knowlege, and filled their bookes full therwith, to the great pro∣fite and pleasure of all posteritie, and to their own great fame and glory. So that of their great plenty, I might wel take somewhat to hyde my pouertie. Howbe it, I haue not so doone it, as, if they should clayme theyr own, I shuld forthwith be left naked. For somwhat I haue noted, which I my selfe, partly by paynfull searche, and partly by dili∣gent experiēce, haue found out. Wher fore, hoth the smalnesse of the volume,
which cōprehēdeth gret matters in ef∣fect, & lso the noueltie of som matters vttred therin, ought to cause yt it shold not be altogither vnwelcome to thee. For, though it be written homely, yet it is not (as I trust) writē vntruly. And in hystories the chiefe thyng that is to be desyred is truthe. Wherfore, if thou fynde that in it, I beseche thee, wynke at small faultes, or at the least, let the consyderation of my well meanynge, drowne them. So shalt thou both en∣courage me to farther diligence, and also vtter thyne owne frendlynesse, in that thou doest rather further, then con¦demne a weake wryter. Of smoothe and flatterynge speache, remem∣ber to take hede: For Trouthe in playn wordes may be tolde, of craft a lye hath nede.
¶The names of Authours in this Booke alledged. Arnoldes Chronicles. Iohn Rastall. Beda de gestis Anglorū Iohn Maior. Cornellus Tacitus. Iohn Bale. Domes day a booke. Iohn Gower. Edward Haulle. Iohn Sleydane. Gildas de uictoria Aure lii & Ambrosii. Merlyn chronicler. Martyn Chronicler. Gildas de gestis Ar∣thuri. Mathewe Paris. Norham chronicler. Gildas the wise. Polydorus Virgilius. Guido de Columna. Robert, a chronicler, that wrate in the tyme of Henry the thirde. Geffrey of Monmouth. Geraldus Cambrensis. Hector Boyce. Rodolphus niger. Houeden. Raynolffe of Chester. Iohn Hardynges Chro∣nicle dedicated to Hen¦ry the .6. Robert Fabian. S. Columbe Cronicus Colmanni. Iohn Leylande. Thomas Lanquet. Iohn Lydgate. Thomas Couper. Iohn Frosarde. William Caxton.
A briefe Description of Englande. BEfore I entre to abridge the factes and gestes of the kynges and other per∣sons within this Realme frome Brutus,Polydore Virgil. the fyrste Kyng of the same, I pur∣pose briefely to make a description of this noble Realme gathered out of Po∣lydore Uirgil, reported in his work of ye Englishe hystorie, who saith: That all Britain, which by two names is called England and Scotland, is an Iland in the Ocean sea, sytuate ryghte ouer a∣gaynst the Region of Gallia: one parte of which Isle Englishmen do inhabite, another parte Scottes, the third parte Walshemen, and the fourth part Cor∣nish men. All they, eyther in language, conditions or lawes, doo differ amongs them selues. Englande (so called of En∣glishemen, whiche dyd winne the same) is the greatest part, which is deuided in∣to .xxxix counties, which we call shyres. Wherof ten (that is to say, Kent, Suf∣fer, Surrey, Southampton, Barkshire, Wyltshire, Dorsetshire, Somersetshire
Deuonshire and Cornwall, do neine the fyrst part of that Iland: which yas bounding toward the Southe, standeth betweene the Thames and the Sea. Frome thence, to the ryuer of Trent, whiche passeth thorough the myddes of Englād be .xvi. shyres: wherof the first vi. (standyng Estward (are Essex, Mid∣deser, Hertfordshire, Suffolke, North∣folke, and Cambridgeshire, the other ten which stande more in the myddle of the countrey, are these: Bedford, Hun∣tingdon, Buckingham, Oxford, North¦hampton, Rutland, Leicestre, Notyng∣ham, Warwike, and Lyncolne. After these, there be .vi. whiche border weste∣ward vpon Wales, as Glocestre, Here∣forde, Worcester, Salop, Stafford, and Chester. Aboute the myddle of the Re∣gion lie Darbyshyre, Yorkshyre, Lanca∣shyre, & Cumbreland. On the left hande toward the west is Westmerlande. A∣gaynste the same, is the Byshopryke of Durham, and Northumberland, which boūdeth vpon the northe in the marches of Scotland. Those shyres be diuided in to .xvii. Bishop rickes, which by a greke word, be called Dioeceses. Of which Dioe∣ceses, Canturburye and Rochester, bee
in Kēt. Essex, Middlesex & part of Hertford, belongeth to the bishoprike of London. The bishop of Chicester hath Suffer. Wynchester, hathe Hampshire, Surrey, and the Isle of Wight. Salesbury, hath Dorsetshire, Barkshyre, and Wylteshire. Excetor, hath Deuonshire, & Cornwall. Bathe, and Welles, hath Somersetshyre. Worcester, hath Glocestershyre,Now at thys presente there is a byshop of Glocester. Worce∣stershyre, and part of Warwikeshire. Hereforde, hath parte of Shropshire, and Herefordshire. Couentre, and Lichfelde, Staffordeshyre, and thother parte of Warwikshire. Chestre, hath Cheshire, Darbyshire, & a piece of a Lancashyre, nere the ryuer of Kepel. The Diocesse of Lincolne,Ther is now a byshoppe at Peterborow. which is the greatest, hath eight shyres, lieng betweene thei Thames and Humbre, as Lincolne, Northampton, Leyce∣ster, Rutlande, Huntingdon, Bedforde, Buckyngham, Oxford & the residue of Hertfordshire. The byshoprike of Ely, hath Cantabridgeshire, & the Isle of Ely Suffolke, and Norffolke, be in the circuite of Norwiche Diocesse. And thys is the Prouynce of the Archebyshop of Can∣terburye,
whyche is the primate of all England, wyth Wales, whyche hathe iiii. diocesses, as hereafter shall be decla∣red. The byshop of Yorke, hath Yorke∣shyre, Notynghamshyre, and a piece of Lancastshyre. The byshop of Durham, hath the bishoprike so commonly called, and Northumberland. Carlisle, contei∣neth Cumberlande and Westmerland: And this is the other prouince of tharch byshop of Yorke, whiche is another pry∣mate of England, & was of long tyme also primate of all Scotlande: but these Diocesses take theyr names of the cities where those seas be placed. The chiefe wherof, is London, where in the begin∣nyng was the Archebyshops sea: but af∣terwardes transposed to Canterbury, a Citie in Kent, placed in a soyle amiable and pleasant. London, standethe in Middlesex, on the northside of the Tha∣mis. That moste excellent and goodly ryuer, beginneth a little aboue a village called Winchelcombe in Oxfordshyre, styll increasyng, and passeth fyrst by the vniuersitie of Oxēford, & so with a mer∣uailous quiete course by London, and and then breaketh into the frenche O∣cean by mayne tydes, whyche twyse in
xxiiii. howers space doth ebbe and flowe more then .lx. myles, to the great cōmo∣ditie of trauailers, by whiche all kyndes of marchandise bee easylye conueyde to London, the principall store and staple for all cōmodities within this Realme. Uppon the same ryuer is placed a stone bridge,London brydge. a woorke very rare and meruai∣lous, whyche brydge hathe .xx. arches made of .iiii. squared stone, of height .lx. foote, and of breadth .xxx. foote, distant one from an other .xx. foote, compacte & ioyned together with vaultes and Sel∣lars. Upon bothe sydes be houses buyl∣ded, that it seemeth rather a continuall streete then a brydge. The Ocean sea doothe bounde Englande, the fyrst part of Britain east and South, Wales, and Cornewall west. The ryuer of Twede deuideth England and Scotland north. The length of the Island begynneth at Portsmouth in the South part, and en∣deth at Twede in the north, conteinyng 320. myles. This Realme aboue other is moste fruitfull on this syde Humbre: for beyonde, it is fuller of mountaynes. And althoughe to the beholders of that countrey a far of, it may seme playn, yet it is full of many hylles, and those for
the moste part voyde of trees: the valeys wherof be very delectable, inhabited for the most part by noble men, who accor∣dyng to auncient and olde ordre, desyre not to dwell in Cities, but neere vnto valleys and ryuers in seueral vyllages: for aduoidyng of vehement wyndes, be∣cause that Ilande naturally is stormye. Humbre hath his beginnyng a little on this side York, & by & by runneth south∣ward, & thē holdeth his course eastward & so into the mayn sea, greatly increaced by the ryuers of Dune & Trent. Trent beginneth a lyttle from Stafforde, run∣nyng through Darbyshyre, and Leyce∣stershyre, passing by Lichfield and No∣tyngham on the ryght hand, and Dune on the lefte: so that bothe those ryuers dooe make an Ilande, whyche is called Aurolme, and then ioynyng together on this syde Kyngston vpon Hull, a goodly marchant towne, they falle into Hum∣bre: by whych ryuer they may aryue out of France, Germanie, and Denmarke. England is fruitefull of beastes, and a∣boundeth with cattell: wherby thinha∣bitātes be rather for the most Grasiers, then ploughmē because they geue them selues more to fedyng, then to tyllage.
So that almoste the thyrde parte of the countrey is imployed to cattell, dere red and fallow, gores (wherof there be store in the northe partes, & conyes, for euery where there is ioly maintenāce of those kyndes of beastes: because it is fulle of greate woddes, wherof there ryseth pa∣styme of huntyng greatly exercised, spe∣cially by the nobilitie and gentlemen. Of Scotland, an other parte of Bri∣tayn, I purpose to say nothyng because I haue promised onely and briefly to re∣membre thaffaires of myne owne coun∣trey, as beste trauailed and acquainted with the knowledge of the same. Wales, the .iiii. part of Britayne lyeth vpon the lefte hand: whiche like a Pro∣montarie or forelande, or an Isle (as it were) on euery syde it is compassed with the mayne sea: excepte it be on the easte parte with the Ryuer of Sabrine com∣monly called Seuerne, whiche deuideth Wales from England. Although some late writers affirme Hereforde to bee a bound betwene Wales and England, & say, that Wales begynneth at Chep∣stolle, where the Ryuer Ueye augmen∣ted wyth an other ryuer called Lugge, passyng by Hereforde dooth runne into
the sea: which riuer riseth in the myddle of Wales out of that hill (but vncertain whether oute of that sprynge) that Sa∣brine dothe,Cornelius Tacitus. whiche Corn. Tacitus cal∣leth Antona. For euen to that place there goth a great arme of the sea,This arme of the sea, as I Iudge, is nowe called Anste, where is a passage betwene the village of Anste and Chepstoll. which pas∣syng through the land westward: on the right hande leaueth Cornewall, and on the left, Wales. Whiche Topography or description, although it be newe, yet I thoughte good to folowe. Therefore Wales is extended frome the towne of Chepstol, where it beginneth almost by a straight line a lytle aboue Shrowsbu∣ry, euē to Westchester northward. In∣to that part, so many of the Britains as remayned alyue after the slaughter and losse of their countrey, at the length be∣yng dryuen to theyr shyftes, dyd repaire as ancient writings report: where part∣ly through refuge of the mountaines, & partly of the woddes and marshes, they remained in safetie: which part they en∣ioy euen to this daye. That lande after∣wardes the englyshe men dyd call Wa∣les: and the Britaius the inhabitauntes of the same, Walshmen: for amonges the Germaynes, Walsman, signifieth a strāger, an alien, an outborn or strange
man: that is, suche a one, as hath a con∣trarye language from theirs, for Wall, in their tongue is called a stranger born as an Italian or Frencheman: whyche differ in speeche from the Germane. Man, signifieth Homo, which is a mā in english. Therfore englishmen, a people of Germany, after they had wōne Bri∣tain called the Britains, which escaped after ye destructiō of their cuntrey, after their countrey maner. walshmen, because they had an other tong or spech, besides theirs, & the land which they inhabited, Wales, which name afterwardes both to the people and contrey dyd remayn. By this meanes the Britaynes with theyr kyngedome loste their name. But they whiche affirme that name to be deriued of their kyng or queene without doubte be deceiued. The countrey soyle towar∣des the sea coaste, and in other places in the valleys and playnes, is most fertile, which yeldeth bothe to man and beaste, great plentie of fruite and grasse: but in other places for the moste parte it is ba∣reyne and lesse fruitfull, because it lac∣keth tyllage: for whiche cause husband∣men do lyue hardly, eating Oten cakes and drinkyng milke myxte with water,
and sowre whay. There be many tow∣nes and strong castels, and .iiii. Bishop∣rikes, if the byshoprike of Hereforde be coūted in England, as ye late writers de∣clare. The fyrst byshoprike is Meneue, so called of Meneua, whiche at this day they call Sainct Dauids, a Citie very auncient, situated vpon the sea coast, and boūdeth westward toward Ireland. An other is Landaeffe, the thirde Bangor, and the fourthe All Saint Asaph. whiche, be vnder Tharchbyshoppe of Canterburye. The walshmen haue a language from then∣glishmen, which as they say, that fetche their Petigree frome the Troianes, do the partly sounde of the Troian anti∣quitie, and partly of the Greeke. But how soever it is, the walshemen do not pronounce their speache so pleasantely and gentilly as thenglyshmen dooe, be∣cause they speake more in the throte: & contrary wise thenglishemen rightly fo∣lowynge the Latines, do expresse theyr voyce somewhat within the lyps, which to the hearers semeth pleasant & swete: And thus much of wales, the third part of Britaine. Nowe foloweth the fourthe and laste parte of Britayne, named Cornewall.
This part beginneth on that syde whi∣che standeth toward Spayn westward: Toward theast, it is of bredth .iiii. score and tenne myles, extendyng a lyttle be∣yonde saynt Germains, which is a ve∣ry famous village situated on the right hand vpon the sea coast, where the grea∣test breadth of that countrey is but .xx. myles: for thys parcell of lande on the right hand is compassed with the coaste of the mayne sea: and on the left hande with that arme of the sea, whiche (as be∣fore is declared) parteth the lande, and runneth vp to Chepstoll: where the coū∣trey is in fourme of a Horne: For at the fyrst, it is narowe, and then growethe broader, a little beyonde the said towne of saint Germaine. Eastwarde it bor∣dreth vpon England, West, south, and Northe, the mayne sea is rounde about it: It is a very barreyn soyle, yeldynge fruite more through trauaile of the tyl∣lers and husband men, thē through the goodnes of the groūd. but there is great plentie of leade and tyn: in the myning and dyggyng wherof doth specially con∣sist the liuynge & sustentation of thinha∣bitants. In this only parte of Britayn,
euen to this daye continueth the nation of the Britaines, whiche in the begyn∣nynge brought out of Gallia occupied & inhabited that Ilande, (yf credite maye be geuen to them, whyche reporte the firste inhabitantes of Britaine to come out of the Cities of Armerica.) The ar∣gumēt & profe wherof, is because ye Cor¦nishmen do speake ye langage, which the Britains vse now in France, whom the Britons do cal Britonātes. This thing to be more true, an old ancient chronicle dothe declare, wherin I found written, not Cornubia, but Cornugallia, compounded of Cornu, a horne, the forme wherof that countrey hath, and of Gallia, out of which contrey thinhabitantes came fyrst, the maner of which name is not to be mis∣lyked. Their tongue is farre dissonant from englishe, but is muche like to the Walshe tongue, because they haue ma∣ny wordes cōmune to both tonges: yet thys difference there is betwene them, when a walsheman speaketh the Cor∣nyshe man rather vnderstandeth ma∣ny woordes spoken by the Walshman, then the hole tale he telleth. whereby it is manyfest, that those thre people dooe vnderstande one an other in like maner
as the Southerne Scottes doo perceiue and vnderstand the Northern. But it is a thyng very rare and meruailous, that in one Iland there should be such varie∣tie of speches. Cornewall or Cornugall is in the Diocesse of Excetour, whyche was ones woorthye to bee counted the fourth part of the Iland, as well for the contrarietie of language as for the fyrst inhabitantes thereof, as is beforesayde. Afterwardes, the Normans which con∣stituted a kyngdom of all those thre par∣tes reckned Cornewall to bee one of the counties or shires of the contrey. Thus muche of the particular descryption of Britayne, that the whole bodye of the realm (by the membres) may be the bet∣ter knowen to some peraduenture that neuer heard the same before. The forme of the Iland is triquetra. or thre cornered, hauyng three corners, or three sydes: Two wherof, that is to say: The corner toward theast, and tho∣ther toward the weast: (bothe exten∣ding northwardes) are the longest. The third syde whiche is the south syde is farre shorter then thother: for the I∣land is greater of length then of bredth. And as in the other two partes is con∣teyned
the lengthe, euen so in the laste, the breadth. In whyche place, the breadthe begynneth: and so continu∣yng from the South parte to the north, it is but narowe. The fyrste and ryght corner of whyche Ilande eastwarde, is in Kente, at Douer and Sandwyche. From whence to Caleys or Boloygne in France, is the dystance of .xxx. my∣les. From this Angle which is agaynst Fraunce to the thyrde Angle, whyche is in the Northe, in Scotlande, the mayne whereof, boundeth vpon Ger∣many, but no land seene, and there the Iland is lyke vnto a wedge euen at the very angle of the land in Scotland. The length wherof is .vii. hundreth myles. Agayne, the lengthe from this Corner at Douer in Kent, to the vttermost part of Cornewall, beynge saynt Myghels mount (whych is the west part or weste angle) is supposed to bee .300. myles. Frō this left Angle beyng the west part and thuttermoste parte of Cornewall, whiche hath a prosect towards Spain, in whyche part also standeth Irelande, sytuated betwene Britayne and Spayn to the northe angle in the further parte of Scotlande, in which part the Ilande
doth end, the lēgth is .viii. hundred mi∣les, in whiche parte there be very good hauens, and saufe harboroughes for shyppes, and apt passage into Ireland, beyng not past one day saylyng, but the shorter passage is from Wales, to Wa¦terforde, a towne in Ireland vppon the sea coast, muche lyke to that passage be∣twene Douer and Calaice, or som what more: but ye shortest passage of all, is out of Scotlande. From this last Angle to Hampton: (whiche is a towne vpon the sea coast, with a hauen so called toward the southe, and therefore called South∣hampton) betwene the Angles of Kent and Cornewall, they doo measure by a strayght lyne the whole lengthe of the Ilande, and doo say, that it conteyneth 800. myles, as the breadth from Meneua, or Saint Dauids to Yarmouth, whiche is in the vttermost part of the Iland to∣wardes the East doth conteyn .200. mi∣les for the breadth of the Iland is in the southe part, which part is the front and begynnyng of the Land, and endeth na∣row, or as it were in a straighte. So the circuit or compasse of the Iland is .xviii. C. myles, which is .200. lesse than Caesar doothe recken or accompt.
Thus muche I haue thought good to take out of Polydore, touchynge the di∣uision of England, with the forme and situation of the same. Much other good matter that author doth alledge, whiche here for breuitie I doo omitte, referring those that desyre to know farther herof, to that boke: where he shall fynde the style and story bothe plea∣sant and profitable.
The Race of the kinges of England, since Brute the fyrste of this Realme: and in the margent are placed the yeares before Christ his byrth, when euery kyng be∣gan their Reignes, tylye come to Cimbilinus, in whose tyme Christe the Sauioure of the world was born, and then foloweth the yeares from Christ his byrthe. AFter the commune and best allowed o∣pinion of the moste ancient and best ap∣proued Authours,1108 Brute the sonne of Siluius Posthumi∣us, arryued in this Ilande, at a place now called Tones in Deuonshire: the yeare of the worlde .2855. the yeare be∣fore Christes natiuitie .1108. wherin he fyrst began to Reigne, and named it Britayn, which before was called Albi∣on: And therin he builded the noble Ci∣tie of London,London buil∣ded. and named it new Troy buildyng there a Temple to Appolyn,
wherein he placed an Archeflamyn. He deuided the same Iland among his thre sonnes:He stablyshed the Troian la¦wes in thys kyngdome. vnto Locrine he gaue the midle part of Britayn, now called Englande, with the superioritie of al this Ile: Un∣to Camber he gaue Wales, and to Al∣banact Scotland: After whiche partiti∣on he deceassed, when he had reigned xxiiii. yeres, and was buried at London, then called new Troy, as is aforesayd. 1084Locryne, the eldest sonne of Brute reigned .xx. yeres: he chased the Hunnes whiche inuaded this Realme: and pur∣sued them so sharply, that many of thē with their kyng were drowned in a ry∣uer, whyche departeth Englande and Scotland. And for so much as the kyng of Hunnes,Howe the ry∣uer of Hum∣ber toke that name. named Humbar, was there drowned, the ryuer is tyll this daye na∣med Humbar, so saythe Hardyng, Fa∣bian, and other. This king Locryn had to wyfe Gwendolyn daughter of Cori∣neus, duke of Cornewall, by whom he had a sonne named Madan, he also kept as paramor, the beautiful lady Estrilde, by whom he had a daughter named Sa∣bryne. And after the death of Corineus duke of Cornewal, he put from him the
sayd Guendolyn, and wedded Estrylde, but Gwendolyn repaired to Cornwall, where she gathered a great power, and fought with king Locryn, and siue him: he was buryed at Troynouant. She drowned the ladye Estrylde wyth her doughter Sabrine in a ryuer,Howe the ry∣uer of Se∣uerne tooke that name. that after the yong maydens name, is called Se∣uerne. Gwendolyne the daughter of Cori∣neus,1063 and wyfe to Locryne (for so much as Madan her sonne was to yong to go∣uerne the land) was by common assent of all the Britaynes,The Queene reigned du∣rynge the my∣noritie of her sonne. made ruler of the whole Isle of Britayn, whiche she well and discretely ruled, to the comforte of her subiectes .xv. yeares, and then lefte the same to her sonne Madan. Madan,1053 the sonne of Locryne and Gwendolyne, was made ruler of Bri∣tayne, of hym is lyttle memorie made, by any wrtters, but that he vsed greate tyranny among his Brytons: And that beyng at his disport of huntyng, he was deuoured by wyld wolues,The king de∣uoured by wolues. when he had reigned .xl. yeres.Policronica. He left after hym .ii. sonnes (as is reported in Polycronica) na∣med Mempricius, and Manlius.
1009.Mempricius, the sonne of Madan, be∣yng Kyng, by treason slewe his brother Manlius, after whose death he lyued in more tranquillitie, wherthrough he fell in slouth,Iohn Har∣dyng. and so to lechery, takynge the wyues and doughters of his subiectes: and lastly, becam so euyl that he forsoke his wyfe and concubines, and fell to the synne of Sodomie with beastes, wher∣by he became odible to God and man. And goyng on huntyng, lost his com∣pany,The king de∣stroyed of wolues. and was destroyed of wyld wolues: wherof the lande was then full, when he had reigned .xx. yeres. 989.Ebranke, the sonne of Mempricius, was made ruler of Britayn, he had as testifieth Policronica,Policronica. Gaufride,Gaufride. and o∣ther .xxi. wiues, of whom he receued .xx. sonnes,Iohn Har∣dinge. and .xxx. daughters: whiche he sent into Italye, there to be maryed to the blood of the Troyans. In Albanye (now called Scotland) he edified the ca∣stell of Alclude, which is Dumbritain,Dumbritaine Edenbrough, Bawburgh, and Yorke buylded. he made the castle of Maidens, now cal∣led Edenbrough: he made also the castel of Bamburgh: he buylded Yorke citie: wherin he made a temple to Diane, and set there an Archeflame: and there was
buried when he had reigned .lx. yeares. About the yeare of the world .3000. according to the prophecie of Helie half the yeares of the world, were fulfylled, whyche was the yeare before Christes byrthe .963. Brute Greneshield,929. the sonne of E∣branke, ruled this lande .xii. yeares, and was buried at Yorke, leuyng after him a sonne named Leill. Leill the sonne of Brute Greneshield beyng a iust man,917. and louer of peace in his tyme buylded Carleile,Carleile buil∣ded. and made there a temple, placyng therein a Fla∣myn, to rule the same, accordyng to the lawes of theyr gods at that tyme: and there was buryed, when he had ruled Britayn .xxv. yeares. Lud Rudibras, the sonne of Leille,892. buylded Canterbury,Canterbury Wynchester and Shaftes∣bury builded. Winchester, and Shaftsburye, wherein he buylded .iii. temples, and placed in the same .iii. fla∣mes, lyke as byshoppes now be. he rei∣gned .xxix. yeares, and left a sonne after him named Bladud. Bladud,863. sonne of Lud Rudibras, who had longe studied at Athens, broughte
wyth hym .iiii. Philosophers, to keepe schole in Britayn: for the which he buil∣ded Stamford,Stamforde buylded. and made it an vniuersi∣tie (as saythe Merlyn:)Iohn Har∣dyng alled∣gyng Merlyn wherein he had great numbre of scholers, studyinge in all the .vii. liberall sciences: whiche vni∣uersitie dured to the commynge of S. Augustine. At whiche tyme the byshop of Rome interdited it, for heresies that fell among the Sarons and Britons to∣gether mixt. so saith Hardyng. He buil∣ded Bathe,Bathe, wyth the hotte ba∣thes builded. and made there a temple to Apollo, and placed there a Flamyn: he made there the hote bathes, and practi∣sed his necromancye: He decked hym∣selfe in fethers,The king at∣temptynge to fly, brake his necke. and presumed to flye in the ayre, and fallynge on hys temple of Apollo, brake his necke, when he had reigned .xx. yeares. 844Leire, sonne of Bladud succeded hys father, he buylded Caire Leyr, now cal∣led Leicester,Leycester buylded and made there a Tem∣ple of Ianus: placyng a Flamyn there to gouerne the same. he had .iii. daugh∣ters, Gonorell, Ragan, and Cordelle: Whiche Cordelle for her wysedom and vertue towardes her father, succeded hym in the kyngedome. When he had
reygned .xl. yeare, he deceassed, and was buried at Leycester. Cordyla,0 the youngest daughter of Liere, succedynge her father, was sore vexed by her two nephues, Morgan of Albanie, and Conedagus of Cam∣ber and Cornewall, who at the lengthe tooke and caste her in pryson: where she beyng in dispayre of recoueryng her estate (as testifieth Galfride) slewe her selfe,Galfride. when she had reigned .v yeares, and was buryed at Leycester in Ianus temple by her father. Morgan,800 the eldest sonne of Dame Gonorell claimed Britayn, and warred on his nephue Conedagus, that was kyng of Camber, (that nowe is Wales) and of Cornwall: but Conedagus met with Morgan in Wales, and there slue hym:Howe Gla∣morganshyre tooke that name. which place is called Glamorgan tyll this daye. And then Condenagus was kyng of all Britayne: he buylded a Temple of Mars at Perche, that now is S. Iohns towne in Scotlande,S. Iohns Towne in Scotlande buylded. & pla∣ced there a Flamyne: he buylded an o∣ther or Minerue in Wales, which now is named Bangor.Bangor in Wales buyl∣ded. The third he made of Mercurie in Cornewall, where he
was borne: he reigned .xxxiii. yeares, and was buryed at London. 766Riuallo, sonne of Conedagus succe∣ded his father, in whose tyme it rayned blood .iii. dayes:It rayned bloud .iii. dais after the whiche tem∣pest ensued a great multitude of vene∣mous flyes, which slewe muche people. And then a great mortalitie throughe out this land, whiche caused almoste de∣solation of the same. This Riuallo rei∣gned ouer this whole Iland .xlvi. yeres, and than deceased, and was buried at Caire branke, that now is Yorke. In the yeere .1554. after the vniuer∣sall Floud, and after Comerus the fyrst king of Italy .1414. after ye destruction of Troy .432. And after Brute arriued in England .356. Rome was buylded in Italy by Remus and Romulus.Rome was buylded. 21Gurgustus, sonne of Riuallo succe∣ded in the kyngdom of Brytayne, who reigned quietly: but was a cōmon dron∣karde, wherof folowed all other vices. when he had reigned .xxxviii. yeres, he deceased, and was buried at Yorke: 684Scicilius, the brother of Gurgustus succeded in the Kyngdom: of whome is left but little memory: but that he rey∣gned
.li. yeares, and was buryed at Bathe. Iago or Lago cousyn of Gurgustus,636 reigned .xxv. yeares: for his euyll gouer∣nement, he dyed of a litargie, and was buryed at Yorke. The game of Chesse about this sea∣son was deuysed by wyse men,The game of  hosse deui∣sed. to myti∣gate the myndes or hartes of tyrantes, the yere of the worlde .3339. the yere be∣fore Christ .614. Kynimacus,612 succeded Iago in thys realme of Brittany, wherin he reigned liiii. yeares: and was buryed at Yorke. Gorbodug succeded his father Kyni∣macus in this realme of Britain,559 as our Chronicles write: He reigned .lxiii. ye∣res, and was buried at London. Forrex with his brother Porrex,496 ru∣led this lande of Britayn .v. yeares: but it was not long ere they fel at ciuile dis∣corde for the soueraygne domynion,Porrex slewe his brother Forrex, and Porrex was afterwarde slayne by his mother. in whiche Forrex was slayne. And Por∣rex afterwardes by his mother was kil∣led in his bed. Thus cruelly was the bloodde and house of Brute destroyed,Brutus lyne extinguished. when that this Realme by the space of 616. yeares had bene gouerned by that
lynage. After the death of the two brethren, Forrex and Porrex, thys Realme was deuided with ciuile warres, for lacke of one soueraigne gouernour, whiche con∣tinued by the space of .li. yeares, vntyll that noble Dunwallo reduced the same into one Monarchie. MUlmutius Dunwallo, the sonne of Cloten,441 duke of Cornewall, re∣duced this realme into one Monar¦chie:The fyrste king of En∣glande that ware a crown of golde, who builded Black well Hall in London. beyng before by ciuile warres and discention, seuered and brought into dy∣uers dominions: he was the fyrste that ware a crowne of golde: he constituted good lawes: whiche long after wer cal∣led Mulmutius lawes: he gaue priuile∣ges vnto Temples,The seconde lawes were Mulmutius lawes. and ploughes, and beganne to make the fower notable wayes in Britayne. In London, called then Troy Nouant, he buylded a great Temple: whiche some suppose to be S. Paules, some Blackwell Hall, whiche was called Templum pacis. Finally when he had brought this Ralme to wealthe and quietnes, reygnyng herein .xl. yea∣res: He dyed honourably, leauing after hym two valiant and noble sonnes Be∣linus
and Brennus, as Fabian writeth He buylded the towne of Malmsbury,R. Fabian and of Uies.The towne o Malmesbury buylded. He was buried at London in the temple of Peace before named. BElinus, and Brennus,401 sonnes of Mulmutius deuyded thys whole Isle of Britayne, betwene them. Unto Belyne, the elder brother was appoynted England, Wales, and Corn wall. Unto the other the North part be¦yond Humber. But Brennus a young man, desyrous of glory and dominion, thinking hym selfe equall with his bro∣ther in marciall prowes, was not there∣with content: Wherfore he raised war agaynste Belyne. But in conclusion by the meanes of their mother they were accorded, and Brennus brynge geuen wholly to the study of warres, lefte his countrey to the gouernance of his bro∣ther, and went into Fraunce amongest the Galles: where in the Prouince of Lions, for his excellēt qualities, he was greatly estemed of Siguinus kynge of the countrey, whose daughter he mari∣ed: And of the Galles was made Soue∣rain captain whē they made their vsage
to Rome. Belyne in the meane tyme both in ciuile iustyce and also religyon,Iohn. Har∣dynge. suche as at that tyme was vsed, greatly increased his Realme. He made three Archeflames,Three arche∣flames in En¦glande. whose seas were at Lon∣don, Yorke, and Carlion.Foure nota∣ble wayes made in En∣glande. He fynyshed the fower great waies begon by his fa∣ther: He subdued and made tributarye vnto hym, Denmarke. In London he made the hauen, whyche at thys daye, retaineth the name of hym, called Be∣lynes gate:Belyns gate in London buylded. and as Iohn Leyland wri∣teth (whose labour and industry in most diligent serchyng out the antiquities of this Realm,Iohn Ley∣lande. is greatly to be cōmended) builded ye tower of London.The tower of London fyrst buylded. He maried his daughter Cambria vnto a prince of Almayn called Antenor, of whō these people were called Cymbri, and Sycambri. Fynally, after he had reigned with his brother and alone .xxvi. yeres, he died: and after the pagan maner, with great pompe was burned: & his ashes in a ves∣sell of brasse set on a high Pynacle ouer Belyns gate (as saith Robert Fabyan) he builded Carlion,Carlyon buylded. and also the temple of concorde,The old tem∣ple nexe to tē∣ple barre buil¦ded. whyche after the opinion of many, is nowe the paryshe churche
of the Temple. Gurgunstus,375 sonne of Belyne, suc∣ceded his father: He subdued Denmark compellyng them to continue their tri∣bute: and in his returne home, mette with a fleet of Spaniards,The Spani∣ards fyrst in∣habited Ire∣lande. which were seekyng for habitations, because theyr contrey was so populous, and not able to susteyne them: to whome the Kynge granted the Isle of Ireland to inhabite and to holde the same of hym as their soueraigne Lord:Ector Boyce But the Scots write that the Spaniards arriued before this time in Ireland. This Gurgunus rei∣gned .xix. yeares, and was buried at Carlyon. Guinthelinus, sonne of Gurgunstus was crowned kynge of Britayne.356 A prince sober and quiet, who had to wife a noble woman named Marcia, of ex∣cellent learnyng and knowledge. She deuised certain lawes,The thirde lawes were Marcian la∣wes. which long time among the Britains were greatly este∣med, and named Marcian lawes. Fy∣nally when this vertuous prince hadde reigned .xxvi. yeres, he dyed, and was buried at London. Cecilius,330 the sonne of Guenthelyne and Marcia, reigned .vii. yeres: of hym
there remaineth nothyng notable. But that (as the Scottes write) in the fyrst yeare of his reigne, a people of Almain called Pyctes,The Pictes fyrste inhabi∣ted the mar∣ches of En∣glande and Scotland. arriued here in Britayn and possessed those parties, which now be the marches of bothe realmes, En∣glande and Scotlande. Cecilius was buried at Carlyon. 323Kymarus succeded Cecilius, and rei∣gned three yeares in Britayne: he was slayne as he was huntyng. 321Elanius, called also Danius, was kyng of Britayn .ix. yeres. 311Morindus, the bastard son of Danius began to reigne in Britain: he (as our Chronicles saye) fought with a kynge, who came out of Germanye, and arri∣ued here, and slew hym with all his po∣wer. Moreouer (as they write) of the I∣rishe seas in his tyme,The king de∣uoured by a monster. came foorthe a wonderfull monster: whiche destroyed muche people. wherof the king hearyng would of his valiaunt courage, needes fyght with it: by whō he was cleane de¦uoured, whē he had reigned .viii. yeres. 303Gorbomānus, eldest sonne of Morin¦dus, reigned .xi. yeres: A prince iust and religious. he renued the temples of his gods, and gouerned his people in peace
and wealth. Oure englyshe Chronicle sayth,Cambridge & Grantham buylded. he buylded the townes of Cam∣bridge. and of Grantham. Archigallo,292 brother to Gorboman∣nus, was crowned kyng of Britayne. he was in conditions vnlike to his bro∣ther: for he deposed the noble men, and exalted the vnnoble. He extorted from men their goodes to enriche his treasu∣rie: for which cause by the estates of the realme, he was depriued of his royall dignitie,The kyng de∣priued. when had reigned .v. yeares. Elidurus,286 the thyrd sonne of Morin∣dus, and brother to Archigallo, was e∣lected kyng of Britayn: a vertuous and gentil prince, who gouerned his people iustly. As he was in hunting in a forest by chaunce he met with his brother Ar∣chigallo, whom moste louyngly he im∣braced, and founde the meanes to re∣concile hym to his lordes: and than re∣signed to hym his royal dignitie, when he had reigned .v. yeares. Archigallo thus restored to his royal estate,281 ruled the people quietly and iust∣ly .x. yeares, & lyeth buryed at Yorke. Elidurus aforenamed,272 after the deth of his brother Archigallo, for his pitie and iustice, by the generall cnsente of
the Britayns was agayn chosen kyng. But he reigned not passyng two yeres, but that his yonger brethern Uigenius and Peredurus raysed warre agaynste hym, tooke hym prisoner, and cast hym into the Tower of London: where he remayned (as they write) duryng their Reigne. 270Uigenius & Peredurus, after the ta∣kyng of their brother reigned together vii. yeres.The town of Pikerynge buylded. Uigenius thā died, & Peredu¦rus reygned after alone .ii. yeares. He buylded the towne of Pyckeryng after the opinion of diuers writers. 261Elidurus, the thirde tyme was made kyng of Britayne, who continued his latter reigne honorably and iustely: but beynge sore bruised with age and trou∣bles he fynyshed his lyfe, when he had now lastly reigned .iiii. yeres, and was buried at Carle. 258Gorbonian reygned in Britayne .x. yeares. 248Morgan was crowned kyng of Bri∣tayne who guyded the realme peacibly xiiii. yeares. 234Emerianus brother to Morgan suc∣ceded in the Realme of Britayne. And when he had tyrannously reigned .vii.
yeares, he was deposed.The kyng de¦posed. Iuall was chosen kyng of Britayne for his iustice and temperance which he gouerned peacyblye .xx. yeares.225 Rymo gouerned this realme of Bri∣tayne .xvi. yeares.207 In his tyme was great plentie and peace. Geruncius reigned here in Britayne xx. yeares.191 Catillus reigned peacibly in Britayn x. yeres,173 he houng vp all oppressours of the poore people: to geue ensample vn∣to other.A good en∣sample. Coilus succeded Catellus in the re∣alme of Britayne,163 who quietly reigned xx. yeares. Porex,143 a vertuous and gentle prince reigned in Britayne .v. yeares. Chirinnus king of Britayn,138 through his dronkennesse (as our Chronyclers write) reigned but one yeare. Fulgen his sonne reigned two yeres in Britayne.137 Eldred,135 reygned in Britayne one yeare. Androgius,134 lykewyse reygned one yeare in Britayne. Uarianus,133 the sonne of Androgius,
succeded his father in this realm of Bri¦tayne. He wholly gaue hym selfe to the lustes of the fleshe, & reigned .iii. yeres. 136Eliud, kynge of Britayne reygned v. yeres: who was a great Astronomer. 124Dedantius kyng of Britayn reigned v. yeares. 120Detonus reigned in this land of Bri∣tayne .ii. yeares. 118Gurgineus reygned .iii. yeares in Britayne. 115Merianus was kyng of Britayne .ii. yeares. 113Bladunus gouerned Britain .ii. yeres 111Capenus, reigned kyng of Britayn iii. yeares. 108Ouinus ruled Britain .ii. yeares. 106Silius reigned in Britain .ii. yeares. 104Bledgabredus was .xx. yeres kynge of Britayne. He delited muche in mu∣sycke, and gaue hym selfe to the studye thereof. 94Archemalus was kyng of Britayne ii. yeares. 92Eldelus reigned kyng of Britayne iiii. yeares. In this tyme dyuers prodigies were sene,Prodigious sygnes in the ayre. as globes of fyre, burstynge oute of the ayre with great noyse.
Rodianus,88 was kyng of Britayne .ii. yeares. Redargius reygned kyng of Britayn iii. yeares.86 Samulius reigned in britayn ii. yeres83 Penisellus was made kyng of Bri∣tayne:81 who gouerned it .iii. yeres. Pirrhus ruled Britayne .ii. yeares.78 Caporus,76 was kyng of Britayne .ii. yeares. Dinellus,74 the sonne of Caporus, a iust & vertuous prince gouerned this realm of Britaine .iiii. yeares. Helius the sonne of Dinellus,70 reig∣ned not fully one yere king of Britayn. Of this prince the Isle of Ely toke this name:Now the Ile of Ely tooke fyrste that name. for that he there buylded a good∣ly palace, wherin was his most delight to lyue: and also was there buried. LUd,69 Kynge Lud buylded Lon∣don from Lō∣don slone to Ludgate, and named it Ludston. the eldest son of Hely, succeded his father, and reigned .xi. yeares in Britayne. As soone as he was made Kyng, he reformed the state of his common weale: for he amended his la∣wes, and tooke awaye all vsages that were naughte: Moreouer, he repayred the Citie of London then called Troy∣nouant, with fayre buildyngs and wal∣les: and buylded on the west part ther∣of
of, a strong gate, whiche vnto this time retaineth the name of hym, and is cal∣led Ludgate. Fynally he dyed, leauyng after hym two sonnes Androgeus and Theomancius: who beynge not of age to gouerne, their vncle Cassiuelane ob∣teyned the Crowne. Our Chroniclers write, that London tooke the name of this Lud, and was called Ludston. He was buryed nere to the same Ludgate, in a Temple whiche he there buylded. 58CAssiuelane, the sonne of Hely (as oure vulgare Hystoriographiers write) after the deathe of his bro∣ther Lud, was made gouernour of Bri∣tayne, whiche hee ruled .xix. yeares. Iulius Cesar made his fyrst voyage into Englande.In the .viii. yere of his reigne, Iulius Cesar, who warred longe in France, made the fyrste vyage of any straunger into this Realme: and afterwarde sub∣dued it. Whan C. Iulius Cesar, had warred seuen yeares in France & Ger∣manie, commyng vnto that part where Calaice and Boloigne nowe stande, hee determined to make warr into Britain whiche vntyll that tyme remayned vn∣frequented and vnknowen of the Ro∣mayns. His quarell was, because that in the warres of Fraunce, he perceyued
the Frenchemen to haue muche succour and aide from thens. Wherfore hauing prepared .lxxx. shyppes, he sayled into Britayne: where at the first beyng we∣ried with an harde and sharpe battayle, And after with sodeyne tempest, his na∣uye almoste destroyed: he retourned a∣gayne into France, there to wynter his men.The seconde voyage of Iu¦lius Cesar in to England. The next spring (whiche was the yeare before Christ .51.) His nauy being newe rygged and increased, he passed the seas agayne with a greater armye. But whiles he went towardes his ene∣mies on lande, his shippes lying at an∣ker, were agayn by tempest almost lost: for either they were dryuen on the san∣des, wher they stacke fast: orels through beatyng one an other, with force of the tempeste, they were destroyed. So that xi. were lost, the other with muche la∣boure were saued. Upon lande also his horsemen at the fyrste encountre were vanquished, and Labienus the Tribune slayne. At the seconde conflict, not with∣out great daunger of his men, he putte the Britayns to flyght, and pursued thē to ye riuer of Thamis: on the further side wherof, Cassiucian, with a great mul∣titude of people, was keping the banks,
but they not hable to resist the violence and force of the Romaynes, hyd theim selues in woddes, and with sodayn erup¦tions oftentymes inuaded them: but in the meane tyme theyr strongest citie,London sub∣mitted to Iu∣lius Cesar. Troynouant submitted it selfe to Cesar delyueryng vnto hym hostages: whyche exaumple also the other cities folowed:England first tributarye to the Romains Iohn Lidgate Iulius Ce∣sar, a bakers son cōquering ye worlde and beyng the first Emperour, was in the ca¦pitoll by the senate slayne with bodkins whereby Cassiuelan after many losses was constreigned to geue pledges, and to agree that Britayne shoulde become tributarie to the Romans. Then Cesar lyke a conquerour with a great numbre of prisoners sayled into France, and so to Rome, where shortely after he was slayne with bodkyns. Iohn Lydgate in his boke named the Serpent of diuision writethe, that Iulius Cesar buylded in this lande diuers cafteis and cities for a perpetuall memorie, to put his name in remembrance: that is to say,The castels of Douer Canterburye Rochester, & the tower of London buil∣ded. the castell of Douer, of Canterbury, Rochester, and the Tower of London, the castell and towne of Cesars bury: takyng his name after Cesar, the whiche is nowe called Salisbury.Salisbury, Chichester and Excester builded. He also edefied Cesars Chester that nowe is called Chichester, and the castel of Excester &c. Thus ended th warres whiche hee
made in Britayn, wherby he rather ope¦ned onely a waye for his successours, to come to the same: then that he delyue∣red to them the dominion therof. Thys cōquest was made .2255. yeres after the uersall floud .1057. yeares. after the ar∣riuall of Brute .702. yeares after the buyldyng of Rome, in the second yeare of the .181. Olympiade, the .1116. yeare beefore the conqueste made by Wylli∣am of Normandye, and .1615. years be∣fore this present yere of our Lord .1564. Theomancius,42 the sonne of Lud, and nephue to Cassiuelan succeded in the re∣alme of Britayne, and reigned quietly xxiii. yeres: and was buried at London. Cymbalinus,19 the sonne of Theoman¦tius reigned kyng of Britain .xxxv. ye∣res, and was buried at London. The most blessed and pure virgin Ma¦ry, mother of our sauiour Iesu Christ, was born of the holy matrone Saincte Anne, the yeare of the world .3948. the yeare before Christ .15. When Cesar Augustius the seconde Emperour by the wyll of God had sta∣blished mooste sure peace thorough the world, our redemer IESV CHRIST,The byrth of Christ. very God and man, vppon whom peace
wayted, was borne in the .xlii. yeare of the reign of Augustus: after the vniuer∣sall Floud .2305. yeres. From the birth of Abraham .2012. yeres. After the de∣partyng of the Israelites out of Egypt 1509. yeares, after the buyldynge of the temple by Salomon .1029. yeres. From the buildyng of Rome .752. yeares. af∣ter the captiuitie of Babylon .614. ye∣res. And in the laste yere of the .194. O∣lympiade. But here is to be noted, that the fyrst yere of our Lorde hath but vii. dayes, after some computation: for he was borne the .xxv day of December, & the fyrst of Ianuary folowynge, began the second yeare. From this place folowing, the ye∣res synce Christes byrth, are pla∣ced in the margent, at the begyn∣nyng of euery kynges Reigne. 17GUiderius, the fyrst sonne of Cim∣balyne began his reigne ouer the Britains, in the .xvii yeare after the byrth of Christ our Sauiour.Thomas Lan¦quet. This man was valiant, hardy, welthye, and trusted muche in his strength. And for that he thought the Romayns had their tribute wrongfully, he of great courage denied to pay the same. For which cause Claudius the .v. Emperoure came in∣to
Britayne wyth a greatte power, to clayme agayne the payment therof: and lastly slew the sayd Guiderius, when he had reigned .xxviii. yeares. ARuiragus,45 the yongest sonne of Cymbalyne, and brother of Gui∣derius, was ordeyned Kynge of Britayne: he reigned .xxvii. yeares.Southamp∣ton, howe it tooke that name. He slue Hamon neere to a hauen of the sea, and threw hym gobbet meale therein: Wherfor it is now called Southāpton. Claudius the Emperoure (after dyuers happes of battaile) tooke kyng Aruira∣gus to his grace. And for so much as he perceiued hym to be a valiant prince, in token of frendship (as the english Chro∣nicles testifie) gaue to hym his daugh∣ter in mariage, named Genissa.Gloucester buylded, whi∣che before was named Carlyon. Thys Claudius (as saythe Fabyan) buylded Gloucester: and Aruiragus was there buryed. Peter and Paule by the tyrannye of Nero,Peter and Paule cruci∣fied. wer crucified at Rome, after the byrthe of our Sauioure Iesus Christe, 68. yeares. MArius,73 the sonne of Aruiragus, an excellente wyse man was or∣deyned kyng of Britayn. He rei∣gned .liii. yeares. In his tyme Lodrik
kyng of the Pictes (whiche were a peo∣ple of Scythia) accompanyed with the Scottes, inuaded Britayne, and spoy∣led the countrey with sworde and fyre, against whom Marius with his knigh∣tes, assembled in all haste, & gaue theim sharpe battaile. Wherein Lodrike cap∣tayn of the Pictes was slayne, wyth a great number of his souldiours: to them whiche he remayned, Marius gaue inha∣bitance in the further part of Scotland. And for as muche as the Britaines dis∣dayned to geue theyr daughters to them in mariage, they acquainted them with the Iryshe men, & maryed theyr daugh∣ters, and grewe in proces of tyme to a great people.Chester town builded. This Marius (as saythe Fabyan) buylded the towne of Chester, and is buried at Carlyon. 126COilus, the sonne of Marius, was ordeined kyng of the Britaynes. He was brought vp euen from his yong age in Italy among the Romains and therfore fauoured theim greatly, & payd the tribute truly. Som write, that he builded the town of Colchester,Colchester buylded. he rei¦gned .liii. yeres, & was buried at Yorke. 180LUcie, the sonne of Coilus was ordei∣ned kyng of Britayne, who in all his
actes and dedes folowed the steppes of his forfathers, in such wise that he was of all men loued and dread.England first receiued the christen faith. This Lucie in the .viii. yere of his reigne, that was about the yeare of our Lord .187. sente louyng letters to Eleutherius bishop of Rome, desyryng hym to sende some de∣uout & lerned men, by whose instructi∣on both he & his people might be taught the sayth and religion of Christe: wher∣of Elutherius beyng very glad, sente into Britayne .ii. famous clerkes, Fa∣ganus, and Dunianus.Gildas in his boke De victo¦ria Aurelii Ambrossi. By whose dili∣gence (as Gildas wryteth) Lucie and his people of Britayne were instructed and baptised in the faith of Christ 1294. yeres, after the arriuall of Brute:In this tyme (as Gildas & Martin, a chro¦nicler dooe write) xxviii. temples of Flamynes were made ca¦thedrall chur∣ches, and bys∣shops placed in the same as Flamyns be∣fore had bene. Lōdon, York and Earlyon were archby∣shops. The yeare of Christe .189. Lucius kynge of Britayne, when he had reigned xii. ye∣res deceased, and was buried at Gloce∣ster: after whose death, for so muche as of him remained no heire, the britaines betwene theim selues fell at greate dis∣corde and warre, whyche continued to the greate disturbance of the realme a∣bout .xv. yeares. By meane of this for∣saide discorde amonge the britons: Se∣uerus was moued to make haste into thys Countreye, as well to quyete the
realme, as to kepe backe the Pictes and Scotts, which vexed them with warre. hee caused a wall of turues and greate stakes to be made of the lengthe of 112. myles,Adrians wall repaired by Senerus, which is yet called the scot¦tyshe banke. or (after some) repaired the wall of Adrian: It began at Tyne, and rea∣ched to the Scottyshe sea. This Seue∣rus gouerned Britayne .v. yeares, and was buried at Yorke. 213BAssianus Caracalla succeded hys father in the empire, and reygned vi yeres. Of nature he was cruell and fierce, able to endure al paynes and labours, & especially in warfare, wher∣to he semed to be framed of nature. 218In Britayne was yet no kynge: but the Emperour was accompted as king, wherefore (as some write) Carassus, a britayn of lowe byrth (but valyant and hardy in marciall deedes) purchased of the Emperour, the kepyng of the coasts of Britayn. By meanes wherof he drue to hym many knightes of his countrey, and addressed deadly warre agaynst the the Romayns: hauyng the better hope, for that he heard of the death of Bassia∣nus the emperour, who about this time was slayne by one of his owne seruan∣tes.Polydore Virgile But Polydore affirmeth that this
Carassus toke on hym the gouernance of Britayne in the tyme of Dioclesian: and sayth, that thys lande was in good quietnes the space of .76. yeares, with whom the latin histories seme to agree. Alectus, a duke of Rome was sente to subdue Carassus, whiche unlefullye vsurped the crowne of Britayne: To whiche Alectus, fortune was so fauou∣rable, that he vanquyshed Carassus: and lastely slew him, when he had reig∣ned .viii. yeres. Alectus,226 the Romayn gouerned the britaynes after he had subdued the land again to the Romains: and vsed among them much crueltie & tyranny. Where∣fore they intendyng vtterly to expell the Romaynes, moued a noble man cal∣led Asclepiodatus,Alectus slayn by Asclepioda¦tus. to take on hym the kyngdom: who gathered a great power and made sharpe warre vppon the Ro∣mayns, and chased them from countrey to countrey, vntyll at lengthe Alectus kept hym at London for his moste sure∣tie: whither Asclepiodatus pursued him and nere to that citie gaue hym batale: in whiche Alectus was slayne, when he had gouerned Britayn .vi. yeres. Asclepiodatus,232 after Alectus was
thus slayn, belayed the citie of London with a strong siege, wherin was Liuius Gallus the Romayn capitayne: and ere it were long, by knightly force and vio∣lence, entred the citie, and slue the fore∣named Gallus nere vnto a broke there at that day runnyng,Walbroke in London, how it toke that name. into whiche broke he threw him, by reason wherof, it was called Gallus or Wallus brooke: and this day, the strete where sometime the broke ranne, is called Walbroke. After which victorie Asclepiodatus gouerned britayne .xxv. yeares. 262At this time happened a great discen∣tion in britayn betwene Asclepiodatus their kyng, and one Coill duke of Col∣chester: whereby was raised a greuous warre,Asclepioda∣tus slayne. in whyche Asclepiodatus was slayn. And Coill toke on hym the king∣dome of britayne, and gouerned the re∣alme the space of .xxvii. yeres. 289Constantius, a duke of Rome was sent into britayn to recouer the tribute: shortly after whose arriuall. Coill whi∣che then was kyng, died: Wherfore the britayns to haue more suertie of peace, wylled this Duke to take to wife Hele∣na, the daughter of Coill, whiche was a wonderfull fayre mayden, and ther∣with
well learned. Thys Constantius when he had recouered the tribute, re∣turned with his wyfe Helena to Rome: as chiefe ruler of Britayne: who gouer∣ned the same .xxi. yeares: he was buried at Yorke. In this Constantius tyme,S. Albon of England mar¦tyred. was S. Albon prothomartir of England, mar∣tyred at Uerolan. Of hym Iohn Lid∣gate monke of Burye hathe compyled a goodlye storye in englyshe meter He∣roicall.Iohn Lidgate COnstantine, the soonne of Con∣stantius,310 succeded as well in the kyngdome of Britayne, as in the gouernance of other realmes, that wer subiect afore to his father. This Con∣stantine was a ryght noble and valiant prince and sonne of Helena, a woman of great sanctimony, and borne in Bri∣tayne. He was so myghtye in marciall prowesse, that hee was surnamed the greate Constantyne: And had the faith of Christe in suche reuerence, that al∣waye mooste studyouselye he endeuou∣red to augmente the same. In wyt∣nesse of hys beliefe, hee caused a booke of the Gospell to bee caryed before hym
and made the byble to be copied out, and sente into all partes of the empire.Wherfore the kynges of En¦glande weare close crownes Of this man the kynges of Britayne had fyrst the priuileage to weare close crow∣nes or diademes: he reigned .xviii yeres Constantine in the .vi. yeare of his reigne came with a parte of his armye agaynst Maxentius,The fyrste christen Em∣perour. whyche vexed the Romanes with greuous eractions and tribute: when he was in his iourney, by a vision in the nyght, he sawe the sygne of the Crosse in the elemente shynynge like fyre, and an angell therby, sayinge in this wyse: Constantine, in this signe thou shalt ouercome. wherfore he beyng greatly comforted, shortly after vanqui∣shed the army of Maxentius: who fleing oute of the battayle, was drowned in Tyber. Helena,S. Helene an englyshe wo∣man. the mother of Constantyne, at Ierusalem found the crosse, on which Christ suffred his passion, and the .iii. nayles, wherewith his fete and handes were pearced. OCtauius, duke of Iesses or wesse Saxons, whō Constantine made lieutenant in Britayne rebelled: and endeuoured to expell the Romayns out of the lande. Whereof when Con∣stantine
had knowlege, he sent against him a Duke named Traherne with le∣gions of souldiours, after whose arri∣uall in Britain was fought a fiers bat∣taile, neere to Wynchester: In whiche Traherne was putte to the worse, and constrained to flee towarde Scotlande: whō Octauius folowed. And in West∣merlande gaue to hym the seconde bat∣taile: in whiche Octauius was chased, and Traherne obteyned the victorie, & pursued Octauius so fiersely, that hee was driuen to forsake the lande, and sai¦led into Norway. Octauius repairyng his army,329 came agayne into Britayn: but in the meane tyme an Earle whyche fauoured hys partie, by treason murdered the forna∣med Trahern. And then Octauius (cal∣led in the Englishe Chronicles Octa∣uian) reigned in this lande at the leaste liiii. yeares. In whiche tyme (as sayth the Scottishe historie) he was troubled with often warres by the Romaines:Ector Boice. Polidore saieth, that this Realme was in good quiete all the tyme of Constan∣tyne and his successours,Polydore Virgile vntyll the fift yere of Gratian, and maketh no men∣tion of this Octauius whiche thyng I
I speake not for anye reproche to Poly∣dore (whom I know right well to haue folowed moste certayne and commen∣dable Authours,) but onely to shewe to the reader, the dyuersitie of hystories, whiche is great. 283MAximus, sonne of Leonine, and cousyn germaine to Constantine the great, was made kyng of bri∣tayne. Thys man was mightye of hys handes: but for that he was cruell, and pursued somedeale the Christians, hee was called Maximus the tyraunt. Be∣twene hym, and one Conon Meridoke a Britayn, was a stryfe and debate, in whiche they both sped dyuersly: but at at length they wer made frends. Maxi∣mus reigned .viii. yeares. Maximus cō¦quered lyttle Britayn.Maximus, kynge of Britayne made warre vpon the Galles, and sayled in∣to Armerica, now called litle Britayn: and subduyng the countreye, gaue it to Conon Meridoke, to hold for euer of the kynges of great Britayn. Maximus, was constrayned of the souldiours, to take on hym the imperi∣all crowne: & therfore beyng in France passed further into the lands of the em∣pire, & subdued a great part of France,
and all Germanie. Gratian the Empe¦rour of hym was put to flight at Paris and slayne at Lyons. Whyles Maximus was occupied in the warres in Italye, Melga kynge of Pictes, and Guanius captayne of the Hunnes, vexed the Britayns. Wherof when Maximus had vnderstandynge, he sente a captaine named Gratian to withstande their force. Saint Ursula,S. Ursula of Englande. with the .11000. Uir∣gins, whiche were sent into little Bri∣tayne to be maried to the foresayde Co∣non and his knyghtes: wer slayn of the barbarous people beynge on the sea. Forthwith the foresaid Gratian that was sent into Britayne of Maximus,391 to defende the land from Barbariens, toke on hym the kyngdom of Britayn, and exercised all tyranny and exaction vppon the people: for whiche cause hee was abhorred of all the Britaynes: and by theym was slayne, when he hadde reygned fower yeares. Then was the Realme a good space wythoute heade or gouernoure: In the whyche tyme they were nowe and then very muche vexed wyth the foresayde Barbarous
people, and other foreyne enemies. The Scotts and Picts in¦uade EnglādNere about the yeare of Christ .427. the Britaynes were inuaded agayne by the Pictes and Scots: which not with∣standynge the foresayde wall that was made by the Romanes, spoyled the coū∣trey very sore, so that they were dryuen to seke for newe helpe of the Romanes: who sent to them a company of souldi∣ors: which agayn chased the Picts, and made a wall of stone of the thicknes of viii. foot,A walle of stone betwene England and Scotlande. & in height .xii. foote. Which thing when they had done, comfortyng the britones, and admonishynge them hereafter to trust to their own māhod & strēgth, they returned agayn to Rome. The Scottes and Pyctes yet once agayne entred the lande of Britayne, spoylynge the countreye, and chasyng the commons so cruelly, that they were altogether comfortelesse, and broughte to suche myserie, that eche robbed and spoyled other: and ouer this, the groūde was vntylled: whereof ensued greate scarcitie and hunger, and after hunger deathe.The Scottes and Picts in∣uaded this re∣alme so sore, that the Ro∣mains refused to defende the same: but ra∣ther to lose theyr Try∣bute. In thys necessitie they sente for ayde to Aetius, the Romayne capi∣tayne, beynge then occupied in warres in a parte of Fraunce: but they had no
comfort at his hand. And therfore wer forced to send ambassade to Aldroenus, kynge of little Britayne, to desyre ayde and comforte: whiche they obteyned, in condition, that if they atchieued the victorie,Beda de ge∣stis Anglorū. Constantine his brother shold be made king of britayn: for to that day they had no gouernour. Which thyng of the Ambassadours beyng graunted, the sayd Constantine gathered a compa¦nye of souldiors, and went forth with them. And when he had manfully van∣quished theyr enemies, obteined the vic∣torie: accordynge to the promise made, he was ordeyned their kynge, and guy∣ded this land .x. yeres. Here endeth fynally the dominion & tribute of the Romans ouer this lande, whiche had contynued by the space of 483. yeares, from the tyme that Brute began to rule this lande .1541. After the citie of Rome was builded .1585. yeres. THen it folowed,433 that when Con∣stantine brother of Aldroenus, had chased and ouercome the Pic∣tes and Scots (as is beforesaid) he was crowned kynge of great Britayne and guyded the lande the space of .x. yeares
in quietnes. In the courte of Constantyne kynge of Britayn was a certayne Picte, in so greate fauoure and authoritie with the kyng,The kynge slayne in hys chamber by a Picte. that he myght at all tymes come to his presence: who watchynge hys tyme, by secrete meanes trayterouslye slewe the kyng in his chamber. 443Then Constantius hys eldest sonne, whyche for his lofte spirite, was made monke at saincte Swithens in Wyn∣chester,A Monke made kyng of Englande. by the means of Uortiger, duke of Cornwal, was taken out of the cloi∣ster, and made king: vnder whose name the foresayd Uortiger ruled all the land and vsed great tyrannye. Constantius, kyng of Britayn, was slayne of certayne Pictes or Scottes,The kynge traiterousely slayne by cer∣taig Pictes. whom Uortiger had ordeined for a gard to the kynges bodye. Whereof when Uortiger had knowledge, he wept and made semblaunt of greate sorowe and heauynes: and caused the sayd Scottes or Pictes to be put to deathe, thoughe he in dede were the chief causer of their treason and murder. So this Constan∣tius reigned but .v. yeares: And Aure∣lius and Uther, the kynges younger
brethren, fled into little Britayn. Uortiger was by force ordeined king of Britayne,448 and gouerned the realme .xvi. yeares, not without trouble. For the nobles of Britayne suspected, that Constantius was not murthered with out hys consent: And therfore aliena∣ted their myndes from hym. In Britayne was so great plentie of corne and fruite,Great plentie of Corne and grayne. that the lyke had not ben seen many yeares before. Whiche plentie was cause of idlenes, gluttony, lechery, and other vices: so that through their incontinent and riottous lyuyng, ensued so great pestilence and mortali∣tie,A great pesti∣lence. that the lyuynge scantely suffised to bury the dead. The Pictes and Scotts also, hauing knowledge of the death of their knigh∣tes, whyche were slayne by Uortiger, for murderyng of the kynge:The Scots & Pictes spoy∣led this land. inuaded, and in most cruell wise spoyled the land of Britayne. Uortiger beyng sore abashed, for so muche ashe knewe the myndes of hys people to be alienated from hym (after some mens opinion) sente for the Sa∣xons, named Angli, whiche had no place to dwel in: & gaue to them inhabitāce in
Kent.The fyrste Saxons en∣tryng thys realme. By their helpe and manhoode in many batails, he vanquished and droue back the Pictes and other enemies: and therefore had them euer after in greate loue and fauour. Hengist, one of the captaines of the Saxons founde meanes that Uortiger kynge of Britayne maryed his daugh∣ter Rowan,Kyng Uorti∣ger deuorced from his lau∣full wyfe, and maryed Ro∣wan, ye daugh¦ter of Hengist the Saxon. a mayden of wonderfulle beautie and pleasauntnesse, but a mys∣creant and Pagane. For her sake, the kynge was deuorced frome his laufull wyfe: by whome he hadde .iii. sonnes. For whiche dede welnere all the Bri∣tones forsooke hym: and the Saxons daily encreased bothe in fauoure multi∣tude and auctoritie: and from this tyme sought alwaye occasyon to extinguyshe vtterly the power of the britayns: and subdue the lande to them selfe. The Saxons couenanted with the Britons, that they shold attend to their worldly busynes: and the Saxons (as their souldiors) would defend the lande from the incursions of all enemies: for which seruice the Britains should geue to them competent meate and wages. And vnder thys pretence caused more Saxons to bee sent for, entendyng at
conueniente tyme, by force to haue the lande in their subiection. Sainct Germain came into Britayn to reduce them from the heresye of Pe∣lagius,Pelagius he∣resy in En∣glande. to the fayth of Christe. The britayns consyderyng the daily repaire of the Saxons into this realm, shewed to their kyng, the ieopardy that might therof ensue, and aduertised him to auoyde the danger, and expell them out of the realme: but all was in vayn. For Uortiger, by reason of his wyfe, bore suche fauour towards the Saxons that he would in no wise heare the coū∣cell of hys subiectes.Uortiger de∣priued of hys kyngdome. Wherefore they with one wyll and mynde depriued him of his royall dignitie, and ordeyned to theyr Kynge, hys eldeste soonne Uorti∣merus. VOrtimer (as before is sayde) be∣yng made king,464 The king poi¦soned by his stepmother. in all hast he pur¦sued the Saxons: and by his mar∣ciall knyghthode, vanquyshed theim in iiii. greate battailes, besydes conflictes and skirmyshes. Untyll at lengthe he was poysoned by meane of Rowen his stepmother, after hee had reygned .vii. yeares. Uortiger obteyned agayn the kyng∣dome
of great Britayne,471 and reygned after this tyme .ix. yeares. But shortly after, Hengistus (whiche was chased of Uortimer into the Isle of Thanet, en∣tred the land with a nūbre of Saxons: but when he hearde of the great assem∣ble, that the britons made against him, be treated for peace: which in fyne was concluded. Hardyng say∣eth the Sax∣ons slewe on the Playne of Salisburye iiii. C. and ix. barones and Erles, & toke the kyngepri∣soner. The Saxons in Britayne, by priuy guyle and treason, got the kyng Uorti¦ger into theyr handes, and kept hym as prisoner: and by that meanes constrey∣ned the Kynge to graunte vnto theym thre countreys in the land of britayne: (that is to say) Kent, Susser, Suffolke, and Norffolke. Than Hengist beganne his dominion ouer Kent: and sendynge for mo saxons, to inhabite the other pro¦uinces:Abbot Ambry buylded Am∣bresbury. shortly after made warre vpon the Britayns: and so chased them, that he kept his kyngdome of Kent in peace and warre .xxiiii. yeares. Uortiger fled into Wales, and there buylded a castell. Of whiche buildyng and longe lette of the same, and of his prophete Merlyn, the common voyce of the people speaketh many thynges.
Aurelie surnamed Ambrose, and U∣ther, the brethern of Constantius king of brittayne: whiche was slayne by the treason of Uortiger, landed with a Na∣uye of shyppes at Totnes: and by the healpe of britaynes,Kyng Uorti∣ger burned in his castell in Wales. whyche gathered to them in all haste, made warre vppon Uortiger, and burned him in his castell in Wales, where he kepte hym for hys moste sure defence. Aurelius Ambrose,481 was ordeyned kynge of Britayne, whyche immediat∣lye hasted hym wyth an army towards Yorke, against Octa sonne of Hengist, who wyth hys saxons kepte the Citie, where he discomfited, and tooke priso∣ner the sayd Octa. A Saxon named Hella, with his .iii. sonnes,The seconde kyngdome of the Saxons. and a company of Saxons lan∣ded in the southe parte of britayne slue the britons, & chased many of thē into de¦sertes and wods, and subdued the coun∣treys of Southery, Somerset, Deuon∣shyre and Cornewall, which after was called the kyngdome of South Saxons A saxon named Porthe,How Poris∣mouthe came to that name. landed, wyth his .ii. sonnes, at an hauen in southsex: After whome, the Hauen is named Portsmouthe.
The thyrde kyngdome of the SaxonsThe kyngdome of the East Saxons began in Britayn vnder a duke named Uffa: The kyngdome wherof contey∣ned Norffolke and Suffolke: the kyngs of that lordeshyp were called Uffines: great murder & veration of the britains was at the entryng of those Saxons. 218In the ende of Aurelie hys reygne, Pascentius, the yongest sonne of Uor∣tiger: who for feare of Aurelius fled in∣to Irelande, inuaded this lande with a great armie: at which season Aurelius was sicke at Wynchester. And therfore sent his brother Uther, to resyst the ma¦lice of Pascentius, & Guillamour king of Irelande. In the meane tyme Aure∣lius dyed (as some write) beyng poyso∣ned: whan he had reigned .xix. yeares. 500VTher, surnamed Pendragon, was crouned kyng of Britayne, and reigned .xvi. yeres. He was enamored vpon the dukes wife of Corn¦wall: and to obteyne his vnlefull luste, made warre vppon her husbande Ga∣relus, and slew hym in bataile: he was buryed at Stone hynge. 517 Gildas made a boke de ge∣stis Arthuri.ARthur, the sonne of Uther Pen∣dragon, a striplyng of .xv. yeres of age, beganne his reigne ouer
Britayne, and gouerned the land .xxvi. yeares, hauynge continuall warre and mortall battayle with the Saxons. Of this Arthure be written many thynges in the Englishe chronicle, of small cre∣dence, and farre discordant from other writers: but yet all agree, that he was a noble and victorious prince in all his dedes and they testifie, that he fought xii. notable battailes agaynst the Sax∣ons, and was alway victour. But not∣withstanding he might not clerely void them out of his land, but that they held theyr countreys whyche they were pos∣sessed of. Iohn Frosarde affirmeth,Iohn Frosard Wyndsor ca∣stell buylded. that kyng Arthure buylded the castell of Wynde∣sour: and there founded the order of the rounde Table. The fourthe kyngdome of the weste Saxons beganne in Britayne,The fowerth kyngdome of the Saxons. vnder a Saxon called Cerdicus. They landed first at an hauē in Norffolk called Yar∣mouth. With this Saxon Cerdicus, & his people, Arthure had muche trouble and warre. This lordshyp cōteyned the west part of Englande, as Wylshire, Somersetshire, Barkshire, Dorsetshire and other.
Arthure, when after many and dy∣uers battailes, he hadde sette his lande in some quietnes: he betooke the rule thereof to hys nephewe Mordred,Galfride. and with a chosen army (as saithe Galfride and other) sayled into Fraunce, where he dyd meruaylous thynges, and van∣quyshed Lucius Hibertus, the Romain Capytayne, whyche thyng semeth not to agree with other histories. Mordred the traytour vsur¦peth the crowne.MOrdred, whiche had the gouer∣nance of Britayn in the absence of Arthur, by treason was crou∣ned kyng through the healpe of Cerdi∣cus kyng of weste Saxons. Of whiche treason when relation came to Arthur beyng then in Fraunce: wyth all haste he made backe to Britayne: where he was mette of Mordred, whyche gaue to hym .iii. strong battails. In the whi∣che manye noble and valyaunt knygh∣tes perished. And lastely, in a battayle foughten besydes Glastenburye, Mor∣dred was slayne,Mordred slayne, and Arthur woū∣ded to deathe. and Arthure woun∣ded vnto the deathe. He was buried in the valley of Aualon, and afterwardes at Glastenbury.
COnstantine,543 kynsman to Arthur by assent of the brytons was or∣deyned kynge of Britayne, and reygned three yeares. This man was by the two sonnes of Mordred greuous∣lye vexed. For they claymed the lande by the ryghte of theyr father: soo that betweene them was foughten sundrye battaylles: In the whyche lastely the twoo bretherne were vanquyshed and slayne. Holy Gildas our countreyman flou∣ryshed in this tyme,Gildas the wyse. he was called Gil∣das the wyse. Aurelius Conanus, a britain, raised mortall warre against Constantine the kyng: and after sore fight, slue hym in the field, when he had reigned .iii. yea∣res, and was buried at Stonehyng. AUrelius Conanus,546 was crowned kyng of Britayn: he was noble, har∣dy, and therwith very lyberall. but hee cherished suche as loued stryfe and dis∣cention wythin his Realme: and gaue lyght credence to theym, whyche accu∣sed other, wer it right or wrong. He im∣prisoned by stren̄gth his vncle, whiche was right heyre to the crown: and dyed when he had reigned .iii. yeares.
The .v. and vi. kyngdome of the SaxōsThe kyngdome of Northumberland began fyrst in Britayn vnder a Saxon, named Ida. This prouince was fyrste deuided into twoo kyngedomes: The one was called Deyra, which conteyned the lande from Humber to Tyne: The other Brenicia, whiche included the coun∣trey from Tyne to the scottyshe sea. Af∣ter this day the britayns decreased day∣ly in lordshyp and rule, and drewe them towardes Wales, so that the countrey about Chester, was the chiefe of theyr lordshyppe. 548Uortiporus, the son of Conanus, was ordeyned kyng of Britayne: of whom is lyttle memorye lefte, sauyng that Gui∣do testifyeth,Guido. that hee was a vyctorious prince: and that hee in dyuers battailes discomfited the saxons: he reygned .iiii. yeares. 552MAlgo, a duke of Britayne, began hys reygn ouer the britayns, and gouerned them .xxxv. yeares, as wryters recorde. This Malgo was the comelyest and moste personable man of all the britaynes then lyuing, and ther∣with indued with knyghtely manhode: but hee delyted in the foule synne of so∣domy: and therfore was greatly spoiled
by his enemies the Saxons.The fyrste war betwene the Saxons in this realme Ethelbert, kyng of the Saxones in Kent, gaue bataile to Ceaulmus kyng of the west Saxons: in whyche fyghte were slayne .ii. dukes of Ethelberts, & hymselfe with his people chased. Thys was the fyrst warre betwene the Sax∣ons, after they had lande and dwelling within this realme. Cutwalphus, the sonne of Cerdicus, kyng of west Saxons, fought valiant∣ly agaynst the Britaynes, and berefte them of .iiii. great townes. After the deathe of Cutwalphus be∣fore named, his brother Ceaulmus de∣syrous of honoure, made sharpe warre vpon the britayns, and wan from them the cities of Glocester, Worcester, and Bathe. CAreticus began to rule the Britons.586 This man (as witnesseth al writers) loued ciuile warr, and was odible both to God and to his subiects, they moued the Saxons to warre vppon hym: who toke from hym a great part of his land. The Saxons heryng of the discenti∣on betwene Careticus and his Britai∣nes,Gurmundus builded Gur∣mundchester so sayth Har∣dyng, who al¦legth Beda. beyng accōpanied with Gurmun∣dus kyng of Ireland, made warr vpon
Careticus, in suche wyse that hee was fayne to take the Towne of Sicester, where they assaulted him so sore that he wyth his menne fledde from thens into Wales: by whyche meanes he lefte a great part of his dominion: and short∣ly after ended his lyfe, when he had rei∣gned .iii. yeares. 589THe Britaines which were chased by their enemies into Wales (as is before sayd) held theim in those parties, and assaulted the Saxons some while in one coast, and som while in an other vnder sundry dukes: and so conti∣nued the space of .xxiiii. yeares. In Britayne Ethelfridus gouerned the Northsaxons, who made suche con∣tinuall warre vpon the Britaynes, and chased them so sore, that it is thoughte be slewe mo of them, then all the other Saxons kynges. By this crueltie, the faith of Christ was almoste vtterly ex∣tinguished among the Britayns which had continued since ye tyme of Lucius a∣bout .400. yeres, & many of the britains were chased out of the Iland, the reste re¦mayned in Wales: who there kept the christen fayth which they had receiued. The britains being chased out of their
countrey into Wales, the Saxons ob∣teyned the whole domynion of this I∣land:The Saxons had the whole possession of this realme. Sauing a part of Scotland which was subiecte to the Pictes and Scotts: & the britons kept thēselues in Wales. In Anno domini .596. S. Gregorie sent Augustin Melitus Iustus,S. Augustin came into En¦glande. and Iohn, with other learned men to preache the chri∣sten faithe to the Angles: whiche were fyrst receyued of Ethelbert king of Kēt,S. Austins at Canturbery. whom they conuerted to the faith, with diuers of his people.S. Paules church iu Lō∣don, & S. An∣drews in Ro∣chester Saint Peters at Westminster, buylded. This Ethelberte (as some write) fyrste began to buylde S. Austyns in Canturbery. S. Paules church in London, & s. Andrews in Ro∣chester. he also excited a citisen of Lōdon to buylde the abbey of Westmynster. CAdwane Duke of Northewales,613 was made soueraigne of the bri∣tayns, who comyng out of Wa∣les, gaue stronge battaile to Ethelfride kinge of Northumberland theyr moste deadly enemy: & in diuers encountres so discomfited the said Ethelfride, that he was forced to intreate for peace: After which concord made betwene those two princes, they cōtinued al their life tyme as two speciall and louyng frendes, he reigned .xxii. yeares.
Edwyne, the sonne of Ella, whiche was persecuted of Ethelfryde kynge of Northumberlande made sore warre v∣pon the said Ethelfride, and slewe hym in playne battayle, and then seysed into his possession the kyngdome of North∣humberland. This Edwine was the fyrst christian kyng of that countrey. Mahomete fyrst begyn∣nyng.Aboute this tyme began Mahomete among the Turkes. The vii. king¦dome.Also about this time began the king∣dom of Mercia or middle England vn∣der the strong painim and Saxon called penda: which lordshyp conteyned Hun∣tyngtonshyre, Herefordshire, Glouce∣stershire, and other, and was greattest of all other kyngedomes. At that tyme reygned in dyuers partes of this lande vii. kynges. Sibertus among the east Saxons, Redwallus kyng of East an∣gles, nowe called Norffolke and Suf∣folke. Ethelbert kynge of Kent. Ethe∣wolphus of Sussex: Ringilus & Quin∣cellinus of Weste Saxons. Penda of Mercia Edwyne of Northumberland. Paulinus buylded the great churche at Lincolne.Edwyn kyng of Northumberlande was baptised of holye Byshoppe Pau∣linus: and after hym, manye of hys people:Iron cuppes fastened by welles & foun¦tayns for tra∣uayling mē to drynke on. he for the refreshyng of wayfa∣ryng
men, ordeyned cuppes and dishes of yron to be fastened by such clere wel∣les and fountayns as dyd runne by the wayes syde. CAdwallyne the son of Cadwane began his reigne ouer the britay∣nes.635 He was valyant and migh∣tie, and warred strongly vpon the Sar∣ons, & made Penda kyng of Mercia tri∣butarie to him: he reigned .xlviii. yeres, and was buried at London in sent Mar¦tyns church by Ldgate. Kyngilpus kynge of weste Saxons was turned to the right belefe, by a ho∣ly man called Berinus. Segebert, Kynge of Easte Angles or Norffolke, ordeyned good learnyng to bee taughte and erected Schooles in dyuers partes of hys dominion, as he sometyme hadde seene in Fraunce.The fyrste Schoole in Cambrydge buylded. By hym was the fyrste common schoole founded at Cambridge. Kenwalcus kyng of west Saxons in Britayn was dryuen oute of his kyng∣dome by Penda, and kepte from thence by force, the space of .iii. yeares. Penda kyng of Mercia warred vpon Oswalde the good and holye Kynge of Northumberland, and slue hym in bat∣tayle
with many of his knightes.Policronica. f. Columbe, cronicis Col¦manni. Oswye, the brother of Oswald ob∣teined the kyngdome of Northumber∣lande: who slue Oswyne his brothers sonne: and made Odilwaldus parta∣ker of his kyngdome. Kenwalcus kyng of Weste Saxons was restored to his kyngedome by the helpe of Anna, kyng of eastangles. He builded the byshops see of Winchester,The byshops see of Winche¦ster buylded. and made Agelbert the fyrste byshop of that see. And after him was one named Wyne, of whome the Citie tooke the name of Wynchester. Glasynge brought fyrst into EnglaudBenet the monke, and maister of the reuerēd Beda, was famous in Britain This Benet broughte fyrst the craft of glasyng into this lande. Chertesey in Southerye was after∣warde destro∣yed by the Danes.Cissa begunne to buylde the abbey of Abington, and Erkenwalde byshop of London buylded the abbeys of Chert∣sey, and of Barkyng in Essex. 683CAdwallader was ordeyned kyng of britons, and ruled only .iii. ye∣res. He vanquished and slew Le∣thayre kyng of Kente, and Athelwolde kyng of South saxons, and then forsa∣kyng his kyngly authoritie. he went to Rome,The kyng be¦cam a monke. and there becamme a religious
man, and was buried at sainct Peters churche at Rome. He was the last king of Britayne. And this lande after this tyme was called Anglia,The Ilande called vniuer∣sally England and the inhabi∣tantes therof Angles or Englyshmen, and the britaynes were called Walshe∣men: whiche name they tooke of a duke called: Wallus. This happened .1791. ye∣res, or as saith Fabian .1822. after that Brute fyrste arryued in thys lande: After the conquest of Cesar .735. yeres: From the entryng of the Saxons vn∣der their leaders Hengist and Horsus, in the tyme of Uortiger .236. or nere therabout. Thus ended the reigne of the Britons: and nowe foloweth the reigne of the Saxons. Althoughe the Saxons had deuyded this realme into seuen seuerall kyngdo∣mes: yet I wyll nowe speake chiefely of the weste saxons in order, because that (in proces of tyme) they subdued the o∣ther kynges, and brought it agayne in∣to one monarchie. AMong the west saxons reigned a686
noble man called Iewe, of greate po∣wer and wysedome, and therewith va∣liant and hardy: in feates of armes ve∣ry expert: he mainteyned such warre a∣gaynste the Kentyshe Saxons, that hee constreigned them to seke and intreate meanes of peace, geuyng to hym for the same great gyftes.The colledge of Welles, & the abbey of Glastenbury newly builded The quene of West Saxōs was abbesse of Barkyng: the kynge her husbande be∣came a religi∣ous man. This man buylded first the colledge of Welles, & the abbey of Glastenbury: he payd the Peter pens fyrst to Rome. When he had gouerned the west Saxons by the space of .xxxvii. yeres, by the earnest labour of his wife Etheldreda, which was an holy womā and abbesse of Backyng in Essex, gaue vp his royall power, and became a pore man, and wēt to Rome on pilgremage. he is of Beda called Hunne or Iewe. 724 S. Beda in this tyme wrote in En¦glande.AFter hym Ethelarde was kynge of west Saxons, in whose tyme the re∣uerend Beda was famous, and wrote his boke called Anglica historia, to Offrick kyng of Northumberlande. Ethelarde reigned v. yeares. 729Uthred was kynge of West saxons. This man made warre vpon Ethel∣wald or Mercia, and lyed therin diuers∣ly. In his tyme appered twoo blasynge sterres,Two comets or blasynge starres. castynge as it were burnynge
brandes towardes the northe. He reyg∣ned .xvi. yeares. Ethelwald before na∣med (as Hardyng writeth) buylded the abbey of Crowlande.Crowlande buylded. The holy man Beda,Beda deceased whiche for hys lernyng and godly life, was renoumed in all ye world, ended his last day about the yeare of Christ .734. he in his lyfe compiled .lxxviii. bookes. SIgebert was made kynge of Weste Saxons:745 he was cruell and tyrānous towards his subiects: and changed an∣ciente lawes and customes, after hys owne will and pleasure. And because a certayn noble man, somedeale sharpely aduertised hym to change his maners, he malitiously caused the same persone to be put cruelly to deathe: And for soo muche as he continued in his malice, & would not amende: he was depriued of all kyngely authoritie.The kyng de¦priued, and slayne by a swyneheard. and lastely, as a person desolate and forlorne, wandring alone in a wodd, was slayn of a swine∣herde, whose lorde and mayster, (when he had reigned as kyng) he had wrong∣fully put to death, when he had reigned iii. yeares. KEnulphus, of the lynage & blood of Cerdicus fyrst king of West saxons,748
reigned in the kyngdome .xxxi. yeares. The vertue of this manne farre passed his fame. At the begynnyng he appea∣sed certayne murmours and grudges, that were among the people, for the de∣posyng of his predecessour Sigebert. Winchcombe abbey buildedKenulfe kyng of Mercia buylded the abbey of Wynchecombe. Offa, a noble man reygned in Mer∣cia, or myddle Englande; he had warre with theym of Northumberlande: and for a tyme subdued theim. He warred also agaynst Etheldred kyng of east an∣gles: and vanquyshed and tooke priso∣ner, Egbert kyng of Kent. The abbey of S. Albons buylded.Offa, kyng of Mercia builded the ab∣bey of saynt Albons, he chased the bri∣tons or Welshemen into Wales, and made a famous dike betwene Wales and the vtter boundes of Mercia, whi∣che is nowe called Offa dike. Kenulphus kyng of west saxons, as he haunted to a woman, whych he kept at Merton,The Kynge Kenulphus slayne. was slayne by treason of of one Clio, the kynsemanne of Sige∣berte, late Kynge. He was buryed at Wynchester. 778BRithricus, of the bloud of Cerdi∣dicus, was made kynge of weste
saxons: and knyghtely ruled his lande, ye space of .xvii. yeres: he maried one of the daughters of Offa, kyng of Mercia by whose power hee expelled Egberte, that was an vnder kyng in the lordship of west saxons. In his tyme (as saythe Fabyan) it rayned blood from heauen,It rayned blood. whiche fallyng on mens clothes, appe∣red lyke crosses. The Danes fyrst entred this land of Britayne,The Danes fyrst entred this lande. but by the strength and puis∣sance of Brithricus, and other kynges of the saxons, they were driuen backe, and compelled to voyde the lande, Bri∣thricus was poisoned by his wife Ethel¦burga.The kynge poysoned by his wyfe. For whiche deede the nobles or∣deined, that from thenseforthe the kyn∣ges wyues shuld not be called Quenes, nor suffred to sytte with them in places of estate. EGbert the saxon,795 whyche by Bri∣thricus was chased oute of the Re∣alme, hauynge knowledge of the deathe of Brithricus, returned onte of Fraunce, and in so knightely wise de∣meaned hym selfe, that he obteyned the gouernement of Weste Saxons, hee ta∣med the welshe men, vanquyshed Ber∣thulphus kynge of myddle Englande,
and subdued to his seignorie and obey∣sance, the Kentysh saxons, eastsaxons, and Northumbers, & reigned as kynge ouer the more part of Englād, the space of .xxxvii. yeares, and was buried at Wynchester. The Danes seconde en∣tryng thys lande. The Danes with a great host, entred this landd the second tyme, and spoyled the Isle of Shepey in Kente, agaynste whom Egbert the kyng addressed hym with his power: whom the Danes forst to flee the field. After which tyme, som of the Danes continually abode in one place or other of this lande. 832EEthelwolphus, the sonne of Egbert began his reigne ouer ye more part of England.Ethelwol∣phus gaue first tithes in Englande, as Iohn Har∣ding affir∣meth. This man in his youth was wyllyng to haue bene a priest, & entred ye order of subdeacon: howbest after he maried a wyfe, by whome he had .iiii. sonnes, whiche reigned after hym suc∣cessiuely. He went to Rome, where he repaired the englysshe schoole,An hospitall for englyshe¦men buylded at Rome. whyche was fyrst foūded by Offa kyng of Mer∣cia. This schoole was after tourned to an hospitall for englyshemen, whyche came to Rome. he fyrst founded the vni∣uersitie of Oxenford,Oxenforde buylded. which some wry∣ters attribute to Offa, kyng of Mercia,
that was in the tyme of Charles the great .ix. yeres before this tyme. He rei∣gned .xxiii. yeares, and was buryed at Wynchester. EThewlaldus,855 after the death of his father, began his reign in England, he maried a woman, whiche his father had kepte before as his concubine: and dyed when he hadde not reygned fully one yeare. EEthelbert,856 The Danes third entryng this land. the brother of Ethelwold was made king ouer the more part of Englande. In the begynnynge of hys reigne, the Danes entred the west part of the realme, and spoiled the countrey afore them, tyll they came to Wynche∣ster, and by strength toke it. But by the kynge and his dukes, they were forced to leaue Wynchester: and in retiryng towardes their shyps, they lost a great number of theyr men. He reigned .vii. yeares: and was buryed at Sherborne. ETheldred,893 This kynge deuided ye day and nighte in iii. partes. 8. howers to serue god .8. houres where suites of his people, and viii. houres to take his sleape & reste. the thyrde sonne of Ethel∣wolphus, toke on him the gouernāce of Westsaxones, and other Prouinces of Englande. He was a man framed of nature, as wel to peace as warr. Amōg his subiectes, he was mylde, gentill, lo∣uyng and pleasant: agaynst his aduer∣saries,
seuere, fierce, valyant, and har∣dye. He lyued in continual warre with the Danes: whiche all the tyme of his reigne, vexed this land with most dead∣ly warres (as Iohn Hardyng writeth) he deuided the day in three partes .viii. houres to serue god, viii. to heare suites of his people, and .viii. to take his sleps and reste. The Danes landed in Northumber¦lande.A company of Danes landed in Nor∣thumberlande: and after manye skyr∣myshes and battayles to theym geuen, by strength they possessed and held that countrey, the space of .ix. yeares, and got also the Citie of Yorke. Kynge Edmunde slayne by the DanesA company of the Danes entred the countrey of Norffolke, where they slue the holy kyng Edmonde, which gouer∣ned the prouince of Norffolke: because he wolde not forsake the faith of Christ. Of this kynge Edmunde, Iohn Lid∣gate,Iohn Lidgate monke of Bury hath compyled a goodly treatice in englishe meter heroi∣call. Women to kepe their cha¦stitie disfigu∣red them sel∣ues by cut∣tinge of theyr noses and o∣uerlyppes.At Colyngham saint Ebbe abbesse cut of her nose and ouerlyppe, and persua∣ded all her yuers to doo the lyke that they beyng odible to ye Danes, mought
better kepe theyr virginitie: in dispite the Danes burned the abbeye, and the Nunnes therin. Also those Danes landed agayne in Southery, and went forwarde tyll they came to Readyng, and toke that towne and cattell: at whiche tyme, whyle E∣theldred was busyed agaynste them, he hadde woord of the landyng of Offrike kyng of Denmarke with an other com∣panye, to whome the Kynge gaue ma∣nye stronge battayles.The king E∣theldred slayn by the Danes But in the ende he was put to the woorse, and receyued a wounde: whereof he dyed, when hee had reygned .ix. yeres.The prioryist Excetor buil∣ded. He buylded the priory of Chanons at Excetor, and was buryed at wynbourne. ALured the fourthe son of Ethel∣wolphus beganne his reigne o∣uer the more parte of England,872 and reigned. xxviii. yeares. This man was of fayre stature and comely perso∣nage no lesse renoumed in marciall po∣licie thenne in Ciuille gouernaunce of hys commune weale. Hee was wyse, dyscreete, and learned, and raudured good Letters excellentlye well.
In youth somewhat he was disposed to the vicy of the fleshe: and therefore be∣sought god to chastise hym by some con∣tinuall sicknes: wherby he might serue God the better, and yet not to be made vnapte to worldly busynes. Wherfore by the ordinance of God, he was taken with the euil called Ficus, and was ther of sycke a longe space. The fyrste yeare of his reign in sundry places, he fought vi. tymes with the Danes: by meanes whereof his people were so weakened, that he was glad to make peace wyth his enemies. The Danes brake the league made with Alured. Wherefore in as secrete maner as he myght, he assembled a cho¦sen company, and set vpon them sodain¦ly: and after the fyrst conflict, held them so shorte: that he constreigned theim to geue hostages for suretie of peace. Alured was sore ouerset wyth newe companies of Danes: but at length, ta∣kynge to hym a valiant courage, he en∣terprised to espye the maner of his ene∣mies, in this wyse:The kynge counterfeated the mynstrell he dyd on hym the habite of a mynstrell; and with his in∣strument of musyke, entred the tentes of the Danes: and in shewynge theyin
pastyme and songe, hee espyed all their slouth and idelnes: and heard muche of their counsell. Then priuily returning to his armye, with a chosen companye fell vpon the Danes in the nyght, and slue of them a great numbre: and lastly concluded a peace, on condition that as many of them as woulde be christened, shoulde inhabite the prouinces of East Angles and Northumberlande: the o∣ther to depart into France.Shaftesbury & Ethlingsey buylded. As Guido writeth, he buylded the house of nūnes at Shaftsburye, and an other house of religion at Ethelyngsey. By the counsell of Nottus,The fyrste grāmer scole in Oxenforde buylded. Allured ordeyned the fyrst Grammer schoole in Oxenforde, and franchised the towne with many great liberties. He buylded the newe mynster in Wynchester,Newe abbey in winchester and there lyeth buried. EDwarde,901 This K. Ed¦warde is cal∣led Edwarde the senior. the Elder sonne of Alu∣red, began his reign ouer the most parte of Englande, and gouerned this land well and nobly. xxiiii. yeares. In knowledge of good letters, he was not to be compared to his father: But in honour worshyppe and marciall pro∣wes nothynge inferiour: and was also
profitable to the cōmon weale, in buil∣dinge and repayringe many castelles tounes and cyties whyche were raced and broken by the Danes. He in hys tyme builded Herford castel,Herford ca∣stell buylded, and adioy∣ned to his lordship al this Iland, sauing onely Northumberlande, whiche was possessed of the Danes. He lyeth buri∣ed at Wynchester by hys father, in the new mynster. and as Fabyan writeth,The monaste¦ry of S. Pe∣ter at Gloce∣ter buyldyd he buylded the monasterie of S. Peter in Gloucester. In this tyme a noble womā named Elfleda, syster to kyng Edward, gouer∣ned ye prouince of middle Englād. This woman whan she had ones assayed the paynes that women suffer in trauay∣lyng with childe, euer after hated the imbracynges of her husbande: sayinge, That it was not seemely for any noble woman to vse suche fleshely lykynge: wherof shold ensue so great sorow and payne. She tamed the Welshmen, and in dyuers battayles chased the Danes. After whole death Edward helde that prouince in his owne hande.
ADelstane, after the death of Ed∣ward senior his father,925 The Kinge was crouned at Kyngston. begā his reign in Englād, he was a prince of worthy memorie, valiant & wise in al his actes: and brought this land to one Monarchye: for he expelled vtterly the Danes, subdued the Scots, and quieted the Welshmen. He reigned. xv. yeres, and lieth at Malmsbury.Iohn Lidgate Of him Iohn Lidgate monke of Bury hath transla∣ted a goodly story out of Latin into en∣glish meter, which was compiled in La¦tine by Girardus Cambrence. EDmūd,940 ye brother of Adelstan toke on hym ye gouernāce of this realm: whose short reigne take from hym the renoume of most highe praises that should haue redoūded to hys posteritie: for he was a man disposed of nature to noblenes & iustice. he reigned .vi. yeres, and was buryed at Glastenburie. ELdred succeded Edmunde his bro∣ther:946 The Kynge crowned at Kyngs town for his sonnes Edwyne and Edgar, wer thought to yōg to take on them so greate a charge. This El∣dred hadde the earneste fauoure of the commons, because hee was a greate maynteyner of honestie, and also most
abhorred naughty and vnruly persons: for his expertnes in feates of armes, he was muche commended. Whereby he quieted and kept in due obeysance, the Northumbers and Scottes, and exiled the Danes. He reigned .ix. yeares, and was buried in the cathedrall church of Wynchester. 955 He was crou¦ned at Kyng∣stoune. A vicious kinge.EDwine succeded his vncle Eldred in the kingdome: of whome is left no honeste memorye, for one hey∣nous acte by him committed in the be∣gynning of his reigne. In the selfe daye of his Coronation, he sodeynelye with∣drewe hym self from hys Lordes and in the syghte of certaine persons, raui∣shed his owne kynswoman, the wife of a noble man of his Realme: and after∣warde slew her husband, that he might haue the vnlaufull vse of her beautie. whiche acte, and for banyshings Dun∣stane, he became odible to his subiects, and of the Northumbers, and people of myddle Englande, that rose agaynste hym, was depriued,The kyng de¦priued. when he had reig∣ned .iiii. yeres. he was buried in the ca∣thedrall churche of Wynchester.
EDgar, brother to Edwyne, began his reigne in Englande. He was a prince of worthy memorye,959 He was crou¦ned at Bath∣some saye at Kyngstoune. for hys manyfold vertues greately renoumed: so excellent in iustice, and sharpe in cor∣rection of vices, aswell in his maiestra∣tes, as other subiectes: that neuer be∣fore his dayes was vsed the lesse felony by robbers, or extorcion or briberye by fals officers. He chastised also the great negligence, couetousnes, and vicious li∣uyng of the clergye he refourmed, and brought them to a better order: of sta∣ture he was but litle, but of mynde va∣lyant and hardy, & very expert in mar∣ciall policye.This kynge builded and repaired. xi. abbeis, in En¦gland, as Wil¦ton, Peterbo¦rowe, Thor∣ney, Ramsey. &c. he prepared a great nauy of shyppes, which he disposed in .iii. par∣tes of his realme, and had souldioures alway prest and ready agaynste the in∣cursions of foreyn and strange enemies be reigned. xvi. yeares. He buylded Pe∣ters Bury, Thorney, Ramsey, and ma¦ny other, & was buried at Glastenbury. Ludwallus, prince of Wales, payd to hym yerely, in name of tribute .3000. wolues, by meane wherof within .iiii. yeares in England and Wales myght scantly be founde one wolfe.The wolues in Englande destroyed. This Ed∣gare
in his floryshing youthe was some deale geuen to the luste of the flesshe: whyche he afterwarde greuousely re∣pented. Good lawes made agaynst quaffyng and alehouses.In his tyme as well the Danes as all other people in Englande, vsed the vice of great drinking: The kyng ther¦fore rode through the realme, and put downe many alehouses, and would suf∣fer but one in a village or town, except it were a great borough: and ordeined certayne cuppes with pynnes and nai∣les. and made a lawe, that who soeuer dranke past that marke at one draught shoulde forfayt a certayne payn: wher∣of the accuser should haue the one half, and the ruler of the Towne the other halfe. It is written by Fabyan, and o∣thers, that Edgar bring at Chester, en¦tred the ryuer of Dee,Eight pety kyngs rowed kynge Edgar vp and down the ryuer of Dee. and syttynge in the bote, he toke the rule of the helme and caused .viii. kynges to row hym vp & down the riuer vnto S. Iohns church and from thens to his palaice, in tokē yt he was lord & king of so many prouinces 975 The Kynge crowned at Kyngston.EDward, the sonne of Edgar by his fyrst wyfe, began hys ceigne ouer this realme, contrary to the mynd
and pleasure of Elfride his stepmother and other of her alliance. In all kyndes of honest vertue, this man might well bee compared to his father: and began hys Reygne wyth suche modestye and myldenesse, that hee was woorthylye fauoured of all menne: Excepte onely Elfryde, whyche euer bare a grudge agaynste hym: for so muche as she de∣syred to haue the gouernaunce of the Realme, for her owne soonne Egel∣rede. Edwarde, whyle hee was huntyng in a forrest (by chaunce) loste hys com∣panye, and rode alone to refreshe hym at the Castell of Corffe:The kyng murdered by his stepmo∣ther. where by the counsayle of hys stepmother Elphrede, he was traiterously murthered, as hee satte on his horse: When hee had rei∣gned .iii. yeares. hee was buryed at Shaftesbury. After his death God she∣wed for hym dyuers myracles. Wher∣fore he is numbred among the sayntes and martirs. Before the death of thys Edward appeared a blasynge starre of meruailous greatnes.A blasynge sterre. It is of some au∣thors writen that the forsaid Elphrede
afterwarde take great penaunce, and that she buylded twoo Monasteryes of Nonnes, Almesbury and Warwell:Almsbery & Warwel buil¦ded. in whyche Warwell she after liued a soli∣tarie lyfe tyll she dyed. 978EGelrede, or Etheldrede, the sonne of kyng Edgar and Alphrede, was ordeyned kynge of Englande,The kynge crowned at Kyngston. and crowned at Kingstoune. He was good∣ly of shape and visage: but wholly geuē to idlenes, and abhorred all princely ex∣ercises: a louer of ryotte, lecherie, and dronkennes, and vsed extreme cruelty towardes his subiectes: hauyng his ea∣res open to all vniust complaintes. In feates of armes of all men moste igno∣rant: his crueltie made hym odious to his subiects: and his cowardise encora∣ged straunge ennemies to inuade his kyngdome. By meanes whereof, thys lande was sore afflicted with warre, fa∣myne, and pestilence. In his tyme de∣cayed the noble kyngdom of England,Englande be∣came tributa∣ry to the Da∣nes: and: became tributarie to the Danes: whereby the Danes, when they had spent the sayd tribute, fel streight again to robberye, and arryued in sundry pla∣ces of Englande: as in the Isle of The∣net,
In Cornewall and Sussex: and af∣ter many damages by them done, and ryche gyftes receaued of the Kynge, they retourned into theyr countreye for a tyme.The Danes besieged Lon¦don. But shortly they agayn en∣tred this lande in so many places, that the kynge Etheldrede was to seeke, to whiche coast he should fyrst go to with∣stande hys enemies. In conclusyon for aduoydyng of further daunger, he was compelled to appeare them with great summes of money: but when the mo∣ney was spente, they fell to newe rob∣byng, and cessed not to spoyle the land: and lastly besieged Lōdon. And to aug∣ment the kyngs sorow, Elphricus that then was admirall of England, traite∣rously fledde to the Danes. And after beyng reconciled, fledde to them the se∣conde tyme? While this cruel warre continued in England, by meane of a byshop named Elphegus, a peace was concluded: at whiche tyme (as Polidore wytnesseth) the kynge made his lande tributarie to the Danes:Great tribute sayd to the Danes the payment wherof, from the summe of ten thousand poundes, in few yeres, was raised to fifty thousand.
The bloudy flixe, the burnyng feuer wyth dyuers other maladies vexed the people throughout all Englande. Etheldred kyng of England, toke to wyfe Emma, the syster of Rycharde Duke of Normandie: whyche for her beautie, was called the Flower of Nor¦mandie. Etheldrede beyng great∣ly inhanced in his mynd for this his ma∣riage, sent forth into al partes of his re∣alme secrete and strayght cōmissions, chargyng the rulers, that vppon a cer∣tayne day and hower assygned,The Danes sodeynly mur¦dered & slayne the Da∣nes (whiche proudely vsed great cruel∣tie in the land) should be sodeinly slayn, and so was if doone. Which thyng was after cause of great misery: For Swain kyng of Denmark hearyng of the mur¦der of the Danes, and beynge sore mo∣ued therwith, landed with a strong ar∣mye in dyuers partes of thys realme:A great num¦ber of Danes aryue in thys lande and so cruelly without mercy and pity, spoyled the countreye, and slue the peo∣ple: that the englysh men wer brought to mooste extreeme and vnspeakable mysery. But yet after & certayne space a peace was intreated: For whyche the Englyshemen payde thirtye thou∣sande
poundes. Howbeit dyuers prin∣ces of the Danes styll continued wa∣stynge the lande in dyuers places. Swayn kyng of Denmarke repen∣ted of the former couenāts, made with the englyshmen: & thinkyng to attayne to the whole dominiō of this land: with a strong army entred fyrste Northum∣berland, than myddle England: and so wente foorthe tyll he came to London,London besi∣ged by the Danes whyche he besieged, and destroyed the countrey of Kent. At this tyme Egel∣rede the kyng despairyng of all recoue∣rie (not ones proferynge to resyste his ennemies, with his wyfe and children fledde to Richard duke of Normandy: & then possessed Swayn ye hole kingdom of this realm: who spoiled the landes of s Edmunds. But after his death succe∣ded Canutus his sonne: who inclosed ye same with a depe dyche: and graūted to the inhabitantes therof, great fredom. And after builded a church ouer ye place of his sepulture, and ordeined there an house of monkes, enduyng them with fayre possessiōs. And after it was vsed ye kings of Englād, whē thei wer crouned sent for: an offering their crounes vnto
S. Edmondes shryne,S: Edmon∣des Burye buylded and redemed the same with a good price. The englyshe men sente agayne for Etheldred out of Normandye, who by the healpe of the Normans, and present assistance of his commons, expelled Canutus. but short∣ly Canutus returned agayne into En∣glande, where he spared nothynge that myght be destroyed with sworde & fyre. In whiche tyme king Etheldred ended his lyfe, when he had reigned .xxxviii. yeares, and was buried in the Northe Isle of Paules churche in London, a∣boue the aultar. Fabian saythe, that in the seconde yeare of this kynges reigne a great part of the citie of London was wasted with fyre:A great fire in London but how it beganne, hys aucthor telleth not. But ye shal vn∣derstand, that this day, the citie of Lon∣don had moste housyng and buyldynge from Ludgate towarde Westminster: and littell or none where the chiefe or hart of the citie is now, except in diuers places was housynge, but they stoode without order. So that many townes & cities, as Cāterbury, York, and dyuers other in Englande, passed London in buyldyng at those dayes, as I haue sene
(sayth Fabyan) by an old boke, somtime in the Guyld halle of London, named Domes daye.A boke in the Guylde hall of London named domes daye But after the conquest it increased, and shortly after passed and excelled all the other. Aboute the .viii. yeare of this kyngs reign, dyed Ethel∣wald byshop of Wynchester, who was born in Wynchester, and ther buylded an abbey of Nunnes (as sayth Fabyan. AFter ye deth of Etheldred,1016 great variance fell betwene ye englishe mē for the election of theyr kyng, for ye citezens of London with certayn other named Edmund the son of Etheldred,Edmūd with the Iron syd a yong man of lusty and valiant courage in martiall aduentures both hardy and wyse, and one that could very well en∣dure all paynes: Wherefore hee was surnamed Ironsyde: but the more part fauored Canutus the Dane. By mea∣nes wherof betwene those two princes were foughten many great battayles: in the which either party sped diuersly, to the great slaughter of thē that toke their partes. But lastly, it was agreed, that the two Captayns shold try theyr quarell betwene them selues onely. In
which fight,1038 although Edmund semed to haue the vpper hand: yet be condiscē∣ded to deuyde the realm and make Ca∣nutus felow with him in the kingdom: whyche agreement was at laste con∣cluded. In this tyme there was an englishe Earle called Edricus, which by hys fals∣hode had wrought muche hurte to hys naturall country, and lastelye was auc∣thor of the deth of the noble Edmund.Kynge Ed∣munde slayne with a speare thrust vp in∣to his found∣ment as he sat on a priuy And therof himself brought fyrst know¦ledge to Canutus the Dane, sayinge in this wyse: Thus haue I doone Canu∣tus for the loue of thee. To whom hee answered, sayinge: For my loue thou hast murdered thyne owne soueraigne Lord, whome I loued most entierly: I shall in rewarde therof, exalt thy head aboue all the lordes of Englande.I iuste re∣ward geuen. And foorthwith commanded hym to be hea∣ded: and his head to be set vpon a spear on the hyghest gate of London.Iohn Hars dynge. These princes reygned together .ii. yeares. Thys Edmund was buryed at Gla∣stenburye.
VUhen Canutus was stablished in the kyngdom,1018 he had knowledge how Olanns king of Norway in his absence inuaded the coūtrey of Den¦marke: wherfore in all hast he sped him thitherward: & by the māhod of the en∣glish souldiors, obteined of them a noble victory, & recouered Norway to his seig¦nory. wherfore when he returned into England, he demeaned him toward all men as a sage gentle & moderat prince, and so continued .xx. yeares. Canutus called a parliamēt at Oxē∣ford:A parliamēt at Oxforde. where it was decreed, that english men and Danes should hold the lawes of Edgare late kyng. Canutus subdued the Scots, wherby he was king of .iiii. kingdoms, yt is to say of England, Scotlād, Denmark & Nor∣way. After that he wēt into Denmark, and so to Rome. And after returned a∣gain into England. Where he kept all his life tyme good iustice, and did many charitable dedes: And after his deathe was buried in s. Swithins at Winche∣ster. Of this Canutus Polidore hath writen a notable history,Polidore Vergile. in ye end of his vii. boke of the historie of England.
1038HArold, the sonne of Canutus, by hys wyfe Elgina, for hys swyftnes surnamed Harefote began hys reygne ouer thys realme of England. In the begynning hee shewed some token of crueltie, in that he banyshed his stepmother Em∣ma, and tooke from her suche iewelles and treasure, as she hadde. He reigned iii. yeares. Hee was buryed at West∣mynster, and after at S. Clementes without Temple barre. 1041HArdikenitus, king of Denmarke after the deathe of Harolde, was ordeyned kyng of Englande. He for the iniurie done to his mother Em∣ma,Reynolde of Chester Robert Fa∣bian caused the corps of Harolde to be taken out of the sepulchre: and smyting of the head, caste it with the body into the ryuer of Thames: where by a fy∣sher it was taken vp, and vnreuerent∣ly buried at S. Clementes (as afore is sayd.) He burdeined his subiectes with eractions and tribute: and in meat and dryncke was so prodygall that hys ta∣bles were spreade .iiii. tymes in the day, and the people serued with great excesse whan he had reigned .iii. yeares
he dyed sodeinly at Lambeth, not with∣out suspection of poysonynge, and was buried at Winchester. Hardikenitus beyng deade, the Da∣nes were beaten, slayn, and dryuen out of this lande, into theyr owne countrey xxviii. yeares after that Swayn began fyrst to reigne. EDwarde,1043 the sonne of Egelrede or Etheldred, by the aduice of Good∣wyne and Leofricus Erle of Che∣ster, after the deathe of Hardikenitus, was sent for out of Normandie to take on him the goueruaunce of this realme of Englande, whiche hee guyded with much wisdome and iustice, from whom issued as out of a fountaiue, very god∣linesse, mercie, pitie, and liberalitie to∣warde the pore, and gentylnes and iu∣stice towards all men: and in all honest lyfe, gaue moste godly example to hys people. He discharged the englyshmen of the great tribute called ye Dane gelt, whiche was often before time leuied to ye impouerishyng of the people. He sub∣dued the Weshemen, whiche rebelled and made warre vpon their borders. The .xvi. yere of this kyng Edward
died ye good Erle Leofricus erle of Mer∣cia & of Chester,Robert Fa∣bian who was buried in the abbey of Couentrie, which he hym selfe had caused to be buylded. He purchased many great priuileges for the aforesaid towne of Couentrie. William ba∣starde duke of Norman∣dye.Willyam bastard duke of Normandie, about this tyme came with a good∣ly company into England: and was ho∣norablye receyued: to whom the kynge made great cheere. And at his returne enriched hym with great gyftes & plea∣sures: and (as som write) made promise to hym, that if he died without issue, the same William shold succede hym in the kyngdome of England. Harolde the sonne of the Erle Good∣win, went to Normādie: wher he made faithfull promise to duke William, that after the death of Edwarde, he woulde kepe the kyngdome to hys behalfe: on whiche condition, he brought with hym at his returne his brother Tosto. Thomas Couper.The noble kynge Edwarde fynished hys laste daye whenne he hadde reyg∣ned foure and twenty yeares .vii. mo∣nethes and odde dayes. Hee purged the
olde and corrupte lawes,The lawes of S. Edwarde the confessor. and pycked out of them a certayn, whych wer most profitable for the commons. And ther∣fore were they called the common La∣wes. For restitution whereof, happe∣ned dyuers commotions and insurrec∣tions in this lande. Hee was buryed at Westminster. HArolde,1066 the eldeste soonne of Earle Goodwyne, beynge of greate power in Englande, and therewyth valyaunt and hardye, tooke on hym the gouernance of thys Lande, nothynge regardynge the promyse that he made to Wylliam duke of Normandye. Wherfore when William sente to hym Ambassades, ad∣monysshynge hym of the couenauntes that were agreed betwene theim. Ha∣rolde, woulde in noo wyse surrendre to hym the kyngdome, whyche Wyllyam claymed, not only for the promyse that was made to hym: but also because hee was the nexte of Kynge Edwardes bloudde. In thys meane tyme, Tosto whiche fledde oute of the Lande, beyng moued
agaynst his brother the kynge of Nor∣way, who entryng in the north partes of England, with a great puisance dis∣comfited .ii. Erles that gaue hym bat∣taile. But Harold in reskuyng his peo∣ple, slewe the kyng, and his owne bro∣ther Tosto, and chased the Norwayes with disworshyp to their shyps. Willliā duke of Norman∣dy conquered this lande.When William Duke of Norman∣dye perceyued, that he could not by any meanes brynge Harolde to fulfyll hys promyse, nor by treatie to yelde to hym the kyngdome: by force he entred the lande, to whome Harolde gaue stronge and sharpe battaile. In the end wherof, William by pollicy obteined the victo∣rye, chased the englishemen, slewe Ha∣rolde, and obteined the gouernaunce of this lande, when Harolde had reigned but .ix. monethes. Hee was buryed at Waltham abbey,Waltham ab∣bey. whyche hym self had buylded, and was the last that reigned of the bloude of the Saxones in thys Realme. Thomas Cou¦per.This happened .617. yeres after the fyrst arriuall of the Saxons or Angles, in whiche space they reygned dyuersly. Fyrst began the kyngdom of Kent, the
yeare of our Lorde .475. vnder Hengi∣stus. And after that .vi. other kyngdo∣domes at sundry tymes tooke theyr be∣gynnyngs. Whych all at the last were broughte into one Monarchie, and sub∣iect to the West Saxons by king Adel∣stane, the yeare of our Lord .ix. hun∣dreth thirtie & eight. Whiche mo∣narchie continued .129. yeares: durynge fiue and twenty of whych yeares, the Danes reigned in this land vn∣der Canutus and Harolde.
A Summarie of King william Conquerour. Anno regid .1. 1067WIllyam Duke of Normandye, sur∣named Conque∣rour,Thomas Couper. Bastarde sonne of Roberte the syxte Duke of that Duchye, and nephew vn∣to kyng Edward the confessor, began his dominion ouer this Realme of England, the .xiiii. day of October, in the yeare of our Lorde 1067. and deceased in the yere .1087. the nynthe day of September, and rei∣gned .xix. yeres .xi. monethes, lackyng fyue dayes. He vsed greate crueltie to∣warde the Englyshe menne, burde∣nynge theym wyth greuous exactions: By meane whereof he caused dyuers to flee the lande into other countreies. And lyke as hee obteyned the kynge∣dome by force and dent of sweard, so he chaunged the whole state of this com∣mon weale, and ordeyned newe lawes
at his pleasure, profytable to hym selfe: but greuous and hurtfull to the people. Thys Wylliam was wyse and politike ryche and couetous, and loued well to be magnifyed. He was a fayre speaker and a great dissembler. A man of come∣ly stature, but somdeale grosse bealyed: sterne of countenaunce, and strong in armes, and had great pleasure in hun∣tynge, and makynge of sumptuous feastes. Wyth thys Wyllyam Conque∣roure,The names of Normanes and other that came with the conqueror. entred into thys Realme, dy∣uers noble menne and gentylmenne, whose successoures for the moste parte to this daye doo remayne in greate ho∣noure and reputation. To whome he dysposed and gaue greatte possessions and reuenues. And because those hou∣ses maye not bee vnremembred, I haue thoughte good in thys place to recorde the names of theym, as Iohn Hardynge in hys Chronycles dedyca∣ted to kynge Henry the syrte, doothe particulerly recite theym. That is to saye: Gospatryke, to whome he gaue all Cumbreland, and made hym erle ther¦of.
Perey Bohune Malot Bewchamp Menylebyllers Umframuile Le Uause Taylboys Musgraue Muschaump Bailiol Bruis Bepount Neuyle Sent Clere S. Poule Melchynes Menvile Albemarle Le Fortz Courtenay Albenay Councy Gournay Gaunt Beer Latimer Darcy Ayncorte Lescrope Maundeuile Ledespenser Purpoynt Momboucher S. Elo Seint Iohn Uernon Estontvile Delauale Euers Bonuile Belasyse Uescy Bouser Clarell Fitz Raufe Fitz Roger Fitz Waltar Fitz William Bulmers Fawcomberde Claruays Fitz Waryne Malory Longchampe Matrauersse Fitz Robert Mandit S. Quintine Fitz Thomas Fitz Henry Caunvyne Iohn le vicount Normanuile Forniuale Lassels Scrutuile Mantalent Manley Mortimer Claruayle Mountforde La Poole Lucy Ualence Lusours Longuile Ferrer Engayne Longspe S. Uay Lacy Longchamp Coluill
Toures Lisle Tracy Chauncy Bowlers Mountagu Sourdeuyle Fulgers. Belknap Coniers Someruile Champneys Longuillers Maners Fitz Urcy Glaunuyle Bewfort Chauser Mountpillers Mortayn Graunson Moruille Breton Broyne Gascoyne Daynvyle Chandose Paruynke Dabrygecourt Deuerose Keruyle Cheuercourt Fitz Hugh Cornuyle Morley Fitz Rayner Pudsay Harecourt Cheyny Dela hay Delamore Gargraue S. Omer Moyne Poynyng S. Richar Chartenay. &c. Hitherto gathered out of Hardyng. The reste I haue collected oute of other good authors Pyget Bertrame Tochet Camoys Hauteney Warrayne Chauent Loueney Bygotte Mohant Marmylon Baylyffe Marrays Estraunge Monbray Audeley Ueer Souche Couderay Brabanson Brabason Butecort Bysette Bassette Tressy Caunuyle Iaunville Andgilham Bascoruile Chamberlaine Logenton Hastynges
Muriell Bures Malebraunche Mortymer Dyne Lynnesey Fenys Boys Muse Peache Daubeney S. Amounde Riuers Meuille Chamburnon Uerdon Rydell Hanley Mortmayn Gower Botiller Fylberde Sent leger Paynell Traynell Peuerell Daniell Arundell Riuell Loueday Denys FitzNormāduk Rous Trusbutte Corbyne Mounteney. &c. Anno. 2. 1068The town of Excetor, & the North∣humbers rebelled, whyche were both subdued and greuoufly punyshed. This kyng Willyam buylded foure strong castells:Two castels buylded at Yorke, one other at No∣tyngham, and other at Lin∣colne. Twayne at Yorke, one at Notyngham, an other at Lyncolne, whych he furnished with garrysons of Normanes. Anno. 3. 1069Canutus kyng of Denmark beyng en∣couraged thereto by certayne englyshe outlawes, inuaded the northe partes of England, & passed through to York: frō whens he was driuen backe by Williā, and forced to flee into his own coūtrey.
Anno. 4. The Scottes wyth their kyng Mal∣colyne,1070 inuaded Northumberland, and spoyled the countrey. Anno. 6. William kyng of England made su∣che warre vpon the Scotts,1072 that he for∣ced Malcolyne to doo to hym bothe ho∣mage and fealtie, he also disherited Gos∣patrike, and exiled hym the lande,Iohn Har∣dynge. and gaue all Cumbrelande with the honour of Carlylle, to Raufe Meschynes, and made hym earle therof. Kynge Wylliam by the counseyle of the Erle of Hertford caused the money and ryches of the abbays to be brought into his treasory he made also the news Forest in the countreye of Southamp∣ton,The new fo∣rest in South¦hampton. for the atchiuyng which enterprise he was forst to cast downe dyuers tow∣nes and churches .xxx. myles of length, and replenysshed the same with wylde beastes, and made sharpe lawes for the maintenance and increase of the same. Auno .10. Roger erle of Hertforde & Ranulphe earle of Norffolke conspired agaynste kynge Wyllyam beyng in Normandye
both whiche were by hym outlawed, and chased oute of the Realme. And Waldiffe that was duke of Northum∣berland and Earle of Huntyngdon and Northampton (who vttered the conspi¦racie) was beheaded at Wynchester,Iohn Har∣dynge. & buried at Crowlande in Lyncolnshire.Execution at Wynchester. Anno. 13. 1079AT this tyme Oswalde Byshop of Salisburye was famous in England. The kyng gaue the Erledome of Nor∣thumberlande to Waltar byshoppe of Durham, who was after slayne by the men of Northumberland. Anno. 15. 1081RObert the eldest sonne of Wil∣liam by the counsell of Philippe kyng of France, inuaded his fa∣thers Duchye of Normandye, wher∣with Wyllyam beynge greately dys∣pleased, gaue hys sonne a stronge bat∣tayle: in whyche it fortuned Robert to mete vnwares in the field with his fa∣ther,10 and bare hym to the earthe. But perceyuynge by the voyce who it was, forth with he lept from his horse, and sa¦ued his father: By whiche dede he was reconciled, and peace betweene them was agreed.
Anno. 16. Whyle kyng William of Englande was in Normandy,1082 Srhewsbury and Wēloke bbeys buyl∣ded. the Northumbers rebelled. About this .xvi. yere, earle Waryng erle of Shrewsbury, made two abbeis, wherof the one was in the suburbes of Shrewsbury, & the other at wenloke. Anno. 19. KYnge Wyllyam caused a newe manner of Tribute to be leuyed thoroughout this Realme,1085 The numbre of men of cat∣tell, and howe many hydes of lande was noted in En∣glande. for e∣uery hyde of land (that is twenty acres) vi. s. And not long after, commanded a valuation to be takē of all lands, fees, and possessions, and diligent serche also to be made, what numbre of men and cattell were within this land.A greuous re¦action. And ac∣cordynge to the quantitie and number therof, gathered an other payment. Anno. 20. Englande was vered wyth manye plagues.1086 For greate morayne fell e∣monge cattelle,Great plages in England. brennynge feuers and hunger emong people, greate bareyn∣nesse vpon the earth, and muche hurte was done in manye places, by the mys∣fortune of fyre: aud specially in Lōdor.
A parte of Poules chur∣che was brentFor Fabyan and other aucthors affir∣meth, that a part of Poules was brent at that same tyme: namely the .vii. daye of Iuly.Battaile ab∣bey and Bar∣mondsey ab∣bey builded. Kyng William buylded two abbeys in Englande, one at Battell in Sussex: the other nere to London called Barmondsay. He buylded the third at Cane in Normandy. He ended his life ye ix. day of Septembre, and was buried at Cane in Normandie. He had .v. children Robert, to whom he gaue Normandy, Richard, who dyed in his youth. Willi∣am Ruffus, and Henry, which wer kin∣ges after hym. And one doughter, na∣med Adela, who he gaue in mariage to Stephen Erle of Blos, who gotte on her Stephen, that after was kynge of England (as sayth Hardyng. VVilliam Rufus, or VVilliam the Red kyng. Anno regni .1. 1087WIllyam Ruffus, the seconde sonne of Willyam conqueror began his reygne ouer the re∣alme of England, the ninthe day of Septembre in the yeare of oure Lorde .1087. and deceased in the yeare of our Lorde. 1100. the fyrst day of Au∣gust:
so that he reigned .xii. yeare .xi. mo∣nethes lackyng .viii. dayes. He was va∣riable and inconstant of his demeanor, very couetous and therewithall cruell. For he burdened his people with vnre∣sonable taxes. He pilled the ryche, and opprest the poore. And caused many to lose their landes for small causes. And what he thus got by pillyng of hys peo∣ple, be prodigally and wastfully spente in great banketting and sumptuous ap∣parell.It remaineth in recorde of good autho∣ritie, that the best payre of hose then to be bought for the kyng, coste but .iii. s. as one Robert af¦firmeth: who wrate in the tyme of Hen∣ry the thyrde. And as one auctor writeth (who wrate in the tyme of Henry the thirde) he would neither eate drynke or weare any thyng, but that it coste vnmeasura∣bly deere. And for an exaumple, hee wryteth (whiche is to be noted in these oure dayes) that in a morning his cham¦berlayne bryngyng hym a newe payre of hosen, he demanded what they cost: his chamberlayn answered .iii. s. Wher with the kynge beynge wrothe (as this author affirmeth) saide as foloweth. Fye a dibles q the king: who sey so vile a dede Kyng to weare so vyle cloath? but it costened more. Bye a payre for a marke: or thou shalt a cor∣ry sore.
A worse payre ynongh, that other swithe hym brought, And said they costned a mark: & vneth he them so bought. Ye belamy (q ye king) these were wel thought, In this maner serue me: outher ne serue me nought. OUt of this aucthor I haue taken the saying of K. William Ruffus because it importeth the simplici∣tie of apparel in those days vsed: If kin∣ges in those dayes ware hose of .xiii. s .iiii. d. the price, then maye subiectes in these days imitate his chamberlayn to weare of inferior price of .iii. s. Whiche price he thought king W. Ruffus wold not haue disdained: but as his chamber∣layne spared the kynges priuie purse in byeng hose in those days: So now some of meane lyuyng spare not theyr owne and others, to employe vpon one paire whiche wold bye princes hose for a hole yere, as this hystorie reporteth. Robert Curthoise his elder brother came with an armie into Englande, a∣gainst William, wherof when the said Willlā had knowledge, he entreated peace. Anno. 2. 1088Dyuers Lordes of this realme con∣spired
against William Ruffus, and as∣saulted dyuers townes within Englād. They stirred in like maner against him Robert Curthoyse duke of Normandy, the second tyme. But William vanqui∣shed the traytours, chased them oute of this realme, and made peace wyth hys brother Robert.A great earth quake. This second yere was a great earthquake, the .xi. daye of har∣uest, that ouerturned many houses and churches in Englande. Anno. 3. The Scottes spoyled Northumber∣land.1089 Wherfore William Ruffus pro∣uided a nauie, and sayled thither: where after dyuers conflictes and skirmishes a peace was concluded. Anno. 4. A great tempest fell on sainct Lukes day in sundrye places of Englande,1090 Greate tēpest in Englande, The roofe of Bowchurche and syxe hundred hou∣ses in London blowē down. and speciallye in Wynchecombe: where a great parte of the steple was ouerthro∣wen with thundryng and lyghtnyng: & in London the wynde ouertourned .vi. hundreth houses, and the roofe of Bow church in Cheape, wherwith was slayn mo than .xx. persones. Anno. 5.
1091In this yere William Ruffus wente into Northumberland, & repayred suche holdes and castels,Newe castell vpon Tyne buylded. The roofe of Salisburye churche consu¦med with lyghtnyng. as the Scots by their warres had impaired: and builded other there besydes, as the Newe castell on Tyne, &c. This v. yere the roofe of Sa∣lisburye Churche was cleane consumed with lyghtnyng. Anno. 6. 1092In Englande fell wonderfull abun∣dance of raine: and after ensued so great frost that horses and cartes passed com∣monly ouer great ryuers,Great frost. when it tha∣wed, the great cakes of yce brake down many great bridges. The welshe∣men rebelled.The Welshemen rebelled, but they wer vanquished: & their duke or captain named Rees slayn in battaile. And after when their woddes wer cut down, they becam by litle & little to more quietnes. The duke∣dome of Nor¦mandy morga¦ged to ye kyng of England.Robert Curthois duke of Normandy layd his dukedome to pawne to his bro∣ther Wyllyam of Englande for tenne thousand poundes. This .vi. yeare (as saith Guido) Hugh Lupus Earle of Chester sente to Nor∣mandye for Anceime,Chester ab∣bey buylded. to buylde an ab∣bey at Chester: whyche he after buyl∣ded, and then was made archebyshop of
Canterburye: and after was exiled by William Ruffus. Anno. 7. Malcolyne kynge of Scottes for dis∣pleasure1093 taken with the vnkyndnesse of William Ruffus inuaded the marches of Englande:The kyng of Scots slayne in Englande. and in Northumberlande was slayne with his eldest soonne Ed∣ward, by Robert Monbray, which was erle of that prouince. This yere was so great a pestilence,Greate pesti∣lence. that many men laye vnburied. Anno. 8. Englande and Normandy were gre∣ued with exactions,1094 Great morein of men. and murreyn of mē so sharply, that tillage of the earth was layde asyde for .x. yeare, wherby ensued great hunger and scarsitie the yeres fo∣lowyng: And many strange & vncouthe syghtes were sene,Strange sigh¦tes sene in the ayre. as hostes of menne, syghtynge in the skie, fyery flames, and suche other. Anno. 10. The .x. yere was sene a blasyng sterre,1096 of great brightnes. Anno. 11. About this tyme Wyllyam Ruffus buylded Westmynster Hall,1097 who mys∣liking the same, for that it was to smal, was determined to make a bygger, and
that it should serue for a chaumber. Westminster hall buylded. Iohn RastallAlthogh Williā Ruffus builded West∣minster Hall, yet was it sens that tyme fynished or repaired by Richard the se∣conde: who gaue the .iii. lyons with the flower de luce quarterly, and the white hart for his cognisāce, & he was the first that gaue the white hart. Anno. 12. 1098 Great floudsThe .xii. yere the ryuer of Thames rose so hye that it drowned many tow∣nes in England. A welle caste out bloud. & Great flames of fyre sene in the element.In England at a towne called Fyn∣chauster in Barkeshire, a well cast out blood as before it had done water, and after by the space of .xv. days great fla∣mes of fyre were sene in the element. Anno. 13. 1099Wylliam Ruffus being at his disport of huntynge by glaunsyng of an arrow that Walter Tyrell a frenche knyghte dyd shoote, was woūded to death in the newe forest in Hampshire, on a Lam∣mas day: and buried at Wynchester. Iohn Har∣dynge.Iohn Hardyng writeth, that William Rufus to enlarge the same forest, ouer∣turned .iiii. abbeyes .xvii. paryshe chur∣ches, and all the towne to thē belōgyng.
King Henry the first, called Beauclerke. Anno Reg .1. HEnry,1100 the brother of Wylliam Ruffus, and the first of that name for his lernyng called Beauclerk began hys dominion ouer this realme of England, the fyrst day of August, in the yeare of our Lord .1100. and reigned xxxv. yeres .iiii. monethes. and one day. This Henry was a noble prince, stronge aud myghty of body, of hyghe stature, blacke heared, and had greate eyes, a comely visage, and a plesant and amiable countenance. He greatly abhor¦red excesse of meates and drynkes. In thre thynges he was excellent, in witte eloquence, and good fortune in battayle And for these, there reigned in him thre notable vices, couetousnes, cruelty, and lust of the body: but yet he was not soo geuen to these vices, but that he farre exceded in vertue. At the beginnyng of his reigne, hee restored the state of the clergie, aswaged the greuous paymen∣tes, reduced agayn saint Edwardes la¦wes, and amended them. Anno. 2.
1101Ranulphe byshop of Durham procu∣red Robert Curthoise duke of Norman¦die (which was now returned from Ie∣rusalem) to warre vppon his brother Henry for the crowne of England: who assembled a strong armie, and landed at Portismouth. But by mediation peace was made on this condition,A tribute pay¦ed to the duke of Normādy. that Hen∣ry should paye three thousande markes yerely to duke Robert. Anno. 3. 1102In this thirde yere of kynge Henry (as sayth Fabian) the churche and hos∣pitall of saint Bartholomew in Smith∣field,The priory & the hospitall of S. Bar∣tholomewe in Smithfielde was begun to be buylded. was begun to be founded by a min¦strell of the kynges, named Rayer: And after finished by good and wel disposed citisens of the citie of London, and espe¦cially by Rychard Whittington. Thys place of Smythfield was at that daye a laystowe of all ordure to fylthe:Smith feld a laystowe. and the place where felons and other transgres∣sours of the kynges lawes were put to execution. Anno. 4. 1103Robert Duke of Normandye com∣mynge into Englande by the entreatie of kynge Henry and his wyfe, released
to hym the tribute of three thousande markes. Anno. 5. But it was not long ere that by mea∣nes of yl reports,1104 great malice was kyn¦deled betwene the two brethren: And shortly thervpon deadly warre sprang, In the end wherof, Robert was taken, and kept in perpetual prison in Cardiff, by his brother, who immediatly seysed the duchye of Normandy, and held it in hys possession. Syr Robert le Fitzhā builded Teu∣kesbury,Teukesbury abbey builded and there was buried. Anno. 6. Robert Earle of Shrewsburye, and Wyllyam of Cornewalle,1105 Rebellion in Shropshire, & Cornwall rebelled a∣gaynst kyng Henry, and were taken and condempned to perpetuall impry∣sonment. Kyng Henry ordeined strayte lawes agaynst theues, and other, that vsed vn∣laufull takyng of mens goodes, in whi∣che was conteyned the losse of lyfe, of eyes, of stones, and other membres of the parties transgressors, accordyng as qualitie of the fact required. Anno. 7.
1106In England appered a blasing sterre betwene the south and the west: and a∣gaynst that in the east appered a greate beame (as it were) stretchyng towarde the sterre,A blasynge sterre. and shortly after were seene two moones, the one in the Easte, and thother in the weste. Anno. 8. 1107A certayne byshop of Fluentyne a∣bout this tyme taught that Antichriste was come, beyng moued with the won¦derfull straunge syghtes, whiche were sene in those dayes. Anno. 9. 1108Henry the Emperor desyred to wife Maude, the eldeste doughter of kyng Henry of England, beyng then but .v. yeares of age, nor able to be maried. Anno. 10. 1109In the .10. yeare of his reygne, the kyng maried Robert his bastard sonne, to Mabel doughter and heire of Robert Fitzham, and made hym the fyrst earle of Gloucester, who after buylded the strong castell of Brystow.The strong ca¦stell of Bry∣stow builded. And the pri∣orie of saint Iames in the nor the syde of the same citie, where his body was bu∣ryed. And his sonne Erle William be∣gan
the abbay of Euishame.Euisham ab∣bey buylded. Debate fel betwene the kyng of En∣glande, and Lewes of France, for the castell of Gysours, and homage whiche the sayd Lewes required to be done for the duchy of Normandie. Anno. 13. At Shrewsbury in Englande was a greate earthe quake,1112 A great earth quake. and the ryuer of Trent was so dryed, that the space of one daye men went ouer dryhoed. And this yere the kyng buylded the ab∣bay of Hyde without the walles of win∣chester,Hyde abbey buylded. that of olde tyme was wythin the walles. A blasyng sterre appered sonne after and thervpon folowed a harde winter,A blasyng sterre. deathe of men, scarsitie of victuals, and morayne of beastes. Anno. 15. Kyng Henry of Englande,1114 subdued the Welshmen, whiche oftentymes re∣belled, and made them sweare to hym fealtie and allegeaunce, and to delyuer pledges for the more certayn confirma∣tion and suretie therof. He also gaue hys doughter in mari∣age to the Emperour with great dower
and made William his sonne Duke of Normandye, whereof began the vsage & custom yt the kings of England made their eldest sons dukes of Normandye. Warre was renued betwene kynge Henry of England, & Lewes of France Anno. 18. 1117Lewes inuaded Normandye wyth muche crueltie, & toke the Citie of Lin∣gnes in Cause. Wherfore kyng Henry assemblyng a strong armye, met wyth Lewys in playne field, and fought with hym a cruell and deadly battayle: in the ende wherof, Lewes was ouercome, & cōstrayned to flee the field. Baldwyne erle of Flanders was there slayne, and Henry recouered the town of Lingnes Anno. 20. 1119 The kynges chyldren drou¦ned in the seaWylliam Duke of Normandie and Riicharde the sonnes of kyng Henry of Englande, and Mary his doughter. Ri∣chard earle of Chester, with his wyfe, the kynges nece, and other to the num∣ber of .160. persons, passyng from Nor∣mandie into Englande, by ouersyght of the shyp maister were drowned, sauing one butcher, which escaped the danger. Anno. 24. 1123In this yeare the abbey of Readyng
was begun to be buylded by kyng Hen∣ry the fyrst. he also buylded Cisseter,Readyng ab∣bey, Cisseter. Windilsore, & Woodstocke buylded. Wyndilsore, and Woodstocke, wyth the parke. Anno. 27. The gray fryers came nowe fyrst in∣to Englande,1126 The gray fri¦ers first came into Englāde and had theyr fyrst house at Canturbery, (as saythe Ro. Fabyan Maude the daughter of Kyng Hen∣ry after the deathe of her husbande the Emperour came into Englande to her father. Anno. 28. The order of sainct Iohns Hospital∣les Templars,1127 and other lyke beganne fyrste at thys tyme. Anno. 32. In this yere began Foūtains abbey.1131 Geffrey Plantagenet erle of Angew maried Maude ye empresse,Fountaynes abbey builded doughter of king Henry: of which .ii. descēded Hēry & secōd which reigned after Stephen. About this time was builded ye priory of Nortō in the prouince of Chester,The priory of Norton and the abbeye of Combre¦more buylded by one Williā, the son of Nichole. Also the abbey of Cōbremore in ye same prouince was buylded about the same tyme. Robert Curthois dyed in prison, and was buried at Glocester. Anno. 33. Henry king of Englande because he hadde none issue mal,1132 ordeyned, that
hys doughter Maude, whiche had bene Empresse shoulde succede hym in the kyngdome. Anno. 36. 1135 Henry the first toke his death by a all of his horse.Kyng Henry of Englande beyng in Normandy, with a fall of his horse toke his deathe, and was buried at Reading: when he had reigned .35. yeres .iiii. mon∣thes, and one day. King Stephen. Anno regni. 1. 1135STephen Erle of Boloyne, the son of the erle of Bloys and Adela, Wylliam Con∣querors doughter, aud ne∣phewe to kynge Henry the fyrst tooke on hym the gouernaunce of this realme of England the seconde day of December, in the yeare of our lorde 1135. and left the same in the yeare of our lord .1154. the .xxv. daye of October, so that he reigned. xviii. yeres .x. monthes, and .xxiiii. days. This was a noble man and hardy, of passinge comely fauor and personage in all princely vertues: he ex∣celled: as in martiall policie gentylnes, and liberalitie towarde all men: and in
especially in the begynnynge. For al∣though he had continuall warre, yet did he neuer burden his cōmons with exac∣tiōs. Only he semed in this blame wor∣thy, that contrary to his othe made to Maude, the doughter of Henry, he was thoughte vniustlye to take on hym the Croune. For which cause he was vexed with warres all the tyme of his reigne. At this tyme was great trouble and slaughter in Englande: for so muche as diuers of the nobles mainteined Maude the empresse agaynst Stephen, whiche was in possession of the croune. Kyng Stephen made warres against Dauid of Scotlande, because he refu∣sed to do him his homage, for Northum¦berlande, and Huntyngdon, whiche he helde by hys wyfe. In thys warre the (Scottyshe hystorie sayth) the Earle of Glouceter was takē.Hector Boice But at the length Stephen made peace, and agreed with Dauid kyng of Scottes, and receiued of hym homage, after that he had wonne from hym certaine townes and castels, and gaue to Henry the sonne of Dauid, the erledome of Huntyngdon. Anno. 2.
1136A vayne rumour was spread in En∣glande of the death of Kyng Stephen, which was cause of muche trouble and busynes in the realm. For diuers of the lordes got them to their holdes, whiche after might scantly with great laboure be quieted and pacified. After whiche tyme Stephen passed ouer into Normā¦dye against Geffrey erle of Angew the husband of Maude the empresse, which was right heyre to the crowne and whē he had quieted that Prouince, he made Eustace his sonne Duke of Normandy, and ioyned frendshyp and league wyth Lewes kyng of France. Anno. 4. 1138Dauid kyng of Scottes (repentyng him of the former agremēt made with kyng Stephen, and purposyng to reco∣uer the crowne of Englande for Maude his nece, cousyn and daughter of kynge Henry) in moste cruelle wyse inuaded Northumberland, where by meane of Thruston bishop of Yorke, the Scottes had an ouerthrow and slayne in greate numbre, and Dauid was constrayned to geue his sonne Henry in hostage for suretie of peace.
In the meane season kyng Stephen was occupied in ciuil warre agayn Ro∣bert erle of Gloucester, & others, which fauoured the partes of Maude: whome the kyng subdued, & part of them were forted to forsake the realme. Anno. 6. Maude the empresse came into thys lande out of Normandie,1140 by ayde of Ro∣bert erle of Glocester, and Ranulph of Chester,Kynge Ste∣phen taken prisoner. made strong warre vpon king Stephen. In the end whereof the kyngs partie had the worse, and hymselfe takē prisoner, and sent to Bristow, there to be kept in sure hold. But the Kentishe men and Londoners, fauourynge the kyng, warred vpon the rebelles, and in opē field toke Roberte rle of Gloceter But shortly after, bothe the kyng & the duke were deliuered out of prison by ex∣change. And Stephen without delay as∣semblyng a strong armie, in suche wyse pursued his enmies, yt hee forced Maude with other of her frendes to forsake the realme. This warre continued a longe time, to the great domage of the realm. About this tyme was foūded the ab∣bey of Stratford Langthorn within .4.Stratford ab¦bey buylded.
myles of London, by a knyght called sir William de mount Fichet. Anno. 10. 1144About this time the Iewes crucified a chylde vpon Easter day at Norwiche in derision of Christe and his religion. Anno. 11. 1144Geffrey Plantagenet, the husbande of Maude the Empresse (who had long continued the warres against king Ste∣phen of Englande) wan from hym the duchy of Normandie: and streight ther∣vpon dyed: and his sonne Henry succe∣ded in the dukedome. Anno. 12. 1145Stephen kynge of Englande after long warre and muche trouble, was a∣gayne crowned kynge at Lincolne, but Robert earle of Glocester made newe warre vpon hym: in whiche he hadde the vpper hand of the kyng at Wilton, so that the kyng was like to haue fallen into Roberts danger: and escaped with muche paine. Anno. 15. 1148 A great frost.Thys yeare the ryuer of Thamis was so stronglye frosen, that horse and cart passed ouer vpon the yee.
Anno. 17. Henry duke of Normādy in the qua∣rell of his mother Maude with a greate puisance arriued in England,1150 and at the fyrst wonne the castell of Malmesbury, then the tower of London, and after∣warde the towne of Notyngham, with other holdes and castels. betwene hym and kyng Stephen were foughten ma∣ny battayles, wherby thys realme was sore troubled. Anno. 18. But at the last peace was agreed be∣tweene Maude the empresse,1151 hir sonne Henry, and kyng Stephen: vpon thys condition that Stephen duryng his life should holde the kyngdom of England: and Henry, in the meane tyme to bee proclaymed heyre apparant in the chief cities throughout the realme. Kyng Stephen buylded the abbey of Coggeshall in Essex.The abbeyes of Coggeshall of Fourneys, and Feuer¦sham buylded He founded an o∣ther at Furneis in Lancashyre, and the thyrde at Feuersham in Kente, where now his body resteth, and deceassed the xxv. day of October: in the yeare of oure Lord .1154. when he had reigned .xviii. yeres .x. moneths and .xxiiii. dayes.
King Henry the seconde. Anno regni .1. 1154HEnry the second of that name the sonne of Geffrey Planta∣genet, and Maude the Em∣presse daughter of kyng Hen∣ry the fyrst, began his reigne ouer this realme of England, the .xxv. day of Oc∣tober in the yere of our Lorde .1154. and deceassed in the yere of our Lord .1189. the .vi. daye of Iuly, so that he reigned xxxiiii. yeres .ix. monthes and .xii. dayes. He was somwhat redde of face, short of body, and therwith fat. Of speache rea∣sonable, well learned, noble in chiualrie and fortunate in battayle. Of coura∣gious hearte, wyse in counsell, and one that loued well peace, liberall to stran∣gers, but hard to his familiars, slowe of answers, vnstedfast of promise, geuen somdeale to pleasure, and an open brea∣ker of wedlocke. By his greate man∣hode & policie, the crowne of England, was muche augmented wyth the an∣nexyng of Scotland, Ireland, the Isles Orcades, Britayne, Poytow, Guyan, & other prouinces of France.
Anno. 2. Kyng Henry cast down diuers castels which were erected in the tyme of Ste∣phen:1155 He wente into the northe partes, and got from the Scots Cumberlande and Northumberland, which they sayd were geuen to them by Maude his mo∣ther, and set an order in that countreye. Anno. 3. In England were sene .ii. sonnes in the fyrmament:1156 Two sonnes sene in the fyr∣mament. and in the Moone appered a redde crosse. King Henry wēt with a strong armye into Wales,The castel of Rutland, and the abbeye of Basyngwerk buylded. and quieted that countrey, and after buylded the stronge castell of Rutland, and founded the abbey of Bas¦syngwerke. Anno. 4. About this tyme came into England certaine Germaynes,1157 Thomas Couper. to the numbre of xxx. which taught the abrogation of the Sacramentes of the altare, Baptisme, and Wedlocke. Anno. 6. Lewes Kynge of Fraunce gaue his daughter Margaret in mariage to Hen¦ry the sonne of Kynge.1159 Henry of Eng∣lande. By reason whereof, was pacify∣ed the Warre and grudge, betwene
Englande and Fraunce, for the landes of Poytowe, and others. Anno. 7. 1160This yeare (as sayth Fabyan) kyng Heury went into Scotlande, and made freshe warre vppon their kynge Willi∣am: so that at last he toke him, and made hym yelde the castell of Carlyle, the ca∣stell of Bamburgh, with dyuers other, and receued of him fealtie aud homage. Anno. 8. 1161 Great fyre at Canturbery.This yeare the citie of Canterbury was fyred by negligence, and a greate parte therof brent. Anno. 10. 1163 Thomas Becket bis∣shop of Can∣turbery.Thomas Becket byshop of Cantur∣bery fledde to Rome to complayn vpon the kyng to the byshop. Anno. 14. 1167King Henry caused Henry his eldest sonne to be crouned king, as he thought to the great quietnes as well of himself as of his realme:K. Henries eldest sonne crowned, hys rather beynge alyue. but as it proued, to the vtter disturbance of them bothe. Anno. 17. 1170Thomas Becket by the mediation of Alexander byshop of Rome, and Le∣wes the French kyng, was restored to
his byshoprike: and not longe after by certayne gentylmen, he was slayne at Canturbery. Anno. 18. Kyng Henry sent ambassade to Alexā¦der bishop of Rome to purge him self of the death of Thomas Becket.1171 Among other thynges it was enioyned hym in his penance,Thomas Gouper. that it should be laufull to hys subiectes as often as them lysted to appeale to the sea of Rome, and that no man should be accompted as Kynge vn∣tyll such tyme as he were confirmed by the Romayn byshop. Anno. 19. Thomas Becket was canonised by the byshop of Rome.1172 Anno. 21. Henry the sonne of Kynge Henry of England,1174 The kynges sonne the se∣conde tyme crowned. was crouned the second tyme with his wyfe Margarete, the frenche kynges doughter. Anno. 22. Kyng Henry the sonne by the setting on of the Kyng of France,1175 Henry the sonne of king Henry rebel agaynst his father. Alinour hys mother, and certayn other nobles, toke armes, and raised deadly warre against his naturall father. Dyuers strong ba∣tailes
were foughten as well in Eng∣land by the deputies and frends of both parties, as also in Normandy, Poytow, Guyen, & Britain: where they wer cor∣porally present: but ye victory fel alway to ye father. There toke partie agaynste kyng Henry the father, Lewys kyng of France, William kynge of Scotlande, Henry, Geffrey, and Iohn his own son∣nes: Robert Erle of Leicester, Hughe of Chester, and other. But in the ende the sonnes with their alyes were con∣strayned to yeld to theyr father, and de∣syre peace, which he gentilly graunted and forgaue theyr trespas. Anno. 24. 1177In England fell greate wetherynge and tempest of thunder and lyghtening in the myddes of wynter: and in Som∣mer folowing fell hayle of suche great∣nes that it flewe bothe man and beast. Anno. 2.6 1179At this tyme were manye Iewes in Englande, whiche agaynste the feast of Easter did vse to sacrifice yong children in despite of christen religion. Anno. 28. 1181Henry the eldest sonne of Henry of
Englande ended his lyfe.The Kynges son deceased. Shortly after began the warre betwene kyng Henry and Philyp of France for homage that the Frenche kyng required to be done for the lands of Poytow, and other, and for the castell of Gysours. Anno. 31. Heraclius Patriarke of Hierusalem,1184 whiche had ben in dyuers partes of Eu¦rope came to kynge Henry, desyrynge hym of ayde agaynst the Turkes, but was denied thereof, as ye made reade in Fabian the .239. Chapter. Anno. 32. At Bury the Iewes crucified a child in despite of Christes passion.1185 Anno. 34. Rycharde Earle of Poytowe made warre agaynst kyng Henry his father,1187 and taking part with the French kyng wan from hym dyuers cities, townes, and castels, and namely the citie of Ce∣nomannta. For sorowe wherof shortly Kynge Henrye ended hys lyfe the .vi. daye of Iune, in the yeare of our Lorde 4189. & lyeth buried at Founteuerard.
Kinge Richarde the firste, called Cueur de lyon. Anno regni .1. 1289RIcharde the fyrste of that name, for his valyantnesse surnamed Cueurdelyon, be¦yng the second son of Hen∣ry the seconde, was crow∣ned Kyng of Englande.Thomas Couper. He began hys reigne the .vi. day of Iuly, in the yere of our Lord .1289. and he deceased, the yere of our Lord .1199. the .vi. day of Apryll: so that he reigned .ix. yeres and .ix. mo∣nethes. He was bygge of stature, and had a mery countenance, in the whiche appered as well a pleasant gentylnesse as a noble and princely maiestie: to hys souldiors he was fauorable, bountifull to hys frendes, and to strangers a gre∣uous ennemy, and hard to be pleased. Desyrous of warre, abhorryng idlenes, enclined somewhat to pryde, lecherye, and auarice: but moste of all he was to be blamed, because he semed vnnatural towardes his father, as ye haue partly hearde of hym, and his brethren, what warres they raysed agaynst him. In his
time were many robbers and outlawes amongest ye whiche (as Iohn Maiore in his fourth booke De gestis Scotorniū,Iohn Maiore writeth) Robert Hoode and lyttell John, renou∣med theues, continued in woddes,Many outla∣wes in Eng∣lande. des∣poylynge and robbyng the goods of the ryche. They kylled none but suche as would inuade them, or by resistence for their owne defence. The sayde Robert intertayned an hundred tall men, and good archers, wyth suche spoyles and theftes as he gotte. Upon whome foure hundred, were they neuer so stronge, durste not geue thonset. The tales and gestes of this Robert be comonly kno∣wen by songes and balades vsed within this realme: he suffred no woman to be oppressed, violated or otherwyse mole∣sted. Poore mens goodes hee spared, a∣bundantely releuyng theym wyth that whiche by theft he gotte frome abbeys, and the houses of riche arles. Whome the sayd Maior blameth for his rapyne and thefte: but of all theues hee affyr∣meth him to be the prince, and the most gentle thefe. In the fyrste yeare of thys Kynges reign,The fyrst bai¦liffes in Lon∣don. the citisens of London obteined
two officers to guide theyr Citie: which were called Bayliffes, whose names shall folowe here vnder. Anno regni .. Bayliffes. Henry Cornhyll 1189Rychard Reinery In this yeare the Iewes were very brag here in thys realme, for that theyr number was so greate. But the cōmon people, especially about London,Many Ie∣wes slayne in Englande. fell v∣pon them, and despoyled them without pitie or mercye, they so hated theym for theyr vsury, and other euyll conditions. The kyng though he were not lyttle dyspleased wyth these offenders: yet coulde he doo no execution on them for the fact, the numbre was so great, wher by they all escaped without punishmēt. Also thys yere the king set at liberty Elianor his mother,Quene Elia∣nor released out of prison. whiche long before at the commandement of his father hi husbande, had ben kept close prisoner. But after her enlargement, the realme was muche gouerned by her. Ranulph of Chester.As sayth Ranulph kynge Rycharde gaue ouer the Castels of Berwyke and Rokesburghe to the Scottyshe Kynge, for the sūme of .x. M. li. for the charges of his voyage. He also sold to the bishop
of Durhā his own prouince, for a great piece of money, and created him erle of the same. Wherfore the king said after in game: I am a wondrous craftesman: I haue made a new erle of an old bishop He gaue his brother Iohn many dig∣nities, as the prouinces of Notingham, Deuonshyre, and Cornewall, and crea∣ted hym Earle of Lancaster. This yere the king was assoiled of ye offence that he had cōmitted in rebelliō against his father in recompence,Guido. wher¦of (as sayth Guido) he voluntarily toke vpon him, and promised to warre vpon Christes enemies: But other authours affirme that his father hadde so wylled hym in his lyfe: whervpon preparation was made towarde the perfourmance of thys iourney. Anno reg. 2. Bayliffes. Iohn Herlyon Roger Duke In this yeare kyng Richard betooke the guidyng of this land to the bishop of Ely then beyng Chancellor of Englād,1290 & sayled into Normandie: & when he had appoynted good gouernoures ouer that countrey, he went to mete the frenche Kyng Philyp the seconde, and hauyng
made sure league one with an other: went eyther of them the sayd yeare on∣ward of their iorney toward Ierusalem In this meane time the Iewes in di∣uers places of thys Realme as at Lin∣colne, Stamforde, and Lynne, were robbed and spoyled.The Iewes in Englande were robbd, & many of them slewe them selues. And at York to the numbre of four hundred and more, had their maister vaynes cut, and so bled to deathe. Anno Reg. 3. baylyffes. William Hauershall 1191Iohn Bukmotte Kyng Richard in his iourney towar∣des Ierusalem, subdued the Erle of Cy¦pres,Kyng Ry∣chard wēt to Ierusalem, & in his absence his brother re¦belled in En∣glande. & then ioynynge his puisance with the French Kynges in Asia, conquered Acon, where ther grew betwene king Richard and Philip the frenche Kyng a greuous displeasure. For whiche cause Philip shortly departed thens. And cō∣myng into France inuaded the contrey of Normandy. And Iohn the brother of kyng Rychard tooke on hym the kyng∣dome of Englande in his brothers ab∣sence. Kyng Richarde of England restored to the Christians the citie of Ioppa, and in many battels put the turke to great
sorowe. Anno Reg. 4. Bayliffes Nycolas Duke Peter Newlay William byshop of Elye,1192 to whome kyng Richard had cōmitted the gouer∣nance of England,Thomas Couper. dyd many cruell dee∣des, and oppressed the clergie, and also the laitie. He woulde commonly ryde with a thousand horses, and greued ab∣beyes by meane of his guestes and his lodgyng with them. Kyng Richard erchaunged Cypres, wyth Guye of Lesyngham for the king¦dom of Ierusalem. Wherfore the king of Englande a long tyme after was cal∣led kyng of Ierusalem. Anno Reg. 5. Bailiffes. Roger Duke Richard Fitz Alyn Kyng Richarde hauynge knowledge that Phillyp of Fraunce inuaded Nor∣mandie,1193 and that Iohn his brother had made hymselfe King of England, made peace wyth the Turkes for .iii. yeares, and with a small company returnynge homewarde by Thrace,Kyng Ri∣charde taken prisoner. was taken pri∣soner by the duke of Ostriches menne, and brought to Henry the Emperour, and there kept in strayte prison, a yere
and .v. monethes. Where it is sayd that he slewe a Lyon, and toke out his hart. Anno Reg. 6. Bayliffes. Williā Fitz Isabell 1194Williā Fitz Arnolde William Longshampe bishop of Ely cōtinuyng his crueltie in England was lastly by strength of the lordes banished the lande. Then he came to the kynge beyng prisoner, alledgyng for hym selfe the best that he could: but when he saw he myght not begyle the kyng with his sugred wordes: he returned into Frāce there to tary the kynges commyng. This yere Iohn the kings brother by the settyng on of the Frence kyng, whē he herd of the imprisonment of his bro∣ther, made great warr within the lād, & toke by strength the castels of Wind∣sor, of Notyngham, and others. And the Frenche kyng made stronge warre in Normandy. Anno Reg. 7. Bailiffes. Robert Beysani 1195Ioke le Iosue Hubert bishop of Salisbury was by kyng Richard sent into Englād to haue the guidynge therof, and also to treate with the lordes & cōmons for the kings deliuerance howe he myght be set at li∣bertie.
The sayde Hubert was by the monkes of Christes church in Cantor∣bury chosen archebyshoppe of Cantor∣burye. Anno Reg. 8. Bailyffes. Gerrad de Anteloche1196 Robert Durant This yere (as sayth Fabyan) kynge Richarde was deliuered oute of prison for the summe of one. C.M. poundes of sterlyng money:Great ransom payde for the kyng. for payment of which ransom all the woll of white monkes & chanons was sold, and rings and crosses of prelates, with vessels and chalices of all churches through the land, and .xvii. shrines were scraped and spoyled of the golde and syluer. &c. Kyng Richard being thus deliuered, shortly after landed at Sandwiche, & so came to Lōdon: wher when he had are∣sted him: with a certayn nūber of knigh¦tes, he rode to Notynghā, & wan the ca∣stell: & after that the castel of Tikhil by force and so called a coūsell of his lordes at Winchester: where he reposed his brother Iohn then beyng in Fraunce, & crouned himselfe sone after again king of Englād in ye city of Winchester,Kyng Ry∣chard agayne crowned at Wynchester. & thē he called a parliament, where he called
agayne into his handes all suche thyngs as he hadde eyther geuen or solde by pa∣tentes, or otherwise: by whiche meanes he gathered a summe of money, and sai∣led into Fraunce, where shortly a peace was concluded betwene the two Kings for one yeare. Then Iohn which hadde taken part with the Frenche Kinge a∣gainst his brother, made meanes to E∣lianor his mother, by whose mediation he was reconciled, and became a trewe Knight to his brother. A preacher called Will∣liam wyth ye long bearde.In this time there was one William with the longe bearde, who moued the common people to seke libertie and fre∣dome, & not to be subiect to the rich and mightie. By whiche meanes hee drewe to hym many greatte companies, and with all his power defended the poore mēs cause against the riche. The King being warned of this tumult, comman∣ded him to cease from those attemptes. But the people stil folowed him as thei before had doone: and he made to them certaine orations openly, taking for his Theme this sentence, Haurietis aquas in gaudeo de fontibus Saluatoris, Whiche is to saie: Ye shall drawe in ioie, waters forth
of the welles of your Sauiour. And to this he added: I am (sayd he) the sauiour of poore men: ye be poore, and haue as∣sayed longe the harde handes of ryche menne. Now drawe ye therfore holsom water foorth of my welles, & that with ioye. For the tyme of your visitation is to men. This William was comman∣ded to appere before the kynges counsel to answere for hym self in suche cases as should be layde against hym: where he appered, but with suche a multitude of people, that the lordes were afrayde of hym, and remitted hym with pleasaunt wordes for that tyme: appointyng some priuily when he was alone, and then to apprehende hym. By whom he was af∣ter taken in Bowe churche in Cheape, but not without sheddyng of blood: for for he was forced to forsake the church,Williā with the long beard forced by fyre to flye oute of Bowchurche in cheape. which they fyered about hym. And whē he was taken, he was arrained before ye Iudges, and with .ix. of his adherentes had sentence of deth, and he wyth those ix. were hanged the morowe after. who of the simple people was after honored as a martyr: in so muche that they reser∣ued relikes of hym, (as it is declared at
large by Robert Fabyan. Anno. Reg. 9. Bailiffes. 1197Roger Blunt Nycolas Ducket This yere the warre was renued be∣twene kyng Richard of Englande, and Philip of France, in whyche eyther of them spedde dyuersly. Anno Reg. 10 Bailiffes Cōstantin Fitz Arnold 1198Robert le Beau Kyng Richard of Englande besieged the castell of Galiarde,Kyng Ri∣charde woun∣ded to deathe with a vene∣mous arrow and was woun∣ded with a quarrell that was shot from the wall, and therof dyed the .vi. day of Apryll, in the yeare of our Lorde .1199. when he had reigned .ix. yeares, and .ix. monethes. Hys bodye was buryed at Founteuerard, his bowels at Carlyle: his harte at Roan. King Iohn. 1199Anno regni .1. IOhn, brother to Richard afore¦named, began his reigne ouer this realm of England the .vi. day of Apryl, in the yere of our
Lord .1199 and deceased in the yere .1216. the .xix. day of October. He reigned xvii. yeares .vi. monethes, and .xiii. days. Of person he was indifferent. But of me∣lancoly and angry complexion. He con∣tempned the byshop of Romes autho∣ritie, whiche if he had doone constantly with iudgement to refrayne abuses, as he semed to doo for couetousnes, and of a froward mynde, vndoubtedly he had ben worthy commendation. By his co∣wardnes and slouthfull negligence, the crowne of Englande greatly decayed. Anno Reg. 1. Bailiffes. Arnold fitz Arnold Richard Fitz bartilmewe1199 Philip kyng of Fraunce (in the qua∣rell of Arthur duke of Britayn, whom certayn of the Lordes had named king of Englande) made warre vpon kynge Iohn, inuaded Normandye, and tooke from hym dyuers castels and townes. Kyng Iohn hearynge of thys warre in Normandye,The kynge toke .iii. s. of euery plough lande. assembled a counsayle, wherin was graunted to hym .iii. s. of euery plough lande thorough England besyde the subsydie of the spirituall lan∣des: and when he had made redy for his dosage, he sailed into Normandy, wher
he spent the tyme to his losse and disho∣nour. But aboute Mighelmas a truce was concluded betwene the two kings of Englande and of Fraunce. Kyng Iohn dueorsed.This yeare was a deuorce betweene kyng Iohn & his wife, the Erle of Glo∣cesters daughter, because of nerenesse of bloode: and after he was maryed to Isabel, the doughter of the Erle of En∣golesym in France: by whom he had .ii. sonnes, Henry, and Richarde, and .iii. doughters, Isabell, Elianor, and Iane. An. R. 2. bailifs. 1200Roger Dorset Iames bartilmew aldermā Ranulph of ester.In this secoud yere (as sayth Fabian) Raynulph Erle of Chester, by thexāple afore shewed by king Iohn, left his own wyse named Constance, whiche he be∣fore had maried, by counsell of Henrys the second, and wedded one Clemens. One Chronicle saythe he dyd so to haue issue: but he therwith displeased God so muche, that he wold suffer him to haue none issue, but dyed without. This yeare (as is reported in Poly∣chronicon) the kyng of Scottes dyd ho∣mage to kyng Iohn at Lincolne.
An. Reg. 3. Bailiffs. Waiser Fitz Ales Symon de aldermābury1201 This yeare in Yorkeshire were sene v. Moones,Fiue Mones sene in the fir¦mament. one in the east, an other in the weste, the thirde in the northe, the fourthe in the southe, and the fyfthe in the myddes of the other: and went com¦passyng the other .vi. tymes, as it were the space of an howre, and vanyshed a∣way soone after. Philyp of France inuaded Norman∣die, and toke diuers castels and townes whiche he gaue to Arthur duke of Bri∣tayne. But shortely after the same Ar∣thure with many other noble men wer taken prisoners by kyuge Iohn, and led prisoners into Englaude. In thys yeare wer chosen .xxv. of the most substantiall and wysest men of the Citie of London,Robert Fa∣bian xxv. Gouer∣nours of the Citie chosen. to mainteine and kepe the Assises of the same Citie, of the whi∣che yerely the Bailiffs wer chosen: and after the Mayre and Sheriffes wer ta∣ken of the same numbre. Anno Reg. 4. Bailiffes. Normand Blundell Iohn de Ely1202 This yere fell excedyng lyghtnyng, thunders,Great tem∣pest in Eng∣lande. and other stormes of wynde
and rayn wt hayle of ye bignes of henne egges, which perished fruit & corn, hou∣ses, and yong cattell. Also spirites were sene in the ayre, in likenes of fowles be ring fier in their billes, which set fire on diuers houses, as R. Fabian reporteth. Philip of France continually made warre vppon the Duchye of Norman∣dye, tyll at the last be subdued the same to his dominion, with the prouinces of Guyen, Poytiers, & Britayn, which be¦fore pertayned to the crown of Englād. Kyng Iohn saylyng into Normandy warred on the borders of France, but of his victories is lyttle written. Anno. 5. Bayliffes. Walter Browne 1203Williā Chāberlain This yeare by meanes of euyl wea∣ther, in the yeare passed,Great dearth of wheate in Englande. wheate was solde for .xv. s. a quarter, whyche was thought an extreme price. Kyng Iohn maried his bastard daugh¦ter to Lewlyn prynce of Wales, and gaue with her the castell and lordeshyp of Elyngsmore, beynge in the marches of Southwales. In this yeare the byshoppe of Rome wate to king Iohn frēdly and gentilly
requiring him to admit Stephen Lan∣gton into the bishoprike of Canterbury (who before was chosen by the monks) & the monkes by him expelled frō their owne abbay, to restore them agayne to the same: but the more his lordes adui∣sed him so to do, the more was he bēt to the cōtrary. In so much that the bishop of Romes messengers returned with∣out obteynynge of their request. Anno Reg. 6. Bailyffes. Thomas Haueril Hamond Bronde1204 The bishop of Rome denounced king Iohn with his whole realm accursed be¦cause he wold not admit Stephē Lang∣ton to the byshopricke of Canterbury.England in∣terdicted. but he little regarded his thretnynges, and would not obey him. At this tyme in Suffolke a fishe was takē like to a man, & was kept liuing .vi. moneths vpon the land with raw flesh and fishe,A monstrous fyshe taken. and after when they saw they coulde haue no speche thereof, they cast it agayn into the sea. Anno Reg. 7. Bailyffes. Iohn Walgraue Richard de Winchestar1205 King Philip of Frāce subdued ye coun¦trey of Normādy,Normandye loste. which sens ye time of
Charles the symple (that is to saye) the the space of .300. yeares) was not in the possession of the kynges of France. Anno Re. 8. Bailiffes. 1205Iohn Holylande Edmonds Fitz Gerrard About this tyme the Iryshemen and shortly after the Welshemen rebelled,Wales and Irelande re∣belled. for that (as some aucthors affyrme) he leuied on them suche greuous taskes to warre agaynst France: so that the king was fayne to raise a great taxe through∣out this realme of England to withstād theyr force. He requyred of the white monkes .6000. marke: but they refused the payement of so greate a summe, so that the Kynge toke great dyspleasure against them: by reson wherof after his returne out of Ireland, he vexed theym sore, and exacted of them more then be∣fore he had desyred: whereby he caused some abbottes to forsake their houses. Anno Reg. 9. Bailyffes. 1207Roger Wynchester Edmond Hardell Kyng Iohn sayled into Normandye: wher after certain skirmishes, he made peace with Philip of Frāce for .ii. yeres. The .ii. bayliffes aboue named, were discharged: and in theyr place & roome
ii. other chosen for the rest of that yere. Also this yeare was graunted to the Citizens of London by the Kynges let∣ters patentes,The fyrste Mayre of London. that they should yearely chose to them selues, a Mayre and .ii. shi∣riffes, on S. Mathewes or Mychelmas day, whose names were as foloweth. Anno Reg. 10. Hēry fitz Alwyne Maire Peter Duke S.1208 Thom. Nelc S. Thys yere London bridge was begon to be builded of stone,Lōdon bridge bnylded of stone. where as before it had ben builded of Timber and repai∣red by a colledge of Priests, which then stode, where the priorie of S. Mary au∣deris nowe standeth. And for wante of other recordes, I wyll declare the opi∣nion of master Fowle, who was the pryor of ye abouesayd S. Mary auderis,S. Mary O∣uerys in Southwark buylded. concernynge the originall bothe of that bridge, and also of Saint Mary auderis church. Fyrst that beyng no bridge but a ferrie to cary and recarye: wherby the Feryar gat great wealth: lastly the Fe∣ryman and his wyfe deccasyng, left the same to theyr daughter, a mayden na∣med Mary Audery: who with the goo∣des left to her by her parentes, and also
the profites which came by the said Fe∣ry, builded an house of sisters, whiche is the vppermost ende of S. Mary Aude∣ris churche, aboue the quire, where she lieth buried, vnto the whiche house she gaue the ouersight & profyt of the same ferry: but afterward the same house of systers was cōuerted vnto a colledge of priestes: who builded the bridge of tim∣ber, and from tyme to tyme kepte the same in reparations: but consyderyng the great charges in repairyng ye same, now lastly in the yere of our Lord .1209. by ye great ayde of the citisens of Londō & other, they begon to build the same of stone: and then the abouesayde colledge of priestes was conuerted vnto a priory of chanōs, bearyng stil the name of the maiden, whiche kepte the ferry: and so called S. Mary Auderie. Anno Reg. 11. 1209Henry fitz Alwyne M. Peterle Iosue S Williā Bloūd S The Englyshemen which were sent by kyng Iohn to ayde the erle of Flan∣ders (as sayth Thomas Couper) chased the Frenchemen: and in the hauen of Sluce compassed and toke theyr whole
nauy of ships, which was in nūber .1020. sayle. Anno. Reg. 12. Hēry fitz Alwine M Adam Whetley S. Stephen le grase S.1210 This yere Pandolph a legate cam frō ye bishop of Rome,A legate from Rome. monishing the king in sharp maner, yt he shold restore maister Stephē Lāgton to his see of Cāterbury & the monks vnto their abbay. the king callīg to mynd ye dangers, he was wrap∣ped in, both in his own realme, & also in Normandy, made promise by othe, to be obediēt to ye court of Rome,The kynge sworne to bee obedient to Rom as at large apereth in Ro. Fabiās cronicle. At that tyme were granted the Peter pence. Anno Reg. 13. Henry fitz Alwyn M. Iohn fitz Pet S Iohn Garlond S1211 This yere Stephē Lāgton archbishop of Canterbury wt the other exiles lāded in Englād: ye king receuing thē ioyously: & was there assoiled of the said bishop: & after yt, the king making restitutiō to ye bishop & other, according to ye third arti∣cle of his othe, the lād was released of ye interdictiō:The land re∣leased of the interdiccion. the king being boūden that as well he as his heyres should euer af∣ter be feuderys to the see of Rome, pay∣yng yerely tribute a thousand markes,
and to holde the Title of the Crowns by the byshop of Rome. Anno. 14. 1212Hēry fitz Alwayne Mair Rādolph Eilād S Cōstātin Iosue S This yere fell greate discentiion be∣twene the kyng and his lordes,Great discen∣tion betwene the kyng and his lordes. partely for that he wolde not mainteyne the la∣wes of Kyng Edwarde, partely for the displeasure he bare vnto them: for that they ayded hym not agaynst the byshop of Rome, and other causes not here spo¦ken of. Herevpon the kyng fell at suche dissention with his lordes, that a greate numbre of people were raised on bothe parties: The Erle of Chester with the other lordes toke the Citie of London, and helde them there a certayne tyme. Caxton his chronicle, wyth other saye, that a great parte of this variance be∣twene kyng Iohn and his barons, was for because the Kyng would haue exiled the Earle of Chester, who oftentymes had aduised the King to leaue his cruel∣nes, & hys accustomed aduotry, which he exercised with his brothers wife and others. But by meanes of the archeby∣shop of Canturbery, and other prelates
a peace was taken for a whyle. This yere (as saith Fabian) on the .xi. day of Iuly,Great fyre in Southwark and London. a great part of Southwark was brent: and in the moneth of August next folowyng, was much harme done in London by fyre. The kynge and his lordes mett with great strengthe on either partie vppon Baramdowne:The Kynge made a char∣ter to his ba∣rons on Ba∣ramdowne. where a charter or wri¦tyng was made and sealed by the kyng: so that the Barony was with it conten∣ted, and departed in peace euerye man into his countrey. Anno. 15. Roger fitz Alwyne M Martin fitz alis S.1213 Peter Bate S. The peace whiche in the laste yeare was agreed betwene kynge Iohn & his barons was this yere by the kynge vio∣lated and broken. Wherfore the lordes assembled to them greate powers, and made sharpe and cruell warre vpon the kyng: in somuche that he was constrai∣ned to send into Normandie for ayde.The king for¦ced to take ye ayde of stran∣gers to defend him agaynste his barons. Then came into Englande, a Normane knyght, named Foukis de Brent, whi¦che broughte with hym a companye of Normans, Flemmyngs and Picardes,
He and his company were so cruel, that they destroyed as well religious houses as other, and dyd muche harme to the lande puttyng the lordes to the worse, the kynge made Foukes & other of his company, wardens of castels and strōg holdes in England. The lordes seynge the kynge perseuer in his wrong, & that he wold in no wyse be induced to holde his owne grauntes, but to do all things after pleasure, and nothyng after lawe or iustice, cast in theyr minds how they myght bryng the realm in a better rule and by one consente wrote to Philyppe kyng of France, that he wold send som noble mā into England, and they wold yeld the lande vnto hym. Piers of Pō¦fret & his son executed at Warham.This yeare kyng Iohn caused to bee drawen and hanged at Warham, one Piers of Pomfrette, and his sonne, for speaking of dyuers thinges against the king. Anno Reg. 16. 1214Roger fitz Alwayne M. Salomō basing S Hugh Basing S Kynge Iohn besieged the castell of Ro∣chester, and wan the sameKyng Iohn laying siege to the castell of Rochester, wan the same, & toke ther∣in certain gentilmen that had conspired against hym, & sent them to dyuers pry∣sons,
placyng strangers in the same ca∣stell. The barons helde them together at London abydyng the commynge of Lewes son to the French kyng whiche lāded in England with a great army, & so cam to Rochester, & wan it with smal payne: he caused all the strangers ther∣in to be hanged: and after came to Lon∣don, where certain alliances and coue∣nants were established and cōcluded be¦twene the lordes and him, and receiued of them homage, as is mēcioned in Po∣lycronicon. Then he with the lordes de∣parted from London,Reynold of Chester. and gat the castel of Rigate, of Gilford, and of Fernham, and from thens to Winchester, where the City was yelded, with all other hol∣des in those partes: and then he with the lordes came agayne to London. At whose commynge, the Tower of Lon∣don was deliuered to them: they slewe all strangers that had ben placed by the kyng in any place. Roger Fitz Alwine for that he was accused to the Lordes to be fauourable to the kynges partie was discharged of that office,The Mayre of London dis¦charged, and an other ser∣ued the rest of the yeare. and one called Serle mercer was Mayre in hys place, the reste of
the yere whiche was viii. wekes. Kyng Iohn beyng thus ouerset with his lordes sent messangers to the bishop of Rome, shewing to hym the rebelliō of his lords, and how they laboured his destruction. Wherefore the byshop of Rome with all haste sente a Legate in∣to Englande,A Legate frō Rome. called Swalo: The whi∣che after his commynge, commuanded Lewes to returne into France, and la∣boured to the vttermoste of his power, to appease the Kynge and his baronye: but all his labour was in vayne. Anno reg. 17. 1215Williā Hardel M. Iohn Crauers S. Andrew Newlād S. This yere kyng Iohn (the warre be∣twene hym and his lordes continuyng) dyed of the Flixe (as is recorded in Po∣licronicon) at the toune of Newarke,Reynold of Chester. he was bowelled in the abbey of Croghtō,The death of Kyng Iohn. and buried at Worceter in the quier of monkes. To tell the opynions of many auctours, concernyng his death, it wold in this place occupy to muche tyme. To be brefe,VVilliam Caxton. Caxton affirmeth he was pri∣soned by a monke of Swinsted abbey in Lincolnshire, for sayinge, If he myghte
liue half a yere, he wold make a halfpe∣ny lofe worth .xx. s. others ar of other o∣pinions: some, yt he dyed for sorow & he∣uynes of hert, as Polidorus:Polidorus Virgile. some of sur∣fettyng in the night, as Radulphus niger:Radulphus niger. some of a bloudy flixe, as Houeden:Houeden Mathevv Pa∣ris. some of a burning ague: some of a cold sweat: some of eating apples, peares, or plum∣mes, Mathewe Parisiensis writeth, that as he wente from Lyn to Lincolneshire, and there hearynge of the losse of hys cariage and treasures, vppon the wa∣shes, fell in great heauynes of mynde: and so therby into a feruent feuer, be∣yng at the abbay of Swynsted, whiche agew he encreased thorough surfetyng and naughty diet by eating of peches & drinking new cider. And when he was thus sick, was caried thēs to the castel of Laford, & from thens to the castel of Newark: and there departed this lyfe, & was buried (as afore is sayd) at Wor∣cestor. It is written by Fabian, and di∣uers other, that he founded the abbey of Bewley in the new forest,The abbey of Bewley buil∣ded. in recom¦pence of the parishe churches, whiche he there ouerturned, to enlarge the fo∣rest, and an abbey of blacke monkes in
the citie of Winchester,The abbey of blacke monks in Winche∣ster. he decessed in ye yere of our Lord .1216. the .xix. of Octo∣ber, when he had reigned .17. yeares .6. monethes and .13. dayes. Henry the thirde. Anno regni. 1. 1216HEnry the sonne of Iohn of the age of .ix. yeares (by the coun∣sell of William duke of Glo∣cester, & the erles of Pēbroke & Chester) was proclaimed kyng of En∣gland, who began his reigne the .19. day October, in the yeare of our Lord .1216. and decessed in the yere .1272. the .vi. day of Nouember. So he reigned .56. yeres. and .28. dayes. The noble men before mēcioned with their retinue kept sharp warre with Lewys the frenche kynges sonne, who by the couenants made be∣fore with the englishemen claymed the crown. But after certain skirmishes & battailes, Lewis began to desyre peace, whyche lastly was concluded,Kyng Henry crowned at Gloucester. and Hen∣ry was crowned at Gloucester. Anno. 1.
Iacob aldermā M. Benet Couētrie S.1216 williā Blūtiuers S. Iacob Alderman was maior one part of the yeare, and Salomon, Basing the other part of the same yere. But the .ii. sheriffes aboue named stode the whole yeare. Swale the byshop of Romes legate accursed Lewys the frenche kyngs son: & after, all suche as toke part with hym agaynste Henry. He accursed Lewlyn prince of Wales, and interdicted hys lande. At the last, Lewys toke a M. markes (or as some authors affirme .xv. M. mar¦kes) of money, & departed this realme. Anno. 2. Serle merser M. Tho. Bokerell She. Rafe Holyland She.1217 When the land was deliuered from straungers, inquisitions were made to knowe what persons assisted Lewys a∣gaynst the kynge: of whiche the kynge pardoned many of the laye menne: but the spirituall men were put to suche fy∣nes, that they were compelled to lay all that they hadde to pledge to please the Kynge: And also besydes that to
sue to Rome to be assoiled: Thys yeare Raynolffe Erle of Che∣ster toke his iourney to the holy land. Anno. 3. 1218Serle Merser M. Iohn Wayle S. Iosenus Spicer S. A parliamente was holden at Lon∣don,ii. s. of euerye plough lande granted to the kyng. by vertue whereof was graunted to the kyng .ii. s. of euery plough lande through Englande. The newe work of west∣minster abbey begon.This yere as is mēcioned in Policro∣nicon, & Thomas Couper) kyng Hen∣ry began to buylde the newe worke of the churche of Westminster. Anno. 4. Serle merser M. Rich. wimbeldeye S Iohn Wayle S 1219Alexander kyng of Scottes maried the lady Iane syster of kyng Henry. Spirites and fyry dragons.Thys yeare was great harme done in England by violēce of whirlwynds, and fiery dragons & spirites were sene flying in the ayre, as affirmeth Robert Fabyan. All strangers banyshed thys land, but such as came wyth marchandyse.This yere was a proclamatiō made yt all strangers shold auoide the realm, ex¦cept such as came with merchādise, & to make sale of them vnder the kings saus
conduct, whyche was doone to auoyde Foukes de Brent, and his complices, who kept the castel of Bedford against the Kyng. This yere was kyng Henry second∣ly crowned at Westminster.Kyng Henry crowned the second tyme at Westminster The castels of Chartley, Be¦ston, & the ab∣bey of Dela∣cresse builded. This yeare Rainolph erle of Chester came out of the holy land into Englād, & began to build the castels of Charte∣ley and of Beston, and after he builded the abbey of Delacresse. Anno. 5. Serle merser M. Richard Renger S. Iosence le Iose. S. This yeare was a counsell holden at Oxenford of the byshops of England,1220 wherin one was condempned,One faynyng hym selfe to be Christ, was crucified. why∣che taught that he was Iesus Christe, and to confirme the same, he shewed the tokens of woundes in hys handes body and feete: he was therfore cruci∣fyed on a Crosse at Alburbury, tyll he died. This yere (as some write) the grey Friers came fyrste into England, and had their fyrst house at Canturbery. Anno. 6. Serle merser M. Richard Renger S.1221 Iosens Iosue S.
A conspiracie was made against king Henry by one Cōstantine in the citie of London:Execution. for the which he was drawen hanged, and quartered, the morow after our Lady day Assumption. Which con∣spiracie so moued the kyng, that he was in mynde to haue cast downe the wal∣les of the Citie. Anno. 7. 1222Serle merser M. Richard Renger S. Thomas Lābert S. This yeare Iohn kyng of Ierusalem came into Englande, and required aide of kyng Henry to wynne agayne Ieru∣salem: but he returned again with small comfort. Salisburye buylded.This yeare the kyng began the foun∣dation of Salisbury mynster. Anno. 8. 1223Richard Renger M William Ioyner S. Thomas Lābert S. The fyrste grant of war∣des to ye kingThis yere the Lordes and gentllmen of Englande first granted to king Hen∣ry and his heyres, the warde and mari∣age of theyr heyres, which was then by lerned mē, called the beginning of euils Anno. 9. 24Richard Renger M. Iohn Trauers S Andrew Bukerel S
Richard the brother of kyng Henry ouercame the Frenchemen, recouered Poyters, and kept the Gascoyns in due obedience. Anno. 10. Richard Renger M. Roger Duke S. Martin fitzwilliā S.1225 This yeare the pleas of the crowne were pleaded in the tower of London. Lewis kyng of France wan certaine castels in the countrey of Poyters: and shortly after spoyled the citie of Aniow. Anno. 11. Richard Renger M. Stephē Bokerel S. Henry Cobham S.1226 In this yere was graunted by kynge Henry to the Sheriffes of the Citie of London,Sheriffwike of London & Midlesex. the sheriffewike of London & Midlesex for the summe of .CCC. poūd by the yeare. It was also granted to ye city fre warrē that is to say,Free wareyn free liberty to hunte a cer∣tain circuite about the citie. It was also granted that the citisens of London shold passe tole free through out all England:Toll free. and also granted by the kynge, that all weeres in the Thamis shoulde bee plucked vp, and destroyed for euer.
Anno. 12. 1227Roger Duke M. Stephē Buckerel S. Henry Cobham S. The cities li∣berties rati∣fied.The liberties of the Citie were this yeare confirmed, and to eche of the she∣riffes was graunted to haue .ii. clerkes and two officers, without any more. Anno. 13. Roger Duke M. walter winchester S. Robert Fitz Iohn S.1229 Thomas Cou¦perKyng Henry sailed with an army in to Britayne agaynste Lewes kynge of France: where after spoilyng the coū∣trey, a peace was concluded betwene the .ii. yong princes. Anno. 14. 1229Roger Duke M. Rich. Fitz Williā S. Iohn Wodborne S. This yere was ordeined by ye Maior and rulers of the Citie of London, that no sheriffe of that citie shold continewe lenger in office then one yere,No sheriffe in Lōdon past one yeare because that they shoulde not by long continu∣ance of office become couetous bribers Anno. 15. 1230Roger Duke M. Michel of S. Cleue S Walter Guffilde S Great fyre in London.This yeare was much harme done
in Lōndon by fyre, which began in the house of a wydowe named dame Iane Lambert. Anno. 16. Andrew Bokerel M Hēry Edmōton S.1231 Gerrard Bate S. Uariance grew betwene kyng Hen∣ry and his lordes,Warre in En¦gland betwen the kynge and his lordes. bycause he put from his seruice Englyshemen, and trusted strangers as well in his counsayle as o∣ther offices nere about hym. Anno. 17. Andrew Bokerel M. Symō Fitzmare S Roger Blunt S1232 In this yere ye king began ye foūdatiō of the hospitall of sainct Iohn, without the east gate of Oxenforde:Saint Iohns without Oxē¦ford begon. In whiche yere also fell wonderfull sore weather, with suche thunder and lightning, that the like had not ben sene.Great tem∣pestes. And there fo∣lowed an earthquake to the great fear of the inhabitauntes of Huntyngdon, and nere therabout. Anno. 18. Andrew Bokerel M. Rafe Ashewy S. Iohn Norman S.1233 This yeare the kyng put from hym the strangers, and restored the English
men to theyr offices. The Iewes dwellyng in Norwyche were accused for stealynge of a chylde whom they purposed to haue crucified. Frederike the Emperor maried Isa∣bel sister of ye king of England. Anno. 19. 1234Andrew Bokerel M. Gerrard Batte S. Robert Ardell S. Kyng Henry maried Elinor ye daugh∣ter of the Erle of Prouance. There appeared as it were hostes of men fyghtyng in the element. The statute of Merton e∣stablysht.The statute of Merton was first enac∣ted at the parliament of Merton. Anno. 20. 1235Andrew Bokerell M. Henry Cobham S. Iorden Couētry S. Quene Elynor founded the hospitall of saint Katherins besydes the Tower of London for the reliefe of poore wo∣men.S Katheri∣nes by the to∣wer builded. Anno. 21. 1236Andrew Bokerel M Iohn Thesalan S. Gerard cordinaner S. Octobonea, a legate of the nynth Gre¦gorie, came into England, and ordeined good ordinances for the Churche. But not all to the pleasure of the yong cler∣gie of Englande. Wherefore as he one
daye passed thorow Oxenford, the scho∣lers sought occasyon against his seruan∣tes, and fought with them, and slue one of the same, and put the legate in suche feare, that he for his safegard tooke the belfray of Osney, and there helde hym tyll the Kynges officers comming from Abyndon, deliuered hym, and conueyde hym to Wallyngford: where he accur∣sed the mysdoers, and compelled the re∣gents and maisters of the vniuersitie to go barefoote through Chepe to Paules at London, & there to aske him forgeue∣nes, and so were forgeuen. Syr Symon Mountforde maryed the Kynges syster, named Elianor, counties of Penbroke. Anno. 22. Richard Renger M. Iohn Withall S. Iohn Goūdresse S.1237 A clerk of Oxenford, or more verily a souldior) fainyng him self madde,Kyng Henry the thyrd like to haue been slayn by trea∣son. enter∣prised to haue slayn King Henry in hys chamber at Wodstocke: but he was takē and put to death at Couentrie. This yeare was borne Edwarde the kynges sonne called Longshankes. Anno. 23. Williā Ioyner M. Reymōd Bingley S. Rafe Ashewy S.1238
This yere Symon Fitz Marie, who before had bene Sheriffe of the citie of London, procured the kynges letters to the maior and rulers of the Citie to electe hym agayne to that same office. Which the Maior and rulers of the ci∣tie refused to do, consyderyng it to be a derogation to the libertie of the same Citie. This yeare on Candelmas daye the king created syr Symon de Mountford Erle of Leycester. Anno. 24. 1239Gerrard Batte Mair. Iohn Gysors S. Michel Tony S. The kyng subdued the Welshemen which oftentymes rebelled. Anno. 25. 1240Reymond Byngey M. Iohn Uoile S Tho. Duresyne S The fyrst Al∣dermen in Lō¦don.This yere were aldermen fyrst cho∣sen in London, which then had the rule of the wards of the citie, but were eue∣ry yere changed, as ye sheriffes ar now. Anno. 26. 1241Reymond Bongley M. Iohn fitz Iohn S. Rafe Ashewy. S. Kyng Henry sayled into Normandie
with a fayre company, purposing to re∣couer Poytiers, Guyan, and other coū∣treys. but after many bickeryngs, som∣what to the losse of Englyshmen, Hen∣ry treated a peace. Anno. 27. Rafe Ashewy M. Hugh Blunt S. Adam Basyng S.1242 Thys yere the pleas of the crowne, wer pleaded in the Tower of London. And in thys yeare Griffith whyche was sonne of Lewlyn,Griffith of Wales brake his necke in the tower of London. lately prince of Wales, entendyng to haue broken pri∣son, fel ouer the inner ward of the To∣wer of London, and brake his necke. Anno. 28 Michel Tony M. Rafe Spicer S. Nicolas Batte S.1243 A Iewe dyggyng in the grounde to enlarge his vineyarde founde vnder a stone a boke,Thomas Couper. wherin was written in iii. languages, greke, hebrue, and latin, of .iii. worldes that shoulde be: of the whiche he appoynted Christ to the be∣gynning of the third world, which was expressed in this maner: In the begyn∣nyng of the third world Gods son shall be borne of a mayde. By the occasyon
of this boke the Iewe was turned to the faith of Christ. Anno. 29. 1244Iohn Gysors M. Robert Cornehil S. Adam Bewley S. A maior of London and a sheriff were both deposed from their romes, because they were both proued periured: and o∣ther were chosen in theyr places: as testi¦fieth Geffrey of Monmouth.Geffrey of Monmouth. Robert Grosthed bishop of Lincolne with other prelates, complayned to the King, of the wast of the goodes and pa∣trimony of the church, which dayly was wasted by alliant byshops, and clerkes of this land, who shortly were auoided Anno. 30. 1245Iohn Gysors M. Symonfitz mary S. Laurēce Frowike S. Thys yeare was much stryfe for the election of the emperour: some elected one, some elected an other: Amongest the rest, some chose the Kynges brother Richarde Kynge of Almayne, and erle of Cornewall: But at the last Radul∣phus Duke of Habspurge in Almayne was by one assent admitted thervnto.
Thys Richarde the Kynges brother buylded the abbey of Hayles.The abbey of Hayles buyl∣ded. Anno. 31. Piers Alleyn M. Iohn Uoile S. Nicolas Batte S.1246 In thys yeare was a myghtye earth∣quake in Englande,An earth¦quake. that the lyke to it, was not sene many yeares before. This yeare the Kyng seysed the fraun∣chise of the Citie of London for a iudge∣ment that was geuen by the Maior and aldermen against a wydow named Mar¦garet Uiell:The kyng sei¦sed the fran∣chise of the ci∣tie of Londō. but shortly the Maior and sheriffes were agayne restored to theyr offices: and thys yeare was a new coyn,Coyne chan∣ged. and the olde called in. Anno. 32. Michel Tony M. Nicolas ioy S. Geffrey winton S.1247 Thys yeare the wharfe of Quene∣byue in London was taken to erme by the Communaltye of London, to paye yearelye fyftye pounde for the same.
Anno. 33. 1248Roger fitz Roger M. Rafe Hardel S Iohn tosalan S Robert Fa∣bian.This yere dyed Robert Grossehed a famous clerke and byshop of Lyncoln, who compiled many famous Bookes, whyche remayne to this daye in the la∣tin and the frenche tongue: the names wherof are partly declared by master Bale in his story of Englyshe writers.Iohn Bale. Anno. 34. 1249Iohn Norman M. Humfrey Basse S Williā fitz Rich. S The great windThis yere was a great wynde vpon the day of Symon and Iude, whych did muche harme in many places of Eng∣lande. 1250Anno. 35. Adam Basing M. Laurēce frowike S. Nicolas Batte S. The frier Augustins began to build or inhabite in Wales, at Woodhous. Kynge Henry maried his daughter Mary to Alexander kyng of Scottes, & receiued of him homage for the realme of Scotlande. Anno. 36. 1252Iohn Toleson M. Williā Durhā S. Tho. Wimborn S.
This yere was graūted by the king,1251 that where before this time the citizens of London,The Maire of Londō sworn in the schequer. did present their Maire be∣fore the kyng wher so euer he were, and so to be admitted, nowe he should come only before the Barōs of the exchequer, and they should admitte him, and geue him his othe. Anno. 37. Nicolas Batte M. Iohn Northāton S.1252 Richard Picard S. This yere in the moneth of Ianuary tho sea rose in such height that it drow∣ned many vilages and houses nere vnto it in diuers places of Englande.The sea arose and drowned many vylages in Englande. This yere also Thames sprange so highe that it drowned many houses a∣bout the waters side, by meane wherof muche merchandise was perished and lost. And this yere was graunted of the kyng that no citizen of London shoulde paye scauage or toule for any beastes by them brought as they before tyme has vsed. Anno. 38. Ri. Ha∣dell Dra. M. Ro. Belingtoni S.1253 Rafe Ashwey S. This yere also the liberties of Londō were again seased by the meane of Ry∣chardThe liberties of London seased.
Erle of Cornwayle, because the Mayre was charged that he loked not to the bakers for theyr syses of bread: so yt the citie was forced to please the Earle with .600. markes, and so they were re∣stored againe. Alphonce kyng of Castell gaue Elinor his daughter in mariage to prynce Ed∣ward the sonne of kyng Henry, to whō his father gaue the pryncedome of Wa∣les,The kynges eldest sonne Prince of Wales. and gouernance of Guyan & Irelād, wherof began that the kynges of Eng∣land ordeined their eldest sonnes princes of Wales. Anno. 39. 1254Rich. Har∣del draper M. St. Distergate S Hen. walmode S The liberties of Londō seased by ye king.The kyng agayn seased the liberties of the citie for certeyn money whiche the quene claymed for hir ryght of ye citizēs, so that they gaue vnto his grace .400. marke, & then were restored to their ly∣berties agayne. The .22. day of Nouēber, were brought to Westminster .102. Iewes Lyn∣coln, which were accused of the crucify∣ing of a chylde at Lyncoln, they were sent to the tower of Londō:Execution of the Iewes. of these .8. were hanged, and the other remayned long in pryson.
Anno. 40. Rich. Har∣del Draper M. Mat. Bokerell S.1255 Iohn Mynour S. This yere a peace was made betwene the citizens of London and the abbot of Waltham, who had bene long in con∣trouersie for toll, that he demaunded of the citizens that came to Walthā faire: but at the last the citizens were set free and bonde to no toll. Anno. 41. Rich. Har∣del Draper M. Rich. Ewyll S.1256 williā Ashwy S. Great variance was betwene ye kyng and the Londoners, in so much that the Mayor and dyuers Aldermen & sherifes,The Maior of London di∣uers Aldermē and the She∣rifes depriued were depriued of their offices, and the gouernance of the citie cōmitted to cer∣teyne persons of the kyngs appoynting: all the controuersie and hādlyng of this matter is at large entreted of by Fabiā. This yere the kyng for so much as he had oftentymes promysed the restitutiō of certaine ancient lawes, but neuer per¦formed the same, the lordes murmuring against him, to appeace their malyce, he helde a parliament at Oxenford,The mad par¦liament holdē at Oxēford. which was after called the madde parliament because manye thynges weare there
enacted, which proued after to the con∣fusion of the Realme, & death of many noble mē. In confirmatiō of these actes were chosen .xii. piers called douze piers which had authoritie to correct the bre∣kers of their ordinaunces.Twelue piers chosen in Englande. These piers altered and chaunged many thinges according to their owne pleasure, greatly to the discontenting of thy kynges mynde, and disquietinge of the whole Realme, as in Fabian and other histories doth at large appeare. Anno. 42. 1257Rich. Har∣del Draper M. Th. fitz Rich. S. Ro. Catheliō, S. Bakers pu∣nished on the tumbrell.This yere Hughe Bygot Iustice, and Roger Turkeley, kept their courtes in the Guyldhall of London, and punished the Bakers vpon the tombrell, where in tymes passed they were punished on the pyllory, and they did many other thinges against the lawes of the citye, but the citie had so be punished of late, yt they durst say nothing therto. Richard the kynges brother retour∣ned out of Almayne into Englande. Anno. 43. 1258.Iohn Gisors Peperar M. Iohn Adriā S. Ro. Cornhil S.
Kyng Henry fearing some rebellion of his nobles,Thomas coper. went into Fraunce, and there concluded a peace on this condi∣tion, that Normādy, Angeow, and Ce∣nomanna, shoulde euer after be in the possession of the Frenchemen, and the kyng of Englande to haue Guien: and that Lewis shoulde geue kyng Henry for his expēces in warr .150000. crowns & for yerely tribute, a .100000. crownes. After whiche peare finished, the kynge retourned into England. A Iewe of Lewkesbury fell into a priuie upō the saturday, and would not for reuerēce of his Saboth day be pluc∣ked out,A Iew drow¦ned in a prime whereof the Earle of Glocester, hearing that the Iewe did so great re∣uerence to his Saboth daye, thought he would doe as muche to his holy daye, whiche is sonday, and so kept him there tyll monday, at whiche season he was founde dead. Anno. 44. Williā Fitz Richard M. Adā Brown S.1259 Ri. Couētre S. A folke mote at Paules crosse.In this yere the kyng commaunded a general assembly or meting at Paules crosse where the kyng in proper person commaunded the Mayre that the nexte
daye after he should cause to bee sworne before his Aldermen euery stripplynge of .xii. yeres of age and vpwarde,An othe to the kyng. to be true vnto the king and his heyres kings of Englande: and that the gates of the citie should be kept with harnissed mē. Anno. 45. 1260Wil. Fitz Richard M. Io. Northāton S. Rich. Pickard S. Kyng Hēry published at Paules crosse the byshops of Rome absolution for him and all his, that were sworne to main∣teyne the articles made in the parlia∣ment at Oxforde: for whiche cause the barons of England begon to vtter their malice, which they had long before con∣ceived agaynst the kyng, and caused an insurrection that continued thre yeres.Gylbart de Clare Earle of Gloucester Richard earle of Glocester decased, and Gilbart de Clare, was earle after him. Anno. 46. 1261Th. Fitz Thomas M. Phi. Walbroke S. Richard Tailer S. A great frost.This yere was so great a frost ye men rode on hors back ouer the thames:The barons of Englande rose gainst the kyng. The barons of Englād armed them against their kyng, & all this yere houered about London & other places without any no∣tabe act of rebellion, saying yt they rob∣bed & spoyled aliens & certeyn other per∣sons
whō they knew to be against their purpose: specially they slewe ye Iewes in all places. Anno. 47. Tho. Fitz Thomas M. Ro. Moūtpyler S.1262 Osbern Buckessel S. 500. Iewes were slayne by the citizēs of Londō,Fyue hūdred Iewes slaine at London. because one Iewe wold haue forsed a christian man to haue paid more then ii.d. for ye vsury of xx.s. for a weke. Hugh le Spencer with the citizeus of London, spoiled & burnt the manours of Richard the kings brother, which hither to had ben a great stay of the warre be∣twene the kyng and the nobles. Nere to Lewys in Susser, kyng Hēry and his barons fought a cruel battel,A battaill at Lewys. in which the kyng hym self with Richarde his brother, sir Ed. his son, & other no∣ble men to the nūber of .25. were taken: & of the cōmōs wer slayn aboue .20000. Anno. 48. Tho. Fit; Thomas M. Tho. Lamford S.1263 Edward blune S. Debate & variāce sel betwene Symon Moūtfort Erle of Lecester, & Gilbert de Clare Erle of Glocester, chief capitains of ye barons: which torned to their great euil. For prince Ed. being now set at li∣bertie, allied him wt the erle of Glocester & gathering to hī a great power, warred
so freshly vpon Symon of Leicester,The battayle of Euisham in Worcester¦shyre. that at the ende he and Hughe spencer with many others of the nobles, were slayn in the battayle at Euishā in Wor∣cester shyre. A parliament at winchesterThe same yere was holden a parlia∣ment at Wynchester, where all the sta∣tutes made before at Oxforde, were dis∣anulled & abrogate. And all wrytinges made for the confirmation of the same, cancelled and broken. London lyke to haue bene vtterly spoy∣led.This yere the citie of London was in great daunger to haue bene destroied by the kyng for great ire and displeasure that he had conceiued against it, because of the fornamed cōmocion: of the which the citizens hauing perfit intelligence, assembled them selues and tooke aduice diuers tymes what was best to be done. At the last it was agreed wholy to sub∣mitte them selues bothe lyues & goodes into the kynges bandes And for confir∣mation therof to make an instrument of their submission, and to seale the same with the cōmon seale of the citie They agreed upon .viii. persones to carye the same and goyng to wyndsore where the king lay, they met at Colbroke a knight called syr Roger Leyborn, who turned
them backe agayne, and after they had discoursed the whole matter with hym, he wylled them to delyuer to hym theyr submission vnder seale, and he woulde moue the kyng in it, whiche thyng they dyd. And after syxe dayes thys knyght retourned to the city, and sayd the kyng had receyued the wrytinges, and would fyrst that they should take awaye all the chaynes that were in the streates of the city, and shoulde pull vp all the postes out of the grounde that the same were fired in, and should bryng them all, both postes and chaynes to the towre of Lon∣don, and that the Mayre with .xl. citizēs should the next daye folowyng attende vpon the king at Wynsore, to confirme the graunt of theyr wrytinge, and they should goe and come safe. And in wyt∣nes therof he delyuered to thē the kyngs letter & seale for the terme of .4. dayes. The nexte daye the citizens beynge at Wynfore, attended at the gate vntyll the kyng came from huntyng, at which tyme the kyng would not once looke on them. And after the kyng was entred, they would haue folowed: but they wer forbydden. But shortly after they were called into the castell, where they were
locked in a tower al nyght with homely interteynment & worse lodgyng,The kynge gaue ye maior of London & foure aldermē with all theyr lands & goods to his sonne prince Ed∣warde. & the next day the kyng gaue fyue of the best of thē vnto prince Edward, which was the Mayor & foure aldermē, and the rest were cōmitted to seueral places to prisē. Anno. 49. 1264Tho. Fitz Thomas M. Peter Armiger S. Greg. Rockesle S. The kynge gaue dyuers citizens of Lō¦don with all their landes & goodes, to his houshold ser∣uauntes.This yere the king came to westmin∣ster, & shortly after he gaue vnto diuers of his houshold seruantes, vpō .60. hous∣holdes and houses within the citie, so yt the owners were compelled to agree & redeme their houses and houshold with al their goodes or els to auoyde, and suf∣fer suche persons to enter as the sayde houses were geuē vnto: & not only that, but also all such landes and tenements, goodes & cattalles as the sayde citizens had in any other places of Englād and then he made one Cuftos or Gardeyn of the citie, Syr Othon Constable of the towre, which syr Othon chose to be bay∣liefes vnder hym, and to be accomptable to hym to the vse of the kyng, Iohn A∣drian, and Walter Heruye, cytizens of the same citie. And after thys, the kyng tooke pledges of the best mens sonnes
of the cytye, that hys peace shoulde bee suerly kept in the same, the which were put in the towre of London, and there kept at the coste of theyr parentes. And shortly after, by great labour and sute made, all the foresayde persons whyche should be in the kepyng of the bayliefe of the castell of Wyndsore, eyght onely excepte, and all the other londoners .31. in number, were delyuered and came to London. Daily sute was made vnto the kyng, to haue his grace and knowe hys pleasure what fyne he woulde haue of the cytie for theyr transgressions by thē done, for ye which the kyng asked .xl. M. poundes, and stucke at .lx. M. markes, but the cytizēs alledged for thē selues ye vnhabilitie of ye citye, as that (many & not of the worst) of theyr cytyzens were fled, the reste at home were spoyled and robbed of theyr goodes. For whych con∣syderations and many other (whyche were tedious to wryte) the cytyzens be∣sought the kynges moste gracious fa∣uour and pytie, to take of them as they might beare. This matter thus hāging, the kyng departed from Westmynster toward Northāpton, & before hys depar¦ting, he ordeined syr Iohn Hind knyght
And maister Iohn Waldean Clerke to be gardens of the citie and tower, the whiche were named in the kynges wry∣tynges, Seneshals or Stewards of the citie. Upon the daye followyng that the kyng was rydeyn, these two forenamed stewardes sent for .24. of the most nota∣ble men of the citie, and warned them to appeare the daye followynge before the kynges councell at Westmynster, where at their apparens was shewed vnto them, that the kynges mynd was that they should haue rule of the citie in his absence vnder the aforesayde sene∣scales: and that to see good rule kepte within the citie, they should be sworne there before the Councell. Whiche beyng done, they departed agayn to the citie. Such continuall labour was made to the kyng, that lastly it was agreed for .xx. M markes, to be payde by the cy∣tie for all transgressions and offences by them done: certeyne persons excepted. Whiche the kyng had geuen his sonne, beyng as afore is sayde in the tower of Wynsore. For the payment of whiche somme at days by agreement sealed, syr Roger Leyborne, and mayster Robert warren clerk, were assigned to take the
sureties for the same. After which suer∣ties receyued and sent to the kynge at Northampton, the kyng sent vnto the citizens a charter vnder his broade seale which ye may reade in Robert Fabian. Then for the leuyeng of this fyne, were cared as well seruauntes, couenaunte men, as housholders. And many refused the liberties of the citie for to be quite of the charge: of whiche nomber many ne∣uer retourned agayne to the citie. Kyng Henry besieged the castell of Kenelworth,Kenelworth castel besieged whiche Henry Hastynges defended against hym the space of halfe a yere, and then gaue it vp into his handes. Anno. 50. Williā Fitz Richard M. T. de la fourd S1265 Gre. Rokesly S The olde franchises and lyberties of London with a newe graunte for the shyre of Middelser, were confirmed by a parliament at Northamton.A parliament at Northam∣ton. Where al so many noble men that had taken part with the Barons, were disheryed of their landes, and therfore fled to Ely, & strengthened it in suche wyse that they helde it long after. Anno. 51.
1266Allen Zowch Ma. Iohn Adrian S. Lucas Bitēcote S. The gentilmen of Englande whiche fled to Ely, robbed & did much harme to the countreys next adioynyng, namely Norfolk,Norwiche spoyled. Suffolke, & Cambridge shyre, thei toke the city of Norwich & spoyled it and raunsomed the ryche men therof at theyr pleasure. A legate of the byshop of Romes labored to the kyng, that ye sayd dysherited gētilmē myght purchase their landes of him, by fine & raunsome. To whose request the kyng lastly agreed, yt ye said gētilmē shold haue their lāds agaī by fine of .v. yeres valure of their lands. The statute for weyghtes and measuresAbout the .li. yere, was made the sta∣tutes of weightes & measure, that is to say, that .32. graynes of whete drye and round, & takē in the myddes of the eare, shuld waye a sterling peny,Iohn Rasal. & .xx. of those pence should make an ounce, & .xii. oūces should make a pound troy, and .8. poūd troy shuld wey a gallon of wine, and .8. gallons of wyne, shuld make a bushel of London, whiche is the .8. part of a quar∣ter. Also that three harly cornes drie and rounde, should make an inche, and .xii. ynches to a foote, and three foote to a yarde, and fyue yardes and a halfe to a
perche or pole. and .xl. pole in lēgth, & .iii. in bredth to make an acre of land, & thes standards of wayght & mesurs, were cō∣firmed in ye .xv. yere of Edward ye third. And also in the tyme of Henry the sixt, and Edward the fourth, and lastly con∣firmed in the .xi. yere of Henry the se∣uenth. Howe be it in the tyme of kynge Henry the syxt, it was ordeined that the same ounce should be deuided into .xxx. partes, called .xxx. pence:The altera∣tion of the coyns, from iiii. pence to xii. pence. and in kynge Edwarde the fourthe his tyme into .xl. partes, called .xl. pence. And in kynge Henry the eyght his dayes, into .44. partes, called .3.s. S.. but the weyght of the ounce troye, and the measure of the foote was ordeined euer to be at one stynt. Anno. 52. Allein Souch M. Thomas Basyng S.1267 Robert Cornhyll S. Gylbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, for vnknowen displeasure, allieng hym selfe with the exiled gentilmen & other nobles of Englande, rose against the kyng,The kyng be¦sieged Londō and held the citie of London, buil¦dyng therin bulwarkes, and caste dyt∣ches and trenches in dyuers places of the cytie and Southwarke, and fortifi∣ed it wonderously.
The kyng lying at the abbay of Strat∣forde, also assaulted the same citie, more then a moneth: as it is to bee red in Fa∣bian, but by diligent labour vpon his partie, and by the Legate and the kyng of Romaynes on the other partie. Foure per∣sons for robe∣ries putte in sackes & caste in ye ThamesAgrement was made betwene the king and hym: In this meane tyme many robberies were done, wherefore foure that bare the cognisance of the Earle of Darby, were put in sackes and caste in the Thames. Anno. 53. 1268Aleyn South M. Williā de Durhā S. Walter Haruy S. A great ryot in London.Uariance fel betwene the felowships of goldsmythes and aylers of London, whiche caused great rufflying in the ci∣tie, and many men to be slayne.Execution. For whiche ryot .xiii of the chiefe capitaines were arreigned, cast and hanged. Aleyn South was discharged of his Mayraltie by the kyng, and Stephen Edworthe made constable of the towre, and custos of the citie. The disherited gentylmen were this yere reconciled to the kynges fauour. And the fiue citizens which had remay∣ned prysoners in the towre of Wynd∣sour,
the whych the Kyng had geuen to his son Edwarde,The Maior of London, & iiii. Aldermē released out of Wynsor ca∣stell. when they had made theyr ende with greate summes of mo∣ney were deliuered. Anno. 54. Thomas fitz Thomas M williā Hadstock M1269 Anketil de Aluern M The ryuer of Thamis was so harde frosen from the feast of S. Andrewe to Candelmas,A great frost. that men and beasts passed ouer on foote from Lambeth to West∣mynster. The marchandises was caried from Sandwiche, and other hauens vn∣to London by lande. The citie of Lōdon with the reuenues therof was geuen to prince Edward.The Citie of London geuē to prince Ed∣warde. Anno. 55. Iohn Adriā vintener M. walter Potter S1270 Iohn Taylour S Prince Edward sailynge into Aia a∣gaynst the infidels, by his policy & man∣ly actes so demeaned hymself, that often times he put the Turks to great shame & disworshyp. For despite wherof they suborned a false Sarasyn, by whose trea¦son he was wounded with a venemous dart, and therof was longe sicke after. This yere the liberties of London wer
newely confirmed. And this yeare the steple of Bowe churche in Cheape fell downe,The steple of Bowchurche blown down. and slue many people both men and women. Anno. 56. 1271Io. Adrian vintener M. Greg. Rokesle S. Henry walleis S. This yeare deceased Richard king of Almayn and Erle of Cornwale, brother to the kyng, and was buryed at Hayles an abbey of white monkes, by hym be∣fore tyme buylded. A great ryote in NorwicheIn June began a great riot in the citie of Norwich, wherethrough, the mona∣sterie of the Trinitie, was burned. And for that fact the king rode down, & made enquiry for the chief doers therof:Execution. wher∣of .xxx. yong men were condemned, dra∣wen, hanged and brent. This yere were diuers prodigies and strange tokens sene in diuers places of Englande. Anno. 57. 1272Sir walter Haruy M Richard Pari S. Iohn Bedill S. In the beginning of this yeare kynge Henry sickned: and he called before him sir Gilbert Clare erle of Glocester, and caused hym to be newly sworne to kepe
the peace of the lande, to the behofe of Edward his sonne, & then dyed the .xvi. day of Nouēber, in the yere of our lorde 1272. when he had reigned .lvi. yeres, & xviii. dais. He was buried at Westmin∣ster vpon the southe syde of saincte Ed∣ward. He buylded a greate part of the same Churche. King Edwarde the firste, surnamed Longshanke. Anno regni .1. EDwarde the fyrst,1272 after the conqueste, surnamed Long∣shanke, began hys reigne o∣uer this realme of England the .16. day of Nouember, in the yere .1272. and deceased the .vii. day of Iuly, in the yeare .1307. so he reigned 4. yeres .vii. moneths, and .xx. dayes. Of stature he was tall and mighty of body, but nothyng grosse his eies were some∣what blacke, & in tyme of anger semed fyerye. Of suche a noble and valyaunt heart, that his courage neuer faynted,
in moste harde and dangerous enterpri∣ses: Of witt excellent, of great toward∣nes, and apt to euery thing, that he him selfe applied. Anno. 1. 1272Sir walter Haruy knight M. Io. Horne S walter porter S In the end of this yere the kynge re∣turned into Englād. Ther was yet busi∣nes about chusynge of the Maior: for dy∣uers would haue made such a Maior as they had lyked. But for that tyme they were disappoynted: whiche in the yeare folowyng vpon the same daye toke fur∣ther effect. Anno. 2. 1273Henry walleis M. Nicolas wichester S. Henry Couentrie S. On the day of Symon and Iude whē Philyp Tailor which before was chosen to be Maior,Greate stryfe for chusyng ye Maior of Lō∣don. and should as that day haue taken his charge in the Guylde hall of London, diuers citisens put hym besyde the maires seate, & set therin sir walter Haruy: ye rumor wherof, came tofore ye kyng, who put them both out, and chose Henry Frowike Custes of the citie, who continued tyll Candelmas.
At which tyme Walter Haruy was set in auctoritie as Maior, and continued the full of that yeare. The kyng of Scottes dyd homage to kyng Edwards for the Kyngedome of Scotlande. The kyng ordeined certayn new la∣wes for the welth of the realme, emong the which was one, that bakers making breade lackyng weight assigned after ye price of corne, should fyrst be punyshed by losse of their breade, and the seconde by enprisonment, and thirdly by the cor∣rection of the pillorye. Myllers for stea∣lyng of corne to be chastised by the tum∣beryll. And this to be put in execution, he gaue auctoritie to all Mayres, Bailif∣fes, and other officers through Englād, and specially to the Maior of London. Anno. 3. Gregory Rockesle M. Lucas Batencourt S.1274 Henry Frowycke S. Kyng Edward buylded the castell of Flynt,The castell of Flynte buyl∣ded. and strengthened the castell of Rutland, & other agaynst the welshmen. Anno. 4. Gregory Rockesly Maire Iohn Borne S.1275 Rafe Blunt S.
Alienynge in Mortmayne.The statute of mortmayn was enac∣ted by kyng Edward. Execution.Michell Tony was hanged, drawen, and quartered for treason. Anno. 5. 1276Gregory Rockesle M Robert de Bracy S Rafe Fenour S King Edward gaue vnto Dauid bro∣ther to Lewlyn prince of Wales, the lordshyp of Froddesham. This Dauid attended in the kynges courte, and dyd vnto hym pleasant seruice, to the intent to espie the kynges secrete counsel: and if any thyng were done or spoken to the hurt of his brother, that he might geue to hym warnyng. Anno. 6. 1277Gregory Rockesley M. Iohn Adrian S. walter Lāgley S. The terme kept at Shre¦wesbury.Mychelmas terme was thys yeare kepte at Shrewsbury. Anno. 7. 1278Gregory Rockesle M. Robert Basing S Williā Merser S Great execu∣tiō of IewesReformation was made for clypping of the kynges coyne, for whiche offence 297. Iewes were put to execution. In this yeare began the foundation of the churche of the frier preachers or
black friers by Ludgate, and also castell Baynarde. The towne of Boston was greately empayred with fyre. Anno. 8. Gregory Rockesley M. Thomas boxe S.1279 Rafe More S. This yeare was fyrst coined halfpens and farthings of siluer,Halfpens and farthings first coyned. where before, o∣ther coynes of other mettal ran among the people to theyr great losse & noyāce. Anno. 9. Gregory Rockesle M Williā Faringdō S1280 Nicolas wichester S Dauid the brother of Lewlyn prince of Wales,Rebellion in Wales. vnkyndly & traiterously mo∣ued his brother against king Edwarde. Anno. 10. Henry Waleis M. williā mazerer S.1281 Nicolas wichest. S. King Edward sent a cōpany of souldi∣ors into wales, vnder guiding of ye erles of Northūberland & Surrey: Of which cōpany many were slain, and syr Roger Clifford taken prisoner. The welshemē subdued certain castels and holdes, & of some townes threw downe the walles. Anno. 12.
1282Henry Waleis M. Rafe Blunt S. Haukyn Betuel S. Execution.Lewlyn prince of Wales was slayn by syr Roger Mortymer: and his heade set vpon the tower of London. Thomas Couper. Marton col∣ledge buylded at Oxenford.William Marton Chancellor of En∣gland about this tyme buylded Marton colledge in the vniuersitie of Oxenford. Anno. 12. 1283Henry Waleis M Iorden goodchepe S Martin Boxe S Execution.Dauid the brother of Lewlyn prince of Wales was taken and beheaded: and dyuers holdes and castels of the Welsh men, geuen to englishe lordes. A parliament at Shrowes∣bury.Prince Edwarde of Caruaruan was born in Wales, at the castell of Carnar∣uan, & a parliamēt was held at Shrews∣burye. Laurence Ducket, han∣ged in Bowe churche.Laurence Ducket a citisen of Lon∣don, was found dead, and hanged with∣in saint Mary Bowe churche of Chepe for the whyche were condemned .viii. men, whiche were drawen and hanged: and one woman brent. The great cū¦dite in Chepe begon to bee buylded.This yeare the great conōuyte stan∣dyng agayn sainct Thomas of Acres in Chepe was fyrst begon to be made.
This yeare began a greate stryfe be∣twene the Kyng and the Erle of Gloce∣ster: whiche after grew to the greate di∣sturbance of diuers townes of Englād, and specially of the Citie of London, as after some deale shall appeare. Anno. 13. Gregory Rockeslei M Stephē Cornhil S1284 Robert Rokesley S This yere the liberties of the Citie of London was agayn seysed into the kyn∣ges handes,The liberties of London sei¦sed into the kyngs hande. and Stephen Sandwiche admytted for Custos, and the Maior dis∣charged (as some write) for takyng bry∣bes of the Bakers. The newe worke of the churche of Westminster vnto the end of the quire begon in the third yere of Henry the .iii. and continued in buildyng .66. yeres be∣fore it was fynished.The newe work of west¦minster chur∣che. Anno. 14. Rafe Sādwiche M Walter Blunt S.1285 Iohn Wade S. This yere were enacted by the King,Parliamente at Glocester. the statutes called Additamenta Gloucestria. Anno. 15. Sir Iohn Bryton M. Thomas crosse S.1286 williā Hautein S.
Kyng Edward sailed to Burdeaur, and from thence rode into Frāce, wher he was honorably receiued of Philyp le¦beau kyng of France. A hote sōmer and greatte cheape of corn & other graynThis yeare the sommer was so exce∣dyng hot, yt many mē dyed through the extremitie therof: And yet wheat was so plenteous, that it was sold at London for .iii. s .iiii. d. a quarter. Anno. 16. 1287Rafe sandwich M. willyā Herford S. Thomas staines S. Great hayle fell in England, and after ensued so continuall raine, that the yere folowyng wheate was solde for .xvi. d. a bushel: and so encresed yerely the reigne of this kynge and his sonne, tyll it was lastly sold for .xl. s. a quarter. Anno. 17. 1288Rafe sandwich M. Williā Betain S Iohn of Cāturb. S Execution for rebellion.Rice ap Meriduck, a welshman, rebel∣ling against Payne Tiptoft, wardeyne of the countreye, was by the Earle of Cornewall in the Kynges absence, ta∣ken, drawen, hanged, and quartered at Yorke. Anno. 18.
Rafe sādwich M. Fulk of .s. Edmōd S1239 Salomō Lāgford S This yeare kyng Edward returned into Englande, and was honorably re∣ceyued of the citesens of London. Anno. 19. Rafe sandwich M. Tho. Romaine S.1290 Williā de Lyre S. This yere the staple of woll was or∣deyned to be kept at Sandwiche.The woll sta¦ple kepte at Sandwyche. And this yere the Iewes were bani¦shed the land:Iewes bany∣shed. for the which cause the cō∣mons gaue to the kyng a fyftene. Anno. 20. Rafe sandwich M. Rafe Blunt S.1291 Hamond Boxe S. This yere died quene Elian or the kin¦ges wife, & was buried at Westminster in the chapell of sainte Edwarde, at the fete of Henry the third. This yere also dyed Elianoure wyfe vnto Henry the third,Quene Elia∣nor deceased. & mother to this Edwarde, whose heart was buried at the gray fryers in London, and her body at Ambresbury, in the house of Nunnes. Anno. 21. Rafe sandwiche M. Henry Balle S.1292 Elys Russell S.
The Kyng helde hys parliament at London, to the whych with diuers lor∣des of his Prouince, came the kynge of Scottes. This yeare .iii. men had theyr ryght handes smitten of in Westchepe for res∣cuynge a prisoner,Execution. arested by an officer of the Citie of London. Anno. 22. 1293Rafe sādwich M. Robert Rockesley S. Martin Aubrey S. The .xviii. day of May fell a wondrous snow, and therwith an excedyng wynd: By violence whereof great harme was done in sundry places of England,Great tem∣peste. as o∣uerthrowyng houses and trees. &c. Anno. 23. 1294Sir Iohn Bryton M Henry Boxe S. Rich. Glocester S. Madocke with the Welshmen rebel¦led agaynst the kyng, wherfore he in all hast made against them, & ouercam thē. Thys yeare the frenchemen arriued at Douer, and spoyled the towne, and brent a parte of it,Douer spoy∣led by French men. in whiche skirmishe was slayne one Thomas of Douer. Anno. 24. 1295sir Iohn Bryton M Iohn Dunstable S. Adā Harlingbery S.
Iohn Baylell was by kyng Edward admitted to be kyng of Scottes, and he for the same dyd his homage, and sware vnto hym fealtie. This yere was takē Madock or Meri∣doke captayn of the rebells in Wales:Rebellion in Wales. he was drawen and hanged at London. Anno. 25. Sir Iohn Britton M. Thomas Sulff S.1296 Adā de Fullam S. Iohn Bailell kyng of Scottes contra∣ry to his allegiance, by the settynge on of the frenchmen,Kyng Ed∣ward wonne Barwyke. rebelled agayn king Edward. Wherfore kyng Edward ha∣sted hym thither. He wan from him the castels of Barwicke and Dunbarre. He slewe of the Scottes (as saith Fabyan) xxv. M. and tooke prisoner sir Willyam Douglas, and other noble men. He con∣quered also Edenbrough, wher he foūd the regall ensignes of Scotland: that is to witte, the croune, the scepter & cloth of estate. In this tyme the englyshmen sustei∣ned many stormes in Gascoyn & Guyen. Anno. 26. sir Iohn Britton M. Iohn de stortford S1297 williā de stortford S
Kyng Henry sayled into Flanders to reskue Guy theyr Erle, which was gre∣uously ouerset by the Frenche kyng, so that he had won muche of his landes. But shortly after kyng Edwards com∣myug, a peace was concluded for .ii. yea∣res: and thens he went to Burdeaux. The Scotts by the enticement of the frenchmen, and settinge on of one Wil∣liam Wallace rebelled, and put the en∣glishmen to muche trouble and losse of many men: emong which was sir Hugh Tresyngham. The Tunne in Cornhyll is nowe the Cundyte.This yere certain persons of the city of Lōdon brake vp the tonne in the ward of Cornhyll, and toke out certain priso∣ners, that thither were cōmitted by sir Iohn Britton: for the which .ix. of them were greuously punished by long impri¦sonment, and great sines. The tunne a∣boue named is now ye cūdit in Cornhill. The liberties of London granted againThe kyng comming againe into En∣gland, and so to Winchester, the citesēs of Lōdō made such labor vnto his grace that they obteined grant of their liber∣ties that had in some part be kept from them by the terme of .xii. yeres or more. Anno. 27.
Henry Walleis M. Richard Reshā S.1298 Thomas Sel S. This yere the kyng made cruell war vpon the Scots, and had of them a great victorie, and then they yelded them sel∣ues agayn to his grace and mercy. This yeare also the kynge called in cer∣taine coynes of money called pollardes, Crocardes, and rosaries. Anno. 28. Elis Russell M. Iohn Armencer S.1299 Henry Fringrith S. Kyng Edward heryng of the vntru∣the and rebellion of the Scottes, made his third voyage against them, wherin he subdued a great part of the land, and toke the castel of Estriuelyn with other, and made the lords sweare to hym feal∣tie and homage. Anno. 29. Elis Russel M Luke Haueryng S.1300 Rich. Champeis S. Thys yeare the Kynge gaue vnto Edwarde hys sonne, the Princedome of Wales, and ioyned there vnto the Dukedome of Cornewall, and the crie dome of Chester.
Anno. 30. 1301Iohn Blunt M. Robert Caller S. Peter Bosham S. A parliamēt at CāturberyThis yeare the Kyng helde a greate parliament at Canturbery. Anno. 31. 1302Iohn Blunt Maior Hugh Pourte S. Simon Parys S. This yere Kyng Edward made great warres in Scotland, where he had ma∣ny great victories. Anno. 32. 1303Iohn Blūt M Williā Cōbmartein S. Iohn de Burford S. Iohn Har∣dyng.This yeare the Kyng caused great in∣quirie to be made of the behauior of his Iustices through out his realme, which was called Broyly Baston. Anno. 33. 1304Iohn Blunt M. Roger Parys S. Iohn Lincolne S. Execution at London.Wylliam Wales whiche had don so many displeasures to Kyng Edwarde in Scotland, was taken, drawen, hanged, and quartred at London on S. Bartyl∣mewes eue, and his head sette on Lon∣don brydge. The nobles of Scotlande in a parlia¦ment
at Westmynster volūtaryly were sworne to be true to the kynge of En∣glande, and to kepe the lande of Scot∣lande to his vse against all persons. Anno. 34. Iohn Blunt M. Raynold Doderil S.1305 Wylliā Causon S. Robert le Bruse, (cōtrary to his othe to kyng Edwarde before made) assem∣bled the lordes of Scotland, and caused hym selfe to be crowned. When kynge Edwarde heard of this treason, he went with haste into Scotlande, where he chased syr Robert le Bruse, and all the power of Scotlande, and tooke many of the noble men prysoners. Anno. 35. Iohn Blūt M. Symon Belet S.1306 Godfrey de la cōduit S. The warres continuyng in Scotlād the noble kyng Edwarde ended his lyfe the seuēth day of Iuly, in the yere .1307.Kynge Ed∣ward the first deceased. When he had reigned .34. yeres .. mo∣nethes and .21. dayes. He lyeth buryed at Westmynster in the chappel of saynt Edward vpon the south syde in a playne tōbe of marble at the head of his father.
King Edward the second. Anno Regni .1. 1307EDwarde the second sonne of of the first Edward, & prince of wales borne at Carnar∣uan, began his reigne ouer the realme of England, the vii. day of Iuly in the yeare of our lord, 1307. who was deposed the .25. day of Ia¦nuary: and in the yeare .1326. so that he reigned .19. yeres. He was fayre of bo∣dy, but vnsted fast of maners, and dispo∣sed to lightnes: he refused the company of his lordes, and men of honour: and hanted the company of villeins and vile persous. He gaue hym self to ouermuch drinkyng, and lightly wold disclose thin¦ges of great councell: and beside that he was geuen to these vices of nature: He was made muche worse by the counsail and familiaritie of certain euill disposed persons. As Piers of Gaueston, Hugh Spencer, & others, whose wanton coū∣saile he folowyng, gane himself wholly to the appetite and pleasure of the body, not regardyng to gouerne his commune weale, by sadnes, discretion; and iustice. Which thing caused first great varīace betwene him and his lords: so that short¦ly he became to his lordes odible: aud in
the end was deposed from his kingdom. Anno. 1. Sir Iohn Blunt M. Nicolas Pigot S.1307 Michel Drury S. King Edward toke to wife Isabel ye dou¦ghter of Philip ye fayre, king of France He gaue Piers of Gaueston, the erle∣dom of Cornwall, & the lordshyp of wal∣lingford, & was ruled al by his counsell. Anno. 2. Nicolas faringdō M. Williā Basyng S.1308 Iohn Butler S. The kyng callyng to mynd the disple∣sure don vnto him & his familiar, Piers Gaueston, by the bishop of Chester, com∣manded hym to the Tower of London, where he was streightely kepte many dayes after. But the lordes perceauyng the kyng geuen all to wantonnesse, and that he was much prouoked thervnto by the meanes of Piers of Gaueston, cau∣sed the kyng to banishe him the realme, and so hee wente ouer into Irelande, where the kyng notwithstandyng com∣forted hym wyth many rych gyftes, and made him chief ruler of that countrey. Anno. 3. Thomas Romain M. Iames of s. Ed. S.1309 Roger Palmer S.
The kynge and hys lordes were at great stryfe for the banyshmēt of Piers of Gauestone, in so muche that the king would not be pleased vntill he were a∣gayn restored. The Rhodes won by chri∣stian men frō the Turkes.This yere was the Ile of Rhodes re∣couered from the Turke, by the knigh∣tes of the order of saynt Iohn Baptist. The crouched friers came first into Eng∣lande.This yere the crouched friers came fyrst into England. Anno. 4. 1310Rychard Rofham M. Symon Croppe S. Pet. Blacknay S. Piers of Gaueston more and more en¦creased: in so muche that he had the cu∣stody of all the kynges iewelles and tre∣sure, of the whyche (as sayeth Fabian and other) he tooke a table and a payre of tressels of golde,A table with tressels & all of golde, con∣ueighed out of Englande. and conueyghed thē with other iewelles out of the lande. He also brought the kyng to manyfolde vy∣ces: as adultery and suche other. Wher∣fore the lordes agayne banyshed hym out of England into Flaunders, to the kynges great displeasure. Anno. 5. 1311Iohn Gysours M. Symō Merwod S. Rich. Wylford S. Piers of Gauestone, was agayne by
the kyng called out of Flaūders. wher∣fore the lordes beyng confederate, besie∣ged hym in the castell of Scarborough,Execution in Gauerside. where they tooke him, and brought him to Gauersyde besyde Warwycke, and smote of his head, to the great discontē∣tyng of the kynges mynde. This yere the kyngs fyrst sonne, named Edward, was borne at Wynsore. Anno. 6. Iohn Poūtney M. Iohn Lambyn S.1312 Adam Lutekyn S. This yere was many good lawes made in the parliamēt Londō, wher, vnto the kynge and his lordes were sworne. Anno. 7. Nycolas Faringdon M. Adam Burdē S.1313 Hugh Baytō S. The Englysh men encountred with Robert le Bruse and his Scottes, at E∣striualen, where was fought a strong battayl.The battayle of Estriuelyn In the ende whereof, the En∣glyshmen wer discomfited and so egrely pursued by the Scottes, that many of the noblemen were slayne: as Gylbert de Clare,Guido de co∣lumna. Erle of Glocester, syr Robert Clyford, syr Edmond of Manle, with o∣ther lordes and barons, to the nomber
of .xlii. knightes, and .lxvii. barons, be∣syde .xxii. men of name, which were ta∣ken prisoners, and .x. M. cōmon souldi∣ours slayne. After thys tyme Robert le Bruze reigned as kyng of Scotland. Anno. 8. 1314Iohn Gysors M. Stephē of abingdō S Hamōd Chikwell S Iohn Har∣dyng.A villain called Iohn Poydras, a tan∣ners sonne of Excester, in diuers places of England, named himself the sonne of Edward the first, and said that by a fals¦nourse he was stolne out of his cradel,A barkers son made clayme to the crowne of Englande in an opē par∣liament holdē at Oxenford. & Edward that was now kyng put in his place, whiche was but a carters sonne: but shortly after, he was conuict of hys vntruthe, and confessed, that he dyd it by the motion of a familiar sprite, which he had in his house in likenes of a catt, whom he had serued .iii. yere, and he for his seruice was drawen and hanged at Northampton.Execution. Anno. 9. 1315Stephē abingdō M Hamōdgoodchepe S Williā Readyng S The castell of Barwike was yelded vp to the Scottes by the treason of Pe∣ter Spaldyng. Two cardinals beyng sent frō Rome to conclude a peace betwene the kyng of
England and the scottes: as they wente through Yorkshire, were robbed by two knights called Gilbert Midleton,Iohn Har∣dyng. & wal¦ter Selby, with .600. mē, which .ii. knig¦tes had don many robberies in those par¦tes, or they were taken, but they wer af¦terward condemned, drawē & hanged at London. And the kynge recōpenced the Cardinals double so muche as they lost. Shortly after sir Gosselyn Deinuile & his brother Robert, with two hūdred in habite of Friers, going about as exiled persons or outlawes,Iohn Har∣dyng. did many great & notable roberies & despites, they robbed & spoiled ye bishop of Durhams palaces, leauyng nothing in them but bare wal∣les, and suche lyke robberyes, for the which they were after hanged at York. Anno. 10. Iohn wēgraue M. Williā Caston S.1316 Rafe Palmer S. The scottes entred ye borders of Nor∣thūberland & most cruelly robbed & spoi¦led the countrey, sparing neither man, woman, nor chyld. To this mischiefe was ioyned so exce∣dyng derth & scarsity,A greate fa∣myne. ye wheat was sold for .iiii. mark ye quarter: ye cōmon people did eate hors flesh, & other vile beastes, &
many dyed for hunger. Anno. 11. 1317Iohn Wēgraue M. Ihon Prior S. williā Furnex S. The whyte battaille.Kyng Edward assembled a new host, and went into Northumberland, wher he layde siege to Barwike. But in the meane tyme the Scots by an other way inuaded ye borders of Englād, & wasted the countrey euen to Yorke, and slew a greate noumber, specially of religious people: wherfore it was called the white battaile. King Edward was constrained to breake vp his siege, and return again into England. Sir Hugh the Spencers, the father, and the sonne, were of great power in England: and by the fauour of the king practised suche crueltie, and bare theim selfe so hautie, that no lord in this land, durst contrary them in any thynge that they thought good: whereby they were greatly hated of the nobles. Anno. 12. 1318Iohn Wēgraue M Iohn Poūtney S. Iohn Dallyng S. The Lordes and nobles of Englande detestynge the outragious pryde of the Spencers, in suche wyse conspyred a∣gainst
them, that they caused the kynge halfe agaynst his mynd, to banysh them the Realme. Anno. 13. Hamond Chikwel M Simon Abingdō S.1319 Iohn Preston S. This yere king Edward contrary to the mynd of his lords reuoked the Spē∣cers from banishement, and set them in lyke authoritie as they before had ben, to the great disturbance of the realme and not long after pursued the barons, and chased them from place to place: as fyrst at Liedes castell in Kent: after in the marches of Wales, where he toke the Mortymers, and sent theym to the Tower of London. Anno. 14. Hamond Chikwel M Reinold at cūdyt S1320 william Prodhā S This yere king Edward ouercam the barons of this realme in many batailes and toke many of them,Great execu∣tion. whome he put to death in dyuers partes of this realm, to the number of .xxii. noble men. Master Iohn Baldocke, a man of euil fame was made Chancellor of Englād, who extremly pilled the cōmons of this realme: for the whiche he was well re∣warded
after, as ye maye reade in the xix. yeare. Anno. 15. 1321Hamond Chikwel M. Rich. Cōstantin S Rich. Hakeney S This yere the sonne appered to mens sight as red as bloud,The sonne ap¦pered as red as blood. and so continued the space of .vi. howers. The last day of October the Irishment by the ayde they had out of England, droue the scots out of theyr land. At whiche time many no∣ble men of Scotland were slain. Amōg whiche was Edward le Bruze the kin∣ges brother. Anno. 16. 1322Hamond Chikwell M. Iohn Granthā S Rich. of Ely S Kyng Edward with a great army en∣tred Scotland: but with sickenes and o∣ther misfortunes that chanced amonge the souldiors, he within short space was forced to returne into England: wherof syr Iames Douglas, and the Scots ha∣uyng knowledge, pursued hym in suche wise, that they slew many english men, and had welnere taken the kynge at an abbey called Beighlād, from the whiche he was forced to flee, and leaue his tre∣sure behynd hym.
Anno. 17. Symon Francis M. Adā Ealisbury S.1323 Iohn of Oxēford S. Charles of France warred vpon the landes of Kyng Edward in Gascoyne & Guyen, and tooke there many townes and castels. Wherfore kyng Edwarde sent his wyfe Isabell to entreate wyth her brother Charles for peace, or (as Froisard sayth) the Quene her selfe fle∣yng the tyranny and mischief of ye Spē∣cers, fled with her yong sonne Edward into France, and was gentilly receiued of hir brother, whiche made greate pro∣mise to ayde hir against the tyranny and iniury of the Spencers. Anno. 18. Hamond Chikwel M. Benet of Fulhā S1324 Iohn Causton S Quene Isabell by the ayde and help of syr Iohn of Heynald with a small com∣pany of Henoways returned into Eng∣lande: to whome the Nobles and the commons gathering in greate numbre pursued the kynge, the Spencers, and other ennemies so egerly, that shortely after they tooke them, and kepte the kynge in pryson at Kenylworthe.
Kynge Ed∣warde, hys Chancellor, ye Spencers, & other taken prisoners.And after at Barkeley they toke master Robert Baldok, the Chācellor both the Spencers, the father, and the sonne, the erle of Arundel, with diueres other, and brought them to the towne of Hereford. Anno. 19. 1325Richard Betain M Gilbert Mordō S. Iohn Cotton S. The morowe after Symon and Iude, syr Hugh Spēcer the father was put to death at Bristowe,Great execu∣tion. and after buried at Winchester: and on saint Hughes day folowyng, was syr Hugh his sonne dra∣wen hanged and quartered at Herford, and his head sent to London, and sette emong other vpon the bridge. After Ro¦bert Baldock the Chancellor was sent to London to Newgate, where he dyed myserably. The earle of Arundell was put to death at Herford: and kynge Ed∣ward was by parliament deposed from his kingdom,Kyng Ed∣ward deposed when he had reigned .xix. yere .6. monethes and .18. days, and not longe after was murthered by syr Ro∣ger Mortimer, and was buried at Glo∣cester.
Edwarde the thirde. Anno Regni .1. EDwarde the thyrde,1326 after the deposing of hys father was crowned king of En∣glād. He begon his reign ouer this realme the .xxv. daye of Ianuarie: in the yeare of our lord .1326. and deceased the 21. day of Iune in the yeare .1377. so he reigned .50. yere, and .5. monethes lac∣kyng .3. dais. This man beside all other gyftes of nature, was endued with pas∣synge comely beautie and fauoure: Of wytte prouident, circumspecte and gen∣tyll of nature: doyng nothyng without great wysedom and consideration. Hee was a man of excellent modestie & tem∣perance, and aduanced suche persons to high dignities, as dyd most passe other in integritie & innocency of lyfe: in fea∣res of armes he was very expert, as the noble enterprises by hym atchieued, doo well declare: Of his liberalitie and cle∣mēcy, he shewed many great examples. Briefly, in all princely vertues he was so excellent, that few noble men before
his tyme were to bee compared to hym. At the beginnyng of hys reigne he was chiefly ordered by syr Roger Mortymer and hys mother Isabell. The liberties of London cō¦fyrmed.In this fyrst yeare of his reigne he con¦firmed the liberties of the citie of Lon∣don, and ordeined, that the maior of the city of London should sytte in all places of iudgement within the liberties of the same for chiefe Iustice, the Kynges per∣son only excepted, and that euery alder∣man that had ben Maior shold be iustice of peace in all London and Middlesex: and euery Alderman that had not bene maior should be iustice of peace within his own ward. Diuers other priuileges he graunted to the citie, whiche ye may reade in Fabian. The kynge went towarde Scotlande hauyng vnderstanding that the scottes were entred into England, as farre as Stanhop parke. He beset them rounde about, hopynge to haue broughte them vnder hys subiection. But when hee thought to be most sure of them by trea∣son of some of his hoft, the scottes esca∣ped cleane, and returned back into scot∣land.Kynge Ed∣ward the se∣cond murdred. About the .xxi. day of September Edward the second was murdered in ye
castell of Barkley by sir Roger Morty∣mer, & was buried at Glocester. Anno. 1. Richard Bretain M. Rich. Roting S.1326 Roger Chācellor S. The kyng maried the lady Philip the erles doughter of Henawde in the cytie of Yorke. The kynge helde his parliament at Northampton,Parliamente at Northamp¦ton. where through the coun¦saile of syr Roger Mortimer, and the old Queene his mother, hee made with the scotts and vnprofitable and dishonorable peace: For why he restored to them all theyr writyngs, charters, and patents, wherby the kynges of Scotlande hadde bounde them selues to be tributarye to the crowne of England, with other like vnprofytable conditions. Anno. 2. Hamonde Chikwell S. Henry Darcy S.1327 Iohn Hawden S. Dauid the yong prince of Scotlād ma∣ried Iane, the syster of kyng Edwarde, whom the scots in dirision, called Iane makepeace. The scotts made many ry∣mes against thenglishmē (as saith Gui∣do) for the fond disquised apparell by thē at that time worne, amongst the whiche this was one.
Scottyshe tauntes.Long beardes hartlesse, Paynted hoodes witlesse, Gay cotes gracelesse, Makes England thryftlesse. Anno. 3. 1328Iohn Ganthā M Symon Frācis S. Hēry Cōbmartē S. Edward erle of Kent, vncle to kynge Edward of England, beyng falsely ac∣cused of treason,Execution. was by syr Roger Mor¦tymer put to death at winchester. Prince Edward was borne at Wod∣stocke. Who in proces of tyme grew to a noble and famous man: and was in his days counted the Flowre of chiual∣rie through out the world. The .xvii. of October, sir Roger Mortimer was ta∣ken in Notyngham castell, and sente to the Tower of London. Anno. 4. 1329Symond Swalond S Richard Lazar S Richard Gisours S Syr Roger Mortimer was accused for diuers points of treason, as that he mur¦dered king Edward the second: and that through hym the scots escaped at Stan¦hope parke, for receiuynge summes of money of the Scottes: for which accu∣sations he was shortly after drawē and hanged at London.Execution.
Edward Baylell, the sonne of Iohn Baylell late kyng of Scottes, by licence purchased of kyng Edward, entred in∣to Scotlande, clayminge the crowne by the right of hys father, where he van∣quished the Scottes, and was crowned kyng at Stone. Anno. 5. Symond Swaylon M. Robert Ely S.1330 Tho. whorwod S. The kyng with a great armye went into Scotland, and at Halidon hyll gaue the Scottes battayle, wherin he obtei∣ned a triumphant victorie, and slewe of them .viii. Erles .900. knightes & of ba∣rons, and esquires 400. and .32000. com∣mon souldiors: he wonne Edenborow, Barwicke,Barwicke wonne. and many other castels, and gaue the gouernaunce of Scotlande to Edward Baylell, betwene whome and the Scots was foughten many battels. Anno. 6. Iohn Poūtney M. Iohn Mocking S1331 Andrew Aubery S The king of France sent .x. shyps to∣ward Scotland, which were so wether driuen into Flanders, that they were little worth after that tyme.
Anno. 7. 1332Iohn Preston M. Nicolas Pike S. Iohn Husbande S. King Edward went agayn into Scot∣land, and laid siege to the castell of Kyl∣bridge: He wan it by strength, and sette the countrey in quietnes, and cam back to the castell of Tyne, where shortly af∣ter Edward Baylell kynge of Scottes, came and dyd hym homage, and sware vnto hym fealtie and fidelitie, and re∣turned agayne into Scotlande. Anno. 8. 1333Iohn Poūtney M. Iohn Hamond S. Williā Hansard S. Embassadors were sent from Philyp de Ualoys kynge of France, for to con∣clude vpon certain articles of variance betwene theyr lord and the kyng of En∣gland, but it toke none effect. Anno. 9. 1334Reignold at cundyt M. Iohn Kyngston S. Walter Turke S. This yere kyng Edward sent ambas∣sadors into Frāce, to conclude a peace, whiche likewyse toke none effect. Anno. 10. 1335Reignold at conduit M. walter mordon S. Richard Upton S.
This yere kyng Edward made claim to the crowne of France, and therfore proclaimed open warre betwene Eng∣lande and France. Anno. 11. Iohn Poūtney M wil. brickelsworth S1336 Iohn Northehall S In this yere (as saith Fabian) the king consyderyng the charge he hadde with warres in Scotlande, and also that he intended to haue agaynst the Frenche∣men, for the obtainyng of his right, ga∣thered togither treasure by dyuers and sundry wayes, wherof the maner is not expressed: but such great plentie cam to his handes, that money was very scant throughout the whole realme: by rea∣son of which scarsnes, vitaile and other merchandise were exceding good chepe: for at London a quarter of wheate was sold for .ii. s. & fat oxe for vi. s .viii. d. A fat shepe for .vi. d. and .viii. d. syx pigeons for one peny,Great cheape of vitaye. a fatt goose for .ii. d. a pyg for a peny: & so all other victuals, after ye rate. This yeare appered a blasyng sterre. Anno. 12. Henry Darcy M. Walter Neale S.1337 Nicolas Graue S.
Kyng Edward for the expedition of his warres agaynst the frenche Kynge sent embassadours into the parties be∣yonde the sea, to allie with hym the erle of Heynault, and other lordes, whiche obeyed not the french king: of whom by the meanes of Iaques Dartnell, he had great comfort bothe of the Flemmings & diuers lordes & princes of those parts. This yere the kyng granted, that the officers of the Maior and Sheriffes of London should beare maces of syluer. Anno. 13. 1338Henry Darcy M. Williā of Pomfret S Hugh Marbre S King Edward for more establishmēt of amitie betwene hym and the Hollan¦ders, Selanders, and Brabanders, sai∣led to Andwarpe, where he concluded the matter with his aliances, and by the consent of the emperor Lewys was pro¦claimed vicar generall of the empire. Southamptō robbed by Frenchmen.In this meane time certayn French men had entred the hauē of Southamp¦ton, and robbed the towne, and brent a great part therof, and vpon the sea they toke .ii. great ships, called the Edward, and the Christopher.
Anno. 14. Andrew Aubery M. Williā Thorney S.1339 Roger Frosham S. Kyng Henry helde a parlyament at Westminster:A great sub∣sedye. and there towarde his great charges, he demaunded the fyfthe part of euery mans goodes. The custo∣mes of the wolles to be payd .ii. yeares before hand: and the ninth sheaff of eue∣ry mans corne. Which was granted vn∣to hym. But before it were all payd, the loue of the people dyd turne into hatred and theyr prayer into cursyng, &c. The kyng changed hys coyne,Coyne chan∣ged & made the noble, and halfe noble: The noble at vi. s .viii. d. which is nowe .x. s. King Edward ouer and beside a great army of Englishe souldiours, hauynge with him welnere the power of the hole Empire,The armes of Englande and Fraunce entermedled. entred the borders of France and made claime to the whole realme of Fraunce, as his rightfull inheritaunce. and for more auctoritie named hym self kyng of France, and entermedled the armes of Fraunce, as it remayneth to this day. Anno. 15. Andrew Aubery M. Adam Lucas S.1340 Bertholo. marys S.
Iohn of Gaunt borne at Gaunt.The quene of England wife to kyng Edward beyng at Gaunt, was deliue¦red of a sonne, whiche afterwarde was called Iohn of Gaunt, which was fyrst earle of Richemont, and after Duke of Gloucester. A battayle on the sea.This yere K. Edwarde sailynge into Flanders nye to ye town of Sluce mett with the Frenche kynges nauy, where was foughten a cruell battaile. wherof the kynge of Englande had the victorie and the French flete that was in num∣ber .400. sayle, was welnere destroyed, and the souldiors taken, slayn and drow∣ned, so that of .33000. fower escaped aliue Shortly after this victorye, kyng Ed∣ward besieged Turney, and the towne of saint Omers, during the time of whi∣che siege, dyuers out rydynges and en∣terprises were aduentured by the Hey∣nawes, Almains, and other his frendes, to the great hurt of both parties. At the ende of .xi. wekes after the siege, a peace was concluded for .xii. monethes, and the kyng returned to Londou. Anno. 16. 1341Iohn Oxenford M. Rich. barking S. Iohn Rokesley S.
This yeare came into England .ii. car¦dinals to treat a peace betwene the kin∣ges of England & of France, who cōclu¦ded it for .3. yeres, but it lasted not so lōg. This yere the quene was deliuered of a mā child at Lāgley: which was named Edmunde of Langley, & was kyng Ed∣wards third sonne. Anno. 17. Symon Francis M. Iohn Luskyn S1342 Rich. Kyslingbery S This yere dyed Iohn duke of Britain by reason of whose death, warre & strife grew, and partes taking by the French kyng and kyng Edward. Anno. 18. Iohn Hamond M. Iohn steward S.1343 Iohn Ayseshā S. This yere the king called a parliamēt at westmynster: In tyme wherof, Ed∣warde hys eldeste soonne was created prince of Wales. This yere ye king made a coyne of fine gold,A new coyne. and named it the florentine, that is to say, the peny of the valu of .vi. s .viii. d. the halfpeny of the valu of .iii s .iiii. d. and the farthing of the value of xx. d. whiche coyne was ordeyned for hys warres in Fraunce, for the golde therof was not
so fyne as was the noble before named. Anno. 19. 1344Iohn Hamōd M. Geff. wichinghā S. Thomas Legget S. This yere the king held a solemn feast at his castell of Windsor:The order of knyghtes of the garter. where he deui¦sed the order of the Garter, and stabli∣shed it as it is at this day. Then king Edward sailed into Sluce, & so into little britain with a strong army. But for that he was disappointed of the Flemmyngs, by reason of the death of his trusty frende Iaques Dartnell, he turned again into England, leauing be∣hynd hym the Erle of Salisbury wyth a stronge company, to ayde Iohn Erle of of Mountford against Charles de bloys Which Iohn by the aide of Englishmen wan diuers towns & holdes in Britain. This yeare the kyng sent the Erle of Derby with a strong army into Guyen for to ayde the erle of Northampton. Anno. 20. 1345Richard Lacer M. Edmōd Hēpnall S. Iohn Gloucester S. Thys yere kyng Edward made great preparation for the warres of France: and Philyp de Ualoys kyng of France
made as greate preparation to defende his land against king Edward. Anno. 21. Geffrey wichinghā M. Iohn Croydon S.1346 williā Clopton S. This yeare kyng Edward sailed into Normandy with .1100. sayle greate and small, and with him his sonne prince Ed¦ward, they ouer rode, spoiled & destroied the countrey before them vnto Parys: and gathered wonderfull riches of pray which he sent into England. Shortly af¦ter, he encoūtred the french kynge nye the foreste of Cresse, when he had not in his host the eight man in comparison of the Frenche army, and obteyned of them a triumphant vyctorie. Where was slayn the kyng of Bohem with .x. other great princes .80. banners .1200. knyghtes, and .3000. common souldiors. After this victory kyng Edward went toward Caleys, and besieged it. In the meane while Dauid of Scotland by pro¦curement of the Frenche kynge, made warre vpon the borders of Englande: but the byshop of Yorke with other lor∣des gathered a greate company, aswell spirituall as temporall, and nere vnto
Durham dyd hyd the kynge of Scottes battayle, where was fought a cruell and fierce bataille. But in the ende the vic∣torie fell vnto the quenes syde. and ther was taken the kynge of Scottes,The kyng of Scotts taken wyth many of his greatest lordes, & there was slain one & other aboue .15000. souldiors. Anno. 22. 1347Thomas Legget M. Adā Bramson S Rich. basingstoke S This yeare, after king Edwarde had lien afore Caleis a yeare & more,Caleis yelded to Edwarde the third. it was yelded vp to hym, as ye maye reade at large in Iohn Frosard his chronicles. Anno. 23. 1348Iohn Lufkin M. Hēry Picard S. Simōwoseley S. A great plageIn the end of this yere about August the pestilence begon in diuers places of England, and specially at London, and so cōtinued tyll that tyme twelue month Anno. 24. 1349Williā Turke Maior Adam Bury S. Rafe Lynne S. This yeare was Calice lyke to haue ben betrayed, but the kyng in tyme pre∣uented it. The Kynge caused to be coyned gro∣tes
and half grotes,Alteration of coyn to a smal¦ler value. the whyche lacked of the weyght of his former coyne .ii. s .vi. d. of a pound troy. And about the end of August ceased the death in London, whiche was soo vehement and sharpe,A great pesti¦lence. that ouer the bodies buried in churches and church yardes, monasteries, and o∣ther accustomed buryeng places, was buryed in the Charter howse yarde of London (as saith Fabyan .l. M. persons. And also many persons of good credite yet liuyng in the citie of London affirm that they haue redde the like, writen on a plate of laton fastened on a crosse of stone in the same Charter house church yarde: and also to haue sene recorded in one olde Booke of the sayde Charter house, that at that tyme the said morta∣litie was so great, that there remained not the tenthe person alyue throughout the realme. Anno. 25. Richard Killingbury M. Iohn Notte S.1350 wil. wocester S. This yere king Edward had a good∣ly victory vpon the sea, against Charles the constable of France where he toke xxii. of their shyppes. Anno. 26.
1351Andrew Aubery M. Iohn wroth S. Gibbō staindrop S. This yeare the castell of Guynes was yelden vnto the englishmen, dwellyng in Calice, by treason of a Frenche man. Also this yere ye englishmen beyng in Britayn, had a goodly victory ouer the Frenchemen, where they tooke many noble men prisoners. Anno. 27. 1352Adam Francis Maior Iohn Peache S Iohn stodeney S This Sommer was so long dry, that it was called after, the dry sommer:The dry som¦mer. for from March tyll the latter end of Iuly, fell lytle rayne or none: by which reason corne that yere folowyng was scant. Anno. 28. 1353Adam Francis Maior Iohn Welde S. Iohn Lytle S. The Duke of Brunswyke made an appeale against Henry duke of Lanca∣ster: for whyche was waged battell in the frenche kynges courte, and beynge bothe ready within the lystes to fyght, the french kyng stayed the matter, and toke the quarell into his handes, so that either of them departed the field with∣out any stroke striken.
Anno 29. Thomas Legget M. williā Totinghā S.1354 Richard Smert S. For so muche as the townes in Flan∣ders brake their promyse before tyme made by Iaques Dartnell,The woll sta¦ples kepte at Westminster, Chichester, Lyncoln, Bri¦stow and Can¦turbery. and now fa∣uoured the french partie, king Edward remoued the market and staple of woll out of Flanders into Englande: as to Westminster, Chichester, Lyncolne, Bristowe, and Canterbury. Prince Edward the sonne of kynge Edward passed into Gascoyn, where he made sore warre, and destroyed castels and townes before hym, and tooke the towne of Remorentine wyth other. Also this yeare was the house of the Friers Angustines in London finished:The frier Au¦gustins chur∣che in Lōdon buylded. whiche was reedifyed by syr Humfrey Bobune earle of Hertforde and Essex, whose bodye lyeth buried in the quier of the said house before the high aultar. Anno. 30. Symond Francis M. Thomas Forster S1355 Thomas Brādon S Edwarde prince of Wales, nye to the citie of Poitiers ioyned battel with king Iohn of Frāce: of whō the prince by his
marcial policy wan a noble victory, not∣wtstandyng that he had in his army but 800. souldiors: & on the french part were 6000. fighting mē. In this conflict King Iohn was taken with his yong son Phi∣lyp, and many of his nobles, & brought into Englande. Anno. 31. 1356Henry Picard M. Rich. Nofinghā S. Thomas Dosel S. Great and royal iustes were holden in Smythfield before the kyng of Englād (the frēch king being prisoner) the kyng of Scottes,A great Iu∣stes in Smith¦fielde. and diuers other nobles. Anno. 33. 1357Iohn Stody M. Stephen Candish S. Barthol. Frostling S. This yere Dauid le Bruze king of scot¦tes was set at libertie, when he had put king Edward suretie of .10000. mark for his ransom. Anno. 23. 1358Iohn Lufain M. Iohn Barnes S. Iohn Burys S. The englyshemen in Britaine tooke the towne of Ancore, and dyuers other, and put them to great ransome. Anno. 34. 1359Symon Duffild M. Simon Bedinghā S. Iohn Chichester S.
Kyng Edward with his son the prince passed the sea to Calice, and from thense rode through France by Picard, Artois Roan, Champayn, and so foorth to Bri∣taine, euer destroying the countrey be∣fore him, hys garrisons also made warre in Beauvoisin, in Picardye, in Brye, in Campayn, and spoiled well nere all the counntrey. Moreouer the kynge of Na∣uarre vexed sore the marches of Nor∣mandy. Thus was the realm of France miserably beset at this tyme on all sydes. At the last a finall peace was conclu∣ded betwene the kynges of Englande & of Frāce, on this cōdition, that king Ed¦ward should haue to his possession, the countreis of Gascoyn and Guyen, Poy∣tiers, Lymosyn, Baleuile, Exantes, Ca∣lice, Guynes, and diuers other lordships castels, towns, & all the landes to thē be∣lōging, without knowlege of any soue∣raigntie or subiection for ye same: and the king of France shold pay for his ransom 300000. crownes: & so King Iohn retur∣ned into France. Anno. 35. Iohn Wroth M. Iohn Denys S.1360 Walter Burney S.
King Edward returned from Caleys into Englande, and brought with hym many noble men of Frāce for hostages. This yere men and beasts perished in England in diuers places with thunder & lightning: and fiends wer sene in mās likenes, aud spake vnto men as they tra¦uailed by the way. Anno. 36. 1361Iohn Peche M. Williā Holbeche S. Iames Tame S. The seconde pestilenceThis yeare was great death and pe∣stilence in Englande, which was called the second mortalitie: in which died Hē∣ry duke of Lancaster: & then was Iohn of Gaunt the kings third son, which had maried the dukes daughter, made duke of Lancaster. Also there were sene this yere in the ayre castels, and hostes of men fighting (as sayth Fabian.) Anno. 37. 1362Stephen Cādishe M. Io. of S. Albons S. Iames Andrew S. This yere was a great wynd in En∣gland,A greate wynde. wherwith many steples and tow∣res were ouerthrowen. King Iohn of Fraunce came into En∣gland, and shortly after died at ye Sauoy in London. Also this yeare was a great
frost in Englande, whiche lasted from the myddest of September to the mo∣neth of Aprill. Anno. 38. Iohn Notte M Rychard Croydon S.1363 Iohn Hiltofte S. Prynce Edwarde sayled into Burde∣aux, and receyued the possession of Guyā that kyng Edwarde had newly gyuen vnto hym. Anno. 39. Adam of Bury M. Symon Mordant S1364 Iohn of Motford S This yere the kyng began the foun∣dation of saynt Stephens chappell at Westmynster,S. Stephēs chapel at we∣stmynster begonne. whiche was finished by Rycharde the second, & sonne of prince Edward. Anno. 40. Iohn Lufkyn M. Io. Bukylsworth S1365 Iohn Oreland S This yere the kyng cōmaunded that Peter pence should no more be gathered nor payde to Rome. This yere Prynce Edwarde had hys fyrst sonne, whose name was Edward, but he dyed at seuen yeres of age. Prynce Edward entred Spayne with a great puysaunce, where he ouercame
the Spanyardes and Frenche men, and expelled Henry the bastarde, and set Pe∣ter in his former estate, as kig of Spain. But not long after the prynces retorne home agayne, Henry repaired his army and warred vpon his brother so fiersly, that in the ende he vtterly vanquyshed hym and put him to death: and thē with∣out resistance possessed the kyngdome of Spayne. Anno. 41. 1366Iohn Louekyn M. Iohn Warde S Williā Dickmā S This yere was borne the second son of Prynce Edward, named Rychard. Anno. 42. 1367Iames Andrew M. Rich. Torgold S. Williā Dickmā S. This yere appeared Stella cometa,A Comet or blasing starre that is a blasing starre. And this yere the er∣les of Armenak, of brett, & of Perygort, with other nobles of ye duchie of Guyan, appealed the Prynce of Wales in the Frenche kynges court, that he had bro∣ken the peace, and wronged them, as in exacting of them ouer great sommes of money, &c. But the Frenche king defer∣red it for certayne causes to long here to reherse.
Anno. 43. Symon Mordon M. Adā wymbinghā S.1368 Robert Gyrdler S. This yere the kyng of Fraunce pro∣ceaded in iudgement vpon the appella∣tion before made by ye erle of Armenak, the lorde of Bret, and erle of Perygort, agaynst Prynce Edward. Wherupon, discorde & variance began to take place betwene ye two kynges: and those lords, which before were sworne to kyng Ed∣ward, dyd nowe yelde dyuers townes of the coūtrey of Poytiers vnto the Frēch kyng. The Duke of Lācaster aryued at Ca∣leis, and entred Fraunce with a com∣pany of souldiours, wher not farre from Arde, the Duke of Burgoyne lodged, within a mile of his army, with a great power, the space of .xviii. dayes, and ne∣uer profered battell. But lastly went a∣way by nyght, and then the Duke pas∣sed further into Fraunce. Anno. 44. Iohn Chichester M. Iohn Pyell S.1369 Hugh hoiditch S. This yere dyed Quene Phylip wyfe to Edward the thyrd,The quenes Colledge in Oxford buyl∣ded she buylded ye col∣ledge in Oxēford, called quenes colledge
The thyrd pestilence.In this yere was the thyrd mortalitie or pestylence, wherof dyed much people. Anno. 45. 1370Iohn Bernes M. Wil. Walworth S Robert Gayton S Iohn Barnes Mayor of Londō, gaue a chest with three lockes,A cheste in Guyldehaule hauyng three lockes, and ne¦uer a peny therin. and a. 1000. markee, to be lent to yonge men vpon sufficient gage, so that it passed not one 100. markes: and for the occupying ther∣of, if he were learned to saye at his plea∣sure Deprofundis for the soule of Iohn Barnes: if he were not learned, to saye Pater noster. But howe so euer the mo∣ney was lent, at this daie the chest stan∣deth in the chamber of London, without eyther money or pledges for the same. This yere the countrey of Lymosyn with other, became obeysaunt to the Frenche kyng, and fell from the kynge of Englande: by reason that Prynce Edward had lately assessed vpon the in∣habytantes of the countrey, a great and greuous taske: by meanes whereof, he lost the loue of the people. Anno 46. 1371Iohn Barnes M. Robert Hatfild S. Adam Staple S. The Erle of Penbroke, as he passed
the sea to reskewe the castell of Rochel, was encoūtred with a fleete of Spany∣ardes, whiche kyng Henry of Castell had sent to ayde the Frenche kyng. Of these Spanyardes after cruellfyght, the Erle was taken, and syr Guystarde de Angle and other, to the number of .160. persons, and the more part of his men slayne and drowned. Anno. 47. Iohn Pyel Maior Iohn Phylpot S. Nycolas Brēber S.1372 Iohn Duke of Lancaster, entred by Calays into Fraunce, & passed through¦out the Realme, by Uermendoys and Campayne, nyghe to turdeaux in Aqui∣tane without battayle: not withstāding the great hurt and domage they dyd to the townes & countreys as they passed. Anno. 48. Adam of Bury M. Iohn Aubery S.1373 Iohn Fisshye S. Dyuers entreatyes of peace were made betwene the kyng of Englande & Fraunce, by meane of the byshoppe of Rome, but none was concluded. Anno 49. William Walworth M. Rychard Lyōs S1374 W. wodhous S
The entreatie of peace continued, but not concluded but for foure monethes at the moste: in which tyme, of entreatie the Frenche kyng wan many holdes, & townes of the Englyshemen, as well in Guyan as in Brytayne, and in other places. Anno. 50. 1375Iohn Warde M. Iohn hadley S. Wil. Newport S. Many wonderfull sycknesses fell a∣mong the people, as well in Italy as in England, whereof there vsed an excea∣dyng great number. Anno. 51. Adam staple M. Iohn Northampton S Robert Launde S Prince Edward departed out of this lyfe, who was in his tyme the flower of chyualry. He was buried at Caunter∣bury, and then kyng Edwarde created Richard sonne of prince Edward prince of Wales: and because the kyng waxed feble and sickly, he betoketh: rule of the lande to syr Iohn of Gaunt duke of Lan¦caster, who so continued duryng his fa∣thers lyfe. Edward the third deceasedThis yere kyng Edward the thyrde ended his lyfe at Rychemonde, the .xxi.
daye of Iune, in the yere of our Lorde, 1377. When he had reigned .50. yeres fyue monethes lackynge foure dayes, and was buried at Westmynster: he left behynde hym foure sonnes, Lewes duke of Clarence, Iohn of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, Edmond of Langley duke of Yorke, and Thomas of Wodstocke erle of Cambrydge. Richarde the second. Anno regni .1. RIchard the second,1377 sonne of Prince Edward of Wales, was ordeyned kyng of En∣glande, beyng as yet but e∣leuen yeres of age. He be∣gan his reigne the .xi. daye of Iune, in the yere of our lorde .1377. and left the same the .xxix. daie of September, in the yere .1399. so he reigned .xxii. yeres .iii. monethes and eight daies. In bountie and liberalitie he farre passed all hys progenitours: but he was ouer muche geuen to reste & quietnes, and loued litle dedes of armes, and martial prowesse, &
for that he was yong, he was moste ru∣led by yong counsayle, and regarded no∣thyng the aduertysementes of the sage and wyse men of his Realme, for the chiefe about hym were of no wysdome nor estimacion: whiche thyng tourned this land to great trouble, and him selfe in fine to extreame myserie. Of hym Iohn Gower wryteth (as Hardyng af∣fyrmeth) these verses in latyne fo∣lowyng. Iohn Gowre in his booke entituled vox clamantes, whiche trea∣teth of the in∣fortunate time of Richarde the second.Principio Regis oritur transgressio legis, Quo fortuna cadit & humus retrograda uadit Quomodo surrexit populus, quem nō bene rexit, Tēpus ad huc plangit, super hoc quod Chronica tangit Stultorū uile cepit consiliū iuuenile Et sectam senium decreuit esse reiectam, Tunc accusare quosdam presumpsit auare, Vnde catallorum gazas spoliauit corum. Whiche may be englyshed thus. When this kyng fyrst began to reigne, the lawes neglected were, Wherfore good fortune him forsooke and thearth did quake for feare, The people also whom he pold, against hym dyd rebell, The tyme doth yet bewayle the woes, that Chronicles doe of sell,
The foolysh councell of the lewde and yonge, be did receyue: And graue aduice of aged heads, he did reiects and leaue, And then for gready thirst of coyne, some subiectes he accusde, To gayne theyr goodes into his hands, thus he the Realme abusde. Anno Regni .1. Nycolas Brymber M. Andrew pickmā S1377 Nyco. Twyford S By the entisement of the Frenche men, the Scottes began to rebell,Froysart, Barwick ta∣ken by .xl. per∣sons. and a squyre of theirs, called Alexander Ram∣sey, with .xl. persous, in a nyght toke the castel of Barwyke: whiche was rescued & recouered by therle of Northūberlād. Anno. 2. Iohn Philpot M. Iohn Boseham S.1378 Tho. Cornwalis S. This Iohn Philpot Mayor of Londō aboue named, gaue to the citie of Londō certayne tenementes, for the whiche the Chamberlayn of Londō, payeth yerely foreuer, to .xiii. poore people of the same citie, euery of them. vii. pence the weke, which is payde to them at the .iiii. quar∣ter feastes of the yere, & as any of those xiii. persons dye, the Maior appoynteth
one, and the Recorder of London an o∣ther in their romthes. This yere the warre was agayne re∣nued betwene the king of Fraunce and Nauarre, who shortly after allied with kyng Rychard of Englande. The lorde Neuile was sent with a cō∣pany of souldiours, to raise the siege be∣fore Fortayne in Poytow, and to ayde the kyng of Nauarre, against the Spa∣nyardes of Castill. Anno. 3. 1379Iohn Hadley M. Iohn Heylisdom S. William Barret S. The Frenche men with galleis and other shyppes,Grauesende spoyled by Frenchmen. entered into the Thames and burnt dyuers townes, & at the laste came to Grauesende, where they spoy∣led the towne, and set it on fyre, and re∣tourned into Fraunce with muche ry∣ches. This yere as Iohn Hardyng wri∣teth, alledging Iohn Gower,Iohn Har∣dyng alled∣ging Govver was suche a pestilence in Englande that most peo∣ple died. A parliament at westmynster, where was graunted, that all men and women, beyng of the age of .xiiii. yeres or vpward, should pay to the king .iiii.d. by reason whereof great grudge and murmure grewe among the commons:
and this was graunted towardes the warres in Fraunce. Anno. 4. William Walworth M. Wal. Ducket S.1380 Wil. mgthod S. This yere the makynge of gunnes was first found,Gonnes firste inuented. in this maner: a certain Almayne (whose name is not knowen) chaunced to haue in a morter, pouder of brymstone that he had beaten for a me∣dicine, and couered it with a stone, and as he stroke fyre, it fortuned a sparke to fall in the pouder, by and by there rose a great flame out of the mortar, and lyfte vp the stone wherwith it was couered, a great heyght: and after he had percey∣ued that, he made a pype of Iron, and tempered the pouder and finished thys deadly engyn, and taught it to the Ue∣necians, when they warred agaynst the Genuates, whiche was in the yere of our lorde .1380. For this inuention he receyued this benefite, that his name was neuer knowen, leste he might for this abhominable deuise, haue bene cur∣sed and euil spoken of whylest the world standeth: so sayeth Polldore. By the meane of the payment aboue named, this yere the cōmōs of this lād,
specially of Kent and Essex, sodenly re∣belled and assembled together vpō black Hethe, to the numbre .60000. and aboue whiche had to their captaynes, Watte Tyler, Iack Strawe, Iack Sheparde, Tom Myller, Hobbe Carter, and suche other: whiche were animated to this re∣bellion, by one Iohn Wall or ball, a ve∣ry sedicious preacher. As ye may reade at large in Iohn Froysard, the first boke the .381. chapiter. They caused muche trouble and busines in the Realme, and chiefly about the citie of London, where they practised much vyllanie, in destroy∣inge manye goodlye places of the no∣bles, as the Sauoye,The Sauoye burnt, & S. Iohnes in Smithfielde spoyled. saynt Iohns in Smythfielde and other. They let forthe all prysoners and set them at lybertie: they spoyled all the bookes of lawe in the Innes of courte, the Recordes of the Counters and other prysons. They set the kyng forth of the towre of London, compellyng hym to graunt al bondmen fredom, and that he shoulde neuer de∣maunde trybute or taxe of his commōs: and also required Iack Strawe, and Wat Tyler to be made Dukes of Essex and Kent, and gouernours of the kyngs person from thenceforth, both in peace
and warre, whiche thynges he graun∣ted: for he durst in no poynt denye them: But Wylliā Walworth Maior or Lō∣don beyng in Smithfielde, nere vnto ye kynges person, and seynge hym stande hoodlesse afore Iack strawe,Iack Straw slayne. rebuked the saide Straw of his great leudnesse, and with a dagger slewe hym, and brought the kyng into the citie:Why the city of Londō ge∣ueth the dag∣ger in armes. Whereupon the rude company was dispersed, and fledde as shepe, some one waye and some an o∣ther: so sayeth Hardyng. In memory of this dede the citie geueth the dagger in their shylde of armes. Anno. 5. Iohn Northāpton M. Iohn Rote S.1381 Iohn Hynde S. This yere was a terrible earthquake throughout all England,An earth quake. whiche threw down many castelles, steples, houses, & trees. Whiche Iohn Hardyng sayth he sawe the .xx. daye of Maye. Anno. 6. Iohn Northāpton M. Adā Bawme S.1382 Iohn Selfe S. This yere was a combat foughten at the kynges pallais of Westminster,A combate. be∣twene one Garton Appellant, and syr Iohn Ansley knight defendāt, ye knight
was Uictor, and Gartō was from that place drawen to Tyborn, and there hā∣ged for his false accusation. Anno. 7. 1383Iohn Northāpton M. Sy. Winthcōbe S Iohn More S Execution at S. Albons.This yere was one Wall, or Ball, taken at Couentre, by Robert Treuil∣lian, and iudged to be hanged at saynt Albons, for that he was the anymator of the Rebelles spoken of in the fourth yere of this kynges reigne, of whom ye may reade at large in Iohn Frosard. Anno. 8. 1384Nycolas Brember M. Nycolas Exton S. Iohn Frenche S. The kyng went towarde, Scotlande with a great army, but when he drewe nere ye borders, such meanes was songht that a peace was concluded. Anno. 9. 1385Nycolas Brember M. Iohn Organ S. Io. Churchmā S. Kyng Rychard maried the daughter of Uinceslaus, Emperour of Almayne. Anno. 10. 1386Nycolas Exton M. W. Stondon S. Williā More S.
The Erle of Arundell went into the Duchse of Guyan, for to strengthen suche souldiers as the kyng at that tyme had in those parties, or to stoure the sea of Rouers. The erle kepyng his course, encountred with a mightie fleete of Fle¦mynges laden with Rochell wyne, and set vpon them, tooke them, and brought them to dyuers portes of Englande: wherby wyne was then so plenteous, that it was sold for .xiii.s.iiii.d. & .xx.s. a tonne of the very choyse. Anno. 11. Nycolas Exton M. Williā Uenour S.1387 Hughe Fostalse S. This yere Thomas of wodstoke duke of Glocester,Robert Fa∣bian the erles of Arūdel, War∣wyke, of Darby, and of Notyngham, consyderyng howe this lande was mys∣gouerned, by a fewe persons about the king, entending reformatiō of the same, assembled at Radecocke brydge, where they tooke their counsell, and raysyng a strong power, came to London, where they caused the kyng to cal a parliamēt, whereof hearynge Alexander Neuyll Archbyshop of Yorke, Syr Lionel Uere Marques of Deuelen, & syr Mychael de la Poole Chaūcellour & erle of Suffolk,
fearyng punyshment, fled the lande and died in straunge countreys. The kynge by counsayle of the aboue named lordes duryng the parliament, caused to be ta∣ken syr Robart Triuilian, chiefe Iustice of Englande, syr Nycholas Brembre, late Maior of Londō, syr Iohn Salysbu∣ry knyght of houshold, syr Iohn Beau∣champe, Stewarde of the kyngs house, syr Symon Burley, syr Iames Bernes and syr Robert Belknappe knyghtes, and a sergeaunt of armes, named Iohn Uske, the whiche by authoritie of the sayde parliament, were conuict of trea∣son, and put to death at the towre hyll, & at Tyborne. And Iohn Holt, Iohn Loc¦ton, Rychard Gray, Wylliam Burgth, and Robert Fuithorpe iustice, with the other foresayde lordes, which before had voyded the land, were banished and exi∣led for euer. Anno. 12. 1388Sir Nych. Twyford M. Tho. Austen S. Adam Gathill S. A iustes in Smithfielde.This yere the kyng kepte a great iu∣stes in Smythfielde, whiche continued xxiiii. days. This yere on the fifth day of August, was the battayle of Ottyrborn,The battayll at Ottyrborn where syr Henry Percy slewe the erle
Douglas of Scotland, and after was ta¦ken prisoner. Anno. 13. Williā Uenour M. Iohn Walcot S.1389 Iohn Loueney S. An esquier of Nauarre accused an en∣glyshe esquire called Iohn Welshe of treason:A combat. for the triall whereof, a daye of fyght was betwene them taken, to bee fought in the kyngs palais at westmin∣ster: where they fought a strong fyght, but Iohn Welshe was victor, and con∣strayned the other to yelde. Where he was dispoyled of his armour,Execution. and drawē to Tyborn, and hanged for his vntruth. Anno. 14. Adam Bawme M. Iohn Francis S.1390 Tho. Uiuent S. The duke of Lancaster vncle to king Richard sayled with a company of soul∣diours into Spayn, to claym the realme of Castle: for so muche as he had taken to wife the eldest daughter of kyng Pe∣ter, that was expelled his kyngdom by Henry his bastard brother: be conque∣red the countreye of Galice, and made league with the kyng of Portugall: but by great mortalitie, whiche fell among
his people, he was fayne to dismysse his armye, and shortly after loste all that e∣uer he had wonne. Anno. 15. 1391Iohn Hind Draper M. Io. Chadworth S Henry Uamer S A bakers man bearynge a basket of horsebread in Fletestrete,A fraye in Fletestrete. one of the bi∣shop of Salisburies mē toke out a lofe, yt baker requyryng his lofe, the byshops man brake the bakers head: whervpon folowed suche parties takyng, that the Maior and Sheriffes and all the quyete people of the citie, coulde not order the vnrulynes of the multitude there ga∣thered togyther, but that they woulde haue hym deliuered to them, who brake the bakers heade, or els to breake open the gates of the sayde byshops palaice, who was the kynges high treasorer: for the whyche the kynge seased the liber∣ties of the Cytie, and discharged the Maior and Sheriffes of the rule of the Citie, and committed the gouernement therof to a knight of the court called sir Edward Dalingerige. The citisens ma¦king great sute and labour to obtein the kynges fauoure, coulde not thys yere
obteyne it. Anno. 16. William Stonden Grocer M. Gilbert Māfield S1392 Tho. Newingtō S Thys yere by the great sute & labour of doctor Grauesend then byshop of Lō∣don,The liberties of London re¦stored. the liberties were shortly restored in reward of whiche paynes, he desyred the Maior wyth the citisens of London in their liueries to resort yerely on their ix. pryncipall dayes to the Churche of Poules vnto the graue of the same by∣shop, after his decease, who lyeth in the myddle of the west end of the sayd chur∣che, and there to say De profundis. &c. As ye may reade in Robert Fabyan. Anno. 17. Iohn Hadley Grocer M. Drew Barētin S.1393 Rich. whittington S. A truce prolonged betwene France and Englande for .iiii. yeares. Thys years dyed Quene Anne wyfe to kynge Rychard. Anno. 18. Io. Frēche Mercer M Wil. Bramtō S.1394 Tho. Knolles S.
Iohn WiklefAboute thys tyme was Wikliffe fa∣mous in England. King Richard made a voiage into Ire¦land, which was more chargeable then honorable. And this yeare was greate tempest of wynde in England. Anno. 19. 1395Wil. More Uintener M Roger Elys S wil. Sheringhā S A truce for .xxx. yeares was made be∣twene England and France: and kyng Richard toke to wife Isabell the daugh∣ter of Charles the Frenche kyng. Anno. 20. 1396Adā bame goldsmith M Tho. Wilford S. williā Parker S. The duke of Gloucester king Richar∣des vncle wyth the Earle of Arundell, and other, was put to cruel death:Execution. for so muche as they rebuked the kyng in cer∣tayne matters ouer lyberally. Anno. 21. 1397Richard Whittingtō Mercer M. williā Askhā S. Io. wodcock S. Thys yeare deceased Iohn of Gaunt duke of Lancaster: He was buryed in
Poules Churche, on the Northe syde of the quyer. The Duke of Hereforde and also the Duke of Norffolke were bothe bany∣shed the lande.The duke of Hereford ba∣nished thys lande. Anno. 22. Drew Barētin Goldsmith M. Iohn wade S1398 Io. warner S Kynge Rycharde lette the realme of Englande to ferme to syr Wyllyam Scrope Earle of Wyltshyre,Englande let to feruie. and to .iii. knyghtes, Busshy, Bagot and Grene. And then in Apryll he wente wyth an armye into Irelande, leauynge for hys Lieuetenaunte in Englande, syr Ed∣mund of Langley hys vncle, and Duke of Yorke. Kynge Rycharde beyng occupyed in Irelande, Henry Bolynbrooke, Duke of Hereforde, and of Lancaster: why∣che was banyshed into France, beynge sente for of the Londoners, came into Englande wyth a smalle power, and landed in Holdernesse in Yorkeshyre, to whome the Communes gathered in greate number, whereof Kynge Ry∣charde hearynge, aboute September he returned, and landynge at Mylforde
hauen, he went to the Castell of Flynt in Wales, where he rested hym, enten∣dynge to gather more strengthe: In the whych tyme, Henry Duke of Lan∣caster came vnto Brystowe, where he tooke syr Willyam Scrope, Ealre of Wylteshyre and Treasourer of Eng∣lande, syr Iohn Bushy, and syr Henry Greene. Syr Iohn Bagot was there taken, but he escaped and fledde, the o∣ther .iii. were iudged and put to execu∣tion.Kynge Ry∣charde taken prysoner by Henry Duke of Hereforde and of Lan∣caster. Kynge Rycharde beyng in the ca∣stell of Flynte (hys noble menne forsa∣kynge hym) was taken: and by Henry duke of Lancaster, sente to the tower of London: where shortly after he yel∣ded vp and resigned to the saide Henry, all hys power and Kyngely tytle to the Crowne of Englande and Fraunce, knowledgynge that he worthyly was deposed for his demerites and mysgouernyng of the Common weale.
King Henry the fourthe. Anno Regni .1. HEnry the fourthe was ordey∣ned Kyng of Englande more by force,1399 as it appeared, then by laufull succession or electi∣on: Whyche thynge tourned hym to muche vnquyetnesse, and caused often rebellyon in thys Realme: of courage he was noble and valyaunt, and after the Ciuile warres were appeased, she∣wed hym selfe very gentill and louyng to hys subiectes. He began hys reygne ouer this Realme, the .xxix. of Septem¦ber, in the yeare of oure Lorde .1399. and lefte the same the .xx. day of March, in the yeare .1412. So hee reygned thirtene yeares, sixe monethes, lackyng nyne dayes. Henry, the soonne of Kynge Henry was chosen Prince of Wales, and duke of Cornewall, Earle of Chester, and heire Apparaunt to the Crowne: hee deposed three Dukes,Ioh. Harding folowing M. Norham, doc∣tor in Theo∣logie. that is to saie, of Albumarle, Ercester, and Surrey, and the marques of Dorset.
Anno. 1. 1399Tho. Knolles Grocer M. wil. waldern S williā Hyde S The lorde Morley appealed the Erle of Salisburye of treason,A guage of battayle. and caste hys hoode for a guage to trye wyth hym ba∣tayle: the whych saying he replied, and caste frome hym hys gloues for guage, to proue hys sayinges vntrewe, which were sealed, and delyuered to the lorde Marshall. Syr Iohn Hollande Duke of Erce∣ster brother to Kynge Rycharde, the Duke of Aumarke, the duke of Surrey with the Erles of Salisbury and Glou∣cester, and other that fauoured Richard of Burdeur, conspyred againste Kyng Henry,A conspiracie agaynst kyng Henry the fourthe. and appoynted pryuily to mur∣der hym at a feaste, whyche shoulde be holden at Wyndsore:Exection. but their treason was disclosed, and they all put to death, with as many knightes and esquiers, as were of that alyance and confederacie. Kynge Ry∣chard murde∣red.Kyng Richarde was put to deathe in Pomfret castell, by a knyghte called syr Piers of Exton, and after brought to the tower of London, and so through the ci∣tie of London to Poules barefaced, and
there stode .iii. dayes for all beholders: and frome thense to Langley, and there buried in a house of Friers: but he was since remoued by Henry the .v. and li∣eth at Westmynster. Upon the deathe of thys Kynge Rycharde,Iohn Govver in hys booke named Vox clamantis Iohn Gower dothe wryte these verses in Latine, as foloweth. O speculum mundi, quod debet in auro refundi, Ex quo prouisum sapiens acuit sibi uisum. Cum male uiuentes, Deus odit in orbe regentes Est qui peccator, non esse potest dominator. Richardo teste, finis probat hoc manifeste, Sic diffinita fuit regia sors stabilita, Regis ut est uita, Chronica stabat ita. Which may be englished thus. O myrrour for the worlde mete, Whyche shouldste in golde be bette, By whyche all wyse men, by forsyght. Theyr prudent wytts may whette: Lo God dothe hate suche rulers as Here viciously doo lyue: And none ought rule, that by theyr lyfe Doo yll example gyne. As thys kyng Richard wytnesseth well, His ende thys playne dothe showe, For God allotted hym suche ends, And sent hym so great woo. As suche a lyfe descrude: as by The chronicles thou mayst knowe:
Anno. 2. 1400Iohn Frauncis Goldsmyth M. Iohn wakell S. williā Ebot S. Whyle the Kynge was in Wales, certayne persons enuyinge that he had so shortely obteyned and possessed the Realme, blased abroade amongest the vulgare people, that kynge Rycharde was yet lyuyng, and desyred ayde of the common people to reposesse hys realme and royall dignitie. And to the furthe∣rance of theyr inuention, they sette vp∣pon poastes, and caste aboute the stre∣tes raylynge rymes, malicious metres and taunting verses against Kyng Hen¦ry and kys procedynges. He beyng net∣led wyth those vncurteous prickes and thornes, searched out the autours:Execution. and amongest other were founde culpable of thys cryme, syr Roger Claryngdon knyght, wyth two of hys seruauntes, the Pryour of Launde, and .viii. Fri∣ers Mynoures or graye Fryers, who were drawen, hanged and quartered at Tyborne in the moneth of February. Owen Glendour of Wales rebelled,Rebellyon in Wales. and kyng Henry wente thyther with a
strong armye, but coulde not wynne to them, they fled so to theyr mountayns. This yeare was greate scarsitie of wheate and other grayn,Great dearth of corne. so that wheat was sold at London for .xvi.s. a quarter. Anno. 3. Iohn Chadworth M. will. Uenour S1401 I. Freminghā S Thys yeare the Cundite standing v∣pon Cornehill in London was begon to be made (where as before tyme it was a pryson for priestes called the Tonne in Cornehyll.The cundite in Cornhyll buylded. A great batayle at Srewesbury,A batayle at Shrewesbury. be∣gan by syr Thomas Percy, Erle of wor¦cester, and other agaynste the Kynge, where syr Thomas Percye was taken and beheaded,Execution. & syr Henry Percy slayn, wyth many other noble men. Anno. 4. Iohn Walcot Draper M. Richard Marlow S.1402 Robert Chicheley S. The Emperor Robert came into En∣glande, only to see the countrey and cō∣modities therof, where he was receiued with great triumph. The Lorde of Castile in Brytayne
landed within a myle of Plymmouthe,Plymmouth spoyled by frenchmen. with a greate compauye, hee lodged all nyghte in Plymmouth, and on the mo∣rowe robbed and spoyled the town, and returned agayne to theyr shyppes. Anno. 5. 1403Williā Alkham M. Tho. Fauconer S. Tho. Poole S. The Britaynes and Frenchemen, whyche the yere before had spoyled and robbed the towne of Plymmouth, were discomfited and slayn of the englishmen, in a battayle on the sea, nere the towne of Dartmouth. This yeare one willyam Serle was ta∣ken in the marches of Scotlande,Execution. and brought to London, and there hanged, drawen, and quartred for the murdring of the duke of Gloucester at Calice. Anno. 6. 1404Iohn Hynd Draper M. Wil. Lowsche S Stephē spilmā S Syr Rycharde Scrope then archebi∣shop of Yorke, and the Lord Mowbraye then marshall of England, wyth other, gathered greate strength to haue put downe the kyng (as the fame went) but they were taken, and presented to the
Kyng at Yorke,Execution. where they were bothe beheaded. Anno. 7. Io. wodcock Mercer M. Henry Bartō S1405 wil. Croumer S This yeare was the bridge and Cha∣pell of Rochester finished by syr Robert Knolles,Rochester bridge builded who also new reedified the bo∣dy of the church of white friers standing in Fletestrete, and there was buryed: That Church was fyrst founded by the ancestors of the Lorde Gray Cotner. Anno. 8. Richard Whittingtō Mercer M Nic. wotton S.1406 Geffrey broke S. Thys yeare syr Henry Earle of Nor∣thumberland,Execution. and the lord of Bardolfe commyng out of Scotland, with a strōg company to the displeasure of the Kyng as they intended, were met and fough∣ten wyth, and dyscomfyted, and theyr heades were stryken of, and sents to London. This Richard Whityugton Maior of London aboue named,Whityngton colledge buyl∣ded. builded the house in London, named Whittingtons col∣ledge. He buylded a great parte of the
Hospytall of Saynete Bartholomewes in west Smithfielde: he buylded the li∣brary at the Gray friers in Lōdon, now called Christes hospitall: he also buylded a great part of the east end of the guyld hall in London, besyde sundry other no∣table workes done by hym. Anno. 9. 1407Wil. scondē Grocer M. Hēry Pōfret S Henry Halton S This yere was a great froste whiche began in December,A great frost. and lasted fyftene weekes. Edmond Holland Erle of Kent was by the kynge made admirall of the sea, who scouryng and skimmyng the sea, at the last landed in Britayn, and besieged the Castell of Briake and wan it: but he was there wounded with an arrow, wherof he dyed soone after. Anno. 10. 1408Drew Barētin Goldsmyth M. Tho. duke S wil. Nortō S This yere in Smithfield was helde a great Iustes betwene the Henowayes and Englyshemen,A great iustes  Smithfield in the whiche were many feates of armes done. Anno. 11.
Richard Marlowe Ironmonger M. Iohn Lawe S1409 wil. Chichley S Iohn Badley taylour was brente in Smithfielde for the Sacrament of the Aulter.Execution in Smythfield. This yeare the market house called the Stockes in London was begon to be buylded.The markett house called the Stockes buylded. Anno. 12. Tho. Knolles Grocer M. Io. Penne S.1410 Tho. Pike S. This yeare a squier of Wales named Rice ap Dee,Execution. which had longe tyme re∣belled agaynst the Kyng, was broughte to London, and there drawen, hanged, and quartered. This yeare was the Guyld Halle of London begon to be newe buylt:The Guylde haill in Lon∣don newe buylded. and of an olde and lyttell cotage, made into a fayre & goodly house as it now apereth. Anno. 13. Robert Chicheley Grocer M. Iohn Rainewel S1411 Williā Cotton S This yeare the .xii. daye of October, the Thames flowed thrise in one day. And this yere the kyng caused a new coyne of nobles to be made which were
of lesse value then the old by .iiii.d. in a noble. Anno. 14. 1412Williā waldren Mercer M Rafe Leuēhind S. williā Seuenoke S. This yeare after the great and fortu∣nate chaunces happened to Kyng Hen¦ry, beyng deliuered of all ciuile diuision and discētion, he mynded to make a voi∣age agaynst the infidels, and especially for the recouery of Ierusalem: and for that cause prepared a greate army, and gathered muche treasure, entendyng to set forward in the same sprynge. When he had thus prepared all thynges neces∣sary for his voyage: he was taken wyth an Apoplerie, of the whiche he languy∣shed tyll his appoynted hower. Duryng which sycknes (as auctors write) he cau∣sed his Crowne to be set on the pyllowe at hys beds head, and sodeynly his pang so sore troubled hym, that he laye as all hys vital spirites had ben departed: such as had cure of hys body, thynkyng hym to be deade, couered his face with a lyn∣nen cloathe. The prince hys sonne be∣yng therof aduertysed, entered into the Chamber, and toke away with hym the
crowne and departed: the father beyng sodaynly reuyued out of his traunce, quickely perceyued ye lacke of his crown, and hauyng knowledge that the prynce had possessed it, caused hym to repayre to his presence, requirynge of hym for what cause he had so misused hym selfe. The Prynce aunswered, syr to my iud∣gement you semed dead, wherfore I as your next heyre, tooke it as myne, and not as yours: wel sonne sayd the kyng, what ryght I had to it and howe I en∣ioyed it, God knoweth. well quod the Prynce, if you dye kynge, I wyll haue the garlande, and trust to kepe it with the sworde as ye haue done: well sayde the kyng, I commyt all to God, and re∣member you to doo well, and with that turned hym selfe, and shortly after de∣parted, in a chamber of the Abbottes of Westmynster, called Hierusalem, the xx. daye of Marche, in the yere of our lorde .1412. When he had reigned .13. yeres, syxe monethes and nyne dayes, and was buried at Cauntorbury.
King Henry the fifth. Anno Regni .1. 1412HEnry ye fifte, began his reigne the .xx. daye of Marche, in the yere of our lorde .1412. and deceased the last day of August in the yere .1422. so he reigned .ix. yeres fyue monethes and tenne dayes. He was a Prynce of great noblenes & pro∣wes, of stature and personage talle and sclender, of nature gentle and lyberall, in dedes of armes expert and cunnyng, wherby he conquered manfully his ene∣mies, and broughte Fraunce to his sub∣iection: before the death of his father he applied and gaue hym selfe to all vice and insolencie of lyfe, and drewe vnto hym riotous and wildely disposed per∣sones: but whan he was admitted to the rule of the land, sodaynly he became a newe man, and turned all that rage of wyldnes into sober and wyse behauior, and vice into vertue: and that he myght not be agayne corrupted, he charged all his olde companions, that vpon payne of their lyues, none of them should come within tenne myles of the place that he
was lodged in.Ioh. Lidgate, He caused Iohn Lidgate monke of Bery, to translate certayne verses of the psaltar into english myter, whiche he vsed in his deuyne seruice. This yere about haruest tyme,Syr Iohn Oldecastell. was syr Iohn Olde castell knight, appeached for an hereticke, and committed to pry∣son, but he brake out of the tower, and went to Walis, where he lyued .iiii. yeres after. Anno. 1. Wil. Crow∣mer Draper. M. Ioh. Suttō S.1413 Iohn Mycol S. Certayne adherentes of the forena∣med syr Iohn Oldecastel,EdvVarde Haule. intending the destruction of this lande and subuersiō of the same,Rebellion. assembled them in Thic∣kettes fielde, nere vnto saynt Gyles in great number, whereof the kyng beyng informed, toke the fyeld afore them, and foke of them so many, that all the pry∣sons, in and about London, were filled. The chiefe of them whiche were .xxix. were condempned by the Clergie of he∣resie, and attaynted of hyghe treason, as mouers of warre agaynst their kyng, by the temporall lawe in the Guyldhall,Execution. & adiudged for treason, to be drawen & hā∣ged, and for heresy to be cōsumed wt fire,
whiche was executed accordingly in Ia∣nuary folowyng. The chiefe of these re∣belles was syr Robert Acton knyght, Iohn Browne Esquser, and Iohn Be∣uerley priest, as testyfieth Edward Hal. Anno. 2. 1414Thomas Fauconer Mercer. M. Iohn Michell S. Tho. Allyn S. This yere the kyng made great pro∣uision to sayle into Fraunce with an ar∣my, & whyle he was shipping of his peo∣ple, syr Rychard erle of Cambrydge, syr Rychard Scrope treasorer of England, and syr Thomas Graye knyght, were arrested for treason, and so strayghtly examyned, that it was cōfessed that they were purposed to haue slayne the kyng, by the corrupting of the Frenche men:Execution. wherfore they were all three adiudged to die, and were headed at Hampton. Then kyng Henry tooke shypping with a great power,Ioh. Harding folowing M. Norham, doc∣tor in Theo∣logie. and sayled into Normā∣die, & toke the town of Harflewe, where he was compassed about with a great hoste of french mē, to ye nūber of .40000. He hauyng but .13000. footemen, and 2000. speares. He slewe of his enemies, 10000. and toke prisoners, nye as many.
This was called the battayle of Agyn∣court,The battayle of Agincourt. of the whiche ye may reade more at large, in Fabian and Hall. Anno. 3. Nycholas Walton Draper M. Wil. Cābridge S1415 Allein Euerard S This yere the Emperour Sigismōd came into Englād, to entreate a meanes of peace betwene the kynges of Eng∣land and Fraūce: but al was in vayne, for in the ende no peace could be conclu∣ded, and kyng Henry went agayne into Fraunce. Anno. 4. Henry Barton Skinner M. Ro. Wodyngtō S1416 Iohn Couentree S This yere in Fraunce kynge Henry obteyned many victories, and gotte all the townes and holdes in Normandy, sauyng Roban, whiche he strongly be∣sieged. This yere on Easter day, was a great fraye in saynt Dunstones churche in the East:Robert Fa∣bian. the begynners thereof was the lorde Straunge,A fraye in S. Dunstones churche. and syr Iohn Trussell knyght, through the quarel of their two wyues, through the whiche fraye many
people were sore wounded and hurt,A fraie in S. Dunstones churche. and one Thomas Petwarden Fyshmōger, slayne out of hande, wherefore both the frayers were brought to the Counter in the Pultrye, and the lord Straunge for begynning the sayd fraye, was the next sunday accursed at Paules crosse. Anno. 5. 1417Richard Marlowe Iremōger M. Henry Reade S. Iohn Gedney S. This yere syr Iohn Oldecastell was sent vnto London by the lorde Powes out of Wales, the whiche syr Iohn for heresie and treason was conuicte, and for the same was draweu to saint Gyles fielde,Execution. where he was hanged on a newe payre of Gallowes with chaynes, and after consumed with fier. The parson of Wrothā with his concubineAbout this tyme the parson of Wrot∣ham in Norfolke, whiche had haunted newe market heath, and there robbed and spoiled many of the kyngs subiects, was with his concubyne brought vp to Newgate where he lastely died. Anno. 6. 1418Wil. Seue∣noke Grocer M. Rau Barton S. Iohn Parnesse S. Kyng Henry conquered Rone, sub∣dued
all Normandie, and was proclay∣med Regent of Fraunce for terme of the lyfe of Charles beyng then kynge. And after his decease ye crown of Fraūce with all ryghtes belōgyng to the same: to hym and his heyres. For confirma∣tion wherof, he toke to wyfe Catheryne the daughter of Charles. Anno. 7. Richard Whit¦tingtō Mercer M. R. Whittinghā S1419 Iohn Butler S This yere kyng Henry retorned into England and so to London and at west mynster Catheryn his wyfe was crow∣ned the .xxiiii. daye of February. Anno. 8. Wyl. Cā∣bridge Gro. M. Iohn Butler S.1420 Iohn Welles S. The Duke of Clarence kyng Henries brother, was ouer set by the Dolphyn of Fraūce, and slayne, to the kynges great displeasure. Kyng Henry went again into Fraūce and made warre vpon the Dolphyn. Anno. 9. Ro. Chi∣chely gro. M. Richard Gosselyn S. Williā Weston. S.1421 The begining of this yere, O. Catherin was deliuered at windsor of a yōg prīe,
whose name was Henry: and the tenth daye of August was the newe weather cocke set on Paules steple. And this yere the Queene retorned into Fraunce to kynge Henry, where was a ioyful metyng, but after folowed sorowe: for shortly after the kyng being at Bofes in Uincent, he wered syck and died, the last daye of August, in the yere of our lorde .1422.. when he had reigned nyne yeres fyue monethes & ten dayes, he buylded the Shene and Sion,Shene and Syon buyl¦ded. and ly∣eth buried at westmynster. King Henry the sixt. Anno Regni .1. 1422HEnry the sixt being an infant of .viii. monethes of age, be∣gan his reigne ouer this re∣alme of England the last day of August, in the yere of our lord .1422. he was deposed the fourth day of March in the yere .1460. So he reigned .xxxviii. yeres syxe monethes and foure dayes, continuyng the tyme of his youthe, he was committed to the gouernaunce of Duke Humfrey of Glocester his vncle:
whan he came to mans state, he was of wytte and nature, symple, gentyll, and meke, and loued better peace thē warre, quietnes of mynde then busines of the world: honestie then profite, rest & case, then trouble and care: all trouble, vera∣tion, vnquietnes, & iniuries, that euer happened to hym (whiche were many & great) he suffered so paciently that he re∣puted them to be worthely sent to hym of God for his offences.Tho. Coper. He fauoured good letters excellently well: in token wherof be erected two famous Colled∣ges,The kynges colledge at Cābrydge, & the Colledge at Eaton buyl∣ded. the one at Cambrydge, called the kynges colledge, the other at Eaton: by meanes wherof good learnyng greatly increased. In the begynnyng of this his reigne, dyed kyng Charles of Fraunce, by rea∣son wherof,Ioh. Harding after maister Norham. the kyngdome of Fraunce should come vnto kyng Henry, and the nobles of Fraunce (except a fewe that helde with the Dolphin) delyuered the possession therof vnto the Duke of Bed∣ford Regent of Fraunce, to the vse of kyng Henry. Anno. 1. William Walderne M. Will. Estfield S.1422 K. Tattarsale S.
A subsidie was graunted for three yeres, fyue nobles of euery sack of woll that should passe out of the lande. Execution.A priest was burned for heresie, cal∣led William Tayler. Newgate buylded.This yere the West gate of London, now called newe gate, was newly buil∣ded by the executors of Richard Whit∣tington late Mayor of London. Anno. 2. 1423William Crowmar Draper. M. Nicho. Iames S. Th. Wadford S. This yere the Duke of Bedford wan from the Dolphyn of Fraunce, manye strong holdes and townes, and nere to a towne called Uernell, be discomfited the Dolphyns whole power, for in that fight were slayne .iii. erles and many o∣ther noble mē, & .5000. cōmō soldiours. Execution.Syr Roger Mortimer, for treasō was condemned by acte of parliament, and hanged and quartered. The kynge of Scottes ma∣ried at saynt Mary Adries in South∣warke.This yere Iames kyng of Scottes, was deliuered, who had remayned pry∣soner in England .xviii. yeres, and he maried in saynt Mary Adries in South∣warke, the lady Iane daughter to the erle of Somerset, cosyn to kyng Henry.
Anno. 3. Iohn Michel M. Symon Seman S1424 Iohn Bywater S This yere the kynge of Portingale came into England, and was honoura∣bly receyued. This yere by the parliament holden at Westminster,The first cu∣stome payde by the mar∣chauntes. was graunted to the kyng for thre yeres, to helpe hym in his warres, a subsedy of xii. d. in the pounde of all marchaundyzes brought in, or ca∣ried out of the Realme,Robert Fa∣bian. and .iii. s of eue∣ry tonne of wyne, the whiche was then called tonnage and pondage, but synce it hath been renewed at sondrye parlia∣mentes, and nowe is called custome. Furthermore, it was enacted that all marchaunt straungers should be lodged within an englysh host, within .xv. days of their coming to their porte sale, and to make no sale of any marchandyse or thei were so lodged: & then within .xl. days folowyng, to make sale of all that they brought, and if any remayned vnsolde at the sayde .xl. dayes ende, that then all suche marchandyse so vnsolde, to be for∣feyte to the kyng. Anno. 4. Iohn Couē∣tre Mercer M. Wil. Milrede S1425 Iohn Brokle S
A parliament at Leicester, where the duke of Bed∣forde endued kyng Henry the sixt with the order of knyghthode, & then the king dubbed nere 40. knightesGrudge and variaunce betwene the Duke of Gloucester protectour of Eng∣land, and his halfe brother the byshop of Wynchester, whiche was appeased by the regent of Fraunce, and debated by a parliament at Leicester, as ye maye reade at large in Edwarde Haull. Anno. 5. 1426Iohn Ray∣newell Fishmōger M. Iohn Arnolde S. Io. Nightham S. This Iohn Raynewell Maior of Lō∣don before named, gaue certayne landes or tenemētes to the citie of London, for the whiche the same citie is bounde to paye for euer, all suche fyftenes as shall be graunted to the kyng (so that it passe not three fyftenes in one yere) for three wardes of the same, that is to say, Dou∣gate warde, Bellynsgate warde, and Algate warde. This yere the englysh men besiegyng Orliaunce, the noble & valiaunt knight syr Thomas Mountague, was slayne by a great misfortune, whose death was the beginnyng of al mischiefe to the En∣glysh men: for after this mishappe they lost by litle and litle, all their possessions in Fraunce.
Anno. 6. Iohn Gid∣ney Draper M. Hē. Frowick S.1427. Rob. Otley. S. This yere a womā dwelling in white Chappell paryshe without Algate of London, was in the nyght murdered by a Bryttaine or Frencheman, whom she had cheryshed and brought vp of almes. Who conueying suche iewelles & stuffe as he myght carie,A murder quit with murder. was taken in Essex, and brought vp to London: but a sone as he came in the parishe where he had committed the murder, the wyues cast vpon hym so muche fylthe and ordure of the strete, that not withstanding the resistaunce made by the Cōstables, they slewe hym out of hande. Anno. 7. Henry Bar∣ton Skinner M. Th. Dushous S1428 Iohn Abbot S This yere the Duke of Norfolk was lyke to haue been drowned, passinge through London bridge, his barge be∣yng set vpon the pyles whelmed ouer, so that he and very fewe escaped, beyng drawen vp with ropes, the rest were all drowned. Anno. 8.
1429William Estefield Mercer. M. Williā Russe S. Ranfe Holland S. This yere was kyng Henry crowned at Westmynster, of whom Iohn Lyd∣gate mūke of Bury, made many goodly verses in prayse and commendation of hym and his coronatiō,Iohn Lidgate as ye may reade them in Robert Fabian, bothe of this coronation, and also of his coronation at Paris in Fraunce. Anno. 9. 1430Nicholas Wotton M. walter Chertsey S Robert Large S A commotion at Abyngton.This yere at Abyngton, began an in∣surrection of certayne lyght persones, that entended to haue wrought muche mischiefe, but they were quieted by the lorde protector, and the chiefe authour beyng baily of the towne, named Wyl∣liam Maundeuyll, a weaner, otherwyse namyng hym selfe Iack sharpe of wyg∣mores land in Wales, with other were put to death. Execution at Tyborne.This yere was one Richard Russel, a woll man, drawen, hanged, & quartered at Tiborne for treason. Anno. 10. 1431Ioh. Wel¦les Grocer M. Iohn Adyrlee S. Step. Brown S.
This Iohn Wels of his goodes,The Stādard in cheape buyl¦ded. cau∣sed the conduit named the Standarde in cheape, to be buylded in Anno .1442. This yere kyng Henry was crowned at Paris by ye Cardinal of Winchester.The kynge of Englād crow¦ned at Paris in Fraunce. And this yere the kyng retorned into England, and so to London, where he was receiued with great ioy & triūphe. Anno. 11. Io. Parneis Fyshmōger M. Iohn Olney S. I. Paddesley S.1432 This yere was sene in the southwest, a sterre called a Comete or blasing ster.A comete. Anno 12. Ioh. Brok∣ley Draper M. Tho. Chalton S. Iohn Kyng S.1433 The Erle of Huntyngton, was sent with a cōpany of soldiours into Fraūce, where he atchieued many great feates of armes. Anno. 13. Roger Ot∣ley Grocer. S. Th. Barnwel S Simond Eyre S1434 This yere was a great frost,A great frost. that such marchandise as came to the Thames mouth, was caried to London by lande. This frost endured from the xxv. day of Nouember vnto the .x. day of February. whiche was .x. wekes.
And this yere deceased Iohn Duke of Bedford regent of Fraūce, after whose decease, all thynges went backwarde with the Englyshemen in Fraunce. Anno. 14. 1435H. Frowick Mercer M. T. Catworth S. Ro. Clopton S. Charles of Fraunce, recouered the ci∣tie of Paris, and wanne by force the towne of Harflewe, and of saynt Denis expelling & murdering the Englyshmen in great number. Calleis be∣sieged.The Duke of Burgoyne besyegyng Calieis, was fayne to flye & leue muche of his ordinaunce behynde hym, at the commyng of Humfrey Duke of Glou∣cester, who pursued hym eleuen dayes, and destroyed the countrey as he went, vnto saynt Omers. Anno. 15. 1436Iohn Mychel M. Tho. Morsted S. Williā Gregorie S. This yere on the thyrd day of Ianua∣ry, dyed Queene Catheryne mother to kyng Henry the syxt, and wyfe to Hen∣ry the fifth, and lieth buried at West∣mynster. This yere on the fourtene day of Ia∣nuary, the gate on London brydge with
the tower vpon it next to Southwarke fell downe,A part of Lō¦don brydge fel downe. and .ii. of the furdest arches of the sayd bridge: but as God would no man therwith peryshed. This yeare it was enacted by a par∣liament,Euery stran∣ger payde to ye Kyng .xvi. d. the weeke. that euery alient housholder in this realme shoulde paye wekely to the Kynge .xvi. d. This yeare all the lyons in the tower of London dyed, whiche had ben there a long tyme. Anno. 16. William Eastfield Mercer M. Wil. Chapman S. William Hallis S.1437 The kyng caused a greate obyte to be kept in Poules churche, for Sigismund the Emperour, who was knyght of the Garter. Anno. 17. Stephen Browne Grocer Mai. Hugh Dyker S. Nicolas Yod S.1438 This yere on new yeres day,Thre hūdred men slayne. a stacke of wodde fell downe at Baynardes Ca∣stell, and slewe .300. men, and hurt ma∣ny other. There was so great a dearthe in En∣glande,Great dearth
that the poore people made them breade of fetches, peason, & ferne rootes. Xviii. persons murdered.This yeare by the falle of a strayre at Bedford .xviii. persons were slayn. Robert Fa∣bian.In this yeare the Cundyte in Flete∣strets was begon by sir Wylliam East∣field late Maior of London:The Condyt in Fletestrete buylded. and fynished of hys owne coste, without any one pe∣ny charge to the Citie. This yeare dyed Roberte Chicheley grocer,An obyte for mayster Ro∣berte Chiche∣ley. and twise Maior of Lōdon, who wylled in his testament, that vpon hys Mynd day, a good competēt dyner shold be ordeyned for .2400. poore men, hous∣holders of the Citie, if they myght bee founde, and .xx. li. in money distributed amongst theym, whyche was to euerye man .ii. d. Anno. 18. 1439Robert Large Mercer M. Robert Marshall S. Philyp Malyas S. Execution at Tower hyll.A prieste was burned at the Tower hyll on the .xvii. day of Iune, whiche of the common people was counted an ho∣ly man, for that he said, the poster n shold synke (as afterwardes it dyd) and suche lyke thynges: they made theyr prayer to
hym, and arrered a greate heape of sto∣nes, and pyght there a Crosse by night, vntyll a commandement was geuen by the kyng to the contrary. The postern of East Smythfielde a∣gaynste the tower of London sanke by nyght the .xviii. of Iuly.The posterne sanke. Anno. 19. Iohn Paddisley goldsmith M Iohn Sutton S. wil. Wetynhale S.1440 Elianor Cobham, wyfe to Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and other persons namely maister Roger Bolynbroke,Robert Fa∣bian. a cunnynge negromancer, and Margerye Iourdemayn, cōmonly called the witche of Eie were accused,Edvvard Hal Thomas cou∣per. that by sorcery and enchantmentes, they practised the kyn∣ges death: as by an image of ware, whi∣che through their diuelysh incantations should lytle and litle wast and consume, and so lyke wyse the Kyng to weare out of his life. Wherefore beyng examined & conuicte, Elianor Cobham was iudged to doo penaunce, as to beare a taper .iii. dayes, thorough the chiefest streetes of the Citie of London, and so to be exiled to the Ile of Man, vnder the kepyng of
syr Thomas Stanley knyghte, Roger Bolyngbroke was drawen hanged and quartered at Tyborne,Execution. and Margerye Iourdemayn the witche, was burnt in Smythfielde. Anno. 20. 1441Ro. Clopton Draper M. Wil. Combis S Richard Riche S This yeare the Towne of Depe was besieged by the Lorde Talbot, and res∣cued by the Frenchemen. A great fraye in FletestreteThys yere was a fray in Fletestrete betwene the Innes of Courte, and the inhabitantes of the same strete: which fray began in the nyght, and continued tyll the next day, where were many mē slayne and hurt on bothe parties. Anno. 21. 1442Iohn Thirley Irōmōger M. Tho. bewmoūt S Rich. Nordon S Paules steple a fyre.The steple of Paules churche in Lon∣don was set on fyre with lightnyng, and lastly quenched by great diligence of ma¦ny men: but chiefly through the labour of a priest of Bowe in cheape. Anno. 22.
Thomas Carworth Grocer M Nicolas wilford S Iohn Norman S1443 An act was made by the common coū sayle of London, that vpon the sondaye should no maner of thyng within the francheses of the Citie be bought or sold Anno. 23. Henry Frowicke Mercer M. Stephē Foster S Hugh Wyche S1444 Kyng Henry by the aduice of the erle of Suffolke toke to wyfe Margaret, the kynges daughter of Sicile, and refused the daughter of the Erle of Arminake, with whome he had made his fyrst con∣tract: which thyng was cause of muche miserie and trouble in England: as fyrst the losyng of Normandy: the diuision of the lordes within the realme, the rebel∣lion of the Commonaltie agaynste the Prince: and fynally the Kynge deposed, and the Quene with the prince fayne to flee the realme. Henry Chicheley byshop of Cantur∣bury dyed,Alsoulne col∣ledge & Ber∣narde colledge buylded in Oxenford. who in hys lyfe time builded two houses for studentes in the vniuer∣sitie of Oxenforde, called Alsolne col∣ledge,
and Bernarde colledge. Anno. 24. 1445Symond Eyre Draper M. Iohn Derby S Godfrey Fildyng S Leaden Halle buylded.Thys Symon Eyre afore named, buil¦ded the Leaden hall in London, and al∣so a beautifull chapell in the east ende of the same: Ouer the gate whereof was written, as foloweth: Dextera Domini ex∣altauit me, That is to saye: The Lordes ryght hande hath exalted me. Wherby be doyng so notable a worke for the com¦mon weale, also lefte a notable example to other Citezens commyng after hym, whom God likewise exalteth with such temporall blessynges, that they be not vnthankefull to God, and theyr cōmon weale, wherin they haue receued them. This yere was a peace concluded with France for one yeare. Anno. 25. 1446Iohn Onely Mercer M. Robert Horne S. Godfrey Boloyne S. Hūfrey duke of Gloucester arested at Bu¦rye.Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and protectour of Englande was at the par¦liament of Bury, arrested, and .vi. days
after he was found dead in his bedde: of his deathe are dyuerse opinyons, whych I ouerpasse. Hee was huryed at Saint Albones. William Wamflete a man of greate deuotion,Mary Mag∣dalen colledge buylded in Oxenford. wysedome, and Iustice, was made byshop of Winchester and Chan∣celloure of Englande: thys man to the fortheraunce of letters, and studious yong men, erected the famous colledge of Marye Magdalene in Oxenford. Anno. 26. Iohn Gidney Draper M. Williā Abraham S. Thomas Scotte S.1447 This yeare was taken the towne of Fogers from the Englyshemen, which was the cause that all Normandye was loste after warde. Anno. 27. Stephen Browne Grocer M. Williā Catlow S. Williā Marrow S.1448 This yeare Roan was yelded to the Frenche Kyng.Roane yelded to the Frēche Anno. 28. Thomas Chalton M. William Hulyn S. Tho. Canynges S.1449
The Marques of Suffolke was bani∣shed the land for .v. yeares, to appeace the rumor of the commons of England, for the death of the duke of Gloucester: who saylyng toward France,A Murder. was mett on the sea by a shyp of warre, and there presently beheaded, by the capitayn cal∣led Nicholas of the tower, and the dead corps cast vp at Douer vpon the sandes the fyrst day of May. A commotion in Kent by Iacke Cade on Blacke heath.The commons of Kent in great num∣ber assembled on Black Heath, hauyng to their captain Iack Cade, naming him self Mortimer. Against whom the kyng sent a great armye, but by the sayd capi∣tain and rebelles they were discomfited, and syr Humfrey Stafford & Williā hys brother wyth many other slayne: After this victorie the Capitaine and rebelles cam to London and cut the ropes of the drawe brydge, and entred the citye, and stroke his sworde on London stone, say∣ing: Nowe is Mortymer lord of this ci∣tie. Upon the third day of Iuly, he cau∣sed the lorde Saye to be brought to the Guylde Hall of London there to be ar∣raigned. Whyche before the Kynges Iustices, desyred to be tried by his peres
but the capitayn perceyuing hys delay, by force tooke hym frome the officers, and at the standarde in Cheape smote of hys head. Hee also beheaded syr Iames Cromer at the mylls ende: And pyt∣chynge these two heades on two polles entred the Cytie: and in despite caused them (beynge borne before hym) in eue∣ry streete to kysse togyther. After thys murder, succeded open robberye wyth∣in the Cytie: But the Maior and other sage Maiestrates, perceiuynge theym¦selues, nother to bee sure of goodes nor lyfe, determyned to expulse this vngra∣cious companye, and sente to the Lorde Scales, keeper of the tower, who pro∣mysed hys ayde, wyth shootyng of ordi∣naunce: and Mathewe Gough was ap∣poynted to assyst the Mayre: so the capi∣taines of the Citie tooke vpon them in the nyght to keepe the brydge, prohy∣bytyng the Kentyshe men to passe. The rebelles hearyng the bridge to be kept, ranne with great force to open that pas∣sage: where betwene bothe partes was a fierce encounter. The rebelles draue the Citelyns frome the stoulpes at the Brydge foote, to the drawe bridge, and
sette fyre in dyuers houses: In conclu∣syon, the rebelles gat the drawe bridge, and drowned and slewe manye. This conflict endured tyll .ix. of the clocke in the mornyng, in doubtfull chaunce: so that bothe partes agreed to desiste from fyght tyll the next day, vpon condition, that neither Londoners should passe in∣to Southwarke, nor the Kentishmen in to London. Then the archbishop of Can¦turbury being Chancellor, with the by∣shop of Winchester, passed into South¦warke, where they shewed a generall pardon for all offenders, vnder the kyn∣ges greate seale, whyche they caused to be proclaymed, wherevppon the whole multitude retyred home: but through a proclamation beyng made, that who so coulde apprehend the sayd Iacke Cade, shoulde haue a M. markes, one Alexan∣der Iden founde hym in a gardein, who in hys defence slewe the said Iack Cade and brought his body to London, where his head was set on London brydge. The bishop of Salisbury was murdred by ye cōmons of the west countrey. Anno. 29. 1450Nicolas Wi¦ford grocer M Io. Middleton S Williā Dere S
The whole duchy of Normandy was yelded to the frenche kynge, by meanes of the Quene, and the duke of Somer∣set: whiche caused so muche trouble in England, that mortall warre ensued. Anno. 30. Williā Gregorie skinner M Mathew Philip S. Christop. wartō S.1451 A commotion began thys yere by the duke of Yorke,The duke of York begane a commotion. and other noble menne, which was appeased for a tyme, and the malice dissembled. Anno. 31. Godfrey M. Feldyng M. Richard Lee S. Richard Alley S.1452 Thys yeare the Quene was delyue∣red of a Prynce, who was called Ed∣warde. Anno. 32. Iohn M. Norman M. Draper M. Iohn Waldern S. Thomas Coke S.1453 Before this Maiors yeare, the Maior, sheriffes, and commons were wonte to ryde to Westmynster, when the Maior should take hys charge: but this Maior was rowed thyther by water: For the whiche, the water men made of hym a
songe, begynnyng, Row the boate Nor∣man &c. The fyre of enuye that a good space had couertely smouldered betwene the Duke of Yorke, and the Duke of So∣merset, with other of the Quenes coun∣sayle, at thys tyme brake out in hot and fierce flames of warres. In so muche, that betwene the Kynge, who defended these persones, and the Duke of Yorke, wyth hys alies,A battayle at saint Albons. at Sainct Albons a cru∣ell battayle was foughte: In the ende wherof, the victory fell to the Duke of Yorke. And on the kynges partye was slayne the Duke of Somerset, the Erle of Northumberlande, the Lorde Clyf∣forde, wyth many other honorable men knyghtes and Squyers. After whyche tyme, the Duke wyth great reuerence broughte the Kynge frome Sainct Al∣bons to London. Where by a Parlya∣mente, hee was made Protectour of the realme, the Crie of Salisbury Chaun∣cellour, and the Erle of Warwyke cap∣tayne of Calice. Anno. 33. 1454Stephen Maf. Foster Maf. Iohn Field S. williā Tailor S.
This yeare in London was a greate fray at saint Martyns le grand,A great fraye in London by saintuary mē by sainc∣tuary men, who issued foorth and hurte diuers citisens: but it was appeased by the Maior and other. There was suche greuous complaints made therof to the Kyng by the deane of Sainct Martins, that the liberties of the citie were in pe∣rill to be seysed. Anno. 34. William M. Marrow M. Grocer M. Iohn Yong S.1455 Tho. Dulgraue S. By meanes of the Quene and other lordes,A ryot in Lō¦don agaynst ye Lombardes. the duke of Yorke was dischar∣ged of his protectorshyp: whyche thyng was cause of newe grudge and malice. A great ryot committed in London a∣gaynst the Lombardes and Italians, because a mercers seruant was caste in pryson for strikyng an Italian. Anno. 35. Thomas M. Caninges M. Grocer M. Iohn Steward S. Rafe Uerney S.1456 At Erith within .xii. miles of London were taken .iiii. wonderful fishes:Great fyshes taken. wher∣of one was called Mors Marina, the second
a swoorde fyshe, the other twoo were whales. A fleete of Frenchemenne landed at Sandwych,Sandwitche spoyled. and spoyled the towne with great cruelty. Anno. 36. Godfrey M. 1457Boleyne M. Mercer M. Williā Edward S. Tho. Rayner S. A fained agremēt was made betwene the Kyng, the Quene, and the Duke of Yorke with his retinue:A great pro∣cession. for ioye wher∣of, a generall procession was celebrated in sainct Paules at London. At whyche solempne feast, the King in habite royal and his diademe on hys heade, kept hys state in procession: before whome wente hand in hande, the Duke of Somerset, the Erle of Salisbury: the Duke of Ex∣cester, and the Erle of Warwike: and so one of the one faction, an other of the other sect. And behynde the kynge, the Duke of Yorke ledde the Quene, with greate familiaritie to all mens syghtes. But wo worth dissimulation: for theyr bodies were ioyned by hande in hande, whose heartes were farre in sunder, as appered shortly after.
Anno. 37. Tho. Scot M Draper M Rafe Iosselyn S. Rich. Medthā S.1458 The noble scyenco of printynge was founde in Germany at Magunce by one Iohn Cuthenbergus,The Science of pryntynge a knight: he found moreouer the Inke by his deuyce, that printers vsed .xvi. yeare after printyng was founde, which was the yeare of our Lord .1458. one Conradus an Almayn brought it into Rome: & Nicolas Iohn∣son a frenche man dyd greatly polyshe & garnishe it. And now it is dispersed tho∣rough the whole worlde, as saythe Polie¦dore Virgile. William Caxton mercer of London fyrst brought it into Englande: aboute the yeare of our Lord .1471. and practised the same in the abbey of sainte Peter at Westmynster. The Duke of Yorke, the Erles of Sa¦lisburye and Warwicke, with a greate hoste met the Kyng and other lordes of England vpon Bloreheath nere to Lō∣don:Bloreheathe fyeide. where because Andrew Trollop a captayn of Calice, the nyght before the battaile should haue ben, fledde with a companye of the beste souldiours to the Kynges parte. The Duke of Yorke,
the Earles of Marche, Salisbury, and Warwyke, mystrustyng them selues to bee to weake, departed wyth a preuye companye, and fledde: The Duke into Irelande, the .iii. Erles into Gernesey: and after to Calais, without any nota∣ble battayle. Symōd Eyre deceased.This yeare deceased the famous cite∣sen of London Symond Eyre: Who (as before is saide) builded the Leaden hall in London: and in the chapel of the sayd hall was written in Latine, as foloweth in Englisshe: The honourable and fa∣mous marchant Symond Eire founder of this worke, once Maior of this Citie, Citezen and draper of the same, depar∣ted oute of this life, the .xviii. daie of September, the yeare of the Incarna∣tion of Christe .1459. and the .38. yeare of the reigne of King Henry the .vi. Anno. 38. 1459William M. Hulyn M. Fishmonger M. Io. Plūmar S. Io. Stocker S. The .iii. Erles cōming frō Calice with a pussaunt armie, the .ix. daie of Iulie mette Kinge Henrie at Northampton,
and gaue hym strong battayle.A battayle at Northamptō In the ende wherof the victorie fell to ye erles, and the kynges host was dispersed, cha∣sed, and many slayne: amonge whiche was the Duke of Buckingham, the erle of Shrewesburie, the lorde Egremount, with other, and the kyng taken in the fielde. The Duke of Yorke retornyng into Englande,The Duke of Yorke made clayme to the crowne. made suche clayme to the crowne, that by consent of a parliament he was proclaymed heyre apparaunte, and all his progeny after hym. Margarete the Quene, in this meane tyme in all haste possible, had gathered a company of Northern men: and neare to a towne in the North, called Wake∣fielde, in a cruell fyght discomfited and slew the Duke of Yorke,A battayle as Wakefielde. with his sonne the erle of Rutlande, the erle of Salys∣bury, was taken prysoner with dyuerse other noble men. Anno. 39. Rich. Lee M. Grocer. M. Rich. Flemyng S1460 Iohn Lambard S The Quene with hir retyne we neare saynt Albons,The seconde battaile at S. Albons. discomfited the earle of Warwick and the Duke of Norfolke, & delyuered kyng Henry hys husband.
Edward erle of March, & eldest sonne to the Duke of Yorke: came vp to Lon∣don with a myghty power of Marchmē, accompanyed with the earle of War∣wycke, and by agreement of a councell, was proclaymed kynge of Englande, and called Edwarde the fourth: shortly after, he pursued kyng Henry towarde Yorke, where he gaue a sore battayle to the kyng and his company.A battayle at Sherborn on Palmeson∣daye. This fyght was so cruell and fyers, that in the field and chase were slayne .xxx. thousand of the commons besyds men of name: of the whiche were the erles of Northum∣berlande, and Westmerlande, the lorde Clyfford, Androwe Trollep, and other, to the number of eleuen.Kyng Henry the syxt fayne to flye the lād And kynge Henry lost all, and was fayne to flee the lande, when he had reigned eight and thyrty yeres .vi. monethes, and foure dayes. And Quene Mar∣garet with the yong prynce fled to her father the Duke of An∣geowe.
King Edwarde the fourth. Anno Regni .1. EDwarde the fourth,1460 began his dominion ouer this Re∣alme of Englād, the fourth daye of Marche, in the yere of our lorde .1460. and lefte the same the .ix. daye of April, in the yere 1483. so he reigned .xxii. yeres one mo∣neth and fyue dayes. He was a man of noble courage, and great wyt: but in his tyme was muche trouble and vnquiet∣nes in the realme. Anno. 1. Hughe Wiche M. Iohn Looke. S.1461 George Irelande. S. This yere the Staplers of Calless de¦manded of kyng Edward .18. thousand poūds, which they had lēt him to main∣teyne his warres against kyng Henry, but their sute was smally regarded, and lastly denyed. Anno. 2. Thomas Coke M. Wil. Hampton S1462 Barth Iames S Margarete the Quene, and wyfe to Henry the sixt, landed in Englād about the beginning of Nouember, but ha∣uyng small succour and euyll fortune:
was fayne to take the seas agayne, and by tempest of weather, was dryuen into Scotland. Anno. 3. 1463Mathewe Philippe Goldsmyth M. Robert Basset S Th. Muschāpe S The lorde Mountague, hauynge the rule of the North,A battayle at Exham. discomfited kyng Hē∣ry, commyng out of Scotlande with a great power, to recouer the crowne: this is called the battayle of Exhā, in which were taken the Duke of Somerset, the lorde Hungerford, the lord Roas, which were after put to death wt many other. Kyng Ed∣ward secretly maried.Kyng Edward was secretly maried to Elizabeth Gray, late wife of syr Iohn Graye: at whiche mariage was none present, but the king, his spouse, the Du¦ches of Bedford, the priest, twoo gentle women, and a yonge man to helpe the priest to masse. For which mariage rose great variance betwene the kynge and the erle of Warwick, his chief fryende and mainteyner. Kyng Henry takē prysonerThis yere was kyng Henry taken in a woodde in the North countrey, by one named Cantlowe, and arested by the erle of Warwicke, and presented to the
kyng Edwarde, and sent to the tower, where he remayned longe after in the Dungyon. Anno. 4. Raufe Iosse∣lyn Draper M. Iohn Tate S.1464 Iohn Stone S. This yere the kyng ordeyned a newe coigne,A new coign as the ryall, the angell, the halfe aungell, and the farthyng: ryals were x. s. the angel .vi. s. viii. d. And the grots were made of lesse value then they were by .viii. d. in an oūce. The siluer that be∣fore was at .ii. s. viii. d. the ounce, was nowe inhaunced to .iii. s. iiii. d. the oūce, and fyne golde that before was .xxx. s. the ounce, was now inhaunced to .xl. s. the ounce. And this yere was Queene Elizabeth crowned at westmynster on Whytson∣daye, or the .xxvi. daye of Maye. Anno. 5. Raufe Uer∣ney Mercer. M. Sir Hē. weuer S Wil. Cōstātin S1465 This yere the .xi. daye of February, the Queene was delyuered of a daugh∣ter, who was named Elizabeth. Anno. 6. S. Io. Yong Grocer. M. Iohn Brown S1466 Henry Brice S
Iohn Darbie Alderman, for that he refused to paye for the cariage awaye of a dead dogge lying at his gate, and for vnmete language, whiche he gaue vnto the Maior, was by a court of Aldermen assessed with the fyne of fyue pounde, whiche he payed euery peny. Anno. 7. 1467Thomas Owlegraue M. Hūf. Heyford S Th. stalbroke S Syr Thomas Cooke, alderman of London, was accused of treason, and arraygned of the same, and founde not gyltye: but yet by reason of the Lorde Treasorer, who was not his friende, he was deteyned in prison, and coulde not be delyuered vntyll he had fyned with the kyng for .8000. poundes which he payed. A greate iustes was in Smythfyelde betwene the lorde Scales, and the ba∣stard of Burgoyne. Anno. 8. 1468Wil. Tay∣ler Grocer. M. Symō Smith S. Wil. Hariot S. This William Tapler Maior of Lō∣don afore named, gaue to the citie of Lō∣don certaine tenementes, for the whiche the citie is bounde to paye for euer, at
euery fiftene to be graūted to the kyng, for all such people as shal dwel in Cord∣wayner strete warde, that shall be sessed at .xii. d. the piece, or vnder. Which cha∣ritable worke ought not to be forgottē, but remayne in remēbraunce to the exā∣ple of them who are able to do the lyke. The grudge whiche the erle of War∣wyke had conceyued against kyng Ed∣ward for the forsayde mariage, declared it selfe openly, so that he adioyned hym with the Duke of Clarence the kynges brother, and by their meanes styrred so the Northren men, that they dyuers ty∣mes rebelled and turned the kynge and the realme to much trouble.A battayle at Banbery. But short∣ly the kyng so demeaned hym selfe, that the rebelles were suppressed. Wherfore the erle of Warwych, perceyuynge hys part to be weakened, fled with the duke of Clarence, and other into Fraunce. Anno. 9. Rich. Lee Grocer. M. Rich. Gardiner S.1469 Robert Drope S. The Duke of Clarence, the earles of Warwycke, Penbroke, and Oxenford,
landed at Darthmouth, to whome by meanes of proclamations, that were publyshed in the name of kyng Henry, the commons gathered in so great com∣panies,K. Edwards fled into Flā∣ders. that Edward fearyng his part, fled into Flaūders to the Duke of Bur∣goyne. Then was Henry the syxt set at lybertie, and agayne proclaymed kynge by meanes of the erle of Warwyck and other, and Edward proclaymed vsurper of the crowne: but that contynued not longe. Execution.The erle of Worcester was beheaded at the tower hyll, and his body with the head was buried in the blacke fryers churche. Anno. 10. 1470Io. Stock∣ton Mercer M. Iohn Crosby S. Iohn Warde. S. Queene Elizabeth wyfe to Edwarde the fourth, beynge in the sanctuary of westmynster, was deliuered of a prince, who afterward was Edward the fifth. Kyng Edward beyng retorned out of Flaunders, arryued in the North parte of England, with a very small company of soldiours: but by meanes that he vsed and through his brother ye Duke of Cla∣rence, who turned now to hys parte, he
came so puisaunt to London that he en∣tred the citie, and tooke kyng Henry in the Byshops palaice, and than went a∣gaynst the erle of Warwick,Barnet finde on Easterday. whom he vanquyshed and slewe with his brother Marques Mountage, on Glademore∣heath nere Barnet, ten myles from Lō∣don. Shortly after, at Tewkesbury,A battayle at Teukesbury. he ouerthrew Queene Margaret, the wife of Henry. In whiche battayle was takē the sayde Margaret with Edwarde the Prynce her sonne, the Duke of Somer∣set, and dyuers other. Kyng Edwarde a∣gaine receyued his royaltie, and was ta¦ken for kyng, and vncourteously slewe prynce Edwarde sonne of Henry the .6. after he had taken hym prysoner:Crueltie. as by smyting hym on the face with his gaūt∣let: after which stroke, his seruaūtes so∣daynly fell vpon hym, and slewe hym out of hande: so sayth Halle, Fabian, and Raistall. A commocion styred by the bastarde Fawcombrydge,The suburbes without Al∣gate and By∣shopsgate burnte. and the commons of Kent, and Essex, who robbed and spoy∣led the suburbes of the cytie of London, and fyred Byshops gate and Algate. Henry the syxt was murdered in the towre of London,Murder. and buried at Chert∣sey,
and after remoued to Wyndsor: he founded the Colledge and schole at Ea∣ton, nyghe to Wyndsor. Anno. 11. 1471Williā Ed∣ward Gro. M. Iohn Alleyn S. Ioh. Chelley S. The erle of Oxenforde was sent pry∣soner to Guynes, where he remayned prysoner, so longe as Edwarde the fourthe reygned, whiche was twelue yeres in all, whiche tyme the lady hys wyfe, myght neuer come to hym, nor had any thyng to lyue vpon, but what people of theyr charities woulde geue hyr, or what she got by hyr nedle. Anno. 12. 1472William Hampton Fyshmō. M. Iohn Browne S Th. Bledlowe. S This Mayor was a good iusticer, he punyshed in hys yere many Bawdes and Strompettes, and caused them to ryde with raye hoodes, and made a payre of Stockes to bee sette in euerye warde of the cytie. Anno. 13. 1473Iohn Tat Mercer M. William Stocker S Robert Bellisdon S
In this yere the erle of Excester was founde dead in the sea, betwene Douer and Calleys. One Iohn Gose, was burned at the tower hyll for heresy.Execution  towre hyll. Anno. 14. Ro. Drope Draper. M. Edmūd Shaw S. Thomas Hyll S.1474 This Robert Drope Maior of Londō,The conduite in Cornehyll enlarged. afore named, buylded the east ende of ye conduite in Cornehyll. Kynge Edwarde required of his sub∣iectes a beneuolence, whiche they gaue him, and so he sailed into Fraunce with a great armie, to aide the Duke of Bur∣goyne: but by sute of the Frenche kyng, a peace was concluded for seuen yeres. Anno. 15. Robert Bas¦set Salter. M. Hugh prince S. Ro. colwich S.1475 This Maior dyd sharp correction vpō Bakers, for makyng of lyght bread, in so muche that he set dyuers of them on the pyllory, whose names I pase ouer. And a woman named Agnes Deyntie, was also there punyshed for sellynge of false mynged butter. Anno. 16. Rauf Ios∣seleyn Dra. M. Rich. Rawfō S.1476 Wil. Horne.
A part of Lō¦don wall new buylded.This yere by the dyligence of this Maior, the newe wall of London, from Creplegate to Byshopsgate, was made as it nowe is, the Maior with his com∣pany of the Drapers, made all that part betwyxt Alballowes church in the same wall and Byshops gate, of their owne proper costes: and the other companies made ye other deale, whiche was a great worke to be done in one yere, cōsidering the purueyaunce of the stuffe. Anno. 17. 1477Humfrey Heyford Goldsmith M. Henry Colet S. Iohn Stocker S. This yere the Duke of Clarence se∣conde brother to the kyng,Murder. beyng pryso∣ner in the towre, was secretly put to death, and drowned in a barell of mal∣uesey, within the sayd towre. Anno. 18. 1478Richard Gardyner Mercer M. Rob. Herding S. Robert Byfeld S. A great pesti∣lence.This yere was a great dearth, and also a great death at London, and in dy∣ers other partes of this Realme. Anno. 19.
Bartholo. Iames Draper M. Thomas Ilam S. Iohn Warde S.1479 This Thomas Ilam sheryffe afore named, newely buylded the great con∣duyte in Cheape of his owne propre¦costes. This yere at the towre hyll wereExecution. .4. felons hanged and burned for robbyng of a churche. Anno. 20. Iohn Brown M. William Daniel S. William Bacon S.1480 This yere the kynge requyred great sommes of money to be lent hym of the citizens of London, who after diuerse assemblies graunted to lende him .5000. marke, whiche was repaied agayne in the next yere folowyng. Anno. 21. William Hariate Draper M. Robert ae S Wil. Wykyng S1481 Rich. Chawry. S This yere the Scottes began to stirre, against whom kyng Edwarde sent the Duke of Gloucester, and diuers other, whiche retourned agayne without any notable battayle. Anno. 22.
1482Edmond Shawe goldsmith M. Wil. Whyte S. Iohn Mathew S. This Edmund Shaw builded Criple gate in London. Kyng Edward makyng great proui∣sion for warre into Fraunce, ended hys lyfe the .ix. of Apryll, in the yeare of our Lorde .1483. when he had reigned .22. yeares .i. moneth and v. dayes. He was buryed at Wyndsor, leauyng after him two sonnes, Edwarde the prince, & Ry∣charde Duke of Yorke, with .v. daugh∣ters, as Elizabeth that after was quene Cicelie, Anne, Katherine, and Bridget. King Edward the fifthe. Anno. 1. 1483EDward the fyft of the age of .xi. ye∣res began hys reigne ouer this Re∣alme of England the .ix. of Apryll, in the yeare of our Lord .1483. and was murdred by Richarde Duke of Glouce∣ster the same yere, the .22. day of Iune. so he reigned .2. monethes and .xi. days. Thys Edwarde was neuer crowned,
but cruelly murdred by Richarde Duke of Gloucester his vnnatural vncle: who after vsurped the Crowne, and was cal¦led Richarde the third. King Richard the thirde. Anno Regni .1. RIchard the thyrd brother to Edwarde the fourthe,1483 tho∣rough many cruel dedes last¦ly obteyned the Crowne of England: Fyrst to compas his wycked and dyuelyshe purpose: hee put to death those noble men, which he thought wold not consent to hys mynde in all thynges: the other he corupted with ryche gyftes: then by hys vntruth and falshode,Quene Elisa¦beth toke sain¦tuary at west mynster. he wrested from the quene Elizabeth (beynge than in sanctuarie:) Rychard her yonger sonne, and brother to the Prynce: Thyrdly he caused to be publyshed at Poules Crosse, by one doc∣tour Shawe that Edward the fourthe, hys elder brother was not ryghtely be∣gotten of hys mother, but by aduou∣trye: and therefore that neyther he, nor hys chyldren had ryght to the Crowne:
or as some wryte, he caused to be publy∣shed, that the prynce & his brother were not ryghtfully begotten of Queene Eli∣zabeth: and therfore the ryghte of the crowne to be his, whiche in fyne he toke vpon hym, and to make a perfect worke of his crueltie, shortly therupon shame∣fully murdered the two yonge chyldren in the towre of London,Murder. and vsurped the crowne two yeres and two monethes. Anno Regni .1. 1483Robert By∣lisdō Habar∣dasher. M. Tho. Norlād S. W. Martyn S. Grudge began betwene kynge Ry∣chard the thyrde, and his nere friende the Duke of Buckyngham: in so much that for displeasure therof, the Duke cō∣spired with dyuers other noble men a∣gaynst hym, and intended to bryng into the lande Henry erle of Rychmonde, as ryghtful heyre to the crowne. This Hē∣ry had fled into Brytayne, fearyng the crueltie of Edward ye fourth: for whiche conspiracie, the saide Duke of Bucking∣ham with dyuers other, was shortly af∣ter taken and put to death. Henry erle of Rychemounte, aided with the Britaynes, entended to arriue
in Wales: but hys nauie was so scatte∣red with a contrary wynd, that he was fayne to retyre backe agayne into Bry∣tayne for that tyme. Dyuers noble men detestyng the tyranny of kyng Richard, fled into Britayne. and there adioyned them with the Erle of Richemount. Anno. 2. Thomas Hyll Grocer M. Richard Chester S Tho. Britayne S1484 Rafe Astrie S This Thomas Hill buylded the Cun∣dyte in Gracious strete. The noble prince Henry erle of Rich∣mount, with a small company of Fren∣chemen, landed at Mylford hauen, nygh Pembroke, whose commynge when it was hearde of in Wales, dyuers noble men with their retinue, forsakyng Ry∣chard, gathered to hym in greate num∣ber: so that his strengthe in short space greatly increased. At a village nere to Leicester, called osworthe, he mette with his enemies; where betwene them was foughten a sharpe battaile:A battayle at Bosworth. In con∣clusion, kyng Rycharde with dyuers o∣ther, was slayne, and Henry obteyned a noble victory: After whyche conquest,
he was immediatly crowned kynge of England in the field:K. Richarde slayne in the fielde. and the dead corps of kyng Richard was broughte to Ley∣cester and there buried at the Gray fri∣ers churche. King Henry the seuenth. Anno Regni .1. 1485HEnrie the seuenth began hys reigne ouer this realme of En¦gland the .22. day of August in the yeare of our Lorde .1485. and deceased in the yeare .1509. the .xxii. day of Apryll: So he reigned .xxiii. yea∣res, and .viii. monethes: he was a prince of meruailous wysedome and polycie, and of great iustice, temperaunce, and grauitie. He so behaued hym in the time of his Reigne, that not withstandynge manye and greate occasions of trouble vnquietnes and warre. Hee kepte his Realme in ryghte good rule and order. Wherfore he was greately estemed & reuerenced of foreyne princes. Anno. 1. 1485Hugh Brice M. Goldsmyth M. Iohn Tate S Io. Swanne S
This yeare maister Thomas Ilam Alderman of London and marchant of the Staple at Calaice newe made the great Cundite in Cheape,The greate Cundyte in Chepe newe buylded. of hys owne goodes. The Kynge ordeyned a numbre of chosen Archers,The first yeo¦men of the garde. and other stronge and hardy persons, to geue daily attendance on his person, whom he named yeomen of his garde. This yeare was the sweatyng syck∣nes,A sweatynge sycknes. of the whyche a wonderfull mul∣titude dyed: and in London besydes o∣ther there dyed .ii. Maiors, within .viii. dayes, and .vi. aldermen. This yeare the beautyfull Crosse in Cheape was newe buylded and made.Arnolds chro¦nicle of Lon∣don. The Crosse in Cheape buylded. Towarde the buyldyng wherof, Tho∣mas Fysher mercer, gaue .vi. C. marks. Anno. 2. Sir Hen∣ry Colet mercer M. Iohn Perciuall S.1486 Hugh Clopto S. This yere the king maried Elisabeth eldest daughter of Edward the fourth:Kyng Henry the .vii. ma∣ried lady Eli∣sabeth, daugh∣ter to K. Ed¦ward the .iiii. by whyche meanes the twoo famylyes of Yorke and Lancaster, the whyche
had long caused diuision, was knytt to∣gether in one. About this tyme Francis Louell, and Humfrey Stafford rebelled in ye north: with them was Martin Swart. Which commotion was quieted by the policy of the Duke of Bedford,A battayle at Stoke the 16 daye of Iune but not without bloud shedde: For there was slayne the Erle of Lyncoln, the lord Louell, Mar∣tyn Swart, & other, aboue .iiii. thousand. And this yeare was borne prince Ar∣thure, in the moneth of September. Anno. 3. 1487Williā Horne Salter M. Iohn Fenkyll S. williā Remingtō S. This yere was quene Elizabeth crow∣ned at Westmynster vppon saynt Ka∣therines daye. Anno. 4. 1488Robert Tate Mercer M. williā Isake S Rafe Tinley S This yere was a taske of the .x. peny of all mens goodes and landes:A great taxe, the Earle of Northumber¦lande slayn. through which the commons of the northe slew the Earle of Northumberlande, wher∣fore Chamberlayne their capitayn with other was hanged at Yorke.
Anno. 5. Williā white Draper M. williā Capel S1489 Iohn Broke S This yeare one Roger Shauelocke slewe hym self:Desperation. For whole goodes was muche busynes betwene the kyngs am∣ner and the sheryffe. Anuo .6. Iohn Ma¦thewe mercer M. Hēry Coot S. Ro. Reuell S.1490 Hugh Hēberton S. Syr Robert Chamberlain beheaded.Execution. This yere the Kyng required a bene∣uolence, which was to hym granted to∣ward his iourney into France. Thys yeare Creplegate of London was new buylded at the costes and char¦ges of syr Edmūd Shaw goldsmith late Maior of the same citie.Creplegate of London buil∣ded. In Iuly was Henry the kyngs second sonne, borne at Grenewiche. This yeare the beautifull Cundyte in Gracious strete,Arnoldes cro¦nicles of Lon¦don. was begon to be buyl∣ded: The stone worke wherof was fy∣nished in the yeare .1494.The Cōdite in Gracious strete. But the fyrst water ran out therof, on the .xix. day of March, in the yere .1503. the .xix. yere of Henry the .vii. and not before. Whyche Cundyte was buylded at the costes and
charges of sir Thomas Hyll grocer: as it doth appeare by certaine verses, wri∣ten on the same Cundyte, as hereafter followeth. Thomas Hill knight, late Maior of this citie, with his wife dame Elisabeth, of their charity For the loue of God, & weale of the cōmonaltie Of their costs onely, thys thyng dyd edyfie, Out of the ground with all thyngs necessary. Anno. 7. 1491Hugh Clop¦ton mercer M. Tho. Wood S. Wil. Brown S. This yere kyng Henry toke hys voy∣age into France with a greate army to aide the Britōs against the french king Anno. 8. 1492Wil. Mar∣tin skinner M. Wil. Purchas S wil. Welbecke S This yere was a peace concluded be∣twene the kings of England & France, and kyng Henry returned agayne into England.A fray in Lō¦don agaynste the Styliard men. And this yere was a fraye or ryote made vppon the Easterlynges or Stilliard men, by Mercers seruauntes, and other: For the whyche dyuers of them were sore punished, and the chiefe aucthors were kept long in prison.
Anno. 9. Rafe stry fish monger M. Robert Fabiā S1493 Iohn wynger S This yeare wheat was solde for .vi.d. the bushell,Good cheape wheate and baye salte. and baye salte at .iii.d. ob. the bushell. Anno. 10. Rich. Chaw¦ry salter M. Nicol. Alwin S.1494 Iohn warner S. This yeare was white hearyng sold at .xl.d. a barell beyng good.Herrynges at iii.s.iiii.d. ye barreli. Dyuers gentylmen in England were appeached of treason, and for fauoryng the conspiracie of Parkyn Warbeck: of whiche some were pardoned, and some put to death. Perkyn Warbecke, whyche by the counsayle of Margarete of Burgoyne,Perkyn war¦becke. namyng hymselfe Rycharde of Yorke: Kynge Edwardes seconde sonne, arry∣ued in Kente: where hee was dryuen backe by the Uplandyshe menne, and other of the inhabitauntes of the coun∣treye, wyth the losse of dyuers of hys men:Great execu∣tion of .160. persons. and shortely after were hanged an hundred and three score persones of the forenamed Rebelles, in dyuerse and sundrye coastes of Englande.
The .v. captains were Mountford, Cor∣bet, Whitebelt, Quintin, and Genyne. Anno. 11. 1495Syr Hē∣ry Colet mercer M. Tho. Kneisworth S Henry Somer S The Scots brake into the north par∣tes of England by the setting on of Per¦kyn Werbecke, and dyd muche harme to the borderers. Anno. 12. 1496Iohn Tate mercer M. Iohn Shaw S Rich. Haddon S This Iohn Tate builded saint Antho¦nies in London: a goodly foundation, as shall hereafter be declared. Where kynge Henry made prepara∣tion for warre into Scotland,Black heath ficide. by means of a payment that was graunted to the Kyng by act of parliament, a new com∣motion was made by the Commons of Cornewall: whyche vnder the leadyng of the lorde Audeley, wyth Mighell Io∣seph the Black smyth, and dyuers other came to Blacke heath, where the kyng met with them, and discomfited the re∣bells,Execution. and toke theyr Captaines, which were shortly after, drawen, hanged, and
quartered: The lorde Audeley was be∣headed at the tower hyll, the .xxviii. day of Iune. Kyng Henry sent an army into Scot∣lande under the guydyng of the Erle of Surrey, and the lorde Neuell, whyche made sharpe warre vpon the Scots. A mariage concluded betwene prince Arthur, and lady Katherine the kyngs daughter of Spayn. Perkyn Werbecke landed agayne in Cornewall,Perkin War¦beck besiegeth Excetor. and assaulted the towne of Excetour and other places: but finally he toke the saintuarie of Beaudly, and was after pardoned his life. Anno. 13. Williā purchase mercer M. Bartholo. Rede S.1497 Tho. windought S. A peace proclaimed betwene the kin∣ges of Englande and Scotlande for the terme of both theyr lyues. Perkyn Warbecke endeuoured to steale away secretly out of the land: but he was taken agayne by his kepers, and by the kynges commaundement cast in the Tower of London: where after he was shewed at westminster, & in Chepe
on scaffoldes, and stocked, to the great wonderment of many people. This yeare one Godfrey a carpenter, toke downe the Wethercock of Paules and set it vp agayne.EdVvarde Haule. English mar∣chantes recei∣ued with pro∣cession.This yeare the Englishe marchants (beyng long absent out of Flaunders) commynge into Flaunders with mar∣chandise, wer receyued into And warpe with generall procession: so glad was the towne of theyr returnyng, whiche was by theyr absence sore hyndred and impoueryshed. Anno. 14. 1498Sir Iohn Perciuall mar. tailer M. Tho. bradbury S Stephē Ienins S Execution at saint Tho∣mas watryn∣ges.At saincte Thomas Watryng a stry∣pling was put to execution, whych cal∣led hymselfe Edwarde Earle of War∣wycke, and sonne of George Duke of Clarence: whiche George synce the be∣gynnyng of Kyng Henries reygne was kept secretly in the tower of London.S. Antonies church in Lō∣don buylded. Thys yere master Iohn Tate aldermā of Lōdon began to edifie S. Anthonies
churche iu London with a notable free schole to the same adioynynge, and also one almes house for poore people. The .xvi. day of Iuly, beyng sonday, and the next sondaye folowyng .xii. per∣sones bare faggots at Paules crosse. Anno. 15. Nicholas Alwyn mercer M. Iames wilforde S.1499 Richard Bronde S. This yeare the .xvi. daye of Nouem∣ber was arraygned at Westmynster,Perkin wer∣becke & other hāged, drawē and quartered at London. Perkyn Warbeck and .iii. other, which Perkyn, and one Iohn a Water, were executed at Tyborne, the .xxiii. daye of the same moneth of Nouember.Execution at London. And soone after, on the .xxviii. daye of Nouember was the Erle of Warwike put to deathe at the Tower hylle, and one Blewet and Atwood at Tyborne. This yere was a great death in Lon∣don:A great pesti¦lence. Whereof (after Fabyan) dyed .xx. thousande, but after Halle hys Chro∣nicle .xxx. thousand. In Maye the Kynge and Quene sai∣led to Calaice:The kynge & quene sayled to Calyce. and at saynct Peters, they mette wyth the Duke of Bur∣goyne,
Anno. 16. 1500William Remington Fishmōger M. Iohn Dawes S. williā Stede S. Arnolds chro¦nicles. Richmonde Baynards ca¦stell & Grene¦wich buildedThis yere the Kyng buylded new his manour at Shene, & changed the name therof, and named it Richemont: and he buylded newe his place called Baynar∣des castell in London, and repayred his place at Grenewiche, with muche other buyldynge. Syr Edmund de la Poole, Duke of Suffolke, departed secretly: by meane of whom, was lyke to haue ben a newe insurrection. Kyng Henry trouthplighted his dau∣ghter Margaret to Iames the Kyng of Scottes: and the .4. day of October lan¦ded at Plymmouth, Katherin daughter of the kyng of Spayne:s. Anthonies churche fyny∣shed. and thys yeare was fynished by master Tate the chur∣che of sainct Anthonies. Anno. 17. 1501sir Iohn Shawe goldsmith M. Sir Lau. Ailmer S Henry Hede S This syr Iohn Shawe mayre of Lon∣don before named, caused the kitchens
and other houses of office to be bnylded at the Guylde hall of London, and sens that tyme the Mayors feastes hath ben there kept: where as before that tyme they were kept eyther at the Grocers or the marchant Taylers Halle. On saint Erkenwalds day, prince Ar∣thur,Prince Ar∣thur maried. beyng but .xv. yeare olde, was ma∣ried unto Katherin, daughter to Fer∣dinando Kynge of Spayne, the .xiiii. of Nouember,Arnolde. whiche Arthur shortly af∣ter departed this mortal life at Ludlow and was buried at Worcester. The dyche from Thames to Holborn bridge was new caste. Anno. 18. Bartho. Rede Goldsmith M. Hēry Keble S1502 Nico. Nines S In this yere began the newe worke of the Kynges chapell at Westmynster,The death of Quene Elisabeth. and Elizabeth Quene of England dyed at the Tower of London in chyldebed, and was buried at westminster. Short∣ly after was dame Margarete the Kyn∣ges daughter,The kynge of Scottes ma∣ried. maryed to the Kynge of Scottes. This yeare the felowshyp of Taylers in London purchased a graunte of the
Kynge to bee called Merchaunts Tay∣loures. Anno. 19. 1503sir williā Capell Draper M. Christo. Hawes S. Robert wattes S. Tho. Granger S. The .xxi. daye of Nouember, was a dreadfull fyre vppon the north ende of London bridge.Fyre on Lon¦don brydge. And vpon the .vii. daye of Ianuary were certayne houses con∣sumed wyth fyre agaynst sainte Botul∣phes church in Thames strete: and the xxvii. day of Marche was an house bur∣ned against saint Martins le grand, and the same day was hurt done wyth fyre in the parishe of saint Peter the poore. This yeare was holden a parliament where was ordeyned a new coyne of sil∣uer:A new coyne as grotes, halfe grotes, and shyl∣linges with halfe faces: and in the same parliament was graunted to the Kyng the loane of .36000. li. Anno. 20. 1504Iohn Winger Grocer M. Roger Achilley S Williā Browne S This yeare the lyberties of the Cy∣tie of London were agayne confirmed. Anno. 21.
Thomas Kneisworth Fishmōger M. Rich. Shore S. Rog. Groue S.150 This Thomas Kneysworthe Maior of London,The cundite at Byshops gate buylded. of his owne goodes, buyl∣ded the Cundyte at Byshoppes gate. Moreouer, he gaue to the companye of the Fishmongers, certayn tenements, for the whyche they be bounde to fynde iiii. scholers that studye arte: two to be at Oxenforde, the other two at Cam∣bridge: euery of them to haue .iiii. li. the yere for their exhibition. They be boūd also to geue to .xiii. aged poore people of their company, to euery of them euerye weke .viii.d. & to euery of them at Bar∣tylmeutide a winter garmēt of frise, or such like for euer. And also to geue to ye prysons of Newgate & Ludgate, euery yere .xi.s. whose notable workes by him done, are wel worthy of remembrance, and to be folowed of others. Edmonde dela Poole was conueyed through the citie vnto the tower of Lon¦don, and there left as prisoner. This yere Philip king of Castile and hys wyfe,The kynge of Castyle lāded in Englande. were weather dryuen into Englande, as they were passynge
towarde Spayn, who were honorably receiued by the Erle of Arundell at the kynges appoyntment with .iii. C. horses all by torchelyght. Anno. 22. 1506Sir Rich. Haddon mercer M. wil. Copinger S Tho. Iohnson S wil. fitz william S Prisoners de¦lyuered.Thys yere the kyng of his goodnesse deliuered out all prisoners in London, whiche lay for .xl. s. aud vnder. Anno. 23. 1507William Browne mercer M. Williā Butler S. Iohn Kyrkeby S. In the ende of Aprill dyed william Browne maior, and for hym was cho∣sen Laurence Ailemer draper, who ser∣ued out that yere. This yeare syr William Capell was put in suite by the Kynge for certayne thynges by hym done in the tyme of his Maioraltie. Anno. 24. 1503Stephen Genings M. M. tailer M. Tho. Ermeu S. Rich. Smith S. This yere was finyshed the goodlye
hospitall of the Sauoy,The hospitall of the Sauoy buylded. nere vnto Cha∣ring crosse, whiche was a notable foun∣dation for the pore done by king Henry. the seuenth. This yere dyed this moste noble and famous prince kyng Henry the seuenth which was in the yere .1509. the .xxii. day of April,The new cha¦pell at West∣minster buyl∣ded by kynge Hēry the .vii. when he had reigned .23. yeres, and eight moneths, and was buryed at Westminster in the new chapel, which he had caused to be builded: and lefte be∣hynd him Henry prince of Wales, whi∣che after him succeded, lady Margaret quene of Scottes, and lady Mary pro∣mised to Charles kyng of Castile. King Henry the eight Anno Regni .1. THe renoumed prince Hē∣ry the eight,1509 beyng .xviii. yeres of age, succeded his father in the gouernance of this realme, and began his reigne the .xxii. day of Aprill, in the yere of our Lord .1509. and deceased in the yere .1546. the .xxviii. day of Ianuary: so he reygned .37. yeares .ix.
monethes and .vi. days. Of personage he was tall and myghtie, in wytte and me∣morie excellent: of suche maiestie tem∣pered with humanitie and gentlenesse, as was comely in so great a prince. Margaret mother to Henry the .viii. buylded .ii. colledges in Cambridge: and Willyam byshop of Lyncolne buylded Brasenos in Oxenford. Kyng Henry maried ladye Katherin his fyrst wyfe.Kyng Henry maried the lady Kathe∣rin late wyfe to prince Arthure. Richard byshop of Wynchester buyl∣ded Corpus Christi Colledge in Ox∣enforde. Anno. 1. 1509Thomas Bradbury mercer M George Monoxe S Iohn Doket S Thys yeare syr Rycharde Empson knyght, and Edmund Dudley Esquier, who had ben great counsaylours, to the late kyng Henry the seuenth, were be∣headed at the tower hyll the .xvii. daye of August: Whose attachement (wher∣vpon folowed ye execution) was thought to be procured by the malyce of theym, who wyth theyr auctoritie, in the late Kynges dayes were offended, orels to
shyft the noyse of the straight execution of penall statutes in the late Kynges dayes, by punyshment of those persons, so saythe Halle. Thys Edmonde Dud∣ley compyled one notable boke, and na∣med it the tree of common wealth: The oryginall copie whereof, I haue seene, though rudely written, worthy (for the excellencie thereof) to be written wyth letters of golde. A copy wherof, I haue geuen to the ryght honorable lorde, the Earle of Leicester. Sir Wylliā Fitz wylliās was disfran∣chysed because he would not be sheriffe. This yeare master doctor Colet deane of Poules erected a free schole in Pau∣les churche yarde in London,Paules scole buylded. and com∣mitted the ouersyght therof to the mai∣sters and wardeynes of the company of Mearcers: because hym selfe was borne in London, and sonne of Henry Colet, whoe was a Mearcer, and Maior of London. Anno. 2. Henry Kei∣bell mercer M. Iohn Milborn S Iohn Reste S1510 Henry, the fyrst son of king Hēry the right, was borne on new yeres day: for
ioy wherof, a great iustes was kepte at Westminster: & on saint Mathewes day folowyng the chylde dyed. Anno. 3. 1511Roger Achi¦ley Draper M. Nico. Shelton S Tho. Mirfyn S King Henry sent the lord Darcy with a goodly company of men into Spayne to ayde the kynge hys father in lawe a∣gainst the Moores: but ere he arriued, a peace was concluded betwene theym: wherefore shortely after he retourned home agayne. The same tyme syr Edwarde Poy∣nyngs (accompanied with the lord Clin¦ton, and dyuers other, was sente into Gelderland, with .xv. C. archers, to aide the prince of Castile, at the requeste of Margaret Duches of Sauoye, and Re∣gent of Flanders. Syr Edmond Haward and the lorde Thomas Haward toke Andrew Bar∣ton, and .150. Scots, with .ii. great ships. The kyng of Scottes requyred hys shyps that were lately taken to bee re∣stored, accordyng to the league: but an∣swer was made by kyng Hēry, that the matter perteined nothing to the league
because that Andrew Barton was a pi∣rate, and robber on the seas. The .xv. day of Ianuary was holden a parliament, in the which two fiftenes and two tenthes of the clergie wer grā∣ted to ayde the king in his warres, that he entended agaynst the French kyng. Anno. 4. William Copinger fishmōger M. Rob. Holdernes S Rich. Haddon S1512 Rob. Fērother S This yeare was finyshed the beauti∣full steple with the lanterne of Bowe∣churche in cheape. The lorde Marques Dorset (with di∣uers other lordes and knyghtes) was sent into Spain with an army of .13000. men, who (a good part of the sommer) dyd much harme in Guyon by spoilyng the countreis. But in wynter returned by meanes of a flixe, which fell among his men. Sir Edward Haward admirall of En∣glande, with a great nauie scowred the seas, and then went toward Britayne. Kyng Henry sent forth a nauy of .xxv. shyppes: among the which the Regent a shyppe royall was chiefe.
Sir Edward Haward lorde admirall of Englande through his to muche har∣dinesse was slayn in Britayn, after whō his brother syr Thomas Hawarde was made admirall by the Kyng. The nauies of Englande and France metynge at Britayne Baye,A battayle on the sea. foughte a cruell battaile, in the whiche the regent of England and a Caricke of Fraunce, beyng crappled together, were burned and their captaynes with theyr men all drowned, the englishe capitayn was sir Thomas Kneuet, who had wyth hym 700. men, in the frenche carricke was sir Piers Morgan with .900. men. Anno 5. 1513Williā Brown mercer M. Iohn Dawes S. Iohn Bridges S. Roger Basforde S. Kyng Henry beyng confederate with the Emperour and the kyng of Spayn, passed with a great power into France, where hauyng in wages vnder his ban∣ner the Emperor Maximilian, & all the nobilitie of Brabant, Flaunders & Hol∣land: he discomfited the whole power of France,Turney and Turwyn. & conquered Turwyn and the great citie of Turney. In thys time the
kynge of Scots, not withstandyng that he was sworn on the sacrament to kepe peace, inuaded this land with a myghty Armie: but by the good diligence of the Quene, and the policie and manhode of the Erle of Surrey the kynges lieute∣nant, he was hym selfe slayne, with .xi. of his erles, and the Scottes discomfy∣ted, but not wythout great losse of En∣glyshemen. Before this tyme the townes about London,Edvvarde Haule. as Islington, Horton, & suche other had so enclosed the common fields with hedges and dyches, that neyther the yong men of the citie myght shoote, nor the ancient persons walke for their pleasure, except either theyr bowes and arrowes wer broken or taken away, or the substanciall persons arested or endi∣ted, saying: That no Londoner shoulde go out of the citie, but in the hygh ways. This saying sore greued the Lōdoners, and sodainly this yeare a great number of the Citie, assembled in a mornyng, & a turner in a fooles cote cam crying tho∣rough the citie, shouels & spades: & so ma∣ny people folowed, yt it was wonder and within a short space al the hedges about
the townes were cast down, and the d∣ches filled, and euery thing made plain. The kynges counsaile hearyng of thys assemblie, came to the graye friers, and sent for the Maior and counsaile of the citie to knowe the cause, which declared to them the noysance done to ye citisens, and their commodities and liberties ta∣ken from them, though they wold not, yet the cōminaltie whiche were anoyed would plucke vp and remedy the same. When the kynges counsayle had heard the answer, they dissimuled the matter, and cōmanded the Maior to see that no other thynge were attempted, and to cal home the citisens, which when they had done their enterprise, came home before the kyngs coūsell, and the Maior departed without any more harme do∣yng: and soo after the fieldes were ne∣uer hedged. Sir Iohn Wallop burned diuers tou∣nes and villages in Normandie. Anno. 6. 1514George Monore Draper M. Iames Yarforde S. Iohn Mundye S. A peace concluded betwene England
and France, & Lewes the french kynge coupled in mariage with lady Mary the kynges syster: on newe yeres day folo∣wyng, he ended his life: wherfore king Henry sent agayne for his syster by the duke of Suffolke and other. This yere Richard Hunne a marchāt taylour of London was foūd hanged in Lollers tower. Anno. 7. sir williā Butler grocer M. Henry worley S. Richard Gray S.1515 Williā Baily S. Lady Mary kyng Henries daughter was borne at Grenewich in February.Lady Marye borne at Gre∣newyche. Lady Mary the kynges syster before maried to the Frenche kyng, returned into Englande: and shortely after was maried to the duke of Suffolke. Margaret Quene of Scottes, kynge Henries eldest syster, fled into Englād, and laye at Harbottell, where she was delyuered of a chyld, called Margaret. In Maie she came to London, where she taried a whole yeare before she de∣parted into Scotlande. Anno. 8. Iohn Rest Grocer M. Tho. Seimer S. Rich. Thurstō S.1516
A great frost.This yere, was suche a frost, that all men wyth cartes myght passe betwene Westminster and Lambeth. All May day.On May euen this maiors yeare, the begynnyng of the .ix. yere of kyng Hen∣ry was an insurrection of yong persons, agaynst aliens: of the whyche dyuers were put to execution, with theyr capi∣tayne Iohn Lincolne, a broker, and the resydue came to Westminster with hal∣ters about their neckes, and were par∣doned. This was called Euyl May day, whereof ye may reade in Edward Hall. And in May the Quene of Scottes re∣turned to her countrey agayne. Anno. 9. 1517Sir Thomas Erme Goldsmith M Th. Balorie S. Rich. Symō S. Many dyed in Englande of the swea∣tynge sicknes,The swea∣tyng sycknes. and in especially aboute London: wherfore the terme was one day kept at Oxenford, and adiourned a¦gayne to westminster. The admirall of Fraunce came into Englande as ambassadour with a great company of gentylmen. The citie of Turney was delyuered
agayne into the Frenche kyngs hande:The Citie of Turney yel∣ded frenche. for the whiche he should pay vi. C. thou∣sande crownes: and for the castell that the kynge buylded .iiii.C. thousand and 23000. poundes turnoys. A peace was concluded betwene the kinges of England France and Castile for terme of their lyues. Anno. 10. Thomas Myrfyn Skinner M. Iohn Alleyn S.1518 Iames Spencer S. This yeare the Erle of Surrey was sente into Irelande as deputie, and the Earle of Kyldare was of his office dys∣charged. Anno. 11. sir Iames Yarforde Mercer M. Iohn wilkinson S. Nicol. partrige S.1519 This yeare was greate preparation made for the kyngs goyng into France to mete the frenche kyng at Arde. As Kynge Henry was at Canter∣burye wyth the Queene, in a ready∣nesse to haue passed the sea, he hearde
of the Emperoures commynge, wyth whom he met at Douer, and accompa∣nied hym to Canterburie: where after the Emperor had saluted the quene his aunt: he toke shypping into Flanders: the last day of May kyng Henry passed ouer to Calais, and met with Francis the Frenche Kynge, at the campe be∣twene Arde and Guysnes: where was great triumphes and many goodly sigh¦tes, in so sumptuous maner, as the like had not ben sene. Immediatly after he met with the Emperour, with whome he went to Grauelyn, and the emperor retourned wyth hym to Calais, where he had great chere: after whyche tyme they departed, and kyng Henry retur∣ned into this realme. Anno. 12. 1520syr Iohn Bruge Draper M. Iohn Skeuingtō S Iohn Remble S In this Maiors yeare the .xvii. day of May, whyche was in the .13. yere of the Kynge,The duke of Buckynghā beheaded. was the duke of Buckyngham beheaded at London for treason: as ye may rede at large in Edward Hall his chronicles, the .12. and .13. yeare of Hen∣ry
the .viii. hys body with the head was buried at the frier Augustins at Lōdon. Kyng Henry wrate a boke against Lu¦ther, and therfore the byshop of Rome named hym defender of the faithe. To whiche booke Luther aunswered very sharply, nothyng sparing the auctoritie or maiestie of the kyng. The frenche Kynge attached all En∣glyshe mens goodes at Burdeaux, and deteyned the kynges tribute, and the Frenche Quenes dower. All frenchemen were attached in the citie of London, and cast in prison. The .v. day of Iuly the cardinall rode through Lōdon to Douer to mete with the Emperor, beyng accompanied with ii. Erles .xxxvi. knyghtes, an .C. gentil∣men .viii. byshops .x. abbots .xxx. chaplai∣nes all in veluet and satyn, and .700. yeomen. This yeare was a greate pestilence and deathe in London,Edvvarde Halle. and other places. Anno. 13. Sir Iohn Milborne Draper M. Iohn Britain S.152 Tho. Pargeter S.
This syr Iohn Mylborne (to his great commendation and the ensaumple of o∣ther the worshypfull of this citie, buyl∣ded certaine almost houses, wherein be placed .xiii. aged poore people, who haue theyr dwellynges rente free, and also .ii. shillinges .vi. d. the piece payde to them the fyrst day of euery moneth, for euer. Kyng Henry fyrste nawed defender of the sayth.The seconde daye of February, the Cardinall declared, howe the byshop of Rome had sent kyng Henrye the fi∣fe of defender of the christen faith, and to his successours for euer. The Empe∣rours coming to London.Thys Charles the fyfthe Emperor of Rome came into England, and was honourably receiued into London, by the Maior, the Aldermen, and com∣mons of the Citie, the syrt of Iune, the kyng hym self accompanying him: from thens he went to Wyndsour, and sate in the stall of the garter. At this tyme was talke betwene the Emperour and kyng Henry, for the mariage of Lady Mary the kyngs daughter, being about the age of .vii. yeres, after great feastes iustes and honourable entertaynment, hee departed to Hampton, and sayled
from thense into Spayn. Duryng this tyme, the Earle of Surrey Lorde Ad∣myrall brente Morles in Britayne, and than retuurned into the Realme. Not longe after (hauyng an armye appoyn∣ted to hym by the Kynge) hee passed o∣uer to Calaice, and entred Pycardye, and brent dyuers townes and castelles. He besieged Hesdyng, but because win∣ter drewe nere, he raysed his siege, and returned home. The Duke of Albanye began to en∣ter this lande wyth a greate armye: but hearyng that the Erle of Shrewesbury was commynge, hee tooke a truce for vi. monethes. Anno. 14. Sir Iohn Mondye goldsmith M. Iohn Rudston S Jo. Champneis S152 The lorde Rosse and lorde Dacres of the Northe, burned the Towne of Kelsey in Scotlande, wyth fower score Uyllages, and also dydde ouerthrowe eyghtene towers of stone, with all their bulwarkes.
The Emperor Charles Kyng Henry of England. Ferdinando, duke of Au∣strige, the byshop of Rome, the citie of Venice, and dyuers other in Italy were confederate against the frenche men. The Rhodes taken by the turkes.The Turkes besieged Rhodes, and on Christmas daye tooke it, to the greate shame and rebuke of Christen men. The lorde Marques Dorset wardeyn of the East marches, brent dyuers vil∣lages, holdes, and other places in Scot∣lande. The kyng of Denmarke came into En¦glande.The .xv. daye of Iune the Kynge of Denmarke, and hys Quene aryued at Douer, and the .xxii. day of Iune, they came to London, and laye at the byshop of Bathes place. Kyng Henry by letters complained vn∣to the princes of Germanie of Luther, who had writen to sharply against him, and desyred theym that he myghte not translate the newe Testament into the vulgar tongue. Sharpe warre and often skyrmishes betweene the borderers of Englande Scotlande and France. The Erle of Surrey burned .37. villa∣ges in Scotlād, & despoiled ye coūtrey frō
the east marches to the west, and ouer∣threwe dyuers holdes and castels. Anno. 15. Syr Tho. Baldrie Mercer. M. Michel English S Nich. Ienyngs S1523 In Decēber, at the cytie of Couentry one Philip Scholemaister to the kyngs henxmē Christopher Pykeryng clarke of the Larder, and Anthony Maynuile gentlemen, entended to haue taken the kynges treasure of his subsidie, as the Colectors of the same came towarde London, & therwith to haue araysed mē and taken the Castell of Kylyngworth, and then to haue made battayle against the kyng: for the whiche they were dra∣wen, hanged, and quartered at tyborne. The .xi. daye of February, the reste that were taken were executed at Couētree. The Duke of Suffolke, with many other lordes and knyghtes, was sent in to Fraunce by kyng Henry, with an ar∣mie of .10000. men: who passynge the water of Some without battayle, tooke dyuers townes and castelles, and de∣stroyed the countrey before him. In De∣cember he returned agayne into Eng∣lande.
The erle of Surrey brent Iedworth in Scotlande, and toke dyuers holdes. The Duke of Albanye, besieged the castell of Warke, and had in a redynes a great army to inuade Englande, but when he heard the erle of Surrey was commyng, he fled back into Scotland. The souldiours of Guynes tooke a great bootie at a fayre in the towne of Morguyson, and syr Robert Iernyng∣ham, and certayne dimilaunces of Ca∣lys, toke dyuers Frenche prysoners. Anno. 16. 1524Sir Wil. Bailie Draper. M. Raufe Dodmer S Wylliā Roche S The fyrst weke of Lent, the Lorde of Camphier and other, came from the Emperour to kyng Henry. The byshop of Dunkell and other Ambassadours, came out of Scotland, and a legate from the byshop of Rome, to entreate a peace betwene England and Fraunce. Syr Raufe a Fanwycke, Leonarde Musgraue, and bastard Hearon, were slayne in Scotlande, by to muche hardi∣nes in pursuing their enemies: at which tyme .300. Scottes were takē prysoners by the englyshemen.
Clement byshop of Rome, sent vnto kyng Henry in token of great loue,The golden rose sent from Rome. the golden rose, that he vseth euery yere to consecrate before Easter. Great triumphe in England for ye ta∣king of ye French kyng by ye Emperour. The Cardinall obteyned lycence of the byshop of Rome,The Cardi∣nall first sup∣pressed abbeis to suppresse certain abbayes, to the intent to erecte two col∣ledges, one at Oxenforde, an other at Ipswyche, and to indue thē with lādes: whiche colledges he began so sumptu∣ously, that it was not lyke they woulde come to good ende. Kyng Henry was lyke to haue been drowned by leapyng ouer a diche in fol∣lowyng his hauke.Kyng Henry in ieopardie to haue bene drowned. This yere was the castell or towre, set vp at Grenewyche. This yere the coyne was enhaunsed in England.The coyne en¦haunced. Luther by the counsell of Christerne king of Dēmarck, & certain other, wrate very hūble letters vnto kynge Henry of Englād, acknowleging a faulte in him self, that he had writtē before so sharply vnto hym: but when the kyng in his an∣swere blamed Luther muche, and no∣ted hym of lyghtnes and inconstancie,
Luther repented his doyng, and wrate that he was deceiued when he thoughte to fynd Iohn Baptist in princes courtes and amonge them that were arayed in purple. A murmuring was in al partes of the realme for payment of money, and in Suffolke .4000. men rose agaynst the Duke and other commissioners, which were appeased by the Duke of Norfolke and other. A truce betwene England & Fraunce for a certaine space, and Ambassadours were sent into Denmarke for restoring of their kyng (whiche was then in Eng∣lande) but the Danes would graunt no∣thyng, they dyd hate hym so extremely for his crueltie. Anno. 17. 1525Syr Iohn Allen Mer. M. Iohn Calton. S. Christ. Askew S. The .xi. day of February being shrofe sonday, fyue men of the Styliarde, dyd penaunce, three of them bare fagottes at Paules, and two of them bare tapers of waxe. And an Austen fryer, called do∣ctor Barnes of Cambrydge, bare a fa∣got at Paules the same daye, and there was present at that tyme the lorde Car∣dinal
with a .xi. bishops, ye bishop of Ro∣chester made the sermon against Mar∣tin Luther and his doctrine. The same yere the .vi. daye of Septē∣ber,The goulde enhaunced. was a proclamation for goulde, the Frenche crowne was valued at .iiii. s. vi.d the Angel at .vii.s. vi.d. the Ryall at .xi.s.iii.d. and so euery pece after that value. Anno. 18. sir Tho. Sey∣mer Mercer M. Ste. Pecock S1526 Nich. Lābert S The thyrd daye of Iuly, whiche was in the .xix. yere of kyng Henry, the lorde Cardynall of England with great pōpe rode thorowe Cheape, and so towarde Fraūce, where he cōcluded a league be∣tweene kyng Henry and the Frenche kyng, whiche both sent their defiaunce to the Emperour, and a stronge armie into Italy, to delyuer the byshop, & driue the Emperours power out of that coun∣trey. The great maister of Fraunce, came to London with great triumphe, for the cōclusion of ye ornamed league. The .xv. daye of Iuly, was one Har∣man drawen from newgate to tyborne,Execution at Tyborne. and there hanged for coyninge of false golde.
Also in Iuly and Auguste, was the sleweis made in Fynsebury fielde, to cō∣uey the ill waters ouer the towne dyche by pipes of lead into ye riuer of Thames. Great scarci∣tie of bread.In the same yere was suche scarcitie of bread at London, and all Englande, that many people died for defaulte ther∣of. And the bread cartes that came from Stratforde to London, were met by the waye at Myles ende by the cytyzens of London, that the lorde Mayor and She∣ryfes of London, were fayne to goe and rescue the sayde bread cartes, and see them brought to the markettes appoyn∣ted for the same. Anno. 19. 1527Syr Iames Spencer Uyntener. M. Iohn Hardy S. Wyl. Hollis S. General peace proclaymed.The first daye of Nouember, the lord Cardynall with the Ambassadours of Fraunce, were at Paules, & there was proclaymed a generall peace betwene kyng Henry of England and Fraunces the French kyng, duryng their lyues, & a twelne monethes and a daye after. The .viii. day of December, thre scho∣lers of Cambridge, & one Forster a gen∣tilmā of ye court, bare fagots at Paules. The fyfth day of Ianuary, the Cardi∣nall
with many byshops, abbottes, and priors, went a procession at Paules,Generall pro∣cession. and sang Le deum, for the escapyng of ye Pope from the Emperour. The .xiii. daye of Ianuary, was a great fyer at Andrewe Moris keye in Thames strete,Fyre in Tha¦mes strete. and at an other keye by it, where was muche harme done. This yere a frenche Crayer of .xxx. tonne, beyng māned with .xxxviii. frēch men,A shyp chased to the tower wharfe. and a flemish crayer of .xxviii. tōne and .xxiiii. flemynges, metyng at Mar∣gate, the one chased the other along the ryuer of Thames to the towre wharffe of London: where syr Edmond Wal∣syngham, lieftenant of the Towre, stay∣ed them bothe, and tooke bothe the cap∣taynes and their men. The vii. daye of Aprill, the lord mai∣ster of the Rhodes, came to London and laye at saynt Iohnes in Smythfielde. The .17. day of Iune, ye terme was ad∣iourned to Mighelmas after,A sweatynge sicknes. because of the sweting sicknes that thē reigned in London, & other places of this Realme. This yere because of ye sweting sicknes ther was no such watch in Lōdō at Mid¦somer, as beforetime had hē acustomed. The vii. day of October, came to lōdō
a legate from Rome,A legate came from Rome. called Cardinall Campegius, who afterward with Car∣dinall Wolsey, sate at the Black fryers in London, where before them was brought in question the kinges mariage with Queene Katheryne, as to be vn∣lawfull, but they longe tyme protrac∣ted the conclusion of the matter, whiche delaye kyng Henry tooke very displea∣sauntly: in so muche that shortly after, the Cardinall Wolsey was deposed frō the Chauncelorshyp of Englande, &c. as ye may reade in Edward Haule. Anno. 20. 1528S. Iohn Rud∣stone Draper. M. Ra. warrē S. Iohn Lōg S. The .xxix. daye of Nouember, the pa∣rysh priest of Hony lane, and a yong mā that some tyme was vsher of saynt An∣thonies schole, bare fagottes at Paules, and two other, one a ducheman, the o∣ther an Englysheman, bare tapers of ware. The .viii. daye of May, a pouchmaker bare a fagot at Paules. The .vi daye of September, one Iohn Scot woodmon∣ger did penaunce in Chepe, and other places of ye citie, goyng in his shert bare legged & bare footed, and proclamation
made at the standard, at Leden hal, & at Erace church vpō his demeanor against the Maior Aldermen, and the shirifes. The .xviii. daye of October, was the Cardynall discharged of his Chaunce∣lorshyp,The Cardi∣nall dischar∣ged of the cha¦uncelorshyp. & the kyng seased al his goodes and his palaice at Westmynster, called Yorke place into his hādes, and the 25. daye of the same moneth, the Cardinall went from Yorke place to Ashere with xxx. persons and no more, and there to abyde tyll he knewe further the kynges pleasure. The .xxvi. daye of October,S. Thomas More made chauncelour. was syr Thomas More made Chauncelour of England, and sworne & kepte his rome all one daye. Wyllyam Tyndale translated the newe testament into englysh,The newe te∣stament prin∣ted in english. and prin∣ted the same beyonde the seas. A peace was agreed vpon, betwene kyng Henry of Englande, the Empe∣rour, the Frenche kynge, the kynge of Boheme, and Hungary. The thyrd day of October, the kyng came to his place of Brydewell,A parliament at the Black∣friars. and there he and his no∣bles put on their robes of parliament, & so came to the black friars, and there sat in their robes, & began the parliament.
Anno. 21. 1529Syr Raufe Dodmer Mercer M. Mich. Dormer S Wal. Chāpion S Cōmaundement was geuē by kyng Henry to the byshops, that Tyndales translation of the newe testament shuld be called in, and that they should see an other set forth to the profit of the people. Fyre in the Uyntrie.The xiii. day of Ianuary, was a great fyre in the Uintry, and much hurt done. Execution at the towre hylThe .24. day of Ianuary were .iii. mē one a Gascoyne, and twoo Irishe men, drawen from newgate to the towre hil, and there hanged and quartered, for coū∣terfeityng the kynges coyne. Execution in Finsbury fielde.The .xvi. daie of May, was a gybet set vp in Fynsbury field, and a mā hanged in chaines for murderyng doctor Myles Uicar of saint Brydes. Execution.The .v. daye of Iuly, was one hanged in chaynes in Fynsbury field, for mur∣dering mistres Kneuets mayde at saint Antolins parishe. To sende to the court of Rome forbyd¦den.Kyng Henry, vpon occasion of delay yt the byshop of Rome made in his contro∣uersie of diuorcemēt, & through displea∣sure of such reports as he heard made of hym, by the Cardinalles to the court of
Rome, and thirdly pricked forwarde by some councellors, to folowe the example of the Germaynes: lastly caused procla∣mation to be made in Septēber, forbyd∣dynge all his subiectes to purchase any maner of thing from the court of Rome Anno. 22. sir Th. Par∣gitour Salter M. wil. Daūcie S1530 I. Choping S The .v. day of April, was a cooke na∣med Rychard Rose,One boiled in Smythfield. boyled in a cauldron of brasse in Smythfield, for poysoning ye byshop of Rochesters seruaūtes & other. The Cardinall being before cast & cō∣uict in a premunire:The Cardy∣nall deceased. in Nouember was arrested by the erle of Northūberland at Cawood, and died at the abbey of Leice∣ster, the .28 day of Nouēber, & was there buried, as he shuld haue ben brought to the tower of London. The whole clergie of Englād,The Clergie condemned in the premunire beyng iudged by the kinges learned counsel, to be in the premunire, for maintaining ye power legatiue of ye Cardinal, were cal∣led by proces into the kynges benche to answere: wherefore in their conuocatiō, they concluded a submissiō,The kynge first named su¦preme head. wherin they called the king supreme head of ye church of England, and were cōtented to geue
the kynge .100000. poundes to pardon them their offences, touching the pre∣munire by acte of parliament. The kynges palace builded at S. IamesThis yere the kyng purchased (at his pleasure) ye whole house of saint Iames and al the medowes about ye same. And there made a fayre māsion and a parke, and buylded many costly and commodi∣ous houses for great pleasure. The .xix. daye of August, the byshop of Norwich burned a batcheler of lawe called Thomas Bilney. The .xxii daye of October, one Pait∣mer a marchaunt and a glasier, bare fa∣gottes at Paules crosse. Anno. 23. 1531S. Nich. Lam¦bert Grocer. M. Ri. Greshā S Ed. Altam. S Execution in Smythfield.The .xxvii. daie of Nouember, was a monke of Bury burned in Smithfielde. Execution at Tybornd.The .iiii. daye of December, was one Ryce Grifyn a gentylman of Wales, beheaded at the tower hyl, and his man hanged drawen and quartered at Ty∣borne for treason. The .xxvii. daye of Ianuary, a Duche man bare a fagot at Paules crosse. Execution in Smithfield.The last day of April, was one Bay∣nam burned in Smithfield.
The .xxv. daye of May,Great fishes taken. was taken be∣twene London and Grenewiche, twoo great fyshes called Herlpoles, bothe a male and a female. This yere,The Clergie sworne to the kyng. the othe that the clergie was wonte to make to the byshoppe of Rome, was made doyde by statute, and a newe othe confirmed, wherein thei cō∣fessed the kyng to be supreme head. Syr Thomas More,S. Thomas More dischar¦ged of the chā¦celorshyp. after sute made was discharged of the Chauncelorshyp the .xvi. daye of Maye. And the fourth of Iune, the kynge dubbed Thomas Au∣deley knyght, and made hym keeper of the great seale. And not long after, lord Chauncelour of England. Thomas Cromwell maister of the kynges Iewell house,S. Thomas Cromwell. began to bee in great fauour with kyng Henry, & was nowe of his counsell. The .xv daye of Iune,Execution at the tower hyl were fyue men drawen from newgate to the tower hil, and there hanged and quartered for coy∣nyng of syluer, and clyppyng of golde. The fyfth daye of Iuly, was a priest dwellyng at saint Androwes besyde the wardrop,Execution at the towre hyl drawen from newgate to the tower hyll, and there hanged and quar∣tered for clippyng of golde.
The priory of Crichurche put downe.Also in Iuly, the kyng put downe the priorie of Chrichurche in London, and all the Chanons of the same place: the kynge sent to other places of the same Religion. The towre of London re∣payred.This yere in August and Septem∣ber, the kyng repayred the towre of Lō∣don, and made there muche buyldyng. The fyrst of September, was my la∣dy Anne Bulleyne, made Marques of Penbroke at Wyndsore. The .vii. daye of October, the kynge went to Caleys and to Bulloyne, and came ouer agayne the .xiii. daye of No∣uember followyng. Anno. 24. 1532Syr Steuē Pecocke Haberda. M. Rich. Rainold S. Iohn Martyn S. Nich. Pynchō S. The .xv. daye of December,Great fyre at Holborne. was a great fyre at the byshop of Lyncolnes place in Holborne, whyche dyd muche hurte. Haule the fa∣mous chroni∣cler, common Sergeant of London.The .xvii. daye of Marche, was Ed∣ward Haule gentylmā of Graies Inne, chosen to be common sargeant of the ci∣tie of London. Whiche Edward Haule made the notable boke of Chronicles. The .x. day of Aprill, was a dole geuē
at saint Marie Audries in Southwark:Foure mē .ii. women and a boie smoulde∣red. at the whiche was so muche preace of poore people, that there was smouldred iiii. men .ii. women, & a boie starck dead. This yere on saint Erkenwaldes daie kyng Henry had maried the lady Anne Bulloyne at Caleyce,Kyng Henry maried the la∣dy Anne Bo∣leyne. and the .xii. daye of Aprill beynge Easter eue, next follo∣wyng, she was proclaymed Queene of Englande. The .12. day of May, one Pauiar being the town clerke of Londō,Desperation. hōg him self. This yere on Whitsonday, beyng the last day of May,Quene Anne crowned. was ye lady Anne Bul∣leyn solemnely & honorably crowned at Westminster. The .xvii. day of Iuly, were two mar∣chantes slaine on the water of Thames toward Westminster,A murder. by one Wolfe & his wyfe, who suffered for the same, as ye shall here after. The .7. day of Septēber, was the lady Elizabeth daughter to king Hēry,Lady Eliza∣beth borne. borne at Grenewich, & there christened at the fryers church the .x. daye of September. The .5. day of October, was a great fire at Baynardes castell,A fire at Ber¦nardes castell & did great hurt. The .24. day of October, being sonday ther was a scaffold set vp at Pauls cros
and theron stode a nonne,Anne Bartō. named Anne Barton of Courtopstrete besyde Can∣terbury, and twoo Monkes of Canter∣bury, and two obseruaunt fryers, and the parson of Aldermary in London cal∣led maister Gold: an other priest-confes∣sour to the sayde nonne, and twoo laye men: and there preached at that time the byshop of Bangor, called the abbot of Hyde, where he shewed their offences, and so from thence they were sent to the tower of London. Anno. 25. 1533sir Christo∣per Askew Draper. M. Wil. Formā S. Tho. Kitson. S. This yere Pope Clement cursed king Henry and the realme of Englande. This curse was hanged on a churchdore at Dunkirke in Flaunders, and taken downe by one William Locke, a Mer∣cer of London. A great fishe taken.The .xxviii. daye of Ianuary, was a great fyshe taken at Blackwall, called a whale, and was brought vp to west∣mynster to the kyng to see, & so brought downe to broken wharffe, and there cut out. Commissioners were sent all ouer
England, to take the othe of all persons to the acte of succession,An othe to the kyng. for the refusall of whiche othe, doctour Fysher byshop of Rochester, & syr Thomas More late lorde Chancellor of England were sent to the tower of London. The fyrst day of April wer Wolf and his wyfe hanged on two gybets,Wolfe & his wyfe hanged at Lambeth. at the turnyng tree in Lambeth marshe, for murdryng of the two marchant stran∣gers afore named. The .xx. day of Aprill were .ii. monkes of Canturbery .ii. obseruant friers,Execution at Tyborne. the persone of Aldermary in London, and the Nonne called the holye Mayde of Courtopstrete in Kent: all these were drawen from the tower of London vn∣to Tyborne, and there hanged and be∣headed, and their heades set on London bridge, and other gates of the Cytie of London, and their bodies buried. The .xx. daye of Aprill all the craftes and companies in London were sworne to the Kyng,Othe to the kyng. and to the Quene Anne, and their heyres. The .xxvi. yere of the kyngs reigne, the .xv. day of May was a great fyre at Salters hall in Breadstrete, and much
harme doone. The .v. day of Iune were all seruants and prentices of the age of .20. yeres, or aboue, sworne to the Kyng, and Quene Anne his wife, and to the issue of them. Lord Dacres of the northe.The .ix. day of Iuly was the lord Da∣cres of the north, arrained at Westmin∣ster of hygh treason, where he so witty∣ly and directely confuted hys accusers, that to theyr great shame he was found by his peres, not gyltie. Edvvarde Halle. Iohn Frythe brēt in smith∣fielde.The .xxii. day of Iuly, was one Iohn Frith a yong man of excellent wyt and learnyng, burned in Smythfield for his opinions concerning the sacrament, and with hym a yong man called Andrewe Hewet a taylours seruant. The .xi. day of August was all the pla¦ces of the obseruant Friers,Fryer hou∣ses suppressed as Grene∣wyche, Canterburye, Rychmounte, Newarke, and newe castell put downe, and Austen Friers sette in their places, and the same obseruauntes were put in places of gray fryers. The .xiii. daye of Auguste was a greate fyre at Temple barre,A fyre at tem¦ple barre. and mu∣che hurte doone, and certayne perso∣nes burned.
The .xvi. daye of Auguste was bur∣ned the kyngs stable at Charyng crosse otherwyse called the mewes,The kynges stable brent. wherein was burned many great horses, & greate store of haye. The .xxi. day of September doctour Taylour,Master Tho∣mas Crom∣well master of the Rolles. maister of the Rolles was dis∣charged, and for hym maister Thomas Cromwell was appointed and sworne, the .ix. day of October, who afterward bare great rule. Anno. 26. Sir Iohn Champneis skinner M Nicol. Lewson S. Wil. Denham S.1534 In Nouember was held a parliament wherin the byshop of Rome with all his authoritie was cleane banyshed this re∣alme,The byshops of Romes au¦thoritie abro∣gated. and commandement geuen, that he shoulde no more bee called Pope, but byshop of Rome, & that the kyng should be reputed and taken as supreme heads of the Churche of England, hauyng ful aucthoritie to reforme all errors, here∣ses and abuses in the same.The fyrst fru¦tes gyuen to the kyng. Also the first fruites and tenthes of all spirituall dig∣nities and promotions, were granted to kyng Henry by acte of parlyament.
The .xxix. day of Aprill, the pryor of the Charter house of London, the prior of Beual, the prior of Exham, and a bro¦ther of the same called master Reignol∣des, and a prieste called mayster Iohn Haile, vicar of Thistilworth wer al con∣demned of treason, and iudged at west∣minster to be drawen,Execution at Tyborne. hanged and quar¦tered at Tyborne, who were there exe∣cuted the fourth daye of May, and theyr heades and quarters set on the gates of the citie of London, and at the Charter house of London was set one quarter. The .viii. day of May the kyng com∣manded all about his court to poll their heades,Polled heads & to geue them ensāple, he cau∣sed his owne head to be polled likewise. The .xxv. day of May was a great exa∣mination of heretikes,Examination of Hollāders. borne in Hollād, there was examined .xix. men, and .vi. women of the same countrey borne. The seconde day of Iune Edwarde Halle the famous Chronicler was cho∣sen an vnder sheriffe of London by the Maior and common counsell,Master Halle vnder sheriffe of London. who was before the common sergeant of London as is aforesayd. The .iiii. day of Iune a man and hys
wyfe borne in Holland were burned in Smithfield for the arrians heresie.Execution in Smythfield. The .xviii. day of Iune wer .iii. monks of the Charterhouse,Execution at Tyborne. named Ermewe, Midlemor, & Nudygate, drawen to Ty∣borne, and there hanged and quartered. The .xxii. day of Iune was doctor Fy∣sher byshop of Rochester,The byshop of Rochester beheaded. beheaded at tower hyll, his head was set on London bridge, and hys bodye buryed wythin Barkyng churche. The .vi. day of Iuly syr Thomas More was beheaded at the tower hyll for de∣niall of the kinges supremacie.Sir Thomas Moore behea¦ded. The erle of Kyldar dyed in the tower of London: and his son Thomas Fitz∣garret, rebellyng in Ireland, slewe the byshop of Deuelyng, and toke the kin∣ges ordynāce. Wherefore kyng Henry sent thyther sir William Skeuington, wyth a company of souldiours. In October the kyng sent doctor Lee to visite the abbeys,A visitation of the abbeys priories and nonne∣ries in England, & to put out all religi∣ous persons that would go, and all that were vnder the age of .xxiiii. yeres, and all such monkes, chanons, & fryers that were so put out, the abbot or prior shold
geue euery one in stede of their habite, a priestes gowne, and .xl. s. of money. And the nonnes to haue such apparell, as se∣cular women weare, and to goe where they would, he toke out of monasteries and abbeyes their reliques and chiefest iewelles. Anno. 27. 1535sir Iohn Alleyne mercer M. Hūfr. Monmothe S Iohn Cottes S A generall procession.The .xi. day of Nouember was a great procession at London by the kynges cō∣mandement, wherin the waites of the Citie goyng formost, folowed the chyl∣dren of the grammer schole of the mer∣cers chapell with theyr master, the scho∣lers of Sainct Antonies with theyr ma∣ster and vsher, the scholers of Poules schole, with their master & vsher, & then al the minstrels of London in theyr best apparell, and the mayster of the sayde mynstrelles, with his coller next went the crouched fryers, the Austen fryers, the whyte friers, the graye fryers, the blacke friers, all in copes, wyth theyr crosses and Candelsticks: The chanons of saint Mary Auderies, of sainct Bar∣tholomewes, of Esyng Spittle, of sainct
Spyttle, wyth the pryours of the same houses, wyth theyr Crosses, candelstyc∣kes, and vergerers before theym, then the clerkes of London in copes, the prie∣stes of London in theyr copes. And then the Monkes of newe abbeye, of Berd∣mondsay abbay, and of Westminster, al syngynge the Letanie with Faburden, theyr Crosses, candelstyckes, and Uer∣gerers before theim. After them came Poules quier wyth theyr residensaries, The byshoppe of London, and the ab∣bottes mytered in theyr Pontificali∣bus. After theym came the Bachelers of the companye of the lorde Mayor in theyr beste apparell: After them, the Lorde Maior in a gowne of blacke vel∣uet, wyth a hoode of the same, and the Aldermenne in theyr gownes of scar∣lette: after theym the craftes of Lon∣don in theyr degrees: The numbre of copes that were worne in this Processi∣on, was .vii. C. and .xiiii. The laste daye of December, the Lorde Maior of London gaue comman∣dement to all paryshes in the same,The names of all Chaun∣tries taken. to brynge in before hym the names of all the Chauntries in theyr paryshes, and
who had the gyfte of the same. Lady Kathe∣rine deceased.The .viii. daye of Ianuarie dyed lady Katherine do wager at Kymbalton, and was buryed at Peterborowe. Quene Anne ware yelow for the mournyng. The smalle houses of re∣ligion geuen to the kyng.In February were geuen to the king by a parliament with the consent of the abbottes all religious houses that were of .300. marke, and vnder. On May day beyng the .xxviii. yeare of kyng Henry, he beyng at a Iustes at Grenewiche, to the admiration of all men, sodeynly departed to Westmyn∣ster, hauynge onely with hym .vi. per∣sons. The next day lady Anne Bullein Quene was had to the tower:Edvvarde Halle. and there for thynges layd to her charge, shortely after beheaded the .xix. day of May.Execution. And on the ascension day folowyng, the kyng ware white for mournyng. The same tyme were apprehended the lorde Rocheforde brother to the said Quene,Execution. Henry Noris, Marke Smeton william Brierton, and Francis weston all of the kynges priuie chamber, whi∣che also aboute matters touchynge the Quene were put to death the .xxii. daye of Maye.
The weke before whitsontyde beyng the .20. day of Maye, the kynge maried Lady Iane daughter to syr Iohn Sey∣mor knyghte,The king ma¦ried ladye Iane. whiche at Whytsontide was openly shewed as Quene. The .viii. day of Iune the Kyng held his hyghe courte of parliament. In the whyche parliament tyme the byshops & clergie of this realm held a solempne conuocation at Paules churche in Lon∣don: where after muche disputynge and debatyng of many matters, they publy∣shed a boke of religion, entitled, Arti∣cles deuised by the kynges hyghnes. In this boke is specially mencioned but .iii. sacramentes,A commotion in Lincolne∣shyre. with the whiche the Lin∣colneshice men were offended, and fea∣ryng the vtter subuertion of theyr olde religion, which they had lyued in so ma∣ny yeares, raised a greate commotion, and gathered together wel nere .20000. men: agaynst whom the kyng dyd sende a stronge power, wherof when the re∣belles had knowledge they desyred par∣don, brake vp theyr armie, and depar∣ted euery man to his home: but theyr capitains were apprehended & executed. This yere the .xix. day of Iune beynge
saint Peters day, the kyng held a great iustyng and triumph at Westmynster,A triumph at westminster. where were ordeyned .ii. lyghters made lyke shyps to fyght vpon the water, the one of them burst in the myddest, and a seruant of maister Kneuets in his har∣neys, leapyng betwene bothe shyppes, was drowned. And in the other shyppe a gunne burste her chamber, and may∣ned .ii. of the mariners. The men of Lincolnshyre beyng pa∣cified and quieted, as ye haue heard: im∣mediately wythin syxe dayes after, be∣ganne a newe Insurrection in Yorke∣shyre,A cōmotiō in Yorkeshyre. for the same causes: But the rude people were more incensed tho∣roughe tales whyche were spreadde by certayne personnes, as that all theyr syluer Chalices, Crosses, ewelles, and other ornamentes should be taken out of theyr churches. That no man should bee maryed, or eate any deyntie meate in hys house, but he should pay a tribute for the same to the kynge. These people were gathered togyther, to the noum∣ber of forty thousand, hauyng for their badges, the .v. woundes, with the figure of the Sacrament, and Iesus written
in the myddest, and called theyr rebelli∣on, a holye pylgremage, in token that they intended to fyghte for the mainte∣nance of christen religion. Anno. 28. Sir Rafe Warren Mercer M. Rich. Paget S.1536 Will. Bowyer S. The .xii. day of Nouember, sir Tho∣mas Neweman bare a faggot at Pou∣les Crosse for that he sange Masse with∣good ale. The .xiii. day of November, one may∣ster Roberte Pagyngton,Master Pa∣gyngton slain a Mercer of London, was slayne with a gunne, as he was goyng to Masse at saynet Thomas of Akers, nowe called the Mercers cha∣pel, but the murderer was neuer open∣ly knowen. Agaynste the rebelles of Yorkshyre aboue named, the Kyng sent the duke of Norffolke, the Duke of Suffolke, the Marques of Excester, and other wyth a great army, by whom after the day and place was appoynted to fyght, sodeynly the nyght before the battayle shuld haue ben, the water that was betwene them,
rose in suche wise, that the two armies coulde not come together, by occasyon whereof, the capitaines of bothe parties had communication of peace: and pro∣mise was made to the rebelles, that such thyngs as they were greued with, shold be redressed by the kynges authoritie, wherwith they beyng contented (by the prouidence of God, departed withoute bloudshedyng. Aske that was chiefe of this rebellion, in Decēber came to Lon∣don, and was not onely pardoned, but also receiued and rewarded with other gyftes of the kyng, but he dyd not long enioye his prosperitie. Execution at Wyndsor.Aboute the same tyme a priest & abou∣cher were hanged at wyndsor, for spea∣king in the behalf of the Yorkshyre mē. A great frost.This yere in Decembre the Thames at London was all ouer frosen: Wher∣fore the kyng with his beautifull spouse Quene Iane rode thorough London to Grenewyche. Execution at Tyborne.The thirde daye of Februarye was Thomas Fitzgarret late Earle of Kyl∣dare, and fyue of his vncles, drawen, hanged, and quartered at Tyborne for Treason.
Also in this moneth of February Ni∣colas Musgraue,A newe com∣motion in Yorkeshyre. Thomas Gilby, and o∣ther, stered a newe rebellion, and besie∣ged the Citie of Carlile, frome whense they were driuen, and many of them ta∣ken and put to deathe. In the same moneth of February, syr Francis Bygot, sir Robert Constable, and other, began an other conspyracie, and for the same wer attainted, and exe∣cuted in the moneth of Iune. The .xxix. day of March beyng Man∣dy thursday,Execution at tyborne. were .xii. men of Lincolne drawen from Newgate to Tyborn: and there hanged and quartered .v. wer prie∣stes, and .vii. were laye men: one was doctor Makerel, a white chanō, an other was ye vicar of Louth in Lincolneshyre. The .15. day of May, in the .29. yeare of Henry the .viii. the lorde Darcy and the lorde Hussey were had from the tower of London, vnto Westminster, & there condemned of treason. In Iune the Lorde Darcye,Execution for treason. the lorde Hussy, sir Robert Cōstable, sir Thomas Percye, sir Francis Bigot, sir Stephen Hamelton, sir Iohn Bulmer & his wife, Williā Lomley, Nicholas Tēpest, & the
abbots of Ierney and Riuers, & Robert Aske were all put to death: sir Roberte Constable was hāged on Beuerley ga∣tes, Aske was hanged in chaynes on a tower at Yorke: Syr Iohn Bulmers wife burned in Smithfield, the lord Dar¦cie beheaded at Tower hylle, the lorde Hussey at Lincolne, and the other suffe∣red death at Tyborne. Cromwell knyght of the garter.This yere at the feast of saint George the lorde Cromwell was made knyght of the Garter. The byrth of prince Ed∣warde.In October on sainct Edwardes eue, was borne at Hampton courte, the no∣ble Prince Edwarde, and shortely af∣ter, Quene Iane lefte her lyfe, the .14. day of October. Anno. 29. 1537Sir Rich. Gresham Mercer M. Iohn Gresham S. Tho. Lewen S. The .viii. day of Nouember the corps of the Quene was caried to Windsore, and buried with great solempnitie. The Kyngs maiestie kept his Christ∣mas at Grenewyche in his mournynge apparell, and so was all the court tyl the morowe after Candelmas day.
The .xviii. daye of Ianuary a salter of London was set on the pyllory for pac∣kyng and sellyng of rotten herryng, and vsing of false weyghtes. The .xviii. day of February a seruant of my ladye Pargetours was drawen,Execution at tyborne. hanged, and quartered for clyppynge of golde. The .xxv. day of February syr Allyn a priest and a gentylman were drawen to Tyborn,Execution at tyborne. and there hanged and quar∣tered for treason. The .xxi. day of Marche Henry Harf∣fam customer of Plymmouth was dra∣wen frome Newgate to Tyborne,Execution at Tyborne. and there hanged and quartered for trea∣son. And one Thomas Ewell lykewyse was hanged and quartered. The .xxii. day of May in the .30. yeare of Henry the .viii. frier Forest was han∣ged and brent in Smithfield for deniyng the Kinges supremacie:Execution in Smythfield. wyth hym was brente the Image of Daruell Gathern of Wales. The .xxvii. daye of Maye was a greate fyre at saynt Margaret Pattens called Roode Lane,A fyre in Rode lane. where were ma∣ny houses burned: and .ix. persons were
there burned to death in that fyre. In Iuly was Edmonde Conyngslie attaynted of treason for counterfaityng of the kynges sygne manuell. And in August was Edward Clyfforde for the same cause attaynted,Execution at tyborne. and bothe put to execution as traitours at Tyborne. The hangmā hanged.The first daye of September beynge the sonday after Bartilmew fayre was one Cratwell hangman of London, and two persons more hanged at the wrest∣lyng place on the backeside of Clerken∣well besyde London, for robbynge of a bouthe in Bartylmewe fayre: at which execution was aboue .20000. people, as it was iudged. Edvvarde Halle. The images in churches taken downeIn September by the speciall motion of the lord Cromwel, all ye notable ima∣ges, vnto the whyche were made anye speciall pilgremages and offerings wer vtterly taken awaye, as the Images of Walsyngham, Ipswyche, Worcester, the Lady of wilsedon, with many other and lykewise all shrines. The abbeyes suppressed.In October and Nouember the ab∣beis wer suppressed, & al friers, monkes chanons, nonnes, and other sectes of re∣ligion, were roted out of this realme.
Anno. 30. Sir Wil. Forman Haberda. M. Wil. Wilkinsō S1538 Nicho. Gybson S This Nicholas Gibson sheryfe and Grocer of London afore named, buyl∣de a free schole at Ratclyffe, nere vnto London, appoyntyng to the same schole for the instructiō of .lx. poore mens chyl∣dren in lernyng and vertuous educatiō, a schole maister and an vsher, with a sti∣pende of tenne pounde by the yere to the maister, and .vi. pound .xiii.s .iiii.d. to ye Usher. He also buylded certayn almesse houses, adioynyng to the sayd schole, for xiiii. poore and aged persons, suche as through impotencie and age are not a∣ble to susteyne the trauell and toyle of the worlde: who quarterly doe receyue vi.s .viii.d. a pece for euer. And the sayd worshypfull and deuout gentleman, du∣ryng his lyfe, dysdayned not in his own person, many tymes to vysite them. Ad∣dyng to their lyuyng in the tyme of his abode and house kepyng there, reliefe of his owne borde: wherby appeared the great zeale he bare to the reliefe of the poore, and not only by wordes (after the maner of many in these dayes,) but in
workes, he manifested the fruytes of charitie, accordyng to suche example as many of his predecessors had lefte to the posteritie. And lyke as of his owne free lyberalytie he hath begonne this com∣mendable monument, I meane the maintenāce of this poore house of christ: so I praye that some of his successors, or other of abilitie wil adde to ye same some further reliefe and increase of lyuynge, wherby (in these dere dayes wherein thinges be at great pryces) not only lear¦ning, the honor of all cōmon wealthes, but also those nedy & impotent persons, may be better furnyshed of necessaries. The friers in London sup∣pressed.The .xvi. day of Nouember, was the Black fryers in London suppressed, and the next day the whyte fryers, the next daye the Graye fryers, and the Monkes of the Charterhouse, and so all the other immediatly after. Lābert burnt in smythfield.The .xxii. daye of Nouember, was one Iohn Nycholson, otherwyse Lam∣bert a priest, burnt in Smythfielde. Also in Nouember, were Henry Mar∣ques of Excester, and erle of Deuōshire, and syr Henry Pole knyghte, the lorde Mountague, and syr Edward Neuell, brother to the lorde of Burganysent to
the towre. The two lordes were arraig∣ned the last day of December at West∣minster, before the lord Audley of Wal∣den, lord Chaunceller, & highe stewarde of Englād, & there found gilty: the third day after, was arraigned sir Edwarde Neuell, syr Geffray Pole, & two priestes called Croftes and Collyns, & one Hol∣land a marriner, and all attainted, & the ix. daye of Decēber, were the sayde two lordes and syr Edward Neuel beheaded at the tower hyll:Execution at the towre hyl the two priesies & Hol∣land were drawen to tyborne and there hanged and quartered, and syr Ieffray Pole was pardoned. The .22. day of Decēber, a priest, Hēry Daunce a Brycklayer, & an Organ ma∣ker, bare fagottes at Paules crosse. On Ashwensday,Execution in Paules chur∣cheyarde. were Iohn Iohnes, Iohn potter, & William Manering; hā∣ged in the princes lyueries (because thei were the princes seruantes) on the south side of Paules churchyard, for killing of Roger Cholmeley Esquier in the same place of malyce pretended. The thyrd daye of Marche, was syr Nicholas Carewe of Bedingtō in Sur∣rey,Execution at lowre hyll. knyght of the gartar, and maister of the kynges horse, beheaded at towre hil.
The thirde daye of Marche, the kyng created at Westmynster, syr Willyam Pawlet knyght, treasorer of his hous∣holde Lorde saynt Iohn: and syr Iohn Russell comptroller of his housholde, lorde Russell. The same tyme, the kynge caused all the hauens to be fortyfied, and rode to Douer, and sent cōmissioners through out all the Realme, to haue his people muster: and at the same season on Ea∣ster daye, was there .ix. vnknowen ships liyng in the downes, wherfore all Kent arose, and mustered in harness the same daye. The .xxviii. daye of Apryll, beyng in the .xxxi. yere of Henry the eight, began a parliament at Westmynster: in the whiche Margaret Coūtesse of Salisbu∣ry Gertrude wyfe to the Marques of Excester,Execution. Reinold Pole, syr Adrian Fos∣kewe, and Thomas Dingley knyght of saynt Ihons, and dyuers other, were at∣taynted of treason: Folkewe and Ding∣ley were beheaded the .x. day of Iuly. The great mustar at Lō¦don.This yere, the .viii. daye of May, the citezins of London mustered at the My∣les ende, all in bryght harneys, with coates of whyte sylke, and cloth and
chaines of golde, in thre great battayls, the number was .xv. thousande, besyde wyffelers and other wayters: who in goodly order passed through London to Westmynster, and so through the sanc∣tuary, and round about the parke of S. Iames: and so up through the fielde, and came home through Holborne. The .viii. daye of Iuly,Execution at S. Thomas Wateryng. the Uicar of Wandsworth, with his chaplayne, and his seruaunt, and fryer Wayre, were all foure drawen from the Marshalsey, vnto saint Thomas a Wateryngs, and there hanged and quartered for treason. In August, the great Onele & Odo∣nele of Irelande, inuaded the Englyshe pale, and burned almost .xx. myles with¦in the same: wherfore the Lorde Graye beyng deputie there, assembled a strong power and draue hym back. The .xvi. daye of September, Duke Frederick of Bauarie, the Palsgraue of Rhine, the Marshal of duke Iohn, Fre∣derick electour of Saxony, with other, came to London, by whom the mariage was concluded betwene kyng Henry & the lady Anne, sister to Wyllyam the Duke of Cleue. Anno. 31.
1539Syr Wil∣liam Hollis Mercer. M. Tho. Feyrie S. Th. Hūtlow S. This Thomas Huntlow shryue, be∣fore named, gaue to the company of the Habardashers certain tenementes, for yt which they be bound to geue to .x. poore almes people of ye same cōpany euery one of thē .viii. d. euery fryday, for euer. And also at euery quarter diner to be kept by the masters of ye same cōpany, to be genē to euery one of those .x. poore people be∣fore named, a peny lose of bread, a potle of ale, a pece of bief, worth .4. d. in a plat¦ter with porage, and .4. d. in money. Execution at Redyng.The .14. day of Nouēber, Hughe Fe∣ryngdon, abbot of Reding, & .ii. priestes: the one called Rug, & the other named Onion, were attainted of high treason, for deniyng ye kyng to be supreme head of the church, were drawen, hanged, & quartered at Redyng. The same days was Richard Whiting abbot of Glastē¦bury, lykewyse attainted, hanged and quartered on towre hyll besyde his Mo∣nastery,Execution at the towre hil. for the same cause. Execution.The first day of Decēber, was Iohn Beche, abbot of Colchester, put to exe∣cution for the lyke offence.
In Decēber,The pencio∣ners first be∣gan. were appointed to waite on the kynges highnes person .50. gen∣tlemē, called Pencioners or speres, lyke as they were in the first yere of ye kyng. The third daye of Ianuary, was the lady Anne of Cleue,Kyng Henry maried the la∣dy Anne of Cleue. receiued at Blacke heath, and brought to Grenewych with great tryumphe: and the syxt daye of the same moneth, she was maried to kynge Henry. The .18. daye of Apryl,Thomas Crō¦well erle of Essex. was Thomas lorde Cromwell, created erle of Essex, & made great chamberlayne of England, whiche euer the erles of Oxenforde had before that tyme. In A parliament whiche began the xviii. daye of Apryll,The order of the Rhodes put downe in Englande. the relygion of S. Iohnes in Englande, whiche of moste men was named the knyghtes of the Rhodes, was dissolued, wherof hearing syr Wyllyam Weston knyght,EdVvarde Haule. prior of S. Ihones, for thought dyed on the As∣sention day, beyng the fifth day of May. In Maye, the .xxxii. yere of his reigne was sent to the towre, doctor Wilson & doctor Samson bishop of Chichester, for releuīg certain prisoners, which denied the kings supremacy: and for ye same of∣fēce, was one Richard Farmer Gro. of
London, a ryche and a welthy man, and of good estimacion,EdVvarde Haule. commytted to the Marshalsey, and after in Westmynster hall was arraigned and attainted in the premunire, and lost all his goodes. Thomas Crō¦well sent to ye tower, and be headed at towre hyil.The .ix. daye of Iuly, Thomas lorde Cromwell, late made Erle of Essex, be∣ing in the counsayle chamber, was so∣daynly apprehended, and committed to the tower of London. The .xix. daye of the same moneth, he was attainted by parliament, and neuer came to his an∣swere: whiche lawe, he was the autour of, he was there attainted of heresie and hyghe treason. And the .xxviii. daye of Iuly, beheaded at the tower hyll, with the lorde Hungerforde. Quene Anne deuorced and called lady Anne of cleueKyng Henry by authoritie of parlia∣ment & conuocatiō, was dyuorsed from his pretensed mariage made with the lady Anne of Cleue: and it was enacted that she shoulde bee taken no more as Queene, but called, the ladye Anne of Cleue. Executiō both in smithfielde and at Ty∣borne.The .xxx. daye of Iuly, Robert Bar∣nes, Thomas Gerrard, Wylliam Ie∣rome priestes, were burned in Smyth∣field. The same daye, Thomas Abell, Edward Powell, and Rychard Fether∣stone,
were drawen hanged and quar∣tered, for denying the kynge to bee su∣preme head of the churche of England. The fourth daye of August,Execution at Tyborne. were dra∣wen from the towre to tyborne, syx per∣sons, & one led betwene two sergeātes, and there hanged and quartered: one was the Priour of Dancaster, an other a Monke of the Charterhouse of Londō, maister Gyles Horne, a mōke of West∣mynster, one Philpot, & one Carewe, and a fryer, all were put to death for treason. This yere the ditches about London were newe caste. The .viii. daye of August, was the la∣dy Katheryne Haward shewed opēly as Queene,Kyng Henry maryed lady Katheryne Hawarde. at Hampton court: which dig∣nitie she enioyed not long. The latter end of this yere was great death of hote burnyng agues & flyxes, & such a drought,A great drouth that welles and smal ry∣uers were dryed vp, and many cattayle dyed for lack of water: the salte water flowed aboue London bridge. Anno. 32. Syr Wyl. Roche Draper M. Wyl. Laxton S.1540 Mart. Bowes S.
Execution.The .xxii. daye of December, was Egerton and Harman, put to death for counterfaytyng the kynges great seale. In other com¦motion in Yorkeshyre.In Aprill, the .33. yere of Henry the eight, certaine priestes and lay men, be∣gan a newe rebellion in Yorkeshyre, which were shortly takē and put to exe∣cution in diuers places: of which Leigh Tatorsale and Thornton, were put to death at London the .28. daye of Maye:Execution. and syr Iohn Neuel knyght, was execu∣ted at Yorke. The same daye the coun∣tesse of Salisbury, was beheaded in the tower of London,Edvvarde Halle. she was the last of the right lyne and name of Plantagenet. Execution at Grenewiche.The .ix. day of Iune, were Damport and Chapman, two of the kinges garde hanged at Grenewich, for robberies, in example of all other. Execution at the towre hil.The .xxviii. daye of Iune, the lorde Leonard Graie, whiche before was de∣putie generall of Irelande, was behea∣ded at the towre hyll, for certayn treason whiche he had committed. Execution at S. Thomas of wateringsThe .28. day of Iune, were hāged at S. Thomas a waterynges, Mantell, Roy∣den and Froudes, gentylmē, for a spoile and murder that they had done in one of the kynges parkes vpon May morning,
the lorde Dacres of the South, beyng in company with them: and on the morow whiche was saynt Peters day, the lorde Dacres was led from the towre a foote betwene the two sherifes, through the citie to tyborne,Execution at tyborne. and there put to death for the same offence. This sommer the kyng toke his pro∣gresse to Yorke.The kynges progresse into Yorke. The fyrste daye of Iuly, was a Wel∣sheman drawen,Execution. hanged, and quarte∣red, for prophecying the kings maiesties death. Anno. 33. Syr Michel Dormer Mercer M. sir Roulād Hil S1541 Hēry Suckley S The lady Katheryne Haward, whom the kynge had maried, for her vnchaste lyuing committed with thomas Culpe∣per & Frauncis Dereham, was by par∣liament attainted. Culpeper and Dere∣ham, were put to death at tyborne,Execution at tyborne. the x. day of December. The xiii. day of Fe∣bruary, were beheaded within ye towre,Execution at towre hyll. the lady Hawarde (otherwyse called Q. Katherine,Iohn Sleidan and the lady Rocheforde. And shortly after, kyng Henry maried the lady Katherine Parre,Kyng Henry maried his sixt wyfe. that had bene wyfe to the lord Latimer, & syster of the Marques of Northampton.
Kyng Henry first named kyng of Ire∣lande.At this parliamēt the kyng was pro∣claymed kyng of Irelande, which name his, predecessours neuer had, but were called lorde of Irelande. In the begynning of Marche, dyed sir Arthur Plantagenet, Uicecounte Lise, bastarde to kyng Edward the fourth, in the towre of London vnattainted. I mayde boy∣led in Smith¦fielde.The .x. daye of Marche, a mayde was boyled in Smythfielde, for poysonynge many persons. In May, the .xxxiiii. yere of his reigne kyng Henry toke a loane of money of al suche as were aboue the value of .50. pounde and vpwarde. The fourth daye of Iuly, the Scottes began to inuade the borders, spoylyng & burnyng, as it had bene in open warre: for whiche cause a garryson was sent thether, then the Scottes pretended a peace, and yet neuertheles in the meane space spoyled the borders. In reuenge∣ment wherof, syr Robert Bowes made a rode into Scotlād, wher he with other were taken without puttyng to raun∣some. Then the kynge sent the Duke of Norfolke with an armie royall, but at Yorke the armie was stayed. And after long consultation, the Scottes woulde
not agree to any reasonable conditions, wherfore the Duke went forward, bur∣nyng and wastyng all the marches, and there taried without any battayle prof∣fered by the kyng of Scottes, vntyll the myddest of Nouember followyng. Anno. 34. Io. Coa∣tes Sal. M. Hē. Hoblethorn S.1542 Hen. Hancotes S. After the departure of our armie frō Scotland, the kynge of Scottes made a rode into Englād, and did much harme: but at the last, syr Thomas Wharton, and syr Wyliyam Musgraue, with a few of the borderers, met with the Scot¦tes on saynt Katheryns eue, the .xxiiii. of Nouember, wher (by the great power of God) they beyng in number .15000. were ouerthrowen, in whiche conflicte was taken the lord Maxwel, the erles of Glencarne and Sassilles, with all the capitaines of the armye. And on saynt Thomas euen the Apostell, they were brought to the towre of London, where they laye that nyght: the next daye fol∣lowyng, they were by the kinges charge apparelled all in sylke, and rode through the citie to Westmynster, where they were sworne to be true prysoners, and
then were they delyuered to the custody of dyuerse noble men, whiche honorably entertayned them. Execution for slayinge an Haraulde.In this season, an Harold of Englād rydyng on the borders syde to do a mes∣sage, was met by certayn rebels, which cruelly agaynst all lawe of armes, slew him in his cote armor, but they for this dede, were sent to the kyng the yere fol∣lowyng, who executed thē for ye offence. At neweyeres tyde, the Scottes that were takē by Carlyle, were by the kyng sent home agayne with great giftes vpō condition to agree to certayne artycles, for the welth of both Realmes. The thirde daye of Iune, in the .35. yere of Hēry the eight, the Abrine a lord in Ireland, with dyuers of the wylde I∣rysh submitted them to kyng Henry. And in Iuly, the sayde Abrine was created Erle of Clawricarde. The going to Laundersey.This yere in Iuly, kyng Henry sent ouer .6000. men to Landersey, whether also came the Emperour in proper per∣son with a great army, and shortly after came down the Frenche king in proper person with a great army, and offred to geue battayle to the Emperour, by rea∣son wherof the siege was raysed.
The .28. daye of Iuly,Execution at Wyndsore. were burnt at Wyndsore thre persons, Anthony per∣son, Robert Testwood, & Hēry Filmer. This yere was a great death in Lon∣don of the pestilence:A great pesti∣lence. & therfore Mighel∣mas terme was adiourned to saint Al∣bons, and there was kept to the ende. Anno. 35. Syr Wil. Bowyer Draper. M. Iohn Toules S154 Rich. Dobbes S Syr Wyllyam Bowyer deceased the xiii. day of Aprill, about Easter, and syr Raufe Warren, serued out the resydue of that yere. The begynning of this Maiors yere, that is to saye, at Alhallontyde, a roade was made into Scotland by the garry∣son there, who burned .60. villages, and toke great praies both of men & beastes. In Nouember, the Englyshmen that were sent to Laundersey, came home agayne. A lytle before Christmas, the Uice∣roye of Sicill, came from the Emperour to kyng Henry in Ambassade, of whom he was honorably entertained, & shortly retorned agayne. This yere beyng leape yere, chaun∣sed
foure Eclipses,Foure Eclip∣sis in one yere one of the Sonne the .xxiiii. daye of Ianuary, and three of the moone: a straunge thyng, and suche as had not happened since the tyme of Charles the great. In the beginning of lent, lorde Ed∣ward Seymer erle of Hertforde, was made lieftenāt of the north partes, and sent thether with an armie, for ye defēce of that countrey. Execution at Tyborne.The beginning of Marche, Germine Gardyner, Larke parson of Chelsey be∣syde London, and Syngleton, were exe∣cuted at Tyborne, for denying the kyng to be supreme head of the churche: and shortly one Ashbee was lykewyse execu∣ted for the same. The .xxii. daye of Marche, the lorde Admirall with a great nauy, departed from the port of Londō towardes Scot∣lande. Houses blow¦en vp with gonpouder.The fourth daye of Apryll, a gonne poulder house called the black swanne, standyng vpon east smythfielde, was blowen vp with other houses nighe ad∣ioynyng: and therein were burned fyue men, a boye, and a woman. Upon Maie euen, in the .36. yere of Henry the eyght, died the lord Thomas
Audeley hygh Chancellor of England: After whome succeded lorde Thomas Writhesley. Upon May daye the nauye sente by the Lord admirall, which vntyll thys tyme had no good wynde, tooke their voyage into Scotlande from Tynmouth: wyth whom was the lorde Edwarde Seymor Erle of Hertford, the kynges lieutenāt and generall captain of the army, whi∣che the fourthe daye of May arriued at Lyth,Lyth and E∣denborough taken. the hauen of Edenborough, and toke the towne of Lyth, and spoyled it: after which they made toward Edenbo∣roughe, where at a certayne brydge the Scottes had layde theyr ordynance: but by the pollicie and manhode of our cap∣taines and souldiors, the Scottes ordy∣nance was won, and discharged against them selues, and thereby were put to flyght: after thys, the towne of Eden∣borough sente vnto the armye, preten∣dynge to delyuer the towne vppon cer∣tayne condytions, to the behofe of oure Kynge: But when the armye entred, they were inuaded by them: for whiche cause the Towne was destroyed, and cleane wasted.
Kyng Henry and the Emperoure a∣greed ioyntely to inuade the realme of France wyth two great powers. About this tyme kyng Henry made great prouisiō for a voiage into France. The coynes inhanced.A proclamation made, enhaunsynge the value of gold to the rate of .xlviii.s. and syluer to .iiii. shyllynges the ounce. It is to be noted, that at thys tyme the kynge caused to be coyned the base mo∣neys,The base mo∣ney coyned. whych was called down the fyfth yeare of Edwarde the .vi. and called in the seconde yere of Quene Elizabeth. After the whytson holye dayes, the Duke of Norffolke, and the Lord pry∣uie seale, with a great army tooke their voyage into Fraunce, and besieged Mutterell, where they laye vntyll the Kynge hadde wonne Boloygne: Not longe after, the Duke of Suffolke with many other noble men passed the seas, and encamped before Boloigne on the East syde. Kyng Henry went to Bo∣loigne.The xiiii. daye of Iuly kyng Henry hym selfe wyth a goodly companye pas∣sed from Douer to Calaice, and the .26. day encamped on the north syde of Bo∣loygne: after whose comyng the towne
was so sore battered wyth gonneshott, and certayne of theyr Towers beynge vndermyned soo shaken wyth force of gunne powder, that after a monethes siege the captayne sente woorde to the kyng, that he would yelde the towne to his behofe, vpon condition that all whi∣che were within myght departe wyth bagge and baggage:Boloigne wonne. whiche conditions Kyng Henry mercyfully graunted, and the Bulleynors departed one and other to the numbre of .4454. The .xxv. day of Septembre the kyng entred into hyghe Boloigne, wyth the nobilitie of hys realme, and the trom∣pettes blowyng, that it reioyced all the whole hoast to heare. The fyrst daye of October kyng Hen∣ry departed frome Boloigne towarde Douer: and at his goyng, he dubbed .iiii. knyghtes at the water syde. Ambassadours were sent both frome the Emperour and the french Kyng for peace to Kyng Henry: but for so muche as he would not geue vp Boloigne, no∣thyng was concluded. The .ix. day of October in the night the frēch mē cam vnwares vpōth english mē
in base Boloigne, and slewe of theym a great number. Howe beit they were shortly chased from thense, and the base towne holden after in good quiete. Anno. 36. 1544Williā Laxton grocer Mai. Iohn Wilford S. Andrew Iudde S. This yere was taken by the Kynges shyps of the weste countrey, and of the Englysh coast, the numbre of .300. fren∣che shyppes, and more. The .xxvi. day of Ianuary, there cam∣ped on the weste syde of Boloigne, be∣yonde the hauen, an army of Frenche∣men, to the number of .xviii. thousand, and laye there ten days, and the .vi. day of February, they wer all put to flight, by the Erle of Hertforde, and the lorde admirall then beynge Lorde deputie of Boloigne. The .vii. day of Iune in the .37. yere of kyng Henry the .viii. a great army of Frenchmen came nere to the hauen of Bulleyne, and skirmished with the En∣glyshmen: and thys armye beganne to buylde a fort, whych before they depar∣ted, they dyd accomplishe.
The French kyng prepared .ii. great armies agaynst the Englishmen, one by sea, an other by lande, that vpon the sea was aboue .200. shyppes besyde galeys: This nauye made shewe dyuers tymes to haue landed in the Isle of wyght, at Portesmouth, and other where: but e∣uer they perceyued suche prouysyon made by kynge Henry, that nothynge was done woorthy memorye, but that theyr sort by Boloine was in the meane tyme fynyshed. Worde was brought that the french menne entended to lande in the Isle of Wyght. Wherfore the kyng wente to Portesmouthe.The kynge wēt to Ports∣mouth, where was drowned ye Mary Rose At whyche tyme of the kynges abode there, a goodly shyppe of Englande called the Mary Rose, wyth syr George Carewe the capitayne, and many other gentylmen, were drowned in the myddest of the hauen, by greate negligence and folye. Certayne frenche men landed in the Isle of Wyght,Frenchemen landed at the Ile of Wyght but they were dryuen away with losse of theyr captaine, and many souldiours. In August the lorde Edwarde Sey∣mor erle of Hertforde was sente by the
Kyng into Scotland, with an armye of xii. thousande men, where he destroyed dyuers towns, and the middle marches and greatly endomaged the Scottes. This yeare in Auguste dyed Char∣les duke of Suffolke, a very noble gen∣tylman, and full of actiuitie. This yeare the .xii. day of Septem∣ber the Churche of saynt Gyles with∣out Creplegate was brent.Saint Gyles church brent. Anno. 37. 1545sir Martin Bowes goldsmith M. George barnes S Rafe Alleyn S The .xxiiii. day of Nouember a par∣liament begon at Westminster, where was graunted to the Kyng a Subsydie of .ii.s .viii.d. of the pounde of moua∣ble gooddes, and .iiii. shyllynges the pounde in landes to be payde in twoo yeare, and all Colleges, Chauntryes,Chantries gi∣uen to Kynge Henry. and hospitalles were committed to the kynges order durynge hys lyfe, to al∣ter and transpose, whyche hee promy∣sed to doo to the glory of God, and the common profyte of the realme. Aboute thys tyme the Lorde admi∣rall landed in Normandye, and brente
the suburbes of Traiport, & dyuers vil∣lages along the sea coast, and destroyed and toke almost all the shyppes in the hauen, which was a riche and a goodly pray, & so returned wtout any damage. Mounsyre de Bees inuaded the En∣glyshe pale besyde Grauelyn. Kyng Henry sent the lorde Edward Seymour Earle of Hertforde, and the Lorde Lysle hyghe Admirall wyth a companie of .vii. thousand men to pre∣uent the Frenchmē, which intended to build an other fort at S. Iohns Rode, at whyche tyme they entred into the ha∣uen two daies before the Frenchemen had appointed to be there, and so defea∣ted them of their purpose. Often skirmishes were betwene the Englishe garrisons in Bulleyne, & the Frenche forte, greately to the losse of both partes, and at one time especially were slayn sixtene Englishe gentlemen and .80. other, and sewe or none of the Frenchemen. The stewes & other like borthell hou∣ses wer by the kings cōmandement put down in all partes of the realme.The stewes put downe. The .24. day of December the kinges
maiestie came into the parliamēt house, to geue his royall assent to such actes as there had passed: where was made vn∣to hym by the speaker, an eloquent ora∣tion, whiche the kyng hym selfe dyd ve∣ry eloquently and wittyly answere. In February shoulde a woman haue ben burned in Smithfield, for clyppyng of gold, but the Kynges pardon came, she being at the stake redy to be burned. In Aprille were dyuers assemblyes made to entreate a peace betwene En∣glande and Fraunce, but as yet tooke none effecte. This .38. yeare of Henry the .viii. the citisens of London, leuyed in the Citie two fiftenes for the conueyance of more water to the Citye: and then was the Cunduites at Algate,The cundyte at Algate and Lothberye buylded. and at Lothbe∣ry begunne to be buylded. And the cun¦duites at Byshoppes gate, was taken downe, and sette lower as it nowe standeth. A general pro¦session in Lou¦don.This yeare the .xiii. day of Iune, be∣ynge Whytsonday, a continuall peace was proclaymed in the Cytie of Lon∣don betwene the kyng of England and the Frenche Kynge, wyth a solempne
Procession, at the tyme of proclamati∣on, gyuynge laude and prayse to God: and at nyghte thoroughout the Citie, great bonfyers were made. The .xxvii. day of Iune doctor Crome recanted at Paules Crosse. The .xvi. daye of Iuly were burned in Smithfielde these fower persones, Anne Askewe gentylwomanne,Execution in Smythfield. Iohn Lasselles gentylmanne. Nicholas Ot∣terden Prieste, and Iohn Handlande Taylour: And Doctour Shaxton som∣tyme byshoppe of Salisbury, preached at the same fyre, and recanted hys o∣pynyon, perswading them to do the like but they would not. The .xxi. daye of Auguste,The aduryrat of France lan¦ded at the to∣wer wharfe. came in∣to Englande to doo hys duetie from the Frenche Kynge, Mounsyre Deneball hygh Admyrall of France, wyth great Tryumphe, and also broughte wyth hym the Sacre of Diepe, and xii. ga∣leys wel besene in dyuers poyntes, and landed at London at the tower wharfe, where he was honourablye receyued wyth many nobles and pieres of thys Royalme, wyth greatte shootynge of gunnes, and so broughte to the Bys∣shop
of Londons palaice, and laid there twoo nightes. On Mondaie the xxiii. daye of August, he rode to Hamp∣ton Courte, where the Kinge laie: and before he came there, Prince Edward receaued him with a companie of fiue hundred coates of veluet: and the prin¦ces lyuerie were with sleues of cloathe of golde, and halfe the coate embrou∣dered with golde. And there were to the number of eighte hundred horses royally apparailed, whiche broughte him to the manour of Hampton court to the prudent Prince hys father, and quene Katherin. Anno. 38. 1546.Hēry Noble-thorne mer∣chant tailer M. Rich. Iarbis S. Th. Curtise S. Execution at tower hyll.In Ianuarie Thomas Duke of Nor∣folke was sent to the tower of London; and condempned to perpetuall prison. And shortly after his sonne the Earle of Surrey was condemned, and behea∣ded the .xix. daie of Ianuarie. These thinges beinge doone aboute the ende of Ianuarie, Kinge Henry de∣parted
out of this life: appointings his first heire to be his yong son prince Ed∣warde, and the seconde ladie Mary his daughter by his firste wife Quene Ka∣therine, and the thyrd, Ladie Elisabeth by his seconde wife Quene Anne Bo∣loigne. Edwarde the sixte. Anno Regni .1. THe gracious prynce Edwarde the sixte,1546 began his reigne the xxviii. daie of Ianua∣rie, in the yere .1546. when he was but .ix. yeres old. He decea∣sed in the yeare .1553. the .vi. daie of Iuly, so he reigned .vi. yeares .v. moneths and viii. daies, by his fathers will were ap∣pointed .xvi. gouernours and ouerseers of this yonge prince, the chiefe wherof, was his vncle Earle of Hertforde, who by the cōsent of the residue, shortly after
was made Duke of Sommersette, and proclaymed Protectoure of the Kynge and realme. The .xix. day of February, he roade solempnely with hys vncle, syr Edward Seymour Lorde Gouernour and pro∣tectour, Duke of Somersette, wyth the nobilitie of the realme, from the tower to Westmynster, thorough the Cytie, whiche was richely hunged with couer-lettes and Carpettes of Tapistrie and arras, Cheape beynge rychely hanged with cloth of gold and syluer, euery cun∣dite runnyng with wine: with pagean∣tes, being richely apparailed to receiue him at euerye place, with Orations of his praise: And on the Southesyde of Paules Churcheyard,S. Paules churche lay at anker. an Argosie came frome the Battilment of Poules chur∣che, vppon a Cable, beinge made faste to an anker, at the Deanes gate, lieng vppon his breast, aidinge him selfe nei∣ther with hande nor foote, and after as∣cended to the middeste of the same Ca∣ble, and tombled and played many pre∣tie toyes, whereat the Kinge with the nobles of the Realme lawghed righte hartilye.
The fiue and twentye daye of Fe∣bruarye, he was crowned Kynge at Westmynster wyth greate solemp∣nitie. In the Monethe of Marche syr An∣drewe Dudley Uyce admyrall, wyth the Paunce and the Harte, beynge but syngle manned, hadde a great con∣flicte wyth three Scottysshe shyppes, beynge double manned, and obteyned the victorie, and toke many prysoners, and broughte the shyppes into Or∣welle Hauen, where they dydde re∣mayne. The Lorde Protectoure wyth the reste of the Counsayle,Images com∣manded to bee taken downe. sent Commis∣sioners into all partes of the Realme, wyllynge them to take all Images out of theyr Churches for the aduoydynge of Idolatrie, wyth them were sent dy∣uers preachers, to perswade the people from theyr beades, and suche lyke. At the same tyme, Procession was commaunded to be no more vsed:Processiō for¦bydden to be vsed And shortly after was a Parlyament, wher∣in besyde other thynges, Chauntryes were geuen into the Kynges handes,The chātries geuen to the kyng to bee vsed at hys pleasure. And also
an order taken for the vse of the Lordes supper, that it should be in bothe kynds of bread and wyne. This yeare in Auguste, the Duke Somersette and the Earle of Warwike wyth a noble armye were sente into Scotlande: and nere to Edenborough at a place called Muskelboroughe,Musklebo∣rough field. the Englyshmen and Scottes mett, where betwene theym was foughten a cruell battayle: The victorye (by the onely prouydence of God) fell to the Englysh men, and the Scottes were slayne (as writeth maister Patten in his booke) a∣boue .xiiii. thousande,Paten. and taken pryso∣ners of lordes, knyghtes, and gentyl∣men .xv.C. Anno. 1. 1547Syr Iohn Gresham mercer M. Thomas white S. Robert Chersey S. This seconde yere of kyng Edwarde the .vi. the watche whyche in London had bene vsed at Mydsomer,Anno .2. and of long tyme before had ben layde downe, was nowe agayn vsed, bothe on the euen of sainct Iohn at Mydsommer, and on the
euen of saincte Peter next folowyng, in as beautyfull maner, and in as good or∣der, as it hadde bene accustomed before tyme. The laste day of Iuly, Stephen Gar∣dyner byshop of Winchester, was for a sermon made before kyng Edward, and the Counsell, wyth the nobilitie sent to the tower of London, where he remai∣ned all this kynges reigne. Thys yeare in London was greate mortalitie by the pestilence.A great pesti¦lence. Wherfore a commauundemente was geuen to all Curates, and other, hauyng to doo ther∣wyth, that no corps shoulde bee buried before .vi. of the clocke in the morning, nor after .vi. of the clocke at nyght, and that there shoulde at the buryeng of e∣nery corps bee ronge one belle at the leaste, the space of three quarters of an hower. Anno. 2. sir Henry Amcottes fishmōger M. Williā Locke S.1548 Iohn Oliffe S. Sir Thomas Seimour hygh Admi∣rall of Englande, brother to the Lorde
Protectour, and the Kynges vncle, had maryed Quene Katherine late wyfe to Kynge Henry, she conceyuynge a sto∣macke agaynste the Lorde Protectors wyfe. And there vppon also in the be∣halfe of theyr wyues, dyspleasure and grudge beganne betweene the twoo brothers, whyche at the lengthe brake out to the trouble of the whole realme, and the confusion of theym bothe: For the twenty day of Marche, in the third yeare of Edwarde the syrt,Anno .3. was the lord admyrall beheaded at Tower hyl.Execution at tower hyll And it was then sayde of many, the fall of the one brother, woulde bee the ruine of the other, as afterwarde it hap∣pened. This yeare about Whitsontide, and so foorthe vntyll September, the com∣mons in most part of this realme,Cōmotion in Cornewall & Deuonshyre mads sundry insurrections and commotions. Amongest whome, dyuers of the com∣mons of Cornewall and Deuonshyre, rose agaynst the nobles and gentilmen: and in sundrye Campes besyeged the towne of Excester, whyche was valy∣antly defended. Also they of Norffolke and Suffolke
encamped them selves in a wood,Commocion at Norwiche called saynt Nycholas woode, nere vnto Nor∣wiche, declaryng them selues to be grie∣ued with parkes, pastures, and inclo∣sures made by the gentilmē: who requi∣red the same to be disparked & set among the commons. They of Deuonshyre dyd not only require that, but also their olde relygion, and the arte of syre articles to be restored. Into Deuonshyre against Humfrey Arundell and his rebelles, was sent the lorde Russell, lorde preuye seale, with a nūber of souldiours. The lorde Graie was also sent with a num∣ber of straungers, which were horsemē, where in dyuers conflictes they slewe many people, and spoiled that countrey. Into Norfolk against captaine Kite a Tanner, and his company, syr Iohn Dudley erle of Warwycke, went with an armie: where both he hym selfe and a great number of gentlemen that were with hym, metynge with the rebelles, were in suche daunger, as they had thought all to haue dyed in the place: but God that confoundeth the purpose of rebelles, brought it so to passe, that as well there as in all other places, they were partely by power constrayned,
partly by promis of their pardō perswa∣ded to submitte them selues to their prynce, and delyuered their chiefe capi∣taynes to punyshment, but yet after the losse of many thousādes of Englishmē. The kyng of Fraunce perceyuinge suche sedicion and trouble in England, as is before mencioned: and takyng gre∣uously the losse of Bulleyne, dyd not o∣mitte the occasion, but in ye meane time, assaulted certayne holdes about ye town, builded of the Englyshemen for the de∣fence of the same, and namely tooke the forte called newe hauen, and thereby muche indamaged the Englyshe garry∣son that laye at Bulleyne. The losse of this was layde to the lorde Protectour, because he hauynge the chief gouerne∣ment of the Realme, dyd not see those partes better furnyshed: in conclusion the Erle of Warwycke as chiefe, with the consent of other nobles of the Re∣alme, by open proclamatiō accused him of misgouernement, as well in this as in dyuers other matters.The Duke of Somerset sent to the to∣wer of Lōdō Wherefore when he fled with the yonge kynge to Wyndsour castell, they caused hym to be set from thēce, and brought as a tray∣tour to the tower of London, the .xiiii.
daye of October. Anno. 3. Syr Rou∣land Hill Mercer M. Iohn Yorke S.1549 Rych. Turke S. This syr Rouland hyll, to the great prayse of his vocation, and to the syn∣guler comfort of the weale publyque of his countrey, erected many notable mo∣numentes and good dedes, whiche here are not to be vnremembred, so many at the least as be come to my knowledge, to the intent that lyke as suche (without doubte) be immortalized in the euerla∣styng worlde, they may not also be for∣gotten in this transitory passage, where they be vsed and practysed, as well to the reliefe of the poore, as to the great commoditie of trauelers, and mainte∣naunce of learnyng, whiche amonges other be these. At his costes and char∣ges he caused to be made a causye, com∣monly called ouerlane pauement, in the highe waye from Stone to Nantwiche, in length .iiii. myles, for horse and man safely to passe with also diuers lanes on bothe sydes the same causye: he caused lykewyse a causye to bee made from Dunchurche to Bransen in Warwick¦shyre,
more then two myles of lengthe, and gaue .xx. pounde in money towarde makynge of a brydge, called Roytten brydge, three myles from Couentree. He made the hyghe waye to Kylborne, nere vnto London: he made foure bryd∣ges, two of them of stone, conteynynge xviii. arches in them bothe: the one of them ouer the ryuer of Seuerne, called Acham bridge, the other Terne bridge, for that the water of Terne renneth vn∣der it, ye other two of timbar at Stoke, & built new a good part of Stoke church. Moreouer he buylded one notable free schole in Drayton in Shropshyre, of cō∣tinuānce for euer, with maister & Ushar, and sufficient stypendes for them bothe, besydes conuenient lodgynges for the the same: and one yerely rent to mayn∣tayne and repayre the same schole house and other the roumes for euer. For the maintenaunce whereof he hath assured landes to the parysh of Drayton, of .22. pounde by the yere: he also purchased a free fayre to the sayd towne, with a free marked wekely, and a free market for cattell euery .xiiii. dayes. He gaue to the Hospital of Christes churche in Londō, in his lyfe tyme fyue hundred pounde in
ready money, and one hundred pounds at his decease, to the poore of the same cytie of London, besyde the fyndynge of certayne scholers at the vniuersities of Oxenforde and Cambrydge, and stu∣dentes in the Innes of courte. &c. Upon a sondaye beyng the .xix. daye of Ianuary,A murder cō∣mitted by Charles Ga∣uaro. were murdered in London betwene Newgate and Smythfielde, two capitaines that had serued the king in his warres at Bulleyne, and other where: the one was called Gambo, the other Filicirga, both Spaniardes: this murder was cōmitted by Charles Ga∣uaro a Flēmyng, who came in poste frō Barwyke to London to doo that acte. And beyng hanged for the same with his three men in Smythfielde,Execution in Smithfielde. sayde at his death, he would neuer repēte it: they were al foure hanged on the fryday next after, whiche was the .xxv. daye of Ia∣nuary. The .xxvii. daye of Ianuary,Execution at Tyborne. Hum∣frey Arundell capitaine of the rebelles in Deuonshyre, was hanged, drawen, and quartered at tyborne, with dyuers other, as Wynslade, Holmes, & Bery, &c. About the same tyme, Robert Kyte capitaine of them that rose in Norfolke
together with his brother Wyllyam, was condemned and sent to Norwiche, where the sayde Robert was hanged in chaynes vpon the toppe of Norwyche castell. The two capitaynes, Arundell and Kite, were brought to Londō about one tyme: and so was the prophecie ful∣filled, that they and their company had great affiance and trust in: that is, that they should mete at London, which they interpreted to prosperitie as cōquerours and not to punishement as traytours. Anno. reg. 4About the beginninge of February, in the fourth yere of Edward the syxte, the Ambassadours of Englande and Fraunce, consulted of a peace to be had betwene both Realmes, whiche after was concluded. The Duke of Somerset de∣lyuered.The .vi. day of February, the Duke of Somerset king Edwards vncle, was deliuered out of ye towre, & ye same night be supped with the erle of Warwick at the sherifes house called maister Yorke. The .x. day of February, One Bel a Suffolke man, was drawen from the towre to tyborne,Execution at tyborne. and there hanged and quartered for mouyng a newe rebellion in Suffolke and Esser. On mondaye, being the last daye of
Marche, a generall peace was proclay∣med betwene the kynges of Englande and Fraunce, & in the same peace were included the Emperour & the Scottes. The .25. daye of Aprill,Bulleine yel∣ded to the frē∣che kyng. the towne of Bulleyn was yelded vp vnto the Frēch king, and his capitaines toke the posses∣sion, which was so great comfort to the Frenchemē, that at their entryng of the towne, many of them kneled down and kissed the stones of the streates. The ii. day of May,Ioane But∣cher burnt in Smythfield. one Ioane Knel, otherwyse called Ioane Butcher, or Ione of Kēt, was burned in Smithfield for heresy, that Christ toke no fleshe of the virgin Mary, but passed through her body as through a conduicte. Not long after, certain leude persons attempted a new rebellion in some part of Kent, but they were sone repressed, & certayne of the chief, as Rychard Lyon, Goddard Gorran, and Rychard Irelād,Execution. were apprehended and put to death for the same, the .xiiii. daye of May. Anno. 4. sir Andrewe Iud Skin. M. August. Hinde S1550 Iohn Lyon S This syr Andrewe Iudde (afore na∣med) erected one notable schole at Tun∣brydge
in Kent, wherein be brought vp and noryshed in good learnynge, great store of youth, as well bred in that shyre as brought from other countries adioy∣nyng. A noble act, and correspondent to those that haue bene done by lyke wor∣shipfull men and other in olde tyme, within the same citie of London. This yere vpon a thursdaye, beynge the .xvii. daye of December, the Tha∣mes beneth the brydge dyd ebbe & flowe three tymes within .ix. houres: and the same daye & tyme, the byshop of Wyn∣chester (who had lyen in the towre from the morowe after saynt Peters day, the first yere of Edward ye sixt, was brought vnto Lambyth by water, before the by∣shop of Canterbury, & other the kynges cōmissioners, where were obiected vnto hym certayn articles on the kynges be∣halfe, and day assigned him to answer. Tho. Coper.The .xxiiii. daye of Ianuary, was a parliament holdē at Westmynster, and was contynued vntyll the .xv. of Aprill. At this time besides diuers other thīgs, it was enacted that priestes chyldren should be legytimate. Anno reg. v.This yere on saynt Valentins daye, beyng the fifth yere of Edward the sixt,
at Feuersham in Kent,A murder at Feuersham. one Arden a gentleman, was kylled by the consente of his owne wyfe. For this act, iust pu∣nyshement was afterwarde taken vpon those that were the doers and consen∣ters to the same. The wyfe her self was burned at Canterbury the .xiiii. daye of Marche, the same daye two other were hanged in chaynes at Feuersham, and a woman brent: Mosby and his syster,Execution. were hanged in Smithfielde at Londō. And Black wyll the Ruffyan that was hiered to do the acte, after his first scape,Execution at Flyshyng. was apprehended and burnt on a scaf∣folde at Flyshyng in Sealande. The .xiiii. daye of February, beynge saturday, D. Stephen Gardiner byshop of Wynchester, was depriued of his by∣shoprike, and so committed to the towre agayne. Into his place was translated doctor poynet, who before was byshop of Rochester. The .24. daye of Apryll, beyng Fry∣daie,An Aryan burnt in Smythfield. a duche mā was burned in Smith∣fielde for heresy, who helde the detesta∣ble opinion of the Arrians. The .viii. daye of Maye, a proclama∣tion was made, that from and after the last daye of August then next ensuyng,
our shyllyng of the value of .xii. d. shuld be currant but for .ix. d. and a groate for three pence: by reason of whiche procla∣matiō ensued great dearth of al thinges, for the people couetyng to reyse the losse of theyr mony, vpon suche kynde of wa∣res or victual as they occupyed, did day∣ly enhaunce the pryce, moste myserablye appressyng the poore. An earth∣quake.The .25. daye Maye, beyng Monday, betwene the howers of eleuen and one of the clock at after noone, was an erth∣quake of halfe a quarter of an howre long at Blechynglye, at Godstone, at Croydon, at Albery, & at dyuers other places in Southery & Myddlesexe. The .ix. day of Iuly, being thursday, the forsayd proclamatiō, which was ap∣pointed to take effect the last day of Au∣gust next commyng (by reason of the in∣faciable couetousnes of the people, op∣pressyng the poore) was shortened vnto this present daye, and tooke effecte im∣mediatly vpon the publyshynge of the same, whiche was done betwene .ix. & tenne of the clocke before noone,The first fall of the money. so that immediatly, a shilling went for .ix. pēce, and a grote for .iii. d. and no word spokē of ye small money, as pēce & half grotes,
by reason wherof, there was no small mony to be gottē to geue ye poore people. The sweating sicknes begā in Londō the .viii. day of Iuly,A sweatyng sycknes. & the .x day of Iuly it was most vehement: whiche was so terrible, that people being in best health were sodaynly taken, and dead in .xxiiii. houres, or .xii. or lesse, for lack of skyll in guydyng them in their sweate. And it is to be noted, that this mortalitie fell chiefly or rather only on men, and those also of the best age, as betwene .xxx. and xi. yeres of age: also it folowed Englysh men, as well within the Realme as in straunge countreis: wherefore this na∣cion was muche afearde of it, and for the tyme began to repente, and remem∣ber God, from whom the plague might well seme to be sent among vs. But as the disease in time relēted, so our deuociō also in short space decaied: the first weke died in Lōdō .800 persōs & thē it ceased. The .xvii. day of August, beyng mō∣day, was proclamacion made,The secōd fall of the money. that the shilling, which of late was called down to .ix. d. shoulde be currant for .vi. d. the groat ii. d. ye half grote .i. d. a peny, a eb. The .xi. daye of October, beyng sun∣day, the Lorde Marques Dorset, was
created Duke of Suffolke, the lorde erle of Warwycke, was created Duke of Northumberlande, and the erle of Wil∣shere, was created Marques of Wyn∣chester, and syr William Herbert, the maister of the horse, was created erle of Penbroke, & dyuers mē made knightes. The Duke of Somerset cō¦mitted agayn to the towre.The .xvi. daye of October, beyng fry∣day, the duke of Somerset was brought agayne to the towre of London, and in the next mornyng the duchesse his wife, was brought thither also: and there wēt also with the Duke the lorde Graye of Wylton, syr Rafe Uane, and syr Tho∣mas Palmer, and dyuers other gentle∣men of his famyliers. Anno. 5. 1551Rychard Dobbes Skynner M. Iohn Lambert S Iohn Cowper S The .xxx. daye of October beyng fry∣daye, was proclaymed a newe coyne of money,A new coyne both syluer & golde: soueraynes of syne golde at .xxx. s. Angels of fyne golde at .x. s. and dyuers other pieces of golde of lesser value: a piece of syluer of v. s. and a piece of two .s. vi. d. the ster∣lyng shylling .xii. d. & sondry other smal∣ler pieces of money.
The .vi. daye of Nouember, beynge fryday, the old Quene of Scottes,The quene of Scottes road through Lon¦don. roade through Londō & Cheape, with a great company of Englyshmen wayting on her, after she had layne foure dayes in the byshops place beside Paules church. The firste daye of December,The Duke of Somerset a∣raigned. beynge tuesday, the Duke of Somerset was ar∣raygned at Westmynster haull, & was there acquited of treason, but condem∣ned of felony, by vertue of an act of par∣liament, made against conuenticles and vnlawfull assemblies. The .vii. daye of December, beynge monday, was a generall muster of the horsemen,A muster of horsemen. whiche were in the wages of the nobles of the Realme: and for the whiche the kynges maiestie allowed ye∣rely for euery man .20. pound, the which muster was made vpon the caussey o∣uer against the kynges palayce at saynt Iames. the number of horse was exte∣med to be a thousande. The .xxii. daye of Ianuary, beyng fri∣day, Edward Duke of Somerset,Execution at towre hyll. kyng Edwards vncle before mencioned, was beheaded at the towre hil: the people be∣yng there to beholde the execution, were sodenly in a great feare, fewe or none
knowing the cause, but this I sawe: the Duke beyng on the scaffolde by .viii. of the clock in the mornyng, enclosed with the garde, the warders of the towre, and other, the people of a certaine hamlet, whiche were warned to be there by .vii. of the clock, to geue their attendance on the Lieftenant: nowe came through the posterne, and perceiuing the prysoner to be alredy on the scaffolde, the formoste began to runne with their bils on their shoulders, & cried to their felowes to fo∣lowe fast after: which sodennes of these men so weaponed, thus running caused the people being next, & which best sawe thē, to thinke that some power had come to haue deliuered the Duke from execu∣tion, which caused them to crye, awaye, awaye, wherupon the people ran, one end way, not knowynge whether, and they which tarried to know some cause of this hurly burly, had thought some pardon had be brought, some sayde it thundered, some sayd the ground shoke, but the occasion was as I haue sayde. Anno. reg .6.This syxt yere of Edwarde the syxt, on the .xx. daye of February, the mar∣chauntes of the Stylyarde at London, were put from theyr pryuyledge of oc∣cupiyng,
whiche they of long tyme be∣fore had vsed. The .xxvi. daye of February,Execution at the towre hyl beynge Fryday, Syr Raufe a Uane, and six Mi∣les Partryge, were hanged vpon the gallowes at towre hyll: and syr Mychell Stanhope, with syr Thomas Arrūdell, were beheaded vpon the scaffold, which foure wer condēned as accessary in that whiche the Duke was condemned for. This yere the sea brake in at Sand∣wiche, in so much that it dyd ouerflowe all the Marshes there aboute, it ouer∣flowed the marshes besyde Wolwich & beyonde saynt Katherynes. The last day of April, through negli∣gence of the gonne pouder makers,A house blow¦en vp with gonpouder. a cer¦tain house with thre last of pouder, was blowen vp & burnt, the sayd gonpouder makers, beyng .xv. in number, were all slayne at the towre hyll, a litle from the Minoris beside London, on the back side of newe abbey. The .iii. daye of August, was borne a marueilous straūge monster,A monster. at a place called Myddeltō .xi. myles frō Oxēford, a womā broght forth a child, which had ii perfect bodies frō ye nauell vpward, & were so ioyned together at the nauell,
that when they were layde in lengthe, the one head and body was eastwarde, and the other west, the legges for bothe the bodies grew out at ye myddes where the bodies ioyned: and had but one issue for the excremēt of both the bodies, they lyued .xviii. dayes, and when they were opened, it appeared they were women children. The .viii. daye of August,Great fyshes taken. there were taken about Nuynborough three great fyshes called Dolphins, or by some cal∣led Kygges: and the weke folowyng, at Blackwall, were syxe more taken and brought to London, and there solde: the least of thē was greater then any horse. The same moneth the commons of the citie of London, chose thre sherifes, eyther after other, and euery one of thē refused the office, and fyned for it as it was thought, twoo hundred pounde a piece, and then the commons chose one Iohn Mainarde, who toke it vpon him, whiche about .ix. or .x. yeres before, had geuen out wares and Iewelles, as it was thought, to ye sūme of .2000. marks to be payde hym when he were sherife of London. The same moneth of August, began
the great prouision for the poore in Lon¦don, towardes the whyche euery man was contributorie, and gaue certayne money in hande, and promysed to geue a certain wekely.The gray fri¦ers in Lōdon conuerted to an hospitall. The first house which was begon was at the Graye friers in Newgate market, which went forward with all spede. The .vii. daye of October were two great fyshes taken at Grauesend,Great fyshes taken. which were called whirlepooles, they were af∣terwarde drawen vp aboue the bridge. The .xiiii. day of October the bishop of Durhā called Cuthbert Tunstall was broughte before the Commissioners, at the place of sir Arthur Darcy knight v∣pon tower hyll, where he was depriued from his sayd byshoprike. Anno. 6. George Bar¦nes haber∣dasher M. will. Garret S Io. Mainarde S1552 This sir George Barnes gaue ye wind myll which standeth toward the east in Finsbery field to the company of the ha¦berdashers of London, to that entente that the profites risyng therof, should be distributed to the poore almose people
of the same companie. And also he gaue to the parson and churche wardeyns of saint Bartholomew the little, certayne tenements, for the which they be bound to distribute to the poore people of the same paryshe .xviii. d. in breade euery sonday for euer. The fyrst chil¦dren taken in to Christes hospitall at London.The .xxi. day of Nouēber, beyng mon¦daye, the children were taken into the Hospitall at the gray friers called Chri∣stes Hospitall to the number of fower hundred. In the sommer past the other yeare, king Edward wēt in progresse into the west countrey, where he had so muche exercise of haukynge and huntynge, as was thought by some at that tyme to be daungerous vnto his health. Towarde wynter he returned to London, & from thense to Grenewitche, where all the Christmas season was passed with mu∣che pleasauntnes and myrthe, vntill at lengthe in Ianuarie he felle sycke of a cough,Anno. 7. whyche ended in a consumption of the lyghtes. The sunday before Candelmas which was the .xxix. daye of Ianuarie, in the vii. yere of Edward the .vi. came a com∣mission
to the Churche wardens of all paryshes in London, that all their lyn∣nen, as albes, chesebels, and surplices, whiche were not occupied (reseruynge necessarie linnen for the churche, should bee geuen vnto the Hospitall aboue na∣med. The .xx. day of May by the encourage∣mēt of one Sebastian Gabota .iii. great shyppes well furnished were set foorthe for the aduenture of the vnknowen voi∣age to Moscouia,A voyage to Moscouie. and other easte partes by the northe seas. And about the same tyme .ii. other shyps were sent foorth to seke aduentures southwardes. In May whiles kyng Edwarde laye daungerously sycke, Lorde Gylford the duke of Northumberlandes fourth son, maryed lady Iane the Duke of Suffol∣kes daughter, whose mother being then aliue was doughter to Mary king Hen∣ries sister, whiche fyrste was maried to the frenche kynge, and after to Charles duke of Suffolke. In this tyme many were punyshed in Englande for talkynge rasshely, that the Kyng shoulde be deade, and dyuers also for sayenge that he was poysoned:
for that rumour was spred throughoute the Realme. The .22. day of Iune, a great thunder began about a .xi. of the clock,A great thun¦der. and dured almoste the space of two houres, and a∣bout .xii. of the clocke was a wonderfull terrible clap, at which clappe the lyttell doore of saint Denyse church in London was driuen open, and the locke thereof with a great parte of the lynyng of the same doore was torne awaye. Kynge Ed∣warde decea∣sed.Kyng Edward beyng about the age of .xvi. yeres, as is sayd before was long sick of a consumption of the lightes, and the .vi. day of Iuly ended his life. he was in this hys youthe, a prince of suche to∣wardnes in vertue, learnynge, and all goodly gyftes, as Europe seldom tymes or neuer hath sene the like: and therfore no meruaile, considering the state of the realme, if all true englyshe hartes dye muche lament soo vntymely death in so tender youthe, and so toward a prince. The .x. daye of Iuly beyng monday, the deathe of Kyng Edwarde was pu∣blyshed:Ladye Iane proclaymed Quene. The same daye in the after noone aboute fower of the clocke, the Lady Iane doughter of the lady Fran∣ces,
the Duchesse of Suffolke, whyche Lady Iane was maryed vnto the Lord Gyiford Dudley the fourthe sonne vnto the Duke of Northumberland was con¦ueyed by water to the tower of London and betwene .vii. and .viii. of the clocke in the euening, proclamation was made throughout the citie, whereby was de∣clared by sondry circumstāces, that king Edwarde beyng deceased, by his wylle had assigned the sayde lady Iane to bee quene, and therevppon so proclaymed Quene of England. Thys matter was very greuouslye taken of the commom people, and a greate numbre of gentil∣men, for the loue they bare to Lady Ma∣ry, and the ryghte of her title. At thys tyme the state of this realme might wel seme moste myserable, wherin the no∣bilitie and counsell on the one parte, and the gentlemen and commons of the o∣ther, appered to be fully bent to mayn∣tayne two contrary titles. For when it was heard that the lady Mary was fled to Framingham castell in Suffolk, the people of the countrey almoste wholly resorted vnto her, and in Oxenforde syr Iohn Williams, in Buckinghamshire,
syr Edmunde Peckham, and in dyuers other places many men of worshyp, of∣fryng them selues as guides to the com∣mon people, gathered greate powers, and with all spede made towarde Suf∣folke, where ladye Mary was. In thys meane tyme the .xiii. day of Iuly, by ap∣pointment of the counsell the Duke of Northumberland, the Erle of Hunting∣don, the lorde Grey of Wilton and dy∣uers other, with a great numbre of men of armes, went to fetche her by force, and was on their way as farre as Bury but not long after, the counsell, partly moued with the right of her cause, part∣ly consideryng that the moste of the re∣alme was wholly bent on her syde, chan¦ged theyr myndes, and assembled them selues at Baynardes castell, and there commoned with the erle of Pembroke, and immediatly came into Cheapeside, with the kyng of heraldes, where they proclaimed the lady Mary doughter to kyng Henry the .viii. and quene Kathe∣rine,Lady Marye proclaymed quene of En∣glande. quene of Englande, France, and Irelande defendor of the faithe. &c. the xix. day of Iuly: kepyng as prisoners in the tower lady Iane lately proclaimed,
and Lorde Gylford her husband. When this was heard in the dukes campe, ma∣ny of his souldiours forsoke hym, and be returnynge to Cambridge, proclaimed the Ladye Marye Quene, and on the twenty day at nyght, beyng apprehen∣ded of the garde, he with other, was brought to the Tower of London, the fyue and twentye daye of Iuly. Thus was the matter ended wythout bloud∣shedde, whyche menne seared woulde haue brought the deathe of many thou∣sandes. Queene Mary. Anno Regni. 1. MArye, the eldest daughter of king Henry the .viii. be∣gan her reigne ouer thys realme of England the vi. day of Iuly,1553 in the yeare of our Lord .1553. & deceased in the yere of our Lorde .1558. the .17. day of Nouember, so she reigned .v. yeares .v. moneths & .xi. days: she was proclaimed Quene at London, the .xix. day of Iuly,
and the .xx. day at the castel of Framing∣ham:Quene Ma∣ry hauynge to the numbre of 30000. men, ye erle of Sus∣sex being lieu∣tenaunt of the armye, when she dissolued her campe at Framingham victuals was of suche plen∣tithe, that a barell of biere was folde for vi. d with the caske and iiii. greate loaues of bread for a peny. and afterwarde beynge accompa∣nied with a goodly bande of noble men, gentylmen, and commoners gathered out of all partes of the realme, came to London, and entred the tower the .iii. day of August. In her fathers tyme and brothers tyme, dyuers noble men, by∣shops, and other were caste into the to∣wer: somme for treason layde to their charge, as the Duke of Norffolke, and the Lord Courtney, sonne to the Mar∣ques of Excester: some for mainteinyng the Popes supremacie, as D. Lonstall, byshop of Durham, and other: whiche continued there prisoners at the Que∣nes commyng to the tower, to all these and many other, she graunted pardon, and restored them to theyr former dig∣nities. Lykewise dyd she vnto doctour Gardener bishop of Winchester, whom she dyd not only sette at libertie, but al∣so made hym hygh chauncellour of En∣glande. For the greate fauour that she shewed to the lord Courtney, whom she made Erle of Deuonshyre, many men were in opinion, that she purposed to haue maryed hym, but in the end it pro∣ued
otherwyse. As all sortes of men almoste dyd re∣ioyce, that Quene Mary had recouered the crowne: so many notwithstandyng muche feared alteration of religion by her. For manyfest signification therof, was geuen dayly, as well by the Quene her selfe, who oftentymes hadde masse and Latine seruice before her in the to∣wer: as also by diuers sermons made of them that at that tyme were appointed to preache about London. The .xi. day of August certaine gen∣tilmen myndyng to passe through Lon∣don bridge in a wherrie,A wherrye o∣uerturned. were there o∣uerturned by violence of the water, and seuen of them drowned. The .xiii. day of August, master Bourn canon of Paules, preachynge at Paules crosse sayd as foloweth: This same day v. yeares the reuerende father in God, Edmunde bishop of London our dioce∣san, preachynge in thys place, and thys same gospell whyche I nowe preache, for the same was cast in prison, and hath there remained tyll this tyme, that the quenes most excellent maiestie hath de∣liuered and set hym at libertie: whyche
saying of the precher so offended the au∣dience, that they breakyng silence, said, the byshop had preached abhomination: other some cried (meanyng of the prea∣cher) pull hym out, pulle hym out: and some beynge next the pulpyt, began to clymbe towarde the preacher to haue pulled hym out, wherwith the preacher stepped backe, and one mayster Brad∣forde, a preacher of Kynge Edwardes tyme, stepped forthe into the preachers place, most myldely and gently persua∣dyng the audience to quietnes and obe∣dience, whose presence lyked the people well:A dagger thro¦wen at Pau∣les crosse but neuertheles Bourne standing by Bradford one threw a dagger at him whiche hytte one of the syde poastes of the pulpet, and rebounded backe agayn a great way: whervpon maister Brad∣forde was fayne to breake of his speche, & forced hym self with the helpe of Iohn Rogers, an other preacher, to conueye Maister Bourne oute of the audience, whiche with great labour they brought into Poules schole. Doctour Boner that was depriued in king Edwards time, was now again (as ye haue heard) restored to his bishoprike
and dyuers other byshops for Religion were displaced: as Cranmer of Canter∣bury: The archbishop of Yorke Poynet of winchester, Barlow of Bath, Farrar of S. Dauis: Harley of Herford: Houper of Gloucester: Couerdale of Excester: Scory of Chichester. &c. And al other be¦nefieed men, that either were maried or wold not forsake their opiniōs, wer put out of their liuinges, & other knowen to be of the contrary parte were set in the same, especially if any were aliue, that in the time of kyng Henry or Edwarde were put out of the same bishoprikes or benefices: as bishop day of Chichester: Heth of worc. Turberuile of Excest. &c. The .22. day of August yt duke of Northū¦berlād was beheded & with him wer put to deth sir Iohn Gates,Execution at Tower hyll. and sir Thomas Palmer called Buskin palmer knights. Peter martyr, who in king Edwards tyme was reader of diuinitie in Oxford obteined licence and safe conduite of the quene, and departed oute of Englande to Argentine whens he came. In this time ye people shewed thēselues so redy to receiue their old religion, yt in many places of the realme, vnderstan∣dyng
the quenes plesure, before any law was made for the same, they erected a∣gayne theyr aultars, and vsed the Masse and latin seruice, in suche sorte as was wont to be in kyng Henries tyme. The greate Hary brente.The .xxvi. day of Auguste in the eue∣nyng, the notablest shyppe in the world was burnt at wolwich, called the great Hary, by the negligence of maryners, she was of burthen a M. tunne. The last day of September the que∣nes hyghnes rode thorough the citie to Westminster in moste goodly maner,A man stoode on the wether cock of Pau∣les. the pageantes in all places accustomed beyng moste gorgiously trimmed: And as her grace passed by Poules, a certain dutche man stode vpon the wethercock with an enseigne in his hande, floury∣shyng with the same, and vnder hym v∣pon the crosse, a scaffold garnished with enseignes banners and streamers, and vnder that vpon the holle an other scaf∣folde with enseignes & streamers, very strange to ye beholders. And the morow which was the fyrst day of October her grace was crowned at westminster by doctor Gardiner bishop of Winchester. The .v. day of October began the par¦liament
at Westminster, and masse of the holy ghoste was songe. The .xxv. day of October the barge of Grauesend by greate misfortune of a ratche running vpon her,Grauesende barge ouer∣turned. was ouerthro¦wen and .xiiii. persones drowned, and xvi. saued by swymmyng. The .xxiii. the .xxv. the .xxvii. dayes of October were certayne disputations in the longe chapell at the northe doore of Paules concerning Transubstantiation but nothyng throughly determined. Anno. 1. Tho. white marchant tailour M. Tho. Offley S. Wil. Hewet S.1553 The same syr Thomas White, a wor∣thy patron and protector of poore scho∣lers and learnynge, renewed or rather erected a college in Oxford,S. Iohns col¦ledge in Ox∣enford erected that was in great ruine and decaye, nowe called S. Iohns college, and before Bernard col∣lege, indowyng the same with landes & reuenues, to the greate prefermente of learnyng and comfort of poore mennes children. Renuing by that ensample, the worthy monuments and dedes done by the lyke godly disposed of ancient tyme
in bothe the vniuersities, whiche maye wel be called, ye two Eies of the realme, whose sight begyn to grow dymme, tho∣rough the coldnes of charitie and want of deuotion late crept into the hartes of men. God graunt they may be restored to the clerenes of their wonted syghte, that learnyng may flouryshe, throughe abundaunce of schollers, with mainte∣naunce for the same. And that the able and riche may liberally imitate theram∣ple of this vertuous gentleman, who both there and in many other places, as by erection of Schooles at Bristoll and Readynge, hathe planted the rootes of learnyng: the fruites wherof no doubte in tyme to come shall flouryshe, to the great cōmoditie and singular ornament of the realme. Trinitie co∣ledge erected.The lyke College also now called tri∣nitie colledge, the ryght worshypfull sir Thomas Pope knyght deceased to his great praise and singular commēdation erected, whiche some tyme was called Durham colledge, also ruinous and in great decaye he reedified: appoyntynge for the maintenance of the fellowes and scholers like possession. By whiche fact
he declared, that like as God had indued him with greate rychesse and reuenues by policie and the princis seruice acqui∣red and gotten, euen so he therby ment to dedicate some portion thereof to the honor of lerning, and gifts of the mynd, that his naturall countrey might attein that honoure, whiche is or ought to be∣longe to euery christen realme. For he remembryng what benefites learnyng dothe conduce and brynge to a well go∣uerned common wealthe, thought not to beslack in distributyng his portion, to thaugmentation of the same. Cardinall Poole, who fledde oute of Englande in the tyme of Kyng Henry, and was in great estimatiō in the court of Rome, was sent for by Quene Mary to returne into hys countrey. About this tyme the parliament dyd conclude, that the Seruice of the chur∣che should from and after the .xx. day of December next ensuyng, be used in all places, in suche maner and fourme as it was vsed in the laste yere of kyng Hen∣ry the .viii. The .xiii. day of Nouēber D. Cranmer
Archbishop of Canturburye, lady Iane that was before proclaimed Quene, and the lorde Gylford her husbande were o∣penly arreigned & condemned for treson. This yere the .xxv. of Nouember be∣yng saincte Katherins daye, after euen∣song began the quier of Poules to go a∣bout the steple, synging anthemes with cresset lyghtes, after the old custome at vi. of the clocke at nyght. The laste daye of Nouember beynge saynt Andrewes day, began the proces∣sion in latine, the byshop, curates, per∣sons, and the whole quiere of Poules, with the Maior and aldermen, and the prebendes in their grey amyses, &c. The .v. day of December the parlia∣ment was dissolued, in the whyche par∣liament all statutes that were made ei∣ther of Premunire in tyme of king Hē∣ry the .viii. or concernynge religion and administration of the sacramentes vn∣der kyng Edwarde the syxt, were re∣pealed, and communication was had of the quenes mariage with kyng Phi∣lyp the Emperours sonne. The beginnyng of Ianuarie the empe¦ror sent a noble man called Ecmondane
and certayne other ambassadours into England to make a perfecte conclusion of the mariage betwene Kyng Philyp and Quene Mary. The .xx. day of Ianuary the lord Chan∣cellor with other of the counsaile, decla∣red openly vnto the Quenes maiesties houshold, that there was a mariage con∣cluded, betwene her grace and the kyng of Spayne, whiche shoulde be a greate strength, honour, and enrichyng to the realme of England. The purpose of this mariage was so greuously taken of dyuers noble men, and a great numbre of gentylmen and commoners, that for this, and religion, they in suche sort conspired agaynst the quene, that if the matter had not brokē out before the tyme appointed, menne thought it would haue brought muche more trouble and danger. For syr Tho∣mas Wyat in Kente, beyng one of the chief,A commotion in Kent. fearynge that the matter was by certaine persones bewrayed, sodenly a∣bout the .xx. day of Ianuary gathered a certayne company, and muche incensed the people of those partes agaynste the quene, saying: That she and the counsel
intended not onely by alteration of re¦ligion to bryng in the pope, but also by mariage of a stranger to brynge the re∣alme into miserable seruitude and bon∣dage. When report of this was brought to London, the Queene, with so muche spede as might be, sent the duke of Nor∣folke with a company of souldiours into Kent against Wiat, where the duke me¦ting with Wyat, not farre from Roche∣ster bridge, was forsaken of his souldi∣ours, and returned to London. The duke of Suffolks, a∣gayn proclay∣med his dough¦ter quene.In this meane tyme Henry duke of Suffolk father to lady Iane lately pro∣claimed Quene fleynge into Leycester∣shyre, and Warwikeshire with a small company in dyuers places as he went a∣gayne proclaimed his daughter: but the people did not greatly inclyne vnto him Wherfore when the erle of Huntyng∣ton, that was sent to pursue hym, came to Couentrie, and was receiued into the citie: the duke, hauyng no great power or strength of menne about hym, was brought therby into a streight, and hy∣dyng hymselfe in a parke of hys owne by Couentrie, was bewrayed by one of his seruauntes, and so taken, and by the
erle of Huntington brought prysoner to London:The Duke of Suffolke ta∣ken. whyle thys stirre and trouble was, the Emperours ambassadours for feare of daunger departed out of the re∣alme, and the same daye beyng the fyrst of Februarie, the Quene came frome Westminster to the Guyld hall in Lon∣don:The Queene came to the Guylde hall in London. and there after vehement woor∣des agaynste Wyate, declared that she ment not otherwyse to marry, then the Councell should thynke both honoura∣ble and commodious to the realm. And if they thought good, that she could con∣tinue vnmaried, as she had done ye grea∣test part of her age: and therfore wyl∣led theym truely to assist her in repres∣synge suche as contrarye to theyr due∣ties rebelled. When she had done, vnderstandynge that many in London dyd fauour Wy∣ats part, she appoynted lorde William Haward lieutenant of the citie, and the Earle of Pembroke general of the field whiche bothe prepared all thynges ne∣cessarye for theyr purposes, with greate prouision of men and artillerie. Whyle thys prouysion was makynge,
Wyate came nere vnto the citie, and was entred into Southewarke, the third day of Februarie, and the morow after Candlemas daye. wherefore the drawe bridge was broken downe, ordi∣nance bent to that parte, generall par∣don proclaimed to all them that woulde geue ouer and forsake the rebels, and a greate rewarde appoynted to hym that toke Wyate prisoner. After Wyat had layne .ii. dayes in Southwarke, he tur∣ned hys iorney to Kyngston on Shroue: tuisday in the mornyng, beyng the sixte of Februarie. where he passed ouer the Thames, and purposed to haue come to London in the night: but by means that the cariage of his chiefe ordinance brake he was so letted that he could not come before it was farre daye. At that tyme the erle of Pembroke, and diuers other were in saint Iames field with a great power, and theyr ordinance so bent that Wiate was faine to leaue the common way, and with a smalle company came vnder saint Iames wall frome the dan∣ger of the ordinaunce: and so wente by Charing crosse vnto Ludgate without resistence, and there thought to haue be
let in. But perceiuyng that he was de∣feated of his purpose, he returned, and aboute temple barre was resysted, and yeldyng hymselfe was taken prisoner.Wyat taken. Proclamation was made in London, that no man vnder pain of death should kepe in his house any of Wiats faction. Wherfore they were all brought forth, and shortly after, about the number of fifty were hanged on .xx. paire of gallou∣ses made for that purpose in dyuers pla∣ces in and about the citie. The .xii. day of February lady Iane the duke of Suffolkes daughter and her husband lord Gylford, whiche hytherto had ben kept in the tower,Execution. were nowe be headed, for feare least any other shold make lyke trouble for her title, as her father had attempted to doo. The .17. of February was proclamatiō made that all strangers should voyd the realme within .xxiiii. days next ensuing,Execution at the tower of London. vpon payne of confiscation of their goo∣ds (all free denisens, marchantes, em∣bassadoures and theyr seruants except.) The .xvii. daye of Februarie Henry Duke of Suffolke was condempned of reason, & the fourth day after beheaded
at the tower hyll,Execution at tower hyll. and hys bodye buried in the tower. The .23. of February, about .240. pri∣soners of Wiats faction went with hal∣ters about theyr neckes toward West∣minster, who had theyr pardon in chepe. The .xv. day of Marche the Earle of Deuonshire, whom the Quene at her fyrst entring deliuered out of the tower and ladye Elisabeth also the Quenes sy∣ster were both in suspicion to haue con∣sented to Wyats conspyracie: and for the same were apprehended and com∣mitted to the Tower. The .x. of Aprill Cranmer archbishop of Canturbury, Ridley of London, and Hugh Latymer ones byshop of worce∣ster, were conueyed as prisoners from the tower of London to Wyndsor, and after frome thence to the vniuersitie of Oxforde, there to dispute with the diui∣nes and learned men of the contrary o∣pinion. Execution at tower hyll.The .xi. daye of Aprill syr Thomas Wiat chiefe capitayn and ryngleader of the rebels was beheaded at tower hyll, and after quartered, his quarters were sette vp in dyuers places, and his heade
on the gallowes at Hay hyll, where it was soone after stolne awaye, and his fyngers and toes cut of from his quar∣ters and conueyed. The .27. of Aprill the lorde Thomas Gray,Execution at Tyborne. brother to the late duke of Suf∣folke, was beheaded. William Thomas a gentylman, and certaine other persons were apprehen∣ded for conspiring Quene Maries death the same William Thomas for that of∣fence the .xviii. day of May was drawen hanged and quartered at Tyborne. The .xix. day of May the lady Eliza∣beth was brought out of the Tower by water, and so conueyde to Richemount, from thense to Wyndsore, and so by my lorde Williams to Rycote in Oxforde∣shyre, and from thens to Woodstocke, where she remayned. The .xxiiii. day of Maye, beynge the feast of Corpus Christi, a ioyner that dwelte in Colman streete, called Iohn Strete wold haue takē the Sacrament out of the priests hands in Smithfield, in the tyme of procession, but he was re∣sisted, taken and put in Newgate, and then he fayned hym selfe madde.
The fowerth day of Iune was taken down all the gallowes that were about London. The same day began the crosse of Cheape to be newe gylded. Anno. reg. 2. A spirite in a wall at Lon∣don. The .xxii. daye of Iune was a procla∣mation made concernyng shootynge in handgunnes and bearyng of weapons. The .xv. daye of Iuly in the seconds yeare of Quene Mary, Elisabeth a yong wenche of the age of .xvi. or .xviii. yeres, did open penance at Paules crosse, stan∣dyng vpon a skaffold al the sermon time where she confessed openly, that she be∣yng inticed by lewde councell, had vpon the .xiiii. day of Marche last passed coun∣terfait certayn speches in an house, nere vnto Aldersgate in London, aboute the which, the people of the whole citie wer wonderfully molested. Some saying it was an angel, some the holy ghost, spea∣kynge in a walls: On this maner she behaued her selfe, she laye and why∣stled in a strange whistell made for the nones, then were .iii. or .iiii. companions confederate with her, which toke vpon them to interprete what the spirit said, expressyng certain sedicious & opprobri∣ous words against the quenes highnes.
The .xix. day of Iuly kyng Philyp the emperours sonne,Kyng Philip came to Win¦chester. passyng out of Spain came into England, & arriued at South hampton. the .iiii. daye after he came to Winchester in the euenynge, and there goyng to the churche, was honourably receiued of the bishop, and a great num∣ber of nobles, for that purpose appoin∣ted: the next day he met with the quens with whom after he had long and fami∣liar talke. The second day beyng sainct Iames day, the mariage was in honora∣ble maner solemnised betwene him and quene Mary. At this time the emperors embassadour being present, openly pro∣nounced yt in consideration of that mari∣age, the emperour had granted & geuen vnto his sonne, the kingdom of Naples. Shortly after, kyng Philip and quene Mary, departed from Winchester, and with a goodly companie were broughte to London, & there with great prouision were receyued of the Citizens the .xviii. day of August. At that time a man came as it wer flying vpon a rope from Pau∣les steple to the deanes walle. In October the emperor sent ambas∣sadours into Englande to yeld vnto his
sonne kynge Philip the Dukedome of Millayne. Anno. M .2. P .1. 1554Iohn Lyon grocer M. Dauid Wodroffe S. William Chester S. Cardinall Poole cam in∣to Englande.The .xxiii. of Nouember Cardinall Poole came oute of Brabant into En∣glande, and was receyued with muche honour in all places as he passed. At the same tyme he was by parlyamente re∣stored to his old estate and dignitie that he was put frome by kynge Henry the quenes father: and shortely after came into the parlyamente house where the kyng, quene, and other states were all present. Then he declaryng the cause of his legacie, fyrst exhorted thē to returne to the cōmunion of the church, & restore to the moste holy father and pope, hys due aucthoritie: secondly he aduertised them to geue thankes to God that had sent them so blessed a kynge and quene: fynally he signified, for so much as they had with great gentylnes restored him to his honour and dignitie, that he most earnestly desyred to se them restored to the heauenlye courte and vnitie of the
churche. The next day the whole court of parliament drue out ye forme of a sup∣plication, the summe whereof was, that they greately repented theym of that schisme that they had lyued in: And ther¦fore desired the quene and the Cardinal that by their meanes they myght be re∣stored to the bosome of the holy churche and obedience of the sea of Rome. The next day, the Kyng, queene, and Cardi∣nall beyng present, the lorde Chancel∣lour declared what the parliamente had determyned concernyng the Cardinals request, and offred vnto the kynge, and Quene the supplication before mencio∣ned, whiche beyng read: the Cardinall in a large oration, declared howe accep∣table repentaunce was in the syghte of God. &c. Immediatly he, makynge prayer vn∣to God, by authoritie to hym commit∣ted, absolued them, and restored them to the churche of Rome. When all this was done, they wente all vnto the cha∣pell: and there syngynge Te Deum, with greate solempnytie declared the ioye and gladnesse, that for thys reconcilia∣tion
was pretended. The .ii. day of December beyng son∣day, the kynges maiestie, the Lord car∣dinall, and diuers other of the nobilitie, repaired to saint Paules church in Lon¦don, and so vnto a wyndow of the same, directly against the crosse, wher the by∣shop of winchester being lord Chācellor of Englande made a sermon, declaryng howe this realme was agayne restored and vnited vnto the churche of Rome. The .27. of Decēber the prince of Pia∣mont duke of Sauoy, with other lordes wer receiued at Grauesend by the lord priuie seale, & other, & so conueyde along the ryuer of Thames thorowe London bridge to Westmin. to ye kings palaice. In the beginnyng of Ianuary the par∣liament was dissolued: Wherin among other thynges it was enacted, that the statutes before tyme made for the pu∣nishement of heretikes, and the confir∣mation of the popes power should be re∣uiued, and in so good force as euer they had ben before kynge Henries reigne: and that such acts as were made against the supremacie of the Pope shoulde bee cleane abrogated and abolished.
The .ix. day of Ianuarie the prince of Orenge beyng receyued at Grauesende,The prince of Orenge came to London. was conueyed along the ryuer of Tha∣mis through London bridge, and landed at the duke of Suffolkes place. The .iiii. of February being monday, Iohn Rogers vicar of S. Sepulchres, was burned in Smithfield.Execution in Smithfielde. The .vii. of February, the lorde Strange being ma∣ried at the court, the same day at nyght was a goodly pastime of Iuga cana by cres∣set lyght, there were .lxx. cresset lightes. The .xviii. of February the byshop of Ely, with the lord Mountacute & dyuers other, well apparelled rode forthe of the citie of London towards Rome ambas∣sadours from the king, quene & councel. The .xvi. daye of Marche a weaner,Execution in Smithfielde. which dwelled in Shorditche, was bur∣ned in Smithfield. The xiiii. day of Aprill in Anno .1555. beyng Ester day, a certain desperate per∣son named Williā Flower, with a wod knyfe, wounded a priest, as he was mi∣nistrynge the sacrament to the people in S. Margarets churche at Westminster: for the whiche offence,Execution in Westminster the said William Flower was burned at westmynster in saint Margarets church yarde the .xxiiii.
day of Apryll. In Maye the Lorde Cardynall Poole the lorde Chauncelloure of Englande, the Earle of Arundell, hygh steward of Englande, and the lorde Paget, wente ouer sea to Calyce, and nere vnto Mark treated with the emperors and Frenche kynges Commyssioners, for a peace to be had betwene the sayde princes, Car∣dinall Poole beyng president there, who returned agayne into Englande, about the myddest of Iune, without any agre∣ment makyng. On the tenthe daye of May, a ladde called Wyllyam Fetherstone, aboute the age of eyghtene yeares, whoe na∣med hym selfe to be kyng Edwarde the vi. was taken about Eltham in Kente, and conueyed to Hampton court, & there brought before the counsell, who exami∣ned hym why he named hymselfe to bee kyng Edward, he requirynge to be par∣doned, sayd he wist not what he did, but as he was counsailed, apperyng many∣festly to be a desperate foole, and so was cōmitted to the marshalsey. The .xxviii. day of May the aforesayd ladde was had out of the Marshalsey in a carte, and so caryed throughe London
to Westminster, wyth a paper on hys head: wherin was written, that he na∣med hym selfe kyng Edwarde. And af∣ter that he had bene thus caryed round aboute Westmynster hall before all the Iudges and others, he was then whip∣ped about the sayde Hall, and after set at lybertie. The later ende of Iune, was a certain muttering traiterously attempted about Wadehurst in Suffex, but it was spedi∣ly perceyued and wyttyly repressed. About the fyrste of Iuly Iohn Brad∣forde was burned in Smithfield.Execution in Smythfielde. This Bradforde was a man of very sober and honest lyfe, and therefore the byshoppes woulde haue ben very glad to haue had hym recant and abiure his opinion. The .xii. day of August the .3. yeare of quene Mary was a terrible fyght on the sea,Anno .3. betwene the Duchemen and french¦men nere vnto Romney marshe, where as .xi. shyps were brent and sonke, that is .vi. frenche shyppes, and fyue greate hulkes, and certayne hulkes taken by the Frenche men. In the beginning of Septēber the king
went ouer sea to Calice,The .iiii. of September kynge Philip ariued at Ca¦laice. and so forthe to Brusselles in Brabant to visite the em∣perour his father. The begynning of October fell suche rayne, that for the space of vi. days men mought row with boates in saint Geor∣ges field, the water came into westmin∣ster hall, and there stoode halfe a yarde depe. Also into the palaice of westmyn∣ster, and into Lambeth Churche, that men mought row about the church with a whirrie. The .xvi. day of October doctor Rid∣ley, and doctour Latymer were burned at Oxenforde. Anno. M .3. P .2. 1555wil. Garret haberdasher M Thomas Lee S. Iohn Machā S. In October and Nouember a parlia∣mēt was holden, in the which the quene beyng persuaded (of the clergie) that she could not prosper so long as she kepte in her handes the reuenues of the churche, yelded vp vnto the spirituall menne, the fyrste fruites and tenthes of all byshop∣rikes benefices, and ecclesiasticall liuin∣ges, which in king Hēries time were by parliament annexed to the crowne: be∣fore the ende of this parliamente, dyed
Stephen Gardener Chancellour of En¦gland on the .ix. day of Nouember, and was buried at Wynchester, and in hys place was appointed doctor Heath arch∣byshop of Yorke. Philpot was burned the .xviii. daye of Nouembre.Execution. Kyng Philyp, beginnyng to gouerne the low countreys, committed vnto him by his father about the .xviii. day of Ia∣nuarie entred into Andwerpe, and was receiued with great solemnitie. The .iiii. day of Marche appered a bla∣syng sterre,A blasyng sterre. and continued the space of xii. dayes. William Fetherston who before had named hym selfe to be kyng Edward (as you haue herd in the yere last past) now said, he had of late sene and spoken with kynge Edwarde: for the whiche he was drawen to tyborne, and there hanged & quartered the .xiii. day of Marche. The .xxi. day of Marche D. Cranmer archbyshop of Canterbery was burned at Oxford: and the same daye the lorde Cardinall Poole song his fyrst masse at Grenewich in the friers church: on son∣day next folowynge, he was consecrated
archebyshop of of Caunterbury, at the same friers churche with great solemni∣tie: and on the .xxv. daye of Marche, be∣yng the feast of the annunciation of our Ladye in the yeare .1556. he was stalled at Bowechurche in Cheape. On Palmsonday euē being ye .28. of Mar¦che, part of the prison house of Newgate at Lōdon was burnt by casualtie of fire. This yeare a certain conspiracie was made by certaine meane persons in En∣gland: whose purpose was to haue rob∣bed the quenes Escheker, to this entent that they myghte bee able to mainteyne warre agaynste the quene. This matter was vttered by one of the conspiracye: whereby Udall, Throgmorton, Peck∣ham, Daniel, and Stanton were appre∣hended for the same, and dyuers other fled into France. The .xxviii. day of Apryll, Throgmor∣ton, and Richard Udall wer drawen to Tyborne, and there hanged and quar∣tered. The .xix. of Maye Stanton was likewyse executed at Tyborne. The .viii. daye of Iune one Rossy, De∣dyke, and Bedle, were also drawen to Tyborn, and hanged & quartered.
The .xxvii. daye of Iune were .xiii. persones brent at Stratforde the bowe, for matters of religion. The .viii. day of Iuly Henry Peckham and Iohn Daniel were hanged and hea∣ded at the tower hyll, and theyr bodyes buried at Barkyng churche. Anno. M .4. P .3. sir Tho. Of∣fley marchāt taylour M. Wil. Harper S. Iohn white S.1556 About this tyme began the hofe bur∣nyng feuers and other strange diseases, wherof died many olde persons,Seuen alder∣men deceased in London. so that in London there dyed frome the laste of Nouēber; vnto the last of Decēber .vii. Aldermen, whose names were Henry Herdson, sir Richard Dobbes late maior sir Williā Larton late maior, syr Henry Nublethorn late maior, sir Iohn Chap∣neis blynde late maior, sir Iohn Oliffe late sheriff, & sir Iohn Greshā late maior The .16. of December a smyth beyng a stranger borne was arraigned at New∣gate for makynge counterfeated keyes, wherwith to haue opened Newgate in the nyght, and so to haue slayne the ke∣per, and lette foorth the prysoners, at
whyche tyme of his arraignement, ha∣uyng a knyfe about hym, he thrust hym in, who gaue witnesse agaynst hym, so that he dyed therof: for the whiche acte after that .xii. men had gyuen theyr ver∣dict against him, and iudgement passed, he was immediatly takē from the barre and in the strete before the Iustice hall, his hand beyng striken of, his body was hanged on a new gybbet set vp for that purpose: the same tyme, the keeper of newgate was indicted for that the sayde prisoner had weapon about hym. The .iiii. of Ianuarie a shippe passyng before Grenewiche (the court beynge there) shotte of her ordinaunce, and one piece beynge charged with a pellette of stone, was shot into the court: but than∣kes be vnto God it dyd no hurt: but pas∣sed through the walles. An ambassa∣dour frome Moscouie.The .xxvii. day of Februarye an am∣bassador came to London from the em∣perour of Cattay, Moscouie, and Russe lande: who was honorably met and re∣ceyued at Totham by the merchantes venturers of London, rydyng in veluet coates and chayues of gold, and by them conducted to the barres at Smithfield,
and there receiued by the lorde maior of London, with the aldermen and sherif∣fes: and so by the lorde Maior, aldermen and merchant venturers, conueyed tho∣rough the Citie, vnto maister Dimokes place in Fanchurch strete, wher he lod∣ged vntill the .12. of May next folowyng in the yere .1557. at the which tyme he toke hys iourney to Grauesend, & there toke shyppyng with the prymrose, and iii. other shyppes to sayle to Moscouie. The lorde Sturton with muche iniu∣ye and crueltie murthered two men:A murderer. and for the same was araigned and con∣demned at Westminster: the .ii. daye of Marche: he was conueyed through Lon¦don to Salisburye,Execution at Salisbury. and there hanged with .iiii. of his seruantes, the .vi. daye of Marche. King Philip, who had ben a good sea∣son in Flaunders to take the possession and gouernement of the low countreis,  Marche returned into Englande, and the .xxii. day he passed through London, beynge accompanied with the Quene, and the nobles of the realme, but be∣cause greate trouble was towarde be∣twene hym and the kyng of France: he
taried not long here, but about the third of Iuly next folowyng, passyng the seas agayne into Flanders made great pro∣uision for warre agaynste the Frenche kyng. The quene thynking her husban∣des quarell to be hers also,Englyshmen sent to saynte Quintins. proclaymed open war agaynst France: and not long after sent ouer an army of one thousand horsemen .iiii. thousand footemen, ii. M. pioners, to ayde kynge Philip, whereof the erle of Pembroke was generall. The .24. day of Aprill in the yere .1557. Thomas Stafford & other englishmē to the numbre of .xxxii. persones commyng out of France toke the castell of Scar∣borough,Scarbrough castell taken by .xxxii. per∣sons. whiche they enioyed .ii. dayes, and then were taken and broughte to London: wher on the .xxviii. day of May the sayd Thomas Stafford was behea∣ded at the Tower hyll:Executio at tower hyll. and vpon the morowe were three of hys companye drawen to Tyhorne, and there hanged and quartered. The tenthe daye of Auguste in the fyfthe yeare of Quene Marye were ta∣ken of Fraunce the chiefest Capitayns that the Frenche kyng hadde, as folo∣weth.
The duke of Motmorency Consta∣ble of France, and his sonne called, Mon∣sieur de Meru, the duke of Monpencier, the duke of Longueuille, the Mareshal of S. An∣drew, the Ringraue Coronal of the Almains, Roche du Main, the Conte of Roche foucaul, The Vicont of Touraine, the Baron of Cur¦ton, the Prince of Manus, besyde many gentylmen and Capitains. Thys yeare on the .xv. daye of Iuly dyed the ladye Anne of Cleue at Chel∣sey,The ladye Anne of Cle¦ue deceased and was buryed at Westmynster, the .viii. day of August. The .xviii. daye of Auguste was ta¦ken the town of saint Quintine by king Philyppe, wyth the healpe of Englishe menne, at the siege whereof, the Lorde Henry Dudley, youngest sonne to the Duke of Northumberland, was slayne wyth a gunne. This yeare before Harueste,Both deart and plentie or corne in one yeare. wheate was solde for .iiii. marke the quarter, Malt at foure and fortye shyllynges the quarter: Beanes at forty shyllyngs the quarter. Rye at forty shillyngs the quar¦ter, and pease at .xlvi. shillinges .viii. d. But after harueste, wheate was solde
for .v. s. the quarter: malt at .vi. s .viii. d ye at .iii. s .iiii. d. and in the countreye, wheate was solde for .iiii. s. the quarter, malt for .iiii. s. viii. d. and in some place a bushell of rye for a pound of candels, whiche was .iiii. d. Anno M .5. P .4. 1557Thomas Curteys fishmōger S. Rich. Malarie S. Iames Altam S. Calaice lost.The fyrst of Ianuary the frenchmen came to Calaice with a great army, and layd siege thervnto: and within .iiii. or v. dayes were maisters therof: and short¦ly after wan all the pieces on that syde the sea: To many it semed strange, how that towne, whiche so many yeares had bene fortified with all munitions that could be deuised, shold nowe in so shorte space be taken of our ennemies. It is to be noted, that the counsell of England raysed great power to haue gone to the defence of that towne: but such tempest rose, as the like in many yeares had not ben sene, wherby no shyppe could broke the sea, and suche of the shyppes, as ad∣uentured, were wonderfully shaken, and forced by the saide tēpest to returne
agayne with great daunger. The French king also inuaded Flan∣ders, and spoyled and brent Dunkirke, before kynge Philyp could come to the rescue: but before the frenche men re∣turned out of Flanders, the Fleminges and the englyshe shyppes metyng with them vppon the sandes betwene Dun∣kirke and Grauelyne slewe of theym a great numbre. Agaynst sommer greate preparation was made both on kyng Philyp and the Frenche kyngs parties, and they retei∣ned styll myghty armies, of purpose to inuade eche other: but nothyng beynge doone, towarde wynter they brake vp their campes. Thys Wynter the quarterne a∣ques contynued in lyke maner, or more behementely then they hadde doone the laste yeare. At this tyme also dyed so many priests that a great numbre of paryshes in dy∣uers places of this realme were vnser∣ued, and no curates could be gotten for moneye. This yeare in Iune were .vii. burned at one stake in Smythfield,Execution. and in Iuly
were syxe bnrned at Brainforde at one stake, and dyuers other in other pla∣ces. Anno M. 6. P. 5. 1558Sir Tho∣mas Lee mercer M. Tho. Hawes S. Rich. Chāpion S. Kyng Philippe beynge absent oute of this realme, Quene Mary beyng dan∣gerously sycke, ended her lyfe, the .xvii. day of Nouember, when he hadde rei∣gned .vi. yeares .iiii. monethes, and .xi. dayes. The same daye dyed Cardynall Poole, and a lyttell before two of her phifitions, and dyuers byshops and no∣ble menne, whome the Quene had este∣med greatly. Quene Elisabeth. Anno regni .1. 1558AFter the decease of Queene Mary, our gracious and soue∣raigne lady Elisabeth, to the greate comfort of Englande, was with ful consent proclaymed quene the .xvii. daye of Nouember, in the yere
1558. Not longe after she came frome Hatfielde in Hartefordshyre, where she then abode, vnto the Charterhouse in London: and wente frome thens to the tower, there she remayned vntyll the xiiii. day of Ianuary folowyng: at which time (the Lōdoners hauyng made sump¦tuous prouision) she passed through the citie to her palaice at westminster, she∣wyng very comfortable and gentil coun¦tenance vnto the people: the next day fo¦lowing, her grace was crowned in saint Peters church at Westminster by doc∣tor Oglethorpe byshop of Carlile. The reporte of this was very ioyfull to suche as in Quene Maries tyme for religions sake fled into Germany, and other countreys, whervpon they nowe shortly returned home agayne. The twentye daye of Ianuary nexte folowynge, beganne a parlyamente at Westmynster:A parliament at Westmyn∣ster. And in thys Parlya∣ment, the Fyrste fruites and Tenthes were restored to the Crowne, and al∣soo the Supreme gouernemente ouer the state Ecclesiastycall, the whyche Quene Marye hadde taken awaye,
and geuen to the Pope: lykewyse the boke of common praier and administra∣tion of the sacramentes in oure vulgare tongue was restored. In this parliament time, shortly after Easter the quenes maiestie appointed a conference or disputation to bee had at Westminster churche, concernynnge matters of religion, but the matter cam to none effect. The .vii. of Aprill was a ioyfull peace proclaimed betwixt our souerayne lady Elisabeth quene of England, and prince Henry the frenche kynge. And the lyke peace betwene her maiestie, & the kyng and quene Dolphiners of Scotland. The .viii. daye of Maye the Quenes highnes rode to the parliamente, and gaue her royall assent to all suche actes as there were made, with high thankes to all the estates for theyr great trauell and diligence therein. The .xxiiii. day of Iune being the feast of saynct Iohn Baptiste, the seruice in the mother tonge was fully establyshed throughout this realme, and the Masse with other latine seruice was cleane a∣bolyshed from that day forwarde.
In August about Bartholomew tide the Church wardens of churches in Lō∣don with their persones and ministers, brought foorth the Roodes and other i∣mages of their Churches, and brente them before theyr churche doores, thro∣wyng in their coapes and vestimentes, alter clothes, baners, crosses, bokes, and all other suche thynges as had bene ac∣compted ornamentes of churches, and some burned roode loftes also. Anno regni .1. sir wil. He∣wet cloth∣worker M. Tho. Lodge S.1559 Roger Martin S. The second yere of Quene Elisabeth many men of warre were conueyde out of France into Scotland,Anno. reg. 1. It is to be no¦ted, that the Maior of Lō¦don beginneth his yeare the 28. day of Oc¦tober, whiche is in the fyrst yeare of the quenes maie∣sties reigne. And the que∣nes seconde yeare begyn∣neth on the 17 day of Nouēber next folo∣wyng. and there pla∣ced in townes and fortresses: wherby it was to bee suspected, that they woulde sodeinly inuade this realme, wherevpon the Queenes maiestie sent the Duke of Norfolke towardes Scotland, as gene∣rall with an armye, who remayned at Berwyke, and the lorde Gray of Wil∣ton beyng lieutenant, entred Scotland with a sufficiente power to ioyne with the Scottes and Frenche men. And in
the ende her grace sent sir William C∣cill knight, her maiesties principall Se∣cretarie together with maister doctour Wotton to treate with the french men, who by theyr wysedomes so well orde∣red theim selues, that they enforced the frenchemen to depart, to the great qui∣etnes and safetie both of Englande and Scotlande: and there vpon her maiestie reuoked her army after the fortes there were rased, withont any seysure or hol∣dyng of any pece within the grounde of Scotlande. The .v. day of Iuly through shotyng of a gonne whiche brake in the house of one Adrian Arten a ducheman,Houses blo∣wen in cro∣ked lane. in cro∣ked lane, and settyng fyre on a fyrkyn & a barrell of gunpouder .iiii. houses were cleane blowen down, and dyuers other sore scattered, there were slayn .ix. per∣sons men and women, and diuers other sore hurt and bruised. This yere on Michelmas euen before noone,The base mo∣neys called in it was published by proclamatiō that the teston of the beste sorte beynge marked with the porteuleys shold then forthwith be taken for .iiii. d. ob. and the seconde sorte beynge marked wyth the
greyhound for .ii. d. q. the third and worst sort not being marked with one of those markes afore named, not to be taken for any value, the thre peny piece whyche was coyned for .iiii. d. shold be but .i. d. ob. the .ii. d. pece, for .i. d. &c.New coynes And shortly af∣ter, her grace restored vnto all her sub∣iectes fyne and pure sterlynge money, bothe of golde and syluer for their cor∣rupt and base coyn, callyng in the same to her maiesties myntes, accordynge to the rates before mencioned. This yeare also the Quenes maiestie by the aduice of her honourable coun∣cell made great preparation of armour, munition and powder to bee in a ready∣nes to defende her maiesties Realme from the ennemye, if nede shoulde hap∣pen. Anno. 2. Sir Wil. Chester Draper M. Thomas Roe S.1560 Christo. Draper S. This maiors yere began in the .xi. mo∣neth of the secōd yere of the quenes ma¦iesties reigne, that is to say the .28. daye of October, and the .17. day of Nouēber
nexte folowynge, begynneth the thirde yeare of her maiesties reigne. Anno. reg. 3.This third yere the .xxi. day of March A notable grāmar schoole was founded by the mayster, wardens, and assisten∣tes of the ryght worshypfull companye of the marchant taylours of the citie of London in the paryshe of S. Laurence Pounteney of London, the ryght wor∣shypfull Emanuell Lucar, Robert Rose Wyllyam Merike, Iohn Sparke, and Robert Duckyngton then beynge mai∣ster and wardens of the same company. The .x. day of April was one William Geffrey whypped from the Marshalsey in Southwarke, to Bethleem, without byshops gate of London, for that he pro∣fessed one Iohn More, to be Christ oure Sauior: he was very sore whipped, and on his head, & about the cart were set pa¦pers, wherin was writtē as foloweth: Wylliam Geffrey, a most blasphemous heretike, denying Christ our Sauior in heauen. The sayd Geffrey beyng stayde at Bethleem gate, the Marshalles offi∣cers caused Iohn Moore to be broughte foorth: and then where as the sayd Gef∣frey hadde tyll this tyme for all his sore
whippyng still professed Iohn Moore to bee Christe, nowe he forsoke hym, and confessed Christ to be in heauen. Then the sayd Iohn More, beyng examyned & answerynge them very ouerthwartely was commaunded to strippe hym selfe,One saynyng him selfe to be Christ was whipte. whyche he semed to do very wyllyngly, who was after tyed to the cart, & whipt an arrowes shote from Bedlem, where at the laste he confessed Christ to be in heauen, and himself to be a synful man. Then was More sent again into Bed∣lem, and william Geffrey to the Mar∣shalsey, where they had layne prisoners nygh a yeare and a half before that time the one for professynge hymselfe to bee Christe, the other an apostle or disciple of the same Christe. The .iiii. day of Iune beyng wednes∣day betwene .iiii. and .v. of the clocke in the after noone,Poules steple a fyre. the steple of Paules in London, beyng fyered by lyghtnynge, brast foorth as it dyd seme to the behol∣ders .ii. or .iii. yardes beneth the crosse, and so brent rounde aboute in the same place, that the toppe with the crosse fell of, and lighted on the south syde of Pau∣les church, and so the spyre brent down∣ward
like a cresset or a bekon to ye stone work, and the belles (which was from the toppe .ii. hundred foote) and so brent downwarde so terribly and vehement∣ly, that within lesse space then .iiii. ho∣wers, the same steple, and all the roofes of the same churche were consumed to ashes: whiche was a lamentable syght, and pitifull remembrance to the behol∣ders therof. Anno. 3. 1361sir Wil. Harper mar. tat. M. Hūf. Baskeruile S. Alexāder Auenō S. In the beginning of this Maiors yere and the later end of the third yere of the Quenes maiesties reigne, the. xv. day of Nouember, the Quenes maiestie publi∣shed a proclamation, wherin her grace restored to the realme diuers small pie∣ces of syluer money, new coine. as the piece of .vi. d. iiii. d .iii. d .ii. d. and .i. d. three halfepenie, & thre farthyngs. And also forbad all ma∣ner of forayn coynes to be currant with in the same realme: as well golde as syl∣uer, excepte two sortes of crownes of golde, wherof the one was the freuche. crowne, & the other a flemishe crowne.
Thys fourth yeare in England were many monstrous byrthes,Anno reg. 4. as in March a mare brought foorth a foale with one body being in good proportion,Manye mon∣strous births this yeare in Englande. and two heades, hauyng as it were a long tayle growing out right like a horn betwene the same two heades. Also a sowe far∣rowed a pygge with .iiii. legges lyke vn¦to the armes of a man childe wyth han∣des and fyngers, moute and eares dys∣fygured. &c. About April a sow farrowed a pigge which had .ii. bodies .viii. feete, and but one head, many calues and lambes wer monstrous, and one calfe had a colier of skinne growyng about the necke, lyke to a double ruffe, whiche to the behol∣ders semed strange and wonderfull. The .xxiiii. day of May a monstrous chyld was borne at Chichester in Suf∣fer,A monstrous chylde. whyche maye not so playnly be de¦clared wyth the penne, as in picture. The head armes and legges lyke vnto an Anatomie, the breast and bealy ve∣rye monstrous bygge, frome the na∣uille, as it were a longe strynge han∣gyng: about the neck a great coller of
fleshe and skyn growyng lyke the ruffe of a shyrt or neckerchief, commyng vp aboue the eares pleytyng or foldyng. &c. This yeare the Queenes maiestie in September addressed a band of her sub¦iectes to the towne of Newhauen in Normandye:The goyng to Newhauen. who were embarked at Portesmouthe, because that hauen is most apt for transportatiō to that place. Upon whose arriuall the townes men and inhabitauntes ioyefully surrendred them selues and their towne into the possession of the Queenes Maiestie. whych was kept by Englyshmen from September .1562. to the .29. day of Iu∣ly then next folowynge, whiche was in the yere .1563. the gouernour of whiche bande was the ryghte honourable, the Earle of Warwyke, who with the ca∣pitaynes seruyng there (whiche were of great experience) and souldiors trayned by them to knowledge of seruice, toge∣ther with part of the old approued gar∣rison of Barwike, did at that time both manfully defend the piece, and valiant∣ly encountred by sundry skirmishes & cō∣flicts with the coūtie Ringraue and his band, the moste part wherof were hap∣pyly
atchieued to the great ouerthrow of the aduersaries part, and singular cō∣mendations of ours. Anno. 4. sir Tho. Lodge grocer M. William Alleyn S.1562 Rich. Chāberlain S. This Maiors yeare began the .xxviii. day of October in the yeare .1562. whi∣che was in the latter part of the fourthe yeare of our soueraigne lady Elizabeth. And the fyfthe yeare of her maiesties reigne began the .17. day of Nouembre next folowyng. Now this fifth yere when the frenche men with huge armies assembled oute of all partes of Fraunce to recouer the place of passage:Anno reg. 5. the stoppyng wherof, by oure power, was the double wo of theyr common wealth, there bredde tho¦rough the heate of tyme and putrifacti∣on of the ayre, a miserable and infortu∣nate plague among oure men, whiche meruailously encreased wyth the death of dyuers of the best capitains and soul∣diours, wherewithall there folowed a cruell and quick siege, wherat was pre∣sent the yang kyng hymselfe, the quene his mother, the Constable, and the best
tried number of warlike souldiors with in the whole countrey, besides an other sort of yong & olde that cared not for life or land, so theyr owne aduenture might wyn agayne the cause of theyr distresse: with this generall ayde, the marishes were made passable and firme ground, which by men of great experience was thought impossible. And with common help the Canons wer placed, the castell & walles were battered, & sundry brea∣ches made beyonde expectation. How∣be it they were rewarded by oure gon∣ners, and made to taste the bitter frute of theyr desperate approche, to theyr great terrour and annoyance. The erle of Warwyke with the remnant of our captaines and souldiours in couragious order, standynge at the seuerall brea∣ches readye to defende theyr assaultes: whych perceyued by the ennemy, they caused theyr trumpettes to sounde the blaste of emparle, that composition of eyther part myght be made to auoyde the imminent slaughter and effusion of bloud.Newe hauen delyuered to the frenche. This offer seemed not vnmete, bothe partes concluded, the town was
delyuered the .xxix. daye of Iuly. When the towne in thys sorte was surrendred to the frenchemen and the greatest parte of our garrison shypped many sycke persons were lefte behynde impotent and vnhable to helpe theym selues. The myserie wherof Edwarde Randolffe esquire, high marshall of the towne, who was appointed to tary and see the vttermoste of oure composition accomplished perceyuyng, moued with naturall pitie of his countrey men, re∣linquyshed without comfort, caused the sayd sycke persons to be caryed aboord, not sparyng his owne shoulders at that time ful feble and full of the plage, him selfe and his men styll bearyng and hel∣ping the poore creatures on shypboord. A rare fact worthy of worldly reward, and no doubte in remembraunce wyth God hym self, the true recorder of mer∣cyfull desertes. Thys yeare as ye haue hearde, the plague of pestilence being in the towne of Newhauen, and many souldioures afected with the same, returnyng into Englande, the infection therof spredde
in dyuers partes of this realme,Greate pesti∣lence at Lon∣ but es∣pecially the citie of London was so in∣fected therwith, that in the same whole yere; that is to say,An hundred & eight parishes in London. from the fyrst of Ia∣nuarie .1562. vntyll the last of Decem∣ber .1563. there dyed in the Cytie and li∣berties therof (conteining .108. parishes) of all diseases .xx. M .iii. C .lxxii. so that there dyed of the plague (beyng part of the nombre before named) xvii. M .iiii. C. and .iiii. persones.A seuen pa∣rishe churches called the out paryshes. And in the out pari∣shes adioyning to the same Citie, being xi. paryshes dyed of all diseases in the whole yere aforesaid .iii. M .ii. C .lxxx. & viii. persons, & of them of the plague be∣yng a part of the sayd numbre laste be∣fore named .ii. M .vii. C .xxxii. so that the hole totall summe of all those that dyed of all diseases in the whole yeare, aswel within the citie of London, and liber∣ties of the same as in the out parishes nyghe adioynynge vnto the same Citie was .xxiii. M .vi. C .lx. and of theym of the plague, beynge parte of the totall summe before named) dyed in all .xx. M .i. C .xxxvi. This yeare for so much as the plague of the pestilence was so hote in the citie
of London there was no terme kept at Michelmas: to be short, ye poore citisens of Lōdon were this yere plaged with a treble plague, as with ye pestilence, scar∣sitie of money, and dearth of victuals:A treble or a three folde plague. the myserie wherof; were to long here to write: no doubt the poore remember it. God bee mercyfull vnto vs, and de∣fend vs from the lyke, if it be his wyll. Anno. 5. sir Iohn White grocer M. Edward Bankes S1563 Roulād Haiward S This Maior begynnyng his yeare the xxviii. day of October kept no Maiors feast at the Guyld hall,No maiors feast kepte at the Guild hal as it had ben ac∣customed before tyme: Also he toke his othe at the vttermost gate of the tower of London. The .vi. yere of the quenes maiesties reigne,Anno reg. 6. begynnyng the .17. of Nouem∣ber (thankes bee geuen to God) was a peaceable yeare, and the plague of pe∣stilence well ceassed in London, yet ne∣uerthelesse for feare thereof, Hillarie tearme was kept at Hertforde castell, besyde Ware. This yeare .1564. the .23. day of A∣pryll
was a ioyefull peace proclaymed wyth the sounde of trompets betwene Englande and Fraunce.Peace proclai¦med betwene England and France. And nowe the plague beynge (than∣kes be to God) cleane cessed in London, bothe Easter and Mydsomer tearmes were kept at Westminster. This yeare through the earnest sute of the armorers,The watche on S. Peters euen at Lon∣don. there was on the Ui∣gile of Sainct Peter a certayne kynde of watche in the Citie of London, whi∣che dyd onely stand in the hyghest stre∣tes of Cheape, Cornhyll, and so forthe towardes Algate, whyche was to the commons of the same citie (for the most parte) as chargeable as whenne in ty∣mes paste, it was moste commendably done, where as this beyng to very smal purpose, was of as smalle a number of people well lyked. The seconde daye of October in the after noone was a solempne Obsequie kepte at Saincte Paules Churche in London, for Ferdinando the Empe∣rour, late beynge departed out of this mortall lyfe, and lykewyse the morowe nexte after, in the forenoone where was a goodly hearce erected in the vp∣permoste
quyre of the same Churche, garnyshed wyth scutchins and baners of his armes very costely and sumptu∣ous. The whole doyng therof wyth the sermon, are at large sette foorthe in a Boke of that matter in print. Anno. 6. Rich. Malary mercer M. Edward Iackman S Lyonell Ducket S1564 The .xx. daye of Nouember,Anno reg. 7. beyng monday in the mornyng about .vi. of ye clocke through negligence of a mayden with a candell,Houses sha∣tered with gonpouder. the snuffe fallynge in an hundred pound weight of gunpouder, thre houses in Bucklers bury, wer sore shaken, and the backer partes of the same houses, were blowen and shatte∣red in pieces: the mayden was so burnt, that she dyed therof within .ii. dayes af∣ter. It is to be noted, that if this pou∣der had layne in a sellar or lower parte of the house, as it laye in a garrette, it hadde done muche more harme: Wher∣fore I aduyse menne to loke warely to suche ware.
The Thames ouerfrosen.The .21. day of December beyng S. Thomas day began a frost, whiche con∣tinued till the .iii. day of Ianuary: on new yeres euen, people went ouer the Thames on the yce, & alonge the Tha∣mes from London bridge to Westmin∣ster, and agaynward, great number of people playde at the foote ball as boldly and (thankes to God as safely as on the drye lande: on New yeres day, beynge monday, on tuisday and wednesday, dy∣uers gentylmen, & others, set vp pricks on the Thames, and shot at the same, and great numbers of people standyng at eyther pricke, beholdynge the same. And the people bothe men and women went on the Thames in greater num∣bers then in any strete in London: The costardmongers stode in dyuers places and playde at the dyce for apples on the yce: on the wednesday at nyght it began to thaw: but men went ouer and along the Thames on thursday all day: but on fryday beyng the .v. day of Ianuarye at night, was no Ice on the Thames to be sene, but that all men mought row ouer and alonge the same, it was so sodeynly consumed: whiche sodeyn thaw caused
suche great flouds and hye waters, that it bare downe many bridges and houses and drowned many people. The .26. day of Ianuary being friday at night tyme were .ii. tides in the space of .ii. houres at London,Eighte tydes in .ii. nyghtes and a daye. on the morow beynge saterday was lykewise .ii. in the mornyng, and .ii. at nyght: on sonday be∣yng the .28. day of Ianuarie were lyke∣wyse .ii. tydes in the mornynge, and at nyght but one, as orderly it had ben ac∣customed. This yere in the citie of Chester was a wonderfull cure wroughte by the po∣wer of god in his minister master Lane vpon a maiden named Anne Milner,The work of god vppon a maid in Che∣ster. of the age of .xviii. yeares, who had bene possest with an horrible kind of torment and sycknes, about the space of .18. or .19. wekes: All whiche time of her sicknes her tormentes beyng terrible, and her sustinance very smal, or almost nothyng now sodeinly the .16. day of February, she was restored to her perfect healthe, (thanks be giuen to god) as ye may rede more at large in a letter imprinted of the same, subscribed by the handes of di∣uers worshypfull knyghtes and gentil∣men
of that citie. An escape out of the tower.The .xxix. day of April the archbishop of Almacarne (a byshoprike in Ireland) made an escape out of the toure of Lon¦don, who had layn there prisoner about iii. quarters of a yere: There was great searche made for hym, but he coulde not be founde within the realme. The .xx. day of Iune the Lady Lineur was sent prisoner to the toure of Lōdon This yere on S. Peters euen at night was the lyke standyng watche in Lon∣don as was the same night .xii. moneths or very lyttle better. Great tem∣pest.The .xvi. day of Iuly about .ix. of the clock at night, began a terrible tempest of lightning and thunder, with shoures of hayle, which lightnyng and thunder continued vntyll .iii. of the clocke on the next mornyng. In the whiche tempest much harme was doone in and aboute Chelmsford in Essex, as by destroying of .v. C. acres of corne, the heatynge down of all the glasse wyndowes on the east side of the said towne, & of the west and south sydes of the churche, the bea∣tyng of the tyles of theyr houses, thro∣wyng downe dyuers barnes and chim∣neys
with the battilments of their chur∣che. &c. The hayle stones beynge measu∣red, were found to be vi. inches aboute: as ye may reade more at large in a boke of the same matter imprinted. At the same tyme was muche harme doone in many other places of this realme, as at Ledes, at Crābroke, at Douer ink ēt &c This yere Christopher prince & mar∣graue of Baudon, with Cicelie his wife sister to ye kyng of Swethlād, after a lōg & daungerous iourney, wherin they had trauayled almost .xi. monethes, saylyng from Stokholme in Swethland, to Fin¦land then crossing the seas ouer to Lyff∣lād, from whens they cam by land al the voyage about by Pole land, Fryseland, Russye, Mahelbrig, thoroughs Saxon lande, so to Antwarpe in Brabant, then to Calaice: at the laste in Septēber they landed at Douer, and the .xi. day of the same, they cam to London, and wer lod∣ged at the earle of Bedfords place, nere vnto Iuie bridge, wher within .iiii. days after, that is to say, the .xv. day of Sep∣tember, she trauailed in childbedde, and was delyuered of a man chylde: whyche child the laste of September, was bap∣tised
in the Queenes maiesties chapell of the White Halle of Westmynster, the Quenes maiesty in her own person be∣yng godmother, the archbyshop of Can∣burye, and the duke of Norffolke godfa∣thers, the Quene gaue the name Edwar∣dus Fortunatus, for that God had so graci∣ousely assisted his mother, in so long and dangerous a iourney, and brought her so fate to land in that place, which she most desyred, and that in so short tyme before her deliueraunce. Rech. Cham¦pion draper M Iohn Riuers S. Iam. Hawes S. Thus (good reader) I haue broughts as thou seest, this small abridgement or Summarie of our englyshe Chronicle, to these our present dayes: meanyng as tyme shall increase, so to encrease the same, yf I be not discouraged of thee in these my symple beginnyngs. Wher∣fore I beseche thee to iudge fauou∣rably, and to correct frendly, so as thy correction maye ra∣ther be an Instruction then a condem∣nyng of me.
The ages of the world, after the ac∣compt of the Bible, the Hebrues, and af∣ter the most ueritable writers, are in numbre .7. as foloweth. THe fyrst age of the world toke his begin∣nyng  at the creation of Adam, and was fi∣nished at the floude of Noe, whiche con∣tinued 1656. The second age toke his beginning at such time  as Noe came out of the ark, and cōtinued til the natiuitie of Abraham, which was yeres 292. The third age continued from the birth of A∣braham, til the departyng of Israel out of Egypt whiche was yeres 503. The fourth age continued from the departing of Israel out of Egypt, till the buyldynge of the  temple, whiche was yeres 481. The .5. age cōtinued frō the building of the tēple til the captiuity of Babilō, which was yeres 414. The sixte age cōtinued from the captiuitie of Babylon tyl the birthe of our Lorde and sauiour  Iesus Christ, which was yeares 614. The .7. age of the world toke his beginnyng at the birth of our sauior Iesus Christ, and hath con∣tinued  till this present yere of our Lord, and shall last til the worldes ende. 1565. The age of the world at the birthe of Christe was .3962. The age of the worlde this present yere of our Lord. 1565. is .5527. FINIS.
Here is shewed howe a man may iourney from any notable towne in Englande, to the Ci∣tie of London: or from Lon∣don to any notable towne in the same realme. ¶Here foloweth the way from Walsingham to London. FRom Walsingham to Pyk∣nam. xii. myles. From Pyknam to Brandon∣fery. x. myles. From Brandonfery to new∣market. x. myle. From newe market to Ba∣brain. x. myle From Babram to Bark way. xx. myle. From Barkeway to Puchryche. vii. myle. From Puchryche to Ware, v. myle. From ware to Waltham, viij. myle. From Waltham to London, xij. myle. ¶Here foloweth the way from Barwyke to Yorke, and so to London. FRom Barwyke to Belforth, xij. myles From Belforth to Anwyke, xij. myle. From Anwyke to Morpit, xij. myle. From Morpit to Newcastell, xij. myle. From Newcastell to Durham. xij. myle. From Durham to Daryngton, xiiij. myle From Darington to Northalerton. xiiij. myle
From Northalerton to Topclyfe, vij myle From Topclyfe to Yorke. xvj myle From Yorke to Tadcaster, viij. myle From Tadcaster to Wentbrydge, x myle From Wenthrydge to Dancaster, viij myle From Dancaster to Tutford, xviij myle From Tutford to Newarke, x myle From Newarke to Grantham, x myle From Grantham to Stanford, xvj myle From Stanforde to Stylton, xij myle From Stylton to Huniyngton, ix myle From Huniyngton to Boyston, xv myle From Royston to Ware, xij myle From Ware to Waltham, viij myle From Waltham to London, xij myle ¶Here foloweth the waye from Carnaruan to Chester, and so to London. FRom Carnaruan to Conway, xxiiij myle From Conway to Dynbygh, xij myle From Dynbygh to Flynt, xij myle From Flynt to Chester, x myle From Chester to Wyche, xiiij myle From Wyche to Stone, xv myle From Stone to Lychfelde, xvj myle From Lychfield to Colfill, xij myle From Colfyll to Couentre, viij myle And so from Couentre to London, as hereafter foloweth. ¶Here foloweth the waye from Cokermouth to Lancaster and so to London.
FRom Cokermouth to Kyswyke, vj myle From Kyswyke to Grocener, viij myle From Grocener to Kendale, xiiij myle From Kendale to Burton, vij myle From Burton to Lancaster, viij myle From Lancaster to Preston, xx myle From Preston to Wygam, xiiij myle From Wygam to Waryngton, xij myle From Waryngton to Newe castel, xx myle From Newe castell to Lychfield, xx myle From Lychfield to Couentre, xx myle From Couentre to Danetre, xiiij myle From Danetre to Tocester, x myle From Tocester to Stony Stratforde, vj myle From Stony Stratford to Brychyl, vij myle From Brychyl to Dunstable, vij myle From Dunstable to S. Albons, x myle From S. Albons to Barnet, x myle From Barnet to London. x myle ¶Here fololoweth the waye from Yermouth to Colchester and so to London. FRom Yermouth vnto Becclis, viij myle From Becclis to Blybour, vj myle From Blybour to Snapbrydge, viij myle Frō Snapbrydge to Wodbridge, viij myle From Wodbrydge to Ipswyche, v myle From Ipswyche to Colchester, xij myle From Colchester to Eastford, viij myle From Eastford to Chelinesford x myle From Chelinesford to Brentwod, x myle From Brentwood to London. xij myle
¶Here foloweth the way from Douer to London. FRom Douer to Canterbury, xij myle Frō Cāterbury to Sittingborn, xij myle Frō Sittyngborn to Rochester, viij myle From Rochester to Grauesende, v myle From Grauesende to Datford, vj myle From Datford to London, xij myle ¶Here foloweth the waye from S. Burten in Cornwall to London. FRom S. Burten to the mount, xx myle From the mount to Thury, xij myle From S. Thury to Bodnam, xx myle From Bondain to Launston, xx myle From Launston to Ocomton, xv myle From Ocomton to Crokehornewell, x myle From Crokehornewell to Exceter, x myle From Exceter to Honiton, xij myle From Honiton to Charde, x myle From Charde to Crokehorne, vij myle From Crokehorne to Shyrborne, x myle From Shyrborne to Shaftisbury, x myle From Shaftisbury to Salysbury, xviij myle From Salysbury to Andeuor, xv myle From Andeuor to Basyngstock, xviij myle from Basingstocke to Harford, viij myle from Harford to Bagshot, viij myle from Bagshot to Stanes, viij myle from Stanes to London, xv myle ¶Here foloweth the waye from Brystowe to London.
FRom Brystowe to Maxfelde, x myle from Maxfelde to Chypnam, x myle from Chypnam to Marleborow, xv myle from Marleborow to Hūgerford, viij myle from Hungerford to Newbery, vij myle from Newbery to Redyng, xv myle from Redyng to Maydenhead, x myle from Maydenhead to Colbroke, vij myle from Colbroke to London, xv myle ¶Here fololoweth the waye from S. Dauids to London. FRom S. Dauids to Axforde, xx myle from axford to Carmarden, x myle from Carmarden to Newton, x myle from Newton to Lanbury, x myle from Lanbury to Brecknocke, xvj myle from Brecknocke to Hay, x myle from Hay to Harford, xiiij myle from Harforde to Roso, ix myle from Roso to glocester, xij myle from glocester to Cicester, xv myle from Cicester to Faryngton xvj myle from faryngton to Habyngton, vij myle from Habyngton to Dorcester, vij myle from Dorcester to Henley, xij myle from Henly to Maydenhead, vij myle from Maydenhead to Colbroke, vij myle from Colbroke to London, xv myle
Hereafter foloweth the names of all the kynges and chiefest gouernours of this realme of Englande, in what leafe ye shall fynde theym. BRute the fyrste kyng of this re∣alme, folio. 9. Locrine fo. eo. Guēdoline quene .10. Madan eodem Mempricius fo. codē Ebranke fo. codē Brute Grinshiled 11. Leill. fo. eodem. Lududribas fo. eodem Bladud fol. ibidem Leire. fol. ibidem Cordyla quene fo. 12. Morgan fo. ibidem Conedagus fo. ibi. Riuallo fo. ibidē. Gurgustus ibidē Scicilius ibidem Iago or Lago fo. 13. Kynymacus fo. ibid. Gorbodug fo. ibidē Forrex & Portex ibi. Mulmutius Dun∣walls fol. ibidē Belinus and Bren∣nus. fol. 14. Gurgostus fol. 15. Guinthelinus fo. ibi. Cecilius ibi. Kymarus ibidem. Elanius ibidem Morindus ibidem Gorbumannus ibid. Archigalio folio. 16, Elidurus fol. ibi. Uigenius & Peredu∣rus fo. ibidem Gorbonian fo. ibid. Morgan fo. ibid. Emerianus ibidē Iuall folio .17. Rymo ibidem Geruntius ibidē Catilius ibi. Coilus fo. ibidem Porex fo. ibi. Chirunnus fo. ibidē Fulgen ibidem Eldred ibidem Androgius ibidem Uarianus ibidem Eliud ibidē Dedantius fo. ibidem Detonus ibidem Gurgincus ibidem
Merianus ibidem Bladunus ibidem Duinus ibid. Silius ibid. Bledgabredus ibid. Archemalus ibid. Eldeius fol. eodem Rodianus fol. 18 Redargius eodem Samulius eod. Peniselus eod. Pirthus eod. Caporus eod. Dinellus eod. Helius eod. Lud eod. Cassiuelane eod. ☞Under Iu∣lius Cesar. THeomancius 20 Cymbalinus eod. Gwiderius eod. Aruitagu 21 Marius eod. Coilus eod. Lucie eod. Basianus 21 Carassus 23 Alectus eod. Asclepiodatus eod. Coill eod. Constantius eod. Constantine 24. Octauius 24, 25 Maximus 25 Constantine 27 Constantius 27 Uortyger 28 Uortymers 29 Aurelius Ambrose 30 Uther Pendragō eod. Arthure eod. Constantine 32 Aurelius Conanus 32 Uortiporus eod. Malgo 32 Caretieus 33 Cadwane 34 Ladwaiyne 35 Ladwaladar eod. Iew 36 Ethelard eod. Cutherede eod. Sygeberte 37 Kenulphus eod. Brithericus eod. Egbarte 38 Ethelwolphus 38 Ethelwaldus 39 Ethelbert eod. Etheldrede eod. Alured 40 Edward ye seniour 41 Adelstane 42 Edmond eod. Eldrede eod. Edwyne eod. Edgare 43 Edwarde. eod.
Egelred fol. 44. Edmond Ironside 47 Canucus fo. 48. Harold. fol. 48. Hardikenitus fo. 48. Edward fo. 49. Harolde fol. 50. VUilliam bastarde Duke of Nor∣mandie fol. 51. Williā Rufus fo. 55. Henry Beauclerk 59. Steuen fol. 62. Henry .ii. fo. 65. Richard fyrst fo. 68. Iohn fol. 7. Henry third fol. 81. Edward .i. fo. 99. Edward .ii. fo. 105. Edward .iii. fo. 111. Richard .ii. fo. 124. Henry .iiii. fol. 132. Henry .v. fol. 137. Henry .vi. fo. 140. Edward .iiii. fo. 154. Edward .v. fo. 161. Richard .iii. fol. 162. Henry .vii. fol 163. Henry .viii. fol. 171. Edward .vi. fol. 208. Mary quene. fo. 222. Elizabeth quene. 239. The Table of all the principall matters conteyned in this booke. AUxolme an plād fo. 3. Albion. foli. 9. Archflamyn. fo. 9. Adrians wall fo. 22. Albon martyred fo. 24. Ambreshuey buylded fo. 29. Abyngton buylded fo. 35. Abbey at Saint Albons buyl¦ded fol. 37. Ambery buylded fo. 44. A barkers sonne claymed the crowne. fo. 107. Armes of England & France ioyned fol. 115. Iusten friers church in Lon∣don buylded fo. 119. Alsoules college builded 147. Anne barton, called holy maid of Kent fo. 186.187. Abbeys visited fol. 189. Abbeys suppressed fol. 194. Andrew Iudde his charita∣ble dedes fol. 214. A mylners sonne fayned hym to be Kynge Edwarde the sixte. fo. 233. fo. 235. Ages of the world. fo. 248.
BIsshoprickes in Eng∣lande folio. 1. Britayne fol. 9. Bambrough builded 10 Bathe buylded fo. 11. Bladud in flyenge brake hys necke fol. 11. Bangor in wales builded 12. Blonde reigned fo. 12. fo. 38. Blackwell hall builded fo. 13. Belyns gate buylded fo. 14. Britones chased into Wa∣les fol. 33. Bishops see of Wynchester buylded fol. 35. Berkyng in Essex builded 35 Brithricus poysoned by hys wyfe. fol. 38. Blasyng sterres. fol. 36.44. 58.60.61.121.144.235. Battayle abbey buylded. 55. Barmōdsey abbey builded 55 Brystow Castell builded 60 Bassynge werke abbey buyl∣ded fol. 66. Bewley abbey builded fo. 81 Beston castell builded fo. 83. Battayle at Lewes fo. 92. Battayle at Euisham fo. 92. Bowe steeple in Cheape blo∣wen downe fol. 97. Blacke Fryers by Ludgat: buylded fol. 100. Barwyke won. fo. 103.113. Battayl at Estreuelyn. 107. Battail on the sea. fo. 115.173 Barwicke taken by .xl. per∣sons. fo. 126 Battayle at Otterborn. 128. Battail at Shrewsbury 134 Battaile at Agencourt fo. 139 Barnard colledge in Oxforde buylded fol. 147. Byshop of Salisburye mur∣dered fo. 149. Battayle at S. Albons 150 Battail at Bloreheth fo. 152 Battail at Northamptō. 153 Battail at wakefield. fol. 153 Battaile the second at saynct Albons fol. ibidē. Battaile at Shirborn. ibidē. Battaile at Exam fo. 154 Bataile at Banbery fo. 156. Barnet field fo. 157 Battayl at Teukesbury 157 Battayle at Bosworth. 163. Battayle at Stoke 164 Blacke heath fielde fo. 166. Baynardes castel builded 168 Brasenose in Oxforde buyl∣ded folio. 171. Bowe steple in cheape buyl∣ded fol. 173. Byshop of Romes aucthori∣tie abrogated fol. 188. Boloygne wonne fol. 204. C COunties of Englande fo. 1. Cornewall described fo. 5
Compasse of England 7.8. Carleile buylded 11. Canterbury buylded ibidem Carlion buylded 14. Cambridge buylded 16. Cesars fyrst voiage into thys lande fo. 18. Cesars second voyage. fo. 19. Cesar a bakers sonne ibidem Cesar slain with book insibi. Castell at Canterbury buyl∣ded. ibidem. Castel at Rochest. built. ibi. Chichester buylded ibidem. Christ hys byrth fo. 20. Chester buylded fol. 21. Colchester buylded ibidem. Close crownes wherfore kyn¦ges of Englād wear thē 24. Constātin slain by a Pict 27 Cōstātius slayn by picts. ibi. Constantius a monke made kyng. ibidem Chertsey buylded fol. 35. College of welles builded 36 Crowland abbey buylded 37 Chastytye of womenne de∣fended 39 Couentrye abbey builded 49 Castels at Yorke builded 53 Castell at Notyngham buyl∣ded ibidem. Castel at Lincoln builded ibi. Chester abbey buylded 57 Cicester buylded 62. Cōbremore abbey builded 6 Coggeshall abbey buylded 65 Castell of Rutlād builded 66 Canturbery a fyre ibid. Charter made to ye barōs 79 Charteley castell buylded 83 Coyn altered. fo. 88.96.115. 116. 118. 136. 155. 169. 180.203.216.241 Castell of Flynt buylded 99. Castel Barnard builded 100 Cheape corne 101. Crouched fryers 106. Cardinals robbed 107. Cheape of victuall 114. Caleys wonne 117. Chest in Guyld hall of Lon∣don fo. 112. Combat fo. 127. 129. Cheape wynes fo. 128. Conspiracie fo. 132 Cundyie in Cornehyll buyl∣ded 134. College of Eatō buylded 141 Custome fyrst payd 142 Cōmotion at Abyngton 143 Calaice besieged 144 Cundite in Fletestrete buyl∣ded 145. Commotion in Kent 148. Crueltie of Edwarde the fo∣werth 157. Commotion by the bastarde Fauconbridge 157. Cundyte in Cornhyll enlar∣ged. 158
Cūdyt in Chepe called ye gret Cundite new buylded 164. Cross in chepe new bylded. ibi Ceyple gate buylded 165 Conduyte in graciouse streate buylded ibidem Cheape wheate & salt 166 Cundit at byshops gate buil∣ded. fol. 170. Charles the .v. emperor came into England 177 Conspiracie at Couētry 179 Cardinal fyrst suppressed ab∣beys fol. 180. Cardinal discharged of chan∣cellorshyp 283 Cardinall deceased 184. Clergy cōdened in premu. ibi Clergy sworn to K. H. 8. 185 Cōmotiō in Lincolnshire 191 Cōmotion in Yorkshire. 191. 193.199. Chantries geuen to the kyng 205. 209. Cundytes at Algate & Loth∣bury buylded 206. Cōmotion in Cornewall and Deuonshyre 210 Commotion at Norwich 211 Charles Gauaro commytied murder 213 Cōmotion in Kent by Tho∣mas Wyat 227 Coūterfait spech ī a wal 240 Cardinall Poole came into Englande 231 Cōspirators mynded to haue robbed the eschequer 235 Calaice loste 238 DEscriptiō of Englād 1. Dune a ryuer 3. Dunbrytayne buylded 10 Douer Castell buylded 10 Danes first entred this lād 38 Danes second entring. ibid. Danes thyrd entryng 39 Danes besieged Lōdō 45 46 Danes sodenly murdred 45. Danes dryuen oute of thys lande 49 Derth of wheat ī Englād 75 Death of Kyng Iohn 80 Delacresse abbey buylded 83 Douer spoyled 102. Drye sommer 118 Dukes of Herford & of Nor∣folke banyshed 131 Dearth of corne 134 Duke of Norffolke lyke to haue ben drowned 143 Duke of Suff. murdred 148 Duke of York began a com∣motion 150 D. of york claimed ye Cr. 153 D. of Clarence murdred 158 Dyches sylde and hedges cast downe about London 174 Duke of Buckyngham be∣headed 176 Dagger throwen at Paules crosse 223
Dearthe and plentie of corne in one yeare fo. 238. E ENgland described fol. 1. Edenburgh builded. 10 Ely howe it tooke that name fol. 18 Englande fyrst tributarye to Cesar fo. 19 Excester buylded fo. ibidem England fyrst baptised 22 England fyrst so named 36 Etheldred slayne by the Da∣nes 40 Ethelyngsey buylded 41 Eight kynges rowed Edgar vp and downe the ryuer of Dee 43 Englande trybutarye to the Danes 44 Edmōd Irōside murdred 47 Earthquake in England 57 61 88 127 215. Euisham abbey buylded 61 Englande interdicled 76 Enterdiction released 78 Edwarde the seconde mur∣dered 111 Englande lette to ferme 131 Elianor Cobham 146 Edwarde the fourth fled the lande 156 Elisabeth wife to Ed. the .4. tooke saintuarye at West∣mynster 156 Earle of Northumberland slayne 164 Excester besieged 167 Englyshe marchantes recey∣ued with procession 167 Euyll May day 175 Execution in Paules church yarde 196 Embassador of Moscouy 236 Eight tydes at London in .ii. nyghtes and one day 247 F FIrste Kynge that ware crowne of golde 13 Forme of the ylande 7 First christē emperor 24 Fortiger sent for ye Saxōs 28 First saxōs entred this lād 28 Fortiger diuorsed ibidem. Fortiger maryed Rowane, daughter of Hengist ibi. Fortiger was depriued 29 Fortiger burned 30 Fourth kyngdom of the Sa∣xons 31 Fifthe kyngdome of the Sa∣xons 32 Fyrst warre betwene the sax∣ons 33 First schole in Cambridge 35 Firste Tythes geuen in En∣gland 38 First grammer schole in Ox∣forde 41 Fountains abbey buylded 62
Fourntis abbey builded 65 Feuersham abbey buylded 65 First bayliffs in London 69 Fyue moones sene in the fyr∣mament 75 Fyrst mayre of London 77 Frewarren granted to Lon∣don 84 Fre toll grāted to Lōdon 84 Fyrst aldermā of Lōdon 86 Folkmote at Pauls crosse 91 Famyn 108. 145 Fray in Fletestrete 129. 145 Fray in S. Dunstons chur∣che in London 139 Fall of a stayre slew .18. per∣sones 145 Fray in London by saintua∣rye men 151 Fyrst yeomen of the gard 164 Fraye in London agaynst the Stylyard 165 Fyrste marchaunt tailours of London 169 Fyre on London brydge ibi. Fryer houses suppressed fo∣lio 187 folio 195 First frutes geuen to K. Hen¦ry the .viii. 188 Fyre in Roode lane 194 Fyrst pencioners 198 Fall of money 215 216 241 GLamorganshyre, howe it toke that name 12 Game of Chesse deuysed 13 Grantham buylded 16 Glocester buylded 21 Gurmondchester buylded 33 Great church at Lyncoln buil¦ded 34 Glasynge fyrste brought into England 35 Glastenbury new buylded 36 Great fyre at London fo. 46. fol. 84. 79. Greate flouodes in Eng∣lande fol. 58.89. Graye fryers came into En∣glande 62 Great wynd 88. 120 Great cundyte in cheape first buylded 100 Great hayle 101 Grauesende spoyled 125 Gunnes fyrst inuented 126 Guyld halle in London buyl∣ded 136 Grenewyche buylded 168 Golden Rose sent to K. Hen∣ry the .8. 180 Golde enhanced 181 Generall procession 189 206 George Barnes hys charita∣ble dedes 19 Great Hary a shyp brent 224 Gon shot into Grenwich 236 Gramer schole builded by the marchant taylers 242 Great frost. fo. 91 57 64 97 120
135. 144. 175. 192. 246. H HUmber a ryuer fol. 3. Humber howe it tooke that name 9. Hot bathes buylded 11. Holy Gyldas 32 Hospital at Rome for english men 38 Herford Castell buylded 41 Haroldes bodie cafte in Tha∣mes 48 Hospitall of S. Bartholo∣mew buylded 59 Hyde abbey buylded 61 Hayles abbey buylded 88 Halfe pens & farrhinges coy∣ued 100 Hotte sommer 101 Henry Duke of Hertford lan¦ded in Holdernes 131 Henry the syxte crowned at Paris 44 Humfrey duke of Gloucester arested at Bury 147. Henry the .vi. fled. ye land 153 Henry the .6. murdred 157 Herring .3. s .4. d. ye barel 166 Houses of office buylded to ye Guyld hal of Lon. 168 169 Henry the .7. buylded ye newe chapell at Westminster 171 Hospital of the Sauoy buyl∣ded bidem Hngman hanged 194 Houses blown vp with gun∣pouder. 202. 218. 241. 246. I Irlande situate 7 Iland deuyded 9 Irō cups fastned by wels 35 Iewes crucified children 64 67. 68. Iewes slayn in Engl. 69. 9 Iewes robbed & spoiled 70 Iewes executed 89. 99. Iewes banyshed 102 Iustes in Smythfielde 119. 128. 135. 155. Iohn Philpot his charitable dedes 125 Iohn ycklefe 130 Iohn Oldcastell 158. Images taken down in chur¦ches. 194.209. Ioane Butcher 214 Images brent 241 Iohn Raynewell his chari∣table dedes 14 Iohn Moore faynynge hym¦selfe to bee Christe, was whypt 242 Kīg deuoured by a mōster 15 King depriued. 16. 17. 41. Kyng Edmond slayne 39. Kynge counterfeated to bee a mynstrell 40 Kyng Edwarde murdred by his stepmother 44 Kynges hose cost .iij. . 56
Kynges childrē drowned 63 K. Suen takē prysoner 64 Kyng Richarde taken pry∣soner 70 Kyng Rycharde wounded to death 73 Kyng Iohn deuorsed 74 Kyng Iohn sworne to the see of Rome 78 Keniworth castel beseged 95 King Henry the .iij. besiegeth London 96 Kyng Ed. the .ii. prysoner in Kenilworth castel 110 Kyng Rychard the second ta∣ken prisoner 131 Kyng Edward deposed 110 Knyghtes of the gartar 116 K. Ri. the .ij. murdered 132 Kynges Colledge at Cam∣brydge buylded 141 K. of Scottes maryed at S. Mary Audryes 141 Kyng Henry the .vj. taken prysoner 154 Kyng Rychard the .iij. slayn in the fielde 163 K. of Scottes maryed Mar∣garet, daughter to Henry the .vij. 169 Kyng of Castel lāded in En∣lande 170 Kyng of Scottes slayne at Scottes fielde 174 Kyng H. the .viij. first defen∣dour of the fayth 177 Kyng & quene of Denmarke came into England 178 King H. the .viij. first named supreme head 184. Kynges palayce at S. Ia∣mes buylded 184. Kynges stable called the me∣we, brent 188 Kyng Henry the .viij. first na¦med kyng of Ireland 200 K. Henry. the. viij. went ta Boleyne 203 Kyng Phylyp of Spayn ary¦ued at Southampton 231 Kyes counterfeyte to haue spoyled Newgate 236 L LOndon described 2 London brydge described 3 Lugge a Ryuer 4 Lengthe of this Iland 7 London buylded 9 Leicester buylded 11 London inlarged 18 Ludgate buylded eod. Londō named Ludstone eod. London, Yorke, and Carliō, archebyshops 22 Lytle Brytayne cōquered 25 Lawes against quaffyng 43 Litle Iohn an outlawe 69 London brydge buylded 77 London lyke to haue bene spoyled 92
London gyuen to prince Ed∣warde 97 Laurence Ducket hanged in Bowechurche 100 Liberties of Lōdō seysed 129 Lyberties of London resto∣red 130 Leaden hall in London buyl∣ded 147 Lorde Saye beheaded at the crosse in cheape 148 Lorde Audley beheaded 107 Ladye Anne of Cleue recey∣ued 198 Lyth & Edenborow takē 203 M Mulmutius lawes 13 Malmesbury buylded 14 Marcian lawes 15 Mordred slayne 31 Mahomets fyrst begining 34 Money of abbeys broughte to the kyngs treasory. 54 Monstrous fyshe fo. 76. 151. 185 185 186 218 219. Madde parlyament 90 Mayre of London prisoner at Wyndsore 93 Mayre of London and foure aldermē geuē to ye prince 93 Men put in sackes throwen in Thames 96 Martyn colledge in Oxforde buylded 100 Market house called the stoc∣kes buylded 136 Murder in Whitchapel 143 Mary Magdalein colledge in Oxforde buylded 148 Margaret quene of Scottes K. Henry the .8. syster fled into England 175 Muster at London called the great muster 195 Mary Rose drowned 205 Muskleborough field 209 Murder at Feuersham 215 Murder by ye lord Sturtō 237 Monstrous byrthes 242 Mayd of Chester 247 N Newe Troy fo. 9. Notable wayes made fo. 14. Newe abbey in Wynchester buylded 41 Newe forest made 54 New Castel vpon Cyne buil¦ded fo. 57. Noble men that cam in wyth William conquerour 52 Normandye loste 67 Newe woorke of Westmyn∣ster 82. 101 Norwiche spoyled 95 Newgate buylded 141 Newe Testament printed in Englyshe 183 Nicholas gybson his chary∣table dedes 195 Newgate on fyre 235
Newe hauen 242. 243. O Oppressers of the pore han∣ged 17. Oxforde buylded 38. Outlawes in England 6 One crucifyed. 83 Othe to the Kynge 91 Order of the Rhodes putte downe 198 One hundred and .lx. per∣sones hanged 166 P Porrex slewe hys brother Forrce 13 Porrex slayne by hys mo∣ther ibidem. Picts fyrst inhabyte Scot∣lande. 15 Pickeryng buylded 16 Prodigious sygnes fol. 17. 97. 66. 109. Peter and Paule crucify∣ed 21 Plenty of corne 28 Pelagius heresye in Eng∣lande fo. 29. Porismouthe howe it toke that name 30 Peter pence fyrst payd 30 Priorye at Excester buyl∣ded 40 Peters bury buylded 43 Parlyamente at Oxen∣forde 48. People of Englande num∣bred 55 Plagues in england 5 Powles churche a fyre 55. 146. 141. Pestilence in England 28. 58. 117. 118. 120. 122. 125. 158. 168. 177. 202. 210. 241. Priorye of sainct Bartho∣lomewes buylded 59 Priorie of saint Iames at Bristowe buylded 60 Priorye of Norton buyl∣ded 62 Pierce of Poumfret 79 Parliamente at Wynche∣ster 92 Parliament at Northamp∣ton 95. 112. Parlyament at Shrewes∣bury 100 Parlyament at Gloucester. fol. 101. Parliament at Canforbu∣ry 104 Parlyament at Oxenforde. fol. 107. Peter pence forbydden to be payde 128 Plymmouth spoyled 134 Person of rotham 13 Parlyament at Leycester. fol. 142. Part of London brydge fal
downe. 145 Posterne by the tower sank by nyght 146 Procession 151 Printing fyrst inuented 152 Part of London wall new buylded 158 Perkyn Watbecke. 166. 167. 168. Prince Arthure maryed. fol. 169. Prisoners delyuered 170 Paules schole buylded 172 Parlyament at Black fry∣ers 183 Priorie of Christechurche in London put down 185 Polled heades 188 Paules Churche laye at an anker 208 Procession forbydden 209 Prince of Orenge came in∣to England 233 Parysh churches in Lon∣don 244 Q Quenes colledge in Oxen∣forde buylded 122 Quenes Colledge in Cam∣bridge buylded 171 R Rome buylded 12 Romayns refuse to defend England 27 Ramsey buylded 43 Rofe of Bow churche blo∣wen downe 57 Rofe of Salisbury churche consumed 57 Rufus slayne wyth an ar∣rowe 58 Readyng abbey buylded 61 Robert Hoode an outlaw fol. 69. Raunsome payde for kynge Rychard 71 Rochester castel beseged 79 Robert Grossehead 81 Ryotte in London 96. 151 Ryot in Norwyche 97. Rhodes wonne frome the Turkes 106 Rebellyon in Kent 116 Rochester brydge buylded. fol. 135. Robert Acton 138 Robert Chesley hys chari∣table dedes 145 Rychmont buylded 168 Rhodes taken by the Tur∣kess. 178 Roulande Hylle his chari∣table dedes 218 S Shyres in Englande fo. 1. Seuerne a ryuer 4 Seuerne, howe it toke that name 20 Shaffesbury buylded 11 Stamford buylded ibide.
Saynt Iohns towne in Scotland buylded 12 Spanyardes firste inhabyt Irelande 15 Salysbury buylded 19 Southampton howe it toke that name 21 Saynt Helene an Englyshe woman 24 S. Ursula of: England 26 Scottes and Pyets inuade England eod. Scottes and Pyets spoyle this lande 28 Saxons stewe .iiij. C. ix. barons and earles 29 Seconde kyngdome of the Saxons 30 Saxons had the whole pos∣session of this realme 34 Saint Augustine came into Englande eod. S. Augustine at Canter∣bury buylded eod. Saynt Paules at London buylded eod. S. Andrewes at Roche∣ster buylded eod. S. Peters at Westminster buylded eod. Seuenth kyngdome of the Saxons eod. Saynt Beda an Englyshe man 36 Segebart depryued & slayne by a swyne heart 37 Shaftsbury buylded 41 Saynt Peters at Glocester buylded eod. S. Edmōds bury built 46 S. Edwardes lawes 50 Shrewesbury abbey buyl∣ded 55 Syr hundred houses blow∣en downe 57 Straunge syghtes in the ayre 58 Smythfielde a leystaw 59 Stratford abbey builded 64 Saynt Mary Auberys in Southwarke buylded 77 Strangers banyshed 82 Salysbury mynster buyl∣ded 83 Saint Iohns without Ox∣ford buylded 85 S. Catherins nye London buylded 85 Symond Mountford earle of Leicester 92 Southampton robbed 114 S. Steuēs chapel at West∣mynster buylded 221 Sauoy brent by rebels 126 Saynt Iohns by smyth∣field brent eod. Shyne and Syon buylded, folio 140 Straungers to be lodged in an englyshe hoste 124
Standard in cheape buyl∣ded 144 Symon eyre his charitable bedes 147.152 Sandwyche spoyled 151 Suburbes without Algate and byshope gate brēt 157 Sweatyng sycknes 164. 175. 182. Saint Anthonies in Londō buylded 167 Scarsitie of bread 181 Shyppe chassed to the tours wharfe 182 Small houses of Religion gyuen to kyng Henry the eyght 190 S. Gyles church at Crepis gate brent 205 Stewes put downe 206 S. Iohns colledge in Ox∣ford buylded 225 Saynt Quintins 237. 238 Scarborowe castel takē 237 T THamys described 2 Twede a ryuer 3 Trent a ryuer 3 Troyan lawes 9 Towre of London fyrste buylded 14. 19. Temple nygh to tēple barre buylded 14 Third kingdom of Saxons fol. 30 Thorney buylded 41 Tribute to the Danes dis¦charged 44 Tempest in England 57.67.75.82.247.85.110 Tewkesbury abbey buyl∣ded 61 Twenty gouernours of London 75 Twelue yeeres in Eng∣lande 91 Terme kepte at Shrewes∣bury 99 Tunne in Cornhyll 101 Treasure conueyed out of England 101 Theues in apparayle of fri∣ers 101 Three hundred men slayn by misfortune 141 Two Maiors and syxe Al∣dermen of London dy within .viij. dayes 164 Thomas Kneysworth hys charitable dedes 171 Turney and Turwyne wonne 171 Towre of Grenewyche buylded 180 Thomas More Chaunce∣ler 181 Thomas Cromwell, 185. 188. 193. 198. Towre of London repay∣red 185
Thomas unflow his cha¦ritable dedes 167 Thomas Whyte his chari∣table dedes fo. 225 Trinite college erected 225 Three folde plague of Lon∣don 245 U Ueye a ryuer 4. Uniuersitie at Stamforde fo. 11. Uies buylded 14. Uortymer poysoned by his stepmother. 29 Uillages and towns drou∣ned 89 Uisytation of the abbeyes fol. 189. Uoyage to Moscouie 220 W Wales described 4. Welshemen fo. 4. Wolues deuoured kynges fol. 10. Wynchester buylded 11 Walbrooke howe it tooke that name 23 Wall of stone betwene En¦gland and scotland 26 Wyndsore castel fyrst buyl∣ded 31. Wynchecombe abbey buyl∣ded 37 Wolues destroyed in En∣glaude 43. Warwell buylded 44 Walthā abbey buylded. 50 Wenloke abbey buylded 55 Westmynster Halle buyl∣ded 58 Wyndsore buylded 62 Wodstocke buylded ibid. Wyllyam wyth the longe bearde 72.73. Wynchester abbeye buyl∣ded 81 Wardes graunted to the kyng 83. Weyghts and measures 95 Woll staple kepte at sande∣wyche 102 Whyte battayle 108 Woll staple kept at West∣mynster 119 Wolstaple kept at Chyche∣ster ibide Wolstaple kept at Lincolm Brystowe; and Canter∣bury ibidem Wylliam Walworth slewe Iacke strawe 127 Whityngton colledge buyl∣ded 135 William Taylour his cha∣ritable dedes 155 Wyat taken 229 Y Yorke buylded 10 FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fletestreete, nygh vnto S. Dun∣stones churche, by Thomas Marshe. Anno Salutis. 1565.
