24904.5 24459133 27697
CLASMATA. H.W.
Medice Cura teipsum. WHilest on the Worlds brave Theatre I looke, And Times and Mans Vicissitudes bemoane; My musing Thoughts in Error grosse I took, That of those bad my self not mended one: For Ills one should be lesse, If I were none. O let me rather my self Rectifie, Then sympathize thus in Antipathie. 'Tis true, I lived in the Golden dayes Vnder the Candor of a fulgent Sphaere, Where seldom Sun obscur'd his Brightest Raies: If now it shines not Radiantly so cleare, Or that moe Clowdes or mistie fogges We feare: If I, THOV, HE, return that are estranged, We need not cry O How the World is changed. Estrang'd I meane from HIM that Ruleth All, Both Sun and Its subordinated Starres; Let I, THOV, HE, before Him prostrate fall, Imploring Him to set in tune the Jarres; For I, THOV, HE, 'tis, all the Fabrik marres. And I, first person of the Three and Worse, Purpose by Grace Divine to change my Course.
Lament. Ierem. 5.21. Turne us O Lord, and we shall be turned. NOw to begin my change the surest Way, Ile use that forme This Prophet us'd before; Turne me O Lord, that Wholly turne I may: I cannot turne one foot, but wrong goe more; Thou must both bring me back, and in at dore. THY SELF'S the Dore, Lord let me in by Thee▪ And give me all that Thou Commandest me. Some thinke they can convert and turne at pleasure, Repentance is at hand and in ther Power: Poore Adams Sons, what is your weight and measure? LORD turne Thou me, first, second, and last houre; If Thou holdst off, Then downe droupe I and lowre. Therefore (as Austens was) my Prayer is, Lord DA QVOD JVBES, JVBE then QVODVIS.
Non est Mortale quod opto. THen stay not there, for wishes not availe thee, If but to mortall Glory thou aspire; Sauns Fortitude and Labour They will faile thee: Immortall is ten thousand Grees yet higher, Who aymes at that shrinks not at blood nor fier. Clog not thy self for this lives brevitie, But spend thy spirits for Eternitie. Nugas Luge. NOw mourn my cheerfull Heart, abandon mirth, It makes my Mind more triviall then ought. The sapid speech that hath a pleasant birth Sowreth by night (me thinks,) and savours nought: That Sweetly lasteth, which is Sober wrought. Gravely passe time, Thou wert not merry born: Mourn in thy life, thou mayst not dye to mourn.
To one that asked why he oft times was so sad. Nunquam minus tristis quam cum pertristis. MY Fancies driv'n and snared in a Toyle, My Mind within as Lady Empresse sits, But Metorlike, They whirle and keep a coile, And are too nimble for my swiftest wits, Turning my calme Thoughts, into flashing fits: My Theories doth Sadnesse safest keep; My Mind works best when Sence and Fancie sleep. Nor is't a Paradox, for mark thine Eye, Thine Eare, thine Hand, thy dainty Tast and Smelling; How ev'ry object meeting to complie Its proper sence, in Fancie sets a swelling, Right reason Wildly to and fro dispelling, Most in their strength is both my Mind and wit, When most of Sence and Fancies vigour quit. Vita petit mortem repetit quia mors mihi vitam. LIght heart, my life (more then I like) makes longer, Nor sad hart shortens much, the strings are stronger: Then live, but dayly dye, that so deaths hower May be (when't comes) than sweetest life, lesse sower. I will not digge for Death, but life so carry, That I for Death, not Death for me shall tarry. Faxit Deus.
Homo Microcosmus. AM I a little World, what is my Fraught? Pride, Folly, Lusts, Humours, and surging Broiles, Changes, Chances, Purpose, and Project naught: Plenty, Want, Sorrowes, Pleasures, Ease, and Toyles; Honours, Disgrace, Conquests, Contempt, and Foiles. Thus balast is This little World for store, As is the Great, though in the greatnesse more. But Piety, Love, Wisedome, Grace, and Peace; Sanctity, true Glory, Vertue Divine: Fulnesse of Ioy, which needeth no increase. High Felicities, never that Decline, Are of the Christall World, Are not of mine. LORD Almoner of Heaven, Deale me Thy Dole, Some pieces Heere as Symbols of the Whole.
Periculum probat. SOme Boast afore-hand Confidence in God In times of troubles, and their Great distresse, How quietly They will embrace His Rodde; And beare all Crosses stoutly do professe: Be not to Bold, I thought my self no lesse. So Peter on his Courage set a Etiam si moriar &c. Mat. 26.35. price, 'Till Chantecler had checkt him once or twice. In Calmes no Cares, No Trialls where no Crosses; Jobs messengers when they beset thee round, When Storms within, Tempests without thee tosses. If then in peace Thou manly stand'st thy Ground, Thou giv'st some proof, thy Faith and Hope is sound. Lord Awe me in my largest Liberties, Thou maist enlarge my straightest miseries. What i'st to know how to abound or wantPhilipp. 4.11.12. More then to be all ONE in Cases all? In Plenty not to full, in Need content; This tott'ring World gives not That man a fall: For as he was he is, and so he shall. For in each Change, by Christ he holdeth fast, O Lord (though late,) Now teach me This at last.
Vpon sad tydings. Ecce me, faciat mihi pro ut bonum videtur in occulis suis.Sam. 2, 15.26. BEsieg'd with Troupes of feares as with an Hoaste, Tumults of Thoughts Irrushing on my mind: Plagues of ill Happs posting from ev'ry Coast; Like blustring Storms, more comming, more behind. And when no End, nor hope of End I find: I say as He who in the like Case stood, LORD Here I am, Doe with me what think'st good. Video meliora probo{que}, Deteriora sequor. DImme-sighted man Canst see and not avoide? Cloze up those eyes that lead thy foot awry; Those Carnall Sights leave not till all be stroyde, And in their Roome get one Spirituall Eye; One Single Heart, which may with it Complie. Then look thine Heart keep clean, and clear thy sight, So shalt thou see, approve, and follow Right.
Remember me my GOD for This, Nehemiah 13.22. MY GOD saith Nehemie Remember me: I dare not call GOD (mine) my Soules's afraid, Yet I have found GOD Good in my degree; As largely Good as he that (My GOD) sayd, Why then to cry My GOD am I dysmaid? I cannot say Remember me for This, That This makes odde between my Case and His. Josua 14.15, in versus calce. Iosue Protesteth he would serve the LORD, Though none else would, yet He and His alone: Exhorteth All in generall accord; He with the first Cont endeth to be one, And in GODS Courts will Second be to none, Place of precedence in Iosues Condition, Strive for in GODS Name, 'Tis a safe Ambition.
The love of GOD to Man. MAn more then Angels Thou didst love O LORD, Thou talk'st with him when he did disobey: Thou threwst Them downe, vouchsafst Them not a Word, But chain'd Them up untill the Iudgement day. The Man Thou chid'st, but sav'dst another way. O Depth of Mercy to this Man of Dust, When to those Angells Thou wert onely Iust. O GOD what's Man, whom Thou didst so Regard? Thou mad'st Him twice (as't were) to make him sure, Renewd'st Thine Image He so fowly mar'de: Stampt in Thy self that so It mought endure, Wert Man Thy self that Manhood mought be pure. Thus GOD the Man sets full at Libertie, Steps in his stead, And is his Suerty. O Second person in the Trinity, Lord Jesus Christ, the Horn of our Salvation; That wroughst in Man by Theoanthropie, More Integrall then at his first Creation: Keep me within the Tower of that Station. Then stronger mine shalbe then Adams Case, For He stood by himself, I stand by Grace. Deo Gloria.
Tremor Cordis. THine Holinesse, O GOD, I apprehending, And Iustice so Exact for least Transgression: How Thou from Heav'n threw'st Angels down offending. And cast out Man from Paradise his Session, O then my Soule comes trembling to Confession. I am a Lump of Sinne, not one spot free, All over sinfull, what becomes of me. Recording then Thy self becam'st a man, And wer't made Sinne for Mans sinnes Expiation; Didst die for Sinne in Sinners Roome: O than 'Gainst Devil and Hell I get Refocillation. And calling Faith to this high Admiration, Beleeve GOD made Himself a Man to Dye For Greatest Sinners, Sinners such as I.
Spiritus, ubi vult spirat. WHat's Spirit Spirit is, what's Flesh is Flesh, Thou Breathest where thou please, O Holy Breath. GOD breathed Life at first, Breath Thou afresh: Else all Life long I do but live in Death. So is all Life, (but what's from The) Beneath. Draw me O GOD to CHRIST, O Draw me still, Me-thinks I come like one against his Will. Etiam Pater, quia Tibi ita placuit, Math. 11.26, et Luke 10.21. EV'n so O Father, for it pleas'd Thee so, The Sonne of GOD on GODS own Will doth rest: The Sonnes of Men will farder Reasons know, As though GODS Will of Reasons were not Best; Cause of first Cause Thou seek'st to have exprest. For still thou sayst There's Reason of that Will, Be't so: But farre beyond thy Reach and Skill.
Luke 21.19. Possesse your Soules in Patience. THy Soule in Patience labour to possesse, The LORD His own Disciples Counsail'd so. This fluctuant World is busie more ore lesse By change or chance to machinat thy woe; Tumbling thy best Endeavours to and fro. To Patience then Lay Anchor in Her Roade, Then Let thy Ship float where it will abroad. O Sonne of GOD that wer't the Sonne of man, Poorest of All, Yet Lord of Allwert borne, First laid in Cratch, so basely life began; Hunted by Herod, felt the Scourge and scorn, Thy shoulders bare the Crosse, Thy Head the Thorn. O CHRIST (whose patience did more encrease: In most Extremes,) Binde me unto Thy Peace.
I will shew mercy, on whom J will shew mercy. Exod. 33.19. THou wilt shew mercy, Lord, on whom thou wilt. Remember me then in Thy mercies Will, And though most Monstrous be my Sin and guilt My Pardon shall with Glory, mercy fill, Mong'st Those Thou pardon'st, Lord, then me imbill To put my name into Thy Mercy-rolles Above the third Heavens Mercy it extolls. IVstice as Great as Mercy is. How than? Thy Iustice, LORD, Thy Sonne hath fully paid; (GOD answers GOD, No man nor Angel can) And in His Blood hath all my Score defraid And doth quite claime what can by Law be laid. Then Thou O GOD maist seale my Pardon sure, Iustice and Mercy Both kept Even and pure.
Come unto me All ye that are laden, And I will refresh you, Math. 11.28. LAden (O LORD) laden I am with Sinne, The heaviest Weight that ever Earth did beare: Crusht down without, contunded more within; Nothing but Wrath and Horrour doth appeare; My trembling Soule in shivers shakes for feare. I come to Thee, thus laden (LORD) thus broken, Ease me, as in Thy Gospell Thou hast spoken. Luke 10.34. O deere Samaritane Binde up my Wounds, My Soules Soare runneth like a Rotten Boile: In Thee such Vertue and such Grace abounds, As Thou canst heale me with a Drop of Oile, Poure it into me and my Soule assoile. Thy Blood's the Oyle, LORD Bathe me in that Vnction, And wash me cleane *Heb. 9, 14.15, & 10, 12.14. It is Thy Blessed function
How unsearchable are the Judgemens of GOD, and His Wayes past finding out, .Romanes 11.33 GOD drowns the World, yet spareth Noe and his, Esau He hates, But Iacob dearely loveth: Who dares find fault or Reason aske of this? If He rejecteth me and thee approveth; Ile silence keepe, for so it me behooveth. Submit thy self to GODS own Sacred Will, Not medling, Why He sends here Good there Ill. And (for no Angell dares make Indagation Into GODS Arke, where His close Counsailes lye:) Get thou a Copy of thine own Salvation. Why others shall not study not to prie, GOD can and Will His own Wayes Iustifie. What thou must learn is wrot in GODS own Story, What is conceal'd, is seal'd up to his Glory. I nothing LORD deserve but wrath and Ire, (Let not my Humblings make me worse to fare:) Most Iust of all must Mercy needs Require, And Me most vile, if Thou beest pleas'd to spare? What's He that murmer 'gainst that Mercy dare. Quit me O CHRIST, no more but speak the Word, For of thy Mercies Thou Thy Self art LORD.
His Soules phancie. IF that my Catyffe Soule did walk on Ground, And visibly were from the body known; Which GOD at first Infus'd so purely Sound: Now by my flesh so vild and loathsome grown, My Phancy is, GOD could not know his own. Expurge (O CHRIST) my Soules fowle Inquination, Then GOD againe will know His owne Creation. His Soules comfort, Math. 18.21, & Luke 17.4. NOt seav'n, but seav'nty seav'n times Peter shall Forgive his Brother by His Masters Will; And if seav'n times a day he sinnes, and call Seav'n times for pardon, he must pardon still. When all Hopes flag▪ This Hope (LORD) mounts the Hill. Thou wilt forgive as oft, and much more too, Then what Thou bidst Thy Servant Peter doe. His Soules Rest. Deus Tranquillus tranquillat omnia. IF Thou bee'st pleas'd O GOD to be at peace, With Thy poore Creature, in Thy Blessed Sonne; Then shall my Faintings, Doubts, and Terrors cease, And Combat with that Horrid Hoast be done, And towards Heav'n my Soule walk safely on. Speak peace then LORD, and Resecat by Grace, My fleshly fetters that Implex my pace.
Or despisest thou the Riches of His Mercy that leadeth thee to Repentance, .Rom. 2.4 ☞WHo not observes how by Sweet Mercies side Iustice close standeth, gyrded with its Sword; May sodenly into Presumption slide: Daunger of Daungers all, to be abhor'd; As which Indulgence, to all Sinnes affor'd. Mercy Right weigh'd, Repentance doth begin; Not Right, a Torrent opens unto Sinne. Not to Repent, and Mercy to despice, Seemes by this Text to Me, to goe as One: If Mercy doth from True Repentance rise, Where no Repentance, Mercy can be none: Those wofull Privatives goe not alone. Who Mercy seekes, and Paenitence exclude, Plainly Himself, And would his GOD delude, Repentance seemes in Order first in place, Mercy in Nature doth praecede before: LORD, Both at once flow freely from Thy Grace; And Both at once, my Soule on knees Implore, Repentance That, Repentance neede no more, And Mercy That, I so converted be, Luke 15.7.In Heaven The Angels may Rejoyce for me.
Lent. ☞ IF all the sinnes, all Sinners, did Confesse, Were to mine Eares (to lessen mine) propounded; As much in weight, And not in number lesse▪ Confesse I must, though therefore were Confounded; Yea (LORD) sins I know not, Thou knowst'd abounded. Not one as I, his dayes have so mispent: Confession must begin first part of Lent. Now, could I sterve my lusts so proud within, Barre Adams out, And CHRIST my LORD retayne; Worlds Courses leave, and Hav'n on Earth begin: Temperance unto my Profession chayne, For my Soules Health Surfets in Sinne, restraine. Through Faith in pure Conscience, Repent; Then acted is the second part of Lent. THe least of these (LORD) is not in my power, Onely from Grace proceed both Will and action: I can Confesse, cannot amend an hower; Begin perhaps, assoone begun, a Fraction: Soule and Soules faculties, all, in distraction. LORD, what I ought to do, and what's not done, Set it on him did Do for me, thy Sonne. H. W. Aetatis sua 76, 1626.
Jud. 14. Ecce venit Dominus. &c. Behold the Lord cometh with ten Thousand of His Saints to Judgement. THat Heav'nly CHOIRE ô Christ that at thy Birth Did sing (aloft,) Glory to God on Hie, Mercy and Peace (Below) to men on Earth; Shall at thy second coming change their Cry, Sounding with Trumpet Judgement through the skye. And shake as with a mighty Rush of Thunder, Foudations of the VNIVERSE, a sunder. Lord, All Thou do'st is just, and Just is Good, Thine Agents, Angels are Caelestiall: Though Wicked Ones may murmur in their Mood, And Cruelty Thy pure Justice Call, Imprecating Mountaines on them to fall; For what Eye can in Thy Great day of Doome Behold that MAIESTY wherein Thou Come? Or what strong Words can Blazon Thine Assize? Act. 2.19, 20. The Starres shall fall, the Heav'ns shall melt away, All Living must stand forth, All Dead must rise; The Sunne grow dark, Moone turn to blood that day: Fire, vapours, Smoake, All over feare and fray. Yet (Lord) in all this Horrour, Flame and Dread, Thou Bid'st Th'ELECT to lift up then their Head. The HOMOLOGIE.Luke 21.28. POore is my knowledge, But I Aym'd to know, My Realls are yet lesser then mine Art: The Theorie Infatuats me so, I playd the Trevant in the practique part, O Lord forgive, And Innovate mine Heart To know, and know to doe, and not to looke, To be sav'd so, as Felons by their Booke. Absit.
Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.38. ad finem usque. IN Magdalens Heart there a Limbeck was, Distil'd her Sinnes into a flood of Teares; Which got her Pardon in such Termes to passe As her LORDS Mercies in the FULL appeares, To comfort all poore Sinners Hearts and Eares: His feet Shee washt in Paenitentiall water, Her Memory is blest for ever after. My stony Heart no Teares can melt nor bruise, O Thou That out of Stones canst Children raise To Abraham, Thy Souppling Grace Infuse Into my Soule, I may my latter Dayes (THOSE PAST O PERDON) treade in straighter wayes: So may with MARY whole on CHRIST Repose, And with those Words these papers up I cloze. FINIS.
