3682.5 99841262 5832
THE PASSIONS of the SPIRIT. LONDON Printed by Thomas Este, dwelling in Aldersgate-streete. 1599.
TO THE WORSHIPFVL and vertuous gentlewoman, Mris MARY HOVGHTON, wife to the worshipfull Mr Peter Houghton Esquire, Alderman, and novv one of the shrifes of London. 1594. IT is the general receiued opinion amōg most men that nothing is more o∣dious in the sight of god & good men, than vnthankfulnes. And in deed, the trees & plants, & the earth it selfe, which for the rain and labour that is beestowed vpon them, yeelde foorth fruite, shew themselues thankfull. And therfore I was so bold, (right Worshipfull) hauing receiued many fauours at your hands, that I might not seeme to haue receiued them in vaine by vnthanfulnesse, to offer vnto your worships hands this little present
Greater men may easely offer grea¦ter gifts. But if gifts may finde ac∣ceptance according to the good harts & minds of the giuer, I feare not but this little gift, though small in view, shall bee graciously accep∣ted? both because the matter is pre¦cious, & it proceedeth from a mind as willing to shew it thankefull, as whosoeuer els that commends him selfe by a greater present. And so wishing vnto your worshipful hus∣band and your selfe, all hearts con¦tent in this life, & euerlasting hap∣pines in the life to come, humbly take my leaue. Your worships at commaund, Thomas Este.
The passions of the spirit VVHere shall I finde that most morneful muse, That neuer heard of any thing but mone, And reade the passion that hir penne doth vse, When shee and sorrow sadly sits alone, To tell the world more then the world can tell What fits in deed most fitly figure hell? Let mee not think once of the smallest thought, Nor speake of lesse then of the greatest griefe, Where euery sence with sorrows ouer wrought, Liues but in death despairing of reliefe,
While thus the heart with torments torne asonder, May of the world bee cald the wofull wonder. The day lyke nights, all darckned by distresse, Pleasure beecome a subiect full of paine, The spirit ouerprest with heauinesse, While helplesse horror vexeth euery vaine: Death shakes his dart, griefe hath my graue prepared: Yet to more sorrow, is my spirit spared. The Owly eyes that not indure the light, The night rauens song
that sounds of nought but death, The Cockatrice that killeth with hir sight, The poysoned ayre that chokes the sweetest breath, Thunder and earthquakes all together met, These tell a little how my life is set. Where words desolu'd to sighes, sighes into teares, And euery teare to torments of the minde, The mindes distresse, into those deadly feares, That finde more death then death it selfe can finde. Death to that life, that lyuing doth descrie, A little more
yet of my misery. Put all the woes of all the world together: Sorrow and death, sit downe in all their pride, Let misery bring all hir muses hether, With all the horror that the hart can bide. Then read the state but of my ruthfull story, And say my griefe hath gotten sorrows glory. For natures sicknesse somtime may haue ease, Fortune (though fickle) somtime is a friend, The minds affliction pacience may appease,
And death is cause that many torments end: But euer sick, crost, greeu'd, and liuing dying, Think on the spirit in this sorrow lying. To shew the nature of my paine (alas,) Payne hath no nature to descrie my payne, But where that paine it selfe in paine doth passe. Think on vexation so in euery vaine, That hopelesse, helplesse, endlesse paynes may tell, Saue hell it selfe, but myne there is no hell. If sicknesse bee a grownd
of deadly griefe, Consuming cares haue caught mee by the heart: If want of comfort, hopelesse of reliefe, Bee further woe to way my inward smart: If friends vnkindnesse, so my griefe is grounded: If causelesse wronged, so my heart is wounded. If loue refused so read on my ruin, If truth disgraced, so my sorrow moued, If faith abused the ground my torments grue in, If vertue skorned so my death approued, If death delaying,
so my heart perplexed, If lyuing dying, so my spirit vexed: My infants yeeres mispent in childish toyes, My riper age in rules of little reason, My better yeeres in all mistaken ioyes, My present time (Oh most vnhappie season,) In fruitlesse labours and in ruthlesse loue, O what a horror hath my hart to prooue! I sigh to see mine infancie mis-spent, I mourne to finde my youthfull life mis-led,
I weep to feele my further discontent, I dye to trye, my loue is liuing dead, I sigh, I mourne, I weep, I liuing dye, And yet must liue to shew more miserie. The hunted Hart somtime doth leaue the hound: My hart (alas) is neuer out of chase. The lime-hounds lease somtimes is yet vnbound: My hands are hopelesse of so high a grace. Sommer restores what winter doth depriue: But my hart withered neuer can reuiue.
I can not figure sorrow in conceit, Sorrow exceedes all figures of hir sence: But on my woe when sorrowes all may wait, To see a note exceed their excellence, Let mee conclude to see how I am wounded, Sorrow hir selfe is in hir selfe confounded. But whereof growes the passion of this paine, That thus perplexeth euery inward part? Whence is the humor of this hatefull vaine, So damps the spirit, and consumes the hart?
Oh let my soule with bitter teares confesse, It is the ground of all vnhappinesse. If lack of wealth, I am the note of need: If lacke of friends, no faith on earth remaines: If lack of health, see how my heart it bleeds: If lack of pleasure, looke vpon my paines: If lack of wealth, of friends, of health or pleasure, Say then my sorrowes must bee out of measure. Measure? no measure measure can my thought, But that one thought
that is beyond all measure: Which knowing how my sorrowes haue ben wrought, Can bring my heart into hir highest pleasure, Which either must my sorrowes cut of quight, Or neuer let mee think vpon delight. There is a lack that tells mee of a life, There is a losse that tells me of a loue: Beetweene them both a state of such a strife, As makes my spirit such a passion proue: That lack of thone and thothers losse (Alas) Makes mee the wofullst wretch
that euer was. My dearest loue that dearest bought my loue, My onely life by whom I onely liue. Was euer faith did such affection proue? Or euer grace did such a glory giue? But such a lack and such a losse aye mee, Must needes the sorrow of all sorrowes bee. My loue is fayer and fayrer then the sunne, Which hath his light but from his fayrest loue, Oh fayrest loue whose light is neuer done,
and fairest light doth such a loue approue. But such loue lost and such a life obscured, Can there a greater sorrow bee indured? Hee came from high to liue with mee beelow: Hee gaue mee life and shewed mee greatest loue. Vnworthie I, so high a worth to know, Left my chiefe blesse a baser choice to proue. I saw his wonders, yet did I not beeleeue him, And for his goodnesse, with my sinnes did grieue him. I saw him faultlesse,
yet I did offend him: I saw him wronged and yet did not excuse him: I saw his foes, yet sought not to defend him: I had his blessings, yet I did abuse him. But was it mine or any others deed? Whose ere it was it makes my heart to bleed. To see the feete that traueld for our good, To see the hands that brake the liuely bread, To see the head whereon our honour stood, To see the fruit where on our spirits fed: These feet, hands bored,
and his head all bleeding, Who doth not dye with such a sorrow reading? Hee plaest all rest. yet had no resting place: Hee healed each paine, yet liud in sore distresse: Deserud all good, yet driuen to great disgrace: Gaue all hearts ioy, himselfe in heauinesse: Suffered them liue, by whome himselfe was slaine: Lord who can liue▪ to see such loue againe? A Virgins childe, by vertuous power conceiued, A harmelesse man, that liu'd for all mens good,
A faithfull friend that neuer faith deceiued, A heauenly frute for heart especiall food, A spirit all of excellence diuine, Such is the essence of this loue of myne. Whose Mansion, heauen, yet lay within a manger: Who gaue all food, yet suckt a virgins breast: Who could haue kild, yet fled a threatned danger. who sought our quiet by his owne vnrest: who dyed for them, which highly did offend him, And liues for them which can not comprehend him.
Who came no further then his father sent him, Who did fullfill but what he did cōmand him, Who praid for them that proudly did torment him, For telling truth to what they did demand him, Who did all good that humbly did intreat him, And bare their blowes that did vnkindly beat him. A sweet phisition for the body crased, A heauenly medison for the minde diseased, A present comfort for the wits amased, A ioyfull spirit for the soule displeased.
The bodie, minde, wit and spirits ioye, What is the world without him but annoy? Hee knew the sicknesse that our soules infected, And that his blood must onely bee our cure, When so our faith his sacred loue affected, that for our liues hee would a death indure, Hee knew his passion, yet his patience bare it: Oh how my soule doth sorrow to declare it! Hee heald the sick, gaue sight vnto the blinde, Speach to the dum,
and made the lame to goe: Vnto his loue hee neuer was vnkinde, Hee loued his friend and hee forgaue his foe. And last his death for our loue not refused, What soule could liue to see such loue misused? To note his words what wisdome they containe, To note his wisdome of all worth the wonder, To note his works what glory they doe gaine, To note his worth, world, heauen, and earth, come vnder. To note the glory that his Angells giue him, Fie that the world
to such disgrace should driue him. Vnseene hee came, hee might bee seene vnto vs: Vnwelcome seemd, that came for all our wealth Hee came to die, that hee might comfort doe vs, VVee slew the subiect of our spirts health. The subiect? no, the king of all our glory: VVeep heart to death, to tell this dolefull story. A Lyon, where his force should bee affected, And yet a Lamb in mildnesse of his loue: As true as Turtle, to his loue elected.
Sure as mount Sion that can neuer moue. So milde a strength, and so fast truth to proue, VVhat soule can liue, and lack so sweet a loue? Hee preacht, hee praid, hee fasted, and hee wept, The sweet creator for his sinfull creature: The carefull watch full warely hee kept, That brake the neck euen of their foulest nature. And when hee did to happie state restore vs, Shall wee not weepe that hee may not abhor vs▪ To hate a loue
must argue lothsome nature, To wrong a friend must proue too foule a deede, To kill thy selfe will shew a curssed creature, To slay the soule no more damnation neede. Then, spoyle the fruit whereon the spirit feedeth, O what a hell within the soule it breedeth! Hee thought no ill but only did all good, Hee gaue all right and yet all wrong receiued. The fiends temptation, strongly hee withstood, Yet let himselfe by sinners bee deceiued. And see at last
when he was woe-be-gone him, The traytorous world did tyranize vpon him. His faultlesse members nayled on the crosse, His holy head was crowned all with thornes, His garments giuen by lots to gaine our losse, His power derided all with scoffes and skornes, His body wounded and his spirit vexed: To thinke on this, what soule is not perplexed? Poore Peter wept when hee his name denied, And Mary Magdalen wept for hir offence:
His mother wept when shee his death espied, But yet no teares could stand for his defence. But if these wept to see his wofull case: Why die not I to think of his disgrace? Happie was hee that suffered death so ny him: That at his end repentance might behould him: Twise happie life that did in loue so trie him, As to his faith such fauour did vnsould him, As crauing comfort but in mercies eyes, That selfe same day did liue in Paradise.
Would I had beene ordaind to such a death, To die with him, to liue with him for euer, And from the aire, but of this blessed breath, To suck the life, whose loue might faile me neuer, And drinck of that sweet spring that neuer wasteth, And feede of that lifes bread that euer lasteth. Oh would my soule were made a sen of teares, Myne eies might wake, and neuer more be sleeping▪ My heart may beare the paines all pleasure weares, So I might see him once yet in my weeping.
When ioyfull voice this song might neuer cease, My Sauiours sight hath set my soule in peace. Should I esteeme of any worldly toy, That might beehould the height of such a treasure? Could I bee Iudas to my chiefest ioy, To gaine possession of a gracelesse pleasure? No: could my soule in comfort once conceiue him, I hope his mercy would not let mee leaue him. Blest was the fish that but the figure swallowed Of my sweet Iesus
but in Ionas name: More blessed tombe by that sweet body hallowed, From whence the ground of all our glory came? Might not my soule bee sooner in a wish, Would I were such a tombe or such a fish. But Ionas left the sea and came to land, And Iesus from the earth to heauen ascended: Why should I then vpon more wishes stand, But cry for mercy where I haue offended? And say my soule vnworthy is the place, Euer to see
my Sauiour in the face. Yet let mee not despaire of my desire, Although euen hell doe answere my desert. Where humble hope, that pittie doth aspire: Proues penitencie, the pacyfiing part. Where mercy sweet, that sees my soules behauiour, May graunt mee grace, to see and serue my Sauiour. Whome till I see, in sorrowes endlesse anguish, All discontent with all that I can see, Resolud in soule in sorrowes lake to languish,
where no conceite but discontent may bee, I will sit downe till after this worlds hell, My sauiours sight may onely make mee well. Canto. 2. BVt shall I so my secret griefe giue ouer, With hope to see the glory of my sight? Or can my soule hir sacred health recouer, While no desert doth looke vpon delight? No, no: my hart is too too full of griefe, For euer thinking to receiue reliefe.
The Sunne is downe the glory of the day, The springe is past, the sweetnesse of the yeere, The haruest in, whereon my hope did stay, And withering winter giues but chilling cheere, And what such death Can griefe, or sorrow giue, As see his death whereby the soule doth liue? Mee thinks I see, and seeing sigh to see, How in his passion patience plaies hir part: And in his death what life hee giues to mee, In my loues sorrow to relieue my heart.
But what a care doth this conclusion trie, The head must off, or else the body die? Hee was my head, my hope, my heart, my health, The speciall Iewell of my spirits ioy, The trusty treasure of my highest wealth, The onely pleasure kept mee from annoy: Hee was, and is, and euermore shalbee, In life or death, the life of life to mee. And let mee see how sweetly yet he lookes Euen while the teares
are trickling downe his face: And for my lyfe how well his death he brookes, While my desert was cause of his disgrace. And let me wish yet while his death I see, I could haue died for him that died for mee. Had I but seene him as his seruants dyd, At sea, at land, in citie, and in field, Though in him selfe hee had the glory hyd, That in his grace the height of glory hild: Then might my sorrow some-what be appeased, That once my soule
had in his sight beene pleased. But not to see him till I see him die, And that my deed was causer of his death, How can I cease to weepe, to houle, and crie, To see the gasping of that glorious breath, That purest loue vnto the soule approued, And is the blessing of the soule beeloued? Shall I not wash his body with my teares, And saue the blood that issues from his side, That keepes my heart from all infernall feares,
Vnto my soule by my firme faith applyed? Shall I not striue with Ioseph for the course, And make his tombe in my soules true remorse? Shall I not cursse those hatefull hellish fiends, That led the world to work such wickednesse? And hate all them that haue not been his friends, But follow on that work of wretchednesse? Cut off the head that first hands on him layd, And help to hang the dogge that him betrayd. Am I not one
of that vnhappie broode, The Pellican doth figure in hir nest, When I must liue but by his onely blood, In whose sweet loue my life doth onely rest? O wretched bird! but I more wretched creature, To figure such a bird in such a nature. Dyd God himselfe ordaine it should bee so, To saue my life my Sauiour so should die? His will bee done: yet let mee weepe for woe, To bee the subiect of his miserie. That though hee came
to mend that was amisse, Hee should bee so the author of my blisse. Shall I not driue the watchman from the graue, And watch the rising of the sonne renowmed? Or goe my selfe a liue into the graue, To kisse the body where it lies intombed? What shall I doe? or what shall I approue, For my soules health that so my soule did loue? Oh. Loue the ground of loue, Oh liuely loue, Why doe I liue that did not die with thee,
When in my heart I doe such horror prooue, As lets my care no thought of comfort see, How my poore soule might once such seruice do thee, To giue mee hope how I am come vnto thee? No: I haue runne The way of wickednesse, Forgetting that my faith should follow most: I did not think vpon thy holinesse, Nor by my sinne what sweetnesse I haue lost, Oh sinne! so sinne hath compast mee about, That (Lord) I know not where to finde thee out.
If in the heauen, it is too high a place, For wicked heart to hope to clime so high: If in the world, the earth is all to base To entertaine thy glorious maiestie: If in the world, vnworthy I to read So sweet a sence to stand my soule in stead: If in my heart, sinne saith thou art not there: If in my soule, it is too foule infected: If in my hope, it is too full of feare, And fearefull loue hath neuer faith elected.
In soule, nor body, hope, nor seare, (aye mee) Where should I seeke where my soules loue may bee? Alas the day that euer I was borne, To see how sinne hath bard mee from my blisse, And that my soule is so in torments torne, To know my loue and come not where hee is. Yet, if that euer heauens heard creatures cry, Lord, looke a little on my misery. Let mercy plead in true repentance cause, Where humble prayer,
may heauenly pittie moue: That though my life haue broken sacred lawes, My hearts contrition yet may comfort proue: That till my soule may my sweet Sauiour see, Mercie may cast one loueing looke on mee. And while I sit with Mary at the graue, As full of griefe as euer loue may liue, My wounded hart some spark of hope may haue, Of such reliefe as glorious hand may giue: To make mee seele though sin hath death deserued, In mercies loue
is my soules life preserued. Which sacred truth vntill my soule doth tast, To slake the sorrow of this heart of myne, My weary life in wofull thoughts must wast, While soule and bodie humbly I resine, Vnto those glorious holy hands of his, Who is the hope of my eternall blisse. Canto. 3. BVt can I leaue to thincke vpon the thing, That I can neuer put out of my thought?
Or can I cease of his sweet loue to sing, Who by his blood his creatures comfort brought? Or can I liue to thinck that he should die, In whome the hope of all my life doth lie? No▪ Let mee thinck vpon his life and death, And after death, his euer life againe. Hee breath'd our life, and giueing vp his breath, Reuiude our soules, that in our sinnes were slaine. His life so good, as neuer death deserued, And by his death, our euer liues preserued.
Did hee not wash his poore Apostles feet? Came hee not riding on a silly Asse? Did hee not heale the criples in the streete, And fed a world where little victuall was? Did not his loue most true affection trye, To die for vs that wee might neuer die? Was neuer infant shew'd such humblenesse: Was neuer man did speake as this man did: Was neuer louer shew'd such faithfulnesse: Was neuer true man such a torter byd:
Was neuer state contayned such a story: Was neuer Angell worthy such a glory. O glorious glory, all in glory glorius! Angells reioyced at his incarnation. O power-full vertue, of all power victorius The true redemption of his best creation! O glorious life that made the diuells wonder, And glorious death that trode the diuells vnder! Thus in his birth, his life, and death, all glory Hee dyd receiue:
who was himselfe the same, The stately substance of that sacred storie, From whence the ground of highest glory came. When highest power, to highest glory raised, And all the hoast of heauen with glory praised. Was euer such ingratitude approued, Since heauen and earth for man, and man was made For onely God, who hild him his beloued, Till gracelesse sinne dyd make his glory fade: That hee, whom Angells with such reuerence vsed, Should bee by men
refused and abused? O liuely Image of the fathers loue! O louely Image of the fathers life! O pure conceipt that doth this concord proue, That all agreement breeds no thought of strife! But that the Sonne in state of all the story, Is found the brightnesse of the Fathers glory. Could euer such a glory bee refused, By those that were in dutie to adore it? Or could so great a glory bee refused,
When Angells tremble, when they stand beefore it? O man, woman, to wound thy soule so sore, To loose the glory so for euer-more! Behould the heauens what sorrow they did show, And how the earth hir dolour did discrie. The Sunne was darck, and in the earth bee low, The buried bodies shewed their agonie. The temple rent, the heauens with anger moued, To see the death of the diuine beeloued. And yet thou man
full little doest regard What thou hadst done vnto thy dearest loue. Thou mad'st more reckning of the worlds reward, Then of the blessing of thy soules be-houe. But (wretched man) descend into thy thought And with this sorrow weare thy selfe to naught. Yet some there were, too small a somme were they, That ioyd to see the somme of all their ioy: They watched the night, and walked in the day, And were not choked with the worlds annoy: But followed on
their heauenly loue alone: Would God in heauen that I were such a one. But aye mee wretch, all wretched as I am, Vnworthy all to follow such a friend: In sweet remembrance of whose sweetest name, The ioyes beegin that neuer makes an end. Let mee but weep and sorrow, till I see How mercies loue will cast on looke on mee. And let mee heare but what my Sauiour saith, Hee once did die that I might euer liue:
And that my soule by hir assured faith, May feele the comfort that his grace doth giue: That for his loue who sorrows heere so sore, Shall ioy in heauen, and neuer sorrow more. Canto. 4. OH ioy aboue all ioyes. that euer were! Could I conceiue but halfe thine excellence, Or how to hope to giue attendance there, Where thou dost keepe thy royall residence, And on my knees thy holy name adore:
Were my soule well, shee should desier no more: To see the day that from an high is springing, To guide our feete into the way of peace, To heare the Virgins playing, Angells singing, The Psalmes of glory that shall neuer cease. To heare the sound of such a heauenly queare, Would it not ioy the soule to see and heare? To see the Saints and Martyrs in their places, By highest grace with heauenly glory crowned: To see the kysses.
and the sweet imbrace Of blessed soules, by constant saith renomed, To see the ground of all these sweet agreeing Were not these sights all sweetly worth the seeing? The Diamond, Rubie, Saphir, and such like Of pretious gemmes that are the worldlings ioyes, And greatest princes for their crownes doe seeke, To heauenly treasuers are but trifling toyes, Wherewith the holy citie all is paued, And all the walls are round about in-graued:
Nor hee that sits on the supernall throne, In maiestie most glorious to beehold, And houlds the septer of the world alone, Hath not his garment of imbrodered gold: But hee is clothed in truth and righteousnesse, The heauenly garments of true holynesse. Oh could my soule out of some Angells wyng By humble sute obtaine one onely pen: Might wright in honour of my glorious king, The ioy of Angells and the life of men.
That all the world might fall vpon their faces, To heare the glory of his heauenly graces. But since I see his wonder worth is such, As doth exceed, the reach of humane sence, And all the earth vnworthy is to touch The smallest title of his excellence: Let mee referre vnto some Angells glory The happy writing of this heauenly story. Where this sweet King that on the white horse rideth, Vpon the wings
of the celestiall winde, Neere whose sweet aier no blasting breath abideth, Nor stands the tree, that hee doth fruitlesse finde, Doth make all tremble where his glory goeth, Yea, where his mildnesse most his mercie showeth. Where heauenly loue is cause of holy life, And holy life increaseth heauenly loue: Where peace establisht without feare of strife, Doth proue the blessing of the soules beehaue: Where thirst, nor hunger, griefe, nor sorrow dwelleth, But peace in ioy,
And ioye in peace excelleth. Oh ioyfull feare on vertuous loue ll founded! O vertuous loue, in mercies glory graced! O gracious loue, on faith in mercy grounded! Oh faithfull loue, in heauenly fauour placed! Oh settled loue, that cannot bee remoued! Oh glorious loue, of glory so beeloued! Where virgins ioye, in their virginitie, The vertuous spouse in vndefiled bed, And true deuines in true deuinitie,
The gratious members in their glorious head. The sinners ioye, to escape damnation: And faithfull soules. in their saluation. Where sicke men ioy, to see their sweetest health, The prisoners ioy to see their libertie, The poore reioyce to see their sweetest wealth, The vertuous to adore the deitie: And I vnworthie most of all to see, The eies of mercie cast one looke on mee.
Canto. 5. BVT can my heart thus leaue hir holy loue, Or seace to sing of this hir highest sweet? Hath Patience no more passions left to proue? Hath phancie laboured out both hands and feete? Or hath Inuention straind hir vaine so sore, That wit nor will hath power to write no more? No, heauens forbid, that euer faithfull heart Should haue a weary thought of dooing well: But that the soule
may summon euery part Of euery sence, where any thought may dwell, That may discharge the dutie of this care, To pen his praise, that is without compare. But since no eie can looke on him and liue, Nor heart can liue, but looking on his loue: Beehould the glory, that his grace doth giue, In all his works that doth such wonders proue. Than all the world may finde their witts to weake, But of the smallest of his praise to speake.
Behould the earth how sweetly shee brings foorth Hir trees, hir flowers, hir herbs, and euery grasse Of sundry natures, of most secret worth: And how each branch doth others beautie passe: Both beasts, and birds, with fishes, wormes, and flies, How each their high creator glorifies. The Lions strength doth make him stand as king: The Vnicorne doth kill the poisons power: The roaring Bull doth make the woods to ring: The Tiger doth the cruell wolfe deuouer:
The Elephant, the weightie burden beares, And rauening Wolues, are good yet for their heires. To see the Gray-hound course the Hart in chase, While litle Dormouse sleepeth out hir time. The Lambs and Rabits sweetly runne at base, Whilst highest trees the little Squirell clime. The crauling Wormes out creeping in the showers, And how the Snayle doe clyme the loftie towers. To see the Whale make furrowes in the seas, While sodainely
the Dolphin strikes hir dead: Which hauing found the depth of his disease, Vpon the shore doth make his dying bed. Where heauens thus work for weaker hearts beehoue, Doth not this grace, a work of glory proue? But since that all, Skye, Earth, or Sea containes, Was made for man, and man was onely made For onely God, who onely glory gaines, And that one glory that can neuer fade: Shall man forget to giue all glory due, Vnto his God
from whom all glory grew? But let mee come a little higher yet, To Sunne and Moone and euery Starre of light: To see how each doe in this order sit, Where euery one doth keepe his course aright: And all to guide these darkned eies of ours, Giue these not glory to the higher powers? No, let not man shew himselfe so vngratefull, Vnto his God, that all in loue did make him, By thancklesse thoughts to make his spirit hatefull,
Vnto his king that neuer will forsake him. But let his soule to God all glory giue, In whome, doth all loue, life, and glory liue. And let mee wretch, (vnworthy most of all To lift mine eies vnto his louely seat,) Beefore the feete but of his mercy fall, And of his mercy but the leaue intreate: That with his seruants I may sit, and sing An ALLELVIAH to my heauenly King.
Canto. 6. COme all the world, and call your wits together, Borrow some pennes, out of the Angells wings: Intreate the heauens to send their Muses hether To help, your soules to write of sacred things. Prophane conceits, must all bee cast away: The night is past, and you must take the day. Speake not of sinne, it beareth no part heere: But write of grace and whence hir glory grue: Think of the loue, that to the life is deere,
And, of the life, to whome all loue is due. And then sit downe in glory all to sing, All to the glory of our glorious King. First, make your grounds of faithfull holinesse: Then, your deuisions of deuine desires: Let all your rests bee hopes of happinesse, Which mercies Musicke in the soule requires: Let all your sharps bee feares of faithfull harts, And all your flats the death of your desarts. Yet rise and fall,
as hope and feare directs, The nature of each note, in space or line: And let your voices carry such effects, As may approue your passions are deuine. Then let your consorts all in one agree, To God alone, all onely glory bee. Then let the dittie bee the deerest thought, That may reuiue the dying hart of loue, That onely mercy in the soule hath wrought, The happie comfort of the heauens to proue. Then let your sounds
vnto the heauens ascend, And all your closes, all in glory end. Glory to him, that sitteth on the throne, With all the hoast of all the heauens attended: Who all things made, and gouernes all alone, Vanquisht his foes, and all his flock defended, And by his power his chosen soules preserueth: So, sing his praise that so all praise deserueth. And whilst all soules are to their glory singing, Let mee poore wretch not wholly hold my peace:
But, let my teares, from mercie glory springing, Keepe time to that sweet song may neuer seace. That while my soule doth thus my God adore: I may yet sing AMEN, although no more. Gloria in excelsis Deo. Amen.
A Praier. O Heauenly God, ô father deere cast downe thy tender eie: Vpon a wretch that prostrate heere before thy throne doth lye. O poure thy precious oile of grace into my wounded heart, O let the drops of mercy swage, the rigor of my smart. My fainted soule oppressed sore, with carefull clogge of sinne: In humble sute submits it selfe, thy mercie Lord to winne. Grant mercy then O sauiour sweet to mee most wofull thrall: whose morneful cry to thee ô Lord doth still for mercy call. Thy blessed will I haue despised, vpon a stubborne minde:
And to the sway of worldly things my selfe I haue enclinde. forgetting heauē & heuēly powers where God & saints doth dwell: My life had like to tread the path, that leads the way to hell. But now my god & loadstar bright I will no more doe so: To think vpon my former life, my heart doth bleed for woe. Alack I sigh, alack I sob, alack I doe repent: That euer my licencious will, so wickedly was bent. Sith now therfore with mournfull plaints that I thy mercie craue: O Lord for thy great mercies sake, let mee thy mercy haue.
Restore to life my wicked soule, which else is like to die: So shall my voice vnto thy name, sing praise eternally. Now blessed bee the Father first, then blessed bee the Sonne: And blessed bee the holy Ghost, by whom all things are done. Blesse mee O blessed Trinitie, with thy eternall grace: That after death, my soule may haue in heauen a dwelling place. FINIS.
A Praier. WIth heauie hart I call to thee, O Lord giue eare vnto my plaint In my distresse consider me, & mark how yt my soul doth faint Forlorne with care because that I, so oft offend thy maiestie. My due desert doth breed despaire & hell I shall haue for my hier, Vnles thou wilt thy wrath forbere: to punish mee in thy iust yre. But sith thy mercy passeth all, For mercy Lord I cry and call. And sith thou paidst yt blodie prise, the fathers wrath to pacifie: In thy great power & strength arise forgiue my sinnes O Lord I cry, lest yt my soul be brought to naught which once y hast so dereli bought
Forgiue thy people all their crime, whose aid on thee doth still depēd And with thy hand in this our time Our noble Queene O lord defend: And that shee may hir foes deface, powre vpon hir thy heauēly grace. Amen. FINIS.
MIEVI. X. VAVLT. MOVRIR. IN. VERTV. QVE. VIVRE. EN. HONCTE. LONDON Printed by Thomas Este, dwelling in Aldersgate-streete. 1599.
